THE CHRISTIANS DAILY WALK in holy SECVRITIE and PEACE.

Being an Answer to these Questions, 1. How a man may do each present days
work, with Christian Cheerfulness? 2. How to bear each present days cross
with Christian Patience?

Containing familiar Directions; Showing 1. How to walk with God in the whole
course of a man's life. 2. How to be upright in the said walking. 3. How to live
without taking care or thought any thing. 4. How to get and keep true peace
with GOD; wherein are manifold helps to prevent and remove damnable
Presumption; also to quiet and to ease distressed Consciences.

First intended for private use; now (though importunity) published for the
common good.

By HENRY SCVDDER, Preacher of the Word.

The fourth Edition, corrected and amended by the Author.

Thine ears shall hear a voice behind thee, saying; This is the way, walk ye
in it,

Isa. 30. 31. LONDON: Printed by I. B. for Henry Overton, and are to be sold at
his Shop, at the entering in of Popeshead Alley out of Lumbard-street. 1631.

The Epistle to the READER.
THE searching out of Man's true happiness has exercised the wits, and Pens of
many Philosophers and Divines with a different success.

1. Some, by a mistake of the end, ^ave erred about the means. All their
enterprises have ended in Va^itie, and Vexation, whilst they have caught at
the shadow of fruit (...) a hedge of thorns, and have neglected the tr^e it
self, whence the ^uit might have bin gathered with ^re certainty, and less
trouble. I marvel not at Varroes report of 288. several opinions about this
subject, when I consider Man's natural corruption, whose understanding is so
darkened, that (as Ephe. 4. 18
those Sodomites were weary in seeking the door of L^ts house) Genesis 19. 11
so in vain have the wisest Heathen sought the happiness, which (though, like
blind men, they groped after it) they could never find. And his spiritual
appetite, and (...) Act 17 27
taste is so distempered that he car*iuage of the chief good, no better then
a sick-man can do of the (...) meats.

2. Others, having the eyes o^ Ephe. 1. 18
their understanding lightened and their senses exercised to discern Heb. 5 1^.
(...) Sensus eterni. V^vita car^^s animaest it a beata ^o ni^isvita Deus est.
Aug. 19. de civit. Dei. tap. 26.
both good and evil, have concluded that man's true happiness consists in the
souls enioyment (...) God, by an holy conformity, and (...) communion with him.

For, What else is true happiness then the enioyment of (...) chief good? And
that God the chief good, appears in this, that all the properties, which
raise up goodness to the highest top of perfections, are in God only. For
Ioh. 1. 5.
he is the most pure, perfect, uniuersall, primary, unchangeable, Genesis 1. 31
communicative, desirable, and delightful good: the efficient, Genesis 1. 27.
pattern, and utmost end of all good; without whom there is neither natural,
moral, nor spiritual 1 Pet. 1. 16 Pro. 16. 4. Mat. 19 17
good in any creature. Our conformity to him the Apostle Peter expresses,
when he says, that the 2 Pet. 1. 4.
Saints are made partakers of the Divine nature; That is, they are Ephesians. 4. 2^.
24.
renewed in the Spirit of their mind, and have put on the new man, which after
God is created ^n righteousness, and true holiness. So that they have* 1. A
new (...) in their understanding facul^e, Col. 3. 10
that they know God, not one^ Ioh. 17. 3.
as Creator, but as Redeemer (...) of the world, and whilst they be^^ld, as
in a mirror, the glory (...) the Lord, with open face, they are changed into
the same image from glory to glory, as by the spirit of the Lord. This
knowledge is begun in this life, in the knowledge of Faith, and shall be Esa.
53. 11.
perfected in the life to come, in the knowledge of sense: this is in a Rom 8.
24. 1 Cor. 13. 9 12
glass; that shall be face to face. Secondly, they have a new life in their
will and affections, that is, they have disposition and inclinations, in their
hearts, suitable, and conformable to the directions of the Word. This the
Apostle Paul intended, when he said Romans 6. 17. (...).
of the Romans, that they had obeyed from the heart, the form of doctrine,
whereunto they were delivered. He says not, which was delivered unto you, but
whereunto you were delivered, that is, the Word is as a mould whereinto being
cast, you are fashioned according to it. Hence it is that the Saints are said
to be Sealed with Ephe. 1. 13
the holy Spirit, because as the Seal leaves its print upon the Wax, so the
Spirit makes holy impressions in the soul: this is called Ier. 31. 32.
the writing of the Law in our hearts; in allusion whereunto the Apostle 2 Cor.
3. 2, 3
compares the hearts of believers to Tables, the Ministers to Pens, the
Spirit to Ink (without which the Pen can write nothing) and the affections
or Conversation of these believers to an Epistle, and this is said to be read
and understood of all men, when they walk as examples of the Rule, 2 Cor. 3. 2.

3. Hence it is that godliness has a selfe-sufficiency joined with it, 1 Timothy
6 6. (...).
1 Timothy 6. 6. Because a man is now in Communion with GOD, whose face when a man
beholds in righteousness, he shall be satisfied with his image. Ps. 17. 15.
Hence Psalm. 17. 15
comes that peace of Conscience, joy Rom 5. 1. 1 Pet. 5. 8. Rom 8. 35. adfinem.
unspeakeable and glorious, and that holy triumph and exultation of Spirit,
which you may observe in the Apostle Paul.

Having briefly showed what this conformity, and communion with God is. I will
add one, or two words more to make it manifest, that only those are truly
happy which are in this estate. I may spare quotations of Writers, who concur
in In hominibus secundum statum pr^sentis vitae, est ultima perfectio secundum
operationem qua homo coniungitur Deo. Tho. Aqu 1 2 d^. qu. 3. Art. 2. ad 4
this opinion. None of sound judgment have denied it, the best Schoolmen
have determined, and concluded it, and there is good reason for it. For, 1.
man's utmost end is that it may be perfectly well with him, which he can never
attain unto without communion with God, who is the chief of Spirits, and the
best of goods. Other things are desired, as subordinate to this. The body is
for the Soul, as the matter for its form, or the instrument for its agent.
Humane wisdom and moral virtues are desired, not for themselves, but for the
fruit that is expected by them, as glory, pleasure, and riches. Fame, or glory
is desired not so much for it self as for the opinion of others, whence its
called (...). Wordly and bodily pleasures are excessively desired, as drink
Tristes exitus esse voluntatu^, quisquis remi^^sci suarum libidinum volet
intel^get: quae ^^ bea^os efficere possent nihil causae esset quit pe^udes
queque bea^ae esse dica^tur Bo^tius de consol. 3. pros. 7.
in a Fever, or Dropsy, better it is to be without the malady then to enjoy
that remedy. Riches are desired not for themselves, but for the sustenance of
life. Life is not so much desired for it self as for the enioyment of
happiness, which when a man has sought in the labyrinth of earthly vanities,
after much vexation, and disquietment of spirit, he must conclude, that it is
only in that truest and chiefest good, which is the fountain, whence true
delight first flows, and the object, wherein at last it rests.

Secondly, That is man's happiness, in the possession and enioyment whereof his
heart rests best satisfied. So far a man is from true happiness as he is
from full contentment in that which he enioyes. The Be would not sit upon so
manyflowers, if she could gather honey enough from any one, neither would
Solomon have tried so many conclusions, if the enioyment of any creature could
have made him happy. Would you know the cause why so many (like Ixion) make
love to shadows and leave the substance, or (that I may speak in a better
phrase) forsake the fountain of Ier. 2. 13.
living water, and dig to themselves broken Cisternes that will hold no water?
Briefly, it is because man, who in his pride would have seen as much as God,
Genesis 3. 5.
is now become so blind, that he sees not himself. For if men knew either
the disposition of their souls by Creation, or the distemper of their souls
by corruption, they would easily escape this delusion. 1. The soul is a
spiritual substance, whose original is from God, and therefore its rest must
be in God; as the Rivers run into the Sea, and as every body rests in its
center. The noblest faculties are abased, not improved, abused, not employed,
vexed not satisfied, when they are yoaked and subjected to these in eriour
objects, as when Nebuchadnezzar fed amongst Dan. 4. 29.
beasts. Or when as they that were brought up in Scarlet, embraced Lam. 4. 5.
the dung. Or as when Servants rode on horseback, Eccl. 10. 7.
and Masters walked like Servants on the ground. Or as when 70. Kings like
dogs did Judge. 1. 7.
eat bread under Adoni-bezeks table: Or as when Sampson made the Philistims
merry with his eyes Judge. 16.
put out.

2. Consider the soul as it is now in this state of corruption, nothing can
now content it, but that which can cure it. The soul is full of sin, which
is the most painful sickness; hence the Prophet compares wicked men to the
raging waves of the Sea, that is never at rest, whose waters cast up mire and
Esa. 57. 1.
dirt; what will you do to comfort him that is heart-sicke? Bring him the
choicest delicates; He cannot relish them; Compass him about with merry
company, and music, It Is tedious and troublesome to him: bring him to a
better Chamber, lay him in an easier bed; all will not satisfy him. Bring the
Physician to him; then he conceives hope; let the Physician cure him of his
distemper, and then he will eat courser meat, with a better stomach, and
sleep on a harder bed, in a worse chamber, with a more quiet and contented
heart.

Just so it is with a guilty Conscience, though he is not always sensible of
it. What comfort can his friends give him when God is his enemy? What delight
can he take in his stately buildings, or frequent visits, who may expect, even
this night, to have his soul Luke 12. 20
fetched away from him, and to be cast into hell amongst Devils? What is a
golden chain about a Leprous person, or the richest apparel upon a dead
carcass? Or, what comfort will a costly banquet yield to a condemned
malefactor, who is now going to execution? Surely no more than Adam found, when
Genesis 3. 10.
he had sinned in the Garden, or then Hamon had, when Assuerus Est. 8. 6, 7. 8*
frowned on him, in the banquet. On the other side, Let a man be in peace with
God, and in a sweet communion, enjoy the influence of heavenly graces, and
comforts in his soul, he can rejoice in tribulation, Romans 5. 3. Act. 16. 25.
Psalm. 23. 4.
sing in prison, solace himself in death, and comfort his soul against
principalities, and powers, tribulation, and anguish, height, and depth, things
present, and things to come. This true happiness which all men desire, Esa.
38. 3.
(but most miss it, by mistaking the ready way conducing to it,) is Romans 8.
38, 39.
the subject matter of this Book. Here you shall learn the right way Rom 3.
of peace. How a man may do every days duty, conscionably, and bear every
days cross comfortably; receive it thankefully, and read it carefully.

But this course is too strict. Object. 1. Answ.


In bodily distempers we account that Physician the wisest and best, who
regards more the health than the will of his patient. The ^^rpenter squares his
work by the Rule, not the Rule by his work. Oh miserable man, what an
Antipathy against truth is in this cursed corrupted nature, which had rather
perish by false principles, then be saved by receiving and obeying the truth!
But secondly, as it is strict so it is necessary, and in that case, strictness
does not blunt, but sharpen the edge of industry to duty. Therefore says our
Savior, Luke 13. 24
strive to enter in at the straight gate,* that is, therefore strive to enter,
because the gate is straight. Bradford well compared the way of Religion to a
narrow Bridge, over a large and deep River, from which the least turning awry
is dangerous. We see into what a Gulf of misery Adam plunged himself, and
his posterity by stepping aside from Gods way. Therefore forget not these Rules
of the Apostle; Walk circumspectly, and make straight Ephe. 5. 15 (...) Hob.
12. 13
steps to your feet, lest that which is halting be turned out of the way.

But many of Gods children attain not to this strictness, yet are Object. 2.
saved.

It Is true; though all Gods children Answ.
travel to one Country, yet not with equal agility and speed, they all
shoot at one mark, yet not with the same dexterity and strength. Some
difference there is in the outward action, none in their inward intention, some
inequality there is in the event, none in the affection: in degrees there is
some disparity, none in truth and uprightness. All that are regenerate are
alike strict in these five things, at least. First, they have but one path, one
way Esaias 35* 8.
wherein they all walk. Secondly, they have but one rule to guide them in that
way, which they all Gal. 6. 15, 16
follow. Thirdly, All their eyes are upon this rule, so as they are not
willingly ignorant of any truth. 2 Pet. 5.
Nor do they suppress, or detain any known truth in unrighteousness, Romans
1. 18
but they stand in the ways and ask for the old way, which Ier. 6 16.
is the good way. Fourthly; They all desire, and endeavor to obey every Luke 1.
9
truth; not only to walk in all Heb. 13. 19
the Commandments of God without reproof, before men, but also, in all things
to live honestly Genesis 17. 1.
and uprightly before God. Fi^tly; Gal. 6. 1.
If they fall, by occasion (as a member may, by accident, be disioynted) (...)
yet they are in pain t^^ they be set right again; if they stumble, through
infirmity (as sheep may slip into a puddle) yet they will not lie down and
wallow in the mire, which is the property of Swine: if they are sometimes
drawn aside, by violent temptations, or step aside, by mistake, yet they will
not walk on in the Counsel of the wicked, nor shall any way of wickedness,
Psalm. 1. 1.
(that is, a constant, or daily course in any one sin) be found in them.
They are so far from perverting the straight ways Act. 13. 10
of God (that is; Speaking evil of that is good) that they will justify God
in condemning themselves, and subscribe to the righteousness of his Word,
praying, that their ways might be directed to keep his Psalm. 119. 5*
statutes.

To conclude. Laying aside all cavils, beg of God a teacheable d^sposition, and
make thy best profit of the labors of this faithful servant of Jesus Christ,
a painful, and profitable Minister of the Gospel. For the matter of the
book, use it as thy daily Counselor. For the manner, and occasion of penning
it, use it, and learn to write by this copy. I mean; stir up the gifts of
God that are in thee, to become more profitable to others, both in presence, by
discourse, and in absence, by writing.

How are we bound to bless God for those Epistles, which the Apostles wrote,
not only to whole Churches, but also to private persons? Nor was this course
extraordinary and proper only to those persons and times. In succeeding ages,
to this day, the believers have been much edified by this course. In the
Greek Church, Chrysostom Chrysostom. Tom. 5. Ep. 7.
wrote diverse Epistles, amongst the rest, in the last of them, he takes
occasion to commend Olympia, to whom he wrote that Epistle, for her delighting
to employ him in answering questions, and resolving doubts. Athanasius, besides
diverse Epistles to others, wrote a little book to Antiochus, containing
answers to 162. questions. Basil wrote about 180. Epistles, amongst (...)
which in his 81. Epistle, exhorting Eus^^^hius to more frequency in writing,
he gives this reason, because they say, ( says he) that Wells are bettered by
being drained out. Amongst the Latin Fathers, Jerome. Tom. 1. from page 108. to
page 117.
Hierome wrote diverse Epistles, there is one, which Erasmus fathers upon
Paulinus Nolanus, written to Celantia, wherein are many pithy and remarkable
directions about walking with God in a holy course, (which is the Argument of
this Book) it is a large Epistle, and Si quid autem, vel eum legis, vel cum
cogitas tibi oritur quaestionis, in quo dissolvendo videar necessarius, scribe
ut rescribam, and paulo post; quod scriptum habetur semye^ va^at ad legendam,
cum va^at legenti, nec onerosum fit praesens, quod cum voles sumitur cum voles,
ponitur. Aug. Ep ad Volus.
worthy to be often read. In S. Ambrose his works are ten books of Epistles,
amongst which, in his 41. and 45. Epistle to S^binus, he commends this course
of instructing one another by writing. In S. Augustins works are to be found
242. Epistles; in the first of which, he exhorts Volusianus, to whom he
wrote, to read the Scriptures, and bids him, if he doubt, to write, promising
that he will answer him: he adds also two reasons of his Counsel, the second
whereof is, because a writing is ever ready when a man is fit to read, nor is
that any burden, ( says he) which a man may take up or lay down at his
pleasure.

He that reads his Epistles at leisure, advisedly, shall find many errors
confuted, many doubts answered, many truths cleared, many useful directions
for a holy life, recorded, and laid up, in those Epistles (as, so many lewels
in a rich Cabinet) for the good of posterity, for ever. If thence we come to
these latter times, and see what large, and elaborate, and learned Epistles,
Calvin, Beza, Drusius, and others have written, in other Countries. Or look
into those holy Letters of Bradford, and other blessed Martyrs in our own
language, besides many since, we shall conclude, that this course has been
of no small use for the direction. and comfort of Gods people in all ages. I Will
add one thing more concerning our own Nation, and times. It Is pity, and to
be lamented, that so many worthy Letters as are written upon special occasins,
for resolution of spiritual doubts, from day today, by one or other, are
imp^isoned in secret Closets and Cabinets, which (if they were brought to light
and published, I am perswadea) would not only exceed all that ever has been
done in this course, since the Apostles time, but also be the best help for
resolution of many hundred cases and doubts (which disquiet Christians) that
ever has been, or, except some such course be taken, ever will be in the
world. I will briefly touch one or two objections more, which some may
interpose against this work, and so conclude.

Many have already written on Object. 2.
these subjects, and therefore this is superfluous.

True it is; Many have written Answ.
on this subject largely, and worthily, as, Master Rogers in seven Treatises,
abridged by Master Stephen Egerton, and Master John Downam in a large and
useful work, and (that I may not forget him, whom, in some respects, I should
first have mentioned) the Reverend Deane of Worcester Doctor Hall, that true
Christian English Seneca. Also Master Bolton, whose general directions for
comfortable walking with God are deservedly approved of the most judicious. Yet
I answer, first, That is never too often taught, that is never sufficiently
learned. Secondly, In the mouth of two or three witnesses the truth is
confirmed. Thirdly, As God is much glorified, so the Church is much edified by
variety of gifts; Paul, Apollos, and Cephas are yours, and you Christ's.
Fourthly; The Christian and intelligent Reader shall find in this some things
new, other things expressed in a new manner, all digested in such a Method,
with such brevity and perspicuity, as was necessary to make the Book a v^de
mecum, easily portable, and profitable to the poor, and ^^iterate.

But it exceeds the limits and proportion Object. 2.
of a Letter.

The first Copy was more brief, upon occasion of a second Letter, wherein
some other cases were propounded, the judicious Author not only handled these
Arguments largely in his public Ministry, but also added more particulars
for his friends full satisfaction in a second copy, hence it came to this
^antitie. But lest whilst I plead for him, I should seem to be guilty of the
same fault my self, I will here stop, wishing thee (Gentle and honest hearted
Reader) to consider that account must be given of what thou read, as well as
of what thou hear, and therefore, to join prayer with thy reading, that
spiritual wisdom and strength may be increased in thee for the practice of
what thou learnest. So I commend the book to thy reading, and thee, and it, to
Gods blessing.

From my study in Coleman-street, London, this 25. of April. 1627. Thine in the
Lord Jesus, JOHN DAVENPORT.

THE CHRISTIANS DAILY WALK.
CHAP. I. Of walking with GOD in general.
BEloved Friend, The occasion of these Directions.
observing your forwardness and zeal in seeking to know how ^^u might please
God, and save ^^ur soul: I thought it would acceptable and profitable to ^^u,
if I should by the infalli^^e Rule of GODS Word, di^^ct you how with most
certainty, ipeed, and ease, you might attain to this your holy aim. Wherefore
(considering that most of Gods children do make their lives unprofitable and
unco^fortable, by troubling themselves about Luke 10. 40, 41.
many thing and that too much in things les^ needful; by caring and fearing
what shall betide them and their hereafter in things concerning this present
life) that you might compass that one thing needfu^ Luke 10. 42
and contain your self within your own line, and calling; amongst other
things, I exhort ted you heedfully to apply your self to do each present day^
work with Christian cheerfulness and to bear each present days ^vil with
Christian patience. When upon, in your ^t Letters, yo^ earnestly intre^^ed me
to giv^ you directions to that purpose*

What my meditations the afforded, I wrote to you. Since that time, I have
preached (...) walking with God in uprightness, ^ut of Genesis 17. 1. Also of
freedom from carfulness; and of the excellency, and means of peace with God,
out of Phil. 4 5. Now, out of those Sermons, and from fresh meditations and
collections, I have compiled into a short sum, so much as I think may be
sufficient to satisfy your desire touching these demands. The sum of the
following Discourse.


The best way to please God, and the nearest and readiest way to heaven, also
to get a cheerful and quiet heart in the mean time till you come thither, is,
To walk with God in vprightnes, being careful in nothing: but in every thing,
by prayers and supplications, with thankesgiving, to make your requests known
unto God. Whi^^ if you do, The peace of God ^^ich passes all understanding,
shall so establish and guard your heart and mind, in and through Christ Jesus,
that you may live in an Heaven upon earth, and may be joyous and comfortable
in all estates and conditions of life whatsoever.

That you should walk with You must walk with God.
God in vprightnes, is commended to you in the cloud of Examples of Genesis 5. 22.
24.
Enoch, Genesis 6. 9.
Noah, Job 1. 1.
Job, 1 King. 9. 4.
David, Luke 1. 6.
Zacharias and Elizabeth, with many other renowned in Scripture. And is
commanded to Abraham, and in him to all the faithful, Genesis 17. 1.

To live by faith (which is, to frame your life according to the will of GOD
revealed in his Word, the object of faith) and to walk with God, are all one.
Genesis 5. 24.
Enoch was said to have walked with GOD, what was this else but to Heb. 11. 5,
6.
believe and rest on God, whereby he pleased him? For, according to what we
Col. 3. 7.
live, according to that we are said to walk. The moral actions of man's life
are aptly resembled by the Metaphor of Walking, which is a moving from one
place to another. No man while ^e lives here, is at Heb. 13. 14.
home in the ^lace where he shall be. There ^^e two contrary homes to which
every man is always going, either to Heaven or to Hell. Every ^ction of man is
one pace or step whereby he goes to the one place or the other. The holiness
or wickedness of the action is the ^everal way to the place of happiness, or
place of Torment.

So that Gods own children, Heb 11. 3. to 16.
while they live in this world as pilgrims and strangers, are but in the way,
not in the Country which they seek, which is heavenly.

This life of says and holiness, 1 These 1. 9, 10.
what is it, but a going out of a man's self, and a continual returning to God
from the way of ^in and death, and a settled going forward in all those acts of
obedience which God has ordained to be the way for all his children Ephesians. 2, 10
to walk in unto eternal life?

A godly life is said to be a walking with God in respect of four things that
concur thereunto.

First, whereas by sin we naturally How many things concurin our walk with
God.
are Isa. 53. 6.
departed from God, and have gone Romans 3. 12.
away from his ways which he has appointed for us, we by the Heb. 10. 20.
new and living way of Christ's death and resurrection, and by the new and
living work^ of Christ's spirit, are brought near to God, and are set in the
ways of God by Repentance from dead works, and by faith toward God in Christ
Jesus; which are the first Heb. 6. 1.
principles of true Religion, necessarily to be presupposed to be the first
steps in this walking with God. Now to believe and to continue in the faith,
is, to Col 2. 6, 7
walk in Christ; therefore to walk with God.

Secondly, the revealed will of God is called Gods way, because in it God does
as it were come forth of the secret of his holy Majesty, to show his people
their (...) to him, and so takes them a^ to himself; according to ^t in the
Ps. Righteousness shall Psa. ^5. ^^.
before him, and shall set us in the (...) of his steps. Now this way of
righteousness revealed in the lord, is the rule of a godly life; ^ee which
walks according ^^ Gods law, is said to walk be^^re God, (compare 1 King. 8.
25. with 2 Chr. 6. 16.) So that he which walks according to Gods will in the
passages and tur^ings of his life, keeping himself to this rule, walks with
God.

Thirdly, he that lives a godly life, walks after the Spirit, not after the
flesh. He is led by the To. ^. ^. 1^.
Spirit of God, having him for his guide; wherefore in this respect ^he is said
to walk with God. Gal. 5. 1^.


Fourthly, that a man may live godly, it is requisite that by the eye of says
he see God present before him in all his actions; thinking of him often upon al
occasions, Isa 64 1.
remembering him in his ways. Psalm. 16. 8
Setting the Lord always before him, as David did. Heb. 11. 27.
Seeing him that is invisible, as Moses did. Doing all things as S. Paul did
preach, 2 Cor. 2. 17.
as of God, in the sight of God. Now he that so walks that he always
observes Gods presence, and keeps him still in his eye in the course of his
life, and that not only with a general and habitual, but, as much as he can,
with an actual inte^tion to please and glorify God, this man must needs be
said to walk with God.

Would you (in a word) know What it is to walk with God.
when you walk with GOD? (1) When you daily go on to repent of sins past,
believe in Christ Jesus for pardon, and believe his Word for direction. (2)
When you walk not according to the will of man, but of God. (3) When you walk
not after the flesh, but after the spirit. (4) When you set God before you, and
walk as in his sight, ^en you walk with, before, af^^r, and according to God.
That Reasons why Christians should walk with God. 1 Ioh. ^. 6.
^ou may walk with God; con^^der these arguments farther convince and induce
you.

First, you are commanded to ^alke as Christ walked; and it concerns you so to
do, if you would approve your self to be member of his body: for it is
nonstrous, nay, impossible, that ^he head should go one way, and ^he body
another. Now our Savior observed all the three later ^^quisi^es of walking with
God, The former, namely, justifying ^aith and repentance belonging ^ot to him,
because he was without Sin.

Secondly, it is all which the lord requires of you for all his love and
goodness showed unto ^on, in creating, preserving, re^eeming, and saying you.
For what does the Lord require of ^ou but to do justly, and to love Micah. 6.
8.
^ercy, and to walk humbly with our God?

Thirdly, if you walk with God, and keep close to him, you shall be sure to
go in the right way, in that Ier. 6. 16
good old way which is called the Isa. 35. ^.
way of holiness: in a most Pro. 3. 17
straight, most near, and (to a spiritual man) most pleasant way, whose paths
are peace, which ends in the Ier. 6. 16
rest of your soul. For, God teaches his children to Isa. 48. 17 Psa. 15. 12.
Psa. 37. 23.
choose this way: And if they happen to err or to doubt of their way, they
shall hear the voice of Gods Spirit behind them, saying; Isa. 3^. 21
This is the way, walk in it.

Fourthly, if you walk with God, you shall Pro. 3. 23, 24. Psa. 37. 24.
walk safely; you shall not need Psa 3. 5, 6
to fear, though ten thousands set themselves against you. For his presence is
with you, and for you. His holy Psa. 3. 4. 7
Angels encampe about you. And while you walk in his wa^es, they are charged
to Ps. 91. 11, 12
support you, lest you should receive any harm.

Fifthly, When you walk^ with ^od, (though you be alone and without all other
companions) ^u do walk with the best compa^y, even such whereof there is ^ost
need, and best use. While God and you walk together, ^ou have an advantage
above ^ll that walk not with him. For ^ou have a blessed opportunity of that
holy acquaintance with God, which is required in Job. Job 22. 21 to 30.
You have opportunity to speak unto him, to ask him his advice in every thing,
praying with assurance of a gracious hearing. Abraham and his faithful (...)
servant made use of their walking with God for these purposes. Is it not a
rare favor that the most high God shall vouchs^^^ to come down from Heaven and
walk on earth with base man, nay, rather to call up man from earth to Heaven
to walk Phil. 3. ^^ Colos. 3. ^.
with him? It would be therefore shameful and hateful ingratitude not to accept
this offer, and not to obey this charge.

Sixthly ^o set the Lord always in your sight, is an excellent preservative and
restraint from sin. With this shield chaste Genesis 39. 9.
Joseph did repel and quench the fiery darts of the temptations of his lewd
Mistress. For who is so foolish, and shameless, as to transgress wittingly the
just laws of a Father, King, and Judge, knowing that he is present, and does
observe him with detestation, if he so do?

Seventhly, to have the Lord Psalm. 119. 163.
always in your eye and thought, is an excellent remedy against spiritual
stoth and negligence in good duties, and it is a sharp spur to quicken you,
and make you diligent and abundant in the work of the Lord. What serva^t can
be slothful and false in his Masters sight? And what Master will keep a
serva^t that will not observe him and do his commands while ^e himself looks
on?

Eighthly, Walking with God in ^anner abovesaid, does excee^ingly Heb. 11. 5.
please God, please Gods ^oly 1 Cor. 11 10.
Angels, please Gods faith^^ll 3 Ioh. 4.
Ministers, and does please ^d strengthen Psalm. 119 74.
all those good peo^^e of God with whom you do ^^nverse. It is to walk worthy
^^ Godin Col. 1. 9, 10.
all well pleasing.

Ninthly, Thus walking with God, you shall be assured of Gods ^ercy and gracious
favor. He 1 King. 8. 23.
^^epeth covenant and mercy with ^ll his servants that walk before ^im with
all their heart. When ^ou do thus walk in the light, ^ou have a gracious
fellowship with God, and the blood of Jesus 1 Ioh. 17.
Christ cleanses you from all sin. Romans 8. 1.
There is no condemnation to you which thus walk. Your flesh, when you die,
shall rest in hope. ^or to them that set God before ^he^, he does show the path
of life, which will bring them into his ^^orious presence, where are ful^esse
Psa 16. un. to 12. verse.
of joys, and pleasures for e^ermore.

Any one of these motives, advisedly thought upon by a willing, an humble, and
prayerfull person, were enough to persuade to this holy walking with God.

Notwithstanding, it is woeful to consider, how few there be which walk thus.
For most men Ps. 10. 4.
seek not after God, God is not in all their thoughts; they walk in the Ephesians.
4. 17
vanity of their minds 2 Pet. 3. 3
, After their own lusts, the 1 I^. 2. 16
lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life: walking
according to the course of this world, according to the will of Satan, the Ephesians*
2. 2.
Prince of the Power of the air; the spirit that now works in the children
of disobedience. Who refuse to return, orto call themselves into question,
though God doc wait and hearken for it, no, not so much as to say, What have
we done? Ier. 86.
But every one runs to his course, as the horse rusheth into the battle.

Now touching all that walk ^us contrary unto God, God has ^id that he will
set his face a^^inst Levi. 26. 21 to 28.
them, and punish them seven ^es, even with many and sore ^agues. And if yet
they will ^alke contrary to him, he will ^alke contrary to them in fury, and
^nish them seven times, and seven ^mes more for their sins. And if yet they
will walk in impeni^ency, notwithstanding Gods off^r of mercy to them in
Christ, Saint Paul could not speak of Phil. 3. 18, 19.
such with dry eyes, but peremptorily pronounces that their end is destruction.

As for your self, I will say no more but this, Weigh well the premises;
Compare the way, wherein you walk with God, with all other ways, compare
company with all other company, compare guide with guides, and compare the
issues and end of this way with the issues and end of all other ways: and the
choice of your walk will easily and quickly be made.

Thus much be said in general of walking with God.

CHAP. II. How to walk with God in all things, at all times.
THE Commandment to Man must walk with his God in every point of time.
walk with God, is indefinite, without limitation, therefore must be
understood to be a walking with him in all things, and that, at all times, in
all companies, and in all changes, conditions, and estates of your life
whatsoever. To walk with God in gross, is not sufficient.

You are not dispensed with for any moment of your life: but all the days of
your life, and each day of your life, and each hour of that day, and each
minute of that hour; you must pass the time, the whole time of your ^welling
here in fear; even Pro. 23. 17.
all 1 Pet. 1. 17
^he day long, says Solomon. You must endeavor to have a consci^nce void of
offense Acts 24. 16. 1 Pet 4. 2.
always, ^s says the Apostle. You must ^ive the rest of your life, not to the
lusts of men, but to the will of God; taking heed lest at any Heb. 3. 12.
time there be in you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the
living God.

1. For this end Christ did redeem Reasons why a man must walk with God at al
times
you from the hands of your enemies, that you might serve him in holiness and
righteousness (which is the same with walking with God) Luke 1. 74 75.
all the days of your life without fear.

2. The end of the instructions of the Word, which is the light to your feet in
this walking, is, that it be bound upon your heart (...) continually to lead,
keep, and Pro. 6. 21 22.
^alke with you at all times.

3. The lusts of your own ^eart, and your 1 Pet. 5. 8
Adversary the devil lie always upon the advantage to stay you, or to divert
you out of your godly course; so that, upon every intermission of your holy
care to please GOD, they take their opportunity to surprise you.

4. You are accountable unto God for losing and mis-spending all that precious
time wherein you Ephe. 5. 15 16.
do not walk in his ways.

5. Besides, he that has much work to do, or that is in a long journey, or is
running a race for a wager, has no need to lose any time. If you be cast
behind in your work and race, you will hardly recover your loss but with much
sorrow, with renewed ^aith, and with more than ordinary repentance.

Wherefore, when you do awake in the night, or in the morning, and while you are
awake in the day, and when you betake your self to sleep at night, you must as
Christ (foreshadowed David) did, have thoughts on ^d, and Psa. 16, 8 Acts 2, 25.
set him always before (...). Psalm. 139. 18
When I awake, I am still with (...), says David, and in the Psa. 63* 6
night remembered God, and his hope (...) Psalm 119 1^7, 148 Isa. 6. 9.
meditation was on Gods word. ^iah (in the person of all the ^hful) says, With
my soul have ^sired thee in the night, yea, with (...) spirit within me will I
seek ^e early.

(...). In the Instant of awaking let How to awake with God.
our heart be lift up to God with ^ thankful acknowledgement ^f his mercy to
you. For it is he ^at gives his Ps. 127. 2
beloved sleep ^ho keeps you both in soul and body Pro. 6. 22
while you sleep: Who ^enueth his mercies every Lam. 3. 22, 23
morning: for, while you sleep, you ^e as it were out of actual pos^^ssion of
your self, and all things ^se. Now, it was God that kept ^ou, and all that you
had, resto^ing them again with many ^ew mercies when you wake.

2. Arise early in the morning, (if you be not necessarily hindered) following
the example of our Savior Christ; and of the good Ioh. 8. 2. Pro. 31. 5.
housewife in the Proverbs. For this, ordinarily, will make much for the health
of your body, and for the thrift, both of your temporal, and spiritual state;
for hereby you shall have the day before you, and shall gain the most, and the
fittest times for exercises of Religion, and for the works of your calling.

3. In the time betwixt your awaking and arising (if other pertinent and
profitable thoughts offer not themselves) it will be useful to think upon some
of these, I must Ephesians. 5 14 1 Cor. 15 34.
awake from the sleep of Sin to Righteousness, as well as out of bodily
sleep unto labor in my calling. The Romans 13. 11, 12, 13.
night is far spent, the day is at hand, I must therefore east off the works of
darkness, and put on the armor of light. I must walk honestly as in the day,
I am by the light of grace and kowledge, to arise and walk in it, (...) well
as by the light of the Sun (...) walk by it. Think also of your waking out of
the sleep of death, ^d out of the 1 Cor. 15 54, 55.
grave at the ^und of the 1 These 4. 16.
last Trumpet; even (...) your blessed resurrection unto ^ory at the last day.
It was one (...) David's sweet thoughts (spea^ing to God) Ps. 17. 15
When I awake, I ^ll be satisfied with thy likeness. When you arise, and
apparel Fit meditations when a man does apparel himself.
^our self, lose not that prime ^ime (when your wit is freshest) with
uncertain, imperti^ent, boundless and fruitless ^houghts, as it is the
fashion of most men and women for to ^oe. This is a fit time to think upon the
cause why you have need of apparel; namely, the fall and sin of your first
Pa^ents, which from them is derived to you. For before their fall, their
nakedness was their Genesis 1. 31.
comeliness; and seeing it, they Genesis 2. 25.
were not ashamed. It will likewise be to good purpose to consider what base
stuff the wise providence of God has appointed to be the matter o^ apparel.
The ri^ds of plants, the skins, hair, or wool of brui^ beasts, and the
Spittle of the Silkworm; very excrements and cast apparel of unreasonable
creatures. Which, as it does magnify the wisdom, power, and goodness of God in
choosing, and turning such mean things to such excellent use: so it should
humble and keep down the pride of man. For what man, who is in his wits, will
be proud of the badge of his shame even of that arparell, for which (under
God) he is beholding to very plants and beasts?

Now also is a good time to call to mind what rules ^reto be observed, that you
may apparel your self so as becomes one that professes godliness: namely, 1 Timothy, 2. 9 10
That your apparel for matter and fashion doc suite with your enerall and
special calling, and ^ith your ^sstate, De^. 22. 5 1 Cor. 11. 13, 14. 15
sex, and age.

That your wearing your appa^ell q 1 Cor. 12 23
be for health, honostic, and ^comelinesse.

3 That you rather go with (...) lowest, than with the highest of your state
and place.

4. That the fashion be neither 1 Z^ph. 1. 8
strange, immodest, singular, or ^idiculous.

5. That you be not over curions, or overlong, taking up too much time, in
putting it on. Isa. 3. 18 to 24


6 Neither the making nor wearing of your apparel must savor of pride,
lightness, curiosity, lasci^iousnesse, prodigaliti^, or base Phal. 4. 8. 1 Cor.
11.
covetousness: But it must be such as becomes holiness, wisdom, thrift,
and honesty, and such as is well reported of.

7 Follow the example of those of your rank and means, which are most so^er,
most frugall, and most discreet.

While you apparel your self, it will be seasonable and profitable also, by
this occasion, to raise your thoughts, and to fix them Rev. 3. 18.
upon that your apparel which does cloth and adorn 1 Pet. 3, 4
your inward man, which is spiritual, and of a divine matter, which never is
cut of fashion, which never wears out, but is always better for the wearing.
Think thus, If I go naked without bodily apparel, it will be to the shame of
my person, and to the hazard of my health and life: But how much more will the
filthy Rev. 3. 17 Rev. 16. 15 Exo. 32. 25
nakedness of my soul appear to the eyes of men, of Angels, and of God
himself, whose Hab. 1. 13
pure eyes cannot abide filthiness; whereby my soul will be exposed to most
deadly temptations, and my self to Gods most severe Judgments; except I have
put on, and do keep on me the Rev. 19. 8
white linen of Christ's Spouse, the righteousnesses of the Saints, that is,
Justification by faith in ^st, and sanctification of every (...) by the Spirit
of Christ?

and because every day you ^be assaulted with the world, ^esh, and the devil,
you shall ^veli to consider whether you ^e put on, and do improve (...) coat
of male, that complete ar^, prescribed Ephesians. 6. 11 to 18.
.

^hen it shall happen that you (...) use your looking-glass, and Iam* 1. 23,
24, 25.
^xperience find that it serves ^iscover, and to direct you ^w to reform
whatsoever is ^omely, and out of order in ^r body: you may hereby re^mber your
self of the necessi^ and admirable use of the mir^r and glass of Gods Word,
and ^spell of Christ, both read and ^ached, for the good of your ^le. For, this
being understood, (...) believed, does not only ^w what is amisle in the
soul, (...) how it may be amended; (...) insome measure will enable you to
amend; for, it does no^ only show you your own face but the very face and
glory (...) God in Christ jesus, which b^ reflexe upon you, will through the
Spirit work on you a mo^^ excellent effect than on Mos Exodus 34. 29, 30.
face in the Mount; which yet w^ so glorious, that the people cou^ not endure
to behold it. For (...) this Gods glory, which by fait^ you behold in the Word,
yo^ shall be changed into the same (...) 2 Cor. 3, 18
mage, from glory to glory, even (...) by the Spirit of the Lord.

Touching these things which I have prescribed to be though upon, when you
arise, and p^ on your apparel in the morning and those other which I she
prescribe when you put off yo^ apparel at going to bed at nigh^ my meaning is
not to urge the as necessary, as if it were sinne^ omit any of these
particulars: b^ except better come in place, (...) most co^venient. Wherefore
ta^ these Cautions. First, (as I said) if other perti^ent and more profitable
thoughts Cautions to the former directions.
^ffer not themselves, or if you be ^rren of other holy meditati^ns, use these.

Secondly, the bare similitudes, and allusions, with all such re^emblances
which are free (not ^ommanded by God, but in our ^oyce to take up from things
^atural and artificial, to put us in ^ind of spiritual things, and to ^eare
our judgments therein) ^ust beused with puttinga wide ^ifference between
them, and ^hofe which are Sacramental. ^or the Sacraments, besides their
^aturall aptness to signify what ^hey do represent, they have di^ine
institution from GOD, whereby to the believer, they ^re through Gods Spirit
effectu^ll, not only outwardly to signi^ie, exhibit, and seal; but inward^y
to apply and confer the thing signified; these not so, yet as ^elps to your
memory and understanding these are of singular use. For our Savior in his
speeches while he lived upon the earth, and in his writings in the holy
Scripture, is frequent in the use of them, as you may observe in the manifold
parables and similitudes in the Gospel.

CHAP. III. Of beginning the day well, walking with God.
SECTION I.
When you are thus awake, and are risen out of your bed, that you may walk
with GOD the remainder of the day: It will be needful that you first renew
your peace with God, and then keep it, by doing those works of piety,
equity, mercy, and sobriety, which any way may concern you that day. For
Amos 3. 3
how can two walk together safe^y (especially a weak one with him that is
strong) except they be agreed? And how can any walk with God, if he be not
holy in ^ll his conversation? You have as much cause to beware of him, and to
obey his voice and not provoke him who goes before you in the wilderness of
this world, to guide and bring you to his heavenly kingdom; as the Israelites
had, Exodus 23. 20, 21, 22
to beware of him who went before them to keep them in the way, and to conduct
them unto the earthly Canaan, the place which he had promised and prepared for
them. It was for this, that Iosuah told the people, that Josh. 24. ^4. 1^
except they would fear the Lord and serve him in sincerity, and put away
their strange gods, they could net serve God, they could not walk with him.
For he is (says he) a holy God: he is a jealous God: he will not forgive your
transgressions, nor your sins.

For this cause (if unavoydable necessity hinder not) Begin the day with
solemn Ps. 92. 1, 2 Psalm 88 13
prayer and How to begin the day with prayer.
thanksgiving. Before which (that these duties may be the better performed) it
will be convenient, if you have time, that you Ps. 57. 7. Lam. 3. 40, 41. Job
11. 13.
prepare your self by meditation* the matter whereof should be an enquiry into
your present estate, how all things stand between God and you. How you have
carried your self since you last prayed and renewed your peace with God, what
sins you have committed, what graces and benefits you want, what fresh
favors Psa. 116* unto 13.
God has bestowed on you since last you gave him his Tribute of thanks, and
how much praise and thanks you do owe to him also for continuance of the old.
Think also what employments you shall have that day; Consider likewise what
ground and warrant you have to approach to the Throne of Grace, to ask ^ardon,
and to ask, and expect ^avour and help of God. Upon ^hese considerations
rightly pro^ecuted, you must work your ^eart to a resolution through Gods
grace, to reform whatsoever Job 11. 14.
you find to be amiss: And that you will fly unto, and only rely upon Gods
mercy in Christ; that you will acknowledge him in all things; and that you will
now seek grace and help of him, whereby you may walk as in his sight in all
well-pleasing, all that day.

To further you herein, do thus:

First, lay a peremptory charge upon your conscience to deal unpartially,
plainly, and fully in this examination and judging of your self.

Secondly, you should be so well acquainted with the sum Deu. 6. 8, 9
and meaning of the Law, that you may be able to carry in your head a
Catalogue or Table of the principal duties, and vices, required, and forbidden
in each Commandment: whereby you may try your obedience past, and may set
before you a rule of your life for time to come.

Thirdly, (lest the calling to mind the multitude and greatness of your
sins by the Law, should make you despair of Gods favor) you should be so
well exercised in the Articles of the Christian faith, and in the principal
promises and precepts of the Gospel, that you may be able also quickly to call
them to mind for the strengthening of your faith and hope in God. The pattern
of wholesome words should 2 Timothy 1. 13
be familiar unto you for these purposes.

All this need not take up 1 Reasons of due preparation before prayer
much time: you will find it to be time well redeemed. For, first, by such
preparation you shall keep your self from that rude and rash thrusting
yourselfe into Gods holy presence, whereof ^ou are warned in the Scrip^ures,
Eccles. 5. 1, 2.

Secondly, when by this means ^ou have well humbled, softe^ed, 2
seasoned, and set straight your heart to Godward, so that you can say, you Ps
66. 1^ Ioh. 9. 31.
regard no iniquity in your heart: and when hereby you have called your
thoughts in from straggling, and have gotten composedness of mind, and inward
strength of soul, without which the arrow of prayer can never fly home to the
mark; then you may approach unto Gods special presence with more faith and
boldness; you shall be more able to utter before him apt confessions, lawful
requests, and due thankesgivings, more understandingly, more distinctly, more
humbly, more devoutly, more feelingly, more fervently, and with more assurance
of a gracious hearing* (all which are requisite in prayer) then possibly you
could ever be able to do without such preparation.

Thirdly, this due preparation 3
to prayer does not only fit you to pray* but is an excellent furtherer of a
godly life. For it makes the conscience tender and watchful over you, by the
daily exercise of the knowledge of the precepts and threats of the Law, and of
the precepts and promises of the Gospel: And it being enforced to examine,
accuse, judge, and pass sentence, yea, to do a kind of execution upon you for
your sin, smiting your heart, and wounding it self with godly fear, grief,
and shame (a work to which the conscience is loath to come, till it must
needs:) wherefore to prevent all this trouble, vexation, and smart, it will
rather give all diligence in other acts which are more pleasing, namely, it
will direct you in the ways of God, check and warn ^ou beforehand, lest you
should sin; to the end that when you come to examine your self again, it
might find matter, not of grieving and tormenting, but of rejoicing and
comforting your heart, which is the most proper, 2 Cor. 1* 12
and most pleasing work of a sanctified conscience. He that knows that he
himself must (and none for him) be at much pains to make himself whole and
clean when he is wounded and defiled, will take the more heed lest he wound
and defile himself.

Fourthly, this due preparation to prayer, taken up in good part with
examining, judging and reforming your self, does prevent Gods judging of you;
for when you judge your self, you shall not 1 Cor. 11. 31.
be judged of the Lord, says the Apostle.

Being rightly prepared, you How to be disposed in the act of prayer.
must draw near into Gods special presence, Psalm 55.
falling low at his footstool, representing him to your thoughts in the
apprehension of one who is in himself, and of himself, the only heavenly,
all-knowing, and All-mighty Majesty Mat. 6. 9.
and Deity: now become your loving and merciful Father through Christ his
Son, your Lord. Then you must 1 Samuel 1. 15
power out your soul before him in confessing your sins, and in making Phil.
4. 6.
your desires ( through the spirit) known unto him in the name of Christ, for
your self and others in all lawful petitions, and supplications, with
thankesgiving; And all this with 1 Cor. 14 15
understanding, with the intention and full bent of the soul Iam. 5. 16
with servor, and Mark 11. 2^
expectation of being heard, in due time and measure, and in the best manner.

The rule and boundary to you for all things required in prayer, is the Lords
Prayer. If you would have reasons to persuade you to this duty of prayer, and
would have further information, touching the fore-pointed-at particular
requisites in prayer, I refer you to that which I have already *published upon
the Lords Prayer. The Key of Heaven.
And touching the chief impedients to prayer, with their removals, I refer
you to the Epistle of my loving and reverend friend, Master Dr. Sibbs, written
before the said Treatise.

SECTION 2. Cautions and advertisements about Prayer.
UNto the Directions Cautions to be observed in preparation to prayer, and in
prayer.
both for preparation to prayer, and concerning prayer it self, take these
Cautions:

First (if it may be) Omit neither the one, nor the other, and let them be the
Psa. 5. 3.
first work after you are up. But if that cannot be, because of some necessary
let, yet perform them so soon as you can, and as well as you can: though you
can do neither, either so soon, or so well as you would, yet omit them not
altogether. Break through all seeming necessities, which will daily cast in
themselves to hinder and thrust out these duties. The Devil, knowing that
nothing does undermine and overthrow his kingdom more than these duly
performed; knowing also that this spiritual performance of them is tedious to
corrupt nature, he will thrust upon you seeming necessities, so many, and so
often, that if you be not watchful to gain, and to take time, breaking through
all such lets as are not truly necessary; you shall ofttimes by the
circumvention of the flesh, and of the Devil, be brought to an omission of
Preparation, or Prayer, or both. Upon which will follow like occasions,
together with a pronenesse to the like neglect, and a greater indisposition to
these duties afterward.

Secondly, lay not too great a task upon your self in this preparation to
prayer, I mean, so much as will take up more time than the works of your
calling, and other needful affairs will permit: but contrive and husband your
time so, that every lawful business may have his Eccle. 3. 1
own time. God has subordinated the works of your general and particular
calling in such sort, that, ordinarily, the one shall not drive out the other.

If through taking too much time in preparation to prayer, and in prayer,
either of them grow necessarily tedious and burdensome; Satan will circumvent
you by this means, causing you out of a true weariness of too much (even
before you are aware) to omit them altogether.

Thirdly, (whereas when you prepare your self to pray, and when you do pray,
it is lawful to think of your worldly business, to the end that you might
pray for direction and for good success therein; for you may ask your Mat. 6.
11
daily bread) you must take heed when you think on these things, that your
thoughts be not worldly through Lu. 12. 29
distempers and distractions about the same. For these will abate your
spiritualnes and strength in prayer, and will shut the ears of God against
your prayer.

I remember you desired me to show you the signs and remedies of distempers
and distractions about worldly things in your preparations to prayer. By
distempers, I mean inordinate trouble about the means, and by distractions, I
mean a vexing trouble about success.

You may know that your mind is diste^pered with world linesse (even in
thinking on ^wfull business) when you pre^re your self to prayer, by these
^^rkes.

First, when (except in case of ^^cessitie in their apparent dan^r) your
worldly affairs are ^st in your thoughts to be the ^atter of your meditation.
For ^oughts how to hallow Gods ^me, and how his kingdom may ^^e, and how you
may do his ^ll, should ordinarily be in your ^inde, before those that con^rne
your daily bread.

2. When they interpose themslves, interrupt and iustle out ^ose good thoughts
whereon you ^ere thinking before, before ^at you have thought of them
^fficiently.

3. When your thoughts of ^orldly business are with grea^r intention of mind,
than the ^oughts of things spiritual and ^eavenly.

4. When they last longer than ^ch as immediately concern the glory of God, and
the good of your soul; or hold you too long upon them.

5. You shall know it by the Signs of diste^pred thoughts through worldlines
in preparations to prayer.
ends which you propound to your self in your thoughts of worldly business;
Are the ends you propound, only, or chiefly that you may prevent poverty, or
that you may have wherewith to satisfy your natural desires? If you propound
not other, and more spiritual ends, your thoughts of them at that time, are
worldly: but if your thoghts of your worldly business, be to the end that you
may lay them to the rule of Gods Word, that you may not offend him in your
labor and care about them; or that you might crave Gods direction and blessing
upon your said care and labor, you being spiritual in thoughts of worldly
business, then your thoughts of lawful business are not distempered with
worldliness.

To remedy these distempered thoughts; First, get a sound Remedies against
distempered thoughts in preparation to prayer.
and clear judgment to discern of what is good, what is bad, also what is
best, and what is least good; preferring things spiritual, heavenly, and
eternal, incomparably before those which are corporal, earthly, and temporary.
Make those best things Mat 6. 21
your Treasure, then your heart will be chiefly set, and your thoughts will
chiefly run on them: and will be moderate in thinking of those things which are
less needful.

2. Do as a wise Counselor at Law, and as a Master of Requests, who must
hear many Clients, and receive and speed many Petitions. Consider whose turn
it is, and what is the most important suit, and dispatch them first. Let
thoughts of worldly business be shut out, and made stand at door, till their
turn be to be thought upon, and till the more excellent, and more needful be
dispatched.

3. If thoughts of the world will impudently intrude themselves, and will not
be kept out; rebuke them sharply, give them no hearing, but dishearten them,
and rebuke the porter and keeper of the door of your heart, smite, wound, and
check your conscience, because it did not check and restrain them.

4. In all lawful business, inure yourselfe hoc agere, Eccles. 9. 10
fully and sufficiently to intend that one thing which you have in hand for the
present; and at all times restrain wandering thoughts as much as may be. Let
your Reason get such power over Fantasy, that you may be able to think of
what you please, when you please You will say, to a sickle brain this is hard,
if not impossible. To this I answer, If you would not nourish and entertain
evil flying, and unseasonable thoughts when they arise; and would (as often as
they offer themselves) be much displeased with them, and with your self for
them; then in time you shall find it possible, and not exceeding hard to think
of what good things you would, and not of what evil things you would not.

5. Lastly, when the time and turn of thinking and doing of your worldly
businessesis come, then think thereof sufficiently, and to good purpose* for
then they will be the l^sse troublesome in thrusting themselves in out of
place, because it is known that in their place, they shall be fully regarded.
Idleness and improvidence about these things, puts a man into streights many
times, and into distempers about his worldly business, more then, cls, needs,
or would be.

How to know that thoughts about success in worldly business are distractio^s
in preparation to prayer, with the remedy.
You would also know when your thoughts of success in your worldly affairs
are distractions in your preparation to prayer together with a remedy against
them.

To think, that, if you be not provident and diligent in your calling, and*
that if God do not bless your diligence, you may do the works of your
calling in vain, and that you may look for ill success; thus to think is
lawful and useful. For it will raise up in you a resolution to be provident
and diligent; and when you have done all you can, these thoughts also will
quicken you to prayer unto God for success. But if your thoughts of thriving,
or not thriving, be other then these, and do bring forth other effects;
namely, if desire of success drive you to think of using unlawful means,
from doubting that you cannot so soon, or so certainly, or not at all, speed by
the only use of lawful: if it make you full of anxietie and fear, that
though you use what good means you can, all will be in vain: if you be yet
doubtful and Mat. 6. 25
take thought about what you shall eat, what you shall drink, and what you
shall put on, or how you and yours shall live another day, then your thoughts
about success in worldly business, are worldly, and distractfull.

I shall let this sin with its remedy appear morefully when I shall write
against taking care in any thing, cap. 13.

Yet for the present, know: All the fruit you shall reap through eating up
your heart with fear and distrust, doubting of success, will be nothing else,
but a farther degree of vexation of heart. For all the carking in the world
cannot bring good success. Besides, nothing provokes the Lord to give ill
success sooner, then when you shall nourish distrustful care.

Secondly, consider the ability and faithfulness of GOD, who has taken care
of the success of your labor upon him: commanding you not to care, but to 1
Pet. 5. 7
cast all the care on him. If you would rest upon this, you might be secure of
good success in ^our outward state, even according to your desire; or else God
will more then recompense the want thereof, by causing you to thrive, and to
have good success in spiritual things, which is much better, and which you
should desire much more.

4. A fourth caution to be observed in your preparation to prayer, and in
prayer, is, Be not slight and formal herein, which is, when cursorily, and
out of an overt custom, you only call your sins, your duties, Gods favors and
his promises unto a bare and fruitless remembrance. For if the heart be not
withal affected with anger, fear, grief, and shame for sin. And if it be
not affected with joy, and with an acknowledgement of being beholding to God
for his favors. Moreover, if it be not affected with hope and confidence in
God at the remembrance of his blessed promises. And if withal, the heart be
not gained to a renowed resolution for to reform what is faulty, and to cry
earnestly to God for grace and mercy, and for the time to come to endeavor to
live a godly life; all your preparation is nothing* Nay, this slight and
fruitless eal^ing of vice and virtue to remem^rance, and no more, is a great
^holdner and strengthner of sin; and a great weakner and quencher ^f the
Spirit. For sins are like to ^dle vagrants, and lawless sub^ects; If
Officers call such before them, and, either say nothing to them, or only give
them threat^ing words, but do not make them smart, they grow ten times ^ore
bold, more insolent, and ^wlesse. Good thoughts are like ^^ dutiful servants
and loyal ^^bjects, such as are ready to ^ome at every call, and offer
them^^lves to be employed in all good services: now if such be not cherished in
their readiness, they ( 2 Samuel 19 3.
like David's people) return dis-heartned, and their edge to future readiness
is taken off. Besides, this cursorie performing of holy duties, is the high way
to an habit of hypocrisy, that cursed Marre-good.

5. My last caution is* that if in your meditations, and in your prayers you
find a dullness and want of spiritualnesse, I would have you to be humbled in
the sense of your impotency and infirmity; yet, Be not discouraged* nor yet
give them over: but rather betake your self to these duties with more
diligence* and earnestness. When you want water, (your Plumpe being dry) you,
by pouring in a little water, and by much labor in plumping, can fetch water;
so, by much laboring the heart in preparation, and by Luke ^1. 13.
prayer, you may recover the gift of prayer. And as when your fire is out, you,
by laying on fuel, and by blowing the spark remaining, do kindle it: so by
meditation whereby you must 2 Timothy 1 6*
stir up the grace that is in you, and by the breath of prayer, you may
revive and inflame the spirit of grace and prayer in you. Yet, if you find
that you have not time to prepare by meditation, or having time, if you find a
confusion and distraction in your meditation, then it will be best to break
through all lets, and without further preparation fall upon the duty of prayer,
only with premeditation of God to whom, and of Christ by whom through the
Spirit you must pray.

If for all this you do not satisfy your self in these holy exercises, yet
give them not over: for God is many times best pleased with your services,
when, through an humble sense of your failings, you are displeased with your
self for them. Yea, if when you have wrastled and contended with God in
prayer, you are forced to Genesis 32. 25. 31.
go halting and limping away with Jacob, in the sense of your infirmities; yet
be not dismayed, for it is a good sign that you have prevailed with Hos. 12. 4.
God, as Genesis 32. 28
Jacob did.

God uses, when he is overcome by prayer, to work in them that do overcome
some sense of weakness, to let them know, that they prevail with him in
prayer, not by any strength of their own, or by any worthiness of their prayer
(when they have prayed best) but from the goodness of Gods free grace, from
the worthiness of Christ's intercession, by whom they tender their prayers, and
from the truth of his promise made unto them that pray. If it were not thus,
many, when they have their hearts desire in prayer, would ascribe all to the
goodness of their prayers, and not to the free grace of God; and would be proud
of their own strength, which in truth is none at all.

CHAP. IV. How to walk with God, the whole day, after it is well begun.
SECTION 1.
When you have thus begun the day by prayer by your self, thus making your
peace with God, and craving his gracious presence to go along with you, and
for you, that day: you must then conscionably, according to the nature of the
day (be it one of the six days, or the Sabbath and Lords day) apply your
self to the business of that day, whether it be in acts of Religion, or of
your personal calling, or in any other works belonging unto you, as you are
superior or inferior in Family, Church, or Commonwealth; whether it be also
in acts of bodily repasts, recreation, or sports, doing all as in Gods sight.

And because all lawful business is 1 Timothy 4. 5
sanctified by the Word and Prayer, and for that it is part of your calling (as
you are Master of a Family) to govern your people in the fear of GOD, and to
teach them to live godly, therefore it is your part to take the fittest time in
the morning to call them together and pray with them, before which prayer, it
will be profitable to read the Scripture in order, with due reverence, taking
also opportunities in all fit times to instruct them in the principles of
Religion, often Deuteronomy. 6 7
whetting the Word upon them.

If it be a working day, Betake your self ordinarily to the work of your
particular calling. For whosoever has no calling whereby he may be profitable
to the society of man in Family, Church or Commonwealth: or having a lawful
calling does not follow it, he lives 2 These. 3. 10, 11.
inordinately. God never made any man for play, or to do nothing. And
whatsoever a man does, he must do it by virtue of his calling, receiving
warrant from it, else he cannot do it in faith; Heb 11. 6
without which no man can please GOD. Besides, whosoever is called to
Christianity, has no way to heaven, but by walking with GOD in his 1 Cor. 7.
17. 24.
personal and particular calling, as well as in his general calling.

1. That you may do this, first, be sure that the thing wherabout you labor,
either with head, or hand, be lawful and How a man should carry himself
before God in his calling.
good.

2. Be Ephesians. 4. 25.
diligent and industrious, for the Pro. 13. 4
sluggard and idle person desires, but has nothing: but the Pro. 10. 4
diligent hand makes rich.

3. Let there be truth, plainness, and equity in all your dealings with men.
1 The. 4. 6
Circumvent and defraud no man. Make not your own gain the waights and
measures to trade by. I will propound unto you sealed waights and rules,
according to which, you must converse with all men.

(1) Consider your neighbors good as well as your own. Weigh unpartially with
your self what proportionable commodity (in common estimation according to
the times) your neighbor is like to have for that which you receive of him.
For you must Mat. 22. 39
love your neighbor as your self. In whatsoever you have to do with men, you
must not look only to your own advantage, but to the benefit also of Phil.
2. 4.
your neighbor.

(2) Observe the Royal Law, the Standard of all equity in this kind: Mat. 7.
12.
Whatsoever you (with a rectified judgment and honest heart) would that men
should do unto you, do you even so unto them: for this is the Law and the
Prophets.

4. Be provident that you let Prove. 6. 6, 7, 8
not slip your opportunities: and take heed lest in these evil times you be
circumvented by fraud, and falsehood, and be ensnared by unnecessary Pro. 11. ^^
Suretiship.

5. Whereas in every calling Pro. 22. 26 Prove. 6. 1. to 6.
there is a mystery, and, for the most part, each calling and condition of
life has its special sin or sins, which the Devil and custom for gain or
credit sake amongst wicked men, has made to seem lawful; yea, has put a
kind of necessity thereupon, which cannot be shunned but with exposing a
man's self to loss, or censure: Look you narrowly by the light of the Word,
and by experience to find out that or those sins, then be as careful to
avoid them.

SECTION 2. Concerning Superiors and Inferiors.
THere are other works also, such as concern you as you Rules to direct
superiors.
are a superior, and in authority, or as you are inferior and subject,
either in Family, Church, or Commonwealth, in doing whereof you must take GOD
along with you, following the directions of his Word and Spirit.

1. As you are a Superior, first, walk worthy of all honor and due respect,
carrying your self in your place with such holiness, wisdom, gravitie,
justice and mercy, keeping such a mean between too much rigor and
remissness, between straining your authority Lev. 25. 43.
too far, and loosening it too much, that those under your charge may have
cause both to fear and love you.

2. Wait on your office, and be watchful over your charge with all diligence
and faithfulness, using all good means to contain them in their duties of 1 Timothy 2 2.
Godliness and honesty; which is the only end why God has set you over them.
The means are: (1) Go before them in good example. Examples of Superiors
Means whereby superiors may contain inferiors in their duties.
have a kind of constraining power working powerfully and insensibly upon
inferiors. (2) Job 1. 5.
Pray with, and for them. (3) Command only things lawful, possible, and
convenient, and only those to which the extent of your authority from God and
man does allow you. (4) As much as in you is, procure for them the means, and
put them upon the Exo. 20. 8, 9, 10.
opportunities of being, and of doing good. (5) Prevent likewise and remove all
occasions of their being, and of doing evil. (6) Protect and defend them, as
much as lies in you, from all wrongs and injuries. (7) When they do well, Ps.
101. 6
encourage them, by letting them see that you take notice as readily of their
well doing, as of their faults; and so far as shall be fit, let them have the
Pro. 31. 31.
praise and fruit of their well-doing. (8) When they do evil, rebuke them
with more or less heat of anger, according to the greatness of their fault:
but never with Col. 3. 19 21 Ephesians. 6. 9.
bitterness, in rating, and reviling them by terms of disdain, and base
contempt. There should be always more strength of reason in your words to
convince them of their sin, and to make them see their danger, and to know
how to be reformed; then heat of anger, in uttering your own displeasure. (1)
If admonitions and words will reclaim them, then, proceed not to corrections
and blows: but if they regard not your reproves, Prove. 29. 15. 17. 19
then according to the nature of the fault, and condition of the person, and
the limits of your authority, you must, in mercy to their soul, give them
sufficient, but not excessive punishment. (10) When you have done thus, and
have waited a convenient time for their amendment, but find none, then, when
they declare themselves to be rebellious, you must Deuteronomy 21. 18, 19, 20, 21
Means to keep governors from abusing their authority.
crave the help of higher authority.

That you may govern according to these directions: Consider well and often,
first, that those whom you govern, are such whom you must not oppress,
neither may you rule over them with Leu. 25. 39. 43.
rigor; because they now are, or may be 1 Pet. 3. 7 Philem. 16
heirs of the same grace together with you.

Secondly, Remember often that you have a Ephesians. 6. 9. Col. 4. 1.
Superior in heaven, that you are his servant and deputy, governing under
him; that all your authority is from him, and that all you do, in governing,
must be for him, and how at last a time will come when you must give account to
him of your Government.

As you are Ex. 20* 12
under Authority, Rules to direct inferiors.
(1) You must honor and reverence all whom God has set over you. (2) You must
Ephesians. 5 24 and 6. 1. 5. Heb. 13. 17
obey them in all such their lawful commands as are within the compass of
their Authority and commission, and that with fidelity, and singleness of
heart, for the 1 Pet 2. 13, 14. Ephesians. 6. 5, 6.
Lords sake. (3) You must submit to their reproves, corrections and just
restraints with patience, without murmuring, muttering, and Tit* 2. 9.
answering again, or resisting; For if you do not submit to the powers that
be ordained of God, or if you Rom* 13. 2
resist them, you rebel against God, and do resist the ordinance of God:
which who so does, shall receive to himself damnation. But if you not only
for wrath, but chiefly for Romans 13. 5.
Conscience to God do submit your selves to every 1 Pet. 2. 13. 14.
ordinance of man, doing therein the Ephesians 6. 6, 7, 8.
will of God from the heart; then, whether men requite you, or not, you shall
be sure of the Col. 3. 24
Lord to receive the reward of inheritance: for thus obeying men, you serve the
Lord Christ.

SECTION 3. Touching Repasts and Recreations.
THe constitution of man's soul and body is such, that they cannot long endure
to be employed, and stand bent with earnestness upon any thing, wherefore
refreshing is needful.

First, the whole man is refreshed by eating and drinking: In which you must be
first holy: secondly, just; thirdly, temperate.

1. It was their sin, which fed themselves without all Iud. 12.
fear of God. Meats and drinks are not good to a man, if he be not Tit. 1.
15. 1 Timothy 4. 4, 5.
pure Rules for eating and drinking.
and holy, and if they be not received with prayer and thankesgiving.

2. You must not eat bread Pro. 20. 17 2 The. 3. 12
of deceit, or ill gotten food: every man must eat his own bread, God would
have no man to eat the Pro. 4. 17
bread of wickedness, nor yet drink the wine of violence.

3. Moreover, you must not eat for gluttony, and Romans 13. 13 Pro. 23. 20, 21.
drunkenness, to please the palate, and to glut the appetite; but for Eccle.
10. 17
health and strength.

2. A man when he is weary, may be refreshed likewise by variety and
interchange of the duties of his particular, and general calling. And the best
Recreation to a spiritual mind, when it The best recreation
is weary of worldly employments, is to walk into Can. 4. 12 13, 14, 15 And
5. 1.
Christ's garden, and there, by reading and Ps. 94. 19
meditating, singing of Psalms, Col. 3. 10
and holy conference, you may solace your self with the sweet comforts of the
holy Spirit, and may work your heart to joy in God, even to joy in the holy
Ghost, and to a Psalm. 119 14. 16. 24.
delight in the Commandments and Word of God. This is the most profitable,
most ravishing, and most lasting delight of all other. Now, by as much as the
soul is of a better, and of a more heavenly constitution, by so much it more
contenteth, and satisfies it self in these delights.

Yet since Sports, even bodily and natural delights, are part of our Christian
liberty, therefore (taking heed that you abuse not your liberty) you may when
you have need, recreate your self with them. Now that you may sport as in Gods
sight, follow these directions:

1. The matter of your sports Rules for sporting.
must be of a common nature, and of things of indifferent use. Things holy are
too good, and things vicious are too bad to be sported or played with.

2. Sports must be seasonable for time; Not on the Sabbath day, in which time
God forbids all men to seek their Isa. 58. 13.
own pleasures. Ordinarily sports must be used not before, but after the body
or mind has been thoroughly employed in honest business. Not overlong to the
expense and loss of your precious time, which you should study to Ephesians. 5. 16
rede^me, not to pass away.

3. Sports must always be kept within the lists of 1 Cor. 16 14.
Charity, both to your self, and to your neighbor. If your sports do
impeach, or hazard your own, or your neighbors name, life, estate, or
comfortable living, your sport is unlawful.

4. Although Sports may be used, yet they must not be loved, or used
immoderately to fill your self with earthly delights, looking at no further or
higher end: For as he that eats and drinks that he may enlarge his
appetite, that he may yet eat and drink: so he that sporteth that he may
sport, is brutish and sensual. It is very Epicurisme: God has threatened that
he that Prove. 21. 17.
loves sports, shall be a poor man, and he that loves wine and oil, shall
not be rich.

5. Whatsoever your sport be, you must so recreate the outward man, that you be
no way worse, but rather better in the inward man. For God has set such a
blessed order in all lawful things; that the meanest being lawfully used,
shall not hinder, but further the best things.

6. In all sports you must propound the right end: the next and immediate end
is to revive your weary body, and to quicken your dull mind: but your furthest
and principal end is, that with this your refreshed body and quickened spirit,
you may the better serve, and 1 Cor. 10 31.
glorify God. For, whether you eat or drink, or whatsoever you do else, let
all be done to the glory of God, says the Apostle.

Thus much shall serve for direction how you should walk with God upon any of
the six days, except there be special cause of setting a day apart for holy
use, as, for fasting and prayer.

CHAP. V. Of Religious Fasting.
SECTION 1.
I Forbear to write of the many kinds of Fasts, and of keeping Wednesday,
Friday, and Lent Fasts: Only thus much, It is evident, both by the Hom. li. 2.
Page 89.
profession and practice of our Church and State in England, that with us they
are held to be Civil, observed for the good of the Commonweal. For choice
has been often made of Wednesdayes and Fridayes both in and out of Lent for to
be kept for Religious Fasts, Anno 1629
which needed not to have been, if the Fasts kept before upon those days had
been judged to be Religious; Yet they have their lawful use, so far forth
as they conduce to their civil end, and are freed from Popish abuse and
superstition. And I do advise you, and all good Subjects, according Romans 13.
1. 5 1 Pet* 2. 13 14
as it will stand with your health, for to observe them.

The Fast which I mentioned in the end of the former Chapt. of which I am to
treat in this, is a Religious Fast. Which is, A sanctifying a day to the Lord
by a willing abstinence from me at^ and drink, and from delights and worldly
labors, that the whole man may be more thoroughly humbled before God, and more
fervent in prayer.

This Fast has two parts; the one, outward, the chastening the body; the
other, inward, the afflicting of the soul, under which are contained all those
Religious acts which concern the setting of the heart straight to Godward, and
the seeking help of God for those things, for which the Fast is intended.

Take Fasting strictly for bodily abstinence, so it is an indifferent thing,
and is no part of Gods worship: But take it as it is joined with the inward
part, and is referred to a religious end, being a profession of an
extraordinary humiliation, and a great furtherance to a man's spiritual and
reasonable service of God, giving a stronger and speedier wing to prayer, which
Ezr. 8. 23 Ps. 35. 13.
must always go with it, so it is more then an ordinary worship.

It has the name from the outward part; it being most sensible: But has its
excellency and efficacy Mar. 9. 29. 1 Cor. 7. 5. Act. 13. 3.
from the inward, it being that for which the outward is observed.

It is called Public, when a whole State, or when any one public
Congregation does fast.

Private, when one alone, one family, or some few together do fast.

God commanded a set Fast to be observed yearly of the Jews; Lev. 16. 29 30.
Lev. 23. 27 Number. 29 7
By which they (forbearing only the Sacrifices and public Solemnities) did
learn to keep the private, according as they had cause.

Public and private have their warrant from the new Testament, as well as from
the Old; Which a Judge. 20* 26 1 Samuel 7* 6
shows that religious Fasts were not peculiar to the Jews; but are a
Christian duty belonging to all fitly qualified for them.

In the times of the government of Chro. 20. 3 Joel 2. 15.
Judges, and 2 Samuel 12 19 Psa. 35. 13.
Kings, before the Captivity, and of the Hest. 4. 16 Dan. 9. 3. Nehe. 9. 1
Ezr. 8. 21.
Rulers of the Jews after the Captivity, we have manifold examples of private
Fasts; and examples and commandment for public.

Our Lord and Savior said, Mat. 9. 15
that his Disciples after his departure from them should fast; and gives
direction unto all touching Mat. 6. 16 17
private fasts. The Apostle 1 Cor. 7. 5
speaks of the husbands and wives abstaining from the marriage bed, that they
might give themselves to fasting and prayer: And we have the practice of the
Act* 13. 2, 3 Act. 14. 23
Apostles again and again for public fasts. All which prove fasting to be a
Christian duty.

The case of a man's self, of others, A general reason of Fasting.
yea of the Church and Commonwealth may be such, that ordinary humiliation and
prayer will not suffice. For as there were some Devils that could not be cast
out, Mar. 9. 29
but by fasting and prayer; so it may be that such hardness of heart may be
grown upon a man; or some sinful lusts ^ay have gotten so much strength ^at
they will not be subdued; ^ome 1 Samuel 7. 5. 7. Judge. 20. 18. 13. compared with
verse. 26.
evils private and public, which cannot be prevented or ^^moved; some special
graces ^^d blessings, which shall not be ^^tained or continued, but by ^^e most
importunate seeking of ^od, by Fasting and Prayer.

Fasting is contrary to that ful^sse 1 Reasons why the body must be afflicted.
of bread, which makes ^th body and soul more prone ^vice, and indisposed to
religi^s duties through drowsinesse ^head, heaviness of heart, dul^sse and
deadness of spirit; ^ow these being removed, and ^e pamprednesse and pride of
(...) flesh taken down by fasting, (...) body will be brought into ^jection to
the soul, and both ^dy and soul to the will of ^d more readily, then other^e
they would be.

A day of Fast is a great fur^rance 2
to the soul for the better performing of holy duties, such as Meditation,
Reading, and Hearing the Word, Prayer, Examining, Judging, and Reforming a man's
self; both because his spirits are better disposed, when he is fasting, to
serious and sad devotion; and, by reason of so large a time wherein the mind
is taken wholly off from the thoughts, cares, and pleasures of this life, he
may be more intent, and more wholly taken up in seeking of God.

Fasting is an open profession 3
of guiltiness before God, and an expression of sorrow and humiliation, it
being a real acknowledgement of man's unworthiness, even of the common
necessaries of this present life.

But it is not enough that the 1 Reasons why the soul must be afflicted. Isa.
58. 5.
body be chastned, if that the souls be not withal afflicted; because, (1) it
is else but a mere bodily exercise which profits little* nay, it is but an
by pocriticall fast, abhorred and condemned of God, frustrating a chief end of
the outward fast, which is, that the soul may be afflicted.

Afflicting the soul works 2
Repentance, another chief end, and companion of Fasting. For godly sorrow
causes repentance, never 2 Cor. 5. 10
to be repented of.

When the soul is afflicted, and 3
heavy laden with sin, then a man will readily and earnestly seek after
God, even as the sick will to the Physician for Physic, and as a condemned
man to the Hos. 5. 15.
King for a Pardon. In their affliction (says God) they will seek me
diligently. If this be true of the outward, then much more of inward affliction.

The afflicted soul is a fit object 4
of Gods mercy; to him does God look that is poor and of a contrite Isa. 66.
2.
spirit, that trembles at his word; yea, the bowels of his fatherly Ier. 31.
19, 20.
compassion are troubled for him that is troubled and ashamed for his sin.

Moreover, upon a day of humiliation (if a man deal sincerely) this affliction
of his soul drives him quite out of himself to seek help of God in Christ,
and makes him endeavor to bring his soul into such good frame, that he may
truly say that he does no^ regard iniquity Psa. 66. 18.
in his heart; and ha^ his unfeigned purpose is, and endeavor shall be to keep a
good ^onscience, toward God and man (...) Whence follows boldness, and
assurance that God will be Ioh. 15. 7.
found of him; and that in Gods own time, and in the best manner he shall have
all his holy desires fulfilled.

All whom lawful Authority Who are to keep a public fast.
enjoyneth, are to keep a Joel 1. 14
publik Fast, so far as health will permit.

These only may keep a private Fast.

Such as are of understanding, 1
else how can they search out their ways, judge themselves, or pray.

In public Fasts, if Authority think fit, little children may be Who may
keep a private Fast. Joel 2. 16.
caused to fast, that the Parents, and others of understanding may (as by
objects of misery) be stirred up to a more through humiliation; but, in private,
Children and Idiots are to be exempted.

Secondly, Novices and unexperienced 2 Mat. 9 14 16, 17. Luke 5 33, 34, 35, etc.
Christians are not to fast in private; such were Christ's Disciples, then, when
exception was taken at our Savior, because they fasted not; whom he excuses,
not only for that it was unseasonable to fast in a time of joy, while he the
Bridegroom was with the^: but because they were not able to bear so strong an
exercise, they being like old vessels, and old garments, which would be made
worse rather than better by the new wine, or new cloth of fasting. Strong
physic is good, but not for babes. There is not the same reason why they may
fast in private as in public, because the Minister by teaching them, and by
praying with them, and for them, takes from them the greatest part of the
burden of the fast in public.

Thirdly, all such as are not in their own power, are not to keep a private
fast, when those under whose power they are, shall expressly contradict it. For
the husband might disallow the vow of his wife, even that wherewith Numb. 30.
5. 8. 13.
she had bound her self to afflict her soul by fasting. Wherefore none may
fast against the will of those which have full power to command their service
and attendance. How often we must fast.


Public Fasts are to be kept as often as Authority shall see cause.

Private, as often as a man shall have more then ordinary cause 2 Samuel 12. 16.
Neh. 1. 4.
of seeking unto God, either for others or himself, for removing or preventing
imminent judgments from the Church and Commonweal; or for the procuring
their necessary good; for subduing some headstrong lust; for Dan. 9. 3. Act.
10. 30.
obtaining some necessary grace, or special blessing; for preparing himself
for some special service of God, or the like.

Though I cannot but justly complain of Christians seldom fasting; yet I dare
not allow you to make this extraordinary exercise of Religion to be ordinary
and common; for then it will soon degenerate into mere Form, or
Superstition: but wish you to observe it as you shall have special occasion,
and when ordinary seeking of God is not likely to prevail.

It is indifferent which of the six days you set apart for fasting according
as shall best suit with your occasions. As for the Lords day, though it cannot
be denied but that if the present necessity require, you may fast upon that
day, neither can I utterly deny servants, and such as are under the power of
others (if they can have no other time) sometimes to make choice of that day;
yet because the Sabbath is a day of Christian Cheerfulness; And for that
Heretics have heretofore The Maniches, Aug. Casulan^. Episl. 86.
made the Sabbath their Fasting day, and so it may be a scandal to Religion;
and because Fasting is somewhat of the nature of a free-will-offering, I think
you shall do best to set such a day apart to your self for Fasting, which is
more your own, and not the Lords day.

The Scripture has not determined How long we must fast. Host 416.
how long a continued fast should be kept. We have examples that some have
fasted a longer time, as Three days; some a shorter, but none less than one
day. In hotter Countries they Judge. 20. 26.
could without impeachment of health abstain from food longer then we can who
live in a colder; but the body cannot be sufficiently afflicted through want of
food in less time than one day.

Thus I have proved Religious Fasting to be a Christian duty. And have showed
what it is; also the parts and kinds of it; Who should and may fast, when, and
how long. It remains that I show you how you may keep a Fast acceptably to
God, and profitably for your self, which is the principal thing to be
regarded in a fast. And this I do the rather, because many well-affected
Christians have importuned me thereunto; who have professed that they would
gladly set about the duty; but ingeniously confessed, that they knew not how
to do it, and (in particular) how to be intentive and spiritually employed
for want of matter for a whole day together. But of this in the next Section.

SECTION 2.
BY way of preparation to a religious Fast, do thus: Preparation to a fast 1


Take but a moderate supper the night before; for if a man glut himself over
night, he will be more unfit for the duty of humiliation the next day, and it
differs, in effect, little from breaking of fast next morning.

When you commend your 2
self to God alone by prayer, that night (as every good Christian usually
does) then set the time alloted, apart for that holy work; setting your self
in a special sort to seek the Lord, as the Saints of 2 Chr. 20. Dan. 10. 12
God in the beginning of their fasts have done; propounding to your self the
end of your intended Fast; Remembering this, that if the chief occasion and end
be your own private good, that you forget not others, nor the public; or if
it be the public; yet mind also your own private; For until you have made
your own peace with GOD, your fasting and praying will prevail little for the
public. And God having joined the public with our private good in prayer, we
must not disjoyne them in our fasting. Resolve with your self, to the utmost
of your power, to keep a religious fast unto God, according to his will; For
this cause, in those your prayers, add serious petitions to God in that
behalf.

When you awake that night, 3
let not your thoughts be upon worldly business, much less upon any wicked
thing; but let them be holy, such as may tend to the furtherance of the holy
actions to be done the next day.

Fourthly, (if necessity hinder 4
not) Arise early the day of your fast. It agrees well with a fasting day
(whereon your flesh is to be tamed) that you give not your self to so much
sleep as at other times. It is probable, that for this cause some lay on the
ground, others 2 Samuel 12. 16.
in sackcloth, in the nights of their fasts, not only to express, but to
further their humiliation, Joel 1. 13.
by keeping them from sleeping overmuch, or oversweetly. Your body being
empty, if withal your soul continue earnestly bent upon afflicting it self,
these will keep you from drowsinesse that day.

When the day is come, Be you strict in observing the outward Fast. To this end,

First, forbear all Hest. 4. 16. Luke 5. 33.
meat and drink, until the set time of the Fast be ended, which usually is
about Supper time. A general Council in the Primitive Church Chalced.
decreed, that total abstinence should be observed until Evening prayer was
ended. In case of necessity, that is, when total abstinence shall indeed
disable you from doing the maine duties of that day, you may eat or drink; for
in such cases GOD will have mercy rather than sacrifice; but then it must be a
small refection* only such, and so much as may remove the impediment to the
spiritual performance of the duties of that day.

Secondly, Abstain from all other 2
worldly delights, as, (so far as will stand with comeliness) from fine and
best Exodus 33. 4, 5, 6.
apparel, also from all Isa. 58. 3.
sports and pleasant music, from the 1 Cor. 7. 5 Joel 2. 16.
marriage bed, and the like.

Thirdly, Abstain from all worldly labor, as upon a Sabbath day; 3 Isa. 58. 3.
for worldly business, and the cares thereof do, as well as worldly delights,
distract the thoughts, and hinder humble devotion; and a ceasing therefrom,
gives a full opportunity to holy employments the whole day. Therefore the
Jews were commanded to sanctify a fast. And that yearly Joel 2. 16.
Fast, called the day of Atonement, was upon peril of their lives to be kept
by a forbearance of Lev. 23. 27 28, 29, 30.
all manner of work. Now albeit the Ceremonials of that day are abolished in
Christ, yet, forbearing work as well as meat and drink (being of the
substance of a Fast,) does remain to be observed in all such as may properly
be called Religious Fasts.

Thus much for the outward fast, you must be as strict in observing the inward.

Begin the day with prayer, according as I directed you to do every day; but
with more than ordinary preparation, with fervency and faith, praying for Gods
special grace to enable you to sanctify a fast that day according to the
Commandment.

Then apply your self to the maine work of the day, which has these parts,
(1) unfeigned Humiliation, (2) Reformation, together with Reconciliation, and
(3) earnest Invocation.

The soul is then humbled, the heart rent, and truly afflicted, when a man is
become vile in his own eyes, through conscience of his own unworthiness, and
when his heart is full of compunction and anguish, through fear of Gods
displeasure, and with godly sorrow and holy shame in himself, and anger
against himself for sin. These affections stirred do much afflict the heart.

To attain this deep humiliation, know that it is to be wrought partly by
awakening your Conscience through a sight of the Law, and apprehension of Gods
just judgments due to you for the breach of it, which will break your heart;
and partly by the Gospel, raising up your heart to an apprehension and
admiration of the love of God to you in Christ, which will melt your heart, and
cause you the more kindly to grieve, and to loath your self for sin, and
withal to conceive hope of mercy, whence will follow reconciliation,
reformation, and holy calling upon God by prayer.

To work this Humiliation, there must be,

First, Examination, to find out your sin.

Secondly, a Accusation of your self, with due aggravation of your sin.

Thirdly, Judging and passing sentence against your self for sin.

Sin is the transgression of the 1 Ioh. 3. 4.
Law, and revealed will of God; Wherefore for the better search and finding out
of your sin, you must set before youth glass of the Law for your Light and
Rule. And if you have not learned, Psalm. 119. 105.
or cannot bear in mind the heads of the manifold duties commanded, or vices
forbidden; then get some Catalogue or Table, wherein the same are set down to
your hand, which you may read with pausing, and due consideration, staying
your thoughts most upon those particular sins whereof you find your self
most guilty.

If, of those many that are, you do not meet with one more fit for this
purpose, or which you shall like better, then use this Examinatorie Table in
manner as Follows:

But expect not herein an enumeration of all particular sins, which is beyond
my skill, nor yet of all the heads of duties or kinds of sins, which would
require a volumne; but of those which are principal and most common; yet
hereby, if your Conscience be awake, it will be occasioned to bring to your
thoughts those other not mentioned in the Table, if you be thereof guilty.

The first Table of the Law concerns duties of love and piety to God, the
performance whereof tends immediately to the glory of God, and mediately to
the salvation and good of man.

The first Commandment concerns the setting up of the only An examinatory
Table of the Commandments.
true God to your self, to be your God.
Examining your self by this (and so in the other Commandments) think thus
with your self: Do I know and acknowledge the only true GOD to be such a one
as he has revealed himself in his Word and works, namely, One only
Infinite, Immateriall, Immutable, Incomprehensible Spirit, and Everlasting Lord
God, having being and All-sufficiencie in and from himself; One who is simply
full of all perfections, and incapable of the least defect, being Wisdom,
Goodness, Omnipotency, Love, Truth, Mercy, Justice, Holiness, and whatsoever
is originally and of it self Excellent. The only Potentate, King of Kings,
Lord of Lords, of whom, through whom, and to whom are all things. The Father,
Son, and holy Ghost, God blessed for ever, Amen.

Do I Believe his Word, in all things related, commanded, promised, and
threatened therein, and that his holy and wise Providence is in all things. Have
I Him and his Word in continual remembrance.

Do I esteem and exalt God in my heart above all, so that it does humbly
adore him at the very mention and thought of him, making my self to be nothing
in mine own eyes, yea, esteeming all creatures to be nothing in comparison of
him?

Have I given religious worship to him only? Have I believed in him, and in
him only? Have I sworn by him as there has been cause, and by him alone?
Have I prayed only unto him? and have I sought to him, and to obtain help of
him only by such means as he has appointed; giving the glory and thanks of my
being, and well-being, and of al other things which are good unto him.

Is my Conscience so convinced of the truth and Authority of God, that it
holds it self absolutely bound to obey him in all things, that it does
incite to that which is good, restrain from that which is evil, encourage me
in well-doing, and check me when I do ill.

Is my will resolved upon absolute and unfeigned obedience to do whatsoever God
commands, to forbear whatsoever he forbids, to subscribe to whatsoever
he does, as well done; and have I borne patiently, all which either by himself
or by any of his creatures he has inflicted upon me?

Have mine affections been so for God, that I have loved him with all my heart,
loving nothing more than him, nothing equally to him? Do I hate every thing
that is contrary to him? Has my Confidence been only in him, and my
expectation of good from him? Have my desires been to him, and for him,
longing above all things to have communion with him? Has it been my greatest
fear to offend him, or to be severed from him? Has it been my greatest
grief and shame that I have sinned against him? Have I rejoiced in God as in
my chief Good? Has mine anger risen against whatsoever I saw cross to his
glory? Have I been zealous for God? And have I made him the utmost end of all
mine actions?

Has my whole outward man, as tongue, senses, and all other active powers of
my body been ready to profess the true God, and to yield obedience to his
will.

Or contrariwise, Am I not guilty of denying of God in word, in works, or at
least in heart, questioning the truth of his being, and of his Word, denying
his Providence, Power, or some other of his Divine Attributes? Have I not been
ignorant of God, and of his will, and erroneous and mis-beleeving, if not
heretical in my conceits concerning God the Father, Son, or holy Ghost.

Have I not been overcurious in prying into the nature and secret counsels of
God, beyond the rule of the revealed will of God? Have I not set up false
Deities, or put my self, or any other creature in the place of God, through
pride preferring, and resting upon mine own way and will before Gods, or by
making my self mine utmost end, professing God and his Religion, only to
serve mine own ends, or by seeking to the creature, (as to Angel, Saint,
Devil, or Witch) instead of the Creator?

Have I not been forgetful of God, and of his will? Is not my Conscience
impure, blind, deluded, or seared; and my will perverse, obstinate, impatient,
and murmuring against God, and full of dissimulation?

Have I not set mine affections upon the World rather than upon God, loving
that which is evil, hating that which is good, yea, God himself, if not
directly, yet in his Holiness, shining in his Ordinances, and in his children,
or as he is a severe inflicter of punishment? Fearing man more than God,
trusting in the Creature, making something besides God my chief joy? Have I
not presumed when I had cause to despair, and despaired after that I had cause
to hope? Have I not ^empted God many ways? And have I not in the matters of
God been either cold, lukewarm, or blindely, or preposterously zealous?

Has there not been a pronenesse in my whole outward man, to rebel against
God?

The second Commandment concerns all such lawful worships of God, which he
only has appointed, whereby he communicates himself to man, and man again
makes profession of him; forbidding (under one kind) all such as are not by
him ordained.
Think thus, Have I worshipped God in spirit and truth in all the kinds and
parts of his Worship, public or private, ordinary or extraordinary; as, by
hearing, reading, and meditating of his Word; by praying, praising, and giving
thanks to him; by a right use of his Sacraments, Baptism, and the Lords
Supper, and by Religious Fasting, Religious Feasting, and making of vows,
according as I have had special occasion? And have I done what did belong to
me for the setting forth and maintaining of Gods true Worship; and have I,
according to my place, executed aright, or submitted unto the government and
discipline of the Church?

Or, besides the omission of the former duties, Am I not guilty some way or
other, of Idoll-worship, conceiving of GOD in my mind, or representing him to
my sense in the likeness of any creture?

Have I not added to, or detracted from any part of Gods Worship? Have I not
run into the appearances and occasions of Idolatry, as, by presence at
Idoll-service, by marriage and needless ^amiliarity with Idolatrous persons,
by reserving undefaced monuments of Idolatry? At least, is ^ot my heart guilty
of not hating, but rather lingering after, Idolatrous worship? Have I not been
guilty of superstition, or Will Worship, etc.

The third Commandment concerns the glory of Gods holy Name, shining forth
in his Titles, Attributes, Religion, Word, Ordinances, People, or any thing
that has in it any print of his holiness or excellency, forbidding the taking
of it in vain, and that in all actions religious or common.
Have I glorified God, by answering my holy profession, with an holy and
unblameable conversation; by performing all holy duties with due preparation,
knowledge, and devotion; also by thinking and speaking of the Names and holy
things of God with holy reverence; and in particular, by fearing an Oath.

Or, have I not caused the Name, Religion, and People of God to be ill thought
of and dishonored by my evil course of living, or at least by committing some
gross sin^ Am I not guilty of rash, unprepared heedlesse, forgetful, and
fruitless reading, hearing, receiving the Sacraments, or performance of any
other the worships of God.

Have I not thought or spoken blasphemously or contempiuously of God, or of any
the things of God? Have I not used the Name of God needlessly, rashly, wickedly,
or falsely in swearing, or lightly in my Salutations, Admirations, or otherwise
in my ordinary communication.

Have I not abused the Name of God, his Scriptures, his Ordinances, and
Creatures, using them for other purposes then he allows, as, for sports,
spells, charms, or any sorcery, luxury, or the like? Have I not passed by the
great works of Gods power, mercy, and judgments without due observation and
acknowledgement of God therein?

The fourth Commandment concerns the ordinary solemn time of the service
and worship of God, requiring that the seventh day (now our Lords day) be kept
with an holy rest.
Have I upon the six days Remembered the Lords day, that I might dispatch all
my worldly business, and prepare my heart, that when it came, I might keep an
holy Sabbath to the Lord, according to the Commandment? Did I, according as my
health would permit, rise early on that day?

Have I performed my daily, both morning and evening exercises of Religion
alone, and with my family that day in private?

Have I caused all under my authority, according to my power, to rest from all
manner of works, and worldly sports; also my self not only from the labor
of my body, but of my mind in all worldly business; except about the things
that concern common honesty, and comeliness, works of mercy, and such
works of necessity as could not be done before, or stay to be done afterward?

Have I always prepared my heart before I went into the house and presence of
God, by meditation of Gods Word and Works, and in particular by examination,
and reformation of my ways, also by prayer, thankesgiving, and holy resolution
to carry my self as in Gods presence, and to hear and obey whatsoever I
should be taught out of the Word of God?

Have I caused my family to go with me to the Church? And did I with them come
in due time, and being there, did stay the whole time of prayer, reading, and
preaching of the Word, singing of Psalms, receiving and administering the
Sacraments, even that of Baptism, when others are Baptized, and did attend
diligently, and join with the Minister and the rest of the Congregation in all
those holy exercises?

Did I spend the day, after the Morning and Evening Prayers, Sermons, or
Catechisings, in meditation, and (as I had opportunity) in conference and
repetition of what I had heard? also in visiting the sick, and other works of
mercy; and so from the beginning to the end of the day have been employed in
holy thoughts, words, and deeds, and all this with spiritual delight.

Or, Am I not guilty of forgetting it before it came, and of neglecting and
profaning it when it came? as, by mere idleness, or by taking opportunity of
leisure from business of my calling to be licentious in company keeping,
daliance, and the like; or by reserving that day for journeyes, idle visits,
and for dispatch of bychares.

Have I not been careless of the Service of God, frequenting it no oftener
then Law, or very shame did compel me?

Have I not been careless whether my servants or children did keep the
Sabbath or no? And when I was at Church, did I not idle out the time by gazing
about, or by sleeping, or by worldly thoughts?

Have I not bought, sold, let, hired, spoken of, or done other works forbidden
to be done, spoken, or plodded upon that day?

Have I not under the name of Recreation sought mine own pleasre, using sports
and games, which cause the mind to be more indisposed, to the due performance
of holy duties then honest labors do, to which they are subordinate, and with
them forbidden to be done that day?

Has not the strict observance of the Sabbath been at least tedious unto me,
so that I could have wished that it had been gone long before that it was
ended?

The second Table concerns duties of love and righteousness toward man, the
performance whereof tends immediately to the good of man; but mediately to
the proof of his being truly religious, and to the glory of God.

God made man not to be alone, nor to be all for himself; Therefore for the
greater good of mankind, he has endued men with variety of gifts, and degrees
of place, some excelling other both in Family, Church, and Commonwealth; yet so
as each is excellent in his gift and place, even the meanest made worthy of
respect from the greatest, because of his usefulnes for the common good: even
as the least member of the natural body is truly useful and to be respected as
well, though not so much, as the most honorable.

Now when each member in the body politic do acknowledge the several gifts
and mutual use one of another, according to their place, then is there a sweet
harmony in the society of man, and there is a sure foundation laid of all good
Offices of love between man and man.

Wherefore in the first place, God in this fifth Commandment provideth, that
the order which he had set amongst men, should inviolably be observed;
Requiring all Inferiors under the name of Children, to honor their superiors,
that is, to acknowledge that dignity and excellency which is in another,
showing it in giving due respect unto his person and name; Implying, that all
Superiors should walk worthy of honor, and that they should mutually show
good respect to their Inferiors, tendering their good, as well as their own.

Touching this fifth Commandment, think thus; Do I live in a lawful Calling?
and have I walked worthy my General Calling of Christianity, and discharged my
particular Calling, and employed the gifts which GOD gave me, for the good of
the society of man, in Family, Church, or Commonwealth?

Have I honored all men, for that they were made after the Image of God, and
have yet some remains thereof, are capable of having it renewed, if it be not
renewed already; and because they are or may be useful for the common good of
man; using them with all courtesy and kind respect, excepting when, and
wherein, they have made themselves vile by open wickedness; so that it will
not stand with the glory of God, good of others, or of themselves, or with the
discharg^ of my place, to show them countenance? Have I showed my due respect
to others in praying to God, and, as there has been cause, in giving him
thanks for them?

Have I conceived the best, that in charity I might, of others? And by love
have indevoured according to my place to cure their grosser evils, and to cover
their infirmities? And have I to my power furthered my neighbors good name and
reputation, and have been contented, nay desirous, that he should be esteemed
as well, nay, better then my self? And, have I, both in his life time, and
after his death, given him the honor of common humanity, as in common
courtesies at least, and in comely burial, so far as any way it did belong to
me, and in maintaining his wronged reputation, etc.

Have I being before others in gifts in any kind, as, learning, wit, wealth,
strength, etc. employed those gifts to the honor of God, and the good of man
more than others?

As I am before others in years, am I before them in gravity, good counsel,
and good example?

As I am above others in Authority, do I acknowledge that it is not originally
in me, but derived to me from God, and have I held it, and used it for him,
keeping within the due limits thereof, governing with wisdom and moderation;
procuring the good of their bodies, and souls, so far as lay in me; commanding
only things lawful and convenient, encouraging them in well-doing, by
commendation, and rewards; preventing evil as much as I could, and restraining
it in them by seasonable and due reproves, according to the quality of the
offense, and of the person, when fairer means would not prevail?

As I am an equal; Have I esteemed others better then my self, and striven in
honor to prefer them?

As I am behind others in gifts and age, have I in word, and gesture, done them
due reverence, and thankfully made use of their good parts, and experiences?

As I am under Authority, whether in Family, Church, or Commonwealth, have I
submitted my self to all my Governors, reverencing their persons, obeying
readily all those their lawful Commandments, which are within the compass of
their Authority to command? Have I received their instructions, and borne
patiently and fruitfully their reproves and corrections?

Or do I not live without a lawful Calling? Or Idly, or unprofitably in it?
Have I not buried or abused my Talent and place, to the hurt rather than the
good, of my self, and others?

Have I not been high minded, esteeming better of myself then there was
cause, hunting after the vain applause of men?

Have I not despised others? yea, those which were good, yea, my superiors,
showing it by my unreverent gestures, and by my speeches to them, and of them?
Have I not some way or other detracted from and diminished the credit of
others, or, at least, envyed their due estimation?

As I am a Superior, have I not carried my self insolently, lightly, or
dissolutely?

As I am under Authority, have I not carried my self stubbornly and
undutifully?

God having set an order in humane society, does next provide for the life,
and safety of the person of man, who must keep this order, and make this
society, by forbidding in the sixth Commandment whatsoever may take it away,
or impair it.
Have I had a care of mine own health, in a sober use of meat, drink, labor,
sleep, recreation, physic, weapons, or whatsoever esse is apt to procure
health, and to prevent disease?

Have I been, or am I meek, patient, long-suffering, easy to be appeased,
apt to forgive, full of compassion, kind, merciful; showing al these, in soft
speeches gentle answers, courteous behavior, requiting evil with good,
comforting the afflicted, releeving the needy, peacemaking, and by doing all
other offices of love, which might tend to my neighbors safety or comfort?

Or, have I not wished my self dead, or neglected the means of my health?
Have I not impeached it by surfeits, by excessive labor or sports, by fretting
and over-grieving, or by any other means? And have I not had thoughts of doing
my self harm?

Have I not been angry unadvisedly, malicious, and revengefull, showing surly
gesture, and behavior, as, sour looks, shaking the head, or hand, gnashing
the teeth, stamping, staring, mocking, railing, cursing, quarrelling, smiting,
poisoning, hurting, or taking away the life of man any way without Gods
allowance?

Have I not been a sower of discord, or some way or other been an occasion of
the discomfort, if not of the death of others?

The seventh Commandment concerns Chastity, whereby God provideth for a
pure propagation and conservation of mankind, forbidding all bodily pollution
under the name of Adultery.
Have I been modest, sober, shamefast, possessing my body in chastity,
shutting mine eyes, and stopping mine ears, and restraining my other senses
from al objects, and occasions of lust, bridling my tongue from lustful
motions, and lascivious speeches, forbearing all manner of daliance and
wantonness; abstaining from selfe-pollution, fornication, or any other natural,
or unnatural defilement of my body, either in deed, or desire?

And being married, was I wise in my choice? and have I kept the marriage bed
undefiled, through a sanctified, sober, and seasonable use thereof?

Or, Am I not guilty of manifold acts of uncleanness? at least of unclean
thoughts, immodest eyes, ears, touches, and embraces, of wanton speeches,
gesture, apparel, and behavior?

Have I not run into the manifold occasions of adultery and uncleannes, as by
idleness, gluttony, drunkenness, choice of such meats drinks, perfumes, or any
other thing that will provoke lust, effeminate dancing, freque^ting wanton
company, or places of unclean provocations, and of unseasonable conversing
with the other sex alone?

The eight Commandment concerns the preservation of man's Goods, the means
of his comfortable maintenance in this life, forbidding all wrong thereabout,
under the name of stealing.
Have I a good Title to the things which I possess, as by lawful inheritance,
gift, reward, contract, or any other way which God allows? Have I been
industrious and faithful in my Calling, frugall, and provident? Have I done
that for which I have received pay or maintenance from others; and have I given
to every man his own, whether tribute, wages, debts, or any other dues?

Or, have I not got my living by an unlawful Calling? or have I not
impoverished my self and mine, by idleness, luxurious, and unnecessary
expenses, by gaming* unadvised suretiship, or otherwise? Have I not withheld
from my self or others, through niggardice, that which should have been
expended?

Have I not gotten or kept my neighbors goods, by fraud, oppression, falsehood,
or by force, and made no restitution? Have I not some way or other impaired my
neighbors estate?

The ninth Commandment concerns Truth of speech, the means of intercourse
between man and man, and of preserving men's rights, and of redressing of all
disorder in humane society, forbidding all falsehood of speech under the name
of bearing false witness.
Have I at all times, in all things spoken the truth from my heart, giving
testimony in public or private, by word, or writing, of things concerning mine
own or neighbors Name, and credit, life, chastity, goods, or in any other
thing that has been matter of speech between me or others, whether in
affirming, denying, with oath or without oath, or in bare reports, or in
promises, or any other way?

Or am I not guilty of telling lies, jestingly, officiously, or perniciously?
Have I not raised, spread, or received false reports of my neigbour? Have I not
spoken falsely in buying and selling, also in commending by word, or writing of
unworthy persons, and in dispraysing the good, in boasting of my self, or
flattering of others?

Have I not given false evidence, used equivocations, or concealed the truth
which I should have spoken, or perverted it when I did speak it?

The tenth Commandment concerns Contentation with a man's own condition, the
foundation of all order and justice amongst men, forbidding the contrary,
namely, Coveting that which is not his.
Am I contented with mine own ^o^dition, as, with my place which ^ hold in
Family, Church, or ^ommon-wealth, with mine ^wne yoke fellow and estate? Can I
rejoice in it? and also that ^t should be well with others, ^ay, better than
it is with my self?

Or have I not been full of dis^ontent with my condition, cove^ing after some
thing or other which was my neighbors, at ^ast by actual concupiscence, in
multitude of evil thoughts, ari^ing from the law of my mem^ers, though my
deliberate will ^ath gone against them?

Thus having by the Law found out your sins, you must araigne Accusation with
aggravation of sin.
and accuse your self, as it were at the bar of Gods Tribunal, representing
your sins to your mind as they are, in their heinousness and
mischievousnesse, according to their several aggravations.

First, consider sin in it is nature, it is a moral evil, an anomy and
irregularity in the soul and actions, an enmity to God the chief good; It is
the worst evil, worse than the Devil and Satan, he had not been a Devil but
for doing evil; worse than Hell, which as it is a torment, is caused by Sin,
but is only contrary to the good of the Creature, whereas sin it self is
contrary to the good of the Creator. It is such a diste^per of the soul, that
the Scripture calls it wickedness Eccle. 7. 25.
of folly, even foolishnes of madness.

Secondly, consider from whence sin in man had his original, even from the
Ioh. 8. 44. Genesis 3.
Devil, who is the father of it; It came and comes from Iam 3. 15.
Hell, therefore is earthly, sensual, divelish, Whenever you sin, you do
the lusts of the Devil.

Thirdly, consider the nature of the Law, whereof sin is a transgression: A
Law most perfect, most Romans 7. 12 Gal. 3. 21 Romans 8. 3.
holy, equal, and good, which would have given eternal life to the doers of
it, had it not been for this cursed Sin.

Fourthly, consider the person against whom sin is committed, whom it highly
offends and provokes; It is Psalm. 51. 4
God, to whom you owe your self and all that you have; who Act. 17. 28
made, and does preserve you, and yours; who, albeit you have sinned, Eze. 33.
11
desires not your death, nor afflicts you willingly; but had rather that you
should humble your self, Repent and live; who, that you might be saved, Ioh.
3. 16
gave his only begotten son, to death, to ransom you; who, by us his
Ministers, makes known his Word and good will toward you, making
Proclamation, that if you will repent and believe, you shall be saved; yea, by
us he entreats you to be 2 Cor. 5. 20.
reconciled to him. It is that GOD who is rich in goodness, forbearance, and 2
Pet. 3 9
longsuffering; waiting when you will turn, that you may live; who, on the
other side, if you despise this his goodness, and shall continue in your sin,
thereby Isa. 3. 8.
provoking the eyes of his glory, is a terrible and Neh. 1. 2.
revengefull God; who, if you still err in heart, and will not walk in his
ways, has Heb. 3. 11
sworn in his wrath, that you shall not enter into his Rest; who in his wrath
is a Heb. 12. 2^.
consuming fire, and is ready and able to destroy Mat 10. 28.
body and soul in the eternal vengeance of Hell fire.

Fistly, Consider sin in the evil effects of it, namely, it brought a Genesis
3. 17 Romans 8. 20
curse upon the whole Creation, for man's sake, whereby the ^reatures are become
defective, and unserviceable, nay, hurtful (...) you, from your sins come
(...) manner of diseases and crosses ^^at ever befell you. This your ^ne
(until it be repented and ^rdoned) makes you Psalm. 11. 5
hateful (...) God, Isa. 59. 2.
separateth between you ^d God, causing him to with^^ld Ier. 5. 25.
good things from you, and (...) inflict evil upon you, even in ^is life: It
defiles the Tit. 1. 15
whole ^an, and every renewed act of ^ne does strengthen the body (...) sin,
and works a decay of ^ace in you, though you be re^^nerate. And if it be
gross, if it (...) not benumme and fear your ^^nscience, yet it will wound
it, ^^d break the peace thereof, if it ^ender, vexing it as motes do Psalm. 51.
^ur eye, or thorns your feet, ^sing terrors and doubtings of ^vation, God
withdrawing his ^our and loving countenance ^m you; And, if you be nor in
Christ, it will in the end bring upon you Mat. 25. 46. Rev. 21. 8.
everlasting damnation.

Sixthly, Consider the ransom (...) sin, who paid it, and what wa^ paid;
consider Christ Jesus, who he was, and what he did and suffered to take away
your sin He, the only son of God, very God, did lay down and veil (...)
glory for ^rime, yea, came dow^ and left heaven to dwell in the Tabernacle of
humane flesh, taking upon him the estate of Phil. 2. 6, 7, ^.
servant, was poor, Isa. 53. 3.
despised (...) men, persecuted from the crat^ to the cross, made to shed tea^
abundantly, yea, so tormente^ with the sense of Gods wrath for your sin, that
for very angui^ he did sweat as it were Lu. 22. 44
drop^ blood. He was accused, condemned, spit upon, mocked, buffette^ and
scourged by wicked me^ made to Mark. 15 21. Mat. 27.
bear his own cross till ( oh oppressed and afflicted soul for very
faintnes he could bea^ it no longer; Then he was hanged amongst thieves, dying
the most accursed Gal. 3. 13.
death; And, which to him was more then all the rest, he, in his humane
apprehension, was forsaken of God, crying out, Mat. 27. 46.
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me.

Now you may be assured, that if the justice of God could have been satisfied,
and your sin expiated and done away by a lesser price, Jesus Christ his only
Son should never have been caused ^o Isa. 53. 10, 12.
pour out his soul a sacrifice for your sin.

This Zach. 12. 10.
looking (by the eyes of your faith) upon Christ whom you have pierced, will at
once show you the greatness and hatefulnes of your sin, which required such ^n
infinite ransom; and the infinite love of God and Christ to you-ward, even
when you were his enemy, in providing for you a sure remedy, which will free
you from both guilt and power of this sin. The thoughts hereof will (if any
thing will) even melt the heart into godly sorrow for sin, and withal, give
hope (in the use of the means) of mercy and forgiveness.

That the former Aggravations may be more pressing, observe these directions:

You must consider sin in the 1
particulars, one after another; for generals leave no impressions: Therefore
2 Samuel 24 10 Psalm. 51. 14
David cries out of his bloody sin in particular.

You must judge the Iam. 1. 15
least sin 2
to be damnable, until it be pardoned, and repented in particular, if known
unto you, at least in general, if not known.

The Heb. 10. 29
greater any sin is, the 3
greater you must judge the guilt and punishment to be.

Sins committed long since unrepented, 4
and the punishments deserved, but deferred, are to be judged to be as near,
Genesis 4. 7.
lying at the door, and dogging you at the heels, as if committed at the
present; so that you may look for Gods hand to be upon you this present
moment; they, like the blood of Abell, or sins of Sodom, cry. as loud to God
for vengeance now, as the first day they were committed, nay, louder, because
they are aggravated by * impenitencie, and by the abuse Romans ^ 4, 5
of Gods long suffering.

Your humiliation must, in your 5 Ezra 9.
endeavor, Ez 10. 1, ^ Mat. 26. ^^.
proportion your guilt of sin; the greater guilt, the greater humiliation.

Know therefore, that sins against God, of the 1 Samuel 2. 25 Mat 22. 38
first Table, considered in equal comparison, are greater than those of the
second.

The more grace has been offered by the Mat 11, 21, 22, 23 24
Gospel, and the more means any have had to know God and his will, the
greater is their sin, if they be ignorant and disobedient.

The Isa. 59. ^^ 1^
number of sins according as they are multiplied, do increase the guilt and
punishment. Eze. 16. 51.


The more bonds are broken in sinning, as, committing it against the Law of
God, of Jude 10. Ier. 34. 18
Nature and Nations, against Conscience, promises, and vows, the greater the
sin and punishment.

All these things known and Of judging and condemning a man's self. 1 Cor. 11.
31.
considered, now judge your self, pass a condemnatorie sentence against your
self; whence will, through the grace of God, follow affliction of soul. Now
you will see that you are base and vile, and that you may justly fear Gods
judgments; Now you will see cause to be grieved, ashamed, yea, even confounded
in your self, and to conceive an holy indignation against your self.

You will now think thus, Ah; that I should be so foolish, so brutish, so mad,
to commit this, to commit these sins (think of particulars) to break so holy
a Law, to offend grieve, and provoke so good and so great a Majesty, so ill to
Deu. 32. 6
requite him, so little to fear him, vile wretch that I am: that I should
commit not only sins of common frailty, but gross sins, many, and often,
against knowledge, conscience, etc. (but still mind particulars) Jesus Christ
my Savior shed his precious blood for me, to redeem me from my vain
conversation, and do I yet again and again transgress, oh miserable man
that I am; What am I in my self at best, but a lump of sin and dirt, not
worthy to be loved, worthy to be destroyed, one that may justly look to have
mine heart hardened, or my conscience terrified, and that, if God be not
infinitely merciful, he should power upon me all his plagues. Wherefore
remembering my doings that they are not good, but abhominably evil, I do loath
my self Eze. 36. 31
for mine abominations: and do abhor my self, and repent, as in sackcloth
and ashes.

Now set upon the work of Job 42. 6 Of seeking to be reformed and reconciled.
Reformation and of Reconciliation* General, if you find there be need:
Particular, as you find there is need. It is not enough to search out and
consider your ways, nor yet to lament them; if withal you do not Lam. 3. 40
41. 42 Ps 119. 59. Zep. 2. 1, 2, 3
turn again unto the Lord, and turn your feet unto his Testimonies: and
withal seek grace and forgiveness.

The Gospel opens a way, and affoordeth means to attain both, through the
commands and promises thereof in the doctrine of faith and repentance.

Now therefore bring your self The Gospel the means of reconciliation and
reformation
to the Gospel: Try your self thereby, first, whether your first faith and
repentance were sound: then set upon reforming, and getting pardon of
particular and later offenses.

But learn to put a difference between the Commandments of the Gospel, and
of the Law: the Law exacteth absolute obedience; The gracious Gospel does
through CHRIST accept of the truth of Faith and Repentance, so that there be an
endeavor after their perfection.

It would be too long to show you at large the signs of unfeigned Faith and
Repentance, I will, for the present, only say this:

Have you been humbled heretofore? and through the promises, and commandment
of the Gospel, which bids you believe, have you conceived hope of mercy,
relying on Christ for it? and thereupon have had a ^^ue change in your whole
man, so that you make God your utmost end, and, out of hatred o^, and love unto
Christ and ^is ways have had a Heb. ^^. ^^^
will in all things to live honestly, and to ^devour in all things to keep
Act. 24. ^^6
always a good conscience to wards God and man; 1 Pet. 2. 2.
desiring the sincere milk of the Word to grow by it; 1 Ioh. 3. 14. Psalm. 16.
3.
loving the brethren, desiring and delighting in communion with them? then be
you confident that your first faith, repentance, and new obedience was sound.

If upon trial you find that they were not sound, then you must begin now to
repent and believe; it is not yet too late.

Touching reformation and obtaining of pardon and power of your particular
sins, do thus:

Consider the Commandment 1
which bids you to Eze. 33. 11. Rev. 2. 5. 2
repent and amend.

Consider the Commandments which bid you to Mat. 11. 28.
come unto Christ when you are weary and beavie laden with your sin; believing
that through him they shall be Mic. 7. 18 19.
pardoned and subdued: to this end,

Consider that Christ has fully 3
satisfied for such and such a 1 Ioh. 2. 1, 2.
sin, yea, for all sin, and that you have many promises of grace and 1 Ioh.
1. 9.
forgiveness, yea a promise that Heb 10, 15, 16, 17.
God will give you grace to believe in him, that you may have your sins
forgiven.

Consider that there is virtue 4
and Phil. 3. 10 Ioh. 1. 16.
power in Christ's death, and resurrection, appliable by Act. 15 9. 1 Pet. 1.
21, 22.
faith, through his holy Spirit for the mortifying the old man of sin, and
quickening the new man in grace; as well as merit to take away the guilt and
punishment of your sin.

Improve this power of Christ 5 Mortification.
in you unto an actual breaking off your sins, and living according to the
will of Christ, which is done by Col. 3. 5. Romans 12. 2. Ephesians. 3. 16.
mortifying the old man of sin, and by strengthening the new and inner man of
grace.

In mortifying your sin, do thus:

Take all your sins, especially 1 Means to mortify sin.
your bosom sins, those to which the disposition of your nature, and condition
of your place does most incline you, your strongest and Captain sins, and
with them the body of corruption in you, the original and mothersinne; Psalm.
51. read it.
smite at them, strike at the very root, arraigne them, condemn them in your
self, dragge them all to the Cross of Christ, and Col. 1. 20 Col. 2. 10 read
to verse 16.
nail them thereunto, that is, by Faith see them all nailed with Christ to the
Cross whereon he was crucified, and believe, that, not onelyin respect of
their guilt, but also of their reigning power, they are al crucified with him,
Romans 6. read that Chapter.
dead, and buried, as is signified to you lively in your Baptism. When you see
that your old man is crucified with Christ, that the body of sin should be
destroyed, you will take courage against sin, and will refuse to serve it,
since by Christ you are freed from the dominion of it. When you thus by faith
Romans 13. 14.
put on the Lord Jesus Christ, you shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh. I
am. 4. 9. Job 42. 6. 2 Cor. 7. 10
Grieve heartily for your sins, conceive deadly hatred against 2
them and displeasure against your self for them. These, like a corrasiue,
will eat out the core and heart of sin.

Make no Romans 13 14
provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts of it; but be 1 Cor. 7. 29, 30, 31
sober 3
in the use of all earthly things, this by little and little will starve sin.

Job 31. 1 Prove 23 20, 31
Avoid all objects and occasions 4
of sin, yea, abstain from the 1 These. 5 22
appearance of it, this will disarme sin.

When you feel any motion unto sin, whether it rose from 5
within, or came from without, 1 Pet. 5. 9 Acts 8. 20
resist it speedily and earnestly by the Sword of the Spirit the Word of God,
as your Mat. 4 4
Savior did, and as Genesis 39. 9
Joseph did; for which cause it must dwell Col, 3. 16
plentifully in you. Thus you shall kill sin.

That you may strengthen the Means to strengthen the inner man.
inner man by the Spirit, whereby you, may not only mortify the deeds of the
flesh, but bring forth the fruits of the Spirit: do thus,

First, Apply Christ risen from 1 Romans 4. 25. Romans 6. 4. Ephesians. 2. 5, 6.
the dead for you particularly; believing that God by the same power quickneth
you, and raises you together with Christ, to walk in newnes of life, Romans 6.
9, 10, 11.
reckoning your self now to be alive unto God, being dead unto sin, and
become the servant of righteousness. This believing in Christ, embracing and
relying upon the 2 Pet. 1. 4
precious promises of the Gospel, does draw down Christ into your heart, and
does more and more incorporate you into him, and by it, he, by his Spirit, Ephesians.
3. 17
dwells in you, whereby of his life and Ioh. 1. 12 16.
grace, you receive life and grace; and so, as the Apostle says, are made
partaker of the divine nature, flying the corruption which is in the world
through lust.

Affect your Rom 15. (...)
heart with joy 2
unspeakeable, and with peace in believing, considering that you are justified
through our Lord Jesus Romans 5. 1, 2, 3. Phil. 4. 4.
Christ; this Neh. 8* 10
Joy of the Lord, as a cordial, will exceedingly strengthen grace in the inner
man.

Take heed of quenching or grieving 3
the 1 These. 5. 19, 20, 21.
Spirit, but nourish it by the frequent use of holy meditation, prayer, hearing
and reading of the Word, receiving the Sacraments, by a Christian Act. 2. 42
46. Act. 4. 32, 33.
Communion with such as fear God, and by following the motions of the Spirit
of God; which you shall know to be from it, when the thing whereunto it mooveth,
is both for matter and circumstance according to the Scripture, the Word of the
Spirit. This is to be led of the Spirit; and this will be to walk in the
Spirit, and then Gal. 5. 16. 18.
you shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh.

Upon your fasting day you shall 4
do well to renew your Covenant with God: and in some cases (so that it be
done advisedly) to enter into a particular Nehem. 9 38 Neh. 10. 29
vow to leave some gross sin, with the occasions of it; and to do some
necessary neglected duty and to embrace all furtherances thereof. This also
will much strengthen your resolution against sin, and for holiness.

There remains yet one principal work wherein a chief business of the day of
your fast lies, for which all formerly spoken to makes way, and by which with
the former means you may attain to true reformation of your self, and
reconciliation with your Invocation upon God, and pouring out the soul before
him
God; which is 1 Samuel 7. 6 Nehem. 1. 4. etc. Nehem 9 5. etc Dan. 9. 3, 4, etc.
Invocation and earnest prayer to God in the Name of Christ through the holy
Ghost, in particular, large, and hearty confessions and complaints against your
self for your sins, asking forgivenes, making known your holy resolutio^s,
asking grace, and giving thanks for that he is at one with you, having give^
Christ for you, and to you, and for that he has given you a mind to know him,
and the power of his resurrection, with other the first fruits of the Spirit,
which is the Ephesians. 1. 13 14
earnest of your inheritance.

Let this solemn and more then ordinary seeking of GOD by prayer alone by your
self be twice at least in the day of your Fast, besides your ordinary prayers
in the Morning and Evening, and having thus made your peace with God, you may,
nay ought to Ezra 8 23 2 Chro. 20 3. ^ etc.
pray for the good or against the evil which was the occasion of the Fast.

But in praying you must in ferrency of spirit Iona 3. 8
cry mightily, striving and wrestling in prayer.

The extraordinary burnt offerings, sin offerings, meat and drink
offerings, besides the fin^ffering of the Atonement, and the continual burnt
offering, meat and drink offering to be offered the Number. 29 7. to 12.
solemn day of the Fast under the Law (which in the substance of it is the
standard of religious Fasts) does show, that a Fast must be kept in manner as
has been said; For hereby we prepare and sanctify our selves, and seek to
God in Christ; hereby we by faith lay hold on Christ the only true sacrifice
for sin; and hereby we do by him draw nigh to God, and in token of thankfulness
do give our selves to be an whole Romans 12, 1
and living sacrifice, holy, and acceptable to God, which is our reasonable
serving of God.

For your greater and more Humiliation for others, as well as for our selves in
this order.
thorough humbling of your self, and further exercise of your faith in God and
love to your brethren and Church of God, something yet is to be added.

You must represent to your thoughts also the sins, and evils that are
already upon, or hanging over the head of your family and nearest friends, and
of your town, Country, or Kingdom where you live, together with their
several aggravations; Psalm. 119 1^6. 158. Ie^. 9. 1. ler. 13. 17.
lay them to heart, considering that they by sinning do also dishonor God
your Father, and do bring evil of soul and body upon those whom you should
love as well as your self: And it is a thousand to one but that you are
involved in their sins, and become accessory, if not by command, example,
counsel, permission, conniving, not punishing, familiarity with sinners, or
concealment; yet in not grieving for them, in not hating them, and in not
confessing and disclaiming them before God. These also bring common Judgments
upon Church and State, which you should prefer before your own particular, and
wherein you may look to have your part.

You must therefore affect your heart with these thoughts, and mourn not only
for your own first, but then for the Ezec. 9. 4
abominations of your family, town, country, and Kingdom. For the sins of
Princes and Nobles, for the sins Nehem. 9 34
of Ministers and People. And, not only for the present sins of the Land,
Dan. 9. 5 6
but for the sins long since committed, whereof it has not yet repented.
Psalm. 119 136
Rivers of waters should run down from your eyes, at least, Eze. 9. 4 Ier.
9. 1
sighs and groans should rise from your heart, because others as well as your
self have forgotten Gods Law, and have exposed themselves to his destroying
Judgments. Do all this so, that you may Lam. 2. 18 19
pour out your heartlike water to the Lord in their behalf.

This is to stand in the Exodus 32 11 to 15 Ps. 106. 23
Breach; the prayer of a righteous man Iam. 5. 16 17
avails much, if it be servent, though he have infirmities. If it should not
take good effect for others, yet your tears and sighs shall do good to your
Eze. 14. 14
self: it causes you to have Gods Ezekiel. 9. 4
seal in yourforehead, you are marked for mercy. God will take you from the
Isa. 57. 1
evil to come; or will make a way for you-to ler. 9. 16
escape; or will pturne the hearts of your Ier. 39. 12
enemies to you, as it was with Jeremy; or if you should be carried captive,
he will be a Ezekiel. 11. 10
little Sanctuary to you in the land of your captivity; or if you smart under
the common judgment, it shall be sanctified to you, and if you perish bodily,
yet when others, that cannot live, and are afraid to die, are a^ their wits end
you shall be able, in the conscience of your mourning and of disclaiming your
own and others sins, to welcome death as a messenger of good tidings, and as a
^ortall to everlasting happiness.

If it be a public Fast, all these things before mentioned are to ^e done
alone, both before and after the public exercises, which amongst the Jews
took up two Nehe. 9. 3.
^ourth parts of the artificial day, ^t which time you must join in public
hearing the Word read and preached, and in prayer with more than ordinary
intention and fervency.

If you fast with your Family, or What to do when a man is interrupted in his
private fast Mat. 6. 18.
with some few, let convenient times be spent in reading the Word, or some
good Book or Sermons, which may be fit to direct and quicken you for the
present work; also in fervent prayer. The other time alone, let it be spent as
I have showed before.

If some public or necessary occasion (such as you could not well foresee or
prevent when you made choice of your day of private fast) happen to interrupt
you: I do judge that you may attend those occasions not withstanding your
Fast; but do it thus, if they may be dispatched with little ado, then
dispatch them, and after continue your fast, but if you cannot, I think that
you had better be humbled that you were hindered; break off your fast, and set
some other day apart in stead thereof; even as when a man is necessarily
hindered in his Number. 6. 9. 12. Motives to often fasting.
vow.

The Benefit that will accrue to you by religious Fasting, will be motive
enough to an often use of it, as there shall be cause.

It was never Judge. 20. 26. 5. 1 Samuel 7. 6. 10. Ezra 8. 23. 2 Chr. 20. 3. 22.
Jonah 3. 7. 10.
read or heard of, 1
that a fast was kept in truth according to the former directions from the
Word, but either obtained the particular thing for which it was kept, or a
better, to him at least that tasted.

And besides that it will (if any thing will) obtain the thing intended, 2
thus fasting will put the soul into such good plight and tune, into such an
habit of spiritualnesse, that (like as when against some special
entertainment, a day has been spent in searching every sluts corner in a
house, and in rubbing and washing it) it will be kept clean with ordinary
sweeping a quarter of a year, or long time after.

I do acknowledge that some have fasted, and God has not Isa. 5^. 3
regardedit; yea, he tells some beforehand, that if they Ier. 14 12
fast, he will not hear their cry. But these were such who Zach 7. 5 11, 12
fasted not to God, they only sought themselves, they would not hearken to his
Word, there was no putting away of sin, as Isa. 58. 6
loosing the bands of wickedness, etc. No mortification of sin, no renewing
their Covenant with God. Now, unless we do join the inward with the
outward, we may fast, but the Lord Isa. 58. 3, 4, 5
sees it not, we may afflict our selves, but he takes no notice, we may
cry and boule, but cannot make our voice be heard on high. But when God sees
the works of them that fast, that they Iona 3. 10
turn from their evil way, yea, that they strive to turn and seek him with
all their heart, then he will turn I^r. 31. 18, 19, 20
to them, his bowels of compassion does yerne toward them, and I will have
mercy on them, says the Lord.

After the time of the Fast is ended, eat and drink but moderately. For, if
you then shall glut August. in Psalm. 43.
your self, it will put your body and soul much out of order.

Secondly, your Fast being ended, hold the strength which you not that day as
much as you can, keep your interest and holy acquaintance which you have
gotten with God, and with the holy exercises of Religion. Though you have give^
over the exercises ^^ the day, yet unloose not the ^ent of your care and
affections against sin, and for God. It is a corruption of our nature, and it
^^ a policy of Satan to help it forward, that (like some unwise ^arriours,
when they have got the day of their enemies) we ^ow full of presumption, and
severity, by which the enemy takes advantage to recollect his forces, and
coming upon us ^^ looked for, gives us the fosse, not the overthrow: we are
too apt, after a day of humiliation, to fall into a kind of remissness, as
if then we had gotten the mastry; whereas if Satan fly from us, if sin be
weakened in us, it is but for a Luke 4. 13
season, and but in part, and, especially if we stand not upon our watch, Satan
will take occasion to (...) ^2 43, 44
return, and sin will revive in us.

I (...) few Cautions ^ou^ excellent, but neglected duty ^^ Fasting:

(...) body, although it must be 1 (...). 9. 7 Col. 2. 23
(...) down, yet it must not bu^ destroyed with Fasting. It mus^ not be so
weakened as to be disabled to perform the works (...) your ordinary Calling.

In private Fasts you must (...) be open, but as private as conveniently 2 Mat.
6. 16
you may.

^ever not the Isa. 58. 6, 7
inward from (...) 3
outward.

Think not to merit by yo^ Fasting, a^ Papists do. 4


Presume not that presently up 5
on the work done, God must grant your asking, as Hypocrites Isa. 58. 3.
do, that say to him, we have fasted, and thou do not regard it. You may and
must expect a gracious hearing upon your unfeigned Mat 21. 22
humiliation, but as for when, and how, you must wait patiently: faith 1 Ioh.
5. 14
secureth you of good success, but neither Isa. 40 13
prescribes unto God how, nor yet does it make Isa. 28. 14
have; but waits his leisure, when in his wisdom he shall judge it most
seasonable.

CHAP. VI. Of the Sabbath.
IF it be the Sabbath or Lords day, you must remember to keep Exodus 20.
it holy; according to the Commandment. For this cause:

First, put a difference between Directions for sanctifying the Lords day.
this and the other six days, even as you put difference between the bread
and wine in the Sacrament, and that which is for common use. And that because
it is set apart for holy use, by divine institution. For as the Seventh day,
from the beginning of the Creation, until the day of Christ's blessed
Resurrection, so our Lords Day which is the day of the Resurrection, i^ moral,
and by divine institution. The Commandment to keep an holy rest upon the
Seventh day after six work days, (which is the ^stance of the fourth
Commandment) rem^^neth the same: And Adam (^o doubt) by the instinct of
incorrupted nature which yeeldeth^ time for Gods honor and ^o lemne worship,
he knowing tha^ God finished the Creation in six da^es, and rested on the
seventh, might by discourse of his reason have judged one day in seven, the
fittest time to be dedicated to his service: But certain he could not be,
either that God would have one day in Seven, or which of those days he would
have set apart for rest, and for holy use. Wherefore it pleased the Lord of the
Sabbath, by a positive institution, to determine that the Sabbath should be
one day in Seven; and, that, from the beginning of the world unto the
Resurrection of Christ, it should be the Seventh from the Creation: but (as it
shall appear by the change of the day under the Gospel) after the
Resurrection, he appointed it to be kept the Seventh from thence; by virtue
whereof, we now keep the Lords day a holy Sabbath to the Lord

So that to keep a day holy to the Lord, and to keep that day which the Lord
should appoint, is absolutely moral, (as all the other Commandments are)
according to the light and Law of nature. And in particular, the keeping the
Seventh from the Creation till the Resurrection, and the Seventh from the
Resurrection ever since to the end of the world, was to them, and is to us a
moral duty, immediately binding the conscience, and is no way alterable by
man, because it is set apart by Divine institution.

That there was such an Institution, I shall evidently prove. For the Sabbath
was Genesis 2. 3
sanctified by God, and was to be observed by his people from the beginning of
the world (when there was no distinction of Jew and Gentile) until the writing
of the moral Law. I know some deny this; but without good ground. For we have
reason to think, that ever since the Creation, Time has been divided by Genesis
29. 27, 28
weeks, whereof the seventh day is the boundary, as well as by Months and
Years. And this reason of the Commandment, Exodus 20. 11
He blessed the Sabbath day, and hallowed it, importing the prime institution
did concern Adam, and all before the Law, as well as since. This was a
received opinion amongst the ancient Phil: (...).
Jews, that this Feast did belong to all Nations from the beginning of the
world. And the Fathers observed it Masier^^. Bronghtons Co^^^t, out of R^^^^n
on Genesis 26 sol (...) Aben (...) on Exo. ^^
before Moses. And though there be no mention of the Saints observing of it
before Isreal's going out of Egypt, yet where there is an Institution, there,
it must in charity be presupposed, that it was observed of the godly; except
the Scripture deny it, which it does not, but does imply the contrary. For the
Sabbath day is spoken of, before the re-delivering of it in the Mount, as of a
solemn day ordained before, and well known to the Jews. Exodus 16 2^, 25, 29* 30
Tomorrow (says Moses) is the rest of the holy Sabbath unto the Lord. And
again he says, The seventh day which is the Sabbath. Moreover, the Apostle
does intimate that the rest of the Sabbath was kept from the Heb. 4. 3, 4.
beginning of the world.

This be said of the Sabbath before the pronouncing and writing of the Law.

And when it was written, God wrote and placed it in the heart of the ten
Commandments, as that, Exodus 20.
which, by the holy exercise thereof, and keeping it holy, should give life to
the keeping of all the rest.

The reasons of the fourth Commandment do as well urge the observing of it to
all men, at all times, as to the Jews. It was also reserved in the 1 Kin. 8. 9
Arc with the other ten, and is one of the Commandments mentioned in the new
Testament, as parcel of the Royal Law, of which S. James says, Iam. ^. 10 11.
Whosoever shall offend in one point, he is guilty of all; he means the ten
Commandments; he understands the fourth Commandment for one, else he would
not say all. Wherefore albeit there are some things that have particular
reference to the Jews in the written Law; as the reason taken from bringing
them out of the Land of Egypt Exo. 20. ^^
: which concerns us only by Analogy: and albeit the circumstance of time,
in respect of which day of the Seven, was alterable, but by the Lord of the
Sabbath removing it from the seventh of the Creation to the day of Christ's
Resurrection; yet there is not any of those ten Commandments which is not
moral, and of moral equity.

But some object* The observing of the weekly Sabbath was a sign between God
and the Jews, that they might know that the LORD did sanctify them; therefore
was abrogated by Christ with other Ceremonies.

Answ. I ^^^gh every Ceremony determinable in Christ, was a sign; yet every
sign was not a ceremony to end at Christ's death. All signs and types of
justification by Christ to come, were nailed on the Cross with him; but signs
of the worlds preservation, also declarative and probative signs and arguments
of sanctification, together with the type of rest and glory, did not end at
Christ's death, there being as much use of them to us now, as was to any other
before.

Object. They object farther, All Sabbath days are abrogated by express
terms? Col. 2. 16.

Answ. He speaks there of none but Leviticall Sabbaths: for (mark it) he
says, they were shadows of such things to come, whereof Christ was the body,
verse 17. But the weekly Sabbath had no more shadow or reference to Christ,
than any other of the ten Commandments.

Object. They yet object; No man must esteem one day above another for
conscience sake, Romans 14. 5.

Answ. No such thing can be concluded thence: For the Apostle warning both
strong and weak Christians not to offend, nor be offended one with another,
would have each do as they should be fully persuaded in their own mind, and
not judge or despise each other: but in what things? in every thing? no, but
only in things in their own nature indifferent, or for the time tolerable, be
instancing in mea^s and days. But I deny the fourth Commandment ever to have
been of the number of indifferent things.

If yet they say; If the fourth Commandment be moral, why do you not keep the
day which the Jews did?

I answer; Keeping holy a Sabbath, or the Sabbath, is absolutely moral, and
the principal intention of the fourth Commandment; but the keeping it upon
that day which is intimated in the Commandment, or the keeping of this day
practiced now by us, became a moral duty (that to them, this to us,) because
by a Divine positive institution, God had appointed that day to be observed by
them, and since that, he has appointed this to be observed by us. Now, since
that the Lord of the Sabbath has ordained another day, in so doing he has
caused (though not an abolishing, yet) some change of the Law, which has
caused the former to cease, and binds us in conscience to observe this.

That it was the will of our Lord and Savior Christ, that we should, since his
Resurrection, keep for our Sabbath, that first day of the week on which he
arose; it may easily appear to any whose judgments are not corrupted with
profaneness of heart, or are not clouded with self-conceit and prejudice.
For in that he arose on that day, and Ioh. 20. 1. 19.
appeared diverse times on this our Lords day to his Disciples before his
Ascension: and did on this day, Act. 2. 1. 4.
being the day of Pentecost, fill his Disciples with the gifts of the holy
Ghost, they being assembled together, this gives a preeminence to this day,
and a probability to the point.

The 1 Cor. 11 1.
Apostles, who followed Christ, and delivered nothing but what they 1 Cor. 11
23. 1 Cor. 14. 27.
received from Christ, and whose determinations were infallible, 1 Cor. 16 1, 2.
did observe this Day as a Sabbath. The Apostle Act. 20. 6, 7.
Paul staying seven days at Troas might have chosen any of the other days,
for the people to assemble to hear the Word, and receive the Sacrament, but
they assembled to receive the Sacrament, and to hear the Word upon the first
day of the week, which is our Lords day. Moreover, the keeping holy of the
Lords day has constantly, and universally, from the Apostles downward to us,
been observed amongst Christians in all places and in all ages. Now the
approved practice of the Apostles (and of the Church with them) recorded in
Scripture, carries with it the force of a precept, and argues divine
institution.

Moreover, the Spirit of GOD honors this day with the Title of Rev 1. 10
Lords Day, as he does the Communion, with the Title of the 1 Cor. 10 21 1 Cor.
11. 20
Supper of the Lord: What does this argue, but as they both have reference to
Christ, so they are both appointed by Christ? The Spirit of Christ knew the
mind of Christ, who thus named this day.

Secondly, being co^vinced of the holiness of this day (the better to keep it
holy when it comes) you must on the week days, before Exodus 20. 8, 9
the Sabbath, or Lords (...) remember it: to the end that none of your worldly
business be left undone, or put off till then; especially upon Saturday you
must prepare for it. Then you must put an end to the works of your Calling;
and do whatsoever may be well done beforehand, to prevent bodily labor even
in your necessary actions, that, when the day comes, you may have less
occasion of worldly thoughts, less encumbrance and distractions; and may be
more free, both in body and mind, for spiritual exercises.

Thirdly, you your self (and as much as in you lies) all under your authority
must Exodus 23 12 Exo. 34. 21
rest upon this day, even in earing time and in harvest, the space of the whole
day, of four and twenty hours, from all manner of works (except those which
have true reference to the present days works of Mat. 12. 1 10 13 Isa. 58. 13
piety, mercy, and true ^ssity) not doing your own ways, not ^^nding your
own pleasures, nor speaking your own words.

Object. If you object that some understand this place of the day of Atonement
and yearly fast spoken of in the beginning of the Chapter?

Answ. Many Interpreters understa^d it of the weekly Sabbath; yet suppose it
should be understood of the Sabbath of Atonement, I, urging it only to prove
the external rest, it serves for my purpose, for these two differed; not in
their Lev. 23. 3. 28.
external rest, except, that in the day of Atonement, they abstained from meat
and drink until even. Upon all other Gods Sabbaths, and holy feasts, the
children of Israel were forbidden not all work, but only Lev. 23. 7, 8. 2^,
25. 35, ^6. Lev. 23. 3. 28.
servile work. But neither on the weekly Sabbath, nor on the day of Atonement,
might any manner of work be done, whether servile, or any other.

Quest. But are we under the Gospel tied unto as strict a rest as the Jews.

Answ. We are bound to keep as strict, and as holy a Rest, as the fourth
Commandment tied them but not to that strictness which some appendixes to the
Law, which were only Ceremonial, or Judicial, did bind them; such as Exodus
16 23.
dressing their meat on the Eve; not Exodus 35 3.
kindling a fire, putting a man to death for gathering sticks, etc. These (as
it is probable) were not only peculiar to the Jews, but for that present time
only, while they were in the Wilderness, and lived upon Manna. And forbidding
to kindle a fire, seems to be a special restraint for that time, to show,
that God preferred the holy keeping of the Sabbath, before the material
building of his Tabernacle, whereabout the kindling of fire was needful: see
Exodus 31. 7. 14. and chapt. 35. 2. 3. 5. etc. But, if these bound the Jews at
all times, then they were part of that yoke and p^dagogie of the Jews, of
which Peter says, Act. 15. 10
neither they, nor their fathers were able to bear; all which were done away
in Christ, and do not bind us.

Fourthly, it is not enough that you observe a rest, but you must keep an holy
Rest. Which that you may do, you must in your awaking put difference between
it and other days, not thinking on worldly business no more then will serve for
a general providence to preserve them from hurt, or loss. Both in your lying
awake, and rising this morning, make use of the directions before showing you
how to awake and rise with God. Rise Psa. 92. 2.
early (if it will stand with your health, and not binder your fitness for
spiritual exercises through drowsinesse afterward) that you may shewforth Gods
loving kindness in the morning. Number. 28. 3, 9, 10
Double your devotions on the Lords day, as the Jews did their morning and
evening sacrifice on the Number. 28. 3, 9, 10
Sabbath day. Eccle 5. 1, 2
Prepare your self for the public holy services by reading, by meditation,
and by casting away Iam. 1. 21 1 Pet. 2. 1, 2
all filthiness, that is, repenting of every gross sin; and casting away
the abounding of naughtiness, that is, let no sin be allowed or suffered to
reign in you. Then Ephesians. 6. 19, ^0
pray for your self, and for the Minister, that GOD would give him a mouth to
speak, and you an heart to hear, as you both ought to do. All this, before
you shall assemble in the Congregation. Being thus prepared, bring your people
with you to the Church. Join with the Minister and Congregation. Set your
self as in the special presence of God, following the example of good
Cornelius, Acts 10. 33
with all reverence, attending and consenting, saying Amen, with understanding,
faith, and affection, to the prayers uttered by the Minister: attending unto,
Heb. 4. 2.
believing and Iam. 1. 22
obeying whatsoever by the Minister is commanded you from GOD. Afterward by
meditation, and by Act. 17. 11, 12.
conference, and if you have opportunity, by repetitions, call to mind, and
wisely and firmly Psalm. 119 11.
lay up what you have learned. The like care must be had before, at, and after
the Evening exercise.

If Baptism be administered, What is to be done when Baptism is administered
Eze. 46. 10.
stay, and attend unto it, (1) To honor that holy Ordinance with the greater
solemnity. (2) And in charity to the persons to be Baptized* joining with the
Congregation in heart* prayer for them, and in a joyful receiving them into
the Communion of the visible Church. (3) Also in respect of your self. For
hereby you may call to mind your own Baptism, in which you did put on Christ,
which also does lively Gal. 3. 27.
represent the death, burial, and resurrection of Christ, together Gal. 5. 24
with your crucifying the affections and lusts, being dead and Romans 6. 3, 4 5.
Col. 2. 11, 12, 13.
buried with him unto sin, and rising with him to newness of life, and to
hope of glory: understanding clearly that the Heb 9. 14 Heb. 10. 22 Mat. ^. 11.
Tit. 3. 5. 1 Ioh. 1. 7.
Blood and Spirit of Christ, signified by waeter, does cleanse you from the
guilt and dominion of sin to your Justification, and Sanctification. Remembering
moreover, that, by way of Genesis 17. 11. Romans 4. 11.
Sealing your Baptism did in particular exhibit, and apply to you that
believe, Christ with all the benefits of the Covenant of grace ratified in his
blood: minding you also of this, that it does not only seal Gods promises of
forgiveness, grace, and salvation to you; but that also it seals and binds
you to the performance of your promise, and vow of faith and obedience, which
is the branch of the Covenant to be performed (according as was professed,) on
your part.

Recourse to your Baptism is an 1 Pet. 3. 21
excellent strengthner of your weak faith, and an occasion of renewing of your
vow, you having broken it: and of resisting temptations, considering that they
are against your promise and vow in Baptism.

When there is a Communion, receive it as often, as, (without interrupting the
order of the Church in populous Congregations) you may. But be careful to 1
Cor. 11. 27
receive it worthily.

It is not enough that you be borne within the Covenant, and What is requisite
before receiving the Communion. 1 Cor. 11. 23 Romans 4. 11.
that you have been Baptized; but you must have knowledge of the nature of the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, both that it is by divine institution, and that
it is a sign and seal of the righteousness of faith, signifying to you (by
the breaking and giving of the bread, and by pouring out 1 Cor. 11. 26
and delivering the wine) the wounding, bloud-shedding, and death of Christ, in
whom the 2 Cor. 1 20, 21 Heb. 7. 22.
Covenant of grace is established, presenting also and sealing unto you by the
elements of bread and wine, the very body and blood of Christ, with all the
benefits of the new Covenant, of which you receive indeed livery and seizon in
the act of receiving by Faith, whereby you also grow into a 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17
nearer union with Christ your head, and communion with all his members your
brethren.

Besides, there must be a special 1 Cor. 11. 28
preparation by examining your self, and making your peace with God before you
receive, which that you may the better do, read Chap. 5. Sect. 2. Also make
your peace, at least be at peace, Mat. 5. 23, 24 1 Col. 11.
and in charity with your neighbor, by an hearty acknowledging your fault so
far as is fit, and making recompense, if you have done him wrong: and by
forgiving, Col. 3. 13.
and forbearing revenge, if he have done you wrong.

In the act of administering, and What is ^ be done in the administering and
receiving.
receiving, join in confession and prayers, and attend to the actions of the
Minister when he breaks the bread, powers out the wine, and by 1 Cor. 10. 16.
blessing sets it apart for holy use: by faith behold Christ, by
representation, wounded, bleeding, and crucified before your eyes for you,
looking upon him whom your sins condemned and pierced to the death, rather
than his accusers, Pilat, and those which nailed him to the Cross, and which
ran a spear into his side, who were (though malicious) but instruments of that
punishment which Cod with other tokens of his wrath did execute upon him
(though in himself a Lamb without spot) justly for your sin, he being your
surety.

This looking upon him whom Zach. 1^. 10.
you have pierced, should partly dissolve you into an holy grief for sin:
but chiefly (considering that by this his passion he has made full
satisfaction for you, and withal seeing God and Christ himself by the hand of
his Minister, truly giving Christ's ^ery body and blood sacramentally to
signify and seal it unto you,) it should raise your heart ^o an holy
admiration of the love of God, and of Christ, and it should stir you up, in
the very ^ct of taking the bread and wine (...) a reverend and thankful
re^^iving 1 Cor. 11. 29
of this his body and blood (...) faith, discerning the Lords bo^e; gathering
assurance hereby, ^at now all enmity between ^od and you is done away, and
^at you by this, as by spiritual ^od and life, shall grow up in ^m with the
rest of his mysti^ll body unto everlasting life.

After that you have received What is to be done after that you have received.
until you be to joyue in pub^ke praise and prayers) affect ^ur heart with
joy and thankefulness* in the assurance of the pardon of all your sins, and
of salvation by Christ, yea, more than if you being a bankrupt should receive
an acquittance sealed of the Release of all your debts, and with it a Will and
Testament wherein you should have a Legacy of no l^sse than a Kingdom, s^aled
with such a seal as does give clear proof of the fidelity, ability, and
death of the Testator: or then, it having been a traitor, you should receive a
free and sul^ pardon from the King, sea^ed with his own seal, together with an
Assurance that ^^ ^a^h adopted you to be his c^ild, to be married to his son
the h^ire of the Crown. This is your case when by faith you receive the bread
and wine, the body and blood of the Lord. Think^ thus therefore with joy and
rejoicing in God, oh! how happi^ am I in Christ my Savior, G^ who has given
him to death for me, and also given him to me, Romans 8. 32. 2 Pet. 1. 3. Romans 8.
33. to the end
how shall he not with him give me all things also, even whatsoever may pertain
to life, godliness, and glory; Who shall lay any thing to my charge, etc? Who,
or what can separate me from the love of CHRIST, etc?

Resolve withal upon a constant 2
and an unfeigned endeavor to perform all duties becoming one thus acquitted,
thus redeemed, pardoned, and advanced, and this in token of thankfulness, even
to keep covenants required to be performed on your part; undoubtedly expecting
whatsoever God has covenanted and sealed on his part.

Join in public praise and 3
prayer heartily, and in a liberal contribution to the poor, if there be a
Collection.

After the Sacrament, If you 4
feel your faith strengthened, and your soul comforted, nourish it with all
thankfulness.

If not, yet, if your Conscience can witness that you endevo^ed to prepare as
you ought, and to receive as you ought, be not discouraged, but wait for
strength and comfort in due time. We do not always feel the benefit of
bodily food presently, but stirring of humors and sense of disease is sometimes
rather occasioned, yet in the end being well digested, it strengthnet^^; so ^^
is often with spiritua^l food, corruption may stir, and temptations may arise
more upon the receiving, then before; especially since Satan, if it be but to
vex a tenderhearted Christian will ^ereupon take occasion to tempt with more
violence: But if you resist these, and stand resolved to obey and to rely upon
Gods mercy in Christ, this is rather a sign of receiving worthily; so long as
your desires and resolutions are strengthened, and you thereby are made more
carefully to stand upon your Watch. Endeavor in this case to digest this
spiritual food by further meditation, improving that strength you have, Ephe.
6. 10. Compare it with the like Dan. 10. 19 5 1 Cor. 11. 30
praying for more strength, remembering the Commandment which bids you to be
strong, and you shall be strengthened.

Lastly, If you find your self worse indeed, or do feel Gods heavy hand in
special sort upon you, following upon your receiving, and your Conscience can
witness truly, that you came not prepared, or that you did wittingly and
carelessly fail in such or such a particular in receiving, it is evident you
did receive unworthily. In which case you must heartily bewail your sin,
confess it to God, ask and believe 1 Ioh. 1. 9* 1 Ioh. 2. 1, 2
that he will pardon it, and take heed that you offend not in that kind
another time.

Upon the Lords day you must likewise be ready to visit and relieve the
distressed. 1 Cor. 1 6* 2


Take some time also this day to look into your by past life, and chiefly to
your walking with God the last week, asbeing in freshest memory, and be sure
to set all straight between God and you.

Last of all, on every opportunity take good time to consider Gods works:
what they are in themselves, what they are against the wicked, what they are to
the Church, and to your self, and to yours. And, in parricular, take occasion
from the Day it self, to think fruitfully of the Creation, of your
Redemption, Sanctification, and of your eternal Rest and glory to come: For
God in his holy wisdom has s^t such a divine print upon this our Lords day,
that at once it does mind us of the greatest works of God, which either make
for his glory, or his Churches good. As, of the Creation of the World in six
days, he resting the seventh, which specially isattributed to the Father. And
of man's redemption by Christ, of whose resurrection this Day is a remembrance,
which is specially attributed to the Son: Also of our sanctification by the
Spirit, for that the observation of the Sabbath is a sign and means of
holiness, which work is specially attributed to the holy Ghost. Lastly, of
your and the Churches glorification, which shall be the joint work of the
blessed Trinity, when we shall Heb. 4 5 10.
ceasefrom al our works, and shall rest, and be glorious with the same glory
which our Head Christ has with the Father, to whom be glory for ever and
ever, Amen. Do all these Psalm. 92. Isa. 58 ^3.
with delight, raising up your self hereby to a greater measure of holiness,
and heavenly m^nae^nesse.

Do all this the rather, because Motives to keep holy the Lords Day.
there is not a clearer Exo. 31 13
sign to distinguish you from one that is profane, than this, of conscionable
keeping holy the Lords Day. Neither is there any ordinary means of gaining
strength and growth of grace in the inward man, like this, of due observing the
Ezekiel. 20 12
Sabbath. For this is Gods great Mart, or Fair day for the soul, on which you
may buy of Christ, Isa 55. 1, 2, 3, 4
wine, milk, bread, marrow and fatness, Rev. 3. 18
gold, white raiment, eye-soelve; even all things which are necessary, and
which will satisfy, and cause the soul to live. It is the special day of
Gods hearing of suites, and receiving petitions. It is his special day of
proclaiming and sealing of Act. 2. 38.
Pardons to penitent sinners. It is Gods special day of publishing and sealing
your Patent of eternal life. It is a blessed day, sanctified for all Exo. 20.
11
these blessed purposes.

Now, lest this urging of the morality of the Sabbath, and so strict an
observation of the Lords day, in spending the whole day in holy meditation,
holy exercises, and works of mercy (excepting only necessary repasts, and a
general providence over their estate) should be thought, as it is by some, to
be merely ^ewish, and to be only the private opinion of some few Zelots, more
nice then wise: Know, that in all things wherein we^ are tied by a
commandment, common to us and the Jews; to observe that as the Jews did, by
virtue of that commandment is not to be Jewish, as to forbear to kill, and
to commit adul^erie, and such like: The same reason is for keeping the fourth
Commandment, which (as has been proved) is one of the Motals. Besides, know,
that the observing the Lords day, by v^rture of the fourth Commandment, and
the change of the (...) day unto the Lords day, to ^e by divine institution;
and that it should be kept strictly holy (as I have showed you) is the
professed doctrine of this our Hom. of the time and place of prayer. part. 1.
page 124, 125, 126.
Church of England. And, I would that all would know and see, that the taking
away of the morality of the fourth Commandment, unloosing the conscience from
the immediate bonds of Gods Commandment, and tying the conscience to observe a
day for Gods solemn worship only by humane constitution, does overthrow true
Religion, and the power of Godliness, and opens a wide gap to Atheism,
pro^anenesse, and all licentiousness: As daily experience does show in those
Countries, where the morality of the Sabbath is not maintained; and in such
places where the Lords Day is not holily and duly observed.

CHAP. VII. Showing how to end the day with God.
When you have walked with God from morning until night, whether on a common
day, a day of Fast, or on the Lords Day, according to the former directions: it
remains that you conclude the day well, when you would give your self to
rest at night. Wherefore,

First look back and take a strict view of your whole carriage that day past.
Reform what you find amiss; and rejoice, or be grieved, as you find you
have done well or ill, as you have gotten or lost in grace that day.

Secondly, since you cannot sleep in safety, if God, who is your Psalm 12^. 4, 5.
keeper, do not ^^. 127* 1.
wake and watch for you: and though you have God to watch when you sleep; you
cannot be safe, if he that watches be your enemy. Wherefore you shall do well,
if at night, you not only conclude the day with your Family, by reading some
Scripture, and by prayer; but you must alone renew and confirm your peace with
GOD with prayer, and with like preparation thereto, as you received directions
for the morning: commending and committing your self to Gods tuition by Psa.
3. 4, 5 Psa. 92. 2.
prayer, with thanksgiving before you go to bed. Then shall you Psalm. 4. 8
lie down in safety.

All this being done, yet while you are putting off your apparel, when you are
lying down, and when you are in bed, before you sleep, it is good that you
Psalm. 4. 4.
commune with your own heart. If other good and apt meditations offer not
themselves, some of these will be seasonable.

1. When you see your self Fit meditations at going to bed.
stripped of your apparel, consider what you were at your birth, and what you
shall be at your death, when you put off this earthly Tabernacle (if not in the
mean time:) how that 1 Timothy 6. 7
you brought nothing into this world, nor shall carry any thing out; Job 1. 21
naked you came out of your mothers womb; and naked shall you return. This
will be an excellent means to give you sweet content in 1 Timothy 6. 8
any thing you have, though never so little, and in the Job 1. 21
loss of what you have had, though never so much.

2. When you lie down, you may think of lying down into your winding-sheete,
and into your grave. For besides that 1 Cor. 11 30
sleep and the Isa. 57. 2.
bed do aptly resemble death and the grave, who knows when he sleeps that
ever he shall awake again to this life?

2. You may think thus also: If the Sun must not go down upon my Ephesians. 4. 26
wrath, lest it become hatred, and so be worse ere morning; then, it is not
safe for me to lie down in the allowance of any sin, lest Psa. 13. 3.
I sleep not only the sleep of natural death, but of that which is
eternal: for who knows what anight will bring forth? Now, it is an high point
of holy Deuteronomy. 32 29.
wisdom, upon all opportunities to think of, and to prepare for your latter
end.

4 Consider likewise, that if you walk with God in uprightness, your death
unto you is but to fall into a sweet sleep, an entering into rest, Isa. 57. 2.
a resting on your bed for a night, until the glorious morning of your happy
Resurrection.

5. Lastly, if possibly you can, fall asleep out of some heavenly meditation.
Then will your sleep be Pro. 3 21 24, 25.
more sweet, and Pro. ^. 21 22.
more secure, your dreams fewer, or more comfortable, your head will be Pro. 6
22
fuller of good thoughts, and your heart will be in better plight when you
awake, whether in the night, or in the morning.

Thirdly, being thus prepared to sleep; you should sleep only so much as the
present state of your body requires; you must not be like the sluggard, to
Pro. 20. 13.
love sleep; neither must you sleep too much: for if you do, that (which
being taken in its due measure, is a restorer of vigor and strength to your
body, and a quickner of the spirits) will make the spirits d^l, the brain
so^tish, and the whole body lazy, and unhealthy. And that which God has
ordained for a furtherance, through your sin shall become an enemy to your
corporal and spiritual Pro. 6. 6. 9, 10, 11.
thrift. Thus much of walking with God in all things at all times.

CHAP. VIII. How to walk with God alone.
SECTION 1.
THere is no time wherein you shall not be either alone or in Company, in
either of which you must walk in all well-pleasing, as in the sight of God.

Touching being alone. First, Affect not solitariness; be not alone, except
you have just cause, namely, when you set your self apart for holy duties, and
when your needful occasions do withdraw you: for out of these cases, two are
better then one (says Solomon) Eccl. 4. 9 10
and woe be to him that is alone.

2. When you are alone, you must be very watchful, and stand upon your guard
well armed, lest you shall fall into manifold temptations of the Devil. For
Genesis 3. 1. Genesis 39. 11 2 Samuel 11. 2
solitariness is Satan's opportunity, which he will not lose, as the manifold
examples in Scripture, a Mat. 4. 1.
and our daily experience does witness. Wherefore you must have a ready eye to
observe, and an heart ready bent to resist all his assaults. And it will now
the more concern you to keep close to God, and not lose his company; that,
through the weapons of your Christian warfare, you may by the power of Gods
might Ephe. 6. 10 etc.
quit your self, and stand fast.

3. Take special heed, lest when you be alone, you, your self, conceive,
devise, or plot any evil, to which your nature is then most apt.

And beware in particular, lest you commit alone, by your self, Mich. 2. 1
Psalm. 36. 4. Mat. 5. 28. (...)
contemplative wickedness, which is, when by feeding your fancy, and pleasing
your self, in Covetous, Adulterous, Revengefull, Ambitious, or other wicked
thoughts, you act that in your mind and fantasy, which either for fear, or
shame, you dare not; or for want of opportunity or means, you cannot act
otherwise.

4. When you are alone, be sure that you ordinarily be well and fully exercised
about something that is good, either in the works of your calling, or in
reading, or in holy meditation, or prayer. For whenever Mat. 12. 44
Satan does find you idle and out of employment in some or other of those works
which God has appointed, he will ^ake that as an opportunity to garnish you
for himself, and to employ you in some of his works. But if you keep always
in your place, and ^o some or other good work of your place; you are under
Gods special protection, as the Bird in the Deu. 22. 6
Law was, while she face upon heregs or young ones, keeping her own nest; in
which case no man might hurt her.

I have already showed how you should behave your self as in Gods sight, both
in prayer, and in the works of your calling. I will write some thing for your
direction touching reading, and Meditation.

SECTION 2. Of Reading.
BEsides your set-times of reading the holy Scriptures, you shall do well to
gain some time from you vacant hours, that you may read in GODS Book, and in
the good books of men.

First, when you read any part How to read profitably.
of the word of God, you must put a difference between it and the best
writings of men, preferring it far before them. To this end (1) Consider it
in its properties and excellencies. No word is of like absolute Psalm. 197 10, 11
authority, holiness, equity, truth, wisdom, true elegancie, power, and
eternity. (2) Consider this Word in its ends, and good effects. No book that
aims at Ioh. 5. 39 2 Cor. 3. 18
Gods glory, and the Rom 15. 4 Iam. 1. 21.
salvation of man's soul like this, none that concerns you like to this. It
discovers your misery by sin, together with the perfect Romans 3. 23, 24
remedy. It propounds perfect Isa. 55. 1, 3
happiness unto you, affords means to Romans 1. 16 1 The. 2. 13
work it out in you, and for you. It is mighty through GOD to 2 Cor. 10 4, 5
prepare you for grace. It is the immortal seed to 1 Pet. 1. 23
beget you unto Christ. It is the 1 Pet 2. 2 Heb. 5. 13 14
milk and stronger meat to nourish you up in Christ. It is the only 2 Timothy 1
13
soulephysicke to recover you, and to rid you of all spiritual evils. By it
Christ gives spiritual sight to the blind, hearing to the deaf, speech to the
dumb, strength to the weak, health to the sick: yea, by it he does cast out
Devils, and raise men from the Ioh. 5. 25
death of sin (they believing it) as certainly as he did all those for the
bodies of men by the word of his power while he lived on the earth. This Book
of Go^ does contain those many rich Legacies be queathed to you in that last
He^. 9. 15 16, 17, 18
Will and Testament of God sealed with the blood of Jesus Christ our Lord. It
is the Isa. 8. 20.
Magna Charta, and Statute-booke of the Kingdom of heaven. It is the book of
Romans 6. 14, ^a 1 Ioh. 5. 13
Privileges and Immunities of Gods children, It is Act. 20. 32
the word of grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an
inheritance amongst all them that are sanctified. For it will make you 2 Timothy 3
15, 17
wise to salvation, through Faith in Christ jesus, making you perfect,
thoroughly furnished unto all good works.

Wherefore as when you hear this Word preached, so when at any time you read
it, you must receive it, not as the word of man, but as it is in truth, the
Word of God; 1 The. 2. 13
then it will work effectually in you that believe.

Secondly, when you read this Word, lift up the heart in Psa. 119. 18.
prayer to God for the Spirit of understanding and wisdom, that your mind
may be more and more enlightened, and your heart more and more strengthened with
grace by it. For this Word is spiritual, containing the secrets and hidden
things of GOD in a mystery, which, as the bare letter does signify, is as a
Isa. 29. 11 12.
book sealed up in respect of discovery of the 1 Cor. 2. 10, 11.
things of God in it to all that have not the help of Gods Spirit, so that none
can know the inward and spiritual meaning thereof, powerfully and savingly,
but by the Spirit of God.

Thirdly, read the Word with an hunger and thirst after knowledge and 1 Pet. 2.
2
growth of grace by it, with a reverent, humble, teachable, and Luke 8. 15
honest heart, believing all that you read, trembling at the threats and
judgments against sinners; rejoicing in the promises made unto, and the
favors bestowed upon the penitent, and upon the godly, willing and resolving
to obey all the Commandments.

Thus if you read, blessed shall you be in your Rev. 1. 3.
reading, and blessed shall you be in your Iam. 1. 25
deed.

The holy Scriptures are thus to Who must read Scriptures.
be read of all of every sort and condition, and of each sex, for all are
commanded to Ioh. 5. 39
search the Scriptures, as well the Laytie as the Clergy, Act. 17. 11 12.
women as well as men; 2 Timothy 3. 15.
young as well as old, all sorts of Isa. 34. 1. 16. Rev. 1. 3.
all Nations. For, though the Spirit of GOD is able to work conversion and
holiness immediately without the Word, as he does in all those infants that
are saved; yet in men of years the holy Ghost will not (where the Word may be
had) work Luke 16. 2^
without it as his instrument; using it as the hammer, plow, seed, fire, water,
sword, or as any other instrument to pull down, build up, plant, purge,
cleanse. For it is by the Word both Rev. 1. 3.
read and preached, that Christ does John 1^ 17 Ephe. 5. 26 27
sanctify all that are his, that he may present them to himself, and so to
his Father, without spot or wrinkle, a Church most glorious.

And whereas it is most true, A Caution not to forbear reading Scripture,
because of the difficulty of it.
that those which are 2 Pet. 3. 1^
unlearned and unstable, do wrest not only hard Scriptures, but all other
also to their destruction; Yet, let not this (as Papists would infer) cause
you to forbear to read; no more, then, because many surfeit and are drunk by
the best meats and drinks, you do forbear to eat and drink.

But to prevent misse-understanding and wresting of Scriptures to your hurt,
do thus. (1) Get and cherish an humble and honest heart, resolved to obey when
you know Gods will: Ioh. 7. 17
If any man will do his will, says How to read and not mistak and wrest
Scriptures
Christ, he shall know of the doctrine whether it be of God. (2) Get a clear
knowledge of the first Principles of Christian Religion, believe them
steadfastly. And endeavor to frame your life according unto those more easy and
known ^criptures, where on these prin^iples and first Oracles of God ^^e
grounded; For these give ^ight, even by the first entrance, i Psalm. 119 130
unto the very simple. This do, ^^d you shall never be unlearned (...) the
mysteries of Christ, nor ^et unstable in his ways. (3) Be ^uch in Isa. 8. 20
hearing the Word in^^preted by learned and faithful ^inisters. (4) If you
meet with place of Scripture too hard for (...), presume not to frame a sense
it of your own head; but take ^tice of yourignorance, admire ^e depth of Gods
wisdom, sus^nd your opinion, and take the first opportunity to ask the meaning
of some or other, Mal. 2. 7. Motives to read Scripture.
whose lips should preserve knowledge.

Let no colorable pretense keep you from diligent reading of Gods Book; for
hereby you shall be better prepared to hear the Word preached. For it lays a
Act. 8. 28 3^, 35.
groundwork to preaching, making way to a better understanding thereof, and
to ^ter ^eeping it in memory ^ also to ena^le you to Act 17. 11 1 Ioh. 4. 1. 1
The. 5. 21
try the Spirits and Doctrines delivered, even to try all things, and to keep
what is good.

1. In reading men's writings, How to read men's writings profitably.
read the best, or at least those by which you can profit most.

2. Read a good book thoroughly, and with due consideration.

3. Reject not hastily any thing you read, because of the mean opinion you
have of the autho^ Believe not every thing yo^ read, because of the great
opin^ on you have of him that wrote it. But (in all books of faith and
manners) try all things by the Isa. 8. 20* Mar. 22. 29* 31.
Scriptures. Receive nothing upon the bare testimony or judgment of any man,
any further then he can confirm it by the Lu. 10 26.
Canon of the word, or by evidence of reason, or by undoubted experience,
always provided that what you call reason and experience, be according unto,
not against the Word. If the meanest speak according to it, then receive and
regard it: but if the most judicious, in your esteem, yea, Gal. 1. 8.
if he were an Angel of GOD should speak or write otherwise, refuse, and
reject it.

Thus much for private reading. Caution in private reading.


Only take this Caution. You must not think it to be sufficient that you read
the Scriptures and other good Books at home in private, when you shall by so
doing neglect the hearing of the Word read, and preached in public. For God
has not appointed, that reading alone, or preaching alone, or prayer, or
Sacraments should singly, and alone save any man, where all, or more then one
of them may be had; but he requires the joint use of them all in their place
and time. And in this variety of means of salvation, God has in his holy
wisdom ordained them to be such, that the excellency and sufficiency of the
one, shall not, in its right use, keep any from, but lead him unto a due
performance of the other, each serving to make the other more effectual to
produce their common effect, namely, the Salvation of man's soul.

Indeed when a man is necessarily hindered by persecution, sickness, or
otherwise, that he cannot hear the Word preached, then God does bless reading
with an humble and honest heart, without hearing the Word preached. But where
hearing the Word preached, is either contemned or neglected for reading sake,
or for prayer sake, or for Prove. 28. 9.
any other good private duty, there, no man can look to be blessed in his
reading, or in any other private duty, but cursed rather. Witness the evil
effects which by experience we see do issue thence, viz. Selfe-conceitednesse,
Singularity in some dangerous opinions; many times a rending away from the
Church by Schism, yea, too often, a falling away into damnable Heresies and
Apostacy.

SECTION 3. Of meditation.
When you are alone, then also is a fit season for you to be taken up in holy
meditation. For according to a man's meditations, such is the man. Isa. 32* 8.
The liberal man devises liberal things: the Churl the contrary. The godly
man studieth how to please God, the wicked how to please himself.

In meditation the mind or reason of the soul stays it self What
meditation is
upon some thing conceived or thought upon for the better understanding
thereof, and for the better application of it to a man's self for use.

In meditating a right, the mind of man exercises two kind of The distinct
acts and parts of meditation.
acts; the one direct upon the thing meditated; the other reflect upon
himself, the person meditating. The first is an act of the contemplative part
of the und^rstanding; the second is an act of Conscience. The end of the first
is to enlighten the mind with knowledge: the end of the second, is, to fill the
heart with goodness. The first serves (I speak of moral actions) to find
out the rule whereby you may know more clearly and distinctly, what is truth,
what is falsehood, what is good, what is bad; whom you should obey, and what
manner of person you should be, and what you should do, and the like: The
second serves to direct you how to make a right and profitable application of
your self, and of your actions to the Rule.

In this latter are these two acts. First, an examination whether you and your
actions be according to the Rule, or whether you come short, or are severed
from it, giving true judgment of you, according as it does find you.

The second is a persuasive and commanding act, charging the soul in every
faculty, understanding, will, affections, yea, the whole man, to reform and
conform themselves to the Rule, that is, to the will of God, if that you find
your self not to be according to it: which is done by confessing the fault to
God with remorse, praying for forgivenes, returning to God by repentance,
reforming the fault through new obedience. This must be the resolution of the
soul. And all this a man must charge upon his soul peremptorily, commanding
himself to endeavor the doing of them.

When you meditate, join all these three acts, else you shall never bring your
meditation unto a profitable issue. For if you only muse and study to find
out what is true, what is false, what is good, what is bad, you may gain much
knowledge of the head, but little goodness to your heart. If you only apply
to your self that whereon you have mused, and no more; you may by finding your
self to be a transgressour, lay guilt upon your conscience, and terror upon
your heart without fruit or comfort: but if to these two you lay a charge upon
your self to follow GODS counsel touching what you should believe and do,
when you have offended him: if you with all bring your heart to a resolution
through GODS grace to be such an one as you ought to be, and to live such a
life for hereafter as you ought to live; then unto science you shall add
conscience, and to knowledge you shall join practice, and shall fill your
self full of comfort. Observe David's meditations, and you shall find they
come to this issue. His Ps. 119. 59
thoughts of God, and of his ways made him turn his feet unto Gods
testimonies. The meditation of Gods benefits made him resolve to Psalm. 116 12,
13, 14
take the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord, and to pay his
vows: When he considered what God had done for him, and thence inferred what
he should be to God again, he says to his soul, Psalm. 10^. 1, ^, 3
My soul and all that is in me, praise his holy Name. When he in his
meditation found that it was his fault to have his soul disquieted in him
through distrust, he Psa. 42. 5. 11.
charge it to wait on GOD, and raises up himself unto confidence. I will
meditate on thy precepts (says he.) What, is that all? no, but he proceeds
to this last act of meditation, and says, Psalm. 119. 15, 16, 106
I will have respect unto thy ways.

Gods holy nature, attributes, Word, works, also what is duty, Rules of
meditation.
what is a fault, what you should be, and do; what you are, and what you have
done, what be the miseries of the wicked, what is the happiness, and what are
the privileges of the godly, are fit matter of meditating, by the direct act of
the understanding.

That which must settle your judgment and be the rule to direct your
judgment, what to hold for true and good, must be the ^ Pet. 1. 19.
Canon of Gods Word rightly understood, and not your own reason or opinion:
nor yet the opinions or conceits of men; for these are false and crooked Rules.

In seeking to know the secrets Cautions about the matter of meditation.
and mysteries of God, and godliness, you must not pry into them farther than
God has revealed; for if you wade therein farther than you have sure footing
in the Word, you will presently lose your self and be swallowed up in a maze,
and whirlepoole of errors and heresies. These Ps. 131. ^ Romans 12. ^
deep things of god must be understood with sobriety, according to that
measure of clear light which God has given you by his Word.

When Sin happens to be the matter of your meditation, take heed lest
while your thoughts dwell upon it (though your intention be to bring your self
out of love with it) it steal into your affections, and work in you some
tickling motions to it, and so circumvent you. For the Eccl. 7. 24. 26, 28
cunning devices of sin are undiscoverable: and you know that your heart is
Ier. 17. 9
deceitful above all things. Wherefore to prevent this mischief; (1) As Ephe.
5. 3
Sin is not to be named, but when there is just cause; so is it not to be
thought upon, but upon special cause, namely, when it shows it self in its
motions, and evil effects, and when it concerns you to try and find out the
wickedness of your heart and life. (2) When there is cause to think of sin,
represent it to your mind as an evil, the Genesis 39. 9
greatest evil, most loathsome, and most abominable to GOD, and as a thing most
hateful and hurtful to you. Whereupon you must work your heart to a
detestation of it, and resolution against it. (3) Never stand reasoning or
disputing with it, as Genesis 3. 2, 3
Eve did with Satan, but without any plodding thereupon, you must do present
execution upon it, by sheathing the Mat. 4. 4. 7. 10
Word, the Sword of the Spirit, into the heart of it, and by the Romans 8. 13
deeds of the Spirit, kill it. And if you would insist long in meditating upon
any subject, make choice of matter more pleasant, and less infectious.

It is needful that you be skillful in this first part of meditation, for
hereby you find out, and lay down propositions. Whence you may conclude; who
is to be adored, who not; what is to be done, what not; what you should be,
what not. But the life of meditation lies in the reflect acts of the soul,
whereby that knowledge which was gotten by the former act of meditation, does
reflect, and 2 Chro. 6 37
return upon the heart, causing you to assume and apply to your self what was
propounded; whence also you are induced to endeavor to work your heart unto
that which you have learned it ought to be.

This, though it be most profitable; yet, because it is tedious to the flesh,
is most neglected. Wherefore it concerns you which are well instructed in the
points of faith and holiness, to be most conversant in this, when you are
alone, whether of set purpose, or in your journyings, or otherwise.

You should therefore be well read in the 1 Cor. 11 28. 31. 2 Cor. 13. 5
book of your conscience, as well as in the Bible. Commune often with it, and it
will fully acquaint you with your self, and with your estate. It will tell you
what you were, and what you now are; what you most delighted in, in former
times, what now. It will tell you what streights and fears you have been in,
and how graciously God delivered you; what temptations you have had, and how it
came to pass, that sometimes you were overcome by them; and how, and by what
means sometimes you overcame them. It will show what conflicts you have had
betwixt flesh and spirit, what side you took, what was the Psa. 77 1. to 13.
issue of the conflict: whether you were grieved and humbled when sin got the
better; whether you rejoiced and were thankful in any sort when Gods grace in
you held his own, or got the better. Your conscience being set aworke, will
call to remembrance your oversight, and advantages which you gave to Satan and
to the lusts of your flesh, that you may not do the like another time. It will
remember you by what helps and means through Gods grace you prevailed and got
a good conquest over some sin, that you may fly to the like another time. If
you shall thus take observation of the passages, and conflicts in this your
Christian race and warfare, your knowledge will be an experimental knowledge,
which, because it is a knowledge arising from the often proof of that whereof
you were taught in the Word; it becomes a more grounded, a more perfect, and
a more fruitful knowledge than that of mere contemplation.

It is only this experimental knowledge that will make you expert in the
trade and warfare of Christianity. Take me a man that has only read much of
Husbandry, Physic, Merchandise, Policy, and martial affairs, who has
gotten into his head the notions of all these, and makes himself believe that
he has great skill in them: yet one that has not read half so much, but has
been of long practice, and of great experience in these, goes as far beyond
him in Husbandry, in giving Physic, in Trading, in Policy, and in true feats
of Arms, as he goes beyond one that is a mere novice in them. Such
difference there is between one that has only notions and brainknowledge of
Christianity, and in may be some practice withal, but severed from
experimental observation; and him that takes notice of his own experiences,
and is often looking into the Records of his own Conscience, thoroughly to peruse
them.

The experiments which by this means you shall take (of Gods love, truth, and
power; of your enemies falsehood, wiles, and methods; of your own weakness
without God, and of your strength by God to withstand the greatest lusts, and
strongest Devil; yea, of an ability to do all things through him that
strengthens you) will beget in you, faith and confidence in God, and love to
him, watchfulness and circumspection, lest you be overtaken with sin, yea
such humility, wisdom, and Christian courage, that no opposition shall daunt
you, neither shall any drive you from the hold you have in Christ Jesus.

Where read you of two such Champions, as 1 Samuel 17 36.
David and 2 Timothy 1. 12. 2 Timothy 4. 7. 17, 18.
Paul? and where do you read of two that recorded, and made use of their
experiences like these?

Wherefore next to Gods book, which gives light and rule to your Conscience,
read often the book of your Conscience. See what is there written for, or
against you. When you find that your self and life is according to the rule
of God* book; keep fast to that with comfort; but, wherein you find your
self not to be according to this rule, give your self no rest, until in some
good measure, at least in endeavor, you do live according to it.

I have insisted the more largely on this point of meditation, because of the
rarenes, necessity, and profitablenesse of it; many of Gods people omit it,
because they know not how to do it, and because they know not their need, nor
yet the benefit which they may reap by it. I have indevoured to show you how.

That you have need to meditate: Motivesto meditation.
Consider, that reading, hearing, and transient thoughts of the best things
upon whatsoever occasion, leave not half that impression of goodness upon the
soul, which they would do, if ^y meditation they might be recalled, and be
made to stay, and ^t sometime upon it. Without ^his meditation, the good food
of the soul passes through the understanding, and either is quite ^ost, or is
like raw and indigested ^^eate, which does not nourish those creatures that
chew the ^^d, till they have fetched it ^acke and chewed it better. Meditation
is in stead of chewing ^he cud. All the outward means of Salvation do little
good in comparison, except by meditation they be pondered and laid up in the
heart.

2. That meditation will do^ you much good, know it by these* (1) It does
digest, ingraft, and turn the spiritual knowledge tendered in Gods
ordinances, into you, and it does frame and turn you into it, so that Gods
will in his Word, and your will become one, willing the same things* (2)
Meditation fitteth for prayer, nothing more. (3) This Meditation makes for
practice of godliness, nothing more. (4) Nothing does perfect and make a man
an expert Christian more then this. (5) Nothing does make a man know and enjoy
himself with inward comfort, nor is a clearer evide^ce that he is in state of
happiness, then this. For Ps. 94. 19
in the multitude of my thoughts within me (^aith David to GOD) thy comforts
delight my soul. And he does by the Spirit of GOD pronounce every man blessed,
that does thus Psalm. 1. 2.
meditate in Gods Law day and night.

CHAP. IX. Of keeping Company, as in the sight of God.
SECTION 1.
When you shall be in company of whatsoever ^rt you must amongst them ^alke
with God.

Directions hereunto are of two How a man should carry himself to all.
^rts. First, showing how toward ^ll: Secondly, how toward good ^r bad.

First, in whatsoever company you are, your Conversation in word and deed
must be such, as ^a^ procure (1) Mat. 5. 16
Glory to God; ^2) 1 Timothy 6. 1
Credit to Religion: (3) Genesis 2. 18
All ^utuall lawful content, help, and ^ue benefit to each other. For these
^re the ends, first, of society; secondly, of the variety 1 Cor. 12 7. 25
of the good ^ifts that GOD has given unto men to do good with.

To attain these ends, your conversation must be, 1. holy: 2. humble: 3. wise:
4. loving.

First, it must be 1 Pet. 1. 15.
holy, you must as much as in you is, prevent all evil speech and behavior,
which might else break forth, being alike careful to break it off, if it be
already begun in your company. Suffer not the name and Religion of God, nor
yet your brothers name to be traduced; but in due place, and manner, contest
against either. Be diliget to watch, and to take all good occasions to utter,
and to nourish good speech, and good motions; even whatsoever may tend to the
practice, and increase of godliness, and honesty.

Secondly, your conversation must be humble. You must give 1 Pet. 2. 17 Ephe.
5. 21
all due respect to all men, according to their several places, and gifts;
reverencing your betters, submitting to all in authority over you. Esteem
your Phil. 2. 3.
equals better then your selves, in honor preferring them before you,
Condescend unto, and tender them of the Romans 12. 16
lower sort.

Thirdly, you must be wise and ^iscreet in your carriage toward all, and that
in diverse particulars.

1. Be not too open, nor too reserved. Not 1 Cor. 13 7
over-suspicious, nor Ioh. 2. 24 Ier. 40. 14 15, 16
over-credulous. For the Pro. 14. 15
simple believes every word, but the prudent looks well to his going.

2. Apply your self to the several conditions and dispositions of men in all
indifferent things, so far as you may without sin against God, or offense to
your brother, 1 Cor. 9 19, 20, 23
becoming all things to all men, comporting with them in such sort, that if it
be possible, you may live in Rom 12. 18
peace with them, and may gain some interest in them to do them good.

But far be it from you to be A Caution to^^hing becoming all things to all
men.
as many, who, under this pretense, are for all companies, seeming religious
with those that be religious; but indeed are profane and licentious with those
that are profane and licentious: for this is carnal policy, and damnable
hypocrisy, no true wisdom.

3. Intermeddle not with 1 These. 4 11
other men's business, but upon due calling.

4. Know when to 1 Timothy 5 13
speak, and when to be silent. How Eccle. 3. 7
excellent is a word spoken in season? As either speech or silence will make
for the glory of God, and for the cause of Religion, and good one of another,
so speak, and so Pro. 15. 23 Pro. 25. 11
hold your peace.

5. Be not Prove. 29 11
hasty to speak, nor be Po. 17. 27 Eccl. 10. ^4
much in speaking, but only when just cause shall require; for as it is Pr.
18. 13
shame and folly to a man to answer a matter before he hear it: so it is for
any to speak before his Job 32. 4, ^5, 6
time, and turn. This is commended to you in the example of Elihu in Job.
Likewise know, that in the Pro. 10. 19
multitude of words wants not sin; but he that refraineth his lips, is wise.

6. Be sparing to speak of your self, or actions, to your own praise, except
in case of 2 Cor. 12 11
necessary Apology, and defense of Gods cause maintained by you, and in the
clearing of your wronged innocence, or needful manifestation of Gods power and
grace in you; but then it must be with all moddestie, giving the praise Phil.
4. 12 13
unto God. Neither must you cunningly hunt for praise by debasing or excusing
your self and actions, that you might give occasion to draw forth
commendations of your self from others. This seeking of praise any way,
argues pride and folly. But do prayse-worthy actions, seeking therein the
praise of God, that God may be glorified in you, then you shall have Romans 2. 29
praise of God, whatsoever you have of man. Howsoever, follow Salomo^s rule;
Pro. 27. 2
Let another praise thee, not thine own mouth, a stranger, and not thine own
lips.

7. As you must be wise in How to mak^ a good use to a man's ^^^fe by others
company.
your carriage toward others, so you must be wise for your self, which is to
make a good use to your self of all things that fall out ^^ company. Let the
good you se^, be ^^^^er of con^ent, and of thanks to GOD, and for your Romans
12. 9
imita^ion. Let the evil you see, be matter of grefe and humiliation, and a
warning to you, lest you commit the like, since you are made of the same mould
that others are made of. If men report good of you to your face, repress those
speeches as soon, and as wisely as you can, Gen 41. 15, 16. Act. 12. 23.
giving the praise of all things to God, knowing that this is but a temptation,
Pro. 27. 14.
and a snare, and a means to breed and feed self-love, pride and vainglory
in you. If this good report be true, bless God that he has enabled you to
give cause thereof, and study by virtuous living to continue it. If this good
report be false, endeavor to make it good by being hereafter answerable to the
report.

If men report evil of you to your face; Be not so much inquisitive who raised
it, or thought-some how to bring him to his answer, or how to clear your
reputation amongst men, as to make a good use of it to your own heart before
God.

For you must know, this evil report does not rise without 2 Samuel 16 11.
Gods providence. If the report be true, then see Gods good providence, it is
that you may see your error and fault, that you may repent. If the report be
false in respect of such or such a fact: yet consider, have you not run into
the appearance and occasions of those evils? then say, Though this report be
false, yetit comes justly upon me, because I did not shun the occasions
and appearances. This should humble you, and cause you to be more circumspect
in your ways. But if neither the thing reported be true, neither yet have y^
run into the occasions thereof, yet see GODS wise and good providence; not
only in discovering the folly of foolish, and the malice of evil men, who
raise and take up an evil report against you without cause* but in giving you
warning to look to your self, jest you deserve thus to be spoken ^^. And what
do you ^now, ^at that you sho^^d have ^allen into the same, or the ^^ke ev^ll,
if by these reports you had not been for^warned? Make use of the railings and
2 Samuel 16 10, 11, 12
reviling of an enemy: for though he be a bad Judge, yet he may be a good
Remembrancer; for you shall hear from him those things, of which flatterers
will not, and friends being blinded, or over-indulgent through love, do never
admonish you.

Fourthly, your conversation amongst all must be loving* you should be kind
and Tit. 3. 2.
courteous toward all men: Do Gal. 6. 1^
good to all, according as you have ability and opportunity. Give 1 Cor. 10 32
offense wittingly to none. Do 1 Cor. 6. 1, 7, 8
wrong to no man either in his name, life, chastity, or estate, or in any
thing that is his, but be ready to Col. 3. 13
forgive wrongs done to you, and to take wrong rather then to revenge, or
unchristianly to seek to be righted. As you shall have calling and
opportunity, do all good to the soul of your neighbors, 1 These 5. 14
exhort and encourage unto well-doing. If they show not themselves to be Mat.
7. ^.
dogs and swine, that is, obstinat scorners of good m^n* and con^emners of the
pearl of good counsel, you must so far as God gives you any interest in
them, Levit. 19
admonish and inform them with the spirit of meeknes and wisdom. With this 1
Pet. 48
cloak^ of love you should cover and cure a multitude of your companions
infirmities and offenses. In all your demeanor toward him, seek not so much
to Romans 15. 2*
please your self, as your Companion, in that which is good to his edification.

Tit* 3. 2.
Speak evil of no man, nor yet speak the evil you know of any man, exceptin
these or like cases. (1) When you are thereunto In what cases a man may speak
of others evil deeds, yet not speak evil.
lawfully called by Authority. (2) When it is to 1 Cor. 1. 11.
those whom it concerns, to reform and reclaim him of whom you speak, and
that you do it to that end. (3) When it is to prevent certain Act. 23. 6
damage to the soul or state of your neighbor, which would ensue, if it were
not by you thus discovered. (4) When the concealment of his evil may make you
guilty and accessory. (5) When some particular remarkable judgment of God is
upon a notorious sinner for his sin, then to the end that GOD may be
acknowledged in his just judgments, and that others may be warned, or brought
to repent of the same or like sin, you may speak Psa. 52. 6
of the evils of other. But this is not to speak evil, so long as you do it
not in envy and malice to his person, nor with aggravation of the fault more
then is cause, nor yet to the judging of him as concerning his final estate.

When you shall hear any in your company speak evil of your neighbor, by
slandering, or whispering tale-bearing, whereby he detracts from his good
name, you must not only stop your ears at such reports; but must set your
speech and countenance against him, like a Pro. 25. 23.
Northwind against rain.

When you hear another well reported of, let it not be grievous to you, as if
it detracted from your credit; but rejoice at it, in so much that God has
enabled him to be good, and to do good; all which makes for the advancement
of the common cause, wherein you are interessed: Envy him not his due praise.

Detract not from any man's credit, either by open Psalm. 15. 3
backbiting, or by secret Pro. 16. 28*
whispering, or by any cunning means of casting evil aspersions, whether by
way of pitying him, or otherwise: As, He is good, or does well in such and
such things; But, etc. This but marreth all.

And to heap up all in a word, In all your speeches to men, and communication
with them, your speech must be Col. 4. 6.
gracious, that which is good to the use of edifying, that it may minister
grace, not vice, to the hearers. It must not be profane, nor any way Ephesians. 4.
29*
corrupt, filled out with oaths, curses, or profane jests, it must not be Job
17. 5
flattering, nor yet detracting* Not Ephesians. 4. 31
bitter, not railing, not girding, either by close sq^is or salt Ephesians. 5. 3* ^
jests against any man; It m^t not be Col. 3 8
wanton, ribaldry, lasci^ious and filthy. It must not be Col. 3. 9*
false; no nor yet 1 Cor. 15 33*
foolish, idle, and fruitless: For all evi^ communication does corrupt good
manners. And, Mat. ^^ 36*
We must answer for every idle word which we speak. Besides, a man may
easily be discerned of what Country he is, whether of Heaven, or of the earth,
by his language; his speech will bewray him.

There is no wisdom or power Means of good spech and carriage in all compan^e.
here below can teach and enable you to do all, or any the forementioned
duties. This wisdom and power must be had from Iam 3. 13 to 18*
above. Wherefore if you would in all companies carry your self worthy the
Gospel of Christ:

First, be sure that the Psalm* 37. 30, 31 Pro. 31. 26*
Law of God, and the power of grace be in your heart, else the Law of grace
and kindness cannot be in your life and speech. You must be endued therefore
with a spirit of holiness, humility, love, gentleness, appeaseablenesse,
longsuffering, meekness, and wisdom; else you can never converse with all
men as you ought to do. For such as the heart is, such the conversation will
be. Mat. 15. 19.
Out of the evil heart come evil thoughts and actions; but Mat. 12. 34, 35.
A good man, out of the good treasure of his heart brings forth good things,
and according to the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks A man must have
the Pro. 16. 23.
heart of the wise, before the tongue can be taught to speak wisely.

Secondly, You must resolve beforehand (as David did) to Ps. 39. 1.
take heed to your ways, that you sin not with your tongue: And that you
will keep your mouth as with a bridle. And, before your speech and actions, be
well advised; weigh and ponder in the balance of discretion, all your actions
and words, before you vent them.

Thirdly, Let no passion of joy, grief, fear, anger, etc. get the head, and
exceed their limits. For wise and good men, as well as bad, when they have
been in any of these passions, have spoken Job 3. 3. 2^. Psalm. 106. 32. 3^.
Mar. 9. 5, 6 Ion. 4. 8, 9. Mar. 6. 22, 23.
unadvisedly with their lips. And experience will teach you, that your tongue
does never run before your wit, so soon, as when you are over-feared,
over-grieved, over-angry, or over-ioyed.

Fourthly, You must be much in prayer unto God, before you come into company,
that you may be able to order your conversation aright: Let your heart also be
lifted up often to God when your are in company, that he would Psalm. 141. 3, 4.
set a watch before your mouth, and keep the door of your lips, and that your
heart may not incline to any evil thing, to practice wicked works with men
that work iniquity, and that he would Ps 51. 1^
open your lips, that your mouth may show forth his praise, and that you may
Col. 4. 6.
speak as you ought to speak, knowing how to answer every man; for the tongue
is such an unruly evil, that no man, only God, can tame and govern it. Iam.
3, 8


SECTION 2. Of ordering a man's self well in ill Company.
When Company is sinful and naught (if you may Rules of ordering ones self
in ill company.
choose) Pro. 1. 15 Pro. 23. 20 Psa 26. 4, 5
come not into it at all. For keeping evil company, will (1) blemish your Name.
(2) It will expose you oft-times to many 1 Kin. 22. 29, 31, 32 2 Chro. 18 31 and
22. 6. 8. 9 Genesis 14. 11 12
hazards of your life and state, And (3) you are always in danger to be
corrupted by the Pro. 22. 24, 25
contagious infection of it.

By bad company, I do not only understand seducers, and such as are openly
profane, or riotous; but also such civil men, who yet remain mere
worldlings, and all lukewarm professors, who are neither hot nor cold. For
although the sins of these latter, do not carry such a manifest appearance
of gross impiety and dishonestie, as do the sins of open Blasphemers,
Drunkards, whore-Masters, and the like; yet they are not less dangerous; your
heart will quickly rise against these manifest enormous evils: but the other, by
reason of their unsuspected danger, through that tolerable good opinion which
(in comparison) is had of them, though in truth they be as dangerous and as
hateful, will sooner ensnare and infect you, by an insensible chilling of your
spirits, and by taking off the edge of your zeal which you had to the power of
godliness: And so by little and little draw you to a remissness, and
indifferency in Religion, and to a love of the world. If you shall think,
that by keeping evil company, you may convert them, and draw them to
goodness; be not deceived: It is presumption so to think* Has not God
expressly Pro. 23. 20.
forbidden you such company? If you be not necessarily called to be in sinful
company, you may justly fear that you shall be sooner Psa. 106. 34. 35.
perverted, and made naught by their wickedness, than that they should be
converted and made good by your holiness.

Secondly, when by reason of common occasions in respect of the affairs of
your calling, general, or particular, in Church, Commonwealth, and Family,
you cannot shun ill company: Look, (1) that in special sort your
conversation be 1 These. 4 12.
honest, Phil. 2. 15 16. Ephesians. 5. 15, 16.
unblameable, and harmless, even with a Dove-like Mat. 10. 16.
innocence, that by your good example, they may 1 Pet. 3. 1
without the Word be brought to the Word, and to a love of the power and
sincerity of that true Religion which you profess. Howsoever, 1 Timothy 5. 14.
give no advantage to the adversary to speak evil, either of you, or of your
Religion; but, by a holy life, 1 Pet. 2. 15.
stop the mouths of ignorant and foolish men: or if they will notwithstanding
speak against you; this your holy life 1 Pet. 3. 16.
shall shame all that blame your good conversation in Christ Jesus. (2) Be Col.
4. 5. Mat. 10. 16.
wise as serpents: Walk warily, lest they bring you into trouble, and do
harm you: but especially lest they infect you with their sin; for 1 Cor. 5. 6
a little leaven will quickly sour the whole lump.

That you may not be infected How to be kept from infection of sin by ill
company.
by that ill company which you cannot avoid; use these preservatives: (1) Be
not Romans 11. 20.
high minded; but fear, lest you do commit the same, or the like sin; for
you are of the same nature, and are subject to the same, and like temptations.
He that sees his neighbor slip and fall before him, had need to 1 Cor. 10 12.
ta^^ heed l^st he himself fall. (2) Your soul, (like the riotous soul of
Lot) must be 2 Pet. 2. 8 Psalm. 119 136, 158
vixed daily with seeing and hearing their unlawful deeds. (3) Raise your
heart to a sensible loathing of their sin; yet have Iud. 22. 23
compassion on the sinner, and, so far as you have calling, 2. These. 3 14, 15
admonish him as a brother. (4) When you see or hear any wickedness, lift up
your heart to GOD, and before him Psalm. 120 5, 6
confess it, and disclaim all liking of it, pray unto God to keep you from
it, and that he would forgive your companion his sin, and give unto him grace
to repent of it.

Lastly, though you may converse with sinful company (when your calling is
to be with them) in a common and ^older kind of fellowship, by a common love,
whereby you do wish well to all, and would do good to all; yet you must not
converse with them with such special and intimate Christian familiarity, and
Psalm. 16. 3
delight, as you do with the Saints that are excellent. Thus do, and the Lord
can and will keep you in the midst of Egypt, and Babel, as he did Joseph,
and Daniel, if he call you ^o it.

Thirdly, As soon as possibly you can, Pro. 14 7
depart out of their company, when you find not in them the ^ppes of
knowledge; or when they any way declare that they have only a 2 Timothy 3 5
form; but deny the power of godliness. From such turn away, ^aith the
Apostle. And so use the preservatives prescribed, or any other whereof you have
proof, that you depart not more evil; or less good, then when you ^ame
together.

SECTION 3. How a man should carry himself toward good company.
NOw touching good company. First, Psa. 163
highly esteem of it, and much desire it. For you should 1 Pet. 2. 17.
love the brotherhood, howsoever the world scoff at it; and Heb. 10. 25.
forsake not the fellowship, or consorting with the godly, as the manner of
some is: But (with David) as much as may be, Psalm. 119. 63.
be a companion with them that fear God.

Secondly, when you are in good company, you must express all brotherly love;
improving your time together for your mutual good, chiefly in the increase of
each others Romans 1. 11, 12.
faith and holiness, Heb. 10. 24.
provoking one another to love, and to good works.

Then you love brotherly, (1) When you love them out of a 1 Pet. 1. 22.
pure heart fervently, which ^s, when you love them, because they are brethren,
Heb. 3. 1.
partakers of the same Faith and Spirit of Adoption, having the same Father,
and being of the same Gal 6. 10
household of faith with you. (2) When you love them not only with a love of
humanity, as they are men, (for so you love all men, even your enemies;) nor
yet only with a common love of Christianity, wherewith you love all professing
true Religion, though actually they show little fruit and power thereof; but
with a specialty 1 Pet. 1. 22 1 Pet. 4. 8.
of love, for kind, spiritual; and for degree, more abundant. Therefore it is
called Romans 12. 10.
brotherly kindness, and a servent love, distinct from charity, or a common
love, 2 Pet. 1. 7.

Where this love is, it will knit hearts together, like 1 Samuel 18 1.
^onathans and David's; making you to be of Act. 4. 32 Benefits of brotherly
love.
one heart and soul. It will make you enjoy each others society with
spiritual Psalm. 16* 3
delight: It will make you to bear one with another; and to Gal. 6. ^
bear each others burdens. It will make you to communicate in all things
communicable, with gladness, and Act. 2. 46
singleness of heart, as you are able, and that by a Gal 6. 10
specialtie, beyond that which you show to them which are not alike excellent.
Yea it is so entire and so ardent, that you will not hold your life to be too
dear, to lay down 1 Ioh. 3. 16
for the common good of the brethren.

When therefore you meet How brotherly love is expressed.
with those that fear God, make improvement of the Communion of Saints, not
only by communicating in natural, and temporal good things as you are able,
and as there is need; but especially in the communion of things spiritual,
Jude 20. 1 The. 5. 11
edifying your selves in your most holy faith, by holy speech and conference,
and in due time and place) in reading the holy Scriptures and good Books, and
by prayer, and singing of Col. 3. 16 Rules of singing.
Psalms together.

That your singing may please God, and edify your self and others, observe
these:

Sing as in Gods sight, and, in 1 Psalm. 30. 4.
matter of prayer and praise speak ^o God in singing.

The matter of your Song must 2 Col. 3. 16
be spiritual, either indicted by the Spirit, or composed of matter agreeing
thereunto.

You must sing with understanding. 3 1 Cor. 14. 15


You must sing with judgment, 4
being able in private to make choice of Psalms befitting the present times
and occasions; And both in private and public to apply the Psalm sung to your
own particular, ^s, when and how ^o pray and praise in the words of the
Psalm, taking heed that you do not apply the imprecations made against the
enemies of Christ and his Church in general, to your enemies in partilar; also
know how to confirm your faith, and incline your will and affections when you
sing the prophesies of Christ, promises, threats, commands, mercies,
judgments, etc.

You must make melody to the Lord in your heart, which is 5 Col. 3. 16.
done (1) by Psa. 57. 7.
preparing and setting the heart in tune, it must be an honest heart: (2) the
heart must be Psa. 25. 1.
lift up, (2) the 1 Cor. 14 15.
mind intentive, (4) the affections fresh and Psa. 33. 3 Rev. 14. 3.
new (the heart believing) and, in matter of praise and thanks, Psa. 84. 1.
joyous.

Lastly, the voice must be distinct, 1
and tuneable.

Lose not your short and precious time, with idle compleme^ts, worldly
discourses, or talk of 1 Timothy 5. 13.
other men's matters and faults; nor yet Act 17* 21
Athenian-like in a barren and fruitless hearing and telling of news, out of
affectation of strangeness, and novelty. But ^et the matter of your talk be,
^ither of God, or of his Word and ^ayes wherein you should walk; ^r of his
works of Creation, Preservation, Redemption, Sanctifica^ion, and Salvation; of
his Judgments which he executes in the world, and of his mercies showed
toward his people: or matter of Christian advice, either of the things of this
life, or of that which is to come. Impart also each to other the experiments
and proofs you have had of Gods grace and power, in this your Christian
warfare. And (as there shall be cause) 1 These. 5 11. 14. Means to live, and
love brotherly.
Exhort, admonish, and comfort one another.

To do all these well, it will require a specialty of godly wisdom, humility,
and love. If these three be in you and abound, your society will be
profitable: The strong will not Romans 14. 1. 3.
despise the weak, neither will the weak judge the strong. You will be far
from 1 Ioh. ^ 10 Romans 14. 13. 19
putting a stumbling-blocke, or an occasion to fall in your brothers way, but
you will follow after the things which make for peace, and things wherewith you
may edify one another. You will then Romans 15. 1, 2, 3
bear with each others infirmities, and not seek to please your self, but
your neighbor, for his good to edification.

You must first be wise to make choice, not only of such matter of speech as
is good and lawful, but such as is fit, considering the condition and need of
those before whom you speak. In propounding questions, you must not only take
heed that they be not 2 Timothy 2. 23.
vain, ^colish, and needless, such as Tit. 3. 9.
engender strife, and do 1 Timothy 1. 4
minister and multiply questions, rather than godly edifying; but you must be
careful that they be apt, and pertinent, both in respect of the person to whom
they are propounded, and in respect of the person or persons before whom they
must be answered.

Some men have special gifts for one purpose, some for another. Some for
interpreting Scripture; some for deciding of controversies; some for
discovering Satan's methods and enterprises; some are excellent for comforting,
and curing afflicted and wounded consciences; some are better skilled and more
exercised in one thing, than in another. And some also of Gods dear children,
as they are not able to ^eare Mat. 9 15 16, 17.
all exercises of Religion, so neither are they capable of hearing and
profiting Heb. 5. 11 12* 13.
by all kind of discourses of Religion. If this were wisely observed,
Christian con^rence would be much more ^uitfull than usually it is*

Secondly, you must be lowly^^ded, and of an humble spirit, or Rom 12. 3
presuming above your gifts and calling. When you speak ^f the things of God,
be reve^end, serious, and sober, keeping your self within your 2 Cor. 10 13
sine, both of your calling, and the measure of the knowledge and grace which
God has given you, speaking positively, and confidently only of those things
which you clearly understand, and whereof you have experience, or sure proof.
Think not your self too good to Act. 18. 26
learn of any, neither harden your neck against the admonitions and reproves
of any. If you have an humble heart, you will do as David did, when he was
admonished and advised by a woman. He saw God in it, and blessed him for it, he
received the good counsel, and blessed it, he took it well at Abigails hands,
and blessed her. Now blessed be 1 Samuel 25 32, 33
God which has sent thee to meet me this day (says he) and blessed be thy
advice, and blessed be thou which have kept me this day from coming to shed
blood, etc.

Thirdly, there will be need of the exercise of much servent love and charity,
even amongst the best. For since that Satan does spite all good company, and
good conference, he will cast in matters of jarres, difference, and discord.
And because the best men differ in opinion, (though not in fundamentals, yet)
in Ceremonies, and less necessary points of Religion; and for that they all
have infirmities, and, while the relics of corrupt nature are in them, are
subject and apt to mistake and misconstrue one another actions and speeches,
as also the ends of their actions and speeches; you will need that this bond of
love be strong, that it be not broke asunder by any of these, or any other
means: but that you remain fast and sweetly Ephe. 4. 3.
knit together in the unity of the Spirit, through this bond of peace.

I commend this Christian society Othermotives to brotherly love.
in brotherly love the rather, because, 1. there is nothing gives a more
sensible evidence of your conversion, and translation from death to life than
this. 2. Nothing does more further the increase 1 Ioh 3. 14 Acts 2. 44, to 47.
Acts 4. 32, 33 Note.
and power of godliness in any place or person then this. For let it be
observed, though there be never such an excellent Ministry in any place; you
shall see little thriving in grace amongst the people, until many of them
become of one heart; showing it by consorting together in brotherly fellowship,
in the Communion of Saints 3. Nothing brings more feeling joy, comfort, and
delight (next the communion with God i^ Christ) then the Psa. 16. 2. Acts 2.
46, 47.
actual communion of Saints, and the love of brethren. It is the beginning of
that our happiness on earth, which shall be perfected in Heaven. It is for kind
the same, that only differs in degrees.

And, to conciude this subject, What must be done after aman has been in
company.
after that you have been in company, good or bad, it will be worth your while
to examine how far forth you have hindered any evil in other, and have
preserved your self from evil: how far you have endeavored to do good to
others, and how much you have bettered your self in knowledge, good affection,
zeal, or any other good grace, by your company; and according as you find, let
your heart check, or cheer you.

CHAP. X: How a man should carry himself as in Gods sight, when things go
well with him.
SECTIONI.
When at any time you Rules of a holy carriage, when things succeed well.
prosper in any thing, and have good success, that you may therein walk
according to God:

First, Take heed of committing those sins whereto man is most apt, when his
heart is fatted with prosperity.

Secondly, be careful to produce those good effects, which are the principal
ends why God gives good success.

The sins especially to be shunned, are (1) Pro. 30. 9
Denying of God, by Deu. 6. 12
forgetting him and his ways, Deuteronomy. 32. 15
departing from him, when you are fat like Iesurun, taking the more Job 21. 14
license to sin, by how much you shall prosper more in the world. (2) Dan. 4.
30 Hab. 1. 15 16
Ascribing the praise of success to your self or to secondarie causes,
sacrificing to your own net. (3) 1 Timothy 6. 17
High mindedness, thinking too well of your self, because you have that which
others have not, and despising and thinking too meanly of those, which 1 Cor.
11 22
have not as you have. (4) If riches increase, or if you thrive in any other
earthly thing, Ps. 62. 10 1 Timothy 6. 17
set not your heart thereon, either in taking too much Job 31. 25
delight therein, or intrusting thereupon. Holy Job, and good David were in
some particulars over-taken with this latter. When Job was warm in his nest, he
did hatch this secure conceit, that he should dye in his nest, and multiply Job
29. 18
his days as the sand. And David Psalm. 30* 6
in his prosperity said, he should never be moved. But the LORD by afflictions
taught them both to know by experience, how vain all earthly things are to
trust unto, and ingeniously to confess their error.

I reduce the good effects, which The good effects of prosperity
are the principal ends why God gives good success, unto these two heads:
(1) professed praise and thanks to God. (2) Real proofs of the said thanks,
in well using and employing this good success for God. Praise and thanks.
Reasons why God is to be praised, and thanked*


First, praise and thank God. For (1) it is the chief and most lasting
service and worship, which God has required of you. (2) It is Psalm. 29* 2
most due, and due to him only, he only is Rev. 11. Rev 5. 1^
worthy, for Romans 11. 36.
of him are all things, and he is called the God of praises. (3) It is the end
Pro. 16. 4
why God does declare his excellency and goodness both in his Word and Works,
that it may be matter of praise and thanks, also why he has given man an heart
to understand, and a tongue to speak, that for them, and with them, as by apt
instruments they might acknowledge his goodness and excellency, thinking, and
speaking to his praise and glory: wherefore David speaking Psalm. 57. ^. compared
with Ps. 16 9 and Act. ^ 26. Psa 108. 1.
to his heart, or tongue, or both; when he would give thanks, says, Awake my
glory, and I will give prays^. (4) There is not any service of God more 1 Timothy
4. 4
beneficial to man, than to be thankful. For it makes those gifts of God
which are good in themselves, to be good to you, and they are the best
continuers of good things to you, yea, Thanks are real requests, and the Phil
4. 6, 7.
best security you can have: for God will not withdraw his goodness from the
thankful.

This Praise and Thanks is a religious service, wherein a man makes known to
God, that he acknowledges every good thing to come from him, and that he is
worthy of all praise and glory for the infinite excellency of his Wisdom,
Power, Goodness, and of all his other holy and blessed* Attributes manifest in
his Word and Works; and that he for his part stands wholly beholding to God,
for all that he has had, now has, and which hereafter he hops to have.

Praise and Thanks go together, and do differ only in some respect. The
superabundant excellency in God, showed by his Titles and Works, is the object
of praise. The abundant goodness of God, showed in those his Titles 1 Chr. ^^.
11, 1^, 13. Psalm. 8 1* 9
and Works, to his Church, to you, or to any person, nothing to which you have
reference, is the object and matter of your thanks.

These things concerning praise 1 Chro. 29 14
and thanks, are needful to be known and observed.

First, Who must give praise What is requisite in praise and thanks.
and thanks? Namely, you, and all that have understanding and Ps. 150. 6
breath, must praise the Lord.

Secondly, To whom praise and thanks are due? Ps. 50. 14 Psalm. 115. 1
Only to God; Not to us, not to us (says the Church) but to thy Name give
glory.

Thirdly, By whom must this Sacrifice of thanks be offered? Even Ephesians. 5. 20
Heb. 13. 15
by Christ only, the only high Priest of our Profession, out of whose golden
Censer our prayers and praises ascend, and are sweet smelling to GOD, as Rev.
8. 3, 4
Incense.

Fourthly, For what must we praise God, and give him thanks? We must praise
him in all his works, be they for us, or against us; we must thank him Ephesians.
5. 20
for all things spiritual and temporal wherein he is any way good unto us.

Fifthly, With what must we praise and thank him? Even Ps. 10* ^
with our souls, and all that is within us, and with all that we have. We must
praise and thank GOD with the inward man, praise him with the Spirit, and with
the understanding; praise him 1 Cor. 14. 1^
with the will, praise and thank him with the affections, with all love,
desire, joy, and gladness, praise him with the whole heart. We must likewise
praise him with the outward man, both with tongue and hands; our words Psalm.
35. 28
and our deeds must show forth his praise. When our thanks are cordial, orall
and real, then they make a good harmony, and sweet melody, most pleasant in
Gods ears.

Sixthly, When must we give thanks? Ephesians 5 20 Psa. 55. 17. Ps. 119. 164 Ps.
104. 33.
Always, Morning, Evening, Noone, at all times, as long as we live, and have
any being, we must praise him.

Seventhly, How much? We must praise and thank him Psa. 48. 1.
abundantly. We must endeavor to proportion our praise to his worthiness and
goodness: As we must love him, so we must thank him with all our soul, and
with all our strength.

There is no sin more common than Luke 17. 17, 18.
unthankefulnesse, for scarce one of ten give thanks, and that one which does
give thanks, besides many other his errors in thankesgiving, does not thank
God for one mercy among twenty. Many in distress will pray, Hos. 7. 14
or cry, and bowl at least, as they in Hosea, for Corn, and Oil, but who
returns proportionable praises to his prayers? Whereas a man should be oftener
in thanks, than in prayers, Psalm. 59. 10
because GOD preventeth our prayers with his good gifts a thousand ways.

Take heed therefore that you be not unthankful. It is a most base, hateful,
and damnable wickedness. For he that is unthankful Disswasives from
unthankfulness.
to God, is (1) A most dishonest and disloyal man, he is injurious to God, in
detaining from him his due, in not paying his Tribute. (2) He is foolish and
improvident for himself; for by not paying his reut of thanks, and for not
doing his homage, he Deuteronomy. 28. 47, 48. Hol. 2. 8, 9.
forfeits all that he has into the Lords hands, which forfeiture, many times,
he takes: But if he do not presently take the forfeit, it will prove worse
to the unthankefull in the end. For prosperity, severed from thanksgiving,
always Hos. 4. 7. Romans 1. 21.
increases sin, and prepares a man for greater destruction. The more such a
one thrives, the more does pride hard-heartednesse, and many other noisome
lusts grow in him. This unthankefulnesse is the high way to be given over to
Rom 1. 21. to 19*
a reprobate sense. Ps. 69. 22.
Such prosperity always ways proves a snare, and ends in utter ruin. For
the Pro. 1. 32
prosperity of fools shall destroy them. And when the wicked prosper, it is
but like sheep put into fat pastures, Ier. 12. 1 2, 3
that they may be prepared to be plucked out for slaughter in the day of
slaughter. An unthankful man is, of al men, most unfit for to go to heaven.
Heaven can be no heaven to him: for there is praising of God continually. Now
to whom thankesgiving and singing of the praises of God is tedious, to him
heaven cannot be joyous.

It does concern you therefore, that you be much and often in thanks and
praises unto GOD. For this cause, do these things: (1) work your heart to a
resolution and longing so to do. (2) Beware of, and remoove impediments to
thankfulness. (3) Improve all good furtherances thereunto.

For the first, Consider that besides Motives to tha^kfulnes
that thanks is the best service, being the end of all other worship, and is
Gods due, and is the end why God gives matter, for which, and meanesby which
we should be thankful; and besides that, nothing is more beneficial than
thankfulness, nor more mischievous than unthankfulnes, as has been already
noted; to add more force with them, consider these motives; Hearty and constant
thankfulness is a testimony of uprightness; it does excellently Psalm. 33. 1
become the upright to be thankful. It is all the homage and all the service
which God requires at your hands, for all the good that he bestows on you.
It is Ps. 147. 1
pleasant and delightful. It is possible and easy through the grace of Gods
Spirit. It is a small matter, to what God might exact; even as an homage-penny,
or pepper-corne. Thankfulness does fat, elevate, and enlarge the soul,
making it fruitful in good works, no duty like it. For the thankful man
(with David) is often consulting with himself, Psalm. 116 12.
what he shall render to the Lord for all his benefits to him. Lastly, this
spiritual praise and thanks to GOD by Christ, is the beginning of heaven upon
earth, being part of the communion and fellowship which we have with God while
we live here. It is that everlasting service which indureth for ever.

Secondly, when you have Impediments to thankfulness.
wrought the heart unto a good will to be thankful, then sh^nne the
impediments thereunto. Amongst many take heed especially of these, (1)
Ignorance, (2) Pride, (3) Forgetfulness, (4) Doubting of Gods love, (5)
Over-eager affection to the benefits received, especially to such as are
temporal.

First, If you be ignorant of the excellency and worth of good things
bestowed, or i^ you misprize things, preferring natural, temporal, or common
gifts, before spiritual, eternal, and special graces, peculiar to GODS
children, you can either give no thanks at all; (for who can give thanks for
that he esteems worth little or nothing?) or if you do give any thanks, it
will be proposterous, giving thanks for temporal blessings sooner, and more,
then for spiritual, and eternal. Moreover, though you do know each good gift
according to its due value; yet if, through ignorance you mistake the Giver,
you will bestow your thanks upon men, and inferior creatures, upon second
causes: but not on God, who is the Iam. 1. 17
Giver of every good and perfect gift.

Secondly, If you be proud and highly conceited of your worth and good
deservings, you will expect greater matters than God will think fit to give;
as 2 Kin. 5. 11, 12.
Na^man did, before he was cleansed; and when you miss of your expectation;
you will be so far from thanks, that you will mutter and complain.

Thirdly, Though you know the worth of the gift, and do know the Giver; also
do think your self unworthy of the gift; yet if you have not these good
gifts of God in actual remembrace; if you have forgotten them, and they be out
of mind, how can you be actually thankful? Therefore when David calls upon
himself to be thankful, he says, Ps. 103. 2
Forget not all his benefits.

Fourthly, Suppose that you know well the worth of the gift, and do judge your
self less then it, and remember well that you received it of God; yet if
through doubting of Gods love, and through mis-beliefe, you think that God
does not give it to you in love and mercy, but in wrath, as he gave Ho. 13. 11
Israel a King; your heart will sink, and be so clogd with this fear, that
you cannot raise it up to thanks, for any gift which you conceive to be so
given.

Fifthly, Suppose that you quit your self of all the former impediments; yet,
if you be overeagerly affected with the gift, you will in a kind of
over-ioyednesse be so taken up with it, that (as little children, when their
parents give them sweet-meates, or such things as they most delight in, fall to
eating of the sweet-meat, and run away for joy, before ever they have made a
leg, and shown any sign of thankfulness) you will easily be overtaken in this
kind, and neglect God that gave it.

The furtherances of thankfulness, Furtherances of tha^kfulnes
are most of them directly contrary to the former hindrances; of many, take
these:

First, Get sound knowledge of God, and of his Psalm. 8.
infinite excellencies and Mat. 6. 13* Romans 11. 36
absoluteness every way, and of his independency on man, or any other
creature: whence it is that he Psalm. 50. 12* 15. 1 Chro. 29 14, 15, 16.
needs not any thing that man has, or can do, neither can he be beholding
to man: But know that you stand in Act. 14. 17 Act. 1^. 28.
need of God and must be beholding to him for all things. Know also that
whatsoever God does, by whatsoever means it be, he does it Isa. 43. 25 Hos.
14. 4.
from himself, induced by nothing out of himself, being free in all that he
does. Know likewise, that whatsoever was the instrument of your good, God was
the Author both of the good, and of the instrument.

Next, Fill your self with a due Iam. 1. 17.
knowledge of the full worth and excellent use of Gods gifts, both common, and
special. Wealth, honor* liberty, health, life, senses, limbs, wit, and
reason, etc. considered in themselves, and in their use, will be held to be
great benefits, but if you consider them in their absence, when you are
sensible of poverty sickness, and the rest; or if you be so blessed, that you
know not the want of them; then if you shall advisedly, and humbly look upon
the poor, base, imprisoned, captives sick, deaf, blind, dumb, distracted
etc. Heb. 13. 3*
Putting your self in their case, you will ^ay that you are unspeakeably
beholding to God for these corporal and temporal blessings.

But chiefly learn to know, and consider well, the worth of spiritual
blessings: Phil. 4. 7.
One of them, the peace of God, passes all understanding. To enjoy the Gospel
upon any terms, to have ^^^vation, such a salvation, offered by Christ, to
have faith, hope, love, and other the manifold saving graces of the Spirit,
though but in the least measure, in the very first seed of the Spirit, though
no bigger then a Luke 17. 6*
grain of Mustardseed, with never so much outward affliction, is of such value,
and consequent, that it is more then 1 Cor. 2. 9
eye has seen, ear has heard, or ever entered into the heart of man. For
besides that the least grace is invaluable in it self; it does give proof of
better gifts, namely, that God has given his Spirit, has given Christ, and in
him, has given himself a propitious, and gracious God, and has given Romans 8.
32
all things also. When you know God aright, and his gifts aright, knowing all
things in God, and God in all things, then you will be full of praises and
thanks.

Secondly, Be 1 Chr. 29 13, 14
low and base in your own eyes. Let all things be base in your eyes, in
comparison of God, account them Psa. 146. 1, 3 Psa. 33. 16, 17
worthless and helpelesse things without him. Judge your self to be, as
indeed you are, Genesis 32 10
less then the least of Gods mercies: For what are you of your self, but a
compound of dust and sin, unworthy any good, worthy of all misery? You stand
in need of God, ^he not of you; Lam 3. 22
It is his mercy that you are not consumed. When you can be thus sensible of
your own need, and that help can come only from God, and that you are
worthy of no good thing; then you will be glad, and thankful at heart to God
for any thing. An humble man will be more thankful for a penny, then a proud
man will for a pound.

Thirdly, Call all the forementioned knowledge of God and of his gifts, into
fresh memory. Commune with your soul, and cause it to represe^t lively to your
thoughts, what God is in himself, what to his Church and to you, Ps. 139. 17
how precious his thoughts are to you-ward. Tell your self often what Psalm. 40. 5
God has done, and what he will do for your soul. Call to mind with what
variety of good gifts he does store his Church, and bless you: you will find
that they will pass all account and number. When withal you call to mind that
God is free in all his gifts to you, who are unworthy the least of them; If you
would cause your self to dwell upon these, and the like thoughts; they would
work in you an holy rapture, and admiration, out of which you shall with David
break out into these or the like praises: Psalm. 8.
Oh Lord, our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth! I thank thee,
I praise thee, I devote my self, as Romans 12. 1
my best sacrifice to thee, I will bless thy Name for ever and ever.

Fourthly, Be persuaded of Gods love to you in these good things, which he
gives unto you: First, he loves you as his creature; and if only in that
regard, he does preserve you, and do you good, you are bound to thank him.
Secondly, you cannot know but that he loves you with a special love to
Salvation; Gods revealed 1 Ioh 3. 16. 1 Timothy* 2. 4
will professes as much, you must not meddle with that which is secret. I am
sure he makes proffer of his love, and you daily receive tokens of his love,
both in means of this life, and that which is to come. Did not he love you,
when out of his free and everlasting good will toward you, Ioh. 3. 16
He gave his Son to die for you, that you believing in him, should not dye,
but have everlasting life? What though yet you be in your sins? Does he not
bid you Hos. 14. 2, 4.
turn? and has he not said, ^hee will love you freely? What though you
cannot turn to him, nor love him as you would? yet endeavor these in the use of
all good means, to be, and do, as God will have you, then doubt no^, but that
GOD does love you; and you must wait, till you see it in the performance of his
gracious promises unto Signs to know when God gives good things in (...).
you.

But if you would consider things aright you may know certainly, that the good
things you have received of God, are bestowed in love to you; I will only ask
these Questions: Has Gods mercy made you to bethink your self of your duty
and obedience to God, have you had a will to be thankful upon the thoughts
thereof? or if you find a defect and barrenness herein; has not this
unfruitful and unthankefull receiving of good things from God, been a great
burden and grief of heart to you? If yea, this is an evident sign, that God
gave those good things to you in love, because this holy and good effect is
wrought in you by them. Again; D^^ you love God? would you love God, and his
ways, and Ordinances yet more? This provet^ that God loves you; for 1 Ioh. 4.
10. 19.
(...) man can love God, till God have first loved him. Likewise, do you love
the 1 Ioh. 4. 7
children of God? The^ certainly you are Gods child and are loved of God; By
these you have proof of your calling and election, how that you are now 1 Ioh.
3. 14.
translated from death to life: after which time, though God may give you many
things in anger, as a father gives correction, yet he never gives any thing
in hatred and in wrath, as he does to his enemies. Romans 8. 28
All things works together for good to them that love God: therefore whatsoever
he gives to such, is in love.

Fifthly, Prefer the honor and 5
glory of God before, and above all things that may be beneficial to your
self: prefer likewise the kindness, and love of God in the gift, far
above the gift it self; then you will never be so taken up with the enjoyment
of the gift, as to forget to give praise and thanks to the Giver.

Sixthly, unto the former helps 6
^dde this: take upon you with ^n holy imperiousness over your soul, charge
your self to be thankful; and, since you have good reason for it, take no
nay. Say with David, Ps. 103. 1.
Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me, bless his holy Name,
etc.

Lastly, to all other means, join earnest prayer to God, to give you a
thankful heart. It is not all the reasons you can allege for it, nor at the
moral persuasions you can propound to your soul can work it, (though these
be good means, yea, Gods means*) if you go about to work your heart to it
in the power of your own might, all will be in vain. For as you cannot pray
but by Gods Spirit, so neither can you give thanks but by the Spirit*
Therefore, say as David did: Psalm 51. 10. 15.
Renew (O Lord) a right spirit in me; and, open my lips, that my mouth may
show forth thy praise.

SECTION 2. Touching proofs of Thanks.
IT is not enough to profess How a man may approve his thanks.
and utter praise and thanks to God; you must give proof of it.

First, Romans 12.
by devoting and giving your self to God, to be at the will of him, who is
your Sovereign Lord, who gives you all that you have, who is always giving
unto you, and always doing you good, Psa. 11^. 14.
Pay your vows to him that performs his promises to you. Let it appear that
you acknowledge him to be such a one, as you say in your praises, and that you
stand bound and beholding to him indeed, as you say in your thanks; in that
you carry your self in your life toward him, as to him who only is
Excellent, who only is God, who is your God, the God of your life and
salvation; and that, in all holy service, and in all holy living. For
Thankes-doing is the proof and life of Thanksgiving, and it is a divine
saying, The good life of the Thankful, is the life of Thankfulness.
Wherefore every new mercy should quicken your resolution to persevere and
increase in well-doing, serving God the rather Deuteronomy. 28. 47.
with gladness of heart, because of the abundance of all things.

Secondly, Do good with those blessings, which God gives you. For every 1
Cor. 12. 7.
good gift is given to a man to profit withal, not only himself, but every
member of that body, whereof he is part. Whatsoever good gift God has given
you, whether corporal, or spiritual, it must be employed to Gods glory, and
to your neighbors good, as well as to your own, as God shall minister
opportunity. If riches (and the same must be understood of health, strength,
wisdom, skill, etc.) be given to you, you must Pro. 3. 9.
honor God therewith: and as 1 Cor. 16 2.
God does prosper you in any thing, you must communicate to them that need; as
to the poor, sick, weak, simple, and ignorant. If God give knowledge, faith,
spiritual wisdom, ability to pray, or any other of his rich graces, you must
not hoard them up, and keep them reserved for your own private benefit; but
you must communicate them to others, and improve them for the good of others;
for the procuring their spiritual good, and edifying them in faith, hope, and
love.

By communicating your goods and common gifts of God in this sort, you make
your self Luke 16. 9
friends with them, against a day of need; and when you honor GOD, and do
good with any the talents which GOD puts into your hand to trade with, then
you make the best improveme^t of them. He who thus makes God his friend in
his prosperitte, shall certainly find him to be his sure friend in adversity
in this life: and when he shall be put out of his Stewardship at death, then
L^k. 16. 9
he shall be received into the everlasting habitations. When, the more you
prosper, the better you desire and endeavor to be, and to do more good, this
is an infallible proof of true thankfulness, and is an evident sign that you
walk with God in prosperity, as he would have you.

Give all diligence therefore, to learn this lesson, Phil. 4* 12
how to be full, and how to abound; But know it can be learned no where but in
Christ's School, and can never be practiced but by Christ's strength. This is it
which the Phil. 4. 12. 13.
Apostle had learned, and said, he was able to do it through Christ that
strengthened him. It is a most needful and high point of learning, to be
instructed, and to know, every where, and in every thing how to be full and to
abound: of the two, it is more rare, and more difficult, then to know how to
be abased, and to suffer want, which shall be the subject of the next Chapter.

CHAP. XI. How to walk as in Gods sight, under crosses in all adversity.
SECTION 1.
EVery day will bring forth Man. 6. 3^
his evil, and cross, whether lighter and ordinary, or more heavy and rare.
The first sort rises partly from the common frailties of the perverse natures
of the^ with whom you shall converse, and partly from your own, as from
tetchinesse, and aptness to take things in ill part. Such are discourtesies
from those of whom you looked for kindness; Imperiousness, and too much
domineering of Superiors; sullenness, negligence, and disregard from
inferiors; an awkewardnesse and crossenesse in the persons and things with
which you have to deal.

Touching these, the Rule is:

Lay not these to heart, too Rules concerning lighter crosses.
near you, Make them not greater than they be, through your impatiency (as
many do) who, upon every light occasion of dislike cast themselves into such
an Hell of vexation and discontent, that all the blessings they receive that
day, are scarce observed, or can make their lives comfortable. Whereas Wisdom
should prevent, and Love and Wisdom should cover and pass by most of these;
seeing, as if you saw not: or if you will give way to any passion at these, let
it be with hatred of their and your sin, which is the cause of these, and all
other crosses. These should occasion you to pity, and pray for them that give
you this offense, and for your self, who many times without cause take
offense. You may (if need require) show your dislike, and admonish the
offender, if so be you do it with Iam. 3. 13
meekness of wisdom: but learn hereby to warn your self, that you give
not the like offense.

But whether your crosses and Rules how to bear all crosses.
afflictions be seeming only, and in conceit, or indeed; whether from God
immediately, or from man; whether light or heavy, follow these directions: 1.
Be not transported with passion and choler like Genesis 4. 23, 24.
proud Lamech, and Jonas 4. 7, 8, 9.
froward Jonas. 2. Be not overwhelmed, or eaten up with grief, like 1 Kin. 21.
4.
covetous Ahab, and 1 Samuel 2^ 37.
foolesh Nabal: But 3. Bear them patiently. 4. Bear them chearefully and
thankefully. 5. Bear them fruitfully.

Now to help you, that passion and heat of anger kindle not, or at least
break not out, or last Remedies
not. against sin full anger.


First, Convince your judgment thoroughly, that passion and rash anger is Mat.
5. 22 Eccles. 7. 9.
forbidden and hated of GOD. It is a fruit of the Gal. 5. 20
flesh. A work of the Iamos 3. 14, 15.
Devil. Bred and nourished by Pro. 21. ^4
pride, Pr. 14. 29
folly, and Jonas 4. 1, 2, 3.
self-love. Also that it surpriseth all the powers of right reason, putting a
man besides himself, causing him to abuse his tongue, hands, and the whole
man, making him like a fool, to let fly and cast firebrands at every thing
which crosses him, and that not only against his neighbor and 1 Samuel 20. 30.
33.
dearest friends, but against God himself. Ion. 4. 9.
Consider likewise that it makes a man out of case to 1 Tam. 2. 8 ^
pray, hear the 1 Pet. 2. 1 Iam, 1. 19.
Word, or to perform any worship to God, and unfit to speak, or hear reason,
or to give or receive good counsel. God barreth such as are froward, the Pr.
2^. 14
company of good men, and says, That such a one does Pr. 29. 22
abound in transgression, and that there is Pr. 29. 20
more hope of a fool than of him. Wherefore he must needs be exposed to all the
just Pr. 19. 19
judgments of God, temporal and eternal. By these and such like thoughts,
work your self to an ill opinion of this vice, and to such a loathing of it,
that you may beware and shun it.

Secondly, Observe watchfully when anger begins to kindle and stir in you,
and before it flame and break forth into tongue or hand; set your reason
aworke, let it step before it, to hold it in and bridle it. Nay, set Faith
aworke, having in readiness, and calling to mind, such pregnant Scriptures as
these: Ephesians. 4. 26
Be angry, but sin not. And, Eccl. 4. 9.
Anger rests in the bosom of fools. And say thus, Shall I sin against
God? Shall I play the fool?

Then you sin, and play the soole in your anger, first, when it is without
cause, as, when neither Rules showing when a man sins in his anger.
GOD is dishonored, nor your neighbor or your self indeed injuried; when it
is for trifles, and only because you are crossed in your will, and desire, and
the like: but chiefly when you are angry with any 1 Kin. 22 24. 26.
for weldoing. Secondly, though you have cause, yet if it be severed from love
to the person of him with whom you are angry, so as you neglect the common and
needful offices thereof. Thirdly, when it exceeds due measure, as when it is
overmuch, and overlong. Fourthly, it is sinful when it brings forth evil,
and unseemly effects, such as neglect, or ill performance of duty to GOD, or
man; also when it breaks out into loud, clamorous, reviling, or s^appish
peeches, or into stamping, sta^ing, flinging, churlish, sullen, or dogged
behavior, or when it breaks out into any injurious act.

Thirdly, If you cannot keep anger from rising, and boiling within you, yet be
sure that you bind your tongue and hand to the good behavior. Make a Covenant
with them, and charge them not to show it, nor partake with it any farther then
considerate reason, and good conscience shall advise you. Set a Law to Psalm.
39. 1. Psa 14 1. 3.
your self, that you will not chide, nor strike while you are in your scalding
heat of anger. If there be cause of either, defer it until you be your
self. If you say, that if you do them not in your heat, you shall do
neither. I answer, that in saying so, you discover a great deal of impotencie,
folly, and corruption. I am sure you never do them well in passion. And
conscience of duty should lead you to chiding, and correcting, when there is
cause, not passion: for, in it, you serve and revenge your self upon the
party, but not God.

Fourthly, Both before and when you are in a chafe. See GOD by the eye of your
Faith coming in, hearing you, and looking upon you. This will Psa. 11. 4, 5
make you whist, and quiet, causing you not only to hold your hands and
tongue, as you find by experience you use to do, when some reverend friend
comes in; but this will cool and abate your very inward heat and passion.

Fif^ly, if you feel your corruption and weakness to be such, and the
provocation to anger to be so great, that you fear you cannot hold, then if it
be possible, avoid all occasions of anger, remove your self, but in a
peaceable and quiet manner, from the person, object, or occasion thereof. And
at all times Pro. 22. 24, 25.
shun the company of an angry man, as much as your calling will give you
leave, lest you learn his ways.

Sixthly, Howsoever it may happen that anger do kindle in you, and break out;
Be sure that you^u^d^e it before it grow into hatred of him with whom you are
angry. For this cause, Ephesians. 4. 26
Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath, you know not what hatred it may
hatch before morning. And the best means which I know to subdue it, is, If you
find your heart to boil against any, Mat. 5. 44
pray heartily to God for him in particular for his good: this you are
commanded. And be so far from seeking revenge, that you force your self to
be loving and kind, showing all good offices of love with wisdom, as you
shall have occasion; overcome evil Romans 12. 17 20, 21.
with good. Pray also to God for your self, that he would please to subdue
this passion for you. This act of love to him performed before God, before whom
you dare not dissemble, will excellently quench wrath, and prevent hatred
aganist him with whom you were angry, and will give proof between God and
your Conscience, that you love him.

If, pleading for your self, you shall say, It is my natural constitution to
be choleric, and flesh and blood will have their course, Know, this is to
nourish your passion. Knowalso, it is a wicked and hateful constitution of
body, which came in with the fall. And 1 Cor. 15 50.
flesh and blood shall not inherit the kingdom of God. Say not, I am so
crossed and provoked, never any the like. For ^ Pet. 2. 23 Heb. 12. 2, 3.
Christ was more injured and more provoked, yet was never in a chafe. And you
provoke God daily a thousand times more every day, yet he is patient with you.
Say not, It is such an headstrong passion, that it is impossible to one who is
of a choleric nature, thus to bridle and subdue it. For, I can assure you,
that by using the former means, if a man also do often, and much shame and abase
himself before God for his passion and folly, and daily repent thereof, and be
watchful over himself, he may of a most choleric man, become most meek
before he dye. I have seen it in old men (whose age in it self gives
advantage to tutchines and frowardnes) who were exceeding passionat intheir
youth, yet through the grace of God, by constant conflict against this vice,
have attained to an admirable degree of meekness.

Next, as carnal anger, so worldly grief must be avoided in all sorts of
crosses. For, by it you repine against GOD, fret against men, and do make your
self unfit for 1 Kin. 21 4.
natural, civil, and spiritual duties, and if it be continued, 2 Cor. 7. 10.
it works death.

The best remedy against worldly sorrow for any cross, is to turn it into
godly sorrow for sin, which is the cause of the cross. Re^^e lie against
worldly grief.
This will cause 2 Cor. 7. 10.
repentance to salvation, never to be repented of, and will drive you to
Christ, in whom if you believe, you shall have joy and comfort; even such 1
Pet. 1. 6. 8.
joy unspeakeable which will dispell and dry up both this, and all other
griefs whatsoever. For godly sorrow does always, in due time, end in
spiritual joy.

SECTION 2. Of bearing all crosses patiently.
IN the third place, I told you that you must bear all your afflictions and
crosses patiently. By Patience, I do not mean a Stoicall sensclesnesse, or
blockish stupiditie, like that of Genesis 49. 14, 15.
Isachar. Nor yet a counterseit patience, like Genesis 27. 41, 42.
Esau's, and 2 Samuel 13 13. 22.
Absaloms. Nor a mere civil and moral patience, which wise Heathen, to free
themselves from vexation, and for-vaine-glorie, and other ends, attained unto.
Nor yet a Rev. 2. 2.
profane patience, of men insensible of GODS hishonour. Nor a
patience-perforce, when the sufferer is merely passive; But a Christ an holy
patience, wherein you must be sensible of Gods hand, and when you cannot but
feel an unwillingnesse in nature to bear it; yet, for conscience to Gods
Commandment, you do submit to his will, and that voluntarily, with an active
patience, causing your self to be willing to bear it so long as God shall
please, like the Mat. 26. 39. 42.
patience of Christ: Not my will, but thine be done. The excellency of Christ's
suffering, was not in that he suffered, but in that he was obedient in his
suffering. He was Phil. 2. 8.
obedient to the death. So likewise no man's suffering is acceptable, if he be
not active and obedient in suffering.

This Patience is a grace of the Spirit of God, wrought in the heart A
description of Christian patience.
and will of man, through believing, and applying the Commandment, and
promises of God to himself; whereby, for 1 Pet. 2. 19
conscience sake toward God, he does submit his will to Gods will, willing
quietly to bear, without bitterness and vexation, all the labors, changes,
and evil occurrents which shall be fall him in the whole course of his life,
whether from God immediately, or from man; as also to wait quietly for all such
good things which God has promised, but yet are delayed and unfulfilled.

To induce you to get, and to show forth this holy Patience, know that Heb. 10.
36.
you have need of it, and that in these respects:

1. You are but half a Christian, Inducements to patience.
you are imperfect in your parts, you want a principal part, if you want
patience: thus S. James argues, implying that he that will be Iam. 1. 4.
entire, and want nothing to make him a Christian man, he must have patience.
This passive obedience is greater than active, it is more rare, and more
difficult to obey in suffering, than to obey in doing.

2. You have not a sure possession of your soul without patience; In your
patience Lu. 21. 19.
possess ye your souls, says our Savior. A man without patience, is not
his own man: he has not power Pro. 25. 28.
nor rule over his own spirit, nor yet of his own body. The tongue, hand, and
feet of an impatient man, will not be held in by reason. But he that is
patient, enjoys himself, and has Pro. 16. 32
rule over his spirit; no cross can put him out of possession of himself.

Thirdly, There are so many oppositions and lets in your race, and growth of
Christianity, that without patience to suffer, and to Romans 8. 25.
wait, you cannot possibly bring forth good fruit to God, nor hold out your
profession of Christianity to the end; but shall give off, before you have
enjoyed the Heb. 10. 36.
promise. Therefore you are bid to Heb. 12. 3
run with patience the race which is set before you. And the good ground is
said to bring forth fruie with Luke 8. 15
patience. And the faithful are said Heb. 6. 12
through Faith and Patience to inherit the Promises.

Fourthly, Patience works Rom 5. 5
experience, without which no man can be an expert Christian; this experience
being of the greatest use to confirm a Christian soul in greatest
difficulties. This be said of the necessity, together with the benefit of
patience, that you may love it, and may desire to have, and show it.

By what means you may attain it, follows:

First, you must be after a sort Means of patience.
impatient, and must spend your passion on your lusts which war in your
members, fall out with them, Col. 3. 5.
mortify them; for nothing makes a man impatient, so much as his lusts do,
both because they will never be satisfied, and it is death to a man to be
crossed in them; and because the fulfilling of lusts does cause a guilty
conscience, whence follows impatience and troublesome vexation upon every
occasion, like unto the raging Sea, which with every wind doth^ome, and rage,
and Isa. 57. 20
cast up nothing but filth and dirt: And as Saint James says, Iam. 4. 1.
Whence are wars and brawlings? So I say of all other fruits of impatiencie,
But from your lusts that war in your members. Take away the causes of
impatiency, then you have made a good way for patience.

Secondly, Lay a good soundation of patience: you must be humble and low in
your own eyes, through an appre^e^sion that you are less then the least of
GODS mercies, and that your Ezr. 9. 13
greatest punishments are less than your iniquities have deserved. As any man
has abounded in humility, so has ^ee abounded in patience, witness the
examples of Abraham, Moses, Job, David, and others.

Thirdly, Store your heart with faith, hope, and love: all these, and either of
these do calm ^he heart, and keep it ^eadie. For besides that, they quiet the
heart in the maine, giving assurance of Gods love in Christ* Romans 5. 1. 3, 4.
For being ius^^fied by faith, we have peace with God, rei^yce in hope, whence
joy and patience in tribulation. And who can be impatient with him whom he
loves with all his heart and strength? These graces also do furnish a man
with an ability of spiritual reasoning and disputing with a disquieted soul,
whereby it may be quieted in any particular disquietment.

Wherefore the fourth mean of patience is, to do as Dav^ did, whenever you
find your heart begin to boil, and to be impatient, you must (before passion
has got the bit in the teeth, and carried you out of your self into height of
impatience) Ps. 42. 11
ask your soul what is the matter, and why it is so disquieted within you.
This do seriously, and your heart will quickly represent to your thoughts, such
and such cross, or crosses, stretched out upon the tenters of manifold
aggravations. All which you must answer by the spiritual reasoning of your
faith, grounded on the word of God, whereby you may quiet your heart, and put
it to si^ence.

Whatsoever the affliction be that may trouble you; you may ^e furnished with
reasons why you should be patient, taken (1) from GOD that sent it: (2) from
your self, on whom it ^eth: (3) from the nature and ^^e of the affliction it
self: (4) by considering the evils of impatience: (5) by comparing the
blessings you have, and are assured that you shall have, with the crosses you
have, especially if patiently endured. You shall from all these considerations
see reason, why your heart should be quiet under the greatest afflictions.

First, consider well, that whatsoever the trouble and cross be, and
whatsoever be the instrument of it, either in the sense of evil, or in the
want of good promised, God your Father, (1) who does all things according to
the wisdom and counsel of his will; (2) who does afflict with most tender
affection; (3) who corrects and afflicts in measure; (4) who has always
holy purposes and ends in all afflictions, and that for your good, has sent it.

First, consider that it was God that did it. ^mos 3. 6 2 ^am. 16. 10.
There is no evil ((...) of punishment) in a City, which the Lord has not
done, says Amos. 1 Samuel 3. 18.
It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good, says El. Psa 39 9.
I opened not my mouth, says David, because thou ( Lord) did it. Job 1. ^1
Hos. 6. 1. 1 Samuel 2. 6 7.
The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the Name of the
Lord, says Job.

2. All this GOD does to his children with Heb. 12. 5, 6.
a fatherly affection in much love and pity. He has your Psa 31. 7
soul still in remembrance, while you are in adversity. Yea, he bears some
part of the burden with you: for (speaking after the manner of man) he says,
that Isa. 63. 9.
in all the afflictions of his children, he is afflicted. Lam. 3. 33
He delights not in afflicting the children of men, much less his own
children.

If you ask, Why then does he afflict, or why does he not ease you speedily?
I ask you, Why a tender-harted father, being a Surgeon, who is grieved and
troubled at the pain and anguish, which he himself caused his child to feel
with corrosives, or hot irons, would notwithstanding apply the burning irons,
and suffer those plasters to vex him for a long time? You will say, Sure the
wound or malady of the child required it, and that else it could not be cured.
This is the case betwixt God and you: Gods heart is tender, and yerneth toward
you, when his hand is upon you: therefore bear it patiently.

3. Isa. 27. 8.
God afflicts you in measure, fitting your affliction for kind, time, and
weight, according to your need, and according to the strength of grace which he
has already given you, or which certainly he will give you. He does 1 Cor. 10
13.
never lay more upon you, then what you shall be able to bear: and will
always with the cross and temptation, make a way to escape. The husbandman
will not always be Isa. 28. 24 25.
plowing, and harrowing of his ground, but only gives it so many earths, and
so many tynes, to some more, to some less, as the ground has need, and as it
can bear them. So likewise he thresheth his diverse sorts of grain, with
diverse Instruments, according as the grain can endure them: Isa. 28 26 27, 28.
the fitches are not threshed with a threshing instrument, neither is the cart
wheel turned about upon the cummin: bread-corne is bruised: because he will
not ever be threshing it, nor break it with the wheel of his cart, nor bruise
it with his horsemen. If the husbandman do all this by the discretion
wherewith God has instructed him; can you think that Isa 28. 29
God, who is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working, will plow, and
harrow any of his ground, or thresh any of his corn, above that which is fit,
and more than his ground and corn can bear? Should not you, his ground and
corn, be patient at such tillage, and at such threshing.

4. Gods end in afflicting, is always his own glory in your good; as, to
humble you, and to bring you to a sight of your sin, to break up the fallow
ground of your heart, Hos. 10. 12
that you may sow in righteousness, and reap in mercy; to harrow you, that
the seed of grace may take root in you. All Gods afflictions are either to
remove impediments of grace: ( Isa. 27. 9.
By this, says Esaias, shall the inequity of Jacob be purged, and this is all
the fruit, to take away his sin. All the plowing is but to kill weeds, and to
fit the ground for seed; all the threshing and winnowing, is but to sever the
chafe from the corn; and all the grinding, and boulting by afflictions, is,
but to sever the bran from the flower, that Isa. 66. 20
Gods people may be a pure meate-offering acceptable to him.) Or else he
afflicts, that his children might have experience of his love and power in
preserving and delivering them, or that they might have the exercise, proof,
and increase of faith, Rom 5. 4
hope, love, and other principal graces, scil. to work patience and
experience by them, which serve for the beautifying and perfecting of a
Christian. 1 Cor. 11 32.
God does judge his children here, that they may repent, and be reformed, that
they may not be condemned with the world. Gods end in chastising you, shall be
found to be always for your good, that you shall be able to say, Psalm. 119 67
71.
It was good for me to be afflicted: For it is Heb. 12. 10, 11.
that you may be partaker of his holiness, and accordingly of his glory and
happiness. Bear therefore all afflictions patiently, for they are for your
good.

If this be your cross and trouble, that you want many of the graces and good
gifts of GOD which he has promised: Know also that this deferring to give
graces and comforts, is of God, not out of neglect or forget fullness of you;
but of set, wise, and good purpose, even to you-ward: As to inkindle your
desires more and more after them; and, it may be, that you should seek them in
a better manner. It is likewise to try your faith, and hope, whether you will
do him that honor, as to wait and rest upon his bare word. When you are fit
for them, you shall have them. You must therefore work your heart yet to wait
patiently for them, considering the faithfulness and power of God that
promised, and how that 2 Cor. 1. 20.
all the promises of God are Yea and Amen in Christ. He is wise, true, and able
to fulfill them in the due time, and in the best manner; for Heb. 10. 23. 37.
faithful is he that has promised, and will fulfill it: and yet a little
while, and he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry.

Secondly, when the Soul begins to be disquieted, consider your self how
unworthy you are of any blessing, how worthy you are of all Gods curses, yea,
of eternal damnation in Hell; and that justly, because of the sin of your
nature, and wicked actions of your life. When you shall do thus, your heart
will be quiet and content, you will say with the Church (whatsoever your trouble
be,) Mic. 7. 9.
I will bear the indignation of the Lord, for I have sinned against him. He
that does acknowledge that he has deserved to be hanged, drawn, and quartered
for an offense against the King, if the King will be so merciful that he shall
escape only with a severe whipping, to remember him of his disloyalty, (though
he smart terribly with those lashes,) yet in his mind he can bear them
patiently, and gladly. If you can think thus, I deserve more punishment in
this kind, nay, in any other, together with this, inal other with this one, or
with these few, my punishment is Ez^. 9. 13
less than mine iniquities deserve: for I might* have been frying in Hell
long since, and have been past all means and hope of salvation, but I live,
and have time, and means to make a good use of my afflictions; These thoughts
will cause you to say, Why am I? Why is living man sorrowful? that is,
impatiently sorrowful, or why does he complain (says the Lam. 3. 39.
Prophet) what? shall man who is punished for his sin, but not fully to his
desert, yet complain? for he yet Lam. 3. 40
lives to search his ways and turn to the Lord, and seek mercy: Say with
the Church in all your distresses, Lam. 3. 19 20, 21, 22.
Its* Gods mercy it is not worse. It is Gods mercy I am not utterly consumed.

Thirdly, When your soul begins to bussle and be out of quiet under
afflictions, whether inward in soul, or outward in body or state; consider the
nature and use of them to you-ward. To the eye and touch of sense they are Heb.
12 11.
evil, and as poison, things hurtful and dangerous; but to the eye and touch
of faith, they are good, and as good physic, 2 Cor. 4. 16
most healthful to the soul, 2 Cor. 4. 17, 18.
and saving. God the skillful Physician has quite altered the nature of
crosses to his children; he that brings light out of darkness, so tempers
afflictions, that they become good antidotes and preservatives against sin,
and good Isa. 27 9.
purgatives of sin. The core, sting, and curse of the cross; which remains
to a wicked man, is by Christ's patient suffering, and Gods mercy, taken quite
away out of the afflictions of believers. Afflictions to the godly, are not
properly punishments serving to pacify GODS wrath for sin; but are only
chastisements to remove sin, and are exercises of graces, and means of
holiness. For they serve either to prevent evil, or to reform it: either to
make way for grace, or to quicken and increase grace, or to discover and give
proof of it. God is as a wise and skilful Goldsmiths, he knows how to purge
his Gold, by casting it into the 1 Pet. 1. 7
fire of affliction, which fire is not the same to the dross, which it is to
the gold; it consumes the dross, but refineth the gold, that it may be fit to
be made a vessel of Honor. Fire serves to try gold, as Well as to purge it:
for pure gold though it remain in the fire many days, the fire cannot waste
it; when it is once pure, it will hold its weight still for all the burning.
Hence it is that the Psalmist says, Psalm. 119. 67. 71.
It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy
statutes: and the Apostle says, Romans 8. 28
All things work together for good to them that love God. He is a froward and
foolish person, who being sick of a deadly disease, does not patiently and
gladly endure the gripings, and extreme sickness of stomach, and bowels, when
he knows that this his sickness, caused by bitter physic, is for his
health.

You will say, If you could Object. 4.
find that your afflictions did you any good, you should not only be patient,
but glad under any afflictions.

I answer: Whatsoever you Answ.
feel, faith in Gods Word will tell you, that they both now do you good, and
hereafter you shall feel the benefit of it. The benefit of Physic is not
always felt the day you take it, but chiefly when the Physic has done
working. The chief end why GOD tries and purges you by afflictions, is, that
he may humble you, and prove you, to do you good at your latter end. Read
Deuteronomy. 8. 15, 16. You should therefore be patient in the mean time.

Fourthly, If yet your heart begin to be disquieted, because of 4
such or such an affliction; Consider with your self, what harm impatience
will do you, compared with the good that will follow a patient enduring of it.
For, besides that it depriveth you of your right understanding, and makes you
to forget your self, as I have said, even to forget your duty both to God and
man; it is the readiest means to double, and lengthen the affliction, not to
abate it, and take it off. That parent which intended to give a child but
light correction, if this child be impatient, and catch at the rod, and
struggleth to get the rod, or to get away by force from him, is hereby more
incensed, and does punish him more severely. But if in any affliction you do
patiently 1 Pet. 5. 6.
submit your self under GODS mighty hand, (besides that ease and quiet it
gives to the soul, and experience and hope which it works in you,) it is
the readiest means of seasonable deliverance out of it; for then GOD will
exalt you in due time. GOD is wise, and too strong to be overcome by any
means, but by strong prayer, and humble yeeldance Hos. 12. 4.
to his will.

Fifthly, If yet your soul be 5
disquieted within you at any crosses; that you may quiet your soul, you must
not (as most do,) take only into the one skale of your consideration, the
weight and number of your crosses, together with such and such aggravations;
but withal put into the other skale the manifold mercies and favors of God,
both in the evils you have escaped, and in the benefits which heretofore you
have received, and do now enjoy, and which (you believing) have cause to hope
to receive hereafter. But amongst all his mercies, forget not this one which
you have already, GOD has given Christ unto you, whereby he himself is
yours, and is your portion. Now, if you have Christ, you have with him, Romans 8.
32.
all things also which are worth the having.

When you have thus weighed, unpartially, blessings and mercies against
crosses, you will tell me, that for one cross, you have an hundred blessings,
yea, Psa. 119. 71.
a blessing in your crosses, and you will say, that this one mercy of being in
Christ, it alone weighs up all crosses, and makes them as light as nothing;
giving you so much matter of joy and thanks, even in the midst of affliction,
that you can neither have cause, not time, to be impatient, or to repine at
any affliction, but to Romans 5. 1, 2, 3.
rejoice even in your tribulations.

And as for the time to come, when you think thereof, you will, with the
Apostle Paul, when you have cast up all your crosses and sufferings of this
present time, yet Romans 8. 18
reckon, that they are not worthy to be compared with the Glory that shall be
revealed in you: For they are but short for time, and light for weight, being
compared with the everlasting weight of glory which they will cause to you, if
you endure them patiently. I will say nothing of the shortness and lightness of
your afflictions ^n comparison of the far more intolerable and eternal
weight of torments of Hell which you escape: and in comparing afflictions with
glory; I will point out to you only the Apostles gradation, you shall have,
for 2 Cor. 4. 17.
affliction, glory; for light affliction, weight of glory; for short
affliction, an eternal glory; for common and ordinary affliction, excellent
glory: And albeit, it might be thought that he had said enough, yet he adds
degrees of comparison; yea, goes beyond all degrees, calling it more
excellent, far more excellent: for thus he says, Our light affliction which
is but for a moment, works for us a far more excellent and eternal weight
of glory. Indeed you must not 2 Cor. 4. 18.
look at the things which are seen with the eye of sense: but at things which
are not seen, (which are spiritual and eternal) seen only by the eye of
faith.

You will say, If you did bear afflictions for Christ, then you Doubt.
could thus think, and thus expect; but you oft-times suffer affliction justly
for your sin.

I answer, Though this place Answ.
principally point at martyrdom and suffering for Christ's cause, yet it is all
one, in your case, if you will bear afflictions patiently for his sake. A man
may A man may suffer for Christ two ways.
suffer afflictions for Christ two ways; First, When he suffers for his
Religion, and for his cause. Secondly, When a man suffers any thing which God
lays upon him quietly for Christ's with and commandment sake. This latter is
more general than the former, and the former must be comprehended in this
latter; else the former suffering for CHRIST'S cause, if it be not in 1 Cor. 13 3
love and obedience, and for Christ's sake, our of Conscience to fulfill his
will, is nothing: whereas he that endures patiently GODS just punishment for
sin, for Christ's sake, endeavoring to submit his will to the will of Christ;
this man suffers, that is, patiently endures affliction for CHRIST, though he
never be put to it to suffer for profession of Christ: and, if such a one were
put to it, he would readily suffer for Christ's cause. And such afflictions as
these, thus patiently endured, work also this excellent weight of glory, as
well as the other.

By these and the like reasonings of faith, you may work your soul to
patience, as David and others Psalm. 42. Psalm. 43.
have done, by casting anchor on God, and on his Word, fixing their stay and
hope in GOD. Let the issue of your reasoning be this, I will wait on God, and
yet, for all matter of disquietment, praise him who is the health of my
countenance, and my God. Thus 1 Samuel 30 6.
David quieted his heart, when he heard tidings, that his City Ziglag was
burnt, and that his wives and all that he had, together with the wives and
children, and all that his soldiers had, was carried captive; and when he saw
that his soldiers began to mutine, and when he heard them speak of stoning
him, he encouraged himself in the Lord his God. And good Iehosaphat, in his
desperate condition, cast anchor here, saying, 2 Chr. 20 12.
O our God, we know not what to do, but our eyes are on thee. Thus by the
exercise of your hope in God, the heart may be wrought unto much patience and
quiet in all distresses. Thus much be said of the fourth means of patience in
the several branches of it.

A fifth means of patience is: 5
observe the patience of others, as of the Prophets and faithful servants of
God, who are recorded in Scripture, and left as Iam. 5. 10 11.
examples of suffering affliction, and of patience. We count them happy that
endure, says James. You have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the
end of the Lord, that the Lord is very pitiful and of tender mercy. But
especially represent to your thoughts the patience of your head and Savior
Jesus Christ, whom you pierced by your sins, who Isa. 53. 7.
as a Lamb dumb before the shearer, opened not his mouth. Now, if you would
consider him who is the Author and finisher of your faith; who, Heb. 12. 1, 2,
3, etc.
endured such contradiction of sinners, and such intolerable anguish of soul,
when he wrastled with his Fathers wrath; then you should not be wearied nor
faint in your minds, when you are under any affliction. If with Christ you set
the joy before you, you shall be able to endure the cross, and despise the
shame of all persecution for welldoing, and shall so run that race that is
set before you, with patience, that you shall in the end sit down with Christ,
at the right hand of Heb. 12. 2. Rev. 3. 21.
the Throne of God.

Sixthly, and lastly, Pray much for patience, waiting patiently for Iam. 1. 4,
5.
it: and without doubt, the God of patience and consolation, who has commanded
it, who sees that you have need of it, who has promised to give you all your
petitions which you make according to his will, will surely give you patience.

SECTION 3. Of bearing afflictions thankefully and fruitfully.
TO bear adversity and afflictions Of bearing crosses thankfully
well, it is not enough that you bear them patiently, because you deserve
them, and because they come from God; but you must bear them Lam. 3. 22 23.
Job 1. 21.
thankfully, Romans 5. 3
chearefully, and comfortably (because they are as you have heard) for your
Psalm. 119 71. Lam. 3. 27.
good. We do not only patiently endure the hand of the Surgeon, and the
^otions of the Physician, but we ^oe thank them, pay them, and are glad of
their receipts, though Iam. 1. 2, 3.
they put us to pain. Count it exceeding joy, says Saint James, when you fall
into diverse temptations, knowing this, that the trying of your ^aith works
patience, etc.

Last of all, unto patience and Of bearing crosses fruitfully.
^hankefulnesse, you must add Psalm. ^19 67. 71.
fruitfulness, and growth of grace; this should be the fruit of al crosses and
afflictions, that with David you may be better for them, and that you may with
Job 23. 10
^ob, come out of them as gold refined and purged from dross. Therefore God
does chasten you as he did Jacob: Isa ^27. 9.
This is all the fruit, to take away your sin, and that you should be Heb.
12. 10.
partaker of his holiness. Be better therefore for crosses: then God has his
end, when after his plowing, harrowing, and threshing of you, he shall reap
the crop of well-doing, which he reapeth not so much for himself, as for you*
for Heb. 6. 7.
the ground that brings fort^ fruit meet for him that dresseth it receives
blessing from God. Al^ good works are treasured up i^ heaven for the doers
thereof.

When you* have learned thi^ lesson also, Phil. 4. 11 12.
How to be abas^ and to suffer need, as well as ho^ to be full and to abound,
together with all the forementioned directions, how at all times, and in all
things to walk with GOD, you shall approve your self to be a good Scholar in
the School of Christ, one of the highest form, a good proficient in the
profession of Christianity, one that has walked far with God; and you shall
hereby declare, that you are neither 2 Pet. 1. 5 6* 7. 8.
barren, nor unfruitful, in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Thus much concerning the outward frame* and form of your life and
conversation, according to which you must walk with God. The inward truth and
life of all this, which is, doing all in uprightness, remains to be spoken
unto, which follows.

CHAP. XII. Of uprightness.
SECTION 1.
ALL which I shall write concerning uprightness, will meet in this point. In
your whole walking with GOD, you must be upright. Both these, to walk with
God, and to be upright, are joined in this precept; Genesis 17. 1
Walk with me, and be perfect, or upright. He speaks not of an absolute
perfection of degrees, in the fullness of al graces, which is only aimed at in
this life, toward which a man by watchfulness and diligence may come nearer,
and nearer; but is never attained until we come to Heaven, amongst Heb. 22. 2^.
the spirits of i^st men made perfect. He speaks here of the perfection of
parts, and of truth of grace in every part, expressing it self in
unfainednesse of will and endeavor; which is uprightness.

That you should be sincere and upright, Read Iosh^a 24. 14. 1 Chro. 28. 9.
And the Apostle tells you, that 1 Cor. 5 7, 8
since Christ Jesus your Passover is slain, you must keep the seven days
feast of unleavened bread (which shadoweth forth the whole time of our life
here) with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth. The examples of Genesis ^.
^
Noah, Job. 1. 1.
Job, Ioa. 1. 47.
Nathaniel, with many others in the Scripture, are therefore written, that of
them you may learn to be upright. There is special reason why you should be
upright.

First, Your God with whom 1 Reasons of uprightness.
you walk, is M^t. 5 4^
perfect and upright: he is truth, ^sa 51. 6.
He loves truth in the inward parts; all his works are done in truth; and
there was 1 Pet. 2. 21, 22.
no guile ever found to be either in the mouth, hand, or heart of your Head
Christ Jesus. Now, you should please GOD, and be like your Father, and like
your head CHRIST JESUS, following his steps.

Secondly, it is to no purpose to 2
do that which is right in Gods sight, in respect of the matter of your
actions, if in the truth and disposition of your soul you be not upright
therein. For the best action void of uprightness, is but like a
well-proportioned body without life and essential form. And that is counted as
Zach. 7. 5, 6.
not done at all to God, which is not done in uprightness. This exception is
taken against Amaziahs good actions. It is said, He did that which was right
in the sight of the Lord, but he did it not in uprightness, he did it not
with a perfect 2 Chr. 25. 2
heart.

Thirdly, the best actions without 3
uprightness, do not only lose their goodness; but in Gods account are held
to be abominable evils. Such were the Isa. 1. 13, 14 Isa 66. 3.
Prayers and Sacrifices of the hypocritical Jews. For GOD holds such
actions, and such services, to be mere Psalm. 78. 34, 36, 37.
flattery, lying, and mocking him to his face.

Now, because there is none so ready to presume and say, he is upright, as is
the hypocrite. So Ephraim; Hos 1^. 8.
In all my labors they shall find no iniquitte in me: that were sin. And,
because there are none so ready to doubt, whether they be upright, as are the
tenderhearted and sincere. So it Psalm. 51. 10
was with David, when he prayed to have a right spirit renewed in him. It will
be needful and useful that I show you, what uprightness is, and by what
infallible marks you may know whether you be upright or no.

Christian uprightness (for of A description of Christian uprightness.
that I mean) is a saving grace of the holy Ghost, wrought in the heart of a
man rightly informed in the knowledge of God in Christ, whereby his heart
stands so entirely and sincerely right to Godward, that in the true
disposition, bent, and firm determination of his will, he would, in every
faculty and power of soul and body, approve himself to be such a one, as God
would have him to be, and would do whatsoever God would have him to do, and
all as God would have him, and that for and unto God.

The Author of this uprightness is Gods sanctifying Spirit.

The common nature of it, wherein it agrees with other graces, is, it is a
saving grace; It is peculiar to them that shall be saved: for only they are
endued with it; but it is common to all, and to each of that sort, who are
effectually called.

The proper seat of this grace is the will.

The ground or spring in man, from whence, through the special grace of the
holy Ghost, it rises, is sound knowledge of God and of his will, touching
those things which the will should choose, and refuse; and from faith in Christ
Jesus, the conduitpipe through which everybeleever does, of his fullness of
uprightness, receive this grace to be upright. Herby Christian uprightnes
differs from that uprightness, which may be in a mere natural,
superstitious, and mis-beleeving man, yea, in an heathen Idolater; for even
such may be unfeigned in their actions in their kind, both in actions civil
and superstitious, doing that which they do, in their ignorance and
blindness, without dissimulation either with GOD, or man. This S. Paul did
before his conversion, he did as he Act. 26. 9.
thought he ought to do.

The form, and proper nature of uprightness, is the good inclination,
disposition, and firm intention of the will to a full conformity with Gods
will, and that, not in some faculties and powers of man, or in some of his
actions, but, universally for subject and object, he would be entire and
sincere in all his parts, and in all things; he would be, and do, as GOD
would have him to be and do, making Gods will revealed in his Word and Works,
to be his will, and Gods known ends to be his ends.

This holy uprightness expresses it self in three actions* two inward, the
other both inward and outward.

First, it shows it self in a Act 11. 2^. Psalm. 119 5^. 106.
well-grounded and unfeigned purpose 1 Three acts in separable from uprightness.
and resolution to cleave to the Lord, and to make Gods will to be his will.
This is an act of the will guided and concluded from sound judgment.

The second act is an unfeigned desire and longing of the heart to attain that
his good purpose and 2
resolution, willing or desiring in all Heb. 13. 18
things to live honestly, and to live worthy the LORD in all wellpleasing;
longing (with David) after Gods precepts. This is an act Psalm. 119. 40.
of the affection of desire, a motion of the will, drawing and thrusting a man
forward, giving him no rest, until he have obtained (at least in some good
measure) his said purpose.

Thirdly, uprightness shows 3
it self in a true endeavor and exercise (according to the strength and
measure of grace received) to be, and to do according to the former
resolutions and desires. Act. 24. 16.
Such was the Apostles endeavor, to have always a conscience void of offense
toward God and toward men. This endeavor is an act of the whole man. All and
every active power of soul and body, as there shall be use of them, are
employed in unfeigned endeavor.

Now touching endeavor, know, there be many think they endeavor sufficiently,
when they do not: others, that they do not, when yet they do. The first, if
they, to the sluggards longing and wishing, do join an outward Some think
they endeavor, which do nor.
conformity to the means of being made good, as to hear the Word, pray now
and then, and receive the Sacraments; and if they do some things which may be
done with little labor and difficulty; and if to these they add some slight
and overt assaies to abstain from sin, and to do well, they think they
endeavor much: whereas, if they do no more, all is to little purpose.

For, to endeavor, is to Act. 24 16
exercise What it is to endeavor.
the head with study how, and the heart with will and desire, and the hand and
tongue, and the whole outward man to do their utmost, putting to their whole
strength, their whole wit their whole skill, and their whole will to subdue
sin, and to be strengthened in grace, and to be edified, and built up more
and more; moving every stone, removing or breaking through every let, shunning
al occasions of evil, or whatsoever may strengthen sin, seeking after, and
embracing all opportunities and Phil. 3. 11 14.
means to be strengthened in the inward man. If one means will not be
sufficient, if there be others to be used, they will find out and use them
also; If they cannot attain their good purposes at once, they will try again
and again. They who endeavor indeed, they do not only seek to obtain their
ends, but they strive in seeking. As hard Students, as good Warriors, and 1
Gor. 9. 24 25, 26, 27.
Wrestlers, and as those who run in a race do, so that they may obtain that
which they study, fight, wrestle, and run for. It is not a bare wishing and
woulding for a fit, or an ordinary seeking; but an earnest Lu. 13. 24
striving to enter in at the straight gate, that gives admitta^ce into the way
of holiness, and into the kingdom of heaven. It is a studying and exercising
a man's self as in a matter of life and death; and as a wise man would do for
a kingdom, where there is possibility, and hope of obtaining it.

Others, who indeed endeavor Some think they endeavor not, when yet they do.
to keep a good conscience toward God and man, yet, because they cannot bring
into act always that which they labor for, or because they see oversights,
neglects, or some faintings in their indevours, they think that they endeavor
to no purpose. Whereas, if they do what they can, according to the strength of
Grace received, or according to the condition or state wherein What is true
endeavor.
they are, which is sometimes better, sometimes worse; If they see their
failings in their indevors, and bewail them, and do ask pardon, resolving by
Gods grace to strive to do better; this is true endeavor, this is that which
God for Christ's sake does accept of. For since that endeavor is a part of our
holiness, you must not think Mark. 14. 8
that it will be perfect in this life; if it be true, you must thank God, for
he will accept of that.

A man's endeavor may be as true, and as much, when yet he cannot perform what
he indevours to do, as it is at some other times, when with the endeavor he
has also ability to perform. As you may see in natural indevours. The same
man being well and in health, if he fall and break not his arms or legs,
he does both endeavor to get up, and does readily get up; but if he be weak,
or if falling breaks his arms and legs; he also has a will and desire to
rise, and assayeth to help himself with one hand, but it will not do; he
tries with the other, that also will not do it; he in that ca^e is feign to
lie until he see h^^pe coming: then he will call, and entreat help, and
when one gives him the hand, though he cannot rise of himself, yet he will
lift up himself, as well as he can, and will hang as light upon him that
helps him as he can possibly; yea, say a stronger then he detaineth him, that
he cannot do as he would, or keep him down, if he as soon as he can have
help, will ask it: Does not this same man in his latter condition as truly
endeavor, as he did in his former? So it is with a spiritual man in his
spiritual endevors. If he assay to do what he can, and call to GOD for his
help, and when he has it, is glad, and willing to improve it, this is the
true endeavor, which, concurring with the two former acts, purpose, and desire,
gives proof of uprightness.

There is a twofold uprightness: A twofold uprightness.
the one of the heart and person; the other of the action. I have described the
uprightnes of the person. Then an action is upright, when a man does not
dissemble, but does mean as he says, and as the outside of the action does
import, intending as much as is pretended, whether it be in actions toward God
or man. The first is, when the heart of man agrees with, and, in the intention
thereof, is according to the will of God. The second is, when the outward act
agrees with, and is according to the heart of him that does it.

That you may rightly judge Rules to direct how to judge of uprightness.
whether you be upright or no: First, take certain rules for direction, to
rectify your judgment. Then observe the marks of uprightness.

First, uprightness being part of Sanctification, is not fully perfect in any
man in this life; but is mixed with much hypocrisy conflicting one against the
other. It has its degrees, sometimes more, sometimes less; in some things more
in some things less, according as either part prevails in the opposition,
and according as a man grows or decays in other principal and fundamental
graces.

2. Secondly, a man is not to be called an upright man, or an hypocrite
because of some few actions wherein he may show uprightness, or hypocrisy:
For an hypocrite may do some upright actions, in which he does not dissemble;
though he cannot be said to do 2 King. 10.
them in uprightness, as Iehu and many others have done; for Iehu destroyed
the house of Ahab, and the Priests of Baal with all his heart And the best man
may do some hypocritical and guilefull actions, as (in the matter of Vria^) 1
Kin. 15. 5
David did. It is not the having of hypocrisy that denominate than hypocrite,
but the reigning of it, which is, when it is not seen, not confessed,
bewailed, and opposed.

A man should judge of his uprightnes, rather by his will, bent, and inclination
of his soul, and good desires, and true indevours to well-doing in the whole
course of his life, then by this or that particular act, or by his power to
do. David was thus esteemed a man according to GODS own heart, no otherwise;
rather by the goodness of his general course of his life, etc. then by
particular actions: for in many things he offended God* and polluted his ^oule,
and blemished his reputation.

Thirdly, Albeit uprightness ^s to be judged by the upright ^tanding of the
heart to God^a^d, yet wheresoever upright^esse Iam. 2. 18.
is, it will show it self in men's actions in the course of their lives; only
observe this, that in judging ^our actions, you must not judge ^^em so much by
the muchnesse, ^ad greatness of the quantity, as ^y the soundness,
ripeness, and goodness of the quality. If it be good in truth, according to
the measure of grace received, God accepts it in Christ. She has 2 Cor. 8.
12 Mark 14. 8
done what she could, faith our Savior. A little sound and true fruit, though
weak in comparison, is far better than many blades and blossoms, yea, then
plenty of grapes, if they be wild and sour.

SECTION 2. Of the marks of uprightness.
THat you may co^ceive more distinctly, and may better remember the signs of
uprightness, I reduce them to these heads: They are taken 1. from
universalitie Signs of uprightness, and whence they are taken.
of respect to all Gods will. 2. From specialtie and prioritis of respect to
such things as God requires specially. 3. From a will and desire to please God
in one place as well as another; in secret as well as open. 4. From a
constancy of will to please GOD at one time, as well as another. 5. From the
true causes efficient and final. 6. From the effects that follow well-doing.
7. From the effects that follow evil-doing. 8. From the conflict which shall be
found between uprightness and hypocrisy. Psalm. 119. 6


First, the upright man is universal in his respect to the whole will of God.

For first, he unfainedly desires Psalm. 119. 33, 34.
and indevoureth to know what manner of man he ought to be, and what he ought
to do. He would know and believe any one part of Gods will, so far as it may
concern himself, as well as another: Threats, as well as promises,
Commandments as well as either; and that not some, but all the threats, all
the promises, and all the Commandment. Ioh. 3. 21
Coming to the light readily, that his deeds may be made manifest.

He is willing to know and believe, what he should do, as well as what he
should have and hope for. But the hypocrite not so, he winketh with his eyes,
and is Mat. 13. 15 2 Pet 3. 5.
willingly ignorant of that sin which he would not leave, and of that duty
which he would not do, and of that judgment which he would not feel. He is
willing to know the promises of the Gospel, but willingly ignorant of the
precepts of the Gospel, and of the condition^ annexed to the promises.

2. Secondly, His universal respect to Gods will, is not only to know, but
todoe, and to submit unto it in all things, willing to leave and shun every
sin; willing to do every thing which he knows to be his duty; willing to
bear patiently, thankfully, and fruitfully, every correction wherewith the
Lord does exercise him. He disliketh sin in all. He loves grace and
goodness in all. He would keep a good conscience in all acts of Religion
toward God; and in all acts of righteousness and sobriety toward and
amongst men. He would forbear not only those sins to which his nature is
not so much inclined, or to which his condition of life affoordeth not so many
temptations: but those to which his nature and condition of life does most
carry him, he will cross^ himself in his dearest just, namely, his darling
and beloved sins; his * own sin, Psalm. 18. 23
as David calls it. Neither does he endeavor to abstain from those vices
which may bring loss, and are out of credit, which some men punish, and all
men cry shame on: but such as through the iniquity of the times, are in
countenance with the greatest, Dan. 3. 18. Act. 4. 19.
and practiced by most; the forbearance whereof may threaten and procure danger
and discredit the doing whereof may promise and perform much worldly gain and
honor. Moreover, the upright man does not only strive to do those holy and
virtuous actions which are in credit, and for his advantage in the world; but
those also which may expose him to disgrace and Dan. 6. 10
loss even of his life and livelihood. He would abstain as well from less
evils, even 1 These. 5 22.
from appearance of evils, as from gross sins: And would so do the greater
things of the Mat. 13. 19
Law, as not to leave the other undone. But the Mar. 6. ^^
hypocrite not so, there is some sin he will not leave, some duty he will not
do, etc. Follow the opposition.

2. Secondly, an upright man is known by this. Where GOD has laid a special
charge, there he will have a first and special respect to it. As to Mat. 6. 33
seek the kingdom of God and his righteousness, that Luke 10. 42.
one thing necessary: and to show a Gal. 6. 10 Psalm. 16. 2.
specialty of love to the household of says. To be first and most at home,
reforming himself and his, Mat. 7. 5. Mat. 23. 23
pulling out the beam out of his own eye. To be most zealous for matter of
substance in religion, and less in matter of ceremony and circumstance.
Lastly, his chief care will be to apply himself to a ^ conscionable
discharge of the duties Luke 3. 10 to 1^. 1 The. 4. 12
^f his particular calling; knowing that a man has no more conscience nor
goodness in truth, then ^e has will and desire to show ^^ in the works of
his particular ^ace and calling. The Mat. 7. 3. 4, 5. 1 ^^m. 5. 13 2 The. 3. 11
hypocrite ^^ contrary in all these.

Thirdly, the upright man inde^oureth to approve himself to God, ^ well in
secret, as openly; as well ^^ the inward man, as in the outward; as well in
thought, as in lord and deed. But it is quite Mat. 6. 2. etc.
^therwise with the hypocrite, if ^^ may seem good to men, it is ^^ he cares
for.

Fourthly, the upright man is constant* his will is that he might Act. 24. 16
always please God. He does as well bethink himself how to do well in
prosperity, as in adversity, and even then studieth how to be able to hold out
before God, if his state should alter. I do not mean such a constancy as
admits of no intermissions or stoppages in the open course of his life. A
constant running spring may between two hills be stayed in his course for a
time, by damming it up; yet the spring will approve it self to run constantly;
for it will be still thrusting to get through, or get under; or, if it can do
none of these, it will raise it self in time (according to its strength) and
get over all lets, and will bear down all before it, and will run with a more
full stream afterward, by as much as it was before interrupted; so it is with
an upright man. But the hypocrite is but by fi^^ and starts; as he Job 27. 10.
calls not on Go^ at all times, so it is with all other his goodness, it is
but as the Mat. 13. 21, 22. Hos. 6. 4.
corn in stony ground, and amongst thorns, and as a morning dew, it endures
but for a season.

Fifthly, An upright man is known by the causes from which all his good actions
spring, and to which they tend, for these two, the efficient, and the end,
denominate the action.

1. That which causes the upright man to endeavor to keep a good conscience
always, is an inward principle and power of grace, causing him through faith in
Ioh. 15. 2. 5.
Christ, in and from whom, as from the root of all grace, he brings forth
fruit; and from 1 Cor. 9. 16, 17, 18. 2 Cor. 5. 14*
love, and Genesis 42. 18.
fear of God, and from 2 Cor. 2. 17.
conscience of the Commandment to do the will of GOD. Not only fear of
wrath, and hope of reward causes him to abstain from evil, and do good; but
chiefly love of God, and conscience of duty. Now, if you would know when you
obey out of conscience of the Commandment, and from When a man obeys of
conscience and love to Christ.
love of Christ; consider, 1. whether your heart and mind stand ready pressed to
obey every of Gods Commandments which you know, as well as any, and that
because Iam. 2. 11
the same God which has given one, has given all. If yea, then you obey out
of Conscience. 2. Consider what you do, or would do, when Christ, and his
true Religion, and his Commandments go alone, and are severed from all
outward credit, pleasure and profit. Do you? or will you then cleave to
Christ, and to the Commandment? Then love of Christ, fear of God, and
conscience of the commandment was and is the true cause of your weldoing;
especially, if you will and indev our all this, when that all these are by the
world clothed with peril and contempt. 3. Consider whether you can go on in
the strict course of godliness alone, and whether you resolve todoe it, though
you shall have no company, but all or most go in the way of sin, and withal
persuade thereunto. When you will walk with God alone, without either company,
this shows that your walking with God is for his sake. So walked Genesis 7 1
Noah, and 1 Kin. 19. 14. What is the cause of hypocrites weldoing.
Eliah, as he thought.

But the cause of an hypocrites well-doing is only goodness of nature, or
good education, or mere civility, or some common gifts of the spirit, also
self-love, slavish fear only, or the like. See this in 1 Kin. 21. 27.
Ahabs repentance, in 2 Kin. 10* 16.
Iehu his zeal, and Ioash his goodness. Ahabs humiliation was only from a
slavish fear of punishment. The zeal of Iehu was only from earthly joy, and
carnal policy: for had it been in zeal for God, he would as well have put
down the Calves at Dan and Bethel, as to stay the Priests of Baal. And the
goodness of Ioash, it was chiefly for Iehoiada's sake whom he reverenced, and to
whom he held himself beholding for his kingdom, and not for Gods sake. For
the Scripture says, that after Iehoiadans death, his Princes solicited him,
and he yielded and fell to Idolatry, and added 2 Chro 24 6. 17, 18. 20. 21.
this also, he commanded Zechariah the High Priest, Iehoiada's son to be
slain, because he in the name of the Lord reproved him for his sin.

Secondly, the upright man's actions, as they come from a good beginning, so
they are directed to 1 Cor. 10. 31.
a good end; he propounds the pleasing of God, and the glory of his Name, as
the direct, chief, and utmost end; not as if a man might not have respect to
himself, and to his neighbor also, propounding to himself his own and his
neighbors good, as one end of his actions, sometimes: but these must not be
propounded either only, or chiefly, or as the farthest and utmost mark, but
only as they are subordinate to these chief ends, and do lie directly in the
way to procure Gods glory. For so far forth as a man's health, and welfare
both of body and soul, lies directly in the way to glorify God; he may in
that respect aim at them in his actions. Our Savior Christ in an inferior
and secondary respect, aimed at his own glory, and at the salvation of man in
the work of man's redemption. Ioh. 17. 1.
When he said, Glorify thy Son; and prayed that his Church might be glorified;
here he had respect unto himself, and unto man; But when he said, that thy
Son may glorify thee; here he made Gods glory his utmost end, and the only
mark which for it self he aimed at.

The upright man's aim at his own, and at his neighbors goods, is not for
themselves, as if his desire ended there; but in reference to GOD the chief
Good, and the highest end of all things.

Indeed, such is GODS wisdom and goodness, that he has set before man, evil
and good: Evil, that follows upon displeasing and dishonouring him by sin,
that man might fear and avoid sin; Good and recompense of reward, that
follows upon faith and endeavor to obey, that he might hope, and be better
induced to believe and obey. This GOD did, knowing that man has need of all
reasonable helps to affright him from evil, and to allure him to good. Now,
God having set these before man, man may and ought for these good purposes to
set them before himself. Yet the upright man stands so straight, and only
to God, that (so far as he knows his own heart) he thus resolved, that if
there were no fear of punishment, nor hope of reward: if there were neither
Heaven or Hell, he would endeavor to please and glorify GOD, even out of that
duty he owes to him, and out of that high and awful estimation which he has
of Gods Soveraigntie, and from that entire love which he bears unto him. He
that ordinarily in doing of common and earthly business (though they concern
his own good) has a will to do them with an heavenly mind, and to an
heavenly end principally, certainly he stands well and uprightly resolved,
albeit, intemptations and fears he does not always feel the said resolution.

But the hypocrite not so; he Mat. 6. 2. 5. 16.
only or chiefly aymeth at himself, and in his aim serves himself in all
that he does. If he look to GODS will and glory, as sometimes he will pretend,
he makes that but the by, and not the main: 2 King. 10. 16.
he seeks Gods will and glory not for it self, but for himself; not for
Gods sake, but for his own. Thus did Iehu.

Sixthly, An upright man may know he is upright, by the effects that follow
upon his welldoing.

First, his chief inquiry is, and he does observe, what good comes by it,
and Phil. 1. 12 20.
what glory God has had or may have; rather then what earthly credit and
benefit he has gotten to himself. Or if this latter thrust in it self
before the other (as it will oft-times in the best) he is greatly displeased
with himself for it. The hypocrit not so* all that he harkeneth after, and is
pleased with, after he has done a good deed, is what applause it has amongst
men, etc.

Secondly, when an upright man has done a prayse-worthy action, he is not puffed
up with pride, and high conceit of his own worth, glorying in himself; but
he is humbly thankful unto God. Thankful, that God has enabled him to do
any thing with which he will be wel-pleased, and accept as well done. Humble
and low in his eyes, because of the manifold failings in that good work, and
because he has done it no better; and because whatsoever good he did, it was
by the grace and power of God, not by any power of his own. Thus David showed
his uprightness 1 Chr. 29* 13, 14.
in that solemn thanksgiving, when he said, But who am I, and what is my
people, that we should be able to offer so willingly after this sort, etc?
But it is otherwise with the Hypocrite: For either he ascribes all the glory
of his good work to himself; or if he seem to be thankful, it is with a
proud thankfulness, like that of the proud Pharise, Luke 18. 11
accompanied with disdain of others, which in his opinion do not so well as
himself.

Thirdly, the upright man having begun to do well, does not set down his rest
there; but striveth to do more, and to be better: he with the Apostle
forgets Phil. 3 13, 14, 15.
what is behind, looking to what is before, not thinking that yet he has
attained to that he should do. So many as are indeed perfect and upright, do
thus. But the hypocrite, if he have some flash of common illumination, and some
little taste of those things that concern the kingdom of heaven, and has
attained to aforme of godliness, he thinks that he has enough, and needs
nothing. So did Laodicea. Rev. 3. 17.


Seventhly, The upright man, and the hypocrite are differenced by their
different affections and carriages, after that they are fallen into sin. For
in many things we sin all. As the upright man did Iam. 3. 2.
not commit his sin with that full consent of will, and with that dexterity,
which the hypocrite may do, and often does; but always with some reluctation
and opposition of will (though not always felt and observed) in so much that
he can say, It was not Romans 7. 15. 17.
he, but sin that dwelt in him: so after he is fallen into sin, when he
has means to make his sin known to him, Job. 31. 33.
he does not hide, excuse, or defend his sin; or if he do, it is but
seldom in comparison, and but faintly, and not long, his Job. 40. 3, 4. Job
42. 3* 6.
conscience smiting him when he does it, or quickly after it.

An upright man will not be much or long angry with any, that shall admonish
him of his sin, yea though an enemy shall by malicious railing call his sin
to remembrance, as Shemei did 2 Samuel 16. 10, 11, 12.
to David, even therein he can see God, and can for the most part abstain
from revenge, and will work his heart to godly sorrow for his sin. But if
any 1 Samuel 25 32, 33.
like Abigail shall, in wisdom and love; admonish him, he blesses God that
sent him, or her, he blesses and makes good use of the admonition, and does
bless the admonisher, and does take it for a special kindness. Thus David, a
man according to Gods own heart, as he bewrayed humane frailty in his many
and great falls; so he gave clear proof of his uprightness, sooner, or later,
by his behavior after his false: He could say, and his repentance did prove it,
that though, to his grief and shame, sometimes he Psa. 18. 21.
departed from God; yet he did not wickedly depart from GOD. Though upright
men be transgressors, yet they are Psalm. 59. 5
not wicked transgressors; there is great difference between those two: For,
though there be evil in their actions, yea in some of them filthiness; and
gross iniquity, yet Eze. 24. 13.
in their filthiness is not lewdness, as God complains of Judah, that is,
they are not obstinate and rebellious, standing out against the means of
purging and reclaiming them. For when God does purge them by the rod of his
mouth or hand, in admonition, and correction, they are willing to reform
whatsoever is discovered Job. 42. 6.
to be amiss.

Moreover, Although the upright man may be often drawn into a way that is not
good, and often through his weakness and heedlesnesse, like the sheep, may
fall into a state that is not good; yet he does not set himself in a Psa. 36.
2, 3, 4.
way that is not good: nor yet like the swine, delights to wallow and lie in
it. When an upright man is fallen, and is recovered out of his spiritual
swoone, when he is well come to himself, he is like a man sensible of his
bones broken or out of joint; he is not well, nor at quie, nor his own man,
until he have confessed his sin, repented of it, asked pardon and grace, and
made his peace with GOD; even, until he be well set and in joint again. An
upright-man is likewise like the needle of the Sun-Dyall, or of the Mariners
Compass, which may by violent motion, and joggling, sometimes swerve to the
West, sometimes to the East; but stands steady no way but toward the North,
and if it be truly touched with a true Loadstone, has no rest but in that one
North point; so an upright man may, through boystrous temptations, and strong
allurements, ofttimes look toward the pleasure, gain, and glory of this
present world: but because he is truly touched with the sanctifying Spirit of
God, he still hangs, and inclines to Godward; and has no quiet, until he
stands steadie toward Heaven. But it is not so with the Hypocrite: He is in
each particular directly contrary. I leave the full and particular application
thereof to your self to enlarge; for having much to write, I abbreviate as
much as I may, without obscurity and defect.

Eighthly, You shall find the most evident mark of uprightness from your
sense of hypocrisy in you, and from your conflict Gal. 5. 17.
with it: The upright man is sensible of a great deal of hypocrisy, and guile
in his heart: Yea, so Psa 51. 10.
much, that oft-times he does make a question whether he have any
uprightness; and until he have brought himself to due trial by the balance
of the Sanctuary (the Word and Gospel of Christ) he does fear he is an
hypocrite. But there is nothing which he would oppose more, nothing which he
complains of, or prays to GOD more against, than this hypocrisy, nor is
there any thing that he longs after, ^aboureth and prays for more, then
that he might love and serve the Lord in sincerity: This was the Apostles
chief care, that he might approve himself to be upright. All this plainly
shows 1 Cor. 9. 26, 27.
that this man would be upright; which thing to will, is to be upright. The
hypocrite contrariwise, he neglects to observe his guile, and
hollow-heartednesse in the things he does; or if he cannot but see it, he is
no^ much troubled at it; but suffers it to reign in him: And as he boasts
of his good actions, so likewise of his good heart, and good meaning in all
that he does (except when his lewdness and hypocrisy is discovered to his
face) flattering himself in his own Psalm. 36* 2.
ways, till his iniquity is found to be hateful.

Before I leave this, I will answer Questions touching judging of uprightness
by these marks. Quest.
a question or two, concerning judging of uprightness by these marks.

First, whether an upright man may at all times discern his uprightness by
these or any other marks.

Ordinarily, if he will impartially compare himself with these evidences, he
may. But as sometimes it so happens that he cannot: namely, in the case of
spiritual In what cases uprightness is hardly discerned.
desertions, when God, for his neglect of keeping his peace with him, is hid
from him for a time, and when in his displeasure he looks angrily, and
writes bitter things against him. Likewise, when he is in some violent and
prevalent temptation, and thereby cast into a kind of Spiritual swoone, and in
such like cases. But a man must not judge himself to be dead, because when he
is asleep, or in a swoone, he has no feeling, or sense of life.

Whether is it necessary, that a Quest.
man should find all these marks of uprightness in him, if he be upright?

No. Albeit if he were in case Answ.
to judge himself, and try himself thoroughly, he might find them all in him,
yet if he find most, or but some of these, he should stay himself upon
those, until he find the rest.

Take heed that you do not as A Caution in judging of any grace by many marks.
many hearers, and many readers do, when they hear and see many signs given
of this, or any other needful grace; If they cannot approove themselves by
all, they will make a question whether they have the grace or no. One may give
you twenty signs of natural life, as Seeing, Hearing, Talking, Breathing,
etc. What though you cannot prove your life by all? yet if you know you feel,
or breath, or moove, you know you are alive by any one of these.

What is to be done when you Quest.
cannot now find that you are upright, whereas heretofore sometimes you did hope
that you were?

Do not presently conclude you Answ.
are an hypocrite; but look back unto former proofs of uprightness. And
though you have for the present, lost your evidence and assurance of Heaven,
yet give not over your possession of what you have, nor your hope. A man that
has once had possession of house and lands, if his state be questioned, will
seek out his evidence: and, suppose that he has laid aside, or lost his
evidence thereof; yet he is not such a fool as to give over his possession,
or his right: but will seek till he find his evidences, or if he cannot find
them, will search the Records, and get them forth thence. So must you Psa. 51.
12.
in this case, you must seek for your evidence again. And entreat your Lord
that he will please to give you a new Copy out of his Court-rou^^ in Heaven,
wherein both your name, and uprightness is written. Howsoever, Act. 11. 23
Job 13. 15, 16.
cleave fast to God and to his promises. Resolve not to dare to sin
wittingly, nor yet to give over your endeavor to walk in his ways; and you
shall not be long, before you shall know that you be upright: or if you attain
not to this, yet be sure the LORD will know 2 Timothy 2. 19.
you to be his, though you do not so certainly know that he is yours. But of
this more, when I shall speak of peace of Conscience.

But in trying my uprightness* Reply.
I find many of the signs of hypocrisy in me. I do not find my self to be
so universal in my respect to all Gods Commandments as I should; I do not
hate all sins alike, I find my self inclined to somesinne more than other,
and I am readier to neglect some duty than other: I cannot so thoroughly seek
GODS Kingdom as I should; I am readier to find fault with others, than to
amend my own, etc. I find that I am not so constant as I ought to be in good
duties, and I have too much respect to my self in all that I do, and too
little to Gods glory: In reading all the notes of hypocrisy, except the last,
I find hypocrisy, nay much hypocrisy to be in me: Must I not therefore
judge my self to be an hypocrite.

No. For truth of uprightness Answ.
may be in the same person, in whom there is sense of much hypocrisy: Nay
this, to feel hypocrisy with dislike; argues truth of uprightness. Indeed
if you felt not thus much, you might fear you were not upright. All that you
have said (if it be true) only proves that you have hypocrisy remaining in
you, and that you feel it. You must remember that I told you, that not the
having, but the reigning of hypocrisy makes an hypocrite. Besides, a man may
have an universal respect to all Gods Commandments, and yet not an equal
respect to all: If you see and bewail your sin, and fight against your
hypocrisy when you feel it, assure your self you are no hypocrite.

What if a man find indeed by these notes of hypocrisy, that it does reign
in him? Quest Answ.


He must know that he is for the present hated of God, and in a damnable
estate, yet his state is not desperate. If the hypocrite forsake his hypocrisy
and become upright, he shall not dye for his hypocrisy: if this be true of a
sinners for saking of all sin, then, it is true of this in particular, of
forsaking his hypocrisy: but in the uprightness wherein he lives, he Ezekiel.
18. 21. 22.
shall live. What Christ said to Hypocritical and Lukewarm Laodicea, that I
say to all such: they must be zealous, they must amend Rev. 3. 19.
and be upright: hypocrifie is as pardonable as any other sin, to him that is
penitent, and that believes in Christ Jesus, Isaiah 1. 11. 16 18.

By this which I have written, you may plainly see, (1) That you ought to be
upright: (2) What it is to be upright: (3) Whether you be upright or no. It
concerns you therefore to hate and avoid hypocrisy, and to love and embrace
sincerity. Which that you may do; make use of these motives and means which
follow in the next Sections.

SECTION 3. ^ouching disswasives from Hypocrisy, and motives to Uprightness.
IF you would abandon hypocrisy, Disswasiv* from thee vil^ of hypocrisy where
it reigns*
consider the disswasives ^ken from the evils and mis^efes that accompany it
where ^raigneth. And how trouble^e and noisome it is, where it is, ^ough it
reign not.

First, Hypocrisy takes away the goodness of the best actions. ^ey are good
only in name (...) in deed. The repentance and ^dience of an hypocrite is
none, because it is fained, his faith is no faith, because it is not unfeigned;
his love no love, because it is not 1 Timothy 1. 5
from a pure heart without dissimulation. Conceive the like of all other the
graces and good actions of an hypocrite.

Secondly, All the goodness Luke 13. 25 Mat. 7. 22. Mat. 25, 11 12.
and actions of an hypocrite, are together with himself wholly lost. Such as
Preaching, Hearing, Praying, Almsgiving, Building of Hospitalls, Colleges,
Bridges, etc.

Thirdly, hypocrisy (in whom it reigns) does not only take away all
goodness from the best gifts and actions, and cause the loss of all reward
from GOD, but it p^ysoneth and turns the Isa. 66. 3.
best actions into most loath some and abominable sins: Insomuch that in
those good works wherein the hypocrite seems to mak^ haste to Heaven, he does
run pos^ to Hell. For such allowed hypocritical holiness is Rev. 3. 15
worse tha^ professed wickedness; it is so odious in GODS eyes, and nostrels,
that for it he will plague those, in whom it rules, with his severest
judgments. For the hypocrisy of men professing the truth, does bring Romans 2.
24.
the name, religion, and best services of God into disgrace and contempt; and
causes the best actions and best men to be suspected. For such as have not
spiritual wisdom to judge rightly, do stumble hereat, and forbear the said
good actions, and exercises of Religion, and the company of those that be
religious, ignorantly judging all of that Religion to be such. Besides,
Hypocrisy is high treason against God; for it is a guilding over, and setting
the Kings stamp upon base metal. It is Psalm. 78. 36
tempting and mocking of God to his face. A sin so abominable, that his holy
justice cannot endure it.

Fourthly, Gods judgments on such hypocrites are manifold 2 These. 2. 10, 11
Heb. 6* 5, 6
For this cause God gives them Gods just judgments upon hypocrites.
over to believe lies, even Popery, or any other damnable error or heresy.
Hence it is that God gives them over many times to fall from good in Luke 8. 18
seeming, to evil in profession; and thence, from evil to worse, even unto
Heb. 10. 25, 26 Job 27. 8
final Apostasy. And at last when God takes away an Hypocrites soul, he is
sure not only to lose his Hope (which adds much to his Hell) but to be made
to feel that which he would not fear, being ranked with those Mat. 24. 51
Sinners which shall be punished with the greatest severity in the eternal
vengeance of Hell-five. For after that an hypocrite has played the civil and
religious man for a while, upon the Stage of this World; his last Act, when his
life is ended, is to be in deed, and to act to the life, the part of an
incarnate and tormented Devil. He shall have his portion with the Mat. 25. 41*
Devil and his Angels. Isa. 33. 14
When fear has surprised the Hypocrites, who shall dwell with devouring fire?
Who shall dwell with everlasting burning? Says the Prophet. Happy were it for
them if this warning might fright them out of this their sin.

Consider likewise; that Hypocrisy Disswasiv^ taken from the evils of
hypocrisy though it do not reign.
does much harm, even there where it does not reign, and that more or less,
according as it is more or less mortified.

For first, it brings the soul into a general consumption of grace, no
sin more. Secondly, it blinds the mind, and insensibly hardens the
heart, no sin more. Thirdly, it makes a man slight and overt in the best
actions. Fourthly, it causes fearful declinations and falling back.
Fifthly, it deprives a man of peace of Conscience in such sort, that a
spiritual Physician can hardly fasten any hope or comfort upon him, on whose
Conscience does lie the guilt of hypocrisy; yea, hardly upon him that does but
fear he is guilty: For he puts off all the remembrances of his good
affections and actions, saying, all that I did, was but in hypocrisy. Sixthly,
and lastly; Besides that, it brings many temporal judgments; it causes
that a man 2 Ioh 8. 1 Cor. 3* 15
loses many of his good works done in Hypocrisy, though through Gods mercy
he lose not himself, which not losing himself is, because he is found in
Christ, Christ's Spirit of uprightness reigning in him.

Now to induce you to love Motives to uprightness.
Uprightness, and to labor to be upright; Consider the good which
accompanies uprightness: First, temporal and outward: but secondly, and
chiefly, that which is spiritual, eternal, and inward. Motives from temporal
benefits.


Uprightness has the 1 Timothy 4. 8
promises of this life: It is a means to keep off Psalm. 91 9 10, 14. Psalm 97.
11
Judgments, or in due time to remove them. If affliction like a dark night
overspread the upright, for their correction and trial for a time, yet light
is sown for them, and in due time will arise unto them. The upright cannot
want health, wealth, friends, or any thing that can be Psalm. ^^ 9, 10.
good for them. Moreover, this uprightness does not only provide well for a
man's self, but if any thing can leave a blessing, and a good portion to his
Pro. 20. 7 Psa. 112. 2.
Children and to his Childrens Children, Vprightnes will. The holy Ghost says,
the generation of the upright shall be blessed.

The spiritual blessings which Motives to uprightnes taken from spiritual
benefits.
belong to the upright, are manifold.

The upright man is Gods faverite, even his Pro. 1^. 20
delight.

He is hereby P^. 1^ 1, 2
assured of his Salvation. For although an upright man may fall into many
grievous sins, yet P^. 19. 13
presumptuous sins shall not reign over him, he shall be kept from the great
transgression, he shall never sin the sin unto death; Yea, he shall be kept
from the dominion of every sin.

By uprightnes a man is strengthened in the inward man, it being Job 19. 23, 25
Ephesians. 6. 14
that Girdle that buckleth and holds together the maine pieces of the
complete armor: Nay, it is that which gives proof to every piece of that
armor, it strengthens the back and loins; yea, the very heart of him that
is begirt with it.

He that is upright, is sure to have his Ier. 29. 13
prayers heard, and to be made able to profit by the Word of God, and by all
his holy Ordinances. Mic. 2. 7.
Do not my words (says God) do good to him that walks uprightly?

The upright man's services to God in prayer, hearing, receiving Sacraments,
etc. though performed with much weakness and imperfections, shall through
Christ be accepted of God. Nay, where there is not power, 2 Cor. B. 42
the will of 2 Chr. 30 18, 19, 20
an upright man is taken for the deed; and where there is power and deed both,
even there the uprightness and readiness of the will is taken for more than the
deed, according to that commendation of them, who were said not only to do,
but to be willing a year ago: For many do good 2 Cor. 8. 10
things, which yet do them not with an upright will, and ready mind.

6 The upright man has always matter ^f boldness before men. He can make an
Apology and Defense for himself against the slanders of wicked men, and
against the accusations of Satan; Act 23. 1. Act. 24. 14, 15, 16
who are ready upon every slight occasion to hi^ him in the teeth, and say, he
is an hypocrite, and that all which he does, is but in hypocrisy; but he can
gave all them thely^* that charge him with dissimulation or hypocrisy He
knows more of his hypocrisy than they can tell him; he finds fault with
it, and accuses himself for it, more than they can do: yet this he can say,
he allows it not, he hates it, and his heart is upright toward God. He
cares not though Job. 31. 35, 36.
adversari^t write a book against him, Job 19. 2^* 24, 25. He has his
defense; if men will receive it, they may; if not, he dares to appeal to
Heaven. For his Record is on high: He has always a Job 16. 19 2 Cor. 1. 1^
witness both within him, and in Heaven for him.

7. Uprightness is an excellent Preventer, and Curer of despair, arising from
accusations of Conscience; even of a wounded Spirit, of which Solomon says:
Who can bear it? For either it keeps it off. Job 27 5, 6. Or if it be
wounded, this Uprightness in believing, and in willing to reform and obey, is
a most sovereign means to cure and quiet it, or at least it will allay the
extremity of it.

Not but that an upright man may have trouble of mind, and that in some
extremity; but he may thank himself for it, because he will not see and
acknowledge that Uprightness which he has, and does not apply it, nor cherish
it; which if he would do, there is nothing would answer the accusations of his
accusing Conscience, nor bring more feeling comfort to the soul so. ner or
better than this will.

8 The Upright man has an Holy boldness with God. When Abimelech could say,
In the integrity Genesis 20. 5.
of my heart, and innocence of my hands I have done this; he had boldness to
expostulate and reason his case with God. An uprigh man in his sickness, or in
any other calamity; yea, at all times, when he needs GODS help, can be bold
to come before GOD notwithstanding his sin that hangs so fast on, his
original sin, and his many great actual transgressions. So did Hezekiah
upon his deathbed (as he thought) saying, Isa. 38. 3
Remember O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth, and
with a perfect heart, and have done good in thy sight. So did Nehemiah, saying,
Nehe 1^ 22
Remember me O my GOD concerning this, and spare me according to the
greatness of thy mercy. This Uprightness gives boldness with God, but
without all Presumption of merit, as you see in good Nehemiah.

9 Lastly, Whatsoever the upright man's beginning was, and whatsoever his
changes have bin in the times that have gone over him, both in the outward and
inward man in his progress of Christianity; mark this, Ps. 37. 37
his end shall be peace. The last, and everlasting part which he shall act
indeed, and to the life, Pro. 28. 18
is everlasting happiness.

And, to contract all these motives into a short, but full sum, The Lord is a
Sun and Shield. Psalm. 84. 11
The Lord will give grace and glory. No good thing will he withhold from them
that walk uprightly.

SECTION 4. Touching means to subdue Hypocrisy, and to nourish uprightness.
IT remains now that you should know by what means you may abate and subdue
hypocrisy; and may get, keep, and increase this grace of uprightness.

First, you must, by a due and Means against hypocrisy, and for uprightnes
serious consideration of the disswasives from hypocrisy, and motives to
uprightness, work your heart to a loathing and detestation of the one; and to
an admiration, love, and hungring desire of the other. And withal by this
means you must work your heart to a resolution by the grace of God to be
upright. This must first be wrought, for until a man stand thus affected, and
resolved against hypocrisy, and for uprightness, he will take no pains to be
rid of the one, nor yet to get the other.

Secondly, you must be sensible of that Hypocrisy which yet is in you, and of
the want of uprightness, though not altogether, yet in great part. For no man
will boat cost and pains to remoove that disease whereof he thinks he is
sufficiently cured, though indeed he did judge it to be never so dangerous; nor
yet for to obtain that good of which he thinks that he has enough already,
though he esteem it never so excellent.

Hitherto both in the motives and means, I have indevoured to gain the will,
to will and resolve to be upright, and to be willing to use all good means to
be upright. Now those means that will effect it, follow.

Thirdly, do your best to root out those vices that beget and nourish
Hypocrisy. Then plant in their r^ome those graces which will breed and feed
uprightness.

The chief vices are Ignorance, and unbeleefe, self-love, pride, and an
irresolved and unsettled heart, unstable and not firmly resolved what to choose,
whereby it wavers, and is divided between two objects, dividing the heart
between Zeph. 1. 5
God, and something else, whether it be false gods, a man's self, or the world;
whence it is, that the Scriptures call an hypocrite a man that has an heart
and an heart, one that is Iam. 4. 8.
double minded.

The graces which breed and nourish uprightness, are, a right knowledge of GOD
and of his will, and faith in him; Selfe-deny all, Humility, The graces that
breed and nourish uprightne^
and lowly mindedness; Stability, and ^nenesse of heart, and that to Godward.

For, the more clear light you can get into your mind, the more truth you
shall have in your will. And when you can so deny your self, that you can
^uite go out of your self, and first give your 2 Cor. 8 5 10, 11
self to Christ, and unto God, then there will follow readiness of mind, and
heartinesse of will, to do whatsoever may please God. Also the more humility
you have in your mind, the more uprightness you shall have in your heart: For
while the soul is Hab. 2. 4
lifted up, that man's heart is not upright in him, says the Spirit. Lastly,
when your eye is single, and your heart one, and undivided, you will not allow
your self to be in part for God, and in part Mat. 6. 22. 23, 24
for Mammon, in part for GOD, and in part for your lusts, whether of the flesh,
or of the world, or of pride of life, you will not give your name and lips to
God, and reserve your heart for the world, the flesh, or the Devil; But by
your will, God shall be all in all unto you.

Fourthly, if you would be in earnest and in truth against sin, and for
goodness, you must represent sin to your thought* as the most hurtful,
hateful, and Genesis 39. 9
most loathsome thing in the world; and must represent the obeying and Psalm.
19. 7, 8, 11
doing of Gods will unto your mind, as the best, and most profitable, most
amiable, most sweet, and most excellent thing in the world: Hereby Ps. 119. 72.
you may affect your heart with a through vexation, and loathing of sin, and
with an hearty love and delight in Gods Commandments: If you do thus, Ps.
119. 97
you cannot choose but shun sin, and follow after that which is good, not in
seeming only, but indeed and in truth with all your heart. For a man is
always hearty, against what he deadly hates, and for what he dearly loves.

Fifthly, if you would be sincere, and do all your actions for Gods glory, and
for his sake, you must, by the light of Gods Word, and Works, fully inform
and persuade your self of GODS Sovereignty and absoluteness, and that,
because he is the first absolute and chief good, he must needs be the last,
the absolute and chief end Rev. 1. 8.
of all ends. For he, that is Alpha, must needs be the Omega, of all Romans 11.
36 Rev. 4. 11.
things. Since all things are of God, and since he made all things for himself;
therefore you should, in all things you do, be upright, intending 1 Cor. 10
28. 31.
GODS glory as your principal and utmost end in all things.

Sixthly, Consider often and seriously, that how close and secret soever
hypocrisy may lurk, yet it cannot be hid from the (...) of God Heb. 4. 12 13.
with whom you ha^, and before whom you w^ Eccle. 12 14.
who will bring every secret (...) to Judgment.

Wherefore take continual notice, that you are in the eye of God that Psalm 94.
9. 10 11. Psalm. 51 6.
made your heart, who requires truth of heart, who perfectly knows the
guil^or truth of your heart. This will much further your uprightness; for who
can dare to double and dissemble in the presence of his Lord, and Judge, who
knows his hollownesse and dissimulation better than himself?

Seventhly, Unite your self more and more strongly unto your head Christ
Jesus, by all good means. Go so out of your self, that you may every day be
more and more in him. Wherefore grow daily in faith and hope in Phil. 3. 8, 9
10, etc.
him, whence as by Conduit-pipes, you shall more and more partake of his
fullness, Ioh. 1. 12 16.
even grace answerable ^ace in kind, though not ^sure, for though yo^apable of
the fulness ^ghtnesse of Christ, in whose mouth was found no guile; Isa. 53. 9.
Yet you shall have a measure of uprightness proportionable to your faith. For
as the branch partaketh Ioh. 15. 5
more of the vine, so it draws more sap and bears more good fruit.

Eighthly, You must, with an holy jealousy of the deceitfulness of your
hearts, examine your self often; not only of what you have done, and now do^,
but of the manner how, what moves you, and why, as you may see before in the
marks of uprightness. Lay your self often to the rule of uprightness, scil.
the will of God, and finding your self faulty, study, and assay to amend, and
be upright, and that to the utmost of your power.

Ninthly, Exercise that measure of uprightness which you have, and be more
thankful for the little you have, than discouraged as many are, because they
have no more. If you find your self upright, be abundantly thankful, and
resolve to keep and increase it by all means. Keep your Pro. 4. ^3.
heart thus with all diligence; then, as all other graces, so this of
uprightness will increase in the using.

Tenthly, and lastly; use the means of all means, the Catholico^ for all
graces, which is Prayer. Think not to gain uprightness by the power of your
own might: but in the sense of your insufficiency, repair often to God by
prayer, even to him who made your heart, in whose hands your heart is, who best
knows the crooked windings and turnings of your heart, who only can amend
and set straight your heart: Who, because he delights in an upright heart, and
has commanded you to seek it in the humble use of his means, will assuredly
give it. Thus David; Renew, Psa. 51. 10 Psa. 119. 80
O Lord, a right spirit within me; And, Let my heart be sound in thy Statutes.

CHAP. XIII. Of lawful care, and of freedom from taking thought.
SECTION 1.
NOw when you have had a holy care to walk with GOD in uprightness, according
to the foregoing directions: It remains that you free your self of all other
care, and that you rest holily secure in God: enjoying your most blessed peace
with him, according to that golden saying of the Apostle, Be careful in
nothing, etc. Philip. 4. 6, 7.

For understanding hereof, know that the Greek Noune, (...)
and Verb, which signify care, or to take care, are taken indifferently in
Scripture, either for lawful, or unlawful care. Now because unlawful care is
more care than GOD requires; Our last Translators of the Bible, whenever
there was need to express a difference between it, and lawful care, do
render it Carfulness, to be careful, or to take thought; As in this place,
and Matthew 6. 25. Matthew. 10. 19. Luke 10. 41. 1 Cor. 7. 32. and elsewhere.

But when these words must be understood of a Lawful care, they are translated
Care, not carfulness, or to be careful. As 1 Cor. 12. 25. 2 Cor. 11. 28.
Phil. 2. 20. 1 Pet. 5. 7. and elsewhere.

The Care which is Commanded, and Carfulness which is forbidden, differ thus;

Care is an act of wisdom, taking up the understanding faculty chiefly,
whereby, after that a man A description of lawful Care.
has rightly judged what he ought to do, what not, what good he is to
pursue, and what evil is by him to be shunned, or removed; he, accordingly
with more or less intention and eagerness of mind, as the things to be
obtained or avoided, are greater or less, is provident to find out, and
diligent to use lawful and fit means, for the good, and against the evil,
and that with all wariness and circumspection; that he may omit nothing that
may further him, nor commit any thing that may hinder him in his lawful
designs; Which, when he has done, he rests quiet, and cares no further,
castall care of success upon God to whom it belongs, expecting a good issue
upon the use of good means, yet resolving, howsoever, to submit his will to
Gods will, whatsoever the success shall be.

Carfulness is an act of fear, and distrust, taking up not only the head,
but chiefly the heart, to the very dividing and disturbance A description of
carefulnes
thereof, causing a man inordinately, and over-eagerly to pursue his desires,
perplexing himself likewise with doubtful and fearful thoughts about
success.

Lawful care may be called a provident care, and care of the head.

Carfulness may be called ^ distrustful care, a carking ^are, or a taking
thought of the ^eart.

This prevident care is not only ^awfull, but necessary; For without it, a man
cannot possibly be ^ecure, nor can have hope of ^ood success.

This provident care is commended Pr. 6. 6, 7. 8
to you, in the examples of the most industrious, and most ^rovident brute
creatures: and ^^ the examples of the most pru^ent men.

As of Gen cap. 32 and 33
Jacobs care of his safety, how to escape the rage of his brother Esau. Of 1
Chr. 22 2 Chr. cap. 2. and 3. and 4.
David and Solomon, in preparing and building the Temple. Of 2 Cor. 11 28.
Saint Paul's care of the Churches; of the 2 Cor. 7. 11.
Corinthians care and study to reform themselves; of the good 2 King. 4. 10.
Noble woman's care to entertain the good Prophet; of the Pro. 30 13, etc.
Good wives, and good houswives care of well ordering and maintaining her
Family. The like you have in the examples of the care of godly 1 Cor. 7. 32. 34.
unmarried men and women, whose care was how to please God, and that they might
be holy both in Body and Soul* Luke 10. 42
and of Mary, who cared for that one thing needful.

Moreover, you are Commanded this provident care, namely, To study to be
quiet, to be no busy 1 These. 4. 11. Ephesians. 4. 28.
body, not idle: but to labor i^ a lawful calling, the thing that i^ good.
Also to 1 These. 4. 12.
Walk honestly toward them that are without* To Ephesians. 4. 3.
endeavor so to walk toward Gods people that you keep the unity of the Spirit
in the bond of peace. To 1 Timothy 5. 8
provide for your own. To 2 Pet 1. 5
give diligence to make your calling and election sure. To Tit. 3. 8
study to maintain good works. But amongst all, you are commanded Mat. 6. 83
chiefly to seek the kingdom of God and his righteousness, as the best
means to rid you out of all unlawful care.

The properties of provident Properties of provident Care, whereby it is
differenced from carefulnes
care are these.

First, the subject or seat wherein provident lawful care resideth, is the
head; for that is the seat of understanding, wisdom, discretion, forecast;
But carfulness is chiefly seated in the heart.

Secondly, provident godly care is always about good and lawful things, it
has a good object, and good matter to work upon, and to be conversant about,
propounding always some good thing to be the end, which it would compass. It
is not a care about evil, as how to Rom 13. 14
make provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof, like the 2 Samuel 13 2
Carfulness of Amnon to defile his Sister Tamar, nor like 1 King. 21
Ahabs and Iesabels carfulness for Naboths Vineyard and life. Nor yet like 2 Samuel 15
Absoloms carfulness, how to usurp his Fathers Kingdom; nor like Hest. 3. 9.
Hamans, how to destroy the Jews, nor like the carfulness of Dan. 6. 5.
Darius Princes, how to entrap Daniel; Neither is it like the carfulness of
those of whom Solomon speaks, Pro. ^. 16
who cannot sleep unless they do mischief.

Thirdly, This holy provident care makes choice only of lawful means, to
obtain that lawful thing which is cared for. David had care of his own life;
therefore he gat intelligence from 1 Samuel 20 1
^onathan of Saul's evil purposes toward him; He did 1 Samuel 24 ^3, 4. 5, 6, 7 1
^^m. ^6. ^* 10, 11
sly and hide himself from Saul; but would by no means lay violent han^ upon
his anointed Lord and King; though he had fair opportunities, and strong
solicitations to kill him, he falling twice into his power, and was earnestly
called upon by his servants to dispatch him.

Observe likewise Jacobs care. Genesis 32.
to save himself, and all that he had, from the fury of his brother Esau; he
used only apt and lawful Genesis 33.
means. For though a man's intention be never so good, and the thing cared for
be good, yet if the means to get it be unlawful, that care is naught. To care
how to provide for yourselfe, and for yours, is in it self good and needful;
but so to care, that you run to unjust and indirect means, it makes it evil.
To care how to be saved, is an excellent care, but when you shall seek to
attain it by ways of your own, or of other men's inventions: as by Idolatrous
worship, and voluntary Religion; or looking to be saved by your own works, by
Purgatory, Popes Pardons, and Indulgences, as the Papists do, Col. 2. 18. etc.
this is a most sinful carfulness. To care how to bring glory to God Romans 3.
7, 8
is the best care, but if any man, for to procure it, use lying for GOD, or any
other unlawful means, it is an unholy care.

Fourthly, This provident holy care is a full, and impartial care, even, of
all things belonging to a man's care. It is not such a care of the body and
state, as causes neglect of the soul. Neither is it such a care of the soul,
as it with neglect of the 1 Timothy 5. 23.
body, life, state, or name. It is not such a care of the private, as to neglect
the public good, or of the public, so as to neglect the private. It extends
it self to whatsoever God has committed to our care, both for ourselves and
others. Those who care only for themselves, and for the things of this life,
sin in their care. Likewise those who seem to care only how to please God,
and to save their souls, yet wittingly or carelessly neglecting their bodies
and affairs of their families belonging to their place, or the common good of
others in Church or Commonwealth, all these are partial, and do sin in
their care. All worldlings and selfe-loving men offend in the first kind. All
superstitious, and indi^creetly devout men offend in the second kind: As not
only Papists in their Popish cloystering up men and women, and in their
whipping and cruel macerating their bodies, and in their penitentiary
Pilgrimages, and in other acts do, Col. ^. 23
not sparing the body; but also all such, who for devotion sake neglect the
necessary duties of their particular calling.

Fifthly, Care of providence, is a discreet and well-ordered care; It puts
difference between things more or less good, and between things necessary or
not necessary, between things more necessary, and less necessary, In all
things it would keep first due order, then due measure. First, caring most for
GODS glory, as Exodus 32. 12. 32
Moses, and Romans 9. 3.
Paul did, who cared more for the glory of GOD than for their own lives and
honors, yea, if they had been put to it, than for their own salvation. Next,
it cares for that one thing needful, how the soul may Luk, 10. 42
be saved in the day of the LORD. As any thing is best, or more needful for
the present, that is cared Mat. 6. 33
first, and chiefly for. If all cannot be cared for, the less worthy things,
the less necessary for the present, and those things to which a man is least
bound, shall be omitted.

Secondly, As provident care does through discretion keep due order, for it is
an ordinate care, so it keeps due measure, seeking Spiritual and Heavenly
things with 2 Pet. 1. 5
more diligence and zeal than those that ^^e temporal and earthly; caring for
the things of this life with great moderation, without eagerness, and
greediness of desire, always proportioning the care to the goodness and worth
of that which is to be cared for. Now because the 1 Cor. 7. 31, 32*
world is to be loved and used as if we loved and used it not, it being of
little worth in comparison: therefore the cares about it in comparison of the
best and most necessary things must be, as if you cared not.

Then cares of the things of this Wh^ cares of this li^^ are in ordinate.
life are inordinate and immoderate, when they will not give men leave to take
the Eccl. 5* 12*
comforts and natural refreshings of this life, as sleep, meat and drink,
and other needful and lawful recreations: but especially when they hinder
them from Mat. 22. ^
exercise, Mat. 1^. 2^, 22* Ezekiel. 33. 31, 32* Mat. 6. 2^*
profitable use, or due performance of religious duties.

2. Secondly, when they are first and chief in amans thoughts, the mind
always running upon them.

3. When they cause a man (out of his overmuch haste to be rich and to enjoy
the world) to use unlawful and indirect means, Pro. 28. 20 22.
or to enter upon dealing and trading beyond his skill, stock, and means well
to manage the same.

4. When they cause a man so to mind his worldly business, that he thinks
nothing well done, or safe, if his eye or hand be not in it, and if it be not in
his own custody; albeit there is cause why others should be used, and
entrusted with it.

Sixthly, this holy provident care knows, as about what, and how, so how
far to care. It knows its limits how far to go, and where to stay.
Namely, when it has chosen a lawful object to be conversant about, and has
found out and used lawful 2 Timothy ^. 12
means, and applies it self to one thing as well as another, in due order
and measure, it stays there, caring no further; but waits patiently GODS
pleasure Psalm. 37* 7.
for good success, casting all care of event and success upon God by prayer
and supplication with thanks giving.

SECTION 2. Of Carfulness and taking thought.
BY all that has been written in the former Section, you may see that although
you may and must care for many things, according to the directions there giv^^;
yet you must as the Apostle says, Be careful in nothing.

This is now the point to be insisted on; God would have none of his servants
and children to care inordinately about any thing, no^ yet, (when in obedience
to his Commandment, and due observance Godschildren should not take thought, or
be careful.
of his providence, they have diligently used lawful means for things lawful
and have able) that they should care at all about the issue or success. He
would not that they should suffer their minds to hang in doubtful suspense and
fear there-about; but would that they should roll Psalm. 37. 5.
themselves and their affairs upon him; whether it be in the matter of their
souls, or bodies, of the things of this life, or of that which is to come. God
freeth them from all carfulness, and would that they should free themselves
therefrom.

God would have you use all good means for this life, but Mat. 6. 25 28. 31, 34
without taking thought for to morrow about what you shall ca^e, what you shall
drink, what you shall put on; or what shall become of you and yours another
day. He would not have you to be so distrustful of him, as to take the care of
afterward, the care of success from him upon your self, eating out your heart
with doubt and fear till you find it. But his Psalm. 55. 22
will is, that when you have done what you can, with a cheerful and ready
mind, that you should leave the whole matter of good, or ill success to his
care.

In like manner, GOD would 1 Pet. 5. 7
have you to use means to save your soul: but when you have so done, and
continue so to do; he would have you care no further. He would not have you to
doubt and fear that all shall be in vain, and to no purpose, or that Psalm. 73.
13
you shall not be saved not withstanding. He would not that you should
discourage and enfeeble your heart Mat. 10, 19. Mat. 24. 6.
by taking thought about the issue of any trialls and temptations that may
befall you before they do come, for, that is vain, nor yet when they do
come, for, that is needless.

In such cases you need only to serve GODS providence in the use of the
present means of Salvation, gaining as much grace and strength as you can
against such times, improving that grace and strength which you have in such
times of trial: but touching success, either how much grace and comfort you
shall have, or when you shall have it, and whether you shall hold out in trial
in the evil day, or be saved in the end; you must not trouble your self
through doubtful and distrustful fears: You must trust God with these things
also.

For our ^aviour prohibiteth his Disciples all trouble, that might Ioh. 14. 1.
27.
arise through fear of ill success in the profession of Christianity. And S.
Paul eases himself of this trouble and fear, committing his soul, and the
issue of all his trials unto GOD, (saying, 2 Timothy 1. 12.
I know whom I have trusted, and I am assured that he is able to keep that
which I have committed to 2 Timothy 4. 6, 8. 18.
him against that day.) He is confident in God for good success in his whole
Christian warfare: so should you.

Now to dissuade you from Disswasiv^ from Care fullness.
all carfulness, and to persuade you to rest secure in God touching the
particular events of all actions, and touching the final and happy event and
good success of your Christian profession: Consider these reasons, (1)
showing, why you should not care eagerly and inordinately for earthly things:
(2) Why you should not take thought about any thing, whether earthly, or
heavenly. Why no man should be careful about earthly things.


First, inform your self thoroughly, that all earthly things are of little
worth, Ioh. 2. 17
very fading, and transitory, likened, when they are at best, to the Isa 40 6.
I am 1. 10, 11.
flower of grass. Wherefore they cannot be worthy of your careful toil, or
carking about them. It is extreme folly for man being endued with reason to
set his mind upon that which is little or nothing worth in comparison, nay
whieh (as Solomon calls riches) Pro. 23. 5.
is not, which is but of short continuance, and only for bodily use, while he
has it: which also is cast, by Ps. 17. 13, 14.
God, unto the wicked, even to his enemies, rather than upon the godly.

Secondly, Inordinate and immoderate care of earthly things is exceeding
hurtful: For besides that it breeds many 1 Timothy 6. 9
foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in perdition: it does hinder the
care of things spiritual and heavenly. It causes, that either a man shall
Mat. 22. 5 Luke 14. 18, etc.
not come at all to the means of Salvation, or if he come to the Word, Prayer,
Sacraments, good company, and good conference, Mat. 13. 22
it causes him to Eze. 33. 31
depart without spiritual profit. It will cause a man to 1 Timothy 6. 10.
err from the says, and to be altogether unfit for death, and unprepared for
his latter end. For when any one part draws more nourishment to it self then
it ought, some other parts must needs be hindered in their growth: And when the
strength of the ground is spent in nourishing weeds, tares, or corn of little
worth, the good wheat is pulled down, choked, or starved. He whose cares are
too much Phil. 3. 19.
about the earth, his care will be too little for heaven.

Next, Consider the reasons: Why man must not care at all about succes in any
thing.
Why you must not care at all about success of your lawful indevours, any
more then by Prayer to commend them to God.

First, because it is to usurp upon Gods peculiar right, and to trench far
into Gods prerogative divine; taking his sole and proper work out of his hands:
For 1 Pet. 5. 7
care of success, and of what shall be hereafter, is proper to God.

Secondly, Ps 127. 2
It is a vain and bootlesse thing (when you have diligently used lawful
means for any thing) to take thought for success. For Luke 12. 25, 26. Mat.
5. 36.
who can by taking thought, add any thing to his stature, or make one hair
white or black. Understand the like of all other things.

Thirdly, Mat. 6. 34
every day brings its full employment with it, together with its crosses and
griefs; so that you shall have full work enough for your care to endeavor to
do the present days work holily; and to bear each present days affliction
fruitfully, and patiently; you have little reason therefore to eat out your
heart with taking thought of future events, and of what shall be tomorrow.

Fourthly, It is altogether needless to take thought about the success of
your actions, for Mat. 6. 26 30, 32.
success is cared for already by God; One whose care is of more use, and
better consequent than yours can be. You are cared for by one, who loves you
better than you can love your self, who is wisdom, and knows what is better
for you, and what you most need, better than your self; who is always present
with you who is both able and ready Ephesians. 3. 20
to do exceeding abundantly for you, above all that you can ask or think:
even God, who cares for meaner creatures than you are, who also is your GOD,
your heavenly Father, of whose care you have had happy experience, who in times
past cared for you when you could not carefor your self, who has kept you in,
and Psa. 22. 10.
from your mothers belly, who, before you were, ordained you to Salvation. Romans
8. 32.
Who in due time gave his only begotten Son for you, and to you, as
appears in that now he has given you faith and hope in him, and love to him.
It is your God and Father who has 1 Pet 5. 7.
commanded, that for the present, and for Psa. 55. 22
for hereafter, you should cast your care and burden on him; having withal
made many gracious promises, Rev. 3. 8. 10
that he will care for you, that he will sustain you, and that he will bring
your ways to pass. Psalm. 37 5
What wise man will clogge himself with needless cares?

Fifthly, Carfulness and taking thought of success proceeds from base and
cursed causes, namely, from ignorance of God, and from unbelief and distrust
of God in whomsoever this sin reigns: hence it was that the Mat 6. 32
Heathen abounded in this sin. And by how much this Carfulness is in any
(though it reign not) by so much he may be said to be of little sound
knowledge, and of Mat. 6. 30
little faith.

Sixthly, Carfulness, and hanging in doubtful suspense about success in any
your lawful indevours, (be it whether you or yours shall prosper, or whether,
you shall profit by the means of grace, or whether you shall be saved in the
end) does produce many dangerous and mischievous effects.

First, It will cause you to neglect The evil effects of caring about succes
in any thing. 2 Kin. 6. 33
provident care to use the means of this life, or of that which is to come,
according as you doubt of success in either, or if you neglect them not
utterly, yet you shall have no heart to go about them. For those that go about
others works, usually neglect their own, so you will be apt to leave your
own work undone, when you take Gods work out of his hands: And who is he
that can take pains about that which he fears will be to no purpose, and will
be labor lost?

Secondly, you will be ready to use Genesis 12. 11, 12, 13. Genesis 16. 2 Genesis 27. 5.
19.
unlawful means for anything when you doubt of succes from lawful.

Thirdly, Taking thought does divide, distract, over-loade, wear and waste the
heart and spirits, nothing more.

Fourthly, You can never be thank full to GOD for anything whereof you fear
that you shall have no good success.

Fifthly, This taking thought and plodding about success with doubtful fear,
will deprive you of the comfort of all those good things you have had, and
which now you do enjoy.

Sixthly, nothing will bring ill success unto you sooner than to be taking
thought, and be troubled about what may be. For when any man shall (not
withstanding the experience he has had, or might have had of Gods power,
love, care, and truth of his promises) yet distrustfully care so far, as not to
content himself with his own work, so far as provident care leads him; but
also will take Gods work, and the burden of his work upon himself, caring
about success, which only belongs to God, and which God only can do and
bear; this folly and presumption does so much provoke God, that it causes him
out of his wise Justice to cease caring for such a one, leaving him to his own
care, and to his wit, friends, or any other earthly helps, to make him by
woeful experience see, and feel, how little any, or all these, without GOD can
avail him. Nay, it causes God not only to withdraw his own help, but the
help of all things whereon such a man does rely; and which is more, causes
them in stead of being for him, to be utterly against him. Is it not just with
God, that whosoever will not be beholding to God to bear their burden, but
will take it up and bear it themselves, should be made to bear it alone, to
the breaking of their back, or at lest to be much bowed and crushed under it?

Wherefore all these things waighed, I return to the exhortation, or
conclusion before propounded, viz. Roll your self and your affairs upon God.
Cast all your care on God, be careful in Psalm. 55. 2
nothing.

Oh! How happy are we Christians if we did but know, or knowing, would enjoy
our Happiness. We are cared for in every thing that we need, and that can be
good for us; We may live without taking thought, or care in any thing. Our
work is only to study and endeavor to please God, walking before him in
sincerity, and with a perfect heart; then we may cleave to him, and rest on him
both for our bodies and souls without 1 Cor. 7. 35
fear or distraction. GOD is All-sufficient, and all in all to such, he is
known by his name Jehovah Exodus 6. 3.
to such; even to be the being, and the accomplisher of his promises to them.
If we shall wisely and diligently care to do our work, we, serving so good and
so able a master, need not care for our wages. If we would make it our care to
obey and please so good, and so rich, and bountiful a Father; We need not be
careful for our maintenance here, in our minority and nonage, nor yet for our
eternal inheritance, when we shall come to full age. We in this holy security
and freedom from Carfulness (if we were not wanting to our selves) might
live in an heaven upon earth; and that not only when we have means (for even
then our security is in God, not in the means) but when to the eye of flesh
we have no means: For God is above, and more than all means.

That you may leave carking, and be brought to cast all your care on God.

(1) Deny your self and your Means to be free from carefulnes
own Pro. 23. 4
wisdom, be not wise in your own conceit, nor presumptuous of your wit,
skill, or means.

(2) Get sound knowledge, faith, hope, To. 8. 32.
and confidence in God; live by faith, Heb. 10. 38, 39.
believing, to the preservation both of body and soul. Get not only faith in
his promise; but in his providence also. When you shall see no way or means of
having the good you desire or of keeping you from the evil which you fear, or
of delivering you from the evil you feel, then call to mind not only the
promises of God, viz. Iosu. 1. 5.
I am with you, Heb 13. 5
I will not leave nor forsake you, and Romans 8. 28
All things work together for good, and many such like, but believe also that
God will provide means to bring to pass what he has promised, though yet you
see not how. When you can say with faithful Abraham, Genesis 22. 8
God will provide you shall be out of fear and doubt. But if (with Genesis 12.
11. Genesis 16. 2
Abraham, in the case of the promise of issue of his body, in whom the Nations
of the earth should be blessed) you believe GODS promises in the maine, but not
Gods providence in the means, then you will be so fearful, doubtful, and
careful, that of your self, or by others solicitations, you will readily find
out, and use unlawful means to obtain the thing promised, as he did when he
went in to Hagar; or to faint in waiting, as many others have done. For we see
the like in 1 Samuel 26 10, 11.
David, when he had faith in Gods providence, he could say of Saul; The Lord
shall smite him, or his day shall come to dye, or he shall descend into the
battle and perish. The LORD forbid that I should stretch forth mine hand
against the Lords anointed. But when he doubted of Gods providence, then he
says, 1 Samuel 27 1.
I shall now perish one day by the hand of Saul.

(3) Give all diligence to make your Calling and Election sure; For when you
know assuredly, that GOD is your heavenly Father, and Christ Jesus your
Redeemer, and that you are of his family, having your name written in heaven,
you then shall easily free your John 14. 1, 2
heart from being troubled with fear and carking care, being sure that your
heavenly Father and Savior does care, and will provide for you.

(4) Lastly, you must oft-times actually cas^ your care on GOD, by making your
requests known to GOD by prayer, and supplication for what you would have,
being heartily thankful for what you have had, now have, and hope to have
hereafter. Then the peace of God which passes all Phil. 4. 6, 7
understanding, shall keep your heart and mind from vexing thoughts, and
heart-eating fears, and that, in and through Christ Jesus, of which peace I
intend next to speak, and with it shall end these directions.

CHAP. XIIII. Of Peace of GOD.
SECTION I. Of Peace in general, and of the kinds of it.
THat you may be persuaded to walk before GOD in uprightnes in all
wel-pleasing, and to live without taking thought about any thing, casting your
care on GOD according to the former directions: God has assured you that peace
shall be upon you, even that peace of God which Gal. 6. 16. Phil. 4. 6, 7
passes all understanding, which shall keep your heart and mind through
Christ Jesus, if you thus do.

Peace and quiet is most desirable. Al things that have motion desire it as
their perfection; bodily things enjoy it by their rest in their places:
reasonable things enjoy this peace in the quiet of their mind and heart, when
they have their desires satisfied, being freed from such opposition as might
disquiet them.

Peace is a true agreement and What peace i^.
concord between persons or things, whereby not only all enmity is laid
down, and all crossing and doing each other harm is forborne; but all amity
is entered into, and all readiness of communicating, and doing good to each
other is showed.

Natural peace, consisting of the harmony and good agreement of the several
parts of man's body, Domestics and Civil peace, consisting of amity and good
agreement of persons in a family or State, is of great price, and very much to
be desired, for the exceeding great benefit which it brings to the body,
family, and state. But the peace of which I am to speak, (which is promised to
all which walk with God according to the Gal. 6. 15, 16.
rule of faith, and of the new creature, casting their care on God) exceeds
all other peace, as far as the soul, heaven, and eternity exceeds the body,
the earth, and a moment of time. Which will easily appear, if you shall
observe by what motives and arguments the holy Ghost does commend, and set this
forth unto you, Phil, 4. 7. It has its commendation above all other peace in
three respects.

First, In respect of the excellency Phil 4. 7. Opened, wherein the peace of
God is explained and magnified.
of the person, with whom and from whom it is, namely, God, therefore it is
called peace of God; It is so called (1) Because it has God for its object; it
is a peace with God, (2) Because God by his Spirit is the author of it; it is
peace from God, a peace which Ioh. 14. 2^
God gives, such a peace which the world neither can, nor will give.

Secondly, this peace is commended in respect of the unspeakable,
inconceivable, and surpassing goodness and worth that is in it. It passes all
understanding, and this it does, not only because unsanctified men are mere
strangers to it, and understand it not: but because regenerate men, to whom it
belongs, and in whom it is, even they (when God gives them any lively
feeling of it) find it to be such a peace, as they could not imagine it to be
before they felt it. For they cannot so distinctly, and so fully conceive and
comprehend the surpassing excellency of it, as by any means fully to express
it. It rather takes up the mind into an holy rapture, unto admiration of what
it sees, and of what it perceives is yet to be known beyond full
comprehension, then possibly can be taken up, and be distinctly and fully
comprehended or expressed by mind or tongue. It fares with them that feel it
in any special degree, as it did with the Queen 1 King. 10* 4, 5, 6* 7
of the South, when she saw Salomons Wisdoms. She had a great opinion of
Salomons Wisdom by that which she received by hear say, but when she saw it,
she was stricken with such admiration, and was so taken up with it, that it is
said, she had no more spirit in her; his Wisdom was not only more than her
expectation, but more than her spirit was able thoroughly to comprehend, in so
much that she gives over to seek to find the depth of it, but breaks out
into words of admiration, saying, the half was not told her of Salomons
wisdom, it exceeded the fame thereof; So does the peace of God. It being like
the dimensions of the love of Ephe. 3. 18 19
Christ, (the root thereof) and like the ravishing joy of Christians (the
effect thereof) passing all full, and distinct knowledge, and passing all means
of full and clear expression, being as the holy Ghost also says,
unspeakeable. 1 Pet. 1 8.
This peace is included amongst those other graces and gifts accompanying the
Gospel, which are such as eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor has 1 Cor.
2. 10
entered into the heart of man, so as clearly to perceive them, or fully to
express them.

Thirdly, This peace is commended in respect of the excellent effect thereof,
which is a proof that it passes understanding, namely, it keeps the heart
and mind in and through Christ Jesus.

This is a rare and most useful effect on man's behalf: For it supplieth the
place, and office of a Castle or strong Garrison (as the 2 Cor. 11. 32. (...)
Greek word signifies) to keep the principal Forts of the soul from being
surprised, or annoied either by invasio^ from without, or by insurrection from
within.

The parts of man, which are kept by this peace of GOD, are the heart, and
mind; by heart is meant the will and affections; by mind, the power of
thinking and understanding. For true peace of GOD does fill the heart with such
Joy, Patience, Hope, and Comfort in believing, that it keeps it from
heart-eating, and heart-vexing grief, fear, distrust, and despair. It
likewise fills the mind so full of apprehension of Gods favors, fidelity, and
love, that it makes it rest secure in God, and to forbear to plod and beat
the brain unnecessarily about any thing, keeping out the dominion of all
carking and distrustful thoughts.

The strength which this peace has, whereby it keeps the heart and mind as
with a Garrison, is impregnable. It is derived from Christ, it has it in and
from Christ; The Text says through Christ, that is, through the power of
Christ's Spirit. For as we are kept by 1 Pet* 1. 5
Faith (from which this peace springs) as with a strong Garrison, by the
power of GOD to Salvation, ready to be revealed in the last time: so, by the
same power of Christ, our hearts and minds are kept by the peace of God, as
with a Garrison, from discouragefull, distractfull, distrustful, and
discomfortable thoughts in the mean time. For what is this peace else but a
parcel of the object of our Faith, as we apprehend it in God to usward, and
the fruit of Faith, as we feel it wrought in us by God.

This peace of GOD is twofold, or one and the same in different degrees.

The first is an actual entering into, and mutual embracing of Peace between
GOD and man.

The second is the Manifestation and Expression of this Peace.

The first is when God and man are made friends: which is, when The different
sorts of peace of God.
GOD is pacified toward MAN, and when man is reconciled unto God, so that now
God stands well affected toward man, and man has put off Enmity against
God: which mutual* Atonement and Friendship, 1 Timothy 2* 5
Christ Jesus the only Mediator betwixt God and man, has by his satisfaction
and intercession wrought for man, and by his Spirit applies unto, and works
in man. For until this Atonement be made and applied, God, in his just
Judgment, and Psalm. 5. 5 Romans 5. 10
Hatred, is an Enemy unto man for sin; and man in his evil mind, and unjust
Hatred, Col. 1. 2^
is an Enemy unto GOD and unto all goodness through sin.

This first Peace, is Peace of God with man inherent in God, working the like
disposition of Peace in man toward God; and is the fountain from which the
second (...).

The second kind (or rather further degree) of Peace of God is the operation
and manifestation of the former Peace, which is a peace of God in man wrought
by the Spirit of God, through the apprehension that God is at peace with him.

This Peace is partly and most sensibly in the Conscience, which is called
Peace of Conscience, and may also be called peace of Justification, according
to that; Romans 5. 1
Being justified by faith, we have peace with God, etc. And it is partly in
the whole reasonable man, whereby the will and affections of the soul agree
within themselves, and are subject to the enlightened mind, conspiring all of
them against the commonadversary the flesh, which yet remains in everypart,
this may be called peace of Sanctification; according to that of the Apostle,
Rom* 6. 22
Being made free from sin, and become servants of God, you have your fruit in
holiness, This is the agreement of all the members to become servants Romans 6.
19.
to righteousness unto Holiness. Not but there will be warring always in our
members, but it is not the warring so much of one Member against another, as
the warring of the Flesh in every member against the Spirit, which also warreth
against the flesh in every member. Which lusting and fighting of flesh against
the spirit begins in man, as soon as the Spirit has wrought the former
peace of Holiness, in setting each member into dueframe and order.

Moreover, this peace of Sanctification consists in this, that albeit a
Sanctified man must never be, nor ever is at peace with sin, so that it does
not assault and molest him, or that he should subject himself to it, or have
it absolutely subject to him in this life, yet he has a peace and quiet
(after a sort and in comparison) from sin, is so much that he is freed from
the Romans 6. 14. 22
dominion and power of sin to hurt him, or to reduce him to his former
bondage unto sin: Now, so far as a man gets a conquest over his lusts,
that they are kept under, and forbear to assault and molest him, so far he
may be said to have this peace of Sanctification.

The Conscience when it is awake and stirring, and in the Act of inquiry, and
of Inditing, accusing, and condemning man for sin, does withal Act. 2. 37
Pro. 18. 14
Prick, Lash, Gripe, Sting, and Wound the heart with unutterable and
unconceiveable griefs, fears, and terrors, through the apprehension of Gods
infinite, eternal and just Wrath for sin.

Now, when GOD by his Romans 5. 1. 5
Spirit gives any true hope and assurance unto a man, that his lustice is
satisfied concerning him through Christ, and that now all Enmity and Wrath is
done away on Gods part; and that he loves him in Christ with a Free, Full,
and Everlasting love, hereby Romans 8. 16
he speaks peace to the Conscience, having done away all the guilt of sin
which before molested it through sense of Gods anger, and fear of punishment.
Hence arises peace and comfort in the Conscience, which therefore is called
Peace of Conscience. Thus the mind cease to be perplexed, and, by faith in
Christ's death through the Spirit, becomes quiet with an Heavenly tranquillity,
resting on the Word of promise, and according to the measure of clear
apprehension of Gods love in Christ, in the same measure the mind is at sweet
agreement within it self, without Ioh. 14. 27
fear or trouble, and in the same measure he has peace of Conscience,
flowing from the assurance of Justification.

As soon also as a man begins Actually to be at Peace with God, his lusts
do begin to be at War with him, rebelling against the law of his mind,
which yet may by little and little be subdued and conquered, though not all
lusts at any time, nor yet any one fully in this life; yet by virtue of the
peace now made with God, if he will improve it by seeking help of God, if
withal he take to him the Ephesians. 6. 10
Complete armor and do fight manfully under Christ's ba^ner, he may so
prevail against them, that he shall be assaulted with fewer Temptations from
his own concupiscence than he was wont; in so much that they do not so often,
nor so strongly assault him as in former times. Now so far forth as the
powers and faculties of man agree in their fight against sin, and do so
subdue it, that it does not assault and molest him, he may be said to have the
peace of sanctification.

The first peace whereby God is pacified, and is become propitious and gracious
to man, is absolutely necessary to the very being of a Christian.

The second, which rises from the manifestation of this Peace unto a man, and
the sensible feeling of the operation of this Peace in man, is not necessary to
the being of a Christian (at least in a sensible degree of it) but to the
well-being of a Christian it is necessary. For a man may be in the favor of
God, and yet be without the sense of this Peace in himself: Because this peace
of Conscience does not flow necessarily from the being in GODS favor, but from
knowledge and assurance of being in his favor.

Now a man in many cases may loose for a time his sense of Gods favor, his
faith being over-clouded with fears and unbelief, as Psalm. 51. 11 12
it was with David, after his adultery with Bathshebath and murder of Vriah,
who yet was upheld secretly by his right hand, ( Psa. 73. 23
as the Prophet was in another case) by virtue of that first peace of GOD; yet,
until GOD did give him the sense and feeling of His loving Countenance, he
was without the second Peace, the peace of Conscience. Yea, though God by
Nathan in the outward Ministry of his Word had given him assurance of Gods
loving kindness, (saying) The LORD 2 Samuel 12. 13
has put away thy sin, thou shall not dye.

That first peace is absolute, and admits of no degrees.

The second, which flows thence, both in respect of peace of Conscience, and
in respect of good agreement of the powers and faculties of man within
themselves, and of freedom from assaults and molestations either of Satan
from without, or from lusts within, is not absolute; but admits of several
degr^ the life to come this latter (...) shall be perfect: for then all
believers shall be perfectly freed from all trouble of Conscience, and from all
molestation of temptations; their victory shall be complete. But in this life
their Peace is but imperfect: It is true for Substance, but is more or less,
^s the light they have received is more clear or more dim: and as grace in
them is more strong, or more weak.

For although man's Justification is absolute, and admits not of more or
less; yet the assurance of it, whereby a man has peace of Conscience, is
more, or less, according to the measure of his ^leare sight and evidence of
his ^aith. Hence it is that the dear children of God have interruptions and
intermissions in their peace, having some times much peace, some times little
or no peace; according as they have in ^ssions in their assurance o^ Gods
favor.

Thus it was with David and Asaph, sometimes his heart was quiet, and Psalm. 16.
9
his soul was glad in assurance that his soul should rest in Hope* at other
times Ps. 42 11.
his soul was cast down and disquieted in him, thinking that he was Ps. 31. 22
cast out of God, sight, fearing that Psalm. 77. 7
God would show no more favor. Yea, he was so perplexed that he did almost
faint, Psalm, 69. 3
and his eyes failed with waiting for God. For since the best assurance of
believers is exercised with Combating against doubting, their truest and best
peace must needs be assaulted with disquiet. And as it is with a Ship at
anchor, so is the most stable peace of a Christian in this life, who has his
Heb. 6. 19
Hope as an anchor of his soul, sure and steadfast: who though he cannot make
utter Ship wrack, yet he may be grievously tossed and affrighted with the
waves and billows of manifold temptations and fears. Likewise though peace of
Sanctification be true, yet it must needs be more or less according as any man
grows or decreaseth in holiness, and as God shall please to give restraint
tospirituall enemies, or power to subdue them more or less.

Now the whole peace of God, both in him to man, and from him manifested and
wrought in man, does pass all understanding, and serves to keep the heart and
mind of him that walks with GOD and rests on him through Christ.

This Peace is it which you must seek for, and embrace in believing, and if
you would have true comfort and tranquillity in your mind, laborespecially to
get and keep the peace of a good Conscience, which seems to be the peace
that is chiefly, though not only, intended in this Text.

SECTION 2. Concerning the excellency of the Peace of God.
THat you may be induced to do your best to obtain this Peace: Consider the
excellency of it; you may conceive much of it by that which has been said in
the opening of that Scripture, and by showing the nature of the Peace,
considering likewise the object, author, and use of it. But that you may better
Reasons showing the excellency of the peace ^^ of God.
perceive that this Peace of God for worth and use passes all understanding;
Take these reasons in particular.

First, That must needs be an excellent Peace which GOD will please to take
into his holy Title, calling himself Heb. 13. 20
God of Peace, calling Isa. 9. 6.
Christ the Prince of Peace.

Secondly, That peace must needs be of infinite value, passing all
understanding, for which Christ gave himself, paying the price of his own
most 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19
precious blood for it.

3. Thirdly, This peace cannot but pass all Understanding, because the cause
from whence it comes, namely, Ephesians. 3. 18 19
Christ's love, and the effect which it works, namely, 1 Pet. 1. 8
joy in the holy Ghost, do as the Apostles affirm, pass knowledge, and are
unspeakeable.

4. Fourthly, This peace was that Luke 2. 10 11, 14
first congratulation, wherewith the holy Angels saluted the Church at Christ's
birth, giving her joy in her newborn Husband, and Savior. And it was that
Ioh. 14. 27
special legacy which Christ jesus did bequeath to his Church, ^aving that as
the best token of his love to it, a little before his Death: Saying, My peace I
^ave with you.

5. Fifthly, This peace is one of the principal parts of the kingdom of GOD,
which consists, as the Apostle says, of Righteousness, Romans 14. 17.
Peace, and Joy in the holy Ghost.

6. Sixthly, By as much as the evils and mischiefs that come to a man by
having God to be his enemy, which draws upon him Gods Wrath, justice, Power,
and all Gods creatures to be against him: And by as much as Pro. 18. 14
the ^^^ vousnesse, and intolerable anguish of a wounded Spirit passes
Understanding; by so much the Peace of GOD, which freeth him from all these,
must of necessity, pass all Understanding.

Now that it is a fearful thing to have God to be an Enemy, it is said, Heb.
12. 29.
He is a consuming fire, and Heb. 10. 31.
it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. It appears
likewise by Christ's compassion and grief for Jerusalem who neglected the time
of making and accepting of peace with God; for he Wept over it and said, If
thou had known, even thou, atleast in this thy day, Luke 19. 41 42.
the things which belong to thy Peace; but now they are hid from thine eyes.
But what it is to have GOD to be an Enemy, is seen most fully by Christ's
trouble and grief in his Passion and Agony in the garden, and in the
Extremity of his conflict with Gods wrath on the Cross, when God showed
himself to be an Enemy, and did for man's sin power on him the fierceness of
his wrath. It made him, though he was God, being man, to sweat for very
anguish, Luke 22. 44.
as it were drops of blood, and to cry Mat. 26. 39.
If it be possible let this cup pass, and Mat. 27. 46.
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

Moreover; If you do observe the complaints of such distressed souls that
have had terror of Conscience, (if you have not had experience thereof in your
self) how that they were at their wits end, Act. 2. 37
pricked at heart as it were with the point of a spear, o^ sting of a Serpent,
pained like men whose Psa. 51. 8
bones are broken and out of joint, making them to Psa. 32. 3
rore* and to consume their spirits for very heaviness, then you will say that
peace of conscience does pass all understanding.

Seventhly, When God and a man's own conscience is for him, and Gods grace in
some good measure, has subdued sin and Satan in him, this draws with Hos.
2. 18, 19. 20
it assurance that all other things (whose peace are worth having,) are also at
peace with him. For, if Romans 8. 31, 32
God be for us, who can be against us. This peace must of necessity bring with
it all things which will make us happy, even all things which pertain to life,
godliness, and glory. 2 Pet. 1. 3


Lastly, add this, that as the worth and sense of peace of God is unutterable,
and unconceivable, so the time of it is indeterminable, Isa. 9. 7.
it is everlasting, and has no end. Consider this with the former, and it
cannot be denied, but that the peace of God does every way pass understanding.

CHAP. XV. Touching the removing of presumption, an impediment to Peace.
IF you would enjoy this happy Peace, you must first remove and avoid the
impediments. Secondly, you must use all helps and furtherances which serve to
procure and keep it.

I reduce the impediments unto two heads:

First, A false opinion and hope The kind* of impedime^ts which hinder peace.
that all is well with a man* and that all shall be well with him in point of
his Salvation, when yet indeed God is not reconciled to him. Hence will follow
a quietness of heart, somewhat like to peace of Conscience, which yet is but a
false peace.

Secondly, Causeless doubting, and false fear that a man's estate touching his
salvation is not good; albeit God be indeed at peace with him; Hence follows
trouble and anguish of heart somewhat like unto that of Hellish despair,
disturbing his true peace.

Either of these do hinder peace.

The first hinders the having.

The second hinders the feeling and comfortable enjoying of peace.

It has been an old device of Satan when he would keep any man from that
which is true, to obtrude upon him that which shall seem to be true, but is
false. Thus he did in the first Mat. 24. 5
calling of the Jews, and (to me is more than probable) will do at their
Mat. 24. 24.
second calling. When he saw they had an expectation of the true Christ, he,
to divert and seduce them from the true Christ, sets up false Christ's. Even
so in the matter of peace: If he can so delude men that they shall content
themselves with a false Peace, he knows that they will never seek for that
which is true. It is a common practice with the Devil, to endeavor to make all
that are not in state of grace, to presume that they are.

Also such is his cunning and malice, that when any man is in the state of
grace, he will cast all the doubts and perils he can, to make that estate
doubtful and discomfortable, to vex and to 2 Cor. 2. 7. 11.
weary him, if he cannot drive him to despair, knowing, that if he could
drive him into, and hold him in utter despair, he were as certainly in his
power as if he did presume. Now the Heart of man so far as it is
Unsanctified, being Ier. 17. 9 9
deceitful above all things, is most apt to yield to Satan in both these
cases. Whence it is that there are very many which brag of much peace, and
yet have least of it. And many fear they have no peace who yet have much of it.

Wherefore the Rule is, Believe not either your deceitful heart, or the Devil,
when they tell you either that you are in state of salvation, or in state of
damnation: But believe the Scripture what it says in either.

You may know when these persuasions come from your deceitful heart, or from
the Devil, thus,

First, If the means to persuade you to either be from false grounds, or from
misapplication of true grounds.

Secondly, If the conclusions, inferred from either persuasion, be to keep you
in a sinful course, and to keep you, or to drive you from God, as, to make you
think that you need not be so strict in godliness, or that now it is in vain,
or to late, too turn and seek unto GOD, then it is from Satan and from a
deceived heart, and you must not believe them. But if these persuasions be from
a right application of true grounds, and do produce these good effects, to
drive you to God, in praise, or prayer, and unto a care to please God, they are
from his gracious Spirit.

The false Peace and evil quiet Conscience does arise from these three causes.

First, from Ephesians 4. 18 19^
Gross ignorance of the danger wherein a man lies because of sin, whence
follows a blind Conscience.

Secondly, from Groundless security Whence presumption and false peace does
arise.
and Deuteronomy. 29 1^^
presumption that all shall be well with him, not withstanding that he knows
he has sinned, and knows that sin is damnable; whence he has a deluded
Conscience.

Thirdly, from Ier. 44. 16, 17.
Obstinacy through delight and custom in sin, whence comes senslesnesse of
Conscience, which is a seared Conscience.

Wheresoever any of these evils reign, albeit God has said Isa. 57. 21.
there is no peace to the wicked, that is, no true peace, yet such fear no
evil; but promise to themselves 1 The. 5 3
peace and safety, like those of whom the Prophet spoke, who had Isa. 28. 15
made a covenant with death, and with Hell were at an agreement; Yea, though
they hear all the Curses against Sinners, which are in Gods book denounced
against them; yet will bless themselves in their own Deu. 29. 19
heart, and say they shall have peace, though they walk in the stubbornness
of their hearts. But whosoever is thus quiet in himself through a false peace,
it is a sign that Lu. 11. 21
the strong man keeps the house, and that, he (continuing in this fools
Paradise) is not far from 1 The. 5. ^ Deu 29. 20
sudden and fearful destruction from the Almighty.

Whosoever therefore would have true peace of GOD, must beware of these three
impediments.

First, He must know and be thoroughly convinced that by nature, by reason of
Romans 5. 2
Adams first transgression which is justly imputed to him, and because of his
own Romans 7. 18 Ps. ^1. 3. 5.
inherent wickedness of concupiscence, and of actual sins of omission and
commission, both inthought, word, and deed, he is in state of sin and
condemnation, having God for his enemy, yea, is an Ephesians. 2. 3.
heir of wrath, and of eternal vengeance of H^l^ fire: According to that of
the Apostle; All have sinned, and are Romans 3. 19 23.
become guilty before GOD, and have come short of the glory of God: Ignorance
of danger may give quiet to the mind for a time, but it can give no safety. Is
not he foolishly secure that makes himself merry in a ruinous house, not
knowing his danger, until it fall upon him? Whereas, if he had known it, he
should have had more fear and disquiet; but should have been in less peril.

Secondly, let no man presume Grounds of fall hopes discovered, and removed.
upon weak and false grounds, that he shall escape the vengeance of hell, or
attain to the joys of heaven. Now how weakly and vainly many do ground
their hopes, and from thence their peace, shall appear by that which follows.

1. Some think that because Presumption, that God will save a man because he
made him, removed.
God made them, surely he will not damn them. True, if they should have
continued good as he made them. God made the Devil good, yea an excellent
creature, yet, who knows not, that Mat. ^5. 41
he shall be damned? If God spared not his holy Jude 6.
Angels after that they became sinful: shall man think that he will spare
him? A sinful man shall be judged at the last day, not according to what he
was by Gods first making; but as he shall be found marred, and made naught by
the Devil, and by his own lusts. When Judah became a people of no
understanding, it is said, Isa. 27. 11
He that made them will show them no mercy, and he that formed them will show
them no favor. Thus it is spoken to every sinner remaining in his sin
notwithstanding that GOD made him.

2. Some say, their afflictions Presumption of escaping hell, because they
think they have it in this life, removed.
have been so many, so great, and so long-lasting, that they hope they have
had their Hell in this life, whence it is that their hearts are quiet in
respect of any fear of wrath and judgment at the last day.

I would ask such, Whether they being thus afflicted have Isa. 9. 13.
returned to God that smote them; and whether their afflictions have made them
better; or whether like Prove. 27. 22
Salomons fool brayed in a mortar, their sin and folly is not departed from
them: if so, they must know, the more they have been, and now are afflicted
(if they be not reformed by it) this does presage that there is the more and
worse behind; as it was in the case of Isa. 1. 5. Isa. 5. 12, 13, 14 Amos 6.
to 13
Judah. Many have been often and extremely whipped by their Parents, and at the
house of Correction, yet, they remaining incorrigible, were at last executed on
the Gallows.

3. Some, though their ways be never so grievous, yet because to them Gods
Judgments are Presumption they shall ever well, because hither to they have
escaped evil, removed.
far above out of their sight, and because they Ps. 10 11 Psalm. 55 6, 19 Eccl
8 11.
have no changes, God forbearing to execute his judgments upon them speedily,
they persuade themselves that God sees not, or that he is not angry with
them, or that Ps. ^. 11 13
he regards not, and that he will neither do good nor bad, thinking that
God has forgotten, or that he is like them, well enough pleased with them;
Hereby Psalm. 50. 21
they lay their Consciences asleep, promising unto themselves Psalm. 10. 6
immunity from punishment, and that they shall never be moved.

Know ye that Gods for bearance of his wrath is not because he sees not, or
because he has forgotten, or regards not your wickedness: but because he
would give you time and means of repentance; it is because 2 Pet. 3. 9
he would not have you perish but come to repentance, that you may be saved.
Which if you do not, this his bounty and long-suffering makes way for his
justice, and serves to leave you without excuse; and to heap up wrath for
Romans 2. 4, 5. 6
you against the day of Judgment, the day of the revelation of the just
judgment of God, who shall render to every man according to his works: For 2
Pet. 2. 9
God knows how to reserve the wicked to the day of Judgment to be punished.
He will take his time Psa. 55. 19
to hear, and afflict you. When he Psalm 50. 21, 22
shall set all the sins, of you that forget him, in order before you; then (if
your speedy repentance do not now prevent it) he will tear you in pieces when
there shall be none to deliver. The longer he was in fetching his blow, the
more deadly will his stroke be when it comes Many malefactors are not so much
as called at a quarter Sessions, when less offenders are both called and
punished; yet have they no cause to promise safety to themselves, for they are
reserved for a more solemn try all, and execution at the grand Assizes. So
wicked men, that are not afflicted here, are reserved for the last Judgment,
at the great and terrible day of the Lord.

4. Presumption of being in Gods favor, because they prosper in this life,
^emoved.
There are some which hope that God does love them, and that he does intend to
save them; for they prosper in every thing, and are not in trouble and
distress as other men: hereupon their Consciences are quiet, and without fear.

Let me tell you who thus think, that, alas, this is a poor foundation to
build your hope upon. What? are you the better for your prosperity? are you
more thankful and more obedient? Do you the more good, by as much as you do
prosper more? If so; well: if not; know, Solomon, by the Spirit of truth,
tells you that Eccl. 9. 1, 2
^o man can know Gods love or ha^red by all that is before him, be it
prosperity or adversity. In these things there may be one and the same event to
the righteous and ^o the wicked. Know moreover, that the wicked, for the most
^art, thrive most in this world; God giving them their Psa. 17. 14
portion in this life, wherewith they fat themselves against the day of
slaugh^er, making their own Ps. 69. 22
table their snare, and their Pro. 1. 32 Presumption, that they shall be saved,
because as great sinners as they have been saved, removed.
prosperity their ruin.

5. There are many, who comparing themselves with themselves, passing by their
own many sins, looking only upon their own Hypocritical and civil good
purposes and deeds; comparing also their sins with the Luke 18. 11
notorious sins of Gods people committed before their Conversion, and with
the gross sins of Noah, Abraham, Lot, Peter, and other godly men, after
Conversion, hence conclude, that since such are saved, they conceive a good
opinion of themselves, and hope they shall be saved, they think that all is
well with them, being such of whom our Savior speaks that Luke 15. 7
need no repentance.

I would have these to know, that 2 Cor. 10 12
they that compare themselves with themselves are not wise, and they that
think well of themselves and 2 Cor. 10 18
commend themselves, are not approved, but those only whom the LORD
commends. Moreover the slips and falls of the Elect, both before and after
Conversion, did serve for their own humbling, and for a warning to all that
should hear thereof. God knows how to reproove and chasten his own that
offend, giving them repentance to life and Salvation; and yet justly will
condemn all those that shall wittingly stumble at their falls, and wilfully lie
in their sins being fallen. It is not safe following the best men in all
their actions, for Iam. 3. 2.
in many things they sin all, not only before, but after conversion. And as
the Exodus 14 20
cloud that guided the Israelites, had two sides, the one bright and shining,
the other black and dark, such is the cloud of Examples of godly men. Those
which will be directed by the light side thereof, shall with the children of
Israel pass safely toward the heavenly Canaan; but those that will follow the
dark side of it shall all perish with the Egyptians in the Red sea of
destruction Whatsoever any were before co^version, or whatsoever gross sin
they fall into after conversion, if they be humble and truly penitent, none of
them are laid to their charge, because they are done away by Christ Jesus.
These are in better state than those who for matter never committed so great
sins, if Pharisie-like they repent not of their lesser sins as they esteem
them, and are proud of their supposed goodness and well-doing. For God, in
justifying the humble Luke 18. 10, 11
Publican rather than the proud Pharisie, shows that proud innocence is
always worse than humble guiltiness.

6. There are likewise some others, presumption, of salvation by popes pardons,
penance, and merit of works, removed.
who are guilty to themselves, of damnable sins, yet hope to be saved by the
goodness of other men, by pardons from the Pope, by absolutions of Priests,
and by certain satisfactory penitential external acts of their own, and by
good works, such as alms, etc. These are Papists, who, if they may have hope
of the Popes Indulgences, if they can get his pardon, and a Priests absolution,
if they fulfill their penance enjoined, if they be devout in certain
superstitions, in their willworship, Colo. 2. 18
and voluntary religion, their conscience is quiet for a time, notwithstanding
their soul and black sins, even their abominable Idolatries.

I do these to wit, that all this is but a blindfolding, smothering, and
stupifying the conscience for a time, laying a double, and a far greater
guilt upon it, it is far from being any means truly to pacify it. For how
can any man have true peace from any, or from all such actions as are in
themselves an actual Col. 2. 19
denying of the true head of the Church Jesus Christ, and are a cleaving to a
false head which is Antichrist? And how can any man merit for himself, when
our Luke 17. 9, 10
Savior says when he has done all that is commanded, he is an unprofitable
servant, and has done but his duty, which thing he must say and acknowledge.
All these before mentioned build their hopes upon false grounds. Those that
follow build their presumptuous and false hopes upon a misse-application of
true grounds.

7. Many acknowledge that Presumption of salvation because GOD is merciful
removed.
they have sinned and do deserve eternal damnation; but they say God is
merciful, therefore their heart is quiet without all fear of Condemnation.

It is most true that God is most merciful: but how? Know he is not
necessarily merciful, as if he could not choose but show it to all men. He is
voluntarily merciful, Rom 9. 18
showing mercy only to those unto whom he will show mercy. God could, and did
Romans 9. 13
hate, and in his justice comdemne E^au, notwithstanding his love, and mercy to
Jacob. God is all justice, as well as all mercy; but he has his several
objects of justice and mercy, and has his Romans 9. 22, 23
several vessels of wrath and mercy, into which respectively he does power
his wrath or mercy. When God speaks of obstinate sinners, he says that Isa.
27. 11
he will not ^e merciful to their iniquities: and says again, He that made
them will not have mercy on them. And David prays with a Prophetical Spirit,
saying to God; Psalm. 59. 5
Be not merciful to wicked transgressors: And who are these, but such as
Psalm. 50. 17, 22
hate to be reformed, who are presumptuous, and Jude 4.
turn the grace of God into wantonness. Now, concerning them that always
err in their heart, he has in effect sworn that he will show them no
mercy. For Heb. 3. 10 11
he has sworn that they shall not enter into his rest.

8. Some others go farther, they acknowledge that GODS Justice must be
satisfied, and they Presumption from uniuersall redemption, removed.
think it is satisfied for them, they dreaming of universal redemption by
Christ, who indeed is said to dye to Ioh* 1. 2^
take away the sins of the world. This causes their conscience to be quiet,
notwithstanding that they live in sin.

It must be granted that 1 Timothy 2. 6
Christ Answ.
gave himself a ransom for all. This ransom may be called general, and for
all in some sense: but how? namely, in respect of the common nature of man
which he took, and of the common cause of mankind which he undertook; and
for that in it self it was of sufficient price to redeem all men; and it was
paid in such sort, that it is appliable to al without exception by the
preaching and ministry of the Gospel. And it was so intendedby Christ, that
the plaster should be as large as the sore* and that there should be no defect
in the remedy, that is, in the price, or sacrifice of himself offered upon the
Cross, by which man should be saved, but that all men, and each particular man
might, in that respect become saveable by Christ.

Yet does not the salvation of all men necessarily follow hereupon; nor does it
follow that all men may be saved if they will: nor yet must any part of the
price which CHRIST paid, be held to be superfluous, though many be not saved by
it. For it being of infinite value (because he was the eternal son of God that
suffered, and, so it was to be, because he was to feel the wrath of an
infinite God) it receives not the consideration of more or less. And the
whole price, and merits of Christ are not to be applied by parts, but the
whole merit is to be applied to each particular man that shall be saved.

But know that the application of the remedy, and the actual fruit of this
all-sufficient ransom, redoundeth to those which are saved, only by that way
and means which God was pleased to appoint, which, (for men of Ioh. 3. 16. ^on
1. 12.
years) i^ faith, by which Christ is actually applied. Which condition, many
(to whom the Gospel does come) make impossibleto themselves, through a wilful
refusing of the Gospel, and salvation it self by Christ, upon those terms
which God does offer it.

Upon this sufficiency of Christ's ransom, and intention of God and Christ that
it should be sufficient to save all, is founded that Mat. 28. 19 Mar. 16. 15
general offer of Christ to all and to each particular man to whom the Lord
shall please to reveal the Gospel; likewise that universal precept of the
Gospel, Mat 3. 2. 7, 8.
commanding every man to repent and believe in Christ Jesus: as also the
universal Mar. 1. 15. Act. 17. 30.
promise of salvation made to Ioh. 3. 16
every one that shall believe in Christ Jesus.

Although, in an orthodox sense ^ightly understood, Christ may be said to have
dyed for all, yet let not every one, nor any one presently presume he shall be
saved. For God did intend this allsufficient price for all, otherwise to his
elect in Christ, than to those whom he passed by and not elected; for he
intended this not only out of a general and common love to mankind, but out
of a peculiar love to his Elect. He gave not Christ equally and alike to save
all, and Christ did not so lay down his life for the Reprobate as for the
Elect. Christ so dyed for all, that his death might be applyable to all. He so
dyed for the Elect, that his death might be actually applied unto them. He so
dyed for all, that they might have an object of faith, and that if they should
believe in Christ, they might be saved. But he so died for the Elect that they
might actually believe, and be saved. Hence it is that Christ's death becomes
effectual to them, and not to the other, though sufficient for all. Now that
many believe not, they having ^he means of says, the (...)
fault is in themselves, through their wilfulness, or negligence; but that any
believe to Salvation, it is of Mat. 13 ^1
Gods grace attending his A^^. 13. 48
Election, and Christ's dying out of his especial love for them; and not of the
power of man's free will, God sending his Gospel, and giving the grace of faith
and new obedience to those whom of his free grace he has ordained to eternal
life, both where he pleases 1 chapter 3. 8.
and when he pleases.

Furthermore, it must be considered that notwithstanding the all-sufficiencie
of Christ's death, whereby the new Covenant of grace is ratified and confirmed,
the Covenant is not absolute, but conditional. Now what GOD prodoundeth
conditionally, no man must take absolutely. For God has not said that all men
without exception shall be saved by Christ's death: albeit he says Christ died
for all; but Salvation is promised to all, only under the Condition of
Repenting and Believing in Christ that dyed; I call them conditions not for
which GOD ordained men to life; but conditions to which they were ordained,
Act. 13. 4^.
by which as by the fittest way (man being a reasonable and voluntary agent)
God might glorify himself in bringing them to eternal life.

Wherefore notwithstanding Christ's infinite merit, whereby he satisfied for
mankind, and notwithstanding the universalitie of the offer of salvation to
all to whom the Gospel is preached; both Scripture and experience show, that
not all, nor yet the most shall be saved, and that because the number of them
which repent, and unfainedly believe, whereby they make particular and actual
application of Christ and his merits to themselves are fewest. For of those
many that are called, Mat. 20. 16
few are chosen. Wherefore let none ignorantly dream of an absolute universal
redemption, as many simple people do. Not yet let any think, that because of
the large extent of Christ's Redemption, they may be saved when they will. For
though Christ be said to suffer to Ioh. 1. ^9.
take away the sins of the 1 Ioh. 2. 2
whole world, yet the Scripture says that the whole 2 Pet. 2. 5
Jude 14. 15
world of unbeleevers and of ungodly men shall perish eternally.

Many will yield that they must Presumption of salvation upon concest their
faith and repentance is good when it is not, removed.
have faith and repentance, and that they must be ingrafted into Christ and
become new creatures, else they cannot look to be saved; but they think they
are all this already, whence follows quiet of Conscience. Whereas when it
comes to the trial, their faith and repentance are sound not to be sound. As
shall thus appear.

They think they have faith; Reasonson which many falsely think they have
faith.
nay, more, they presume further, that they have true faith, and that they are
truly religious and in state of grace.

It is not enough for a man to Answ.
seem to himself to be religious, for he may deceive his Iam. 1. 26
own heart: a close hypocrite may think himself to be Gal 6. 3
something, when yet he is nothing; deceiving himself; as, no doubt, the Mat.
25* ^* ^1.
foolish Virgins did.

But many will think that they Reply.
have good reason to judge that they have true faith, etc. and that (1) Because
they believe the whole Scripture to be the good Word of God. (2) They believe
not only that there is a GOD, but that Jesus Christis the Son of God, and
Savior of the world, yea, according to the letter they believe all the
Articles of the Christian faith. (3) They think they are believers, because
they have been Baptized, and have given their names unto Christ; Luke 13. 26
they profess the only true Religion, they have the very true form of
godliness in all the external exercises of Religion; so that it may be said
of many of them, as it was said of the Isa. 58. 1.
jews, They seek God daily, and delight to know his ways, as a Nation that
did righteousness, etc.

Whereas, if they believe no Answ.
more, nor no better, they may know that their faith is only an historical
and general faith (or only a temporary faith at the best) necessary indeed to
Salvation, but not sufficient to save. The Iam. 2. 29
Devils believe as much as the first, and very hypocrites may, and do
profess, and do as much, as the second, and third. The Apostle Paul (having
to do with hypocritical Jews, who because of the Sacraments and form of
knowledge, and profession, though without practice, did nourish in themselves a
vain persuasion that they should be saved) he removes this false ground of
their hope, thus, saying, Romans 2. 28, 29
He is not a Jew which is one outwardly, but he is a Jew which is one inwardly,
neither is that circumcision which is outward in the flesh, but that which is
of the heart in the Spirit, and not in the letter, whose praise is not of men
but of God. In like manner Saint Peter does give all Christians to know, that
that Baptism which is only a putting away of the filth of the flesh 1 Pet. 3.
21
does not save; but that Baptism which gives proof that the Heb. 10. 22
heart is sprinkled from an evil conscience, as well as the body washed with
pure water, showing it self by the 1* Pet. 3. 21*
answer which a good conscience makes in believing in truth, consenting unto,
and embracing the new Covenant, whereof Baptism is a seal, of which anciently
men of years made profession when they were Baptized. Neither is it any thing
worth to have the ^ Tim. 3. 5
form of godliness in profession, when the power thereof is denied by an
evil conversation; as you may see by the Isai 1. 11 Isa. 58. 3, 4 Ezekiel. 33.
31, 32
exceptions which God takes against the Jews, albeit they seemed to love
Sacrifices and Sacraments, Prayers, Fastings, and Sermons.

For howsoever such as these are most apt to claim an interest in Isa. 58. 3.
g Luke 13. 26
Christ; yet so long as their faith is not a particular faith, drawing with it
affiance, and sole reliance on Christ for Salvation, declaring its truth and
life by indevouring to perform the new Covenant on their part, by new
obedience, in an endeavor unto all manner of good works, Luke 1 3. 27
Our Savior professes that he knows them not, but bids them depart from
him, because they were workers of iniquity.

But, secondly, many of these presume that their faith is a lively Reply.
and saving faith, and that because, as they think, they have repented and are
become new creatures. And all because they have had such an inlightning as by
nature man cannot attain unto, nay, the Word has affected them much, and
somewhat altered them from what they were, namely, (1) when they were hearing a
Sermon, or when Gods rod was over them, they have mourned, wept, and showed
some kind of humiliation. (2) At the hearing of Gods precious promises in the
Gospel in the glad tidings of Salvation, they have felt a taste of the heavenly
gift, and of the good Word of God, and of the powers of the world to come. And
(3) they find that they do not commit many of those sins which they were
wont to commit; and that they do many good duties toward GOD and man, which
they were wont not to do. (4) They desire that Gods people should pray for
them. (5) They desire to dye the death of the righteous, and to go to heaven
when they dye. And (6) which is more, some can say, that sometimes they have
wished that they could leave sin, and that they had grace to do well.
Besides, (7) They see that the best of them that truly fear God, both
Ministers and others, are well persuaded of them.

But what of all this? These Answ.
men, as near as they come, yet going no farther, are far from Salvation.
For the Common gifts of Gods Spirit, given unto men in the Ministry of the
Gospel, may elevate a man higher, and carry him farther toward heaven than
nature, art, or mere humane industry can do; and yet if the saving graces of
the same Spirit be not added, he will be left far short of heaven. Mere
Oratory in some patheticall Preachers, when they speak of matters doleful and
terrible, will move the affection, and draw tears from some hearers. Likewise
a plain, powerful and downright conviction of the certainty of Gods wrath
denounced; and sense of some just judgment of God may wring forth some tears,
some humiliation, yea some kind of reformation. Did not, Act. 24. 25.
Felix tremble, when Saint Paul reasoned of Righteousness, Temperance, and
Judgment to come? Did not 1 Kin. 21 21. 27, 29.
Ahab humble himself when the Prophet denounced Gods judgments against him
and against his house? Did not the Psalm. 78. 34.
Israelites often (when they were in distress and when God did not only warn
them with his Word, but smote them also with his rod) return and seek early
after God?

And whereas they say, they tasted of the heavenly gift, and of the good Word
of God, and of the powers of the world to come, they may know, that such is the
sweetness of Gods promises, and such is the evidence and goodness of Gods
truth in the glad tidings of Salvation that (the common gift of the Spirit
going with it) all the forementioned feelings may be wrought in men altogether
destitute of saving grace. For did not the Mat. 13. 20, 21, 22.
seed sown in stony and tho^nie ground go thus far? Did not those mentioned
in the Heb. 6. 4 5, 6.
Hebrews (who notwithstanding all this might fall away irrecoverably) attain
to thus much?

Now if men not in state of grace may go so far as has been proved, then it
must not be marvelled that even such with Mar. 6. 20
Herod may also reform many things: For an hypocrite may have not only a
kind Heb. 10. 26. 29. 2 Pet. 2. ^0
of illumination, but a kind of sanctification, which may, for the time, work
a kind of change in him, so that he may leave many evils, and may do many
good things; he may forsake bad company, and keep good; yet this man may be
in no better estate then he out of whom the evil Mat. 12. 43, 44, 45.
spirit did go, which returned with seven other more wicked than himself; or
then the 2 Pet. 2. 22
Sow that was washed. A Ex. 12. 32
Pharaoh also, and a Act. 8. 24.
Simon Magus, in their fear, may desire a Moses and a Peter to bless them and
pray for them. That cursed Number. 23. 10
Balaam could wish that he might dye the death of the righteous, he would
seem not to transgress for an Number. 24. 13
house full of gold; and (though faintly) tells God, that if it did seem
evil in his eyes, Number. 22. 34.
he would go back again. Yea, further, it is possible for a man without
saving grace, even out of mere self-love, either when he smarts or is
ashamed for some foul sins, or is afraid of Hell; or when by the sweet
allurements of the Gospel he is affected with an admiration of heaven and
heavenly things, I say it is possible for him, not only to wish freedom from
punishment, and enjoyment of eternal glory as the end; but may desire power
against sin, and grace to do well, as the means; but how? only as from a
flash of lightning, suddenly come, and as suddenly gone; like the Pro. 13. 4
sluggards longing: but when he comes to be taught the mystery of godliness,
and is put upon the spiritual works of holiness, as, the cutting off the
right hand, and the denying himself for Christ, then he will none of it, he
conceives (like those Discipies in Ioh. 6. 60
John) that they are hard sayings, Who can hear them? For their good wishes
were not from a settled deliberate will, out of true hatred of sin, and out of
love to God and goodness therefore they were but slight, and unconstant.
Moreover, the best men, yea, the best Ministers may have a very good opinion of
an hypocrite. Psa 55. 14
David esteemed highly of Achitophel, the Mat. 26. 22
Disciples never suspected Judas; For they seeing a good outside, being also
charitable, and not able to see the heart, do always judge the best, and
think men to be changed and renewed, when sometimes it proves otherwise.

They mistake, when they say, they are changed and reformed, if still they
retain any bosom and beloved sin, as Herod did. To change-sinnes, one sin
into another, is no change of the man, for he that changes the prodigality of
his youth into Covetousness in old age, remains a notorious sinner before
God as well now, as then; conceive the like of all other; likewise to forbear
the act of any sin, because they have not the like power, occasions,
temptations, or means to commit sin, as in former time, this is no change:
sin in these respects has left them, not they it. What true co^version and
repentance is.


For true conversion and repentance does consist of a true and through change
of the whole man as well in one part as another, whereby not only some actions
are changed, but first and chiefly Ephesians. 4. 22 23, 24. Romans 12. 2
the whole frame and disposition of the heart is changed and set straight to
God. ward from evil to good, as well as from darkness to light. And whereas
naturally a man is earthly minded and makes himself his utmost end; so that
either he only minds earthly things, or if he mind heavenly things, it is
in an earthly manner, and to an earthly end, as did 2 Kin. 10
Iehu: if this man have truly repented, and is indeed converted, he becomes
Col. 3. 1. 2
heavenly minded; he makes GOD and his glory his chief and furthest end, in
so much that when he has cause to mind earthly things, his will and desire is
to mind them in an heavenly manner, and to an heavenly end. If you would judge
more fully and clearly of this true change: See at large the description, and
signs of uprightness before delivered, Chap. 12.

Last of all, there are many presume Presumption of repentance here after,
(that although as yet they have no saving faith in Christ, nor sound
repentance) that God will give them space and grace to repent, and believe
before they dye. Whence it is they have peace for the present.

These must give me leave to tell them that they put themselves upon a
desperate hazard, and adventure.

First, who can promise unto himself one minute of time more than the present,
since every man's breath is in his nostrils ready to expire every moment?
Besides, the Spirit says, Psa. 73. 19
God does bring wicked men to desolation, as in a moment. And again, Pro. 29. 1
He that being often warned, hardens his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed
without remedy.

(2) Suppose they may have time, yet whether they shall have grace to believe
and repent, is much to be doubted. For the longer repentance is deferred, the
heart is more hardened, and more indisposed to repentance through the Heb. 3. 13
15. 19
deceitfulness of sin. And it is a just judgment of God upon such, as are
not led to repentance by the riches of Gods goodness, forbearance, and
long-suffering, that he should leave them to their Romans 2. 5
impenitent hearts, that cannot repent, so treasuring up unto themselves wrath
against the Romans 2. 5
day of wrath, Custom in sin does so root and habituate it in man, that it
will be as hard for him by his own will and power to repent hereafter (he
neglecting GODS present call and ^ffer of grace) as it is for the Blackmoore to
change his skin, or Ier. 13. 23
^he Leopard his spots.

It cannot be denied, but that God is free, and if he please, may open a door
of hope, and gate of Hos. 2. 15
mercy unto the most obstinate sinner, who has deferred his repentance to his
old age; wherefore if such a one find his heart ^o be broken with remorse for
his other sins, and is troubled inconscience for this his sin, if not
accepting of Gods grace when it was offered; I wish him to humble himself
before God, and conceive hope. For God has promised pardon to the penitent
Ezekiel. 18 21. 22
whenever they repent. And though no man can repent when he will, yet such a
one may hope that God is now giving him repentance in that he has touched his
heart, and made it to be burdened with sin.

Yet for all this hope which I give to such a man, know, that it is rare, and
very seldom to be found, that those that continued to despise grace until
their age, did ever repent; but God left them justly to perish in their
impenitency, because they despised the means of grace and the season in which
he did call them to repentance, and did offer them his grace, whereby they
might repent. GOD deals with all sinners ordinarily, as he said he would
do, and as he did to Judah, Because I would have purged thee (says he) that
is, I took the only course to purge thee, and bring thee to repentance, Ezekiel.
24. 13.
and thou wast not purged, therefore thou shall not be purged from thy
filthiness any more, till I have caused my fury torest on thee. Thus I have
endeavored to discover and remove the false grounds, and misapplication of true
grounds, whereby the Conscience is deluded, and brought into a dangerous quiet
and false peace.

In the third place he that would not be gulled with a false peace in stead of
a true, must beware of obstinacy, delight, and senslesnesse of sin. For this
1 Timothy 4. 2
seares the Conscience as with an hot iron. Now a seared conscience is quiet
with a false peace, not because there is no danger; but because it does not
feel it. Great care must be had therefore, lest the Conscience be seared,
being made thick skinned, brawny, and senseless, for then it does altogether,
or for the most part, forbear to check or accuse for sin, be it never so
haino^s.

This searednesse is caused by a Causes of a seared conscience to be avoided.
witting and customary living in any sin; but especially by living in any
gross sin, or in the allowance and delight in any known sin, also by
allowed 1 Timothy 4. 8
hypocrisy and dissimulation in any thing, and by doing any thing Romans 1. 27
Jude 10. Ephe. 4. 18 19
contrary to the clear light of nature, planted in a man's own breast, and head,
or Heb. 10. 26
contrary to the clear light of grace shining in the motions of the Spirit, in
the checks of conscience, and in the instructions of the Word.

Keep therefore the conscience tender by all means; (1) By Means to keep
the conscience tender.
harkening readily to the voice of the Word; (2) By a careful survay of your
ways daily. (3) By keeping the conscience soft with godly sorrow for sin.
(4) By harkening to the voice of conscience admonishing, and checking for sin.

Either of these three kinds of conscience, viz. the blind, presumptuous, and
seared conscience will admit of a kind of peace (or truce rather) for a while,
while it sleeps; but what God said of Cains sin, must be conceived Genesis 4.
7.
of all sin; If thou do not well, sin lies at the door. And upon what
terms soever it be that it lie still, and trouble not the Conscience for a
time, yet it will awake in its time, and then by as much as it did admit of
some peace and quiet, it will grow more turbulent, mad, and furious; and (if
God give not repentance) this false peace ends for the most part either in
Romans 1. 21. to 29.
reprobate mind, or Mat. 27. 5.
a desperate end, even in this life, besides the hellish horrors in that which
is to come.

Now to the end that no man Signs of false hope and peace.
should quiet his heart in this false and dangerous peace, whether it proceed
from the aforementioned causes, or from any other; ^ would advise him to try
his Peace, whether it be not false, by these infallible marks:

First, is any man at peace with Gods enemies, allowing himself ^n the love of
those things or persons which hate God, and which are hated of God, such as are
the world and the things of the world, whereby he denies the power of
godliness, living wittingly and delighting in any evil company or in any
gross sin, as vain or false swearing, open profanation of the Sabbath,
Malice, Adultery, Theft, Lying* or in any of those mentioned, 2 Timothy 3 2 3. or
in any known sin ^ith allowance. The holy Ghost says of such, that 1 Ioh.
2. 15.
the love of God is not in them, therefore the peace of God is not in them, and
whosoever makes himself a friend to his lusts and to the world, makes
himself an Iam. 4. 4.
enemy of Gods As any man is at peace with the flesh, the world, and the
Devil, h^ is not at true peace with God, no^ God with him. If any such expec^
peace, and should ask, is it peace answer may be made like to tha^ which Iehu
made, both to the servants and king of Israel. Wha^ 2 Kin. 9. 19 22.
have you to do with peace? Wha^ peace so long as your notorious sin and
rebellions, wherein you delight, are so many? For he that cares not to keep a
good conscience toward GOD, and toward men, cannot have true peace of
conscience. For there is no true peace but in a Heb. 13. 18.
good conscience.

Secondly, Is any man not at peace but at war rather with GODS friends, and
with the things which God loves; being out of love with spiritual and
conscionable prayer, hearing the Word, good company of Gods people, and the
like? if any man despise the things God commands, and loves; certainly, God
2 Timothy 3. 5.
and he are two, and whatsoever his form of godliness be, GOD holds him to
be yet in state of perdition. For whosoever says he knows GOD, but yet
loves 1 Ioh. 2* 4.
not, and keeps not his Commandments, he is a liar. And if any man love not
his brother, whatsoever show of peace and friendship is betwixt God and him, I
am sure God says, Ioh. 3. 10
he that does no^ righteousness is not of God, neither he that loves not
his brother, he is a child of the Devil, and therefore has no true peace with
God.

Thirdly, He whose quiet of heart and Conscience is from false peace, is
willing to take it for granted, that his peace is sound and good; and cannot
abide to look and to enquire into his peace, to try whether it be true, and
whether it be well grounded or no; being (as it seems) afraid lest stirring
the mud and filth that lies in the bottom of his heart, he should disquiet it.
And for this cause it is, that such a one cannot endure a searching Ministry, 2
Chro 36 16 Act. 7. 54.
nor will like that Minister which will dive and rake into the Conscience, by
laying the heart and Conscience open to the light and touchstone of the Word.

Thus I have showed you what is a first and maine impediment to be removed, (
viz. presumption and false hope) if you would have true peace, for false hopes
breed only false peace.

CHAP. XVI. Touching false fears.
SECTION 1.
THe second head to which I reduced impedime^ts to true peace, is false fear;
for if you doubt, fear, or despair of your estate without cause, it will much
disturb and hinder your peace.

There is an holy fear and despair Needful fear before conversion.
wrought in man, when GOD first convineeth his heart and conscience of sin;
whereupon (through sense of GODS wrath and heavy displeasure, together with a
sense of his own disabilitie in himself to satisfy and appease Gods wrath
(he is in great perplexity, being out of all hope to obtain GODS favoua, or to
escape the vengeance of Hell by any thing which he of himself can do, or
procure. This is wrought more or less in every man of years before
conversion, as in those which were Act. 2. 37
pricked at heart at Peter's Sermon, and in Act. 9. 9.
Saint Paul himself, and in the Act. 16. 29
Iaylor. This is a good necessary fear, serving to prepare a man to his
conversion. For in Gods order of working, he first sends the Rom 8. 15
Spirit of bondage to fear, before he sends the Spirit of Adoption to enable
a man to cry Abba Father. This fear, and trouble of Conscience rising from it,
is good; and as the Needle to the thread, makes way unto true peace.

Moreover, after that a man is Holy and good fear after conversion.
converted, though he have no cause to fear damnation; yet he has much matter
of fear, by as much as he is yet subject unto many evils both of sin and
pain; as, lest he offend GOD, and cause his angry countenance, and his
judgments; also, lest he should fall back from some degrees of grace
received, and lest he fall into some dangerous sin, and so lose his evidence of
heaven, and comforts of the Spirit. Wherefore we are commanded to Phi. 2. 12
work out our Salvation with fear and trembling; 1 Pet. 1. 17.
and to pass the whole time of our soiourning here in fear.

This fear, while it keeps due measure, causes a man to be circumspect and
watchful, lest he fall, it spurreth him on forward to repent, and quickens him
to ask pardon and grace to recover when he is fallen, yea, an excellent means
to prevent trouble, and to procure peace of Conscience. But the fear of which
I am to speak, and which, because it disturbeth true peace, is to be removed,
is a groundless and causeless fear, that a man is not in state of grace,
albeit he has given his name to Christ, and Causeless fear.
has not only given good hope to others; but (if he would see it) has cause
to conceive good hope that he is indeed in the state of Grace.

This fear may rise either from Natural distempers, Satan joining with them;
Or from Spiritual temptations, rising from causeless doubts.

By natural distempers, I mean The kinds of causeless fear
a disposition to frenfie, or height of Melancholy, in which states of body the
spirits are corrupted through superabundance of choler and melancholy, whereby
first the brain (where all notions, and conceits of things to be understood,
are framed) is distempered, and the power of Imagination corrupted, whence
arise strange fancies, doubts, and fearful thonghts. Then, secondly, by reason
of the intercourse of the spirits between the head and the heart, the heart is
distempered and filled with grief, despair, and horror, through manifold
fears of danger, yea, of damnation; especially when Satan does convey himself
into those humors, which as he easily can, so he readily will do, if GOD
permit.

Where there is trouble of this Strange effects of fear rising from natural
distempers.
sort, it usually brings forth strange and violent effects, both in body and
mind, and that in him that is regonerate, as well as in him that is
unregenerate. Yea, so far, that (which is fearful to think) even those who
(when they were fully themselves) did truly fear God, have in the fits of
their distemper (through impotency of their use of reason, and through the
Devils forcible instigation) had thoughts and attempts of laying violent hands
upon themselves and others, whom they have dearly loved. And when they have
not well known what they have done or said, have been heard to break out into
oaths, cursing, and blasphemous speeches against GOD and his Word, who were
never heard to do the like before.

These troubles may be known Difference between trouble rising from bodily
distemper, and that of trouble of conscience.
from true trouble of Conscience, by the strangeness, unreasonablenesse,
absurdity, and senselessness of their conceits in other things, as to think
they have no heart, and to say they cannot do that which indeed they do, and
a thousand other odd conceits which standers by see to be most false. Whereby
any man may see that the root of this disturbance is in the Fantasy, and not
in the heart.

Albeit, both the regenerate and Some difference between regenerate, and
unregenerate, in these distempers.
unregenerate, according as they are in a like degree distempered, are in most
things alike; yet in this they differ; Some beams of holiness will glance
forth now and then in the regenerate, which does not in the unregenerate,
especially in the intermissions of their fits. Their desires will be found to
be different, and if they both recover, the one returns to his wonted course
of holiness with increase: the other (except God work with the affliction to
conversion) continues in his accustomed wickedness. It pleases God, that,
for the most part, his own children who are thus distempered, have the
strength of their Melancholy worn out and subdued before they dye, at which
time they have somesense of Gods favor to their comfort; But if their disease
continue, it is possible that they may die raving and in seeming, (if you judge
by their speeches) despairing, which is not to be imputed unto them, but to
their disease, or unto Satan working by the disease; if they gave good
testimony of holiness in former times. When these troubles are merely from
bodily distempers, though they be not troubles of conscience, yet they make a
man incapable of the sense of peace of conscience. Therefore whosoever would
enjoy the benefit of the peace of his conscience, must do what in him lies,
to prevent or remove these distempers. And because The best means to quiet the
heart in bodily distempers*
they grow for the most part from natural causes, therefore natural as well
as spiritual remedies must be used.

1. Take heed of all such things as feed those humors of Choler and Melancholy,
which must be learned of experienced men, and of skillful Physicians, and, when
need is, take Physic.

2. Avoid all unnecessary solitariness, and as much as may be keep company
with such as truly fear God, especially with those who are wise, full of
cheerfulness, and of joy in the Lord.

3. Forbear all such things as stir up these humors; as, overcarefull
study, and musing too much upon any thing, likewise all sudden and violent
passions of anger, immoderate grief, etc.

4. Shun Idleness, and according to strength and means be fully employed in
some lawful business.

5. Out of the fit, the party thus affected must not oppress his heart with
fear of falling into it again, any more then to quicken him to prayer, and to
cause him to cast himself upon God.

6. Out of the fits (and in them also if the party distempered be capable)
spiritual counsel is to be given out of GODS Word, wisely, according as the
party is fit for it, whether to humble him, if he has not been sufficiently
humbled, or to build him up and comf^^^ him, if he be already humbled.

7. Lastly remember always that when the troubled person is himself, that he
be moved to prayer, and that others then pray much with him, and at all times
pray much for him.

When these troubles are mixed, coming partly from natural distemper, and
partly from spiritual temptation: then the remedy must be mixed of helps
natural and spiritual. What the natural helps are, has bin shown, also what
the spiritual in general, and shall be showed more particularly, in removing
false fears rising from spiritual temptations.

The fears which rise for the Diffrence between those fears which rise
chiefly from Melancholy and those which are chiefly from trouble of conscience.
most part from distemper of body, may be known from those, which for the most
part, or only, rise from the spiritual temptation, thus. When the first fort
are clearly resolved of their doubts, and brought unto some good degree of
cheerfulness and comfort, they will yet, it may be, within a day or two,
sometimes within an hour or two, upon every slight occasion and
discouragement, return to their old complaints, and will need the same means
to recover them again. But those whose trouble is merely out of spiritual
temptation and trouble of conscience, although for the time it is very
grievous, and hardly removed, and sometimes long before they receive a
satisfying answer to their doubts; yet when once they receive satisfaction and
comfort, it does hold and last until there fall out some new temptation, and
new matter of fear. This is because their Fantasies and memories are not
disturbed in such sort as the others were.

The seeming grounds of fears The ground of false fears.
that a man is not in state of grace when yet he is, are for variety almost
infinite. I have reduced them into this order, and unto these heads:

First, they who are taken with false fears, will say their sins be greater
than can be pardoned.

Secondly, when they are driven from that, they say then that they fear GOD
will not pardon. When they are driven from this by causing them to take notice
of the signs of Gods actual love to them which give proof that he will save
them. Then,

Thirdly, they will question the truth of Gods love, and favor. But being put
upon the ttyall whether God has not already justified them, and given them
faith in Christ; which are sufficient proofs of his love: then,

Fourthly, they will seem to have grounds to doubt whether they have faith,
from which they are driven by putting them to the trial of their
Sanctification: then,

Fifthly, they doubt, and will object strongly, that they are not sanctified,
which being undeniably proved: then,

Sixthly and lastly, they fear they shall fall away and not persevere to the
end. Which fear being taken away also, and all is come to this good issue,
they shall have no cause of disquiet fear.

This is the easiest, most familiar, and the most natural method (so far as
I can conceive) both in propounding, and in removing false fears.

SECTION 2. Removing false fear, rising from thoughts of the greatness of
punishment and sin.
FIrst, some in their fits of despair, speak almost in Cains words (saying)
that their Genesis 4. 14
punishment which they partly feel, and which they most of all fear, is
greater than they can bear, or than can be forgiven.

I answer such. If sense and fear of wrath and punishment, be your trouble, I
would have Fear of punishment must be turned into trouble for sin.
you not to busy your thoughts about the punishment; but divert them and pitch
them upon your sins, which are the only cause of punishment, for, get your
sins off, and in one and the same work you get off and free your self from
the punishment. Labor therefore that your heart may bleed with godly sorrow
for sin, cry out as Ps. 51. 4, 5
David did against his sin, so do you against yours, confess them to GOD,
strike at the root of sin, at the sin of your nature, wherein you were
conceived, aggravate your actual sins, hide none, spare none, find out,
arraigne, accuse, condemn your sins, and your self for them, grow first
into utter detestation of your sins, which have brought present punishment,
and a sense and fear of the eternal vengeance of hell fire; then likewise
grow into a dislike with your self for sin, Ezekiel. 36. 31.
loath your self in your own sight for your iniquities, and for your
abominations. Now when you are as a prisonerat the bar, who has received
sentence of condemnation, when you are in your own apprehension a damned
wretch, fearing every day to be executed; Oh, then it concerns you, and it is
your part When the soul is troubled for sin, fly to GOD for mercy and grace in
Christ.
and duty, to run to GOD the King of Kings, whose name and nature is to
forgive iniquity, transgression, and sins; and, that you may be accepted, go
to him by Jesus Christ, whose Office is to take away your sins, and to
present you without sin to his father, whose Office is also to procure and
sue out your pardon. Wherefore in Christ's name pray, and ask pardon of God,
for his Son Jesus Christ's sake, and withal be as earnest in asking grace
and power against your sin, that you may serve him in all well-pleasing. Do
this as for your life, with all truth and earnestness; then you may, nay, must
believe that God for Christ's sake has pardoned your sin, and has done away
the punishment of your sin. For this is according to the Word of Truth, even
as true as God is, who has Commanded you to do thus, and to believe in him.

But some will Reply, this putting Reply.
me unto a consideration of my sins, breeds all my woe, and fear, for I
find them greater and more than can be pardoned.

Oh; Say not so, for you can Answ.
hardly commit a greater sin than indeed to think and to say so. It is
blasphemy against GOD: yet this sin (if you will follow GODS Counsel) and
all other may, and shall be pardoned. I intend not to extenuate and lessen your
sin; but you must give me leave to magnify Gods truth and mercy, and to
extol Christ's love and merit. Howsoever it is Reasons proving that sin
cannot be nupardonable, because of the greatness thereof.
true, that because sin is a transgression of a law of infinite holiness and
equity, and in respect of the evil disposition of the heart, is of infinite
intention, and would perpetuate it self infinitely, if it had time and means;
and because God the object, and Person against whom sin is committed is
infinite, therefore sin must needs contract an infinite guilt, and deserve
infinite punishment; which the very least sin does: yet, because the subject
of sin, the man that sins, is finite, his sin, being the erring act of a
creature, cannot every way be infinite. Wherefore such an act, or
transgression, cannot in it self be unpardonable by a Creator, a God, who is
every way infinite.

Seco^ndly, Consider that the price to satisfy GODS justice, namely, the death
of CHRIST, even 1 Pet. 1. 19
the precious Act. 20. 28
blood of God, the only begotten Son of God, does exceed all sin in
infiniteness of satisfaction of GODS justice and wrath due for sin. For if
Christ's death be a sufficient ransom for the sins of all Gods Elect in
general; then much more of thine in particular, whosoever thou be, and how
great, and how many sins soever thou have committed.

Thirdly, Know that the mercy of God, the forgiver of sins, is absolutely and
every way infinite. For mercy in God is not a quality. but is his very nature,
as is clear by the description of Exodus 34. 6.
his Name, proclaimed, Exodus 34. Which rightly understood and believed, takes
away all the objections, which a fearful heart can make against himself,
from the consideration of his sins.

First, He is merciful, that is, he is compassionate, (and to speak after the
manner of man) is one that has bowels of pity, which yerne within him at the
beholding of thy miseries, not willing to punish and put thee to pain, but
ready to succor and do thee good.

But I am so vile, and so ill deserving, Reply.
that there is nothing in me to move him to pity me and do me good.

2. He is Gracious, whom he Answ. Hos. 14. 4.
loves, he loves freely, of his own gracious disposition, who says, I,
even I, am he that blotteth Isa. 43. 25.
out thy transgressions for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins.
And when God says he would sprinkle clear water upon sinners, and that he
would give them a new heart, etc. he says, not for your sakes do I this,
Ezekiel. 36. 25, 26. 32.
says the Lord God. That you should be sensible of your own misery, and then,
in the sense thereof, that God may be Ezekiel. 36. 37
enquired after and sought unto for mercy, is al which he looks for in you to
move him to pity and mercy, and such is his graciousnes, that he will work
this sense and this desire in you, that he may have mercy.

But I have a long time provoked Reply.
him.

3. He is long-suffering to youwards, Answ.
2 Pet. 3. 9. 15.
n^ot willing that you should perish, but that you should come to repentance,
but waits still for your repentance, and reformation, that you may be saved.

Yea, But I am destitute of all Reply.
goodness and grace to turn unto him, or do any thing that may please him.

4. He is abundant in goodness, Answ.
and kindness, he that has been abundant toward others heretofore in giving
them grace, and making them good, his store is no whit diminished, but he has
all grace and goodness to communicate to you also, and to make you good.

Yea, but I fear, though God can, yet God will not forgive me, and give me
grace. Reply. Answ.


5. He is abundant in truth, not only the goodness of his gracious
disposition makes him willing, but the abundance of his truth binds him to
be willing, and does give proof unto you that he is willing. He has made
sure promises to take away your sin, and to forgive it; and not yours only,
but reserveth mercy for thousands. Believe therefore that God both can and
will forgive you.

Yea, but my sins are such, and Reply.
such, and such, bred at the bone, ^^numerable, heinous, and most ^^ominable. I
am guilty of sins (...) all sorts.

6. He forgiveth iniquity, trans^ession, Answ.
and sin. He is the God that will subdue Mic. 7. 19
all your ini^uities, and cast all your sins ^^to the bottom of the Sea.

Yea, but I renew my sins daily. Reply.


7. I answer out of the Psalm His mercy is an everlasting mercy; his mercy
endures for ever Answ. Psa. 118. 1. Mat. 6. 11.
He bids you to ask forgiveness of sin daily; therefore h^ can and will
forgive sin daily yea, if you sin Luk 17. 4
Mat. 18. 22
Seventie time seven in a day, and shall confess it to God with a penitent
heart he will forgive; for he that bids you be so merciful to you brother,
will himself forgive much more, when you seek unto him.

I, But I have not only committed Reply.
open and gross sins both before and since I had knowledge of GOD; but I
have been a very Hypocrite, making profession of GOD, and yet daily commit
grievous sins against him:

8. What then? Will you say Answ.
your sins are unpardonable God forbid. But say, I will follow the Counsel
which GOD gave to such abominable Hypocrites. I will wash me and make me
clean. I will by Gods grace wash my heart from iniquity, and Isa 1 16. Ier.
4. 14.
my hands from wickedness, by washing my self in the Laver of regeneration,
bathing myself in Christ's blood and in the pure water of the Word of truth,
applying my self to them, and them to me by faith. Say in this case, I will
hear what God will speak: Psa. 85. 8.
And know, that if you will follow his counsel, Isa. 1 18. If you will hearken
to his reasoning and embrace his gracious offer made to you in Christ Jesus,
the Isa. 1. 18.
issue will be this, though your sins have been most gross, reiterated,
double dyed, even as crimson and sear let; they shall be as wool, even as
white as snow. God will then speak peace unto you, as unto other his Saints;
only he will forbid Sins before and after conversion pardonable.
you to return to folly.

For not only those which committed gross sins through ignorance before their
conversion, as did Abraham in Idolatry, and S. Paul in persecuting; no^ yet
only those which committed gross sins through infirmity after their
conversion, as did Genesis 9. 21
Noah by drunkenness, and Genesis 19 33
Lot by incest also, and Mat. 26. 47
Peter by denying and forswearing his Master Christ Jesus, obtained mercy,
because they sinned ignorantly and of infirmity: But also those that sinned
against Knowledge and Conscience, both before and after conversion, sinning
with an high hand, as 2 Chronicles. 33. 6. 10 12, 13
Manasses before, and (in the matter of 1 Kin. 15 5
Vriah) David after conversion, they obtained like mercy, and had all their
sins forgiven. Why are these examples recorded in Scripture, but for patterns
to sinners, yea, to most notorious sinners of all sorts, 1 Timothy 1. 15, 16
Which should in after times believe in Christ Jesus unto eternal life?

Be willing therefore to be beholholding to God for forgivenes, and believe in
Christ for forgivenes, which when you do, you may be assured that you never
yet committed any sin which is not, and which shall not be forgiven.

For was it not the end, why Christ came into the world, that he might save
sinners, yea 1 Timothy 1. 15, 16
chief of sinners as well as others? Was he not wounded for Isa 53. 5.
transgressions, viz. of all sorts? Is it not the end of his coming in his
Gospel to call Luk 5. 32
sinners to repentance? What sinners does he mean there, but such as you are,
who are laden and burdened with your sin? Does he not say, 1 Ioh. 2. 1
if any man sin, mark* if any man, we have an advocate with the Father,
Jesus Christ the righteous. Who by being made Col. 3. 13
a curse for you, has redeemed you from the curse of the whole Law. Therefore
from the curse due unto you for your greatest sin. Consider this again, can
the sin of a finite creature go beyond the pardon of an infinite Creator?
Can a sin in some sense finite, deserve beyond the satisfaction of a price
for value every way infinite?

Howsoever it is impossible for a notorious sinner, yea, for any sinner, by his
own power or worth to enter into the kingdom of Heaven; Yet, know, what is
Mat. 19. 26
impossible with man, is possible with God. Genesis 18. 14.
Is any thing too hard for the Lord? He can alter, and renew you, and give you
faith and repentance, he can make these things possible to you that believe:
yea, Mar. 9. 23
all things are possible to him that believes.

I, you will say, if I did believe. Reply.
Why, what if yet you do not believe? It is not hard with him, you coming to
his means of faith, you harkening to the precepts and promises of the Word,
considering that the God of truth speaks in them, I say, it is not hard for
him in the use of these means to cause you to believe.

Wherefore neither greatness of sin, nor multitude of sins should, because
of their greatness and multitude, make you utterly despair of salvation, or
fear Damnation; When once you can believe, or but Isa. 1. ^9.
will and desire to obey and believe, the greatest matter of fear is past.

I know if you never had sinned, you would not fear damnation. Now to a man
whose sins are remitted, his sins (though Romans 7. 20
sin dwell in him) are as if they were not, or never had been, For they are
blotted out of Gods remembrance. I, even I am he (says God) Isa. 43. 25.
that blot out thy transgressions for my names sake, and will not remember thy
sins. And who is like thee (says the Prophet) Micah. 7. 18, 19.
that pardons iniquity, etc. he will have compassion upon us, he will
subdue our iniquities, and will cast all our sins into the bottom of the
Sea. A debt when it is paid by the Surety, puts the principal out of debt,
though he paid never a penny of it. The holy Ghost speaks most comfortably,
saying, that God does find no sin Rev. 14. 5.
in them whose sins are pardoned. Ier. 50. 20
In those days, and at that time says the Lord, the iniquity of Israel shall
be sought for, and there shall be none; and the sins of Judah, and they shall
not be found; but how may this be, he gives the reason, for I will pardon them
whom I reserve.

If you believe that God can pardon any sin, even the least, you have like
reason to believe that God can pardon all, yea the greatest; for if God can do
any thing, he can do every thing, because he is infinite. He can as easily
say, Mat. ^. 5
thy sins are forgiven thee, all thy sins are forgiven thee, as to say,
Rise and walk. He can as well save one that has been long dead, rotten, and
stinking in his sin, as one newly fallen into sin. For he can as easily
say, Ioh. 11. 4^*
Lazarus come forth, as to say, Mar. 5. 4.
Damsel I say to thee Arise.

Lastly, to make an end of removing this fear, I ask thee who art troubled with
the greatness of thy sins past, and with fear that they can never be
pardoned, how stand you affected to present sins? Do you hate and loath
them? Do you use what means you can to be rid of them? Are you out of love
with your self, and humbled because you have harbored them to GODS dishonor,
and your own hurt? And do you resolve to Ezekiel. 18 21, 2^
return from your evil ways, and to enter upon an holy course of life, if
God shall please to enable you, and is it your hearty desire to have this
grace to be able? And are you afraid, and have you now a care lest you fall
wittingly into sin; then let Satan, and a fearful heart object what they
can, you may say, though my sins have been great and heinous, for which I
loath my self Ezekiel. 36. 25. to 33.
and am ashamed, yet now I see that they were not only pardonable, but are
already through the rich mercy of God pardoned. For these are signs of a new
heart and a new mind. Now to whomsoever GOD gives the least measure of saving
grace, to them has he first given pardon of sin, and will yet abundantly
pardon. For he says, Isa. 55. 7.
Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts: and let
him return to the LORD, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for
he will abundantly pardon.

SECTION 3. Removing the fear that rises from doubts that God will not pardon.
THere are others who make no doubt of Gods power, they believe he can forgive
them; but they fear, yea, peremptorily conclude, that he will not pardon
them, and that because they be Reprobates (as they say) for they see no signs
of Election, but all to the contrary.

I answer these thus. When your Answ. No man has signs of election til
effectual calling.
Consciences are first wounded with a sense of Gods wrath for sin; it is very
like, that before you have believed and repented, you cannot discern any signs
of Gods favor, but of his wrath; for as yet you are not actually in state of
grace, and in his favor. And oft-times after a man does believe (though there
be always matter enough to give proof of his Election) yet he cannot always
see it. If you be in either of these estates, (conceive the worst) yet you have
no reason to conclude that you are Reprobates.

It is true, that God before the foundation of the world, fully determined with
himself, whom to choose to Salvation by grace, to which also he ordained
them: and whom to pass by, and leave in their sins, for which he determined
in his just wrath to condemn them. But who these be, is a secret which even in
point of Election the Elect themselves cannot know, until they be effectual^y
called, nay, nor being called, until by some experience and proofs of their
faith and holiness, they do understand the witness of the Spirit, which
testifies to their spirits, that they are the children of God, and do make
their Calling and Election (which was always sure in God) 2 Pet 1. 5. 10 No
man can know certainly in this life that he is a Reprobate
sure to themselves. But in point of reprobation, namely, that God has passed
them by, to perish everlastingly in their wickedness, no man living can know
it, except he know that he has sinned the sin against the holy Ghost, that
unpardonable sin.

For God calls men at all ages, and times, some in their youth, some in their
middle age, some in their old age; yea, some have been called at their Luke
23. 42, 43
last hour. Now let it be granted, that you cannot by search into your selves
find the signs of effectual calling, (which yet may be in you though your
dim eyes cannot perceive them.) Nay, suppose that you are not yet effectually
called, here is no cause for you utterly to despair and say you are
Reprobates. How know you that God will not call you before you dye?

It were a far wiser and better course for you that will be thus hasty in
judging your selves In what order a Christian should ascend to the knowledge of
his Election.
to be Reprobates, to busy your selves first with other things. Acquaint your
selves with Gods revealed will in his Word. Learn to know what God has
commanded you to do, and do that; also what he has threatened, and fear that;
and what he has promised, and believe, and rest on that. After you have done
this, you may look into your selves, and you shall read your Election written
in golden and great Letters.

For, God never intended that the first lesson which a Christian should learn,
should be the hardest, and highest lesson that can be learned, taken out of the
book of his eternal counsel and decree, and so to descend to the* A. B. C. of
Christianity. Which were a course most perplexed, and preposterous. But his will
is that his scholars and children should learn out of his written Word here on
earth, first, that Genesis 1. 31
God made all things, and that he made man good, and how that man hearkening
to Satan they found out Eccl. 7. 29
evil devices, and so fell from grace and from God, and so both they and the
whole world that came of their loins; became guilty of eternal damnation. Next
God would have you to learn, that he, in is infinite wisdom, goodness, and
mercy, thought of, Gen 3. 15. Genesis 17. 1. 2. 11. Romans 4. 11. Ier 31. 31. 32.
and concluded a new covenant of Grace, for the effecting whereof he found out
and appointed a way and means to pacify his wrath by satisfying his justice,
punishing sin in man's nature, by which he opened away unto his mercy, to show
it to whom he would, namely, He gave his only Son, very God, to become
Phil. 2. 6 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
very man, and being made a common person and surety in man's stead, dyed, and
endured the punishment due to the sin of man, and rose again, and was
exalted to sit at Gods right hand to reign, having all authority committed
unto him. Thus he made the new covenant of grace, established in his Son
Jesus Christ, the tenor and condition whereof required on man's part is that
man accept of, and enter into this covenant, believing in Christ, in whom it is
established; then, whosoever believes in Ioh. 3. 16
him, shall not dye, but have everlasting life. This God did in his wisdom,
justice, mercy, and love to man, that he himself might be Romans 3. 26
inst, and yet a iustifier of him that is of the faith of Jesus. And has
therefore given his Word and Sacraments, and has called, and has Ephe. 4. 8*
given gifts to his Ministers, thereby to beget, and increase faith in men, by
publishing this good news, and by commanding them: as 2 Cor. 5. 20
in Christ's stead, in Gods name to believe, and to be reconciled to God, and to
live no longer according to the will of their old Masters the Devil, the
World, and the Flesh, under whom they were in cursed bondage; but according to
the will of him, that redeemed them in holiness and righteousness, whose
service is a perfect and blessed freedom.

Now when you have learned these lessons first, and by looking into your selves
can find faith and new obedience; then by this 2 Pet. 1. 5. 10, 11
your effectual calling, you may as by safe stayres ascend to that high point
of your Predestination, which will give you comfort through assurance that you
shall never fall away.

When you observe this order in learning your Election to life, it will not
minister unto you matter of curious and dangerous dispute, either with God, or
man thereabout; but of high admiration, thankesgiving, and unspeakeable
comfort, causing you to cry out with the Apostle, Romans 11. 33.
O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God, etc. And
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has chosen us in
him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without
blame before him in love, having Predestined us unto the Adoption of
children, by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his
will, to the praise of the Ephesians. 1. 3. 5, 6.
glory of his grace, wherein he has made us accepted in his well-beloved, etc.

There are yet some, who having Fear of sinning against the holy Ghost removed.
heard that there is a sin against the holy Ghost, and that it is
unpardonable, are full of fears that they have committed that sin, thence
conclude that they are Reprobates, for they say, that, they have sinned
willingly against knowledge and conscience since they received the knowledge of
the truth, and tasted of the heavenly gift, and of the good Word of God.

If you who thus object, have Answ.
sinned against knowledge and conscience, you have much cause of grief and
complaint against your self, and have much cause of humbling your self before
God, confessing it to him, asking pardon of him, and grace to believe and
repent, both which you must endeavor by all means. Yet I see no cause why you
should conclude so desperately, that you have sinned against the holy Ghost and
are a Reprobate. For as few in comparison (though too many) commit this sin,
so few know what it is.

All sin 1 Kin. 15. 5 2 Samuel 11. 4. 6. 10. 15. 25.
against knowledge and conscience is not this sin. Nor yet all wilful
sinning. It is not any one sin against the law, nor yet the direct breach of
the Heb. 10. 28.
whole law, nor every malicious opposing of the Gospel, (if it be of
ignorance) neither is it 1 Timothy 1 13
every blasphemy, or persecution of the Gospel, and of those that profess
the truth, (if these be done out of ignorance or passion:) Nor yet is it every
2 Chronicles. 16. 10
Apostacy, and falling into gross sins of 1 King. 11. 4, 5, 6 Heb. 10. 28,
29
diverssorts, though done against knowledge and conscience, yet this sin
against the holy Ghost contains all these and more. It is a sin against the
Gospel, and free offer and dispensation of grace and salvation by CHRIST
through the Spirit. Yet, it is not any particular sin against the Gospel,
nor yet a rejecting of the whole Gospel ( Luke 23. 34
if in ignorance,) nor yet every denying of Christ, or sudden revolting from
the outward profession of the Gospel (when it is of Math. 26 69, 70, 74
infirmity through fear, and such like temptation.) Neither is it called the
sin against the holy Ghost, and is unpardonable, because it is committed
against the Essence, or Person of the holy Ghost, for the essence of the three
persons in Trinity is all one: And the person of the holy Ghost is not more
excellent than the person of the Father and the Son; but it is called the
sin against the holy Why called sin against the holy Ghost. Why unpardonable.
Ghost, and becomes unpardonable, because it is against the Office of the
holy Ghost, and against the gracious operations of the holy Ghost, and therein
against the whole blessed Trinity, all whose works, Ad extra.
out of themselves, are consummate and perfected, in the work of the holy
Ghost. Moreover, know that it is unpardonable, not in respect of GODS power,
but in respect of his will. He having in his holy wisdom determined never to
pardon it. And good reason why he should will, not to pardon it in respect of
the kind of the sin, if you well observe it; it being a wilful and malicious
refusing of pardon upon such terms as the Gospel does offer it, scorning to
be beholding unto God for it. You may perceive what it is, by this description.

The sin against the holy Ghost A description of the sin against the holy
Ghost.
is an utter, wilful, and spiteful rejecting of the Gospel of Salvation by
Christ, together with an advised and absolute falling away from the profession
of it, so far that against Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6.
former knowledge and conscience, a man does maliciously oppose and blaspheme
the Spirit of Christ, in the Word and Ordinances of the Gospel, and motions of
the Spirit in them, having resisted, rejected, and utterly quenched all those
common, and more inward gifts and motions wrought upon their hearts and
affections, which sometimes were entertained by them; in so much, that out of
hatred of the Spirit of life in Christ, they Heb. 10. 26, 27, 28, 29
crucify to themselves a-fresh the Son of God, and do put him (both in his
Ordinances of Religion, and in his members) to open shame, ^reading underfoot
the Son of God, counting the blood of the Covenant, wherewith they were
sanctified an unholy thing, doing despite to the spirit of grace. If you shall
heedfu'ly look into these places of the Mat. 12. 24. 31, 32.
Mark 3 28, 29, 30.
Luke 12. 10.
Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6.
Heb. 10. 26, 27, 28, 29. How to be sure that a man has not committed this sin
against the holy Ghost.
Scripture, which speak of this sin: and withal do observe the opposition
which the Apostle makes between sinning against the Law, and sinning against
the Gospel, you shall clearly find out the nature of this sin.

But to resolve you of this doubt; (if you be not overcome with Melancholy, for
then you will answer you know not what, which is to be pitied rather than
regarded.) I would ask you that think you have committed the sin against
the holy Ghost these Questions. Does it grieve you, that you have committed it?
Could you wish that you had not committed it? If it were to be committed, would
you not forbear if you could choose? Would you take your self beholding to
God, if he would make you partakers of the blood and Spirit of his Son,
thereby to pardon and purge your sin, and to give you grace to repent? Nay,
are you troubled that you cannot bring your heart unto a sense of desire of
pardon and grace? If you can say yea; then, albeit the sin or sins which
trouble you may be some fearful sin, of which you must be exhorted speedily
to repent: yet certainly it is not the sin against the holy Ghost. It is not
that unpardonable sin, it is not that sin unto death. For he that
commits this sin cannot relent, neither will he be beholding to GOD for
pardon and grace, by Christ's blood and spirit, he cannot desire to repent. But
he is given over in Gods just judgment, unto such a reprobacy of mind,
pollution and deadness of conscience, perverseness and rebellion of will, and
to such an height of hatred and malice, that he is so blasphemously and
despit^fully bent against the Spirit of holiness, that Heb. 10. 29
^t much pleases him rather, than any way troubles him, that he has so
maliciously and blasphemously rejected, or fallen from, persecuted, and spoken
blasphemously against the good way of Salvation by Christ, and against ^he
gracious operations of the Spirit, and against the members ^f Christ, although
he was once convinced clearly that this is the ^nely way of Salvation, and that
those graces and gifts were from God, and that they were the dear children of
God whom he does Fear that God will not pardon because their hearts condemn
them, removed.
^^w despite.

Others, if not the same, object ^^us; God will certainly con^^mne them:
because 1 John 3 20
S. John ^^th said, if their hearts condemn ^em, God is greater than their
^arts, hence they in far. God will condemn them much more. For they say their
hearts do condemn them.

There is a double judgment Answ.
by the heart and conscience. It ^^^g^^h a man's state or person, ^^^the^ ^e be
in state of grace, ^^^ ^^ ^o. Also it judges a man's ^lar actions, whether they
be good o^ no. I take it, that th^i place of John is not to be understood of
judging or condemning the person; For God in his final judgment does not
judge according to what a man's wea^ and erroneous conscience judges (for so it
cannot choose bu^ be, more or less in this life) making it the square of his
judgment to condemn or absolve any. For many a man in his presumption Hos.
12. 8 Luke 18. 11
justifies himself i^ this life, when yet God will condemn him in the world
to com^ and many a distressed soul, li^^ the Luke 15. 18, 19.
Prodigal, and humble Luke 18. 13, 14.
Pu^^ li^an condemns himself, when yet God will absolve him. For a man may
have peace with God, yet God, for reasons best known to his wisdom, does not
presently speak peace to his conscience, as it was with David, in which case
man does judge otherwise of his estate than God does.

This place is to be understood 1 Ioh. 3. 20
of judging of particular actions, namely, whether a man love his 1 Ioh. 3. 18,
19, 20, 21, 22.
brother not in word and tongue only, but in deed and truth, according to the
exhortation, ver. 18. Which if his Conscience could testify for him, then it
might assure his heart before God, and give it boldness to pray unto him, in
confidence to receive whatsoever he did ask according to his will. But if his
own conscience could condemn him of not loving his brother in deed, and
truth, then God, who is greater tha^ his heart (but wherein greater? greater in
knowing man's heart, and the truth of his love) knowing all things, must needs
condemn him therein much more. Even as Peter in the question whether he loves
Christ or no, he appeals to Christ's omniscience, whereby he proves his love
toward him saying; Ioh. 21. 17
Thou know all things, thou know that I love thee. This is the full scope
of the place. Yet this I must needs say, that the holy Ghost has instanced in
such an act, namely, of hearty loving the brethren, which is an infallible
sign of being in state of grace: whereby (except in case of extreme
melancholy or frenzy, and in the brunt of a violent temptation) a man may
judge, whether at that present he be translated from death to life, yea* or ^o.

If any shall think the place to be understood of judging the person, he must
distinguish between that judgment which the heart does give rightly, and de
iure, and that which it gives erroneously. But suppose, that you trying your
selves by this, your hearts do condemn you of not loving the brethren, can
you conclude hence that you shall be finally damned? God forbid? All that you
can infer, is this; you cannot have boldness to pray unto him until you
love them, nor can you assure your selves that you shall have your petitio^s
granted. And the worst you can conclude is, that now for the present you are
not in state of grace, or at the least you want proof of being in state of
grace. You must then use all Gods means of being ingrafted into Christ, and
must love the children of GOD, that you may have proof thereof. Did Acts 26
10, 11
Paul love the brethren when he breathed out threatening and was, as he
himself says, mad against them? Was he at Acts 8. 3.
that time a Reprobate? Did he not afterward, being co^verted, so love GODS
people, that he could be content to 2 Cor. 12 15.
spend, and be spent, himself for them. So many thousands, whose consciences
for the present may justly condemn them of not loving those that be zealous,
and indeed Gods children may yet love them hereafter as dearly as their own
souls.

Some will yet say, certainly we are Reprobates. For we have Fear of being
Reprobates, because they cannot tell that Christ is in them, removed.
according to the command of the Apostle, tried whether we be in the faith, or
no, and whether Christ be in us, but we find neither; the 2 Cor. 13 5.
Apostle says, we know these to be in us, else we are Reprobats, 2 Cor. 13. 5.

By Reprobate in this place, is not meant one that is not elect, Answ.
one whom God in his just judgment past by and ordained unto wrath. For none of
the Elect can before their conversion know, by any search, that they are in the
faith, or that Christ is in them: For that cannot be known which yet is not.
Many are not converted until they be thirty, forty, or fifty years old.
Will you say, these in their younger years were Reprobates? You may say, they
then were in state of condemnation, and children of wrath, but no Reprobates.
Besides, a man must not be said, not to be in the faith, and not to have
Christ in him; because he does not know so much: For many have faith, and are
in Christ, yet do not always know it.

The word Reprobate, because it is ordinarily understood, by our common people,
for a man ordained to condemnation, is too harsh, except its true meaning were
expressed, and the Greek does not necessarily enforce it. Yet I confess it is
a term proper enough, if it were not (in our English) almost appropriated to
the former sense.

These words now rendered, except ye be Reprobates, may (as I judge) rather be
translated thus; Except you be unapproved, or except (...)
you be without proof, namely, of your being in the faith, and of Christ's
being in you, whereof you outwardly make profession.

Howsoever it be translated (for in this I submit my self to the Church) let
any that is judicious observe the matter therein handled, and the Metaphor taken
from Goldsmiths in trying of metals, and they shall find, it must be
understood in t^hs sense.

The Corinthians did question 2 Cor. 13. 3
the lawfulness of Paul's calling to his Apostleship; therefore they require of
him to give them a (...)
proof of Christ speaking in him. His answer is to this purpose, as if he
should say; I will go no farther to seek a sign, or proof of Christ
speaking in me, then to your selves. Has not the Word and Gospel of CHRIST
been powerful by my Ministry to convert you, and to beget faith, and to
form Christ in you? Look into your selves, try if you have not faith, and if
Christ be not formed in you? If you find this, I need no other proof of my
calling, nor of Gods power and grace, blessing me in my calling. But if upon
trial you cannot find that you are in the faith, etc. you are unapproved
Christians. Either you have yet only a mere form of Christianity, and like
false coin or Reprobate silver, are but hypocrites and counterfeits; or if you
be Christians in truth, yet you are inexperienced Christians, and without
proof of it to your selves. But whether you find that you have faith or no,
etc. I trust and am assured that both I and the rest of Christ's Ministers with
me, shall approve our selves to be true and faithful Ministers of Christ;
though in the account of the false Apostles and of some of you, we be as
Reprobates, or unapproveable, 1 Cor. 13. 7
that is, such as in your opinion cannot give proof of CHRIST (...)
speaking in us.

Our late excellently learned and reverend Translators, ver. 7. translated the
same word, in the (...)
affirmative, Approved, wherefore, the privative particle being added, the
translation may well be unapproved, or, without proof, or refuse.

Some may Reply, if I find upon Reply.
trial that I am a counterfeit, and as Reprobate silver, may I not then judge
my self to be a Reprobate?

No. For first you may err in Answ.
judging of your self. Secondly, if you do not err, you can judge only this,
that yet you are not in state of grace: but in the use of the means, you may
be. God can as well convertian Hypocrite, as a Pagan. For though now you be
dross and refuse, you may ere long be pure Gold. For God in making vessels of
honor, does more than all earthly Kings, and all their Goldsmiths can do; For
they by their prerogative setting their stamp, and by their Goldsmiths skill,
can make current coin, and rich Vessels, if that they have pure metal to
work upon: But they cannot make good metal of base stuff, or can make gold
of brass. But such is the force of Gods Word and Spirit, that whereas they
find you base and drossie stuff, they, by imprinting the Character and stamp
of Gods Image upon your hearts, do metamorphise and transform you into the
same 2 Cor. 3. 18.
Image, from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord. As soon as you
are truly touched and anointed with this Spirit, you shall become good Gold,
and Silver, vessels of honor fitted for the LORDS use whereunto you were
pre-ordained.

There are yet others object Fear that God will not pardon because they seek
too late, removed.
fearfully, saying, that they are cast-awayes, and that God will not have
mercy on them: and that because now it is too late, they have passed the time
and date of their Conversion, they therefore will not use, or at least have no
heart in using GODS means to convert them, such as prayer, reading, hearing
the Word, etc. Nor yet willingly will suffer others to pray either with them,
or for them, and all because they think it is now too late, and in vain,
mistaking this and such other Scriptures, Pro. 1. 24 28
Because I have called (says GOD) and you have refused; they shall call on
me, and I will not answer. And because they think they sin when they pray,
and hear the Word, and that the more means is used to save them, their
condemnation shall be the more increased. Thus Satan, and a fearful heart
deludeth many.

It must be acknowledged, that Answ.
God would have all men Ioh. 12. 36
walk and work while they have light, because Ioh. 9. 4.
the night will come when no man can work. And Heb. 3. 13, 15*
whilst it is called to day, he would have every one return, and accept of
grace offered, and not to harden their hearts against it. And our Savior
bewaileth Jerusalem, because they did let slip the Luke 19. 42, 43
day of their visitation. All which does show that God has his set period of
time, between his first and last offer of grace, which being passed, he will
offer it no more; and that justly, because they took not his offer when they
might. And this time is kept so secret with God, that if he offer grace to
day, who can tell whether he will offer it to morrow? Or whether he will offer
it again? Who knows whether God will take him from the means of Salvation,
or, will take the means of Salvation from him? All this our holy and wise God,
has revealed in his Word to make men wise, to take the opportunity and time of
grace while it is offered. Wherefore whosoever have let slip their first times
and offers of grace, have sinned and played the fools egregiously, for which
they have cause to be much humbled. But for you to conclude hence that the date
and time of your conversion is out, has no sufficient ground. For it is not
possible for you It is not possible for any to know that the time of his
conversion is past.
to know, that your time of conversion is past all recoverie. But you should
rather for the present time believe, and hope that it is not past. Indeed to
presume to put off receiving grace until to morrow, is foolish and dangerous,
but if God give you time till to morrow, that you live, and it can be said to
day, so long as you yet live, and the external means of Salvation are not
taken from you, either in their exercise, or out of your remembrance; but you
do yet live to hear what God has commanded you to do, and to hear what
good things he yet offers unto you with Christ, or if the means be taken
from you, or you are detained from them by sickness, etc. so long as you yet
live to 2 Chr. 6. 37. 39.
call to remembrance what God has commanded you to believe and do, you cannot
say the time is too late. If you would yet condemn your selves for refusing
grace heretofore, and would be now willing and desirous to accept of it.
Moreover, would you now with all your heart, use the means of Salvation, and
endeavor to believe and repent, if you thought it were not too late? And does
it grieve you that you have let slip the opportunity? And would you gain and
redeem that lost time, if you knew how? Then, I dare, in the name of God,
assure you, that the date of your conversion is not out. It is not too late for
you to turn unto the Lord. Heb. 3. 15
While it is to day. I may boldly say harden not your heart, which, if you do
not, you must know that now is an acceptable time, now is the day and time of
your Salvation. At what time soever GOD does send his 2 Cor. 5. 20
Minister unto you, by whom GOD does beseech you, they entreating you, as now I
do, in Christ's stead, that you would be reconciled to GOD, 2 Cor. 6. 2
this is the acceptable day, if you will be entreated by them: The day wherein
GOD will accept of you, is not past. Moreover, at what time soever, and by what
means soever, any man shall humble himself for sin, and ask grace, the
date of Gods acceptance of him is not out. Learn this in the example of Chro.
33 10, 12, 13
Manasses, and many other who had refused grace in their yongertime; yet were
converted in their age. You have Gods express words for it, who says, Mal. 3.
7
From the days of your fathers, that is, for a long time, Ye are gone away
from mine ordinances, and have not kept them, Return unto me, and I will
return unto you, says the Lord of Hoasts.

That place in the Proverbes Pro. 1. 28
rightly understood does not contradict any thing which I have said, nor yet
serve for that for which it is alleged: For by refusing, there he means, a
constant and obstinate refusing of wisdoms counsel, until such time that
God has broughtsome misery on them (the^ they should call upon him.) By
calling upon him in that place, is not meant a hearty praying, with godly
sorrow for sin, making request for pardon and for grace; but a crying or
howling rather like those in Hos. 7. 14
Hosea, under the sense of Gods judgments, praying in truth only to be eased
of it. For at Ezekiel. 18.
what time soever a sinner shall repent, GOD will turn to him. And whosoever
looks toward Christ, the true 2 Chro. 6. from 36. to 40.
Temple,) shadowed forth by the material Temple at Jerusalem,) and confesses
his sin, and asks pardon, 2 Chronicles. 7. 12.
God will pardon, for so has he promised.

But may not a man pray too Reply.
late, and seek repentance in vain, as Esau did, Heb. ^2. 17
who found no place of repentance, though he sought it carefully with tears?
Did not the Mat. 25. 11, 12.
foolish Virgins seek to enter into the Bridechamber, but were not admitted?
And does not our Savior say, Lu. 13. 24
many shall strive to enter in, and shall not be able?

No man can ask grace and Answ.
forgiveness of sins too late, if he ask for grace and power against sin
heartily: But a man may ask a temporal blessing, or the removal of a
temporal evil, when it may be too late.

As for Esaus careful seeking of repentance, you must understand it, not of
his own repentance from his prophanenes, and from other dead works: but of
his Father Isaacks repentance; he would have had his father to change his
mind, and to have given him the birthright, which was already bestowed upon
Jacob. Read Genesis 27. 34. 38.

Whereas the foolish Virgins did assay to enter into the Bridechamber, when the
door was shut: know, that this is a parable, and must not be urged beyond its
general scope, which is to show that formal professors of Christianity, such
as have only a form of godliness, without the power of it; they, although
they will not live the life of the righteous, yet they could wish their Number.
23. 10.
end, might be like theirs: And because of their outward profession of Christ's
Name in this life, they securely expect eternal life; but because before their
death, they did not provide the oil of truth and holiness, therefore at the
day of Judgment, they shall be disappointed of entering into Heaven, which in
the time of their life, they did so much presume of.

The like answer may be given, unto that place alleged out of Luke 13. 24. Yet
unto that place more may be said: You mistake when you say, that Christ says,
many shall strive to enter and shall not be able. He says; Strive to enter in
at the straight gate, for many I say to you, shall seek to enter in, and shall
not be able, he does not say, many shall strive to enter.

There is great difference in the signification of the Greek (...)
words, and so there is between striving and seeking, signified by them.
Seeking imports only a bare professing of Christ, such as is showed in giving
the name to Christ, coming to Church, hearing the Wo^d, and receiving the
Sacraments. For thus did the men spoken of by our Savior, who are said not to
be able to enter. But to strive to enter, is to do all Hos. 6. 3.
these and more, it is to strive in seeking for him, that they take up their
cross and follow him, they give their hearts to him, as well as their names,
they are hearty and sincere in Praying, Hearing, Receiving, they strive to
subdue their lusts, which offend Christ, and strive to be obedient to his will,
as well as to believe his promises, and to hope for happiness, this i^ to
strive. Now never any did thus strive in seeking to enter (though it were but
the last day of their life) that was put back, and not received. Wherefore say
not it is to late. But say, the more time I have lost, the more cause there is
why now I should presently set to Religion in earnest, and not loose time in
questioning, whether I shall be accepted or no.

And whereas you said, you are afraid to use the means of Salvation, for the
reasons before objected; hereby you may see, that all this is but the malice,
and craft of the Devil, by keeping you from the means, to keep you from
Salvation. For it is most Psalm. 73. 13
false to say, that to pray, hear the Word, etc. is to increase your sin
because you cannot perform these as you should, and as you would. I am sure,
it is a greate^ sin in you to for bear these necessary duties, out of
despair that they shall ever profit you, or that you shall be accepted o^ God.
You should think thus, if ^^ do not use the means of salvation, I shall
certainly perish everlastingly; but if I do pray, hear, etc. I may be saved,
therefore in obedience to God I will do as well as I can* But little does a
man know how well he may do, if he would endeavor; neither can a man conceive
how acceptable a little endeavor shall be, if he do but desire to be true in
his endeavor. For as 2 Cor. 12. 10.
GODS 2 Chronicles. 30. 19.
power is seen in man's weakness, so is Gods grace seen in
man^insufficiencie. When we are weak, then God in us can be strong. And when
we in humilty like our services worst, then through Christ. God may be best
pleased The weakest performance of duties, less dangerous tha whole omissions.
with them. But whatsoever you do, Do not neglect, nor absent your selves
from exercises of Religion: for weakest observances, where is truth, are far
more acceptable than whole emissions. Wherefore, if (as you say) you would not
increase your sin, and thereby your damnation be willing to use, and to join
with others, in the use of all good means of Salvation; then if you be not
saved, yet you shall have the less punishment. But you may be assured, that if
in obedience to Gods Commandment you shall pray, hear the Word, receive the
Sacrament, and have communion and conversation with those that fear God, you
shall be saved in the end.

What if you do not yet feel benefit and comfort (when you use these means
of salvation (according to your desire? yet you must wail the good hour both
of grace and comfort, even as the Ioh 5. 3
impotent folk did, who lay waiting for the Angels coming to move the waters,
that they might be healed of their diseases, at the ^oole of Bethesda. For if,
when God hides his face, Isa. 8. 17.
you will wait and look for him, then God will Isa. 30. 18
wait his time to be gracious, and blessed shall you be that wait for him. It
may be, it comes justly upon you, that God should make you wait his leisure,
and cause you to buy wisdom wise dear experience, because you did once
account it an easier matter to believe and repent, and therefore you did not
take the first offers, but made God wait. If it were thus, yet despair not of
grace, only be humbled. For Psalm. 103 10
God does not deal with us after our sins, nor reward us after our
iniquities, but according to his rich mercy and promise made to us in Christ
Jesus.

SECTION 4. A removal of fears rising from doubts of Gods love.
THere are very many, who have true proofs that they are the Elect of God, and
have reason to think, that God not only can, but will do them good: yet
because they will deny that to be bestowed upon them, and to be in them which
indeed is, therefore they fear, and are causelessly disquieted. I would have
such to consider first, whether they have not in them already evident proofs
and sigues of GODS effectual love toward them in Christ. These will
acknowledge, that it is most true, that if they were sure, that GOD did love
them, they should not fear; but this is all their doubt, that GOD does not
love them.

Some give this reason of their Doubts of Gods love because of their grie vous
afflictions, removed.
doubt. God has afflicted them, and still does Plague them, yea, albeit they
have professed the name of Christ, they are in some thing or other chastened
daily, in so much that they seem to be in the condition of those whom GOD
has threatened to Deuteronomy. 28. 20.
curse in every thing they put their hands unto. Therefore (say they) GOD does
not love them.

Such weak and inconsiderate reasonings are incident to those Answ.
whom GOD truly loves, Did not the holy men of GOD reason, and conclude thus?
But when do Gods Children thus? It is in their Ps. 31. 22
haste, before they b Psalm. 116 11.
be well advised what they think or say. And whence is it? Is it not from their
Psalm. 73. 13, 14, 22.
ignorance, and brutishness, being carried away by sense? So foolish was I and
ignorant, says the Prophet, etc. But when they come to themselves, and do
come to learn what is truth by the Word, then they learn, that it is not
outward prosperity will make wicked men happy, neither is it outward
affliction that can make a good man miserable. Then they will neither applaud,
nor envy the prosperity of the wicked, nor yet misconstrue, nor repine at
their own afflictions. For they learn, that Eccl. 9. 1
no man can know Gods love or hatred by any outward thing, that does befall the
sons of men in this life.

They learn, that God does often smile on his enemies, and that he does often
frown upon is angry with, and does correct those whom he dearly loves, even
as a Pro. 3. 12 e Rev. 3. 19
Father does his Children.

They learn by the Word likewise, that GOD has excellent ends in all this,
even in respect of them, and all for their Romans 8. 28
good, namely, for trial of their graces, for prevention of sin, for to
remove sin, bringing them to repenrance, and that they might be made Heb. 12.
10
partakers of his Holiness. Besides, herein he does much glorify himself,
showing that he is Isa. 28. 29
wonderful in Counsel, excellent in Working: causing the affliction to work
for his glory, in his peoples good. Yea, you may learn by the Word, and by
your own experience, that although the child of God in his infirmity and
passion, when he is under the rod, may let go his hold of God; yet, that God,
in his love and compassion toward his child, will Psalm. 73. 23, 24.
hold him fast by his right hand, and will not leave him; but will guide him
with his Counsel, that he may afterward receive him unto Glory. This is the
way of GOD with his Children; wherefore none from hence has cause to question
GODS love, but to conclude it rather.

But I have brought afflictions Reply.
upon my self by mine own sin and folly, I am impatient under them, and am
little or no whit better for them, but rather worse.

If it be so, it is your sin, and Answ.
it behooves you presently to repent; but do not say, these things cannot
befall those who are in state of grace and beloved of God. For did not 2 Samuel 12
9, 10, 11, 1^
David by his adultery and murder bring upon himself much affliction? And had
not penitent Job 3. 3 Job 6. 9.
Job diverse fits of impatience? And was not the Psalm. 73. 3 to ver. 15
Prophet, at first, rather worse than better by his afflictions, when thereby
he had almost judged the state of the wicked, because they prospered, to be
better than his, because he was continually chastened and plagued, thinking
that all his Religion had been in vain, and to no purpose. It was their
faults, and so it is yours, if it be true which you say; yet it cannot be
denied, but that God loved them, and so he may you, notwithstanding. You may
know that afflictions, many times, do work like Physic, which, at first
stirs humors, and which discovers, and seems to increase the disease,
before that it cure it; and this God does many times, that his children may
more fully see their corruptions, to their through humbling, before he cure
them.

There are others (and it may be the same, when the tide of affliction is
turned) because they Prosper, and are not in trouble as other men, do conceive
that God does not love them. For it Doubts of Gods love because they prosper,
removed.
is said, Rev. 3. 19
as many as he loves, he does rebuke and chasten, and he does Heb 12. 6 Answ.
chasten every Son whom he receives.

See, a fearful and doubtful heart will draw matter to feed its fears and
doubts, out of any thing. But know, God is a wise and good Father, he knows
In what cases God usually does not afflict his children.
whento strike, and when to hold his hands.

In these cases God does not usually afflict his children with his heavy rod.

First, when they be Infants, babes in Christ, or (if they be grown to
years) when they be spiritually weak or sick, and cannot bear correction;
then, though they be way ward, and froward, and deserve strokes, God does
forbear, and is inclined to pity rather.

Secondly, when they be good Children, that is, show that they would please
him, indevouring to do what they are able, though it be with much imperfection,
then GOD will not strike, but Mal. 3. 17
spares them, as a Father spares his only son that serves him.

Thirdly, when forbearance of punishment, and when fruits and tokens of
kindness will reclaim his children from evil, and do prove incitements unto
good; God in this case also, like a wise and loving Father, had rather draw
them by the Hos. 11. 4
cords of love, then drive them with the lashes of his displeasure. Thus you
see God may love his Children, and not be always afflicting of them. The
Husbandman does not always plow and harrow his land, nor yet is he always
threshing of his corn.

Well, do you prosper? Then take notice of Gods goodness toward you with
thanksgiving; study and endeavor therefore tobe the more obedient. If you
cannot, yet grieve because you cannot be more thankful and more obedient.
Then, because prosperity has made you better, or at least to will to be
better, hence you may assure your selves, that your prosperity is not given you
in wrath, but in love. But take heed, (quarrel not with God) because he
forbeareth to afflict you, either make this use, that you be good, and amend
without blows; or else be sure the more is behind, and then when it comes
it will be the more grievous; because, for his good will, you did foolishly
call his love into question.

As the forementioned did question Fears that God does not love men, because
they think their state to be wo^se th^^ any others* removed.
Gods love, from considerations taken from their outward conditions; so there
are very many, besides what they conclude from outward crosses, gather also
from their inward horrors and distresses of Conscience, and from their
intolerable perplexities of soul, that God does not love them: they think that
their distress is other, or greater than the affliction of any of GODS
Children, therefore they want peace, fearing that God does not love them.

Those to whom GOD does Answ.
bear special love, may be so far perplexed with inward and strange terrors
and discomforts, that they may think themselves to be Psalm. 77. 7, 8, 9.
forsaken of God. Thus the Psalmist complains, will the Lord cast off for
ever? And will he be favorable no more? Yea, not only he, but Mat. 27. 46.
Cant. 5. 6. Isa. 49. 14
Christ Jesus himself, and his Church, did in their sense and feeling, take
themselves to be forsaken of God; yet none that are wise will say, that these
were out of Gods love, or were ever 2. Cor. 4. 8, 9.
quite forsaken, though never so much perplexed and cast down; though, in
their own feelings and sense, they, in the agony of their spirits, did thus
think or speak.

God has most holy and blessed The ends why God does g^vously (...) stres^
children
ends, why that many times he does lead and leave his Children in such
straits, that they are altogether without sense of his love.

First, it may be a just correction of them, for their not showing love to God,
and because they do in part forsake him by their sins. This is therefore to
humble them, and to make them know themselves, and to bring them to repentance.
God may be pacified toward them in the maine, yet for a time, show them no
countenance; as DAVID, though his anger was appeased toward Absolon, 2 Samuel
14* 24.
yet for a time he would not let him see his love, for he would not let him
come in his sight, that Absolon might be more humbled, and might the more
detest his sin.

Secondly, God exercises his beloved ones with many fears, horrors, and
doubts, to prevent that spiritual pride which else would be in them and that
selfesufficiency which else they would conceive to be in themselves; If they
should always have sense of inward and spiritual comforts, and should not
sometimes have 2 Cor. 12 7
pricks in the flesh, and buffetings of Satan, they would be exalted above
measure, and would be some thing in themselves in their own opinion. But when
there is such difficulty in getting, and in holding of grace and comfort, and
when they shall find what need they have of both, and how neither can be
had, but from God, in and by Christ, it will make them empty themselves of all
things in themselves, that they may be something in Christ. And then, when
they have grace and comfort, they will acknowledge themselves to be beholding
to GOD for the same.

Thirdly, GOD does withhold from his Children, the sense of his favor, to try
the sincerity and truth of their sole dependace on him; trying, whether
because GOD seems to forsake them, they will forsake him; whethsr, like King
Ioram, they will say, 2 King. 6 33 1 Samuel 28. 7
why shall they wait upon God any longer? And, whether they will with Saul,
betake them to unlawful means of help: Or whether on the other side, they
will say with Job 13. 15
Job and Psalm. 42 9. 11
David, though GOD kill us, or forget us, yet we will trust in him, hope in
him, and praise him, who they are persuaded is, and will show himself to be
the health of their countenance and their GOD. God uses to leave his Children,
as, in another case, he left 2 Chr. 32. 3^
Hezekiah, to try them and to know what is in their hearts.

Fourthly, God withdraws himself for a time, that they may learn to esteem
more highly of his favor, and to desire it more, when by the want of it, they
find by experience, what an Hell it is to be without it. And that they may be
more thankful for it, and be more careful; (by studying to please God) for
to keep it when they have it. This holy use Psalm. 80. 18, 19. Can. 3. 2. 5
Can. 5. 1. 8. Can. 2. 7. Can. 8. 4.
David and the Church made of Gods forsaking them (as they thought) for a time.
It made them seek more diligently after God, promising that if he would turn
to them, they would not go back from him; resolving by his grace to stick
more close unto him.

But know this to your comfort, God does never wholly or for ever forsake his
Children.
when God does most withdraw himself and forsake you, it is but in part, and
in seeming, and but for a time. He may, for the causes before rendered, turn
away his face, and forbear to show his loving countenance; but he will not
take his Psalm. 89. 32, 33, 34.
loving kindness utterly from you, nor suffer his faithfulness to fail. What
God said to his afflicted Church, that he says to every afflicted member
thereof. Isa. 54 7. 8
For a small moment have I forsaken thee; but with great mercies will I gather
thee. In a little wrath have I hid my face from thee for a moment: but with
everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, says the LORD thy Redeemer.
Hence it is that in your greatest extremities, your faith and hope shall
secretly (though you feel not their working) preserve you from utter despair.
As it was with Psalm. 22. 1.
David, and with our Blessed Savior, who albeit these words of theirs to God,
Why have thou forsaken me, argued fear, and want of sense of Gods love, yet
these words, My God, my God, Mat. 27. 46
do argue a secret affiance and hope.

And whereas you say, that no man's grief or troubles are like yours, partly by
reason of outward afflictions, and partly by inward temptations and distresses,
(give me leave to deal plainly with you.) It is a foolish and a most false
speech. Talk with a thousand thus troubled, they will all say thus, No man's
case was ever as mine is, Nor so bad: will any that have but common sense
think this to be true? Most of these must needs be deceived. You feel your
own distress, but you cannot fully know what another feels.

If you would rightly look into the distresses of others, who were better than
your selves, according as they are recorded in the Scripture, you would not
thus think. As for outward afflictions, upon whom did God ever lay his hand
more heavy then on his Job 1.
servant Job? Had not 2 Cor. 11. 23 to 33
S* Paul also his trouble without, of all sorts, and terrors within, etc. And,
if you consider sorrows, fears, and distresses of all sorts, were yours such
as David's were, or more than his? I pray what mean these, and many more the
like speeches? My bones are vexed, my soul is vexed; b Psalm. 6. 2, 3 6, 7
but thou, O Lord, how long? I am weary with my groaning, mine eye is consumed
with grief, it waxes old. Psalm. 10. 1
Why stand thou a far off? Why hidest thou thy self in time of trouble?
Psalm. 13. 1
How long will thou forget me Lord; for ever? How long will thou hide thy face
from me? Psalm. 22. 14, 15
I am poured out like water, and all my bones are out of joint. My heart is
like wax, it is melted in the midst of my bowels. My strength is dried up like
a potsheard; my tongue cleaves to my jaws, and thou have brought me to the
dust of death. Ps. 32. 3, 4
My bones wax old through roaring all the day. For day and night thy hand was
heavy upon me. Ps. 38. 3, 4
There is no soundness in my flesh because of thine anger, neither is their
any rest in my bones, because of my sin. Mine iniquities, that is, the
punishment of mine iniquities, are gone over my head, they are too heavy for
me. Thus and much more, does he complain. Psa. 69. 3
I am weary of my crying, my throat is dry. Mine eyes fail while I wait for my
God. Psa. 77. 2.
So Asaph, My sore ran, and ceased not, my soul refused to be comforted,

What think you now? Were not Job, Paul, and David, in Gods love and favor,
notwithstanding all this? It may be you Reply.
will reply, howsoever the matter of their trouble might be greater than yours,
yet they could remember God, they could pray to him, they had faith and
confidence in God in their distresses, al which you want; therefore herein your
case is worse than theirs.

Consider your selves well, Answ.
(I speak only to you that are wounded at the very heart for sin) and it is
to be hoped that in some measure you shall find the like grace, faith, and
confidence in you, which was in the^; If you see it not, be grieved for the
want thereof; Endeavor to do as you say they did in their distresses, only be
not discouraged, and all shall be well. But take notice, I pray you, that
sometimes David neither did, nor could pray, (as he conceived of his own
prayer) any otherwise than in Psa. 32. 3.
roaring and complaining; at which time, he says, he kept silence; But when
he could Psa. 32. 5
confess his sins and pray, then he had some apprehension that God had
forgiven him his sin. And for all Asaphs remembering of God, yet even then he
was Ps. 77. 2. 3
troubled, and his spirit was overwhelmed, and he says, his soul refused
comfort; and David says unto God, Ps. 119. 82
when will thou comfort me? I grant it was his fault, yet it was such a fault
as was incident to one beloved of God. Moreover, I deny not, but that Job and
David had faith and hope in God; but these graces in them were of times
overclouded with unbelife and distrust; as does appear in their many
passionate distempers; at which times, yet their faith appeared to others in
their good speeches and actions intermingled, rather then to themselves. And
the Prophet confesses that those his faithless complaints were Ps. 31. 2^
in his haste, and Ps. 77. 10
from his infirmities.

How say you now? Is it not thus with you? Are you not like others of Gods
children? Off, and on, up and down, you would pray and cannot, you would
believe but (as you think) cannot, you would have comfort but cannot feel it.
Only you feel a secret support now and then, and now and then, you do see
and feel a glimpse of GODS light and comfort; for which you must be
thankful, which you must cherish by all means, and with which you must rest
contented, waiting until God give you more.

You should know and consider, An old device of Satan to make a man think his
case to be worse than any others.
that this is an old cunning device of Satan, to make you believe that your
case is worse, or at least much different from the case of any others, because
he knows, that while he holds you thus conceited, no common remedy, which
did cure and comfort others, can cure and comfort you. For you will still ask,
Was ever any as I am? And if Gods Ministers cannot say yea, and, that such an
instruction, and such a promise in the Word did help him; then you conclude
that you are incurable.

But last of all, let it be supposed that your case is worse than any bodies
else. Is there not a sovereign Balm in Gods Word, a Catholicon that will
heal all Ier. 8. 22.
spiritual diseases? Gods Word is like himself, to a believer, an Mar. 9 23
Omnipotent Word. Is any thing Gen 18. 14.
too hard for the LORD? Neither is there any spiritual disease too hard for his
Word. When Christ healed the people with his Word, did it not heal even such,
the like whereof, were never known to be cured before?

They made no question, whether he cured the like before Indeed Ioh. 11. 39,
40.
Martha failed in this, for she said of her brother Lazarus being dead; LORD he
stinketh, for he has been dead four days: she conceived her brothers case
to be desperate, and that none in his case could be raised. But Christ did
blame her for want of faith* and by his Word he did as easily raise Lazarus
from being dead so long, as he did cure Mar. 1. 31
Peter's wives mother sick but of an ague.

It is not greatness of any man's distres whatsoever, that can hinder from
help and comfort, but only as then in Mar. 6. 5, 6,
curing men's bodies, so now in curing and comforting men's souls, nothing
hinders the cure, but the greatness of the unbelief of the party to be cured:
for Mar. 9. 23
all things are possible to him that believes.

You will yet Reply: indeed Reply.
here lies the difficulty in the unbelife.

Well, be it so. If unbelief be Answ.
your disease, and trouble, do you think that God cannot cure you of
unbelief as well as of any other sin? But know that if with him in the
Gospel, you feel your unbelief, and complain of it, and confess it unto
GOD, saying, Mar. 9. 24
Lord I have cause to believe, Lord I do, I would believe, help thou my
unbelief; if withal, you will wait until GOD give you power to believe, and
to enjoy comfort in believing, for, Isa. 28. 16
faith makes no haste, this same is both to believe in truth, and is a
certain means to increase in believing.

Wherefore let not Satan, nor yet a fearful heart make you to judge your
case to be desperate and remediless, either in respect of Gods power or will,
though you yet be in distress, and do feel in you much fear and unbelief.
Seek to God, and with patience wait the good time of deliverance, and
comfort; and in due time, you shall have help and comfort, as well as any
other.

There are yet some, that fear Doubts that God does not love them because
their prayers are rejected, removed.
God does not love them, because they have prayed often and much; but God
rejected their prayers, and has not heard them.

There are many just causes, why God may reject, or at least not grant your
prayers; and yet may love your persons.

For first, It may be you I am. 4. 3.
ask amiss, either asking things unlawful, or asking things inconvenient for
the present, or in asking to have good things temporal, or spiritual, in that
quantity and degree, which GOD does not hold fit for you as yet; or you ask
good things to an ill end, as to satisfy some lust, as pride, voluptuousness,
covetousness, or some other; or it may be you might ask only with a
natural desire, or if with spiritual, yet you did it but faintly, without
fervor; or lastly (though you failed in neither of the former,) yet you failed
in this, you were doubtful, you did not ask in faith, you did not believe,
you should have the things so asked. Whosoever do thus fail in asking, I am.
1. 6, 7
let them not think ever to receive any thing in favor from the LORD. And it
is a fruit of Gods love, when he does not answer prayers so made; For it will
cause you to seek him, and to pray to him, in a better manner that you may be
heard.

Secondly, God does many times in love and mercy hear God hears prayers many
ways.
his childrens prayers, when they think he does not. God hears prayers many
ways, you must observe this, else you will judge that he does not hear your
prayers, when yet indeed he does. Sometimes, yea, always when it is good for
you, he gives the v^r^ thing which you pray for. Some^^^^s he gives not that
thing which you ask; but some thing^s good, nay, much better. As, when you
ask corporal and temporal good things, he denies to grant them; but in
stead thereof does give you things spiritual and eternal, likewise when you
ask grace in some special degree, such as joy, or comfort in God, or the like,
it may please him not to let it appear that he gives the same unto you; but
in stead thereof he does enlarge your desires, and he gives humility, and
patience to wait his leisure, which will do you more good than that which you
prayed for. So likewise when you pray that GOD would rid and ease you of such,
or such a temptation; God does not always rid and ease you of it; but he in
stead thereof gives you strength to withstand it, and keeps you, that you
are not overcome by it; thus Christ Heb. 5. 7.
was heard in that which he feared, so he said to the 2 Cor. 12 9
Apostle, My grace is sufficient for thee? Which is better than to have your
particular request. For now GODS power is seen in your weakness, and God
has the glory of it; and you hereby have experience of GODS power, which
experienceis of excellent use.

Likewise you may desire, to have such, or such a cross removed; yet God may
suffer the cross to remain for a time, but he gives you st^ength and
patience to bear it, wisdom and grace to be less earthly, and more heavenly
minded by reason of it. There was never any, that, with an holy and humble
heart, made lawful requests according to the will of Christ, believing he
should be heard; but, though he were a man of many failings in himself, and
did discover many weaknesses in his prayer, was heard in that he prayed,
either in what he did ask, or in what he should rather have asked, either in
that very thing, or in a better.

I would have you leave objecting, and questioning, whether God love you.
Consider this; Has he not loved you, Ioh. 3. 16.
that has given his only be gotten Son for you, and to you, Rev. 1. 5.
who has washed you with his blood, Romans 4. 25.
having given him to dye for your sins, and to rise again for your
justification, and has hereby translated you into the kingdom of his dear
Son, having also Phi. 1 29
given unto you to believe in his Name, hereby Ioh. 1. 12
making you his children, inheritours with the Saints in light. What greater
sign can there be of greater love of God toward you? And what better evidence
can you have of Gods love in justifying of you, then the Heb. 11. 1
evidence of your faith, whereby you are Romans 3. 28
justified.

SECTION 5. A removal of false fears, rising from doubtings whether they have
faith and are Justified.
ALL men will grant, that if they were sure that they had faith, they should
not doubt of their justification, nor of Gods love to them in Christ. But many
doubt that they have no faith, or if they have any, it is so little, that it
cannot be sufficient to carry them through all oppositions to the end, unto
salvation.

First, if you have any faith, Answ.
though no more then as a Luk 17. 6
grain of Mustard Seed, you should not fear your final estate, nor yet doubt
of Gods love, for it is not the great quantity and measure of faith that
saves; but the excellent property and use of faith, if it be true, though
never so small: For a man is not saved by the worth of his faith, by which he
believes, but by the worth of Christ, the person on whom he believes. Now
the least true faith does apprehend whole Christ, as a little hand may hold a
Jewel of infinite worth as well though not so strongly as a bigger. The least
infant is as truly a man, as soon as ever it is endued with a reasonable
soul, as afterward, when it is able to show forth the operations of it, though
not so strong a man: even so it is in the state of Regeneration. Now you should
consider that God has 1 Ioh. 2. 12
Babes in Christ, as well as ^ld men, 1 These. 5 14 Romans 14. 1 Romans 15. 1
feeble minded as well as strong, sick children as well as whole in his
family. And those that have least strength and are weakest, of whom the holy
Ghost says, they have a Rev. 3. 8.
little strength in comparison, yet they have so much as (through God) will
enable them in the time of greatest trials, to keep Gods Word, and that they
shall not deny Christ's Name. Also know, God like a tender father, does not cast
off such as are little, feeble, and weak, but has given special charge
concerning the 1 These. 5. 14
cherishing, supporting, and comforting of these, rather than others. And Mat.
12. 2
Christ Jesus, he will blow up, and not quench the least spark of faith.

This which I have said in Caution.
commendation of little faith, is only to keep him that has no more, from
despair. Let none herby please or content himself with his little faith, not
striving to grow, and be strong in faith. If he do, it is to be feared that he
has none at all; or if he have, yet he must know that he will have much to
do to live, when he has no more than can keep life and soul together, and
his life will be very unprofitable, and uncomfortable, in comparison of him
that has a strong faith.

But you will say, you are (1) so Reasons why many think they have no faith,
but without cause.
full of fears and doubtings, (2) you are so fearful to dye, and to hear of
our coming to judgment, and (3) you cannot feel that you have faith, you
cannot feel joy and comfort in believing, wherefore you fear you have no
faith.

First, if you (having so sure a word and promise) do yet doubt and fear so
much as you say, it is your great sin, and I must blame you now, in our
Saviors name, as he did his Disciples then, saying, Mat. 8. 26
Why are you fearful, Mat. 14. 31.
why are ye doubtful, O ye of little faith? But (to your reformation and
comfort) observe it, he does not argue them to be of no faith, but only of
little faith, saying, O ye of little faith. Thus you see that some fears and
doubtings do not argue no faith.

Secondly, Touching fear of Reasons, why some are more fearful to die than
others, and why al naturally are unwilling to dye.
death and judgment, some fear does not exclude all faith. Many out of their
natural constitution are more fearful of death than others. Yea, pure nature
will startle and shrink to think of the separation of two so near, and so
ancient, and such dear friends as the soul and body have been. Good men, such
as David and Hezekiah have showed their unwillingnesse to die. And many upon a
mistaking, conceiving the pangs and pains of death in the parting of the soul
out of the body to be most torterous, and unsufferable, are afraid to dye.
Whereas unto many, the nearer they are to their end, the less is their
extremity of pain; and very many go away in a quiet swoone without pain.

And as for being moved with some fear at the thought of the day of Judgment;
who can think of that great appearance before so glorious a Majesty, (such as
Mat. 16. 27
Christ shall appear in) 2 Cor. 5. 10, 11
to answer for all the things he has done in his body, without trembling? The
Apostle calls the thoughts thereof the terror of the Lord. Indeed to be
perplexed with the thoughts of the one or other, argues imperfection of faith
and hope, but not an utter absence of either.

You have other and better things to do in this case, than to make such
dangerous conclusions, viz. that you have no faith, etc. upon such weak
grounds. You should rather when you feel this over-fearefulnesse to die and
come to Judgment, labor to find out the ground of your error, and study and
endeavor to reform it.

Unwillingness to dye may come from these causes.

First, From too high an estimation, Causes why Christians are too unwilling to
die
and from too great a love to earthly things of some kind or other, which
makes you afraid and too loath to part with them.

Secondly, You may be unwilling to die, because of ignorance of the super
abundant and inconceivable excellencies of the happiness of Saints departed,
which if you knew, you would be willing.

Thirdly, Fear of death and coming to Judgment, does (for the most part)
rise from a conscience guilty of the sentence of condemnation, being without
assurance, that, when you dye, you shall go to heaven.

Wherefore if you would be Helps against fear of death.
free from troublesome fear of death and Judgment, Learn (1) to think
meanly and basely of the world, in comparison of those better things provided
for them that love God, and use all things of the world accordingly, without
Psa. 62. 10
setting your heart upon them, 1 Cor. 7. 29, 30, 31.
as if you used them not. (2) While you live here on earth, take your selves
aside often times in your thoughts, and enter into heaven, and contemplate deeply
the joys thereof. (3) 2 Pet. 1. 10, 11.
Give all diligence to make your calling, and election, and right unto heaven,
sure unto your selves; But let me give you this needful Item, that you be
willing and ready to judge it to be sure, when it is sure, and when you have
cause so to judge. Let your care be only to live well, joining unto faith
virtue, 2 Pet. 1. 5.
etc. and you cannot but dye well. Death at first appearance like a Serpent
seems terrible, but by faith you may see this Serpents sting taken out, which
when you consider, you may for your refreshing receive it into your bosom. The
sting of death is sin, the strength of sin is the Law, 1 Cor. 15. 55, 56.
Romans 8. 2.
but the Law of the spirit of life in Christ has freed you from the law of
sin and of death. I confess that when you see this pale horse, death
approaching, it may cause nature to shrink, but when you consider that his
errant is to carry you with speed unto your desired home, unto a state of
glory, how can you but desire he should carry you away out of this vale of
misery, that mortality 2 Cor. 5. 4
might be swallowed up of life.

If you would do all this in earnest, you would be so far from fear of
death, that you would, if you were put to your choice, with the Phil. 1. 23
Apostle, choose to he dissolved, and to be with Christ, which is best of
all, and so far from fearing the day of Judgment, that you would love and 2 Timothy 4. 8
long for Christ's appearing; waiting with patience and cheerfulness, Job 14. 14
when your change shall be. Endeavor to follow these directions; then, suppose
that you cannot keep down these fears, and conquer them as you would, yet be
not discouraged, for fears and doubts in this kind, do flow many times from
strength of temptation, rather than from weakness of Faith.

Moreover, what if you cannot An answer to those which question their faith,
for want of feeling.
attain to so high a pitch in your Faith, as S. Paul had, are you so
ambitious, that no other degrees of Faith shall satisfy you? Orare you so
foolish, as thence to conclude, that you have no Faith.

Thirdly, Whereas you say, you are without feeling, therefore you fear you
have no faith. I acknowledge that want of feeling, and want of sense of Gods
favor, is that which does more trouble GODS tenderhearted Children, and make
them more doubt of Gods love, and of their justification, than any thing else,
whereas I know nothing that gives them loss cause.

For first, What mean you by feeling? If you mean the enioyment of the things
promised, and hoped for, by inward sense; This is to overthrow the nature, and
to put an end to the use of faith and hope. For Heb. 11. 1
Faith is the ground of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen.
And the Apostle faith, Romans 8 24
Hope that is seen is not hope. Indeed faith gives a present being of the
thing promised to the believer, but it is a being, not in sense, but in hope,
and assured expectation of the thing promised: Wherefore the Apostle speaking
of our spiritual conversation on earth, says, We 2 Cor. 5* 7
walk by faith, not by sight. These two; faith and feeling, are opposite one
to the other in this sense; For when we shall live by sight, and feeling,
then, we shall cease to live by faith.

Secondly, If by feeling you mean a joyous and comfortable assurance that you
are in Gods savor, and that you shall be saved, and therefore because you want
this joyous assurance, you think you have no Faith, you must know this
conclusion will not follow.

For Faith, whereby you are saved and set into state of grace, and this
comfortable assurance that you are in state of grace and shall be saved, do
differ, and are not the same. It is true, Assurance is an effect of faith in all
that have this assurance, yet it is not such a proper and necessary effect,
which is inseparable from the very being of faith in man at all times. For you
may have saving Faith, yet at sometime be without the comfortable assurance of
Salvation.

To believe in Christ to Salvation is one thing, and to know assuredly that you
shall be saved, is another. For Faith is a direct act of the reasonable soul,
receiving Christ, and Salvation offered by God with him. Assurance rises from
a reflect act of the soul, namely, when the soul by discourse returns upon
it self, and can witness that it has the aforementioned grace of faith,
whereby a man can say, I know that I believe that Christ Jesus is mine, and I
know that I believe, that the promises of the Gospel belong unto me. The holy
Scriptures are written for both these ends, that first Faith, and then
assurance of faith and hope should be wrought in men. Ioh. 20. 31.
These things are written, says S. John in his Gospel, that you may believe,
that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God, and that believing you might have
life through his name. Again, these things have I written (says the same 1
Ioh. 5. 15.
Apostle in his Epistles) to you that believe on the name of the Son of GOD;
that ye may know that you have eternal life, and that you may believe, that
is, continue to believe, and increase in believing on the name of the Son of
God.

A man is saved by faith, but has comfort in hope of Salvation by Assurance;
So that the being of spiritual life, in respect of us, does subsist in Faith,
not in Assurance and Feeling. And that is the strongest and most approved
faith, which cleaves to Christ and to his promises, and which holds his
own, without the help of feeling. For, albeit Assurance gives unto us a more
evident certainety of our good estate, yet faith, even without this will hold
us certain in this good estate, whether we be assured or not.

Wherefore some Divines have well conceived of a double certainty of things
apprehended by man's judgment. The first is Certainty of Adherence, and
cleaving fast to the thing it believes, causing a man (from the bare assent
and consent to the truth and goodness of the promise, and from the
Commandment of God in his Word, which bids him believe and rest on his
promise) for to cleave to the promise and to rely on it, and to obey that
Commandment, which comma^deth him to believe in Christ Jesus; yea, though this
truth be not otherwise so evident and clear to the understanding, as to
satisfy man's natural reason. For though Faith in its minority, cannot always
comprehend to the full, how, and by what means, or why in reason, the thing
promised should be fulfilled; yet, because it conceives thus much, that the
things of God are not fully comprehended by humane reason, and that the truths
of God are infallible, whether it comprehend them or not; will first believe
and rest on the promise, and then afterward consider how it may be, so far as
is fit to be understood by reason. Hence it is that albeit reason, as it is now
corrupt, will still be Ioh. 3. 4.
obiecting, and will be satisfied with nothing, but what it may know by sense,
and by demonstration from Artificial Arguments; yet Rom 4. 19, 20. Heb 11 8. 11
Faith, even above and against sense, and all natural reasoning, will give
credit unto, and rest upon the bare naked divine witness of the Word of truth,
for his sake that does speak it.

Secondly, there is a certainty of Evidence, namely, when the thing believed
is not only said to be true and good, but a man does find it so to be by
sense and experience, and is so evident to man's reason convincing it by force
of Argument, taken from the Causes, Effects, Properties, Signs* Contraries,
and the like, that it has nothing to object against the thing propounded to be
believed. The certainty of Adherence, is the certainty of Faith. The
certainty of Evidence, is the certainty of Assurance.

The certainty of Assurance and evidence is of excellent use, for it makes a
man 2 Pet. 1. 8 10
fruitful in good works, and does fill him full of joy and comfort: therefore
it must by all means be gotten, yet, it is not of it self so strong, nor so
constant, nor so infallible as the certainty of Faith and Adherence is. For
sense and reason since the fall (even in the regenerate, though they will lay
some foundation in the Rules of Faith to proceed by, yet erring in, or
misapplying the rule) are weak, variable, and their conclusions are not so
certain, as those of pure Faith: Because Faith builds only upon Divine
Testimony, Romans 4. 18. Heb. 11. 11
concluding without reasoning or disputing, yea, many times against reasoning.

So that notwithstanding the excellent, and needful use of Assurance, and
certainty of Evidence; it is Faith and the certainty of Adherence, whereby even
in fears and doubts a man cleaves fast to the promises, and is that which we
must trust unto, and is the Cable we must hold by, lest we make ship wrack of
all, when we are assaulted with our greatest temptations, for then many times
our Assurance leaves us to the mercy of the winds and Seas, as Mariners
speak. If you have Faith, though you have little or no feeling, you are yet
sure enough of Salvation, indeed, though not in your own apprehension. When
both can be had, it is best, for then you have most strength, and most comfort,
giving you cheerfulness in all your troubles, but that certainty of Faith,
and cleaving to the naked word and promise, is that to which you must trust.

See this in the examples of most faithful men, for when they have been put
to it, it was this that upheld them, and in this was their faith commended.
Abraham against all present sense and reason, even against hope, believed in
hope, both in the matter of receiving a son, and in going about to offer him
again unto God in Sacrifice. He denied sense and reason, he Heb 11. 17, 18, 19.
considered not the unlikelihoods, and seeming impossibilities in the judgment
of reason, that ever he should have a seed, he being old, and Sarah being old
and barren, or having a seed, that he should be saved by that seed, since he
was to kill him in Sacrifice. He only Romans 4. 18 19, 20, 21.
considered the Almighty power, faithfulness and soveraigntie of him that had
promised, he knew it was his duty to obey and to wait, and so let all the
business thereabout to rest on Gods promise, For this, his faith is commended,
and he is said to be Rom 4. 20
strong in faith.

Job, and David, or Asaph, showed most strength of Faith, when they had little
or no feeling of Gods favor, but the contrary rather. Job had little feeling
of Gods favor, when for pain of body he said, Job. 13. 14. 24.
wherefore do I take my flesh in my teeth: and in anguish of soul he said,
Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and take me for thine enemy: Yet then this
certainty of faith, which made him cleave unto GOD, made him to hold fast, and
say in the same Chapter, Job 13. 15.
Though he slay me, yet I will trust in him. When David said to GOD, Psa. 42.
9.
Why have thou forgotten me? His Assurance was weak; yet even then his Faith
discovered it self, when he says to his soul, Ps. 42. 11
Why art thou disquieted within me, Hope in God, who is the health of my
countenance, and my God. You see then that the excellency of Faith lies not
in your feeling, but, as the Psalmist speaks by experience, in Ps. 73. 28.
cleaving close unto the promise, and relying on God for it, upon his bare
word. For he says, It is good for me to draw near to God, I have put my
trust in the Lord God, this was it which secretly upheld him, and kept him in
possession, when, as you may see in that Psalm, his Evidences, and Assurance
was to seek.

Wherefore, Believe Gods promises made to you in Christ, and ^est on him; even
when you want ^oy, and feeling comfort. For ^aving Faith, you are sure of
heaven, though you be not so fully ^ssured of it as you desire. It will ^e your
greatest commendation, when you will be dutiful servants and children at GODS
Commandment, though you have not present wages, when you will take Gods word
for that. Those are bad servants and children, which cannot go on cheerfully,
in doing their Master or Fathers will, except they may receive the promised
wages, (...) least in good part aforehand, O^ every day; or except they may
have atleast a good part of the promised inheritance presently, and in hand.
Feeling of comfort is part of a Christians wages and inheritance (to be
received at the good pleasure of God, that freely gives it) rather than a
Christian duty. To comfort and stay ourselves on God in distress, is a duty,
but this joyous sense and feeling of Gods favor, is a gracious favor of God
toward us, not a duty of ours toward God. It is from too much distrust in God,
and too much self-respect, when we have no heart to go about his work,
except we be full of feeling of his favor. He is the best child or servant,
that will obey out of love, duty, and conscience, and will trust on God, and
wait on him for his wages and recompense. Though want of apprehension of Gods
favor, and of feeling of comfort may be accounted a great misery; yet it is
not to be judged a proof, of no grace, or of no true Faith.

Thirdly, when you say, you cannot feel, that you have faith or hope, you
mean, as in deed many good souls do, you cannot find and perceive, that
these graces be in you in truth, which, if you did, you would not doubt of
your salvation: My answer is, Many do not feel that they have faith, because
they do not feel for it*
If faith and hope be in you, then if you would judiciously enquire into your
selves, and feel for them, you may find and feel them, and know that you
have them; For as certainly, as he that sees bodily, may know that he sees;
so he that has the spiritual sight of Faith, may know that he has Faith.
Wherefore try and feel for your Faith, and you shall find whether it be in you
yea or no.

For this cause, (1) Try whether you ever had the necessary Antecedents and
Preparatives, which ordinarily make way for the seed of Faith to take deep
root. (2) Consider the nature of saving Faith, and whether it has wrought in
you accordingly. (3) Consider some consequents and certain effects thereof.

First, has the Law shut you up, in your own apprehension, under the curse,
so that you have been afraid of Hell. And has the Spirit also convinced you
of sin by the Gospel, to the wounding of your conscience, and to the working
of true humiliation causing the heart to relent, and to desire to know how to
be saved; and if after this you have denied your self, and received and rested
on Christ, according to the nature of true Faith, as follows, then you have
Faith.

If you doubt, you were never sufficiently humbled, then read Chap. 16. Sect.
6.

Secondly, Consider rightly the nature and proper acts of Faith, lest you
conceive that to be faith which is not, and that to be no faith, which is.

You may know wherein true saving Faith consists, by this which follows.
Whereas (man being fallen into state of condemnation by reason of sin, thereby
breaking the Covenant of works,) it pleased God to ordain a new Covenant, the
Covenant of Grace, establishing it in his only Son Christ Jesus made man,
expressing the full tenor of this his Covenant in the Gospel, wherein he
makes a gracious and free offer of Christ, in whom this Covenant is
established, and with him the Covenant it self, unto man; now when a man
burdened with his sin, understanding this offer, gives credit unto it, and
assenteth thereunto because it is true, and approves it, and consents to it,
both because it is good for him to embraceit, and because it is the will and
Commandment of God, and is one condition in the Covenant that he should
consent for his part, and trust to it; when therefore a man receives Christ
thus offered, together with the whole Covenant in every branch of it, so What
it is to believe
far as he does understand it, resolving to rest on that part of the
Cavenant made and promised on Gods part, and to stand to every branch of the
Covenant, to be performed on his part; Thus to embrace the Covenant of grace,
and to receive Christ, in whom it is confirmed, is to believe.

This offer of Christ, and the receiving him by faith, may clearly be
expressed by an offer of peace, and favor, made by a King unto a woman that is
a rebellious subject; by making offer of a marriage between her and his only
son, the heir apparent to the Crown, who, to make way to this match,
undertakes, by his Fathers appointment, to make full satisfaction to his
Fathers justice in her behalf, and to make her every way fit to be daughter to
a King. And for effecting this match between them, the Son with the consent
and appointment of his Father, sends his chief servants a wooing to this
unworthy woman; making offer of marriage in their Masters behalf, with the
clearest proofs of their Masters good wi^ to her and with the greatest
earnestnes and entreaties, to obtain her good will, that may be. This woman at
first being a Ward, or bondwoman unto this Kings sons mortal enemy, and
being in love with base slaves like her self, companions in her rebellion, may
happily set light by this offer; or if she consider well of it, she may doubt
of the truth of this offer, the match being so unequal and so unlikely on her
part, she being so base and so unworthy, she may think the motion to be too
good to be true; yet if upon more advised thoughts, she does take notice of
the peril she is in while she stands out against so puissa^t a King in her
rebellion, and does also see and believe, that there is such a one as the Kings
Son, and believes that he is in earnest in his offer to reconcile her to his
Father, and that he would indeed match with her; whereupon she considers also
that it shall be good for her, to forsake all others and take him; and that
especially because his person is so lovely and every way worthy of her love.
Now when she can bring her self to believe this, and resolve thus, though
she comes to it with some difficulty, and when with all she gives a true
and hearty consent to have him, and to forsake all other, and to take him as he
is, to obey him as her Lord, and to take part with him in all conditions,
better or worse, though she come to this resolution with much ado, then the
match is as good as made* between them; for hereupon follows the mutual
plighting* of their troaths each to other.

The application is easy throughout* I will only apply so much as is for my
purpose, to show the nature of justifying Faith.

God offers his only begotten Son Jesus Christ, yea, Christ Jesus by his 2
Cor. 1^ ^*
Ministers, offers himself in the Gospel unto rebellious man, to match with
him, only on this condition, that Ps. 45 (...)
forsaking his kindred and fathers house, forsaking all that he is in himself,
he will receive him as his Romans 7* 4
head, husband, Lord, and Savior; Now when any man understands this motion,
so far as to assent and consent to it, and Ioh. 1. 12.
to receive Christ, and cleave to him; then he believes to Salvation, then
the match is made between Christ and that man, then they are hand-fasted and
betrothed, nay married, and are no longer two, 1 Cor. 6. 17.
but are become one spirit.

By all this you may see, that in saving faith there are these two acts.

First, An assent to the truth of the Gospel, and that not only Two special
acts in saving Faith.
believing in general, that there is a Christ, believing also what manner of
person he is, and upon what condition he offers himself to man to save him;
but also believing that this Christ graciously offers his love and himself,
to a man's self in particular.

The second act is, an approbation and liking well of this offer of Christ,
with consenting, and hearty saying, I will, to the said offer, resolving to
take him wholly, and fully as he is, accepting of him according to the full
tenor of the marriage covenant, not only as a man's Savior, for to defend and
shelter him from evil, and to save him and bring him to glory; but as his head
to be ruled by him, and as his Ps 45. 1^
Lord and King to worship and obey him, believing in him, not only as his
Priest to satisfy, and to make intercession for him, but also as his Prophet
to teach, and as his King to govern him, cleaving to him in all estates,
taking part with him in gall the evils that accompany the Luke 9. 2^
profession of Christ's Name, as well as in the good.

The first act is not enough to save any. The second act cannot be without the
former, where both these are, there is a right receiving of the Gospel, there
is true faith.

The principal matter lies in With what manner of will and consent, a man
receives Christ by faith.
the consent and determination of the w^ll in receiving of Christ; Which that
it may be without exception, know with what manner of will you must consent,
and receive Christ.

First, it must be with an advised and considerate will, it must Luke 14. 28 31
not be rash, and on a sudden, in your ignorance, before you well know what you
do. You must be well advised, and consider well of the person to whom you give
your consent, that you know him, and that you know the nature of this
spiritual marriage and what you are bound unto by virtue of it, and what it
will Luke 14. 28.
cost you, if you give your self to Christ.

Secondly, Your consent must be with a determinate and complete will, touching
present receiving him, Act. 8. 37
even with all the heart. It must not be a faint consent, in an indifferency
whether you consent or no, it must not be in a purpose, that you will receive
him hereafter; but you must give your hand and heart to him for the present,
else, yet it is no match.

Thirdly, Your consent must be with a free and ready will; it must not be, as
it were with a forced will and constrained, yielding against the will; but
(howsoever, it may be with much opposition and conflict, yet you must so beat
down the opposition, that when you give consent, you bring your will to do
it) readily and freely, with thankful acknowledging your selves much bound to
CHRIST all the days of your life, for that he will vouchsafe to make you such
an offer.

When consent is rash, faint, and not free, this will not hold for good any
long time; but when your consent is advised, complete, and free, out of true
love to CHRIST, as well as for your own benefit, the knot of marriage betwixt
Christ and you, is knit so fast, that all the lusts of the flesh all the
allurements of the world, and all the powers of Hell, shall not be able to
break it.

By this which has been said Many presume that they have faith, which have
none
touching the nature of Faith, many, who thought they had faith, may see that
yet they have none.

For they only believe in general that there is a Christ, and a Savior, who
offers grace and salvation to mankind, and hereupon they presume. This
general faith is needful, but that is not enough, it must be a persuasion of
Gods offer of Christ to a man in particular, that the will in particular may be
induced to consent. There must likewise be that particular consent of will, and
accepting of CHRIST upon such terms as he is offered. They that receive
Christ aright, enter into the marriage covenant, resolving to forsake all
other, and obey him, and to take up his cross, and to endure all hardness
with him, and for him, as, shame disgrace, poverty, hatred, and spite in the
world, and all manner of misusages; this they consent to, and resolve upon for
the present, and from this time forward, for the whole time of their life,
which things many neither did, nor intended to do, when they gave their names
to Christ; they only received him as their Jesus, one by whom they did look
to be saved, and honored, looking that he should endow them with a fair
ioynture of heaven, but they did not receive him as their Lord. In doing thus,
they erred in the essentials of marriage. For they erred in the Person, taking
an Idol Christ for the true Christ. They erred in the form of marriage; they
took him not for the present, nor absolutely, for better, for worse (as we
speak) in sickness and health, in good report, and ill report, in persecution
and in peace, forsaking all other, never to part, no not at death. Wherefore
Christ does not own these foolish Virgins, when they would enter the Mat. 25.
12
Bride-chamber, but says, I know you not; For because there was no true
consent on their part, they had no faith, and their contract or marriage with
Christ was only but in speech, but was never Legal, nor consummate.

By this which has been said, others who have Faith indeed, may know they
have it, namely, if they so believe the Covenant of Grace established in
Christ, that with all their hearts they accept of him, and it, so that they will
stand to it on their parts, as they are able, and rest on it so far as it
concerns Christ to fulfill it. For this is Faith.

Unto this, some fearful souls Reply.
will reply; If we have not Faith, except unto assent to the truth, we do also
receive Christ offered, with a deliberate, entire, and free consent, to rest on
him, to be ruled by him, and to take part with him in all conditions; then we
doubt that we have no Faith; because we have so hardly brought our selves to
consent, and find our selves so weak in our consent, and have been so
unfaithful in keeping promise with Christ.

Truth, fullness, and firmness Answ.
of consent of will to receive Christ, may stand with many doubtings, and with
much weakness, and sense of difficulty, in bringing the heart to consent.
For so long as there is Romans 7. 23
a law in your members warring against the law of your mind, you can never do
as you would. If you can bring your hearts to Isa. 1. 19.
will to consent, and obey, in spite of all oppositions, this argues hearty
and full consent, and a true Faith. Nay, if you can bring the heart, but to
desire to receive Christ, and to enter into Covenant with GOD, made mutually
between God and you in Christ, and that it may stand according to the offer
which he makes unto you in his Word, even this argues a true and firm
consent, and makes up the match between Christ and you. Even as when Jacob
related the particulars of an earthly Covenant, into which he would have Laban
enter with him, Labans saying Genesis 30. 34
I would it might be according to thy word, gave proof of his consent, and did
ratify the Covenant betwixt them. If you can therefore, when God tenders unto
you the Covenant of Grace, willing you to receive Christ, in whom it is
established, and to enter into this Covenant. If (I say) you can with all your
heart, say to GOD, I would it might be according to thy word: The Covenant is
mutually entered into, and the match is made betwixt CHRIST and you.

And whereas it does trouble you, that you cannot be so faithful to Christ, as
your Covenant does bind you, it is well you are troubled, if you did not with
all make it an argument, that you have no Faith, for in that it heartily
grieveth you, that you cannot believe, nor perform all faithfulness to
Christ, it is an evident sign that you have faith. You must not think, that
after you are truly married to Christ, you shall be free from evil
solicitations by your old lovers; Nay, sometimes a kind of violence may be
offered, by spiritual wickednesses, unto you, so that you are forced to many
evils indeed Romans 7. 19
against your will, as it may befall a faithful wife, to be forced by one
stronger then she; yet if you give not full consent unto them, and give not
your heart to follow them, your husband CHRIST will not impute these rapes unto
you.

Yet, let none by this take liberty Caution that none abuse Christ's lenity.
to oftend Christ in the least thing, for though Christ love you more tenderly,
and more mercifully, than any husband can love his wife, yet know ye, he does
not do^e on you; he can see the smallest faults, and sharply (though kindly)
rebuke and correct you for them, if you do them presumptuously. But he
esteems none to break spiritual wedlock, so as to dissolve marriage: but
those whose Heb. 3. 12*
hearts are wholly departed from him, and are set upon, and given to something
else. If you thus look into the nature of faith, (I speak to a soul troubled
for sin) you may know and feel that you have it.

3. You may know a lively faith likewise, by most certain Faith known by the
effects thereof.
consequents and effects. I mean not comfort and joy, which are sometimes
felt, and through your fault sometimes not; but by such effects, which are more
constant, and more certain, and may be no less felt than joy and comfort, if
you would feel for them: Amongst many I will reckon these.

First, you may know you have Faith by your feeling and opposing of the
contrary, if you feel a fight and conflict between believing and doubting,
fear^, and distrust; and in that combat you take part with believing, hope, and
confidence, or at least desire heartily that these should prevail, and are
grieved at heart, when the other get the better. If you feel this, do not
say, you have no feeling. Do not say, you have no faith.

This conflict, and desire to have faith, gave proof, that the man in the
Gospel who came to Christ to cure his child, had faith, Mar. 9. 34
I believe Lord, says he, Lord help my unbelief. Do not say (as I have
heard many) this man could say I believe; but we cannot say so. I tell you, if
you can heartily say, Lord help my unbelief, I am sure, any of you may say, I
believe. For, whence is this feeling of unbelief and desire to believe, but
from Faith?

Secondly, You may know you have Faith (I speak still to an afflicted soul
which dares not sin wittingly) for that you will not part with that Faith
which you have, upon any terms. I will ask you (that have given hope to
others, that you do believe, and that yet doubt you have not truth of faith
and hope in God) only these questions, and as your heart can answer them, so
you may judge. Will you part with that faith, and hope, which you call none,
for any price? Would you change present states with those that presume they
have a strong Faith, whose consciences do not trouble them, but are at quiet,
though they live in all manner of wickedness? Or at best are merely civilly
honest? Nay, would you (if it were possible) forgo all that faith, and hope,
and other graces of the Spirit, which you call none at all, and return to that
former state, wherein you were in the days of your vanity, before you did
endeavor to leave sin, and to will to endeavor to settle to Religion in
earnest? Would you lay any other foundation to build upon, then what you have
already laid? Or is there any person or thing, whereon you desire to rest for
Salvation and direction, besides Christ Jesus? If you can answer, no; but can
say with Ioh. 6 68
Peter; To whom shall we go, Christ only has the words of eternal life;
you know no other foundation ^o lay, then what you have laid, and have willed,
and desired to lay it right; you resolve never to pull down what you have
built, though it be but a little. It is your grief that you build no faster
upon it. By this answer you may see, that your conscience, before you are
aware, does witness for you, and will make you confess, that you have some
true faith and hope in GOD, or at least hope that you have. For (let men say
what they will to the conttary) they always think they have those things,
which by no means they can be brought to part with.

Thirdly, If you would have feeling and proof of your faith and Justification;
feel for it in the most certain effect, which is the exercise of your
Sanctification. Do you feel your selves laden and burdened with sin? Do
you feel your hearts ^ke with sorrow for sin? And with all, do you feel
your selves to be altered from what you were? Do you now bear good will to
Gods Word and Ordinances? And do you desire the pure word of God, that you may
1 Pet. 2. 2
grow in grace by it? Do you affect 1 Ioh. 3. 14
Gods people therefore, because you think they fear God? Is it your desire to
approve your selves to God, in holy obedience? And is it your trouble, that you
cannot do it? Then certainly you have Faith, you have an effectual Faith. For
what are all these but the very Pulse, Iam 2. 22 26.
breath, and motions of faith? If you feel grace to be in you, it is a better
feeling, then feeling of comfort; for grace (in men of understanding) is never
severed from effectual Faith but comfort many times is; for that may rise from
Presumption, and false Faith. Grace only from the Spirit, and from true Faith.

SECTION 6. A removal of fears, rising from doubting of Sanctification.
IT is granted by all, that if they be truly Sanctified, then they know that
they have Faith an^ are justified; But many fear they are not Sanctified, and
that for Fe^res of (...) b^ing sanctified, because a^ its thought, they were not
sufficiently ^o^id^d in their first Conversion, ^emoved.
these seeming reasons.

First, some fear they are no^ Sanctified, because they do no^ remember, that
ever they f^^ those wounds and terrors of conscience, which are first wrough^
in men, to make way to Conve^sion, as it was in them, who we^^ Act. 2. 37.
pri^^^ a^ heart at Peter's Se^ mon, and in Act. ^. 6.
S. Paul, and the Act. 16. 29
Iaylor* Or if they felt a^^ terr^, they fear they we but certain flashes,
and for runners of Hellish ^^^ments, li^^ those of Genesis 4. 13
Cain, and Mat. 27. 3, 4.
Judas. Answ.


As it is in the natural birth with the mother, so it is in the spiritual
birth with the child. There is no birth without some travel, and pain, but
not all alike. Thus it is in the new birth with all that are come to years of
discretion. Some have so much grief, fear, and horror, that it is
intolerable, and leaves so deep an impression, that it can never be
forgotten; others have some true sense of grief and fear, but nothing to the
former in comparison, which may easily be forgotten;

There are causes, why some have, or at least feel, some more, some less.

1. Some have committed Reasons, why some feel more grieve and fear in their
first Conversion then* others.
more gross, and more heinous sins than other, therefore they have more
cause and need to have m^re terror and heartbreaking than others.

2. God does set some apart for greater employments than others, such as will
require a man of great trust and experience, wherefore GOD (to prepare them)
does exercise such with greatest trials, for their deep humiliation, and for
their more speedy and full reformation, that all necessary graces might be
more deeply, and more firmly rooted in them.

3. Some have been religiously brought up from their infancy, whereby, as
they were kept from gross sins; so their sins were subdued by little and
little, without any sensible impression of horror; Grace, and comfort being
instilled into them almost insensibly.

4. Some, by naturals constitution, and temper of body, are more fearful, and
more sensible of anguish than others, which may cause, that although they may
be alike wounded in conscience for sin, yet they may not feel it all alike.

5. There may be the like fear and terror wrought in the conscience for sin,
in one as well as another; yet it may not leave the like lasting sense, and
impression in the memory of the one, which it does in the other. Because God
may show himself gracious, in discovering a remedy, and giving comfort to one,
sooner than to the other. As two men may be in peril of their lives by
enemies; the one as soon as he sees his danger, sees an impregnable Castle,
to step into, or an Army of friends to rescue him; this man's fear is quickly
over, and forgotten: The other does not only see great danger, but is
surprised by his enemies, is taken and carried captive, and is a long time in
cruel bondage and fear of his life, til at length, he is redeemed out of
their hand. Such a fear as this can never be forgotten.

You may evidently know, whether you had sufficient grief and fear in your
first conversion by these signs. Had you ever How to know that a man had
sufficient grief, and te^r^ur, in his first Conversion:
such, and so much grief for sin, that it made you to dislike sin, and to
dislike your self for it, and to be weary and heavy laden with it, so as to
make you heartily confess your sins unto GOD, and to ask of him mercy and
forgiveness? Has it made you to look better to your ways, and more careful
to please God? Then be sure, it was a competent and sufficient grief; because
it was a godly 2 Cor. 7. 10
sorrow to repentance, never to be repented of.

Again, are you now grieved and troubled, when you fall into particular
sins? then, you may be certain, that there was a time when you were
sufficiently grieved and humbled in your Conversion, For this latter grief is
but putting that grief into further act, whereof you received an Habit in your
first Conversion.

If you can for the present find any proofs of Conversion, it should not
trouble you, though you know not when, or by whom, or how you were converted;
any more then thus, that you know that God has wrought it by his Word and
Spirit. When any field brings forth a croppe of good corn, this proves that
it was sufficiently plowed; For GOD does never sow, until the fallow ground of
men's hearts is sufficiently broken up.

Now as for those of you which The difference between the terrors that prepare
to co^version, and those which are the beginning of helli^h torment.
remember that you have had terrors of conscience, and it may be, ever and
anon feel them still, who fear that these were not beginnings of Conversion,
but rather beginnings of Desperation and Hellish torments; you should know,
that there is great difference between these and those.

Those fears and horrors, which are only flashes, and beginnings of hellish
torment, are wrought only by the Law and spirit of bondage, giving not so much
as a secret hope of Salvation. But those fears, which make way unto, and which
are the beginnings of Conversion, are indeed first wrought by the Law also, yet
not only, for the Gospel has at last some stroke in them, partly to melt the
heart broken by the Law, partly to support the heart, causing it by some little
glimpse of light, to conceive possibility of remedy; Compare the terrors of
Cain and Judas, with those of the men pricked at Peter's Sermon, with S. Paul's
and the Iaylors, and you shall see both this, and the following differences.

2. The former terrors and troubles are caused, either only for fear of
Hell, and fierce wrath of God, but not for sin; or if at all for sin, it is
only in respect of the punishment. These tending to conversion, are also
caused through fear of Hell, but not only; The heart of one thus troubled,
aketh because of his finne, and that not only because it deserves hell; but
because by it he has offended, and dishonored God.

3. Those, who are troubled in the first sort, do continue headstrong and
obstinate, retaining their wonted hatred against God and against such as fear
GOD, as also their love to wickedness; only, it may be, they smoother and bite
in their ranckor, through the spirit of restraint, that for the time it does
not appear; But in the other will appear some alteration toward goodness;
As, whatsoever their opinions and speeches were of Gods peoples before, now
they begin to think better of them, and of their ways. So did they in the
Acts, before they were pricked at heart, they did Act. 2. 13
scoff at the Apostles, and derided Gods gifts in them, but afterward said (
Act. 2 37.
men and brethren) they conceived reverently of them, and spoke reverently to
them. See the like in Act. 9. 6.
Paul, in his readiness to do whatsoever Christ should enjoyne him. The Act.
16. 24 30. 33.
Iaylour also in this case, quickly became well affected to Paul and Silas.

4. The former sort, when they are troubled with horror of conscience, fly
from God, and seek no remedy, but such as is worldly and carnal, as
jollitie, company-keeping, music, and other earthly delights, as in building,
and in their lands and livings, according as their own corrupt hearts, and as
carnal men will advise them, whereby sometimes they stupifie and deaden the
Conscience, and lay it asleep for a time. Thus Genesis 4. 17 etc.
Cain and 1 Samuel 16 17.
Saul allaied their distempered spirits. And if they have some godly friends,
which shall bring them to Gods Ministers, or do themselves minister to them
the instructions of the Word, this is tedious, and irksome to them, they
cannot relish these means, nor take any satisfaction in the^. But the other
Act. 2. 37.
are willing to secke to God, by seeking to his Ministers, Isa. 50 4.
to whom God has given the tongue of the learned to minister a word in season,
to the soul that is weary; and though they cannot presently receive comfort,
will not utterly reject them, except in case of Melancholicke distemper, which
must not be imputed to them, but to their disease.

And in application of the remedy, as there were two parts of the grief, so
they must find remedies for both, or they cannot be fully satisfied. First,
they were troubled with grief for fear of Hell, for taking away whereof, the
blood of Christ is applied, together with Gods promise of forgiveness to him
that believes, and a commandment to believe, all this is applied to take away
the guilt and punishment of sin. Secondly, they were troubled for sin,
whereby they had dishonored and displeased God, now unless also they feel in
some measure, the grace of Christ's Spirit healing the wound of sin, and
subduing the power of it, and enabling them at least to will and strive to
please God, they cannot be satisfied. As it was with David, though God had said
by the Prophet, 2 Samuel 12 13
The Lord has put away thy sin, that is, forgiven it; yet he had no comfort
until God had Ps. 51. 10
created in him a clean heart, and renewed a right spirit within him. Whereas
if fear of Hell be off, it is all that the former sort care for.

5. As for the first sort, it may be, while they were afraid to be damned, they
had some restraint of sin, and it may be, made some proffers tending to
reformation; but when their terrors are over, and forgotten, then 2 Pet. 2. 22.
like the dog, they return to their vomit, and like the sow that was
washed, to their wallowing in the mire of their wonted ungodliness. But as for
them, whose terrors were preparations to Conversion, when they obtain peace
of Conscience, they are exceeding thankful for it, and are made by it more
fea^efull to offend. And although they may, and often do fall into some
particular sin, or sins, for which they renew their grief and repentance;
yet, they do not fall Fears that they are not sanctified because they are
pestred now with worse thoughts, then ever, removed.
into an allowed course of sin any more. Thus much in answer to the first
doubt of Sanctification.

Secondly, There are many, which doubt they are not sanctified, because of
those swarms and multitude of evil thoughts which are in them; some whereof
(which is fearful for them, to think or speak) are blasphemous, unnatural,
and inhumane, calling Gods being, truth, power, and providence into question;
doubting whether the Scripture be the word of God, and many more of this nature,
having also thoughts of laying violent hands upon themselves and others, with
many more of that and other sorts, such as they never felt at all, or not so
much, in their known state of unregeneracy, before they made a more strict
profession of godliness, such as, they think, none that are truly sanctified
are troubled withal.

To resolve this doubt, know Answ.
that evil thoughts are either put into men from without, as when 1 Chr. 21 1.
Satan does suggest, or men do solicit evil, thus Job 2. 9.
Jobs wife, Curse God and dye. Or they do arise from within, out of the evil
concupiscence of a Mat. 15. 19.
man's own heart. And sometimes they are mixed, coming both from within and
without.

Those which come only from How Satan's suggestions may be known from man's
own thoughts.
Satan, may usually be known from them that arise out of man's heart, by their
sodainenesse and uncessantnesse, namely, when they are repelled, they will
sometimes return again an hundred times in a day. Also they are unreasonable,
and unnatural, and withal are strange, and violent in their motions, taking
no nay, but by violent resistance. Whereas, those which altogether, or in great
part, are from man's own corrupt heart; they usually arise by occasion of some
external object, or from some natural cause, and are not so sudden, and
incessant, nor are so unnatural, inhumane and violent.

Now all those evil thoughts ( or thoughts of evil rather) which are from
Satan, or from man's putting them into you* if you consent not unto them, but
do abhor and resist them with detestation, they are not your sins; but
Satan's, and theirs that did put them into you. They are your crosses, because
they are matter of trouble to you, but they are not your sins, because they
leave no guilt upon you. They are no more your sins then these thoughts, Mat
4. 6. 9
Cast thy self down headlong, and fall down and worship me (viz. the
Devil,) were Christ's sins, if you consent not, but resist them, as CHRIST
did.

You should heedfully observe this. For if the Devil was so malicious and
presumptuous, as to assault our blessed Savior with such divellish
temptations, casting into his head such vile and blasphemous notions and
thoughts; should you think it strange that he does pester you with the like?
And if for all this, you have no cause to doubt, whether Christ were the Son
of GOD or no, (though the Devil made an ( if) of it, and it was the thing the
Devil aimed at, why then should it be doubted that any of Christ's members may
be thus assaulted, and yet have no cause for this, to question whether they be
sanctified, or in state of grace? For these in them are so far from being
abominable evils that (being not consented to) they, as I said, are not their
sins.

It is a piece of the Devils cunning, first, to fill a man full of thoughts for
matter, abominable, and then to be the first that shall put in this accusation
and doubt, viz. Is it possible for any Sata^s cunning in casting in blasphemous
thoughts
child of God, for any that is sanctified with Gods holy Spirit to have such
thoughts? But consider well that an innocent Benjamin may have Joseph's cup put
into his sacks mouth, without his privity or fault, by him, who for his own
ends, intended to make matter thereof whereby to accuse Genesis 44. 2^4. 15.
Benjamin of theft and ingratitude. Was Benjamin any whit the more dishonest or
ungrateful for all this? A malicious Cutpurse having tempted a neighbor to
jayn with him in cutting of purses, being denied by him, does craftily plot how
to do him a mischief, and meeting the said neighbor in a throng of people,
cutteth another man's purse, and closely conveigheth it into his neighbors
pocket; and presently asks if none have lost their p^^se, which being missed,
he po^^^eth at his neighbor, saying, that ^e suspecteth him; who being taken
and searched, the purse is found about him, yet you will judge this neighbor
to be innocent. Satan does not want malice or craft in this kind to play his
^^ates. Where he cannot corrupt men, yet there he will ve^ and perplexe them.

But let it be granted that these blasphemous and abominable thoughts, which
trouble you, are indeed your sins, either because they arise from your own
evil heart, or because you did consent to them, they being cast in by others.
If so, then you have much cause to grieve, and to repent, but not to despair,
or to say you are not Gods child: For it is possible for a sanctified man to
be made guilty, either by outward act, or by consent and approbation, or by
some means or other, of any one sin, except that against the holy Ghost; yea
of any blasphemy except that: now albeit a man be guilty of these vile, or
blasphemous thoughts and doubtings, yet if he confess and bewail his sin,
even his blasphemy, if his heart ache at the thoughts thereof, if he repent,
believe, and ask mercy, it shall be forgiven him. For he has our Mat. 12. 31,
32.
Saviors word for it.

And whereas you say you were not troubled with such abominable thoughts before
that you made profession of an holy life. I answer, this is not to be Reasons,
why worse thoughts maybe cast into a man's head after, then before conversion.
wo^dred at. For before that time the Devil and you were friends, then he
thought it enough to suffer you to be proud of your civil honesty, or, it may
be, to content your self with a mere form of godliness, suppose that you
were free from notorious crimes, as adultery, lying, swearing, etc. For when
he could by these more plausible ways lead you captive at his will, he saw
you were his sure enough already, what need was there then, that he should
solicit you any further, or to disturb your quiet? But now that you have
renounced him in earnest, and that he and you be two; you may be sure, that
he will attempt by all means to reduce you into your old state: or if he fail
of that, yet as long as you live (so far as God shall permit) he will do
what he can, to disturb your peace, by vexing, and molesting you.

Moreover, GOD does permit Reasons of Gods permission of Satan to cast in most
vile thoughts.
this, for diverse holy purposes.

1. To discover the Devils malice.

2. To chastise his children, and to humble them, because they were too well
conceited of the goodness of their nature in their unregeneracy, or might be
too uncharitable and censorious of others; and too presumptuous of their own
strength since they were regenerate.

3. God likewise permits these buffetings and winnowings of Satan, as to
prevent pride, and other sins, so to exercise and make proof of the graces
of his children; to give them experience of their own weakness, and of his
grace, toward them, and strength in them, even in their weakness; preserving
them from being vanquished, albeit they fight with Principalities and powers
and spiritual wickednesses. For 2 Cor. 12 9.
Gods strength is made perfect in man's weakness.

That you, who are troubled How to be armed against blasphemous thoughts,
before they come
with blasphemous and other abominable thoughts, may be less troubled, or at
least not hurt by them, follow these directions, which will (1) show you how to
arm your selves against them, before they rise o^ be suggested. (2) How to
carry your selves when they are i^ you. (3) How both before, in and after your
conceiving o^ them.

First, arm your self with evident proofs that there is a God that there is
a divine, spiritual absolute, and independent Being from whom, and to whom a^
all things, and by whom a^^ things do consist. Next, confirm your self in a
sure persuasion, that the Bible and holy Scriptures are the pure word of this
only true God. Then labor with your heart that it may so awe and love God and
his will, that it he always ready to rise against every motion to sin,
(especially these of the worst rank) with loathing and detestation.

To be assured that there is a Convincing reasons proving that there is a God.
God, Consider first the Creation, preservation, and order of the Creatures.
How could it be possible that such a world could be made and upheld, or that
there should be such an order, or subordination amongst creatures, if there
were not a God? The heavens Psalm. 19. 1. Psalm. 104.
give their influence into the air, water, and earth, these by virtue hereof
and by their inbred properties, support and afford means to all living
creatures. The creatures without sense serve for the use of the sensitive; and
all serve for the use of man; who although he be an excellent creature, yet of
himself he is so impotent, that he cannot add Lu. 12. 25
one cubit to his stature, nay, he cannot make Mat. 5. 36.
one hair white or black, therefore could not be the maker of these things.

Moreover, If the Creatures were not limited and ordered by a superior Being,
they would one devour another, in such sort as to bring all to confusion. For
the savage beasts would eat up and destroy all the tame and gentle, the strong
would consume the weak, the Job 38. 10, 11.
Sea, if it had not bounds set to his proud waves, Ps. 104. 6
would stand above the mountains, and the Devil, who hates mankind, would
not suffer a man to live at any quiet, if there were not a God, one stronger
than the strongest creatures to restrain Satan, and to confine every thing to
his place and order. How could there be a continual vicissitude of things? How
could we have rain and fruitful seasons, and your souls fed with food and
gladness, if there were no Act. 14. 15, 16, 17.
God? Thus by the Romans 1* 20
Creation, the invisible things of God, that is, his eternal power and
Godhead are clearly seen; for by these things which are thus made and thus
preserved, he has not left himself without witness, that God is, and that
Pro. 16. 4
he made all things for himself, even for his own glory.

Secondly, If all things came by nature, and not from a God of nature, how then
have Miracles (which are many times against nature, and do always transcend
and exceed the order and power of nature) been wrought? For nature in it self
^oth always work (even in its greatest works) in one and the ^^me manner and
order. For Nature is nothing else, but the power ^^ God set in the creatures to
support them, and to produce their effects in a set order. Wherefore if any
thing be from Nature, or from Miracle, it is from GOD, the one from his power
in things ordinary, the other from his power in thing* extraordinary;
wherefore, whether you look on things natural, or above nature, you may (...)
there ^^ a God.

Thirdly, look into the admirable workmanship of but one of the Creatures,
namely, your own soul, and in it particularly into your Conscience; whence
are your fears that you shall be damned? What need it; nay, how could it trouble
you, for you^ blasphemous thoughts and other sins, if it were not privy to
i^*selfe, that there is a God which will bring Eccl. 12. 14.
every thought ^ judgment.

Fourthly, make use of the eye of faith, whereby you may Heb. 11. 27.
^^ God, who is invisible, and that more distinctly, more certainly, an^ more
fully. Remember that it is the first principle of all Religion, which is first
to be learned, namely, Heb. 11. 3. 6.
That God is, that all things are made by him, and that he is a rewarder of
all those, that so believe this, that they diligently seek Him.

That you may assure your Convincing reasons, that the Scriptures are the Word
of God. ^
selves, that the Scriptures are the word of God. Consider first, how
infallibly true they are in relating things past, according as they were many
hundred years before; also in foretelling things to come many hundreds of
years after, which you may see to have come to pass, and daily to come to
pass accordingly: Which they could not do if they were not Gods Word.

2. They lay open the particular and most Heb. 4. 12, 13.
secret thoughts, lusts, and affections of man's heart, which it could not do
if it were not the word of him, that knows all things, in whose sight all
things are naked and open.

3. They command all duties of piety, sobriety, and equity, Psalm. 19. 7.
and do prohibit all vice, in such sort as all the writings and laws of all
men laid together, neither do, nor can do.

4. As the Scriptures discover a state of eternal damnation unto man, and Gal.
3. 22
conclude him in it; so they Romans 1. 17
reveal a sure way of Salvation, which is 1 Cor. 2. 9
such a way as could never enter into the imagination and heart of any man, or
of all men together, without the Word and revela^^^n of the Spirit of GOD,
w^^^^ his wisdom found out, ^^d ordained this way.

5. The Script^^^^ are a word of power, 2 Cor. 10 4, 5, 6.
almigh^^^ beyond the power of any creature. pulling down strong holds;
casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against
the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ.

6. Lastly, the Scriptures have an universal consent with themselves, though
penned by diverse men, which argues that they are not of any 2 Pet. 1. 20, 21.
private interpretation; but that those holy men of God spoke as they were
moved by the holy Ghost. Much more might be said to this point, but this may
suffice.

Moreover, Against temptations, How to be forearmed against temptations to acts
unnatural and inhumane.
to offer violent hands upon other or your selves, you must have these and like
Scriptures in readiness* Exo. 20.
Thou shall not kill; And Act. 16. 28
see thou do thy self no harm, and such like. And that you may be prepared
against all other vile temptations, possess your hearts beforehand with this,
that these are great wickednesses, and against God, against your God. When
Joseph could say, Genesis 39 9
Shall I commit this great wickedness and sin against GOD, no temptations
could prevail against him. Thus much for fore*arming your selves against
blasphemous and vile thoughts and temptations.

In the second place; When you are thus armed, whenever these blasphemous and
fearful thoughts rise in you, or are cast into you, Take heed of two
extremities.

First, do not contemn them so How to be kept from the hurt of Devilish
thoughts in the time of temptation.
as to set light by them, for this gives strength to sin, and advantage to
Satan.

Secondly, Be not discouraged, nor yet faint through despair of being rid of
them, in due time, or of withstanding them in the mean time. For then Satan
has his end, and his will of you.

But carry your selves in a middle course; Plod not too much on them, dispute
not too much in your self with them; presume not of your own strength, but,
by lifting up of your hearts in prayer, call in GOD Said to resist and
withstand them; present some pregnant Scripture to your mind, such as is direct
against them, whereby you may with an holy detestation resist them, according
to CHRIST'S example with ( Mat. 4. 6. 7
It is written.) Now when you have done all this, then (if it be possible)
think on them no more.

Thirdly; Endeavor at all times to make Conscience in the whole course of your
life of your thoughts even of the least thoughts of evil, yea of all thoughts,
and this will be a good means to keep out all evil thoughts. If it cannot
prevail thus far; yet you shall have this benefit by it, when your heart can
tell you, that you would in every thing please God, and that you make
conscience of less sinful thoughts than those vile ones with which you are
troubled; then you may be sure that you may be, and are Gods children, and are
sanctified, notwithstanding those blasphemous thoughts and Devilish temptations.

Again, Some doubt they are not sanctified, because they have Doubts of
Sanctification because they have fallen into grossesins, removed.
fallen into some of those gross sins, yea, it may be into worse then those
which they committed in their state of unregeneracie.

I answer such. You are in very ill case, if you do not belie Answ.
your selves, and if so, you are in ill case, because you belie your selves. I
advise you that have thus sinned in either, to repent speedily, and to ask
forgiveness. God by his Spirit does as well Hos 14. 1, 2, 3, 4.
call you to it, as he did Israel, saying, Return to the Lord, thou have fallen
by thine iniquity, take with you words, and turn unto the Lord and say unto
him, take away all our iniquity, and receive us graciously, then will God
answer, I will heal your backsliding, I will love you freely. You say that
you are backeslidden, suppose it were so, he says, I will heal your
backsliding, etc. read Ier. 3. 12. 13. Mic. 7. 18. 19.

You must not doubt, but that gross sins committed after a man is
effectually called, are pardonable. It is the Devils policy to cast these
doubts into your heads, wholly to take you up, by shutting out all hope of
grace and mercy, that you might have no thoughts of returning, and seeking
unto God for mercy; But believe him not: he is a Ioh. 8. 44
Liar. For it may befall one that is in state of grace, to commit the same
gross sins after Conversion, which he did before, if not greater than the
same. Did not 2 Samuel* 1 1^
David, by his adultery and murder, 1 Kin. 15. 5^
exceed all the sins that ever he committed before his Conversion. Did not 1
Kin. ^^ 4, 5.
Solomon worse in his old age then even in his younger days? Did Mat. 26. 74.
Peter commit any sin before* his conversion, like that of denying and for*
swearing his Master? Why were the falls of these Worthies written, but for 1
Cor. 10. 11, 12.
examples to us on whom the ends of the earth are come?

First, That 1 Cor. 10. 11, 12.
every one that stands should take heed left he fall.

Secondly, That if any be fallen into any sin by any occasion, that he might
rise again as they did, and that they may not despair of mercy.

No man (though converted) has any assurance, except he himself be in special
sort watch* full, and except he have special assistance of Gods grace, to be
preserved from any sin, except that against the holy Ghost: But if he be
watchful over his ways, and do improove the grace of God in him after
Conversion, seeking unto God for increase of grace, then he, as well as the
Apostle 1 Cor. 4. 4
Paul, may be kept from such gross sins as are of the foulest nature,
otherwise not.

Indeed they that are borne of God, have received the most sweet anointing of
the Spirit, the seed of grace, which ever remains in them. Whence it is that
they sin otherwise in state of regeneracie, then they did in state of
unregeneracie, in so much that the Scripture of truth (notwithstanding the
regenerates particular gross sins) says, that whosoever is borne of God 1
Ioh. 3. 9.
sins not, not that they are free from the act and guilt of sin, for Iam.
3. 2.
in many things we sin all, says Saint James, but because they Romans 7. 15,
etc.
sin not with full consent: They Ioh. 8. ^4 Romans 6. 16* 18, 19, 20, 22.
are not servants to sin: They do not make a trade of sin, as they did in
their unregeneracie. Neither do they sin the 1 Ioh. 5. 17. 18.
sin unto death, which all unregenerate men may, and some do, yet for all
this, it may, and often does come to pass, that partly from Satan's malice, and
power, and partly from the remains of corrupt nature, partly from Gods just
judgments on many, because they stood not on their watch, or because they were
presumptuous of their own strength, or because they were over-censorious and
unmercifull to them that had fallen, that true converted souls may fall into
some particular gross sin or sins (for matter) greater then ever before
Conversion.

Others yet complain and Doubts of Sanctification because they fear they have
not Repented, removed.
say, they fear they have never repented, they feel that they cannot repent;
for they cannot grieve as they ought. They can pour out floods of tears, more
then enough for crosses, but many times they cannot shead one tear for sin.
They do nothing as they ought to do. They live in their sins still. How then
can they be said to have repented, and to be sanctified.

If by doing as you ought, Answ.
you mean perfectly well in every point and circumstance of the Law; never any
mere man did thus; If you could so do as you ought; What need have you of
CHRIST to supply your defects, and to redeem you?

But if by doing as you ought, you mean a doing according as God, now
(qualifying the rigor of the Law by the graciousnesse of the Gospel) does
require of you, and in Christ, will accept of you; namely, to Isa. 1. 19.
will and endeavor in truth to do the whole will of God; then, if you will,
desire, and endeavor to mourn for sin, to repent, and obey as you should,
you may truly be said to do as you ought, and as you should. And in this case
whatsoever is wanting to the perfection of deed; Faith in Christ Jesus, who
kept the lawfully, and as he ought, for you, does supply the defect thereof,
For Rom, 8. 4
the righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in all (though not fully by any)
which walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.

And as for weeping at crosses, sooner and more than for sins, this does not
always argue more grief for one than for the other; For weeping is an effect
of the body, following much the temper thereof, also sense apprehends a
natural object, or matter of bodily grief in such sort, that the body is
wrought upon more sensibly, then when a spiritual object of grief is only
apprehended by Faith. Wherefore bodily tears flow easily from sense of
crosses, and more hardly from thoughts of sin; For spiritual objects do not
ordinarily work passions in the body, so soon, or so much as bodily and
sensible objects do. Grief for a cross is more outward, and passionate,
thence tears; but spiritual grief is more inward, sad, and soaking, in which
cases, tears lie so far off, and the organs of tears are so much
contracted, and shut up; that they cannot be fetched, or wrung out, but with
much labor. When you are bidden in Scripture to mourn and weep for your sins,
nothing else is meant, but to grieve much, and to grieve heartily, as they do,
who weep much at outward calamities, Besides, it is not unknown that even in
natural grief, dry grief, is many times greater than that which is moistened,
and overfloweth with tears. And some softer effeminate spirits can weep at any
thing, when some harder spirits can weep at nothing. As the greatest spiritual
joy is not expressed in laughter, so, neither is the greatest spiritual grief
expressed in tears. Psa. 51. 17
God regards the inward sighing of a contrite heart; more then the outward
tears of the eyes. An 2 Samuel 24 17, 18.
Hypocritical Saul being overcome with kindness, and a 1 Kin. 21 27. 29.
false-hearted Ahab, being upon the rack of fear, may in their quames and
passions weep, and externally humble themselves, and that in part for sin;
when a dear child of God may not be able to command one tear. The time when
Gods Children have most plenty of tears, is when the extremity and anguish
of grief is well over; namely, When their hearts begin to melt through hope
of mercy, Zach. 12. 10.

And as for leaving sin altogether; Who ever did in this life? Who ever
shall? Since there is 2 Chr. 6. 36.
no man that lives, and sins not. But mistake not, you may through GODS
grace have left sin, when yet sin has not left you. For whosoever hates
sin, and resolves against it, and in the Law of his mind would not commit
it; but is drawn to it by Satan, and by the Romans 7. 23.
law of his members: and (after it is done) does not allow it, but disclaimes
it with grief; this man has left sin. And if this be your case, It may be
said of you, as the Apostle said of himself: It is not Romans 7. 20
you that do evil; but it is sin that dwells in you, that does it.

Many yet complain, They Doubts of Sanctification because of their dullness in
spiritual duties, removed.
cannot Pray, Read, Hear, Meditate, nor get any good by the best Companies,
or best conference which they can meet with. They are so dull, so forgetful,
so full of distractions, and so unfruitful, when they go about, or have been
about any thing that is good, that they fear they have no grace at all in
them; yea, it makes them sometimes to forbear these duties; and for the most
part to go about them without heart.

It is not strange that it should Answ.
be so with you; so long as there is a Satan to hinder you, and so long as you
carry about the old man and body of sin in you. Moreover, Do you not many
times go about these holy duties remissely, negligently, only cursorily and
customarily without preparation thereunto, not looking to your feet, and
putting off your shoes before you approach unto Gods holy things, and holy
presence? Do you not many times set upon these holy duties in the power of
your own might, and not in the power of Gods might; or have you not been
proud, or too well conceited of your selves, when you have felt that you have
performed good duties with some life, or, are you sure, that you should not be
spiritually proud, if you had your desirein doing al these? Further, do you
not mis-call things; calling that, no Prayer, no Hearing, etc. or no fruit,
because you do them not so well, nor bring forth so much, as in your enlarged
spiritually covetous desires you long to do, and have? If it be thus with
you, then first mend all these faults, confess them to GOD, and ask mercy.
Next be thankful for your desires to Pray, Read, Hear, etc. And for your
longing to do all these as you should; Prosecute these desires, but always in
the sense of your own insufficiencies, and in the power of Gods might, then
all the forementioned duties shall be performed with less difficulty, and
with more fruit and comfort.

Yet, because in all these duties you travel to heavenward against the hill,
and your passage is against Wind and Tide, and with a strong opposition of
enemies in the way; you must never look to perform them without sense of much
difficulty and little progress in comparison of what you aim at in your
desires. It concerns you therefore to plye your Oars, and to apply your
selves, by all means, to Phil. 2 12
work out your Salvation with fear and trembling: I mean, with fear to
offend in any the aforementioned duties, not in fear that you have no grace,
because you cannot perform them as well as you should, and would. For since
that you feel and bewail your dullness, deadness, and unprofitablenesse in
holy services, it argues that you have life, because no man feels
corruption, and disliketh it, by corruption, but by grace, I am sure that such
as have no true grace, can, and do daily, fail in all these duties, but
either they find not their failings, or if they do, yet they complain not of
them with grief and dislike. If you heartily grieve, because you do Neh. 1.
11.
no better, your desires to do as you should do, are a true sign of grace in
you. For that duty is always well done, in Gods account, where there is truth
of endeavor to do it well, and true grief that it is done no better.

And whereas you say, that by reason of want of spiritual life in holy duties,
you have been made to neglect them altogether. I pray, what have you got
thereby, but much grief, ^^d unrest? But tell me, how is ^^ with you, are you
pleased with your self in your neglect, or is it so that you can have no peace
in your hearts, until you set your selves diligently to do those duties again,
as well as you can? If so, it is a sign that you are not quite destitute of
saving grace.

Others, when they have been at holy exercises, and in good company, have felt
joy, Doubts of Sanctification from sudden dullness after comforts, removed.
and sweet comfort therein; but afterward, oft-times much dullness has
suddenly seized upon them; Which makes them fear they have not root in
themselves, and that their joys and comforts were not sound.

This dullness after fresh-feeling-comforts Answ.
may, and often does befall those, in whom is truth of grace, but commonly
through their own fault. And to speak to you; It may be you were not
thankful to God for your joys and comforts when you had them; but did ascribe
too much to your selves, or unto the outward means, by which you had them. Or
it may be, you did too soon let go your hold of these spiritual comforts,
betaking your self to worldly business, or to other thoughts, before you had
sufficiently digested these, and before you had committed them unto safe
custody, in so much that the Devil finding your comforts to lie loose, and
unguarded, steals them from you; or else happily the Lord knows that you
are not able to bear the continuance of your joys and comforts, but your
hearts will be over-light, and over-joyed, and 2 Cor. 12. 7.
exalted above measure, therefore either as just chastisements, or in his
loving wisdom, GOD may suffer deadness in this sort to seize upon you.

There are also some, when Doubts of Sanctification for that they are outgone
by others, removed.
they perceive, that some new comers on to Religion, which have not had one
half of the time, and means to be good as they have had, yet out strip them
in knowledge, faith, mortification, and willingness to dye, they cannot pray,
nor yet remember or discourse of good things so well as they, wherefore they
doubt of the truth of their own graces.

It is more then you can certainly Answ.
know, whether they have more saving grace than you; for when you shall with a
charitable eye look upon the outside of another behavior, and shall look
with a severe and searching eye into the corruptions of your own inside, you
may easily, through modesty and charity, think others better than your
selves, and it is good for you so to do; an error in that case, if you do
commit it, is tolerable. Many also can utter what they have, it may be, better
than you, and can make a small matter seem much, and a little to go far, when
many times you in modesty may not set forth your self, or, if you would,
cannot. Counterfeit Christians may make a greater show then the true, who are
not so apt to make a show, or to put forth themselves. Also an hypocrite may
have ability to pray and perform all external exercises of Religion, by
reason of his natural parts and education, better then others who are more
sincere.

But let it be granted, that many of short standing in the School of
Christianity, have got the start of you in grace: If it was through Gods grace
accompanying their diligence, and from his just hand upon you, following your
negligence, then they are to be commended, and you are to be humbled, and to
be provoked unto an holy aemulation by them to quicken your pace, and to double
your diligence. But take heed that it be not your pride and self-love, which
causes that you cannot brook it, that others should betterthan your selves.

It may be that it is not your fault, but it is from Gods abundant grace unto
others, above that which you have received. For the Scripture makes it
evident, that God gives unto several men Ephesians. 4. 7. ^om. 12. 3.
differently according to his good pleasure, hence it was that 1 Cor 12 11.
Psalm. 119. 9, 100.
David became wiser than ^u teachers and ancients; and the Apostle Paul
attained more grace than those that were in Christ before him. GOD gives unto
some five Talents, when he gives unto others but two; He that had most given
him, gained in the same space of time, twice as much as the other, yet he that
gained but two Talents had his commendation, and his proportionable reward of
his well-doing. For the Lord says unto him also, Well done Mat. 25 21 22. 23.
faithful servant, enter into thy Masters ^^y. For he improved his Talents
according to the measure of grace received, though he gained not so much as
the other. What though the little finger, or any other 1 Cor. 12 15, 16.
inferior members of the body, have not such excellent abilities, as the eye,
the tongue, or some other parts, shall it therefore make question whether it
be of the body?

Take heed Mat. 20. 15
that your eye be not evil, because GOD is good. May not he give as much to
the last, as unto the first, and more if he please? We should rather be
thankful for the increase of grace in others, then either to repine at them,
or without ground to conclude against the truth of our own. For we are much
the better, if we would see it, for others graces; Gods kingdom is enlarged
and strengthened thereby, the common good of Christ's body, which is the Church,
gains by it. Now the more excellent any member of the body ^s, according to
his gifts and place, 1 Cor. 12 26
the rest of the members should herein the more rejoice.

Many yet will say, he that is truly sanctified, does grow in grace, but I do
not. Doubts of sanctification from the sense of the want of growth of grace,
removed. Answ.


If you grow not, it is your sin, of which you must repent. But you may grow
in grace when yet you may think that you do not. A tree may grow in the
general, when yet some particular branch may in part decay: so it may be with
grace. Besides, true grace may grow most, when those in whom it is, may think
that it grows least; namely, when through the sense of their not growing as
they would, they are truly humbled, and stirred up to desire heartily, and to
pray that they may grow, and to use all means whereby they may grow. Moreover,
growth of grace, like the growth of trees, is as well out of sight, and under
ground, in the root, even when it is outwardly nipt or driven in by the blasts
and winters of afflictions, and manifold temptations, as when in Summer, in
sight, above ground, it shows his growth in the branches, blossoms and fruit
thereof. He that grows inwardly in humility, and in a greater love and
desire of holiness, he grows better indeed, though not bigger in his own
conceit.

Lastly, Many yet will say, that Doubts of Sanctification from the sen^e of
hardness of heart, removed.
their hearts remain hard and stony, yea, they say that they grow harder and
harder; wherefore they think that the stome heart was never taken out of them,
and that they remain unsanctified.

Know, that there are two sorts of hard hearts.

One Zac. 7* 1^
total and not felt, which Answ.
will not be broken nor brought unto remorse, either by GODS Threats,
Commandments, Promises, Judgments, or Mercies; but obstinately stands out
in a course of sin, Ephesians. 4. 19
being past feeling.

The second is, An hardness mixed with some softness, this is felt and
bewailed: This is incident to Gods Children; of this the Church complains,
saying unto God, Isa. 63. 17
Why have thou hardened our hearts against thy fear? Now when the heart feels
its hardness, and complains of it, is grieved, and disliketh it, and would
with all a man's soul, that his heart were tender like 2 Chr. 34 27.
Iosiahs, so that it could melt at the hearing of the Word, this is a sure
proof that the heart is regenerate and not altogether hard; but has some
measure of true softness, for it is by softness that hardness of heart was
felt, witness your own experience, for before the hammer and fire of the Word
was applied to your hearts, you had no sense of it, and never complained
thereof.

You must not call a heavy heart, a hard heart, you must not call a heart
wherein is a sense of an indisposition to good, a hard heart, except only in
^omparison of that softness, which is in it sometimes, and which it shall
attain unto, when it shall be perfectly sanctified; in which respect it may
be called hard. Whosoever has his will so wrought upon by the Word, that it
is bent to obey GODS will, if he knew how, and if he had power, this man
whatsoever hard^esse he feels, his heart is soft, not hard. The Apostle had
a heart held in, and clogged with the Rom (...)
flesh, and the law of his members, that it made him to think himself
wretched, because he could not be fully deliverd from it, yet we know his
heart was not an hard heart.

Amongst those that are sanctified, there remains more hardness in the heart
of some than in others; and what with the committing of gross sins, and a
cursorie and slight doing of good duties, and through neglect of means to
soften it, the same men's hearts are harder at one time than at another, of
which they have cause to complain, and for which they have cause to be
humbled, and to use all means to soften it; But it is false, and dangerous,
hence to conclude that such are not in state of grace, because of such
hardness in the heart; For as GODS perfectest Children on earth, 1 Cor. 13. 9
know but in part, and believe but in part; So their hearts are softened but in
part.

SECTION 7. Removal of fears rising from doubts about falling from Grace.
THere yet remain many, who though they be driven up into so narrow a corner,
that they cannot reply to the answers given to take away their false fears and
doubts; but they are enforced to yield, that they find that they now are, or at
least have been in state of grace, they now see they have believed, and have
been, and it may be now are sanctified; yet, this they fear, that they
either are already fallen, or shall not persevere, but shall fall away before
they dye

Touching falling away from Answ.
grace, first know, that of those that give their names to Christ in outward
profession, there are two sorts.

The first sort are such, who have received only the Heb. 6. 4. 5
common gifts of the Spirit; as first, illumination First sort of Christians.
of the mind to know the mystery of Salvation by Christ, and tru^y to assent
unto it.

Secondly, Together with this knowledge, is wrought in them by the same spirit,
a ^^^hter impression upon the affections, which the Scripture calls a Heb. 6,
4 5
taste of the heavenly gift, and of the good Word of GOD, and of the powers of
the world to come; By these gifts of the Spirit, the sou^es of these men are
raised to an ability to do more than nature, and mere education can help
them unto; carrying them further then nature or art can do, by working in them
a kind of spiritual change in their affections, and a kind of reformation of
their lives. But yet all this while they are not ingrafted into Christ, neither
are Mat 13. ^1
deeply rooted, as the Corn in good ground, nor yet are thoroughly changed and
renewed in the inward man; they have at best only 2 Timothy 3. 8
a form^ of godliness, but have not the power thereof.

Now these men may, and often Who may fall away, and how*
do fall away, not only into some particular gross sins, of which they
were sometimes after a sort washed; but into a course of sinning; falling from
the very form of godliness, and may so utterly loose those gifts received,
that they may turn Papists, Anabaptists, or may fall into any other Heresy,
and in the end become very Apostates; yet this is not properly a falling from
grace. It is only a falling away from the common graces or gifts of the
S^irit, and from those graces which they did Luke 8. 18
seem to have, and which the Church out of her charity did judge them to
have; but they fall not from true saving grace, for they never had any. For if
ever they had been indeed 1 Ioh. 2. 19
incorporated into Christ Jesus, and had been sound members of his body, and
in this sense had ever been of us, as the Apostle John speaks, then they
should never have departed from us, but should no doubt have continued with us.

The second sort of such as have The second sort of Christians
given their names to Christ, are such as are endued with true justifying
faith, and saving knowledge, and are renewed in the spirit of their mind;
whereby through the gracious and powerful working of the sanctifying Spirit,
the Word makes a deeper impression upon the will, and the affections, causing
them not only to taste, but which is much more, to feed and to drink deep of
the heavenly gift, and of the good word of GOD, and of the powers of the world
to come; so as to digest them unto the very changing and Rom 12. 2
transforming them by the renewing of their minds, and unto the sanctifying of
them 1 These. 5 23
throughout in their whole man, both in spirit, soul, and body; so that
CHRIST is indeed formed in them, and they are become 2 Cor. 5 17 2 Pet. 1. 4.
new creatures, being made partakers of the divine nature.

Now concerning these; It is Once and ever instate of grace.
not possible that any of them should fall away, either wholly, or for ever.

Yet it must be granted, that A truly regenerate man may fall far back though
not quite away
they may decline and fall back so far, as to grieve the good spirit of GOD,
and to offend and provoke God very much against them, and to make themselves
guilty of eternal death. They may fall so far as to Psalm 32. 3
interrupt the exercise of their faith, Psalm. 51. 8 9, 10, 11
wound their Conscience, and may loose for a time the sense of Gods favor, and
may cause him like a wise and good father, in his just anger to chide, correct,
and threaten them, making them believe he will turn them out of doors, never
to receive them into his heavenly Kingdom; until by renewing their faith and
repentance, they return into the right way, and do recover GODS lo-ving
countenance toward them again.

That you may understand and believe this the better, consider what grace God
gives unto his elect, and how, and from what they may fill: also you must
observe well the difference that is between the sinning of the regenerate and
unregenerate, together with their different condition wherein they stand, while
they are in their sins.

In the first act of Conversion, What grace God gives to his Elect in their
conversion, and how.
(I speak of men of years, and discretion) GOD by his Word through his holy
Spirit does infuse an habit of holiness, namely, an habit of Faith, and all
other saving graces, this, every child of GOD receives, when he receives
that oh. 2. 20
holy anointing of the spirit, that which the Scripture calieth the 1 Ion. 3 9
Seed remaining in him.

Secondly, God by his gracious means and ordinances of the Gospel does
increase this habit and these graces.

Now because every man that Whence it is that the Elect may decline and
backes^^^e, and how ^arre.
is truly regenerate, does carry about with him the body of sin and
corruption, and lies open daily unto the temptations of the world, and the
devil, a truly regenerate man may be drawn, not only into sins of
ignorance, and common frailty, but into gross sins; whereby the light and
warmth of Gods spirit may be so much chilled and darkened, that he may break
out into presumptuous sins. Yea, upon his negligent use, or omission of the
means of spiritual life and strength, God may justly give him over to a
fearful declination in grace and backesliding: Yet the truly regenerate fall
only from some degrees of holiness, He never falls from the first infused
habit of grace.
and from certain Acts of holiness; but not from the first infused habit of
holiness that 1 Ioh. 3. 9
blessed seed ever remains in him. His falling is either only into
particular sins, and into much failing in particular good duties, or if it be
toward a more general defection, yet it is never universal, from the
general purpose of well-doing, into a general course of evil.

For the regenerate man does never so sin, as the unregenerate man does,
although for matter their sins may be all alike, yea, sometime those of the
regenerate, greater. There is Difference between the sinning of the regenerate
and unregenerate.
great difference in their sins, and manner of sinning.

1. Regenerate men may sin of ignorance, but they are not 2 Pet. 3. 5
willingly and wilfully ignorant, as are the unregenerate in some things or
other.

2. Regenerate men may commit, not only the common sins of infirmity; into
which, by reason of the remains of the lusts of the flesh, they fall often,
such as rash anger, discontent, doubts, fears, dullness, and deadness of
heart in spiritual exercises and inward evil thoughts and motions of all
sorts; but they may also commit gross sins, such as are an open and direct
breach of GODS Commandments; yet those are done against their general
purpose, as David did, for Psalm. 39. 1
he had said he would look to his ways; and he had Psalm. 116 106
determined to keep Gods righteous judgments. Yea, many times they are
doneagainst their particular purposes, as Mat. 26. 35
Peter's denial of his Master. They are not usually plotted, or thought on
before, but Gal. 6. 1
fallen into by occasion, ^ 2 Samuel 11. 2
or are haled and enforced thereunto by the violent corruption of the
affections, or sensual appetites. Moreover, they do not make a trade and
custom of sin: These kinds of sins do not pass them any long time
unobserved: but are seen, bewailed, confessed to GOD, and prayed against; and
are b^rthenous and irksome to them, making them to think worse of themselves,
and to become base in their own eyes because of them. But it is directly
otherwise, usually, with the Genesis 27. 4. Micah 2^
unregenerate in all these particulars.

3. The regenerate may not only commit sins gross for matter, but
presumptuous for manner, namely, they may commit them not only against
knowledge, but with a premeditated de^^eration and determination of will, as
David did in the 2 Samuel 11 8 unto 2^.
murder of Ur^a^. But itis seldom, that a child of GOD does commit
presumptuous sins: His general determination and Ps. 19. 13
Prayer is against them. It is with much strife, and reluctation of will, and
with little delight, and content, in comparison. He never sins
presumptuously, but when he is drawn thereunto, or forced thereupon by some
over-strong corruption and violent temptation for the time, as David was, being
over-eagerly bent to hide his sin, and to save his credit: For 2 Samuel 11 8, 9,
1, 11, 12.
if he could by any means have gotten Vriah home to his wife, he would never
have caused him to be sl^ine. And although presumptuous sins cast him into a
deadness and benummednesse of heart and spirit, in which he may ^^e for a time
Ps. 32 3, 4
speechless, and pr^yerlesse, as it was with David; yet he feels that all is
not well with him, until he have again made his peace with God* And when he
has the ministry of GODS powerful word, to make him plainly see his sin,
then he will ^ Sam 12 13. Psa. 51.
humble himself and reform it. The unregenerate nothing so.

4. Lastly, a regenerate man may fall one degree further, namely, He may so
loose his first love, that he may (though I cannot say fall into utter
Apostasy) yet decline from good, very far, even to a coldness and remissness
in good duties, even in the exercises of Religion, if not to an utter omission
for a time. The life and vigor of his graces may suffer sensible Eclipses, and
decay. 2 Chro 15 17
Asa, a good King, yet went apace this way, as appears by his 2 Chr. 16 10, 12
imprisoning the good Prophet, and in oppressing the people in his latter
days, and in trusting to the Physicians, and not seeking to God to be cured of
his disease. And 2 Samuel 12 24
Solomon the truly beloved of GOD in his youth, went further back, giving
himself to all manner of Eccles 2.
vanities, Neh. 13. 26
and in his old age did so dote upon his many wives, that he fell to Idolatry,
or at least became accessory, by building them 1 Kin. 11 3 to 10.
Idol Temples, and accompanying them to Idolatrous services, in so much that
it is said, they turned away his heart after other gods, and his heart was not
perfect with the Lord his God, as was the heart of Divid his Father. Yet there
is a wide difference between these backe-slidings, and the Aposta^ies of men
unregenerate. For these do not approve nor applaud themselves in those evil
courses, into which they are back slidden when (out of the heat of temptation)
they do think of them; neither have the regenerate full content in them, but
find vanity, and vexation in them, as Solomon Ecclesiast.
did, even in the days of his vanity. They do not in this their declined
estate, hate the good generally, which once they loved, but look back upon it
with approbation; and their heart secretly inclines unto a liking of it, and
of them that are, as they once were; so that in the midst of their bad estate,
they have a mind to return, but that they are yet so hampered, and entangled
with the snares of sin, that they cannot get out. Lastly, they in Gods good
time, by his grace, do break forth out of this Eclipse of grace, by the light
whereof they ^^e their nakedness and folly, and are ashamed of their
backsl^ding and revolting; and they again aoe their first works. And with
much ado, recover their wonted joys and comforts, though it may be never with
that life, luster, and beauty, as in former times, and that as a just
correction of their sin, that they may be kept humble, and be made to look
better to their standing all the days of their life by it. It is not so with
hypocritical professors, who never were truly regenerate; but quite contrary,
as you may observe in the Apostacies of 1 Samuel 28 3* 6 7 etc.
Saul, and of 2 Chr. 2^ 17. 18. to 23.
King Ioash, and Simon Magus, and others.

Th^se differences rise hence, because that the common graces of the
unregenerate are but as Grounds of differences between the fals^f men truly
sanctified, and others.
flashes of lightning, or as the fading light of Meteors, which blaze but for a
while; and are like the water of Lana-fl^nds, which, because they have no
spring to feed them run not long, and in time may quite be dried up.

But the saving graces of the regenerate, receive their light, warmth, and
life, from the Sun of righteousness, therefore can never be totally or
finally Eclipsed. And they do rise from that Well and Ioh. 4. 14. The
condition of the true Christian differs from that of the for^all Christian, in
respect of Gods purpose and love.
Spring of living water which cannot be drawn dry, or^o dammed up, or stopped,
but that it will run more, or less, unto eternal life.

As the regenetate man does not sin in such sort as the unregenerate, with
all his heart, so neither is he when he has sinned, in the same state and
condition, which the unregenerate is in. He is in the Condition of a Son,
who notwithstanding his failings, Ioh. 8. 35
abides in the house for ever; but not as the other, who, being no son, but
a servant, is for his misdemeanor turned out, and abides not in the house for
ever.

Although the regenerate as well as the unregenerate do draw upon themselves,
by their sins, the simple guilt of eternal death, yet this guilt is not
accounted, neither does it redound to the person of the truly regenerate, as it
does to the other; because Christ Jesus has so satisfied, and does make Ioh.
17. 9 15. 20
intercession for his own, that his death is made effectual for them, but not
for the other. Their Justification and Adoption by Christ remain unaltered,
although many benefits flowing from thence, are, for a while, justly suspended,
they remain children still, though under their Fathers anger; as 2 Samuel 14 24
Absalom remained a son uncast off, not dis-inherited by David, when yet his
Father would not let him come into his presence. This spiritual Leprosy of
sin, into which Gods Children fall, may cause them to be suspended from the
use and comfortable possession of the Kingdom of God, and from the enjoyment
of the privileges thereof, until they be cleansed of their sin by renewed
faith and repentance. Yet, as the Lev 13. 46 2 Chro. 26 21
Leoper in the Law, had still right to his house and goods, albeit he was shut
out of the City for his Leprosy; so the truly regenerate never loose their
right to the Kingdom of heaven by their sins. For every true member of
Christ is knit unto Christ by such everlasting bonds, whether we respect the
relative union of Christ with his members by faith to Justification, which
after it is Rom 8. 15. 16. 17. 35
once made by the spirit of Adoption, admits of no breach or alteration by
any means: o^ whether we respect the real union of the Spirit, whence flows
Sanctification, which though it may suffer decay, and admits of some
alteration of degrees, being not so strong at one time, as at another, yet can
never 1 Ioh 2. 27 1 Ioh 3. 9
quite be broken off, as has been proved; these bands, ^ say, are so strong,
and lasting, that all the powers of sin, Satan, and Hell it self Romans 8. 33
unto the end.
cannot sever the weakest true member from Christ, or from his love, o^ from
Gods love toward him in Christ.

This strength of grace, that Whence it is that a true Convert cannot fall
quite from grace.
keeps men from falling totally or finally from CHRIST, does not depend upon
the strength or will of him that stands, but on the Romans 9. 11
Election, and determination of him that calls.

And whereas it may be demanded, Quest.
why a man being at his highest degree of holiness, that ever he attained, at
which time he had most strength, did yet fall back more than half way, may
not as well, or rather fall quite away?

I answer, It is not in respect of Answ.
the nature of inherent holiness in him; for Genesis 1. 2
Adam had holiness in perfection, yet fell quite from it. 1 Genesis 3.
There is nothing in the nature of this grace and holiness, excepting only in
the root whence it springs, but that a man may now also fall wholly from it.
But it is because grace is now settled in man upon better terms. For the little
strength we receive in regeneration, is (in point of perseverance) stronger
then the great strength which the first Adam received in his Creation. Adam was
perfectly, but changeably holy, Gods children inregeneration are made
imperfectly, but Ier. 32. ^0
unchangeably holy. This stability of grace now consists in this, for that
all that by faith, and by the holy Spirit are ingrafted and incorporated into
Christ the second Adam, have the spring and root of their grace founded 2 Cor.
1. 21, 22 Ephe. 1. 4.
in him; and not in themselves, as the first Adam had. They are 2 Cor. 1. 21,
22 Ephe. 1. 4.
stablished with their brethren in Christ. Wherefore, all that are actual
members of CHRIST cannot fall from grace altogether; For as Romans 6. 5 unto 12.
Christ dyed to sin once, and being raised from the dead dies no more; so
every true member of Christ, having part with him in the first resurrection,
dye no more, but live for ever with Christ. For all that are once begotten
again unto a lively faith, and hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from
the dead, to an inheritance incorruptible, 1 Pet. 1. 3 4, 5
are kept, not by their own power unto Salvation, but by the power of God
through faith in Christ Jesus.

Now, that a man effectually called, can never fall wholly, or for ever from
state of grace, I in few words reason thus. If Gods 2 Timothy 2. 19
Counsel, on which man's Salvation Reasons prooving that a man effectually
called, can not fall quite away
is founded be sure and unchangeable, and if his Romans 11. 29
calling be without repentance.

If Gods love be unchangeable and alters not, but Ioh. 13 1
whom God once loves actually, him he loves to the end.

If Heb. 7. 2^. 25
Christ's office of Prophet, Priest, and King, in his teaching, satisfying, and
making intercession for, and in his governing his people, be after the order
of Heb. 7. 21
Melchisedecke, unchangeable and everlasting, he everliving to make
intercession for them: and Ioh. 6. 3^ Luke 22. ^^ Ioh. 17. 1^
if his undertaking in all these respects with his Father, not to lose any whom
he gives him cannot be frustrate.

If the Ephesians. 1. 13. 14.
Seal and earnest of the Spirit be a constant Seal, which cannot be razed;
but seals all in whom it dwells unto the day of Redemption.

If the 1 Pet. 1. 23, 25
Word of truth wherewith the regenerate are begotten, be an immortal seed
which when once it has taken a conception, and has taken root, does live for
ever.

If God be constant and faithful Ier. 32. 40.
in his promise, and omnipotent in his power, to make good this his word and
promise, saying, I will make an everlasting Covenant with them, that I will not
turn away from my people and children, to do them good, but I will put my
fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me.

Then from all, and from each of these propositions, I conclude, that a man
once indeed a member of Christ, and indeed in state of grace, shall never
totally or finally fall away.

The patrons of the doctrine of falling from grace, when they cannot answer the
invincible arguments which are brought to prove the certainetie of a man's
standing in state of Salvation; they make a loud cry in casting in certain
popular objections, such as are very apt to take with simple, and unstable
people.

They first come with suppositions, Objections for falling from grace answered
and ask this and like questiona: If David and Peter had dyed in the act of
their gross sins, whether should they have been saved or no.

I answer, we have an English Proverb, What if the sky fall? Propositions are
but weakly grounded on mere suppositions. I ask them why did they not dye in
the act of their sin? Well, say they had dyed in the act of their sin, they
could not dye in their impenitency, they in an instant might return to GOD,
and rely on CHRIST, or at least, if sudden death had surprised them, their
general repentance and faith in Christ which they had before their fall should
have stood them instead. For their Justification and Adoption was no whit
impaired, though their Sanctification was somewhat diminished. But we must
believe Gods promise, and the issue will be this (though we cannot always
tell how) that Ps. 73. 24
God will so guide his Children with his Counsel, that afterward he will
receive them to Glory.

Secondly, they object violently, seeming to stand much for God and godliness,
that this doctrine of not falling wholly from God, and of certainty of
Salvation, after a man is once in state of Grace, is a doctrine of
licentiousness and carnal liberty, causing men to be negligent in the use of
means of grace, and careless of their standing; For when they once know they
shall not be damned, they will live as they list; say they.

First, I appeal to ancient and daily experience, both in Ministers and
people. For those who have been most assured of Gods favor, and of their
salvation, have been and are more frequent in preaching, more diligent in
hearing, and have used all good means of salvation more conscionably and more
constantly then those of the other opinion, and have been most holy and most
strict in their lives. But the doctrine of these that teach falling away totally
and finally from grace, they being the enhansers of free will, on which all the
fabric of their building hangs, is rather a doctrine opening a gap to
licentiousness: For they conceiving that they may convert if they will, cannot
but think that they are not so unwise, but that they will, and shall convert
before they dye, therefore take liberty to live as they list in the mean time.

Secondly, the Scriptures, the ingenuitie of saving Faith, and Rom 6. ^. etc.
all sound judgment do reason quite contrary. For the certainty of the end
does not hinder, but incite and encourage men, in the use of all good means
which conduce unto that end. Christ knew certainly that he should attain his
end of Mediatorship, viz. the salvation of men's souls, and that of the
Gentiles, as well as of the Jews, this was no cause, why he might be slack
in the means, but God says not withstanding to our Savior, Psalm. 2. 8.
Ask of me, and I will give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance. Was there
ever any more earnest in prayer, or more longing to finish his work, than our
Ioh. 17. 1.
blessed Savior, although he was infallibly certain that he should save and
glorify man, and that God would glorify him? When Dan. 9. 1.
Daniel knew certainly the time of deliverance out of Captivity, he was not
hereby carnally secure, and slack in the use of all good means to speed and
hasten it; but betaketh himself to fasting and prayers, that Gods people might
be delivered. Because God had assured David that he would build him an house,
therefore (says he) 2 Samuel 7 27.
thy servant has found in his heart to pray, viz. that thou would establish
it. What child is there that has any ingenuitie or goodness of nature in him,
will slight and neglect to please his Father, because he has assured him of a
large inheritance, or because his inheritance is entayled upon him?

Moreover, the greater certainty any man has that his sins are pardoned, and
that he (through Gods grace) now is, and shall abide, in state of Salvation,
the more he will apprehend the unspeakeable love of God to him in him in Christ
Jesus, which will cause the same man to Luke 7. 4.
love much, which much love of him to Christ, will cause him Ioh. (...)
not to live as he list, but to keep the Commandments: and (as the Apostle
says) even 2 Cor. 5. 14
constrain him, and will cause that his Commandments shall not be 1 Ioh. 5. 3
grievous, but delight some to him.

But do these objecters think thus, and do they infer this in earnest? Do
they think, that themselves are or were at any time in state of grace? If yea,
I hope they will not say, they are or were made more dissolute and more sinful
by it; If no, then it is no marvel that they make these inferences. For it
has ever been the manner of such as were without grace, and not indeed in
state of grace, to wrest and pervert the doctrines of grace, making them to be
unto them Licenses, and Jude 4. Romans 5. 21.
occasions of wantonness and licentiousness. As thus. If where sin
abounded, grace abounded much more; then say they, Romans 6. 1 15
Let us sin that grace may abound. And if we are not under the Law but under
grace, then let us sin, because we are not under the Law, but under grace.

But as any man has truth of grace, the more he knows it, the more
hereasoneth, otherwise Ezra having not only a hope, but was in possession of
that which God had promised; He does not say, now we may live as we li^t, but
says, Ezr. 9. 13 14
should we again break thy Commandments. An honest heart makes the same
inference from spiritual deliverances. The Scripture from abundance of Gods
grace, and from the certainty of it, does reason for grace and for obedience,
Romans 6. 2.
How shall we that are dead to sin, live yet therein. And in another place
the Apostle John says, We know that we are the Children of God, etc. but what
is the inference? Is it we may now sin, and live as we list, because we
know that when Christ shall appear, we shall be like him? No. the holy Apostle
infers this, 1 Ioh. 3. 1, 2, 3.
He that has this hope, purges himself as he is pure.

SECTION 8. A removal of sundry doubts in particular, about falling from Grace.
NOtwitststanding all that Fears of falling away quite, because men doubt they
have only a form of godliness, Removed.
has been said, touching certainty of perserverance in grace, after that a
man is indeed in state of grace; many will doubt they shall fall away, for they
fear that all their Religion has been but in Hypocrisy, and in form only,
but not in power; now such may fall away, as has been said.

If it were true, that all which you have done were in Hypocrisy, then until
you repent of your Hypocrisy, and be upright, you may justly fear as much;
yet you must not desperately conclude, that you shall fall away from your
profession; but be you quickened and stirred up by this fear to abandon
Hypocrisy, and to serve the LORD in sinceritis; and hereby make your calling
and election sure, that you may not fall, and then you have Gods word for it,
that Psalm. 15. 1 2. 5.
you shall not fall.

Many think that they are Hypocrites, which yet are sincere; wherefore try
whether you be an Hypocrite or upright, by the signs of uprightness before
delivered, Chapter 12. Sect. 1.

Only, for the present, note Note.
this; When was it known, that an Hypocrite did so see his hypocrisy, as to
have it a burden to him, and to be weary of it, and to confess it, and bewail
it, and to ask forgiveness thereof heartily of God; and above all things to
labor to be upright? If you find yourselves thus disposed against Hypocrisy,
and for uprightness, although I would have you humbled for the remainder of
hypocrisy, which you feel to be in you; yet chiefly I would have you to be
thankful to God, and to take comfort in this that you feel it, and dislike
it: thank God therefore for your uprightnes, comfort your selves in it, and
cherish and nourish it in you, and fear not.

Moreover, consider this, How can it justly be conceived that he should be an
Hypocrite, that from an inward principle, from the inward motions of his own
heart, shall, with a settled and deliberate will, out of love to God and
goodness chiefly, and out of hatred of sin, resolve, to his power, to abstain
from all sin, and to do whatsoever he shall know to be his duty, and
withal prays heartily unto God for grace to that end, truly endeavoring the
same, having a careful eye, not only to the matter of what he does, but to
the manner and truth of it, being truly grieved when he fails in either? You
being such a one, how dare you at once offer wrong to your self, and to Gods
grace in you, by judging your self to be an Hypocrite?

Others object, that they are Doubts, through being already fallen back,
removed.
already fallen far back from what they were; They do not feel so much
zeal and fervencie of affection to goodness, nor against wickedness; nor yet
do they now feel those comforts and clear apprehensions of GODS favor
toward them, as they did in their first Conversion.

It may be that you are fallen Answ.
back, and have lost your first love, whence all which you have objected will
follow; but may it not befall a particular child of GOD to have lost his first
love, as well as a Rev. 2. 4.
whole Church, the Church of Ephesus? You could not for that conclude that
Ephesus was no Church, neither can you hence conclude, that you are none of
Gods children, or that you shall not hold out unto the end. But if it be so, be
willing to see your sin, and to be humbled and repent heartily of it; follow
the Counsel of Christ, Rev. 2 5.
Remember whence you are fallen, repent, and do your first works, (and
certainly Ps. 73. 24 Psa. 89. 30. 32.
Gods child shall have grace to repent) then you Rev. 2. 11
enduring to the end shall not be hurt of the second death, notwithstanding
that sin of yours in losing your first love.

But it may, and it often does Reasons why many think they have less grace now
than at first, but mistake.
happen, that a true child of God does in his own feeling think he has less
grace now, than at first, when yet it is not so; The reasons of his mistake may
be these.

At the first, a truly regenerate man does not see so much as afterward he
does. At first you had indeed the light of the Sun, but as at the first
spring and dawning of the day, whereby you saw your greater enormities, and
reformed many things, yea, (as you thought) all: but now since, the Sun being
risen higher toward the perfect day, shining more clearly, it comes to
pass, that in these beams of the Sun (as when it shines into an house) you
may see many motes, and very many things amiss in your heart and life, which
were not discovered, nor discerned before; you must not say you had less sin
then, because you saw it not, or more sin now, because you see more. For as
the eye of your mind, sees every day more clearly, and as your hearts grow
every day more holy; so will sin appear unto you every day more and more, for
your constant humiliation, and daily reformation. For a Christian, if he go
not backward, sees in his latter time more clearly a far off, what is yet
before him to be done, and with what an high degree of affection he ought to
serve God, and to what an height of perfection he ought to raise his thoughts
in his holy aim, which in the infancy of his Christianity he could not see;
Hence his error; Even as it is usual for a novice in the V^iversitie, when
he has read over a few Systemes, and Epitomes of the Arts, to conceit better
of himself for Scholarship, than when he has more profound knowledge in
those Arts afterward, for then he sees knottie difficulties, which his weak
knowledge, being not able to pry into, passed over with presumption of knowing
all.

Secondly, Good desires and feelings of comforts are sudden, strange, and new
at first, which suddenness, strangeness, and newness of change out of state
of corruption and death, into the state of grace and life, is more sensible,
and leaves behind it a deeper impression, than can possibly be made after
such time that a man is accustomed to it: or that can be added by the increase
of the same grace. A man that comes out of a close, dark, and stinking
Dungeon, is more sensible of the benefit of a sweet air, of light, and
liberty the first week, than he is seven years after he has enjoyed all
these to the full. Let a mean man be raised suddenly, and undeservedly unto
the estate and glory of a King, he will be more feeling of the change, and will
be more taken and exalted in his conceit with the glory of his state for the
first week or month, than at ten years end, when he is accustomed to the
heart and state of a King, yea more, than if at ten years end, he happen to
have the accession of another Kingdom unto him, and though double power and
glory be conferred on him.

Thirdly, GOD for special causes does tender his Scholars, when they first
enter into Christ's School; In like manner does he de^dle and deal with his
Babes in CHRIST, before they can go alone.

Do not wise Schoolmasters (the better to enter and encourage their young
and fearful Scholars) show more outward expressions of affection and
kindness toward them, and forbeareth to exercise Schoole-discipline on them,
the f^ist week that they come to School, yea, it may be, show more
countenance and familiarity toward them their first week, then ever after,
until the time that they send them to the University? And has not a young
chilae more attendance, and fewer falls in his, or her infancy, while it is
carried in the arms, or led in the hands of his father or mother, then when it
goes alone? But when it goes alone, it receives many a fall, and many a
knock; yet this does not argue less love in the parents, or less strength in
the child now, then when it was but one or two years old.

Fourthly, Albeit Gods trees Psa. 92. 14
planted in his Courts, always should, and usually do, in their age, bear
more and better fruit, then they did or could do in their youth; yet these,
through a false apprehension of things, may judge themselves to be more barren
in their age, then they were in their youth. It may be, you feel not in you
that vigor, heat, and ability to perform good duties now in age, as you did
in your younger days; But may not this arise from natural defects, as from
want of memory, want of quickness of wit, and from want of natural heat and
vigor of your spirits, all which are excellent handmaids to grace. You may
observe this in those elder people, that study to approve themselves to God
until their age, and in their age, they have these natural defects
recompensed with other better and more lasting fruit, as with more staydnesse,
and soundness of Judgment, more humility, more patience, and more Ioh. 2. 12,
13
experience, where with their gray hayrs are crowned, they continuing in the
way of righteousness; Look Pro. 16. 31
for these, and look to approve your selves in these in your age, and these
will prove more beneficial to you, than your fresh feelings, and your
sensibly-felt zeal in your younger times.

There are yet others (it may be the same) when they observe that many who are
of longer standing than themselves, who have had much more knowledge, Fears of
falling quite away because others are already fallen, removed.
and have made a further progress in the practice of godliness than they, are
yet fallen fear fully into some gross sin, or sins; yea, some of them are
departed from the faith, and have embraced with 2 Timothy 4. 10.
Demas this present World, either in the lust of the flesh, the lust of the
eye, or pride of life; They are some of them fallen to Popery, or to some other
false Religion; Wherefore they fear that they shall fall away also, and that
their hearts will deceive them in the end.

That the falls of others should Answ.
make all that do stand 1 Cor 10 12
to take ^eede lest they fall, is according ^o the express will of God. It is
^^ high point of wisdom for ^ou to observe and do it. Like^ise to fear so
much as to quicken you to watchfulness and ^^ayer, is an holy and commendable
fear: But to fear your total or final falling away, only because some that
have made profession of the same Religion are fallen, is without ground.

For it may be, those which you see to be fallen away, never had any other
than a form of godliness, and never had more than the common graces and gifts
of the Spirit. For if they be quite fallen from the faith, it is because 1 Ioh.
2. 19
they were never soundly of the faith. Moreover, grant that some of them which
are ^^^^n had saving grace; may they not with Psalm. 51.
David, and Ecclesiast
Solomon recover their falls? This you should hope and pray for, rather than by
occasion of their falls, to trouble your self with false and fruitless fear.

Last of all, some yet fear Fears of falling away in time of persecution
removed.
that if persecution should come because of the Word and the Religion which
they do profess, that they should never hold out, but should fall away.

Do you thus fear? Then buckle close unto you the Ephesians. 6. 11. 13. 14.
complete Answ.
armor with the girdle of sincerity, exercise your selves beforehand at your
spiritual weapons; make and keep your peace with GOD, under whom at such
times you must shelter your selves, and by whose power it is that you must
stand in that evil day. But know, that a child of GOD need not fear
persecution with such discouragefull and such desperate fear, neither should
you; for this will but give advantage to your enemies of all sorts, and will
make your ^^andsfeeble, and your hearts faint. Raise up your spirits, and chase
way your fear thus. Consider he goodness of your cause. Consider How to be
kept from dastardly fear in time of persecution.
the wisdom, ^valour, and prowess of him that has already ^edeemed you with
his blood, who has already led captivity ^aptive, who is your Champion, and
has engaged himself for you, not to leave you, until he has brought you to
glory; I mean Christ Jesus, who is Lord of heasts, under whose Banner you
fight in your whole Christian warfare. Consider likewise, the faithfulness of
Gods promise, made to all his Children concerning his presence, and help in
time of persecution, commanding them not to take thought thereabout, having
promised to give them a Luke 21. 14, 15.
mouth and wisdom, which all their adversaries shall not be able to resist.
And suppose that you have, or at least feel that you have but little strength,
yet consider (if it be cherished and thankfully acknowledged) what this will
do; it will cause you to keep Rev. 3. 8. 10
Gods word, and that you shall not deny Christ's name: and it has a promise of
being kept from the hour of temptation that shall come upon all the world, to
try them that dwell upon the earth, you shall be kept at least from the hurt of
the temptation. Consider last of all, the blessed experience, which the holy
Martyrs have had of GODS love and help (according to his promise) in their
greatest persecutions, and fiery trialls. Observe the wisdom and courage of
those who in their own nature were but simple and fearful. Read the Book
of Martyrs next unto the Scriptures for this purpose, and through GODS grace,
though you were naturally as fearful as Hares, you, when you shall be called
to it, shall be as courageous as Lions.

It is not hard for you to know How to know in time of peace to hold out in
persecution.
now, whether you shall be able in time of persecution to stand fast and not
fall away. If you now in the peace of the Gospel can deny your selves in your
lusts, in love to God, and for Conscience sake toward him, and can rather part
with them, than with the sincere following of CHRIST, then you shall be able,
and you will deny your selves in the matter of your life, if you be put to it
in time of persecution, rather than deny CHRIST. For this first is as difficult
as the latter; and the same love to GOD, and Conscience of duty which does now
uphold you, and bear you through the one, will then rather uphold, and bear
you through the other. For in times of trial and suffering for his name, you
may look for his more special assistance.

Wherefore I do wish all that are troubled with false fears, to rest
satisfied in these answers to their doubts, and I would have them give over
calling their Election, Gods love, their Justification, their Sanctification,
or their final perseverance into question: but rather fill your selves with
hope and assurance of GODS favor, (I speak still to burdned Consciences)
comforting your selves therein, abounding in thankesgiving to GOD for what you
have, rather than repining in your selves for what you want.

Yet I know there are some (as Doubts, taken from deceitfulness of heart,
removed.
if they were made all of doubting) will object, my heart is deceitful, I
doubt all is not, I doubt all will not be well with me.

If your heart be deceitful, Answ.
Why then do you believe it, when it casts in these doubts, And why do you
trust to it more than unto the evidence of the Word, and Judgment of Gods
faithful Ministers, who by the Word give most satisfying resolutions to your
doubts? which also does minister unto you matter of assured hope and Doubts,
from present fainting, removed.
comfort.

Another will say, I do even faint in my troubles, and in my fears, and I am
ready to give over all, what shall I do? What would you have me to do?

Your case is not singular, many Answ.
other have been, and are in this case; It is no otherwise with you, than it
was with the Psalmist and Jonah; Do as they in that their fainting did; First,
give not over, but remember God, call upon him, give him no rest. Secondly,
trust on him, and Psalm. 27. 23, 24.
wait until you have comfort: That holy man of GOD said, Psalm. 73. 26.
My flesh and my heart fails, but GOD is the strength of my heart, and my
portion for ever. Likewise Iona. 2. 4. 7
Jonah, ^ said I am ^ast out of thy sight, yet I will look again toward thine
holy Temple. And again, when my soul fainted within me, I remembered the
Lord, and my prayer came up unto thee, into thine holy Temple, that is as if he
had said unto God, I prayed unto thee in the name of Christ, and thou did
hear me. When you walk in the darkness of affliction, and inward
discomfort, He, to whom God gave the tongue of the learned, to speak a word
in due season to him that is weary, gives you counsel, (and whose will you in
this state of yours follow, if not his) his counsel is this saying, Isa* 50. 4.
10
Who is among you that fear the Lord, and obey the voice of his servant, that
walks in darkness and has no light? Let him trust in the name of the Lord,
Psalm. 27. 23 24.
and stay upon his God. Mark it, He that fears and obeys, yet may be in
darkness and have no light; what darkness is this, but that spoken of, verse.
4. viz. an afflicted weary soul, without light of comfort? And men, thus
distressed, must trust in the Lord, and stay on their God.

Yet these poor souls (who, Reply. We do not our part, therefore God is not
tied to (...).
whether they should be sharply reproved, or pitied more, is hard to say; I am
sure they deserve both) will yet object strongly. It is true, they that fear
God and obey him, may trust in the Lord, and stay upon God. And he has made
most rich promises to the^ that know him, that do* fear and obey him. See,
here is promise with condition (says one) I must fear the Lord, I must obey
him, I know God will do his part, if I could do mine, but these I do not,
what warrant then, or ground have I to look for comfort, or any thing at Gods
hand, for his promises belong not to me?

I know well that with this Answ.
doubt the Devil does much perplexe the afflicted souls of many of Gods
dearest children, and by it keeps off all the remedies which Gods Word can
afford, so that they cannot fasten and do them good. For the propositions of
the Word are easily assented unto; but all the matter lies in the application
of them to the wound. It is still put off (...) and keep his Commandments:
there he promises with Condition: here he absolutely promises those on whom
he intends to bestow these blessings, that he will put his fear in their
heart, that they may be capable of them: And, which is more, to the end that
men might repent, believe, and live godly, which is the Condition to which the
promise of forgiveness and Salvation is made, God declares that he has
raised Christ and exalted Act. 5. 30. 31
him to be a Prince and a Savior for to give this faith and repentance, that
their sins may be forgiven, and their souls saved by him. I pray consider
well whether al these promises of this sort be not made absolutely on GODS
part, and without any Condition on man's part. Wherefore, whereas God has made
many excellent promises of free and great rewards; as, to hear the prayers,
and to fulfill the desire of them that fear him, and to give life and glory to
them that believe and obey him, and that do hold fast the confidence, and the
rejoicing to the end; you see that here are promises of the first sort made
with a kind of Condition: But that GOD will give his people both to will and
to do these things required in the condition, he has absolutely promised, as
has been clearly proved.

If you yet reply and say, are not Reply.
these latter promises made under condition of our well using the outward
means thereof, such as hearing of the Word, prayer, etc.

GOD indeed commands Answ.
these means to be used; and, if we perform them aright, God will not fail
to bless the good use of these means; but this well using them is not in our
own power, neither is it a Condition for which God is necessarily bound to
give Faith, and to plant his fear in our hearts, any otherwise than by his
promise; but it is a Condition by which he has ordained ordinarily to give
these graces to al which in the use of them shall wait upon him for them. For
both the giving of his word, and the giving us minds to hear the Word, and the
opening of the heart to attend, and the convincing and alluring the heart to
obey; hang all upon those absolute promises. Isa. 54. 13
They shall be all taught of God, and the rest before mentioned.

Wherefore, let none of years Caution.
think that without hearing, praying, and the right using of Gods ordinances,
they shall ever have faith, and the fear of God wrought in them, or shall ever
come to Heaven. For we are commanded to pray, hear, etc. and that in Faith,
or else we can never Heb. 4. 2. Iam 1. 7.
look to receive any thing of the LORD. And doing what lies in manspower in
the right using the means of Salvation is of great consequence, although it be
not a sufficient cause to move GOD necessarily to give grace; For I am
persuaded that the best should have more grace, if they would do what in them
lay continually, to make good use of the outward means of grace; and the worst
should be guilty of less sin, if they would do what in them lay to profit
by the good use of the said means. And the neglect or abusing of the Psalm. 81.
11 12 Mat. 21. 43
means, is sufficient cause why God should not only withhold grace, but
condemn men for refusing it.

But some will yet say, let all which has been said be granted, Fears rising
from want of such graces as God has promised absolutely, removed.
I find that God has not fulfilled these his absolute promises to me, for I
do not yet fear God and obey. How can I hope? How can I choose but fear my
estate?

Let this for the time be granted, that God has not planted his fear in your
heart, etc. as yet; May he not do it hereafter? Since he has made unto you
such excellent promises, to fulfill them without condition on your part, but
that you should only use the means, and wait. Will you not give him leave to
fulfill them in his own time? And will you not wait, and be glad if they may
be fulfilled at any time? Times and seasons of Gods communicating his graces,
are reserved to be at his own disposing, not at ours. It should be your care
only to be present at GODS Ordinances, and when you read or hear the Word or
will of God, to endeavor to believe and obey it: As when he says; Thou shall
love the Lord thy GOD with all thy heart. Thou shall believe in the name of the
Lord thy God, and trust in his Name. Thou shall obey the voice of the Lord thy
God, and serve him, and such like. Attend to the Word heedfully, and because
this Word is infallibly true, and excellently good, bring your thoughts and
heart to believe, and to approve it, and say within your selves, these are
true, these are good, this I ought to do, this I would believe, and do; Lord
help me, and I will do it, Psa. 119. 5
O that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes. In such like agitations,
and reasonings of the reasonable soul, it pleases GOD to give his grace both
to will, and to do his Commandments.

But, secondly, do not say, that you have not faith, and the fear of God, and
love to him, all which God of his free grace promised (as you heard) to you
absolutely, which graces are indeed the conditions foregoing the reward
promised; when as in truth you have them. For what kind of duties be these,
think you? Are they Legal, which require perfect, exact, and full degrees of
faith, fear, and love? Or are they not Evangelicall? Such as do require truth
in all these, and do not exact full perfection in degrees. If you have desire,
and if you can desire to fear him (which is the scantling of the fear of Gods
people, as Neh. 1. 11
Nehemiah calls it) so if you Mar. 9. 24
desire to believe, and Isa. 1. 19.
will to obey, in the inmost longing of your soul, according to the measure and
strength of grace in you, this according to the Tenor of the blessed Gospel
of our Lord Jesus Christ, is true and acceptable through Christ, for whose sake
GOD does 1 Cor. 8. 12.
accept the will for the deed, in all such cases wherein there is truth of
will and endeavor, but not power to do.

Furthermore, if you think that it is your well doing that must make you
acceptable to God, you are in a proud, and dangerous error. Indeed God will
not accept of you, if you do not endeavor to do his will; but you must
propound to your self another end, than to be accepted for your well-doing:
You must do your duty to show your obedience to God, and to show your
thankfulness, that God has pleased, and does please to accept you in his Son
Christ; and that it is your desire to be accepted through him.

But I would have you which are pressed with the load of your sins, look
nearly, judiciously, and impartially into your self, it may be, you have more
faith, fear of God, and obedience then you are aware of, or then you will be
known of. Can you grieve, and does it trouble you that you have so little
faith, so little fear of GOD, and that you do show so little obedience? and
is it your desire and endeavor to have more, and to do as well as you can,
though you cannot do so well as you should? then you have much faith, fear,
and ^bedience. For to grieve for little ^aith, fear, and obedience, is an
^videntsigne of much faith, fear, and obedience. For whence is ^his trouble
and grief, but from Gods saving graces? And to ^rieve for little, shows that
you ^ong for and would have much.

Let this suffice to be a full answer to the principal doubts, whereof
fearful hearts will ^ake no answer. Never yield to your fears, wait on God
still ^or resolution of your doubts in ^is best time: For it is not man that
can; but it is Psalm* 85. 8
God that both ^an and will speak peace to his people, not only outward, but
inward peace.

In the mean time, though you can have no feeling comfort in any of GODS
promises, yet consider God in the Lord, and that Christ is Lord of all, you are
his creature, you owe to him all obedience, wherefore, you will, as much as you
can, keep your self from iniquity, and you will strive to do his will, let
him do with you as he pleases, yea, though he kill you, or though he give you
no comfort till death, you will trust in him, and will obey him, and it is your
desire to rest and hope in him as in your Redeemer, then whether you know that
God is yours or no, I am sure he knows you to be his; this is an argument of
strong faith. And you are upon a sure ground, The foundation of God remains
sure: The Lord knows his, and who be they? Even all that professing his name
2 Timothy 2. 19.
depart from iniquity. And whosoever in his heart would, he, in truth, does
depart from iniquity.

Something remains yet to Troubles, through want of peace of Sanctification,
removed. Answ.
be answered. Many say, that, do what they can, they are assaulted still so
thick with temptations that they cannot have one hours quiet.

What of that? Does this hinder your peace with God, that the Devil, the
World, and your lusts (Gods sworn enemies) are not at peace with you? So long
as you have peace of Sanctification in this degree, that the faculties of soul
and body do not mutiny one against the other; but hold a good correspondencie
in joining together against their fleshly lusts, which fight against the soul,
you are in good case; I mean, when the Understanding, Conscience, Will, and
Affections are all willing to do their part against sin their common enemy:
Not but that you shall find a sensible warring and opposition in all these,
while you live here, even when you have most peace in this kind, but how? The
unsanctified part of the understanding is against the sanctified part of the
understanding, and unsanctified will, against the sanctified will, and so in
all other faculties of the soul, flesh in every Gal. 5. 17.
part lusts against spirit in every part, and spirit in every part lusts
against flesh in every part. For as every sanctified part has the spirit, so
it has likewise the remains of the flesh fighting one against the other. Now
if that your faculties and powers be ruled all by one spirit, you have a good
agreement, and good peace within you, notwithstanding that the flesh does so
violently war against this spirit; For this warring of sin in your members,
against the spirit, and the warring of the spirit against sin, argues
clearly that you have peace with God, and this war continued, will in time
beget perfect peace.

But let no man ever look to have peace of sanctification perfect in this
life; For the best are 1 Cor. 13 9
sanctified but in part; Wherefore let no man professing Christ think, that he
shall be freed from temptations and assaults, risin^ from within, or coming
from without, so long as he lives in this world. Are not Christians called to
be Soldiers? Wherefore we must arm our selves that we may stand by the power
of Gods might, and 1 Cor. 16 13.
quit our selves like men against the assaults of our spiritual enemies.

Is it any other than the 1 Cor. 10 13.
common case of all Gods Children? Was not Christ himself tempted, that he
might Heb. 2. 18*
succor those that are tempted? Have you not a promise not to be tempted above
that you are 1 Cor 10 13.
able? It is but resisting and enduring a 1 Pet. 5. 10. Heb. 10. 37
while, yet a little while. Is there any temptation out of which God will not
give a good issue? Has not Christ Luke 22, 32. Ioh. 17. ^5. 20.
prayed that your faith fail not?

Let us therefore keep peace in our selves, that the whole man may be at
agreement, and let us keep peace one with another, fighting against the common
enemy. And the Romans 16 20
God of peace shall tread Satan, and all enemies under-foot shortly, and then
Romans 8. 37
through Christ you shall be more than Conquerours, you shall not only hold
what you have kept from losing but shall possess all that Christ has won
for you. And the more battles you have fought, and in them through Christ have
overcome, the greater triumph you shall have in glory.

Now as a surplussage to all that has been said against groundless fears,
which deprive poor How, notwithstanding all a man's causes of fears he may
know the peace of God belongs to him.
souls of heavenly comfort; If any yet cannot be satisfied, but fear still
that GOD is not at peace with them, I will propound a few Questions, to which
if any soul can answer affirmatively, he may be assured of Gods peace and
love, and of his own Salvation, whatsoever his fears or feelings may happen
for to be.

1. How stand you affected to Quest.
sin? Are you afraid to offend God thereby? Is it so that you dare not
wittingly sin? Is it your grief and burden that you cannot abstain from
sin, nor get out of it so soon as you would, when you are fallen into it?

2. How stand you affected toward holiness, and goodness, and unto the power
of godliness? Is it your hearty desire to know Gods will, that you may do
it? Do you desire to fear him, and please him in all things? And is it your
grief and trouble when you fail in well-doing? And is it any joy to you to
do well in any true measure?

3. Thirdly, How stand you affected to the Church and Religion of God? Are you
glad when things go well in the Church, though it go ill with you in your
own particular? And are you grieved when things go ill in the Church, when it
may happen to be with you, as it was with good Neh. 1. 4.
Nehemiah, or 1 Samuel 4. 20. 21.
Ichabod^ mother, that all things go very well, or at least tolerably well,
for your own particular?

4. Fourthly; How stand you affected to men? Is it so that you cannot delight
in wicked men, because of their wickedness, but Psalm. 15. 4
dislike them? Whereas otherwise their parts and conditions are such, that you
could much Psalm. 16. 4.
desire their company. Do you 1 Ioh. 3. 14. Psalm. 16. 3.
love those that fear the Lord, and that delight in goodness, therefore
because you think they are good, and are beloved of God?

5. Fifthly; Can you endure to have your soul ripped up, and your beloved sin
smitten at, and let out by a searching Ministry, approving that Ministry, and
liking that Minister the rather? And do you with Psa. 141. 5
David desire that the righteous should reproove you? And would you have an
Pro. 25. 12*
obedient ear to a wise Reprover?

6. Lastly; Though you cannot always have that feeling proof of your good
estate, which is the certainty of Evidence? Nay say, you have it but seldom,
or it may be, you can scarce tell whether you have it at all; Do you yet
resolve, or is it your desire, and will you, as you are able, resolve to cleave
to God, and hang upon Christ, and upon Gods merciful promises made to you in
him, seeking salvation in Christ by faith, and by none other, nor by any other
means?

If you can answer, yea, to all, or to any one of these, you may assure your
selves that you are in Gods favor, and in state of grace. What though you
cannot feel in your selves that you have this so sure as you would by a full
certainty of Evidence (but it is your fault that you have it not so) yet you
have it sure by the best certainety, namely, by a true certainety of Ad^erence,
and cleaving unto God? For when you are resolved not to sin wittingly, and
allowedly against GOD, and not to depart from him whatsoever become of you; and
it is your longing desire to please him. When (I say) you stand thus resolved,
and thus affected as has been said, then certainly God and you are knit
together by an inseparable bond: When you hate what God hates, and love what
God loves, and will what God wills; are not God and you at one, and at
peace? Are you not nearly and firmly linked one to another? What though this
bond be some what secret and unseene to your selves? yet it is certain, God
knows you to be actually his, and will for this, own you, when you seem to
doubt of it; and will always Psa. 73. 23
hold you by your right hand, whether you feel it or no. But why should you
think that you are without Evidence, when you cannot but feel that in truth
you cleave thus to GOD, and stand thus affected to him, from hence if you were
not wanting to your selves, you might gain a most peaceable and joyous
assurance, that you are in Gods favor, and shall be saved. Thus much of
removing of impediments to true peace.

CHAP. XVII. Touching furtherances and means of peace of God.
IT yet remains, that I should show furtherances and means to get and keep
this true peace of God which passes all understanding.

Men do err in judging of their own estates, and in like manner in
concluding that they Causes of error in mis-iudgeing of a man's state first
removed.
have true peace or not, from two causes; Either by erring in the Proposition
which they lay down as a rule to judge by; Or else by erring in the Assumption
and Application of their actions or persons to the rule propounded. Now if you
err either in the Proposition, or in the Assumption, and application, you of
necessity will err in your Conclusion.

Wherefore if you would judge rightly of your actions and person, take heed
first that you do not fail in your Proposition and Rule: which that you may
not do, you must know what is necessary to the very being of a Christian, what
not; and this is to be learned only by the only Canon of truth to us, the
word of GOD. For many err herein, because they think that such and such
things are necessary to the being in state of grace, which are not; and that
such and such things are sufficient to the being of a Christian which are not.

Now you shall find, that it is truth of faith and other saving graces, not
the great degree and quantity of them that makes a Christian. And that it is
not the most forward profession and form of godliness, without this power and
truth therefore, that will do it.

Secondly, Take heed that you fail not in your assumption and application of
your self and of your actions to the Rule, though rightly propounded. The
Scripture must also rectify you in this. For many a one erreth in this also,
saying, my actions and condition are according to the Rule, or not according to
the Rule; When indeed they are otherwise than they judge. For every man's own
spirit so far as it is sinful is apt to give a false Testimony of it self.
David said Psa. 31. 22*
he was cut off from God, when he was not. The Rev. 3. 17.
Laodiceans thought themselves in good state, when Christ says they were
wretched and miserable.

Now that you may not err either in the Rule, or application of your self to
the Rule, you must use all good means to have your judgment rightly informed
in either point: and then be willing to judge of your self as you are, and of
your peace with God as it is.

I told you that the holy Scripture must be your guide, in judging what you
should be, and what you are; I mean the Scripture rightly understood. Now to
attain a right understanding of the Scripture, and abisitie to judge your
self by it, whether you be in state of grace, from the knowledge whereof
comes peace, look back unto Chapter 8. Se and ion 2. taking unto them these
following directions.

1. Observe a difference and distinction in true Christians, both in their
different manner of calling, and estate after calling. Some called in infancy,
as Samuel and John Baptist: Some in middle and old age, as Abraham, and
Zacheus. Some called without sensible terrors of conscience, as those before
mentioned. Some with violent heart-ache and anguish, as S. Paul and the lay*
our. In some these terrors abide longer, in some a shorter time. And after
Conversion all are not of like growth and strength. Some babes, weak in
judgment and affections; Some strong men, strong in grace generally; but
strong also in corrup^ion insome particular* Some old men so well grounded in
knowledge, and confirmed in resolution, that no lust gets a head to prevail
in them. Also one and the same man may be sometimes in spiritual health and
strong, sometimes under a temptation, weak, and feeble, sometime can pray, etc.
and have comfort, sometime not. Now, none must conclude he is no Christian,
because he is not in every thing like others, no^ at all times like himself.

2. Trust not your own judgment, of sense in your own ease, whosoever would
understand, and be wise according to Scripture; must deny himself, and not
Pro. 3. 5.
lean to his own sense or wisdom; but must be 1 Cor. 3. 18.
a fool that he may be wise, you must bring your conceits to be ordered and
framed by the Scriptures. You must not presume to put a sense of your own into
the Scripture; but always take the sense and meaning out of it. It is
presumption, of a man's own opinion, and stiffenesse in his own conceits,
which marreth all in this case. And whence is this but from his folly and
pride? Oh, if you who are troubled in Conscience, could be every way nothing in
your selves, you would quickly be something in God, and you should quickly know
it. If you would be humbled, and not nourish this pride in you, you should
quickly know your state with comfort.

I know many of you will wonder that I should charge you with pride; you
judging your selves to be so base and vile. Well for all that, I will now prove
to your faces, that it is humility you want, and if it were not that you were
proud, you would judge of things otherwise than you do.

For first you cannot believe in CHRIST (you say) because you cannot obey him,
and be dutiful as a good wife to him: If you could obey, then you could
believe that he were yours and you his; whereas, you must first believe in
Christ, and take him for your husband, and believe he is your husband, before
you can obey him. Can a woman, or should a woman obey a man, and carry her
self toward him as to her husband, before that she believe that he is her
husband? If you could obey as you should; Oh, then you think CHRIST would love
you; It were well if you could love CHRIST, and obey him, it is your duty. But
to think he will not save you, because you have no goodness or worth in you
to cause him to love you, is not this from hence, you would be some thing in
your self, for which Christ should cast his love upon you. Christ Hos. 2. 19 20
marries you not because you were good, but that he might make you good, that
you might know him, etc.

But you do not see this his Object.
work in you, that he has made you good, therefore you doubt.

I answer: though it may be in Answ
you, yet Christ will not let you see it, because you will not believe that he
is yours, and you his. Bring your heart to this, (and you have reason for it)
for the Father gives him, and he gives himself to you in the Word and
Sacraments; then you will love him, and obey him abundantly. Is not she a proud
and foolish woman, that may have a Kings son, upon Condition that she will
strip her self of all her own proper goods, and let him endow her at his
pleasure, yet still she will be whining and discontented with her self,
because she has nothing of her own to bring to him, for which he should
love her.

But you will still say, Christ Object.
has not endued you with so much grace, as to be able to do as you should.

Content your selves, If you Answ.
would but see that he has married you to himself, you then would use the
means which he has appointed, whereby he gives his graces, you would be
thankful for what you have, you would pray and wait his pleasure for more,
relying on his wisdom for how much, and when. If you do not thus, then in
this you show your selves proud, in that you prefer your own wisdom before
his.

Let it be supposed that you are not proud, standing upon terms of having any
goodness in you, for which Christ should love you, but you would with all your
hearts be all that you are in him, and would be beholding to him for taking
you, poor, and ^as^ as you are Is there no other pride (think you) but when
you do think well of your selves, or would be thought well on, for your
goodness? Yes, there is another pride which is as dangerous in this case of
causlesse doubting; and that is to be too well conceited of, and to be wedded
to your own knowledge, and to your own opinion in judging your selves.
Understand it in this particular. The holy Scriptures give you to understand (I
speak still to such only as with all their souls would please GOD, yet can
feel no comfort) that your state, in point of Salvation, is good. And Gods
experienced children, yea, his faithful Ministers, who dare not lie for God,
much less to ease you, they according to the Scriptures do assure you that
your state is not as you say it is; but you have conceits other wise, and you
have no feeling of comfort, and in your sense to you, it is otherwise then
either the Scripture, or the Ministers speak. Now when you will prefer your
own opinion and sense (such as it is) before the judgment of Gods word of
truth, and before the judgment of Gods Ministers, judging according to this
word. Are you not highly conceited of your own opinion? And are you not
strangely proud? though it may be you thought otherwise.

Wherefore if you understand things aright, you must have a mean conceit of
your own understanding, of your own opinion, and of your own sense. For as
you must deny your goodness, and be poor in respect of conceit of any
goodness in you, if you would ever look to have any goodness from Christ; so
you must deny your own opinion, knowledge, sense, and wisdom, if you would
know spiritual things aright, and would become wise through Christ.

And that it may appear now, that you are not too well conceited of your own
opinion touching your estate, make use in this case of Experienced Christians,
but especially of judicious and godly Ministers. Let not fear An excellent
help making way to peace of conscience
either of troubling them, nor yet of shaming your self hinder you. But do it
according to these directions.

First, Acquaint such a one with Rules how to lay open our state to others,
when the Conscience is troubled.
your case betimes; keep it not to your self too long. For then like a bone
long out of joint, and a festred wound, it will not be so well, nor so easily
cured, beside the vexation in the mean time.

Secondly, deal plainly, truly, and fully, in setting down the cause of
your trouble, not doing as many, telling one part of your grief, and not
another, which has been the cause that they have gone away without comfort.
Either tell all or none in this case. If you think him not faithful, reveal
nothing thereof to him: If you judge him a fit man, then show all, as you will
do your bodily maladies and diseases to a Surgeon, or Physician, if you would
have them cured.

Thirdly, Believe them rather than your selves in this case, hearken to them,
and make use of their judgment and experience, and be not presumptuous of
your own understanding and feeling. In times of your fears and doubts be not
rash and sudden in judging your selves. The Devil is a jugler, and your eyes
be dazeled, and of all men Men overgone with trouble of conscience, are most
unfit toiudge of their own estate.
you are the most unfit and incompetent to judge of your selves in this case.
For when groundless suspicion, and causeless fears have like a headstrong
Colt got a head, and has caught the bit in his teeth, it will (like to other
passions) carry you head long whither it lists, contrary to al right, reason,
and understanding. In such suspicion and fear of your estate, you are like a
jealous woman in the fit of her jealousy, and fear of her husbands
unfaithfulness; she will pick matter out of every thing he does, (though he
study to give her no occasion of suspicion) to increase her suspicion of him;
If he be somewhat strange and austere, then (she says) he loves her not but
others better. If he be kind to her, then she thinks that this is but to
dazel and blind her eyes, that he may without suspicion give himself to other
women. Deal now ingenuously, and answer whether it is not, or whether it has
not been so with you? I pray mark your absurd and contrary reasonings. When
you prosper, thence you infer, sure God does not love me, for whom he
loves, he corrects. When God whips you well for this, and does cast you into
grievous afflictions, thence you conclude, sure God is wroth with me, and does
not love me. If you be troubled in Conscience, Oh, then GOD writes bitter
things against you, you can have no peace. And when he gives you quiet of
mind, Oh, then you fear all rises from presumption, your case is naught, and
it wasbetter with you when you had trouble in mind. Is it not thus? Are you
not ashamed that you have been thus senseless, and absurd in your own
reasonings: and yet, this understanding, reason, and sense of yours must be
harkned unto, before the truth of Gods Word, and before the judgment of all
men, though never so judicious. Will any body that is wise trust such a
judgment? If an excellent Physician for others, is seldom found to be the
best Physician for himself in a dangerous sickness, but will make use of one
(it may be) inferior in judgment in Physic to himself; for his own wits
be not so well his own in his own case; then me thinks, it should be your
wisdom to make use of the judgment of others, and not follow your own sense.

But you will say, shall I think otherwise of my self than I Reply.
feel?

I answer; I, in some cases, or Answ.
else you will be counted a wilful fool, as in the case of an Ague, you
feel your drink to be of an odd relish; before you had your ague, you knew
it was well rellished, and those which bring it, tell you it is the same,
standers by taste it for you, and say it is the same, and that it is
excellently well relished, I hope you are wiser in such a case as this, then to
conclude according to your feeling, and taste; every one sees that the fault
was in your palate, not in the drink. Even so it is with you when the palate
of your understanding is distempered with a shaking fit of groundless, and
faithless fear, wherefore in this state, deny your own sense, and trust not
your own judgment; but hearken unto the judgment of other men. And the
rather, because GOD does therefore comfort men, and give them experience of his
consolations, 2 Cor. 1. 4
that they may comfort other in like case. Also he has given commandment ^o
his more understanding, and more confirmed children, that they should 1 The. 5
14
comfort you, giving you to understand how it is with you in the matter of yous
^onk, better than you can know of your selves. Nay more, God has given to his
Ministers ^he Isa. 50. 4.
tongue of the learned, to speak a word in due season to the soul that is
weary. Should not the judgments of these be regarded? But which is most of
all, God has not only given to Ministers skill, to discern your state better
than your selves, but has given power and Ioh 20. 23.
authority, when they shall see cause, in his name to absolve you, Chap. 17
and to assure you, that (if it be with you, according as you do thus and
thus relate your state to be) you are in Gods favor, and in state of grace.

I mean not that you should hang your faith upon any man's, or any men's
judgment; but when that men judicious, being in better case to judge of you,
then you are to judge of your selves, shall by the Word of God, and by
authority from him give you hope and comforts; you ought to comfort your
selves by these means.

Thus much I have said, that your judgment might be fitted to understand
aright in what state you stand. Which if you will observe it, it will be an
excellent furtherance toward the obtaining of peace.

Now I will show by what means you may have cause and matt^ your judgment to
work upon, whence it may give you peace and comfort.

If you would have peace and Means to get and keep true peace.
comfort in your souls, then first and chiefly you must get and cherish the
Spirit of God in you, that it may speak peace to you, and may give you matter
for your spirit to work upon, whereby you may conclude, you are in Gods
favor. For, though I grant, that you can have no feeling witness to your
self (say whatsoever can besaid) until your spirit can witness that you are
Gods children; yet your spirits are not to be trusted in their witnessing but
only so far forth as the Spirit of God does witness to your spirits that it
is so, that you are indeed his children. Whatsoever comfortable conceits a man
may have in himself of his good estate in grace, he^ an have no true joy, and
(...) by the holy Ghost, whose proper work it is to comfort, and is therefore
called the Ioh 14. 16
Comforter. For by him only a man can know, and by him a man may know 1 Cor. 2.
12
the things which are given him of God.

But it will be said, the Spirit Reply.
blows where it lusts, how is it possible for any man by any means to get
it?

In respect of man's own ability, Answ.
it is as unpossible for him to get the spirit to come into, and to move in his
heart, as it was for those impotent folk, which lay waiting at the Ioh. 5. 3, ^
Poole of Bethesda, for the Angels coming to move the waters, to cause the
said moving of the waters; yet they waiting, the waters were moved, and ever
and anon they that waited, and gave not over waiting at the Poole, were
benefited. Thus if men will wait in the use of the means wherein, and whereby
GOD does give and continue his holy Spirit to men, they may look to have it.

The first means to get the Means to obtain the Spirit.
spirit, is to be an empty soul, sensible of the loss of that holy Spirit
which once you had in Adam, you must mourn, and hunger, and Mat. 5 3, 4, 5, 6.
thirst after the Spirit. If you will do thus, you may expect the receiving of
the Spirit. For God says, that Isa. 4 4. 3.
he will power water upon him that is thirsty, etc. I will power my spirit
upon thy seed, says he to the Church.

Secondly, that your heart may be stirred up to long for the Spirit, you must
know that there is an holy Ghost, and not only so, but must know him to be
God, and you must believe him to be the comforter: And, as it is in our
Creed, give him this honor and glory, as to believe in him, and conceive of
him as the proper Author of sanctifi atten and comfort, this is the way to have
the Spirit, and to be sure of it that you have it. Our Savior says, that the
not knowing or believing hereof, is the cause why the Ioh. 14. 17
World receive not the Spirit.

Thirdly, be constant and diligent in waiting for the having, and for the
increase of the gifts of the Spirit, in the holy exercises of Religion, as,
reading, hearing and meditating of the Word of God, especially of the blessed
Hystory, and promises of the Gospel, etc. You must wait for it in the motions
and stirring of GODS Word in you by Gods means, then as Cornelius and his
company received it at Act. 10. 44.
Peter's Sermon; and as the Galathians at the Gal 3. 5
hearing of says, so may you. For the Gospel is called the 2 Cor. 3. 6. 8.
Ministry of the Spirit.

Fourthly, Pray for the Spirit, and though you cannot pray well without the
Spirit, yet since it is Gods will that you should pray for it, set about Prayer
for it as well as you can, then God will enable you to pray for the spirit, and
you shall have it. For Christ says, If ye that are evil know how to give
good gifts to your children: Lu. 11 14
How much more shall your heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them that
ask him? As these are means to get the spirit, so they are means to continue,
nourish, and increase the graces of the Spirit.

Fifthly, If you would keep and nourish this Spirit, you must take part with
it in its lusting against the flesh, you must not resist, but willingly receive
the comforts and motions of the spirit, and must do your best to bring forth
the fruits of the Spirit, you must take heed that you neither Ephesians. 4. 30 31
grieve nor 1 These. 5 19, 20.
quench the spirit; It is grieved, when it is resisted, crossed, or opposed any
way. It is quenched as fire is, two ways; first, by throwing on water, all
sinful actions, as they be greater or smaller, are as water, they do
accordingly more or less quench and abate the Spirits operations. Secondly,
fire may be quenched and put out by withdrawing of wood and fuel. All
neglect, or negligent using of the Word, Sacrament, Prayer, Meditation, and
holy conference, and communion of Saints, do much chill and quench the spirit:
Whereas the daily and diligent use of all these, does much increase,
strengthen, stir up, and inflame it; whence must needs follow much peace and
comfort.

Now when you have gotten this holy Spirit, and have any proofs of the holy
Spirits being in you, then you ought to rest satisfied in the Spirits witness
to your spirit, your spirit should doubt no more. For even in this that God
has given you his spirit, the very being of it in you is a real proof, and
the greatest confirmation that can be of your being instate of grace. For when
you have this S^^^it; I You are 1 Ioh. 2 27.
anointed, what greater confirmation would you have of being made Rev. 1. 6.
Kings and Priest^ to God. 2 You are also by this spirit Ephesians. 4. ^0
sealed to the day of Redemption, what greater confirmation can there be of
Gods Covenant, and of his Will and Testament toward you. 3. It is likewise the
2 Cor. 1. 22. Ephe. 14
Earnest of your inheritance, which gives present being, and beginning to the
Covenant, and binds to the perfect fulfilling it in its time, wherefore you
are so surely Gods, when he has given you his Spirit, that unless you can
think he will lose his Spirit, the earnest which he gave you, you can have no
cause to think that he will lose you, or not fulfill the promise of Salvation
ma^^ unto you, whereof his Spirit is the earnest, How the Spirit does witness
to a man that he is Go^s (...).
and part of the Covenant.

This Spirit does witness to a man, that he is the child of God two ways.
First, by immediate witness and suggestion. Secondly, by necessary inferences,
by signs from the infallible fruits of the said spirit; by which later witness
you may know the former to be a true testimony from Gods spirit, the spirit of
Adoption; and not from a spirit of error and presumption. For this spirit of
Adoption is a spirit of Z^ch 12. 10
grace and supplication, it is a spirit of Isa 61. 3.
godly sorrow, and it is a spirit of a Romans 8. 26
Act ^ 8. Gal. 5. ^2.
spiritual joy. Where it does testify that you are Gods children there it
will give you new hearts, causing you to desire and endeavor Act. 24. 16
to live like Gods children, in reverent fear and love, leading you in the
right way. checking Isa. 30. 21.
you, and calling you back out of the way of sin; stirring you up to prayer,
with sighs, desires, and inward groans, at least making you to confess your
sins, and to ask and hope for pardon in the name of CHRIST. And will still
be putting you on to live like obedient children; giving you no quietif you do
not. Thus much of the first and principal means of getting true peace and
comfort.

Secondly, If you would have the invaluable Jewel of p^ace, then abstain as
much as is possible, from the act of all gross, and from all presumptuous
sins; and from the allowance of any sin. For the more sin, the more guilt;
and the less sin, the less guilt: Now, the less guilt lies upon the
Conscience, the more peace of Conscience, the Psa. 51. 14
more guilt, the less peace.

Thirdly, When you fall into sin, (for who lives and sins not) then with
all speed affect your heart with godly sorrow for it, cause it to be a burden
and a load, and weariness to the Conscience; but withal, affect your heart
wi^h hope of mercy, forgivenes, and grace through Christ. Then with all humble
submission you must seek unto GOD, the God of peace, but come to him by Christ
Jesus, the Isa. 9. 6.
Prince of peace, upon whom lay the Isa. 53. 5.
chastisement of your peace. Ask mercy and forgiveness. Ask repentance,
grace, and new obedience. Believe in Christ. If you do all this, then you come
unto Christ, and unto God by Christ, according to his Commandment, and you
have his sure promise, that Mat. 11. 29.
you shall have rest to your souls. This do, for Ioh. 16. 33
in Christ only can you have peace. This true application of CHRIST'S blood,
and satisfaction, will so Heb. 9. 14
sprinkle e Heb. 10 12
the Conscience, from the guilt of sin; that there shall remain Heb. 10. 2*
no more Conscience for sin, that is, no more guilt which shall draw upon you
the wrath of God and eternal punishment for sin; whence must needs follow
peace of Conscience; because the Conscience has nothing to Heb. 9 Psalm. 32 3,
4, 5.
accuse you of, guiltiness being washed off by Christ's blood. As soon as
David, after his foul sins, could come thus to God, his heart had ease.

But when you have thus gotten a good and clear Conscience, How to keep the
Conscience tender. See also Cap. 15. Sect. 2. at the end of it.
take heed of defiling it again, or giving it any matter of unrest: Be as
tender in keeping your Conscience unspotted, and unwounded as you are of the
apple of your eye. Sin not against knowledge, and Conscience, and in any case
smother not the good checks and watchwards of your Conscience. For if being
washed, you do again defile it, this will cause new trouble of heart, and you
must again apply your selves to this last prescribed remedy.

In the fourth place, CHRIST having taken upon him the burden of your sins,
which was intolerable, you must take upon you, and submit unto the yoke of
Mat. 11. 19
Christ's service, which is light and easy. You must endeavor to do whatsoever
he has commanded in his Word and Gospel, following his steps in all his
imitable actions; in all humility and meekness, in all spiritual and
heavenly mindedness. When you can thus subject your selves to Christ in
holiness, you shall have peace. For the holy Ghost says, the work of Isa.
32. 17.
righteousness is peace; and again says, To be spiritually minded is Romans 8.
6.
peace, that is, brings with it peace. I comprehend CHRIST'S yoke of the
Gospel in these three, Faith, Hope, and Love. As these three be in you and
abound, in the same degrees shall peace be in you, and shall abound.

Having Faith in Christ (says Romans 5. 1.
the Apostle) we have peace with God. It is God that justifies, Romans 8. 33
who shall lay any thing to your charge? For justifying Faith is the ground and
spring, from which only sound and true comfort does flow.

Hope will make you wait, and expect with patience for the accomplishment Romans
8. 25
of GODS sure promises; whereby it will hold you as steady, and as sure from
wrack of soul, as any Anchor can hold a ship; God does therefore give hope,
that it may be as an Anchor, sure and steadfast; Though while you are in the Sea
of this world, it does not keep you so quiet, but that you may be in part
tossed and disquieted with the waves and billows of fear and doubt, to try
the goodness of your vessel, and strength of your Anchor, and tacklings; Yet
you shall be sure not to make shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience, if
Heb. 6. 18. 19
you shall lay hold upon this hope set before you.

And as for Love, They that love the Lord shall have peace, you must therefore
love God, love his ordinances and his people; Love God with all your heart;
Love your neighbors as your selves, love Gods Commandments For great peace
shall they have (says the Prophet) that love Gods Law, and nothing shall
offend Psalm. 119. 165.
them.

Whosoever do thus take up Christ's yoke, and follow him, shall find rest to
their souls; and Mat. 11. 29
peace shall be upon them, as upon the Israel of God. Gal. 6. 16.


Fifthly, If you would have peace use all good means, whereby you may be often
put in remembrance of the exhortations and consolations of God. They in the
Hebrews were therefore out of quiet, and ready to faint in their minds, both
because they forgot the exhortation, which said, My son, Heb. 12 5.
despise not the chastening of the Lord, etc. And because they forgot the
consolation, which says, Heb. 12. 6.
Whom the LORD loves, he chasteneth. Means of being put in mind of Gods
consolationss


The principal means of being put in mind of GODS consolations, are these
following.

1. You must be much Conversant in Scriptures, by reading, hearing, and
meditating thereon. For they were all written to Romans 15. 4.
that end, that through patience and comfort of the Scriptures, you might have
hope.

The Scriptures of God, they are the very Isa 12 3.
Wells and ^sa. 66. 11
Breasts of consolation and Salvation. The Law discovers sin, and by its
threats against you, and by relating judgments executed upon others, does
drive you to Christ; The promises of the Gospel made Gal. 3. 24
to you, and the signification of the accomplishment thereof to others, do
settle and confirm you in Christ, whereby your heart is filled with joy and
consolations. The Gospel is called the Romans 10 15
Gospel of peace, and the Ministers of the Gospel are said to bring glad
tidings of this peace, ^t is the bright shining light in the Gospel, which will
Luke 1. 79
guide your feet in the way of peace.

2. Be much in good Company, especially in theirs, who are full of joy and
peace in believing, whose example and counsel will mind you of joy and
comfort, and will be of excellent use unto you, to establish you in peace.

Sixthly, and lastly, Acquaint Job 22. 21. 23.
your self with God, touching the course he uses to take with his children in
bringing them to glory; Acquaint your self with God also in praying much for
peace, unto him who is the God of peace, the Father of mercies, and the God of
all consolation; then shall you have peace, and much good shall be unto you.
For it is GOD that Psalm. 85. 8.
speaks peace to his people, wherefore assuredly his answer to him that
asks peace, will be an answer of peace, even this peace which passes all
understanding. GOD shall give you peace, and with it glory, even a glorious
peace.

Thus having directed my Pen not only to you in particular, in this tract of
peace, but (since it is judged fit to be public) both in this and the other
directions, to a daily walk, unto all other that need and desire it, you may
see the excellency of peace, together with the impediments, furtherances, and
means of peace. Sh^nne the Impediments, improve the furtherances, and I dare
assure you, that albeit in this life you may still feel a conflict between
faith and doubting, between hope and fear, and between peace, and trouble of
mind; yet in the end you Psalm. 37. 37.
shall have perfect peace; and in the mean time, though I cannot promise you
to have always that peace which will afford you sense of joy; yet God has
promised, that you shall have that which shall keep your hearts and minds in
Christ; And what would you have more?

Thus I have endeavored to satisfy your godly desire, I have of purpose
written much in as few words as the points in hand would well bear; I did it
the rather, not only because writing is tedious to me, but because I know
that you are established already in these truths, wherefore these may be
sufficient to help you unto distinct notions of the most necessary things
that belong to a Christian life, and to put you in remembrance. I have omitted
many allegations of Scriptures, and have forborne to write out most that are
alleged. It was partly for haste, partly for mine own ease, and partly
because it would have made this Book to be too big for a vade mecum to carry
about with you; but I considered that you are much conversant, and well read in
the Scriptures; and you may turn to the places, both in the line, and in the
mar^ent, for you will find, that, for the most part, the life of each point in
hand lies hid in the Text of the Scripture alleged. I thank God I have
reaped much benefit to my self in studying, and Penning these directions. I
pray God that ^ou may reap much good in reading of them. Now the God of Romans
15. 13 Heb. 13. 20 21.
hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing. And the God of peace that
brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the
Sheep, by the blood of the everlasting Covenant, make you perfect in every
good work to do his will, working in you that which is well pleasing in his
sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever and ever,

Amen.
A Table of the chief things observable in this BOOK.
A
DOubts of Gods love, because of grievous Afflictions, removed. 554 In what
cases God usually does not Afflict his children. 559 The ends why God does
grievously Afflict his children. 563 A Caution in becoming All things to all
men. 215 How to walk with God Alone. 184 Fit meditations when we Apparel our
selves. 21 Rules how to Apparel our selves. 22 Cautious to the directions
about Arising, and apparelling. 27 How to Awake with God. 19 Fit meditations
when we Awake and arise. 21, 22
B
Fit meditations at going to Bed, before sleep. 180 When a man loves
Brotherly. 234 Benefits of Brotherly love. 233 How Brotherly love is expressed.
235 Means to live and love Brotherly 239 Motives to Brotherly love, and
communion of Saints. 242
C
How a man should carry himself as before God, in his particular Calling. 55
Difference between Care, and Carfulness. 384 Adescription of lawful Care.
ib. A description of Carfulness. ib. True properties of provident care,
whereby it is differenced from Carfulness. 387, etc. When Cares of this life
are inordinate. 393 Gods children should not take thought, or be careful about
any thing. 396 Disswasives from carfulness. 399 Why no man should be Careful
about earthly things. ibid Why no man must care about success in any thing.
401 The evil effects of Caring about success in any thing. 405 Means to be
free from Carfulness. 409 The condition of a true Christian, even when he
has sinned, differs from that of a formal Christian, when he sins. 688
How a man should be have himself in all Company. 213 How a man should make
good use to himself by all Company. 218 Means of good speech, and carriage in
all Company. 225 Rules whereby a man may well order himself in evil Company.
228 How to be kept from infection of sin, by bad Company. 231 How to demean a
man's self in good Company. 234 What is to be done after a man has been in
Company. 244 Motives to Brotherly love, and Communion of Saints. 242 How a man
may know that he has been sufficiently humbled, and prepared for Conversion.
630 None can know that the time of his Conversion is past. 542 None must be
troubled, though they know not when, nor by whom they were Converted. 631 What
grace God gives in the first Conversion. 686 What Conversion and true
repentance is, 474 Men over-gone with trouble of Conscience, are most unfit to
judge of their own estate* 767 An excellent help to peace of Conscience in
the former c^se* 765, etc. When the Conscience is troubled, it is good to lay
it open to some faithful and skillful Christian. ibid Rules touching opening a
man's state to others when the Conscience is troubled. ibid How to keep the
Conscience tender. 480. and 679 How to walk as in Gods sight, under Crosses in
all adversity. 273 Rules how to pass by, or bear lighter Crosses. 274 Rules
how to bear all Crosses. 275 Of bearing Crosses thankefully. 313 Of bearing
Crosses fruitfully. ib
D
How to begin the Day well. 28, 29 How to walk in the sequel of the Day,
after it is well begun. 53 How to end the Day well. 179 Reasons why naturally
all are unwilling to Dye. 585 Reasons why some are more fearful to Die than
others. ibid Causes why Christians are too unwilling to Dye. 587 Helps against
fear of Death. 588 Difference between the sinning of the regenerate and
unregenerate. 688
E
Rules for Eating, and drinking. 64 In what order a man should ascend to the
knowledge of his Election. 518 Whence it is that the Elect may backeslide, and
how far. 685 The Elect never fall from the first infused grace. 688 Some
think they Endeavor to do well, yet do not. 324 What Endeavor is in
general. ibid Some think they Endeavor not, when yet they do. 326 What is
true Endeavor. ibid A man's Endeavor in some case^ may be as true, when yet he
cannot perform it, as in some other cases, when he can perform it to the
full. 327 The excellency of Christian Experience. 126, 127.
F
An answer to them that question their Faith, because they want feeling. 590
Many do not feel they have Faith, because they feel not for it. 603 How a
man may know that he has Faith. 621 Reasons why many without cause think they
have no Faith. 584 Many presume they have Faith, but have none. 614 Reason: for
which many think they have Faith, but have not. 463 Who may Fall from grace,
and how. 683 A regenerate man may Fall far back, but not quite away. 685
Grounds of difference between the Falls of men truly sanctified, and others.
688 Whence it is, that a true Convert cannot Fall quite away from grace. 695 Of
Religious Fasting. 68 A general Reason of Fasting. 72 Reasons why the body
must be afflicted in Fasting. 73 Reasons why the soul must be afflicted in
Fasting. 74 Who are to keep a public Fast 76 Who may keep a private Fast. 77
How often we must Fast. 78 How long we must Fast. 80 Preparation to a Fast. 82
How to keep a Religious Fast. 84, etc. What to do when a man is interrupted
in his private Fast. 142 Motives to often Fasting. 143 Directions what is to be
done after a Fast. 145 Cautions touching Fasting. 146 Needful fear before
co^version 485 Holy Fear after conversion. 486 Causlesse Fear. 488 The kinds
of causlesse Fears. ibid Strange effects of Fears rising from natural
distempers. 489 There is some difference between the regenerate in those Fears
which arise from mela^choly, and others 490 Difference between those Fears
which arise chiefly from melancholy, and those which arise from trouble of
conscience. ibid Grounds of false Fears. 495 Fear of punishment must be
turned into trouble for sin. 498 Fears of sinning against the holy Ghost,
removed. 527 Fear that because the heart condemns, God will condemn much
more, removed. 529 Fear of being reprobates, removed. 531 Fear that God will
not have mercy, because they have let pass the time of their Conversion,
removed. 540 Fears arising from doubts of Gods love, removed. 576, etc. Fears
through conceit of being in worse case than any other, removed, 561 Fears that
God loves them not, because they think their prayers are rejected, removed.
576 Fears from doubting of faith, removed. 581 Fears of not being sanctified,
because they think they were never sufficiently humbled, nor have repented,
removed. 626 Reasons why some feel more sense of Fear and horror, in their
first conversion, than others. 627 Fears that a man is not sanctified, because
he is pestered with worse thoughts than ever, removed. 637 Fears of not being
sanctified, because of falling into gross sins, removed. 656 Fears that
they are not sanctified, because of sense of dullness, and deadnessein
spiritual duties, removed. 665 Fears of not being sanctified, because of
sudden dullness, after fresh feeling comforts, removed. 670 Fears of not being
sanctified, because out-gone by others, removed. 671 Fears of not being
sanctified, because of hardness of heart, removed. 677 Fears of falling away
from grace, removed. 681, etc. Fears taken from thinking the heart is
deceitful, removed. 727 Fears, from present fainting, removed. ibid Fears
because we do not our part, removed. 729 Fear from want of such graces, where
of God has absolutely promised, removed. 676 Fears, through want of peace of
Sanctification, removed. 744
G
Convincing reasons to prove that there is a God. 647 God does never wholly
forsake his children. 566 Once, and ever in state of Grace. 685 Reasons why man
being once in state of grace, can never fall quite from it. 701 Reasons why
many think they have less grace now, than in their first conversion, but
mistake. 714
H
What is the cause of Hypocrites well-doing. 341 Disswasives from hypocrisy.
361 365 Means against hypocrisy. 373 Grounds of false hope discovered, and
removed. 444
I
Means to strengthen the Inner man. 133 Rules to direct Inferiors. 62 Causes
of error in Judging of a man's state. 754 Of Judging and condemning of a man's
self. 126
L
ATable of Duties commanded, and of Vices forbidden in the Moral Law. 90, etc.
No man must abuse Christ's lenity. 620 Signs to know when God gives good
things in love. 265 Directions for sanctisying the Lords day. 147
M
What Meditation is. 195 The distinct acts and parts of Meditation. 198 Rules
for meditation. 202 Cautions about the matter of meditation. 203 Motives
persuading to meditation. 211 Means of Mortification. 131
O
When it is that a man obeys out of conscience, and love to Christ. 340
Weakest performance of duties is less dangerous than whole omissions. 551
P
A description of Christian Patience. 286 Inducements to patience. 286, 287
Means of Christian patience. 288 Upon what grounds, arguments may be taken to
work the heart to patience. 291, 292 What peace is in general. 414 The peace
of GOD explained and magnified by the opening of Philip. 4. 6. 7. 415 The
different sorts of peace of God. 421 Reasons proving the excellency of the
peace of God. 432 The impediments of peace. 437 Whence presumption, and false
peace does arise. 441 Signs of false hope and false peace. 476 An excellent
help to peace of conscience. 765 Means to get and keep true peace. ibid How
to know in time of peace to hold out in time of persecution. 725 How to be kept
from dastardly fear in time of persecution. 723 Reasons of due preparation of
the heart to prayer. 32 How to be disposea in the act of prayer. 35 God
hears prayer many ways. 578 Cautions to be observed in preparation, and in
prayer. 37 Signs of distempered thoughts thorough worldly business to prayer.
42 Remedies against distempered thoughts in preparation, and in prayer. 43 How
to know, when thoughts of worldly business are distractfull in preparation,
and in prayer. 45 Remedies against the said distractions in preparation, and in
prayer. 47 Pride is a manifest hinderance of Christi^^ Comfort. 764, 765
Grounds of presumption discovered and removed. 437. unto 481 Rules of holy
carriage in prosperity, and when men have good success. 245, 246 Good effects
of prosperity. 247 Doubts of Gods love, because men prosper, removed. 559
Presumption of Gods love, because they prosper, removed. 448 Presumption
arises either from false grounds of hope, or from true grounds misapplyed. 442
Presumption that God will save a man because he made him, removed. 444
Presumption of escaping Hell, because men think they have it in this life,
removed. 445 Presumption they shall ever be well, because hither to they have
escaped evil, removed. 446 Presumption they shall be saved, because as great
sinners as they have bin saved, removed. 450 Presumption of Salvation, by Popes
Pardons, penance, and merit of works, removed. 452 Presumption of salvation,
because God is merciful, removed. 454 Presumption from universal Redemption,
removed. 456 Presumption of Salvation, because as men think their faith and
repentance is good, when it is not, removed. 462 Presumption of repenting
hereafter, removed. 475
R
How to read the Word profitably. 187 Who must read the Scriptures. 188 None
must forbear reading of Scripture, because of the difficulty of it. 191 How to
read and not wrest, or mistake Scripture. 190 Motives to read Scripture. 194 A
caution touching private reading. 195 How to read men's writings profitably. 194
A Christian must be well read in the book of his Conscience. 206 207 How to
attain Reconciliation and Reformation. 128 What is the best Recreation. 64 The
Gospel is the means of Reconciliation and Reformation. 128 A truly
regenerate man may fall far back, though not quite away. 685 Great
difference between the sins of the regenerate, and unregenerate. 688 The
regenerate never loses the first infused habit of grace. ibid. No man can
know certainly in this life that he is a Reprobate. 517
S
Doubts of Sanctification from fear of having not repented, removed. 660
Doubts of Sanctification from being out-gone by others, removed. 671 Doubts of
Sanctification through dullness in spiritual duties, removed. 665 Doubts of
Sanctification from sudden dullness after comforts, removed. 670 Doubts of
Sanctification through sense of hardness of heart, removed 677 An old devise of
Satan, to make a man think his own case worse then that of any others. 573
How to know that a man's persuasion that he is in state of salvation, or
damnation, is a delusion of Satan, oris according to the truth from Gods
gracious Spirit 754. 755 and 778 How Satan's evil suggestions may be known
from man's own evil thoughts. 639 Satan's malice and cunning in casting in
blasphemous thoughts. 632 Rules of Singing unto edification. 241 Accusation and
aggravation of Sin. 118 Reasons proving that Sin cannot be unpardonable,
because of the greatness of it. 501 Sins after as well as before conversion
pardonable. 507 Why the unpardonable Sin is called the Sin against the holy
Ghost. 527 Why the Sin against the holy Ghost is unpardouable. ibid A
description of the Sin against the holy Ghost. 526 How to be sure that a man
has not sinned against the holy Ghost. 527 Reasons proving infallibly, that
the Scriptures are the Word of God. 651 In what cases a m^n may speak of
others evils, and yet speak not evil. 222 Means to obtain, and keep the
Spirit of God. ^74 H^w Gods Spirit does ^o man's Spirit, that he is God^ child.
778 Rules for Sporting. 66 A man may Suffer for Christ two ways. 308 Rules for
Superiors, and Governors. 58 Means whereby Superiors may contain
inferiors in their duty. 59 Means to keep Superiors from abusing their
authority. 61
T^
How to be armed against temptations unnatural and inhumane. 653 Why God is to
be Thanked, and praised. 247 What praise and Thanks is, and wherein they
differ. 249 What is requisite in praise, and Thanks. 250 Motives to
Thankfulness. 254 Impediments to Thanks. 256, 257 Furtherance to Thanks. 259
How a man is to give proof of his Thanks. 269 Difference between Terrors of
Conscience, that prepare to conversion, and those which are the beginning of
hellish Torments. 631 Reasons why worse thoughts may be cast into a man after,
then before his Conversion. 644 Reasons why God may permit Satan to cast into
his Children most vile Thoughts. 645 How to be armed against blasphemous
Thoughts. 646, 647 How to be kept from the hurt of Divellish Thoughts. 654, 655
Difference between Trouble rising from bodily distempers, and that of Trouble
of Conscience. 490 Troubles through want of peace of Sanctification, removed.
744
V
Disswasives from Unthankfulness. 25^ Of Uprightness. 31^ Reasons why a man
should be Upright. 317 A description of Christian Uprightness. 319, 320 Three
acts inseparable from Uprightness. 322 A twofold Uprightness. 328 Rules
directing how to judge of Uprightness. 329 Uprightness is not perfect in this
life. 330 A few Upright or hypocritical actions, do not prove a man to be
Upright, or an hypocrite. ibid. Inward Uprightness will always show it self
in outward righteousn^sse. 332 Signs of Vprightnes, and whence they are taken.
332 Questions about judging of Uprightness answered. 354 In what cases
Uprightness is hardly discerned. 355 A Caution in judging of Uprightness by
many marks. 356 Motives to Uprightness. 367 Means against Hypocrisy, and
for Uprightness. 373 The graces which breed and nourish Uprightness* 276
W
Christians must Walk with God. 4 What it is to Walk with God. 4 How many
things concur in walking with God. 6 Reasons why we should Walk with God. 9
Man's walking with God must be always. 1^ Reasons why a man should walk with
God at all times. 17 With what manner of will and consent, a man receives
Christ by Faith. 61^
The end of the Contents.
FINIS.

