A Short Information, but agreeable unto Scripture: OF IDOL-IMAGES.

Made unto the Christian Congregation at Prague, when as, by his Royal
Majesty's most gracious Command, the Castle-Church there, was cleansed from all
Images, on Sunday the twelfth of December, in the year 1619.

By Abraham Scultetus.

Faithfully translated according to the high Dutch Copy printed at
Heidelberge, by Gotthard Voegeliu, 1620.

M. D. C. XX.

The Entrance.
I Doubt not but that there are many, who will think it strange, which either
now do see and behold, or shortly shall hear and understand, that the Altar
and Images are removed and put out of this Church. For many men will perhaps
thus think and say with themselves: That God might even as well have bin
served and honored through the Images: That also they were the common peoples
Books and Bible: And that the Altar and Images did much adorn and beautify
the Church, which now (being dispoyled of these Ornaments) seems to be bare
and naked like a Wilderness.

Now therefore the better to meet with, and satisfy such conceited thoughts, I
will for this time lay aside and pretermit the Text of the Gospel appointed
for this day; and briefly, yet plainly and evidently declare unto you, what
almighty Gods will and pleasure is, concerning such Images and Altars. Which
will and pleasure of God, when it shall be brought forth, and made manifest out
of the holy Scripture, as clear as the day light and bright Sunshine, then
shall not any be justly offended, at the clensing and purging of this Church
from Images. But all godly minded people that do see it, or shall hear of it,
will spiritually much rejoice thereat, and be heartily thankful for the same,
first unto the most high God, and next unto his royal Majesty.

Wherefore that all may become profitable unto us, we will first call upon our
Lord God, for the grace and assistance of his holy Spirit, with the same prayer
which our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ himself has taught us, saying, Our
Father, etc.

The Text.
Thus spoke the strong and jealous God, out of the fire unto the people of
Israel: EXODUS 20. 4, 5, 6. Thou shall not make unto thee any graven Image, or
any likeness of any thing that is in Heaven above, or that is in the Earth
beneath, or that is in the water under the Earth. Thou shall not bow down thy
self to them, nor serve them: For I the LORD thy God am a jealous God,
visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and
fourth generation of them that hate me: And showing mercy unto thousands of
them that love me, and keep my Commandments. The Exposition.
ANd if Moses and Aaron stood here together, yet could they not sufficiently
utter, with what a fiery zeal the Lord God has forbidden, to make and worship
Images. For when the Lord gave the ten Commandments, he threatened not in any
Commandment so hard and grievous a punishment unto the transgressors; and
promised not in any Commandment unto the obedient performers, so large a
blessing, as in the Commandment of Images. For he will punish those who
transgress this Commandment, even unto the fourth generation; but will richly
and ouer-abundantly reward those with grace and mercy, who obediently observe
and keep this Commandment.

And the Lord God has not repeated any Commandment so often, as he has done
even this Commandment of Images. For in the twentieth Chapter of Exodus, when
he first gave the ten Commandments, he does not thereupon presently repeat any
other Commandment, then this, and says: Ye have seen that I have talked with
you Exodus 22. 22, 23.
from Heaven. Therefore ye shall not make with me (any thing) Gods of Silver,
neither shall ye make unto you Gods of Gold. And when Moses was ready to dye,
and admonishes the people of their duty, he presses not any Inhibition so
deeply into their hearts, as even that Inhibition of Images. For in the fourth
Chapter of Deuteronomie, he thus speaks unto the people: Take ye therefore
Deuteronomy. 4. 15, 16, 17, 18.
good heed unto your selves. (For ye saw no manner of similitude on the day
that the Lord spoke unto you in Horeb, out of the fire.) Lest ye corrupt your
selves, and (...) cording to his Essence and being: But yet he may be graven
and pictured according to that form, wherein he appeared unto diverse of the
faithful in the old Testament.

To which I answer: God may at his pleasure, Thou shall not make unto thee any
Image. Again, Make not unto you any Image, the likeness of any figure.
Besides, the forms and shapes wherein the Lord God did at any time appear
unto any of the Saints, were not in any wise Gods Image and Picture. For God
only took such forms and shapes upon him but for a time, and did soon
after, lay them aside again. And thus did he also show and reveal himself,
sometimes now presently after this form, then anon again, after another
form; in so much that a man must needs stand in doubt, which form and shape
was Gods true likeness and similitude. Therefore the Prophet Esaias,
notwithstanding he had seen the Lord sit on the Circle Esaias 40. 22, 25.
of the Earth, even above on high, as upon an elevated seat, whose clothing
filled the Temple; yet does he reprove all them who will make any Image,
likeness, or similitude of God, and asks as was heard, saying: To whom then
will ye liken me?

3. So also God should not, nor ought to be 3. God should not, nor ought to be
pictured.
graven or pictured. For such Imagery is both hurt full unto men, and
dishonorable unto God. It is hurtful unto men; for a man may soon thereby
corrupt and undo himself, yea, and provoke the Lord God unto anger against
him, as it is written in the fore-alleaged fourth of Deuteronomy. It is
dishonorable, and a disparagement unto the Lord God, as whose Glory and Majesty
cannot by any means be graven or pictured, with any manner of visible Image or
Picture. Whence it is, that the holy Apostle Paul writes in the first Chapter
to the Romans, That the Heathen became Fools, To. 1. 22, 23.
when they changed the glory of the incorruptible God, into an Image made like
to corruptible man, and birds, and to four footed beasts, and creeping things.

This doctrine of ours concerning the forbidden Images and Pictures of God, is
so clear and evident, that it is also acknowledged of sundry principal Popish
Divines, to be sound, good, and agreeable to the will of God. For one of them
called Gabriel Vasquetz, acknowledges plainly, speaking Lib. 2. de adorat.
disp. 4. cap. 2.
of adoration; that all manner of picturing of God, is directly forbidden in
the second Commandment. And the chief Sorbon Doctors at Paris, Claudius
Espencaeus, Salignacus, Picherellus, as as also with them Bishop Monlucius have
long since showed (as is to be seen in the History of the Reformed Churches
in France the fourth Book) that they therefore wished, that all Images and
Pictures of the holy Trinity, were clean removed and wholly put out of
Churches and Houses, seeing the same are plainly forbidden by the Holy
Scripture, by Councels, and by many godly, learned, and much praised worthy men.

But yet here, me thinks, I hear some man object again and demand: Seeing
that the Son of God is become man, whether he may not be pictured according
to his humanity?

To which I answer: Christ came not therefore

Now as concerning the Images and Pictures of Of the Images of Saints.
the Virgin Mary, of Elizabeth, and of other holy Saints: If a man knew of what
form and fashion they properly were indeed, their Pictures might well be had
in private houses. But they are not by any means to be there set up in those
places, where men perform Gods public service and worship, neither to be
prayed unto, no nor yet for ornament sake. Not to be prayed unto, that being a
chief part of Gods worship. For it is written: Thou shall not bow down thy
self unto Exodus 20. 5.
them, nor serve them. And again, Thou shall worship Mat. 4. 10.
the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve, which is taken from the Law
in Deuteronomie, Deuteronomy. 6. 3. and 10. 20.
where the word (only) is wanting, and supplied by Christ as being Gods true
meaning. Not for ornament sake; for it is written: Abstain 1. These. 5. 22
from all appearance of evil. Now the Images set vpin holy places, have the
appearance of being prayed unto and worshipped: For there are many people who
think and are persuaded, they are set up there for that very end and purpose.
And if they had not that appearance, yet there is great danger therein, that
they may be prayed unto, and worshipped of superstitious people: as we have
hitherunto seen, that it has been but too much practiced in this place. And
we ought, as much as in us lies, endeavor to avoid and prevent such danger.
For it is written: Thou shall not put a stumbling Leuit. 19. 14
block before the blind, but thou shall fear thy God, says the Lord in
Leuiticus. And again, Christ Mat. 4. 7.
says, (out of Deuteronomy. 6. 16.) Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. Wherefore
the consequent follows not, nor is of any value: It is lawful to have the
Pictures of the Apostles, and of other holy Saints of God in private houses:
Therefore it is also lawful to have and set them up publicly in Churches. For
in a private house, (where the Inhabitants be not superstitious) there is no
appearance of praying unto them, and worshipping of them, nor yet of any danger
that they might be prayed unto, and worshipped of other superstitious people,
and therefore are not there unlawful. And so much shall suffice to have spoken
of the first maine point; namely, that God should not nor ought not, that God
cannot be graven or pictured.

Of the second.
But yet there are people here found, who give 2. God will not be called upon
or honored by Images.
out, that it is true indeed, men should not pray, nor give reverence or
worship unto the Images and Pictures; yea, and that they themselves also do it
not. But yet say, that men may honor and worship God by and through the
Pictures, according as these words following, stood written here on the beam
under the great Crucifix:

Effigiem Christi, cum transis semper honora:
Non tamen effigiem, sed quem designat adora.
That is:

When ere thou do before Christ's Image stand,
Or pass it by; give honor out of hand:
Yet not to the Image, which thine eyes do see;
But to the Lord it represents to thee.
Whereunto we give this answer: That it were much to be desired, that Images
were not indeed prayed unto, and worshipped at all. But the practice and
experience teaches far otherwise: whilst it is daily seen, how the people do
come, and bow themselves before the Altars, Images and Crucifixes; how they put
off their Hats unto them; how they kindle Lamps and Tapers unto them. And
should many of them see, that a Crucisix should be hewed in pieces, or burned
into ashes, oh! how would even their very heart then bleed for giefe? This is
indeed truly to do reverence and honor unto Images, and make Idols of them.
But go too: Say, they pray not unto the Images; say, they give no reverence,
nor do honor and worship unto them. Yet will not God have, nor can endure,
that we pray unto him, that we worship him, and that we give him honor in, by,
or through Images. For he says at once roundly and expressly out: They shall
not be bowed down unto, nor served. In which words he forbids all manner of
service, honor, or worship, that may any way whatsoever be given unto Images.
As also it is written, John 14. 6. that No man can come to the Father but by
the Son: not by Images and senseless dumb Idols. Besides, it excuses not
their Idolatry at all, that they pretend and say; that through and by the
Image, they pray unto and call upon the Savior. For the Israelites would not
be taken or thought to pray unto, and worship the golden Calfe: as they
themselves also say, To morrow is a Feast (not unto the Calf, but) Exodus 32. 5,
8, 10.
unto the Lord. And yet nevertheless the Lord says unto Moses, They have
worshipped the Calfe, and have sacrificed thereunto, and therefore his wrath
was waxen hot against the people to have consumed them. Yea, it fails so
far that God will be worshipped by Image^s, as that he will not at all be so
much as served BEFORE IMAGES. For thus sound forth aloud his own words. Ye
Leuit. 26. 1.
shall make you no Idols nor graven Image, neither rear you up a standing
Image, (or Pillar) neither shall ye set up any Image of stone in your Land, to
bow down unto it, or before it. And therefore before Images we ought not to
pray, not to baptize, not to administer the Lords Super. For whether a man
hood-winke himself, or no; whether a man see the Images, or see them not; yet
it is all one, and directly against the will of God, that any should pray
before Images.

If now it be not lawful at all for us to honor and worship the Lord Christ
through and by Images; then is it much less lawful for us to honor and
worship the Saints deceassed, as the Virgin Mary, Peter, Wenceslaus, Rochus,
Sebastian and others, by and before the Images. For, besides that the Saints
departed are not to be worshipped or prayed unto, neither in regard of
themselves; for it is written: Thou shall worship the Lord thy Mat. 4. 10.
God, and him only shall thou serve: nor yet in regard of their being
Mediators and Intercessors: For it is written: For there is one God, and one
Mediator between God and Men, even the Man Christ 1. Tim. 2. 5.
Jesus. Wherefore; If any man sin, we have an 1. John 2. 1.
Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the righteous: And he makes
intercession for the Saints according Romans 8. 27.
to the will of God. For he is entered into Heb. 9. 24.
Heaven it self, now to appear in the presence of God for us. And therefore
they have great need to look well about them and consider, how they will one
day answer for it before God, who now so much love Images, as that they honor
them with the putting off of the Hat, with kneeling, and with other like
Ceremonies. For they belong unto the number of those, of whom the Prophet
Isaiah speaks in his second Chapter, saying: Their Isai. 2. 8, 9.
Land is full of Idols, they worship the work of their own hands, that which
their own fingers have made. There the mean men bow down, and the great men
humble themselves: This thou will not forgive them.

Of the third.
Here hence now it is easy to conclude, what 3. That Christian Magistrates
ought to remove all Images from the Churches, they mean to worship God in.
then a Christian Magistrate is to do, when for his serving of God he takes
in a Church, which is replenished with Idol-Images? The Lord himself
determines the matter, Exodus 34. 13. Thou shall destroy their Altars, break
down their Images, and cut down their groves. And Deuteronomy. 7. 5. Thus shall ye
deal with them; Ye shall destroy their Altars, and break down their groves,
and burn their graven Images with fire. Again, Deuteronomy. 12. 3. You shall
overthrow their Altars, and break their Pillars, and burn their groves with
fire, and you shall hew down the graven Images of their gods, and destroy the
names of them out of that place. And 1. Sam. 7. 3. Samuel spoke unto all the
house of Israel, saying: If ye do return unto the Lord with all your hearts,
then put away the strange gods, and Ashtaroth from among (...)

The first supposed ground is,
That God speaks in the ten Commandments, of the Idol-Images of the Heathen
and unbelieving people: Therefore the Commandment of Images, concerns not at
all the Images of Christians under the new Testament.

The Answer is: It is false, that God in the old

The second supposed ground.
Yet God himself had in Salomons Temple all manner of Images.

I answer: It is very true indeed: But there Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob;
there were not any Historical commemoratiue Images, of which it is here spoken.

The third supposed ground.
But yet the common lay people may by Images be put in mind of many good
things: especially by the Crucifix, of the Death and Passion of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

I answer: It stands not in man's will and pleasure, Psalm. 111. 4 He has made
his wonderful works to be had in remembrance: the Lord is gracious and full
of compassion. And even for this purpose has the Lord God ordained the
preaching of his Gospel, that by the same the benefits of our Lord Christ
might be as it were together painted before men's eyes: According as the
Apostle Saint Paul witnesses of himself, Gal. 3. 1. 2. 5, 6. etc. That he had
evidently set forth Jesus Christ before their eyes; not by a Crucifix, but as
himself further acknowledges, through and by the preaching and hearing of
faith. And even to this end did our Lord Jesus institute his holy Supper, that
we should celebrate it in remembrance Luke 22. 19.
of him. For the bread that we break, 1. Cor. 11. 24 25, 26.
is it not a notable remembrance (I beseech you) that Jesus Christ endured and
suffered for us many bitter sorrows, and such as never man suffered (Consider,
and behold, if ever there were sorrow like Lam. 1. 12.
my sorrow) and at length death it self, when body and soul were pulled
asunder the one from the other upon the Cross? The Cup of Blessing or
Thanksgiving, is it not an excellent remembrance, that the blood of Christ
Jesus ran gently out of his body, and was shed for our sins? These
Remembrancers has our Lord Christ instituted, and Saint Paul has repeated
them. But the Idol and Imagery Remembrancers has Antichrist, even the Pope
instituted. Before whose being, there was not any Image-remembrancer known of
in the Church of God. But this was well known, that every Image was falsehood,
Ier. 10. 14. And that they be teachers of lies, Habac. 2. 18.

The fourth supposed ground is an Objection made by Protestants:
For the abuse of a thing, a man must not therefore cast away the thing it
self: As a man will not cast away good Wine, because that some abuse it to
drunkenness. Even so we may still retain Images in Protestant Churches, if we
do but forbear to worship them and pray unto them.

I answer: This rule (A thing is not therefore presently to be cast away,
because it has been abused) 2. Kin. 18. 4.
and looked upon, was again broken down, when it came to be worshipped by the
people?

The fifth supposed ground.
Why (may some say) thou stand now thy self in that Pulpit, from whence
much Idolatrous matter has bin preached. Thou do celebrate the Lords Supper
in that Church, wherein the Papists have held their Mass. Wherefore then is
not both Pulpit and Church broken down together?

I answer: We teach not that all that should be Tim. 5. 22. Be not partaker of
other men's sins: keep thy self pure. Again Thou shall not tempt the LORD thy
God. According to this Rule did the godly Priests (in the time of magnanimous,
heroical Champion Judas Maccabeus) reform all, when as the holy Place had bin
grievously profaned by that wicked Antiochus. They brake not down the Temple,
in which there had been shameful Idolatry committed: but they cleansed, and
bare the defiled stones into an unclean place, as it is written, 1. Mac. 4.
42. 43. According to this Rule, our Lord, Mat. 21. 12, 13. made reformation at
Jerusalem. For he neither brake down the Temple, nor yet the Pharisees
Pulpit, from whence they taught merely men's traditions and inventions. But he
cast out all them that bought and sold in the Temple, and overthrew the tables
of the money changers, and the seats of them that sold Doves; whereby they had
made his House of Prayer, a Den of thieves. The (...)

What? Will ye be wiser then the Ancients? Our forefathers had for many
hundred years ago, the Images in worth and honor in this place.

I answer: Whether in this respect we will be David answer in his 119.
Psalm, 100. v. where he says: I understand more then the Ancients, because I
keep thy Precepts. But if a man will enquire of the age of Images amongst
Christians, then it will appear, that before twelve hundred years, before
thirteen hundred years, before fourteen hundred years, before fifteen
hundred years, before sixteen hundred years, there was not any Image of God
the Father, any Image of God the Son, any Image of God the Holy Ghost, any
Image of any Saint departed, found at all in any of the Christians Churches and
Houses of Prayer. Yea, look how many Images, how many Altars, how many
Challices, how many Massing Vestments are yet found amongst us; so many present
witnesses are there, that we are stepped aside from the ancient simplicity:
when as they knew not of any Image, of any Altar, of any Challice, of any
Massing Vestments. As the same is as clear as the Sunshine, to be showed out
of Justin Martyrs second Apology, out of Irenaeus, Tertullian, Origin,
Cyprian, and other much esteemed worthy ancient Fathers.

The ninth supposed ground.
And if we will have the Images put down, then ought they first to be put out
of men's hearts, and afterward from before their eyes.

I answer: Thus say men here on Earth; and it Break them down, destroy them,
burn them; that is, put them away from before your eyes, and out of your
sight. And that not without great reason. For even like as a man will not see a
Thief that he steal, and will not see an Adulterer that he break Wedlock,
with an opinion that Theft and Adultery must be first showed unto him out of
Gods Word to be unlawful: Even so should not, nor can a Christian Magistrate
see and behold that men rob the Lord of his honor, and use alliance with
Images; seeing the Commandment: Thou shall not make unto thy self any Image,
thou shall not bow down unto it nor worship it; is even as clear and evident,
as the Commandments: Thou shall not steal: Thou shall not commit Adultery.

The tenth supposed ground.
The people are offended at the taking down, removing and putting away of
Images. 10. Object.


I answer: They took offense also at our Lord Christ's preching, Ioh. 6.
Should not Christ therefore have preached? Whosoever does the will of God, he
has not any need to fear any offense at all to be by him occasioned and
given. But whosoever is offended at the full doing of the will of God, he
sins both against God, and against his Neighbor.

Out of all which, every one may well perceive and understand, what a number of
weighty and perswasiue reasons did together enforce his Royal Majesty is not
at all any way purposed, to compel or grieve any man's conscience: as also he
has never yet done in his own hereditary Countries. For in this respect, he
holds with the Emperor Maximilian the second, who was wont to say: That Kings
commanded and bare Rule over their Subjects bodies, but not over their
Consciences. But yet for all this, his Royal Majesty will not (as it were not
sitting he should) have his own Conscience ensnared; and therefore desires to
serve the Lord God, according to that clear knowledge wherewith God has
enlightened him, and according to that his will, which he has revealed unto
him. And what that revealed will of God is, ye have now already sufficiently
understood: Namely, that

He will not be pictured, as also he ought not, nor yet can be pictured.

He will not be honored, by, through, or before Images

He will, that men break down all Images, and wholly depend on him alone with
all the heart.

Whosoever therefore now (in the fear of God) truly thinks on all these
things, he will not at all be offended at the removing, and casting away of
all Images herehence: But he will much rather, greatly thank the Lord God,
that the public abomination and great offense, is in time removed and taken
away.

And if yet there should perhaps be any, who has notwithstanding still some
doubt and scruple in his mind, let him but please confidently to come unto us:
and he shall with all love, mildnes, and well befitting good resolution be
answered, and have more full information and satisfaction given unto him by us
out of Gods Word. For it is our very intent and purpose, wholly so to labor
and endeavor to bring much people unto saving knowledge, as that thereby they
may rightly come to know, and gladly acknowledge the true Will of God, and
according to such knowledge, zealously and faithfully to serve him. Whereunto,
the Lord vouchsafe both unto us and to you the holy Spirit, who has promised
and bound himself to give it us, if we call faithfully upon him for it: even
Jesus Christ the righteous, blessed and praised, with the Father and the Holy
Ghost, now and for ever, Amen.

The Prayer after the Sermon.
ALmighty, most merciful, most gracious, loving God and Father, we give thee
most humble praise and thanks for all thy mercies and benefits, which we
incessantly have received, and still do of thy rich goodness; that thou have so
graciously governed us all the whole time of our life long, protected and
preserved us, and even hitherunto have kept us. But especially and above all
we thank thee dear Father, that thou have suffered us to live to see the
good day, wherein this Church is cleansed and purged from all Idolatry and Images.

We beseech thee O eternal Lord God, graciously to enlighten their eyes, who
yet sit in the dark^ (...)


