A SECVLAR SERMON CONCERNING THE DOctrine of the Gospel by the goodness and
power of God restored in the fifteenth age from the birth of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

MADE BY THE REVEREND AND WORthy Preacher Mr. ABRAHAM SCVLTETVS, in the
High Dutch tongue.

AFTER BY ANOTHER TRANSLAted into Latin, and now out of Latin into English.

LONDON, Printed by William Jones, dwelling in Red-crosse street near S.
Giles Church, Anno 1618.

A SECVLAR SERMON MADE IN THE Arch-Palatine court, in the year 1617. And of
January the first. Seculum i(...)tin, signifies (...) age, contain(...) an
hundred years. There(...) this Sermon (...) called secular (...)cause it
cont(...)neth the story (...) the last hun(...) years, when(...) the Gospel
(...) restored, from (...) year 1517, (...) this year (...)

THat which is written by the Kingly Prophet David we see Psa. 145.
certainly helps at this present. The mercy of God is over all his works.
For, from this mercy we do freely acknowledge that we have received this
benefit, that we live, and in good health begin this new year. From this mercy
it is, that being free from pestilence, and death, we have not seen bloody
wars, nor other public calamities. From the same mercy we have received it,
that by the celebration of the Nativity of Christ, (which we have here
liberty solemnly to keep) we joyfully understand, how, for our good, Christ
was borne at Bethlehem; how the Angels sweetly delighted us with their hymns,
how the shepherds of Bethlehem daunced, with a holy joy; and how Simeon and
Anna entertained with kisses the Savior newly borne.

Go too then, O Palatinate, magnify the Lord thy God with due praises: and
thou O Heidleberg, with pious affection, publish his name and glory, which is
most worthy to be worshipped and adorned.

And because now this is the hundred year, since which time the everlasting
and Almighty God, looking upon our Ancestors with the eye of his grace and
favor, delivered them out of the horrible darkness of Popery, and brought
them into the clear and fair light of the Gospel, let us also looking back
to these times, behold and consider, how gracious, God has declared himself
to his Church in the said hundred years, and how mercifully he has gathered
it together, having been before dispersed and scattered here and there, and
being gathered, how wonderfully he has preserved it, unto this present time.

2 For so it will be made manifest, that the Lord Jesus Christ, does worthily
and agreeably to his proceeding, bear the name of Jesus (that is a Savior)
that was given at his Circumcision, expressing it by really saving his people,
and to be our true Jesus and Savior, not only by the excellency of his merit,
but also by the virtue and power of his effectual operation and working which
he shows out most mightily in, and toward his Church, and people.

Moreover also (as I persuade my self) here will be matter and occasion
abundantly ministered unto us, for the celebration and praise of the name of
God, where we shall behold his wisdom, omnipotency, goodness and justice,
every where most clearly shining in his government of the Church in this
century, or last hundred years.

And that I may shortly comprehend all this matter: even as God in times past
reformed the world by the Apostles and their faithful successors: So likewise
in the fifteenth hundred year from the birth of Christ, God I say began to
order the reformation and government of his Church? All which things my purpose
is at this present, evidently to show and demonstrate unto you.

1 Whereas it behooved that Christ should be borne one thousand six hundred and
seventeen years agone: God sent John Baptist as a forerunner, that he might
prepare and make ready a way for the Lord: In like sort when the same Christ
was (as it were) to be borne again, it pleased God that diverse preparatory
helps and furtherances to the rest that was to follow should be furnished,
before he took in hand the reformation it self of Christian Religion.

Amongst which means of preparing way to the said reformation, most worthily
I may name and account first the liberal arts and sciences, and the daily
exercises of good sciences, and chiefly of the three learned tongues and
languages, as instruments to make way to the reformation that was to follow. In
the next place I nominate and rank Universities and particular Schools (as
they call them) which by a commendable purpose and worthy example for imitation
and following, were in that time, partly founded and erected, and partly also
preserved and enlarged. To these I add also the invention of the Art of
Printing, which before had been utterly unknown, and by means whereof it came
to pass that Doctor Luthers books, being dispersed and spread into diverse and
most large countries and nations, came into very many men's hands, and were
every where read and diligently studied. Here also amongst the aforesaid
means, the translation of the Scriptures is not to be passed by, but
attentively to be considered. For in the year, one thousand five hundred and
fifteen, the old Testament saw the light that was to be wished for, being
published in print in the original Hebrew tongue by Frauncis Ximenius, being
Archbishop of Toledo, and a Cardinal: and so likewise was the new Testament
printed in the year next following.

Which books opened the eyes of many, and maruelously raised their desire, so
that being inflamed with a zeal diligently to know and search out the
heavenly truth, they might easily discern, how far the Popes of Rome had
departed from the purity of the Scripture.

2 In time past also, when Christ went about the reformation of the world, he
called not to that service the Scribes and Pharisees which were of great
authority, but he chose unto it twelve Disciples, men despised by the world,
and esteemed base, which for the most part were fishermen.

So likewise one hundred years agone, Christ taking in hand the work of a new
reformation, used not thereunto any purple-cloathed Praelate, nor Cardinal,
whose names were most flourishing and famous, but he raised up hereunto for this
service Martin Luther a Monk of the order of the Augustinians, Phillip
Melanchthon a professor and reader of the Greek tongue in the University of
Wittenberg, and two Priests of small account, to wit, Huldrich Zwinglius, and
John Oecolampadius.

3 Moreover the doctrine of the Gospel breaking out, (at the first publishing
of it by the Apostles) with a divine and most powerful force, suddenly like
the lightning enlightened the universal world, so as even in the time of
Irenaeus reported to have bin taught by Polycarpus scholar to John the
Apostle, Christ came to be famously known by the nations and people, both of
the East and West parts of the world: even so, when as one hundred years
agone, after that the Idolatry of the Papists running (as if they had been mad
or bewitched after the worship of Images) being discovered, the contrite and
wounded hearts of men were led (as by the hand) from their confidence in their
own merits, to the precious ransom of the death of Christ, it is incredible
to be spoken, with how great celeritie and speed, and with what great
success, the purity of true Religion pierced into all countries. For it
rested not now only in Cities; neither was it content to remain amongst the
inferior of the Nobility and gentry: but it entered into the Courts even of
Kings and Emperors, and gat their allowance and approbation.

May it please you then (for proof hereof) that we first view the Cities?
Amongst these, the first that flourished and were famous for the praise of
sincerity of the Gospel, were these: Strausborough, Breme, Norinberge, Worms,
Erford, Hoslaria, and Embden of Frize-land. All these cheerfully and with ready
minds received, and entertained the truth coming unto them, in the very
first beginning. These also kindled by and by a fervent zeal of Religion in
other countries. Amongst these were Maydenborow, Hamborow, Lubeck, Brunswick,
Wismaria, Rostochium, and almost all the Cities of the Empire. Nay furthermore
in Li^feland, the cities of Riga, Derbatum, Renalia, in Helu^tia or
Switzerland, Basile, Scafhusium, Tig^rum or Zurich, Berne, and diverse others.
All which Cities as they embraced the doctrine of the Gospel with great
gladness and gratulations, so Wolfgongus Capito has left written a singular and
memorable act, in this respect, of the men of Berne, which is this: Having
received the Gospel, they set their prisoners at liberty, and proclaimed
freedom, for such as they had banished out of the land, to return into their
Country again, yielding this notable reason for their so doing. For said they,
if we would have dismissed and discharged our malefactors and prisoners in the
honor of an earthly King, that should have come unto us. How much more now
ought we then since Christ the King of glory is come unto us, bringing with him
the most glorious benefit of everlasting redemption? And therefore we most
earnestly wish and desire that as much as might be, all men may be made
partakers of so great a benefit and deliverance as is now bestowed upon us.

In going out from the Cities, let us view the degree of Knighthood. In this
degree there attained a perpetual Crown of honor that noble Frauncis of
Sickengen, Huldrick of Hutt^n, and Siluester of Schawenburg. For when Luther
was miserably vexed and persecuted by the Pope, they undertook the defending
and protecting of him with all their force and power. And when Luther was
excommunicated, and was thinking to fly into Bohemia for refuge,
Schawenbergius before mentioned, offered him free access unto him, and
promised him a company of a hundred horsemen of Franconia to conduct him safely
to him.

Of this praise are also pertakers, the Landshadii, Steinacenses,
Helmstatenses, Gemingenses, and Mensingenses, who every one of them from the
year 1521, and 1522, had procured the sincerity of the Gospel to be
publicly preached in their territories. In whose steps, John of Salhausen of
Bohemia, treading did the same, and being accused for it to Lewis King of
Hungary and Bohemia, he defended himself with a notable Apology.

Now amongst the Princes that received the Gospel, the heroical worthies of
the house of Saxony obtained the principal place, to wit, Frederick the wise,
John the sincere, and John Frederick the constant, being Electors: whose most
commendable example, even straightwayes from the beginning followed, Lewis
Count Palatine the Duke of Bipont, George Marquis of Brandborow, Marquis
Albertus Duke of Prussia, Ernestus Duke of Brunswick and Luneburg, Frauncis
Duke of Luneburg, Phillip Landgraue of Hassia, Wolfgangus Prince of Anhalt, and
Frederick the second, Duke of Silesia, Lignicum, and Briga.

From thence the fame of the Gospel sounding all abroad, there opned their
gates also to the Lord Jesus Christ in their countries, these Princes. John
Duke of Cleue, and his successor William (although there fell 1533.
out some such causes and times as suffered them not to finish and perfect the
reformation which they had begun, so as it had been to be wished.

These princes also embraced the Gospel, Hu^drick 1534.
Duke of Wirtemberg, with his brother George, Earl of Wirtemberg, and
M^nbelgard, and Bar^inus and Phillip 1537.
Dukes of Pomerania, Ioachin the second Elector of 1538.
Brandenburg, and his brother John Seuerus, Henry Duke 1539.
of Saxony father of Mourice and Augustus Electors, 1543.
Hermannus Archbishop of Coullen, Charles Marquis of Baden, Julius Duke of
Brunswicke, Gotthardus Duke 1556.
1568.
of Curland, William Prince of Orange, to whom the lowcountrymen are much
beholding in that respect.

For what should I speak of the Arch-Palatine country? wherein we have the
reformation made by the Electors, that is begun by Frederick the second, 1546.
continued by Otto Henricus, and finished and brought to perfection by
Frederick the third, to his eternal and greatest honor, and our unspeakable
benefit and comfort. Neither was Lewis the peaceable Elector estranged from
favoring the Gospel, seeing that 1538.
his brother Frederick graciously granted free exercise of the Religion of the
Gospel to eight cities lying in one precinct in the higher country of the
Palatinate, which are Amberg, Neufore, Kam, Nafurg, Weiden, Nanpurg, Au^bac,
and Ch^mnate. Herein also it secmeth most worthy to be remembered, that a Prince
of the Empire George Earl of Anhalt, a Prince of most 1548.
approved piety and holiness, is said to have esteemed the doctrine of the
Gospel so precious, that he doubted not himself in his own person, out of a
rare and extraordinary zeal to deliver it to his subjects preaching unto them.
We have heard also, that the same Prince gra^ed with a mariage-Sermon, the
Elector Augustus, and his noble wife, being publickely married according to the
accustomed right and manner of the Church.

For which cause the Queen of Denmark joyfully gratulating the spouse her
daughter, said often, that no greater grace could happen to her in the world.

After these Princes followed also Kings, every of them in their several times
and distances of years. Amongst these, the first was Frederick King of
Denmark, who having shaken off the yoke of the Pope, embraced the pure
doctrine of the word of God.

Soon after followed him Gustarus King of Sweden, Mary Queen of Hungary,
sister to the Emperor Charles, Marga^et of Valoys, Queen of Navarre, sister
to Frauncis King of France, to whom she most earnestly commended oftentimes,
the cause of such Christians as being exiled, fled for refuge into France,
yielding her self most gracious unto them, yea and as if she had borne the
kind affection of a mother toward them. Such a one was also Renata, the
daughter of Lewis the twelfth, King of France, who having been married to
Hercules Duke of Ferrary, enlightened the darkness of Italy it self with the
light of the Gospel. And when she had returned widow and dowager into
France, in the tempestuous and stormy time of the most foul and shameful
massacre, and slaughter extremely raging in Paris, and every where else in
France, in the year 1572. she reached forth a gracious and helpefull hand,
for the relief of the most afflicted state of many godly persons: and amongst
others she received and entertained that most religious and worthy teacher
master Daniel Tossanus, together with his wife and children, and cheerfully
patronized and defended him in the time of extreme danger.

Now if we behold and consider the reformation of the English Churches, here
comes to my mind, and as a most beautiful and comfortable Star shines
Edward the sixth, the most gracious King of England, who being inkindled with an
heroical Spirit and zeal, desired those Churches to be thoroughly cleansed
from Popish Idolatry. After also, his sister Queen Elizabeth followed his
piety and most religious example both with like affection and success.

What? did not also James Hamelton Viceroy in Scotland, first permit and make
free to every one that would, the reading of the Bible in the English tongue,
and the order of prayer. By which worthy act, the true Christian Religion
straightwaies took so great increase, as that the States in Parliament
provided by public law in the year 1561, that all the people should live
quietly and in peace without reuiling, or iniurying one another for any
pretense or excuse of Religion.

Moreover this is also manifest by certain proofs, that these three Emperors
Charles the fifth, Ferdinando and Maximillian departed out of this life, resting
upon the same comfort and faith, which Luther taking out of the Scriptures,
preached and published, in that he showed and taught that all the hope of
everlasting life consists in the death of Christ.

After these notable personages of the civil state, let us now come also and
remember the teachers of the Church: wherein we may consider that after the
Apostles time, God raised up almost in a continual succession most worthy
teachers, such as these were, Ignatius, Policarpus, Justinius Martyr, Clement of
Alexandria, Athenagoras, Origin, Cyprian, Tertullian, Athanasius, Epiphanius,
Hilarious, Basil, Gregory of Nazianzene, Jerome, Augustine, Ambrose, Chrysostom
and many others, by whose worthy service and labor, the work of the
Reformation of the world begun by the Apostles, was happily and with great
success proceeded in, and furthered.

And even so to those first goodly and glorious lights of the Church in
Doctrine and Divinity, Luther, Melanchton, ZWinglius and Oecolampadius, God
added and adjoined other teachers, that were men famous for their piety and
learning, who receiving the Gospel from the former, as a lamp and a light
delivered unto them (the fowlest errors of Popery having been discovered) have
brought with them a clearer and greater light of understanding and knowledge of
the books of the Bible.

In Helvetia and Switzerland, who is ignorant that there have been many, who
partly by preaching, and partly by writing, have served the Church with great
diligence and profit? Amongst whom these men are worthy of immortal praise:
Henry Bullinger, Rodolph Gualter, Oswald Myconias, Conrade Pellicane, Berthall
Haller, Gasper Megander, Leo Judah, Benedict Aretius, John Wolf, Lewis Lauater,
Josias Simler, Bibliander, William Stuckius.

Do we demand what teachers they have had in high Germany? Surely in that
country there has been great plenty of notable teachers. Such as were these,
Ambrose Blawrer, John Swickius, Martin Bucer, Malthias Tellius, Wolfangus
Capito, Caspar Hedio, Andrew Osiander of Hala in Swevia, Erardus Schnepfius,
and Ma^tin Frechtius at Tubinga, Ambrose, Mollerus and John Hesse at
Wratislavia or Bresla; Conrade, Somius at Vlms, Wolfangus Musculns at Augusta
or Ausborow, Francis Lambert, Andrew H^perias, John Pincer, Denis Melander in
Hassia, and in Wittemberg Jasper Cruciger both the father and the son; Georg
Mayor, John Bugenhagius, Paul Eber, John Foster, John Auenar, Henry Moller,
Frederick Widebrame, and Christopher Pezelius.

In Livonia or Lief-land there have been worthy Preachers, as Andrew Cnophius
and others, and in Borusia, John Poliander and John Brismana; in the lower
Saxony, Vrbanus Regius, Hermane Brown, and Albert Hardenbergius, in Frisia,
Micronius, Menso, Altingus, and diverse others.

And who is there amongst us whom the remembrance of these famous men does not
move and effect with singular delight, to wit, of William Farell, Peter Viret,
John Calvin, Austin Marlorate, Theodore Beza, Antony Sadeel, and of Phillip
Mor^y of Plessay, and others, who partly by teaching, and partly by writing,
have mightily overthrown Popery, and advanced the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

Neither has this favor of God been wanting unto Spain. For what men Spain
has had teachers of the Evangelical doctrine, the same it has also most
glorious Martyrs, to wit, Frauncis Drianda, Diazius, Doctor Constantine,
Confessor to the Emperor Charles the fifth.

Italy it self also has sent us over from thence most excellent Divines to
the very great benefit of our Churches, Peter Martyr, Ierom Zanchius, and
Immanuell Tremellius.

These men also in Scotland, have left us most ample and large fruits of their
service; for the Gospel, John Knoxe, Robert Rollock, John Iohnston, and diverse
others.

But in England God has set out, as upon a Theater and stage to be seen by
all the world, very many famous and learned men, who have stoutely defended and
maintained the doctrine of the Gospel against the deceitful impostures of the
Antichrist of Rome.

And such were these, Thomas Cranmer Arch bishop of Canterbury, Hugh Latimer,
John Hooper, Nicholas Ridley, John Rogers, Hugh Philpot, John Iuell, Laurance
Humphery, with William Whitaker, John Rainolds, William Perkins, William Fulke,
and an infinite number of others, whom it were too long to rehearse.

How should I be silent of the land of Denmark which has had most famous
Preachers of the Gospel, to wit, Palladius, Hemingius, Macabaeus, etc.

The Hungarians also speak of Michael Starinus as of their glory, who reformed
many particular Churches in it, and set Ministers of the word over them, to
whom he himself prescribed what order was to be held for the making of
Sermons profitable and fruit full, and in what manner the Sacraments were to be
administered. They will recite in like manner Steven Szegeden, Paul Thurius,
Jasper Charles, Peter Melius, Martin Hollopaeus, Matthew Scaricaus, Thomas
Fabricius of Tholna, and many others.

And that I may mention no more, the Churches of Poland, even to this day, not
without a thankful remembrance they speak of that worthy noble personage
John Alaskaw, of the Earls of Gorkaw, and the Lords, Oselinians, who in their
time were a defense and an ornament to the doctrine of the Gospel.

So do they likewise speak of those notable Divines, Erasmus Glisner, Georg
Israel, John Laurence, Balthazar Euchner, John Turnorius, and others who have
fruitfully delivered the Gospel to the people.

5 Now to extend the comparison begun yet further, in the beginning God, who is
most and only wise, spread and propagated the Gospel, by means which in
appearance, were directly contrary to the furtherance of it: such as was the
overthrow of Jerusalem, and the dispersion of Christ's Disciples into diverse
parts of the world. And the same course has God observed every wherein our
time.

In the year 1522, that noble Gentleman Frauncis Sickingen had gathered so
many worthy men into his Castle of Landscale, as might seem to have been
sufficient to have furnished some University, and famous School. For at one
and the same time, he had with him John Oecolampadius, Martin Bucer, John
Schwebelius, Iaspar Aquila.

Now, no long time after, when he was besieged by certain Princes, he left it
to the pleasure of those Divines, to go for their best safety and security
where every one of them would.

By which occasion of that siege and of their dispersion, John Schwebelius
going to the Count-Palatine Jews Duke of Bi^ont, he laid there the first stone
of the Evangelical reformation. Martin Bucer went to Strawsborowe, which with
what fruit and benifit of the Church he did it, is manifest by the common voice
and testimony of all Germany.

John Oecolampadius took his journey to Basile, to which City he so made
known and apparent his learning and piety, that he was invited and desired
with most earnest request to take pains to read and preach unto them.
Whereunto after that he had yielded, in the space of a few years, he so
advanced the cause of Religion, that the said City greatly rejoiced at the
sight of a full reformation, procured by him amongst them.

Jasper Aquila he went to Thuringia, and there furthered the edification of the
Church of Christ, with great zeal, and happy success. A like occasion almost
about the same time fell out at Treptqaine (a place in Pomerland) which was
this. There flourished a certain College, that was famous by the learning of
certain men, of which College, John Bugenhagius was the Rector.

Now it fell out, that Luthers book of the Babylonicall captivity being sent
from Lipsia, were delivered there to Bugenhagius to be read over, who having
slightly looked upon it, is reported to have said to his fellows, brethren,
the Sun did never see a greater Heriticke then Luther. But after a few days
looking more diligently and attentively into the said book, he changed his
opinion and testimony of him openly before the same brethren, and said: that
all the world had bin drow^ed hitherto, in most palpable errors. Which he
a^terwards set so clearly before them, as that they all consented in judgment
with him. Which after that the Bishop of Camintum came to the knowledge of, by
and by (as the manner is) he began fiercely to persecute them.

Wherefore they began all to fly and provide for the safety of their life. And
Bugenhagius going to Wittenberg, took an Ecclesiastical charge, and
afterward reformed the Churches of Hanborow and Lubeck, and of all the
Kingdom of Denmark.

Andrew Cnophius went into Leif land, and there brought the City of Riga to
acknowledge and to receive the truth of the Gospel, which at the beginning
brake out into so great flames, that straightwaies Darbetum and Reualia came
thither (as it were) from the brightness of it, to kindle their light.

The rest of them flying from Treptum, bestowed themselves abroad in the town
of Pomerland, and handled the cause of the Gospel so happily and with so great
success as that by the authority and commandment of Barnim and Philip Dukes
of Pomerania, the states of the land being assembled together in that town, by
common council and decree Popish abuses were banished out of all Pomerland.

Now let us view France and namely Meaux in France, there Bishop Bricomet with
great earnestnes undertook to maintain the cause of the Gospel. And having
called together thither very many learned men, and amongst them John Faber
Stapulensis, a man of eminent and great name, he commanded them publickely to
preach the true doctrine of the Gospel. But after when the Bishop being
terrified and put in fear, fell away from true religion, all the ministers
also were compelled to forsake the country: whereof some went into the
Kingdom of Navarre, and some to Paris: and (althougth privately and in secret
places) they instruct the people by their Sermons. Many of them also in the
City of Metz, whither they had fled, began the building of that goodly Church,
which even to this day does continue and flourishe. Others also went to other
places of that Kingdom, where they made Christ, and the doctrine of the
Gospel more famous.

And is there any man, who herein may not acknowledge, admire, and publish the
wisdom of God? especially, considering that he then shows forth his mighty
power for the help and advancement of his Church, when we think it most of
all abandoned and forsaken.

The like thing happened also in Italy, which (for the profession of the Gospel)
banished many godly persons from Naples, Luca, Pisa and Locarne. All which
persecutions, the wisdom of God directed to that end, that by the service of
the same men, which had been banished from these places, the building up of
the Churches in other countries, might be excellently raised up. The same we
know to have been done at Geneva, Zarick, London in England, and in other
places.

In like manner, the small Caldian war being finished, the brethreen and
professors which were driven out of Bohemia and Morauia, came to Pole-land,
where they who had been refused by King Sigismond, found a very gracious
patron of Albert Duke of Borussia. Yet some of these turning back again into
Polonia, were received by diverse noble men in Pole-land.

And what came of their return? In the space of eight years, there was so
much effected by their industry and labor, as that Peter Vergerius (having ben
sometimes Bishop of Iustinopolis, and the Popes legate in Germany) by the
writings of our men which he had undertaken to confute, was brought to the
acknowledging of the truth, even he confessed that he found in Pole-land forty
Churches established in good order, by those brethren which they never thought
would come to pass, who had banished them with so great cruelt^e.

Moreover it cannot be denied, but that the persecution in the Low Countries,
furnished the dominion of the Palatine Elector, with many teachers, and
Preachers of the word, adorned with all kind of good learning and knowledge;
whose godly labors did greatly advance the work of reformation begun by
Frederick the third Elector.

The like also fell out in this country. For when as after the blessed decease
of that most worthy, pious and virtuous Prince, some alteration in Religion had
driven and dispersed Ministers of the word into other places, by these
ministers in like manner, the doctrine of the truth was propagated and spread
into other places.

Furthermore by what means think we, that the most famous Dukedom of
Wirtenberg was brought to the acknowledging of the Gospel? was it not when the
Duke Huldrick himself was dispossessed and cast out of his Dukedom? for
whereas he lived privately with Phillip the Landgraue of Hassia, and there
heard the teachers of the sincere Religion preaching, and had before that been
present at a collogue and conference at Marpurge, his mind took such a taste
of true Religion, as that after, having received his Dukedom, he procured
carefully the same true Religion to be preached unto his subjects.

Neither has God used these means only, for the propagation and advancement
of his word, but also many other courses that have been marvelous.

For I call Hungary to witness, that even Soldiers and men of War have
given furtherance to Gods word. For whereas the Dutch Army brought thither by
King Ferdinandus, had in it many Lutheranes, by their means that Kingdom
better discerned of Popish Idolatry.

Italy also may testify the like of it self, when both the Army of Charles
the fifth besieged the Pope, and some dissentions began to grow between the
Pope and the Venetians.

To the number of these other means, I may also add divine and spiritual
songs, which having been made by Preachers of the Gospel, and accustomed to
be sung by poor Scholars, insinuated and closely conuaied the knowledge of
the truth into an infinite number of men in Germany and the Low Countries, and
chiefly in Hungary, where for the want of the Art of Printing, this means was
devised, that the songs which had been endited by the teachers, young boys
and scholars should deuoutely and sweetly sing, not only at men's doors, but
even at feasts and banquets.

Moreover I think that I may truly say, that it has been a great means to
further the knowledge of the truth, that particular Schools have been
founded and erected in many places, and that disputations have been held by
the professors of the Gospel with the Papists. Of which sort are the
disputations held at that time at Lipswick in the year 1519, 1519.
at Zurich and Bresla 1523, at Basile 1524, at Norimberge 1523.
1525, at Bathe in Switherland 1526, at Bern 1528, at 1524.
London 1549, and such like. 1525.


6 Another likeness between this age and the primative 1526.
Church may be in this, that the enemies of 1528.
the truth set upon the Christians of the primitive 1549.
Church, sometimes with severity of edicts and proclamations, after which
grievous punishments, and at the length by open war: in the very like manner,
for the space of these hundred years, grievous Proclamations have been often
published against true Religion and the professors of it. And when they little
prevailed, they killed infinite multitudes of men by fire and water, by the
sword and by hanging, and many other kinds of punishments: and when neither
these means had the like success which they desired, they came at length to
this, that strong Armies were levied, and brought into Germany, the
Low Countries, and into France, to have rooted out true Religion, if it had
been possible.

Further also as in that time the heathen Emperors (whether they would or no)
heard the confessions and Apologies of the Christian faith, which are extant
and to be read in Justin Martyr, Athenagoras, Tertullian, and others: Even so
in this our age, Kings and Kesars, have of necessity been made to take notice
and information of the truth of the Gospel, which in all things they did not
approve of.

For who is ignorant that the Emperor Charles the fifth was present at the
public reading of the confession of Ausburge, so named of the City where
this was done? Likewise to King Ferdinandus, a confession of their faith was
both exhibited and read by the brethren and professors in Bohemia and Morauia.

We read likewise that Frauncis, the first King of France, heard with his own
ears the famous confession of the Christians of Merindole.

Also Theodore Beza, in the conference at Poessy, the King and the Queen, yea
all France in a manner hearing it, delivered the Articles of our faith, so
soundly and so effectually, as that the Cardinal of Lorraine said, that he
wished that either Beza had been dumb, or that all the States there present
had been deaf that day.

7 Yet will we not stay here, but observe another point of comparison: for in
the primitive Church, there were very many Christians who (as the
Ecclesiastical History does witness) professed the truth of the Gospel with
the loss of their goods, and also of their very life it self: So likewise in
these hundred years last past, God has set before our eyes notable and famous
examples of Christian constancy in an infinite number of most worthy persons,
men and women, rich and poor, learned and unlearned, noble and vn-noble.

The regard of the time will not suffer me here to enlarge my self, yet can I
not by any means pass by in silence, in Germany the houses and the families
of the Electors, to wit, that the house of Brandeburge, Saxony, and the
Palatine have brought forth those heroical persons, to whom you may truly
apply the speech which by the Apostle is uttered of Moses, that they esteemed
the reproach of Christ to be greater riches, then the treasures of the
Egyptians.

First let us go to the house of Brandburge, and call to mind George the
Marquess of Brandenburge, who being then to King Lewis, the great Prefect and
Governor of his Court, retained with his help, and defended with his aid,
the Christians in Silesia, Bohemia, and Hungary, being charged and burdned with
diverse slanders.

After also, when the Emperor Charles the fifth, in the assembly at Ausburge,
published a severe edict and Proclamation, with a most grievous punishment
added to it, charging all men to abandon the Religion of the Gospel, the said
Lord Marquess, had this honorable report of his constancy, that fearing
nothing the Emperors indignation, he boldly said kneeling before his
Majesty, that he had rather yield his head to be smitten and cut off, then to
depart the least jot from the truth, which he had once acknowledged and
received, which when he once had spoken openly, they say that the Emperor
answered, that the cutting off his head was not sought for.

Will ye go from Brandeburg to Saxony? There we shall see Duke Henry the
progenitour of the two most gracious Electors Mauricius and Augustus worthily
showing how deep roots the love of the Gospel had taken in him.

For when his brother George Duke of Saxony (who was a most earnest defender of
the Popish Religion) a little before his death, having caused it to be signified
to him by messengers (sent for that purpose) that he would make him his heir,
upon condition, that he would forsake the Religion Euangelical reformed; but if
he refused to perform the condition, that he would give all his dominions to
King Ferdinandus: Duke Henry of whom I spoke, answering presently, said
plainly and expressly to him; this your message evidently represents and
brings into my mind that which is written in the holy Scriptures, when
Satan promised to Christ, the Kingdoms of the whole world, upon condition,
that falling down at his feet, he would worship and adore him. Do you
think that I esteem any worldly riches and benefit more, then I do the glory
of God? Certainly your expectation does much deceive you. With which answer
he dismissed those messengers, adding to his former speech, this notable
sentence, that he had rather be poor with Christ, then rich with the Pope.

Which memorable act of his religious piety wanted not his reward from God.
For before that the legates and messengers had returned some, Duke Georg his
brother dying, without executing that his determination, altogether against his
will, left Duke Henry his heir and successor. And what should I speak of John
Frederick Elector of famous memory? Of whom, the Emperor Ferdinandus himself
is reported to have said to Doctor N(...)vius chief Physician of the Elector
of Saxony: that John Frederick Flector, was a Prince of a magnanimous and high
courage, whose valor and virtue if his Soldiers had followed in the War,
with like animositie and boldness, he had never been overcome. Further he
is reported to have said, that he stood by the Emperor Charles, and beheld
with how cheerful and gracious a countenance he came to the Emperor,
presenting himself, not as a captive and prisoner, but cheerful as one that
should have led a dance.

And surely that he excelled in the greatness of an invincible mind and
courage, he made it manifest in his very imprisonment and captivity, to the
wonder and admiration of all men.

For in the assembly at Ausburge, the Emperor had drawn all the States of the
Empire to his purpose, that stricken with fear, they freely professed, that
they would receive whatsoever the General Council that was to be called,
should determine of Religion. Then he required and commanded the Prince being
prisoner to do the like. But he then answered that in all other things he was
ready with all submission to yield his service and obedience: but in that which
concerned Religion and conscience, he humbly be fought him in his gracious
clemency to respect him.

So great was the magnanimity of this Prince Elector when he was a prisoner,
so great was his zeal for the true worship of God, when the other States being
yet free, and yet affrighted with the fears of dangers, professed that they
would willingly obey the decree of the counsel that was to be held: whose
judgment was yet unknown what it would be. Therefore Melanchthon a most
religious Divine notably in verse commended the constancy, of this likewise
most religious Prince and Elector, saying.

He won more praise by constant profession of faith, then if he at home had
fought fierce and terrible battles. Furthermore the County Palatine, is able to
show also in this glorious field, and to this day commends to all posterity,
those most famous Princes, Otto, Henry, and Frederick the third of that name,
either of them Electors, and most constant defenders of the truth.

Ottho Henricus desired rather to loose the principality of Neuburg, then by
forsaking the truth of Religion to keep it, and to win the favor of Caesar
and of the Pope: which faithfulness and constancy in Religion, God recompensed
with a large and ample blessing. For he not only restored unto him, the
foresaid dominion; but also, Frederick the second being dead, he gloriously
advanced him to the Electorship.

Behold also the Count Palatine Frederick the third, him to whom piety it
self gave his Surname, so that he was renowned and called Fredericus Pious,
and consider with me a little his diverse and great trials which he endured for
the cause of Religion.

He was constrained, sometimes to avoid the darts of his brother, sometimes to
withstand his children, and sometimes to resist his kins-folke, yea at the
length in the assembly at Ausborow he had the Emperor himself and the Princes
and States of the sacred Empire greatest adversaries unto him.

Yet surely Caesar's Majesty notably made answer for him to the Electors and
Princes that would have excluded and shut out the said Frederick Pius, out of
the peace of the Empire, saying, I must answer you, as Christ did Salome: you
know not what you ask. Do you not know, that he is a Prince of the Empire?
will you be at discord among your selves? Notwithstanding the same Emperor,
very severely and peremptorily commanded the same Elector Frederick, to change
and utterly forsake his Religion, which was said to be a diverse Religion from
that which was said to be allowed at Ausburge, and infected (as they said) with
the error of Caluinisme. Then the Elector openly and plainly (as the love of
Religion persuaded him) to this effect declared his mind to the Imperial
Majesty, that in the matter of Faith and Religion, he did acknowledge one
only Lord, to wit, God, who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.

That such question and business concerned not the loss of any temporal
estate, or of this present life, but the everlasting salvation of the soul:
which as he had received and had it recommended unto him from Christ his Lord
and Savior: so he both ought and would keep it entire and whole without hurt
or blemish unto him, even with the danger and loss of this present life.
Furthermore he said, that he was willing and ready to yield to any whatsoever
they were, a just reason, apology, and defense of his Catechism and Faith.

Which magnanimity and courage of a constant faith, Augustus Duke of Saxony
and Elector admiring, friendly and brotherly striking with his open hand the
shoulder of this most pious Prince Frederick, said, Frederick, thou do far
excel us all in piety and Religion.

Behold a cheerful mind of a Prince in the profession of the truth, nobly
resembling the Emperor Iouinian, who being taken by the Soldiers to receive
the Imperial dignity, refused to take it upon him, except the Army by whom
he was chosen, would cast away their Idols, and embrace the sincerity of
Christian Faith.

Our own Prince also, in like manner a most constant professor of Religion,
resolved rather to loose the dignity to be one of the seven Electors, then to
abandon the truth of the Gospel, if he could not keep his Electorship
without the loss of true Religion.

Now let us proceed from Germany to Italy, and bring out before you, two
worthy champions for the faith, out of the Kingdom of Naples, to wit,
Galeacius Caracciolus Vice-Marques, and the same a son of the sister of Pope
Paul the fourth; the other John Berniardin Boniface Marquis of Oria. Both these
were enflamed with so great a zeal of Religion, as that all their worldly
dignities neglected, and the honor of their life and state despised, they
forsook their houses and their country, and led the rest of their mortal
lives in such a voluntary banishment, as the sincerity of Religion laid upon
them.

Here also I could name you many other worthy and famous personages in Spain,
Italy, Scotland, and Germany, which some of them secretly, and some of them by
open violence suffered death for the profession of the Gospel. But the
Martirologies and stories of the Martyrs have cased me of that burden of
rehearsing them, (as being set out purposely to declare and to register the
names of these who have borne witness to the truth) and may be repaired and
resorted unto for this matter.

Yet cannot I in silence pass by any means, that only in Belgia (containing
the 17 provinces of the Low Countries) whiles Charles the fifth yet lived, were
slain and murdered fifty thousand Christians, and that the Duke of Alua
cruelly boasted, that in the space of six years after he had been governor
of that country eighteen thousand persons had been killed by his
commandment, and also from the year 1576, to the agreement at Gaunt there
had perished by the tyranny of the Papists thirty thousand.

Yet there was a greater Vintage and Harvest in France, for it may be proved
by arguments worthy to be believed, that from the year 1564, to the year 1564.
1586, that is in the space of two and twenty years, that one hundred and
forty thousand godly persons sealed and signed with their blood the sincerity
of Religion. Which is so reckoned, as that, they are not numbered in this
account, who under Henry the second* and Frauncis the first, being roasted and
burnt, went up to the fire with so great courage and constancy of mind, and so
to the death gave testimony to the truth, as that in the year 1533, the
tongues of the Martirs were cut out, that they might not be able to speak unto
the people.

Now in England it is incredible to be spoken, what slaughter and how many dead
corpse have been made: how many excellent men (amongst whom some were Bishops
and Archbishops) in the Reign of Queen Mary, being burnt alive with fire,
without fear endured that shameful and cruel death with marvelous strength
and power of Faith*

And if we should also declare the notable and invincible constancy of Rochell
in France, and of Maydenborowe in Germany, here we should have a large field
to discourse, to their immortal praise. But we are to proceed, and make
another new comparison between the auntienter Apostolic, and latter
reformations of the Church.

2 In these times the Christians being miserably afflicted, God (appearing and
shining through these clouds unto them) then at length gloriously lifted up,
and exalted his Church, when it lay cast down to the lowest, and was even
trodden underfoot. Therefore Sulpitius Seuerus was bold to say, writing of the
ten years persecution under the Emperors Dioclesian and Maximinian, we never
conquered with greater glory and triumph, then when we could not be conquered
with the continual slaughters and massacres of ten years together: In like
manner, in these hundred years last past, besides and above the expectation,
opinion and thoughts of all men, God oftentimes mightily delivered his Church,
taking it, as it were out of the very jaws of the enemies.

In the year 1521, after the departure of Luther, who in the assemblies of the
States of the Empire at Wornis had appeared and presented himself before
Caesar and the Princes of the Empire, to make answer for his proceedings,
there was set and published an edict or proclamation of most sharp severity
against the professors of the Gospel, whereof the Popes Legate, Cardinal
Jerome Alexander is reported to have said to Marinus Caracciolus; Oh, my
Caracciolus, if we have done nothing else at this diet and assembly, yet this
we have effected (as I am in good hope) that by this edict and mandate of
Caesar's we shall shortly see the Germans at war one with another, and
tumbling in their own blood.

But what fell out? a little after, there arose an exceeding great trouble in
Spain: so as the Emperor went thither to pacify it, and the professors of
the Gospel had a little breathing time, as some milder air appearing. For the
Imperial edict being mittigated and qualified by the States of the Empire
assembled at Norinberg, the true doctrine was seen daily to be more largely
and more courageously spread and advanced.

In the year 1526, and the fourteenth of January, Charles the fifth being
Emperor, and Frauncis the first being King of France, with great conjunction
and agreement of mind and affections endeavored and went about it, joining
their forces together, to pull up by the roots the Lutheran Religon (as they
call it) but altogether in vain. For the Pope himself brake the bond and
league, making the Emperor so much business in Italy, that he professed by
public writing, that the Pope was in all the fault, that he had hitherto with
less success suppressed the heresy (as he termed it) of the Lutherans.

Again in the year 1530. did not all men fear and tremble at the publishing
of that most cruel edict of the Emperor Charles, wherewith at the Diet at
Ausburg, he thundered against the professors of the Gospel? but behold, God,
as from heaven, delivered them. For the Turk, (as one that had been drawn
thither by the hair of his head) came into Austria: which rumor caused the
Emperor not unwillingly to grant peace to the Protestants, that he might
obtain aid of them against the Turk, the common enemy of all Christendom.

So likewise, the league agreed upon at Smale-cald, being broken, and
prosperous success making all subject unto Caesar's power, who knows not that
which happened. For when it was thought, that the cause of reformation had now
been utterly overthrown in Germany, Almighty God fully overcame and subdued
the Conquerers mind, and so perplexed him, that he not only no more urged the
General Council (to whose determination the States of the Empire had before
promised to yield all obedience) but also made an unnecessary and needles war
with the Pope, and despaired of success in fighting any more with the
Germans, who yet before, he supposed to have bin wholly conquered and subdued.

Neither was it otherwise with the Heluetians, who being constrained to defend
with Arms the liberty of the Euangellicall profession, were once or twice
overcome by papists: yet notwithstanding the truth triumphs as invincible
their Churches, even to this day.

England also may be a witness hereof, wherein men almost despaired of the
maintainers of the Gospel, when as by the reign of Queen Mary, many goodly
lights had been extinguished, and so many strong buttresses and pillars had
been overthrown and cast down to the ground.

But the Lord, who calls light out of darkness, he called that most gracious
Queen Elizabeth out of the prison, and placed her in the royal throne of the
Kingdom, whereby all the hope of the Papist was disappointed and exposed to
shame and ignominy.

Likewise France will testify this, which was most shamefully defiled and
stained with that horrible massacre and slaughter that was made of true
professors in the year 1572. For at that time there was celebrated and kept at
Rome a solemn thanksgiving to God for that action performed with so great
success, and so agreeably to their desire, in the rooting out of the Hugonets,
(as they called the professors of the truth of the Gospel.)

But within a year after, the multitude of professors appeared in so great
number, as a man would have thought that all those had been risen from the
dead, and restored to life again.

Neither are there wanting like examples in Hungary, Bohemia, Morauia, Silesia,
Aus^ria. For about some thirteen years agone, these adversaries with very
great endeauours desired to cut off all means of exercising the Religion
reformed. But utterly in vain, God withstanding them; who sending them his
help from heaven, brought the matter to that pass, that greater liberty was
granted to these countries then they ever enjoyed in any time before.

Finally, for the last point of this comparison: In the primitive Church God by
manifest signs and tokens showed the severity of his just judgment upon many
tirants and persecutors of the Church, by their fearful ends and tragical
deaths.

In like manner Sigismund the Emperor 200. years agone having burnt at
Constance, John Husse, a most pious and godly Preacher, together with him burnt
and consumed all his own royal estate. For deceasing without heir male,
Ladislaus his Grand-sonne by his daughter succeeded him, and so he confined
the celebritie and honor of his name in the space of a few years. So
likewise in this last age we have received by report, and seen with our eyes
that vengeance has followed them at their heels, which bearing impiety and
ungodliness in their hearts, and showing it openly by strange cruelty, went
about with all their power to assail and to pluck up by the roots the pure
doctrine of the Gospel.

In the year 1546. George Wisehart a Preacher of the Gospel in Scotland
(after burnt to ashes by the commandment of Cardinal Beton) in the midst of
the flames of fire prophetically foretold the Cardinal of the death and
overthrow that hung over his head. And that not in vain, for he was killed
that very year, and that so, as in the same place, where the stake and ashes
of that constant Martyr had been seen not long before, in the same place so
soon after, the dead body of that tyrant was to be seen exposed to the hate
and scorn of all men.

With him reckon also Steven Gardner, who being Bishop of Winchester, and
Cancelor to Queen Mary, employed his service and power very busily to destroy
the Christians. But his punishment followed not long after: for being taken
with a sore disease, and despairing of the favor and mercy of God, he cried
out, alasle for me, I have sinned with Peter, but I have not wept, nor
seriously and truly repented as Peter did.

In France, remember Minerius, making war with the innocent men of Merindoll,
and miserably killing and murdering them with more then Scythian and Barbarian
cruelty. What? art thou sorry? and do thou sigh and lament to hear it? stay
a while, and thou shall see and acknowledge the wonderful judgment and
vengeance of God upon him. For this tyrant Minerius falling into a most
grievous and fearful sickness, ended his ungodly life, with horrible crying
and howling.

Kings also furnish us with some examples of tragical ends. For Fruancis, the
first king of France, in the agony of death, felt how heavily the blood of the
Wald^nses and Merindolians lay upon his conscience, wherefore he gave
commandment and charge to his son Henry that he should put to death John
Monk, by whose counsel and persuasion he had begun the persecution: which
Monk perceiving, speedily fled, and so escaped the present danger.

Likewise we have heard that Henry the 2. King of France, having often
threatened, and said, that with his own eyes he would see Burges to be consumed
and burnt with fire upon a wound taken in the eye in his running at-Tilt, ended
his life with very great torments.

Neither was the end of Frauncis the second of that name any better, who having
denied the Christians free exercise of the Religion of the Gospel: (who by
supplication had requested it) he also by an Apostume risen in his brain, and
running at his ear, died with his ear putrified and rotten.

And thou also Charles the ninth, King of France, go thou also and defile thy
hands with the blood of thy subjects. Thou also did miserably perish in thine
own blood. And you two tirants (I speak of Henry the third, and the Duke of
Guise) do you also take pains in the heinous crime of the massacre and
slaughter at Paris; do you also kill, murder and destroy: but with what
success, even, and issue have you done it? either of you ended your life, with
a violent and bloody death, but the reformed Religion you have not driven out
of France. But what do I speak of these things, the Emperor himself,
Charles the fist, he confessed that he had used and employed all his force
and power, to establish the authority of the Pope, and to maintain his
dignity, but that his endeavor had been all in vain, and that his money and
treasure was spent, which loss was tolerable and might be borne, but that
which was altogether intolerable, he had lost his honorable name amongst men,
and his estimation and dignity, the loss whereof was not to be recovered by
any means.

Here it were worth our labor to note and mark the perfidious falling away
of Apostatates, and the infirmity of the faithful. Here also intestine and
inward dissensions and discords were to be touched, and to be compared with
the contentions of the ancient and primitive Church: but the regard of this
present time does not suffer me so to do.

Therefore, let it suffice to have heard, that Christ the Lord has most
effectually expressed, and accomplished really, and in powerful act and deed,
the name of Jesus and Savior, that was given him by order from God, in that
he does so fatherly gather, so wisely govern, so mightily preserve, and so
justly protect his Church against all the adversaries and enemies of it.

Now let the Jesuits go, and vain-gloriously boast of the miracles, which they
say, have been done in the East and West Indiaes: but we most worthily
publish and magnify the miracles, justly to be admired and wondered at, which
God has done in our own days, and in the age of our fathers, in Germany,
England, Spain, Italy, France, Hungary, Bohemia, Pole-land, Denmark and Swed
land.

For these are indeed that which they are said to be, miracles.

That God has wrought so great things by so mean and base instruments.

That the doctrine of the Gospel within so few years, has like the
lightning, enlightened so many countries and Kingdoms.

That by means altogether contrary to the reason of man, the sincerity and
purity of the doctrine of the Gospel flourishes at this day, being
propagated and spread fair and near.

That by how much the greater the cruelty of tyrants has been in blood
sheding, in burning and hanging of the godly, so much the further has the
sound of the Gospel bin heard, and passed into more places.

That a most puissant and mighty Emperor, going through Germany with such
success of many victories as he could have wished, yet was notable by any
means to conquer and subdue the Gospel in Germany.

That in France six Kings continually succeeding one another, and employing
all their forces, and using many and diverse means and practices for it, yet
have not been able to effect the suppression of the reformed Churches in
France.

That Philip the second, the greatest King that has been of Spain, has
wasted all the treasure which he had gathered in the East, and in the West, for
the rooting out of Religion, partly in France, and partly in England, and
chiefly in the Low countries, and that with no other event and success, but
that these huge masses of treasure being exhausted and lost, and his Kingdom
being cast into many great straits and difficulties of debt, before his death
full sore against his will, he heard this message delivered to him, that the
reformed Churches in France, England, and the Low-countri^s did prosper and
flourish, as they had done in any former time.

Which things being so, worthily do we all extol and magnify this most
gracious goodness and mercy of our God, who in goodness add power excels all,
whereby when we were drowned in the midst of a sea of errors and darkness in
Popery, has illuminated and enlightened us with the most clear and goodly light
of the knowledge of himself, and of his Gospel.

For if in the old Testament the godly so often celebrated and praised with
songs, the redemption of the people of Israel out of Egypt, and from their
enemies of Madian, surely we have far greater cause, why we should magnify
with all praise and honor our marvelous deliverances from the Idolatry of
Antichrist.

Moreover, this historical commemoration and rehearsal of the admirable and
wonderful work which we have heard, to have been performed by God in his
Church, ought to give encouragement to all the faithful with greater alacrity
and cheerfulness, and with greater strength and constancy to keep and retain
the truth which they have once acknowledged: which being grounded and founded
steadfastly and securely in the holy Scripture, has been again and newly
confirmed in these last hundred years by so singular and excellent miracles.

And this we ought the rather to do, because we know that our Savior Jesus
does still live, and we are certainly persuaded, that as he has done
hitherto, so likewise always hereafter, he will gather, govern, and preserve
his Church.

Now let us also remember that it is our part and duty to worship and honor
this Jesus our Savior with our mouth, with our hearts, and with all our
strength. For he it is (as the Angel expressly testifies) which will save and
preserve his people. Of which people they only are to be accounted, who do
not walk, nor live according to the flesh, but according to the Spirit:
whereof, who sees not this to follow? That he that has not the Spirit of
Christ, is none of his: and that he who is none of Christ's, cannot in any sort
enjoy the comfort of this name of a Savior?

Let us then embrace our most faithful Savior, let us love him, let us fear
him, and let us honor him: So without all doubt, we shall prove by
experience, that he will renew again hereafter, unto us his ancient favor,
and will most mightily protect us his Christian Church, by his patronage and
defense from all our enemies both of soul and body.

For this says Amen, that is, that true and faithful witness, the gates of
hell shall not prevail against my Church.

To this mighty and great Savior, be thanks, honor and glory, for all the
comfort, help, and benefits hitherto bestowed upon us, both now, and in all
ages, for ever and ever, Amen.

THE PRAYER.
MOst Gracious God, and merciful father, we give thee thanks for all thy
benefits, wherewith hitherto, thou have largely and bountefully blessed us. O
Lord my God, thy thoughts are great and thy works admirable and wonderful,
which thou set before us, to behold and consider. Nothing can, nor ought to
be compared unto thee. I will declare thy works, and speak of them, although
they exceed all account and number. We acknowledge it to proceed from thy
grace and favor, that in all places thou have miraculously gathered a people
that is pleasing and acceptable unto thee; that thou have wisely governed, and
mightily preserved the same. Especially we praise thee that it has pleased
thee, to call us in these countries to the Communion of thy Son Jesus Christ,
and that this day thou have granted thy grace to us sitting by the cratch of
thy newborn Son, to hear how sweet^ly the Angels sung their heau^nly hymn
and song; and how joyfully they greeted and congratulated us, for the exceeding
great benefit of thy Son sent to take our flesh and nature upon him. And not
only to hear this, but moreover also to see how the shepherds did adore him;
Simeon and Anna blessed him: the wise men that came to him from the East, did
honor him with gold, myrrh and frankincense. Blessed be thy holy name for
evermore, for these and all other benefits, which thou do bestow upon up,
and wherewith thou do adorn us. Gracious God and merciful Father, we
beseech thee also for the time to come, to show forth thy marvelous works
amongst us, and always to gather a Church to thy self amongst us, and
graciously to preserve this which thou have already gathered, that the number
of them may daily increase, who may truly acknowledge thee and thy Son Jesus
Christ, and may celebrate and magnify thee, both in this life, and also in
that which is to come for evermore.

Furthermore, with earnest prayers we beseech thee, as thou have done
hitherto, so likewise hereafter graciously and mercifully to turn away from
us, the fury of war, the scarcity and dearth of victuals, and the plague of
pestilence, and whatsoever besides may be hurtful to our countries.

Drive away also far from us the most savage cruelty of the Pope, and of his
adhaerents, hinder and restrain his counsels that they take not effect.

Contrariwise we b^seech thee to grace and adorn with all manner of blessings,
the Emperors Majesty, the Royal dignity of the King of great Britain, as
also all other Christian Kings, the Electors of the Empire and other Princes,
especially the most illustrious and gracious Prince Frederick, Count-Palatine
Elector our gracious Lord, together with the most illustrious Princess his
wife, and the Princess daughter of the late Elector: and our young Princes,
and all the noble house of the Counts-Palatines, Princes Electors, with their
Counselors and Officers, maintain and preserve them all with thy gracious
patronage, protection and defense.

Take care also, we beseech thee, of all Widows and Orphans, and preserve our
bodies with the comfort of health, and crown our life with Christian
uprightness and integrity.

Help all those which endure diverse afflictions, especially such as suffer
grievous persecutions for the truths sake. Make them know by their experience,
that Jesus our Savior is more able to comfort them, then all the world to make
them to sorrow.

Finally, when the short term and time of our life shall pass away, refresh
and comfort us before we depart from hence: and receiving us into the arms of
thy mercy, translate us out of this old world, to that new one, which is not
finished nor ended with any course of the Sun, or of the Moon: but wherein
thy self art to be the Sun, the Moon, and all in all things, these mercies
we ask in the name of Jesus Christ, and pray also further as he has taught
us. Our Father, etc.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 3. helps, r. fulfileth. p. 4. adorned r. adored. p. 17. Treptquine. r.
Trepto. were, r was. p. 20. r. the Smalcaldian war. p. 22. r. with. for
which. p. 24. retained for relieved. p. 25. him, r. them ibid. some. r. home.
p. 52. l. 2. r. there was set out etc. p. 33. r. in their Churches. p. 39.
add. for and. page, vltima, daughter read Dowager.


