THE BOOK OF HONOR and Arms.

AT LONDON, Printed by Richard Ihones, dwelling at the sign of the Rose and
Crown near Holburne Conduit. 1590.

THE BOOK OF HONOR and Arms.

Wherein is discoursed the causes of Quarrel, and the nature of Injuries,
with their repulses.

Also the means of satisfaction and pacification; with diverse other things
necessary to be known of all Gentlemen and others professing Arms and Honor.

Fortes and magnanimi sunt habendi, non qui faciunt, sed qui propulsant
iniuriam.

TO THE RIGHT HOnorable Sir Christopher Hatton, Knight of the most noble Order,
and Lord Chancellor of England: Richard Ihones Printer, wishes long life, with
increase of happiness.
RIght Honorable, the manifold testimonies of your love both unto Honor and
Arms, have induced me to think the first sight of this small book does of
right belong unto your Lordship, being by the due degrees of virtue ascended to
that place, which among others in this Realm, is (and long has been) reputed
most honorable. To your L. therefore I humbly dedicate the same, as unto him,
that by censure of our Sovereign, with the applause of people, has in hand
the consideration of actions apperteining to equity, Honor and Justice. The
property of which virtue (as Cicero says) is to foresee that no violence be
offered, but only by him that with injury is thereunto provoked: and that
things common should be commonly used, and private things priuatlie enjoyed.
By which rule appears, that virtue allows just revenge, and admits the
defense of property and right. But for that your Lordship has been as well an
actor in Arms, as a knower of what is due to Honor, I omit to say more, either
of the one or the other: beseeching your good Lordship to pardon my boldness,
and take in acceptable wise the intent of the Author, who both by election and
obligation acknowledges himself yours.

Your Lordships ever to command: Richard Ihones.

To the Reader.
THE cause of all Quarrel is Injury and reproach, but the matter of content,
is Justice and Honor. For love whereof, we shun no care of mind, loss of
wealth, nor adventure of life. Hereof proceeds all disputation in Schools,
pleading in law, war, and all worldly wrangling. For who so is either in
deed or opinion, persuaded to have truth and reason on his side, does not
only constantly believe that so it is, but also being thereof denied, holds
himself injured, and consequently burdened. True it is, that the Christian
law wills men to be of so perfect patience, as not only to endure injurious
words, but also quietly to suffer every force and violence. Notwithstanding,
for so much as none (or very few men) have attained such perfection, the laws
of all Nations, for avoiding further inconveniences, and the manifestation of
truth, have (among many other trials) permitted, that such questions as could
not be ciuilie proved by confession, witness, or other circumstances, should
receive judgment by fight and Combat, supposing that GOD (who only knows
the secret thoughts of all men) would give victory to him that justly
adventured his life, for truth, Honor, and Justice.

Seeing then that al human laws have permitted the trial of Arms, and that
every injurious action not repulsed, is by common consent of all Martial
minds holden a thing dishonorable, infamous, and reproachful; it cannot be,
but at some times and occasions such questions and quarrels shall arise, as
necessarily must receive trial by the Sword. And Cicero says, that he who
repulseth not an injury, being able, offends no less, than if he had
abandoned his friends, parents and country. By these reasons appears that
the trial by Arms is not only natural, but also necessary and allowable.
Notwithstanding, for that the vulgar sort (and many right noble also) be
ignorant what are the true causes requiring trial of Arms, and what words or
deeds are of such quality as ought be repulsed or revenged; I have at the
earnest requests and often desires of very honorable friends (by way of
abreuiation) reduced into this small volume, all causes of Quarrel or Combat,
the nature of Injuries and repulses, the equality and disequalitie of men, who
may be challenged, and for what respects Challenges ought be refused: with
many other things in matter of Honor and Arms worthy to be known and
considered.

And albeit I am not ignorant that public Combats are in this age either
rarely or never granted; yet for that (as is before said) no providence can
prevent the questions and quarrels that daily happen among Gentlemen and
others professing Arms, it shall not be amiss, but rather behouefull that all
men should be fully informed what injury is, and how to repulse it, when to
fight, when to rest satisfied, what is Honor and good reputation, how it is
gained, and by what means the same is kept and preserved; which was the
respect that the Earl Balthazar Castilio in his book of the Courtier, does
among other qualities requireable in a gentleman, specially advise he should
be skillful in the knowing of Honor, and causes of quarrel. This book does
not incite men to unadvised fight, or needles revenge (as some simple wit may
surmize) but enformeth the true means how to shun all offenses: or being
offended, shows the order of revenge and repulse, according unto Christian
knowledge and due respect of Honor.

And for that the dignity of Knighthood apperteineth chiefly to Martial
merit, I have thought fit briefly to touch the original thereof: declaring
how many Orders or degrees of Knights were in times past, and of them, how many
yet extant.

We have not in this work meddled with Armorie, or blazing of Badges; but
chiefly touched matters offenciue to reputation and Honor, whereof Combat or
particular trial of Arms ought to ensue. If ought else is looked for, it may
be taken from the learned. Tractant Fabrilia fabri.

FINIS.
The Contents of this work divided into five Books.
The first Book.
WHat a Combat is, and the original thereof. cap. 1. Of the order of
challenging and defending. cap. 2. For what cause the party belied ought to
challenge, and of the nature of the Lie. cap. 3. Of the nature and diversity
of Lies. cap. 4. Of Lies certain. cap. 5. Of Lies conditional. cap. 6. Of
Lies general. cap. 7. Of Lies special. cap. 8. Of vain Lies. cap. 9. Whether
a man injured in presence of a Prince, it suffices of answer in presence of
private Gentlemen. cap. 10. Of the return of Lies. cap. 11. How upon every
Lie the trial of Arms is not necessary. cap. 12. Of the form of a Cartel or
letter of Defiance. cap. 13.
The second Book.
OF Injury and Burden. cap. 1. How shameful and dishonorable it is to offer
injury with advantage and cowardly. cap. 2. That every Lie given, ought not
occasion Combat. cap. 3. For what causes the Combat is to be granted. cap. 4.
How between Padrines no fight or quarrel ought be. cap. 5. Of Arms both
offenciue and defenciue. cap. 6. Of the election of the weapon. cap. 7. How
many ways victory is gained. cap. 8. What was ancientlie due unto such as
were victorious in public Combat. cap. 9.
The third Book.
WHat sorts of men ought not be admitted in trial of Arms. cap. 1. Whether
a Bastard may challenge a Gentleman to Combat. cap. 2. Of restitution of Honor.
cap. 3. Of the disequalitie of Gentlemen. cap. 4. Of Injury done with
advantage. cap. 5. Of Injuries evil offered. cap. 6. Of Satisfaction. cap. 7.
What satisfaction is to be given upon an Injury by deeds. cap. 8. Other
means of Pacification and composition. cap. 9. Of satisfaction to be given
upon words. cap. 10. How the giving of satisfaction is a thing not
reproachful. cap. 11.
The fourth Book.
OF Nobility accompanied with great dignity. cap. 1. Whether a King may
challenge an Emperor to Combat. cap. 2. Whether a quarrel between two
Emperors may be decided by particular Combat. cap. 3. Of the equality and
disequalitie of great Nobility, and of the privileges due unto all men
professing Arms. cap. 4. Certain Questions, Opinions and Judgments upon
accidents happening in trialls and exercises of Arms. cap. 5. Of the honor
gained or lost by being disarmed in sundry places, and of sundry pieces. cap.
6. Of honor gained or lost by the hurts given or taken in Combat for life, or
in Triumph. cap. 7. Of Iusts and Turniamens, and how the accidents in such
exercises are to be judged. cap. 8. The manner of Combats as they were
(auncientlie) tried in England. cap. 9. Certain Combats for life granted by
the Kings of England. cap. 10. Certain Combats for Triumph and Honor,
performed before the Kings of England. cap. 11. The ceremony appertaining to
delivery of Prizes at Iusts and Turniaments before the King. cap. 12.
The fifth Book.
OF what quality a Gentleman professing Arms ought to be. cap. 1. Of
Knighthood. cap. 2. Of the original of Knighthood, given as dignity: and what
Princes have authority to make Knights. cap. 3. The Ceremony at the making
Knights, about the year of our Lord, 1020. cap. 4. The Ceremonies at the
disgrading Knights in those days. cap. 5. How many degrees of Knighthood have
been, and of them how many are yet extant. cap. 6. Of the Order of the Garter.
cap. 7. Other degrees of Knighthood in England. cap. 8. The order of the Toson,
and original thereof. cap. 9. The order of S. Michael. cap. 10. The Order of
the Anunciata. cap. 11. Knights of the Band. cap. 12. Knights of S. Iago. cap.
13. Knights of Calatraua. cap. 14. Knights of Alcantara. cap. 15. Knights of
Montesio. cap. 16. Knights of Redemption. cap. 17. Knights of S. John in
Jerusalem, of some called Knights of the Rhodes, and now Knights of Malta. cap.
18. Knights Teutonici. cap. 19. Knights of the Sepulcher. cap. 20. Knights of
S. Marie. cap. 21. Knights of S. Lazaro. cap. 22. Knights of S. Steven cap. 23.
Ceremonies in degradation of Knights. cap. 24. The Authors Intention. cap. 25.
The Authors Conclusion. cap. 26.
FINIS.
THE BOOK OF Honor and Arms.
What a Combat is, and the original thereof. CAP. 1.
A COMBAT, is a single fight of one man against another, for trial of truth,
either else of diverse men, as two, four, six, ten, or more, equally and
indifferently agreed upon, to fight on horsbacke or foot without advantage,
in number of persons, or disequalitie of weapons.

These kind of fights seem to be first used of great Princes, who desiring to
end public Contention and war, did mutuallie consent to determine the same
by their own private virtue and adventure of life, as did Golias and David,
the Horatij and Curiatij, with diverse other, who fighting only in person, for
the public cause, thereby saved the effusion of much blood, and the lives of
many most worthy Captains and valiant Soldiers. And albeit the cause and
occasion of these Combats, was public respect, yet each particular Gentleman
or other person professing Honor and Arms, ought sufficiently be moved
thereunto for defense of his own particular reputation; which respect, and
happily also some public occasion, moved the Combat of Aeneas with Turnus, of
Menelaus with Alexander, of Pulfius with Varenus, of Robert Mountfort, with
Henry Earl of Essex in England: yea, Kings and Princes have of late time done
the like, as Charles the third, King of France, with the King of Hungary,
Alfonso King of Spain, with Richard Earl of of Cornwall, and King Alfonso
with King Ranier.

These particular fights were first used among the people called Lombardes, as
appears by the laws written by Aliprandus one of the Kings that governed
that Nation: yet true it is, that the Combats of those People, and in that Age,
were tried with no other weapons but only certain shields and staves of
wood, unless it were for cause of infidelity. Neither seems it that the
chief occasion of their fight was respect of Honor, nor that the vanquished
should become dishonored, or Prisoner unto the vanquisher, as since has been
used.

Of the order of challenging and defending. CAP. 2.
FIrst is to be considered, that all Injuries are either by words or by deeds,
and that in every Injury by words, the Iniurer ought be the Challenger: but
in an Injury by deeds, the Injured ought to challenge, as for example, Simon
says to Austen, thou art a Traitor. Austen answers, Thou lie: then does it
behooue Simon to maintain his words, and consequently to challenge Austen to
the Combat.

An Injury by deeds is thus. Simon gives a hurt, a cut, or other violence
unto Austen; whereat offended, he says, Thou have done me offense, violence,
injury, or such like speech. Simon answers, Thou lie. Then behooves it
that Austen do challenge Simon, and force him by fight to maintain the hurt he
offered. Wherefore as a rule or maxim in matter of Honor, it is specially to be
noted, that whosoever is truly and lawfully belied, must of force become
Challenger to maintain that he spoke or did, and whereupon the Lie is given
him.

And although some men, rather to show the dexterity of their wits, than the
valor of their minds, will at such occasion use many superfluous words,
whereby further speech of offense does follow, and so take opportunity to
give the Lie unto whom the hurt by hand was given; yet the true and precise
reason of Honor is, that he who gave the blow and hurt, should without further
dispute be challenged, unless he deny the doing thereof with offer of
satisfaction. Thus appears briefly, that whosoever is lawfully belied,
ought by Arms to challenge, maintain, and prove that which he affirmed or
did, in prejudice of the honor or person of the Injured.

For what cause the party belied ought to challenge, and of the nature of the
Lie. CAP. 3.
FOr so much as in ordinary trial by law, and civil Judgments, whosoever
stands accused; by denial of such accusation, is free from condemning until
further proof be made: even so in every imposition by speech, contrary to
good reputation; honor or honesty, ought either by civil or martial means
be maintained and auowed. Therefore, who soever being offered injurious speech,
shall say to the offerer thereof Thou lie, or thou say not truly, does
thereby repulse the injury, and force the Iniurer to challenge. And every
denial be it never so simple, imports a Lie, and is of like effect, although
the manner in pronouncing denial only, is an answer more friendly and
courteous, than the quality of an injurious imposition requires.

And although the manner of denials are diverse, as Thou lie, Thou say
untruely, etc. yet every denial is a repulse of injury, being spoken to
that which was injury: But if the same be uttered in answer of any words,
wherein was no offense, the same becomes injurious: as thus. If I tell or say
any thing without evil imposition to any person, and one standing by, shall
say I speak untruely, or use other denial of that my speech affirmed; by
that manner of speech he gives me an imputation of a Lier, and consequently
offers me injury. Moreover, for that every injury by words may for once be
wrested, it is lawful for me, with every my denial to repulse that injury,
and my second denial contains the effect of a Lie, and his first, the force
of injury; by which mean, the burden shall rest upon him. But if so it be,
that he answers or says, The truth is otherwise, or any other such speech,
that cannot be injurious, nor shall any ways burden me, unless I shall in
some injurious sort reply, and then he denying, may lay the burden upon me:
for the difference that makes one word sometimes injurious, and sometimes not,
is, that the same is sometimes spoken injuriously, and sometimes not, as thus.
If I say unto another man, Thou say not true, thereby I reprove him, and
consequently offer injury: but if I say, That which thou say is not true,
that speech is not injurious, and may be without burden of him unto whom it is
spoken.

Yet in one case, that rule fails: for if I say, such a thing I have done,
another answers, That is not true: by so saying, he does burden me. To
conclude I say, that whosoever refraineth with his words and speech to offend
others, he can by no means receive the Lie.

Of the nature and diversity of Lies. CAP. 4.
But for the more plain conceiving of the nature and diversity of Lies, we
will particularly discourse thereof, and show how many sorts of them be, how
they are to be given, and in what sort they are to be answered. It is
therefore to be known that of Lies, some be Conditional, and some be
Certain: and of both them, some be General and some Special. To these may
be also added one third kind, which we will call Vain Lies.

Of Lies certain. CAP. 5.
WE call those Lies certain, which are given upon words spoken and affirmed;
as if I should say or write unto another man, Thou have spoken in prejudice of
mine honor, honesty and credit, and therefore do lie. This may be called a
Lie certain, because I stand certeinlie assured that such a man has spoken
evil of me: yet true it is, that because I do not in these words
particularly express the matter or speech whereupon I give the Lie, therefore
it shall be reputed a Lie general, and consequently of no force: For indeed no
Lie is lawful, unless the matter and words whereupon it is given be plainly
and expreslie repeated. Therefore the Lies which are given upon certain and
apparent words, are they which in truth do bind the party belied unto proof,
unless he can deny to have spoken that whereupon the Lie is given him, and
the form thereof is thus. Harman, thou have said that at the Battle of
Montcontour I abandoned mine Ensign, and cowardly ran away: whereunto I
answer, Thou have lied. By this apparent and particular expression of that was
said, the Lie given is made Special, and consequently lawful.

Of Lies Conditional. CAP. 6.
CONDITIONAL lies, we call those which are uttered upon condition, as if a
man should say thus: If thou have called me a thief, thou do lie: or if
thou shall hereafter so say, thou lie: And how often thou have or shall so
say, so often I say thou have and shall lie. These Conditional lies in this sort
given, are the occasion oftentimes of much disputation, because they are not in
force until such time as the Condition is verified, I mean, until it be
auowed that such words have indeed been spoken. For he unto whom such a Lie is
given either by words or writing, as he finds himself guilty or not, so may
he make answer; and having happily spoken such words, he may in using general
words find an evasion: yea the debating of such a Conditional quarrel may be
so handled, as he who gave the Lie conditional, shall utter some speech
whereon to receive a Lie certain. If therefore he who is charged with a Lie
conditional, have not indeed said that wherewith he is charged, then ought he
say, I never spoke any such thing, and thereunto add another Lie, either
Generally or Conditionally uttered thus. Whosoever says that I have spoken
such words, he lies: or thus. If thou or any man else will affirm I have so
said, thou lie.

Albeit this manner of proceeding from one Lie to another, and from one
Condition to another, does seldom occasion other effect than the multiplying
of words: yet do we often see that questions are so handled, and consequently
no good or honorable resolution does follow. Wherefore to avoid all doubts,
it behooves Gentlemen and other persons of honor or credit, to shun all
Conditional lies, and before he does offer the Lie, either by confession of
the party or witness worthy credit, be assured he has cause to give the
Lie. So shall the Lie be certain, and the belied forced, either to deny that
he said, or stand to the justification thereof.

Of Lies general. CAP. 7.
A Lie general may be in two sorts, in respect of the person, and in respect
of the injury. The Lie is general in respect of the Person, when no man to
whom it is given is named, as thus. Who ever has said that I have been a
Rebel to my Prince, does lie. To this manner of Lie no man is bound to make
answer, because many may happily have so said, and that so being, he that
gives the Lie should be forced to fight with them all, which were
inconvenient. For it is unlawful upon one quarrel to fight oftener than once,
and unfit that one man should hazard his reputation upon the sword of another
man. Wherefore to remove such disorders, it has been thought good that this
kind of Lie should be unlawful, of none effect, and disallowed.

Touching the other Lie which we call general in respect of the injury, is
thus. Simon, thou have said evil of me, and spoken words in prejudice of mine
honesty, and therefore I say thou lie. This manner of Lie, not being given
upon any matter certain, or words specially repeated, is to none effect: and
therefore if he who gives such a Lie, intends to make a just quarrel, it
behooves him to set down in writing, the very words whereupon he gives the
Lie. For besides that, such lies do not bind the adverse party, they are also
perilous, and apt to be returned. I say therefore that for so much as a Lie
general is of small effect, and therewith fit to be wrested against the giver
thereof, it ought of all Gentlemen to be utterly refrained.

Of Lies special. CAP. 8.
LIes special are those which are given unto special persons, and upon
express and particular matter: as for example, Gregory, thou have said that
upon the day of Battle at Grauling, I abandoned mine Ensign and charge; for
which saying thou have lied. This is that Lie which (as is before said) I call
a Lie certain and lawful; yet is it to be intended that he who gives this Lie
either by word or writing, ought first to be informed fully, and have
sufficient proof and witness of that he says, so as the same cannot be
denied. For wanting due proves, he to whom the Lie was given, may answer, that
I lie in charging him with such words as he never uttered, and in that case it
shall behoue me to prove the reproach wherewith I have charged him: but if he
cannot deny that wherewith he is charged, then must he either maintain his
speech, or confess the fault.

Here is to be noted, that in such quarells wherein manifest falsehood and
untruth appears, no Prince ought to permit any Combat: neither ought
Gentlemen be ashamed in such cases to refuse the fight; because it is a thing
more honorable for respect of reason to refuse Combat, than perform the same
without cause or obligation. Seeing then that this sort of Lie, whereof we
presently entreat, is only true and lawful; therefore it behooves
Gentlemen, and all others professing Honor and Arms, therewith to give repulse
unto such injuries as are offered: and desiring to show the cause of their
offense either by word or writing, they must so plainly and sincerely set
down the intent thereof, as no part of the affirmation can be either denied
or wrested to other sense than it was uttered or written, whereby afterward no
doubt shall arise, who ought to challenge, and who to defend.

Of Vain Lies. CAP. 9.
THe simple and ignorant sort of men persuading themselves, that he unto whom
the Lie is given, does thereby lose the election of the weapon; therefore
ignorantly and foolishlie they give the Lie, before they either know or ask
the question wherefore they so do: as thus. If thou will not say I am an
honest man, thou lie in thy throat: the folly of which speech does plainly
appear. For seeing the Lie is nothing else but an answer, in this the order of
nature is changed, and the answer uttered before the question asked. Another
sort of ignorant quarrellers are, that will say thus. If any man has said
evil of me, he has lied: and if he will deny to have so said, he also
lies. This silly sort of quarrelling, may likewise be called a Lie foolish
and vain: for he who shall use such words, does thereby take upon him both
to propound and to answer, and consequently perform the office as well of
Defender as Challenger.

Another sort of these Vain lies are thus offered: Simon meeting with Jews
says, Draw thy weapon, and I will presently prove thee a Liar and a Varlet:
Or if thou will not draw, then art thou a Varlet also. This manner of Lie is
without foundation, cause or reason, and therefore meet to be laughed at.
Others there are, who being charged to commit dishonest actions, do for the
present time depart without making either denial or answer; but after having
assembled a number of friends weaponed with advantage, says to him that
charged him, Thou lie: which manner of doing is also cowardly and foolish.
For as every accusation or imputation ought be done without advantage, even so
every answer without advantage, ought be uttered. Also every Injury offered
in presence, should likewise in presence be answered: and if in absence any
such wrong be done, in absence an answer may be made. Finally, unto matter
of injury in writing, the answer ought be framed in writing: yet is it
reason, that if a man armed or accompanied do offer evil speech or violence
to him that is unarmed and alone; in that case it shall be lawful to make
answer at time more convenient. But if so be that any man finding and knowing
me better armed, accompanied, or prepared than himself, will nevertheless offer
me injury; in that case it is lawful for me by words or deeds to repulse the
injury, and be revenged notwithstanding mine advantage, because it was his
folly to offer offense, seeing my strength. But Gentlemen should ever so do,
as the Lie may be no less or more honorably given, than the injury was
offered.

One other advantage in offering injury may be in this sort. If any man shall
offer the same in place of privilege, or in presence of the Prince; in that
case it has been thought fit that no Lie or other repulse should be.
Nevertheless, it seems reasonable, that if it pleases the Prince to know
that I am in his presence or Court iniuried, that it may also please him that I
may desend my self. Yet true it is, that in such places it becomes the
Injured to temper his answer, and use words of reverence, and the rather if he
who offers the injury be a person of more respect and favor with the
Prince before whom the injury was offered, Howsoever it be, I take not upon me
to inform what ought in such case to be done, but tell mine opinion as that
which I think to be honorable: whereunto I add, that wise Princes will more
patiently endure the repulse, than the offer of Injury in their presence.

Whether to a man Injured in presence of a Prince, it suffices to answer in
presence of private Gentlemen. CAP. 10.
Having in the former Chapter spoken of Injury offered in the Princes
presence, it seems not unnecessary to know how such offense is to be
repulsed or revenged. For as it is not easy to have opportunity to make
repulse before the Prince; so were it also fit to use respect before persons of
so high estate and calling, as heretofore has been alleged. But for the more
btiefe deciding of this question, I will only produce the censure of Don
Francisco Maria Duke of Vrbin, which was to this effect. That Princes either
through their attention to other weighty affairs, or their seldom experience
in trial of Arms, were no less, or more ignorant, than other Gentlemen of
mean reputation. And therefore concluded, that to an Injury offered in the
presence of a Prince, it sufficed to make answer before private Gentlemen, as
persons unto whom the knowledge and experience of Arms and Honor apperteined:
Such was the opinion of that Duke, a Prince in his life and place reputed no
less skillful in points of Honor, than all other ways virtuous. Whereunto may
be added, that in matter of Arms, al Emperors, King and Princes, have ever
vouchsafed to be called by the name of Gentlemen and Soldiers. And therefore it
stands with good reason, that an answer made in the presence of Gentlemen
and Soldiers, should be of virtue sufficient to repulse an Injury offered
before a Prince of what title so ever.

Of the Return of Lies. CAP. 11.
HEretofore we have said, that he unto whom the Lie is given for a repulse of
injury, ought be the Challenger: yet for more certeintie of that saying, we
are diligently to examine what sort of Lies are lawful. It is therefore to be
understood, that the true and proper nature of the Lie, is to repulse Injury,
and whenever it works not that effect, it becomes Injury, and by another
Lie may be returned. Also it is to be noted, that in one selfsame quarrel
as well unto a Denial as an Affirmation, the Lie may be given. The Lie
lawfully given unto an affirmation is that, whereof we have before spoken, as
thus. One man says unto another, He is a Rebel to his Prince: He answers,
Thou lie: and this kind of Lie cannot be avoided, because it is given for
repulse unto an infamy directly offered. But if I, speaking of other do say,
He is an honest man, and one standing by, does give me the Lie: in that case
the Lie shall not be reputed a repulse, but an Injury; and it is lawful for
me to say, that gainsaying the commendation I gave, he lies; because he
encountereth my affirmation, and seems to deny that all men are holden
honest, til proof be made of the contrary. Wherefore it behooves him that
denied the man to be honest, to prove such denial: in the mean time he is
burdened and bound to challenge me.

But let us now speak of Lies given upon the negative which are either
lawful, or may lawfully be returned: as if any man does say of me, That in
such a service of Arms I had not done my duty, and I should answer with the
Lie, that shall be a lawful answer. Yet if a man shall say, That he has not
failed of fidelity unto his Prince, and I say he lies; then is it lawful for
him to answer, Thou lie in saying I lie, and consequently force me to
challenge; because in affirming his own fidelity he does not injury to any
man: but I denying thereof, do greatly wrong him, and therefore reasonably
the Lie to be returned upon me. Now it rests to produce some example, how in
one selfsame quarrel, both upon the affirmative and negative the Lie may be
given, so as neither the one nor the other party has apparent place of
repulse, as in this case.

Two Gentlemen being in the field prepared to fight, do there fall into
disputation, whether the weapons be lawful or not: by mean whereof, the day
is spent in speech, and nothing done. Hereupon a question grew whether the
weapons were reasonably refused or not, the one by affirming them to be
lawful, does burden the other, and he by denying them to be lawful, does
burden him; so as it rests doubtful who ought to challenge.

Thus much touching the nature of Lies, how they are to be offered, repulsed,
or returned. A matter of some difficulty to be understood, yet necessary to
be known of all Gentlemen.

How upon every Lie, the trial of Arms is not necessary. CAP. 12.
ALbeit heretofore has been said, that he who receives the Lie ought to be
Challenger, yet is not our meaning that upon every Lie given, the trial of the
sword should forthwith follow. For seeing the trial by Arms is incerteine,
and the civil trial assured, therefore it behooves every Gentleman to be
justified rather by this, than the other trial. And indeed it is no less
expedient for Gentlemen and all others professing Arms, to know when to put
up, than when to draw their weapons. Who so therefore upon any affirmation
shall be lawfully and orderly offered the Lie (having means to make such
proof) ought by civil and reasonable trial make justification, and not take
sword in hand, till necessity so enforces, and he who finds himself
offered any unjust or unlawful Lie, may either trauerse it, or utterly
disdain it.

Of the form of a Cartell or Letter of Defiance. CAP. 13.
IN such places as public Combats were permitted by Princes, the custom was
that the parties agreed to fight, should challenge one the other, by some
instrument in writing, which they commonly called a Cartel: but that custom
being now discontinued, he who challenges does send some Letter to that
effect, which ought be framed in brief terms, and thereby to express in
short and proper words the effect of the quarrel and injury, be it in words
or deeeds. Also to set down expreslie the particularities of the matter, the
persons, the times, and places, which for the true expressing of the cause are
required, to the end the adverse party may the better determine of his
answer. And for that Combat is a kind of Judgment, it behooves no less
therein, than in civil trial that particular proves and circumstances should
be expressed, and that he who challenges should summon his adversary, and he
that is Defender produce the Lie.

In this writing it also behooves to use al plainnes of words and phrases,
leaving aside eloquence and ambiguitie of speech; for it suffices a man being
offered any injurious speech, do say, Thou lie, without adding any word
thereunto. It is also to be known, that the Defender ought have the election
of the place and weapon. For no reason were it that I should both challenge
another man, and also appoint him to fight with what weapon pleases me. One
thing I think good more to advertise, that it seems unto me a thing very
honest, and worthy a Gentleman, that all speeches and writings of or to an
Enemy, should be in good and honorable terms; for thereby the speaker or
writer shall honor himself, and declare he has to do with a person of
reputation; for otherwise he shall disgrace his own judgment, in meddling with
men unworthy, and such as are unfit to be regarded.

THE SECOND BOOK.
Of Injury and Burden. CAP. 1.
WE have already discoursed what Injury is, and how the same ought be
repulsed: now is to be informed in what cases Princes and supreme Governors
may grant or deny the trial of Combat. I say therefore, that the office of
every Prince moved to grant Combat, is first to consider the nature and
quality of the quarrel, to the end he may assuredly know whether it be of
such importance as requires the trial of the sword, and cannot otherwise be
determined. For it is a rule certain, that every question or quarrel that
may be decided by civil authority and proves, ought not in any wise be tried
in Combat. But for more particular knowledge of this matter, you shall
understand, that we call an act done contrary to reason, Injury, or (as some
do term it) Offense or Wrong: and the Burden, is a certain natural
obligation, whereby a man stands bound to repulse or maintain the matter in
question. Wherefore, whenever we see a man burdened or charged, it is
presently and consequently looked for, that he ought to be a Challenger. It
is also to be known, that otherwhiles one man may do unto another such an
act as may be both an Injury, and a Burden: so may also an Injury be done
without Burden, and a Burden without Injury.

An Injury joined with Burden is thus. If a man shall charge me with an evil
fact never by me committed, whereby (contrary to all reason) he seeks my
slander, hereby he offers me Injury, and the Burden he lays upon me, is,
for that I stand bound to repulse and make answer unto such outrageous words,
and consequently am forced to answer, He lies, whereby I am disburthened,
and lay the burden on him, by which mean I become discharged of mine
obligation, and bind him unto the proof and mainteining of his words, which
is to maintain and be a Challenger. And in handling the matter, this is to be
noted, that I only do burden him without offer of Injury, because I make
this answer upon a just and reasonable cause, only with intent to lay the
Burden on him.

An Injury without Burden is in two sorts, viz. in word or in deed, as thus.
If one man shall charge another in word, with that which is manifestly false;
in that case it is not necessary to make any answer at all, because he who
speaks such words, proves himself an apparent Liar, and therefore not
worthy of so much respect as to be answered; so are those words Injury, but
no Burden. An Injury in deeds without Burden, is, when one man offers
unto an other violence with advantage, or in such evil sort, as the fact
appears to be done contrary to honor and reason; in that case, to what
purpose should the Injured challenge the Iniurer? seeing the matter to be
plain and apparent. But happily it may be said by him that is injured, Shall I
rest without revenge? Thereunto may be answered by Princes, or others having
authority to grant Combat, that to admit trial by Arms is only lawful for
the finding out and justification of truth; but the punishment of wilful acts
contrary to peace, is by civil authority to be performed. And in mine
opinion, whosoever receives an Injury in deeds dishonorablie offered, is
thereby neither dishonored nor burdened: and for revenge of such cowardly and
beastiall offenses, it is allowable to use any advantage or subtlety,
according to the Italian proverb, Ad vna sopercheria, si conuiene vn' altra
sopercheria, and ad un tradimento un altro tradimento, which is, that one
advantage requires another, and one treason may be with another acquitted.

How shameful and dishonorable it is to offer injury with advantage, and
cowardly. CAP. 2.
IT may seem strange that heretofore we have said, that a traitorous Injury
might be in like sort revenged; yet is it very reasonable that so it should
be: and though it were not, yet does he that offers such an Injury incur
apparent Infamy, without burthening him unto whom it is offered. For what
reason can maintain that any man should be worthy of Infamy, that was by
another cowardly and sodeinlie hurt or stricken? Nay, who is he that will not
blame him that offers such an Injury, and acquit him unto whom it was done?
To conclude therefore, I say, the Infamy is due unto him that wilfully does a
dishonorable wrong, not to him that receives it: for no man wants power to
refrain a wicked action, no man wants power to perform his promise, no man
is forced to be a traitor: and therefore, whosoever falls into any such
fault, becomes odious and infamous: besides that, in offending cowardly, he
seems to want virtue and courage required in a Gentleman. By ancient custom
it has therefore been determined, that if any man having committed such
cowardly and foul facts, shall afterward challenge another Gentleman, he may
in respect of the Infamy due for his former doings, be lawfully refused.

I will also advise all Gentlemen to eschew one other vile and evil abuse,
which is thus. A man having offered injurious words, and is lawfully belied, he
may not with a cowardly stroke or touch of a cudgill, or any such like
means, think to be acquitted of the burden, as some men have supposed; yet
the vulgar sort do think that to give a blow, or spit in the face of a man,
and run away, discharges a lawful Lie, which is far otherwise. Mine
opinion therefore is, that a man directly is not discharged by any such act,
but stands still burdened to prove that affirmation, whereupon the Lie was
given him, and consequently must challenge.

That every Lie given, ought not to occasion Combat. CAP. 3.
For So Much as the Lie is not indeed the cause of fight, but the occasion; it
is not necessary that upon every Lie given, Combat should forthwith
follow. For if the fault wherewith a man is accused, be not such as requires
trial in Arms, than does not the Lie given thereupon bind him, because the
quality of the Injury and not of the Lie is to be respected. Therefore in
every law whereby Combats are permitted, the causes are expreslie and
particularly declared, as both by the law of Lombardie and the Emperial
constitutions appears.

For what causes the Combat is to be granted. CAP. 4.
A Thing most certain it is, that to reduce the ancient customs to the use of
present time, were not only hard and difficult, but also impossible:
wherefore omitting to tell of what has been, we will only speak of that
which ought be in this matter observed: I say then that the causes of al
quarrel whereupon it behooves to use the trial of Arms, may be reduced into
two: for it seems to me not reasonable, that any man should expose himself
to the peril of death, save only for such occasions as do deserve death.
Wherefore whenever one man does accuse another of such a crime as meriteth
death, in that case the Combat ought be granted. The second cause of Combat
is Honor, because among persons of reputation, Honor is preferred before life.
Therefore whenever any such crime is imputed, as by the civil law is judged
infamous, the Combat and trial of Arms ought be allowed, if by civil and
ordinary course of law it cannot.

How between Padrins, no fight or quarrel ought to be. CAP. 5.
AT such time as public Combats were by Princes permitted, the custom was,
that those unto whom the field was granted, did bring with them certain
friends to behold the fight, and see that nothing were done contrary to the
agreement and capitulation. For what cause these men were so called I know
not; but some have thought the name of Padrine comes of the latin word Pater,
which signifies father, or of Patrini, which signifies a person, unto whose
charge or tuition another was commended. Howsoever it be, these Padrines in the
time of Combat, performed the same office which Advocates and Pleaders use in
disputation of civil causes. And as they do not use to pay any part of that,
wherein the client is condemned, even so no reason binds that the Padrine
should fight, or be called to perform more than the due of his office, since
the Injuries, the Lies, the Cartels and Defiances are passed between the
Principalls, and the Padrins ought do none otherwise than as Advocates. Thus
much I thought fit to speak of the office of Padrins, because it is often seen,
both in public Combats and private also, that some Gentlemen being chosen to
behold the fight, and see it be equally performed, have not only been the
cause to kindle new quarrel, but also entered thereinto themselves contrary
to honor and reason.

Of Arms both offensive and defensive. CAP. 6.
IT has been before said, that by the law of Lombardie, every Combat
(unless upon quarrel of infidelity) should be tried with shields and
staves, and with no other weapon. But the matter of their Combats was only for
trial of truth, without respect of honor. Howsoever it were, besides that
custom must be received for law, it seems to me that either in public or
private fight, such weapons ought be used as are commonly worn of Gentlemen
and others professing Arms. And touching Arms defensive, it has been also
the use, that as they are thought allowable in war and all general fights,
so in particular trial of Arms, they ought not be rejected; because
Fortitude accompanied with Prudence, is much the more commendable, seeing he
that unwisely or inconsideratlie aduentureth himself, is not to be reputed
valiant but furious: neither is he accounted valiant, that without council or
cause, delights in dangers, but he that never does shun any generous
action, tending to public benefit or his own private reputation. And
Aristotle says, that a valiant man does neither fear all things, nor dare do
all things. For these respects it has ever been thought fit, that in
particular Combats, the fighters should be allowed Arms defensive, and not
perform the same naked and utterly disarmed, with swords and daggers only,
as is in this part of the world now used. And since the peril of life is no
less in particular than in public fight, it seems very reasonable that
defensive Arms should be allowed; yet so as both the Challenger and Defender
be equally armed and weaponed, which in truth ought be at the election of the
Defendant, as heretofore has been discoursed. But because the custom of the
land is (and happily also law forbids that any man should be armed save
only in the war) I think no Gentleman ought refuse to fight disarmed. And
here will I not omit to remember an abuse which hardly is discontinued, I
mean that some English Gentlemen are so obstinatlie addicted to custom, as
notwithstanding they do themselves enter quarrel and be Challengers, yet
will they use that sort of weapon only which pleases themselves. An opinion
contrary unto reason, and the use of all other people, as though ancient use
made that weapon only allowable, which reason will also prove Vice as good as
Virtue, because it is no less ancient.

Of the election of the weapons. CAP. 7.
FOr good and reasonable causes, many advantages are due unto him that is
challenged, because he being accused and constrained to fight, just and true
reason wills that he should enjoy al honest favor. It has been therefore
well determined, that whosoever is Defender, does sufficiently acquit
himself, and ought be reputed victorious, if he be not victored. But on the
other side, he that challenges, must not only escape to be vanquished, but
also vanquish his enemy; for otherwise he shall be reputed as victored, and
lose the quarrel, which is very reasonable, because his office is to prove,
but the Defender is not bound to more than to defend.

Another favor also apperteineth to the Defender, which is, the election of
the weapon, which is also reasonably done, because if another man will
voluntarily call me to trial of the Sword, the choice of the weapon ought of
right to be mine. Yet true it is, that no Defender ought to make election of
other Arms either defensive or offensive, than such as are lawful, and worn
ordinarily by Gentlemen and Soldiers. Therewith also is to be observed, that
if the question whereupon the Combat or fight grows, may be decided by
civil trial, that then no trial of Arms ought be enterprised. Much more
also may be added touching the equality or disequalitie of the persons that
enter into fight, and likewise of the Arms as well defensive as offensive: but
because public Combats are now almost generally forbidden, and in this land
most rarely used, I speak only of those things which are to be known for
the performance of private Combat and fight between particular Gentlemen.

How many ways victory is gained. CAP. 8.
AT such time as public Combats were used within a List, or place specially
appointed for that purpose, there was a Judge indifferently chosen by the
fighters, to see and determine which of them were victorious, and who was
victored. But notwithstanding the discontinuance of those Ceremonies, and the
performance of fight by warrante of Princes Letters Pattents; yet do I think
it not amiss, briefly to set down in what cases men were reputed victorious.

1 It is therefore to be known, that if the Challenger does not vanquish the
Defender in the day of fight before the Sun setting, he is himself to be
judged vanquished, and cannot afterward challenge any other Gentleman to the
Combat. This sort of victory and this privilege is only due unto the
Defender, all other trialls are common and indifferent to both the fighters.

2 The next kind of victory is, when any of the fighters does yield unto his
enemy, either by confessing himself not able to defend, to yield himself
prisoner, or by uttering any other speech tending to submission.

3 The third is, when any of them does expreslie deny or unsay that he
affirmed, and the words whereon the quarrel grows renouncing the quarrel.

4 Fourthly, he who runs away, and abandoneth the Lists or field where the
fight is performed, ought to lose the victory, and be adjudged as vanquished,
and this is the most base and dishonorable sort of vanquishment.

5 He is also to be without victory and vanquished, that is slain within the
Listes or field: yet is this sort of vanquishing least dishonorable and
infamous, although by ancient custom, to such men as were slain in public
Combats, no burial was granted among Christian bodies.

What was ancientlie due unto such as were victorious in public Combats.
CAP. 9.
ALbeit I am not ignorant that this discourse is little or nothing pertinent to
private Combat or quarrel: yet for that it concerns a matter very pleasant
to us, and glorious for those that have been victorious, I will briefly set
down what was due by ancient order of Arms, unto such Gentlemen as in
public Combat were victorious.

1 Whosoever was vanquished within the Listes, was the prisoner of him that did
vanquish. To him also was due all Arms both offensive and defensive, garments
and horse, with all furniture brought thither either for ornament or use.

2 The person of him that was vanquished, was by honorable custom given unto
the Prince of the place, or else unto some other Prince whom he served or loved;
but this was done by use, and not of duty.

3 The vanquished also might be compelled to pay the charges of the vanquisher.

4 The vanquished might be forced to pay ransom no less, than if he had been
a prisoner of the war. But if the prisoner or vanquished did serve the
vanquisher the space of five years in services meet for a Gentleman, than
ought he be set at liberty freely without payment. And if in the mean time
he were employed in any base act or service unworthy his degree, than was it
lawful for him to escape and break prison. Or if it happened that during the
imprisonment, any land or other wealth came unto the prisoner, yet was it not
lawful for the victorious to increase the ransom.

5 If the victorious did die within the time that the victored was a prisoner,
than should his heir have the same title and interest.

6 If a prisoner were suffered to go at liberty upon his faith given, he ought
in any wise return whenever he was called, unless the victorious did become
a Traitor to their common Prince, or were excommunicate, or that between the^
were some new enmity: for in those causes, it was lawful not to return.

7 If being in this sort at liberty, he happened to become a Prince or Lord,
then should he not be bound to return, but pay ransom only.

8 If during the time of imprisonment he were not well used, he was not bound
to return, yet ought he pay a convenient ransom.

9 If the prisoner did happen to save his taker from any great peril during
the imprisonment, he ought by the law to be forthwith set at liberty.

THE THIRD BOOK.
What sorts of men ought not be admitted to trial of Arms. CAP. 1.
For So Much as the trial of Arms apperteineth only to Gentlemen, and that
Gentilitie is a degree honorable, it were not fit that any persons of meaner
condition, should thereunto be admitted. Wherefore, as the Judges of civil
trials, do ordinarily reject the testimony of such as are accounted
Infamous; even so in Martial trial, a person honorable ought not by men of
base quality be accused: for how can he charge another with any crime, that
has himself committed an offense against his own reputation.

1 It has been therefore ordained and determined, that no man having committed
treason against his Prince or Country, shall be admitted.

2 He also may be repulsed that has had intelligence or conference with the
enemy of his Prince or Country, or that being taken of them, does there
remain, having means to return unto his Princes service.

3 He that becomes a Spy or explorator for the Enemy, or that takes an oath
against his Prince, or that takes a Princes Pay and departs before he has
served the full time.

4 He that abandoneth the Army of his Prince, and flees unto the Enemy, or
being discharged does go unto the Enemy in the time of Skirmish or fight,
shall be reputed as infamous, and also a Traitor.

5 He that abandoneth the Ensign of his Prince or Captain, or that either by
day or night shall maliciously depart from the place of his charge about his
Princes person, or in the Camp.

6 Among these we will account all Thieves, Beggars, Bawdes, Victuallers,
persons excommunicate, Usurers, persons banished the Army, and every other
man exercising an occupation or trade, unfit and unworthy a Gentleman or
Soldier.

7 Finally, whosoever is defamed of any notable crime, or is by the law of
the land not admitted to bear witness, may be numbered among them that
lawfully are repulsed; these men, I say, challenging any Gentleman or Soldier,
ought not only be refused, but of every honest person to be abhorred,
because in fighting with men of such condition, a man of good reputation does
equal himself unto persons utterly unworthy. Yet true it is, that whosoever
repulseth a person for cause of Infamy, must assuredly know, that he has
been for such crimes condemned, or at the least the same is a thing so
notorious, as the party repulsed cannot deny it. But if any such infamous man
be challenged by a Gentleman or Soldier, he may not after be refused, unless
that after challenge he commits some infamous fact, which is to be observed
as well in the Challenger as the Defender.

Whether a Bastard may challenge a Gentleman to Combat. CAP. 2.
FOr that by law no Bastard can inherit the lands and honors of his supposed
father, it may be reasonably doubted, whether he be of such condition as may
challenge a Gentleman to trial of Arms. Notwithstanding, for that such
impediment proceeds not from the Bastard himself, and that no man ought
justly be repulsed saving such as are condemned, or infamed for their own
viletie, me thinks that Bastardie ought not to disable a man to be admitted
unto Combat: and S. Hierome says, that the fault in birth of such men, is not
their own fault, but theirs that did beget them. Also Chrysostom writes
thus, we ought not to be ashamed of the vice of our Parents, but endeavor our
selves unto virtue. Whereupon we conclude, that every Bastard having well and
virtuously served in the war, or that for his good merit has aspired to
bear charge of reputation in the Army, ought be received to fight with any
private Gentleman or Soldier, because men so borne, have not only been
oftentimes advanced to honor, but they and their posterity also, have atteined
and continued in high dignity and greatest estimation.

True it is, that men so borne, cannot maintain themselves to be Gentlemen by
birth, and therefore directly must not claim such title, or enter the trial
of Arms, and therefore in that respect may be repulsed, not as infamous, but
as ignoble, which defect either by valorous endeavor in Arms, or virtuous
study in learning may be supplied.

Also all such Bastards as have long served loyally in their Princes Court,
and that by privilege of their Prince are made legitimate, or has lived
orderly among other Gentlemen, in place of reputation, may not be repulsed.

Of Restitution of Honor. CAP. 3.
ALbeit every Sovereign Prince has power to pardon disloyalty, treason, and
every other offense committed against his person, Crown or dignity, and can
also restore unto the party pardoned, his lands and his offices, with any
other favor: yet ca^ he not undo that is done, nor bring to pass that to be
well done, which is already evil done, nor that a mind infected with Infamy,
should be clean and void of dishonor, and consequently (notwithstanding
restitution) the Prince has still just cause to be suspicious of such a man's
fidelity, as is apt to be drawn to dishonest actions, and every other
Gentleman should hold him in evil conceit.

Moreover, touching the power and authority of Princes, in this case it
seems that as they cannot bereave the good men of their goodness, so can they
not take from the evil their evil thoughts, seeing their jurisdiction
extends unto the wealth and persons of Subjects, but over the minds of men
they have no power. My Prince can make me at his pleasure rich or poor, but to
make me good or bad is not in his power, for that apperteineth only to Gods
grace and mine own endeavor.

It may therefore be inferred, that if a man restored after the committing of
any notorious evil fact, shall challenge another Gentleman to trial of Arms,
he may be reasonably repulsed. Yet am I of opinion, that the restitution
should be of force in the children and posterity of the person infamed and
condemned, as they that ought not suffer the punishment due to the offenses of
another, chiefly in respect of Baptism, whereby all the sin of forefathers
is cleansed.

Of the disequalitie of Gentlemen. CAP. 4.
BEfore we enter into consideration of this matter, I think good to
advertise, that as there be diverse sorts of men that may not challenge others,
so are there some that ought not be challenged of any. The first of them is
Clerks, or Ecclesiastical persons, professing religion. The other sort is
Doctors, with all Students, and such men as are only given to literature and
knowledge. But to return unto disequalitie of noble persons, I say that the
true nobility of men, is Virtue, and that he is truly noble that is
virtuous, be he borne of high or of low Parents. And the more highly he be
borne, the worse reputation he meriteth, if he cannot continue the honor left
him by his Ancestors. Chrysostom says, what honor is it to be well borne,
being defiled with vile conditions: or what hurts base parentage to him, that
is with gentle manners adorned? Who so vaunteth of his Ancestors, seems
without any good thing of his own. Seneca says, that who so will truly judge
what worthiness is in man, must consider of him naked, laying aside his livings
and titles of honor, with all other favors of fortune. He must also imagine
him without body, and then weigh of what value or excellency he is in mind,
because nobility is placed in the mind, and in the mind it appears.

Now to speak of disequalitie, I say that albeit Emperors, Kings, Princes,
great Lords, and mean also, are comprised within the name of Gentlemen and
Soldiers, yet is there among them such inequality, as no Gentleman of what
title soever, may be compared unto a King, nor any Soldier unto an Emperor,
whereof we will speak hereafter more at large.

Touching the disequalitie of private nobility, thus is it to be discoursed.
All Gentlemen are either without office, either else they have office or
dignity, as the government of Towns, Countries, Ambassages, or commandments
in war. Who ever of them has any office or employment, either it is given
him for time or life. If he be an officer for time, and is occasioned to
answer in Arms, he may defer the Co^bat till the expiration of his time in
office.

If the office be for life, and the quality thereof such as makes him
Superior to the adversary, he may fight by Champion.

If such an officer be not Superior to the enemy, he ought ask leave of his
Prince, and not obteining it, shall without license go unto the place of
Combat, and with Arms answer the Enemy; for the obligation of honor is to
be preferred before all other. Whosoever is borne noble (under which word is
comprised all sorts of nobility and gentilitie) is equal to any other
Gentleman of private condition. Note here, that in saying a Gentleman borne, we
mean he must be descended from three degrees of gentry, both on the mothers
and fathers side, such is the opinion of Paris.

A Gentleman descended of the most noble house, not having jurisdiction or
commandment, may be challenged of any private or particular Gentleman. Also in
respect that the profession of Arms is honorable, a Soldier that has long
served without reproach, ought be accounted a Gentleman.

Also a Scholar having continued the study of good learning, and is aspired
to the degrees of schools, cannot be denied the title of gentry.

A simple Soldier of honest fame, may fight with any other Soldier, Corporal,
Sergeant, or other officer, the Captain excepted, and he also may be
challenged to answer by Champion.

Every Captain may challenge another Captain, unless their charges be such
as the one can command the other, and this rule must serve through all degrees
of Soldiers, both on horseback and foot: yet is it to be understood, that men
at Arms being the most honorable sort of Soldiers and in continual pay,
(being for the most part Gentlemen) may not be refused to fight with any
private Captain of footmen.

It may be also that a Captain of footmen should fight with a Captain of
horsemen, were it not that those charges are given to Noble men, and the charge
of men at Arms to the most Noble: yet is consideration to be had as well of
their birth as their charges. For the Captain in meaner place, may be so
honorably borne, as he ought not be repulsed: which respect is also to be had
among Capteines, both on horseback and foot, and likewise among all horsemen,
and Soldiers on foot in particular.

Of Injury done with advantage. CAP. 5.
HEretofore has been said, that no Injury offered with advantage, ought to
burden him in reputation unto whom the same was offered, and that such
Injuries may in like sort be revenged, which being a thing very natural and
reasonable, needs no further proof. Notwithstanding, to the intent each man
may be fully informed what Advantage is, we think fit somewhat to say
thereof.

Advantage in general is, when one man does injury unto another, so, and in
such time and place as the Injured cannot be revenged: but to speak thereof in
particular, thus may it be said for example.

If one man being armed does assault another disarmed, or that he be better
armed, that we call advantage.

If a man in office or place of dignity, having about him friends or servants,
does offer injury to another of meaner estate, that is (likewise) Advantage.

If two or more men, do hurt or strike another, so as the man hurt is not able
to make present revenge, that is also Injury with advantage.

By these few examples, may all other aduantagious Injuries be conceived: but
therewith is to be remembered, that the dishonor and burden of such acts do
apperteine unto the Iniurer, and the injury only rests upon the Injured
without burden, unless he show apparent signs of cowardice: whereupon may
be inferred, that no Injury with advantage does occasion any necessary
quarrel, since no man is necessarily bound to challenge; but only he that
stands charged and burdened. For if an Injury with advantage did burden
the reputation of the Injured, then were it easy for every coward to burden
the most valiant man alive, because such Injuries are most safely offered. It
seems therefore good in this case to disstinguish the nature of aduantagious
Injuries, which may be in this manner.

Either the Injury with advantage is offered in presence of other men that can
bear witness thereof, or else it is offered out of presence of others.

In the first case, the testimony of witnesses will make the fact punishable
by law and civil trial, which is the true revenge, for (as has been often
said) the trial of Arms is not allowed, but in such cases as the civil
proves cannot appear.

If the Injury be offered where no man can witness the manner thereof, then
rests it in the choice of the Injured, either to be revenged by challenge,
which is the more honorable, or with the like advantage. At such time as
Princes were pleased to grant license for the trial of reputation in public
Combat, whosoever was known to have offered this sort of Injury (with all
others his Aiders and Abettors) were published and proclaimed as persons
Infamous. What has been said of these Injuries in deeds, is likewise to be
understood where they are offered in words. Note also that an Injury received
without advantage, either by word or deed, may not be discharged with an
Injury of words or deeds done with advantage, as thus.

A blow given by hand without advantage, is not truly discharged with ten
blows of the hand or cudgel with advantage. For it is not reasonable that a
dishonest fact done with advantage, should reuerse an honest fact done in good
sort and manfully. The cause why Injury with advantage does not burden the
Injured, is, because no law in the world commands things impossible.

Of Injuries evil offered. CAP. 6.
ONe other sort of Injury there is not far unlike unto the former, yet
somewhat diverse from it, which for the present we will call Injuries in evil
sort offered, as thus.

If one man does strike another sodeinlie behind his back, that Injury is not
done with any advantage of company or weapon, and therefore is not properly
said to be an aduantagious Injury: yet is it not manfull or honest, but vile
and cowardly, and the more if the Iniurer having given the blow, does run
away.

If a man does cast a Dagger, Sword, or other thing of offense, and therewith
hurt, that may be also reputed an Injury in evil sort.

If a man bearing displeasure toward another, will cause his friend or servant
to strike him; that may be also reputed an Injury evil offered.

Also, if I in words shall speak injuriously or slanderously of another man
in his absence, or cause others so to do; that may be also accounted an Injury
evil offered and out of time.

Of Satisfaction. CAP. 7.
MAny men do hold opinion, that Injuries committed by deeds, cannot by words
be satisfied. But this matter is not to be considered simply, by comparing
words unto deeds, but by the weight and greatness of the dishonor that is
received by the fact and the words, and also of the shame which I offer unto my
self and is offered by others. For whether do we think a Gentleman less
commendable that traiterouslie hurts another, or him that by such means
receives the harm, which may be also said of him that offends with
advantage, or that gives a hurt in evil sort. In mine opinion there is no
doubt to answer this question, because in ordinary reason the offender ought
to be blamed, and not he that is offended, as has been heretofore discoursed.
Notwithstanding, if I having done such an act, do confess the injurious
manner thereof, and say that without cause the same was by me committed, and
consequently desire pardon, there is no reason but that he who received the
injury should rest satisfied. For I know no offense so great, as is
unpardonable upon such submission, and the more for that the nature of all
generous minds is inclined to compassion and forgiveness.

Yet contrary to my conceit, some others do hold, that if I have done any
injurious deed, no satisfaction suffices, unless I freely yield my self
into the hands of him who is injured, and stand at his mercy; which seems
unto me a course very doubtful and unlike to receive good. For if the
Injured with his own hand shall do any thing to his satisfaction, in so doing
he shows no courtesy, and consequently doubleth the anger and quarrel. Or
if without other demonstration, forgiveness be taken as a satisfaction, then
will the matter rest suspicious, as a thing agreed on before, and prejudicial
unto the reputation of him that is injured. But true it is, if a man should
unadvisedly or rashly offend me, and presently knowing his error, fall down
at my feet, deliver me his weapon and pray pardon; in that case there is no
doubt, but that I ought rest satisfied, and he freed from suspicion. But if the
matter be not at the first thus handled, and the blood cooled, then seems it
hard how to compass a peace by way of remission.

Now to confirm that was before said, that words are of effect sufficient to
satisfy an Injury by deed, I say if a man greatly harmed by another, does
write that he intends to prove the hurt received of him to be injuriously
and vngentlemanlie done, and the Iniurer will answer and confess he has
indeed done evil, and an act not justifiable; surely no reason would that
afterward any quarrel or obligation of honor should remain. The like
satisfaction ought be received from the mouth of the Iniurer, and therefore
conclude, that Injuries by deeds may with words be recompensed.

What satisfaction is to be given for an Injury by Deeds. CAP. 8.
BEcause the ground and substance of this matter consists in knowing the
truth; he that has done wrong, ought in reason to confess it; and he that
has right, should maintain it: therefore when any man justly offended has
taken a revenge convenient according to the quality of the offense, to make a
peace betwixt these parties, the matter must be thus handled. He that has made
the revenge shall say: Very sorry I am to have had occasion to use any act of
revenge, and without that occasion, if I had done thus, I should not have done
well, and as a Gentleman ought to do, or other words to like effect. After which
words pronounced, the other party knowing in conscience that he gave the
occasion (confessing his fault) ought to rest satisfied, and so will, unless
he be a body void of reason. Likewise, if two Gentlemen upon some unkind
words do draw, and the one hurt the other; to make them friends, the way is
thus. He that gave the hurt or wound shall say, that the Gentleman wounded,
behaved himself as a valiant man ought, and although he received the hurt yet
his virtue did sufficiently appear. Upon these or like speeches, a peace may
reasonably ensue with reputation to both; for the one by giving the hurt has
gained honor, and the other receiving praise of his enemy is acquit of evil
imputation; whereby all men shall know, that both the one and the other has
tried himself a manly and valiant Gentleman.

If one man does strike or offer violence unto the other, and presently run
away; or if the party offended by any other mean, cannot be presently
revenged: yet in that case, if he lay hand on his weapon and endeavor to make
revenge, he shall be reputed valiant, and the other a coward. But to make peace
between them, the only way is, that he who offered the violence, shall in
plain terms confess the manner how it was done, and pray pardon. And
although it may seem contrary to the courage of man, not to maintain that is
begun; yet when he considers in his own conscience, that the act was
injurious and dastardly, it shall be better christianlie to repent, than
wilfully to persist against all truth and reason.

If one man does chance to hurt another unawares, or unknowing him, as
sometimes it happens in the night or dark places, the amends must be to say,
I know you not, for knowing, I would not have so done, nor might so do without
offering wrong and discourtesie, and therefore pray you hold me excused.

Sometimes it happens that one challenges an other to have stricken him, and
the other does deny that so he did: in that case the satisfaction must be
thus. The party charged to have stricken, shall say (if so the truth be) Indeed
I did not strike you, and if I had (having no such cause) I might justly be
accused of Injury. After this sort, many other questions may be ordered, using
such words and reasons, as to discreet Gentlemen shall be thought convenient.
And here I will remember all Gentlemen, making profession of Honor and Truth,
that they should not in any wise maintain any unjust words or wrongful
action. But being by choler or other occasion entered into Injury, they ought
rather reform their error, than obstinatlie continue to the offense of their
own conscience and knowledge. Neither can it be dishonorable to confess that
which is true, nor be sorry for misdooing.

Other means of Pacification and composition. CAP. 9.
THe first of these is, that as well the Iniurer as the Injured should be
drawn into the presence of some honorable personage, and before any act of
submission or repetition of words before passed, to agree and refer the order
and ending of all questions, unto one man indifferently chosen by consent of
both parties. That being done, the man unto who^ this office is committed,
shall particularly and a part entreat with the Iniurer to affirm what he
will say on his behalf. Then calling the Injured, shall say and assure him,
that the Iniurer has made a good and reasonable satisfaction, in every thing
that may be prejudicial to the honor or reputation of the Injured: And
therefore require as well the one as the other to stand satisfied, and repute
themselves in such estate and condition, as they were before the quarrel was
commenced. This order has been oftentimes used, and satisfaction so made,
thought effectual: for sometimes it proves a thing very difficult to bring
the adversaries together face to face, before a Judge or other person of
authority: sometimes also being met, they fall into new quarrel upon new
occasion: either else before they come, a doubt will arise how they shall be
accompanied, and whether they shall come armed or without weapon. Another while
there grows difficulty upon the words of satisfaction. It has been also
seen, that in such conference there has passed some blows of the hand,
weapon, foot, or other violence, whereby the enmity was rather increased,
than appeased. In which respects, this order is many times used.

Another way is this, that some person of great authority should call the
parties before him, and take a truce until he shall at more leisure consider
of the quarrel, enioyning them in the mean time not to speak or do any
thing either against other: which order is covertly a truce perpetual.

Another way is, that a Prince or personage of authority, should persuade with
the parties to put the quarrel into his hand, and consent to rest satisfied
with that he shall upon his honor determine. Diverse other indirect means have
been devised for the compounding and appeasing of Injuries, which I leave to
the discretion of wise and valiant Gentlemen.

Of satisfaction to be given upon words. CAP. 10.
IT has been already said, that the ground of all satisfaction is truth,
which cannot be denied: wherefore whenever one man has uttered any untrue
imputation of another, he may without discredit confess the thing to be
otherwise than he spoke, saying in his own excuse (unless the truth be
contrary) that which I said I thought then to be true. Or thus. That I said,
was told me of others. Or thus. What I said was in my choler. These speeches
tending to show the truth to be otherwise than was said, the party offended is
disburthened.

If a man has given the Lie to another, and after does know the words
whereupon the Lie was given to be true: he may in that case without reproach
revoke the Lie, and thereby make satisfaction. And if happily he make
difficulty to use such a reuoca^ion directly, then may he say, I confess the
words to be true whereof our quarrel grows, either else he may repeat the
words, and therewithal allow them.

Another way to procure satisfaction is, That he who gave the Lie shall say or
write unto the party belied to this effect: I pray you advertise me by this
bearer, with what intent you spoke those words of injury, whereupon I gave you
the Lie. The other will answer, I spoke them in choler, or with no meaning to
offend you. Thereunto may be answered by him that gave the Lie, thus. If your
words were said only in anger, and no intent to challenge me, then do I
assure you that my Lie given shall not burden you, for I acknowledge you to be
a true speaker, and a Gentleman of good reputation; wherefore my desire is,
that the speech passed between us may be forgotten. This form of
pacification may serve in many cases, and at sundry occasions.

Sometimes it happens, that a man repenting a speech evil spoken of another,
will after deny that any such words were spoken; which seems no full
satisfaction, unless he add these words: I spoke it not, or if I had spoken
it, I should have said untruely. These or like speeches are in this case very
convenient: for if another man speaks evil of me, by the denial of his
speech he shameth himself, but not satisfies me, unless he also affirm mine
innocence. But a Gentleman having indeed said any thing, ought rather
confess, than deny what was said: which satisfaction I think not
dishonorable, but honest, as proceeding from a Christian conscience.

If a man has said any thing that is true, yet unfit to be spoken, he ought
not deny that so he said: but for satisfaction must say thus. I spoke the
words without intent to offend, and therefore pray pardon: for indeed to speak
a truth with intent to offend, does give just cause of offense.

How the giving of satisfaction is a thing not reproachful. CAP. 11.
NOw for that satisfaction is commonly made by means of Unsaying, (for by
that term we will call as well every reuocation of words, as confession to
have done evil) it may be objected that if unsaying be so reproachful, as for
it a man may be discredited, and of other Gentlemen repulsed; then if I have
spoken untruely, or done evil by unsaying or denying thereof, I am to incur
infamy. But for answer of that objection, I say, that great difference there
is between unsaying in the Listes or fields by force of Arms, and that
unsaying which is uttered voluntarily for the love of truth; for the one is
spoken for fear of death, and the other by persuasion of reason. For he that
persisteth to maintain evil does condemn himself, as a man that would fight
contrary to justice: but the other shows he will not take Arms for any
cause, but that which is just. And as the one is the part of an evil and
wicked person: so is the other a sign of sincerity and loyal meaning. For
since there is no man living faultles, yet he that knows his error and
repents, is most to be excused, endeavoring to make satisfaction Therefore
that Gentleman who knows his own fault, and labors to amend it, does not
only deserve to be excused, but is also worthy much praise in offering such
satisfaction as apperteineth to reason, and the office of a just and true
Christian. To conclude therefore, I say, albeit the vulgar sort do think, that
satisfaction is a sign of cowardice: yet who so choseth to fight against
reason and truth, ought be reputed rather a beast than a Christian, and a
furious fool rather than a reasonable creature.

THE FOVRTH BOOK.
Of Nobility, accompanied with great dignity. CAP. 1.
THe Imperial laws have determined that no man of base calling, ought be
admitted to fight with any Gentleman or other person professing Arms: yet for
better conceiving what Nobilie and Gentilitie is, it behooves to know, that
Nobility is (as some have defined it) ancient riches accompanied with
virtuous conditions. Others not allowing that opinion affirm, that riches,
being of their own nature vile, do nothing help toward Nobility; and
therefore concludes, that virtue alone suffices. Bartholus says, that riches
do help to attain unto Nobility; but to preserve it, Virtue only has
power. Others do think, that Nobility proceeds from the ancient honor,
fame, and title of Predecessors; because otherwise a bondsman being virtuous,
might challenge that honor. Some men also have thought, that as before God he
is most noble and and worthy, unto whom is given most grace; even so he is
most honorable among men, whom Princes or laws have enhabled unto dignity.
Howsoever it be, most sure it is, that no man gives unto himself any title,
but it behooves him to receive it from others. Therefore Bartholus concludes,
that to be made noble, it is requisite the Prince do bestow some sort of
dignity, or title upon the person that is ennobled, to the end he may be
known from the Plebeiall people: but we say that men may be reputed noble
three ways. First, by nature or descent of Ancestors, which is the vulgar
opinion. Secondly, for virtue only, which the Philosophers affirm.
Thirdly, by mixture of ancient gentle race with Virtue, which is indeed the
true and most commendable kind of Nobility: for seeing man is a creature
reasonable, he ought be called man, in respect of his own virtue, and not the
virtue of others; which moved Ulysses to say unto Ajax, boasting of Auncesters.

Et genus, and Proauos, and quae non fecimus ipsi,
Vix ea nostra voco etc.
But for better manifestation that natural Nobility mixed with Virtue is most
true and perfect, thus may it be proved. The almighty God has created all
things both in generality and specialitie, with a certain excellency and
bounty, one more perfect than the other, one noble, another ignoble. For among
stones some are precious, others of no virtue, and of the better sort of them,
some more or less precious and orient: even so among living creatures both in
generality and specialitie, we find some courteous and gentle, others rude
and void of virtue. Much more is the difference of nature in men, among who^
the eternal God has dispensed his grace to some more, and to some less,
according to his divine will and pleasure. Wherefore they seem to err much,
that think Gentilitie in nature has not any force, when experience proves
that of one raze and progeny are commonly wise, just, valiant, and temperate
men; of another, simple, unjust, cowardly, and intemperate persons.
Notwithstanding, for that we find in ordinary observation, that neither the
horse of excellent courage, does always beget another of like quality, nor
that the virtuous man has ever children resembling himself, we do not
(having proof of their degeneration) esteem either the one or the other:
which moved Iuuenal to say, Malo Pater tibi Thersites, dummodo tu sis
AEacidae similis, Vulcaniaque arma capessas,
Quam te Thersitae similem producat Achilles.


Seeing then that either by natural instinct, nurture or endeavor, some men
are more virtuous than others, therefore ought they be reputed more gentle,
noble, and worthy honor, than are those which are void of noble Auncesters,
good education, and industry. For albeit no rule is so general or certain,
but sometime receives exception; yet appears it that nature in her own
operation, does seldom digress from the order thereof. The Falcon never or
very rarely brings forth other bird than a Falcon. The Greihound engenders
a whelpe like unto himself. Nevertheless, if either that bird in shape
resembling her damme, has not in her like virtue: or that whelpe does prove
in delight diverse from his sire, they thereby become either contemned, or
little esteemed. Even so is it among men descending from Auncesters of honor
and virtue: for if neither by celestial grace, learning, nor endeavor they
aspire unto the habit of virtue, then become they thereby unfit for all
public action, unprofitable to themselves, and consequently disdained, or at
the least lightly regarded, what pedigree, Arms, or badges soever are to
warrant their antiquity or nobility: wherefore eftsoons concluding I say
with the Poet.

Tota licet veteres exornent vndique cerae
Atria, nobilitas sola est atque vnica virtus.
Paulus aut Cossus aut Drusus moribus esto,
Hos ante effigies maiorum pone tuorum
Praecedant ipsas illi te consule virgas.
Dic mihi Teucrorum proles, animalia muta
Quis generosa putet nisi fortia? nempe volucrem
Sic laudamus aequum, facili cui plurima palma
Feruet, and exultat rauco victoria circo.
Nobilis hic, quocunque venit de gramine, cuius
Clara fuga ante alios, and primus in aequore puluis.
Whether a quarrel between two Emperors may be decided by particular
Combat. CAP. 2.
IT happened the Imperial seat being void, the Electors named unto that
dignity two Princes, not by general consent, but by deuisio^ of voices, the
one party chosing Alfonso king of Spain, the other Richard Duke of Cornwall
brother to the King of England. These Princes claiming the Empire, the one
challenged the other to try the right by Combat: whereupon grew a question,
whether persons of so high calling ought be admitted to fight in Combat.
Thereunto is said, that for so much as the Empire in the beginning was gotten by
Arms and virtue, and that the execution of all justice rests in Arms, it
seems an Empire in that sort gained, to be more honorable, than if it were
given by election. Besides that, in such trial, the victorious enjoys it by
divine judgment. And for example that Empires have been so judged, we read
that the Romans being in war with the Albanois, it was by consent of the one
and the other people agreed, that three brethren of the one party called
Horatij, should fight with three of the enemies who were also brethren, called
Curiatij. These men being brought together, after long and doubtful fight, the
victory fell unto the Romans, and the Albanois (according unto agreement)
willingly yielded their Country unto the Romans government. On the contrary
may be alleged, that for so much as the weldooing of the whole Empire,
consists upon the life of the Emperor, he ought not to fight in person. But
this is to be understood of an Emperor already possessed and invested, for
if the election be doubtful, then to avoid a public war and effusion of
blood, it seems very reasonable, that two Princes making claim, ought be
admitted to trial of Arms, so long as no other title or interest appears.

Whether a King may challenge an Emperor to Combat. CAP. 3.
THe ancient Emperors of Room were of so great puissance, and had under them
so many Monarchies and Kingdoms, as well near the chiefest part of the world
was unto them subject, and the Princes of those ages were reputed either
Subjects, Vassals, or Tributaries unto the Emperors. In which respect, it was
thought unfit that the Emperor should vouchsafe to fight with any King or
Prince of what state or quality soever. It appears also, that the honor and
respect borne toward them was excessive, because the civil law does call the
Emperor Lord of the world, affirming he has jurisdiction over Kings and all
Princes; yea there wants not of those, that have named him GOD upon the
earth, and consequently reasonable that he should refuse to fight in Combat
with any King or other Potentate. On the contrary side may be alleged, that
the dignity and title of Kings is more ancient, than that of Emperors, and
that they have the like sovereignty over men. For well we know that Aeneas,
Romulus, and Numa, governed in Room many and many years, before that Julius
Caesar usurped the title of Emperor, Nevertheless, Lancislao King of Hungary
challenging the Emperor, was repulsed as unworthy. It happened also, that
another King contending with the Emperor for the Kingdom of Polonia, the said
King did challenge the Emperor to Combat, as before that time Carlo Martello
the son of Carlo the second had done for trial of the title of Hungary,
which he claimed by descent from his mother.

The said King of Hungary (who was then possessed) being of person puissant,
did condescend to fight with Carlo Martello a young man of twenty years, and
inexpert in Arms, yet indeed rightful heir. These Princes resolved to make
trial by Arms upon a day certain, and appointed the King of England to be
their Judge, and they to perform the fight in a certain Island of his, which
was done, and Carlo Martello became victorious, and took from the Hungarian
King his helmet, which had a cheine hanging at the same, which helmet Carlo
Martello and all his successors used as a badge. But for resolution of this
matter thus we conclude, that Princes or Kings having dependence of the
Empire, may be repulsed to fight with the Emperor: but a King sovereign,
acknowledging no Superior, and holding his Dominion of GOD and his own sword
only, may challenge and fight with any Emperor.

Of the Equality and disequalitie of great Nobility, and of the privileges
due to all men professing Arms. CAP. 4.
A King uncrowned may lawfully challenge a King crowned, unless the King
uncrowned be unlawfully aspired, or a Tyrant. The number of Christian Kings
are 14 of whom only four were auncientlie crowned by the Pope, that is, the
French King, the King of England, the King of Jerusalem, and the King of Sisil.
All the other Kings were crowned by their own Prelates Thus says Paris.

An Earl being a Prince absolute, and not subject unto the Empire, or any
other Potentate, may refuse to fight with any person being a subject,
notwithstanding he has the title of Prince, Duke, or Marquize. Here is to be
noted, that these titles of honor were at the first given in office, as the
title of Duke was proper unto him that was a General of the Army. A Marquize
was he unto whom the confine or Marches of a Country or Kingdom was
committed. An Earl or Count was a Judge or Commander in Peace, and of them in
the ancient Emperors service were diverse, as the Countes Palantine, were as
stewards of the Emperors house, of his Court, or Stable, and every of them
might challenge any Prince, Duke, or Marquize being a subject; because they are
in respect of subjection, reputed none other than Barons.

A Gentleman well borne and descended from Parentage of four degrees, may
fight with any Earl or Baron, in case of treason to his Prince or Country,
and also murder and infidelity, because they are (besides their dignity)
none other than Gentlemen, and Gentilitie or Nobility is hereditarie and
cannot be taken away, but Dignity may. But in other quarrels of less
importance, the Earl in respect of his dignity may fight by Champion; but in
the cases aforesaid he shall fight in person, unless he be aged, lame, or
otherwise disabled.

A Captain General of an Army Imperial or Royal, may not be challenged by
any Gentleman or Lord; neither ought the Governor of any City, Town, or
Castle, because no public commandment may be abandoned for private respect.
The like is to be understood of Ambassadors, who in regard of the place they
hold, may, during their Commission, repulse the challenge of any Gentleman or
other subject whatsoever.

A Soldier baselie borne, having lived in continual exercise of Arms by the
space of ten years, without committing any disobedience, or other
reproachful act, ought be admitted to fight with any Gentleman borne.

A Gentleman, who either by his own fault or his Auncestor, has committed any
treason against his Prince, may be repulsed to fight with any other Gentleman,
unless the said offender or his Auncestor were restored in blood, or is in
descent three degrees from the Auncestor that was attainted.

A Gentleman that is known a Spy for the Enemy, or bewraieth the secrets of
his own Princes Camp, abandoneth his Ensign, or commits any other
Military offense, may be repulsed to fight with every other Gentlemen of good
fame and reputation. And by the ancient custom, men blotted with such note,
might not live in any city or town where the Emperor or other Prince
remained.

A Gentleman that has made profession of Arms by the space of twenty years
in the Court or Camp of his Prince, without infamy or reproach, may
(notwithstanding he be dismissed, retired or cassed) fight with any other
Gentleman that lives in present Pay and exercise of Arms.

A Gentleman having aspired unto any title or dignity, and is either in
respect of age or infirmity retired to his own house, ought nevertheless to
enjoy all his honors, and shall be ever (without committing dishonorable fact)
reputed worthy the honor he received in Court or Camp, and fight with any
other Gentleman whatsoever.

An Artificer following the Camp, and exercising his Art or Mystery
(notwithstanding he be also in Pay) may be repulsed to fight with any priuare
Soldier that makes particular profession and exercise of Arms.

No man under the degree of a Gentleman ought be received or allowed for a man
at Arms on horseback: for by the Imperial laws the Regiment of Lances, was
called Equestris ordo, and they whom we call Light horsemen, were named Celeri.

Certain Questions, Opinions, and judgments upon accidents happening in
trialls and exercise of Arms. CAP. 5.
1 IF two men at Arms do covenant to fight on horseback, and run ten
courses with sharp Lances, and that he who worst performs those courses
should be judged victored and prisoner to the other: It happens that at the
second course the one of them falls from his horse, and sodeinlie recovering
to horsback offers to perform the rest of the courses. The question is,
whether it be lawful for him so to do, or by the fall be reputed a prisoner?

Whereunto is answered, that in a Challenge for life and death, no man ought
be accounted vanquished unless he be slain, or forced with his own mouth
to yield or deny those words whereupon the quarrel grows: yet otherwise it
is, when the Challenge or Combat is for Honor only, love of Ladies, or
exercise of Arms, because in that case (notwithstanding the Runners be
determined upon a certain number of courses) yet if at the first, or after
(before those courses be all performed) any of them do fall, he that
receives the fall shall lose the honor, and the other depart with victory.

2 Two Gentlemen being come into the field to fight for life, the one in
fighting happens to fall, the other presently sits upon him and says,
yield thy self; he that lies under, says like words, and therewith wounds
his enemy lying upon him, who feeling the grief mortal, strikes the other
in the throat; he that was first fallen arises and walks, shortly after
they both die; the question is, which of them ought to be judged victorious?

Albeit no dead man can require judgment of victory; yet to the end the honor
due unto the victorious may be in sign of his valerous merit bestowed, and the
spoils of the vanquished laid under his Ensign, thus it is said. He who first
had the body of the enemy in his power and under, ought be reputed
victorious: yet may it be alleged, that the other who gave the first mortal
wound, ought have the victory, because the time thereof and not the time of
death is to be considered. Others are of opinion, that the longer liver ought
to have victory: and some affirm, that if the Challenger gave the first wound
whereof death ensued, although himself did first die: yet had he performed his
part and deserved most praise. Some also do think, there is no judgment can
be given but that the matter should lie dead. Howsoever it be, I leave the
same to more learned Doctors and better experienced Knights.

3 Two Gentlemen being on horseback, the one challenges the other, the fight
being begun, the Challenger alighteth and kills his enemy; the Question is,
whether he may so lawfully do?

Thereunto is answered. That if the Challenge were for trial of Honor,
Triumph, or sport on horsback, then is no honor due to him that thus killed his
enemy, for that neither of the fighters ought to be on foot: but in a Combat
for life it is otherwise. Since then it is lawful as well for the one as the
other to take and use all means, advantages and subtilties that can be
invented.

4 Two Gentlemen capitulate to fight on horseback, and that he who first
falls shall be vanquished. At the first encounter they fall both at one
instant; question is, which of them ought be victorious.

To this case may be answered, that for so much as the Challenger is not only
to defend himself, but also offend and win victory, now falling even with
the Defender, he thereby ought be accounted victored; for in all doubtful
causes the Defender is most to be favored. Others are of mind, that seeing
the fall of the Challenger might proceed of his own force, and not the virtue
of the enemy, the judgment ought lie dead. But the true decision of this
question is thus. If the Combat were for trial of Virtue, Love, or Prize, then
ought the Challenger to lose the honor; but if the same were for life, then
ought the fight to be performed in one other day by consent of both parties;
because in Combats of that kind no victory is gained until one of the
fighters be either slain or yielded, or has with his own mouth denied the
words whereupon the Combat was occasioned.

5 Two Gentlemen determined to fight on horseback for life, the one
overthrows the other: being down, the enemy comes upon him: he that is
under says, I yield, and at the same instant with his dagger strikes and
kills him that is above: the question is, which of them ought be pronounced
victorious.

Thereunto is said, that for so much as the words and deeds of him that lives,
were said and done at one instant, being of contrary effect, the judgment
ought have relation unto the deeds: for often times words are uttered, diverse
from the intent of that is done. But if so be a man does say, I yield, and he
unto whom he yields does stay to fight and accept thereof, then shall the
sayer be reputed vanquished; and afterward offending him to whom he is
yielded, for so doing, he ought be dishonored and condemned as a Traitor.

6 Two Gentlemen being agreed to break certain Lances for Prize and Honor,
the horse of the one happens to stumble upon a broken Lance and falls;
whether shall he in respect of that fall be judged to lose the honor?

To this question, the answer is apparent. For seeing that the fall proceeded
not from the virtue or force of the adversary, but by misfortune, the Gentleman
fallen ought to be excused. Notwithstanding, if the fight had been for life, the
matter ought receive other judgment, seeing in those kind of Combats it is
lawful to take all oportunities and advantages.

7 Two Gentlemen determined to fight for life upon an accusation of treason,
whether is it lawful for the Judge to depart them, before the Combat be
performed and fully ended? Whereunto may be answered, that for so much as the
office of a Judge, is to give sentence according to allegations and proves; it
seems that the Judge ought in no wise to stay the fight, but permit the
Combat to proceed, till the one or the other of the fighters be either
yielded or slain, especially in quarrels of so heinous weight as is the
cause of treason. For Frederick the Emperor, who cassed and disanulled all
particular Battles and Combats used by the Lombards, did notwithstanding
allow, that upon quarrel for treason and secret murder, the Combat should be
permitted and granted by all Princes, because the one was offensive to God,
the other to Prince and Country.

8 Two Gentlemen being come to Combat did covenant, that which soever of them
did give unto his enemy most wounds, should be victorious: the one has his
eye put out with a shiuer of a Lance, and the other has his body and armor
pierced through: the question is, who ought have the victory?

To that doubt we answer thus. Albeit the eye is a member of much delicacie,
and also placed in the head: yet for that the Lance is passed through both
breast and back, it must needs be that he on whom those wounds are, should
confess to receive most hurt, and consequently to lose the honor and victory.

9 Two Gentlemen being in fight, the one puts out the eye of his enemy, and
he in requital of that hurt, cutteth off his nose; the question is, who is by
those hurts most dishonored?

It may seem at the first sight, that loss of an eye is greatest, being a
member placed above, and that without the sight a man proves unfit for all
worldly actions: yet for so much as the want of a nose is commonly accounted
the greatest deformity, and a punishment due for infamous offenses, it may be
reasonably inferred, that the loss of that feature should bring with it most
dishonor. Besides that, seeing man is made according to the similitude of God,
we account that the face being made more deformed by loss of the nose, than
of one eye: therefore the greatest honor of this Combat is due unto him who
takes the nose of the enemy.

10 Two Gentlemen in fighting on horseback with Lances, the one has his hand
maimed, the other his knee and whole leg made lame; which of them ought
receive most honor?

Hereunto may be said, that the hand being a member most necessary for fight,
and placed much higher than the leg: therefore the loss thereof is of more
importance, and conseque^tlie dishonorable. On the other side is alleged,
that seeing the leg is of as great necessity, so as without it he is dishabled
to serve either on horse or foot: therefore he who becomes hurt and lame in
that part, receives most dishonor, and the more for that no Art can supply
that want, as in the hand it may. But I refer the true deciding of this doubt
unto the wise and learned reader.

11 Two Gentlemen come to fight for life, the Challenger being left handed is
maimed on that hand, the other being right handed loses it; which of them
ought receive most dishonor?

It seems that in this case the losses and harms are equal; for he who was
left handed, being maimed on that side, is deprived of that hand which he used
chiefly, and was no less apt for him, than the right hand is unto the enemy.
And since it is the office of the Challenger not only to maintain but also
offend and prove, in not doing more to prejudice the Defender, than that harm
himself receives: therefore the Challenger (although he loses but a left
hand) is in this case most dishonored. Yet because the exercise of these men's
hands were of like necessity, I think (under correction) the judgment ought
to rest as indifferent.

12 Two Gentlemen in performing a Combat on foot, are hurt in places equal;
the question is, whether of them is victorious?

We have in the former question said, that where two fighters be equally
hurt, the Challenger should depart with dishonor, because he has not proved
that which he took in hand, which is to vanquish the Defender. Therefore, the
drawing the enemies blood, and the manner thereof is to be considered. If then
the one be hurt on the right arm, and the other on the left, it may seem
there is none advantage: for as the right hand is apt to offend in fight, so
the left hand is no less fit to defend. Notwithstanding, for that the use of
the right hand is both more necessary and ordinary, he who is hurt thereof,
ought to be adjudged unto most dishonor, chiefly in Combat for life. For in
the exercise of Arms for honor only, the judgment ought lie dead, or else he
shall be thought victorious that most manfully performed his part, or that
regards least the wound, or that most cunningly does handle his weapon. The
quality of the hurts is also to be considered, which of them is more or less
mortal, likewise which member is more or less to be regarded.

13 Four Gentlemen determined to fight on horsbacke for trial of truth and
life, did enter into the Lists: the one party do both charge one of the
adversaries reputed a man of small force, yet valiantly defending himself,
did hurt one of the assailers. And his companion seeing the matter so handled,
sodeinlie dismounteth, and with his Lance wounds the other of his enemies in
the back, and forces the one of them to deny his words: he that denied
flees out of the Listes, persuading his fellow being first hurt to abide
there, saying it was more honorable to dye within, than without the Listes. He
who forced the enemy to fly, pursued him; but not able to take him, a
question was moved which party ought be accounted victorious, because on
either party one was hurt, and the other two went out of the Listes without
license of the Judge. Whereto may be said.

That he who denied, ought with his companion to lose the Honor. For albeit one
of the enemies did also leave the Lists, yet his intent therein was to pursue
his foe being fled thence: and for so much as the Combat was for matter of
Treason, it suffices not only for the victorious to vanquish the enemy, but
also to bring him into the power of the Judge to be punished. And it is
plain, that seeing of the one party one was hurt, and the other fled, they
ought to be judged to lose all honor, and be condemned as guilty of that
whereupon the quarrel was moved.

14 Seven Gentlemen do compound with seven other, to run certain courses
at the Tilt for honor and love of Ladies; in which match, it happened that five
of the one party did commendablie acquit themselves, but the other two of
that side were overthrown. On the other side, two only performed their
courses well, and the rest of that company exceeding evil, losing many
Lances, and running very foul: whereof a question grew, whether unto five
well doers and two evil, or unto two weldoers with five evil, the honor ought
be allotted?

Albeit in this case much may be spoken, yet for that the question is not of
any particular man's merit, but which party in general performed best the
enterprise; it may be alleged, that the party wherein were most weldoers
ought to have the honor, notwithstanding the fall of two of their companions:
yet for so much as to fall from horseback by the enemies force or virtue is most
reproachful, it seems that the misaduenture of two men only, may
reasonably be the loss of honor to all the rest. And therefore we leave the
judgment of this doubt unto wise men, better experienced in Arms.

15 Two Gentlemen being in Combat for life, the Challenger takes the sword of
the Defender from him, notwithstanding the Defender most valiantly defends
himself with his arm and hands all the whole day, during which time he could
not be forced either to deny, yield or be slain. A question thereupon arose,
whether of them was victorious?

For So Much as this Combat was for life, and that in every fight of such
nature, no victory is fully gained until the Defender is slain, or else
forced to yield or deny; it seems that he is not to be judged guilty, nor
having done any of these, although his sword were lost, which indeed in all
Martial exercises and feats of Arms is a thing much to be discommended. But
most certain it is, that in all Combats and actions of Arms, for Honor, Love,
and Praise only, whosoever loses his sword, must presently (also) lose the
honor and victory.

16 Two Gentlemen fighting for life within the Listes, the one yields
himself a prisoner. Whether may the Prince of the place (who in Combat is
elected a Judge) save the life of him that is vanquished? Hereunto may be
answered.

That albeit every prisoner apperteineth unto his taker, yet has it commonly
been used, that the victorious have presented their prisoners unto the Prince,
to be disposed at his good pleasure, who in recompense thereof, do use
(according to the magnanimous minds of such persons) not only to pay the
charges of the victorious, but also in sign of clemency and mercy set the
unfortunate prisoner freely at liberty. As did the noble King Edward the third
of England, unto John Visconti, who in his presence was vanquished by Thomas de
la March base son unto the French King. And Phillip Duke of Milan did the
like unto another unfortunate Gentleman vanquished by a Neapolitane Knight.

Of the honor gained or lost by being disarmed in sundry places, and of
sundry pieces. CAP. 6.
A Man that loses his Sword in fight, is more reproached than he that loses
his Shield. For he gains the greatest honor that wins the chief weapon
from the enemy, which is the Sword, seeing therewith the Emperor and Kings do
create their Knights, and the Sword is borne before them in sign of authority
and regal power.

He that loses his Headpeece in fight, is more dishonored, than he that loses
his Shield, because the Helmet defends the most principal part of man, but
the Shield armeth a lower place.

He that loses his Gauntlet in fight, is more to be blamed, than he who is
disarmed of his Poulderon. For the Gauntlet armeth the hand, without which
member no fight can be performed, and therefore that part of Armor is commonly
sent in sign of defiance.

He that is cast out of the Saddle by violence of his adversaries encounter,
shall be more reproved, than he who falls by the default of his horse, the
breaking of girths, or any such like accident.

Of the honor gained or lost by the hurts given or taken in Combat for life or
in Triumph. CAP. 7.
HE that in fight loses his Eye, shall thereby receive more dishonor, than he
that loses his Teeth; because the Eye is a member serving the most necessary
sense, but the Teeth are only instruments of the mouth. He that loses his
right Eye, is more to be reproached, than he that loses the left Eye; because
the right side is in better opinion of men. The like is to be said of the
hands, of the arms and legs. If a man having but one Eye do fight with
another man that has two, in losing that one Eye, he shall be more blamed,
than he who has two Eyes, although he loses one. He that loses his whole
hand, shall be more reproached, than he who loses one Eye. And he that
loses a foot, is more disgraced, than he that loses one hand.

Of Iusts and Turniaments, and how the accidents in such exercises are to be
judged. CAP. 8.
IT is written, how at a Triumph in the noble City of Naples, a Gentleman
called the L. Peter Count of Derise, received so furious an encounter by the
Lance of another that ran against him, that therewith he became at one
instant disarmed of his Shield, his Curats and Headpeece, so as he being
utterly disarmed, was left on horsback in his doublet only, without other
harm: In requital whereof, the said Peter gave unto the other Gentleman so
violent a blow, as therewithal the girths of the horse were broken, and the
man cast headlong on the ground. Thereupon a question was moved, which of them
had merited most honor, or rather which of them deserved least reproach?
Whereunto was answered absolutely, that he who fell fro the horse, was most
dishonored; for (next unto death) to fall from the horse is most reproachful.

Yet is it less disgrace to fall with the horse, than to fall alone: and
therefore, albeit a man does run never so well, if in the end he does fall
from the horse, he can by no means receive honor for that day, but shall
rather depart with disgrace.

Who so fighting on foot at Barrier, or in any other exercise of Arms, is by
the force of his adversary constrained with his hand to touch the ground,
shall thereby lose all commendation.

He that on horseback directs his Lance at the head, is more to be
praised, than he that touches lower. For the higher the Lance hitteth, the
greater is the Runners commendation.

Who so runs low, is not only unworthy praise, but also meriteth
reproach. And he who so carries his Lance comely and firm, is more to be
praised, although he break not, than he who misgouerneth his horse, or
vnskilfullie handles his Lance, although he does break.

He that uses to run high, sits steadelie and moves least in his course,
accompanying his horse euenlie and justly, is in running worthy al
commendation.

He that falls with the encounter of the adversary (although as is before
said, the same be a great disgrace) yet is it more excuseable, than if he
remains on horseback amazed, suffering his horse to wander he wotteth not
whether.

He that with his Lance takes away the Rest of the adversaries Armor,
meriteth more honor, than he that takes away any other ornament.

He that breaks his Lance on the Pomell or bolster of his adversaries
Saddle, deserves worse, than he who bears his Lance well without breaking.

He that breaks on the face or other part of the horse, meriteth worse, than
he that breaks not at all.

He that hurts an horse, shall not receive honor, although before he has
run well: for he that hurts an horse is in like predicament with him that
falls, who cannot on that day receive any honor.

He is worthy small estimation, that cannot govern his own horse, or that
sits loose in his saddle: but much is he to be praised that with his force
disordereth his adversary in the saddle.

He that lets his Lance fall, can claim no commendatio^. And less worthy
praise is he that knows not how it should be charged.

He that breaks the Lance furiously in many pieces, is more reputed, than
he that breaks it faintlie in one only place.

He that conueieth his Lance into the Rest in due time, is worthy
commendation: but he that carries it shaking in his hand or vnstaiedlie in the
Rest, meriteth blame.

He that dexterouslie carries the Lance long on the arm, and skilfully
conueith it into the Rest near the time of encounter, is more allowed, than he
that sodeinlie and at the first setting out does charge it.

To conclude, he is worthy all commendation, that bears himself well on
horseback, that sits comely, that fitteth his body well with Armor, that
has his person so disposed as if it were without Armor, that can endure to
wear it long, and that till the end of the day disarmeth not his head.

He that performs not all his determined courses, ought not receive any prize
or honor.

He that hurts or touches an horse with his Lance, shall neither have
prize nor praise, for he is in case as though he had fallen.

He that does fall, may not run any more in that day, unless he falls on
his feet standing right up, and be also a Challenger: for in that case he may
return to horse and answer all comers, because on that day he is so bound to
do.

The manner of Combats in England, as I found them recorded in the French
tongue, and written in an ancient book, showed me by Master Garter her
Majesty's chief Herehault.
FIrst, the Cartell or bill of Quarrel as well of the Challengers behalf as of
the Defenders, was brought into the Court before the Conestable and Marshall.
And when the truth of the cause of quarrel could not be proved by witness,
nor otherwise, then was it permitted the same should receive trial by force of
Arms, the one party by assailing, the other by defending. The Conestable as
vicar general unto the King assigned the day of battle, which was to be
performed within forty days next following, whereunto both the Challenger
and Defender condiscended. This being done, the weapons were equally appointed
to either of them, that is to say, a Sword, a Dagger, and one other weapon,
which they called a Glaiue. Then were the fighters commanded to bring in
sufficient pledges for surety, that they and every of them should appear and
perform the Combat betwixt the Sun rising and going down of the day
appointed for the acquitall of their pledges, and that they nor any of them,
should do or cause to be done any molestation, damage, assault or subtlety
against the person of his enemy, either by himself, his friends, his
followers, or other person whatsoever.

In what sort the King commanded the place of Combat to be made.
THe kings pleasure being signified unto the Conestable and Marshall, they
caused Listes or Railes to be made and set up, in length three score paces, and
in breadth forty paces. The place where these Listes were appointed, was ever
upon plain and dry ground, without ridges, hills, or other impediments. At
either end of the said Lists was made a gate or place of entry, with a strong
bar to keep out the people. For the guarding of either gate one Sargeant was
appointed, and commanded not to suffer any man to approach within four foot.
The one gate opened toward the East, the other toward the West, being
strongly barred with a rail of seven foot long, and of such height, as no
horse could pass either under or over the same.

In what sort the King did sit to behold the Combat.
ON the day of battle, the King used to sit on a high seat or scaffold
purposely made; at the foot whereof, was one other seat for the Conestable
and Marshall. Who being come thither, called before them the pledges as well of
the Defendant as the Challenger, to be showed and presented unto the King,
there to remain within the Listes as prisoners, until such time as the
Challenger and Defender were come, and had performed all their ceremonies.

In what sort the Challenger used to present himself to Combat.
THe Challenger did commonly come unto the East gate of the Listes, and
brought with him such Armor as were appointed by the Court, and wherewith he
determined to fight. Being at the gate, there he stayed until such time as the
Conestable and Marshal arose from their seat, and went thither. They being
come to the said gate of the Listes, and beholding the Challe^ger there, the
Conestable said. For what cause art thou come hither thus armed, and what is
thy name? Unto whom the Challenger answered thus. My name is A.B. and am hither
come armed and mounted, to perform my challenge against G. D. and acquit my
pledges. Wherefore I humbly desire this gate may be opened, and I suffered to
perform my intent and purpose. Then the Conestable did open the visor of his
Headpeece to see his face, and thereby to know that man to be he who makes the
Challenge.

These Ceremonies ended, the Conestable commanded the gate of the Lists to be
opened, whereat the armed man with his necessaries and council entered. From
thence he was brought before the king, where he remained until such time as
the Defender was come thither.

In like manner, the Defender being appeared, did make request unto the
Conestable and Marshall, desiring they would be pleased to deliver and
discharge his pledges. Whereupon the said Conestable and Marshal did humbly
desire the King to release them, because the Defender is already come, and
presented before his Majesty, there to perform his duty. But in case the
Defender did not come at time convenient in the day appointed, then did the
King deliver his pleasure unto the Conestable, and he report the same unto the
Marshall, who forthwith did give order unto his Liutenant, that the Defender
should be presently called to appear by the Marshall of Herehaults in the
South, called Clarentieux: and in case the Marshall of Herehaults of the King
in the South were not present, then was the proclamation made by some other
Herehault of King Clarentieux. But if the Combat were performed in the North,
on the other side of the River of Trent, in the circuit of the King Norre;
then was his Marshall to make proclamation. The words of the Proclamation was
to this effect. Oiez. G. D. Defendant in this Combat, appear now, for in this
day thou have taken upon thee to acquit thy pledges in presence of the Lords
Conestable and Marshall, and also defend thy person against A.G. who challenged
thee to maintain the cause of this Combat.

This Proclamation was made thrice at every corner of the Lists: but if at the
second time, the party appeared not, then the Herehault did add these words
The day passes, and therefore come without delay. And if in case the said
Defendant appeared not before noone, but stayed until the third hour after,
then did the Herehault by commandment of the Conestable and Marshall, in the
beginning of the Proclamation say, A.G. appear in have and save thine honor,
for the day is well near spent, wherein thou did promise to perform thine
enterprise. It was also used that the Conestable his Clarke, should in a book
record the hour of the fighters appearing within the Listes, either on foot
or on horseback, in what sort they were armed, of what color the horses were,
and how they were in all points furnished.

It was also auncientlie used, that the Conestable moved the King in favor of
the Fighters, and know whether his Majesty were pleased to appoint any of his
Nobility or other servants of reputation, to assist them in Combat.

The Conestable and Marshall did suruay the Lances and other weapons,
wherewith the Combat should be performed, making them equal and of even
measure.

The Conestable also appointed two Knights or Squires unto the Challenger, to
keep the place free from impediments; the like was also done for the Defender.

The Conestable did also move the King, to know whether his Majesty in
person would take the oaths of the Fighters, or give him and the Marshall
authority to do it out of his presence.

The Conestable also did send the Marshall unto the Challenger and his council
to make ready his oath, declaring that after that ceremony all protestations
should be void.

After these preparations, the Conestable caused his Clarke to bring forth the
book, whereupon the Combatters were solemnly sworn.

The first Oath.
THe Conestable having caused his Clarke to read the Challengers bill, calling
him by his name and said. Dooest thou conceive the effect of this bill? Here is
also thine own Gauntlet of defiance, Thou shall swear, by the holy
Evangelists, that all things therein contained be true, and that thou
maintain it so to be upon the person of thine adversary, as God shall help
thee and the holy Evangelists.

The oath thus taken, he was led back unto his former place, and the Conestable
did cause the Marshall to produce the Defender, who took the like oath. This
oath was ever taken the parties kneeling, unless it pleased the Conestable and
Marshall to pardon that duty.

The second Oath.
THe second Oath was also indifferently propounded to either of them, viz.
That they had not brought into the Listes other Armor or weapon than was
allowed, neither any engen, instrument, herb, charm, or enchantment, and that
neither of them should put affiance or trust in any thing other than God and
their own valors, as God and the holy Evangelists should help them. That
done, they were both sent back to their places of entry.

The third Oath was thus.
THe Combatters being again called, were commanded by the Conestable to take
one the other by the hand, and lay their left hands upon the book: which done,
the Conestable said. I charge thee A.B. Challenger, upon thy faith, that thou
do thine uttermost endeavor and force to prove thine affirmation, either by
death or denial of thine adversary, before he departs these Lists, and
before the Sun goes down this day, as God and the holy Evangelists shall
help thee.

The very same oath in like manner used was offered unto the Defender, and
that done, the Fighters returned unto their places, friends and councellers.

These ceremonies ended, an Herehault by commandment of the Conestable and
Marshall, did make proclamation at four corners of the Lists thus. Oiez, Oiez.
We charge and command in the name of the King, the Conestable and Marshal,
that no man of what state, title, or degree soever, shall approach the Listes
nearer than four foot in distance, nor shall utter any speech, word, voice or
countenance, whereby either the Challenger or Defender may take advantage upon
pain of loss of life, living and goods to be taken at the Kings good pleasure.

Then the Conestable and Marshall assigned a place convenient within the Lists,
where the King of Herehaults and their officers should stand and be ready if
they were called: for afterward al things were committed to their charge,
as well on the behalf of the Defender as the Challenger, as if any thing were
forgotten in their confessions, either touching their lands or consciences: or
that any of them desired to eat or drink. All those lacks were supplied by
the Herehaults and none other. But here is to be noted, that no meat or
drink might be given unto the Challenger, without leave first asked of the
adversary, who did not deny the request. And after, the Herehault ought go
unto the Conestable and Marshall and make them privy, to desire their favor,
that the Fighters might eat, drink, or ease their bodies.

After these orders taken, the Conestable and Marshall did avoid the Listes of
all sorts of persons, save only one Knight and two Esquires armed, to attend
on the Conestable, and the like number to await on the Marshall, either of them
having in his hand a Lance without head ready to depart the Fighters, if the
King did command. Of more ancient time the Conestable and Marshall, were used
to have certain Liutenants and servants within the Listes. Also the one part
to keep order on one side, and the others to look unto the other side. And if
the Queen happened to behold the Combat, then the Conestable and Marshall
awaited on the Kings side, and their Liutenants attended on the Queen.

Then did the Conestable alone, sitting down before the King, as his Vicar
general, send his Liutenant to the Challenger to come unto him, and the
Marshall with his Liutenant did accompany the Defender.



The Conestable thus set, did pronounce this speech with a loud voice: Let
them go, let them go, let them go and do their best. Upon which words
pronounced in the Kings presence, the Challenger did march toward the Defender
to assail him furiously, and the other prepared himself for defense
soberlie. In the mean time, the Conestable and Marshall with their Liutenants
stood attentive to hear and see if any words, sign, or voice of yielding were
uttered by any of the Fighters, and also to be ready if the King should
command the Lances to be let fall to depart the fight.

The Conestable and Marshall did also take regard, that the Challenger and
Defender should appear at the day and hour appointed, whether the quarrel
were for treason or otherwise.

The Conestable did likewise measure the weapons of the Combattors, and also
search whether they had about them any engine, or other unlawful things, as
Charms or Inchauntment: yet was it lawful both for the Challenger and
Defender, to be as well and surely armed as they could. And if any of them
would have his Sword shorter than the Standerd, yet was not the other bound to
have his cut to that measure, if he required that favor of the Court. But if
either the one or the others Sword passed the Standerd, then was that
inequality to be reformed: or if they were both ouerlong, both ought be
reformed.

It had been also in more ancient time used, that the Conestable and Marshall,
should foresee, that if the Kings pleasure was to depart the fight, and suffer
the Fighters to rest, before the Combat ended, that they should be parted in
due time, when no advantage were. Likewise, that they should take heed that
none of them should priuatlie speak unto the other of yielding, or otherwise.
For unto the Conestable and Marshall apperteined the witnessing and record of
all things.

And in case the Combat were for question of treason, he that was vanquished
should be forthwith disarmed within the Lists, by commandment of the
Conestable and the Marshall. The said Armor and weapons of the vanquished, in
one end of the Lists was defaced in his disgrace, and after, the same was
drawn out together with his horse. From thence also the man vanquished was
drawn unto the place of execution to be there headed or hanged, according to
the custom of the Country. The performance of all which punishment,
apperteined only to the Marshall, who ought see all things done in his own
presence. And in case the Challenger did not vanquish his enemy, then ought he
suffer the same pains that are due unto the Defender, if he were vanquished.
But if the quarrel were upon a crime of less importance, the party
vanquished, should not be drawn unto the place of execution, but only led
thither to receive death or other punishment, according to the custom and
quality of the matter.

If the Combat were only for trial of virtue, or honor, he that was
vanquished therein, should be disarmed and put out of the Lists without further
punishment.

If it happened that the King would take the quarrel into his hand, and make
peace between the parties without longer fight. Then did the Conestable lead
the one, and the Marshall the other of the fighters out of the Lists, at diverse
gates, armed and mounted as they were, having special regard that neither of
them should go the one before the other. For the quarrel resting in the Kings
hand, might not be renewed, or any violence offered without prejudice unto the
Kings honor. And because it is a point very special in matters of Arms, that
he who leaves the Lists first, incurreth a note of dishonor: therefore to
depart the Lists in due time was ever preciselie observed, were the Combat for
treason or other cause whatsoever.

It is also to be remembered, that without the principal Lists, were ever
certain Counterlists, betwixt which two, the servants of the Conestable and
Marshall did stand. There stood also the Kings Seriants at Arms, to see and
consider if any default, or offense were committed contrary to the
Proclamation of the Court, against the Kings royal Majesty, or the law of
Arms. Those men were ever armed at all pieces.

The servants of the Conestable and Marshall had charge of the place, and good
order thereof. The Kings Seriants took care to keep the gates of the Lists,
and be there ready to make arest of any person, when they should be commanded
by the Conestable or Marshall. The fees of the Marshall were all Horses, pieces
of Armor, or other furniture that fell to the ground after the Combattors did
enter into the Lists, as well from the Challenger as the Defender. But all the
rest apperteined to the party victorious, whether he were Challenger or
Defender.

The Bars, Posts, Railes, and every other part of the Lists were also the
fees of the Marshall.



Certain Combats granted by the Kings of England. CAP. 9.


EDmond, of the raze of West Saxons, fought in combat with Canutus King of
Denmark, for the possession of the Crown of England. In which fight, both the
Princes being weary, by consent departed the land betwixt them. Anno. 1016.

RObert Mountfort accused Henry of Essex of treason, affirming that he in a
journey toward Wales near unto Colshil, threw away the Kings Standerd, saying
the King was dead, and turned back those that went to the Kings succor.
Henry denied the accusation, so as the matter came to be tried by Combat. The
place appointed for fight, was a little I Will near unto Reading. In this Combat
Henry was vanquished and fell down as dead, and at the suite of friends,
license was obtained that his body might be buried by the Monks of Reading.
But it happened that the body of Henry recovered, and became a Monk in that
Abey. Anno 1163. In the reign of King Henry the second.

HEnry Duke of Hereford accused Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norffolke of certain
words by him spoken, as they rode between London and Brainford, tending unto
the Kings dishonor. Thomas Duke of Norf. denied to have spoken any such word,
but Henry affirming his accusation, the King granted the Combat to be
performed at Couentrie the 7. of September 1398. Anno Rich. 2.

A Combat was fought at Westminster in the Kings presence, between John Ansley
Knight, and Thomas Catrington Esquire, who^ the said Knight had accused of
treason, for selling the Castle of S. Saviors, which the Lord Chandos had
builded in the I Will of Constantine in France. In which Combat the Knight was
victorious. Anno 1379. regni Rich. 2.

A Combat was granted unto an Esquire borne in Nauarra, to fight with an
English Esquire called John Welsh, whom the Nauarrois accused of treason. But
the true cause of the Nauarrois his malice was, for that the said Welsh had
forced his wife, as (being vanquished) he confessed. The King gave sentence he
should be drawn and hanged. Anno. 1384. Regni Rich. 2.

A Combat was fought between Sir Richard Wooduile and one other Knight borne
in Spain. After the third blow given, the King stayed the fight. Anno 1441.
Regni Henr. 6.

A Combat was granted unto John Viscount borne in Cipres, and Thomas de la
Marshe bastard son unto Philip King of France, in the reign of King Edward
the 3. at Westminster.

Certain Combats for Triumph, Honor, and Love of Ladies, brought before the
Kings of England. CAP. 11.


IN the former Chapter we made mention of the Ceremonies appertaining to
Combats for life, as they were ancientlie used. Now I think fit for the
furniture of this work, briefly to remember some special exercises of Arms
brought before the Princes of this realm for Honor, and love of Ladies only:
and among the rest (as actions most worthy memory) we will touch certain
particular Combats (or as they are commonly called) Triumphs, Iusts and
Turniaments performed before our present Sovereign Queen Elizabeth, a Prince
of so great magnanimity and wisdom, as by imitation of her most noble and
princely virtues, the Court of England both for Arms and learning has in her
reign excelled all others.

Triumphs before King Edward the third.
IN the reign of King Edward the third, a royal Just was holden at Lincoln by
the Duke of Lancaster, where were present certain Ambassadors sent by the King
of Spain for the Lady Ioane daughter to the King, who should have been
married unto that King of Spain: but meeting her on the way, she died. Anno.
1348.

A Triumph was holden at Windsor before the same King Edward: whereat was
present, David King of Scots, the Lord of Tankeruile, and the Lord Charles
Valloys, who by the Kings license was permitted to run, and had the prize.
Anno. 1349.

IN Smithfield were solemn Iusts in the same Kings reign, where was present a
great part of the most valiant Knights of England and France. Thither came also
noble persons of other Nations, as Spaniards, Ci^riots, and Armenians, humbly
desiring aid against the Pagans. Anno 1361.

A Triumph before King Edward the fourth.
IVsts were again holden in Smithfield, where Anthony Wooduile Lord Scales
did run against the Bastard of Burgondie. Anno. 1444.

A Triumph before King Henry the sixth.
ONe other notable action of Arms was persosonallie performed in Smithfield,
between a Knight of Spain called Sir Francis le Aragonoys, and Sir John
Astley Knight of the Garter. For after the said Sir Francis had won the honor
from all the men at Arms in France, he came into England, and made a general
Challenge, but by the great valor of Sir John Astley lost the same unto him.
The memory of which action remains with Master Garter principal King of
Arms.

Triumphs before King Henry the seventh.
AT Richmont was holden a solemn Triumph, which continued a whole month,
where Sir James Parker running against Hugh Vaughan was hurt and died. 1494.

ONe other Triumph was in the same Kings days performed in the Tower of
London. Anno. 1502.

Triumphs before King Henry the eight.
But far exceeding al these was that magnificent Iusts and Turniments, at the
meeting of the two excellent Princes, King Henry the eight of England, and K.
Frances the French King: who choosing unto them xiiij. others, did challenge to
run at the Tylt, and fight at the Turney and Barrier with all comers. The
Chalengers were; The King of England, the King of France, the Duke of Suffolk,
the Marquis Dorcet, Sir William Kingston, Sir Richard Iernegan, Master Nicholas
Carew, and Master Anthony Kneuet, with their Assistants, Sir Rowland and Sir
Giles Capell: with these were so many other French Ge^tlemen, as made up the
number aforesaid.

For Defenders, thither came Monsieur de Vandosme, the Earl of Devonshire, and
the Lord Edmond Howard; every of the^ bringing in a fair Band of Knights well
armed.

This most noble Challenge of these two mighty Kings, accompanied with xiiij.
other Knights, of either Nation seven they caused to be proclaimed by Norrey
King of Arms, in England, and France, Germany, Anno 12, Hen. 8.

ONe other most memorable Challenge was made by the same King; who in his own
royal person, with William Earl of Devonshire, Sir Thomas Kneuet, and Edward
Neuell Esquire, answered all comers, at Westminster. The King called himself
Cuer loyal; the Lord William, Bon voloir; Sir Thomas Kneuet, Vailliant desir;
and Edward Neuill, Joyous penser.

Defenders were;

The Lord Gray, Sir William a Parr, Robert Morton, Richard Blont, Thomas
Cheyney, Thomas Tyrrell, Sir Rowland Christopher Willoughby, the L. Howard,
Charles Brandon, the Lord Marquis, Henry Guilford, the Earl of Wiltshire, Sir
Thomas Bullin, Thomas Lucie, the Lord Leonard, the Lord John, John Melton,
Griffith Done, Edmond Howard, Richard Tempest.

After this Challenge was ended, the prize appointed for the Challengers
party, was given unto Cuer Loyal: and among the Defenders to Edmond Howard.

ANother solemn Challenge was proclaimed and performed by certain English
Knights: vz. Sir John Dudley, Sir Thomas Seymour, Sir Francis Poinings, Sir
George Carew, Anthony Kingston, and Richard Cromwell: Anno. 1540.

Of like Actions in Arms since her Majesty's Reign, these do seem most
notable, as appears by the memorialls of M. Clarentieux, a Gentleman very
diligent in her Majesty's service, and careful to observe things to the Honor
of her Majesty's Court.
ONE solemn Just, Turniment, and fight at the Barrier was holden at
Westminster, wherein the Duke of Norfolk, the Earl of Sussex, the Earl of
Warwick, the Earl of Leicester, the Lord Scrope, the Lord Darcie, and the
Lord Hunsdon were Challengers, and with great honor answered all Comers.

The Defenders names are not extant.

A Royal Challenge was also there proclaimed before her Majesty, wherein were
Challengers, the Earl of Oxenford, Charles Howard, Sir Henry Lee, and
Christopher Hatton.

The Defenders were;

The Lord Stafford, the Lord Henry Seymour, Edward Harbart, Sir George Carry,
Thomas Cicill, Henry Gray, William Howard, Sir Jerome Bows, Henry Knowles,
Henry Kneuet, William Norris, Richard Bulkelcy, Thomas Kneuet, William
Knowles, Rafe Lane, George Delues, Robert Colsel, Lancelot Bostocke, Brian
Ansley, Henry Mackwilliams, Thomas Bedingfield, Thomas Moore, William
Worthington, Richard Blunt, Thomas Conyngesby, Robert Alexander, Roger Clopton.

This Triumph continued three days. The first at Tilt; the second at Turney;
and the third at the Barriers.

On every of the Challengers her Majesty bestowed a Prize: for the receiving
whereof, they were particularly led armed by two Ladies unto her presence
Chamber.

The Prize at the Tilt on the Defenders party was given unto Henry Gray; At
the Turney unto the L. Henry Seymor; at the Barriers unto Thomas Cicill.
Before them went Clarentieux king of arms in his rich coat of Arms.

This magnificent Combat was performed Anno 1571.

AN honorable Challenge was likewise brought before her Majesty by the Earl
of Arundell, calling himself Callophisus, who with his Assistant Sir William
Drewrie challenged all comers. Anno 1580,

The Defenders were;

The Earl of Oxford, the Lord Windsor, Philip Sidney, Edward Norris, Henry
Knowles, Robert Knowles, Fulke Greuill, Thomas Kneuet, Thomas Kellaway, Rafe
Bows, George Goring, George Gifford, Anthony Cook, Henry Bronkerd, Edward
Deny, Richard Ward, Sir Thomas Parrot.

The Prize was given to the Earl of Oxford.

TO these actions of Arms may be added the notable Turniament on horseback
within her Majesty's Palace at Westminster, which became the more rare and
memorable, for that it was performed in the night. The manner whereof in
brief, was thus.

It pleased her Majesty (according to her Princely custom in receiving of
noble strangers) to conuite unto supper the Duke Momorancie chief Marshall of
France, at that time come hither to take the honorable Order of the Garter.
This magnificent supper ended, it pleased her Highness (the weather being
warm) to walk out of her Chamber into the open Tarrace, whether also
(awaiting on her) went the said Duke, and all others of the French Nobility,
with the Ambassadors, Lords and Ladies of this Court. At her Majesty's coming
to the North side of the Tarrace, there were prepared and set rich Chaires,
Cushions and Carpets. In which place it pleased her to stay, intertaining most
graciously the said Duke and other noble strangers. Next unto them were placed
the Ladies, Lords Counselors and other persons of reputation, according to
their degrees and conueniencie of the room. So as the said Tarrace was on all
sides beset with Lords, Ladies, and persons of quality sumptuously apparelled
and richly furnished, and among them (both above and under) stood many of the
Guard in their rich coats, holding an infinite number of Torches: and so in
the preaching place: by which mean, to those that beheld the Tarrace in this
sort furnished, they deemed it rather a Theater celestial, than a Palace of
earthly building.

The place with this royal presence replenished, sodeinlie entered the Earl
of Essex, and with him twelve Gentlemen armed at al pieces and well mounted. The
Earl and his horse was furnished with white cloth of silver, and the rest in
white satin, who (after reverence done to her Majesty) marched to the East
side of the Court, and there in troop stood firm. Forthwith entered the Earl
of Rutland with a like number in like sort armed and apparelled all in blewe,
and having presented his reverence stayed on the West end. Before either of
these Bands one Chariot was drawn, and therein a fair Damsel conducted by an
armed Knight, who presented certain speeches in the French tung unto her
Majesty. These Ceremonies past, the Queen commanded the armed men to fall
unto fight, which was performed with great courage and commendation, chiefly in
the Earl of Essex, a noble personage, valerous in Arms, and all other ways
of great virtue. Truly, this action was meruailouslie magnifice^t, and
appeared a sight exceeding glorious to those that were below looking upward to
the Tarrace, where her Majesty, the Lords and Ladies stood, so pompously
apparailed, Iewelled and furnished as hardly can be seen the like in any
Christian Court; as my self and other the Actors (at occasions staying from
fight) with great admiration did behold and think.

Of the Actors names in this Combat, it seems no note is kept: yet are many
of them living.



NOt inferior, but far exceeding in princely pomp and quality of Actors
was that royal Combat and fight on foot before her Majesty, the 1. of
January Anno 1581. where Monsieur of France, the Prince d' Aufine, the Earl
of Sussex, the Earl of Leicester, the Count S. Aignon, Monsieur Chanuallon,
and Monsieur Barqueuille were Challengers.

The Defenders were;

The L. Thomas Howard, Sir William Russell, Monsieur Brunys, Monsieur S.
Vincent, Sir Thomas Cicill, Henry Gray, John Borough, Lord Windsor, Walter
Windsor, Le Boylere, Le Cheualier, Ambrose Willoughbie, Sir William Drurie,
Thomas Radcliffe, Lord Sheffeld, Robert Carry, George Carew, Fulk Greuill,
William Knowles, Francis Knowles, Thomas Kneuet, Lord Darcie, Anthony Mildmay,
Rafe Stauerton, Lancelot Bostock, George Beeston, William Worthington, Thomas
Kellaway, Sir George Carey, Rafe Bows, Henry Windsor, John Wotton, George
Goring, Edward Moore, George Giffard, Thomas Borough, Anthony Cook, Hercules
Newtas, Richard Skipwith, Henry Bronkard, John Parker, Francis Darcie, John
Tyrrell.

They are not here placed according to their degrees, but as they were called
to fight.

AFter so many royal and stately Triumphs, it may be thought superfluous to
insert the ordinary exercises in Arms, almost yearly used on the 17. of
November, in memory of the applause of all subjects at her Majesty's coming
to the Crown of England, as even this last year was used by the right noble
and valerous Earl of Essex: a Gentleman of great hope, or rather virtuous
proof and singular perfection. In liew whereof (or rather to avoid iteration
of names) we have here set down those Lords and Gentlemen that have been Actors
in public exercises of Arms on horseback, since her Majesty's reign: as
chiefly by Master Clarentieux notes does appear. By consideration of which
persons, as well in quality as number, it may easily be conceived, that the
magnificence of her Majesty's Court is equal or exceeding the Courts of other
Kings her noble predecessors.

They are not here placed in order of their degrees, but according to the time
of the Actions wherein it pleased them to be: and with such titles as they
since had, or now have.
The Duke of Norffolke. The Earl of Sussex. The Earl of Warwick. The Earl of
Leicester. The Earl of Ormond. The L. Honsdon. The L. Scroope. The L. Darcie.
The L. North. The L. Norris. The L. Charles Howard. The L. Gray. The L.
Stafford. The L. Henry Seymor. The Earl of Oxenford. The Earl of Essex. The
Earl of Rutland. The Earl of Arundel. The L. Windsor. The L. Thomas Howard.
The L. Sheffeld. The L. Borough. The Earl of Essex. The L. Willoughbie. The L.
Strange. The Earl of Comberland. The L. Brough of Ireland.
Knights and Gentlemen.
Sir Christopher Hatton,
Knight of the Order.
Sir George Howard. Edward Fitzgarret. Sir Robert Constable. Sir Henry Lee.
Anthony Digbie. Thomas Warcop. Thomas Markham. Sir George Beeston. Sir William
Gorge. Henry Haruie. Edward Hongarford. Thomas Cornwallis. John Iernegan.
Robert Colsel. Robert Wiseman. Francis Haruie. Sir Thomas Layton. William
Howard. Sir Edward Harbert. Sir Henry Cobham. Walter Windsor. Sir Henry
Kneuet. Sir George Carey. Henry Knowles. William Norris. Rafe Lane. Sir John
Dauers. George Delues. Sir Henry Gray. Lancelot Bostock. Brian Ansley. Sir
Jerome Bows. Sir Thomas Cicill. Henry Mackwilliam. Thomas Bedingfield. Sir
Richard Bulkeley. Thomas Kneuet. Sir William Knowles. William Worthington.
Edward Carry. Sir Thomas Gorge. Richard Blunt. Thomas Moore. Thomas Coningesbie.
Robert Alexander. Roger Clopton. William Hyfeld. Thomas Cotton. Sir Walter
Rawleigh. Sir Philip Sidney. Sir William Russell. Sir Thomas West. Robert
Knowles. John Carey. Fulke Greuill. Rafe Bows. John Zouch. Sir William Drurie.
Thomas Kellaway. George Goring. John Ludcot. Edward Greuill. William Tressam.
Edward Moore. John Tyrrell. Henry Bronkard. Sir Thomas Parrot. Thomas
Radcliffe. Sir Edward Norris. Anthony Cook. Sir John Packington. George
Giffard. Richard Ward. Euerard Digbie. Sir Edward Deny. Sir William Hatton.
Thomas Vauisor. Henry Nowell. Sir John Borrowe. Sir George Carew. Anthony
Mildmay. Thomas Gerrard. Edward Winter. Sir Charles Blont. William Gressam.
John Wotton. John Parker. Francis Darcie. Robert Carry. Sir Edward Wingfield.
John Chidley. Sir Philip Butler. Richard Skipwith. Pecksall Brocas. William
Haruie. Thomas Sidney. Iarues Clifton. Richard Acton.
MY meaning was here to have inserted all the Speeches, Emblemes, Devises,
Posies, and other Complements, used in all Challenges and other public
exercises of Arms since her Majesty's Reign: but for want of observation, or
rather lack of some sufficient man to have set them presently down, those
things cannot be recovered. Henceforth that defect is like to be supplied by
the dextrous hand of Master W. Seagar, (now called Somerset) one of her
Maiesties-Herehaults, a Gentleman both learned and languaged, and therewith
also by his own hand able to express in demonstration, with great art and
excellency. Whose mind is wholly bent to her Majesty's service, and the
honor of her Court.

The Ceremonies apperteining to the delivery of Prizes at Iusts and
Turniments. CAP. 12.
AT any public Triumph before the King, it seems the use has heretofore
been, that the Prizes of best desert should be given by the hand of the
Queen, notwithstanding it were in the Kings presence: but first a solemn
proclamation to be made by the Herehaults: to this effect; O Yes, O yes, O yes.
Be it known to all men by these presents, that by the authority of the most
high, most excellent, and most puissant Prince H. by the grace of God King of
England, France, and Ireland, etc. That of those which have Iusted on the
Challengers side A.B. has deserved the Prize, and to him let the same be given
as due, by the censure of the Queen, with the assent of her Ladies,
Gentlewomen, and all others of her Highness Court here present.

Likewise on the party of Defenders C.D. has Iusted well, E.F. better, but
G.H. best of all: unto whom the Prize is judged, by the most mighty, most
excellent, and virtuous Princess, with consent aforesaid.



This was the form of delivering the Prizes, at the most noble and triumphant
Iusts performed by King Henry the eight and Francis the French King, with
their Nobility and Gentlemen of Arms, at their interviewe in Picardie: where
the Proclamation in form aforesaid was pronounced in English and French, which
by favor of Master Garter I have seen recorded.

IT seems in elder times, the use was that the Prince did give a letter of
attestation to such persons as wan any Prize, either in Combat for life or
Honor: for my self have read such a one granted by a King of France unto an
Italian Gentl. in these words following: whereunto (as it seems) was added a
great and honorable Ceremony.

NO I Filippo, per gratia di dio Re di Franza, etc.

notifichiammo a tutti coloro, a quali peruerranno queste nostre littere, et
che lo haranno a grado et in piacere, e generalmente a Imperadori, Re, Duchi,
Marchesi, Conti, Principi, Nobili, Caualierie Gentilhuomini, come hauendo noi
celebrato le nostre feste a honor, a laud, and a gloria di nostro Signor dio,
and ad honor di tutti i Caualieri che sono venuti a combattere a tutto
transito in questo honorato passo di armi: vogliamo che siano riconosciuti
coloro che si saranno valorosamente portati, senza esser may vinti pure vna
volta, poi che si debbe dar l'honore a chi merita, and ch'e senza menda. Pero
per queste ordoniammo, commandiammo, e sententiammo, che a gloria, a honor, a
laud, and a fama, del egregio, e virtuoso Caualiere N. esso sia publicato in
tutti quatro i cantoni delle lizze and sbarre, da i Re d' armi, Araldi, and
Passauanti, con trombette, e sonatori, con consitimento nostro, and delli
giudici del campo, rappresentanti la persona nostra, per lo migliore di tutti i
Caualieri de nostro regno. Et commandiammo che sia posto sopra un cauallo tutto
bianco, e che tutti coloro che vi si truoueranno, cosi done, come huomini,
vengono con esso noi tutti a piedi, e sia fatta processione generale: e. N.
vada sotto il baldacchino fino alla chiesa. Appresso commandiammo and
ordoniammo, che vscendo della chie^^, si vada per tutte le lizze and sbarre, e.
N. ne prenda la possessione, e per i Re d' Armi gli siano date tutte le chiaui
delle debt lizze insegno di vittoria Et ancora commandiammo, che siano
celebrate feste che durino quindeci giorni, a laud and gloria del vittorioso
N. E perch ciascuno conosca la real verita di questo fatto, habbiamo segnata
la present carta con color vermiglio, esuggellata co'l nostro real suggillo.

Data nella nostra Citta di Parigi, a 4. di. Luglio, etc.

The same in English.
PHilip by the grace of God King of France, etc.

Be it known to all men unto whom these letters shall come, and to every
other person that take delight or pleasure in Arms, and generally to all
Emperors, Kings, Dukes, Marquises, Earls, Princes, Barons, and other
Gentlemen, that we have celebrated a solemn Triumph, to the honor, praise,
and glory of God, and the commendation of such as did fight in this honorable
action of Arms. And being desirous, that they who have valorouslie performed
their parts without receiving blame or disgrace, should be known: to the end
honor may be given to every one according to his merit. Therefore we have
hereby ordained, commanded and judged, for the everlasting honor, praise, and
glory of the excellent and virtuous Gentleman. N. his name shall be proclaimed
in every of the four corners of the Lists or place of Iusts, by the King of
Arms, the Herehaults and Pursiuants with our allowance, and by the censure of
the Judges of the field, representing our person: letting all men thereby to
know, that the said. N. is the most excellent and most virtuous Gentleman of
Arms in all our kingdom. We moreover command, that he shall be mounted upon
a white horse, and that every person present, as well women as men shall with us
follow him in Procession on f^ote: and that the said. N. shall ride under a
Canopie unto the Church. We likewise ordain and command that in return from
the Church, we shall pass through the place of Iusts, and there the said. N.
to take possession, and the keys of the said Lists to be delivered him by the
King of Arms in sign of victory. Lastly, we command, that the celebration
of the feast shall continue the space of xv. days, to the commendation and
glory of the victorious. N. And in witness of the very troth in this matter, we
have signed these letters with red ink, and thereunto have set our Royal
seal.

Dated in our City of Paris, the 4. of July, etc.

What the use at this time in like cases is, may appear by the Prizes
aforesaid bestowed by her Majesty.

THE FIFTH BOOK.
Of what quality a Gentleman professing Arms ought to be. CAP. 1.
BY consideration of things contained in these books, a Gentleman may be
informed what are the true causes of quarrel or offense unto Honor; what
repulses are due unto Injuries of all sorts; what judgment is to be given upon
accidents in the exercises of Arms. Whereunto we added some particular
examples of certain Combats for life performed by persons of honor within this
land: and likewise have noted the actions most glorious in Triumphs brought
before the Princes of this realm. And for so much as these actions of Arms
(chiefly on horseback) are, and ever have been used of noble personages and
Gentlemen of the best sort, whom the Romans in their flourishing time by a
general term called Equites, and are presently both of the Italians and
Spaniards named Cauallieri, without respect to private dignity or other
distinction: we will therefore for this time (yet with respect to each man's
title) adventure to english the word Eques, a Gentleman that professes Honor,
Virtue and Arms, or any of them, particularly reciting with what condition and
qualities he should be endued: which in brief are these.

1 First, he ought be of good constitution in body, and convenient strength to
suffer travel, and perform the actions apperteining to a man of Arms. 2
Secondly, he should be well favored of face and comely: for commonly GOD and
Nature gives beauty to such persons as are destined to command, and from
others borne to obey they have withholden that favor. Which moved some
writers to affirm, that the princely presence of Priamus did show him to be
worthy of government and command other men. 3 Thirdly, he should be of bold
aspect, rather inclined to severity than softness: which countenance the
Swisses and Turks do much affect. 4 Fourthly, he must be sober and discreet;
not inclined to vain delights or effeminate pleasures. 5 Fiftlie, that he be
obedient. For of obedience proceeds that the meaner are content to be
commanded by the better, and the ignorant by those that know. This virtue was
greatly embraced of the Romans, and occasioned their often victories: and at
this day is well observed among the Turks. And of the punishment for
disobedience toward the military Magistrates, the Romans have left two most
notable examples; the one of Manlius Torquatus, who caused his own son for
that fault to be slain, notwithstanding he had vanquished the enemy. The
other of Papirius the Dictator, who for the like offense was punished by Fabius
Rutilius General of the horsemen in the Roman Army. 6 Sixthly, he ought be
vigilant and patient: for in the one consists the execution of warlike
actions: by the other all travails, pains, and misfortunes are endured. 7
Seventhly, he must be faithful and loyal, which quality is required in all
sorts of subjects, but chiefly in Soldiers, for thereupon depends his Princes
security and state also: which moved Vigetius to say that the safety of a
Prince consisted in well choosing his Soldiers. Which is the cause that men
professing Arms, do commonly swear by the faith of a Soldier: the French
man, a foy de Soldat: the Italian, a fe di Soldato, etc. Yea the Kings of
France do commonly use this phrase, a foy de gentil home: a foy du chiualier.
8 Eighthly, he ought be constant and resolute; because resolution makes al
difficulties easy, and constancy or perseverance brings perfection in that
he professes. 9 Ninthly, that he should be charitable, because wars are
not taken in hand for the destruction of Countries and towns, but the defense
of the laws and people. Lastly, that he should be fortunate, since Fortune is
the Lady of Armies, because she shows her virtue in nothing more, than in
the adventures of war.
Of Knighthood. CAP. 2.
For So Much as in these former books we have discoursed the points of Honor,
and in what sort the exercises of Arms have been used in England; it shall not
be amiss but rather necessary to speak of Knighthood; which dignity was at
the beginning given chiefly for service in Arms and valiant enterprises. Our
meaning therefore is, to examine the original occasion of the name of Knight,
and how many orders and degrees of Knighthood there are or have been in
Christendom. For performance whereof, it behooves to know that the Romans
(among whom Martial Discipline was first known, and names given to men for
valerous merit) divided their people into Patritij and Plebei. After that
time, another division was made, as, Senatores, Equites and Plebs. As the
French have at this day Les nobles and la populaire, or gentiles homes and
villains. And we in England divide our men into four sorts, Gentilmen,
Citizens, Yeomen, Artificers and Laborers. Of Gentlemen, the first and
principal is the King, the Prince, Dukes, Marquises, Earls, Viconts, and
Barons. These are the Nobility, and be called Lords or Noblemen. Next to these
be Knights, Esquires, and simple Gentlemen: which last number may be called
Nobilitas minor: for they in Parliament have no place among the Lords.
Therefore the Barons or degree of Lords do resemble the dignity of Senators
in Rome, and the title of our Nobility is like unto the Patritij, when the
Patritij did signify Senatores aut Senatorum filij. But that degree which we
do now call Knighthood, is most like unto the title in Rome named Equestris
ordo: yet other opinions there are both of the beginning and name of Knight, as
well among the Italians as the Spaniards. But howsoever it was, most certain it
seems, that until Equestris ordo was erected in Rome, there was no such
degree of men as we call Knights, neither was that name given with such
ceremony and show of dignity, as since has been used. Yet some there are
that fail not to affirm that Knighthood had the original from Romulus, in
this sort.

That King having settled his Government in Rome, partly for security, and
partly for magnificence erected three Bands of Horsemen, the first called
Romence after his own name, the next Titience, after Tito Tatio, and the third
Luceria, whereof only I think Liuie makes mention. Hereupon they will infer
that Knighthood begun under Romulus.

The Spaniards do hold opinion, that when faith and plain dealing decayed,
those men that made profession of war, every thousand did choose but one man
whom they thought to be of greatest wisdom, courage and courtesy among the
rest. That being done, they made choice of such an horse as was reputed to
excel the rest for beauty, force, and other perfections, and forthwith gave
that beast unto that man whom they had chosen, as though their intention were
to conioyne that singular beast unto that notable man, naming him Caualiero,
which signifies Horseman, though we improperly english it Knight.

Thus much is said in general concerning Gentlemen that make profession of
Arms, whom the Romans (as it seems) sometimes called Milites, and some
other times Equites. The Italians and Spaniards Caualieri: the French,
Cheualiers. But in our language (as is now used) none are called Knights, but
only they that have that title given by the Prince, or his Lieutenant, with a
ceremony thereunto belonging. And of Knights made according to the use of
England, are diverse degrees: as shall hereafter be declared.

The original of Knighthood given as dignity, and what Princes have
authority to make Knights. CAP. 3.
IT is affirmed by some writers, that Alexander the great, with the advice of
his learned tutor Aristotle, resolved to bestow upon such persons as had done
any notable service in the war, some honor and degree, in token of
extraordinary virtue and notable merit: and therefore gave unto some Badges,
to some Cheines, to some Privileges, and other such like demonstrations of
honor.

The Roman Emperors in like manner, sometimes before the beginning of a
service, and sometimes after, bestowed not only commendation, but also
dignities on those whose virtue they thought so worthy: as Crownets of Bays,
of Gold, of Myrtill, or some other thing, as was thought fit to the giuers.
They gave also Horses, Swords, Armours, arming Garments, and such like: and
they that received them, in token of Honor kept them carefully in perpetual
memory of their own valor, and the honor of that Prince who gave them. By
this mean also they became much admired and esteemed of all other Soldiers.

Afterward, for more encouragement of virtuous minds, other Princes thought
meet that the memorable acts of Soldiers should be in perpetual memory
written, and such Privileges as were given, to be recorded, calling them in
those writings valiant men, companions in Arms, victorious Soldiers and
Knights. Which manner of proceeding did animate the men of war no less, than
the great pourtraitures which the old Romans were wont to make for those that
had performed egregious acts.

Touching the making of Knights, we say, that every Prince sovereign has
power to give that dignity to what person it pleases him, as well in peace as
war. But here is to be noted, that the Knights made, are of more or less
reputation, according to the quality of that Prince that makes them: for he
that is made Knight by a King, shall be preferred before a Knight made by a
Prince of meaner title. Wherefore to conclude, we say, that an Emperor,
Kings, Dukes, and other Princes, acknowledging no superior, may make Knights:
and so may Commonweals, as the Venetian and Genoa States. The Popes also do
take upon them to make Knights for money, calling them commonly after their
own names: Cauallieri di San Petro, San Paulo, Giuliani, Pij, etc.

The manner of making Knights, about the year of our Lord. 1020. CAP. 4.
IN that age, a Prince determining to make a Knight, caused a high scaffold to
be built in some Cathedral Church of his kingdom, or other spacious place
near unto it. Thither the Gentleman was brought to receive that honor. Being
come, he was forthwith set upon a Chair of silver covered with green silk.
Then was demanded of him, if he were healthie in body, and able to endure the
exercises required in a Soldier. Also, whether he were a man of honest
conversation, and what witnesses worthy credit he could produce to answer
for him. This being done, the Bishop or chief officer of that Church took the
Bible, and holding it open before the new Knight, in the presence of the King
and all others, spoke these words, saying. Sir, you that desire to receive the
order of Knighthood, swear before God and by this holy Bible, that ye shall
never fight against this mighty and excellent Prince that bestows the order
of Knighthood upon you, unless ye shall be occasioned so to do in the service
of your own King and natural Prince: for in that case (having first yielded
up the Collar; devise, and other Ensigns of Honor now received) it shall be
lawful for you to serve against him, without reproach or offense to all other
companions in Arms: but otherwise doing you shall incur infamy, and being
taken in war, shall be subject to the pains of death. Ye shall also swear,
with all your force and power to maintain and defend al Ladies, Gentlewomen,
Orfants, widows, women distressed and abandoned. The like ye must do for
wives being desired, and shun no adventure of your person in every good
war wherein ye happen to be.

This oath taken, two of the chief Lords led him unto the King, who presently
drew forth his Sword and laid the same upon his head, and said: God and S.
George (or what other Saints the King pleased to name) make thee a good Knight.

Then came unto the Knight seven noble maidens attired in white, and girt his
Sword unto his side.

That being done, four Knights of the most honorable in that presence put on
his Spurs.

These ceremonies past, the Queen took him by the right arm, and a Duchess
by the left, and led him unto a rich seat made on high, and thereupon set him:
the King sitting down on the one hand, and the Queen on the other.

After the King and Queen were thus set, and the new Knight between them, all the rest of the Lords and Ladies set them down also upon other seats
prepared for them, three dissents under the Kings seat.

Every Lord and Lady being in this sort placed, thither was brought a solemn
Collation or Banquet of delicate meats, whereof the Knight, the King, the
Queen, and the whole company did eat. And so the Ceremony ended.

The order of disgrading of Knights in those days. CAP. 5.
IF any Knight had in that time been corrupted with money by his Princes
enemy, or committed any other notable fault against loyalty and honor, the
other Knights forthwith made humble suite unto the King that he might be
punished. Which request being granted, they apprehended the offender, and
caused him to be armed from head to foot, in such sort as if he should go to
the field. Which done, they led him up to an high stage made in a Church for
that purpose, where were thirteen Priests saying those prayers ordinarily
used at Burials, as though that Knight had lien dead at their feet. At the end
of every Psalm they took from him one piece of his Armor. First, they took
off his Helmet as that which defended his traitorous eyes, then his Gauntlet on
the right side as that which covered a corrupt hand: then the Gauntlet of the
left hand, as from a member consenting. And so by peecemeale dispoyled him of
all his Arms, as well offensive as defensive, which one after another were
thrown to the ground: and at the instant when every part of Armor was cast
down, the King of Arms first, and after him all the other Herehaults cried
aloud, saying: This is the Helmet of a disloyal and miscreant Knight. Then was
brought thither a Basin of gold or silver full of warm water: which being
holden up, the Herehaults with a loud voice, said: What is this Knights name?
The Purseuants answered that which in truth was his name. Then the King of
Arms said. That is not true, for he is a miscreant and false traitor, and such
a one as has broken the ordinance of Knighthood. Thereunto answered the
Chaplins. Let us give him his right name. Then spoke the Trompets. What shall
be done with him? To which words the King answered: Let him be with dishonor
and shame banished my kingdom, as a vile and infamous man that has done
offense against the honor of Knighthood. When the King had so said, the King of
Arms and other Herehaults cast the warm water on the disgraded Knights face
(as though he were a new baptized) saying: Henceforth thou shall be called by
thy right name Traitor. Then the King together with twelve other Knights put
upon them mourning garments declaring sorrow: and coming unto the Knight
disgraded put him down the stage, not by the staiers he mounted up, when he
was made Knight, but threw him down tied unto a rope. Then with great ignomie
he was brought unto the Altar, and there laid groueling on the ground, and
over him was read a Psalm full of curses.

These were the Ceremonies used at the degradatio^ of Knights in the time of
Sir Tristram, Sir Lancelot, and other famous Knights, who were (no doubt) men
very valiant in Arms: but by means of writers that have added unto their acts
many untruths, their prowess and enterprises are holden as fables.

How many orders and degrees of Knighthood have been: and of them how many yet
extant. CAP. 6.
1 THe first and most noble order, both for antiquity and honor, is that of
the GARTER. 2 The next to it is that of the TOSON. 3 The third is that of S.
MICHAEL. 4 The fourth is that of the NVNTIATA. 5 There is also one new order
of Knighthood in France, called the Order of S. ESPRIT: whereof I am not fully
informed.
All these Knights be called Knights of the Collar, in sign they excel others
in Honor and reputation: as those Orders whereinto Emperors, Kings and Princes
do enter.

Next to these in dignity, are 1 The Knights of the BAND. 2 The Knights of S.
IAGO. 3 The Knights of CALATRAVA. 4 The Knights of ALCANTARA. 5 The Knights of
MONTESIO. 6 The Knights of REDEMPTION. 7 The Knights of MALTA. 8 The Knights
TEVTONICI.


The third sort of Knights, are 1 The Knights of the SEPVLCHER. 2 The Knights
of SANTA MARIA. 3 The Knights of S. LAZARO. 4 The Knights of S. STEFFANO.


These may be called rather Knights of Superstition, than persons of Honor.

Among these, we make no mention of Knights of the Round Table: neither have
we set down the Knights of Amadis de Gaul, nor of Orlando Furioso: Yet do I
suppose some part of those stories to be matters of truth, although writers
have added unto them things incredible. By which mean the histories themselves
are holden fabulous.

We have not here spoken of the Knights of the Star, nor of them which were
called Knights of the Spur: which orders are extinct or not regarded. The
Knights Templers were also long since cleerelie suppressed.

Of the Order of the Garter. CAP. 7.


EDWARD the third King of England, after he had obtained many great victories,
(King John of France, King James of Scotland, being both prisoners in the Tower
of London at one time, and King Henry of Castile the bastard expulsed, and Don
Pedro restored by the Prince of Wales) did first erect this Order in his
Kingdom Anno 1350. upon no weighty occasion (as is reported).
Notwithstanding, the same is, and long has been in so great honor, as
Emperors, Kings and Princes have desired to be of that company, accompting
it great Honor.

The number of this College or fellowship is 26. Knights, and when any of them
dye, another is chosen by consent of the company.

The Sovereign of the Order is the King of England, his heirs and successors.

THe habit of these Knights is a Kirtle, Gown, Cloak, Chapperon, Collar,
whereat ha^geth the image of S. George. Also a Garter richly furnished with
gold and precious stones, wherevpo^ these French words are written: Honey soyt
qui mal y pence. Which may be thus in English: Evil come to him, that evil
thinks.

This Order was dedicated to S. George, as the Advocate of those Knights.

The custom was long, that these Knights yearly held a feast at the Castle of
Winsor, where is also the Church founded by the same King Edward, who likewise
gave great stipends to certain Priests to serve there.

It is not commonly known what was the occasion that moved the King to make
this Order: but thus have I heard it vulgarly reported. That King Edward
dancing with the Queen and other Ladies of his Court, took up a Garter that
happened to fall from one of them: whereat some of the Lords smiling, the King
said unto them, that or it were long he would make that Garter to be of high
reputation. Upon this ground (it is said) the Order took beginning.

Every year all the Knights on the feast day of S. George, are bound to
resort unto Windsor, or such other place as by the Sovereign shall be appointed.

The principal Officers apperteining to this most honorable Order, are these.
The Prelate. The Chancellor. The Register. The King of Arms named Garter: and
the Usher called the Black Rod. Which places are presently furnished with
these persons. viz. Doctor Cooper Bishop of Winchster, Prelate. Master John
Wolly Esquire, one of her Majesty's privy Counsel, Chauncellor. Doctor Day
Deane of Winsor, Register. Master W. Dethicke chief King of Arms, Garter.
Master William Norris Esquire, Usher.


The Statutes of this great Order are remaining with the said Master Garter, a
Gentleman very studious in his faculty, and careful to preserve the Records
belonging unto the Nobility of England. From him I received the names of these
Knights of the first institution of the GARTER, which I found in an ancient
book of his written in the French tongue.

The first Knights of the Order.
King Edward Sovereign. The Prince of Wales his son. The Duke of Lancaster.
The Earl of Warwick. The Captain de Buch. The Earl of Stafford. The Earl
of Salisburie. The Lord Mortimer. Sir John Lisle. Sir Bartholmew de Bourchesh.
Sir John Bewchamp. The Lord of Mahun. Sir Hugh Courtney. Sir Thomas de Holland.
Sir John de Gray. Sir Richard Fitzsimond. Sir Miles Stapleton. Sir Thomas
Wall. Sir Hugh Wortesley. Sir Neel Loring. Sir John Chandos. Sir James
Dandely. Sir (...) de Holang. Sir Henry Eme. Sir Fauchet de Prichcourt. Sir
Walter Pauelly.
The names of those that are presently of the same most noble Order.
The Queen of England Sovereign. The King of Spain. The Duke Casemirus. The
Vice Conte Montacute, The Earl of Shrewsburie, Earl Marshall of England. The
Lord of Honsdon, Lord Chamberlein. The Earl of Warwick. The Earl of
Hontingdon. The Lord Bourleigh, Lord Threasurer of England. The Lord Gray. The
Earl of Darbie. The Earl of Pembrooke. The L. Howard of Effingham, L.
Admiral of England. The Lord Cobham. The Lord Scroope. The Earl of Essex. The
Earl of Ormond. Sir Christopher Hatton, Lord Chauncelor of England. The Earl
of Sussex. The Lord Buckhurst.
Other degrees of Knighthood in England. CAP. 8.
THree other sorts of Knights there are in England: but because they wear no
garment, badge or sign to show the difference of their degree from other
Gentlemen, they are not noted or known to strangers for Knights. Yet among our
selves we know them right well: for every man having that dignity is called
Sir. As Sir Thomas, Sir John, Sir William, etc.

But here is to be noted, that Knights are not borne, but made, either before a
Battle to encourage them to adventure their lives, or after the fight, as an
advancement for their valor then showed: or out of war they are made for
some notable service done, or some good hope of virtues that do appear in
them.

These Knights are made either by the King himself, or by his commission and
royal authority given for that purpose, or by his Liutenant in the wars, who
has his royal and absolute power for that time. And this order may be
resembled to that which the Romans called Equites Romanos, differing in a
sort, but in some other sort does agree with it: for seldom in all points one
Common wealth does agree with an other, nor long any State accords with it
self. Equites Romani were chosen ex Censu, which is according to their
substance and riches: Even so be Knights in England for the most part,
according to the yearly reuenew of their lands, being able to maintain that
estate: yet all they that had Equestrem Censum, were not in Rome Equites: no
more are all Knights in England that may dispend a Knights land or fee, but
they only to whom it pleases the King to give that honor. In Rome the number
of Equites was uncertain, and so is it of Knights in England at the pleasure
of the Prince.

Equites Romani had Equum publicum, but the Knights of England find horses
themselves both in peace and war. Census Equester among the Romans was at
diverse times of diverse valewe: but in England, who so ever may dispend of his
free lands forty pounds starling of yearly reuenew, by an old law, either at
the Coronation of the King, or marriage of his daughter, or at the dubbing of
the Prince, Knight, or some such great occasion, may be by the King compelled
to take that order and honor, or to pay a fine: which many rich men, not so
desirous of honor as of riches, had rather disburse. Some also who for good
respect are not thought worthy that title, and yet have ability, neither be
made Knights though they would, and yet pay the fine of forty pounds starling,
which (as silver is now prised) is 120. pound current money. Whereof this word
Knight is derived: or whether it signifies no more but that which Miles does
in Latin, which is Soldier, I know not. Some hold opinion that the word Soldier
does betoken a waged or hiered man to fight. Caesar in his Commentaries called
Soldiers, men devoted and sworn by band or oath to serve the Captain: which
order if the Almaines did follow, it may be that they who were not hiered,
but being of the Nation upon their own charges and for their advancement, and
by such common oath and band that did follow the war, were (perhaps) called
Knights or Milites: and now among the Almaines some are called Lance-Knights,
as Soldiers not hiered, although they be well near all hiered. Or it may be
that they which were next about the Prince, as his Guard and servants, picked
and choice men out of the rest, being called in the Almaine tung Knighten,
which is as much to say as Servants: these men being found of good service, the
word afterward was taken for an Honor, and for a man that professes Arms. Now
our language is so altered, that hard it were to give judgment thereof. But
sure it is, we in our English do call him Knight, whom the French do call
Cheualier, and the Latin Equitem, or Equestris ordinis.

Touching the making of these English Knights: the manner is this. He that is
to be made Knight, is stricken by the Prince with a Sword drawn, upon his back
or shoulder: the Prince saying, Soys Cheualier, and in times past was added S.
George. And when the Knight rises, the Prince says, Auance. This is the
manner of dubbing Knights at this present: and that term dubbing was the old
term in this point, and not creating. These sorts of Knights, are by the
Herehaults called Knights Batchelers.

Of Knights of the Bath.
AT the Coronation of a King or Queen there are made Knights of the Bath, with
long and curious Ceremonies, whereof I am not perfectly informed.

Of Knights Bannerets.
THese Knights are made in the field only, with the Ceremony of cutting away
the point of his Standerd, and making it as it were a Banner: he being before a
Batcheler Knight, shall then become of greater degree, allowed to display his
Arms in a Banner, as Barons do: and the wives of all these three degrees of
Knights shall be called Ladies, as Barons wives are.

The Order of the Toson, and the original thereof. CAP. 9.


THe number of Knights that were at the first admitted into this Order was 31.
who ought be of noble blood, men of good merit, and without reproach.

The chief or head of this company, is he unto whom the succession of the
Dukedom of Burgondy does lawfully descend.

Whosoever enters into this Order, shall renounce all other Orders of
Knighthood of every Prince, Company or Religion. Yet out of that law are
excepted all Emperors, Kings and Dukes, unto whom is dispensed, that they may
wear the Badge of this Order, if they be chief and Soueraines of their own
Order. But to the end the truth may appear, a general Counsel of Knights
shall be called to consent unto that dispensation.

The Sovereign of this Order, has authority himself alone to give and
bestow the Ensign of the Order: which is a Collar of gold, wherein are the
Arms of Burgondie, having the Toson of gold hanging thereat. This Collar, the
Sovereign and every of the Knights is bound to wear daily, and failing
thereof shall incur a penalty. But in time of war or great affairs, to
wear the Toson only shall suffice. Or if by mishap the Cheine do break, it
is lawful for mending thereof it may be carried to the Goldsmith. Or if any
Knight travailing by the way shall doubt to be robbed, he may without offense
lay by or hide his Cheine. Yet is it not lawful to increase the quantity of
the said Cheine, nor add thereunto any other stones or workmanship, and most
of all it is unlawful to sell it, engage it, or exchange it.

These and many other Statutes and ordinances the Knights of this noble Order
are sworn to observe and keep. And many of them have been since the first
institution enlarged, altered, or taken away by the Soueraines of the said
Order.

The day of assembly for these Knights, was at the first institution appointed
on the feast of S. Andrew, but sithence altered unto the second of May, and
that but once in three years, unless it shall please the Sovereign otherwise
to command.

To this Order do belong four principal Officers. That is, a Chauncelor, a
Threasurer, a Register, a King of Arms named Toson d'oro.

The first inuenter of the Impresa belonging to the Order of the Toson, was
Charles Duke of Burgondie, whose great valor brought the French King Lewis the
xj. into much trouble and war, as Monsier de Argenton writes.

His Impresa or devise was an Instrument made to strike fire, with these words:
Ante ferit, quam flamma micet. Meaning, he had power to kindle great war, as
indeed he had. But his wars had unhappy event. For having in hand a war
against Lorayn and the Swisses, after the defeat of Morat and Grauson, he was
utterly overthrown and slain before Nansi, the even of the Epiphany.
Whereupon Renato Duke of Lorayn being victorious, and seeing a Standerd of Duke
Charles, with the Impresa of the Instrument of fire, said. That unhappy Prince
when he had most need to warm him, wanted leisure to strike fire. Which
speech was very pithie; and the more, for that the earth was then covered with
Snow, and by reason of the conflict full of blood. At that time was the
greatest frost and cold that any living man could remember.

The Toson which these Knights do wear hanging at their collers of the Order,
is the form of a golden Fleece, expounded to be like unto the Fleece of gold
which Jason won at Colchos. Others suppose it to be the Fleece of Gedeon,
whereof is made mention in holy Scripture: which signifies, Fidelity or
Justice uncorrupted.

The number of these Knights was much increased by the Emperor Charles the
fifth: who having in hand the Dukedom of Burgondie, elected into that Order
persons of greater quality than were at the first, and would have that the
election should be by consent. And after him King Phillip did the like.

Here is to be noted, that albeit Duke Charles did invent the Impresa: yet the
Creation was begun after by Duke Phillip, surnamed Le bon: at such time as he
called a general assembly of the States at the Hage in Holland. Anno. 1456.

The names of Knights in this first Creation.
Phillip Duke of Burgondie, Sovereign. William of Vienna of S. George. Rinieri
Pot, Lord of the Castle. The Lord of Rombaix. The Lord Montacute. Orland of
Vquerque. Anthony of Vergi, Conte of Lignij. Hugh of Lanoij, Lord of Santes.
John, Lord of Cominges. Anthony of Tolongeon, Marshall of Burgondie. Peter of
Lucimburg, Conte of Beureuie. Gilbert of Lanoij, Lord of Villerual. John
Villiers, Lord of Isleadam. Anthony Lord of Croij and of Renti. Florimonte of
Brimeu, Lord of Massincure. Robert, Lord of Mamimes. James of Brimeu, Lord of
Grigni. Baldwin Lanoij, Lord of Mulambais. Peter of Baufremont, Lord of Cargni.
Phillip, Lord of Teruant. John of Orequi. John of Croij Lord of Tuors, super
Marne.
The Knights elected into the Order of Toson, by Phillip King of Spain and
Duke of Burgondie.
1 Phillip Duke of Austria, and King of Spain, Sovereign of the Order. 2
Maximilian the Emperor, second of that name. 3 Don Beltramo della Cueua, Duke
of Alburqueque. 4 Don Inigo Lopes di Mendoza, Duke of Infantasgo. 5 Cosmo di
Medici Duke of Florence, and of Siena. 6 Don Emanuel Filibert, Duke of Sauoya.
7 The Admiral Conte of Egmont, Prince of Gaure. 8 John of Ligni Conte of
Arumberghe, Baron of Brabanson. 9 Octauio Farnese Duke of Parma and Piacenza.
10 Marco Antonio Colonna, Duke of Palliano and Baron of Rome. 11 Ferdinando
Duke of Austria. 12 Don Consaluo Fernandes of Cordoua, Duke of Sessa and
Ferranoua, Conte of Cabia. 13 Don Pedro Hernandes of Velasco Duke Frius,
Conestable of Castiglia. 14 Don Fernando Aluares of Toledo Duke of Alua. 15
Albert, Duke of Bauiera. 16 Henry Duke of Branswiche Luniburg. 17 Pietro
Hernesto Conte di Mansfelt. 18 Phillip de Croij, Duke of Arscot. 19 Charles
Prince of Spain. 20 Phillip Montmorancy Conte of Horn. 21 William of Nassau,
Prince of Orange, and Lord of Breda. 22 John Conte of Ostfaie. 23 Charles Baron
of Barlemont, Lord of Perunet. 24 Charles of Brimen, Conte of Megen, Lord of
Huuercourt. 25 John, Marquis of Berges, Conte of Walhayn. 26 Antonio Doria
Marquis of San Steffano, Lord of Giersa. 27 Don Francisco Fernandes d' Auolos,
Marquis of Piscara. 28 Sforza Sforza S. Fiore, Conte of S. Maria, of Versi,
Lord of Castello Arquato. 29 Phillip of Montmorancy Lord of Aricourt. 30
William of Croij Marquis of Renty. 31 Florence of Montmorancy Lord of
Montegnij. 32 Phillip Conte of Ligni, and of Faulquembergh. 33 Charles of Lanij
Prince of Sulmona. 34 Anthony of Salaing Conte of Hoochstrat. 35 Giouachino of
Mehausem great Chauncelor of Boemia. 36 The Duke of Medina Celi. 37 The Duke of
Cordoua. 38 The King of Portugal when he comes to full age.
Of the Order of S. Michael. CAP. 10.


IN the year 1469. Lewis the xj. then French King erected an Order of
Knighthood, whereinto himself, with others the most principal Peers of
France did enter.

It is said, the occasion which moved the King to entitle this Order with the
name of S. Michael, was the memory of an apparition of that Saint upon the
bridge of Orleance, when that City was assailed by the English: at which time
lived a certain Maiden called Ioane, a woman so rare of wit and valiant in
Arms, as was reputed more than a mortal creature, or rather some Inchantresse
of singular knowledge. This I find written: but in that time of Superstition
easy it was to induce the people to believe things incredible.

This Order is also ornefied with a great Collar, whereat hangs the Image of
S. Michael.

The words apperteining thereunto are these: Immensi tremor Oceani.

The Sovereign of this Order is the French King and his successors.

The number of Knights that ought be admitted into the said Order is 36. But
of late years that ordinance has been broken, and the number so much
increased, as thereby the Order is become of small reputation: yet is it
thought that the Collar apperteining unto the said Order is given only to the
number aforesaid: although the Michael is bestowed on many. But sure it is that
the intent of that King was to make choice only of the most noble personages
of his own blood, and of others who for virtue and honor were holden worthy,
as by the first election appeared: who were these.

The first Knights of the Order of S. Michael.
Lewis the xj. Sovereign. King Charles of Spain Duke of Vienna. John Duke of
Burbon and of Auergne. Lewis of Lucimburg, Conte of S. Paul, and Conestable of
France. Andrew di Laual, Lord of Loheac, Marshall of France. John Conte of
Sanserre, Lord of Bueil. Lewis of Beaumont, Lord of the Forest and of Plessis
Mace. John of Tutuille Lord of Castiglione. Lewis Bastard of Burbon, Conte of
Rossiglione Admiral of France. Anthony of Chiabanes, Conte of Dammartin, Grand
master of the Kings house. John Bastard of Armignac, Conte of Cominges,
Marshall of France, and Governor of the Delfinato. George of Trimouille, Lord
of Craon. Gilbert of Gabanes, Lord of Croton, Seneschall of Vienna. Lewis Lord
of Cursol, Seneschall of Poilou. Tanequi of Castello, Governor of the Province
of Rossiglion and of Sardena.
The rest of Knights to be chosen into this Order, was deferred until the next
meeting.

The place of assembly of these Knights, and where their Arms and other
Ensigns of Knighthood should be preserved, was appointed to be the Church on
Mount S. Michael.

Unto this Order were appointed a Threasurer, a Chauncellor, a Register, and
one Herehault named Monsanmichaele.

The Feast ordained for these Knights was on Michaelmas day yearly to be kept.

The Statutes apperteining unto this honorable Order, are to be seen in the
book, entitled, The Ordinances of France.

Of the Order called the Nuntiata. CAP. 11.


THis Order was also about the same time begun by Amedeo Conte of Sauoy,
surnamed il Verde, in memory of Amedeo the first Earl, who having valerouslie
defended the Island of Rhody against the Turks, wanne those Arms, which
deseruinglie is now borne by the Dukes of Sauoya, which is a white Cross in a
red field. The Collar apperteining to this Order, is made of gold, and on it
these four letters ingraued, in this wise. F.E.R.T. which signifies Fortitudo
eius, Rhodum tenuit. At the said Collar hangs a Brooch, wherein is the figure
of our Lady and the Angel sent unto her.

The Church appointed for Ceremonies apperteining unto this Order is called
Pietra, a Castle within the Diocese of Belleis, whereunto was given at the
foundation of this Order, certain lands for the sustentation of fifteen
Chaplins.

For continuance of this Order, at the time of the constitution were made many
honorable ordinances to be kept by the Knights presently elected, and after to
be elected: which are to be found written in the works of Francisco Sansouino.

These four Orders aforesaid be reputed most honorable, and are adorned with
great Collers, in token that for state and dignity they excel the rest.

Knights of the Band. CAP. 12.
THis Order was first erected by Alfonso King of Spain, son to Ferdinando
and Queen Constanza in the year 1268. And to give the said Knighthood
reputation and honor, the King himself, with his sons and brethren
vouchsafed to enter thereinto: with them were also admitted diverse other
Gentlemen of best quality and greatest estimation.

The cause that moved the King to name them Knights of the Band, was, for that
he commanded every man elected into the Order, should wear a certain red
scarffe or lace of silk the breadth of three inches, which hung on their left
shoulder, and was tied under the right arm.

No man might enter into this Knighthood, but such as the King did specially
admit: neither was any person capable of that dignity, unless he were the
son of a Knight, or some Gentleman of great account, or at the least such a
one as had served the King by the space of ten years in his Court, or in the
war against the Moors.

Into this Order no Gentleman could be received being an elder brother, or an
heir in possession or appearance, but only such as were younger, without land
and liueload; because the Kings intention was to advance the Gentlemen of his
Court that had not of their own.

At such time as any Gentleman was admitted a Knight, he promised to observe
these Articles following, which I have thought good particularly to express,
and the rather because they tend only to enterteine the minds of men in the
offices of Courage and Courtesy, without any mixture of superstition, whereof
almost al other Orders in those days tasted.

First, that he should speak unto the King for the commodity of the Common
wealth and the defense thereof, so often as he were thereunto required. And
refusing so to do, shall forfeit all his patrimony, and be banished his
Country.

That he should above all things speak the truth unto the King, and at every
occasion be faithful to his Majesty.

That he should not be silent when so ever any person should speak against the
Kings honor: upon pain of being banished the Court, and deprived of his Band
for ever.

That he should be no great speaker, and in speaking to utter the truth. But
if he should affirm or say any untruth, then for a punishment to walk in the
streets without his sword for one whole month.

That he should endeavor himself to keep company with wise men, and persons
experienced in the war. For being found to converse with Merchants,
Artificers, or base people, he should be therefore greatly reproved by the
Great Master, and for one month be commanded to keep his house.

That he should maintain his own word, and faithfully keep promise with his
friends. And being found to do otherwise, to be enjoined to walk and go
alone unaccompanied of any other of the Kings Court, and should not presume to
speak or come near unto any other Knight.

That he should always have good Armor in his Chamber, good horses in his
stable, good Lances in his Hall, and a good Sword by his side: or otherwise to
be called Page and no Knight for one whole month.

That he should not be seen mounted upon any Mule, or other unseemly
Hackney: neither walk abroad without his Band, nor enter into the Kings
Palace without his Sword, nor eat alone at home, upon pain to forfeit for
every such offense one mark toward the mainteining of the Tilt.

That he should be no flatterer of the King or any other person, neither take
delight in scoffing, upon pain to walk on foot for one month, and be
confined to his house another month.

That he should not complain of any hurt, nor boast of his own acts, nor in
curing his wounds cry oh: for if in vaunting wise he uttered any ostentacious
speech, he should be reproved by the great Master, and let alone unvisited of
all his companions.

That he should be no common gamester, chiefly at the Dice, nor consent that
others should play in his house, upon pain to forfeit for every such offense
one months pay, and for one month and half not to be seen in the Court.

That he should not in any sort lay to pawn his Armor or weapons, nor play
away his garments: upon pain to be imprisoned in his own house a whole
month, and for two months following to go without the Band.

That he should be daily apparelled in fine cloth, and on holy days in
silk: and on high Feasts wear gold in his garments if he pleased, without
being compelled so to do. But if he did wear Buskins upon netherstocks of
cloth, the great Master should take them from him, and give them in alms to
the poor.

That in walking either in the Court or City, his pace should not be swift or
hasty, upon pain to be reproved of his fellow Knights, and punished at the
great Masters discretion.

That he should not speak any thing unfit or offensive to his fellows in
Arms, upon pain to ask him forgiveness, and to be banished the Court for
three months.

That he should not commence or enter suite of law against the daughter of any
Knight, upon pain never to have Lady or Gentlewoman of the Court to his
mistress or wife.

That if he happened to meet with any Lady or Gentlewoman of the Court, he
should forth with alight from his horse and offer her his service, upon pain
to lose one months wages and the favor of all Ladies.

That if any Lady of Honor required service at his hand, he refusing to do it
(having power) should be called for ever the discourteous Knight.

That he should not eat alone, nor at any time feed upon gross meats.

That he should not enter quarrel with any of his fellow Knights: or if any
such disagreement did happen, that he nor any other Knight should make party,
but by all good means seek to reconcile them, upon pain to pay a mark
toward the charge of the next Iusts.

That if any man not being of this Order should presume to wear the Band, that
then he should be forced to fight with two Knights: but vanquishing them,
should be also a Knight himself: and being vanquished, should be banished the
Court, and never to wear the Band.

That if at any Iusts or Tournaments in the Court, a Gentleman being not of the
Order, should win the prize, then the King was bound forthwith to make him a
Knight of the Band.

That if any Knight of the Band did offer to draw his sword against any of his
fellows: for so doing should absent himself two months, and two other
months wear but half his Band. And if a Knight did hurt his fellow in
Arms, he should be imprisoned one half year, and the next half year be
banished the Court.

That no Knight for any offense should be punished or judged, before he were
brought to the King and his pleasure signified.

That he should be ever furnished to attend on the King whenever he went to
the war: and if any battle were stricken, then ought these Knights jointly
to give the charge: and if in any such service a Knight performed not his part,
he should lose one years pay, and one other year wear but half the Band.

That no Knight should be enforced to serve in any war, save only against
the Infidels. Or attending on the King to any other war to wear no Band: and
if he served any other Prince in his war, he should lose the Band.

That all the Knights should assemble three times a year to consult upon
matters perteining to the Order. The assembly was at such place as the King
pleased to appoint, and there they awaited with their Horse and Armor: the
first meeting was in April, the second in September, and the last in Christmas.

That all the Knights of this Order should fight at the Turney at the least
twice every year, Just four times a year, play at the Canes six times a
year, and manage horses every week. And who so failed to perform all or any
of these Knightly exercises, should attend on the King one month without a
Sword, and one other month without a Band.

That if the King did come to any city or town, that then the Knights within
eight days after, should prepare a place for the Iusts and Turniaments: they
should also exercise all other warlike weapons: and if any Knight were
negligent in these things, he should be confined to his lodging, and wear
but half the Band.

That no Knight might remain in Court without a Mistress, with intent to marry
her, and not dishonor her: and whenever she pleased to walk, he was to
attend on her on foot or horseback, to do her all honor and service.

That if any Iusts were holden within ten mile of the Court, every Knight to
be there, under pain to go without his Sword for one month, and without his
Band another month.

That if any of these Knights were married within twenty miles of the Court,
all the rest should accompany him to the King to receive a gift, and from
thence to the place of wedding to exercise feats of Arms there, and every
Knight to present the Bride with some gift.

That the first Sunday of every month, all the Knights should show
themselves armed before the King, ready to perform any action of Arms at the
Kings pleasure: for the King would not have them be only Knights in name, but
in deed also.

That in no Turniament there should be more Knights than thirty on one
party, and so many on the other party, and that no Sword should be brought
into the place but such as were rabbated both of edge and point. And that upon
the sound of Trompet the fight should begin, and at the sound of the Clarions
every man to cease from fight and retire, upon pain that who so failed,
should never more enter into that Combat, and be banished the Court for one
month.

That at every day of Iusts each Knight should pass four Carieraes, before
four Knights appointed for Judges: and they who brake no staves in those
courses, should pay the charge of the Iusts.

That if any Knight were sick and in perrill of death, all other his fellow
Knights should visit him, and exhort him to godliness. And if indeed he did
dye, to accompany his corse to the grave. Also to mourn in black one whole
month, and absent themselves from the exercise of Arms for the space of three
months, except the King should otherwise command.

That within two days after such funeral, all the Knights should assemble,
and present the Band of the dead Knight unto the King, making humble suite for
some of his sons to succeed, if any of them were meet, praying it would
please his Majesty to be good to the mother, that she might live according to
her honorable calling.

Knights of San Iago. CAP. 13.


NExt unto the Knights aforesaid, for honor and estimation are these Knights of
S. James in Spain, by the Spaniards called Caualieri di San Iago. The
original of which Order was this.

At such time as the Arabians had well near conquered that Country, the
remainder of the Spanish people refusing to live under the laws of that
barbarous Nation, retired themselves unto the mounteines of Asturia, and there
settled a government.

After some years of their abode there, certain Gentlemen consulting
together, determined to make an assotiation and begin a war upon the
Infidells. These Gentlemen to the number of thirteen, being all Barons and men
of great quality, agreed also upon certain religious rules of Knighthood, yet
reserving unto themselves liberty of marriage.

The Ensign which they resolved to wear, was a red Cross in the form of a
Sword.

This Order was erected at such time as the King Don Ramiro wanne the victory
against the Moors in the Province of Compostella, at which time great
possessions and privileges were given to S. James of Compostella. Anno. 1030.

This Order has one chief Governor, who is called Great Master; he with
thirteen other Knights have authority to choose or remove any Knight at
their discretion.

Upon the Feast day of All Saints these Knights do use to meet, and consult
upon matters apperteining to their estate.

The revenues belonging to these Knights is merueilous, amounting to many
hundred thousand Ducats.

Many Popes have given their allowance to this Order, yet either they could
not, or would not reserve a greater tribute thereof, than ten Malachini yearly.

Knights of Calatraua. CAP. 14.


BY imitation of the Order aforesaid, was this Knighthood of Calatraua begun in
the year 1130. The inuenter thereof was Don Santio King of Toledo.

They were called Knights of Calatraua, of the Province and place where they
were made and settled, which was where ancientlie the chief Church of Templers
had been, who not being of power sufficient to resist the Saracens, were forced
to yield the place unto these Knights.

The habit of these Knights is a black garment, and upon it in the breast is
set a red Cross.

These Knights have also exceeding great possessions, and many Commandries in
diverse places of Spain.

Knights of Alcantara. CAP. 15.


THese Knights living in effect under the ordinances and rules of the former,
do wear a green Cross.

Near unto the City of Alcantara in Castiglia upon the river of Tago, they
have a Church of great beauty, endowed with rich possessions.

Knights of Montesio. CAP. 16.


IN Valentia are the Cauallieri di Montesio, a place also seated in that
Province.

These Knights do wear a red Cross, and their Order begun about the same
time that the Knighthood of Calatraua took beginning.

Knights of Redemption. CAP. 17.


THese Knights were erected in the Kingdom of Aragon by King James, who
conquered the Islands Maiorica and Minorica in the year 1212.

Their garments are white, and thereon a black Cross.

The office of these Knights is to redeem prisoners, whereupon they are called
Caualieri della Redentione.

The chief Governor of them remains at Bercellona.

Knights of S. John in Jerusalem: of some called Knights of the Rhodes: and
now, Knights of Malta. CAP. 18.


IT is written (with what warrant I know not) that at the City of Amiens in
Picardie a Province of France, there was borne a certain Gentleman, who in his
childhood had been brought up in learning: and being grown to man's estate,
disposed himself to the exercise of Arms, and therein long time continued.
Afterward, having atteined riper years, he despised the world, and framed
himself to a solitary life, as one fully resolved to live in contemplation
unseen of any but God alone. Having sometime remained in that solitary sort,
a sodeine desire he had to visit the Sepulcher where Christ was buried, which
shortly after he did. And to the end he might with security pass the
barbarous Nations, he apparelled himself like unto a Physician; by which mean
without impediment he performed his journey. Thus having passed the difficulties
of travel in diverse strange Countries, he arrived at Jerusalem, and being
there, fell into acquaintance with Simon, Patriarch of that City, and in
lamenting wise informed him of the oppression and cruelty offered and daily
used by the Infidels toward the poor Christians. Whereunto Simon answered,
that albeit the Christians in those Countries endured great outrages, yet they
of Jerusalem suffered much greater, and should be forced to more if God did not
defend them.

By this conference, the Patriarch conceived Peter the Hermit (for so he was
called) to be a man of good understanding, and apt to execute any action of
importance that should be committed unto him. Whereupon the Patriarch
determined to make him a messenger unto the Pope, unto whom by letters he
imparted the great calamity and afflicted estate of the poor Christians
inhabiting the Holy land.

Peter having received his instructions and letter of credence, returned into
the West, first unto the Pope, and after solicited other Princes: in such sort,
and with so good success, as by his persuasions, many great Kings and
Potentates consented to take in hand the recovery of the Holy land from the
oppression of the Infidels, and some of them furnished that enterprise with
men, some with money, and some did go in person. Among which number (as the
chief) was Robert Duke of Normandy, son to King William of England, Godfrey
Duke of Lorayn, with two of his brethren called Eustace and Baldwin, Hugh
surnamed the Great brother to the French King: with diverse other Princes,
Dukes, Earls and Barons. Also thither went Beomondo Duke of Calabria, who for
zeal to that service (or desire of honor) resigned his Dukedom unto Ruggiero
his brother, taking with him so many of his subjects as would voluntarily
follow him, of whom (with such other Capteines and Soldiers of Italy as came
unto him) he assembled more than twenty thousand, all choice men and young fit
for the war.

All things in this sort prepared for the journey, Urban the second (then Pope)
sent unto these Capteines a white Cross, with commandment that all the
Soldiers should wear the like, calling that enterprise la Cruciata. It is
said, that the Christians, at such time as this war was proclaimed in
Chiaramont (a City of Auernia) endeavored themselves universally to animate
the Soldiers, and joined in general prayer for their good success, giving
them meat, apparel and furniture, unasked or required. Moreover, those that
were indebted, were forgiven, and such as had been banished were pardoned. The
women also (contrary to their custom) willingly and with much joy consented
their husbands and sons should pass in this enterprise, and for their
furniture gave them their Jewels, Cheines and money. The French King likewise
sent them great treasure, and gave privileges to the Soldiers lands and wives
in their husbands absence. And many great Princes and other Lords sold and
impawned their patrimonies to further this action. So as the Army assembled
for this holy enterprise, amounted unto three hundred thousand footmen, and
one hundred thousand horse, who presently marched toward Constantinople,
where they passed the straight called Bosphoro Tracio, and landed at Calcedonia.

For the first enterprise they besieged Nicea in Bithinia, which within fifty
days was yielded: and the fourth of July at the foot of certain Mounteines
near unto that City, the Christians fought a battle with a Turkish Army,
which in number exceeded ours, and thereat was present Soliman the Emperor of
Turkey and Persia: but the Christians had victory with the loss of two
thousand men: but of the enemies were slain forty thousand.

This victory gained, the Christians following their enterprise, within short
time won an hundred Cities and Towns of account, and among them the great
Antiochia, before which they begun the siege the 20. of October, and took it
the last of May following, where they found Corbona King of Persia, and
Cassiano Lord of Antiochia. Near unto that place in one other conflict were
slain more then an hundred thousand Turks, with the loss of four thousand
of ours.

The cause of this victory was (in that time of Superstition) imputed to the
virtue of a bloody Lance found in Antiochia, which they supposed to be a
Spear wherewith Christ was wounded on the Cross. It was also said, that the
Turks did see, or imagine to see (as they reported) another great Army coming
against them from the Mounteines, conducted by three Capteines mounted upon
three white horses, the beholding whereof occasioned their flight.

This victory being had, a Navy arrived from Genoa and from Venice. Also with
them came certain ships conducted by one Vymer of Bullein in Picardie, a
notable Pirate, who repenting his former life, determined to follow that
honorable action.

The Christian forces thus increased, they marched toward Jerusalem, and
besieged it. And notwithstanding the City was of great force, yet by Gods
help and the valorous adventure of the Christians, it was assaulted, and in
the end yielded. Anno 1099.

This City thus conquered, the said Peter (as the chief procurer of the
enterprise) was highly honored, and Godfrey Duke of Lorayn elected King of the
Holy land.

But to return unto the original of these Knights, I say, that somewhat
before the Christians conquered the City of Jerusalem, they had obtained of
the Saracens leave to dwell near unto the Sepulcher of Christ, and there
builded an house, calling it the Hospital of Christians, whether all other
Christians daily resorted. After that, the number of Christians increasing,
they builded another house for women, calling it S. Mary Magdalens. And at
length they made a third house, and called it S. John Baptists, where for the
keeping of good order they appointed an Officer, whom they called Rector.

Sometime after, was elected unto that Rectorship a Gentleman called Gherardus,
who commanded that he, with all others of that house, should wear a white
Cross upon a black garment, which was the original of the Order, and ever
since has been used.

Afterward one other Rector or great Master was elected, whose name was
Raimondus, to whom authority was given, that he should govern and command
all the Knights of this Order wheresoever they were dispersed.

Many years after, these Knights conquered the I Will of Rhodi, holden by the
Turks Anno 1308. which was the cause they were called Knights of Rhodi. And
diverse Princes seeing them Martiallie inclined, gave unto them great lands and
possessions: and they became greatly esteemed for their service, chiefly
against the said Turks, and the Sultan King of Egypt and Jerusalem. The said
I Will of Rhodi (during those Knights inhabited there) was four times assaulted,
yet by Gods help, with the valiancie of the Knights, it was defended. Then
Mahomet Ottoman Emperor of Turkey Anno 1480. with an excessive force of men
and an hundred sails of Galleys (conducted by a Bassa borne in Greece,
descended of the raze of Paleologhi sometime Emperors of Constantinople) did
besiege it: but after 89. days of continual battery, they were forced to
abandon the enterprise, and for their farewell in the last assault, the Knights
slew more then forty thousand Turks.

But in the year 1523. in the month of January, the Turks again invaded
that Island, and after three months siege prevailed: for the rest of
Christendom never vouchsafed them either aid or relief.

Since the loss of Rhodi, these Knights have remained in the Island of Malta,
and often defended it against the enemies of Christendom, but chiefly in the
year 1565.

The first erector of Statutes and rules for the government of these Knights,
was the said Raimondus, calling himself Raimondo di Poggio, seruo di poueri di
Christo, e custode dello spidale de San Giouanni Battista di Hierusalemme.

No man might be received into this Knighthood, until he had proved his
gentilitie in presence of the great Master and other Knights.

Nor no man descended of a Moore, a Jew, or Mohammedan, might be admitted,
although he were the son of a Prince.

And every Knight of this Order was sworn to fight for the Christian faith,
do justice, defend the oppressed, relieve the poor, persecute the Mahometans,
use virtue, and protect widows and orphants.

Diverse other Articles there be, but for that they are full of Superstition, I
omit them.

The original of the Knights Teutonici. CAP. 19.


THese Knights do not much vary from the former, for their custom is to
intertein Pilgrims, and at occasions to serve in war.

The beginning of this Knighthood was a certain Almaine, who after the taking
of Jerusalem by the Christians (together with diverse others of that Nation)
remained there. This Almaine being exceeding rich and married, kept a frank
and liberal house, relieuing all passengers and Pilgrims that travailed to
Jerusalem: in so much as his house became as an Hospital or place of ordinary
access. At length he builded near unto it a fair Church, which (according to
the use of that time) he did dedicate to our Lady.

Not long after, many Christians resorting thither, as well for love of the
Christian religion, as to visit the sick, they resolved to erect a
fraternity, and having chosen a great Master to be Governor, ordained that
every man of that assotiation, should be apparelled in white, and upon their
uppermost garment wear a black Cross.

It was also agreed, that no man should be admitted into that Order, save
only Gentlemen of the Dutch Nation: and they to protest at all occasions to
adventure their lives in defense of Christ's Gospel.

About 88. years after Jerusalem had remained in the Christians hands, it was
taken again from them by the Saracens in the year 1184. since which time it
never was recovered. For which cause these Knights retired to Tolemaida, where
they remained.

At length Tolemaida being also taken by the Saracens, they returned into
Germany their natural country. Where after some short abode (as loathing
rest and idleness) they went unto Frederigo the second then Emperor in the
year 1220. to let his Majesty understand that the people of Prussia used
incursions upon the confines of Saxony, adding that those people were
barbarous, Idolaters without the knowledge of God, and therefore besought his
Majesty to grant them leave to make war upon them at their own charges, yet
with condition that whatsoever they gained, his Majesty would give the same to
the maintenance of that Order, and they the Knights to be the Lords thereof for
ever.

The Emperor allowing of that suite, presently granted them the Country, and
under his seal confirmed the gift.

These Knights by this donation much encouraged, forthwith took Arms, and
within short space subdued all that Province, and then passed the river of
Vistola, and conquered other people, who became their subjects, and were made
Christians.

Within short space after, these Knights builded diverse Churches, and among
them some Cathedral Temples, making them places of residence for Bishops, who
were also enjoined to wear the habit of the Order.

Near unto the river Vistola was a great Oak, where these Knights builded the
first Castle and Town, which with time was increased and called Borgo di Santa
Maria, where is now the chief Church apperteining to this Order: thereunto
belongs so great riches and revenues, as these Knights may both for men and
money compare with diverse Princes.

This Country of Prussia is great, and much thereof bounded by the river
Vistola: and is also confined by Sarmatia, the Massageti, and Polonia.

These Knights are also Lords of Liuonia, which was likewise by them brought to
the faith of Christianity, and is with Christians now inhabited.

Knights of the Sepulcher. CAP. 20.


THis Knighthood is now extinct, or rather conjoined unto the Order of Malta.

The Ensign belonging to these Knights was two red Crosses.



Knights of S. Mary. CAP. 21.


IN the life of Pope Urban the fourth (at which time was great war among the
Princes of Italy) certain rich Gentlemen of Bolognia and Modona desiring to
eschew the present troubles, and be exempt from public charges, desired of
that Pope to permit them to live in contemplation, and erect a new Order of
religious Knighthood, which for money they obtained, calling themselves Knights
of Saint Mary.

The habit of this Order was very pompous, and thereupon a red Cross wrought
with gold round about.

They were specially inhibited to wear gold in their spurs and horse
harness.

They made profession to fight against the Infidels, and all others that
offended Justice: Notwithstanding, they lived ever at home in rest with their
wives and children.

They were commonly called Caualieri di Madonna: but because they lived
continually in ease and pleasure, men termed them Frati gaudenti: as much in
our language, as Goodfellowe brethren. It may be some of them are yet extant.

Knights of S. Lazaro. CAP. 22.
THese Knights of this Order do plead great antiquity, saying they were in
the time of S. Basil, and their profession has been confirmed by sondrie
Popes. They also affirm, that Frederick the Emperor surnamed Barbarossa,
gave them great possessions in Sicilia, Calabria, Puglia, and Terra di Lauoro:
And to those lands diverse Popes did add much. Notwithstanding, time that
wears all things away, did also consume these riches, and the Order well
near extinct, till of late years Pius quartus the Pope did revive it: who
made Gianotto Castiglione a noble Gentelman of Milan great Master.

These Knights do profess to be obedient unto their great Master, and other
Officers of the Order. They promise also to live chaste, or at the least
continent and content with one wife. Also to be charitable, and liberal,
chiefly to poor people infected with leprosy.

Moreover, every Knight promises to wear a green Cross, and before they
enter into this Knighthood must prove himself to be borne in lawful
wedlock, and a Gentleman both by father and mother, and to bear Arms. Also
that he is descended of ancient Christians, and no Morrano or Turk. That he
has of rent at the least 200. Crowns therewith to maintain his dignity.
That he and his ancestors have ever lived as Gentlemen, without use of any
base or mecanical occupation. That he has not been suspected of any notable
evil fact, or is defamed for any vice. That he be not indebted, nor is wedded
to any widdowe, or has had more than one wife. But besides these passable
protestations, he must undertake to say five and twenty Pater nosters, and so
many Aue marias, with other Superstitious things not worthy the writing.

This Order have of late time been much favored by the Dukes of Sauoy.

Knights of S. Steffano. CAP. 23.


IN the year 1561. Cossimo Duke of Florence and Siena, having settled his
government, and living in peaceable estate, erected this religious Order of
Knighthood, calling those that entered thereunto Caualieri di San Steffano. To
these Knights he gave a red Cross bordered about with gold.

The Statutes annexed unto this Order, are not unlike to those apperteining to
the Order of Malta: saving that these have liberty to marry.

The chief place of their resiance is the City of Pisa, where the Duke
prepared them a Church, and builded for them a Palace wherein to lodge. And
because near to that City is a Haven fit to receive the Galleys wherein these
Knights should serve, it seemed good to that Prince to settle them there.

The Duke himself and his successors is great Master of this Order: and under
him are diverse other Officers of reputation.

This is the last Order or degree of Knights that I have seen or read of, save
only the great Knighthood of S. Esprit, whereof (as is before said) I am not
informed.

The Ceremonies in the degradation of Knights. CAP. 24.
IT seems that the degradation of Knights has been used only for offenses
of greatest reproach and dishonor: which I conceive partly by the rarenes of
such actions, and partly for that the men bereft of that dignity, were not
only degraded, but also by law executed. As in the reign of King Edward the
4. it appeared a Knight was degraded in this sort.

First, after the publication of his offense, his gilt spurs were beaten from
his heels, then his sword taken from him, and broken. That being done, every
piece of his Armor was bruised, beaten, and cast aside. After all which
disgraces, he was beheadded.

In like manner, Andrew of Hekela Knight and Earl of Cardoyl, was in this sort
disgraded. He being apprehended, was by the Kings commandment brought before
Sir Anthony Lucy, Anno. 1322. apparelled in all the robes of his estate as an
Earl and a Knight, and so led unto the place of Judgment. Being thither come,
Sir Anthony Lucy said unto him these words. First thou shall lose the Order of
Knighthood by which thou had all thine honor: and further, all worship upon
thy body be brought to naught. Those words pronounced, Sir Anthony Lucy
commanded a knave to hew the Knights spurs from his heels, and after caused
his sword to be broken over his head. That done, he was dispoyled of his
furred Tabord, of his Hood, of his furred Cotts, and of his Girdle. Then Sir
Anthony said unto him these words: Andrew, now art thou no Knight, but a
knave, and for thy treason the King does will thou shall be hanged.

This manner of proceeding in the degradation of these two Knights, I found
recorded in an ancient book of Master Garters, written in the self same
words that are here expressed.

The Authors Intention. CAP. 25.
ALbeit the whole scope and intent of this book is to discourse the points of
Honor and dignities apperteining unto Arms; yet for not being mistaken in my
meaning, I have thought good to say, that the commendation due unto learning is
of no less desert, tha^ that which belongs to Martial merit. And indeed
very rarely does any man excel in Arms, that is utterly ignorant in
letters: for by how much one Captain is more learned than another, by so much
is he more capable of government in Arms, and ought be the better reputed.
For who without learning can conceive the ordering and disposing of men, in
marching, incamping, or fighting, without Arithmetique? Or who can comprehend
the ingenious fortifications or instruments apt for offense or defense of
Towns, or passing of waters, unless he has knowledge of Geometry? Or how
may Sea service be performed without skill of the Latitude of the place, by the
Pole, and the Longitude by other Stars: which must be learned of the
Astronomers. Yea learning is (no doubt) of such excellency and necessity,
that no Common weal without it, is well governed. What State can be well
ordered, unless the Governors or Magistrates have studied Philosophy,
chiefly that part which entreats of manners, since it only enformeth, first
how every man should govern himself. Secondly, how he should guide his own
family. And thirdly, teaches how a City or Common weal may be ordered and
governed, as well in times of war as peace: which moved Plato to say: That
happy is the Common weal where either the Prince is a Philosopher, or where a
Philosopher is the Prince. And although it cannot be denied that Empires and
Kingdoms are both won and kept as well by force and manhood, as by wisdom
and policy; yet is the chief of that policy atteined unto by learning. For
in all sorts of governments the wiser have authority over the rude and
unlearned. And as in every private house or town the most discreet and best
experienced are preferred, so in all Nations they that be most civil, learned
and politic, do find means to command the rest, notwithstanding in force
they be inferior. The experience hereof was apparantlie seen in the Grecians
and Romans, among whom, like as wisdom and learning was most esteemed, so
their Empires were spread furthest and continued longest. And to prove that
excellency of learning in those Nations prevailed against others equal with
them in manhood and courage, we will use this only example. That albeit this
realm before any conquest thereof, was (no doubt) inhabited with people of
great courage; yet for that they were uncivil, or at the least without policy
and learning, they were brought under the subjection of other Nations: as the
Saxons were last by the Normanes, and the Romans by the Saxons before that,
and the Britains by the Romans first of all. And albeit diverse men have been
and yet are, both wise and politic without learning, and some also that be
learned (in respect of worldly policy) be very simple: yet I say, that such
wise men should have been more excellent, if they had been learned; and the
other more simple and foolish, if they had been utterly without learning.

Exercise in war makes not every man fit to be a Captain, though he
follows Arms never so long; and yet is there none so unapt for the war,
but with use is more perfect, and the rather if he be learned. For if
experience does help, then I am sure that learning helps much more to the
increase of wisdom. We will then determine, that experience, because it does
further wisdom, may be called the father thereof, and memory the mother;
because she does nourish and preserve it: for in vain should experience be
sought for, if the same were not held in remembrance. Then if both experience
and memory be helped and increased by learning, it must needs be confessed,
that experience helps wit. Every man sees that the experience of an old man
makes him wiser than the young, because he has seen more; yet an old man sees
only things in his own time: but the learned man sees not only his own age
and experience, but whatsoever has been in long time past, yea since the first
writer took pen in hand, and therefore must needs know more than the
unlearned man, be he never so old; for no memory can compare with writing.
Besides that, if the unlearned do forget any thing seen, hardly shall he
reduce it to memory again: whereas the learned man by turning his book, has
mean to call to remembrance what he happens to forget. Therefore, as he that
lives four score years must needs have more experience than he that lives
forty: so he that sees in books the accidents of a thousand years, knows
more than he that by living one hundred years could atteine unto. In like
manner, if he that trauaileth many Nations, is of more experience than others
of like age that never went from his native country: so he that is learned, by
Cosmographie, histories, and other learning, sees the manner and usage of
every Country in the world, yea of many more than is possible for one man in
all his life to travel through: and of these he trauaileth, much better does
he learn, by small abode there, than another by longer experience that is
altogether unlearned. By this learning we may also conceive the situation,
temperature, and quality of every Country throughout the world. Also through
the science of Astronomy, we know the course of the Planets above, and their
Aspects and Conjunctions; which the learned men in times past atteined unto by
long conference and observation; but we by perusing their books only may
learn it: yet without that help we could never. To conclude, there is nothing
either of profit or necessity for man's life, but by learning is taught more
perfectly, than it can be compassed by experience, or other mean whatsoever.

But leaving the commodities of learning to be discoursed by those that are
learned indeed, this only I say, that the endeavor of Gentlemen ought be
either in Arms or learning, or in them both. And in my poor conceit, hardly
deserves he any title of honor or gentilitie, that does not take pleasure in
the one or the other. For as no living creature is borne to idleness, so is
there no doubt but God and nature has destined each one for some commendable
business. And like as base occupations are fit for folk of base fortune, so
valiant and virtuous minds, in actions of honor and virtue should be employed.
And if in this earthly life any thing there be that meriteth fame or favor,
surely the same is a virtuous life and valerous endeavor: whereof Iuuenall
says: Res gerere and captos ostendere ciuibus hosts
Attingit solium Iouis and caelestia tentat.
Principibus placuisse viris non vltima laus est.


The Authors Conclusion. CAP. 26.
WE have said in our former discourse, that no man of any quality or fortune,
is borne or destined to ease, idleness, or unprofitable occupation: we have
likewise touched the commodities of such learnings, as are required in actions
both civil and Martial, whereby may appear, how necessary it is for all
Gentlemen to endeavor themselves in the one and the other, as those knowledges
whereby men are made worthy of honorable title. Notwithstanding, through
corrupt custom or bad education, the greater part of our English Gentilitie is
not only ignorant what honor and virtue means, but consequently disdaineth
(or at the least wise lightly regards) those labors whereby they might and
ought become comfortable to friends, and serviceable to their Prince and
Country: which happily moved the Poet to forewarne fathers to have care of
childrens education, saying: Gratum est quod patriae ciuem populoque dedisti,
Si facis vt patriae sit idoneus, vtilis agris,
Vtilis and bellorum and pacis rebus agendis.


And in continuing the consideration of this matter, I am occasioned to be
right sorry, that our English youth do not only earnestly affect vain
pleasures and improfitable pastimes as recreation; but also use them with
daily labor as their chief business and special profession. And to speak
plainly, I am more then half persuaded, that a great sort of our Gentlemen
(chiefly those that have had their nurture at home with their own ignorant
parents) do take more comfort to be called good Faulkners or expert Woodmen,
than either skillful Soldiers or learned Scollers. Yet who so observes, shall
find, that the same men by secret instinct of gentle nature, do not a little
glory in the ancient badges, titles and services of their auncesters,
supposing those passed merits (supported with riches) ought without further
sufficiency, make them more worthy than others, whose own proper virtue and
labor have indeed deserved much honor. But as no foul flies with the wings
of another, nor no horse does run on legs not his own: so ought no man be
praised or admired for the virtue or good merit of another. And albeit the
fame of auncesters honor, may (for some short space) maintain a certain hope
of virtue, (chiefly where no vice appears) yet time, which does distinguish
things indeed, from those that only appear, will also (like unto counterfeit
metal) bewray the want or worth of every man, and for such a one he shall be
known and esteemed, of what name, house, parentage or predecessor so ever, he
is descended. It therefore behooves every Gentleman well borne to embrace the
love of virtue, and in the actions thereof to employ the course of his whole
life. For what can be more pleasing to a generous mind, than the study of
wisdom? whereby to know good from evil, and truth from falsehood, the one to
be followed, the other eschewed.

What may be more blessed than Justice? whereby we refrain from all injuries,
and give unto every one that which unto him apperteineth. What is more noble
than Fortitude? which contemns all worldly accidents, and with invincible
courage fights for equity and right. And what is more fit or better
beseeming a noble personage, than Temperance? which teaches comelines and
moderation, governing the passions and perturbations of mind, to the quietness
of man's life, and contentation of others. These with other virtues on them
depending, have from base birth and poor parentage, brought many to great
title and dignity. And as those virtuous endeavors have advanced them, so the
discontinuance of like delights, did utterly deface that honor in their
posterity. Virtue I say, is that which from mean estate has ever led the
lovers thereof to great reputation and glory. Among infinite examples
(omitting men of meaner fortune, yet worthy much honor) we have Agathocles,
Eumenes, Pertinax, Dioclesian, Valentinian, with other Emperors, Kings and
Capteines. Of like fortune in birth was Marcus Tullius, Cato, Horace, with
diverse most notable learned men: yea Socrates himself (who by the Oracle of
Apollo was judged the wisest man alive) had no great parentage. And Julius
Caesar, that both for Arms and learning excelled, and was the first Emperor,
aspired from low degree to excessive glory. Notwithstanding, through
protraction of time, and the degeneration of those men's posterity, not only
their own houses and names are vanished, but also the honor and renown of the
Nations where they lived, is utterly decayed and extinguished. Which the
Christian Poet Palingenius expressed well in these verses.

Nempe diu res nulla manet, nempe omnia semper
Deteriora solent fieri, in peiusque referri,
Naturae imperio, and fatorum lege perenni:
Deinde iterum ex alio faetu instaurata rinassi.
Thus have we heard the means of aspiring unto Honor, and by what occasion the
same is lost or decayed. But well I wot, that unto these reasons and examples
produced to incite our English youth, they answer, that were they sure to
attain unto the least part of that fortune these great personages and many
others their inferiors have come unto, then would they not fear to adventure
their labor and lives to the uttermost: but because the pains and perils are
certain, and the success doubtful, they think it more wisdom to Hunt and
Hawke at home, than hazard their bodies abroad, or beat their brains about
that which happily never shall turn them to profit. This silly allegation
compounded of sloth and pusillanimitie, may easily be refelled, but slowly
followed. Notwithstanding, (for that I am used to lose my labor) I will reply
thereunto thus: That seeing no reward is due before desert, and that Honor is
the recompense of virtue, it may not be looked for until some virtuous
testimony be first showed. What Soldier is so simple, as entering into pay
will at the first day look to be made a Captain, or have promise within few
years to become a General? What Scoller will at his first coming to study
demand the degrees due unto Art, or that shortly after (with little
learning) will challenge to be a Doctor? Yet true it is, that sometimes the
simplest Archer does hit the mark, which many an excellent shooter misseth:
notwithstanding, hardly can any wise man be brought to lay money on his side,
or hope of such success. Even so, in the atteining of Honor, although favor
and fortune ofttimes prefers the unworthy, yet the true way and most
likely mean thereunto, is true virtue and industrious life. Wherefore
concluding I say, that every noble and magnanimous mind, does not so much covet
the rewards of virtue, as it takes delight in virtue it self. As the same
Poet says: Propter se virtus petitur, non propter honorem,
Ipsa licet proprie, ac vere, mereatur honorem.


FINIS.

