The school of Virtue, and book of good Nourture for children, and youth to
learn their duty by. Newely perused, corrected, and augmented by the first
Auctour. F. S

With a brief declaracion of the duty of each degree.

Anno. 1557.

Despise not council, rebuking folly ^eme it as, needful and holy.

Imprinted at London in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Hedgehogge by
Wyllyam Seares.

The Auctours name in verdyt.
S Say well some will by this my labor
E Every man yet Will not say the same
A Among the good I doubt not favor
G God them forgive Forced me blame
E Each man I wyshe It shall offend
R Read and then judge Where fault is amend.
Face aut Tace.
The school of virtue.
FIrst in the morning when thou do awake
To God for his grace thy peticion then make.
This prayer following use daily to say
Thy heart lyftynge up Thus begin to pray.
The morning prayer.
O God from whom al good gifts proceed
To thee we repair in time of our need
That with thy grace thou would us endue
Virtue to follow and vice to exchue:
Hear this our request and grant our desire
O lord most humbly we do the require.
This day us detende that we walking aryght
May do the thing acceptable in thy sight.
That as we in years And body do grow
So in good virtues we may likewise flow
To thy honor and joy of our parents
Learning to live well and keep thy co^maundmentes.
In flyinge from all Vice sin and crime
Applyinge our books not losing our time.
May fructifye and go forward here in good doing
In this vale of misery unto our lyuees ending.
That after this life here transitory
we may attain to greater glory.
The Lords prayer then se thou recyte
So using to do at morning and night.
How to order thy self when thou rysest, and in apparelynge thy body,
Capitulo. i.
Fly ever slouthe Cato.
and over much sleep
In health the body thereby thou shalt keep.
Much sleep ingendereth diseases and pain
It dulles the the wit and hurts the brain.
Early in the morning thy bed then forsake
Thy raiment put on thy self ready make,
To cast up thy bed It shall be thy part
Else may they say that beastly thou art.
So to depart and let the same lie
It is not semynge nor yet manerly
Down from thy chamber when thou shalt go
Thy parents salute thou and the famely also
Thy hands se thou wash and thy head keame
And of thy raiment se torn be no seame
Thy cappe fair brusht thy head cover than
Taking it of In speaking to any man.
Cato does council thee Cato.
thine elders to reverence
Declarynge thereby thy duty and obedience.
Thy shyrte coler fast to thy neck knyt
Comely thy raiment look on thy body sit.
Thy gyrdell about thy wast then fasten
Thy hose fair rubd thy shows se be clean.
A napkyn se that thou have in redines
Thy nose to cleanse from all fylthynes.
Thy nails if need be se that thou pair
Thine ears keep clean thy teath wash thou fair.
If ought about thee chance to be torn
Thy friends thereof show how it is worn.
And they will new for thee provide
Or the old mende In time being spyde.
This done thy setchell and thy books take
And to the scole haste see thou make.
But ere thou go with thy self forthynke
That thou take with thee pen paper and ynke.
For these are things for thy study necessary
Forget not then with thee them to carry.
The soldier preparynge him self to the field
Leaves not at home his sword and his shield.
No more should a scoler forget then truly
what he at scole should need to occupy.
These things thus had Take straight thy way
Unto the schole without any stay.
How to behave thy self in going by the streate and in the school. ii.
IN going by the way and passing the street
Thy cappe put of Isocra.
Salute those ye mete
In geuynge the way Cato.
to such as pass by
It is a point of siuilitie.
And thy way fortune so for to fall
Let it not grieve thee thy fellows to call
when to the schole thou shalt resort
This rule note well I do the exhort.
Thy master there being Salute with all reverence
Declarynge thereby thy duty and obedience.
Thy fellows salute In token of love
Lest of inhumanitie they shall thee reprove.
Unto thy place appointed for to sit
Straight go thou to and thy setchel vnknyt
Thy books take out thy lesson then learn
Huubly thy self Behave and govern.
Therein taking pain with all thine in dustry
Learning to get thy book well apply
All things seem hard when we do begin
But labor and diligence Virgil.
yet does them wyn.
we ought not to reckon and coumpt the thing hard
That brings joy and pleasure afterward
Leave of then labor and the lack rue
Lament and repent when age does ensue.
Deades that deserved Fame and great praise
Buried had been we se in oldedayes.
If letters had not then brought them to light
The truth of such things who could now resyght
Apply thy mind to learning and science
For learning in need Cato.
will be thy defense
Nothing to science compare we may well
The swetenes whereof all things does excel. Cicero

And Cato the wise this worthy saying has
That man wantinge learning is as the image of death. Cato.

The roots of learning most bitter we deem Aristot.

The fruits at last Most pleasant does seem.
Then labor for learning while here thou shall live
The ignorant to teach and good example give.
So shalt thou be thought A membre most worthy
The commonwealth to serve In ryme of necessity.
Experience does teach And show to thee plain
That many to honor By learning attain.
That were of birth But simple and bace
Such is the goodness Of Gods special grace.
For he that to honor by virtue does rise
Is double happy and counted most wise.
If doubt thou do Desire to be toulde
No shame is to learn Being never so oulde.
Ignorance does cause Great errors in us
For wantynge of knowledge Doubts to discuss
Then learn to discern the good from the ill
And such as thee warn Bear them good will.
when from the school ye shall take your way
Or orderly then go ye two in array
your selves matchynge So equal as ye may
That men it seeing May well of you say.
In commending this your laudable ways
which must needs sound to your great praise.
Not runnynge on heaps as a swarm of bees
As at this day Every man it now sees.
Not using but refusing Such foolyshe toys
As commonly are used In these days of boys.
As hoopynge and halowynge as in hunting the fox
That men it hearing Deryde them with mockes.
This foolyshnes forsake this folly exchewynge
And learn to follow this order insuynge.
In going by the way Neither talk nor iangle
Gape not nor gase not at every new fangle.
But soberly go ye with countinaunce grave
Humblye your selves toward all men behave. Isocra.

Be free of cappe and full of of curtesye
Great love of al men you shall wyn thereby
Be lowly and gentle and of meke mood
Then men con not but of you say good
In passing the urete Do no man no harm
Use thou few words and thy tongue charm.
Then men shall see that grace in the grows
From whom virtues So abundantly flows
when thou art come where thy parents do dwell
Thy leave then taking Bid thy fellows farewell.
The house then entering In thy parence presence
Humbly salute them with all reverence.
How to behave thy self in ser: uynge the table. Cap. iii
When thy parents down to the table shall sit
In place be ready For the purpose most fyt,
with sober countinaunce Lokynge them in the face
Thy hands holding up this begin grace.
Give thanks to God with one accord Grace before meat.

For that shall be Set on this board.
And be not careful what to eat
To each thing living the Lord sends meat.
For food he will not Se you peryshe
But will you feed Foster and cheryshe,
Take well in worth what he has sent
At this time be therewith content.
Praysynge God.
So treatablie speaking as possible thou can
That the heaters thereof May thee understand.
Grace being said Low cuesie make thou
Saying much good May it do you.
Of stature then if thou be able
It shall become thee to serve the table.
In bringynge to it Such meat as shall need
For thy parence upon that time to feed.
Disshes with measure thou ought to fill
Else may thou happen thy service to spyll.
On their apparel Or else on the cloth
which for to do would move them to wroth.
Spare trenchers with napkyns have in redynes
To serve afterward If there come any guess.
Be circumspect^ see nothing do want^
Of necessary things that there be no skant.
As bread and drink se there be plenty
The voyders with bones Often se thou empty.
At hand be ready If any do call.
To fetch or take up If ought fortune to fall.
when they have done then ready make
The table up fair In order to take
First the saulte Se that thou cover
Having by thee Either one or other
things from thy hands then to conuaye
That from the table thou shall take away.
A voyder upon the table then have
The trenchers and napkyns therein to receive
The croomes with a napkyn together them swepe
It at the tables end In a voydex them keep.
Then before each man A clean treanchour lay
The best first serving As judge thou soon may.
Then cheese with fruit On the table set
With Bisketes or Carowayes As you may get.
Wine to them fill Else ale or bear
But wine is metest If any there were.
Then on the table Attend with all diligence
It for to void when done have thy parence
Each side of the clothe Do thou turn in
Foldynge it up At the higher end begin
A clean to well then On the table spread*
The to well wantynge the cloth take in stead.
The basin and ewer to the table then bring
In place convenient their pleasure abiding.
When thou shall see them ready to wash.
The ewer take up and be not to rash.
In powrynge out water More then will suffice
The table then void that they may rise.
All things thus done forget not thy duty
Before the table Make thou low cursie
How to order thy self sitting at the table. Capitulo. iiii.
O Children give care your duties to learn
How at the table you may your selves govern.
Presume not to high Socra. Cato.
I say in no case
In sitting down to thy betters give place.
Suffer each man First served to be
For that is apoynte Of good courtesy.
When they are served then pause a space
For that is a sign of nourture and grace.
Saulte with thy knyfe then reach and take
The bread cut fair And do not it break.
Thy spone with pottage to full do not fill
For fylynge the cloth If thou fortune to spyll.
For rudnes it is thy pottage to sup
Or speak to any his head in the cup.
Thy knyfe se be sharp to cut fair thy meat
Thy mouth not to full when thou do eat.
Not smackynge thy lyppes As commonly do hogs
Nor gnawynge the bones As it were dogs.
Such rudenes abhor Such beastlynes fly
At the table behave thy self manerly.
Thy fyngers se clean that thou ever keep
Having a Napkyn thereon them to wype.
Thy mouth therewith Clean do thou make
The cup to drink In hand if thou take.
Let not thy tongue At the the table walk
And of no matter Neither reason nor talk. Plato.

Temper thy tongue and belly always
For measure is treasure the proverb does say
And measure in althynges Cicero.
Is to be used
what is without measure Ought to be refused.
For silence keeping thou shall not be shent
where as thy speech May cause thee repent
Both speech and silence I socra.
are commendable
But silence is metest In achylde at the table.
And Cato does say Cato.
that in old and young
The first of virtue Is to keep thy tongue
Pyke not thy teethe at the table sitting
Nor use at thy meat Over much spytynge.
this rudnes of youth Is to be abhorde
thy self manerly Behave at the board.
If occasion of laughter at the table thou se
Beware that thou use the same moderately.
Of good manners learn So much as thou can
It will thee prefer when thou art a man
Aristotle the Philosopher this worthy saying writ Aristot.

That manner in a child are more requisite
then playnge on instruments and other vain pleasure
For virtuous manners Is a most precious treasure.
Let not this saying In no wise thee offen^e
For playnge of instruments He both not discommende.
But does grant them For a child necessary
yet manners much more see here he does vary.
Refuse not his council Nor his words despise
To virtue and knowledge By them may thou rise.
How to order thy self in the Church. Cap. v.
When to the Church thou shall repayer
Knelynge or standing to God make thy prayer.
All worldely matters From thy mind set apart
Earnestly prayinge to God lift up thy heart.
A contrite heart Psalm. l.
He will not dispyse
which he does coumpt A sweet sacrifice.
To him thy sins show and confess
Asking for them Grace and forgyuenes.
He is the Physician that knows thy sore.
And can to health A gain thee restore. James the. i.

Ask then in faith Not doubting to have
The things ye desire ye shall then receive.
So they be lawful Of God to require
He will the hear and grant thy desire.
More merciful he is then pen can express
The aucthor and gener here of all goodness.
All ye that labor Math. x.
and burdened be
I will you refreshe In coming to me.
These are Christ's words the scripture is plain
Spoken to all such as here suffer pain.
Our wylles to his word then let us frame
The heavenly habytacion thereby we may clame.
In the church comely thy self do behave
In usage sober thy countinaunce grave.
while you be there taulke of no matter
Nor one with an other whisper nor chatter.
Reverently thy self Order always
when to the Church thou shall come to pray
Each thing has his time Consider the place
For that is a token of virtue and grace
The Lord does call it Luke. xix.
the house of prayer
And not to be used As is a fayer.
The fruits of gaming, virtue and learning. Capitulo. vi.
O Little child Eschew thou ever gain
For that has brought Many one to shame.
As dysynge and cardynge And such other plays
which many undoes as we se now a days.
But if thou delyght In any earthly thing Cicero.

Delyght in knowledge Virtue and learning.
For learning will lead thee to the school of virtue
And virtue will teach thee Vice to subdue.
Vice being subdued thou can not but floryshe
Happy is the man that virtue does norysh.
By knowledge likewise thou shall doubts discern
By virtue again thy life well govern.
These be the fruits By them we do take
Cursed is he then that does them forsake.
But we err in wit In following our will
In judging that good which plainly is ill.
Let reason thee rule and not will thee lead
To follow thy fancy A wrong trace to tread.
But subdue thy lust and conquer thy will
If it shall move thee to do that is ill.
For what hurt by game to many does grow
No wise man I think but does it well know.
Experience does show and make it manifest
That all good-men can it but deteste.
As strife and debate murder and theft
which among christians would god were left.
with cursynge and bannynge with swearyng and tearyng
That no honest heart can abide the hearing.
These be the fruits that of them does spring
with many more as evil that comes of gaming.
How to behave thy self in ^aulkynge with any man. Capitulo. vii.
IF a man demand a question of thee
In thine answer making be not to hasty.
way well his words Isocra.
the case understand
Ear an answer to make thou take in hand.
Else may he judge in thee little wit
To answer to a thing and not hear it.
Suffer his tale whole out to be toulde
Then speak thou may and not be controulde.
Low obeisaunce making lokinge him in the face
Tretably speaking thy words see thou place.
with countinaunce sober thy body vprighte
Thy fete just to gether thy hands in like plight.
Cast not thine eyes on neither side
when thou art praised therein take no pride.
In telling thy tale neither langh nor smyle
Such folly forsake thou banish and exyle.
In audible voice thy words do thou utter
Not hie nor low but using a measure.
Thy words se that thou pronounce plain
And thai they spoken Be not in vain.
In vttryng whereof Keep thou anorder
Thy matter thereby thou shalt much forder.
which order if thou Do not observe
From the purpose needs must thou swaru^
And hastines of speech will cause thee to err
Or will thee teach to stut or stammer.
To stut or stammer is a foul crime
Learn then to leave it take warnyng in time.
How evil a child it does become
Thy self being judge having wisdom.
And sure it is taken by custom and ure
while young you be there is help and cure.
This general rule yet take with the
In speaking to any man Thy head un covered be.
The common proverb remember ye ought
Better vnfedde then un taught.
How to order thy self being sent of message. Cap. viii.
IF of message forth thou be sent
Take heed to the same Give ear diligente.
Depart not away and being in doubt
Know well thy message before thou pass out.
with possible speed then have thee right sone
If need shall requirr it so to be done.
After humble obeisaunce the message forth show
Thy words well placinge in vttringe but few.
As shall thy matter serve to declare
Thine answer made then home again repare.
And to thy master thereof make relacion
As then the answer shall give thee occasion.
Neither add nor deminish Socra.
any thing to the same
Lest after it prove to thy rebuke and shame.
But the same utter so nere as thou can
No fault they shall find to charge thee with than.
In most humble wise look done that it be
As shall become best a servants degree.
Against Anger, Envy, and malice. Cap. ix.
IF thou be subject and to anger thrall
And reason thee rule not needs must thou fall
Conquer thy will Pericles.
and subdue thy lust
Thy fansy not following thy cause though be just.
For anger and fury will thee so change
That thy doings to wise men will appear strange.
Thine anger and wrath seek then to appeace
For wrath says Plato Leads shame in a leace. Plato.

The hasty man Isocra.
wantes never trouble
His mad moody mind his care does double.
And malice thee move to revenge thy cause
Dread ever god and danger of the laws.
Do not revenge though in thy power it be
Forgive the offender being thine enemy.
He is perfectely pacient we may repute plain
From wrath and furye Plato.
himself can retrayne.
Disdain nor envy The state of thy brother
In word nor deed not hurtyng one another. Seneca.

Debate and disceate contencion and envy
Are the chief fruits of an evil body.
And Solomon says The heart full of envy Solomon.

Of him self has no pleasure nor commodity.
The fruits of charity, love, and patience. Cap. x.
Charity seeks not that to her does belong
But patiently abydinge sustainynge rather wrong.
Not enuiynge but bearinge with love and patience
So noble is her nature forgeuing all ofence.
And love does move the mind to mercy
But malice again does work the contrary.
which in the wicked will ever bear stroke
Patience thee teaches thereof to bear the yoke.
where patience and love to gether do dwell
All hate and debate with malice they expel.
Love constant and faithful Pithagoras does call Pithagoras.

To be a virtue most principal.
Plato does speak Plato.
almost in effect
where love is not no virtue is perfect.
Desire then god to assiste thee with his g^^^^^
Charity to use and patience to embrace.
These three folowinge will thee instruct
That to virtues school they will thee conducte.
And from virtues school to eternal bliss
where incessaunt joy continually is.
Againge the horrible vice of swearynge. Cap. xi.
IN vain take not the name of god
Swear not at all for fear of his rod.
The house with plagues he threteneth to visit
where oaths are used they shall not escape it.
Just are his judgments and true is his word
And sharper then is a two edged sword.
wherefore beware thou his heavy indignacion
And learn to live well in thy vocacion.
wherein that god shall thee set or call
Rysinge again if it fortune to fall.
By prayer and repentance which is the only way
Christ would not the death of a sinner I say.
But rather he turn From his wickedness
And so to live in virtue and goodness.
what better art thou for this thy swearyng
Blasfamouslye the name of god tearyng.
Provoking his ire and kyndlinge his wrath
Thee for to plauge that geuinge the has.
Knowlage and reason thy self for to rule
And for to flee the thing that is evil.
Senica does council thee all swerynge to refrain Seneca.

Although great profit by it thou might gain.
Pericles whose words are manifest and plain Pericles.

From sweryng admonishes thee to obstaine.
The law of god and commandment he gave
Swearynge amongst v(...) in no wise would hau^
The council of philosoph^^ I have here expreste
Amongst whom sweryng was utterly deteste.
Much less amongst christians ought it to be used
But utterly of them clean to be refused.
A gainste the vice of filthy talking. Cap. xii.
NO filthy taulke in no wise use
Thy tongue thereby for to abuse.
Of every idell word an accumpte we shall tender
All men I would this saying to remember.
To god for it at the general day
In earnest or sport we shall speak or say.
which day to the just shall be most joyful
And to the wicked again as woeful.
As we here do so shall we receive
Unless we repent and mercy of god crave.
If god will deal with us so straight
For things that be. of so small weight.
Then have we cause to fear and dread
Our lives lewdly it we have lead.
Thy tongue take heed thou do refrain
From speaking words that are most vain.
Thy will and wit to goodness apply
Thy mind exercise in virtuous study. Aristot.

Against the vice of lyinge. Capitulo. x. ii.
TO forge to feign to flater and lie Plato.

Requiere diverse colors with words fair and slye.
But the vtteraunce of truth is so simple and plain
That it needs no study to forge or to feign.
wherefore say truth how ever stand the case
So shalt thou find more favor and grace.
Use truth and say truth in that thou go about
For time of althinges the truth will bring out
Shame is the reward For lying dew
Then avoid shame and utter words true.
A liar by his lying this profet does get
That when he says truth no man will him credet.
Then let thy talk with the truth agree
And blamed for it thou shalt never be.
How may a man a liar ought trust
But doubt his deeds his words being unjust.
In tellyng of truth there longs no shame
Where vttring of lies deserves much blame.
And though a lie from stripes ye once save
Thrice for that once it will the besceue
Trust then to truth and neither forge nor feign
And follow these precepts from liyng do refrain.
A prayer to be said when thou go to beode.
O Merciful god hear this our request
And grant unto us this night quiet rest.
Into thy tuicoin oh lord do us take
Our bodies slepynge our minds yet may wake.
Forgive the offenses this day we have wroughte
Against thee and our neighbor in word deed and thought
And grant us thy grace hense forth to fly sin
And that a new life we ma^e now begin
Deliver and defend us this night from all evil
And from the danger of our enemy the devil
Which goes a boute sekyng his pray
And by his craft whom we may betraie.
Assiste us oh lord with thy holy sprite
That valiantly against him we may ever fight
And winning the victory may lift up our voice
And in his strength faith fully rejoice.
Saying to the lord be all honor and praise
For his defense both now and always.
the duty of each degred. brefely declared.
YE princes that the earth rule and govern
Seek ye for knowledge doubts to discern.
ye judges give judgment according to right
As may be found acceptable in the lords sight.
ye prelates preach purely the word of our lord
That your livings and prechinges in one may accord.
ye fathers and mothers so your children instruct
As may them to grace and virtue conducte.
ye children likewise obey your pare^tes here
In all godliness see that ye them fear.
ye masters do you the thing that is right.
Not lokynge what ye may do by might.
ye servants apply your business and art
Doing the same in singleness of heart.
ye husbands love your wives and with them dwell
All bitterness set aparte using words gentell.
ye wynes to your husbands be obedient alwaie
For they are your heads and ye bound to obeie
ye persons and vickers that have cure and charge
Take heed to the same and ^ou^ not at large.
ye men of law in no wise delaie
The cause of the poor but help what ye may
ye that be crafts men use no disceite
Giving to all men tale measure and weighte.
ye that be landlordes and have housen to let
At reasonable rentes do them forth set.
ye merchauntes that use the trade of merchandise
Use lawful wares and reasonable prise.
ye subjects live ye in obedience and awe
Fearyng gods stroke and danger of the law.
ye rych whom god has goods unto sent
Releue the poor and help the indigente.
ye that are poor with your state be content
Not having wherewith to live competente
ye magestrates the cause of the widow and fatherles
Defend against such as shall them opresse
All ye that are called to any other office
Execute the same acordinge to justice
Let each here so live in his vocacion
As may his foul save and profet his nation
This granting god that sits on hie
we shall here well live and after well die
Famam virtutis m^^s
Abolire nequit
quod. F. S.
Im printed at London in Paul's Churchyearde. By william Seare^.


