A BRIEF AND TRVE RELATION OF THE MVRTHER of Mr. THOMAS SCOTT Preacher of Gods
Word and Bachelor of Divinity.

Committed by John Lambert Soldier of the Garrison of Vtricke, the 18. of
June. 1626.

With his Examination, Confession, and Execution.

LONDON, Printed for Nath. Butter. 1628.

A brief and true Relation of the Murder of Master Thomas Scott.
AMongst many disastrous events and cruel murders which have lately happened
in these parts, no one is so lamentable; at that which was committed upon Sunday
last being the 18. of June, 1626. by one John Lambert. His father (he said)
had been sometimes Master of a ship, and his mother was a Gentlewoman, borne
in Warwickeshire, and lived and died near Tower Hill in London, where he was
borne. Himself had been brought up with a Merchant of Wine in London; and for
a while was his Factor in France, where he learned the language perfectly. But
his estate failing him, in the end was forced to betake him to Arms, and
follow the war. He was at this time aged thirty and six years, of a tall
stature, and well clothed.

The Murder was in this manner committed.
Master Scot who had preached in the forenoone, and in the afternoon about two
of the clock coming toward St. Peter's Church to perform the exercise of that
day, was accompanied with his brother Master William Scott, (that was come but
7. days before out of England to see his brother) and with his Newhew Thomas
Scott. Master Scott coming betwixt them both, and approaching near unto the
Church yard; Lambert who had feated himself by 12. of the clock at the
Churchyard gate to attend his coming, espying him draw nigh, rose up from his
fear, and made toward them, drew his Rapier (which he had purposely sharpened)
and put in a thrust toward his heart. But his brother perceiving the thrust so
near, which the lap of his cloak beat it a little downwards: and it entered
through a skirt of his doublet, and wastband of his hose into his be ly.
Whereupon falling down he was raised up again by his brother, and nephew,
betwixt whom he was.

This being done, Lambert sought by flight to have escaped, but he was
presently apprehended, and brought back to Master Scott; who told him he had
never offended him, and asked him what reason had moved him to so wicked a fact.

Lambert very audaciously and insolently replied; that what he had done, he
would answer; And that he was a Traitor to his Sovereign, and had injured him
by hindering his preferment to the Queen of Bohemia. Master Scott replied, I
know thee not, God forgive thee and I do from the bottom of my heart.

The rumor hereof was presently brought into the Church, by the Readers wife
coming in with an open exclamation; Whereupon all the people ran forth much
amazed and confused, and some of them drawing their swords, would have slain
Lambert. But Mons: Van Hilton Secretary of the States, and others there
present persuaded them to put up their swords, and to let Justice pass upon
him. Lambert was presently brought to prison; and Master Scott, went himself
to Mr. James Nelthorpe the Chirurgian his house, and all this while was of good
courage. After his wound was searched he said, Master James what think you? I
hope it will soon be healed; but Master James shaked his head, and replied
nothing to him, which Master Scott perceiving answered himself, Then must I
prepare my self for God, and for death. And these were the last words he
spoke, who was presently carried home in a chair, vnclad, laid in his bed, and
about one hour after dyed, which was about four of the clock in the
afternoon.

Lambert all this while made no show of any sorrow; but most impudently
affirmed (as it were triumphingly) That if it were to be done, he could yet
do it again; making a fond and vain show of hope of deliverance, which he
persuaded himself of, by an apprehension, or rather a Satanicall illusion,
which had thus blinded and seduced him thereunto. For, after-wards very often
he publicly affirmed unto all that conferred with him, and more especially
to the Commander of the garrison, and the Preacher that went unto him to stir
him up to repentance: That he knew they all could not hurt him; For, says he,
my heavens, my Mistress, the spirits of my Sovereign in the Queen of Bohemia
will free me presently. And calling for pen and ink to write unto her, he
there write something to no purpose, and then the pen and ink was taken from
him.

In this blinded and seduced opinion of his own worth, of that good deed, (as
he termed it) and of the insurie which Master Scott had done unto him, he
continued all the next day: adding other circumstances thereunto, how that the
resolution to do this damnable fact, had been taken about eight weeks
before: And that his spirits had urged and enforced him thereunto. And he
confessed that the Sunday before he had feared himself in the same place
thinking then to have killed him; but he was by an evil spirit carried unto
the town walls, and with that spirit guarded to his lodging where it left him,
and that presently after in his lodging he was assaulted by many good spirits,
(as he called them) who would give him no ease night nor day, until that deed
should be performed; and assured him that Master Scott alone was the cause of
the hinderance of his preferment, and advancement; And that as soon as he
should be slain, then his advancement should presently follow.

With these, and many other fond reasons, he hardened himself, and to the
Sergeant Mayor of the Garrison, he affirmed that the fact was just, lawful,
according to Gods word, and the law of Moses, which by Scrip-he would justify;
For, (says he) confirm that law of Lex talionis, he might recompense one
evil deed with another, as an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth, etc; and
then he had done but Justice, for which no law could convince or condemn him.

In this seduced and blinded obstinacy, he continued till Tuesday at night:
For, all the exhortations and admonitions that could be used to him could
nothing at all prevail with him. Now the next day after the fact was done, he
being only examined, and having answered as is aforesaid: his examinations
were by the present commander of the garrison (Captain William Droumownd
Segeant Mayor of a Scottish Regiment, sent unto Vienna, to the Governor, the
Baron of Brederode, who by post sent them to the Prince. from whom came answer
back again upon the tuesday following to proceed in Justice against him
according as the nature of his fact did require. Which by sharp examination
upon the rack was effected on Wednesday following.

A little before which time he began to have some feeling of the fact, and a
kind of sorrow for the same; desiring the aid of the Officers to labor for
his release, and said to be well contented to offer his right hand for sais
faction for the deed, so that his life might be spared. And yet even at the
very instant of his torture would not be persuaded but that his heavens, and
his Sovereign (who daily and hourly had termed him one of heavens worthies,
and heavens elect, and many the like epithites) would free him, and not suffer
him to be hurt, but found the contrary.

Afterward he confessed further, that he intended often to have acquainted
Master Scott with these temptations, to have revealed the same, but considering
that by some means or other it might be known; and for which the soldiers
would have raised jests, and mocked and leered him there with, he therefore
held his resolution. And moreover upon the rack, and afterward being charged,
that he was hired to do this deed, and desired that he would reveal the
truth, who they were that had set him on in this action: He very seriously
protested, that although he had served the en emie for the space of three
months or thereabouts under a Scotch Captain before Bergenvp Zome the time of
that siege, and afterward a while in garrison in Flanders; yet he himself was
never any Papist; And that he was not set on, nor hired, by any Priest, Jesuit
or other whatsoever; But that the spirit had persuaded him of the injuries as
is aforesaid, and that he could have no rest until that fact was performed.

He affirmed likewise that he never missed the hearing of Master Scotts
Sermons; and that very often he had heard him preach unto his good content,
with delight and comfort.

The same wednesday was Master Scott buried in Vtricht, after a very honorable
manner; accompanied with all the Ministers, Elders, and Deacons of the several
Congregations; with the Deputies of the States of the Province, and most of the
Magistrates of the town in mourning cloakes; with a train of Burgers, and the
Commanders, Captains, Officers and Soldiers of the Garrisons, the like has
not been seen, nor known in Vtricht; with a general lamentation of all men
for the loss of so worthy a man.

The day following, the Council of War assembled to determine the sentence,
who there a greed that the offender should be Raiebracht, that is, to have his
bones broken upon a wheel, and so to be set up by the ordinary place of
Justice; which, when Lambert understood, with an earnest desire he entreated
that his body might be buried. Upon this his entreaty, that sentence was
altered, and it was resolved, that the next day his right hand should be cut
off, and nailed to the gallows, then he to be hanged, and his dead body to be
laid upon a wheel without any burial.

The same evening the Preacher, and other godly men being sent unto him, to
give him warning and to prepare him for death: They found him as incapable of
instruction, and as full of his fond and imaginary conceits as before; Then
likewise affirming that his Sovereign, who daily and hourly appeared unto him
as the spirit of the late Queen Elizabeth in the Queen of Bohemia, the spirit
of his Sovereign King James, and of his Excellency the late Prince of Orange;
by whom he was entitled one of Heavens Worthies, Heavens Elect, etc. And from
these vain fantasies he could not be brought neither by threatening of his
temporal death, nor of his souls damnation hereafter. He continued in this
obstinacy, and obdurateness, 09 notwithstanding whatsoever promises, or
threatenings could be spoken unto him concerning his salvation or damnation. In
all other discourses, whereof there were sundry both in English and in good
French, he was very sensible, able enough, and prompt, and held a good
formalitie therein, to the admiration of many that were sent and heard him.

At the place of execution there was no alteration in him, His right hand was
first cut off, and nailed to the gallows; And after that the Preacher had
exhorted him, and prayed with him, he was hanged. And very seldom has it
been seen that a man should live so long as he did hanging, though the
Executioner did the best he could to help to rid him out of his pain.

FINIS.
A Funeral Elegy upon the untimely and much bewailed death of that reverend
Preacher of Gods Word Mr. THOMAS SCOTT, slain upon Sunday the 18. of June,
1626. Stilo veteri.
SVch is hells rage against Gods sons, Gods Saints,
Such good men's wrongs; such are their pains and plaints
Whilst they live here; Such wicked men's despite
Against Gods Word, that Word of power and might;
They join with hell their bodies here to slay,
Who join with God to save their souls for aye.
They stop their breath who pray to Gods good Spirit,
To breath into their souls Christ's saving merit.
With swords deviding their two darling twins,
Who with Gods Word divide their souls and sins:
Witness this corpse, this sacrificed Saint,
Whom none of crime, none could of wrong attaint.
Yet on Gods day upon Gods Word attending,
By cursed hands his blessed days had ending.
Another.
Man's life' s a warfare, wayfare. Ah good man
Thou foundst it true; Thy words, thy writings can
Witness to all, inflamed with true Zeal
To God, to Church, to King, to Commonweal,
Armed with valor, to thine eternal praise
Thou warr' dst against the monsters of our days;
Oppos' d great giants sins, great sinners hence
Warr' d against thee, and wronged thy innocence.
From War to wayfare thou did' st run thy race
In warlike lands disposing time and place,
To Gods great glory, and the Churches good,
Till hellish hands exhausted thy hearts blood.
Well, it was Gods will who had decreed it best
To call thee from thy labor to his rest.
Then farewell father, mounted from mortal eyne,
Such was thy life, I wish my soul with thine.
Certificate.
THe Soldier (named John Lambert, the Preachers name was Mr. Thomas Scott)
watching his opportunity murdered him, and publicly examined at Vtricht, on
the rack, and after, made this vain and ridiculous relation, That the spirit
his Mistress, the heavens elect, the favorite to Q Elizabeth the late Queen of
England, whose spirit transmigrated into her Majesty the Queen of Bohemia,
which Q. of Bohemia so favored him, that she intended to receive him into her
service. and considering with himself why he was not entertained into her
service, a spirit suggested to him, that M. Scott hindered him, and until such
time as the said M. Scott was killed, he should not be entertained into his
Majesty's service. Whereupon, he was resolved to kill him; He confessed also
that he was never hired or induced, by the persuasions of any Priest, Jesuit,
or any other person to attempt this bloody act. He was twice racked and whipped
on the rack; At which time of his racking and whipping, and at other times of
his private and public examinations, yea even to his death, he continued in
his foresaid confession, avouching and solemnly protesting, on his hope of
salvation, the naked and whole truth of his said confession. That this was the
sum and substance of his confession, we whose names are hereunder written,
do faithfully and in the word of truth, sincerely witness and testify.

Jeremiah Elborough Pastor of the English Church at Vtricht, who was present at
his Confession upon the rack, and at his death.
I whose name is here underwritten, Commander of the right Honorable the Lord
Viscount Wimbledon his foot Company, was likewise at the said Lamberts
Confession both before and at his death, who on the rack protested as is above
written. This is truth.

Hv: HANKINSON.




