TWO SERMONS, UPON THAT GREAT EMBASSY OF OUR LORD AND SAVIOVR JESUS CHRIST,
Recorded by his Evangelist, Saint MATTHEW, Chap. 10. v. 16.

Preached by JOHN SCVLL, an humble Professor and Minister of the Word.



LONDON, Printed by Thomas Snodham. 1624.

TO THE RIGHT WORTHY, THE RIGHT wel-deseruing of Church, and Commonwealth, Sir
HENRY WILLIAMS, Knight.
FAcile omnia tenenti, multa superflue Bern. ep. 138. ad Hen. reg. Ang.
ingeruntur. Many words to a man of understanding, are more then enough. It was
your desire to have some thing said on this ensuing Text; your desire to know,
intimates your will to observe. Prius vtique est scire deum: consequens
Lactant. de inst: lib 6 cap 5.
est colere. A man must know God, before he can serve him. It was your pleasure
to assign me the Speaker; your choice argued your opinion: Oh that it were as
easy for me to make good, as (for him that sometimes said) to say, Faciam vt
ista de me tua duplicetur opinio. It is now Cic. Epist.
your propper goods; It is your goodness to communicate it to the good of
others. Bonum quo Communius, eo melius. Arist.
The more common that a good thing is, the more good it will do. Quibus parum,
vel quibus nimium est, mihi ignoscant, Aug. de Ciuit. Dei. li 22 c. 30.
quibus autem satis est, non mihi, sed domino mecum, congratulantes, agant
gratias. If ought be amiss, the fault is mine: If well, the praise is Gods.

And now, as Demosthenes spoke to the Athenians, (...) Them. (...):
(...): That as he respected them in all things, so they would him in this one:
So also would I make bold, of you, to beg this favor, that as I have ever
honored your Virtues, and now ventured into the world to Observe you: so you
would vouchsafe to Patronize my Obedience, a more acceptable sacrifice 1 Samuel
15. 22.
then the fat of Rams, and to suffer it to pass under your name; (...), as
an Argument of your Isocr. ad Them.
Favor, and my Respect. (...). Some body perhaps may be the better for it: you
cannot be the worse; (...), Though not Isocr. sup.
the richer, yet the more renowned. Pleases it you, that as you have made your
House, as Obediahs Caves, to hide the Prophets of the 1 Reg. 18. 13.
Lord, and to feed them: so you would make your Name also, as the house of the
Lord, to preserve the Books of the Prophets, and protect 2 Reg. 22. 8.
them. And so I leave this Suckling at the breasts of your fostering, and you
and yours to the fostering Father of the Church, and rest,

Totus in eo tuus cuius and tu totus es. JOHN SCVLL.
Aug. ad Paulin. ep. 32.

The first SERMON.
MATH. 10. 16. Behold, I send you as Sheep in the midst of Wolves: be ye
therefore wise as Serpents, and innocent as Doves.
PLus est in metuendo mali: (it was the Cic. Torq. ep. li. 6. ep. 82.
experience of a man many ways renowned) quam in eo ipso quod timetur: the
fear (commonly) is greater then the hurt, for we fear always the worst: and
speed better often times then we hoped. But Precogitatum malum (as a great
Philosopher Seneca.
observes) minus offendit: that expectation Superanda omnis fortuna ferendo.
Virg.
of ill, mitigates the extremity of the ill; for either we labor to prevent
it, or resolve to endure it.

Christ Jesus in this Text fore-warneth his Apostles of the hard measure that
they should meet with in the world, and because they should not think it
uncouth when it came: he thereupon warns them, to be wise as Serpents, Marl.
in hunc locum.
and so to shun it: to be innocent as Doves, and so to bear it.

In the precedencie of this Chapter, Jesus Christ sent his Apostles with
Commission and Instruction: with Commission to Preach, verse 7. for that is to
do the work of an 2 Timothy 4. 5.
Evangelist: Secondly, to work miracles, verse 8. the appendix (as Beza
speaks) to the word: (...) signs and 2 Cor. 11. 12.
tokens (says the Apostle) of an Apostle.

He sent them with Commission, their warrant for what they did: with
Instruction: their Caution how to behave themselves, meekely or sternely, as
Heralds in Gods steed, to denounce Peace or war, according as they to whom
they are sent, are either worthy or unworthy, verse 13.

But that journey of theirs (like the Doves out of the Arc) Genesis 8. 9.
was neither far nor long: but, as was David's victory over the Lion and the
bear; his encouragement to venture upon 1 Samuel 17. 34. Marl. ex Calu.
Goliath: so was that of theirs, Durioris militiae praeludia quaedam: their
Preparatiue to this their second, but longer, farther, and more dangerous
Expedition.

This Text then is but the Renewing of the former Negotiation, with like
Commission and Instruction. Behold? send you, etc. there is the Commission: Be
ye therefore, etc. there is the Instruction. These are the two essential parts
of the body of this Text, either of which has, (as Hierome speaks of the
Revelation) tot Sacramenta quot verba, as many Hier. ad Paulin. ep. 83.
mysteries as members. The first in the first is the Preparation to their
Mission, in the first word, Behold: the second is the power authorizing, in the
second word I: behold I: the third, the Mission, in the third word Send: Behold
I send: the fourth, the Legates, in the fourth word You: Behold I send you: the
fifth, the Opposition between them that are sent, and them to whom they are
sent: the one (...), Sheep: the other (...), Wolves. The Instruction is an
Imitation; first, of Serpents; secondly, of Doves: to learn Wisdom of the
one, and Innocence of the other.

Thus (as you see) have I, like Ahimaaz, crossed the next 2 Samuel 18. 23.
way; and brought you on the sudden (as was Habakkuk to Dan. 14. 36.
Babel) to the holy City; but you come not as Baladan to Esai. 39. 1.
Hezekias, to see: but as the Eunuch to Jerusalem, to worship: Acts 8. 27.
and in the interim to spend some minutes in the Lords house, as the Queen of
Sheba did months in Salomons, to 1 Reg. 10. 1.
learn the manner.

Behold, I send you
(...). Selah, in the old testament concludes some thing or Hier. epist. 2. ep.
64.
other remarkable, that went before: (...), Behold, in the new foreshewes the
like matter of note, in that that follows.

To teach us, that what manner of men God sends into Church and
commonwealth; to what conditioned men they be sent, and how they converse
among us, is a matter of special note and consequence. (...) Plato.
(...). As Gods hand of mercy or judgment, is upon Church or commonwealth; so
accordingly does he send good or evil Magistrates to govern them. He pitied
the affliction of his people in Egypt, and sent Exodus ^. 10.
Moses, and he delivered them under other persecutors, as Chushan, Rishathaim,
Eglon, Iabin, Oreb, Zeb, Sihon, etc, and sent them Othniel, Ehud, Barak,
Gideon, Iphtah, etc. and they saved them. He saw their Shepherds turned
Wolves: he sent David a good Shepherd, and he fed them. Again, Ezekiel. 34. 23.
he would chastise their rebellion; He gave them Jeroboam, Ahab, Zedekias,
Reges in furore, Kings in his wrath, and they plagued them: he pitied his
Church, and sent Constantine, Hos. 13. 11.
Theodosius, Helena, etc. and they became Kings, her nursing-fathers, and
Queens her nursing-mothers: he Esaias 49. 23.
again visited her iniquity, and gave her Nero, Dioclesian, Julian, etc. and
they persecuted her; as a certain religious man in Constantinople, wondered why
it pleased God to make Phocas Emperor, an Angel (says Anastatius) told him,
Quia non inueni Peiorem: he was the worst he could Anast. quest. inscript. q.
15.
meet with: and good enough was he (had he been worse) for that time and
people. The same Anastatius tells us likewise of a certain lewd vagabond,
consecrated (by the appointment of an Angel) Bishop of Thebaris, whom an
Angel also thus menaced: Cur superbis et magnifice tibi places o An ibidem.
infoelix? re vera non tanquam dignus sacerdotio, factus es episcopus: sed quia
haec ciuitas tali digna erat episcopo: What aileth thee thou wretch? and why
magnifiest thou thy self? it is not because thou wast worthy to be a Priest,
that thou wast made a Bishop; but because this City was worthy of no better a
Bishop.

Because, an unwise King destroys his people: (as Jeroboam that sinned, and
made Israel to sin) but where they that be in authority, be men of
understanding (as Solomon) there the city flourishes, Eccles. 10. 3. The good
or ill Governor, is the bane or welfare of his charge.

Because, as the judge of the people is himself, so are his 2: Ecclus. 10. 2.
officers: and what manner of man the Ruler of the City is, such are all they
that dwell therein: a wonder it was to see, how unlike the Romans were to
themselves under Numa, from what they were under Romulus, but that ipsi se
homines Liuius dec. 1. lib. 1.
in regis, velut vnici exempli mores formant. The greater will draw the lesser:
the ruler, the people. Like people, like Esai. 24. 2.
(...), Cohen, Prince and Priest: it is the fashion of the world to fashion
their betters. Regis ad exemplar totus componitur orbis.

This might inform us, how we stand to Godward, in Ioh. 1. 11.
lamb of God, to the faithful, the flock of Christ: or, Sheep unto Wolves?
as the Prophets to the Jews; or Wolves unto Math. 23. 34.
Sheep? as the Dragon after the woman; or finally Apoc. 12. 13.
Wolves unto Wolves? as Iehu to the house of Ahab. Has 2 Reg. 10.
God sent Sheep unto Sheep? as when John sent to Christ, Matthew. 11. 2.
Ecce quam bonum, Behold how good and pleasant a thing it is for Psalm. 133. 1.
Brethren to dwell together in unity? or, has he sent Sheep unto Wolves, as
in my Text? the Instruction is the Use, be wise as Serpents, etc. or has he
sent Sheep unto Wolves, Ezekiel. 34. 3.
that eat the fat, and cloth themselves with the wool: that kill them that
are fed, but feed not the Sheep: The harvest indeed Math. 9. 37 38.
is great, but the laborers few: wherefore pray the Lord of the harvest that
he would send forth laborers into his harvest: or, has he sent Wolves unto
Wolves, the Ichneumon to the Crocodile, that darts himself into the belly of
the Crocodile, and there eats what the other before had eaten: and when he
has list to come forth, he makes his way by eating a hole through the
Crocodiles belly? They bite and devour one another, take heed lest ye be
consumed one of another. Gal. 5. 15.
When God sends Sheep unto Sheep, it is, that mercy and truth might meet
together: that righteousness and peace might Psalm. 85. 10.
kiss one another: when he sends Sheep unto Wolves, it is, that upon you
might come all the righteous blood that was shed Math. 23. 35.
upon the earth: when he sends Wolves unto Sheep, it is to prove you, that
the trial of your faith being much more precious then 1 Pet. 1. 7.
gold that perishes (though it be tried with fire) might be found to your
praise, and honor, and glory, at the appearing of Jesus Christ. When he sends
Wolves unto Wolves, it is to punish sin with sin: when the young vipers
eat their Plin. hist. natural. lib. 10. cap. 62
way through their mothers belly when they were borne: to revenge the death of
their father, when they were begotten. Herein now appears the love of God
toward you, in sending unto you Sheep, not Wolves. And here again do you
turn mercy into judgment, should you to your shepherds prove Wolves, not
Sheep. Howsoever, God commands, and we must obey: Christ Jesus sends, and we
must go.

Behold, I send.
As the Father sent me, so send I you; said Jesus to his Apostles: Ioh. 20. 21.
The Father sends, and the Son sends: the Father sends the Son, and the
Son sends the Apostles: the Father sends the Son to reconcile the world to
himself. For it pleased the Father, that in him should all fullness dwell,
Colos. 1. 19. and 20.
and by him to reconcile all things unto himself: and to set at peace through
the blood of his Cross, both the things in earth, and the things in heaven:
the Son sends the Apostles to Preach this reconciliation by himself: for God
was in Christ, and Reconciled 2 Cor. 5. 19.
the world to himself, not imputing their sins unto them: and has committed
to us the word of Reconciliation: the Fathers Mission is the Sons Commission:
the Son sends, and the Apostles Preach.

Christ Jesus sending is warrant for our Preaching: All power is given to me
both in heaven and in earth: Go therefore Mat. 28. 18. 19.
and teach all nations. I came down from heaven, and have done Ioh 6. 38.
my Fathers will on earth, and now all power is given to me in heaven Phil. 2.
8.
and in earth. Ye have been witnesses of my obedience: be ye Acts 1. 8.
Acts 5. 32.
also Heralds of my sovereignty. Ye have seen my sufferings, testify my 1
Pet. 5. 1.
glory. All power is given to me in heaven and earth: The Math. 17. 9.
most joyful tidings that ever came to heaven or earth. Luke ^. 10.
Go and teach all Nations: Preach the Gospel to all creatures: Mar. 16. 15.
the glad tidings of that New and better Covenant, that God promised, Hebr. 7.
22.
and now by me contracteth with all Nations. In thy seed, (said God unto
Abraham) shall all nations of the earth be blessed, Genesis 22. 18.
there is the Promise. So God loved the world (said the son John. 3. 16.
of the same Father) that he has given his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life:
there is the Performance. This is my beloved Son Matthew. 17. ^.
(said the Father of the Son) in whom I am well pleased, (...), hear him:
there is obedience enjoined us.

But how shall they hear without a Preacher? and how shall Romans 10. 14. 15.
Petr. Longab. in cap. 10. ad Romans
they Preach except they be sent? Credere ex auditu est: audire ex
Praedicatione: Praedicare ex Missione: Faith comes by hearing, hearing comes by
Preaching; and Preaching comes by the authority of Jesus Christ's sending.

Behold, I send.
No man may take upon him any Authority, unless he No man takes this honor
unto himself, Hebr. 5. 4.
but he that is called of God, as was Aaron. When Brennus had taken Rome, the
Romans that escaped to Veies, instantly importuned Plut. Camil.
Camillus (then a banished man in Ardea) in that common calamity, to become
their Dictator; but he by no means would accept of that transcendent honor,
till such time as they that were besieged within the Capitole, the body
presentatiue of the State, confirmed his election by their Suffrages: Thus Numa
contented not himself with election Plut. Numa.
of Romans and Sabines, till inauguration from heaven confirmed him King of
Rome. For when Tatius his ioyntraigne with Romulus, had made of both Nations
one people: it was in the first Interregnum concluded, that the one should
choose the King, but out of the body of the other: so to engage him to either
side: to the one, for that they chose him; to the other, for that he was of
their Nation. Now though Numa were thus chosen by a wonderful consent of both
Nations, yet put he not on the imperial Diadem, till he consulted with
heaven, to confirm his calling on earth. It is a Praeminire by the laws of
England to usurp authority without authority, but as all men agree of the
name of Happiness, to call it (as the Philosoper observes) (...), yet are
there (if Varro in Augustine reckons Arles. ethic. 1.
right) 288. differing opinions, what it should be: so Aug. lib. 19.
all acknowledge a power authorizing, but differ about the Ciuit. dei. cap. 1.
persons authorized, who they should be.

The pronouncing of the word (...) Shibboleth, showed Ephramite, and who a
Gileadite. The Ephramites Iudic. 12. 6.
in stead of (...) Shibboleth, pronounced (...) Sibleth: Like our Irish that
cannot sound the letter H. So Moses Exodus 18. 30.
by the Vrim and Thummim points out the able Minister: and Iethro by the four
Cardinal Virtues, the complete Exodus 18. 21.
Magistrate: the Vrim in the Minister is the purity of Doctrine, the Thummim,
the sincerity of his life. In the first, we are light, to illuminate; in the
second, salt, to season others: Mat. 5. 14.
but if the light that be in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness?
If the salt has lost its savor, wherewith shall it be Matthew. 6 23.
salted? it is thenceforth good for nothing but to be cast out, Math. 5. 13.
and to be trodden under foot of men. Let your light so shine before men, that
they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven.
Preaching is as the body of Chrysostom.
good life: good life as the soul of Preaching. Now as the body without the
soul is dead, so is Preaching without good life; and this is the Ministers
Shibboleth. Now whether it be they that have the Vrim and want the Thummim, or
have the Thummim and want the Vrim: either incapable, as Vzziah to meddle with
the Arc: or unworthy, as Simon 2 Samuel 6. 6.
Magus to dispose of the holy Ghost: these may be of Ieroboams, Acts 8. 18.
but not of God his making, Priests: intruders, not Apostles. I have not sent
these Prophets (says the Lord) and Ier. 23. 2^.
yet they ran: I have not spoken unto them, and yet they Prophesied.

Secondly, when they that sit in Moses chair, as the Moses spirit, as those
seauentie: that respect persons, and judge for reward: that Number. 11. 25.
with the current of the world, seek their own, and nor that Micah 3. 11.
which is Jesus Christ. They happily be sent: but as Antiochus Phil. ^. 2^.
to Jerusalem to undo us. But as the faithful Minister is 1 Cor. 4. 1.
(...), the disposer of the mysteries of God: As 2 Cor. 5. 20.
if God by him besought you; So is the sincerely dealing Magistrate (...) gods
minister, if thou do well (...) for thy good: if thou do evil, then is
he (...), Romans 13. 4.
a revenger of gods wrath for thy naughtiness.

Behold I send you.
Fishermen (for the most part) simple and unlearned taken says Augustine, Non
de foro Iustiniano, sed de simplicitate Serme de Apost.
piscatoria, not out of the Doctors Commons great Clerks and learned in the
Law; but out of the company of fishermen, simple and illiterate.

Brethren, you see your calling: how that not many wise men after the flesh,
not many mighty, not many noble are called. But God has chosen the foolish
things of the world to confound the 1 Cor. 1. 26.
wise, and God has chosen the weak things of the world to confound the mighty
things, the vile things of the world, and things which are despised has God
chosen, and things which are not, to bring to naught things that are. That no
flesh should rejoice in his presence. In homine triasunt ex quibus oritur omnis
humana gloriatio. Hugo Card in 1 Cor. 1.
Man takes occasion; either in his soul, because of his wisdom, or in his
flesh, because of his nobility, or lastly in outward things, because of his
might and riches, but God says the Apostle, has chosen Non multos sapientes,
not many wise men, and that (says the Cardinal) confounds the Ibid.
first, vain boasting. Non multos nobiles; not many noble men, and that
confounds the second. Non multos potentes, not many mighty men, and that
confounds the third, That no flesh might glory in his presence. That the wise
Ier. 9. 23.
man glory not in his wisdom, nor the strong man in his strength, nor the
rich man in his riches. But as it is written, He that rejoices, 1 Cor. 1. 31.
let him rejoice in the Lord.

God brings to pass the purpose of his own good pleasure either; with
means, as when he saved Noah by Genesis 7. 1.
means of an arc: or with small means; as when he sed five thousand men,
beside women and children, with five loaves Math 1^. ^1.
and two fishes; Or without means: as when he made all things Genesis 1. 1.
of nothing, only he spoke and it was done, he commanded and it Psalm 33 9. 2
Re^. 2. 21.
stood fast: Or against means: as when he sweetened salt water with salt. The
Remora or Echeneis is a little fish, of but half a foot long, and yet states a
ship though under sail with never so good a forewind. Blow the wind (says
Pliny) how Plin. hist. not. l. 32 cap. 1.
it will, rage, storm and tempest, what they can, labor hundreds at the oar
with might and maine, as sometimes at Anthonies admiral, and Caligulaes
galliace; if she arrest, no violence is able to rescue. The Minister is the
least of the fingers of God; and yet is he powerful over the creatures of God.
Dedit Dominus potestatem Apostolis, super Naturam, Aug. sermon. de Apost.
vt eam curarent: super Daemones, vt eos euerterent: super Elementa, vt ipsa
immutarent: super Mortem, vt eam contemnerent: super Angelos, vt corpus domini
consecrarent. God has given Apostolical power.
to his Apostles (and their successors) power over nature, devils, elements,
death, Angels: Over nature to heal her, Heal the sick, cleanse the leapers:
Over devils, to cast them Mat. 10. 8.
out; Lord even the devils are subdued to us through thy name: Luc. 10. 17.
Over elements to change them, Elements into Sacraments: Detrahe verbum ab
aqua, and quid erit nisi aqua? accedat verbum Aug. hom. 80.
ad elementum, and fit sacramentum: Take the word from the water (in Baptism)
and what will it be but water? add the word unto the element, and it becomes a
Sacrament: Over death to contemn it, by dying to triumph over death, 1 Cor. 15.
54.
for to swallow up death in victory: Over Angels to consecrate bread and wine,
the blessed Sacrament, of the body and blood of Jesus Christ, a grace denied to
Angels and Archangels, to Principalities and Powers, to Virtues, Throanes, and
Dominions, to Cherubins and Seraphins: They only that are sent to preach, have
power to consecrate. Power as the Minister of God, over the creatures of God:
Elias over the fire, to pursue the water, like the rainebowe, 1 Reg. 18. 38.
the clouds, and to lick it up like oil: as also over the air to be clear
or cloudy, sunshine, or rain. Moses Iam. 5. 17.
over the sea, to turn it to dry land: over the land, to turn Ex. 14. 21.
the dust thereof into lyce. Joshua over the sun and moon, Ex 8. 16.
to stand-still, the one in Gibeon, the other in the valley of Aeialon, till
the Lords people avenged themselves on their Josh. 10. 12.
enemies. Thus we see the minister of Jesus Christ, powerful that at the name
of Jesus every knee should bow: both of things in heaven, and things in earth,
Phil. 2. 10. 11.
and things under the earth, and that every tongue should confess that Jesus
Christ is the Lord, unto the glory of God the Father.

Would ye be without fear of the Magistrate? do well for Rulers are not to be
feared for good works, but for Romans 13. 3.
evil.

Would ye have comfort of the Minister? receive him Galathians received the
Apostle, as an angel of God, Gal. 4. 14.
yea, as Christ Jesus: as Zacheus did Christ, joyfully, they come to you as
Christ to Jerusalem, Meekely: meekely and Mat. 21. 5.
simply like sheep: meekely without pride: simply without fraud.

Behold, I send you as Sheep.
Nihilo robustieres, vel magis pares, ad vim hostium repellendam, Marlor. in
hunc locum.
quam sint oues contra luporum rabiem. No more able to contest with the malice
of the wicked, then the filly sheep to daunt the fury of wolves: tied
notwithstanding to preach the word, and that with all boldness. (...) Acts 4.
29.
(...) Basil 6. 10 ethie.
(...). Boldly and confidently stand in the profession of Jesus Christ and his
word, considering, not their own disabilities to resist, but Christ's
designement, that set them on work.

Behold, I send you as Sheep.
1. In disposition of nature. Meek: (...), not domineering, 1 Pet. 5. 3.
Sheep Simple: (...), not hypocritizing. Math. 7. 15.
Behold, I send you as Sheep in the midst of Wolves: not that others crueity
should turn you into Wolves; but that wolves assuaged by your gentleness might
be turned into Sheep. You must be in disposition of nature, meek and simple
as Sheep. Marlor. in hunc locum.
Ouibus nihil est simplicius, nothing more simple, and without guile: nihil
innocentius, nothing more innocent, and without offering wrong: nihilmagis
imbelle, more weak, and less resisting wrong. to feed 1. The body with bread
and water, 1 Reg. 18. 13.
as Obediah fed the Prophets. 2. the soul with 1. The word, to win them to
Christ, the power of Romans 1. 16.
God unto salvation. 2 useful 2. The Sacraments; to incorporate them into
Christ, as the branches John 15. 5.
in the vine. 3. Their own lives Phil. 2. 17.
(should there because) to be offered up upon the sacrifice and service of
their faith. to clothe 1. The body with raiment Job 31. 20.
as Job with his fleece. 2. The soul with truth, Ephesians. 6. 14.
righteousness, peace, faith, etc.

Meminisse debemus quo vocabulo Christus gr^gem suum appellat, Cypr. Sermon. 2 de
zelo and (...). c.
quo nomine nuncupat: Oues vocat, vt innocentia Christiana ou^b^s aequet^r
Agnos vocat, vt agnorum naturam simplicem, simplicitas mentis inn^^etur: We
must remember how Christ called his flock; what title he attributed unto them.
He called them Sheep, he called them Lambs; Sheep for their innocence,
Lambs for their simplicity: To teach us that men of eminent place, in Church
and Commonwealth, If a man be fallen, by occasion, into any fault, ye which
are spiritual restore such a Gal. 6. 1.
one* with the spirit of meeknes.

Ea est animantium omnium natura, vt mansuetudine potius quam violentia
reguntur: Such is the nature of all creatures, that it is won, rather by
gentleness then austerity, specially Man, animal sui iuris, a creature, says
Seneca, at his own Seneca.
dispose, and not so easily awed as wooed. Blandienti possum Hieron. epist. 40.
ad Ruffinam.
ac quiescere, non timeo comminantem: I can (says Hierome) be contented to be
entreated, but menacing cannot disaster me.

Hence it was that Alphonsus often walked without his Panormit. l. 2. de reb.
g. Alphon. Plut. Number.
guard, but Numa utterly discharged them: in token that they were Sheep, not
Wolves: meek, not imperious: innocent, not injurious; and loved rather to be
loved then feared.

There is no surer guard to a Prince, then the perfect love and good will of
his Subjects. There is no such way to Plut. Arat.
win their love as gentleness. There is no such way, either for the
Magistrate to insinuate himself into the heart of the people; or for the
Minister to work upon the heart, as for the one and the other to be calm,
where they might be rough: to be Sheep where they might be Wolves.

Behold, I send you as Sheep.
Sheep (says Pliny) are in great request, both in regard Hist. nature. l. ^.
cap. 67.
that they serve for sacrifices: as also by reason that their fleece yields so
profitable an use. Not only the heathen sacrificed Sheep to pacify their
false gods (devils, whom Psalm. 96. 5.
they worshipped in stead of God) but the true worshippers of the One and true
God, celebrated yearly their Passover Exodus 12. 24.
with this sacrifice: and was besides a perpetual peaceoffering Leuit. 3. 7.
for sin.

Good governors, in Church and Commonwealth, A good Shepherd gives his life
for his Sheep. Ioh. 10. 11.
Baiazetts prayer for his army, was much like David his prayer for the people:
To dye himself deservedly for his credulity; rather then so many Innocents
should be slaughtered, as Sheep, undeservedly, for him. I have sinned (said
David) yea, I have done wickedly: but these Sheep, what have 2 Samuel 24. 17.
they done? Let thy hand, I pray thee, be against me, and against my fathers
house. The two Decij, the Father and the Son, Liu. decad. 1. l. 8. and 10.
Luendis periculis publicis piacula, as sacrifices, to free the Commonwealth
from danger, devoted themselves for their armies: So did Codrus for the
Athenians; for when in the war of Peloponesus, he understood by Oracle that
that side Herodot.
should have the victory, whose captain should be slain: he took upon him
the habit of a poor common soldier, and so became a sacrifice for his
country. When Pompey Plut. Pomp.
(on Syllas behalf) would have put all the M^mertines to the sword, Sthenius,
a governor among the Hymerians, took all the fault upon himself, telling
Pompey, that it was he that had persuaded his friends, and compelled his
enemies to do as they did. Lycurgus, a lawgiver among the Lacedaemonians,
Plut. Lycurg.
after that he had sworn them to the unviolable keeping of his laws till his
return, thrust himself into perpetual exile; because that he would have the
laws that he had made for their good perpetually kept. These were good
Platonists, borne not for themselves, but for their country.

Your Skarlet then is not this peoples, but your own Our Lawne, the robe of
purity, whitned in the blood Apoc. 7. 14.
of the Lamb. We must not be found to seek, (...) but (...), 2 Cor. 12. 14.
not yours, but you; nor you seek to be found, (...), but (...), never a ^ot
the richer, but a great deal the more honourabler, by your places. When you
reckon your living, you may value your reue^ues, but not your office. Habere
enim questui rempub: non modo turpe est: sed and scelestum Cic. lib. 1. offic.
and nefarium. To rise by the ruin of the Commonwealth, is abomination: to
undo many to make One, is both sin and shame; it is to be a wolf, and not a
Sheep. Whereas those that Christ in my text sends, must be Sheep, not
Wolves, in disposition of nature, meek and simple: useful toward others to
feed and clothe.

Behold, I send you as Sheep.
Simon thou son of Iona, love thou me more then John 21. 15.
these? He said unto him, yea Lord, thou know that I love thee. He said unto
him, feed my Lambs. He said to him again the second time. Simon, thou son
of Iona, love thou me? he Simon, Iona, love thou me! Peter was sorry
because he said unto him the third time, love thou me? and said unto him,
Lord thou know all things: thou know that I love thee. Jesus said unto
him, Feed my Sheep. He asked him thrice, that a threefold confession might
make amends for a threefold denial: but all the matter in charge was of
feeding.

Good Governors must be Feeders. David fed Israel: The widow fed the Prophet,
and the Prophet Psalm. 78. 72.
the Children of the Prophets. 2 Samuel 19. 32.


Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the flock 1 Reg. 17. 15.
2 Reg. 4. 38.
whereof the Holy Ghost has made you ouer-seers, to feed the Acts 10. 28.
Take heed to your selves, for he that has no care of his own salvation,
will have none also of others. Take heed Mar. ex Call.
unto your selves, and all the flock: for a man shall answer, not only for
himself, but for all also under his charge. I come against the shepherds
(says the Lord) and will require Ezekiel. 34. 10.
my Sheep at their hands. Take heed unto your selves, and to the flock, to
feed the Church of God. First, exemple Seneca.
Conuersationis, by example of good life: because plus mouent exempla quam
verba, example is more powerful with the multitude then precept. Secondly,
verbo Praedicationis, by preaching of tho Word: because the Priests lips
should Mal. 2. 7.
preserve knowledge, and the people should seek the Law at his mouth. Lastly,
Fructis Orationis, by his continual intercession for them. God forbid that I
should sin against the 1 Samuel 12. 23.
Lord, and cease praying for you.

Woe unto the Shepherds of Israel that feed themselves: Ezekiel. 34. 2.
and covetous shepherds, for they are dogs, not shepherds. Esa 56. 10.
The ignorant dumb dogs. The covetous greedy dogs. Woe to the merciless
and cruel Shepherd, that strengthens Ezekiel. 34. 4.
rules them. These, whether they be Ministers or Magistrates, are butchers,
not Shepherds: Wolves not Sheep. Whereas good governors must be Sheep not
Wolves. Sheep in nature; Sheep in use, not only to feed, but to clothe also.

Behold, I send you as Sheep.
The Ox is of principal use for the belly, the Sheep for the back: the Ox
for our daily food, the Sheep for our apparel: for even as men be
beholding to the Ox for their principal food which they labor for: so must
they acknowledge, that they have their clothing and couerture from the silly
Sheep.

Christian prelacy does not only feed, but clothe also. I put on justice and
it covered me: my judgment was as aroabe Job 29. 14.
and a crown. In Aarons Miter was engraven (...) Ex. 39. 30.
holiness unto the Lord. His roabes were of four several colors: the
embrodering a bell and a Pomegranate, and all to show how Gods Ministers must
be clothed. The inscription Hieron. deritu and vest sacerdot.
in his crown, is the description of his life: The four several colors, the
four distinct elements of the world: the embroydering of the bell, the sound
of his preaching: the many kernells in the Pomegranate, the many virtues of his
life.

The Kings daughter is all glorious within: her clothing is of wrought gold.
Glorious she is within: rich without: with Psalm. 45. 14.
inward holiness; with outward righteousness: her clothing is of wrought
gold. Of all metals; First, Purissimum, sine sulphuritate comburente, most
pure, without soyling. Secondly, Mollissimum, tender and of large extent, as
one deneere into an hundred and twenty leaves. Thirdly, grauissimum, exceeding
ponderous, ob diuturnam conc^ctionem, firmissimam compositionem, by reason of
long concoction, Plin hist. nature. l. 13. cap. 1.
firm composition. Fourthly, Suauissimum, very sweet, by reason of the
excellency of the temperature comforting the heart, and strengthening the
spirits. The Church of God is a Virgin, pure as the Son: meek and mild as
the lamb: chaste as the Dove: sweet as the Rose: The Virgins Psalm. 45. 15.
her fellows, the Angels of light, like unto her, shall bear her company: In
stead of fathers she shall have children non modo sermonis and vocis
incitamento, sed fidei, and virtutis exemplo: By her soule-sauing words, loyal
Cyprian ad Lucium Papam.
love, and works of grace.

She is the woman clothed with the Sun, and the moon is under Apoc. 12. 1.
her feet. O let her Priests be clothed with righteousness: let Psalm. 132. 9.
her Saints rejoice and sing. Her eyes are like the doves: Ob let Cant. 4. 1.
their voices be like the Angels, the Lambs everlasting Gospel. Apoc. 14. 6.
She is the Lilly among the thorns. Make them good God, Cant. 2. 2.
oh make them Sheep amidst the Wolves. Behold, I send you as Sheep.

In the midst of Wolves.
Diverse countries are subject to diverse annoyances. Afric to Locusts. Italy
to Scorpions. Egypt, to Crocodiles. France to Wolves: but the common plague
that infecteth the whole world, is the Wolf feritas, (to distinguish with Cic
offic. l. 3.
the Orator) in figura hominis, the Man-wolfe, and his cruelty. Deposite homine
in syluestre animal transiens, when a man Seneca de Clem. ad Neronem.
leaves to be a man, and degenerates into a Wolf.

Cruelty is a Wolf, tyrannizing over all parts of the world. It began in
Caine, since is spread over all nations, Genesis 4. 8.
times and places. It was the entertainment that Lot found Genesis 19* 9.
among the Sodomites, Sampson among the Philistims, Judge. 16. 21.
Jeremy in Egypt, Ezechiel at Babel, Peter and Paul at Rome, Thomas and
Bartholmew in India, James at Jerusalem, Philip at Hierapolis, Andrew at
Idessa: in a word wheresoever the Apostles be in expediting their commission,
there are they as David between Saul and Achish. 1 Samuel 17. Calu. in Psalm.
Vnica onis inter duas Luporum turmas. Environed (as the center with the
circumference) round about with Wolves.

This should teach us to walk warily, blameless and Phil. 2. 15.
of a naughty and crooked nation. Because ad innumeros telorum iactus, exposita
est hominum vita. Cruelty has many Call. in Psalm. 34.
instruments of death thirsting after blood, the blood of the faithful
specially, Qui velut oues sunt in medio luporum. Who are as Sheep in the midst
of Wolves. Behold, I send you as Sheep.

In the midst of Wolves.
The natural man perceives not the things of the Spirit of 1 Cor. 2. 14.
God, for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because
they are spiritually discerned. Non tantum non Mar. ibid.
intelligit, sed ne assentitur quidem ijs rebus quas docet spiritus dei. As he
knows them not, so neither does he approve of them.

To teach us, that men before they be regenerate, be no Herod a Fox. Jeremy
called Ephraim Luc. 3. 32. Ier. 31. 18.
a Calfe. Daniel calls the Assyrians a Lion: the Persians a Bear: the
Graecians, a Leopard: Darius, a Dan. 7. 4. 5. and 6.
Ram, and Alexander, a Goat. Amos calls the Princes Dan. 8. 3. and 5.
of Samaria, Cowes, John calls the Jews, Vipers. Christ Amos 4. 1.
Jesus in the text calls the bloody and unregenerate, Wolves. Math. 3. 7.
Herod was a fox for his subtlety, Ephraim, a calfe for his wantonness: the
Assyrians, a Lion for their haughtines: the Perseans a Bear for their
boysterousnesse: the Greeks, a Leopard for their Polyarchies: Darius, a Ram
for his forces: Alexander, a Goat or Roe-bucke for his expedition: the
Samaritanes, Cowes for their baseness: the Jews, Vipers for their Parricids,
and Wolves for their cruelty. Ovid moralatizeth Lycaont cruelty when he
metaphorphizeth Metamorph.
him into a Wolf; and so we likewise see what manner of man Demenetus
Parrhaesius was, who in a Plin. hist. nature. l. 8. ca. 22.
solemn sacrifice that the Arcadians wickedly celebrated unto Jupiter Lyceus,
tasted of the intralls of a child, and so was turned into a wolf. Such were
the family of the Antai, Idem ibid.
of which one every year, was transformed into a Wolf. Little and better were
Vespatian and Nero. The one of which made his officers to serve his turn as
spunges, first Sueton.
to soake them in the fat of other men, and then to squeeze them, as goods
confiscate to himself. The others care was, Ne quis quid habeat; that no man
but himself if it were possible should be worth a groat.

Such a one (said Socrates to Zopyrus) had I been, had Is not my word even
Ier. 23. 29.
like a fire, says the Lord? and like a hammer that breaks the stone. Man's
heart is as iron, the word of God as fire to soften it, and as a hammer to
work it to his own good will and pleasure. It is as a stone, but the hammer
of Gods word works it into a well pleasing sacrifice of a broken Psalm. 51. 17.
and contrite heart: It is lively and mighty in operation. Heb. 4. 12.
Then let us fly unto it for reformation; so shall the Wolf dwell with the
Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie with the Esa. 11. 6.
Kid, and the Calfe with the Lion, and the fat beast together: and a little
child shall lead them. The Cow and the Bear shall feed; their young ones
shall lie together: and Esa 11. 6.

(...). Sibylla apud lac. inst. di. l. 7. c. 24.

(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
Word for word in a manner, as if Sybil had been to translate the Prophet into
Greek meeter. Then shall none hurt nor destroy in all the mountain of mine
holiness. Esa. 11. 9.

Nec lupus inside as pecori: nec retia ceruis Virg. eglog. 5.

Vlla dolum meditantur.
But the Apostles in the mean time are sent as sheep.

In the midst of Wolves.
Had he sent them among Lions, there might be hope that submission might
purchase pacification: but to crouch to the Wolf, is to despair, and dye. The
Lion is a chiefetaine, though bloody, yet generous: but the Wolf is a Tyrant,
and insulteth over misery.

Corpora magnanimo satis est prostrasse Leoni. Ovid. l. 3. de Trist. elog. 5.

Pugna suum finem cum iacet hostis, habet.
At lupus, and turpes instant morientibus vrsi:
Et quacunque minor nobilitate fera est.
The Israelites, as silly sheep, were grievously oppressed under the Wolves
their Taske-masters; and Pharaoh Exodus 5. 7.
the Master-wolfe commanded to lay more upon them. The poor Countryman is
grievously taxed with a long rent, biting brokage, deep gratification; and the
tyrannizing Landlord, griping Usurer, and extorting Officer, cry still with
the Leech, Give, Give. Prou. 30. 15. Lazarus lay at the rich man's gate a Lazer
indeed, full of sores, and affamished. The dogs lent him their tongues, Luc.
16. 21.
to lick his soars, but no man vouchsafed him a crumme from the dogs to
stay his stomach.

The greedy guts of this World are without all feeling of Joseph besought his
brethren in the anguish of his soul: they saw it, but would not hear him.
Genesis 42. 21.

Cum penes crudelitatem sit timeri, penes nos sit odisse: Cruelty Val. max. l.
9. cap. 2. Suet.
comes at last to be as fearful of others as hated. Nero kept poison in a
box; Cleopatra Vipers, to prevent their cruelties deserved hatred. Aristippus
trusted neither friend nor Plut. Arat.
servant to lodge within his Court gates. Herod was afraid Math. 2. 3.
of his own son, as well as the Infants, least he as well as another might
prove to be Christ, and so sent him packing as Joseph. antiq.
well as them. Cruelty is ever fearful in it self, and hated of others; and
God one time or other pays it home in its own kind. Therefore were Jacobs
ten brethren imprisoned. Genesis 42. 17. We (said they) as they communed together,
have verily sinned against our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his
soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear him: Therefore is this
trouble come upon us. Pharo that destroyed Exodus 1. 16.
the males of Israel, was himself with all his chivalry drowned in the Red
Sea. Dives that denied the Exodus 14. 28.
poor beggar a crumme of bread, was himself denied a Luc. 16. 21.
drop of water to cool his tongue in Hels tormenting Verse 24. 25, 26.
flames. Negauit micam: Negatur ei and gutta, He denied a crumme of bread; he
is denied a drop of water. (...). There shall be judgment merciless to Iam.
2. 13.
him that shows no mercy. Adonibezek had cut off the thumbes and great toes of
70 Kings; and had himself Judge. 1. 7.
at last his own thumbes and toes cut off. As I have done, so God (says he)
has rewarded me. Verse 7.

Here may the Minister learn to win Wolves with lenity, With all humbleness
of mind, and meekness, with long suffering, supporting one Ephesians 4. 2.
another through love.

Here may ye Magistrates learn, 1. Vt neque Consentientes sitis malis, vt
approbetis: Neither doing ill your selves, nor Aug. de verbis dom.
consenting to others ill doing; for the thief and the receiver, the periurer
and the procurer, the usurer and the broker, the whore and the baud, ill doing,
and consenting Romans 1. 31.
to ill doing, are equally ill. 2. Neque Negligentes vt non arguatis. Careless
of your own duties, or winking at the faults of others. For, Cursed is he
that does the Ier. 48. 10.
work of the Lord negligently. 3. Neque Superbientes vt Insultanter arguatis.
Nor glorying in your authority, nor insulting over misery. Improve, rebuke,
exhort, and discharge 2 Timothy 4. 2.
the duty of your calling. But how? (...), with all long suffering and
doctrine. Regat disciplina vigor Greg. in moral. l. 5.
Mansuetudinem; and mansuetudo ornet vigorem. Let Justice be the rule of mercy,
and mercy the crown of Justice. Be as Moses, Meek. But therewithal
faithful. As Joshua Number. 12. 3.
affable. But Just also, gathering like good Shepherds the Heb. 3. 2.
sheep into the fold: but reclaiming like good Magistrates Josh. 7. 19.
the Wolves from their cruelty, or us from them. Behold, I send you as Sheep.

In the midst of Wolves.
The heat of the female, worries the males with desire after her: but when
weariness has lulled them asleep, and sleep given respite to desire, she
singleth out one, and away they go; the rest follow dry-foote; and if they
light upon him, they tear him lim-meale.

When tyrants have their will, others as wicked, and as Minorum perditio,
maiorum cibus and vita. The lesser always becoming food Polyb. l. 15.
to the greater, and the stronger prevailing against the weaker. Like the times
of Galba, Otho, and Vitellius: when Laws Tacitus.
lay asleep, and all things were adjudged by the Sword, when nothing was less
secure then to be securely innocent. The imperial House of the Caesar's
received four Emperors Plut. Galb.
in less then ten months: for one murdered another, and him first, that
first corrupted the Soldiers, in teaching them to make gain by change of
Emperors.

Torua leaena lupum sequitur: lupus ipse capellam: Virg. eglog.

Florentem cytisum sequitur lasciua capella.
(...). A shrewd Crow has hatched as shrewd an egg. As is the Mother, so is
the Daughter. Ezekiel. 16. 44.


A warning for us, not to repine at the wicked. Fret not thy self because of
the ungodly; neither be thou envious against the evil doers. It will not be
long before vengeance Psalm 37. 1.
overtake them: For they shall soon be cut down like the grass; and be
withered even as the green herb. They I my self have seen the ungodly in
great prosperity, and flourishing like a green bay tree; and I went by and he
was gone, I sought him, but his place could no where be found. The
bloodthirsty and deceitful men shall not live out half their days. Psalm.
55. 25. For either Justice by the Law, or others as wicked as themselves
without Law, cuts them off before their time. Cruelty is an Ismael, whose hand
is against every man, and every man's hand against him. As Actaeon was torn in
pieces of his own dogs, so is sin persecuted of its own Family; Ovid.
metam.
one thief robbes another, one adulterer is jealous of another.

(...). Hesiod.

(...).
Clodius accusat Maechos: Catilina Cethegum. Iauen.

One thief robbes another, and the great thieves lead Laert. l 6.
the little thieves to hanging: one Adulterer is jealous of another, and the
more he preuailes against his corriuall, the deeper is he engaged to sin and
Satan.

Suis and ipsa Roma viribus ruit. It falls by its own weapons, like Saul. 1 Samuel 31. 4. It grows desperate, and becomes its own executioner, like
Achitophel and Judas, 2 Samuel 17. 23. and Mat. 27. 5. A cruel life has a
desperate end. Tigellinus put off his coming Plut. in vit. Otho.
before Otho as long as he could, but when excuses could serve no longer, he
took a razor and cut his own throat: for it is a fearful thing when malice
is condemned by her Sap. 17. 10.
own testimony: and a Conscience that is touched, does ever forecast cruel
things. Conscientia mala been sperare Aug. in Psalm. 31.
non potest: A cruel life cannot hope for a peaceable end. Tigellinus
conscience told him, that he had been such Plut. supra.
a Wolf under Nero, and such a Fox under Galba, that Otho to satisfy the
State, could do no less then pull his skin over his ears.

Oh that, terror of Conscience, present or future judgments, Romans 12. 18.
persuade them to live peaceably one with another, and to Math. 7. 12.
do as they would be done unto!

Oh that the sweet of mutual well-wishing, one man to another, by which one
man becomes as a God unto another; O that present or future blessings, in body,
or in soul, or in both; here for a time, or in Heaven for ever, could
regenerate Wolves into Sheep: Men into Doves: Gods own Psalm. 100. 2.
people, and Sheep of his pasture: His Sisters, his Loves, his Cant. 5. 2.
Doves, his undefiled! Simplicity should no longer suffer under tyranny, nor
innocence under malice; the Sheep under the teeth of the Wolf, nor the Dove
under the tallent of the Hawke: but till these be persuaded to forbear, Sheep
and Doves must either fly their provoking, or bear their cruelty.

The end of the first Sermon.
THE SECOND SERMON Upon that great Embassy of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, recorded
by his Evangelist Saint Matthew. Cap. 10. Verse 16.
Behold, I send you as Sheep in the midst of Wolves.
Be ye therefore wise as Serpents, and innocent as Doves.
BEhold, I send you as Sheep in the midst of Wolves. A dangerous message; Be
therefore wise as Serpents, and innocent as Doves. Ye cannot walk safely,
except ye walk warily: Be ye therefore wise as Serpents, and innocent as
Doves. Wise as Serpents, to keep you safe from Wolves: Innocent as Doves, to
keep you blameless with God. He tells them not in what point this wisdom,
this innocence of theirs does consist; but sends them as it were to School,
where to learn both; the one of Serpents, the other of Doves. Elegans est
icon: mira Marl. in hunc locum.
hypotyposis. A dainty comparison, a rare resemblance.

Behold, I send you as Sheep in the midst of Wolves: Be ye therefore wise as
Serpents, and innocent as Doves. Facilior cautia est, vbi manifesta formido
est: Provident men are seldomest Cypr. de simpl prclat. tr. 3.
damnified. Christ Jesus forewarnes his Apostles of ensuing danger, to make
them the more circumspect to prevent it. In the 30 verse, he opposes Flight
against Persecution; because no man should thrust himself into needless
danger. Here he exposes them as Sheep in the midst of Wolves: Where because
their Mission is their danger; he therefore makes their Instruction their
policy.

When we cannot do our duty without danger, we must Gird thy loins, and take
this box of Oil in thy hand, 2 Reg. 9. 1.
and get thee to Ramoth Gilead: And when thou come thither, look where is
Iehu the son of Iehosaphat, the son of Nimshi; and go and make him arise
up from among his brethren, and lead him into a secret Chamber: Then take the
box of Oil, and power it on his head, and say; Thus says the Lord, I have
anointed thee for King over Israel: Then open the door, and fly without any
tarrying. Elisha commanded, and the junior Prophet singles out Iehu from the
other Captains, least he should be circumuented in the doing of what he was
commanded: He flees so soon as he has done, least he should be apprehended
for the doing. If the duty of our calling expose us unto necessary danger, and
we dye for our consciences (as John for reproving Herod,) our death is
precious: Math. 14. 4.
Right dear in the sight of the Lord, is the death of his Psalm. 116. 13.
Saints. If we escape (as Eliah out of the hands of Iezabel,) 1 Reg. 19 2.
our life is honorable. Triumphat Victor imperator, and non Aug. Confess. l.
8. cap. 3.
vicisset nisi pugnasset: The Conqueror returns triumphantly; but had he not
conquered, he had not triumphed; and had he not fought, he had not conquered:
and quanto maius Ibidem.
periculum fuit in pralio; tanto maius gaudium in triumpho: The greater the
danger was in the fight, the greater by so much is the glory in the triumph.
Horatius Cocles stood single Liu. decad. 1. lib. 2.
against Porsennas whole Army, till the bridge was broken behind him: then he
leapt into the water, and saved himself by swimming: His first care was to
perform his duty to his Country; his next care was to reserve himself for
his Country.

We cannot at once perform all duties we owe to Church and Commonwealth:
David did his Father Iesse good service, when being his Shepherd, and but a
stripling, 1. Sam. 17. 34.
he slew the Lion and the Bear, and rescued his Sheep. He did his Master
Saul better service, when his Captain and a man, he slew his ten for the
others one. Saul has killed his thousand, and David his ten thousand: but the
Cap. 18. 7.
best service he ever did, was Gods and his Countries; when an old man and a
King, when he fed Jacob, Gods people, Psalm. 78. 72.
and Israel his inheritance: when he fed them with a faithful

To teach us to walk warily between despair and rashness: Circumciliones to
force men to kill Aug. contra lit. Petiliani, lib 2. cap. 83.
us, through a vain hope to become Martyrs; Martyrem non facit poena sed
causa: It is not the pain, but the cause that makes a Martyr; nor yet with the
Stoics presume of security, Aug. cont. Crescon l. 3. cap. 47.
through opinion of fatal necessity. Nusqua^ tuta fides; A man knows not whom
to trust: Therefore it is, that our blessed Savior in the next verse, bids us,
Beware of men. Ye are, in the Text, as Sheep in the midst of Wolves; Be ye
Mat. 10. 17.
therefore wise as Serpents, and innocent as Doves.

The Creatures serve man four manner of ways, 1. Either Aug. de Genesis ad Lit.
lib. 3. cap. 17.
vtiliter Probando, Demonstratiuely for our good, as the Angels; 1. to direct
Israel in the way: 2. to comfort Eliah with bread and water; and Hagar, with
showing her a well. Exodus 13. 21. 1 Reg. 19. 6.
3. To protect the Israelites from the Egyptians; Ioshuah Genesis 21. 19.
with the Sword; Elisha with Horses and Chariots of fire. Exodus 14. 19.
4. To deliver the Apostles out of prison. 5. To rejoice at, Josh. 5. 13. 2
Reg. 6. 17.
and assist our well doing, our conversion; our prayers. 6. To take charge over
us while we be alive. 7. To carry Acts 5. 17.
Luc. 1^. 10.
us to Heaven when we be dead. The second use of the Apoc. 8. 3.
Creature is, Poenaliter Laedendo; Exemplarly to punish, as the Psalm 91. 11.
fiery Serpents in the Wilderness, the Devils in Hell. The Luc. 16. 20.
third service that the Creature does unto man, is i. Salubriter Number 11. 6.
Luc. 16. 23.
exercendo, naturally to use, Some for food, as the clean beast, 2. Some for
raiment, as the Sheep, 3. Some for Leuit. 11. 47.
physic, applicando naturalia actiua passiuis, by applying natural causes to
produce natural effects. 4. Some for necessity, as the Elements without us,
and without which we cannot live one minute: or within us, and whereof we are
composed, and without which we are not. 5. Some for pleasure, as Saul his House
and Wives, the Kingdoms of 2 Samuel 12. 8.
Israel and of Judah given to David. The fourth kind of service that man has
of the Creature, is Ignoranter docendo, inducing him by the instinct of Nature,
either ad studium Sapientiae, To enrich his understanding with wisdom, as the
Serpent, or, ad Comparandam exercendamque virtutem, To crown his actions with
moral virtues, as the Dove: Nothing is so naught, but is good for something.
The Spider gathers the infected air; the Toade affoords a stone precious for
the sight: The Viper on Paul's hand, proves Acts 28. 3.
him an Apostle, not a murderer. Behold, I give unto you power to tread on
Serpents, and Scorpions, and over all the power Luc. 10. 19.
of the Enemy, and nothing shall hurt you: The Angels that sinned, the old
World that repented not, are ensamples how 2 Pet. 2. 4.
we fall from grace, or remain impenitent after warning. The Serpent that
deceived us in Paradise, where was nothing to offend us, teaches us in my Text
to walk warily in the World, where are Wolves to devour us.

Men may go to School, and learn even of brute Prou. 6. 7.
The Riuer-Horse finding himself ouer-grosse, by reason Plin. bist. not. l. 8.
cap. 26.
of his high feeding, sets his body against the sharpest reed he can meet
with, and so pricketh a vain in his leg, and lets himself blood. The
Heart draws arrows out Plin l. 8. c. 27.
of his body, by eating of the herb Dictamnus. The Lyzards eat of the herb
Calaminth, and it is their antidote against the biting of Serpents. The Land
Torteyse prepares himself with Marioram against he fights with them. The
Swallows cure the soar eyes of their young ones with Celedine. The Dragon his
squeazy stomach with Lectuce. The Stocke-Doues, Iayes, Merles, Owsels, with
bay-berrias: Partridges, House-Doues, and Turtle-Doues, with Pelletary of the
wall; all water Foul with Cicory. If the Swine has eaten of the herb
Hyosciamus, he takes Creafishes, and it is his antidote: wild Olives the
Elephants after the swallowing of the Lyzard Camelion; and Pismires the Bears,
after Mandrake Apples. Finally, the Snake by restinesse, and lying still all
Winter, has a certain membrane or filme grown over his whole body; but
having recourse to Fenell, with the juice thereof, he casts that old coat
that clogged him, and appears fresh, slicke, and young again.

O that the painful Pismire could set sluggards on work, that he that 2 Thessalonians. 5. 10.
would not work, should not eat. O that we that are more inclined to sin,
then the Hyppopotamus to diseases, labored to ease our selves of our corrupt
affections, as he of his superfluous humors. O that we sought remedy to cure
natural concupiscence, as the Heart after Dictamnus, to draw darts out of his
wounds. O that we armed our selves against sin and Satan with the armor of
righteousness, as the Camelyon with Calamynth, or the Tortoyse with Marioram
against Serpents. O that we applied to our sick^ souls the comfort of Gods
Word, as the Swallows Celedine, to their sore eyes; and digested it into our
souls and consciences, as the Dragon Lectuce into his stomach; the Birds
Pellitory, or the Fowls Cicory. But we alas are more filthy then Swine, and
yet wallow still in the mire of sin: we have swallowed more sins, then the
Elephant Lyzards; and yet never seek after oil of mercy to purchase pardon.
Surcharged with a lethargy of sin, securelesse ever to be awaked, waxen old
in sin, and yet without striving to be renewed by grace.

See, oh see how we are sent to School to brute beasts, The Ox knows his
Owner, and the Ass his Masters Esa 1. 3.
Crib: but Israel has not known, my people has not understood. The old
Pelican pierces her breast to feed her young: Plin. hist. not. l. 10. cap.
23. Lib. 8. cap. 3.
The young Storkes feed the old, that formerly fed them: But Parents are
grown unnatural, and Children undutiful. The Elephants know that they are
hunted for their Idem. l. 8. c. 30
teeth, and in extreamities break them off, as a ransom for their lives. The
Beauer bytes off his stones; the Sea-Calfe Cap. 3^.
easts up his gall and runnet in his maw: O let us also cast away every thing
that presses down, and the sin that hangs so fast on. Let us run with
patience the race that is Heb. 12. 1.
set before us. Mahomet the great Turk discontinued the Hist. Turc.
wars two years to accompany his fair Irene; for which, when his Bassoes
muttered, he upon an appointed day, led her forth into the great Hall of his
Palace, arrayed in the most richest robes of state, and Jewels for price and
worth the most precious that the whole perephery of his Empire affoorded, to
the approbation of his choice, and wonderful amazement of the beholders; not
in regard of her bravery alone, but much more of her surpassing beauty: but he
with the one hand took hold of the hair of her head, and with his semitary in
the other hand smote off her head. An action for murdering of an Innocent, and
his love Turkish, and like himself; but for resolution from vain pleasure
singular, and such, that had God been the object, and the sacrifice unbloody,
Iuberem macte virtute, As Porsenna Liu. dec. 1. l. 2.
sometimes spoke to Cain^ Mutius, and could not but commend and admire. Better
things are expected from us, then from bruit Beasts and Infidels great shame it
were for us to come short of them.

Be ye therefore wise as Serpents, etc.
From diverse Creatures men learn diverse things. Spinning Aelian. var. hist.
from the Spyder; the ordering of a battle from the Crane; Navigations from the
Kyte: and in my Text, simplicity from the Sheep, innocence from the Dove, and
wisdom from the Serpent; and that in a fourfold respect.

He refuses to hear the voice of the Charmer, charm he The Serpents property.
never so wisely. He holds, says Iunius (out of Jerome, Augustine,
Cassiodere, etc.) one ear close to the ground, and covers 1. Psalm. 58. 5. In
hunc locum.
the other with his tail.

A lesson for us all, an emblem in stead of a Doctrine; to Take heed how we
hear. The ear is the Organ of Faith. Luc. 8. 18.
For Faith comes by hearing: He that has ears to hear, let Romans 10. 17.
him hear. We must of necessity hear; but we must therewithal Mat. 13. 9.
take heed how we hear. The Sower went forth to Luc. 8. 5.
sow his seed; and as he sowed, some fell by the way side, and it was trodden
under feet; and the Fowls of Heaven devoured it up: and some fell among
stones, and when it was sprung up, it withered away, because it wanted
moistness; and some fell among thorns, and the thorns sprang up with it, and
choked it: and some fell on good ground, and sprang up, and bare fruit an
hundred fold. the Word. The good ground, are they that with an honest and good
heart, hear the Word, and keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience; Such
a one, Libenter audit v^ilia; Prudender discernit audita; Obedienter operatur
intellecta: Bern. epist.
He is willing to hear what makes for his good; like Mary, that sat at Jesus
feet, and heard his preaching. He Luc. 10. 39.
is of understanding to judge of what he hears, like the Apostles, to whom it
was given to understand the secrets Luc. 8. 10.
of the Kingdom of God; Is conformable in life, according to his knowledge;
like James, and all true believers shows Iam. 2. 18.
his faith by his works; and lives as he believes.

A Caveat for Magistrates how they hear either open Aristides; the one to
advantage his own Plut. Aristid.
cause, and disadvantage his enemies, told him; This fellow my adversary, has
done you great wrong: My friend (replied Aristides) tell me only the wrong
that he has done thee; for I am Judge here to do thee right, not my self. He
would not suffer the one to get the start of the other, either by insinuating
himself into the favor of the Judge, or by by-accusing of his adversary.
Alexanders manner of Plut. Alex.
sitting in judgment, is this Doctrines emblem: for he leaned on his elbow,
with his hand under his head, whilst that the Plaintiffes Bill was in reading;
and so lent one ear to the plaintiff, and reserved the other for the
Defendant. For,

Quistatuerit aliquid part inaudita altera: Sen. Med.

Aequum licet statuerit, haud aequus est.
He that determines a Controversy without hearing of both parties, though
happily his judgment chance to be just, yet is he himself an unjust Judge.
The Law of necessity must have its course: because. Innocens si accusatus sit,
absolui potest; Cic. pro Roscio.
nocens nisi accusatus fuerit, damnari non potest. An honest man may come to
his trial, and be acquitted; a Malefactor unless he be arraigned, cannot be
convicted.

But that which in a general use concerns us all as Christians, Ulysses when
he was to pass by the Sirens, Homer.
stopped the ears of them that were with him in the Ship, and bound himself
to the maine mast; and as Serpents Plin.
stop their ears against the Mathematician spelles: so we, ad patriam
festinantes mortiferos Syrenarum cantus, surda aure Hier.
transire debemus: as we hasten to our Country of Heaven, should turn the
deaf ear to the entising vanities in our journey. And this is one point of
wisdom that we may learn of the Serpent, in stopping the ear; another is in
defending the head:

For howsoever the rest of the body speedes, he will be sure to keep the head.

Whatsoever alteration in Religion, innovation in State, I have fought a good
fight, and have finished 2 Timothy 4. 7.
my course; I have kept the Faith. I have fought a good fight; not only with
Beasts, after the manner of men: not only against flesh and blood, but against
Principalities, against Ephesians. 6. 12.
Powers, and against worldly Governors, the Princes of the darkness of this
World, against spiritual wickednesses. I have fought Heb. 12. 1.
a good fight, I have finished my course, the race that is set before me;
looking unto Jesus Christ the author and finisher of my faith. I have fought a
good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the Faith; the Depositum,
laid up like the Vrim and the Thummim 1 Timothy 6 20.
on the breast, without which it is impossible to please Heb. 11. 6.
God. Whatsoever alteration in Religion, innovation in State, occurrance
between man and man may happen, it is our part and duty to preserve faith
toward God. 2. Fidelity toward our Country. God forbid that I should sin
against 1 Samuel 12. 23.
the Lord, and cease praying for you. The people had cast off Samuel, and not
only him, but the Lord also from 1 Samuel 8. 7.
reigning over them; yet it had been sin in him not to preserve fidelity
toward his Country, or to have ceased praying for them. As Phocion was led to
execution, one Plut. Phoe.
asked him what he would have to his son? nothing said he, but that my son
remember not the wrong that my Country now does unto me. In all occurrances we
must preserve faith toward God, fidelity toward our Country. 3. Good report
among men, that when they speak evil of you, as of evil doers, they may be
ashamed, which blame your good conversation 1 Pet. 3. 16.
in Christ. Duo sunt tibi necessaria, Conscientia and fama: Conscientia propter
Deum, fama propter Proximum. A Ambr. epist. ad Constant.
man must be tender of his Conscience, and of his good name: Of his Conscience,
to be justified before God; of his good name, to be justified before men: He
must preserve good report among men. 4. Conscience in all his actions. Our
rejoicing is this, the testimony of our Conscience, that in simplicity 1 Cor.
1. 12.
and godly pureness, and not in fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God we
have had our conversation in the world. How hard soever we fare in the world,
this will continually feast us. For a good Conscience, is a continual feast.
Prou. 15. 15.


The nearer that the members neighboureth one upon Psalm. 12. 6.
to you his name and authority; his name, (...) his authority the Sword. The
King has made you his Vicegerents Romans 13. 4.
of Oyre, and Determine, to hear and judge: your Country has put her self
into your hands, as under cover barn. You of all men must stand stiff for
God, the King, and your Country. As L. Tubero, sometimes Lord Chief Justice
of Rome, sat on his Pretorian Throne; one Plin hist. not. l. 10. cap. 18.
of the Birds called Picus Martius, pearcht on his head, stayed there,
notwithstanding the concourse of people, and suffered Tubero to take him down:
The South-sayer thereupon coniectured, that if the Bird were let go, that it
portended the ruin and overthrow of the whole State and Empire; but if that he
were killed, that then it presaged the death of the said Lord Chief Justice.
Did not Tubero now hold the Wolf by the ears? If he holds him, he bytes him;
if he lets him go, he killes him: but he was not long in deliberating whether
to prefer his own, or his Countries good; and incontinently pulled the Bird
in pieces. And it was not long till the presage of the Bird took effect
indeed, and was fulfilled in Tuberos own person. He was not like Caligula,
that Suetonius.
wished that all the Senators had but one neck, that he might cut it off at a
blow. Nor like Nero, that therefore Xiphilmus in Nerone.
thought Priamus a happy man; for that he saw together with himself the joint
destruction of himself and his Country together. Tubero in profane learning,
and the Serpent in Divine, be better Schoolemasters: The one thought it better,
vt Pereat vnus quam vnitas: Rather as Caiphas Ioh. 11. 50.
prophesied, that one man dye for the people, then that the whole Nation should
perish: The other, howsoever the body speedes, will be sure to keep the head.

Notum est, eum totum corpus pro capite obijcere ferientibus. It Aug. de doct.
body a fence for his head; so should we pro capite nostro Christiana, lib. 2.
cap. 16.
Christo, corpus potius persequentibus offerre: Rather take the Idem ibidem.
blow our selves, then that it should light upon our head, Christ Jesus. The
Serpent slippes away if he can; if he cannot, yet Caput ab ictu subtrahit:
cedique partem reliquam derelinquit; Howsoever the body speedes, he is sure to
keep the head. To teach us, says Hilary, nosque hoc exemplo opportere, Hill.
in Malt.
si quid acciderit persecutionum caput nostrum quod est Christus occulere, vt
ablatis nobis in omnes cruciatus, fidem ab ^o arcessitam, iactura Corporis
communiamus: To interpose our bodies for the defense of our head; to suffer (as
the Apostle counsels) afflictions, as good Soldiers of Jesus Christ. And 2 Timothy 2. 3.
rather as Peter promised; and we all are bound to make good, to dye for him,
then deny him. And this is to be wise as Mat. 26. 35.
Serpents, in keeping the head. The third remarkable thing in the Serpent, for
us to imitate; is, that,

Every Spring he casts his old coat; he begins at the The third property.
head, and turns the skin over it. All that will be good Christians, must
according to the Apostle, Cast off the old Plin. l. 8. ea. 27.
man, which is corrupt through deceivable lusts; and put on the Ephesians. 4. 22.
new man, who after God is created in holiness and true righteousness. If any
man will be in Christ, let him be a new Creature. In 2 Cor. 5. 17.
Baptism we first contract it; in the Sacrament of the Altar we renew it,
daily we make profession of it, and here in my Text, are we sent to School, to
the Serpent to practice it.

Per cauer^a angustias cearctatus deposita veteri tunica vires nouas accipere
dicitur: He passes through a narrow Aug. de doct. Christiana, l. 2. cap. 16.
place, and so leaves his skin behind him. Sic exuendus est a nobis vetus
homo, vt induamur nouo: So must we cast off the old man, and put on the new.
Aug. sup.


More particularly, and to intimate the present occurrance; iniquus est index
qui ant inuidet Cic. pro Roscio.
aut fauet: Neither favor, nor disfavor, can stand with the equity of a
Judge. Yours, all the rest, deuoid of all impression, to receive the stamp of
Justice, that you Master Sheriff hang not an innocent for his goods; nor you
of the Jury, acquit a Malefactor for his friends; nor you the Justices of the
Peace, look on to give aim. Ye may neither Prou. 17. 15.
justify the wicked, nor condemn the just; for that is abomination. Ye may
not as newters stand aloof, and look on, like Metius Albanus between the
Romans and the Fidenates: Vt igitur (such was the form of Tullus judgment
upon him) Liu. decad. 1. l. 2.
paulo ante aninium inter fidenatem Romanamquerem, ancipitem gessisti: ita iam
corpus passion distrabendum dabis. As thy mind but a little since was
wavering, so shall now thy body be distracted between the enemy and us; and
thereupon was incontinently fastened to two Chariots and so rent asunder in the
midst. And as for the prosecutor and the witnesses, let the first take heed
that malice set him not a work against conscience, like Theophilus, who
persecuted Socrat hist, eccle. l. 6. ca. 7.
his own faith, and turned Anthropomorphit; so to vent his spleen on
Dioscorus, Bishop of Hermopolis. Let the rest beware least in befriending their
friend, they make God their enemy: like Scipio his Army, that sided contrary
sides; the Navy with Sex. Digitius; the Camp with Q. Trebellius, ready says
Lalius, to swear, Magis quae vellent, quam quae Liu. dec. 3. l. 6.
sciant vera esse, Rather what they would have, then what they knew to be true.
The one is, the taking of Gods Name in vain, for which GOD will not hold a man
guiltless: The Exodus 20. 7.
other is, the finne against the holy Ghost; it will never be forgiven. Mat. 12
32.
Learn therefore of the Serpent, to cast off your old coat, to leave your old
acquaintance at home, and to come hither vnpreiudicated in affection, either of
love or hatred, like so many Aristides, whom in case of Justice, neither
friendship Plut. Aristid.
could make to step aside for his friend, nor envy move to do injustice to his
very enemy. And this is to be wise as Serpents, in casting off the old coat.

Finally, before he coupleth with the Lamprey, he disgorgeth The 4. property.
himself of his poison.

Pliny out of Macer observes, that the Lampreyes be all Hist. not. l 32. cap.
2.
female, and couple with Serpents.

Serpenti nubit, prompteque ex aequore saltat in littus, says Bellenius De
aquatilibus lib. 1. cap. 13.
out of Oppianus. But before they come together, he casts his poison, as the
Emblamists note, and make it Andr. Alciat emblem. 191.
an hieroglyphicke of marriage. Whence the natural Philosopher, the Moralist,
and Divine, observe each of them their respective Doctrine: The first is
Natural, the second Moral, the third Theological.

Man and Woman before they be made one by Matrimony, Doctrine 1.
must forgo all sinister opinion, that the one might have of the other; and
take one the other, for better, for worse: for richer, for poorer. The
Magistrate, for as much as he is

For as much as the communion of Saints, by the participation To be members one
of another; we may Romans 12. 5.
not presume to communicate in the Sacraments, till we have purged our selves
of the leaven of maliciousness.

Art thou a married man? learn here to live peaceably She is flesh of thy
flesh, and bone of thy bone. Genesis 2 23.
And never any man hated his own flesh. She cannot lightly Gal 5. 29.
be a veryer Vixen then Xantippe; yet Socrates, a Heathen, learnt to bear, not
only with her thunder, but with her tempest also, rain, and shows.

And are not you, ye reverend Fathers, as Moses brazen Number. 21. 9.
do they look but upon you? Are any circumuented by their fraud, or oppressed
by their malice? whither do they come but to you? Index and ara idem sunt:
pariter enim ad Seneca.
vtrumque confugium. The Judge and the Altar are morally the same: for where
but with you shall a man find Sanctuary?

Finally, come you my Brethren to communicate in the If thou bring thy gift to
the Altar, Mat. 5. 23.
and there remember that thy brother has ought against thee; leave there thine
offering before the Altar, and go thy way: first be reconciled to thy brother,
and then come and offer thy gift. There is no living in Ireland for any thing
that has venom; there is no coupling with the Lamprey with the poison: there
is no coming to the Lords Table, with retaining of your natural corruptions,
and fostering of them; you must cast off, you most cast up your old coats,
your innated venom: you must first be reconciled to God, and your Brethren.
First, wash your hands, before you eat: Wash them in Innocence; and so go to
the Lords Altar. Behold, Psalm. 26. 6.
I send you as Sheep in the midst of Wolves: be ye therefore wise at
Serpents, and innocent as Doves.

Non multum distat in vitio aut decipere aut decipi posse: It is Hieron. ad
Rustic.
incident to man to deceive, and to be deceived. To prevent both, our blessed
Savior counsels in my Text; To be wise as Serpents, and innocent as Doves.
Innocent as Doves: Ne Hieron supra.
cuiquam machineris dolos; Wise as Serpents: Ne aliorum supplanteris insidijs;
Neither deceiving, nor being deceived. If either go single, Va Soli. Woe unto
him that is alone; because Eccles 4. 10.
Prudentia absque simplicitate malitia est: and simplicitas absque Hieron. sup.
Oseam.
ratione stultitia est. Wisdom without Innocence, is but machauillian policy
without Religion: and Innocence without wisdom, but will worship without
knowledge. The Serpent had wisdom without innocence, and became Genesis 3. 1.
a Tempter: Eve had innocence without wisdom, and Genesis 3. 6.
became a transgressor. Vtraque been in admonitione conuertit: Greg. in moral.
vt simplicitatem columba astutia Serpentis instrueret: and rursus serpentis
astutiam, columbae simplicitas temperaret: Christ Jesus ioynes both together in
the Instruction, that Wisdom might be Innocencies Lecturer, and Innocence
Wisdoms moderator: because, vtrumque per se indigens, (as one concludes
Sallust.
between plain force and stratagems) alterum alterius auxilio ege^. Wisdom
must inform Innocence, and Innocence temper Wisdom.

A man may not venture on Church, or Commonwealth Exodus 29. 6.
crowned like Aarons; because of his sanctity: For the Lord Leuit. 10. 3.
will be sanctified in all them that come near unto him. His tongue cloven,
like those on the Apostles. Propter donorum diuersitatem, Acts 2. 3.
because of his gifts: Out of his mouth, as out of the Mar. ex bull.
Lambs, must go a two edged Sword. Because the Word of Apoc. 1. 16.
God in his mouth must be lively, and mighty in operation, Heb. 4. 12.
and sharper then any two edged Sword; Edged on the one side, and on the other:
On the one side, with the Vrim of the Word, on the other, with the Thummin of
good life; least after that he has preached to others, he himself should be
reproved. 1 Cor. 9. 27.
The Magistrate must be a man of courage, fearing God, dealing truly, and
hating covetousness. He must be a man Exodus 18. 21.
of courage, like the title of the Kings of England; Defender of the Faith. He
must have the fear of God before his eyes; like the Seraphins, that cover
their faces with their wings. He Esa. 6. 2.
must be just and upright in all his dealings, like Melchizedek: Melchi-zedek,
Melchi-salem, King of righteousness, King Heb. 7. 2.
of peace; but first Melchi-zedek King of righteousness, then Melchi-salem
King of peace. He must be free from covetousness, he must be more, he must
hate it; he must be free from covetousness, contented like a good Christian
with what he has. 1 Timothy 6. 6.
He must be more, he must as a good Magistrate hate it, as the root of all
evil. He must have Iustitiam in affectu, Justice in Prudentiam in intellectu,
Wisdom in the understanding: Fortitudinem in effectu, Fortitude in the
resolution. Ambr. de officijs.
Temperantiam in vs^. Temperance in the life and conversation.

What King going to make war against another King, sits not down first,
and takes counsel, whether he be able with ten thousand men, to meet him
that comes against Luc. 14. 31.
him with twenty thousand? Now our warfare is not against few, or contemptible,
but many and mighty adversaries: not Subjects, but Princes; not carnal, but
spiritual: not against flesh and blood, but against Principalities, against
Powers, and against worldly Governors; the Princes of the darkness Ephesians. 6.
12.
of this world, against spiritual wickednesses. For this cause take unto you
the whole Armor of God: The weapons offensive and defensive, the Sword of the
Spirit, the Shield of Faith, the Breast Plate of righteousness, and the Helmet
of saluat^^^: stand therefore and your loins girt about with verity, and
(...) the breast plate of righteousness, and your feet shod with the
preparation of the Gospel of Peace: about all, take the shield of Faith,
wherewith we may quench all the fiery darts of the wicked; and take the helmet
of salvation, and the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God; Join
moreover virtue with your faith, and with 2 Pet 1. 5.
virtue Knowledge, and with knowledge Temperance: and with Temperance Patience:
and with Patience, Godliness, and with godliness brotherly kindness: and
with brotherly kindness, Love: Be wise as Serpents, but be there withal
innocent as Doves; for wisdom without innocence is but subtilty: and
innocence without wisdom, foolery. Be ye therefore wise as Serpents, and

Innocent as Doves.
Men, like Apes love to imitate: for as they that would Plut. Moralib.
be neat, consult with their glass, how things stand according to the idaea
of their forming fancy: so they that intend matter of consequence, propose
unto themselves some man of note, how he in the like case carried himself and
Plut. Moralib.
his cause. The point then of discretion, is in the choyce-making. 1. of the
Object 2. of the Quality, 3. of the Extention. 1. What to imitate and to be
like unto: 2. Wherein and in what respect: 3 How far forth. Optimum est
maiorum sequi Seneca in prouer.
vestigia, sirecte praecesserint, it is a very good thing to be like unto our
ancestors in their good parts. Scipio African Zunigle.
proposed unto himself Cyrus Zenophon to be like unto Caesar, Alexander the
great. And Selimus the great Turk, Caesar: Diogenes, like a snayle, loved to
carry his house on his back, Aristippus, like the Heliotropium, turned with
the carte: Lysander in the wars was both a Lion and a Fox: Plut. Lacon.
The Apostles, in my text, Serpents and Doves. The first point of discretion is
in the choyce-making what to imitate and to be like unto: the second is,
wherein and in what respect every good man has some thing in him to be liked:
but we may not in every thing be like to every good man. When X^^xis was to
picture Juno, he chose among all the Agrigetine beauties only five: and
presented in those five, quod erat, in vnaquaque praecipuum, that that every
one had Anominus.
singular and surpassing others. When we propose patterns for our lives, it
must be a plurimis optimis, a choice of many and very good, and then are we
bound to imitate in them, Non omnia, sed optima, not every thing, but the best;
Idem ibidem. Cic. 7. Offic.
because, Non vinitur cum perfectis, the best be but men, and men have their
imperfections. The third thing to be considered in this choice of ours, is, how
far forth to be like our pattern. Of this the Apostle gives the rule: Be yet
1 Cor. 11. 1.
followers of me, even as I am of Christ: In his omnibus quaec^^que Aug. contra
Petilianum lib. 3. cap. 2.
in nobis bona nostis: imitatores nostri estote, sicut not Christi: follow us,
not simply and without restraint, but with this limitation, as we follow
Christ: but if we pretend Christ, and not follow Christ, retinete illud
dominicum, let Christ his rule be your lesson; The Scribes and Pharisees sit in
Moses chair, all therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that Mat. 23. 2.
observe and do: but after their works do not: for they say and do not. The
things that my text proposes to us to be like unto, are the Serpent and the
Dove: the things wherein we should be like unto them, are Wisdom and
Innocence: how far forth we should be like unto them, I have already spoken
of the Serpent, and now I come to the Dove. Behold, I send you as sheep in the
midst of Wolves: be ye therefore wise as Serpents

And Innocent as Doves.
Innocence is an (...), communicating her name to contrary natures, as much
as is between Love and Fear; there is says Bernard, Innocentia Timeris, and
innocentia A^^ris, Bernard.
Children of a name but no kin: the one the Daughter of Love, the other of
Fear: the one generous, the other base. Joseph's virtue brought him to that
honor and power, by which if he would, he might have revenged himself on his
brethren: for at his word was all Egypt to be armed; Genesis 41. 40.
but such was the goodness of his nature, that in stead of falling upon them
to hurt them, he fell upon them, kissed Genesis 45. 15.
them, and wept upon them: he kissed them because he loved them; he was glad
to see them, and wept for joy. Generosity looks after matter to show mercy,
but baseness if it seems an innocent, it is but for fear. Aut eius qui
Patitur, Bern. insent.
ne reddat talionem, lest the party grieved right his own wrongs, like the
Gibeonites, that had a will to try their fortunes against Joshua, as well as
their neighbors, but the example of Ierico and Ai, made them afraid. If
baseness seems Josh. 9. 3.
an innocent, it is but for fear, 1. either least the party grieved, right his
own wrongs: 2. or for fear, Superioris potestatis, Bern. ibid.
ne inferat talionem; of the higher powers, lest they pay wrong doing in it is
own kind; like Agbarus, that would Eusebius. hist. Eccl. lib. 1. cap. 14.
feign be doing with the Jews, but for fear of the Romans. 3. or finally, for
fear, Interioris Iudicijs, qui reddit vnicuique Bern. ibid. 2 Pet. 2. 15.
secundum opera sua, of God, that rewards every man according to his works;
like Baalam, that was willing enough Number. 22. 22. 24. 26.
to get Balak his money, and curse Israel, but for fear of the Angel that had
like to have killed him in the way. Now eam Deus Innocentiam probat, qua homo
non poenae timore fit innocens, Aug. de vera innocentia.
sed amore iustitiae, God approues that man that is an Innocent, not for fear
of punishment, but for love of righteousness.

He is not an Innocent, blameless and without fault, that Inimicus iustitiae
est, qui poenae timore Aug. epist. 144.
non peccat: amicus autem erit si eius amore non peccat, that man is auerse to
God and goodness, that forbeares ill-doing, only out of fear of punishment
incident to ill-doing: but the man of God abstaineth from ill-doing, out of the
love that he bears to God and goodness.

Oderunt peccare boni, virtutis amore. Horat. Epist. lib. 1. ad Number.

Tu nihil admittes in te, formidine poenae.
Quando timore poenae, non amore iustitiae fit bonum, nondum been Aug. contra
Pelag. lib. 2.
fit bonum. When out of fear and not love we do our duties, we do that we
should, but not As we should; we fail in the cause: Nec fit in cord, quod
fieri videtur in opere, quando mallet homo non facere, si posset impune: there
is a great deal of difference between the intention and the work, when a man
does the good that he would not, because he durst not otherwise do.

This should teach us to do our duties, not out of fear, Nam qui gehennas
metuit, non peccare metuit, sed ardere: Aug. epist. 144.
he that is afraid of hell, is not afraid to sin, but to burn: ille autem
peccare metuit, qui peccatum ipsum, sicut gehennas Ibid.
odit, but he is afraid to sin, that hates sin, as he hates hell. This is
Lovely, this is Douely innocence.

Pliny notes in the Dove three things. 1. that she never Three remarkable
properties in the Dove. Plin. hist. nature. lib. 10. cap. 34.
plays false play with her mate. 2. that she patiently without contradiction
endures his imperious taunts of jealousy. 3. that he no sooner offers
reconciliation, but she entertaines it, without retaining any thought of
fore-past unkindness: Whence we may observe likewise three properties in an
Innocent: 1. that he offers no wrong, 2. that Three remarkable properties in
an Innocent
he patiently endures wrong: 3. that he is easily reconciled after receiving
of wrong. These generous sciences graffed into the stock of innocence, take
root downward, and bear fruit upward: They take root in the heart, the
tongue, Esa. 37. 31.
and the hands; and bear fruit in thought, word, and deed. Who shall ascend
into the hill of the Lord, or who shall rise up in his Psalm. 24. 3. 4.
holy place? Even he that has clean hands and a pure heart, and that has not
lift up his mind unto vanity, nor sworn to deceive his neighbor: An
Innocent must have 1. clean hands, 2. a pure heart, and 3. a wary tongue; He
must have clean hands, that neither force nor fraud mar his works; he must
have a pure heart, that neither ignorance nor wilfulness corrupt his thoughts;
he must have a wary tongue, that neither augmentation nor diminution
disproportion his words. The first is, Innocentia operis, the innocence of the
hands in Bern. in sent.
the work; the second is Innocentia sermonis, the innocence of the tongue in
the word; the third is Innocentia cogitationis, the innocence of the heart in
the thought.

To be absolute in all Three, we must beware of a threefold Male, the first is,
A Malefaciendo from ill-doing, because in Malefacere opus est simulatorium, vel
impium, vel impudicum; Berne. in sent. Ibid.
the first is, cum aliud intendimus quam opere demonstramus: When we intend one
thing, and pretend another, like our wisard Egyptians, whilst one looks in
your hand to tell you your Fortune, an others hand in your pocket is doing with
your purse.

(...): Achilles apud. Hom. Illiad. 1.

(...):
I cannot abide a man that carries two faces under one hood: A friend in show,
a foe in heart: This is Simulatorium, Saint Martins Ware, counterfeit stuff.
The second is Impium, sin and wickedness; Cum proximum nostrum Bern.
ladimus: Like him that sacrifices (says Augustine) the Aug.
son in the sight of the father, a ruthful spectacle it were for a father to
see his son upon the altar: a doleful suffering it is for the Son of God
to feel his members massacred. He that sacrifices the son must look for
vengeance from the Father: He that persecuteth Jesus Christ in his members,
shall stand confounded, when the Lord 2 Thessalonians. 1 7. 8.
Jesus Christ shall show himself from Heaven, with his mighty Angels, in
flaming fire, rendering vengeance, unto them that know not God, and which obey
not unto the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, which shall be punished with
everlasting perdition, from the presence of the Lord, 9.
and from the glory of his power; when he shall come to be glorified in his
Saints, and to be made marvelous in all 10.
them that believe: This is, impium, sin. The next is impudicum, shame; Cum
nos aliquo modo sordidamus: When Bern. sup. Plin. hist. naturalis lib. 8. ca.
10.
we defile our selves with our own flesh. Like the Panther that has a longing
after man's dung: Beasts will do their kind, But fornication, and all
uncleanness, or covetousness, let Ephesians. 5. 3.
it not be once named among you. This is Innocencies first Caveat, viz. a
Malefaciendo. The second is a Maledicendo, Bern. in sent.
from ill speaking, because in Maledicere, sermo est vel supernacaneus, vel
detractorius, vel adulatorius: The first is vaineglory, the second imputation,
the third flattery. The first is vain Ratione and vtilitate carens, to no
purpose: Bragadochies, Bern. sent.
Soldiers, and Travelers; the one a vainglorious Thraso, the other a
Polytropian Ulysses. This is idle. The second derogatory, fraterna bona inuida
corrosione, and odij instinctu Bern. sup.
diminuens: Lessoning the good that is in another; like Zoylus, that barks,
because he cannot bite. Quoniam Aelian. Var. hist. lib. 11.
(says he of himself) malefacere quod vellem non possum, maledico, because I
cannot do the evil that I have a will to do, I do the evil that I can, I
speak ill: This is a peremptory sign of a deboiste nature: vilium satis
hominum est, and Hieronimus.
suas lands quarentium alios viles facere: quia alterius vituperatione se
laudari putant; this kills a man in the opinion of others. The third and last
marres him in his own; Caputalicuius Bern.
falsa ^lei delmitione demulcens, coming within a man to undo him: an English
man Italianated, a devil incarnated; like the Hyena that glauers with you till
you trust her, and Plin. bist. nature. lib. 8. cap. 30.
then she killes you. This is Innocencies second bane, and we must beware of it.

The third Caveat is a Male-Cogitando from ill-thinking, because in
Male-Cogitare est, vel immunditia, vel superbia, Bern. sent.
vel auaritia: uncleanness, pride, or covetousness. The first is, cum res
sordidae and impure memoria reuoluuntur; when Ibid.
we defile our selves with the memory of our own pollutions. This is their
great and grievous sin, that reckon up their past escapes to glory in them:
This sin that good Father Saint Augustine thus sentenceth; Nullum scoelus tam
Ad quendam Commit.
abhominabile est coram deo, quam praeterita peccata vnicuique nostrum dimissa,
reminiscendo gaudere, and inde exultare; God hates nothing so much, as to
reckon up old sins, and glory in them; this is filthiness: The next is
arrogancy; Cum animus quasi superior supra proximos suos erigitur and
inflatur; when a man thinks that there is none so good as himself, like
Rabsache and Senacherib that insulted over Hezekias 2 Reg. cap. 18. and 19.
Isiod. etim.
the King of Jerusalem, and the God thereof: Superbus dictus est, quia supra
vult videri quam est; A proud man will seem to be more then he is; like Sabor
in Herodotus, that pretended kindred to the Sun; or Alexander in Curtius,
that pretended himself to be the Son of Jupiter; or Simon Magus in Acts 8. 9.
the Acts of the Apostles, that would needs be some great man; or Lucifer, in
the Prophet, that said in his heart: I will Esa. 14. 13.
ascend into heaven, and exalt my throne above, beside the stars of God: I
will sit also upon the mount of the congregation, in the fides of the north. I
will ascend above the height of the clouds, and I will be like the most high:
this is insolency. The next and last is Avarice: Cum diabolo instigante,
contra praeceptum Bern.
dei, res proximi concupiscitur; When through the instigation of the devil, we
covet that that is none of our own. Like the horseleech, that still cries
Give, Give, or hell and destruction, Prou. 30. 15.
that never have enough; for, tam deest auaro Prou. 27. 29. Hier. ad Paulin.
quod habet, quam quod non habet; the miser wants as well what he has, as what
he has not; and this is Innocencies third caveat; viz a Male-Cogitando: Say
not then I will do to him as Prou 24. 29.
he has done to me, recompense to no man evil for evil, be not overcome Romans
12. 17. Verse 21.
of evil, but overcome evil with good. The covetous man makes profit of his
friend, the angry man works revenge on his enemy, the envious man wishes well
to no man, the cruel man will do good to no man, but the Innocent man
carries himself toward his Hug. Card li. 2. de anima. cap. 9.
friend, ad gratiam, respectfully; toward his enemy, ad patientiam
temperately; toward all men, ad beneuolentiam, to wish them well; toward as
many as he can, ad beneficentiam, Chrysostom. in hom.
to do them good: Gaude de innocentia and exulta, gaude inquam quia vbique
illaesa est, vbique secura; Let thy innocence be thy joy of heart: Si tentaris
profitis, if thou be tempted, it is for thy good; for, blessed is the man that
endures tentation; Iam. ^. 12.
Si humiliaris erigeris, if thou be humbled, it is to exalt thee: Luc. 14. 11.
for he that humbles himself, shall be exalted: Si pugnas vincis, if thou
fightest, thou shall overcome, for a man cannot be an innocent and foiled: Si
occideris coronaberis; if thou die for thy 1 Ioh. ^. 9.
conscience, thou shall be crowned for thy innocence; for Apoc. 7. 11.
he that dies a Martyr, shall be clothed with the long white roabe of
purity. Labor, O labor to preserve Innocence in thought, word, and deed;
for, as Pericles spoke to Sophocles, that a judge must have, non modo manus,
sed oculos etiam atque linguam abstinentes, not only clean hands, but
continent eyes also, and a wary tongue; so, he that will be absolutely
innocent, must look not only to his actions, but to his words also and
thoughts to be justified in all.

I said I will take heed unto my ways, that I offend not in my Psalm 39. 1.
tongue; was the Kingly Prophet his resolution. Pambo Socrat. hist. eccl. l. 4.
cap. 18.
thought this one line lesson enough for six months, and nineteen years,
little enough to learn perfectly this one point of innocence. Set a watch O
Lord before my mouth, and Psalm. 141. 3.
keep the door of my lips: (there is the innocence of the tongue;) O let not
my heart be inclined to any evil thing; Let me not be occupied in ungodly
works (there is the innocence of the hands.)

Plants are first seeds, before they become to be vegetatiues; Creatures are
first Embrions, before they become to be sensitiues: and works first thoughts,
before they be formed into actions. If therefore you would prevent the deed,
you must not entertain the thought: Now the will and the deed before God, are
both alike; Voluntas pro opere Hieron. sup. Mat.
reputatur: God takes the will for the deed. If a man has a will to do
harm, Quamuis non nocot, cui vult nocere, and abstine Aug. de vera innocentia.
at ab iniquo opere, reus tamen fit sola voluntate: Though he do no harm,
yet his will to do, makes him before God guilty of the harm.

The Law (Right Reverend) lies in your hands: quo plus potestis peccare,
definite; Abuse not your authority to do injustice. Seneca in Pro.
You are Sheep, you might be Wolves: Posse and nolle, nobile; It is a virtue
not to do all that a man may do. Heavens ordinance has made you Gods on
Earth: Douely Psalm. 82. 6.
innocence will make you Saints in Heaven.

Innocence speaks neither good of evil, nor evil of good. Beware (ye Gentry
of the Country) how you aggrauate or extenuate any cause; because, as Hecuba
in Euripides spoke to Ulysses.

(...) Her: apud Eurip

(...)
(...).
Your allegations are Axioms, and according to your credit with the Judge; so
shall you do either good or harm, by your report.

Innocens est, qui cum alijs non nocet, nec sibi nocet. An innocent Aug: in
Psa. 38
wrongs neither others nor his own conscience, in either justifying the
wicked, or condemning the innocent. Ye good men of the Jury, are held for
sheep, O be not Wolves in Sheep clothing: You are thought to be wise as
serpents, to preserve the head, O spend not your venom upon the members: You
should be Doves for your innocence, O be not Apodes for your partiality,
always in Plin. hist. in l. 10. ca. 39.
extremities, either flying with the plaintiff, or lying down with the
defendant: you are judges de facto, you must be (...), you must have no respect
of persons Deuteronomy. 1. 17.
in judgment, you must follow your Evidence, and find secundum allegata and
probata, as you have proof to induce you.

Finally what man is he that lusts to live, and would Psalm. 34. 12*
feign see good days? Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips that they
speak no guile. Eschew evil and do good, seek peace and ensue it. Or would
you have good days while you live, and peace at the end? Keep innocence and
do Psalm. 37. 38.
the thing that is right: for that shall bring a man peace at the last.

He that would dye Peaceably must live innocently: innocently

It is observed in the Dove, that she not only never plays Ser. 2. fol. 42.
false play with her mate; but that therewithal she patiently also undergoes
his imperial taunts of Jealousy; to teach us that

Douely innocence is not only the forbearing of Omnem iniuriae illationem
abhorrens: an utter Cic: offic.
detestation of all wrong doing. To this are men tied by the law of nature:
Homo naturae obediens, homini nocere non potest. Idem Ibid.
If we conform our selves in obedience unto nature, we cannot offer any
violence, one man to an other. The other Aug: quaest. 83. quaes. 31.
is, Honestatis causa rerum difficilium voluntaria ac diuturna perpessio: A
noble entertainment of a good cause, though we suffer for it, either in
Christ, as all good Christians, for hereunto are ye called, for Christ also
suffered for us, leaving 1. Pet. 2. 21.
us an example that we should follow his steps; or for Christ as Martyrs and
confessors, blessed in suffering for Mat. 5. 10.
Righteousness sake, aequo non iniquo animo, willingly and Aug: de pat. cap: 2.
innocentlie: for this is thanks worthy, if a man for conscience toward God
endure grief, suffering wrongfully: 1 Pet. 2. 19.
and that because,

First, He will not take Gods office out of his hands, to Reasons.
work his own revenge, for, vengeance is mine, and I will repay, says the
Lord. Romans 12. 19.


Secondly, He waits patiently Gods leisure, in hope at last to be delivered.
Say not thou I will recompense evil: but Prou. 20. 22.
wait upon the Lord, and he shall save thee.

Thirdly, Though he be not for the present delivered: yet he is resolved,
that the afflictions of this present time, are not Romans 8. 18.
worthy of the glory that shall be showed unto us.

Fourthly, In the interim he possesses his soul by patience Luke 21. 19. is
master of himself, and calmeth natures outrages. He that is slow unto anger,
is better then the mighty man: Pro. 16. 32.
and he that rules his own mind, is better then he that wins a City.

Fifthly, He knows not what good his example may do, Ye have heard of the
patience of Job: and have known what end Io. 5. 11.
the Lord made,

When man, by persecution, goes about to trouble thee: Greg: homil. 35.


First, Ne contra mala proximi pertrahatur men's ad retributionem mali, least
thou think upon revenge, to do as thou art done unto. Love your enemies,
bless them that curse, Mat. 5. 44.
do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which hurt you, and
persecute you, This is God his proceeding with Ver. 46, 47, 41.
Take heed,

Secondly, Ne contra tentamenta aduersari^ seducatur ad Greg: sup.
delectationem vel consensum delicti. Least thou yield to Satan's temptation.
Tentare potest, vincere non potest nisi consentiaris; Though Satan works upon
the will, yet it must be our consent that acts the sin; Suggerere potest,
cogere non Chrisost. in mat.
potest; he can but move, he cannot force.

The third care is, Ne contra flagella opificis proruat ad excessum Greg: sup.
murmurationis; least we repine at his visitation: For the Lord corrects him
whom he loves, even as a Father does Pro. 3. 12.
the child in whom he delights.

And here are we affronted with a three fold vexation in our suffering, the
first is, Causa iusta innocentis, the innocence Bern: insenten.
of the party suffering: But it is better if the will of God be so that ye
suffer for well doing, then for evil doing. The second 1. Pet. 3. 17.
is, Anxietas nimia doloris, extremity of sorrow because of our suffering; But
God is faithful, who will not suffer 1. Cor. 10. 13.
you to be tempted above that you be able, but will give you the issue with the
tentation, that ye may be able to bear it. The third is, the unworthiness of
the inflicter, when the creature that should be our servant becomes our
tormentor. Theodor: ser. 3. Vt non Deo: it a creaturae nobis inseruiunt. Cypr.
tract. 1. Cont. Demetr.
Non immerito reluctantur bestiae hominibus, quam ipsi Deo suo rebels sint.
How should the creature serve us, if we serve not God? Or when men that should
be as the shepherd and the sheep; as a turtle and her mate, become
notwithstanding, Wolves instead of Shepherds, and Harpies instead of Doves, O
but did the ways of a man please the Lord, he would Prou 16. 7.
then make all his enemies at peace with him.

Tu ne cede malis: sed contra audentior ito. Virg: aeneid. lib. 8. Ecclesi 28.
1.


Magna est virtus, si non laedas a quo laesus es. Magna est fortitudo si etiam
laesus remittas. Magna est gloria si cui potuisti nocere, parcas: It is great
worth in a man to forbear to repay Isidor: soliloq: 2.
ill, magnanimity and glory to forgive and forget. It is remarkable in the
Dove, first, that she never plays false play Sermon. fol 42.
with her mate; secondly, that she patiently bears with his causeless
jealousy; thirdly, that he no sooner offers reconciliation but she retains
it: To teach us that,

An innocent and good man is easily pacified, soon reconciled; Tolerasse and
odisse non est virtus mansuetudinis, sed velamentum Greg: homil. 7. sup. Ezekiel.
furoris: He does not only forgive, but forget also; the reason is, because God
will not forgive us, except we forgive our brethren. Should a man bear hatred
against man, and desire Eccle. 28. 3.
forgiveness of the Lord? If you forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly
Father will also forgive you: But if you do not Mat. 6. 14.
forgive men their trespasses, no more will your father forgive you your
trespasses. (...). The recompense of forgiveness is forgiveness; men's forgiving
of men, to be themselves Basil.
forgiven of God.

Forgive therefore, and it shall be forgiven: Be courteous Ephesians. 4. 32.
Has God for Christ's sake forgiven you? for his sake forgive Nazian.
you one another: Has God for Christ's sake forgiven Matt. 28. 24.
thee tenue thousand talents? wilt not thou for his sake Quantum vis dimitti
tibi, tantum dimitte, quoties vis dimitti tibi, toties tu dimitte^ Petr.
Chrysostom. ser. 67.
Look how much and how often thou would be forgiven* so much and so often do
thou forgive. And God, who is rich in mercy, make you perfect in every good
work, working in you that which is pleasant in his sight, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

FINIS.

