THE BEARING And BVRDEN OF the SPIRIT.

Wherein the sickness and soundness of the soul is opened, and eight Cases
of conscience cleared and resolved for the settling and comforting of perplexed
consciences.

By JOHN SEDGVVICK, Bachelor in Divinity and Preacher of GODS Word in London.

LONDON, Printed by G. M for R. Harford, and are to be sold by H. Blunden at
the Castle in Cornehill, 1639.

TO THE WORSHIPEVLL Captain SAMVEL CARLETON, and his virtuous Wife Mrs. MARTHA
CARLETON, Grace and Peace from Jesus Christ.
Beloved Friends,
IT is well known unto you, at whose request these Sermons (now presented
jointly to you both) came to be preached, and for whose sake they are thus
printed; if any good come to any by either, next unto God, the thanks is due
unto you; I cannot deny to do that service which comes within the compass
of my calling and power, which may either profit your selves, or satisfy any
of your Noble friends; my only sorrow is, that I have so long delayed my
promise, and your expectations; you now see, long look for comes at length,
and my earnest desire is that it may answer the expectation of the Noble Lady,
and my thankful mind, whose requitals to you and yours for many undeserved
favors, lay in no other way then the furthering of your spiritual good, and
comfort. God (you see) gains glory to himself by weak means, and many
times derided Sermons by braine-sick, and full men, do prove relishing and
healing to wounded consciences: I wish from my heart unto you both, and all
yours the peace and purity of conscience, the integrity and sincerity of holy
walking; together with the addition of all graces and comforts belonging unto
Christians, and that a spur may be found in these Sermons, to prick you on to
a holy care of conscience, which will prove your best friend, or worst enemy;
believe me (friends) the man is as his conscience is; if that be good in
constitution, and in execution, all things will answer to it in life and death:
you enjoying its goodness, shall not fail of its strength and boldness; make
much of it, and cherish it therefore as your best lewell, and in so doing, I
shall account my pains plentifully recompensed, and be further encouraged to
be yours in what I am able when you shall be pleased to command me; in mean
time I take leave, and rest

Yours in the Lord Jesus, JOHN SEDGVVICK.
Soper-lane London, August 21. 1638.
To the Reader.
I Wish thee conscience and care in reading and following what is contained in
the ensuing Sermons; which are now more large in the Press then they were in
the Pulpit, and may receive a farther addition of certain cases if leisure
shall permit, in mean time let this that is done profit thee, and help him
with thy prayers who is thine in the best bond and ready to do thee good,

JO: SEDGVVICK.

THE BEARING of the burden by the SPIRIT.
PROVE. 18. 14. The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity, but a wounded
spirit who can bear?
Solomon in his Proverbs is the great Master of the Sentences, all his Parables
are master Sentences, whose matter exceed their words, and whose words excel
not themselves; each sentence is pithy, and complete, and so absolute, that
most an end (especially from the beginning of the tenth Chapter) it shines in
its own native brightness, and therefore (at this time) it spares us the
searching after any coherence.

This present Proverb presents us with two observables;

1. The power of a sound spirit against all external calamity, uttered in
these words, The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity. 2. The
impotencie of a man's spirit against inward perplexities, a wounded spirit who
can bear?
Concerning the first part, I shall enquire into these things:

First, what is meant by the infirmity of man?

Secondly, what is that spirit of a man which does and will bear this
infirmity of a man?

To the knowledge of the firstenquiry, know that the infirmity of man is double.

himself; but can and does thoroughly judge himself unto the bewailing, and
loathing, and leaving of all known evil; in this case conscience will be his
comfort, and his stay, upholding him in the assurance of a good estate with God
against all those troubling arguments, and distressing fears where withal he
is daily followed.

2. Another is sorrowful: humane calamity is humane infirmity; take all those
miseries and crosses which divine providence does inflict either immediately,
or mediately upon men, suppose them to lie in the goods, names, bodies,
children, or friends of men. And this is the infirmity of man spoken of in this
Text; its no new thing for the Holy Ghost to call crosses and afflictions
befalling men, by the name of infirmity or weakness, and that because of that
natural imbecility which is found in man to free himself from them, or to
stand under them; a state of calamity is a weakening estate; and none are more
weak then men under the cross and rod, these things do make men feeble and
infirm; as sickness is the weakness of the body, so crosses, reproaches,
and afflictions are the weakness of man.

Concerning our second inquiry, you must note that there is a double Spirit
sustaining humane infirmity.

1. One above man, and yet A twofold Spirit.
given unto man, and that is the Spirit of God, who is a Spirit of power, and
does help to bear up the burden of all our calamities; likewise the Spirit
also helps our infirmities, says Paul, Romans 8. 26. when a Christian does
find a weakness in himself, both to do and to suffer; the Spirit of God is
assistant unto him, and does make the burden easy and supportable; and what we
are never able to bear of our selves, by his strength we can and shall bear
it, as the Apostle she weth, saying, I can do all things through him that
strengthens me, Phil. 4. 13.

2. Another in man, which makes man to be man; which in some places is The
spirit of man diversely taken.
taken largely for the whole soul of man; but in this place more narrowly and
strictly for the conscience of man, its usual for the Hebrews to express
conscience under the name of the spirit or the heart of man; and in the New
Testament, it is called in one place our spirit, Romans 8. 16. and in another
place the spirit of man; for what man knows the things of a man, saving the
spirit of a man which is in him, 1 Cor. 2. 11. and surely if we do Conscience
called a spirit and why.
look unto the original, and being, and manner of working of conscience in
man, which is every way spiritual, it is most aptly named spirit, and this is
the spirit which is so able to sustain a man under his infirmities.

Now this spirit of man comes Man's spirit considered two ways:
under a double consideration.

1. Of Original Creation, 1. In its Creation
as it was man's before the fall, in full vigor and rectitude, and so it was
specially useful and serviceable unto Adam, that had he been put unto it,
the Omnipotency thereof would have borne the greatest of burdens; a spark
whereof is to be found, and may be seen in many mere natural men; whose
spirits retain such strength in them, that they have endured many crosses, and
manfully received the charge of many and great calamities, thinking the
chiefest point of virtue consisted in bearing crosses and devouring injuries;
they have I say gone far in this work of enduring outward calamities,
although failing in the right manner and the right end of the same.

2. Of spiritual qualification, ^. In its regeneration.
the spirit of a man, as it is renewed by grace, is strong to do much, and to
suffer much, it is of such incredible might, that it does and will support in
the midst of all trouble. Grace is a creature enlivening the spirit,
enlightening the spirit, and so assisting the spirit of a man, that it
over-masters the fear and the feeling of afflictions, upholding a man in
being, in liberty, in confidence, and in cherfulness under all, and any
even the greatest infirmities that may or can befall him; flesh and blood will
tremble at that trouble which grace will trample upon; nature will shrink at
that pain as intolerable, which a sound and sanctified spirit makes nothing
of in comparison.

No chastening for the present seems to be joyous but grievous, Heb. 12. 11.
But the thing I aim at is this,

That when conscience within man is truly good, it is mighty to bear up a man
from sinking and fainting under the present cross: Suppose the cross to come
in its full weight, and to be heavily laid on a man by the hand of God, yet
there shall be such a supportance from a good conscience unto man, that the
burden shall scarce be burden some, it shall never become over-burthen some,
a man by it shall be kept from being slavishly dejected, or overwhelmedly
fearful, the spirit shall not fail before the cross; No calamity shall
overdaunt or overcome such an one: the Text says, it will sustain the
infirmity: the holy Spirit does not speak of it as a thing possible or
probable only, but real and actual, as having a certainty in it; and the
truth of this you may observe two ways.

1. In the sentence of Scripture. 2. In the soundness of argument.
For the Scripture, in one place it says; Nay in all these things we are more
then conquerors, Romans 8. 37. Behold a strange truth of speech; They were killed
all the day long for the sake of Christ, and accounted as sheep for the
slaughter, there was humane infirmity in extremity, and yet they were
conquerors, more then conquerors, and that not in a few of these, but in all
these things; here is the exceeding sustaining of the spirit. In another place
its written, We are troubled on every side, yet not distressed, we are
perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but
not destroyed, 2 Cor. 4. 8, 9. infirmity was great upon these men, and yet not
over matching, none of all these miseries could bring their spirits under
misery; but as the maine Ocean swallows up the overflowings of all other
rivers, and as the well rig'd ship bears its own burden stoutly in the midst
of a most tempestuous sea; so their sanctified spirits did receive all, and
sustain all these calamities, being in nothing terrified, much less by any
thing overcome: David, Job, Paul, and the holy Martyrs are ready to witness
unto this truth, but we will spare them for this time.



when I am weak then am I strong, says Paul, 2 Cor. 12. 10. the strength of a
gracious spirit is the strength of God made perfect in weakness verse 9. it
is no weakness that is able to overmaster it; power is too hard for
weakness, as light is overmatching to darkness; all humane calamity to a
sound spirit is but infirmity, it therefore bears it; were it strength and
might, then the case might be doubtful, as in all cases where power and power
meet, but here is power against weakness, and therefore no marvel if it
bear up and overcome.

2 Cor. 1^. 10.
lightsome temper that it takes pleasure in infirmities; rejoices Romans 5. 3.
in tribulation, yea and accounts it all joy when it falls into diverse James 1.
2
temptations; Now the joy of the Lord is the strength of the soul, Neh. 8. 10.
and who so are filled with it, can live in death, sing in prison, and with much
courage, and constancy bear up; and endure any calamity.

bear a burden without a pair of shoulders; but when patience possesses the
soul and spirit of a man, all burdens are overcommingly and cheerfully borne.



1. Setlednesse and staiment Three things in contentment upholding the spirit
of mind, it is the souls quietation under all trouble, making it still and
silent, freeing it from all those murmurings, repinings, and disturbances
wherewithal naturally it is hurried up and down like a ship in a storm.

2. Delightfullnesse and complacencie of soul, it does not only compose the
mind unto any condition by an holy pliablenesse, but it yields unto man an
approovement of his condition, that a man shall see such a goodness in it unto
himself, that he shall be well pleased without, no way quarrelling at it, or
disliking of it; contentment makes the present condition to be Gods
condition; and knows that Gods condition is the best condition, Psalm. 16. 6.

3. Satisfyingnesse of mind. In all contentment there is sufficiency; there is
a blessedness even in misery, and there shall be no want in all wants, the
reachings and cravings of the soul shall be fully answered. Now hereupon,
because by holy contentment the soul is enabled to take up the impression of
the present condition, as humid qualities do receive the figure of their
continent, and because the mind and soul falls in with an afflicted condition
as the dispensation and allotment of a Sovereign and wise God: hence it is J
say, that the spirit is so sustaining under trialls and troubles.

Faith does 4. things to the enabling of the spirit under the cross.
its calamity.

1. It apprehends divine assistances, and sets up overmatching helps under all
calamities, it is the dejection of the spirit to be left to it self in times
of trouble, and for a man to find to his sense a troubled condition to be his
master, as we may see in Elishaes servant, who when he saw the great host of
the King of Assyria, sent to take his master; cries out, Alas master how shall
we do? his troubles were above all his arguments, and the man seems to be at
his wits end; But behold the faith of Elisha, and you shall see it to be above
all his trouble; for he quiets his own heart, and the heart of his man, with
the believing apprehension of a greater power with him then against him:
Saying, fear not, for they that be with us, are more then they that be with
them, 2 King. 6. 15, 16. it is the work of faith to find out, and to bring
home a Christians helps unto him in times of trial; it makes God at such times
both present in favor, and assistant in council, and power, in confidence of
this David will lie him down, and sleep and wake, and not be afraid Psalm. 3.
5, 6.
of ten thousands of people that have set themselves against him round about,
yea he can walk through the valley of the shadow of death and fear none evil,
Psalm. 23. 4.

2. It sets up God for a man's own in love, and care in the midst of all
afflictions; God separated and divided from a Christian in any misery is the
weakness of the Spirit and makes the heart to sink and faint within; Oh how
down and dead, how cracked, and undone was David when God to his sense was gone
from him? at such times he was a man without a spirit, and now the evil was
great, and sore, and intolerable: But when by the eye of faith God was
discovered to be his God, and he could well perceive that it was not all his
afflictions which could separate him from the love of God unto him in Christ;
Now he cheeres up himself and says to his soul, Why art thou so dejected O
my soul? trust still in God, who is the health of my countenance and my God,
Psalm. 43. 5.

3. It keeps of from the soul and spirit whatsoever might weaken or deject
it in and under calamities; in the day of a Christians calamity, it is with
him as it is in the gathering of a bile or botch in the body, all the ill
humors will make their recourse unto the botch, increasing disquietment unto
the patient; just so, when we have miseries seazing upon us, suspicion of Gods
love toward us, Four ways how faith releeveth the soul
in carrying a man from all the creatures unto God, showing unto him that men
are but men, whose breath is in their nostrills, and whose power is confined,
and malice overruled by the power of an Almighty God, who being with us and
for us, we need in nothing to fear who can harm us? partly in keeping a man
from looking too much downward and overwhelming our selves in and by the
aggravation of our trouble: can make him, so it is not any bad condition that
can mar him, partly by setting a Christian upon the way of mitigation,
learning the Christian the art and skill of breaking the wave in the midst of
his most violent tossings. Now it starts up the hand of God in all this, and
the wisdom and goodness of God in ordering all unto good, which was David's
stay in the great calamity, and made him to say, let him alone, and let him
curse, the Lord has bidden him, and it may be that the Lord will look on
mine affliction, and that the Lord will requite good for his cursing this day,
2 Samuel 16. 11, 12. partly by countermanding the violent risings and habitual
vexations of the soul; faith is an enemy unto distempered passions, it checks
it, and cries it down and will not admit that a man should be angry and
froward, and fretfull under the hand of God; Do thou well to be angry? Jonah
4. 4
says faith, shall we receive good and not evil from the Lord? Job 2. 10.

4. It puts the pawnes and earnests of God into the hands of a Christian in
evil times; a man in any condition without the promise is as weak as
miserable; but the promises of God going along with a man they will prove his
greatest strength and comfort in any condition; we must know, that the Covenant
was made for the comforting of Christians in all conditions, and there are
special promises made to Christians in times of their distress, which only
faith can find, and supply the Christian withal: by means where of the head
is held above water, and the man made stronger then all his trialls and
crosses; when faith reads that God will know the souls of his in adversity,
Nah. 1. 7. That God will be with his in the fire and water, Esa. 43. 2. That
all miserable evils shall end in spiritual good to them that love God, Romans
8. 28. And that, that God who has showed his great and sore evils will
quicken them again, Psalm. 71. 20. 21.

Now the spirit gathers spirits unto it self, and is made lively, and strong;
yea it gets upon the rock and triumphs over all trouble.

Having thus opened the point unto you, the Application must needs be this.

Two evidences of weakness of spirit, 1 Fear.
two things.

1. Some men do overfeare troubles before they come, the very empty thought
and conceit of troubles is terrible and perplexing unto them; when it was told
the house of David saying, Syria is confederate with Ephraim, his heart was
moved, and the heart of his people as the trees of the wood are moved with
the wind, Esaias 7. 2. When Belshazzar saw the coming forth of the fingers of a
man's hand, and writing over against the Candlestick upon the plaster of the
wall, his countenance was changed, and his thoughts troubled him; so that the
joints of his loins were loosed, and his knees smote one against another, Dan.
5. 5, 6, 7. and even so is it with too too many among us, the very news and
conceit of troubles or calamities which possibly may befall them, does put them
into such shaking fits, that they know not what to do with themselves; and now
tell me where is the soundness and strength of your spirit? call you that a
stout spirit that is daunted with the report and thought of calamity?

Ob. Good men have feared troubles?


Sol. Know, that there is a A twofold fearing of troubles, 1. Of faith
twofold fearing of troubles before they come.


The one is, a careful and believing fear, opposed to carnal security, which
was found in holy Job, who said, the thing which I greatly feared is come upon
me, and that which I was afraid of is come unto me, Job 3. 25. Surely the good
man in his prosperity did not cast of all thought of adversity, but did wisely
consider, that a change might come upon his estate and family; it might be that
his sun might be darkened, and his day turned into night, and he looked upon
his children, and wife, and friends, and stock, and honor, as things dying and
fading, there being no constancy in outward mercies unto any.

The other is, a carking and 2. Of distrust.
distressing fear opposite unto faith and comfort; a fearing either without a
cause, or beyond all bounds, thorough the utter mistake of a miserable
condition unto the sons of men; wherein fears do cut, and divide the heart,
even emptying a man of all present joy, and future hope; this now is an
argument that the spirit of infirmity does possess a man, and that he wants
that spirit which will sustain a man's infirmity.

2. Some men are overburdened 2. Faintness.
by the crosses which do befall them, the least cross that is does sink them,
and they cannot bear or endure any calamity, indeed before that troubles come,
they will brag and boast as if they would and could carry all the world before
them, and no adversity could overmaster them or their spirits; but when they
are put to it, and the day of trial comes, alas they are men of very poor
and impotent spirits, Achitophel like, who being under disacceptation most
desperately hangs himself, as being no way able to bear it; O how do men
roar, and complain, and lie down in the dust, suffering crosses to bind
them hand and foot, and to spoil them of all their comforts? it is strange to
observe the weakness of spirit in some men, who though they have many
comforts for one cross, yet that one cross does so dampe and daunt them, that
all joy and comfort is gone, and they are mightily overwhelmed; thus do most
men want supporting spirits: and surely their strength is weak who faint in
the day of trouble, Pro. 24. 10. and such men may do well to suspect the
soundness of their spirits; certain it is, that there is a want of soundness
of spirit where the supportance of spirit does wholly fail: cease to wonder
that thou art so sinking and fainting, and leave crying out against the
greatness of thy present trouble, knowing that there wants such a spirit
within as should be, which is the cause of this thy failing.





1. That it may so fall out, that a Christian indeed may be to seek of the
help and strength of his spirit in and under crosses befalling him; Suppose him

1. To have forfeited the sense of divine favor. 2. To have formerly neglected
or abused divine assistances. 3. To be suddenly surprised by the strangeness
and the strength of the calamity coming upon him. 4. To be followed both with
the continuation of some grieving affliction, or the multiplication and coming
in of one cross upon the neck of another:
And surely in these and the like times, the spirit within him which always
retains strength and might, may not be so serviceable and supporting unto him
as at other times it has been, and in time to come it may be again.

2. That though there may be much fainting overtaking the spirits of sanctified
men for a time, yet it is not total faintness; there is and may be a very
weak upholdment; the spirit is many times well near spent in the spiritual
conflict, and laboring under some grievous wounds, and now it upholds in much
weakness; a horse that is almost tired, carries his burden, but not in that
pace and with that mettle as when he was fresh; there are degrees of strength;
sometimes we are helped with a little help, Dan. The strength of the spirit
is graduall.
11. 34. and it is a day of small things with us, and it is not much that the
spirit within does for us; at other times the spirit being freed is more full
of assistance and carries us thorough all troubles; one man's spirit may
sustain him under his infirmity more then another; yea and the spirit of the
same man may at one time and in one cross more bear him out then in another.
Witness David, who in the case of Nabal was very weak and passionate; he had
scarce the spirit of a man in him. But now in the case of Shimei where the
cross was far greater, his spirit did with much strength bear him out.

3. That there is a double sinking of the spirit under afflictions, or
miserable evils.

1. One arising from the weakness of nature in the want of all grace, and thus
the godly faint not. 2. Another arising from the weakness of grace by the
opposition of temptation and corruption.
And thus the godly may faint in part, but they shall come to a recovery of
themselves again; it is with the godly in their sinkings under afflictions, as
with a man that is skillful to swim; at the first when he is cast into the
water he is over head and ears, and the whole body is covered, but by and by
he rises up again and swimmes upon the water, commanding the water under
him; whereas it is with a mere natural and carnal man in his sinkings under
afflictions, as it is with a stone cast into the deep, there is a great noise
made, but he sinketh lower and lower and never rises up again;

of the spear; but this is an argument of an evil and naughty spirit not to
be sensible of Gods hand and rod. 2 That men carnal and formal to outward
seeming are marveilous hardy in temper, and stout in spirit, and have without
flinching or fainting passed thorough many afflictions, and endured extreme
torments, when alas they have brawned themselves, or a spirit of slumbering and
benummednesse is cast upon them; and for some self aims they have only
restrained passion, in the mean time they do remain destitute of all
positive joy, peace, and confidence, and want the assurance of the goodness of
their spirits in bearing the cross befalling them.

Quest. How may a man know that by a sound and good spirit he bears the
cross and calamity which God lays upon him? Three signs of a sound spirit
upholding man under the cross.


Answ. By these Signs.

1. When the cause of suffering is good; a good spirit cannot bear up in an
ill cause; when a man suffers as a murderer, ^. A good cause.
or as a thief, or as an evil doer, or as a busy body in other men's matters,
as it is written, 1 Pet. 4. 15. Now conscience cannot uphold; but when a man
suffers as a Christian, and is reproached for the name of Christ, conscience
can and does uphold, as you may read in the 14. and 16. verses of the same
Chapter; we see the stoutnesse of the Apostles enduring the lash and the
prison, was grounded on this, that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for
his name, Acts 5. 41.

2. When the carriage under 2. A good carriage.
the cross is becoming a good spirit, which carries a man under Six ways of
the spirits carrying a man under the cross.
the cross,

1. With silence, stopping inward frettings, and outward murmurings against the
Lord; making a man to say, yet my soul be silent unto the Lord, it lays the
mouth in the dust, and dares not open the mouth against the Lord to charge him
foolishly, 1 Samuel 3. 28, 29. Psalm. 39. 9. 62. 5.

2. With submission and subjection; the soul is low and very humble, poor,
and exceeding empty; the man is cast down under Gods hand and will; saying, it
is the Lord, let him do as it seems good unto him, 1 Samuel 3. 18. 2. Sam. 15.
25.

3. With thankefullnesse; the man can kiss the rod, and bless the rod, and
say with Job, the Lord gives and the Lord takes away, blessed be the name of
the Lord, Job 1. 21, 22.

4. With religion; making God as lovely and good, and worthy to be praised and
prayed unto under calamity as at any other time of prosperity: a man under the
power of a sound spirit does loose much of his sin, nothing of his
godliness; I dare say he is more quick and hearty in his devotion then at
other times; the soul does now settle it self upon spiritual employment, and
is taken up with God, Is any man afflicted, let him pray, James 5. 13.

5. With humiliation; now a man shall find the guilts of his sin, and does
consider the deserts of his sins, he can and does weep more for the
sinfullnesse of sin, then for all the evils he does sustain and endure; he
well knows that man suffers for his sin; and that sin deserves more
evil, then God inflicts upon his children; and that the evil of sin being
the greatest of evils, can never be sufficiently bewailed.

6. With hope, waiting upon Gods time and pleasure for deliverance out of
trouble, expecting that great good shall happily befall him, in and by all the
troubles which he endures; he considers that as the Be has his sting, so he
has his honey; and crosses have their comforts in the latter end, as well as
bitterness in the beginning.

3. When their coming out 3. A good issue.
of trouble is glorious and gracious; a sound spirit does bear afflictions
with power unto profit; and carries all painful evils with sovereign good
unto it self; so that when a Christian is at the end of his trouble and
tossings, he shall set down with great cost and recompense; having the great
fruit of his patience; even blessed is he that endures, and the Spirit of God
and glory shall rest upon him, he shall say with David, before I was afflicted
I went astray, but now have I kept thy word, Psalm. 119. 67. And it is good for
me that I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy statutes, verse 71.
Nevertheless afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness unto
them which are exercised thereby, Heb. 12. 11. if we can find any good by
afflictions, that our proud hearts are humbled, that our corruptions are
weakened and wasted; that our graces are quickened and enlarged, and that we are
in any degree made more holy and heavenly; this is an argument unto us, that we
have borne all our afflictions by the strength of a sound spirit.

found within you a good and a sound spirit to bear you up under your
troubles; we know not to what times of trial God has reserved us; we may
meet with the cross, and calamity may be our portion, we know not how soon,
and then strength to bear will do well; but know, that there is nothing will
better help in sufferings, and keep up the soul in patience and comfort,
then the spirit which is spiritual, there is no spirit to the sound spirit,
and the spirit can never be sound until that it be made spiritual;
conscience was made good at the first; and conscience is fit for goodness now,
and goodness will be the good of it, and the good of man by it; learn to
know two things.

First, that the goodness of The goodness of spirit stands in 7. things. 1.
Holiness
conscience stands, 1. In its sanctity by spiritual renovation; when as it is
free from the filth of corruption, and qualified with divine graces.

2. In its quietness and peace, 2. Quietness.
it must be pacified as well as purified; it must not only be privatively
quiet, but also positively quiet, there must not only be no torment, but a
blessed security and assurance within it.

3. In its sincerity, it must be 3. Uprightness
upright, freed from the rottenness of guile and hypocrisy, this is that
truth in the inward parts which God so much delights in, Psalm. 51. 6.

4. In its ability, when it is 4 St^engt^
strong in execution, and able to exercise its own operations, and freely
disposed to spiritual employments; what good can conscience do us whilst it
is weak and unable to bear it self?

5. In its tenderness, it must 5. Tenderness.
be feeling, melting, yielding, and bleeding.

6. In its clearenesse, the 6. Clearenesse.
good of conscience is the light in conscience, it must be filled with saving
light, and be informed by the rule, not only natural, but spiritual; it must
in some measure in a spiritual manner see and know it self, its God, its
duty, its way, its work, its object.

7. In its freedom, it must 7. Liberty
have liberty, although it has a a binding power, which it derives from the
Word of God, yet it self must be freed from entanglements by sin and error,
and must be brought into bondage by no creature.

Secondly, the way to attain this goodness of spirit is, Two ways of
attaining goodness of spirit.


1. To be sensibly convinced of the badnesse and naughtiness of our spirits
naturally; we have within us no spark of saving goodness, but our hearts are
full of guile and guilt, and they are evil above all things, Ier. 17. 9. we
foolishly fancy their natural goodness, and that keeps us of from found
endeavor after their spiritual goodness; who among us would labor after
that which he conceives he wants not; our work is to get sound acquaintance
with the illness and bafenesse of our own spirits, and to bewail the same
before the Lord.

2. To set upon the use of those means whereby badnesse may be remooved, and
Means of making conscience good to be are are four. 1. The Spirit.
true goodness may be brought into your consciences, which I conceive are
these four.

1. The Spirit in Sanctification, who alone can and does heal the infirmity of
man's spirit, by the subduing of corruption within him, and vouchsafing courage
and strength unto the inner man by the creation of all saving graces within.

2. The Lord Jesus in application, 2. Christ.
there is that virtue in the bleedings and dyings of Christ, that it is able to
kill and crucify sin, and to sprinkle from an evil conscience; and to purge
the conscience from dead works to serve the living God, Heb. 9. 14. and 10. 22.
there is enough in the Lord Jesus to make us wholly holy, and truly good in
Gods sight; he being made unto us of God, Wisdom, and Sanctification; and one
every way fitted for the communication of holiness to his members.

3. The Word in administration, 3. The Word.
the Law and the Gospel meeting in the spiritual virtue thereof with the
spirit of man; is a notable means to make it good and sound; the Word of God
by its comfortable promises, and clear directions does and will mightily
enable the spirit in his office of upholding and strengthening man in the days
of adversity: the Word of God is suitable nourishment unto the spirit; it is
strong, and the admirable strength of the spirit; it is sweet, and the great
refresher of the spirit; it does every way so glad and cheer man's spirit, that
it gives him most sure grounds of standing under the greatest burdens; Unless
thy Law had been my delight, I should then have perished in mine affliction,
Psalm. 119. 92.

4. Faith in operation; a 4. Faith.
conscience full of infidelity is full of badnesse, and fears, and sinkings;
but the more believing a man's heart is, the more sound, and the more stout it
is; I had fainted unless I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord in
the land of the living, Psalm. 27. 13. I assure you, that faith is a grace that
deals with the God of all comfort, and the Word of all comfort; and when
distresses are like a strong tide beating much upon off all waves, and keeps
the spirit in strength and courage in times of trouble.

Six things to be done about the spirit. 1. Abuse it not.
spirits fail us we are undone; and to this purpose I shall advise you unto
these things:

1. Abuse not conscience; the abuse of our best friends is base, and we cannot
with safety Twelve ways of abusing conscience
to our selves abuse our spirits. Now men abuse their conscience 12. ways.

1. By resisting the motions of conscience; there is in conscience a certain
natural power, either by a watch word to give warning when men are bent to
sin, or to give the check after the commission of sin; it is a word within
us, and behind us, it does dictate to us and direct us: Now when a man shall
cross conscience in this work, and notwithstanding all that it says and
does, go on in an evil way; this is the abuse of conscience by an act of
resistance.

2. By disregarding the motions of conscience; conscience is speaking, and that
very loud; it many times grows importunate with us, and stands in our way at
every turn. Now when men turn away their ear, and pass over conscience,
finding out other matters of very purpose that they may not answer or follow
conscience, it is a great abuse of conscience, Acts 24. 26.

3. By wounding and wasting conscience, our spirits are tender things, and
should be gently used: it is as our eye, and every the smallest dust offends
it; it is as a glass, and every knock crackes it; it is a brittleship, and we
may soon make shipwreck of it, 1 Timothy 1. 19. a sinful course will wound and
wast conscience: but take me sins committed against the light of nature, of
Scripture, and of grace, and those do exceedingly gore conscience.

4. By disquieting and vexing conscience; to bring trouble and torment into the
soul, is no small abuse of the soul; it is the greatest injury that can be
done unto it, and this men do

1. In forcing sin upon it. Conscience vexed and how?
2. In linking sin with it. 3. In hindering the operations of it.
5. By tempting conscience; some men prove devils unto their own consciences:
partly Two w^ies of tempting conscience.
in laying baits before it, setting conscience in the presence of vileness,
and using it to sinful companies, or sinful occasions; certain I am, that it
is a hard matter to keep all fair with conscience, when and where there is
nothing but vileness: and partly in trying conclusions upon it; men play the
Empericks with their consciences, putting them upon the practice of things, the
lawfullnesse whereof they know not, or are not yet resolved of.

6. By deading and searing conscience; conscience is and would be living and
sensible, now when men brawne it by the daily and customary practices of
horrible and gross sins, and by disusance, they do abuse it, and so disable
it for all spiritual service.

7. By smoothering the scruples of i^; conscience is many times full of real
and personal cases, and sometimes it is not able to resolve it self, now if a
man thorough pride or bashfullnesse shall keep all close, and not seek the
satisfaction and resolution thereof, this makes the inward ranckling and
festering and languishing thereof.

8. By blinding and darkening conscience; knowledge is the eye and light of
conscience, for it sees no more then it knows, now ignorance is the thing
that blindes conscience, and without knowledge it is not good; it is a madness
in men to take away or to put out the light which should guide and direct their
own consciences in things to be believed and done.

9. By abasing conscience; conscience was made for goodness, to uphold and
maintain that, and for high and holy employment, to do that; now when it
shall be used for a color and cloak for sin and wickedness (and men shall
either make their sins to carry the name of conscience, as unwarranted opinions
and practices now adays do; or make conscience the cause of sin, as too
many do, who cannot come to Church and receive the holy Sacraments, under a
pretense that conscience will not let them, a great belying and abusing
Conscience abased and how?
of conscience, or to make conscience a false witness; fastening untruths on
it, as do such men that will take it upon their consciences, that it is not so
nor so as they are accused, when indeed it is so; conscience is put to swear
against conscience, and to speak against conscience, and to accuse and
condemn, and to execute conscience; this is the putting of conscience unto the
basest offices that can be) and this way men do notably abuse conscience.

10. By silencing conscience; conscience within us can and would speak unto
us, when as others cannot, or dare not to speak unto us. Now when men command
it unto silence, and stop the mouth thereof, and cannot endure that it should
be a voice either of direction or correction unto them, but bribe or choke
conscience, it is a great abuse unto it.

11. By neglecting it; conscience is worthy our best respect and attendance,
and we cannot do too much to cherish and refresh it. Now when men shall run
from it, as many a Whore does from her child, leaving it upon the Parish, and
let who will look after it; when men shall never enquire after its health, but
suffer it to take grievous falls and hurts; when men shall pass over its
wounds not minding its cure; when men shall suffer it to want the best means
of information, consolation, and corroboration, and let it cry it self to
death, they show most horrible cruelty unto conscience, and do as grossly
abuse it, as a Nurse does her sucking babe, to whom she denies her care, and
breasts.

12. By overloading and entangling conscience; conscience can and will bear
much; but yet as the overlading of a ship is her sinking, so the overlading of
conscience by sins, and sorrows, and fears, and impertinent scruples, is
the abusing and wronging of conscience.

conscience is our good and strength at all times; let this then be your work,

1. Remoove daily the evillnesse of sin from within it, and before it,
nothing is the undoing of conscience but sin, and we must endeavor after
the daily bathing of it in the blood of the Lord Jesus: the increasing of its
renovation by the Spirit, we must be much in the practice of repentance, and
washing away those sins which lie upon conscience, by the tears of godly
sorrow.

2. Feed and nourish it with its appointed food; the strength of our natural
spirits stands in their nourishment, and it is as true of our spiritual
spirits, conscience must not be overfasted nor overphysick'd, but we must give
it the Word in promise; Christ in merit, and the sense of pardoning mercy, and
we flesh and refresh it.

Noah; nay, it will prove an Arc or Garrisonunto us for our safety; learn
therefore upon the access of all calamity to retire into conscience, and
commune with thine own spirit, and call upon conscience to do its office and
work; keep not conscience idle within you; the less you employ it, the
unfitter will it be for your strength and service; call upon it to act its
own proper operations, and you shall find the comfort of it unto you in your
afflictions.

Prove. 4. 23. Some men have made shipwreck of conscience and lost it, 1 Timothy
1. 19. and our condition in this life is full of danger, conscience within us,
is in the midst of many and malicious adversaries, and in as much danger by
evil men and devils as ever, and it stands us much upon to be watchful; and
to be always fearful and jealous, least both we and it become a prey unto
Satan, to this end, 1. Shut carnal security out of doors; 2. Avoid all
occasions of sinning, play not upon the hole of the Aspe, and come not near
the den of the Cockatrice; 3. Wisely withstand temptations unto all sin, and
wickedness; 4. Keep close to the rule in a holy and religious practice.

Learn then, 1. To give God The contenting of conscience stands in 2. things.
content: in the pleasing of God you greatly content conscience; the servant
has no reason to be offended all the while his master is quieted. 2. To
promote conscience in its power, unto its place: conscience must be more worth
unto us then the world; wealth must not buy it, worship cannot equal it, and
we must not prefer the pleasing of men or our selves unto it, it is the
discontent of conscience to be undervalued or to be put off at low rates: and
surely, if the government of conscience be despised, it cannot be pleased;
conscience is conscience, and will and must be known and acknowledged to be
conscience; you must hear and obey conscience; go and do what conscience
enjoyneth, we must work, and stop, and fear, and hope, and give, and lend,
and restore when conscience bids us, conscience must not be crossed and vexed
by us wittingly or willingly, it deserves better of us.

a wounded spirit who can bear?

THE BVRDEN of the spirit under its wounds.
But a wounded spirit who can bear? Here we have the impotencie of man's
spirit against inward perplexities laid down by way of an interrogation, which
is a most vehement Negation, who can bear? (i. e.) no man can bear it: in
which words the Holy Ghost does teach us these two things:

1. That the spirit of man may be wounded. 2. That the wounded spirit is
insupportable.
We will begin with the possible estate of the spirit or conscience of man,
which is this,

That it may come under great and fearful wounds: I am Man's spirit may be
greatly wounded.
poor and needy, and my heart is wounded within me, says David, Psalm. 109.
^2. and again he tells us, that his spirit was overwhelmed within him, Psalm.
142. 3. we find wicked men, and good men wounded in their spirits unto great
vexation. I shall briefly open unto you three things:

1. What a wounded spirit is? 2. The difference of the wound in the good and
bad. 3. The grounds and causes of this wound.
A wounded spirit what.
for the time does sensibly suffer miserable, and in a sort, hellish evils in
a distressefull, uncomfortable, fearful, restless and desperate manner.

There goes to the making of the wounded spirit these things:

1. Miserable, and in a degree, hellish evils; I say that innumerable evils
do compass the soul; it is not one misery, but an army which does at this
time follow a man; thou renewest thy plagues against me, and thou increasest
thy wrath upon me, changes and armies of sorrows are aginst me, says Job 10.
17. the soul is cast into a peck of troubles, and into the abundance of
calamity; yea, and it is such kind of misery which nothing can better represent
and shadow then the very pains of the damned; the soul for the time feels
that gnawing worm, and lies (as it were) boiling and frying in hell fire;
there is no torment like unto it, it goes beyond all, having a fulness and
exquisiteness of misery in it.

2. The feeling of those miserable evils; a man has now his conscience
opened, and is made to know and apprehend the extremities of miseries which now
lies upon him even with fulness of weight; the spirit of man is living, and
very tender, and misery and distress is felt. In a seared conscience there is
nothing but senselessness, for that is past feeling, Ephesians. 4. 19. but in a
wounded conscience there is some life and tenderness; the practical notions
are not quite extinguished; the natural light is still burning, and indeed
miseries would not be miseries unto us, did they not touch us to the quick.

3. The manner of the apprehending of those miserable evils, which is every
way most grievous; for

First of all it is with much distrosse of foul; the soul is thereby filled
with unspeakeable Psalm. 77.
anguish and pain, it is as it were put upon the rack, and putto torture and
torment in extremity; my soul is soretroubled says David, Psalm. 6. 3. there
is such a strange oppression upon the spirit that the heaviness of it is unto
death, Mat. 26. 37.

Secondly, it is without all comfort unto the spirit: it is all darkness
without the mixture of light; the spirit of a man is so drunk up, that it now
wastes it self in daily heaviness; O that my grief were well weighed, says
Job 6. 2. My soul refused comfort, says David, Psalm ^7. 2. a man under the
wound of conscience is so under the power of discomfort, and so swallowed up of
heaviness, that the soul can enjoy no spiritual or natural comfort for the
time, every thing does terrify it, nothing does comfort it.

Thirdly, it is a spirit filled with horror and fear; and that not only in the
apprehension of present misery, but by the expectation of more and future
evils; the wounded spirit is a spirit of horrible bondage, and keeps a man in
bondage to servile terrors, trembling thoughts, the dreadful sound is always
heard, and such men do create, meditate, and multiply fears, the spirit of
trembling does so overtake them, that they are a terror unto themselves; they
daily apprehend nothing but guilt, and wrath, and death, and hell, and
damnation, Job* 15. 21. Deuteronomy. 28. 65. Dan. 5. Ier. 20. 4.

Fourthly, it is full of unquietness, and daily tossings and tumblings; it is
exceeding restless and raging; O the disquiet of a wounded conscience, the sea
in time of tempest is not more raging and rolling; madness is not more working
and unquiet; the plague and other impetuous diseases are not more vexing and
restless to a man then a wounded spirit is; Thou keep mine eyes waking,
says David, Psalm. 77. 4. When I held my tongue my bones consumed, thine hand
is heavy upon me day and night, Psalm., 2. 3, 4. My sore ran and ceased not in
the night, Psalm. 77. 2. Why art thou so disquieted within me O my soul, Psalm.
43. 5.

Lastly, the spirit is cast into the devouring gulf of desperation; such under
the feeling of their spiritual miseries, do conceive a desperateness of
condition; such do now begin to damme up all the springs of mercy, and dry up
the blood of Christ, and close up the door of grace against themselves; and
that I may not be mistaken in this point, note with me two things,



2. That in every wounded conscience Desperation in every vvounded conscience
completely or incompleatly.
there is a degree of desperation; sometimes and in some men it runs in more
compleatnesse, when men take their sins in such an high manner, and with such
an overreaching power, as that neither mercy can, or will ease them; they set
an eternal night within their souls without hopes of a morning, framing to
themselves an utter impossibility of pardoning mercy as Caine, Genesis 4. 13. and
Judas, Mat. 27. 5. and this is a distress David under his wound, Psalm. 77. 7,
8, 9, 10.

4. The time of man's feeling this misery and calamity; I know well that the
wound of the spirit is graduall; in some it is more then in other, and it has
not alike continuance in The degrees and the continuance of this wou^d in men
different.
all; in some it is but for a little space, they quickly recover of their
disease, and attain refreshment and comfort, as we may see in Peter, he went
out and wept bitterly, there was his wound in spirit; but he could speak
comfortably and confidently to Christ after his Resurrection, this showed that
he was not long in the agony; Paul lay three days in the affliction and
distress of spirit, and then least he should be swallowed up of too much
sorrow, Anani as was sent unto him to refresh and comfort him; But as God gives
speedy ease to some, so he is pleased to let others lie a longer time under
the perplexities of a wounded spirit. David cries out, shall I never be
remembered, Psalm. 19. 1. My soul is sore troubled, but Lord how long will thou
delay? Psalm. 6. 3. Now let the time be shorter or longer, All the days of the
afflicted are evil, Prove. 15. 15. and all the while a man does feel this
evil, so long the wound does remain.

2. We must know, that though the wound of conscience is incident unto good
and bad, yet it is with a great and wide difference; the wounds of spirit in
wicked men are,

1. Legal; they spring up in the soul from the terrible operation The
difference that is betwee^ the wound of the wicked and the wound of the godly
in 5. things.
of the law within their souls; the Law of God has an extreme curse written
in it, and this it writes in the conscience of every wicked man, I say by its
spiritual vigor it gets within the conscience of a wicked man, and so the
wound is made: there is no work of the Gospel as well as of the Law, but all
is done and made by the Law alone, in all unregenerate men.

2. Paenall and judicial, such men lie under the justice and wrath of God, and
for fear of hell and punishment are most of all cast down, so that were there
no punishment to be endured, it were not the displeasure or offense of God by
sin that should amaze them; My punishment is greater then I am able to bear,
says Caine, Genesis 4. 13. whereas the wound in the godly is paternall and
penitential, a fatherly chastisement of God for trial, wherein the child of
God is wounded most at heart by the deep apprehension of his sins, and the
displeasure of his Father against sin, or

3. Violent; the wound in them works with more and greater violence, having
more of the fire of hell in it; such men are wholly under the terrors of the
wound, having no assistance from God, no hope of ease, no glimpse of light, and
no allayment by the saving power of the Gospel, which the godly do find
first or last, more or less in degree.

4. Mortal, the wound in the issue prooveth desperate and incurable, and
though for a time their spirits may be benumbed by the application of false
means, that so there may seem to be a cessation of the raging thereof, yet
the wound remains still; they carry it with them to the grave, to the
judgment seat of God, yea and to hell it self; whereas God does in due time,
and by good means make a complete cure of all the wounds in the spirits of
his; there being no disease in their soul, but as it is possible of cure, so
it is actually cured.

5. Hurtful; the wounds of wicked men do them no good but hurt, they are
hereby driven from God, and fall away more and more; whereas the The benefit of
spiritual vvounds in the godly serve in 6. things. 1. Sense of sin. Three
ways of feeling sin
wound in the godly is an occasion of much good unto them, by the wounding of
their spirits they are wrought unto these six things.

1. Sensiblenesse of the bitter and sad effects of sin; God has ways enough
to make his feel their sins; as his Word, which strikes hard on the ear,
threatening sin and wickedness, then if men hate reproof, and harden their
hearts, God has his rod; he shows man his judgment, and in that man's sin
and his anger, by which if man will not learn righteousness, and feel the
bitterness of his sin, then troubles arise in conscience, that shall be
awakened, and dis-eased, that shall come upon man with fears and horrors for
the sins that he has committed; so that hereby he shall be made to possess
the sins of his Job 23.26 Psalm. 51.3.
youth, and to know his own wickedness, as Job and David did.

2. Humility and emptiness 2. Humility of soul
of soul; the wounds of the spirit does weaken the proud and perverse conceits
of man's own strength and righteousness; God by these does make men vile in
their own eyes and opinions; it is strange to see what rising humors are
found in the godly before the wound befalls them, their blood is exceedingly
overheated; but now by an humbled spirit God does work them to an humble
spirit, carrying them as to sin denial, so to self denial.

3. Enquiry after sin; these 3. Search after sin
wounds of the spirit do make us reflect on the evil of sin, and to search
more seriously and narrowly into what we have done, when the spirit is wounded
it is most in agitation, and in a manner taken up wholly with reflexive acts;
it is ofttimes with a troubled conscience as it is with troubled waters, the
troubling of which fetches up that mud and filth which lay sunk and buried
below; men do begin to see more clearly what they have done by what they
suffer, let God trouble Joseph's brethren, and this presents unto them their
long past guilt in selling their brother, Genesis 42. 21. and when Israel was
troubled with Gods wrath and mortality, they could now read their sins in
Gods countenance, Psalm. 90. 7, 8.

4. Confession and acknowledgement 4. Confession of sin.
of sin; deep wounds provoke unto vomiting, and although we are naturally as
apt to conceal as to commit sin, yet spiritual wounds will not long be
hid; David like a child had hurt himself, and he hides it; he had taken
down poison and keeps silence; but at last the wound festred, and his heart
was too heavy for his body, so as he roareth for the disquietment of his
spirit, and he is made most freely and humbly to acknowledge his sin unto
God, Psalm. 32. 3, 4, 5.

5. Detestation of sin; spiritual 5. Hatred of sin.
wounds do work in the godly deep hatred against sin; O this lying under
the sense of wrath, this racking under the strong and piercing accusations of
conscience for sin, does incense the soul with the deepest loathing of sin
that may be, so that the broken sinner says unto it, get thee hence, Esa. 30.
22.

6. Reformation of life, endeavors 6. Change of life.
of obedience for the future, with watchful fear against sin, is the fruit
of the spiritual wound in Gods children; such do say, now I find and feel
what it is to venture on stolen waters, and what it is to taste the pleasures
of sin for a season, O I am now in the flames, I have found a dart stricken
thorough my liver, and what have I to do any more with idols, Hosea 14. 8. If
God will once heal my soul, and pardon me my sin, J will not sin against
him as I have done in time past, but I will take him for my God, and do unto
him all the possible service for his honor that I can.

Causes of the vvound in man's spirit, 9.
the wound of the spirit in men, J find them very different; and they are more
general, or special and particular; I shall name some of them. 1. Sin
committed


1. The wound in man's spirit is caused by sin; if any thing dishearten, fear
and distress the soul, it is sin; every sin committed and lying upon the
conscience is a wound to conscience; Now when you sin so against the brethren
ye wound their conscience, says Paul, 1 Cor. 8. 12. whence I infer, if
another man's sin will wound another man's conscience; then much more a man's
own sin will wound his own conscience; this is true, Malu^^ culp^ (...) bit
malu^^ poenae.
that all man's miserable and penal evils, whether inward or outward, do
follow his sinful evils; had there been no sin there had been no wound,
and thus man is the entire cause of his own wounding; if we be Hosea 1^ 9.
tasting of the forbidden fruit, sucking at the pleasures of sin, and do
swallow down the secret poison thereof, no marvel if it cast our souls and
and spirits into pain, and vexation, and unspeakeable stretchings and
strainings. Note, that as it is all sin in general, so it is What sins do most
of all wound conscience
the greatness, aggravations, and repetitions of some sins in particular,
which do greatly wound conscience within man, I mean, unnatural sins, such
as are sins of blood, and sins of uncleanness: unreasonable sins committed
contrary to the clear light of reason, as sins of Rebellion and Treason,
found in Achitophel and Judas: formal sins, which is the slubbering over Gods
services out of custom and for fashion, when a man knows he ought to do
them with holiness of affection and highness of reverence; local sins, the
sins of a man's calling and place, such as are idleness, unfaithfullnesse and
unrighteousness in buying, selling, borrowing, lending, restoring and the
like: sins against vows solemnly made against sin, yea and sins of
repetition, men going over the same sins often; all these and other the like
sins do not a little wound conscience in men.

2. The wound is caused by ^. Sin fell.
the sensible apprehension of the debt and guilt of sin; guilt apprehended in
depth is the greatest wounding of conscience that may be, when a man comes to
know his transgressions, and to possess the sins of his youth; finding the
fastening of sin in the venom of it upon his soul, this is the great malady
and disease of the soul, there is nothing so mortal and deadly as sin is, and
there is nothing more terrible and troublesome then for a man to see himself a
sinner without a Savior, and to read his own sins unto himself in an
unpardonable manner; it is one thing to read a sin in the Word, and another
thing for the Word and conscience to make us to read it in our selves in all
the offense and danger and damnation of it, Psalm. 51. 3. Job 13. 25, 26.

The Law over pressed or over applied.
over-taking of the threats and enforcements of the Law unto a man's self: the
Law is terrible, and causes the bondage of the spirit, putting a man to his
deepest distresses, when as sin and conscience does meet and mingle with it.

There are two things about Two things about the Law.
the Law causing the wound of spirit in man.

1. One is, The unskilful managing of it by the Ministers, they preaching it
without reference to the Gospel, as it was delivered on Mount Sinai.

2. Another is, The overfastning of the Law in its terror and execration upon a
man's self; the Law has an extreme curse written in it self; it renders up a
man a sinner to the severity of Gods justice, and irresistibility of his wrath,
it powers in the fiery indignation of the Almighty, and acknowledges no
Savior at all. Now when a man shall write down after the Law, that he is a
man every way under the execration and exaction of the Law, this is the
sadness and sickness of his spirit, Romans 7. 9. When the Law came sin
revived and I died.

Tasting of divine wrath.
up the former intimations from the soul, there is a mighty wound in the
spirit, as we may see in David, Psalm. 77. the first 10. verses; how much more
horrible and wounding to the spirit is the apprehension of the angry and
wrathful face of God setting it self against a man? Jobs mind was exercised
with this, and it was his wounding; The arrows of the Almighty are within me,
the poison whereof drinks up my spirit, the terrors of God do set themselves
in array against me, etc. Job 6. ^4.

Failing of conscience
conscience unto man upon repair made unto it; the good or evil day of a
Christian is set by the voice of conscience unto him: Now when conscience is
silent, and shall speak neither good nor bad unto a Christian, when as no
testimony at all shall stand up, but after great and studious enquiry no
verdict can be obtained; this is asad wound to the spirit, The misery of
conscience in silence in three things.
and it does exceedingly distract and divide a Christian. Note the effects of
conscience in silence,

1. It gives man but a negative estate, and that cannot satisfy and settle
the soul; it is not enough to my quiet that God looks not as mine enemy, but
he must look like a friend on me. 2. It gives suspicion of a neutrall
estate, so as a man cannot tell whether God and conscience be for him or
against him. 3. It breeds a suspicion of a bad estate; withdrawments and
suspensions are sometimes the forerunners of bitter intentions.
Accusations of conscience
power of conscience; conscience in its accusations showing the guiltiness of
sin, and expressing the anger of God toward a man for sin: in a cheerful and
excusing conscience we may behold a gracious God conscience we do behold an
angry God, and our selves most miserable creatures: when a Christian shall be
totally under the accusations of conscience; that his conscience shall speak
nothing to him, but that his heart is base and vile, and that in such and such
particular passages of his life he was not right and perfect, but hollow and
hypocritical, when I say conscience shall thus charge sin upon men; this is
the time of their wounding, as we may see in Judas, Mat. 27. 5.

Self jealousies.
an evil jealousy, and an overhard opinion of our selves and estates toward
God. Some men fall out with themselves, and other men fall from themselves;
shall I say that they censure themselves, and charge themselves falsely?
concluding against a state of grace, and charging themselves with hypocrisy
and insincerity without just cause; Sure I am, this is too too frequent among
Gods children, who upon such grounds as these, do mis-judge themselves, and
thereby make too great a wound within their spirits: I say because they find
within themselves the want of such measure of graces, and expressions of
obedience which they once had, desire to have, and see others have; when they
see within themselves a partial and temporary indisposednesse unto spiritual
required duties; when as gifts and graces for a time lie hid and dead in
respect of vigor and sensible operations: when all endeavors seem to be
fruitless, and a Christian finds to his seeming the ordinances to go and come
without all life and power unto him; passing no influence of bettering into his
soul. Now he sits him down in grief; and the soul begins not only to
misgive or mistrust it self; but to question the truth of all, and it not only
fears but concludes that surely the hands were washed in vain; and whatsoever
has been done in religion and in the service of God, it has been done in
hypocrisy, Psalm. 73. 13. and can you conceive how deeply this does wound the
spirit of a man?

8. A next thing greatly wounding to the spirit of man is the New risings of
old sins: New rifings of old sins.
I mean when those sins which long since were committed, and long since
bewailed, and long since renounced, and we long since did obtain within our
hearts some comfortable assurance of their pardon, do meet us in their guilt
not yet remooved, as a debt not yet discharged, and as an evil not yet
thoroughly healed, this causes miserable trouble within the soul, and upon
this, these conceits fall in; Surely this sin of mine is not pardoned, why
would God remember it? Surely there was but a skinning over the soar, my heart
was never healed by Sanctification; how could it be that my sins should haunt
me again, this is now the sickness and death of many a soul.

Want of some good desired.
of man, the want of some desired good; it is not the absence of good generally
considered which makes the spirit to be wounded; for there are such whose
unfeelingnesse is such, that they have no sense of sin, nor of any spiritual
want lying upon them; but that which makes the wound of the spirit to a man is
this, when his wants are presented unto him, and their supplies are suspended
and denied; the soul would have mercy, and mercy is denied him; he would have
ease, and he seeks it, and yet he is kept in misery: when a man's prayers makes
not their returns, but a man calls and none answers; comforts delayed or
denied do break the heart, and greatly wound the heart.



That a wounded spirit is a burden The wound suffered yet not borne.
insupportable by the sons of men; no man can bear it; men must suffer and
endure the perplexities thereof, but bear A twofold bearing.
it (that is) to sustain a man's self under it, no man can, this wound cannot
be borne with 1. With ease.
ease, so as men enduring and feeling it, should make nothing of it; but it is
with 2. With difficulty.
great difficulty and disquietment; a burning fever carrying to all men that
are vexed with it; there is no withstanding The burden is too great
1. To good men. 2. To bad men,

this wound by any man, nor any standing under it by any man; unto bad men it
has been unsupportable; O how grievous was it unto Caine, who cries out, My
punishment is more then I can bear, Genesis 4. 13. Judas out of the trouble felt
by it, hangs himself to be rid out of it, Mat. 27. 4. many thorough the weight
and torment of it, have been forced to throw themselves down from high
mountains, to stabb, and poison, and drown themselves; nay unto good men,
whose grace and strength was great and much, this wound has been wounding,
witness David, Psalm. 32. 3, 4. Hezekiah, Ezekiel. 38. 13, 14. and holy Job in his
whole History, and Christ himself suffering this wound (without sin) in his
humane spirit, cried out under its burden, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? and it cannot Reasons prooving the burden, of a wounded conscience
are seven.
be otherwise, if we consider these reasons.

why have thou set me as a mark against thee, so that I am a burden unto my
self, says Job 7. 20. Now all wounds and burdens that are extrinsecall a man's
spirit can bear, but that which lies within it self it cannot; you know if
the ship be whole the waves do only beat against make her self her own
grave; thus it is with conscience, it cannot be both patient and burden, and
under all wounds it self being wounded, it is that which makes the burden
insupportable.

him, his sleep forsakes him, and his dreams do not please him, he lies on
his bed boiling in disquietnesse and wishes for day: conscience can relieve
against all wounds but its own; Suppose the wound to lie in a man's honor,
friends, and estate, conscience can heal all that, but it self being wounded
in the least degree, it is beyond the cure and comfort of all outward things;
we have a saying, that no borrowing part can help the lending part; what help



and he is now avenging the wrong that is done to his mercy and patience, and
is it possible for the creature to sustain it self? can we imagine any
enabling against Gods pressure and power? a man while he is to deal with men
may bear up himself, and he may have much strength of wit or impudency of
face to outface all enquiries, but when men are to deal with an all-seeing,
and an all knowing, and an all-sinne revenging God, the might of whose glory is
able to confound men and Angels, if he once shall start up our guilts, and
break into our souls; if he send a trembling heart, and sorrowful mind, if
himself be witness against us, and by his power imprison and shut us up, we
cannot avoid it, or bear it; time will not ease us, company will not ease us,
peace will not ease us, when he wounds none can heal but himself.

Fifthly, the wound of the spirit is accompanied with the accusations of
conscience; conscience cannot be bribed or put of, there is no flying from it;
the strength of conscience is awakened, and her cruelty roareth, conscience
under wounding does arraigne, evidence, condemn, and bind over unto eternal
wrath for sin; and it is of an indefatigable, unresistible and unavoidable
power in working, a man by flight, or death, or friends, may escape the
Magistrates hand, but by neither can he possibly ever escape from a displeased
conscience, a tormented conscience cannot fly from God, nor can a man fly
from it.



strongly and subtly working; such is Satan's cowardice that he takes us at the
weakest, and such is his malice that he will yet weaken us we being weakened
already; Satan falling in with the bruisings and sores of men's souls, and
bringing in the fretting gall of hell, and pouring forth the sharpest vinegar
of most violent objections, the soul tortured and the wound enlarged, and
conscience overcharged; Satan now tells the sinner of the impossibility of
mercy, and uncapablenesse of the blood of Christ, he now follows him with
strange endictments, representations, and conclusions, yea and arguments of
insincerity and hypocrisy, and this adds to the weight and makes the burden
intolerable; there is no such trouble as to be daily troubled with the devil.

Having thus opened the wound unto you, and its burden, I shall fall upon the
Application of both, in this manner:

First, be wise to know the woundednesse of your spirits, and to consider what
is your condition thereby. I press you to this the rather upon these grounds,

Tim. 4. 2. they are dead and A seared spirit is worse then a wounded spirit
sleepie, their spirits never moove or work within them, and let me tell you,
that a wounded spirit is infinitely beyond a dead spirit; a troubled conscience
is a mercy in respect of a seared conscience; conscience in trouble may happily
prove conscience in goodness and peace, and a cure may follow it: when iron
is put into the fire it may be made pliable and receive another impression,

2. Because men ordinarily take least notice of their spiritual wounds in
their cause and cure; they are lumpish and heavy, full of sad thoughts and
evil imaginations, and many times they roar and complain, but this is their
Men do mistake the spirits wound.
ignorance, they know not what ailes them; they are so mistaken in the cause
and business in hand, that they judge themselves to be under some bodily
distempers by melancholy passions, and other violent humors, a great madness
and ignorance in men; and being fallen upon this point, let me tell you that
melancholy prevailing in men does come very near to the trouble of conscience,
but it is not the wound of conscience here spoken of; Satan makes it his bait,
and man makes it his burden, but we may not make it this wound; concerning
which I shall yield you two things,

1. That melancholy given The operation of melancholy in man.
way unto does corrupt the imagination, and those actions of the mind or the
^ext instruments by which the mind works, that therewith the heart,
affections, and conscience are greatly distempered with fear and grief, and
do conceive a many uneschewable miseries against it self, against which
fancies and imaginations, no arguments of reason can prevail, and this
darkning vapor and blackish fume thus affecting the soul, does add torment
unto it, making it for the time incapable of the sense of comfort, I say this
humor of melancholy has very subtle spirits that fly up into the brain,
and the instrument of discretion and there they lodge their contagious
qualities, which corrupt the spirits, and annoy both heart and brain; whence
arise strange imaginations and fancies in the head. Head and heart having
intercourse, and body and soul being united, the soul is nor thereby a little
troubled.

2. That what ever vain men judge; melancholy is not a spiritual malady, or
the wounder spirit here spoken of; the difference Melancholy is not the wounded
spirit, proved by 5. reasons.
between both is great; as

1. In the ground and cause, the troubles of melancholy arises either from
natural causes in the body, or from supposed and fained causes, the
imagination conceiving things to be so and so, when indeed nothing is really
so; the trouble of conscience arises from the sight and sense of sin in the
soul, the apprehension of divine wrath due to man for sin and such like
spiritual and real causes.

2. In the seat of it; troubles from melancholy seat themselves in the head
and natural spirits, the man having lost the right use of his wits, and being
mistaken in his imagination, in conceits becoming monstrous; true trouble is
in the conscience and whole soul of man.

3. In the cure of it; physic may cure the one, it being a bodily disease or
distemper; but it is not all artificial and natural means that can cure the
wounds of the spirit.

4. In the effects of it; melancholy makes a man simple and absurd in his
thoughts touching himself; such men will speak to you and yet conceive
themselves to be without head or heart and life; they will tell you that they
see Devils and feel Devils within them; and you shall hear many odd things
from them, when as trouble of conscience loses not it self, but speaks
according to the truth and feeling of it self.

5. In the enlargement of it; melancholy seldom or never works grief for
Gods dishonor; it is not touched with sorrow for sin, and when it is cured, it
gives not a man any ground and measure of spiritual joy; it enforces not a
man to Christ for ease and rest; it quickens no man to prayer and duty; all
which the wounds of the spirit in some men do most kindly and savingly.

Thirdly and lastly, let us know our selves rightly in our troubles of mind,
and we shall the better know our selves in our comforts; nothing does so
prepare the heart for comforts, and make us to relish our comforts as the
sense of soul trouble and heaviness: I dare affirm that if we did know and
find our spiritual wants and wounds more, we would and should withal be
more upon the ways and feelings of comfort then we are.

neither eye has seen, ear has heard, or tongue of man is able fully to
express, none can in any way of expression speak of it, but such as have more
or less felt it; and shall we pass by any that are laboring under this
burden, not yielding them our pity? it is a foolish madness in many to think
this sickness and this wound to be but passion, conceit, and mopishnesse put
into their heads by reading good books, or hearing some strict Preachers, or
melancholy; and because it often changes the body, they think it arises from
the body, and what need all this ado about it? it is cursed cruelty in any to
look upon any laboring under this wound, crying out against them, censuring
of them for hypocrites, and in thought sentencing them to hell, blaspheming
their God and their religion; O Considerations for the pitying of wounded in
soul.
you ignorant men learn better and be now instructed.

1. That there is no disease for symptoms and torments like unto this; all
other maladies are natural, but this is supernatural; they come from the
constitution of the body, this of the soul; in them the humors first, in this
the conscience first, and humors last are distempered; they may all be cured
by natural remedies, the body may be brought to a fittemperature; but it is
not all the medicines under heaven that are merely natural can cure or
comfort here.

2. That it is an argument of an unsanctified and stony heart within man to
disregard, tax, or censure men under the miseries of inward perplexities, you
being merciless and wanting tenderness and experience cannot pity them
aright.

3. Blessed are such as judge wisely of such poor souls, and do labor to
relieve their souls in their woundings: this is a work of mercy indeed, and a
business becoming the most excellent of Christians; Motives to pity and to
relieve wounded Christians.
Christ himself received his anointing, and was sent of God to bind up the
broken hearted, Esaias 61. 1, 2, 3. Ministers have the tongue of the learned
given them to speak a word of comfort to such whose souls are weary, Esa*
50. 4. and shall not we that are Christians comfort the feeble minded, and
support the weak, 1 These. 5. 14. bearing one another burden; O let us pity
such, and pray earnestly to God for such, considering our own case, Gal. 6. 1.
would we not be prayed for were we in their conditions?

and they bless God that they were never troubled in mind all the days of
their life; some men walk with wounds in their spirits, and would give all the
world did they enjoy it for freedom and ease, and shall any man enjoy the
liberty and peace of his conscience from God and yet walk without joy and
praise; it well becomes men healed of their wounds, out of that ease and
liberty they have obtained to be very joyful and thankful.

said enough; it is a burden that none can bear, think not out of your
ignorance and pride to outface conscience, or that ever you shall be able to
stand under the burden of its wounds: it will amaze you, and bring you down;
and therefore strive to avoid the pangs and pains of it; and to this purpose

First, know that conscience within, is a most tender part which will be soon
troubled and wounded.

Secondly, know that conscience troubled is a most vexing part; if a man
trouble his eye,

Thirdly, know that conscience under wounds is pining and will languish it
self unto death, Prove. 12. 25.

Fourthly, consider how apt men are to wound conscience, and they do it many
ways: well then, follow this counsel. Six rules for the keeping of the wounds
of spirit.


1. Make no adventures upon sin; for a man to make light of the least sin, and
impudently or improvidently to hazard his soul upon the occasions of sin, is
the ready way to wound the spirit: there are too too many who out of a secret
confidence of their self maintenance do object their souls upon sinful
companies; they do as many men that go out of their houses well and sound,
but home they are brought all gored and wounded; in like manner, sinful
occasions have the advantage of us and will soon wound us, let us not proudly
presume of our own strength, it is not the largeness of our judgments, or
fulness of our graces, or the peremptorinesse of our resolutions that can
keep us (presuming) from foiles and wounds by sin; such as make nothing of sin
shall soon be wounded and darted by sin.

2. Seek not outward pleasures too much; excess of pleasures breed excessive
tremblings and sadness of spirit; such men do pierce themselves thorough and
thorough with many sorrows who do affect a way of worldly delight, and will
take their fill of pleasures; who so will have the Be must have his sting
also, and if we will laugh and be merry beyond measure, we shall lie down
and howl for vexation of spirit; do not so vainly bathe your selves in
carnal delights and worldly recreations; the worldlings pastime is the
deadness and wound of a Christians conseience.

3. Beware of formality and remissness in holy services: the Ordinances not
rightly used do wound exceedingly; how vexing is the word to a formal and
carnal Christian? did any man fall of, grow cold, and begin to dead his heart
to the means and duties, but his heart at the last was greatly wounded for it;
the neglect of Christ by the Church, when his voice did seem unseasonable and
inopportune unto her, was punished by her spiritual wounding, Cant. 5. 2, 3,
4, 5, 6.

4. Nourish no hypocrisy or guile within you, do not color sin with fair
pretenses, and plaster over a foul heart with an outside profession, serve
not graven images when you pretend a service unto God, if you do so, know that
it will fester to a sore, and make such a wound, which will prove the great
disquietment of your souls; Satan would have fastened this hypocrisy on Job,
to have aggravated his misery; and he well knows that hypocrisy is wounding.

5. Go not on in sinful ways against general or particular convictions;
there are who have such abundance of love to sin in them, that they will be
wicked against the light of knowledge and the dictate of conscience, it is not
the knowledge they have of evil, nor the risngs up and reproves of conscience
within them for evils which can hold them of from evil; but on they go, and
wickedly they will do, now as this prooves an aggravation of sin, so it makes
the wound very deep; if knowledge and conscience hold us not of from sin, it
will hold on sin, peircing the marrow, and vitals of the spirit; David went
against as great light as any man did, and did not his sins prove wounding
sins, breaking his bones and heart? and so will thine too.

6. Keep your selves in the ways of duty, walking in every action according
to the rule, and peace shall be upon your spirits, Gal. 6. 16. I say the more
holy and unblameable a man is, the more strict a man is with himself in
keeping himself under the law of religion, the more assured peace and
soundness shall he find within his conscience; The ways of wisdom are
ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace, yea and the keeping of
sound wisdom and discretion shall be life unto our souls, Prove. 3. 17, 21,
22. I assure you that duties conscionably, sincerely, and constantly performed,
do keep up the soul in life and joy.

Men do continue themselves under their spiritual vvounds six ways
under it then they need to do; I shall touch upon the ways and grounds of
continuing the wound of conscience on a man's self.

1. Want of seasonable counsel and comfort; when men do hide their wounded
estate, and will not repair to appointed comforts and comforters, this does
not only enlarge the wound, but settle it; as we see in bodily wounds, if
they want a timely looking too, it is the longer before that they heal; the
case is so here, delays breed dangers: and we are speedily to make in to our
remedies, do not slight the least wound as many do, who at the first make
nothing of it; but set upon the cure as soon as you epsy the wound; the
medicine is prepared before hand, and physicians to apply it are at hand, only
take you heed of a sinful bashfullnesse, and dumb devil, and cursed
negligence, cry not out when it is too late.

2. Recourse unto contrary medicines; there are many false and deluding
medicines unto conscience; and there are many medicines which are vertuall, but
yet not suitable, all medicines heal not all diseases; we see in experience in
bodily wounds which are but small and little to look to, if that a contrary
medicine be applied to it, it does enrage it, and increase it, and continue it
many times unto the death of the patient; and thus if men in and under their
spiritual wounds will run to the use of such druggs and playsters which may
only for a time damme up the sense, but not make upthe wound, they may long
and long continue under the wound, and cry out of their wounds; you may no more
think to heal the spirit by sin, then by adding piles of wood Saul's music
which could tune his jarring spirit, nor Belshazzars cups which could blot out
the sense of the secret handwriting; it is not your mad mi^th, or joviall
companions, or worldly employments that can take of your sadness of spirit;
they may put of from some horror for the present, but they double horrors in
their return; even as cold water does the heat in a burning fever.

3. Illness of diet; diet is much in continuing of bodily wounds; there are
meats and drinks which men must abstain from, if that they intend to be
cured: and it is as true in the spiritual Surgerie; if that we enlarge our
desires after for bidden fruit, and delight to feed upon sinful husks, and
will be doing that we should not, we may thank our selves for the smart of our
wounds; is it the way to be rid of a wound to vex it? and to feed contrary to
it?

4. Selfe-nicenesse; men are many times so tender and indulgent toward
themselves, that they will be healed only by soft words, and the covering of a
fair cloth, they will not submit themselves unto the painful searchings of
the Law; but they are in this cruel to themselves, and out of self favoring
do make their misery larger and longer.

5. The life of sense; which is open to all winds, and the keeping open of all
wounds within the soul, my meaning is this; that when Christians do place the
disposition of God toward them, and judge of themselves according to the
condition of their own feelings and sensible apprehensions; this is that which
does greatly keep up the wound of the spirit; for now the soul being under
its ebbings, and finding the channel in a manner dry, so as he cannot see
what he was wont to behold; begins thus to reason, surely God is not my God in
grace and mercy, for I cannot find him in his love to me as I was wont to do;
which condition is full of suspense and fear and doubting, and must needs
continue the wound.

6. Harkning unto Satan; if a man do believe the devils testimony and
information touching his estate and condition, and take up all his speech upon
trust for truth, he shall keep himself in bleeding wounds, the more Satan
does tamper with our condition, and take upon him to judge of our sins, and
services, and temper and standing, the more sad and doubtful will our
condition be. I say if we shall put the issue of our condition upon the
determination of Satan, and all his interpretations and decisions shall be
gospel with us, Lord how shall we be tossed too and fro? and where there is
no rest, how can there be the healing of the wound?

cast off all hope of cure, and despairingly conclude against all your
comforts; know 1. That the best of Gods Saints have been under the
grievousnesse of this wound, and that in as fearful and terrible a manner as
any of you can possibly be, and they have received their cures: 2. That the
greatest of our spiritual wounds (suppose them to be more settled and
permanent wounds) are capable of cure, and may be cured, God which has healed
this wound in many of his dear children, and is the wise and able Physician
Three means to get out of our wounded estate
for his people, can and will heal all the wounds of our spirits, and it
matters not how great and grievous the wound be, if God be Surgeon, Ier. 17.
14. Hosea 6. 1. he can heal one as well as another, and all wounds as soon as
any, and therefore say not my spirit is greatly wounded; but rise up to the
cure, and learn in the next place

2. To be willing of cure; I know that there can be no pleasure in staying
under wounds unto any wise man; yet as many are ignorant of the true remedies,
so many are very unwilling to use those remedies provided and prescribed for
their cure; we find in some people such refusals of offered comforts; such
sleightings of able counsels; yea and such shunnings of soule-searchings, that
it makes us to fear them, and of many of them we may say, we would have cured
Babell, but she would not be cured, Ier. 51. 9. and rest not here but

Thirdly, learn to follow the ways and means prescribed for your healing;
there is balm in Gilead, and a poole at Bethesda, There are five things to be
done if we do intend the curing of our wounded spirits 1 Open the wound
and Physicians enough among us, only we must take the course, and address
our selves

1. Unto the opening and searching of the wound; it is not enough that we have
a view of our wound in general, seeing that we are sick and aile ill, but we
must find out the particular malady in the special reason of it; and
therefore you must suffer the Ministers of God to go to the quick, and to
lance and lay open all; there is a holy incision to be made into the wound of
the spirit by Gods Law, this does find out and open the particular hidden and
malevolent humor of the soul, and it is your duty to let the Law into your
hearts, that so it may have its perfect work, bless God for a searching
Ministry, and deliver up your selves to that word which makes most
inquisition into your wound; the word that does most wound you for the present,
it will by Gods blessing be a means of the after curing of you.

2. Unto the washing and 2. Wash the wound
cleansing of the wound; there is a great deal of filth that falls into man's
spirit, in the wounding thereof, which of necessity must be washed away, or no
cure will follow; who so is not willing to be rid of sin (that as extreme
filthiness does lodge within him) he shall never receive the right cure of
his spiritual wound; it is sin which is the core of the ulcer; O remoove it in
the guilt of it, and remoove it in the filth of it; get the washing of
Justification, and of Sanctification into thy soul, and doubt not but thou
shall be cured. 3. Apply the plaster.


3. Unto the laying on of the all-healing plaster upon the wound; it is the
plaster in application that is healing; Christ's blood was shed to heal broken
spirits, Esaias 61. 1, 2, 3. and 53. 6. He is that Sun of righteousness that
has healing under his wings, Mal. 4. 2. that blood alone can assuage all our
ragings, and heal all our woundings; Now then, make a seasonable application
of that blood to your wounded souls, sprinkle with his blood your wounded
spirits; God alone is pacified, if the blood of Christ be sprinkled, and
conscience does heal when God is reconciled; O that we would set our selves by
faith into the dying and bleedings of Christ; a man must earnestly labor to
believe that Christ does and will satisfy for those sins which breed the
terror within; and this will prove the curing and the comforting of his heart,
as we may see, Act. 16. 31.

4. Unto the daily openings 4. Dress it daily.
and dressings of the wound; it is a necessary thing for the soul to be
venting it self into full and frequent confessions of sin; there is a need of
letting out the filthy matter that the wound in healing gathers; this we
hold; keep in sin, and let out the filthy matter and ease will follow; it is
an easing thing to be much in acknowledgement of sin to God, and to accuse a
man's self of sin before God; we see David found it specially curing unto him,
Psalm. 32. 3, 5. and besides this, there must be the renewing of our repentance
and godly sorrow for sins committed; sinful wounds are deep wounds, and great
sins call for great sorrows; David was wholly in tears, and Peter weeps
bitterly; and we must be constant in repenting, if we expect a complete and
comfortable cure; and lastly we must lay open all our sores before the Lord in
prayer; David's sore ran and ceased not, and yet in the day of his trouble he
sought the Lord, and he prayed when his spirit was full of anguish, Psalm. 77.
2, 3. and thus must we do, we must come unto God with all our sins and
soars craving healing from him; who will heal us in his own time, and by his
own means, Hosea 6. 1. and 14. 4.

5. Unto the upholdments of 5. Provision.
our spirits, under all the dressings of its wounds; we are very apt to faint
in the thought of distresses; but when we are felt and dressed, and dealt
withal in a most healing way, we are ready to qualme and sink, so that it
does very much concern us to have our cordials and restoratives near us, such
as are the sweet and precious promises of the opinion of us, and that his love
is toward us; we must set up the saving virtue of Christ's blood against the
damming power of sin; we must eye Gods acceptance of weak endeavors, and
passing by of many failings, we must conclude that a state of love may be
under the sense of much wrath, and that though the pain for the present be
much and great, yet it is sanctified, and God will put an end unto it for good
unto such as are his in Covenant. This if we could wisely do, we should keep
down the risings of uncomfortable thoughts; and cease so much talking of our
pain, and making complaint thereof, and happily attain to the curing of the
wounds of our spirits; the greatest of mercies, and the ground of singular
rejoicing; because the wounds of the spirit are so intolerable and
unsufferable as I have opened unto you.

Eight Cases of conscience opened for the relievement of wounded spirits.
IT now remains that I open unto you some of the things which are greatly
wounding unto man's spirit; and yield unto you such relievements against them,
as Cases of conscience do require, a work requiring both experimental
knowledge, and the tongue of the Learned, unto which I acknowledge my self
insufficient, yet having found the good proof of these following directions in
the comforting of many souls already, I am the more encouraged to communicate
them unto you in a more public way, and the blessing of the Almighty go
along with them.

CASE. I. Of the suspension of divine favor.
THe first thing which I Case 1.
shall speak of as The absence of Gods lov^ in sense is a great trouble.
greatly wounding and troubling the spirits of Gods children, is the absence of
God in the sense, and feeling of his loving kindness; all absences of God
(suppose them to be longer or shorter, inward, or outward;) troubles Christians
exceedingly, if Caine could make it distraction unto him when he was cast out
of Gods visible presence, Genesis 4. 15, 16. If Mary weep because that they had
taken away her Lord and she knew not where that they had laid him, John 20. 13.
how much more wounding unto Christians is the suspension of divine favor? the
soul cannot lie under the sense of Gods displeasure and withdrawments of his
love without much alteration and affliction. The life of a Christian is much
after the life of some great Favorite in the Court, whose which opens and
shuts with the Sun; just thus all the while the love of God shines upon a
Christian, so as he is able to apprehend it, he lives, and is very cheerful
in spirit; the sense of divine love is a spring of joy, a well of consolation,
and the admirable refreshment of the soul; Psalm* 30* 5.
thy favor is life, Psalm. 63* 3.
thy loving kindness is better then life, says David, this was it that gave
unto him exceeding joy of heart, Psalm. 4. 6, 7. The Church sat under the
shadow of Christ with great delight, and his fruit wa^ ^weet unto her taste,
Cant. 2. 3. The enjoyment of this love is the day and joy of a Christian. But
now if that there be a withdrawment or clouding or restraining of the love of
God unto sense; let God (I say) but hide his face, and seem to forget and
forsake his; let him but cover himself with a cloud, and absent himself for a
time, covering his with his wrath and just displeasure, now it is all night and
darkness, yea and death it self unto Christians; as you may see in these
Scriptures of experience, Psalm. 30. 7. 88. 14. 44. 24. 77. 3, 7, 8, 9. 13. 1.
31. 22. Lam. 3. 18. and 42, 43, 44. Esa. 45. 15. 49. 14. Jonah 2. 4. kind
husband; but his departure Absalom that had no goodness in him, was troubled
with his fathers withholding the wonted signs of his favor in banishing him
from his presence, and can we imagine but that when God turns his back,
departs in displeasure, keeps himself darkened and unseene (that not so much
as the least comfortable view of his countenance can be espied) changes the
set of (...) countenance, and folds up all the former intimations of love and
favor from the sense and apprehension of his children, this is the wounding,
the unsetling and the casting The greatness of this trouble.
down of the spirit; I dare affirm, that all outward dignities and revennues
which God does cast upon Christians in variety and plenty, in this condition
will nothing avail to comfort them, divine suspensions are divine desertions,
and when God is displeased with a man, which of all the creatures can comfort
him? the Moon loses her light when Causes of the trouble three.
you:

1. That times of suspension are times of stirring tentations; God is no sooner
absent, but Satan is present and combating with Christians; if God withdraw
from Job, the Devil will set on with eagerness.

2. That times of suspensions are times of greatest suspicions, now fears and
jealousies and doubtings do arise within men.

3. That under all the withdrawments of Gods favor, there is eminent
disquietnesse and enlargednesse of sorrows; the Visceribus frementibus.
very bowels of the Church was troubled for the absence of Christ, Cant. 5. 4.
and the absence of a God, the fountain of all good, goes to the heart of a
Christian, for now the light and comfort of heaven is wanting.

This is the miserable condition of Gods children under the suspension of
divine favor; But you will ask me what relievement may be affoorded
Releevements to souls under the suspension of Gods love*
to Christians whose spirits are under this trouble?

Unto such men I shall propose these four directions.

folding up the blessed light of his countenance; these shut the door, draw
the curtains, cause the eclipse, and make the wall of separation between God
and his; men in sinning forsake God, and God for sin does forsake men,
leaving them to themselves forsaken of all comforts, and feeling miserable
wrath; we see how David's great sins did suspend the comfortable presence of
God for a time from his soul, Psalm. 51. 11, 12. and the Church acknowledges;
Thou have hid thy face from us, and consumed us, because of our iniquities,
Esa. 64. 7. and the Prophet tells us, Your iniquities have separated between
you and your God, and your sins have made him hide his face from you, Esa.
59. 2. Though God takes not away his favor totally and finally, though he
light of his countenance, Psalm. 90. 8. for which sins of theirs it does
become them seriously and soundly to judge themselves, you must therefore
learn to bewail the loss of divine favor more in the cause of it, then
misery by it; when Isracl heard that God would not go in the midst of them,
they mourned and no man did put Exodus 33. 3, 4.
on his ornaments; and surely an humble submission of our selves to God, in the
confession of our provoking and displeasing sins, and the taking home unto our
selves the just desert of condemnation, together with the crying down the
wrath of God; and seeking the face of God by prayer does well become all
Christians who desire to enjoy the loving favor and the blessed countenance of
God; what Father will show Christians are chiefly to be humbled for three
things.
face, till God see dejection in our countenances, and grief in our hearts for
our sins? O then let us be humbled, For

1. Our former dis-esteemes of former feelings of divine love, for that we did
no more prize, and for that we did so carelessly undervalue, and but in an
ordinary manner entertain the pledges and testimonies of Gods special love
unto us.

2. Our former uncomfortablenesse of spirit in and under the feelings of Gods
love vouchsafed to us Christians; we did walk with too much sadness of spirit
under many testimonies of Gods love unto us, (a thing very displeasing unto
God) and for which God does greatly humble those that are his; they who will
not walk chearefully under the shining of Gods love upon them, shall have it
withdrawn from them unto their deep sorrow.

3. Our unstedfastnesse and remissness in holy walking, we have been too
remiss in the Ordinances and duties, we have been cold and careless in
prayer, and hearing, etc. and this God cannot abide, for this we must be
humbled before the Lord, if ever we expect the light of his countenance.

Secondly, prejudice not 2.
your selves unto a state of divine love, make it not a thing impossible to you
to recover and regaine Gods face and favor; Christians in their losses are to
grieve, and hope; it is not safe in the suspensions of divine favor to cast
off all hope of enjoying the same; it was a weakness in David to think that
God would be favorable no more; it is one of Satan's tricks to present God at
such times in full wrath to the soul, and to persuade man that he must bid
farewell unto Gods love, the sense being once lost it should never come again
into the soul. Now if men close with Satan and will not be brought within the
compass of divine love, but are always rearing up arguments of divine wrath
within themselves against themselves, how shall they come to settle their
souls in love? Can the waters the devil against our selves and our comforts;
but know that though God be not easily gained in his love once lost, yet the
sense of Gods love after the sense of much wrath is attaineable, it being both
tendered in the promise, and that which many faithful Christians seeking have
obtained; read what is written, for a small moment have I forsaken thee, Esaias
^^. 7, 8.
but with great mercies will I gather thee: In a little wrath I hid my face
from thee for a moment; but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on
thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer.

not always be offended; though God be not changeable in himself and love,
yet sense of his love is with much variation to the same Christians; sometimes
they have Sense of love is graduall.
much light and evidence, and can and do apply it with great strength and
comfort, enjoying as it were their heaven on earth; anon their apprehensions
are clouded, and applications weakened, so that great love does run with little
sense, they are sons yet under sense of wrath, and yet they may rise up
again, and their God arise in the light of his countenance upon them;
assuredly Christians 4 Thing to be done for the rega^^ning o^ God^ lov^ in
sense.
might walk with more sense of Gods love if that they did practice these four
things.

1. The giving off the ways of sin; a man is no way more an enemy unto his
own assurance of divine love, then in and by the continuing in the love and
practice of any one known lust which is the great displeasure of God; God (I
grant) does love where sin is, but he does neither love sin nor will he
show himself loving to that man that is a lover of sin; if the heart gather
iniquity to it self, how can the love of God dwell there? what is it that
makes Gods children in the days of distress most doubtful of Gods love, and
most to question the same toward them? is it not the sins that they have
committed? and can we be in the ways of assurance when we live in the ways
of wickedness? Danger by sinni^
all adventuring upon sins does beget divine hatred, make faith to reele, and
breeds nothing but doubts, and fears, and jealousies; all which keeps off the
feeling of divine love; O resolve to give of all sin, no way engage your
hearts unto it, and you shall find upon your turning from sin, the turning
of Gods face toward you; 2 Chronicles. 7. 14. Esaias 55. 7.

2. Be found in the ways of duty; enlarge the uprightness of your souls, the
humility of your minds, and strive to all conscionablenesse, fervencie and
steadfastness of spirit in all required services, and you shall find divine
favor bowing and bending toward you; a man is never more in the way of love,
then when he goes right on in the course of godliness, when a man's life is
wrought unto Gods will and spent in Gods work; there cannot want particular
discoveries of Gods love more or less; if we live to God and with God* acting
and mooving on in a course of holiness, though for the present all seem to be
clouded and darkened, love will break out; Note Three things about love and
duty.
with me three things,

1. That a Christian wanting assurance of divine love, dares not to decline
duty and the services of a spiritual life; though he cannot as yet feel God
in love, yet he will wait upon God in duty.

2. That the sense and assurance of Gods love in the heart, does much enlarge
the heart in the cheerful and powerful performance of holy duties; no man is
more spiritfull or painful, then he which day by day feels Gods goodness;
this is as the oyling to the wheels, and the light unto working.

3. That while men go on in a course of holy obedience, and moove on in duties
out of love to God, God will not fail at length to give them some intimations
of his love, Thou meetest him that rejoices and works righteousness, those
that remember thee in thy ways, Esaias 64. 5.

3. Preserve your selves under the Ordinances, you are in the ways of love
when you are in Gods presence, hearing Gods voice, and partaking of his
Sacraments; these reveal the Fathers face unto you, here you shall have
tenders of divine love unto you; and by these God will convey the sense of his
love unto you; I have declared unto them thy Joh. 17. 26.
name, and will declare it, that the love wherewith thou have loved me may be
in them; where we plainly see that God by the means of salvation does
persuade and settle the heart in the assurance of his love; let it then be your
wisdoms to attend, serting your selves under the manifestation of love, and
God in time will speak peace to your hearts, and let you to know the love that
he has toward you, wait I say upon God in his Ordinances, and surely the
good hour will come that the heat and comfort of Gods love shall be
apprehended by you: I will hear what the Lord will speak, for he will speak
peace unto his people and to his Saints, Psalm. 85. 8.

4. Clear the warrants and grounds of faith; this is most true, that faith
lives in love, and in the promises of love, and there can be no sound
persuasion of Gods love in the soul without faith; as the Gospel shows
love, and God bestows love, so faith receives and applies love; 1 Ioh 4 16.
We have known and believed the love that God has to us, now faith does
never work so clearly and apprehensively in divine love, as when its warrants
and grounds (which are the promises of God) are very clear unto the soul;
there are two Two things keeping men of the apprehension of divine love 1.
Misplacing of warrants.
things which keep men off from the comfortable apprehension of divine favor.

1. One is the misplacing of warrants, when men are mistaken in the matter of
Gods love, and will judge themselves to be under divine love upon general
testimonies, and by foreign pawnes, even such as hypocrites or cast-awaies
may have, forgetting that saying of Solomon, No man knows love or hatred by
all that is before them, Eccles. 9. 2. Suppose a man to have concurrence of
natural parts, common graces, morrall moderation, formality of religion, and
plenty of all outward things, now if he hereupon fancy a love of God unto him
(as too many do) the man mistakes himself and cannot be settled in Gods love
to him.

2. Another is the darkening 2. Darkening of warrants.
and mudding of warrants, when faith is kept from the clear apprehension of
promises, and cannot see all its privileges, when men will cast mists of
misinterpretation and jealousy upon the promises, questioning their goodness
or truth, either in themselves or to themselves; now love cannot be so felt and
apprehended as it might be; let it be your work therefore to read over the
promises of God to faith, and make them as plain and clear to faith as you
can, consider well how many grants of favor are made over to faith, and
enlarge faith in these promises, and then shall you find and feel much love
in your souls.

8. Things for the settling the soul in the absence of divine love.


1. That it is no new or strange thing for Gods dearest children in their sense
to be forsaken of divine love, and to have apprehensions of divine wrath
toward them; the light of Gods love was withdrawn for a time from Christ the
Son of Gods only love, and from his Church, Psalm. 44. Lam. 3.

2. That God does never withdraw the sense of his love from any of his children
but for some special causes and profitable ends; such as are,

1. The trial of their disposition and temper toward himself; it is an
excellent spirit that can love God frowning, and depend upon God absenting and
withdrawing himself; I will wait upon the Lord that hides his face from the
house of Jacob, and I will look for him, Esaias 8. 17.

2. The ransacking of their Causes of Gods suspending his love from his
souls, now they go to seek and find out all the idols of indignation that
are remaining within them; a little of Gods anger felt and apprehended does
much afflict the heart with sorrow for sin, and eat out the love of sin
within, a man does never apprehend and feel his sins with more grief and
hatred then in the times of Gods absences, as 1 Samuel 21. 1, 2.

3. The putting us into the most excellent life of faith; our disposition is to
live too much by sense, and we would always enjoy God by sight; but for as
much as sight is reserved for another world, and there we shall have the full
and constant fruition of Gods love by vision, God will and does in this life
exercise us in the life of faith, making us in the non-feeling of love to
believe love unto us.

4. The searching out of their grounds and evidences, to see if that there be
any thing of God left within them, by which they may gain any assurance that
God does love them.

5. The preparing of them for greater apprehension of his love and favor in
time to come; God many times after a little absence does show himsel^e more
glorious and comfor^^ble in his love to the soul then ever he did in times
past; in the little forsakings of God the soul is more set after God, and more
enlarged to receive from God the testimonies of his love then ever it was
formerly.

Now then if God will do his children good in and by the withdrawments of his
countenance from them, why should they be so dejected as they are under them?

3. That though the love of God be much unto his in every condition, yet such
as are Gods shall never be able to know and feel all the love of God to them,
or so much of Gods love as their desires lead them unto: in this life we have
our tastes, and we shall never have our fill until we come to heaven, Ephesians.
3. 19.

4. That the condition of love is one thing, and the feeling of love another
thing; always love is not felt, Gods love may be toward us when his look is
not, a tender Father does many times fold up his love in angry words and harsh
actions, and a loving God to a sinful Christian may exercise his love
insensibly, so as a man may be in favor when he feels no favor, he may be
that in faith which he is not in sense.

5. That such who have not present sense of love, may yet have a present ground
for Gods love unto them; Now the The promise is the ground of love.
sure ground of Gods love unto us is the promise of love; Thou Lord wilt bless
the righteous, Psalm. 5. 1^.
with favor will thou compass him, says David; and truth it is that our
happiness stands in this assurance, that divine love is in the promise; here
is our stock, and if we had no more love then what we could hold in sense, all
love would soon be gone; this therefore must be the wisdom of Christians not
to judge of their interest unto Gods love by the present actual feelings of it
within their souls, but by the gracious promise of love made over unto them on
Gods part; reason thus; what though I cannot feel and find Gods favor to be
toward me? yet

6. That such Christians who have not the present sense of Gods love, may have
future sense of Gods love; Gods love is never totally nor finally withdrawn
from his children; the suspensions of Gods favor are temporary, and God does
many times reserve great assurance unto after times: David in confidence of
this says, The Lord will command his loving kindness in the day time, and in
the night his song shall be with me, and my prayer unto the God of my life,
Psalm. 42. 8. Thus says the Church, He will bring me forth to the light, and I
shall behold his righteousness, Micah 7. 9. This is the reasoning of faith;
God has loving kindness and he can show it, and and will show it, I have
found him a very loving God unto my soul in times past, and why should I doubt
of future expectations;

Love one for kind different in degree
a more large and greater measure, and a larger and greater sense of that love
then others, according to the will and wisdom of God; I say it passes to the
sense with much variation, now the least assurance of divine love toward us
should be a great upholdment of our spirits under the want of much sense and
feeling of Gods love within us.

Ob. Yea, could I find any pledges of Gods love to me, then I could be
comforted and settled, but I fear that God did never love me?


Sol. Beloved, you see how scruple begets scruple, as wave does wave; and to
give a short 4. Signs of the former feelings of Gods love
answer unto this case, there are these signs of a man's former enjoyment of
Gods love?


1. Continued temptations about the love of God unto a man's self in
particular; and that not only in the times of affliction and hour of death,
but at such times when a Christian sets himself to try his own standing in
grace, and to settle himself in the assurance of Gods love unto him, I say the
more interest any man has into Gods love, the more spite shall he have from
Satan, and the more feeling any man has of divine love, the more shall such a
man be followed with strong suggestions, and horrible temptations drawn from
divine wrath, shall we imagine that if Satan hearing the proclamation from
heaven of Gods love to Christ, Mat. 3. 17. would notwithstanding seize upon
him, and tempe him to doubt of his Sonship and Fathers care and love, that now
any member of Christ in and under the assurance of Gods love shall be free from
his malicious molestations and hideous temptations? the devil hates where God
loves; and it is strange to behold how he not alyer and a murderer Job. 8. 44
from the beginning? is not his name the accuser of the Brethren before God day
and night? Revel. 12. 10. are not all the testimonies of Satan directly or
obliquely against the truth of God and comfort of Christians? tell me O
Christian, what is it hurtful or prejudicial to Satan if God do hate a man?
him whom God indeed does hate is the proper subject of Satan, and no wise
Prince will make war on his own subjects: conclude that were thou not in Gods
favor, Satan would let thee alone and not trouble thee in the settling, o^
under thy not feeling of his love unto thee.

2. Miserableness of soul under the want of the apprehension of divine love;
we now can grieve and grow sad because we fail of our once enjoyed feelings,
all cloudings and ecclipses in the assurance of divine love ar terrible to
Christians; the hiding of the Sun is discomfortable, and the withdrawments of
divine love is a cause of just trouble; men that never felt divine love, make
nothing of its absence; but to have it called back from one that has found and
felt it, it makes a sad and a dark day; it is impossible for thy soul of man
to be humblingly and sorrowfully sensible of the want of Gods love, but there
has been some former feelings of divine love within his soul, Psalm. 30. 5.

3. Risings of the desires after the sense and degrees of divine love; if a man
has tasted of Gods love unto him he shall find stirrings and longings in his
soul after further and greater sense; now says such a one, O that God would
shine forth in much love unto my soul; O that I could see his face as the face
of a reconciled God unto me; time was when I enjoyed his love and it was
better then wine; O that I could now enjoy it once more, then should my life
be full of comfort and content unto me; can true desires rise up after divine
love, if it were never formerly apprehended and felt by the soul? assuredly it
is, because there are some sparkles of Gods love in the soul that men do
eagerly and sincerely desire the same; Let him kiss me with the kisses of
Cant. 1. 2.
his mouth, for thy love is better then wine: the Church had found the love of
Christ to be better then wine, and hereupon she does desire him to kiss her.

4. Endeavors after the sense of Gods love; they that have once tasted of Gods
love in the enjoyment of it, are ready to maintain and hold it up within that
one day spent (though with much conflict of corruption and temptation) in the
true taste and sense of Gods love in Christ is far beyond all the
contentments which the world can afford; and if at any time they are at a
loss and do miss of their former feelings they give not off their hope and
diligence, but do set themselves into the ways of assurance, and will leave
no stone unrolled to get their former sense of love if it may be: whence does
this arise? is it not from some former touch of the soul by the love of God?
when Elijahs mantle was once cast upon Elisha, he could not but follow him;
and certain when Gods love has been seen and felt, a man shall follow on to
know more and more the ways of love.

The foundation stands in 2. things.


1. That all upright and believing persons have a loving God, who is the
fulness and fountain of love unto them, how ever their feelings and
apprehensions are of it; say, Yet God is good to Israel, and bears a Psalm. 77.
1.
loving heart to the upright; beloved, know that changes in us do not conclude
any change in God, he is a constant and unchangeable God in his love to his,
whom he once loves he Joh. 13. 2.
loves unto the end.

2. That Christians are saved because God loves them, not because they do
perceive and feel the love that God has toward them, our feeling makes to
comfort, but the being of love unto happiness.

CASE. II. Of doubtings arising and continuing in the soul.
THere are two sorts of Two sorts of men. 1. Men of no doubtings.
men that are of contrary opinions about the matters of doubtings; the one
concludes an unwarranted happiness unto themselves, because they find within
them selves a freedom from all doubts; they bless God that they never doubted
in all their lives; but have gone on always in a settled and peaceable way,
never scrupling or questioning their own present standing or future happiness;
a very strange temper from religion; for though doubtings be not the essence
of a Christian, yet he cannot be a sound and settled Christian that never
doubted; it cannot be but that such who in the state of nature did not fear to
sin, will when they are brought into the state of grace doubt of themselves
by reason of sin; would you not wonder at that man who should and yet never
to be weatherbeaten, or wind-shaken, or to be so simple as to doubt, for
certain this is nothing but presumption and selfe-deceiving; and I would wish
no man to bless himself in this estate.

The other doubts of his 2. Men of doubtings
estate because of doubtings; it is a maine part of Satan's policy to stagger
Gods children, and to cause the rising up of suspicions within themselves,
doubting whether that they are Christians, in the state of grace by reason of
the many doubtings that are found within them: O say they, we find within our
selves the suspension of our minds in the determination thereof; our souls
do hang between two objects, and unto The nature of doubtings
either of them they cannot fixedly incline; we find that there are at one
time two distinct and opposite ways, and objects and ends proposed and
presented unto our minds for choice, as to believe and not to believe, to be
saved and not to be saved, to do this and not to do this, to have heaven and
not to have heaven: and now it becomes questionable unto us, which of these two
is eligible, or which of these two shall befall us; the mind reflects upon
both, and looks upon both, yet one alone must be ours in the issue; our minds
do debate exceedingly and beat themselves about them, whether this or that;
this way or that way we shall go we know not; there are found within us at
the same time the assentings and dissentings of our minds; persuasions and
disswasions take hold of us, we are like unto the waves of the sea, that thrust
forth to the shore and yet drawing back again, or like unto men in ungrounded

1. Upon things to be believed Doubtings seen in two things.
and done, there are within us doubtings of the truth and goodness of the one,
or of the lawfullnesse and unlawfullnesse of the performance of the other; we
still halt between two opinions: if we look

2. Upon our own particular course and condition; whether that we are
Christians indeed, and be such whose persons are accepted of God, whose ways
do please God; who have any part in the Covenant, or just title to the best
things, and that when we die we shall go to Heaven; here likewise our hearts
do mis-give us and we daily question our own estates; And could this be our
condition if that we were in a good estate? This I confess is the trouble of
Gods dearest children, whose Doubtings in the godly cause 4. things.
minds within them are diversely carried, and cannot come to a rest, whose
minds do hang in suspense and cannot determine; this condition causes unto
them, 1. Multiplication of disputes, such persons have contrariety of
reasonings within themselves, reason can never be equally balanced, but
remains as a pair of scales turning this way and that way, such can say as
much why they should not do such and such duties as why they should do them;
and they conceive as many and as strong reasons why that they should be damned
as well as saved; 2. Interruption of the practical act of the understanding,
that it cannot give sentence either way for a man or against a man: so that men
under doubts remain under certain trouble and restlesnesse, but uncertain
quiet and relief, and know no more what to resolve on then he who has
referred himself and his cause unto the umperage of him, who will not as yet
declare himself.

3. Uproare in affections; they will be very tumultuous; passions by doubtings
are set on a hurley burley and rage exceedingly, now men fret and fear and
faint, and even vex themselves unto death. 4. Alterations and changes, men
under doubts are constant in inconstancy, and do never remain settled unto
themselves; they cannot be long of one mind; but as the weathercock does
turn with doubts should so perplexe him? Consider with me one thing more;
what it is that causes doubtings in the soul? and if we prove the springs or
causes to be evil and terrible, no marvel if that they are so troublesome
unto Christians: I open it thus unto you, Five cau ses of doubtings in
Christians.


Doubtings within Christians spring,

1. From original corruption, that sinning sin, and mother of all sin in
men, which has in it the seed of all sin, and therefore doubtings, nature it
self can nothing but doubt, flesh in the Elect is wavering and weak, even
when grace would believe and settle, innumerable evils have compassed me
about, mine iniquities have taken hold of me so that I am not able to look
up, they are more then the hairs of my head, therefore my heart fails me,
says David, Psalm. 40. 12. in which place you may see plainly what it was that
made David's heart to fail him, it was his sins, these were the clog unto his
spirit, and these were they that did stagger and doubt him.

Pro. 4. 18.
is uncertain and doubtful.



4. From the greatness of dangers into which they are cast; if Peter be ready
to sink in the sea he will doubt; O thou Mat. 14. 31.
of little faith wherefore did thou doubt? says Christ; we see how his
fears did sink him below the waters, and ^urely as a Christians troubles
(inward or outward) do arise, so do his doubtings arise also; the ship does
not more naturally arise

Ten relieveme^ts against doubtings in the mind.


But you will say unto me, what shall a Christian do for his settling that is
doubtful in mind? I shall yield unto you these helps following.

freedom from al doubts, whilst there is a devil to tempt, and Christians are
weak in judgment and experience, lying in the cradle of godliness, they may
be tossed too and fro and fall to questioning of their estate; there is no tree
so surely rooted Peter doubts, and the Disciples doubt, and the Christians
doubt, though they did not despair, Mat. 14. 31. 28. 17. 2 Cor. 4. 8. a man's
estate may be good, and his title current to God, and Christ, and Heaven, and
yet he may be irresolved, and troubled with many doubtings and that for a long
time together.

small portion of faith; it is not the absence of faith, but the littleness of
faith in them which is the ground of their doubtings; O thou of little faith,
wherefore did thou doubt? where we see that Christ does impute Peter's
doubting to the Littlenes of faith a ground of doubting and why?
littleness of his believing; I say that when faith is little in comparison,
and little in operation, this is the ground of doubting, for here wants
proportionable strength unto settling, and here men have too open an eye upon
their wants and discouragements, but a very dim eye to see their helps and
encouragements; in a word, here is a want of strength to repair to the means
of establishment, and a marvailous unskillfullnesse to argue from the promises,
and to maintain its own grounds; thus it is, as the less

One and the same person may believe and doubt and how?
faith, yet both may and do meet in the same person; actual doubtings may
be where is habitual faith, they are not answering parts one unto another,
for they remain in contrariety and opposition, nor things that are
simultaneous in their acts and operations; doubtings can no more consist at the
same time with the acts of faith, then its possible that a man should lay his
hand on the rock and not lay his hand on the rock at the same time, or that a
man's eye should see and not see the color at the same time; the soul cannot
at the same time set out from the same faculty opposite acts: and it cannot be
that while the soul does believe it should doubt.

A caution
and doubtings must not conclude a nullity of grace and faith within
themselves, God forbid that we should think our field had no corn because of
many

Peter's doubting did not put him out of the rank of believers; Christ does not
say to him, O thou of doubting, thy faith is little; but he Mat. 14. 31.
gives him this title, OF thou of little faith; God judges of his according to
their better part, and if he find a little grace among many corruptions, he
calls us according unto the grace.

Sixthly, there must be care taken to distinguish doubtings in Christians from
doubtings that are found in unregenerate men; most true it is, that the same
disease of doubting is incident unto good and bad, it is corruption in both, it
being a sin for any to doubt; yet it is as true, that doubting stands
differingly in the godly from the wicked in these respects:

1. In the godly there is doubting against a temper and frame directly opposite
unto doubtings; doubtings in them do hold an opposition against faith and
persuasion wrought in the soul; faith in nature and Doubting a nature and an
infirmity.
act is opposite to doubting in nature and act; they have two springs or causes
in the soul of man; it is impossible that the doubtings of the godly should
spring from their spiritual frame and temper; grace does not begin or cherish
doubtings in any, it forbids to doubt and commands to believe; it grieves at
doubting and thirsts after settling, so that they stand as infirmities in the
godly, not as a nature; in unregenerate men doubtings are a nature and of their
entire constitution; doubtings are begotten and bred up in them by a nature
that is wholly sinful and doubtful.

2. In the godly doubtings are subdued in their power, by reason of conversion
and Sanctification, wherein this as well as all other sins receives it
deaths wounds; the life and trouble of doubts only remain Doubtin in combat
and in conquest.
in the godly, interrupting them in the great work of believing, for were not
faith assaulted by the stirrings of doubtings within, it would do its part
most gloriously, but now as a man that has a maimed leg cannot moove as he
desires, no more can Christians believe as they would, by reason of doubtings
which do cross them; but this is all that doubtings can do in the godly,
they can molest, but never command; their powers are crushed, and faith rises
up victoriously over all at the last; now in wicked men doubtings reign and
have sovereign authority.

3. In the godly doubtings are partial; it is of the subject, not of the
object, in action, not Doubtings 1. Partial. 2. Entire.
affection, of evidence, not adherance, of the circumstantialls, not
substantialls; it is thus with Christians, that though in many passages they
cannot be certainly persuaded that they are good and right, yet in many other
things they are settled and resolved; whereas doubtings in wicked men are total
and entire, it is all doubting and that in all things.

4. In the godly doubtings turn unto their profit, God for very good ends does
suffer Ends of doubtings in the godly four.
doubtings in his, as 1. To free them from many sins of pride, presumption,
negligence and the like: 2. To force them to their divine helps, that now they
may the more enquire and seek resolution and settling from Heaven. 3. To make
them more firm and certain Nil tam certum quam quod ex dubio certum.
fixednesse, a scholar by enquiry gets satisfaction, and a Christian by his
doubtings comes to be more resolved; all our doubtings end in resolution: God
will give unto his at the last full satisfaction of soul and conscience.

5. In the Elect all doubtings are curable and recoverable, they are possible
of cure, and shall actually be cured in Gods time by Gods means; the Lord does
mercifully heal his of all the tossings and turnings of their minds, that at
length they come to rest upon the mountain of his truth and goodness unto
them in Christ; there is an excellent temper toward yet they will with Noah's
Dove hover over the Arc, which is Christ and the Promises, the only and able
grounds of steadfastness and settling unto Christians.

The doubtings of wicked men are possible of curing, if we consider what God
by his power can do; but yet they remain uncured by the justice of God lying
upon them, and do go on increasing doubtings unto their own damnation; so
that in the one, doubtings are miserable, but in the other damnable.

Seventhly, beware of maintaining and cherishing doubtings within your own
souls: it is for Christians to labor after the cure of this disease of
doubting, and to close up this spiritual distemper within their souls,
considering Motives to cure doubtings are three
1. That doubting is an ill quality in the soul, that breeds unto much
discomfort, depriving of all true staidness and contentment; 2. It is that
which is very hindersome to a progress in Christianity, keeping Christians at
a stay and standing, and 3. There is nothing which is more injurious to God in
his Attributes, who must not be questioned in his promised Power, Truth, Love
and Goodness; and yet we find this to be a common failing in doubting
Christians, to cherish and nourish doubtings within themselves, yea, and many
times to study and follow the way of doubting; a great and cruel evil most
grateful unto Means against cherishing doubts.
Satan, and displeasing to God: my counsel therefore is unto you

1. To make and maintain no argument within you against the full and gracious
promises of God; delight not in that childish and unreasonable kind of
disputation which may hurry the soul with fears and doubtings, helping doubts
against faith; if men will thrust away the promises from themselves, and say,
that though there be an absolute truth and goodness in them, yet their truth
and goodness does not belong unto them, how can the soul possibly settle and
be quiet; can more can a Christian resolve and settle if it plead against the
promises.

2. Believe no testimony of Satan concerning your conditions; I know Satan
will take upon him to judge of Christians sins and services, and temper and
state, and as he has an art to color over the true condition of sinful
bondage, so he has a delusion in hiding from the eyes of Christians the true
powers of gracious sincerity and safe standing; now if we look upon things in
the devils glass, believing that all things are in us and with us as he does
tell us, how shall we be tossed too and fro, and what can abide us but daily
doubtings? for Satan will always be deciding and determining against a
Christians comfort and happiness, he being their utter enemy; it does well
become us to wave the erroneous judgment of Satan,

1. By making our appeals The testimony of Satan put by two ways.
unto God the Just and Supreme Judge, to whom immediately and only the
decisive power does appertain, I say none but God can decide the trial of a
man's eternal estate.

2. By resting in the testimony of Gods Word; we must learn the skill of
beating of Satan by the Word, setting up the judgment of the Word against the
judgment of Satan; and if we can find from the Word a good estate, let Satan
go and whistle, we need in nothing be troubled by him.

3. Be not apt to give way unto needless and causeless fears; this is a
great fault in Christians, and very injurious unto settling; you shall seldom
find but that an overfearing nature is a doubting nature, and if we will give
way unto the creating and multiplying of our fears, we shall feed and nourish
scruples and doubtings exceedingly; consider it in experience, if that a child
be hurt, or any undesired news brought unto us of the sickness, or calamity
of a near and dear friend, the heart is presently grieving and fearing, and
when fears prevail and command within, then the mind is full of
questionings, sure the wound is mortal, and my friend is dead, or in far
worse condition then is reported unto me, and alas what will be the issue?
the party is extremely cruciated in his mind, and just so is it in the case
in hand, if that men will still fear their estate, how can they but still
continue under doubtings, and be as it were at their wits end, not knowing
what to do or what shall become of themselves.

4. Do not disregard motions and motives unto setlednesse; there are many who
come to Gods Word and Ministers with their doubtings, and with many tears and
bitter complaints they vent themselves of them, now when the Minister has
judicially showed unto them not only the causes but the cures of those their
doubtings, and has given unto them curing comfort and counsel, they set up
their reasons against all that is said, and conceive the man to be mistaken in
them; or else they forget the consolation, not applying themselves to the way
prescribed; and surely long may such continue under a doubting condition who
reject all directions given unto them.

constant bottom to settle upon; observe the uncertainty of this life of sense
in Thomas; the man would not believe that Christ was risen, except he should
see in his hands the print of the nails, and thrust his hand into his side,
Ioh. 20. 21. Say now that Christ had for ever withdrawn his bodily presence
from Thomas, where had been all those sweet comforts which he might have
enjoyed in and by the resurrection of Christ? certainly he had lost them for
ever, if sense must be his judge and give the sentence; Christ therefore does
show him his weakness and failing, in saying to him, Thomas, Blessed are they
that have not seen and yet have believed, verse 29. you that will have all by
sight and feeling, or else you will never be quiet, I tell you

1. That sense is not a fit judge of a Christians spiritual condition; it
cannot at all times see into our estates, much less report our estate unto us,
the spiritual Psalm. 73. 28.
condition may be without all feeling; eyes may fail, and flesh fail, and God
frown, and faith only express such acts as are pure and hidden, grounding it
self upon the naked promise, and how can sense report and give sentence.

2. That sense is yea and nay, it makes our condition to be good and bad,
lost and found, and that many times in one day nay in one hour, and all
because it looks on the outside of things, judging according to outward
appearance; I yield that it is uncomfortable for a man to walk without his
feeling, but it is as uncertain to walk altogether by feeling.

3. That the spiritual course of Christians does many times go against all
the sense of Christians; sense and the promise are many times at a
contradiction; the promise goes on when sense cannot perceive it, but behold
the contrary; and how can sense meeting with contrarieties resolve?

4. That sense goes man's way, but faith goes Gods way; sense mooves upon what
appears, and takes Gods deed, whereas faith relyeth upon Gods Word, and
pitcheth upon things invisible; I will wait upon the Lord that hides his face
from the house of Jacob, and I will look for him, Esa. 8. 17. to this purpose
read Esa. 50. 10. Hab. 3. 17, 18.

after ye believed you were sealed, says Paul, Ephesians. 1. 13. a man cannot
have the fruit before he has the tree, nor safety before he has laid
himself on the rock; nor assurance before he believes; look as the soul

1. The first ground of all a Christians assurances and experiences, if any man
has either in his soul he obtained them by faith.

2. The prime instrument bringing home the comfort of all divine good unto the
soul, the joy of Heaven, merit of Christ, and favor of God cannot actually
comfort and quiet man's heart until that faith has done its part.

Faith at liberty and in authority does compose a Christians doubtings, keeping
him from sinking under them, two ways;

1. By yielding a ground for setlednesse; all the while the soul can find and
feel no bottom, it cannot but doubt and stagger; can the ship but roll up
and down when the Mariner cannot find a place to fix his anchor? but when a
man can find in and by believing the truth and goodness of a promise to rest
upon, and can say as David, Remember the Psalm. 119. 49.
word unto thy servant upon which thou have caused me to hope, now is he
resolved and become quiet; I believed and therefore I spoke, and what reason is
there that a man should doubt his safety when he is once fully set upon the
rock?

2. By overmatching all the causes and grounds of doubtings imagined by
Christians; Christians doubt many times when as they have little reason to
doubt; and sometimes they think their reasons for their doubtings are
unanswerable; but faith prevailing will put the lie and folly upon all that can
be said for doubting, it will shame and silence the foolish reasonings of the
hearts of Gods children; you may see this in David; when his thoughts ran
wild upon the prosperities of wicked men, and the adversities of Gods children,
how did his doubts come in upon him, even to his sinking, he says, Verily I
have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in innocence, for all the
day long I have been plagued: but how does he recover himself? Surely it was
by the exercise and liberty of his faith, he went into the house of God, and
there his faith found matter and ground to work upon, and he became better
settled in his soul, Psalm. 73. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. and truth it is, that every
thing appears in all causes of fear, when faith is not the master and cannot
have full power to be agent and factor for a Christian; Believe in the Lord
your God and you shall be established, 2 Chronicles. 20. 20.

If iniquity be in thine hand, put it far away, and let not wickedness
dwell in thy tabernacles; for then shall thou lift up thy face without spot,
yea thou shall be steadfast, and shall not fear, Job ^^. 14, 15. where we
plainly see, that the more sin does die in its love and power within the
soul, the more will doubtings die too; kill sin, and faith lives, and doubts
vanish; The Apostle would that men should draw near with a true heart in
assurance Heb. 10. 22.
of faith, (i. e.) to cast away doubtings in their approaches to God, and not
to come indifferently, may be I shall be accepted, may be I shall not, but
as verily persuaded of Gods acceptance; happily some Christian might say to
him, how might a man do this? (he answers) having the heart sprinkled from
an evil conscience, q. d. faith cannot well persuade, nor the heart settle
till you get quit of sin, if your consciences do charge and condemn you of
evil, you will be doubtful, truth it is, that doubtings are cured by
Mortification, the heart must be circumcised of its unbeleeving and hardness
and ungodliness ere ever we shall get quit of doubtings; if we resolve to
be evil, we must resolve to be doubtful, were it not for sinnefullnesse
faith would be quicker and stronger, and we more settled and stayed in our
minds, a heavy rhume falling into the eyes does hinder a man from looking up;
and sin entertained in the soul reares up contrary reasonings and denials to
faith, making the encouragements of it to be so difficult, that a Christian
spirit does fail him, and he shall not be able to look up, Psalm. 40.12.

CASE. III. Of personal unworthiness.
IT has not a little troubled the minds of many of Gods dear children to
consider what unworthy creatures they are in themselves, and that they are so
ill deserving at Gods hands, having no more goodness in them to commend them
to Gods acceptance and love; we find them many times complaining, and that
with much grief of heart that they have nothing in them but sin and
wickedness, and how should God ever accept such as they are to love and life
under the presence of their unworthiness? they stand in their own light,
Satan hereby taking advantage against them; This I find to be a maine
masterpiece of Satan's cunning: that before a man is convinced of sin, he
makes him so full, and rich, and worthy, that he cares not for the merits of
Christ, or the mercy of God, he will not beg, but buy a place in heaven;
Laodicea was rich, and increased with goods, and had need of nothing, not
knowing that she was wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked,
Rev. 3. 17. The Corinthians did so shine in their own opinions, and were in
such self credit, that they were rich and full reigning as kings; but when a
man's eyes are opened to see the sinnefullnesse of his sins, then he makes
him very poor, and his unworthiness to be such and so great, that it is not
for him to think of heaven, or mercy, or Christ; a great temptation, under
which lies lurking a white devil. To relieve the soul in this case, I shall
propound these few considerations.

1. That if unworthiness were a sufficient ground to keep men of from divine
favor and eternal happiness, none of all the sons of men could ever be
saved, for all have sinned, and by sin made themselves unworthy of mercy.

2. That there is no subjective worthiness antecedently required unto
justification and salvation; God well knew the unworthy condition of Israel
when he made them his people, entering into the Covenant of life and peace
with them, Ezekiel. 16. can you conceive that there was any inherent worthiness
in them that did lie weltring in their own blood? beggars are not worthy of
alms, traitors are not worthy of pardons, nor sinful men worthy of Christ or
mercy, Luke 15. 21. and why should we dream of having a requisite worthiness
of our own? if man had any thing in him, he were altogether unfit to come in
unto the free offer of grace; we see the invitation is made to the monie-lesse
and merit-lesse Christian, Esa. 55. 1.

3. That though worthiness be not in the stream, yet it is in the fountain;
and though there be no subjective worthiness in men, yet there is an
objective worthiness in Jesus Christ, which is tendered to sinners by grace,
and accepted by faith; there is enough in Christ to make our persons lovely and
acceptable to God, without whom, if we had all selfe-worthinesse, we should
remain in Gods eyes most unworthy persons; This is my beloved Son in whom I
am well pleased, says the Father, Mat. 3. 17.

4. That notwithstanding man's own great unworthiness, Assurances for
acceptance under unworthines.
there is enough to assure him of divine acceptance; for

First, Mercy in God is full and free, it has enough in it self to incline it
self to gracious pardons, and favorable acceptances; God does blot out
transgressions, not for man's sake, but for his own sake, Esa. 43. 25.

Secondly, man's chiefest selfe-worthinesse is to see his own unworthiness,
and to be humbled for it; certainly, such Esa. 64. 6. Luke 15. 21.
as have base and low esteems of themselves, and can dwell upon the guilt and
merit of their own sinnefullnesse, judging themselves to hell for it; such
Phil. 3. 7.
as can (with Paul) disclaim from all worth in themselves, and do see in all
their parts, and gifts, and performances an inability to engratiate them with
God; such as can in the best of conditions, and after the best of performances,
bewail their weak expressions of duty, acknowledging themselves to be most
unprofitable Luk 17. 10.
servants, needing the mercy of a God and the merit of Christ; these I say are
men of the greatest worthiness with God; according to the old truth, he paies
best for Heaven that sees he has nothing at all to pay for Heaven.

Thirdly, an unworthy sinner may plead out the Covenant of grace with God, and
the freeness of the tenders of his mercy; I know no man that can or does more
admire and magnify divine mercy, then a sinner truly sensible of his own
unworthiness; I know none more desirous of mercy then such; I know none will
be more ready to accept of Heaven and favor out of freeness of grace then
such; I know none to whom the offer of salvation purchased by Christ is made
but such; and what now does hinder them from coming in unto God, pleading with
him after this or the like manner. Gracious Lord, I am here before thee for
mercy, and for thy Christ, I see in my self nothing worthy thee or thy Christ;
for I am wholly sinful; if thou now wilt receive me for thine own, and
pardon me my sins out of thine own free grace, and for the merit of thine
only Son alone, thou shall show thy self a gracious God indeed; O Lord that
which draws me in unto thee for grace, is thine own free grace; thou gave
me the word and hope of comfort, and therefore I durst not stand out; Lord,
lo here I am before thee, without all confidence in my self; O let it be
unto me according to the freeness and richness of thy mercy, refuse me not
though I am unworthy to be called thy son.

5. That too much standing on selfe-unworthinesse, is many times an argument of
secret pride, and opinion of merit; men would feign be some body with God, and
do something for Heaven; Lord how willing is man to have a finger in his own
salvation, and to be at the least a co-adju^or with Christ in the office of his
Redemption; when as in truth it is mercy alone that must do all, and such are
most in the way of comfort that refer their spiritual condition unto mercy,
setting up and advancing the free favor of God as the only cause of their
spiritual estate, 1 Cor. 15. 10. tell me sadly and seriously thou troubled
soul, if thou had more goodness in thee, if thy graces were more perfect in
thee, and thy services had been or could be better performed by thee, then
thy hopes and assurances could and would rise within thee, then thou could
have confidence and settlement within thee? yes, and what is this I pray thee,
but the spice of pride and secret dependence on merit? what will thou look
upon thy self, and within thy self, and draw out principles of salvation from
thy self? how art thou only beholding to grace and to Christ for thy
salvation when thou thus porest and priest into thy self? if thou will be a
cause of thine own good, thou must be a ground of thine own glory, and if
thou will bring thy penny, thou will make thy self joint purchaser with
Christ; tell me O Christian, had thou all thy desired qualifications, would
they or can they equal the favor of God? and durst thou to stand upon this so
as to build thy eternal welfare on it? be persuaded out of this vain and
empty conceit of thine, and cease further to perplexe thy soul under the
thoughts of thine unworthiness, God indeed looks not out of himself in the
acts of his mercy, but man must look wholly upon God, and no way upon himself
if he intend to be saved and enjoy mercy.

CASE. IIII. Of imperfection and littleness of faith and other graces.
SUch as are men of grace in truth, would be men of grace in perfection, no
present measures can content such; a sweet and blessed temper, and if it were
rightly regulated, it would work to Christians much comfort, and free their
minds of much trouble; but thus it comes to pass, that Christans do much
trouble their minds with the degrees Littlenes of grace apprehended.
and measures, operations and actions of their graces received; they either
comparing themselves with others interessed in the same graces with themselves,
and observing that others do excel them by far, so as no comparison can be
made between them; or else they looking into themselves do find their graces
beset with many corruptions, that they can discern much more sin in them
then grace, that it is in a manner all naught within them; in a word, they
finding the pulse of grace beating slowly within; their faith and patience
unactive and in a manner idle within them; This I say gives them occasion to
question their condition, now surely they are not right and sound, for that
they are more imperfect in their graces then others, they go not forward and
increase in their graces as others do; O the eye of their faith is dim, and
does but darkely apprehend the promises of God, they do many times discern
the promises with mistakings; fulness and setlednesse of apprehension is
wanting in them; they cannot come off their carnal reasonings and self
disputations, yielding firmness and entirenesse of assent unto the truth of
Gods promises as they ought to do, their minds are not yet so settled, that
all is yea and Amen that is spoken by God in the promises unto them; they often
say within themselves, has God indeed said this and this? and may a man rely
upon the word of his promise? they cannot cast anchor so as it shall fasten;
they see the shore but cannot reach it, and they see Christ and the promises,
but cannot apply them, there is an interruption and suspension of the acts of
application; as for the persuasions of faith in them, they are small or none at
all, they cannot say that God is their God, and Christ their Christ, and this
they make to be their death and burden, under which estate we shall show you
that Christians have not so much cause of creating Ten releevements to the
soul under imperfection of grace.
perplexities to themselves as many times they do; consider with me,

1. That a little grace is better then no grace; it is the want of grace that
is damnable, and may cause a man to close up against himself all assurance and
settlement; tell me O Christian, would thou change thy poor condition in
grace for the greatest graceless condition in the world? will thou part from
that grace thou have for any or all the seeming pleasures of sin? I dare say
thou would not, then be quieted in thy mind, and do not foolishly argue
the nullity of a gracious condition from the imperfection of thy graces.

2. That a little grace requires a great deal of thanks, it coming from the
God of all grace and being an argument of sound sanctification; shall I say
that it is not the way of thankfulness to make little of any divine mercy;
we are too little for the least measure by reason of our unworthiness; and we
do not well to undervalew the least proportion and gift of grace.

3. That which one man makes little unto himself, would be a great deal with
many other Christians; we find in experience, that the rich man's complaint
would be the poor man's content; many poor souls could well feast themselves
with the fragments that come from their tables, when as they do foolishly and
proudly complain of want; just so it is with many Christians, they tell us that
grace is weak and small in them, when other Christians reasoning with them,
and hearing them complain, do bless God for their estate in grace, and would
be exceeding glad were they in their condition of grace.

4. That men of no grace are never troubled and truly humbled about smallness
and weakness of grace, the eyes of such are not yet opened to see their
spiritual wants.

5. That little grace is an argument of grace in the soul; a little man is a
man, and a little faith is faith; grace in truth has a being in weakness it
self, and though it be in the lowest measures, there the soul has an
interest in God, in Christ, in the promises and in heaven, little faith can and
does lay hold of great things, and prooves unto Christians a great assurance.

6. Little grace is a creature of God which he will not despise or forsake;
Does God despise Zach 4. 10.
the day of small things? will any tender mother cast off her babe because it
is weak? and shall we imagine that God will not accept according to that a man
has, be it never so little? Christians be persuaded that grace in truth
though never so small is for acceptance.

7. Little grace will do much, it many times does that in and for Christians
under weakness that all the world cannot do for them, it is their light in
darkness, their life in death, and their upholdment from sinking; the widows
little oil and little meal went a great way, God blessing it; and thus it is
with little grace, it will carry a man thorough the whole world and do mighty
things for him; the great advantages of a little grace is unspeakable.

8. That grace in weakness is made for strength, and grace in littleness is
fitted for increase, our graces pass from imperfection to perfection, and from
weakness unto strength; Gods strength being made perfect 2 Cor. 12. 9.
in man's weakness; weakness does both call in and set out the glory of divine
assistance: consider, that he who has most grace has not all he should have,
and he who has least in grace has not all that he would have, both measures
are rising up unto greater perfections; little grace is in a state of growth,
and in and by the use of means it is enlarged, as we may see in Nicodemus and
all newborn Christians, whose growth is much in parts and powers of their
graces: they have risen from small beginnings to most admirable perfections.

9. That gifts of Sanctification and appertaining unto men's salvation are
different and unequal, grace is alike in nature, but not alike in measure in
all; the different standings of Christians in Christianity and grace, is set
out unto us both in the comparisons and appellations of them in Scripture; they
are compared to branches, stars, sheep, and the members of the body; we
read of men, and babes, fathers, and children; all men be not of one stature,
nor all trees of one growth, nor all Christians of equal grace; to some is
given a greater, to others a lesser measure of grace; grace in one is much and
strong, in another little and weak, sincere in both, but absolutely perfect in
none; Note with me two things. Graces are two ways considerable.


1. That all degrees of Christians do agree together 1 Quaad esse and habitum
in the substantial part of grace, every man has the same spirit of
holiness, knowledge, faith, repentance, love, etc. is alike in them all,
flowing from one and the same common fountain.

2. That the varying of 2. Quoad operari and exercitium
Christians is much in the active part of grace, they may have their several
agilities, so as one man may know more then another, one man may pray more
fervently and frequently then another, and so is it in the rest of all required
duties; meethinkes that it is with Christians in this case as it is with men in
nature; every man those faculties, yet every man is not equal in the
expressive ways of nature.

But you will querie, whence A question about the causes of inequality of
measures and operations of graces in Christians
does this inequality of graces and holy operations arise?

I answer, not from nullity and falsenesse of grace, as weak Christians do
surmise; but

1. From the wise dispensation of God, who gives grace to every man according
to his own good will and pleasure, and follows his own measures with the
same proportion of assistance.

2. From the variety of particular occasions; every Christian has not alike
forcible occasion to exercise his graces given him.

3. From the variety of particular ends; God intends some Christians for some
singular end and services to which he fits them by the great improovement and
use of their graces.

4. From the variety of particular assistance; every man has not at all times
an equal gale or breath of the Spirit to enlighten, affect, excite, and draw
them onward.

5. From the variation of natural tempers; bodily constitution conduces much
to the actions of the soul.

6. From the sinfullnesse and carelessness of some Christians above others,
when as thorough the conceit of the eminency of their graces, they do swell
with pride, when they cannot be thankful for graces and abilities formerly
received, when their imaginations are mean of graces bestowed, they thinking
that they will not serve turn to their salvation; in a word, when they are
inconstant in duties and do not stir up the graces in them, wisely watching
the motions of the Spirit, and improoving the seasons of grace; this is the
thing which occasioneth the inequality spoken of.

10. That no man misseth of Heaven for want of measures, but for want of the
truth of grace, I grant a Christians consolation lies much in the comparative
degree, but his salvation is in the positive degree of grace, though one
Christian cannot believe as strongly as another, yet believing he shall be
saved as well as another; littleness and greatness of grace do agree in
saving issue; a weak and a soar eye in the Israelites did behold the brazen
Serpent to health as well as a sound and clear eye, the hand of a little
child can lay hold of a precious Jewel given unto it; just so is it here,
difference in proportion and in operation of graces may stand with truth of
grace and assurance of Heaven, one man rides faster then another, yet both meet
at length in the same Inn; one ship makes more speed then another, yet both
put in at the same harbor; and one Christian has more grace and does more
duty then another, yet both shall meet in one Christ and Heaven.

CASE. V. Of failings in duties.
WHen Christians do look upon their services public or private which they
do perform unto God, they find many failings, especially in the manner of
their performance; Lord with what dullness and deadness and distraction of
spirit do Christians pray, and hear, and meditate, and humble themselves etc.
upon this do many Christians mis-judge themselves, concluding against their
selfesincerity and souls comfort; now nothing is well done by them, and why
should they pray and read, and hear, and receive Sacraments any more; it is
but sin that they do, and it will but increase their judgment, this is a
bitter and most desperate remptation, and once given way unto, it does lead a
man far into sin and trouble, for when once a man takes exceptions against
himself for doing duties, that he will put himself out of the way of duty,
how easily does he make himself a prey unto Satan?

To the releevement of the soul under this burden, I shall Five setlings
against failings in duties.
yield you these meditations following.

1. That the best of Gods servants have been, are, and may be indisposed in
holy duties; though the spirit of Peter be willing, yet the flesh was weak,
Mat. 26. 41.
and there being contrary lustings of the flesh against the Spirit, a Christian
cannot do the things he would; O how does flesh clog and dull the best of Gods
Saints? there is within them a living spring without a lively operation; the
spring I say is open, but the operation narrow, so as it is with them in the
manner of their performing duties, as it is with a sick man, he would feign

2. That there is a wide difference between a heart that is dead unto duty,
and a dull and indisposed heart in duty; a dead heart wants a living spring and
is contrary unto all duty; as it falls off from duty, so it gives it self an
allowance and dispensation in the same, and can and does find no trouble within
it self under all non-performances of duties; whereas a Christian under all
his unevenesse in duties, has an inward intention and inclination unto duties,
such men in their dullest times and greatest indispositions see not more duties
then they would do, and are grieved because they cannot do duties in a more
lively and spiritual manner; such stand up from the dead and are ready for
divine emploiment; there is a praying spirit in them; so as they can say with
Paul, the good Romans 7. 19.
that I would I do not.

There are two evidences when the bent of a man's heart is for duties in a
living and right way.

First, when a heavy kind of performing duties is displeasing and contrary
unto the frame of the soul and spirit of a man; such men set upon duties
sorrowfully, and perform duties with fear, and rise from duties humbled,
greatly blaming themselves for the heaviness and distraction of spirit which
they observe to be in themselves.

Secondly, when the desires are rising out of the state of indisposition, such
men easily fasten upon the ways of quickening and bettering themselves in duty,
expecting that they may be shaken out of their fits of dullness: I dare say
that such men will read the more, and pray the more, and hear the more,
hoping to find some help in the use of the ordinances and performances of
duties, they have heard and do find it to be true, that frequencie in

3. That when a Christian cannot do duties with that life he should and would
do, yet he may do them with much sincerity and uprightness of heart, and in
a far different way from a formal and carnal Christian; I yield unto this,
that an hypocrite who has a name to live may talk much of duty and may mount
high into the visible duties of holiness, applying himself to many religious
actions; the Jews were not failing in their services and sacrifices, and
solemn assemblies; but yet they came short of sincerity, and so all was lost
labor unto them.

You may ask me what is Seven differences betvveene an hypocrite and a
Christian in doing duties
the difference betwixt an hypocrite and a sincere Christian in doing duties?

I answer, it is much every way; which may be seen in seven things.

First, a Christian does perform all duties by the power of spiritual life
wrought within his soul, he prays, and believes, and reads, and hears in
the Spirit by virtue of the working of the Spirit; the principle of life in the
soul is sufficient to it self to act required duties, it needs not altogether
those natural and accidental helps which false Christians must have to set
them on work; the bird flies in the air from a principle of life and motion in
himself, whereas a clock being

Secondly, a Christian is more general or universal in the performance of
duties then any hypocrite can be; he sets himself to duties of every kind,
even those of the highest nature and excellency; duties required admit of a
distinction, there are the greater and the lesser things of the Law; there are
some duties which strike at the quick and call for strictness, such as are
self-denial sinnes-mortification, the sanctifying of God in a man's thoughts,
desires, and speeches in all the conditions of life; some duties there are
which are exceeding high and climbing, as believing in God and in Christ, and
keeping the conversation in Heaven; to conclude, there are ordinary and
extraordinary duties, public and private duties, costly and painful duties,
and all these the spirit of soundness is for, Christians are ready to act all
as well as one duty of holiness; look which way duty (whose latitude is much,
and parts many) divides it self, thither they dispose themselves, that as
water will run in all prepared channels, so a Christian follows all
required duties, whereas hypocrisy does duties with partiality and delicacie,
it severs and divides duties, it will be upon this, but not on that duty, and
is neither whole nor lively in any duty; and no marvel, for as waters cannot
rise higher then

Thirdly, a Christian does act spiritual duties spiritually, in the purpose
and resolution of his heart he does empty himself of flesh and corruption
(which will be creeping into duty) as much as may be; such an one undertakes
no duty, but with selfe-examination and soule-humiliation for sin committed and
remaining within, such follow the Law of the spirit, exercising all vouchsafed
graces in the performance of duties; Christians indeed do hear and pray with
much knowledge, faith, fear, humility, etc. and by reason of the performance
of the duty they become more spiritual; I say a Christian in duty is another
man from what he is at other times, such heavenly raptures and
soule-ravishments do befall him, that in a manner he feels no world, no
place, no time; whereas a formal Christian is a base and mixed metal,
formality leads him into duties carnal, keeps him in duties carnal, and
brings him off from duties not only carnal, but much more sinful and
profane then he was before.

Fourthly, a Christian does perform duties encreasingly; his desires are such
and so great unto duty, that he cannot give himself any satisfaction in doing
duties; his spirit within him is like unto leaven which is of a rising nature,
or to the grain of mustard seed which was of a spreading nature; the soul will
be carried with vehement desire of bettering it self in duty, and performing
more and more duty unto God, nay it rises in duty against opposition, that as
a living spring does David's spring at sometimes did but drop gently, at other
times it did run freely and fully, whereas the hypocrite keeps him in a circle
or compass, he is confined and limited, and is much like unto artificial
bodies incapable of extension; restings and sufficits overtake such men, and if
there be any swellings in duties, it is not from an incorporated principle of
grace which is within as a feeding spring, but from some external reason and
influence; there may be the rising of waters in a pond by

Fifthly, a Christian exercises himself in spiritual duties chearefully,
such do spiritual actions pleasingly, as with willingness of heart, so with
gladness of heart; it is meat and drink and recreation unto them to perform
spiritual duties, Exodus 35. 29. Psalm. 100. 2. Psalm. 110. verse. 3. Ephesians. 6. 5,
6. whereas hypocrisy is of a Bearish nature, slow to the duty; it is moved,
it mooves not it self; to a formal heart 1. Spiritual duties are grievous
and tedious, and though something be done, yet it is with secret weariness,
reluctancie, and unwillingnesse, there are many objections raised up against
duties, and many cases and questions which must be answered and resolved before
such can set on to duty. 2. The closing up of spiritual duties is very
pleasing and delightful, the Lord knows that as in his heart he wishes
there were no time nor duties belonging to God, so he is glad of a sudden
release from all duties, the shorter the Sermon and the shorter the prayers the
more pleasing, such is the incongruity of spiritual services with carnal
hearts, and if that any joy and delight be in them at all, it is but false and
vanishing.

Sixthly, a Christian does perform duties constantly; such men have
everlasting spirits in serving God, and though there may be pawses and certain
cessations by reason of some intervenient accidents, yet a total and final
cessation in duty cannot overtake Christians; grace in truth never dies unto
duty, but holds out unto the very last in believing, obeying, and praying,
whereas an hypocrite according to his false and vanishing principles is mutable
and inconstant in duty; according to that speech, Will Job 27. 10
the hypocrite delight himself in the Almighty? will he always call upon
God? sometimes he may do it, but at all times he neither can nor will pray.

Seventhly, a Christian does act all required duties discreetly and wisely; I
mean with the observation of the rules and requisites and methods which
wisdom it self does declare unto men in and for the performance of duties;
such will principally do those duties which are suitable and proper to
themselves and falling in their relations and conditions, and that within their
own orb, whereas hypocrisy wanders from its own nest, and does prey abroad
in other men's families, but not at home in their own families; such will
manage duties mooving on-ward in a just proportion; they spend not all the time
in duties of faith, and duties of charity alone, but so do one act of
godliness that they may do another also, one business does not put by
another with them, as it does with hypocrites, who in doing of some duties
hinder themselves in other; in a word, such are seasonable in doing duties;
though no time be unseasonable for Christian duties, yet all duties must not
be performed at all times; Christians must hear when God requires them to
hear, and pray when God requires them to pray, Psalm. 1. 3.
they must bring forth all their fruit in the season of it; whereas the service
of hypocrisy is fruit out of season, such as are formal will be coming to
Church when others are going from Church, they will pray when they should
hear, and read when they should pray, which makes their service the
sacrifice of fools, Eccles. 5. 1.

4. That in the doing of Christian duties the bent of the heart is both
observed and accepted of God; you cannot forget the counsel of David unto
Solomon, Know thou the God of thy Father, and serve him with a perfect heart
and a 1 Chronicles. 28. 9.
willing mind, for the Lord searches all hearts, and understands all the
imaginations of the thoughts, if thou seek him he will be found of thee: out
of which place we gather, that God does behold the heart in duty; and him that
prepares his heart to seek him, though he be not cleansed according to the 2 Chronicles. 30, 19, 20.
purification of the Sanctuary shall be accepted with him; view well the
sincerity of your performances, and let it cheer you against your weaknesses.

5. That Christians under weakness of performances, must have an eye unto
Christ who appears for them in Heaven, presenting all services done unto the
acceptance of his Father; learn to know, that what we cannot do perfectly,
Christ did it for us, his active obedience being imputed to us, and though
duties come from us in much weakness, yet Christ makes up our duties as well
as our persons; a sincere heart must act duties, a gracious God must accept
duties, a mighty Redeemer must present duties, the Angel had a golden Censor
and much Rev. 8. 3.
incense that he should offer it with the prayers of the Saints upon the golden
altar; we know that the acceptance of a Christians best services is in Christ
alone, and it is no life in our duties that can make them meritorious with God,
yea and it is no impotency in duties which can cause God to reject them, if we
by faith betake our selves to Christ; In Christ there is sufficiency of merit
to cover all our selfe-blamed indispositions, and to gain the acceptance of
all our sincere, though weak performances.

CASE. VI. Of fruitless endeavors.
MAn looks for wages when he has done his work; and if duty and service
prove successelesse that he find no return or recompense at all, this is
not a little grieving and sadding unto the Spirit; we hear Christians thus
complaining, I have along time waited upon God in service, I have been
conversant with him in his Ordinances, many a Sermon have I heard, many a
Sacrament have I received; I have humbled my soul before him in prayer, and
tears, and fasting, and I alas can find no return of my prayers, I cannot get
any thing at Gods hands, my corruptions are yet within me, I am still where I
was, and am no better, and can do no more then formerly, my abilities are as
little, and my comforts as few as ever; surely all is not well with me, and
all is not even betwixt God and my soul; how goes his promise along with me,
seeing I find no performance to me? here the soul is musing and doubtful.

To ease the soul under this distress, I shall propose these things.

1. That no man shall do the least service for God which shall be in vain
unto himself; God is a good Master, as he sets us about the best work, so
Mal. 1. 10. 1 Cor. 15. ult.
he will give us the best wages, no man shall serve God for naught; we see
that God takes it ill when the Jews charged him with neglect and irrecompence
for their serving of him, Mal. 3. 13, 14, 15.

2. That want of present wages must not dishearten Christians in the doing of
their duties; up and be doing, and trust God for wages; service and progress
in duties belongs to us, and their rewards and recompenses belong to God; we
must do our part, and not be weary in welldoing: for in due season we shall
Gal. 6* 9.
reap if we faint not; the husbandman is to plow the land, and to sow the
corn if he expect the harvest, and so Christians must first do their duties
of hearing, and praying, and reading, if they will have Gods wages.

3. That unto our present doing, we must add waiting and expectation; Our eyes
wait upon the Lord till he have mercy Psalm. 123.
upon us, says David; if beggars will not stay they loose their alms, and if
Christians will not wait they may loose their grants; and why should we not
wait? in all Gods promises there is such a truth which shall be performed, and
he has made many precious promises unto waiting for the performance of his
promises, None shall be ashamed that wait on me, Esa. 49. 23. David waited
upon God and he inclined to him and heard his cry, Psalm. 40. 1.

4. That the Lords answers of good shall at length recompense and equal all
the services and patience of man; how ever for the present defer his
comforts, and put off thy complaints, and the time is long and tedious unto
thee, yet know, that a Christian is sure to speed well with God at the last,
and he shall have his recompenses in the best things at the best time, there is
a time and day which God will not overpasse; The vision is yet for an appointed
time, but at the end it shall speak and shall not lie, though it tarry, wait
for it, because it will surely come, it will not tarry, Hab. 2. 3. Thou have
done God much service and made many prayers unto him, and yet nothing comes
of it, wait and thou shall never repent thee of thy pains and patience,
consider but these three things.

1. That a man cannot wait too long for promised mercies, they being the most
excellent and useful of all mercies for Christians.

2. That God is wise and good in causing spaces between our endeavors and his
recompenses; God herein is either chastning some for former neglect of
accepting grace offered in the day of grace, or preparing the soul for the
receiving and enjoying of his recompenses.

3. That the longer any one stays without Gods wages, the better and greater
it shall be when it comes; God will give unto his their wages with an
increase, he will give them double comfort, Esa. 40. 2. doubt not of this but
that God will fulfill your desires to the full, and comforts first or last
shall come in such a plentiful measure, that they shall make amends for all;
Abraham waited long for Isaac, and he had him at the last, and though the
world recompense the best work with the worst wages, yet God does not so, but
will crown all our endeavors to his own praise and the comfort of his.

CASE. VII. Of Relapses into sins after resolutions and premises and pardons.
THe impudencies of sin are such, that they make their returns upon the chaste
hearts of Gods Saints, and the weakness of Christians is such that they fall
into sin often, multiplying sin very far, and here they rest not, but
many times notwithstanding purposes and promises and better resolutions they
slack again in their watchfullnesse, and notwithstanding their recovery out
of sins, they return again unto folly and act the same sins again; it
may happen to them Relapsing into sin what it is.
as unto many men under their diseases; they may in some good measure recover
strength and health, and there may be certain discontinuations of the violent
workings of the disease, but yet there may be a falling back of them into the
same disease even unto great danger; just so, they may not only lapse and
receive a recovery out of the same by the hand of mercy, but after along space
of discontinuance, even when they have seemed to have parted from their old
sinful practices, they may be brought back again to the second acting of
the same sins; which evil does befall them upon Causes of relapses nine.
these or the like grounds.

1. From boldness without a warrant, they adventuring upon their own
strength, and forgetting the strength of sinful occasions; presumptuous
patients feeling their legs again, will abroad into the air, and finding some
appetite will feed on any kind of forbidden meat, and hereby they fall back
again; and presumptuous sinners soon forget themselves and soon relapse into
sin.

2. From fear against the promise, they having their eyes too open unto
troubles which they desire to shun, and out of fear of enduring misery, they
have adventured so far, that they have miserably brought themselves down
again by sin; I know nothing which made Abraham more to redouble his lying
then the redoubling Genesis 12. 13. and 20. 11.
of his fears, he had his eyes too much upon the preservation of his life, he
was afraid that they would kill him for his Sarahs sake, and therefore once and
again he hazarded her chastity, and his own truth.

3, From dislike without a cause; discontentednesse among the Israelites made
them in their souls to long the second time for the fleshpots of Egypt,
though Egypt was formerly unto them a house of bondage, the desire of
alteration, and men's unwillingnesse to be that which God would have them to
be, has been and is a great cause of their fearful relapses into sins.

4. From standing without a watch; when Christians mind not a falling whilst
that they are standing; but remit their watch, and holy jealousy, omitting the
means of steadfastness, they quit their own strength of standing, and quickly
relapse; if a sick man grow careless of his diet, or a lame man throw away
his crutches, and a Christian grow mindlesse of his falling, they are in a like
condition of slipping back.

5. From straites without faith; crosses not borne by faith have returned many
to their old way, the want of water and bread, caused the Israelites more then
once or twice to glide into the sins of murmuring and distrust.

6. From company without choice; all society has a force in it, it brings with
it fire or water; it is an encouragement, or discouragement unto sin; the
Israelites, being mingled among the Heathens, learned their works, and fell to
idolatry the second time, Psalm. 106. 35. flaming brands will not more set on
fire quenched sticks, then sinful companies will revive dead purposes unto
sinfullnesse; experience shows that the joining with old companions, has
made men to resume their former excess of riot, contrary unto their former
resolutions and promises.

7. From the Spirit without assistance; if the Spirit take away his hand, or
deny his actual assistance, the Christian presently relapseth; take away the
fire from the water and it will

8. From extremities forgotten; time was that Christians did find and feel
the bitterness and horror of sin, the stinging effects thereof remaining
fresh and sensible in the conscience, and then they did abhor and fear to
sin, they did vow and promise not to sin; take we a drunkard that has
surfeted with wine or strong drink, and whilst he is under the scorchings of
his sinsicknesse, bring unto him wine and strong drink, O he cannot abide it;
but when the sickness is over, and the experiments of sins extremity buried,
he will rise from the smaller bear to the strong, and from that to the
strongest wine again, and as certain it is that when men do forget what their
sins have cost them, they will gradually slide into their old course of sinning
again.

9. From brethren despised; there is a great evil among Christians; they are
not only many times ungroundedly too too suspicious, over-credulous and
censorious of their brethren; but over incompassionate and strangely insulting
over their brethren in their failings, especially where they least affect, we
shall hear such griefelesse and disgracing narrations of Christians
miscarriages, even by Christians themselves, that it would make a man to
question whether all wisdom and mercy be not banished out of their hearts;
now when God sees this proud and envious and spiteful spirit in any of his
own children, he lets them also be tempted, and under temptations they are
permitted to fall, that they may learn to be more merciful to the names of
their brethren, and to make them know that the sin that overturnes one
Christian may overturne any Christian, and that one Christian seeing another to
fall, should compassionately help him up, and not scornefully cast him off;
read Gal. 6. 1.

These things with many other causing the relapsing of Christians into sin,
do make the souls of Christians under its relapsings heavy and sad; they
considering within themselves that the baseness of relapsing is likened to the
dog turning 2 Pet. 2. ^2.
to his vomit, and the sow that is washed wallowing in the mire, it does
greatly trouble and disquiet them; concerning the settling of Christians
laboring Five settlements under relapses.
under this evil, I shall only propound five things of principal knowledge
and use.

First, that all Relapsings into sin are great evils, wheresoever they are
found; relapsing argues corruption, yea, and a sinful disposition in man;
There is not only the evil of sin in this condition, but we shall find
many bitter effects and issues befalling Christians under their relapses, for
they do not only hereby object themselves to many temporal punishments, Psalm.
78. 61, 62, 63. but unto these four spiritual evils.

1. Soule-disquietment, the peace of conscience being broken by every relapse;
I say relapses are of a disquieting nature to conscience in these five respects.

1. Because they bring back Relapses disquieting to conscience in five respects.
all former guilts, and with that all the former burdens and fears and terrors.

2. Because they yield unto conscience matter of undeniable accusation; the
doubling of sin does double the accusation and vexation of conscience.

3. Because they are the aggravation of sin unto man.

4. Because they make the foundations and resting places of the soul
questionable, relapses put a man to clear and prove his former grants and
assurances to Heaven, and his own sincerity to God, and in Religion.

5. Because they do greatly advantage temptations unto despair, Christians
are never more apt to despair then upon the consideration of their often
falling into sin.

2. Discouragement in all accesses unto God; the Christian cannot with that
confidence and boldness draw near unto God in prayer having relapsed, as else
he might have done; how can such believe that God will love them, and hear
them, when as they have dealt so falsely with him, having promised him not to
sin, and mocked and abused him in his mercy and pity and patience, he having
formerly pardoned them their sins.

3. Disablement unto renewed repentance; Now Christians do find it more
difficult to return from sin, their souls being sunk deeper into sin,
and more entangled by sin then formerly it was; take me a Christian that is
but single in sin, and he finds the difficulties of repenting to be
great; but how does Satan renew his power, and a Christian loose his strength,
when that the same sins are repeated over and over; assuredly there is
strange strengthenings of sin in relapsing into sins, one sin living in and
by another.

4. Fears of death, O how unwelcome is the news of death, and how unwilling
are such to die who have often fallen into the same sins? Relapses do put a
sting into death, making it very terrible unto the sons of men.

2. That the Elect of God may fall back again into the same sins; there is
I say a possible incidency of relapsing unto persons of all sorts: it is most
certain, that wicked men who are ordained to destruction may relapse, Pharaoh
though humbled for the present, did notwithstanding harden his heart again and
again; yea and they who are good and holy and have soundly repented them of
their former sins may yet relapse: the example of Abraham, Lot, Peter, and
Israel does declare it, how often does God lay this sin unto the charge of
his people? Ier. 3. 12. and 14. 2^ Psalm. 78. 57. and no marvel, for though
their repentance be sound, yet their mortification is imperfect, in this life
there is no sinful disposition wholly rooted up, and dried in sanctified
persons, and corruption remaining will put forth its nature into more and more
acts, yea and into the same acts of sinning; as long as sin retains its
nature, it does and will retain the inclinations and operations of that nature
also; if the fire be not wholly put out, who will think it impossible that it
should catch and burn again?

3. That though the act of relapsing be incident both to good and bad, yet it
is in a differing manner, which I shall open Relapses into sin by the godly
different from relapses into sin by the wicked. Relapses 1 Natural
unto you in the distinctions of relapsings.

First, there are relapses

1. Natural. 2. Accidental.
Natural relapses are such as spring from a disposition and temper that is
wholly sinful and for sin; if a man by a coard pluck up very high the the
dog unto his vomit, their own natural love and delight will return them; the
truth is, that though external and intervenient occasions may pen up or
restrain the violence of corruption for a time, yet such is the inward
disposition of a natural man unto sin, that he soon returns to his old
course again; skin up the soar and the ulcer will break out again, and if
the heart be not changed, but chained by the power of restraining graces
alone, man will return to his old vomit and vain course.

Accidental Relapses are 2. Accidental.
such which befall the godly by sudden and strong temptations; a land flood may
carry back pieces of timber from the bank into the remote places of the
ground; an unexpected gale may drive the Mariner back into the harbor
again, and it is as possible that temptations may break in with that
violence, that Christians may be over-borne, and carried away to those sins
which their souls do most sincerely abhor, and they have solemnly
covenanted against, yet here the effect and the intention are contrary, heart
and sin being at difference and upon terms of defiance.

Secondly, Relapses may be either into the acts of sin, or else into the
exercise of sin; one sick person falls back into some fits only, another
returns under the power of his disease again; the godly man falls back into
some particular sin, but there he staieth not, for though he fall he
rises again; he is as a man fallen into the water, but he gets out quickly;
the wicked falls back into the courses of sin again, lying down in their
falling back, their end being worse then their beginning. Relapses 1.
Voluntary.


Thirdly, Relapses are

1. Voluntary. 2. Involuntary.
Voluntary Relapses are such as have the propension and complacencie of the
heart in them; the sea does as naturally ebb, as it does flow, and wicked men
make their returns unto sinful courses with much more delight then their
departures; O how glad is a Jayle bird of the opportunity of liberty to go to
his old haunts? and much more joyful is every wicked man when he is at
liberty to feed himself upon his sinful pleasures, he does even bewail his
misery that he was kept so long from them.

Involuntary Relapses are 2. Involuntary.
such as arise contrary to the intention and affection of persons, it is not
the pure love of sin that draws back the godly into sinning again, which may
appear in the consequent of their relapsing, they are not now, as a fish newly
taken out and newly leapt again into the water, in their proper element, a
sinful way and course cannot be agreeable to their souls, they find no rest
in a sinning condition, but their souls are sick and sad, they weep and are
troubled exceedingly, and can receive no comfort in themselves until they see
themselves recovered again; as we may see in David and Peter.

Fourthly, there are Relapses in

1. Conquest. 2. Combat. Relapses 1. In conquest.

Relapses in conquest is when a man out of malice and obstinacy of heart,
without all ground or cause is carried back again as a slave unto his sinful
doings; some men never stick at the matter, their hearts find no manner of
stop, and nothing within puts an impediment to their returns; the heart and
the sin are now in league, and they like the way of sin exceedingly; the
state of wicked men in returning to their sins, is much answering to the
returns of a man unto his bed to take his rest and sleep, he loves his bed
and vexes at every thing that keeps him from going into it; just so the heart
of every wicked man likes the sin, but hates the impediment, nothing at all
does awe him from sinning again, but the shame and punishment of sin; and he
accounts that word and friend his enemy which stops him in sinning.

Relapses in combat is, when 2. In combat.
a man is reduced to his old sin, but it is with much fear, secret
reluctancie, and some opposition; I see another law in my members warring
against the Romans 7.23
law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law of sin, says
Paul, a good man relapseth resisting; his reducing into sin is much after the
manner of the bringing back of an escaped prisoner, when he espies such as
would take him he runs from them, and hides from them, and he is not easily
laid hold of or brought home again, many escapes he makes by the way, and
would rather die in the place then return; and so surely does a Christian
strive with griefs and tears and prayers against all returns into sin.

Fifthly, Relapses in respect Relapses* ^. Hurtful
of their effects are

1. Pernicious. 2. Profitable.
The unsound heart by falling back into sin, grows more and more hardened
and insensible, more careless and froward in sinning, more free and forward in
sinning; acting his old sins with greater love and delight then ever.

God does good men good ^. Helpful
by their relapsings; though there be no good in sin, yet it is good that
sin be, and the wisdom of God can and does turn it unto the good of his,
I say this is the accidental effect of the godly man's falling into sin,
greater humiliation and sorrow, greater watchfullnesse and fear, greater
dependence on God; stronger covenants and resolutions; deeper loathings, and
greater conquest over sins; In these five didistinctions you may observe the
difference of relapses in good and bad men.

4. That the sin of relapsing is pardonable; it is such a sin which God
has pardoned, and he can and will pardon; Christ does tell us, that all
manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men excepting that
against the Holy Ghost, Mat. 12. 31. under that phrase of all manner of sin
relapsing is included; God does not shut the gate of mercy against all
relapsing sinners, and because this is made a ground of trouble unto many
Christians, that they do conceive such a sin cannot be pardoned, I will
briefly evidence the pardonablenesse of Relapses.

First, that sin unto which the promise of curing is made, is pardonable to
Gods children; for God never cures sin, but where he first covers it; but the
promise of healing is Two rea^ons proo^ing the ardona^lenesse of ^^lapses.
made unto backsliding; Return ye backesliding children, and I will heal
your backslidings, says God, Ier. 3. 22. Hosea 14. 4.

Secondly, that sin is pardonable to Christians, unto which is annexed a
possibility of repentance; for God has promised pardoning mercy to penitent
sinners; but a Christian may repent of it, for repentance was required of
backsliding Israel, Return, says God, yea and it was practiced also, Behold
we come unto thee, for Ier. 3. 22
thou art the Lord our God; consider seriously of Peter's condition, were not
his bitter and brinish tears the repenting of his folly in so often denying
his master?

5. That as there are means to keep from relapsing, so there are means to
deliver out of relapsing into sin; we may not weakly conceive, that because
we have made our returns into sin contrary unto our promises and purposes,
that we shall never get out of them again; this is the way to keep the soul
in hell Delivery from relapses
upon earth; I grant you

1. That revolting into sin is greatly displeasing to God. 2. That it is a
difficult thing 1. Difficult
to get out of a sin into which a man has often relapsed; a man cannot be
healed and recovered without much pain and much ado the second or third time
of the same disease.
Yet I pray you despair not 2. Possible.
your hearts; suppose the worst, that the sins which you have fallen into
again are great, and grievous sins, and that they were not unwilling
omissions, or sudden passions, but had knowledge and premeditation in them;
that they were sins once repented of and solemnly vowed against, 1. All this
and much more makes the recovery to be difficult not desperate. 2. The sins
that Abraham, Lot, and Peter fell into, were great and heinous sins, and yet
they recovered again. 3. There is no disease beyond Gods cure, or sin above
his pardon; cannot God pardon sin often? surely God that has once mercifully
recovered his, falling back, will also do it the second and third, and
fourth, and every time for his.

Ob. But many fall back into sin and do never recover themselves again,
and this may be my case?


Sol. True, some diseases are dangerous and some are deadly, and there are
relapses curable and incurable; such who falling back out of malice and
obstinacy, resting themselves in a constant delight of those sins into which
they have rela^sed, making their sin their gain, can gain no assurance of
healing; but such as fall back through incogitancie and infirmity, being
exceeding troubled at heart for their sins and relapses into their sins,
may expect and shall find a cure.


Leave disputing and use these means following, and by the blessing of God you
shall Four means to get out of relapses.
get out of your diseases of sin into which you are relapsed.

First, work the relapses upon your souls; repeated sins are as broad and
deep wounds, of which if a man mean to be soundly cured, he must admit of a
sound and thorough search; relapses into sin are like the returns of the
distemper into the body, of which if a man expect to be rid, he must resolve
to fetch up and find out the distempering cause; until a man soundly feels,
and truly knows the evillnesse of relapses, he will not seek out for any
recoverie; by the help of judgment, conscience, and the law, we may find
out the full evil of relapses into sin.

Secondly, physic the soul for this sin, we are to drink down the bitter
potion of repentance, we must not think to come off of this sin with a few
tears and a little sorrow; renewed stains in the soul are not easily gotten
off; we must lie down in our shame, and our confusion must cover Ier. 3. 25.
us; renewed sins must have our renewed sorrows, and renewed hatred, the
more a man sins, the more reason has he to hate sin: and the oftener he
sins one sin, the more reason has he to labor the mortifying of that; get
above all things a strong and settled hatred and abomination of all sins for
time to come, and an unfeigned sorrow for sins past.

Thirdly, keep to the Ordinances, our spiritual recovery is by means, who
though they can do little of themselves, yet being blessed and assisted they
can do much; these set out relapses to the life; quicken the heart to sorrow;
break open the riches of Gods unspeakeable mercy and goodness in promises of
pardon and healing; and do greatly enable the heart to believe all promised
mercy.

Fourthly, have in unto God, suing out the promises which he has made in the
Covenant; let no fears or distrusts keep you off; but go in unto God or else
you perish; your diseases are your own; but all recoveries do belong to God,
Hos. 13. 9. Ier 3. 22.
who has undertaken to cure all that return to him; and therefore come to God
again A threefold way of coming to God for cure.


1. With confession, freely and humbly acknowledging your fault with the
Church, Ier. 3. 13. 2. With petition, entreating his pardon and his peace, say,
receive us graciously, Hos. 14. 2, 4. 3. With faith, persuading thy soul from
the promise and performance of God that thou shall be healed.
There are several promises made to answer all the possible exigencies of
Christians; and why does God make promises of healing and forgiving the
backslidings of his people? is it not to encourage the hearts of his children
to lay hold on that promise, and to sue it out in the needful time? surely if
we did more speedily and heartily beset the Lord, we should find a great
healing of our revoltings and backslidings.

CASE. VIII. Of strange and terrible thoughts following Christians.
A Christian has a double conversation, from whence troubles do arise unto
him, one is outward, another is inward, that notes the whole carriage of the
life; this the course of the whole soul; a Christian is not a little troubled
with himself being wise to study himself and to find out the frame and
temper of his heart, and made tender to feel even the least erroneous
flashings of the apprehending faculty, such as his thoughts are, which does
prove unto him great souleburdens, as I shall now open unto you in this
manner, showing Four things about the thoughts of men. Three sorts of
thoughts. 1 Natural
to you four things.

1. That thoughts are of three sorts,

1. Natural. 2. Spiritual. 3. Sinful.
Natural thoughts are those motions, stirrings, and acts which reside or are
framed in the sensible, and intellectual part of man; and they do comprehend
under them those reasonings, consultations, purposes, resolutions, intents,
meditations, considerations, conceits and apprehensions, which the
understanding by the help of fancy frames within it self; these following
the nature of man in constitution and creation, and immediately resulting from
the mind of man, are not unfitly called natural thoughts; man is borne and was
made a thinking creature, such thoughts will be in us do what we can, it being
natural to the mind to be thinking; and if we take such thoughts in a simple
consideration they are no sins or faults, the mind of Adam in Creation yea
and of Christ himself (who was in all things like unto us sin excepted) were
full of such thoughts rightly composed; they had many transactions in their
minds, yea and their minds held notable discourses with the things that they
knew, and touching things to be done; they had their fore-thoughts preparing
them to actions, and they had their after-thoughts recollecting things done by
them.

Spiritual thoughts are those 2. Spiritual
motions and turnings of the mind, flowing from the work of grace in the
soul, and determining themselves in spiritual and supernatural objects;
there are two things which do constitute the spirituallnesse of man's thoughts.

1. The original cause of them; namely their springing from a sanctified
fountain that is closed within the soul, the mind must be renewed and
sanctified, altered, and cleansed, ere it can and does yield out holy
inclinations, and motions, and have within it holy projects, counsels,
imaginations and reasonings.

2. The special object of them; the thoughts pitching themselves in a right
way upon things that are divinely good, and making for Gods glory, and man's
salvation are said to be spiritual.

These kind of thoughts are peculiar unto Gods Saints after regeneration, for
without the Spirit no man is able to think one good thought, 2 Cor. 3. 5. as
for wicked men if we consider their thoughts formerly they are stark naught;
yea and if we consider them objectively, they may be naturally and morally ((
i. e.) as they moove in the way of nature, and tend to the good of a civil
state and country) good; but spiritually good they are not, they no way
further their sanctification and obedience, but do occasion much hardness and
sinfullnesse unto them.

Sinful thoughts are the 3. Sinful.
motions and stirrings of man's mind unto sin, when the mind by the object or
the subject does muse on sin and wickedness, representing and acting over
the same in imagination and speculation, entertaining Mat. 5. 28. Romans 13. 14.
Pro. 6. 18.
and harboring the same in provision; arting and skilling it self in the
cunnings and methods thereof that it may become witty in wickedness; and is
continually framing, Esa. 32 7.
plotting, and devising wickedness within it self.

2. That sinful and evil Two sorts of evil thoughts.
thoughts are of two sorts.

1. Ascending thoughts, which flow from the corrupt heart of man; Out of the
heart proceed evil thoughts, says Christ, Mat. 15. 19. there is not a more
entire cause of sinful thoughts then sinful corruption, evil thoughts must
have an evil principle; waters do not more issue out from a full fountain,
then sinful thoughts do spring from a sinful nature.

2. Injected thoughts; whose working is inward, but cause outward, Satan does
venture upon the thoughts, and gets his entrance into the soul by them; one of
the Fathers tells us, Mala co gitatio Diaboli primogeni ta. Hieron.
that a wicked thought is the devils eldest daughter; this one thing I am sure
of, that as natural corruption is mother, so Satan is ordinarily father unto
vile thoughts in men; Satan put into 1 Chronicles 21. 1.
David the thought of numbering his people, and Satan filled the heart of Anani
as that he lied to the Holy Ghost, Acts 5. 3.

Happily curiosity may here enquire into the just difference between those
sinful thoughts which ascend from man's nature, and such which are injected by
Satan?

Certain it is that there is a real difference; but for my part I cannot
peremptorily conclude it; a Christian may know, that the devil has been in
his heart and laid his egg there, and shuffled in his motion there; but because
there is such a mixture of seeds in the generation of sinful thoughts which
are monstrous, and that both of them are like Simeon and Levi, brethren in
evil, it is to me a point of great difficulty to determine their apprehensive
difference; yet I reverence those Divines and their opinions who have given out
the probable differences between Diabolical and Natural thoughts, in their
unnaturallnesse, unreasonablenesse, suddenness and uncessantnesse, unto whose
reasons I leave my Reader, and do proceed to teach you.

3. That sinful thoughts divide and multiply themselves Diversities of
thoughts in men.
severally. Sometimes into thoughts of blasphemy against God and Christ, and
the Scriptures; men wretchedly imagining and thinking negatively Psalm 94. 19.
and unworthily of either, O how meanly conceited are many Psalm. 53. 3.
men of Christ, making him the Carpenters Son, a man of sorrows and no way
to be regarded for salvation, and as 2 Pet 3. 4. 1 Cor. 1. 21.
for the Scriptures, their authority and verity is questioned, and men deem it
to be but the word of man, vain and foolish, and as for God he is directly or
virtually shut out in his being and Attributes, men think him not to be at
all, or not to be so just, present, powerful, gracious, and merciful as he
has revealed himself to be; witness these Scriptures, Psalm. 14. 1. Job 22.
13, 14. Ephesians. 2. 12. Sometimes into thoughts of infidelity, against the power,
and promise, and providence of God, and these arise principally in times of
men's distresses; now Mat 6 25, and 7, 28, 31.
men take thought what they shall eat, and for to morrow how they and theirs
shall do; the Prince thought in himself that the present scarcity was such,
that should God open windows in Heaven, it could not cause such a plenty as
the 2 King. ^. 2.
Prophet spoke of. Sometimes into thoughts of pride, men Luke 18 11. Luke 15. 7.
have selfe-justifying thoughts, and selfe-advancing thoughts, distentorious,
and curious Romans 12. 3.
thoughts, many times they climb up unto the exploration of secrets beyond
reason to the ruin of their parts and estates. Sometimes into thoughts of
folly; men's thoughts are empty and incoherent; they carry the scumme and
foaming of the water in them, men many times do not know what to make of them,
neither are they able to give a good account of them unto God or men; There are
also unsettled thoughts which have no steadiness or fixednesse in them; they
come and go having a fluencie in them, as bubbles rise up and sink again; so
do the thoughts of many rise and fall; men do think and unthinke again,
even as they will be gone, and many times they take their flight beyond the
call and command of Christians themselves. There are strange and horrible
thoughts that many times do come into men's minds; as for a man to abhor God,
renounce Christ, Heaven and all, for a man to murder himself, for a parent to
murder his child, etc. There are distracting and withdrawing thoughts; such as
creep into us when we are about the performance of duties, alienating us from
the more spiritual performance of them; as Benjamin found Joseph's cup in his
sack, and he knew not how it came there, so Gods children do find such
dartings and droppings in of strange thoughts when they are upon duties, that
they wonder whence they should arise. Also there are unseasonable thoughts;
thoughts that are good materially may become circumstantially evil; it is
Satan's policy to prevent and interrupt a convenient and present good, by
thrusting in some unseasonable good, a good that is not well placed and timed;
for a man to have praying thoughts is good, but when he should have hearing
thoughts to have these praying thoughts is unseasonable, etc. To conclude,
there are despairing thoughts, men conceiving themselves to be reprobated and
rejected of God, to whom the possibility of pardoning mercy and heavenly
happiness does no way appertain; I said in my have I am cut off Psalm. 31. ^2.
from before thine eyes, says David; there was his perishing thoughts.

4. That sinnefullnesse of thoughts are a just cause of soule-trouble unto Gods
Saints, you shall hear them bitterly thus complaining, seldom do thoughts of
God or goodness rise up within me, my soul is so dry and barren, that I
seldom think of any good, but then when I am to do it; yea and oftentimes
when I am doing good I think not of it, I have occasions enough before me for
good thoughts, but my nature is dull and will not, or inexpert and cannot make
use of them; and if my thoughts begin at any time to work upon good objects,
if I take God, or Christ, or the Word, or my sin into my thoughts, I soon
loose the sent, and am far from insisting on them; the Be may and now I do
despair in my thoughts of mine estate. God beholds me in my thoughts, and it
is sinful corruption that sends up these thoughts, and Satan cannot but enter
by these thoughts, and I can do nothing as I should do it for these thoughts;
my cross and calamity is greatned by these thoughts, alas what will become of
me for these my thoughts?

This is the thing which has made a deep wound in the spirit; for the curing
and comforting Seven settleme^ts about thoughts.
whereof, I shall lay down certain propositions and prescriptions.

1. That the dearest children of God besides their natural thoughts, may have
many sinful and evil thoughts glancing and rising up within their Job 1. 5.
minds; yea they may have the same vile thoughts which 3 Causes of evil
thoughts in Gods children
a very wicked man has; and wonder not at it; seeeing 1. Satan is as watchful
and malicious against them as any other, and he does more fiercely assault
them then any other, and is more willing to vex them then any other. 2.
Corruption cleaves to the souls of them as well as others, and it works in
them as well as in any other; where the spring of corruption is not wholly dried
up, it is and will be more or less bubbling out into most vile and noisome
thoughts. 3. Infirmity is many times as much in them as it is in others; they
are not always so watchful, and fearful as it does become them; if the
windows stand open no wonder if birds fly into the chamber, and if Christians
let down their watch, and care, no wonder that vain thoughts do enter,
lodging themselves by armies within them, sporting themselves in their minds,
and presuming to justle in with them to the Church, and to the Closer, mightily
distempering and distracting them in duty, nay making them to become like other
men.

2. That it is a mercy to come unto the sound acquaimance of the evillnesse of
a man's own thoughts; Hypocrisy and sinful vanity conceive that thoughts are
free, and therefore is it fearelesse and careless about them, making nothing
of them; you shall hardly persuade a wicked man to think that his thoughts are
evil and ought to be bewailed, or amended; whereas a man that is godly indeed,
he is made sensible of the sinnefullnesse of his thoughts by way of fear and
trouble, these amaze his mind, afflict his spirit, and do so greatly burden
him, that he cries out of them; and by this discovery made unto him, he is set
into the way of rising from them, and forsaking of them according to Gods
requirement; Let the wicked forsake Esa. 55. 7.
his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts; and truth it A twofold
remoovall of evil thoughts, 1 By cessation
is, that though the godly do not find evil thoughts remooved by absolute
cessation, so as they shall never stir more at all; yet they are remooved by
subjection and manner of operation, 2 Subject. on.
although they do start up, yet the Elect upon the apprehension of their
evillnesse, subject not themselves unto them; they are not so effectually
active or actuating as formerly, or as they are to wicked men; this is a truth;
that evils apprehended are soonest arraigned, condemned, bewailed, prevented,
and overcome.

3. That among many ill thoughts lurking and lodging within us, it must be our
wisdom to take notice of the good thoughts that are within us also; it is
most true, that Christians are mixed creatures, flesh and Spirit, nature and
grace; and so there may be found within them many spiritual Signs of
goodness of thoughts
and excellent thoughts, as well as evil and bad thoughts; I would have men to
know

1. That every thought of evil is not an evil thought, but the goodness of
man's thoughts stand in thinking upon the evil and ungodliness of his nature
and practice, and the dishonor of God by the same unto repentance it self.

2. That when the heart can lay out for holy duties, and project a course of
sanctification, and a way of salvation prudently declining the occasions
stirring up to sinful thoughts; then there are good thoughts within; all
providing thoughts for duty are very good thoughts; the wicked man is thinking
how he may shift off all good and do all evil, and a godly man has contrary
thoughts unto all sin, and caring thoughts for all duty.

3. That many times the number of evil thoughts may be more to a Christians
sense then the number of his good thoughts; a Christian may see and discern in
himself a great deal of corruption working against a little grace.

4. That one good thought springing up within the soul amongst many bad
thoughts, may be a ground of comfort against all evil thoughts whatsoever; it
being an argument of grace in truth to send out good thoughts.

4. That though the same evil thoughts may be both in the good and bad, yet it
is with a great difference, For

1. It is not all evil thoughts in good men; they have some Four differences
between the thoughts of good and bad men.
good thoughts in them.

ob. So have wicked men too?


Sol. Have they good thoughts within them? whence come they? I am sure corrupt
nature cannot send out one good thought, and unregenerate men are truly empty
of spiritual thoughts; but make the best of them and their thoughts, I am sure
they are in them against a temper to evil thoughts, and against their will and
affections; light is not more displeasing to soar eyes, then good thoughts are
distasteful unto wicked men; good thoughts are strangers with them, they go
away as soon as they come, all their thoughts of goodness are transient and
merely apprehensive, no way practical and permanent, let them be never so
good materially, they are no way good subjectively and circumstantially.


2. Under all bad thoughts within, a good man is weary and burdened, and
willing of good and better thoughts for them, he cannot fall in with ill
thoughts by way of approbation, but in his judgment he does condemn the
universality of evil thoughts, which are thrust upon his mind unavoidably;
whereas wicked men are unwilling of good thoughts, making them their burden,
and are hugging of sinful thoughts, making them their delight; affectuous
thoughts do not more belong to the pleasure of the body, then sinful thoughts
do to the delight of the wicked.

3. Ill thoughts in the godly are in resistance, as they come not in with
welcome, so they stay not there in quiet and entertainment; they do bewail
them, and pray against them, laboring the remoovall of them by all means.

4. Ill thoughts in the godly do spring from corruption impaired and disabled
by the presence and power of sanctifying grace which can hold mo peace with
corruption; ill thoughts in wicked men do flow from corruption in strength and
unsubdued, and therefore they make no opposition against them any farther then
they oppose themselves to themselves, and their own ends; it is one thing to
be troubled with the evil of thoughts, and another thing to be troubled with
the clogging circumstances of thoughts, an evil man may resist an evil
thought, for the declining of some sensible evil, or for the furthering of
some other evil, all a wicked man's thoughts do bow and bend to sinful
projects, whereas good men under the trouble and vexation of evil thoughts
receive much good at the last; God hereby making them more fearful of sin,
and watchful over their thoughts.

5. That multitude of rising and injected thoughts not affected, but vexing and
perplexing the soul, cannot take away the ground of a Christians comfort and
confidence; there is no Mark. 3. 18 Acts 8. 22.
thought of heart be it never so vile but it may be repented of, and divine
grace can pardon it; and they are not of force to alter a man's estate in grace
or glory; confider what I say; that if Satan should study all the arts of hell
to coin the etc. and afterward dart them with all the violence of hell into
the mind of men, (men in the mean time abhorring and rejecting them) they
shall prove but men's crosses, they shall not be reputed as their sins, and
so shall no way impair their happiness standing twixt them and Heaven; and as
they cannot alter an estate in happiness, no more can they diminish a
condition in holiness; Benjamin was never the more dishonest, because Joseph's
cup was in his sack, or Joseph the more unclean because his mistress did
attempt his chastity, no more do the evil of injected thoughts alter the
gracious temper of a Christian; does the beating

6. That where thoughts are sensibly evil and naught, it is more wisdom to
seek their cure and strengthening against them then to stand too long
complaining of them, and of trouble or danger by them; and here know, 1. That
it is no easy or ordinary work to alter, order, and keep under a man's
thoughts, they are very wild and unruly and wily. 2. That it is not natural
means or agents which can cure the Christian of the evillnesse of his
thoughts, that which turns nature must be another thing then nature, all
natural causes work only in a natural way and to that only which is
natural, a spiritual agent and a spiritual way is required to free men from
ill thoughts; I Six helps against evil thoughts.
cannot fall into all particulars, let these that I shall name suffice for the
general.

1. Repent for the whole evil of your thoughts; let Acts 8. 22.
them break and bleed your souls, and then you are in the way to bedelivered
from them; Wash thine heart O Jerusalem Ier. 4. 14
from wickedness that thou may be saved, how long shall vain thoughts
lodge within thee? how do men come to remoove, and dislodge vain thoughts? it
is by repentance for sin and ungodliness, this is the forsaking of a man's
thoughts spoken of by the Prophet Isaiah; Esa. 55. 7.
If thou have done f^olishly in lifting up thy self, or if thou have thought
evil, lay thine hand upon thy mouth, says Solomon, Prove. 30. 32.

2. Give scope and rule unto Gods Word which is every way healing and ordering
unto the evillnesse of men's thoughts, the Word is a notable means to preserve,
yea and to deliver from evil thoughts; it begets a new The use of the Word
about the thoughts is fivefold.
spring, I mean a new mind, and that will send out new and suppress the old
thoughts; the Word of God is

1. A searcher and discerner of the thoughts and intents of man's heart, it
traceth and hunts out the secret windings and mindings of the same, Heb. 4. 12.

2. A condemner and reproover of sinful thoughts; it does indite all evil
thoughts, sharply checking men for contemplative wickedness, Mat. 5. 28.

3. A remoover of sinful thoughts; it frees the soul from evil
cogitations, Psalm. 119. 11. the voice of the Word sounding in the soul unto
evil thoughts, is like the wise clamor by which the ravenous birds are scared
from their unjust prey.

4. A subduer of evil thoughts; let the Word work never so powerfully, yet
strange thoughts will remain still in the soul; but the Word is of that force
that it casts down imaginations, and brings into captivity every thought, 2
Cor. 10. 4, 5.

5. A preserver against evil thoughts; the Word of God can keep out evil
thoughts, and maintain good thoughts in the mind; it will store and enrich
the mind with divine principles and habits; so that the mind shall not be
naked and empty; but full with the variety of heavenly notions; the Word is
full, and the mind shall find here a promise, and there a precept, there a
threatening, and here a reward, etc. the Word is mighty in operation, and it
will draw out with sweetest power those heavenly principles, and with them
those gracious habits in the mind unto some acts and operations; like as the
Sun in stirring up of habitual grace and implanted principles, the mind by it
is set on working and musing on that which is good. In a word, the Word of God
does present the mind with fresh objects of meditation, whereby it mooves the
soul from one meditation to another, and from one good thought to a better.

3. Wisely keep off from all such occasions and things which might stir up
and continue in you evil thoughts; there are many things which will foment
matter of evil to the mind, which has not only active but receptive
dispositions, it does not only work from an inward but an outward cause;
occasions have been very impressive upon the mind, we may see it in David and
Peter, etc.

There are seven things (stirring Seven things to be avoided as continuing
sinful thoughts in men.
up evil thoughts in men) to be taken heed of.

1. The not making conscience of evil thoughts; it was wont to be said that
Quicqui^ pudet dicere, pu^et and cogitare. Hier in Ep. ad Them.
whatsoever is unlawful to be done or spoken, is as unlawful to be thought;
and I am sure this is as true, that such as make no conscience of thoughts,
will make no conscience of what they do or speak; this fancied liberty of
thoughts has opened the flood-gate and occasioned the letting in of multitude
of vain thoughts into men.

2. The subjecting of thoughts unto passions and affections; thoughts were
ordained to moderate and take off passions, there being a natural influence
from the thoughts to the affections, but if men give way unto passionate
distempers, these will breed distraction and division of thoughts; if fire be
stirred there fly up a multitude of sparkles, and if passions sway, they raise
up a variety of disordered thoughts within us, the soul thereby is no sooner
delivered of one thought, but it is in labor and pain with another.

3. The neglecting and suppressing of the good motions of the Spirit; the holy
Spirit is blowing, and breathing, and filling the heart with good meditations,
which must not be 1 These. 5. 19.
quenched if that we will free our selves from ill thoughts.

4. Looking on Satan's wars; my meaning is, that when Satan shall inject his
thoughts into us, we must not take them up, and gaze upon them, giving them a
walking room within us; if they stay within us, they will either defile us, or
else soon become ours.

5. Evil company, which does either find us or will make us bad; I say the
evil discourses and examples of wicked persons will corrupt good manners and
strangely alter the mind both to the evillnes of thoughts and delights.

6. Idleness, this brings forth thoughts of Atheism, and all kind of
impieties; he who takes off his hand from labor, does teach his heart to think
evil, for the mind will still be working, though the man be idle; it is good
therefore to be upon the duties of our calling, be made wise by David, 2 Samuel
11. 1, 2, 3.

7. Worldliness; there is a strong efficacy in an earthly treasure, to steal
away the soul both from it self, and God, the world and gain begets a world
of thoughts in the heads and hearts of men, who are more full of vain and
wandering thoughts in hearing and praying, then such whose hearts are set upon
the riches of this world? thick and foggie air does darken the earth, and
worldly engagements do stuff and stifle the mind, stirring up many plottings
and contrivements.

4. Labor for strength of affections unto God; the more we can keep up
spiritual affections within us, setting them upon God, and duty, and Heaven,
the more we shall keep out and keep down carnal and sinful thoughts; it is
an excellent thing to fill the head and heart with God, and to be zealously
affected in good things; these things have a strong power over man, and will
make him to be thinking aright; see it in David, O how I love thy Law? it is my
meditation all the day, Psalm. 119. 97.

5. Watch and observe the heart duly, taking an account of thoughts; let no
thoughts come in unespied, but keep watch and ward within the soul, and that
with much diligence and fear, and learn to examine all your thoughts most
strictly by the rule; say often what and whence are these thoughts of mine? can
and do these agree with the Word and Law of God? be not too favorable unto
them in your selves, and you Pro. 4.
shall the better suppress them and keep them out.

6. Commit your ways unto God by faith; Commit thy way Pro. 16. 3.
unto the Lord, and thy thoughts shall be established, I know no better way to
keep out the confusion and vexation of sinful thoughts, then by setting up
faith in exercise; this is a grace which will 1. Fence the mind with divine
arguments against all carnal reasonings and selferesolutions. 2. Answer Satan
in all his reasonings and suggestions. 3. Raise up the mind to quite contrary
things to those which Satan puts within us; and 4. When Satan does urge his
horrible thoughts upon us, it will make us to fly to God with our complaints
against Satan, and to spread our condition before the Lord, saying, Lord behold
me, and my condition, I cannot be quiet for Satan, and mine own stirring
corruptions they are still casting up evil thoughts within me contrary to thy
Word, thy glory, and my will; Lord lead me not into these temptations, or
deliver me from the evil of these thoughts, that they may not prevail over
me.

Lastly, know that there may be much comfort to a Christian in doing duty,
notwithstanding he find many wandering and impertinent thoughts within him in
duty, we may not give over duties public, and private, because of some
distractions accompanying us, prayer is to be used as a means to cure our
wanderings in prayer; if dirt stay the heart in duty. Three things encouraging
^o duty under vvandring ^houghts.


1. Resolution against all sinful thoughts in duty, when a Christian does
find the bent of his heart to be against them before he begin the duty, he is
to go on in duty.

2. Sincerity and humility in the doing of duties; he that can with a sincere
and humble heart go thorough duty, may take comfort in performing duty;
duties must not be judged of by accidental and involuntary imperfections, but
by the temper and disposition of the heart which God looks at.

3. Acceptance of duties in Christ, all a Christians duties have their
immediate ground of acceptance in Christ, and not in the strength and
setlednesse of man's performance. To conclude all that at this time I mean to
speak of in this Argument; know, that Satan in injecting of evil thoughts
into the godly, deals with them as many wicked men do with the names of Gods
children; we find that the children of others begetting, are many times laid
at honest men's doors, and unto honest men's charge, and who can stop the mouth
of iniquity? yet in this case a clear conscience is the ablest comforter, and
confuter; just so Satan begets and stirs up within us evil thoughts; and
then he would father them on us, and trouble us by them; but our pure hearts
rising up against them, and bewailing them, makes us clear of them before God,
who is the judge of uprightness and the rewarder of innocence.

Deo Gloria.
The Table.
A.
ABusing of conscience in 1* 2. things, Page 55. Abasing of conscience what,
page 61. Accusations of conscience, page 98. Application of the plaster, p.
144. Absence of Gods love, page 152. Assurances for acceptance under
unworthiness, 2, 8.
B.
Labor for a Bearing spirit, ^ 46. Benefits by spiritual wounds, p. 6. p. 85.
A twofold Bearing the wound, page 104. The Burden of the spirit to good and bad
page 105 The Bent of the heart in duty page 263.
C.
Comfort of the Spirit, page 15. Contentment, page 17. Clearenesse of
conscience, page 49 Care for conscience, page 55. Content of conscience, p. 67,
68. Confession of sin, page 88. Change of life, page 89. Compassion due to the
wounded in spirit, page 121. Considerations to pity such, p. 123. Continuance
under wounds, caused 6. ways, p. 133. Clearing of warrants what, p 173 Causes
of Gods suspending his love, page 177.
D.
Desperation two fold, page 79. Degrees of wounding, page 81. Differences in
the wounding, p 82 Detestation of sin, page 89. Dress the wound* page 145.
Danger by sinning, page 168. Darkning of warrants, page 175. Doubtings in their
nature causes differences and sorts, page 195. Difference between Christians
and others in doing duties, page 266.
E.
Enquire after sin, page 87. Fruitless Endeavors, page 280.
F.
Faith does four things to strengthen the spirit, page 19. It does four ways
relieve the soul, page 23. Fearing of trouble twofold, p. 28, 29. Faintness,
page 31. A case about Fainting of spirit, p. 33. Faith in operation page 54.
Feeding of conscience what, p. 64 Sin Felt three ways, page 85. The Failing of
conscience what, page 97. To Fear the wounding of spirit, page 126. Former
feelings of love, four signs of it, page 185. Foundations of divine love to
the soul, page 192 Faith and doubtings go together, page 207. Faith to be
cherished and advanced, page ^27. Failings in duties, page 260.
G.
A Good cause for suffering, p 41. A Good carriage under suffering in seven
things, page 45. The Goodness of spirit seen in seven things, page 48.
Graces two ways considerable, page 254.
H.
Humiliation an effect of the wound, page 43. Hope, page 44. Humility, page 86.
Harkning to Satan, page 138. Humbling necessary for three things, page 162.
I
Infirmity double, p. 3. Self Jealousy, p. 99. Illness of diet, p. 136.
K.
Six rules for Keeping off wounds from the spirit, p. 128 The Knowledge of the
wound of the spirit necessary, p. 114.
L.
Liberty of spirit, p. 49. The Law and two things about it, p. 94 95. The Life
of sense, p. 137, 225. Three things about Love and duty, p. 170. Love one for
kind different in degree, p. 184. Littleness of faith causes doubts, p. 206.
Little grace apprehended, p. 245.
M.
Means of making conscience good, p. 51. The Misery of conscience in silence,
in three things, p. 97. Mistaking about the wound of conscience, p. 115.
Melancholy is not this wound, p. 117, 118. Motives to pity wounded spirits,
p. 124. Means to get off the wounds of spirit, three, p. 140. Misplacing of
warrants, p. 174. Motives and means against doubtings, p. 216.
N.
New risings of old sins, p. 102. Spiritual Niceness, 137.
O.
Overlading of conscience what and how, p. 63. Operation of melancholy, p. 116.
Opening of the wound needful, p. 142.
P.
Patience of the spirit, p. 16. Prevention, p. 69. Rules for Preserving the
spirit from wounds, p. 6, 128. Provision, p. 147. Promises the ground assuring
love p. 185.
Q.
Quietness of conscience, p. 48. A Question about the inequality of graces, p.
256.
R.
Religion expressed under the cross p. 43. The Remoovall of sin, p. 64. Seven
Reasons proving the burden of conscience insupportable, p. 106. Releevements
under the suspension of Gods love, p. 159. For the Regaining of Gods love in
sense, four things, p. 167. Ten Releevements against doubtings, p. 204. Ten
Releevements under imperfection of graces, p. 248. Five Releevements against
failings in duties, p. 261. Relapses after resolutions, p. 286. Causes of
Relapses nine, p. 288. The misery of Relapses, p. 296. The kinds of Relapses,
p. 301.
S.
A twofold Spirit, p. 6. Conscience called a Spirit, p. 8. Man's Spirit
considered two ways, Ibid. Strength of Spirit graduall, p. 36. Sinking of
Spirit double, p. 37. Sleighting of crosses evil, p. 39. Sins that are most
wounding, p. 92 A Seared spirit, p. 114. Sense of love graduall, p. 167. To
Settle the soul in assurance of love, p. 176. Sin to be subdued, p. 231.
T.
Thankefullnesse, p. 43, 125. Tenderness of spirit, p. 49. Tempting of
conscience of what, p. 58. To Taste divine wrath, p. 96. Testimony of Satan put
by two ways, p. 219. Thoughts 1. In their sorts, p 319. 2. In their trouble.
3. In their trial. 4. In their cure.
V.
Uprightness of conscience, p. 48. Use conscience, p. 65. Conscience Vexed, p.
58. Unsteadfastness in walking, p. 163 Unworthiness, p. ^34.
W.
Weakness of spirit, p. 28. Wound of spirit, p. 73. Want of good, p. 103.
Willing of cure, p. 141. Wash the wound, p. 143. Gods Wages, p. 281. Waiting
must be added to doing, page 283.
FINIS.
A Postscript to the Reader
THou have a promise of Cases in the Epistle unto thee, I had no sooner made
it, but it was called for by desiring and needing Christians, time and leisure
also serving, it is brought forth, as fitly agreeing with the subject handled,
and deemed (by men more judicious then my self) very comforting and settling
unto perplexed souls.

I. S.

Errata.
Page 116. for are the next instruments, read or. Page 323. for formerly,
read formally.


