HONOR Military, and Civil, contained in four Books. Viz.

1. Justice, and Jurisdiction Military. 2. Knighthood in general, and
particular. 3. Combats for life, and Triumph. 4. Precedencie of great Estates,
and others.
IMPRINTED AT LONdon by Robert Barker, Printer to the Queens most Excellent
Majesty. ANNO DOM. 1602.

TO THE MOST HIGH, MOST MIGHTY, AND MOST Excellent Sovereign Princess
ELIZABETH, by the Grace of GOD Queen of England, France, and Ireland, Defender
of the Faith, etc.
COnsidering (most sacred, and most mighty Princess) that the duty of every
Subject is, not only to obey, but also to the uttermost of his power, in his
degree and quality, to advance the Honor of his Prince and Country; I have
according to my poor talent endeavored, in discharge of my duty, for the
place of Service which I hold under your Majesty, by your most Gracious
favor, to frame these Discourses concerning Arms, Honor, and the Princely
Magnificence of your Majesty's Court, a subject proper to Armorists, and men of
my profession, not handled heretofore in our English by them, or any other to
my knowledge: Yet fit to be known of all Noble and worthy personages, being
persuaded that as your Majesty has been a Mirror to all the world for
excellent gifts of Mind, Person, and Fortune: So your Reign most happy both
for victorious Arms and flourishing Arts, which shall remain glorious to all
posterity, may happily receive some Honorable note from hence, which I most
heartily desire, as the chiefest scope of my dessein.

And so most humbly beseeching your Majesty to vouchsafe that your poorest
Servant may in all duty, and humble devotion prostrate himself, and his
Labors, at your most Sacred feet, I beseech the Almighty God to grant your
Majesty to exceed all other Princes in length of life, in perfect health, in
prosperous Reign, and all felicity.

Your Majesty's Most humble and obedient servant, W. Segar Norroy.

T. B. To the Reader.
THE principal marks whereat every man's endeavor in this life aims, are
either Profit, or Honor; The One proper to vulgar people, and men of inferior
Fortune; The other due to persons of better birth, and generous disposition.
For as the former by pains, and parsimony do only labor to become rich; so
the other by Military skill, or knowledge in Civil government, aspire to Honor,
and humane glory: whereof this Book chiefly entreats, and enformeth all
Gentlemen and Soldiers, not only what commendations and prizes belong to
valorous desert, but likewise what penalties and punishments appertain to
disloyalty, and Arms abused. Therewith also is discoursed what dignities, and
honorable degrees, accompany Martial merit; What order has been observed in
public Combats, and princely Triumphs, both ancient and modern; What places
are due to Noble personages, as well men as women; And to some others also
according to their sex, age, Office, or place of Service, with diverse other
things, whereof worthy Gentlemen desire to be informed. This work with much
labor compiled, and not without great cost and care now Imprinted, is
according to order by learned censure allowed, and by the Honorable
approbation of the right Noble Earl of Nottingham, the most ancient, and most
Honorable Commander in Arms of this kingdom, and chief Knight of the Order,
favorably admitted and recommended. The imitation of whose virtue, and valor,
and the excellent actions of other worthy men mentioned in this Book, may
reasonably incite all young Gentlemen, to employ their time in study of Moral,
and Military virtue; Thereby, to become serviceable to their Prince, profitable
to their Country, and worthy of all Honorable estimation, and advancement.

Vale.
The Contents of the first Book.
THe Prooeme. Cap. 1. Military Justice, and the original thereof. Cap. 2. Of
war and the causes thereof. Ca^. 3. Of Soldiers. Cap. 4. How soul. did
anciently take oath. Ca. 5 What sorts of men ought to be reputed soldiers,
etc. Cap. 6. Of young soldiers called Tyrones. Ca. 7. Of old sold. called
Veterani. Cap. 8. Of soldiers called Emeriti. Cap. 9. Of crimes Military in
general. Cap. 10. Of Treason and Traitors. Cap. 11. Of Disobedience. Cap. 12.
Of Cowardice. Cap. 13. Of other Military crimes. Cap. 14. Of punishment
pecuniarie. Cap. 15. Of degrading of soldiers. Cap. 16. Punishments Military.
Cap. 17. Of wages and pay. Cap. 18. Restitution of sold. goods. Cap. 19. Of
Donatiues, or Rewards. Cap. 20. Of Apparel. Cap. 21. Of Hostages. Cap. 22.
Restitution of sold. persons. Cap. 23. Privileges anciently granted unto
Soldiers. Cap. 24. Of Cassation and dismission. Cap. 25. Of Justice
appertaining unto war offensive. Cap. 26. Of Justice appertaining to war
defensive. Cap. 27. Of Peace. Cap. 28. Of Licenses and Pasports. Cap. 29. Of
Ambassadors or Legates. Cap. 30. Of prisoners taken by the enemy. C. 31. Of
rescuing of Prisoners. Cap. 32. Of enemies. Cap. 33. Of Immunities Military.
Cap. 34. Of Captains general, etc. Cap. 35.
OF HONOR Military and Civil, containing five parts*
CHAP. 1.
The Prooeme.
For So Much as the life of man holds on a traueilers course continually as it
were under sail, either in the calm of Peace, or the tempestuous sea of
War: it behooves every well governed Common weal to be prepared for the
one and the other. which moved wise Princes and Magistrates, not only to
devise Laws how men might sieve peaceably, but also to prepare Arms, both
defen sieve against foreign invasion, and correctiue against domestical
insurrection. It therefore seems expedient to conioyne good Laws unto Arms:
the one command, the other to execute: yet because they are in nature diverse, or
rather contrary, it proves a matter of much difficulty. For well we see,
between equity and force is no proportion. Laws are friends to peace and
rest: but war is always accompanied with men of audatious, sudden, and
seuerest spirit. The Philosophers and wise Lawmakers therefore have endeavored
more, to make such wars as might assure peace, then to enjoy such peace as
might not be able to withstand war. Iustinianus desiring to unite Laws and
Arms, authorized one Officer to command both Martially and Ciuilly, whom be
called Praetor; and so the Romans continued that name for their General of
war. His office was mixed both of authority Martial, and Civil. It seems
therefore that as our bodies cannot without sinowes and blood be strong, so the
war without aid of Law and equity may not endure: which moved wise men of
former ages to be persuaded, that Prudence and Power ought never to be
disioyned. Of which opinion the ancient Poet Horace seemed to be, saying, Vis
expers consilij mole ruit sua. The same reason induced learned writers, to
commend valiant Captains and wise Counselors, jointly, and (as it were) in
one and the self same rank. With Croesus they coupled Solon: with Simonides,
Pausanias: Pericles with Anaxagoras. The Poets likewise in their works do
praise Agamemnon with Nestor: Diomedes with Ulysses: meaning to mix force with
policy, and civil Laws with power and Arms. The Kings of Lacedaemon before
they went unto the war, did first sacrifice and consult with the Muses how
they were to proceed: for so did Terpander and Pindarus men of special note in
Sparta, and which were employed to set forth the praises of such of the
Lacedaemonians as were both in Music and Arms excellent. The Romans did
highly and openly extol Quintus Fabius Maximus, Rollianus, and Pub^ Decius,
for their notable knowledge as well in Arms as learning. Thus does it appear,
that Arms and Laws cannot be disioyned: and consequently, where the
counsel of Captains is directed by Law, equity and Religion, there
insolency, fury, and unlawful force is repressed.

CHAP. 2.
Military Justice and the original thereof.
Having discoursed what concord ought be between Military and Civil
government, it seems requisite to say, that Military Justice generally is a
Law made by consent of all Nations, the property whereof is to repulse force,
and to redress injury. For who so in defense of his own person does resist
force with force, shallbe thought to have so done justly. And albeit bruit
beasts do seem in some sort to offend, and defend without the aid of wit,
and humane forecast, yet because all they do, is without discourse of reason or
election, it cannot be said that they use force according to Justice, but
rather moved by natural instinct, consequently attempt without order, or
warrantie of any lawful proceeding, which indeed lives only among men. For
admit that no Laws were, and all things left subject to Fortune and chance,
yet such is the force of equity and reason, and the root thereof so firmly
fixed in the minds of men, as though never so much defaced and obscured in
savage and degenerate natures, may not yet utterly be razed out of the minds
of any, be they never so outrageous, but that at one time or other, either
openly to the world, or inwardly to themselves, will they, nill they, some
vigorous and lively sparks thereof will appear. The like may be particularly
said of Justice Military, whereof in the minds of Soldiers so deep an
impression is made, as no force or time can raze it out. And touching the
execution of Iuridiction Military, we say the same was ever performed by
Judges and Magistrates thereunto purposely appointed, and that men of Arms and
all other Soldiers were in all Military matters, directed, punished, and
ordered by their proper Commanders, as in ancient time they were in Rome, and
since in France has been used. But first, to touch the original of Martial
justice, it seems to have been taken from the Romans, who for causes
reasonable, bestowed upon men of warte great privileges, dignities and
immunities, afterward confirmed and increased by diverse Emperous. By whose
example some Kings of France, and other princes have done the like. Yet true it
is, that at the beginning, such jurisdiction was executed only in the field,
by the Tribunes, or their deputies, I mean in ordinary offenses, or else by the
Legate in their absence, or else by the Consul or General, in causes capital,
and faults of most importance. But in process of time, the insolency of
Soldiers increasing, the said justice became more general, and the authority
thereof extended into all towns and places whatsoever, inflicting exemplarie
punishment according to the quality of each man's offense, yea, in the end the
reputation of Martial jurisdiction became equal to that of civil Justice.

CHAP. 2.
Of War, and causes thereof.
CIcero says, that discord and dissension among men, is ended either by
persuasion or force: the one proper to men, the other to brute beasts: and
where the first cannot prevail, the other may be excused. Reasonably therefore
are those wars to be taken in hand, where injury can not be otherwise
repulsed, nor peace by other mean preserved. And most apparent it is, that
nature has bestowed upon all creatures certain arms or weapons wherewith to
defend themselves, and offend their enemies, yea, whosoever observes shall see,
that each living body is in some sort by nature disposed to make war: as the
calfe, before his horns be grown, does endeavor to offend with his head. The
colt turns his heels when his hooues are scarsely hard. The little whelpe,
whose teeth be tender and unfit to bite, will nevertheless do his best to
offend with his lips, Man likewise, of all other creatures least furnished both
for offense and defense, will with all his strength, hands and feet, labor to
resist his foes, as appears even in children, who provoked to anger, do
spurn and bite; happily moved thereunto with desire of victory only. The same
reason inciteth men, both in general and particular, to contend: so as one
city makes war against another, one province inuadeth another, and whole
kingdoms and commonweals do endeavor to oppress one the other. Yea, the
affections in every sole body, do (among themselves) str^ue and make war;
which moved some Philosophers to say, That no victory is woorthier of
commendation then that wherein man does conquer himself. Fortior est qui se,
quam qui fortissima vincit moenia: nec virtus altior ire potest, says Ovid.
Seeing then that each man has war within himself, and against others, and
cities contend for honor and empire, one taking from the other, what can be
said Ours, more then that, which is gotten and defended by arms? Yet true it
is, that some wars are not properly so called; as where one part of the
people does assault the other: for that kind of contending ought be named
sedition: but when one Nation takes Arms to offend an other, there we say is
war. When the Romans were divided, one faction laboring to oppress
another, (who by nature ought to have joined together) such enimitie was called
Sedition: but when the Galls, the Carthagenians, or other foreign people
assaulted the Romans, or were by them assailed, that contention was truly
called War. But omitting to say more of civil or domestical dissension, let
us discourse of that War which is ordinarily made with foreign people, for
Empire and glory, as when the Romans took Arms against the Latins, Sabines
and Carthaginenses, or when they fought with the Celtiberi and Cimbri, not who
should command, but who should live: yet ought the cause whereof the War
grows be just, and such as the enemy cannot but acknowledge reasonable. For
who is so impudent as will deny that if injury be done, or the goods or honor
of other men be taken, but he from whom the same was taken, is justly caused
to become an enemy? Non licet cum alterius incommodo suum augere commodum. Yet
Aristotle proves that some men are by nature borne to command, others to obey,
whereof may be inferred, that Wars are necessary as well to compel those to
subjection that are destenied thereunto, as also for others (who ought to
govern) to hold their authority. The Romans also did think good sometimes
to make War only to entertain the youth fit for service; as when they sent
their Army unto Carthage, being persuaded that ouerlong idleness might
corrupt. For indeed, the labor and discipline of War, does make men honest
and temperate. It seems therefore that Princes martially disposed, have not
only thereby purchased renown, but also much enlarged their dominions For
which reason the Lacedaemonians do seem to accuse Pausanias justly, for
inhibiting them to extend the bounds of their dominion. But contrariwise
Lycurgus and Minos are much praised persuading the Lacedaemonians and the
people of Cyprus to advance their glory, by War: whereof we may infer,
that Peace is not the only end of War: yet not doubt the chiefest and most
necessary cause thereof, according to the opinion of Cicero, saying, Nullum
bellum esse iustum, nisi quod aut rebus repet it is geratur, aut denuntiatum ante
sit and indictum. Whereby appears that Wars ought not to be made without
just cause, and public expostulation. And Plutarch writing the life of Numa,
says it was not lawful for a King or any Soldier to take Arms, until the
Foecials had so commanded or allowed. Wise Princes and commanders therefore
ought to deliberate maturely before they take Arms, to the end the War may
be just, and the proceeding thereof advised. In which point they shall do well
to imitate the example of Traianus, who used to observe these cautions viz.
carefully to supply the places of Soldiers slain: courageously to repress
the enemies pride: and according to discipline Military, compel Muteners to
obedience and order. To that purpose also, Octauianus Augustus did say, No
war ought be taken in hand, unless the same did promise more hope of profit,
then fear of loss. For who so shall otherwise do, may be compared unto a
Fisher, that angleth with an hook of gold, which being broken, or lost, all the
fish hehath gotten, suffices not to make a recompense.

CHAP. 4.
Of Soldiers.
THat men of war have been anciently called Milites, every man knows: but
for what reason that name was given, every one is not informed. We say
therefore with Vlpianus, that men professing Arms, were called Milites a
malitia, idest duritia, which is as much to say, as they were so named in
respect of the hardness and danger they endure in defense of other people, or
else because they repulse the evil and injury which enemies do ofter.
Romulus called unto his guard a thousand men, and some writers have thought,
that thereof Soldiers were called Milites. Howsoe^er that were, sure it is
that anciently who so would become a Soldier, it behooued him to procure his
name to be enrolled in the Generals book. For necessary it is, that he who
commands should know what number, and so what quality his soldiers be.
Which reason moved Alexander Scuerus to keep in his chamber a Catalogue or
Roll of his soldiers, and at his leisure, considered of their suites, their
number, their dignities and wages. He likewise cautiously provided, that no
man should aspire to privileges Military, by ambition, but for virtue and
skill. And who so desires to enjoy the honors appertaining to Arms, ought
first to prove he is a Soldier. In which case the laws of Cossus, Crassus
and Sceuola must be remembered; for thereby is decreed, that as a man being no
citizen, should not take upon him to be a citizen, so he that is not enrolled a
soldier, cannot anow himself a soldier. By the laws Civil, three ways
there are for soldiers to prove their profession: which done, they shall not
afterward endure any unworthy or unreasonable imposition. The first proof
is by letters and certificate of Captains or Officers. Charles the seventh
king of France commanded that no man should be capeable of charge or office in
the war, unless he were authorized by the Kings letters and (...), in
testimony of the public honor and degree he had. Secondly he ought to make
proof, that in former time he had behaved himself as a good Soldier, and
such a one as served long with commendation. Lastly, to be recorded among the
number of received soldiers, for that testimonial cannot be disproued. It was
also anciently used, that in token of honor due unto soldiers of good merit,
a girdle was given; for it is written in the law Imperial, Militia exornatos
confestimcingi debere. And Charles the seventh king of France in his Edict
says thus: Edictum est, ne quis Miles in numeros referatur, qui non cinctus,
sit armis^* it a munitus, vt probum decet militem. All Soldiers who served on
horseback (by the Romans called Equites) used to carry on their left arm a
certain shield or buckler, and in the right hand a lance, and unto their side
a Spanish sword was girded. Thus appears it that the girdle was the first
Ensign bestowed upon soldiers, and without it no man might account himself
among the number of military men, nor claim the privileges due unto
soldiers. For only they that were enrolled and girded were properly called
soldiers: and they that were newly elected to supply the bands, were named
Tirones. It was also an use among the Romans, that when any Captain attained
this Ensign of the General, he then delivered a Roll or list wherein his
number was contained. By which means the Commander general might be informed
of his whole Army. It is also to be remembered, that besides these enrolled
men, do appertain to every army certain supposed soldiers, who are men
absent, or not used, and nevertheless may enjoy the immunities of the war:
for so was it decreed by Claudius the Emperous, calling those sorts of
Soldiers Militia imaginaria.

CHAP. 5.
How Soldiers did anciently take oathe.
TO exact an oath of Soldiers was ever thought necessary, not only for the
Common weal, but also for the Soldier himself. For at such time as Soldiers
served voluntarily, Lucius Flaccus, and Caius Varro being Consuls, the Senate
of Rome thought fit to compel men of war to swear, though before that time
no oath was taken, but at the pleasure of him that would. Cincius in his first
book de remilitari, affirms the oath to be thus: or to this effect. In
exercitu decemquc millia passuum prope, furtum non facies dolo malo, solus
neque cum pluribus. Extra hastam, hastile, ligna, pabulum, vtrem, follem,
faculam, si quid ibi inueneris, sustulerisue, quod tuum non erit, quod pluris
nummi argentei erit, vti ad Consulem Caium Laelium, Luciumue Cornelium, sieve ad
quem little ius erit, proferas: aut profitebere in triduo proximo quicquid
inuencris, sustulerisue dolo malo: aut domino suo, cuius id censebis esse,
reddes: Vtine quid non recte factum esse voles. We read also, that long after
Petreius forced the Soldiers of Pompey to swear they should not abandon their
Captain, nor Camp; neither should they do any treason, nor consult one with
another privately. The like oath was ministered unto the Soldiers of Domitianus
by Caesar, and they became the more obedient. To which agrees that of
Polybius, Sc obtemperaturos, and facturos quicquid mandabitur ab Imperatoribus
iuxta vires. Out of Liuie lib. 22. Sese fugae atque formidinis ergo non
abituros, neque ex ordine recessuros, nisit teli sumendi, aut petendi, aut
(...) feriendi, ant ciuis seruandi caussa. Also Consulis iussu se conuenturos,
nec iniussuabituros. Out of Halycarnasseus Lib. 10. Secuturos se consules,
neque signa desertures, neque aliquid contra populum facturos. These words
also Scipio swear, Liuij Lib. 22. Vt ego Rempublicam non deseram, neque vllum
ciucm Romanum deserrepatiar. Si sciens fallo ex animi mei sententia, tum me
Jupiter Opt. Max. domum, familiam, remque meam pessimo laetho afficiat. The
oath was taken in the presence of the whole Legion, by one Soldier holding
his drawn sword in his hand, and then all the rest severally answered drawing
their swords, Idem in me. After under the Emperors was added, Se Caesaris
salutem omnibus rebus antelaturos. And they which took oath to Julian the
Emperor, laying their swords to their necks swear, Se omnes pro eo casus quoad
vitam profuderint, si id necessitas exegerit, perlaturos. In the declining
state of the Roman Empire, when Barbarians were enrouled among Roman
soldiers, they were branded with the Emperors mark, and took their oath,
Per Deum, and Christum, and Spiritum Sanctum, and per Maiestatem imperatoris
omnia se facturos quae praeceperit Imperator, nec mortem recusaturos pro Romano
Republica. In France also it was anciently used that every Soldier received
into any band, or ornified with the girdle Military, should be sworn unto the
King or the general of horse, if he were a horseman; or serving on foot, his
oath should be taken by the Praetor, or Captain of footmen. And so greatly was
an oath esteemed, as Caesar procured a Law to be made, that no Citizen
unsworn, should remain out of Italy more then three years. By imitation of
which example, the Senate of Rome decreed that all Magistrates should swear to
answer truly unto those Interrogatories that were propounded. The Soldiers
of that time did swear by the gods; and Radamanthus did think that all doubts
ought be decided by oath. Either else they were to swear by the wind, and
the sword: because the one was cause of life, the other of death, for such was
the Scythian use; Or else by Jupiter, Mars and Pallas; or sometimes by
eleuating a Scepter, which Princes in old time accustomed. But the Christians
do swear in form according to the pleasure of the Prince, the General or
Chief^aine: but in matter the oath of Christians is to swear by the Deity, As
by God, or by his holy Euagelists, etc.

And here is to be noted, that if any soldier were absolved from his oath,
yet might he not without the Generals license, be received into any other
Army: which ordinance was observed by Constantinus and the ancient Romans
also. For when Pompilius remained in Province, with his Army, where the son
of Cato served as a Tiro or young soldier, he thought good to discharge that
Legion, where the son of Cato was. But he desirous to continue in the war,
did write unto Pompilius, that if he pleased to consent he might remain
there, he would by anew oath become bound, because the first oath dispensed
with, he might not fight with the enemy. And hereof we may be also informed
by an Epistle which Marcus Cato the father did write, wherein he commanded his
soon not to bear Arms; for (quoth he) Qui miles non est, cum host pugnare
non debet. Thus concluding we say, that soldiers ought be first girded, then
enrolled, and lastly by oath obliged.

CHAP. 6.
What sorts of men ought to be reputed Soldiers, and who may not be pressed
to bear Arms.
ALbeit the war is to employ men of diverse quality, yet ought they only to
be reputed Soldiers, that make profession of Arms. Therefore out of that
number, Victualers, Merchants, Artificers, and generally all men attending
their own private profit, are excluded. Neither ought any of them be
privileged by the war, because such negotiants be occupied in their own
commodity, and therefore, as men of base sort, unworthy to be numbered among
men of war: because their only endeavor is to gain: which they cannot (
nisi admodum mentiantur) we also account to advocate, procurer, pleader, or
perswader to merit the immunitie of war. For Claudius the Emperor commanded
that every soldier should (without counsel) render a reason of his own life.
The Philosophers also thought those men needless in every common weal:
Neither can we allow Ploughmen to be properly called soldiers, when they
are first pressed to supply the want of men trained; yet true it is, that in
respect their bodies are accustomed to hardness and labor, they become often
times men of good service. And some great Captains and Generals also, living a
rural life, have nevertheless performed their office with much glory, as
Fabritius, Cincinnatus, and others. Martianus the great doctor did also reject
bondmen, as persons improper and unworthy the name of soldiers, affirming it
unnatural for him that was not his own, to serve any other master then him
only to whom he was bound. And to say truly, the mind of man used to slavery,
is base, abject, and unapt for the war: Yet has it been seen, that in times
of necessity those men have been employed For we read how Marcus Antoninus the
Emperor, after the war of Carthage, trained a great number of slaves, and
made them fit for arms, calling them volones. And Sex^us Pompeius in the civil
war of Italy against the Romans armed many bondmen. Yet certain it is, that
no slaves were received for soldiers, until they had been enfranchised; and
so was it decreed by Lucius Aemilius Paulus, and Terentius Varro, then Consuls.

And for as much as the name and dignity of a soldier is honorable, all
persons having committed any infamous crime, and thereof convicted, ought not
afterward bear arms. Also because the war requires beauty and force in
men, no soldier should be allowed, that wants any member or limme of his
person, which moved the Emperor Domitianus and Nerua to decree, that no child
should be gelded. And Constantinus commanded that upon pain of death no Eunuch
should be made, being persuaded that gelding did take from men the courage and
viuacitie required in war. Yet was it allowed by the ordinance of the good
Emperor Traianus, that albeit a man were borne with one only stone, or by
any mishap did loose it, yet might he by the law Military bear Arms; for
Silla, and Cotta had naturally that imperfection. We conclude therefore that
some fort of Eunuchs (but no gelded man) may bear Arms. And histories do
make mention that the Enunch Narcete in the reign of Justinian expulsed the
Goths out of Italy. Likewise Eucherius a principal favorite of the Emperor
Constantius was both an Eunuch and a Captain very notable. And Cyrus having
conquered Babylon made choice of Eunuchs only to guard his person, holding
them of no less force then other men, and by example of horses gelded, was
persuaded, their bodies were no whit disabled for the war.

But as these before may not be received, in respect of natural debilitie, so
others for respect of qualification, are privileged and excused, as Priests,
and persons Ecclesiastical, to whom Romulus granted Immunities: the like grace
was given to the Druides in France, by Caesar: also all Graduates in school
may challenge that privilege.

The same Immunitie is also due to men aged, and those youths that are not of
perfect strenght; for so was it judged by Gordianus the younger: In which point
the law of Gracchus is also much to be liked, for thereby he commands that
no person of less age then seventeen years should be called unto the war.

CHAP. 7.
Of young Soldiers, called Tyrones.
IT is said of Hercules Prodicus, That he growing toward man's estate, retired
himself into a solitary place; and there sitting alone, considered, that two
ways there were to pass the course of his life: the one was of pleasure, the
other of industry and virtue. This consideration I recommend to all young men,
yet therewith wish, the choice should not be left unto themselves: For the
greatest number affecting idleness or sensual delight, or else wanting mature
judgment, would follow that way they find themselves inclined unto. It
therefore behooves they should be compelled to the exercise of virtue and
Arms. And as great pity it were to withholde the rewards due to military
merit, so not to incite young men to the exercise of Arms, were an error
inexcusable. For so was it decreed by law of Dioclesianus and Maximianus:
which also was more anciently observed of the Romans, as by their histories
appears: For when Quintus Seruilius (being Tribunus Plebis, with authority
Consulare) was to assemble an army against the Lucanes and Equians, he refused
to make a confuse choice of the people, and elected of the younger sort only.
After that time, the Dictator Camillus with his General of horse Seruilius
Hala, did the like. And Appius Claudius, with Lucius Furius Camillus, being
Consuls, by direction of the Senate, in a war against the Gauls, did choose
only young men, both of the City and of the Country: yea sometimes for want of
them, prisoners and persons condemned were pressed to bear Arms. In some
other ages by reason of scarcity of able bodies, some youths before they were
seventeen years old, and others that exceeded fifty, were forced to the
war. But here is to be remembered, that neither these Tyrones, nor others for
necessity chosen, ought be of equal reputation unto more ancient soldiers:
yet thus much privilege the Romans did allow them, That when any error was
committed, they were (in respect of youth and want of experience) the sooner
pardoned. In the flourishing state of the Roman Empire, the Tyrones were
chosen out of the free borne, at the age of 17. years by Officers called
Conquisitores, Scruius Honoratus.
and for the first year they had their Tutors, and Guardians appointed to
ouersee them. But it is referred to one among other causes of the overthrow of
the Empire, when landed men were charged to find Tyrones according to their
revenues and possessions. For Vegetius writes, Lib. 1. cap. 7. Tot vbique ab
bostibus illatae sunt clades, dum longa pax militem incuriosius legit, dum
possessoribus indicti Tyrones per gratiam aut dissimulationem probantur, tales^
sociantur armis quales dimini habere fastidiunt. For then slaves, and base
people were matriculated for soldiers, insomuch as straight laws were made to
the contrary.

CHAP. 8.
Of old Soldiers, whom the Romans called Veterani.
THe Romans called those soldiers Veterani, that had served long either in the
Legion, or elsewhere, and behaved themselves dutifully as beseemed honest men.
The time ascribed unto that name of Veteranus, was commonly twenty years,
which being passed, the soldier was called also Emeritus. The privileges
bestowed upon such persons were so great, as diverse Emperous did contend who
should be most liberal. Also Canutus king of Denmark decreed, That when
soldiers did meet to eat, the younger should give place to him that was his
ancient in Arms, because his meaning was (even in ordinary ceremonies) to
observe the honor due unto ancient service, and whosoever in that case failed
to perform the Kings commandment, should be cassed with ignominy.
Constantinus the Emperor privileged old soldiers so much, as to exempt them
from all imposition, contribution, and exaction, The great Antoninus, and his
father before him, commanded that all Veterani should be free from paying unto
the building of ships; also in buying of wares in fair, or market, they should
pass without payment of custom. They were also permitted, without
molestation, to live in ease and rest. Also to them it was lawful to use
commerce, fell, employ money, traffic, and do all things for their own best
commodity. So concluding, we say, that the Emperor Dioclesianus and Maximianus
ordained, That unto every Veteran, having honestly served in any Legion, or
under any ensign the space of twenty years, an honorable or causarie
dismission should be granted. After which time, he enjoyed many other
immunities, which extended also to his children, but no further. And
Constantinus, besides many other graces, commanded they should be offered no
sort of injury, thinking it unmeet that men so much privileged by their
Prince, should endure any wrong or indignity. Nevertheless, if they, or any
of them did steal, or commit felony, then without respect of privilege, the
punishment due by law should be inflicted. But rarely is it seen, that men
having long lived virtuously, and enjoying the degrees of honor, should offend
or do any act of slander or infamy. Lastly, the Veterani might marry wives,
they could not be put to tortour, nor condemned to the Mines nor public
works, they night manure their lands: for Constantine the Great assigned them
lands that would fall to husbandry, and to every one of them to buy necessaries
25000, pieces of money called Folles, one yoke of oxen, and an hundred bushels
of grain. To the other 100000. of those Folles, as appears in Codex
Theodosianus li. 7. titulo 20. where there is also a most ample Privilege
granted to them by the said Constantine.

CHAP. 9.
Of Soldiers called Emeriti.
REasonable it seems, that soldiers having endured the danger, toil, and
travel of the war, should be suffered to lead the rest of their lives in
ease and rest: for so has their long and loyal service deserved. We read that
the Legionarie soldiers of Rome that had many years continued in pay (without
committing any crime) were licensed to depart at their pleasure,
notwithstanding the Oath formerly taken: and every man having so served the
state, might also claim the privileges appertaining to old soldiers: for so
was it decreed by Tiberius the Emperor: and Caligula (as Tacitus says) taking
view of his bands, dispensed with diverse Captains before they had gray hairs:
as one that respected rather their imbecilitie and strength decayed, then the
time they had served: being persuaded that age approaching, was a cause
sufficient to merit honest liberty. It was therefore thought fit, that all
soldiers that had well served, should be left to their liberty. Antoninus
the Emperor commanded that such men should be dismissed with honor, and
extraordinarily rewarded. Which favor was granted, not only to men armed, but
also unto all officers that followed the General, and served in place of
reputation: yet were they inhibited to keep company with other men, then such
as made profession of Arms, or to intermeddle in any affairs, not
appertaining unto the war, upon pain to forfeit ten pounds in gold. These
Emeriti were always ancient seruitours, and professors of Arms, who
continued in Court or Camp, ever ready to perform the Emperors will and
commandment. Touching the time of their service, it seems to rest chiefly in
the Princes commandment, and was sometimes more, and sometimes less, as has
been formerly said: yet in shorter space then ten years, no soldier was (with
grace) dismissed, as shall be more particularly said in the Chapter of
Cassation.

CHAP. 10.
Of crimes Military in general.
FIrst it is to be known, that some crimes be common, and punishable in all
men: and some are proper to men of war only: of the first are forgeries,
adultery, public and private violence, sedition, manslaughter, burning of
houses, treason, sacrilege and other enormities: for whosoever commits any
such offense, whether he be a man of war or not, the punishment due is all
one. Crimes proper to soldiers, are such only as are committed contrary to
discipline Military, and excuseable in other men, not being soldiers. Now is
it necessary to understand how crimes contrary to Military Justice ought be
punished. We call that discipline Military, whereby men are made obedient, and
instructed in all such qualities as are required in a soldier. And for so much
as the readiest way unto virtue, is first to restrain vice, we must endeavor
by discipline to hold men in obedience. And notwithstanding al humane policy
and laws, both divine and humane, some men there are so vile and malicious, as
(without respect) will commit all acts or injuries that can be invented, yet
good governors do forecast, not only what men do, but also what may be done:
which moved the Romans to consider that some men did commit faults beyond
expectation, in so much as there wanted not of those that have slain their
own fathers. For which offense, Solon in his laws provided no punishment: and
being asked why he did not inflict penalty upon those offenders, answered, he
thought not that any man would have been so wocked. We therefore think fit, to
prescribe punishments unto all crimes: for soldiers (like unto others) be
neither gods nor perfect creatures, but men apt to err, and without restraint
of law not to be governed. Arrius Meander in his first book Dear Militari
says, Crimes properly Military are those which a man (as a soldier) does
commit. And here a certain difference between error and crime is to be
noted: for we call that an error when any thing is done contrary to common
discipline: as to be slouthful, disobedient, and unwilling: but he is said to
commit a crime, when the fault is accompanied with intent to hurt: for without
that intent, the act may be imputed to destenie or chance, and as a thing
happened unawares: therefore Antoninus the Emperor did command Herculianus and
other Captains, that if a soldier having stricken another man, did prove the
act was without intent to kill, that then he should not be condemned of
manslaughter: as if a man be slain when soldiers be trained, or in exercise
of arms, then that act is not accounted criminal, but casual: yet if such an
act be done in any other place, the doer thereof shall be re^uted guilty. But
as the humors of men are diverse, so are the crimes by them committed of diverse
quality, as hereafter shallbe discoursed.

CHAP. 11.
Of treason and Traitors.
ALbeit a custom most common it is that Traitors flying unto the enemy, are
well entreated and greatly esteemed, so long as their service is thought
profitable: yet afterward (their condition being known) that credit does
decay, and consequently the favor they find becomes every day less then
other. The law calls them Traitors that endeavor to betray their Prince or
the liberty of their country: they are also called Traitors that having a
charge, do yield the same up unto the enemy, of whom it is by law decreed,
they ought to be capitally punished, or at the least discharged. Likewise all
Explorators or spies that bewray our secrets and inform the enemy, are
accounted Traitors, and worthy capital punishment. With these offenders the
Egyptians used to deal more mildly, for in that case the offenders had their
tongues cut out, and so suffered to live. They were also accounted to have
committed a crime treasonable, that furnished the enemy with weapon or
munition, whereby they might offend us, and we with more difficulty offend
them. The goods of such men ought be confiscate, and their lives subject unto
death. The doctor Paulus judged that who so did sell any armor unto the
enemy, did thereby incur the forfeiture of his life. Edward the third, king
of England, in a Parliament holden at Winchester, caused Edmond Earl of Kent
to be convicted of Treason, for persuading other Lords to rebel. Yet true it
is, that Traitors are diversely punished, according to the quality of the
crime, the custom of the country, and the discretion of the Prince. Tullus
Hostilius king of Rome, caused Metius Suffetius guilty of Treason, to be
beaten by the Littori, and after torn in pieces with horses. Antony de Leua
defending Pauia, discovered a soldier of his had informed the French, that in
that city small store of powder remained, he called him to be examined: and
the fault confessed, the soldier was put to death and quartered. Among the
Athenians it was not lawful to bury a Traitor, which was the cause that the
bones of Themistocles were secretly carried into his friends house and there
buried. Bellesarius finding that a Citizen of Athens called Laurus, had
complotted treason, commanded his body should be brought unto a hill before
the city, and there thrust through with a stake, which manner of death is at
this day used in Turkey. Charles the Emperor making war upon Philip duke of
Austria, practiced with certain of the Captains to persuade Philip to leave
the field, who having compassed so much as the Emperor required, they
demanded a reward of their treason: which was forthwith paid in counterfeit
money, and carried home. But the Traitors perceiving the money not to be good,
returned therewith, desiring better payment: The Emperor calling both for the
Traitors and the payers, caused the Traitors to be put out of the doors,
saying, That false workmen must be paid with false coin.

CHAP. 12.
Of Disobedience.
TOuching contumacie, or disobedience, the law determines, that whosoever
resuseth or omitteth to execute that which the General commands, or does what
he forbid death, ought to be punished by passing the pikes; yea though he has
effected what he would: which rule the Romans observed precisely, as appears
by the Justice of Lucius Papirius the Dictator in flicted upon Fabius
Rutilianus General of the horse, although he were victorious and had slain
twenty thousand Samnites. Likewise by the judgment of Torquatus against his
son (having contrary to his commandment fought with the Tusculans and gained
victory) was nevertheless beheaded. Therefore it remains (as a rule) that not
only breach of commandment, but also simple contumacie is an offense capital,
if the same be apparent. Yea, sometimes omission of due respect is criminal,
though not ever capital. As if a man with order do enter into a place
guarded, or pass out by any other way then that which the General has
appointed. Another point of disobedience it is, not to go unto the army being
called, or without license to depart from thence: for that is indeed an
apparent contempt, and by the Romans punished with death. Omnis contumacia
aduersus Ducem capite punienda est. Posthumous Triburtius commanded Aulus
Posthumous to be put to death, for vanquishing the enemy without his
commission: and Aulus Fuluius for going to fight uncommanded, condemned his
son to die. Yet the Egyptians made a law that Captains and soldiers, for
disobedience, should not be put to death, but remain infamous, until by some
notable service their reputation were rccouered. Arrius made a law, that if a
man did wound his fellow soldier (though it were with a stone) he ought to be
cassed: it it were with a sword, to loose his life. The like was decreed by
Kanutus King of Denmark.

CHAP. 13.
Of Cowardice.
IT seems that all Military offenses may be comprised in three, viz.
Cowardice, Treason, and Disobedience: yet will we speak more particularly.
Touching the first, easily may it be conceived, that Cowardice is the cause and
occasion of many other transgressions, for who so is irresolute, or apt to
entertain fear, is also soon persuaded to save himself with dishonor. By
Cowardice soldiers do forsake their ranks: and sometimes abandon their
Ensign: which faults the Romans punished with death. It was long since by an
Edict commanded in France, that whosoever did forsake his colors, or the rank
wherein he was placed, should receive punishment by passing the pikes. Another
kind of Cowardice is to feign sickness, or without leave to be absent from
the Army. He is also culpable of that crime, that leaves his place of
standing upon the wall, during the assault: or shall abandon the trench. Yet
true it is, if any such fault be committed at any other time then during the
assault, the same is not absolutely capital, but is arbitrable. It has been
also anciently used, that if a soldier without lawful excuse did go from the
Watch, or office of Scout, or any other service allotted unto him by the
Sergeant, that then he should be judged to pass the Pikes, or Harquebuzies,
according to that kind of weapon wherewith he served. And if many soldiers
(as a whole Ensign or troop) did commit that crime, the Roman use was to
execute every tenth man, in presence of the rest: to the end the pain might
fall upon few, and the terror to all. And in such cases of Cowardice the
General ought to be inexorable, because severity does make an army
invincible. The experience whereof was seen when Spartacus defeated the
Romans conducted by Crassus. For presently upon that dishonor, Crassus
commanded a decimation, and put to death a tenth man in every Legion, for not
having fought manfully. That being done, he begun to fight anew: And albeit
the number of Romans was diminished, yet were they victorious, and cut the
enemies in pieces. But here is to be noted, that of fleeing there is two sorts,
the one proceeding of a sudden and unlooked for terror, which is least
blameable: the other is voluntary, and as it were a determinate intention to
give place unto the enemy: A fault exceeding foul, and not excusable.

CHAP. 14.
Of other military crimes.
BEsides these crimes formerly touched, many other there are that merit severe
punishment, and chiefly, To abandon the Army, and flee to the enemy. For what
injury can be greater, or what offense more foul in a soldier, then being
instructed, trained, and well entertained, to employ his virtue in service of
an enemy? This crime was therefore in ancient time grievously punished, and
the greater the quality was of him that did offend, the more was the
punishment inflicted. Yet do we not find any particular pain ascribed to
this offense, but left to discretion of the General. Nevertheless in that
case it shall not be amiss to imitate the ancient proceeding of ancient
Chieftaines. The Romans therefore for punishment of the Brutij, who fled unto
Hannibal, protested them to be from thenceforth neither soldiers, nor
companions in arms, but persons ignominious, and servants unto the Army. And
when Cyrus intercepted a letter, which one of his Captains called Orontes had
written, offering to serve the enemy with a company of horse, Cyrus assembled
the Leaders, and in their presence condemned Orontes to death. Fredericus the
second possessing the kingdom of Naples, was by his son Henry abandoned,
and being with the enemy he pardoned him, yet with condition he should confine
himself to the bounds of Apulia, until his father returned from Germany:
during which time, Henry practiced some other innovation, and therefore was put
in prison, and in the end suffered death. Elfricus a chief Leader under
Etheldred King of England, pretending to do service, fled unto the Danes: but
the war being ended, he returned unto his Prince, desiring his life: which
with difficulty he obtained, yet did the King command his eyes should be put
out.

To these offenders, we may add all such as secretly do relieve the enemy
with counsel, money, meat, or by any other mean whatsoever. In which case
the Emperor Constantius decreed, that if a soldier, Captain, or Leader did
utter any word, sign, or voice, to encourage the enemy, that for so doing he
should be tied in chains, and as a beast be led whersoeuer the Army went.

Of this kind we may account two other sorts of men, whom the Romans called
Emansores and Desertores. They named him Desertor that went from the Army, and
did not only secretly depart, but stayed long with the enemy, as one
intending never to return. But Emansor was he that without license went away,
and very shortly did come again, and therefore his offense reputed the less.
This error is most commonly found in young soldiers whom we call Tyrones.
Neither are they to be all punished alike, but the Judge is to examine the
circumstances of the cause. The law wills that who so is found a Desertor in
war, is to be capitally punished, whether he were horseman or soldier on
foot. But if a horseman do prove a Desertor in peace, he thereby forfeiteth
his degree: or if he were a footman he loses his pay. If such an offender be
found in the city, he incurreth the loss of his head: but being elsewhere
found (and that the first fault) he may be restored, but offending the second
time, shall loose his life. He that to this fault shall add any other, ought
be the more sharply punished: and having so offended, he shall be in case, as
if he had been twice a Desertor. To this kind of offense, in diverse ages, and
by diverse Princes, diverse penalties were appointed. The Spartanes repulsed such
men from being capable of any office, and to live ever unmarried: also to give
place to all other men, and have the one side of their beards shaven. Auidius
the usurper commanded, that some should have their hands cut off, and other
their legs broken. David King of Scotts, and second of that name, being
forced to flee his kingdom, at his return (as one mindful of those that
abandoned him in time of danger) caused all Chiefetaines and Captains to pay
money, and would have disinherited Robert Stewart, who was before named his
heir. Also for an example to posterity, he imposed a pecuniary punishment
upon al those that did abandon their king in fight.

Another sort of fugitives be they, that being taken prisoners, will not
return (although so they might:) of which number, some do only rest with the
enemy, and others do take part and fight on his side, which is an offense of
great importance. Paulus the Ciuilian writes, That such offenders should be
either burned alive, or hanged. Vlpianus would have them also burned. Or,
rather, as some report, he was not executed by the King for leaving him, but by
the factious Lords for adhering firmly to the King.
Nicholas Brembre an Alderman of London at a battle in Essex, or near Oxford
(as others say) fled from King Richard the second, and after being found in
Wales, was brought from thence to London, where he was publicly put to death.
Also at the siege of Capua, seven hundred fugitives were taken, beaten with
rods, and their hands cut off. By these examples appears, that no certain
punishment was inflicted for this offense.

To these we may add all seditious persons, who desirous of innovation do
attempt diverse enterprises to move mutenie or rebellion. These seditions are
most commonly in armies composed of diverse nations, or where strangers are
called for aid. In Cybaris a great number of Achaians and Troezenians did
dwell quietly, until the Achei finding their number the greater, took Arms
and expulsed the Troezeni. In Constantinople likewise the strangers did
conspire to oppress the Citizens, but in a battle were all forced to fly.
Also after the suppression of the tyrants in Syracusa, the strangers and hired
soldiers fell into great dissension. For reformation of this fault, Julius
Caesar is to be followed, who finding such a mischief to arise, cleared the
army of all busy heads, swear the soldiers, and at the beginning repressed
the sedition. Modestinus the doctor did give counsel, that whosoever did begin
any muteny, should loose his life, if the sedition were dangerous; but being
of less moment, the beginner thereof should be cassed. The law of Naples
commands, that soldiers or others, moving any sedition, should forfeit both
life and goods. Trebonius a chief conspiratour against Caesar, was put to
death by Dolabella: and Marinas Phalerius Duke of Venice, for conspiring
against that state, was beheaded: yet in some places and times the punishment
of these offenses was only pecuniall, or infamy.

Another crime of greater consequence it is, to yield up, or abandon a place of
strength, or depart from a standing given in charge: for by the Roman law,
those crimes were ever accounted capital. It is likewise capital for fear of
an enemy, to forsake the trench, the wall, or other place to be defended.
Therefore Augustus Caesar, caused certain Captains (having abandoned a place)
upon pain of death to recover it. Modestinus says, That he who leaves his
place of watch or ward, is to be reputed worse then an Emansor, and
consequently for such a fault to be punished, or at the least be discharged his
service: and he that forsakes the trench, incurreth the same penalty, though
the enemy do make no approach: but if the enemy be at hand, then so to do,
is capital. Every man may read that Appius Claudius sent certain bands
against the Volses, and they abandoning their ranks, were beaten with rods, and
after executed: which proceeding seems extreme, and therefore in like case
some few have been put to death to terrify the rest. Antonius leading an
army against the Parthians, executed only every tenth man of those that first
did run away. The like was done by Appius Claudius in the war against the
Volses, putting a few of those soldiers to death, that first abandoned their
Ensigns. Caius Caesar, according to the Laws of Petreius (at suite of the
Legions) did put to death only twelve persons that were the chief moouers of
sedition; so great was his mercy. Nevertheless, the use was ever to put him
to death that did flee first. It is said that Epaminondas walking the round
where the watch was set, happened to find a soldier fast asleep, whom forth
with he slew with his sword: saying, As he found him, so he left him. The like
penalty do they incur that sleep, or depart from their place of watch:
which moved Epaminondas to account a soldier sleeping, like a man without life.

By the law Military it is provided, that if any Soldier do loose his Arms,
or sell them, he shall for so doing be capitally punished, or at the least
disabled to bear Arms, at the discretion of the Judge. Or if any soldier do
cast away his Arms, and not defend himself against the enemy, shall thereby
incur infamy. The old Romans reputed him worthy to receive a bastonado that
abandoned his Ensign. The like punishment they thought due to him that did
forsake the General. If any Captain did flee from his Company, or any
Ensigne-bearer did let fall his Colors, he was beheaded, or beaten to death
with cudgels. Appius Claudius being sent against the Volses, caused certain
Ensigne-bearers, for loosing their Colors, and others that fled out of their
ranks, to be beaten with rods. Paulus the doctor holds it a great fault for
any Soldier to sell his Arms: yet seems he less culpable then the former.
But that kind of crime is thought equal unto desertion: and whether he sell
all or part of his Arms, the fault is one. Yet that doctor makes this
difference, viz. he that sells his greaues or his powldro^ s, ought to be
beaten: But who so sells his shield, his head-peece or sword, shall be punished
as a Desertor. In this age to loose, exchange, or borrow the Arms belonging to
another Ensign, is an offense very great, and so punished by the Edict of
Francis the French King. Likewise by the Law of Scotland, if any Soldier do
empawne his sword, he should be reputed unworthy the company of other
Soldiers, and judged infamous; yet true it is, that if any young Soldier (whom
the Romans called Tyro) do commit that fault, he ought to be punished with
more favor. Now concluding we say, that seeing the loss or selling of Arms,
argues no magnaimitie, courage, or care of a Soldier, but is rather a sign
of sloth and pusillanimitie, incurring that error, he is not to be esteemed
better then a base or abject companion. And for that reason it seems the
Spartans did well to banish Archilocus the Poet, writing these words, Melius
est arma abijcere, quam mori.

Among these Military crimes, we may not forget that which the law calls
crimen falsi. This fault may be diverse ways committed, and chiefly by fayning
sickness, which is a sign of cowardice, and unworthy a soldier. The Lawyers
assign to that offense, a beating with cudgels. Another way this fault may be
incurred, if a man that is no soldier, will affirm he is a soldier, or
wears an Ensign which he ought not: the one was punishable by the law
Cornelia, the other to be more severely punished, by the opinion of Modestinus.
The Egyptians made a law that who so counterfeited false letters, or razed any
writing, should have both his hands cut off. Kenethus king of Scots made an
ordinance in his kingdom, that who so committed this fault, should be hanged,
and forthwith cast into a grave. Of this crime are they also guilty, that make
any counterfeit money: and they that forge false keys to escape out of prison.
Yet Constantinus the Emperor refers this last fault to the discretion of
competent Judges.

It is also a fault very infamous to commit any theft, either in the field or
town, and consequently severely to be punished. The Romans used therefore to
swear soldiers (were they servants or freemen) to carry nothing out of the
camp: or if by hap any thing were found, then the finder to bring it unto the
Tribune: But if neither love of virtue nor oath prevailed to withhold men from
stealing, then were they with great severity by the Roman law punished.
Valentinus and Theodosius consented, that if any soldier did spoil houses or
fields, the country people might then assemble, and kill them. The like was
permitted by the Edict of Francis the French King 1523: yet with this caution,
that if any of those thieves were taken alive, that then they should be brought
before the Judges or Governors of the province, and by their discretion
receive correction. This crime was ever accounted so detestable, as whosoever
therein did offend (though the goods taken were of small worth) yet was the
offendour severely chastified. Tiberius the Emperor caused a soldiers head to
be cut off, for stealing a Peacoke. Charles Duke of Burgundy commanded a
soldier to be nailed unto a post, for taking a hen from a poor woman. Selim
the Turkish Emperor caused Bostangi Bassa his son in law to be beheaded, for
spoiling the Provinces where he was governor. Francis the French King decreed,
That if any purueyour or victualler of the Camp, contrary to his Commission,
did exact or carry away the commodities of his subjects, it should be capital,
were it in town or country.

For many respects also the vice of adultery ought be severely punished, as
well in war as peace: which caused Lucius Cautilius Scriba, the same year
the Romans were defeated at Canna (by commandment of the chief Bishop) to
be beaten extremely, for having committed that crime with Florina. Julius
Caesar likewise caused a special favorite of his to be capitally punished, for
dishonoring the wife of a Roman gentleman, though no complaint was made
thereof. Papinianus the doctor says, That if any soldier do keep in his
house his own sisters daughter, he may be reputed an adulterer. And as a
Maxim or Rule it was decreed by all doctors of Law, That no soldier condemned
of adultery may after bear Arms. By the law Iulia the crime of adultery was
thought worthy of infamy, and the offenders disabled to bear Arms.
Aurelianus commanded, that if any soldier did ravish the wife of his host, he
should be tied unto two trees, and torn in pieces. Frotho king of Scots made a
law, That if any man by force defloured a virgin, he should be gelded. The
Egyptians proclaimed, That whosoever was found in adultery (although it were
with consent) yet the man should be beaten with a thousand stripes, and the
woman have her nose cut of^. Diverse other military offenses there are, which
for brevity I omit: wishing all Princes, Generals, and other sovereign
commanders in Arms, to incline rather to mercy then extreme severity:
following the advice of Salustius, who persuades, that soldiers should not
(for ordinary errors) be punished like unto vulgar people; and ever respect to
be had unto those that were ancient servants and Emeriti. For in the reign of
Antoninus, so great honor was given to old soldiers (called Veterani or
Emeriti) as if any of their sons had offended, they were not (like to others)
condemned to labor in the mines of metal or other public works, but sent
into a certain Island. And here is to be noted, that this favor extended no
further then the first degree. It is also to be remembered, that as punishments
are diverse, so ought they be diversely inflicted: for no Captain or other
commander of greater quality, ought be condemned to the mine, or forced to
labor in those works; neither may he be hanged or burned, unless the crime
be capital. Also soldiers should not be cast unto beasts to be eaten, nor
put unto torture: which privilege is precisely observed in Italy. And in this
point, Magistrates are to regard the quality of crimes, and the circumstances:
for he that commits an outrage upon his father, meriteth an extreme
punishment; but he that is drunk or wanton, deserves not so great an
infliction. The quality of offenders is also to be looked unto: for freemen
and bondmen are not to be equally used. Now to conclude this matter of crimes
military, we say that the Romans practiced all these punishments, Viz.
Pecuniaria mulcta, Munerum indictio, Militiae mutatio, Gradus deiectio, and
Ignominiosa missio: Which is, Pecuniall taxation, Forfeiture of immunitie,
Putting out of service, Degradation, and Ignominious cassation.

CHAP. 15.
Of punishment pecuniarie.
SOme crimes are of such quality as soldiers are only checked in their pay,
for negligence: or otherwise taxed for their absence: yet ought they not be
reproved as Desertors, or loyterers, if by sickness, imprisonment, or other
constraint they were forced to commit offense. For to such faults the law
assigns no other punishment then at the discretion of the Chieftaine. Yet
does it appear, that in the year 153. ab vrbe condita, Publius Varro, and
Marcus Sergius Tribuni militum, having received a defeat of the Vienti, they
and the soldiers were commanded to pay a great sum of money, notwithstanding
that Sergius affirmed the loss to proceed only from the fortune of war. And
Virginius desired he might not be made more unfortunate at home, then he had
been in the field. Zeno the Emperor punished a soldier for taking upon him to
let another man's house, his own term being therein determined: because
Iustinianus had inhibited soldiers to dispose or meddle with goods not their
own. Unto like punishment is he subject that shall require his Prince to
permit him to receive pay, in two diverse armies. If any soldier did take upon
him other function then that of the war, or so do, as deputy unto another,
he was taxed in ten pounds of gold. Archadius and Honorius made a law that if
any soldier disturbed a victualer, he should pay an hundred pounds of gold.
The same Emperors ordained, that if any Captain or other Commander whatsoever
did use a greater part of an house or lodging, then the Harbenger had allotted
unto him, he should incur the penalty of three hundred pounds in gold, and
if any soldier of less quality so did, he should be cassed. Theodosius the
Emperor to suppress all evil customs in the war, decreed, that if a
soldier required any thing that was appertaining to his host, he should be
taxed to pay ten pounds. The French King made a law, that if soldiers did take
the goods of any Citizen, or man of the country, he should be capitally
punished, as if they had committed theft. Kanutus King of Denmark ordained,
that all military pains might be satisfied and redeemed by money, excepting
only the chastisement of beating: therefore who so had incurred the crime of
manslaughter was condemned in forty thousand talents of money: one part thereof
to be paid unto the King, another to the soldiers, and the third to the
kinsfolk of the party slain.

CHAP. 16.
Of degrading and dishonouring Soldiers.
APpius Claudius, by commandment of the Senate, pronounced that all the Roman
soldiers taken prisoners by King Pyrrhus of Epiro, and after by him freely set
at liberty, should be put back, and lose honor. He that served on
horseback, from thencefoorth became a footman. He that was a foot soldier
was put to a sling: and he that embezeled another man's weapon, was utterly
discharged. He that abandoned his place, did forfeit his degree. He that in
peace did forsake a Leader of horse, was put from his place: and if many have
done so, and return shortly, then they were all abased and appointed to meaner
services. He that moved any muteny or small sedition, was degraded and abased.
Diverse Emperors have decreed, that if any soldier on the holy day did behold
Comedies or other vain sights, he should lose his entertainment. Iustinianus
deprived a Captain called Bessa, for having omitted opportunity to renforce a
place of strength called Petra. Seuerus the Emperor confined and degraded all
the Praetorian soldiers that distrubed Pertinax. He also took from them their
military girdles, their apparel and other ornaments, confining them to abide
an hundredth miles from the city. Fuluius Flaccus the Censor deposed his
brother from military dignity, because he being a Tribune, without order
from the Senate, did license a band of soldiers to return to their houses.

CHAP. 17.
Punishment Military by beating.
FOrasmuch as great Captains did find by experience, that hope of impunitie,
was the occasion of many Military errors, and to the end no fault should be
free from chastisement: they therefore appointed pains to be inflicted upon
every offense. A soldier that resisted correction offered by his Captain, was
beaten with a cudgel: and if he laid hold or hand thereof, he was cassed: and
if he brake it or laid hand upon his Captain, he was put to death: whereof may
be inferred, that soldiers were anciently beaten. The Roman use in this kind
of punishment was thus: A Captain coming to correct a soldier, at the first
slightly touched his person with a cudgel, or (as some have written) with a
withy made of a vine tree, which done, all other men present in the Army did
strike the condemned man with staves and stones: yet when many had offended
together, they were not thus handled, but out of a great number some eight or
ten of the seditious were slain, the rest sent away. In the mean space all
were in fear of equal punishment. The Senate of Rome used to deliver unto
their Captains a certain short staff or cudgel, wherewith to beat the
soldiers that offended, which served also to direct them in their march and
ranks. This punishment they called Castigatio per vitem. Hadrianus the
Emperor refused to deliver any such staff, but only to Captains of
discretion and good fame. It is also written that Lucilius a Centurion having
broken his staff required another, and breaking that also demanded a third.
Whereupon (as Tacitus notes) he was nicknamed, Cedo alteram, i. Reach me
another. Caluinus called also Domitius obtained license of the Senate to beat a
Captain named Iubillius for fleeing the field cowardly. It is also extant that
certain Legions, abandoning a Consul were beaten (or as now by the Italian
phrase we term it) did receive the Bastonado. This kind of punishment was
ever accompanicd with infamy: which moved Kanutus king of Denmark to decree,
that all punishments of that kind, might be dispensed with for money: alleging
that because dogs were so corrected, therefore it was of all other
chastisements most ignominious, and consequently to be abhorred, persuading all
great Captains to use temperance, and to punish rarely and advisedly:
remembering that Phaleucus a General of the Phocenses was slain by a soldier,
to whom he had given a Bastonado: much more cautious and slow ought Colonels,
and private Captains to be, in offering this kind of correction.

CHAP. 18.
Of wages or pay.
For So Much as the life of man cannot be sustained without meat, and soldiers
wants can not be supplied where money lacks, it behooves they should be
furnished with ordinary and daily wages. Yet true it is that in times long
since passed, men of war served at their own charge, and without pay:
therefore at what time the Romans begun to give wages is not (I think)
certainly known. Some histories say, that until the reign of king Tullus,
the Romans received no wages. Others affirm that giving of pay began when
Massinissa made war with Syphax king of Numidia, for then Scipio hired
certain mercenary soldiers: a course never before known among the Romans.
Liuy writes that in the year 348. ab vrbe conditae, when Gneus Cornelius
Cossus, Valerius Potitus, Publius Cornelius Cossus, and Claudius Fabius
Ambustus were Tribunes military with authority Consulate at the siege and
sack of Anxur, (now called Terracina) the Senate decreed the soldiers should
receive pay out of the common treasury: for (says he) until that time every
man provided for himself. Howsoever these payments began, sure it is (as
Thucydides writes) that in the war of Peloponesus, to every footman two
drachmae was daily given: which in the month amounted unto 60. How that pay
may be compared to ours, or the entertainment of soldiers in this part of
Europe I know not. Omitting therefore to say more thereof, let us see how those
pays were anciently bestowed. Antoninus the Emperor decreed that in his
reign, no wages nor donatiue should be given to any soldier for the time he
did remain with the enemy: although at his return he were allowed
Postliminium. It therefore seems strange that Modestinus holds, that if a
soldier taken by the enemy, and having served his full time, do return home,
he ought not to be entreated as an old soldier, and receive reward as an
Emeritus. Whereunto Arrius Menander in his book de re Militari assenteth: yet
here is to be noted, that to receive a donatiue, and to receive wages, are
diverse. For Donatiues are bestowed only on those men that have performed their
full time of service, and called Emeriti: but wages or ordinary pay is due as
a yearly or monthly entertainment. To me therefore it seems not necessary
that donatiues should be given unto any man being a prisoner, nor that he can
challenge pay to be due during his absence, unless the same be granted by
special grace and favor of the Prince. For who so is a prisoner in the
enemies hand, may be reputed a dead man: and who can say a dead man deserves
pay? Moreover, as he who without lawful leave absenteth himself, ought to be
checked, so those soldiers that are slothful or lazy, do woorthily merit
to lose their wages, according to the censure of Antoninus Pius the Emperor,
saying, That nothing was more unreasonable then slothful folk to devour the
common weal, when by their labor they did not increase the commodity
thereof. Yet reason it is that sick men should receive their pay, because they
are supposed to serve, although they be by want of health impeached: neither
ought they be abridged of pay that are employed in their own particular
affairs so long as they depart not from the Army, nor the service receives
prejudice.

CHAP. 19.
Restitution of Soldiers goods.
THe Romans and other free people made Laws whereby such lands or goods as
were taken from them by the enemy, should be restored. For what is lost in the
war or by mean of the war, the same was redeliuered unto the owner by
force of the said Law called Postliminij ius: and it seems a course of
natural equity, that whatsoever has been taken and kept by force in absence,
the same should be restored unto the owner when he returns. As therefore by
going out of our confines, a man loses his lands and goods; so by entering
again, he may claim his own. This grace is granted not only unto men able
for fight, but also to all others that with counsel, service, or otherwise may
stand the State in stead. Likewise if a son be taken by the enemy, and during
his imprisonment the father dies, he may at his return home, enter into the
possessions of the father. Or if a mother were taken, and her son yet unborn
in her body, when he is borne he may be ransomed for the prise of one soldier,
and return to the lands he is to inherit: yet true it is that freemen may not
enjoy the benefit of this Law, unless they return with intention to abide in
their country; which was the reason that Attilius Regulus could not be
admitted to receive his own, having sworn to go again unto Carthage and not
continue at Rome. The same titles also have they that be owners of great ships
and Galleys fit for the war, but Fishers and watermen are denied that
advantage, because their vessels are made only for profit or pleasure, and not
for the war. Neither may any fugitive receive this favor: for he that
leaves his country with intent to do evil, or become a traitor, must be
accounted among the number of enemies. But if a man do go unto another
country that is in league with us, and then return, albeit that country be
distant from ours, he shall not need to be restored by virtue of this Law, but
enjoy his own, as if he had never gone from home. Yet true it is, that
sometimes in peace a man may claim the benefit of Postliminium, as when a
freeman is detained by force and made a captive: yet can he not be said taken
by the enemy, because those violences which are used before the war is
published, are not properly called actions of the war; though the difference
seems small, when they take from us, and we from them. But if a captive do
flee from us and return, he shall not be allowed Postliminium. Whosoever is taken
prisoner during his absence, may be reputed as dead; for so the law does
account him: which reason percase moved Caius Cotta (returned home from
prison) to say, he was twice borne. But here is to be remembered, that no
prisoner returned, can by the law of Postliminium receive wages or donatiue
for the time of absence, unless it be by grace. If a Citizen of Rome did go
from the City without license of the Senate (unless he were taken by the
enemy) he lost the privileges of Rome, but being taken and returned, he might
recover his city and liberty. It was also decreed by the Romans, that if a
father, or the people did give or sell a man, and the enemy receive him, he
might not after be allowed Postliminium: but if the gift were not accepted,
then he might; because there is no giver where a receiver wants.

CHAP. 20.
Of Donatiues, or Rewards.
THe ancient Emperors, and before them the Consuls and other commanders in the
war, had in use to bestow upon Captains and Soldiers certain gifts to
encourage them to serve well. Those great Magistrates did also use after or
before any action of much importance, to assemble their army, and then
selecting out of the whole number some few men of most merit did give unto
them notable commendation. They likewise used to bestow a lance or sword upon
him that had wounded an enemy, or some such weapon. To him that had unhorsed
or spoiled an enemy (if he were a footeman) was given a pot of gold or other
piece of plate. If he were a horseman, he received an ornament or favor to be
set on his crest. He that mounted first upon the wall of an enemies town,
received a crown of gold. These donations or favors did not only encourage
men to valor, but also made them much honored at home: for besides glory and
fame, they were also received into their countries with much pomp and
applause: which incited others to attempt the like. Octauius Caesar after the
Philippian war, did give unto the Legionarie soldiers certain crowns, and
unto every Captain a garment of purple: but Hostilius, one of those Tribunes,
saying those crowns and garments were like unto boys bables, they were
rewarded with land and money. Julius Caesar did give unto the sons of
Adbucillus (the one called Rocillus, the other Aegus) in recompense of their
great service in Gallia, certain lands there, besides diverse sums of money,
whereby they became enriched. The same Caesar, after his triumph for victory
against Pharnax, performed all the promises he had made; and gave unto every
soldier five thousand groats, to every leader twice so many, to every horseman
double so much. Pompeius having overcome Mithri^^tes, before he triumphed,
bestowed upon every soldier five hundred groats, and upon the Captains a
far greater reward. The Scipiones and Metelli were likewise most careful to
reward and honor their soldiers. Alexander Seuerus was wont to say, That
soldiers would not live in awe of their General, unless they were well
apparelled, well armed, full fed, and some pence in their purses. Sometimes
also soldiers were honored with other gifts, as crowns, lances, furniture
of horses, bracelets, lands, images of brass or stone, with diverse other
ensigns of honor, as Pliny and Aulus Gellius have written. Which gifts were
by the Doctors of Law anciently called Donatiues. But here it shall not be
amiss to remember the dishonorable Donations of Lucius Sylla, who used to
take money from the true owners, and give the same to others.

CHAP. 21.
Of Apparel.
AS victual is necessary, so is it requisite that soldiers should be clothed:
which moved great Commanders to be careful that men of war might be ever
furnished as well of apparel as of food. Caius Gracchus first procured a law to
be made, that garments might be given unto soldiers without diminishing their
pay. Long after, the Emperors Archadius and Honorius caused certain money to
be given unto every soldier for the provision of his coat: which order was in
Illyria only. It was also anciently ordered that military garments were
provided in this sort: viz. every thirty inhabitants paid for one soldiers
coat in Thracia. The like was done in Scythia, Mysia, Egypt, and every other
province subject unto the Empire. These Countries were also sometimes taxed
according to the acres of land, and sometimes according to the number of
dwellers, and the money paid into the military treasury. Francis the French
king proclaimed an Edict, that soldiers resting in any city or village in the
winter, should have garments there: and being furnished for the summer, should
use their summer suits until the winter following: and then resume them
again. And in case the keeper of those garments did not truly restore them,
then upon complaint unto the General, order should be taken for the soldiers
satisfaction. By which means the soldiers were ever honestly clothed, well
armed, and comely furnished both on horseback and on foot. Yet Pesceninus
Niger inhibited soldiers to use in the waare any girdle garnished with gold or
silver, to the end the enemy should not be enriched. He therefore commanded
such ornaments to be reserved for their wives and children. Adrianus the
Emperor used to wear in the war plain garments without garnishing of gold,
or strings set with stone. The scabberd of his sword was also seldom wrought
with Iuory. In the reign of Maximinus Caesar, after the Persian war, a
private soldier happened to find a purse or sachel set full of Margarites and
precious stones, which he took off, contenting himself with the beaty of the
leather whereof it was made. For indeed garments of cloth and skins to keep
out cold and rain, are only needful for soldiers. Yet true it is, that in
the time of the Emperor Iulianus, the manners of soldiers were changed. And
Maximinianus the younger, used to wear a Jack of golden maile, after the
Polonian guise: he also had his Armor and Lance gilded. Caius Caesar after a
great victory, suffered his soldiers to become wanton, and called them
companions in Arms, permitting them also to ornifie their weapons with silver
and gold. And here it shall not be amiss, to tell how great regard the
Emperor Aurelianus had to discipline, notwithstanding the favor he afforded
to all men of war, charging his Captains to observe these instructions:
Sivis Tribunus esse, imo sivis viuere, manus militum contine: adding these
commandments, let no man take away the Pullen of of another, his sheep, his
oil, his wood, his grapes, his salt, but rest contented with his victual. Let
soldiers live upon spoil of the enemy, not of the country. His arms shall
be bright, and his garments strong, let his new apparel supply the old, and
his wages remain in his purse, not in the Tavern: let him lay by his chain
and ring, and keep his horse fat. Let no beast taken be sold, but every man
help another. Let the Physicians cure infirmities freely, and without rewards.
Let nothing be given to the soothsayers. Let every one be quiet in his lodging,
for who so moves any mutenie or misrule shall be punished. This is in effect
the sum of such precepts as are to be observed by soldiers: whereby appears
what they are to do, what to leave undone, and what garments ancient Emperors
and soldiers were wont to use. Yet true it is that the hope of all good
service and success, does consist in valor, conjoined with policy, whereunto
we will add, that decent apparel, and fit ornaments of body, do become all
military commanders, as well to make them venerable in sight, as also to give
beholders occasion to think, they are persons worthy of respect and honor.

CHAP. 22.
Of Hostages.
FOr the observation of Articles and capitulations of truce or peace, Princes
and commonweals were wont to deliver certain hostages or pledges, to the
end that if promises were broken, then the goods of hostages on the party
breaking (by the Edict of Commodus the Emperor) were confiscate, I mean only
those goods which the hostages have there gotten. Vlpianus writes that
hostages cannot without license dispose their own goods by will or testament.
Hostages are delivered either as captives, or else as pledges to keep
conditions: which being performed they ought be returned home: for unto other
obligation free men may not be bound. The Romans acknowledging ancient
favors to them done by King Philip, at such time as they took Arms against
Antiochus, and desirous to requite the same, they sent Demetrius his son
(then an hostage) unto his father. Contrariwise Constantinus being in Britain
began also a war upon the Scots, and sent to them hostages, by which mean
he made the Britains his sure friends: whereof the Scots informed, and knowing
that secret intention, suddenly slew all the hostages. Whereby appears that
where faith is broken, there revenge is taken upon hostages. Likewise Henry
duke of Saxony holding Venceslaus brother to Pribislaius Prince of the
Obotriti, an hostage, put him to death even in his brothers sight, for being a
mouer of that war. We therefore conclude that hostages may be given, and
ought to be received for performance of capitulations, because peace assured,
is better then victory hoped for. And here it shall not be impertinent to
remember that a young Gentleman nephew to Marcus Bambalionus remaining an
hostage, by his discretion practiced a peace with the enemy: which by other
mediation could not be compassed.

CHAP. 23.
Restitution of Soldiers persons.
IT seems not reasonable that a soldier having endured the fortune of war,
and therein also hazarded his own life, (falling into the enemies hand) should
be deprived of any privilege or profit to him due. The Emperors Dioclesianus
and Maximinianus commanded that soldiers taken by the enemy, and returned
home, should be restored to all they lost, although their goods were seized and
confiscate: yet diligent inquisition to be made, whether that soldier were
remaining with the enemy willingly, or by force. In this case the opinion of
Adrianus the Emperor is to be allowed, saying, A soldier willingly taken and
let loose, ought be returned back to the enemy: but if he were taken in
service, and after escaped, then ought he be restored to his former estate. But
thereof good proof is to be made, for if before that time he had been esteemed
a faithful soldier, then some credit ought be given him: but if he were an
Emansor, a man negligent, or one that had been long absent, and after returned,
then should he be little believed. The doubt therefore is, whether a soldier
thus returned, has been a fugitive or a prisoner. In the one case he shall be
punished, in the other he ought be restored and receive his pay with
recompense, as a veteranus or old soldier. We conclude therefore that common
soldiers, (and officers in the war also) being detained by the enemy, ought
to be fully restored, and participate of every Donatiue or other liberality the
Prince shall please to bestow. And Vlpianus did think that such allowance
might be demanded in the name of the soldier remaining prisoner, if his
Attorney did so require. By the law Imperial the same is also commanded, and if
a soldier together with his father and mother were taken prisoner, the father
and mother dying in prison, the son may (by the law Cornelia) challenge their
goods and lands. For considering his absence was occasioned by service of the
commonweal, he ought not only to receive restitution to his country, but
also enjoy his best fortune, with the greatest reward can be reasonably
required.

CHAP. 24.
Privileges anciently granted unto Soldiers.
Soldiers were (by ancient custom) unconstrained to pay subsidies out of
lands, confining or fronting upon the enemies country: and during their
service in the field were excused from all ordinary impositions, and taxations;
also from bestowing of gifts, and giving of rewards.

Soldiers accused of any crime, ought not be tortured, or being found gilty
might not be hanged upon any gallous or gibbet, before judgment were lawfully
pronounced.

Soldiers were privileged from guing witness in twenty causes.

Soldiers during the war, were free from prescription.

Soldiers ought to receive restitution of all things taken from them, or their
wives.

Soldiers were exempt from prevention of Justice: and permitted to use
privilege.

Soldiers could not be constrained to take tuition of another soldiers
children.

Soldiers were credited more then other men in the buying of wares for their
money.

Soldiers paid custom for the wares they carried, yet what a soldier bare
about him, was not subject to confiscation.

Soldiers were not retained in prison, or forced to pay above their power.

Soldiers were excusable of contumacie and supposed deceit, yet if he were
called ought to appear.

Sou^diers being prisoners, were set free, upon the bond of those that were
suitors for them.

Soldiers might not be punished having about them any badge, or ensign of
honor, but before punishment were inflicted, those badges were taken away.

If any soldiers Attorney did make a contract or bargain, the soldier was
bound to perform it.

CHAP. 25.
Of Cassation and Dismission.
THe Romans used diverse Especes or kinds of Cassing, calling one honorable,
an other causary, and the third ignominious; which diverse names did proceed
from diverse reasons. But first is to be considered that the Roman soldiers
were Legionary and perpetual, but ours are only voluntary and temporal. Their
Legions were continually in being without discontinuance, ever in exercise, and
in time of peace preparing for the war. But our bands do assemble
extraordinarily and casually when peril does approach, or when the Prince is
pleased upon any sudden to call them. And as our soldiers are by unlooked for
occasion assembled, so are they returned home, so soon as the war (which was
cause of their convocation) cease. This is the reason that Cassation, which
the Romans did account dishonorable or infamous, seems to us little or no
disgrace at all. For indeed the Romans did hold no dismission honorable,
unless he who was dismissed did depart by license of the Emperor or General,
and that with special grace and favor. The Roman custom was also such, as
no man of Arms was Cassed with honor, until he had served a horseman ten
years, a footman twenty years, and sea soldiers twenty five years. In the
end of which terms, the men of war were licensed to depart with
commendation: (and for the most part) with recompense of service, to some more,
and to some less, according to their merits. From which time forwards they
continued or discontinued at their pleasure, or if they were required to stay
in the Legion, the same was by way of entreaty and no compulsion, and during
that abode, to be free from all services and impositions, save only to fight
with the enemy. Also whenever those men marched, they followed a particular
Banner, purposely appointed for old soldiers, leaving the Standard ordinary,
and the Eagle. And if they or any of them desired to return unto his own
house, they were permitted so to do, and received diverse privileges,
confirmed and increased by Constantine the great. Thus much concerning Cassing
honorable.

Touching Cassation causary or reasonable, that was ever in consideration of
sickness or disability accidental and incurable, as if any Soldier became
blind, or lame: or happened to have any such impediment as might make him
unfit for Arms.

Cassation ignominious, was for some offense or crime worthy of less
punishment then death: and who so was in that sort cassed, might no more abide
in Rome, nor approach the Imperial Court. By an Edict of the Praetor, a soldier
was noted of infamy, if he departed from the Army, and so judged by the
commandment of the Emperor or general Captain: and every soldier so sent
away, shall be judged infamous, whether he be a common man, or a particular
Captain, or other inferior commander. Pomponius adds, that if a Chieftaine
or other officer (although he wear the ensigns of a Consul) may be cassed
with infamy and rest ignominious; but the sentence of his discharge must be
particularly expressed. After the judgment of Ignominy, he that is
discharged, shall not be capable of any office or dignity. Traianus accounted
no idle person or other man noted of ignominy, worthy to enter his court. The
Germans will not permit such a one to repair unto divine service, to take any
pay, to enjoy privilege, or have ought to do with the sword or other weapon;
and neither they nor their sons to have any immunitie. Likewise a soldier
that kills or wounds himself, shall be guilty of ignominy. Julius Caesar
cassed Caius Amenus a Tribune of soldiers in the tenth Legion, for inciting
the Roman soldiers to mutiny, and spoil a part of Italy; judging him to be
ignominious and worthy to be banished. In ages more ancient, persons condemned
for infamy, were also let blood, nomine poenae.

CHAP. 26.
Of Justice appertaining unto war offensive.
MOst sure and certain it seems, that for division of people, establishment
of kingdoms, distinction of Signiories, limitation of lands, and building of
houses, the wars were first devised: yet is no war just unless the same be
maintained by reason: for before Arms are taken in hand, it behooves to
prove all other means, by courtesy and humanity to compass that which is
desired. But because it falls out more then often, that the enemy cannot be
persuaded by reason, nor acknowledge to have done wrong, and most seldom to
make voluntary restitution; no other hope of help rests, then to force and
constrain him. For two ways there be whereby we are to defend our selves; the
one by reason, which is proper to men; the other by force, which is common to
bruit beasts: So as the first not prevailing, it behooves to use the other.
And because man is so far in love with his own affections, as commonly he
lays hold of shadows in stead of substance, inclining to that which
appears, in lieu of that is perfect, and prefers passion before judgment;
he thereby becomes blind, as well in determining public as private affairs.
Either else through a violent selfeloue, or a certain insatiable desire to
possess more then comes to his share, he easily inclines to injury others,
whenever he may be Judge in his own cause: So hard a thing is it for a man
to determine between himself and others, as though he were forced either to
do injustice, or suffer it. Here of it comes, that as the fire does
naturally come forth of flints, being beaten one against another, so the
discord of men's affairs encountering, does occasion so great troubles as would
utterly ruin all, if by virtue of courtesy and moderation the sharpness of
reason were not reabated. Whereunto may be added, that the success of wars
is ever doubtful, notwithstanding the greatest advantages, and that war may
be begun how and when we will, yet can it not be ended when and how the
vanquisher pleases. So seems it in all respects a great simplicity, or
rather plain folly to exchange tranquillity for trouble, being thereunto
persuaded, by covetous desire or hopes uncertain. Concluding therefore, I say,
that no war offensive ought be enterprised without mature consideration, and
for causes just, not only in our own conceit, but also irreprehensible in the
conscience of the enemy. And so shall ever be, if we do as we would be done
unto, entering into war for occasions ordinary, accustomed and received of all
nations, viz. To recover those things which are unjustly detained, and to force
the authors of injury to be delivered; if the same were not done by public
counsel and consent; or for revenge of injuries enterprised against us without
cause, and publicly; or for recovery of passage into foreign countries,
paying al duties: for by law of Nations, passages ought be open to all men, so
long as the same may be without prejudice, or probable suspicion.

CHAP. 27.
Of Justice appertayning towarre defensive.
NO war can be properly called defensive, but that only which is made for
defense of our selves, and to resist forain invasions: thereby also to assure,
not only us and ours, but also to protect Allies and neighbors unjustly
oppressed: whenever they desire aid against those that wrongfully and
without cause will oppress them. In all which cases this kind of war is
justifiable: because the same is warranted not only by law of Nations, but
also by Justice natural, seeing nothing can be more reasonable and lawful
then to repulse force with force. For apparent it is that every creature
untaught and without instruction, before it has power to do any thing, will
endeavor (in some sort) to repulse injury and violence, and consequently save
it self. And very natural it is in all men to be displeased, when they are of
others unworthily and unreasonably oppressed, which is the cause that laws do
permit that men in their own defense may kill those that shall assault them:
so as the same be done with moderation, and that our peril cannot otherwise be
eschewed. But here may be noted the difference between defense and offense.
For those whom we have slain in the field and without intermission of time,
are properly said to be slain in our defense, and is a thing allowable: but
they that after the conflict are killed, cannot be judged slain in our
defense: because that war or violence is deemed offensive, and therefore
absolutely forbidden in every particular person, and the revenge thereof
appertains unto authority public: which moved Cicero to say, Iustum
bellum est quibus necessarium, and pia arma quibus nulla nisi in armis spes
relinquitur. Now it rests to tell what war is truly called just and
necessary. We say therefore that war to be necessary when our enemy
endeavors to take from us those things without which we cannot live, or when
they assail us with daily and dangerous incursions. Secondly when they take
from us those things without the which we cannot take comfort in our lives: as
religion, liberty, and justice. Thirdly, when they take from us those things
wherein we have our only delight, as our children, our kinsfolk, our friends,
our familiars, and such commodities as we have long enjoyed, and without which,
our breath and being must needs be displeasing. In all which cases, it is more
then necessary for Princes to defend their subjects, and give unto al others
their friends and Allies aid, and protection.

CHAP. 28.
Of peace.
IN diverse countries, and amongst diverse people the ceremonies and rites in
confirming and establishing of peace, truce and leagues, have been diversely
used. We read that the Grecians (after the death of Cyrus the younger)
concluding a peace with Arieno a Commander of certain barbarous people, used
these ceremonies. First they caused a Bull, a Boar, a Wolf, and a ram to be
slain, and laid them upon a shield: into the blood of those beasts the
Grecians did dip their swords: and then the Barbarians did put into the same
blood their lances, either of them promising and protesting to observe
fidelity, friendship and society.

The Kings of Armenia and Hiberia, to confirm peace between them, consented
the thombes of their right hands should be fast tied together, which done,
then either thombe was stricken with a knife, and the blood coming out, they
licked thereof in sign of mutual love. But the Romans did ever command that
no peace should be concluded without consent of the Senate and people. For
their custom was, that whenever peace was to be made, the Praetor, the
Consul, or Senate, did deliver unto the Foecial a certain herb called
Verbena, or else grass pulled up by the root, and therewith some boughs of
Verbena, together with a flint stone taken out of the Temple of Jupiter
Feretrius: which done the Foecial caused a sow to be brought into the market
place, and holding a scepter in his hand, like unto Jupiter, and covering his
head with a cloth, crowned himself with a crown of Verbena: Which rites being
ended, he obtested and beseeched Jupiter and Mars, and the other gods, that if
any of the parties did fail to perform the capitulations, that then he
should be stricken and slain like unto the sow. After which obtestation her
body was cut with the flint: then they cast upon it water and fire, and so the
sacrifice was fully solemnized according to the verse of Virgil, Antiqui coesa
firmabant foedera porca.

Menippus in his answer to Quintus Lincius the Consul, affirmed there were
three kinds of treaties. The first was, where the victorious in war did give
Laws unto him that was victored: for he who was most potent in Arms, may ever
dispose of all things at his discretion. The second was when the adversaries,
being of equal force, the peace was concluded aequo foedere, that is with
equal conditions, and all things restored as they had been taken: and that he
whose possession was by war disturbed, should be restored. Of this kind were
treaties between Octauius Caesar, Antonius and Pompeius, and the conditions
being signed and sealed were sent unto Rome, to rest in the custody of the
Virgins Vestall. The third kind of treaty is between those that never were
enemies, and notwithstanding do join in league and amity. In that case, if
any of them were victorious or victored, yet did they neither give nor take
Law, the one from the other.

The Tartarians concluding any peace or treaty, did sanctify the same in this
sort. First they caused a Partizan, a sword or other weapon of war to be
brought, and thereupon they took an oath, which done, they drank of the water
wherein the Partizan, sword or other weapon was washed, pronouncing these
words, Quicunque pacta, and fraternitatem violarit, aut contraeam violandam
insurrexerit, vel aliquid intentauerit, aframeis incidendus, occidendusque
pereat, ac tanquam aqua, defluat, ac euanescat.

The Lacedaemonians confirmed their treaty with great sacraments, protesting to
observe them justly, simply, without fraud or deceit, and renewed the same
yearly. As therefore treaties of this kind do bind either party equally, so
are they both equally and lawfully conjoined in the obligation.

Truce is a peace for a short time: to the end the enemy may take breath and
be advised. Varro calls truce an abstinence of Arms, and as it were the
holidays of war. For albeit the fight cease, yet the war continues. The
term of truce is neither more nor less, but as the enemies shall agree.
Lucius Pontius General of the Samnits, desired a truce for six hours only.
The second truce between the Romans and the Carthaginians was to continue for
fifty years. The Vients also obtained a truce of the Romans for an hundredth
years. The first truce whereof we read, was taken in the reign of Romulus
when then Sabins made war upon the Romans under Titus Tacius their king. In
which expedition certain Ladies of Rome were employed and conducted by
Hersilia, whose persuasion prevailed with those kings. The nature of truce is
such, as during the continuance thereof, the enemies (without offending) may
meet and speak together. It is also lawful for every soldier (during that
term) to go and return safe at his pleasure. But here is to be noted, that
every Treaty as well of truce, as peace, ought be faithful and sincere: and
therefore I much disallow Cleomenes king of Lacedaemon, who having concluded a
truce for an hundred and thirty days, did nevertheless (in the night) spoil
the enemies country, alleging the truce was made for days, but not for
nights; which crafty construction ought be misliked. Howsoever that were, sure
it is that no matter of State is of more difficulty, then the assurance of
Treaties, and leagues between Princes and commonweals, either friends or
enemies, newters or subjects. For some require only mutual protestation or
oath, others demand ostages: some would be possessed of towns and strong
places, and others would have the enemy utterly disarmed; Yet experience has
proved that league to be best, which is ratified by alliance and
consanguinitie. But this subject ought be discoursed by doctors and expert
politicians.

CHAP. 29.
Of Licenses and Pasports.
IN certain causes, and for some reasons, Captains General and other
Commanders in the war, were wont to grant License unto their soldiers to be
absent from the army, or other places of service, with allowance of time
convenient, for their going and return. Yet true it is, that such Licenses
ought not to be given without earnest occasion, and for good respects,
whereunto we will add, that meet it is, that not only soldiers, but also
horses ought to be restrained, and seldom suffered to pass out of the Army.
Neither ought any horse of service be employed in hunting, hauking, or other
needless exercise: for so was it decreed in the discipline of Augustus. The
Emperors Archadius and Honorius commanded all Captains and Commanders to be
wary in giving License to soldiers, chiefly when the enemy is at hand, or
when he makes incursion: for at such times to give License was accounted
capital: or if any soldier did absent himself from his Ensign without leave,
that crime was also punished by death. Licenses are therefore to be rarely
granted, and for necessary considerations. Yet no License may be denied, when
urgent occasion so requires: which error Appius Claudius the Decemuir
incurred, when by his letters he required that Luctus Virginius might not be
suffered to come unto Rome: fearing he would accuse him for the rauishing his
daughter: but by good hap Virginius departed from the Army one day before the
letter arrived there. Howsoever that were, yet true it is, that no soldier of
any Army well governed, ought demand Pasport or License to depart at any
unseasonable time, neither should any Captain condescend to license him: which
moved Hannibal after the taking of Saguntum in Spain, to proclaim that every
soldier occasioned to go unto his country or friends, ought before he went
to desire license. Likewise by an Edict of Francis the French king all
soldiers were inhibited to go from the Army without License. It was also the
Roman use, that every soldier did ask leave of his Captain, and the
Captain to have License of the General of horse, or Captain general, before
he departed from the Army: also during his absence to leave a sufficient man
to supply the place, and he himself to return at the time prefixed: which
done he received his whole pay without diminution, as though he had never been
absent. As touching the limitation of time, and the number of soldiers who
were licensed to be absent, we read that Scipio in the war of Carthage gave
license unto three hundred Sicilian soldiers, and put three hundred other men
to serve in their places: and Francis the French king commanded, that more then
thirty horsemen should not be licensed to go from the Army at one time: and
they not to be absent longer then three months, upon pain to be checked of
their whole wages. William Rufus King of England did inhibit soldiers and all
other subjects of reputation to depart the land without leave, which is yet
observed. It seems by Pol. Virg. that rather the hand of God, then the King
punished this attempt: for he was there slain in the battle.
And Polydor Virgil writes that one Edward Wooduile (chief governor of the
Isle of Wight) for going forth of the Realm without license was put to death
under King Henry the seventh. But Zeno the Emperor (punishing that offense
more mildely) ordained, that if any soldier were absent one whole year without
license, he should be put after ten; if he were absent two years, he should
give place to twenty; if three years, then to be utterly discharged from the
Army at his return thither. Theodosius and Valentinianus in that case, would
not utterly discharge them the Army, until four years absence was complete.
If any soldier were sent unto a Prince to perform any service, and at his
return did signify such employment, together with his diligence to return,
in that case he ought be excused, because his absence was by commandment, and
in service of the State, not for his own profit or private commodity. But who
so for his own particular affairs is licensed and assigned a day of return,
in failing thereof he shall be reputed a loyterer, or a fugitive; unless he be
detained or otherwise justly excused. To conclude therefore we say, that no
soldier departing from his Ensign without leave, can be excused, nor his
absence auowable, but when the same is for service of the prince or common
weal: as Scoeuola in his military Ordinances has written.

CHAP. 30.
Of Ambassadors or Legates.
THe office of an Ambassador was by the Romans accounted both honorable and
sacred, including as well power of commandment, as dignity. Whenever
therefore any Ambassador did come to Rome, he was first brought unto the Temple
of Saturnus, there to have his name written before the Praefectiaerarij: from
thence he went to deliver his legation unto the Senate. But first it ought be
remembered, that men meetest to be employed for Ambassadors, are they indeed
who are of most sagacitie and greatest skill how to discover the counsels and
designs of the enemy. Scipio Africanus having occasion to send an embassage to
Syphax, elected certain Tribunes and Centurions, and caused them to be basely
apparelled. Cato beholding certain Ambassadors to be sent by the Senate to
compound a peace between Nicomedes and Prusias, the one of them had his
headfull of skarres, the second was impotent of his feet, and the third
timersome, said, This Legation has neither good head, feet, nor heart.
Ambassadors ought be in all countries inviolable: in sign whereof they
anciently carried about them the herb Sagmen, which we call Veruen, to show
they were sacred, and that no man should dare to lay hold on them; and who so
offered them violence, was thought to have done contrary to law of Nations.
Which moved Publius Mutius to command, that whosoever did strike an
Ambassador, should be delivered unto that enemy from whom the Ambassador was
sent. And though the enemy received him not, yet should he remain an exile, as
if he were interdicted from fire and water, according to the sentence of
Publius Mutius. Yet do we read, that Dioscorides and Scrapion Ambassadors sent
from Caesar to Achillas, so soon as they came within his sight, and before he
heard them, or for what affairs they were sent, commanded them to be taken and
slain. Caesar likewise sent Marcus Valerius Porcillus unto king Ariouistus,
who being there arrived, was presently taken and put into prison,
notwithstanding he were a young man of great virtue and courtesy. Likewise
Comius Attrebas being sent by Caesar into Britane, was cast into prison by the
Britanes. Laertes Tolumnius king of Vients, did ^lea four Ambassadors of
Rome, whose portraitures remained long in the market place. Such honor the
Romans used to give unto those men that dyed for their country. Alexander the
Great besieging a City called Tyrus, sent Ambassadors unto the inhabitants
thereof, who contrary to the law of Nations, slew them, and from an high
tower cast down their bodies.

CHAP. 31.
Of prisoners taken by the enemy.
WHo so is taken in the war, ought by the law of Nations to be reputed a
lawful prisoner: yet if afterward he escape and return home, he recouereth
his former estate. They that are thus taken, were by the Romans called Serui,
quod seruantur: as much to say, as being taken, they ought be kept, not killed:
whereof may be inferred, it is unlawful to kill a man having yielded
himself: because that act is inhumane, and all great Captains have forbidden
it, according to the saying of Horace, Vendere cum possis captiuum occidere
noli. Herein also we are to follow the example of ancient Princes and chief
commanders in war. Alexander the Great took to wife Roxanes whom he had
taken prisoner in the war. Henry the seventh king of England having taken
Lambert a king of Ireland together with his schoolmaster, pardoned both their
lives; the one because he was a child, the other a person Ecclesiastical and
dedicated to God: so says Polydor Virgil. Romulus made a law, that cities
taken by war should not be utterly demolished, nor all beasts in the field
slain: but settling there certain Colonies, they did participate of the
commodities with the natural people. Yet true it is, that some conquerors have
anciently used great cruelty. For read we may, that the Africans caused many
Cathaginians their prisoners, together with their Captain Gestones, to have
their hands cut off and their legs broken with a wheel. Likewise Hasdrubal
after Megarae was recovered from the Romans, caused their eyes, their tongues,
and secret parts to be torn with iron hooks: he also cut off their fingers
and flayed their bodies; and before they were dead, hung them upon the walls.
We may also here remember the terrible custom of the Thuliti, who used to
sacrifice the bodies of men taken in war, as an oblation to the gods most
acceptable. Howsoever these people handled the matter, it is, no doubt, lawful
for men that are victorious, peaceably to rule and command those that are
victored. And Ariouistus answering Caesar, said, that the people of Rome used
to command nations conquered, according to their own discretion, not the
d^rection of others. Who so therefore falls into the hands of an enemy,
becomes his captive: neither can he be owner of any thing when he himself is
possessed by another. This only remains, that in him there rests a right
and title to his own, notwithstanding possession be lost. Here we may also
remember, that all places taken by the enemy, do cease to be sacred or
religious, yet being delivered from that calamity, they return to their former
estate Iure postliminio. Therefore seeing the graves of the enemy are not to us
sacred, the violation of them do bear no action.

CHAP. 32.
Of rescuing and ransom of Prisoners.
IF any soldier be taken, and by aid of others rescued, he ought not remain
prisoner to the rescuers, but shall forthwith be restored to liberty, and enjoy
his former estate: for soldiers must be defenders of fellows in Arms, not
their masters. Likewise if any stranger do redeem a prisoner from the enemy,
the soldier redeemed shall not be accounted the strangers prisoner, but
remain with him as a pledge until the ransom be paid: for so was it decreed
by Gordianus the Emperor. If a woman prisoner be redeemed from the enemy, and
marieth with him that redeemeth her, in that case, she and her children shall
be discharged, both of bondage and payment of money. If any man shall redeem a
prisoner taken by the enemy, the prisoner is forthwith at liberty, and the
redeemer shall be compelled to accept the price offered, without further
question. If a man contracteth marriage with a woman his prisoner, he shall be
judged to have forgiven her ransom. Yet if a dishonest woman redeem her
daughter from the enemy, and (knowing her to be honest) shall deliver her to
be dishonored, and the daughter (to preserve her chastity) flees to her
father: in that case the mother makes her self unworthy to receive the prize,
in respect of her lewd intention, and the daughter shall be restored freely to
her liberty. This is also a rule general, that a freeman taken by the enemy
and redeemed, so soon as his ransom be paid, or his body by other mean set
at liberty, he thereby recouereth his former estate, in the mean space
although the ransom is not fully satisfied, yet may he challenge his right of
succession, so as thereby he shall in time be able to discharge the debt.
Moreover, if he who redeemeth a prisoner, shall remit the bondage of his pawn,
yet is not the redeemed at liberty, from his redeemer, albeit he be restored
to that freedom which formerly he had lost: but he shall not be compelled to
do service unto the children of the redeemer. The first beginning to give
ransom for redeeming of captive Soldiers was after the defeat of Canna, at
which time Hannibal did grant leave that the Romans might ransom themselves.
The price then of a horseman was five hundred pieces of money, a footman three
hundred, and for a servant one hundred. And if any moneys or other goods were
left in deposito, or given to redeem a captive, they might be lawfully
demanded during an hundred years after. Neither ought it be thought strange
that a part or an whole inheritance belonging unto a captive, and left unto
persons unknown, ought be bestowed to redeem him. For heretofore the
Emperors, moved with pity and compassion of poor Soldiers misaduentures,
have by Law decreed that an whole inheritance may be given to ransom captives:
because nothing should be withholden from redeeming men that have endured the
fortune of war in defense of our country.

CHAP. 33.
Of Enemies.
WE properly call those people enemies, that publicly do make war upon us,
or against whom we make war: yet thieves and robbers cannot be named enemies,
neither may they be reputed captives that are taken or kept by thieves, and
being set at liberty shall not need to be restored by Postliminium. But who so
is taken in the war is a prisoner unto his taker, and being set at liberty
by the Law of Postliminium shall recover his former estate.

The people that moved war against the Romans, were ever thereunto moved,
either by ambition, as the Parthians, or by desire of liberty as the Germans,
by whom at length the Roman Empire was subverted. The Athenians used to
contend with some enemies for victory: but with the Barbarians they fought
until death, because they were reputed their greatest enemies, to whom if any
man did give aid, or means to spoil the country, he was burned alive: if he
sold any port or haven, he deserved loss of life: and he that furnished the
enemy with hay or come, was likewise capitally punished. The Romans would not
receive conditions from any enemy being in Arms: because (as Quintus Cicero
said) an enemy ought with hands and feet to be repulsed. In Macedon a Law
there was that whosoever did return from the war, and had not slain an
enemy, should be strangled with a cord. The Scythians had an use, that at
solemn feasts, no man should drink of the great cup which was carried about,
unless he had slain an enemy. The Iberi had a custom to set about the tomb
of every dead man, so many Pyramids, as he had slain enemies. The Persians
made a Law, that Explorators and spies, in consideration of the dangers they
endured, should be maintained by public contribution. And albeit the hate
which enemies have one toward the other be great, yet the Indians in time of
war, did refrain to use force against Plowmen, or molest them, being reputed
ministers of common vtility. Pomponius writes, that in Rome it was not lawful
for any man to pass out of the City by other way then the gates: for otherwise
doing he should be reputed an enemy, which was the cause that moved Romulus to
kill his brother Remus, when he climed upon the wall: yet was he no enemy.
Howsoever that was, Martianus affirms resolutely, that wheresoever a fugetiue
is found, there may he lawfully be killed as an enemy: yet is he not so called.

CHAP. 34.
Of immunities Military.
ALbeit unfit it were, that soldiers discontinuing the war, whom we formerly
called Emansores, or other men newly entered into that profession should be
protected or excused from payment of debts, or otherwise privileged, yet meet
it is, that men of long and loyal service should be in some sort borne with,
and favored. In that case therefore diverse immunities have been anciently
granted unto soldiers of great service or good merit, as appears by diverse
decrees made by the Emperors Seuerus and Antoninus, who dispensed with an
execution awarded against one man called Marcellus, commanding that his pay
should not be arested to the use of his creditors: if other mean of
satisfaction might be found. Because the law compels soldiers to pay only
so much as they are able, yet that favor extends not to all men professing
arms, but those in particular, that have served long, and for such debtes as
they incurred, during the time they continued in the war. Here is it also to
be remembered, that no gift bestowed for service, may be upon any private
contract, impawned. For if the creditor can be otherwise satisfied, then the
law determines no execution shall be taken upon gifts or goods bestowed for
service, anciently reputed sacred: which reason moved the most Christian king
Francis to make an Edict, whereby he commanded, that unto such soldiers as
wanted money, victual should be sold in credit: but, if after a convenient
time that debt were not paid, then the Treasorer should make stay of the
soldiers pay, and deliver it unto the creditor. Likewise Charles the seventh
did forbid, that the Arms of soldiers should be sold to satisfy creditors.
The law of Graecia did also inhibit the taking of Arms for satisfaction of
debt: yet by the same law power is permitted unto creditors to arrest any
soldiers person that is indebted. The same law likewise commands that no
artificer appertaining to the war, should be personally imprisoned for money,
yet was it lawful to extend his goods. Solon in his law called Sisacthia made
for the Athenians, seems to think it unreasonable, that the body of any
Citizen should be imprisoned upon debt due for usury. Summarily therefore we
say, That soldiers are bound to pay so much as they are able, and no more:
which happily moved Tertullianus to affirm that who so has possession of any
stock of goods (chiefly appertaining unto the war) he may be forced to pay
unto his creditors, so much as is properly his own, but not take any thing
belonging unto the State: neither is it lawful for the father to sell the
lands or goods entayled or assured in perpetuum unto his heirs, as Papinianus
has written.

CHAP. 35.
Of Captains general, Marshals, and other chief Commanders.
IN Athens a man called Dionysiodorus did take upon him to read an art of
conducting and trayning soldiers, which skill albeit he had known, yet could
he not inform any of his auditory how to become a good Commander: because the
leading of men is indeed the least part of Commanding. For it behooves a
General not only to conduct an army, but also to provide things needful both
for the war, and mainteining of men. A careful chieftaine therefore is to
show himself patient, prudent, cautious, liberal, and such a one as loves
more to give then to keep. Homer used to call Agamemnon a Pastor of people,
because he carefully intended the safety of his Army. Antonius for many
qualities no commendable Emperor, yet in one point much to be praised, because
he liked better to be called a companion of arms, then a Prince. He also
sometimes vouchsafed to march on foot, and in his own hand carry the general
ensign of the army, which was of great poyze, and not to be borne of the
strongest soldiers, without much pain. Theodosius the Emperor did not command
the meanest soldier to do any thing, but that he himself would sometimes do:
wherein he performed the part of a stout soldier, and an excellent
chiefetaine: which example percase moved ancient men of war (after victory)
to elect their Emperor, out of the number of notable soldiers: for so it
seems Germanicus was advanced. We likewise read that Tiberius was pleased to
consent that Blesus should be called of the Legions Imperator, for that was the
ancient title due to Commanders general. The history of Maximinus shows,
that he became preferred by the war, being borne of obscure parents in
Thracia, and (as some write) the son of a shepherd. Yet because he was a man
of great fortune, courage and strength, by the degrees of war he aspired to
govern many Countries. After that time, he became Liuetenant general unto
Alexander: and in the end, by the Roman army chosen Emperor. Thus much
concerning general Commanders, advanced for proper virtue.

Plato in his common weal, wishes a Chiefetaine to be elected in this sort; A
General of horse (says he) ought be made by consent of the whole Army. The
Praefecti whom we call great commanders, were elected by those soldiers that
bare targets: The Tribunimilitum had their advancement by voice of men at
arms: and other Captains of meaner place were appointed by the chief General.
The horsemen did ever give their voices first, in presence of the foot bands,
and two of them that gained most voices, were appointed to command the rest.
The Captains also did name him for Emperor, that was in service most
painful, in peril most resolute, in action most industrious, in execution
most quick, and in counsel most provident. In this election no respect was
had, whether the person elected were a Senator, or recommended by the Senate,
because the qualities aforesaid sufficed to make a General, as appeared in
Maximinus the Emperor: in whose election the Senate did not intermeddle. That
General therefore seems of most sufficiency, who knows (as a soldier) how
to offend his enemy, govern his own forces, endure heat and cold, sleep on
the ground, patiently suffer both labor and lack. For sometimes we see, that
he who has authority to command, needs another to command him. Some others
also are called to authority, and command in the war, before they have skill
how to do it, or have read any precepts military, or are by the rules of
predecessors informed. For a matter of more difficulty it is to know what
appertains unto a Captain, then to execute the office of that place, seeing
skill must precede action, and use go before commandment. In this point we
have heard Francis the French king much commended, who kept in memory the
history of all his predecessors: and to witness his proper valor, at the
battle of Pauia (wherein albeit he was unfortunate) yet with his own hand he
slew a German Ensignebearer, to his eternal glory. It seems therefore
expedient, for all Princes and commanders in war, to be well studied in
histories, and chiefly those that concern the actions of their ancestors;
which perhaps moved Edward the third, king of England, at such time as he made
war upon Robert the second, king of Scots, to command a certain Monk to
attend his Majesty in that expedition, and with his pen to express in verse
(being indeed an excellent Poet) all the actions and proceedings of that
enterprise. Mahomet the second, king of Turkey, endeavored much to know the
histories of his predecessors, and gave bountiful rewards unto one writer
called John Maria of Vincenza, for expressing the victory he obtained against
Vssancassan king of Persia, as Paulus Iouius notes: much more praise and
honor is due unto those Captains that have by long service and due degrees of
war deserved the titles appertaining to arms, and bear about them the
scarres and tokens of true valor. Adrianus the Emperor would not permit any
man to be a Tribune, or take charge in the war, whose beard was not full
grown, or whose wit or years were incapable of that office: neither would he
suffer a Captain to take any thing from his soldier.

Among many other parts of commendation required in a sovereign commander,
there is not any more to be honored then liberality: and contrariwise
avarice ought to be extremely abhorted. For hard it is to attend the affairs
of war, and over much to affect money. Great reason therefore had Nicomedes
to think himself used with indignity by the Bithynians, when he having borne
all the offices of war, and was wounded in many places of his body, was then
repulsed. All which notwithstanding, Antisthenes was preferred, and made
General, when he had never performed any action praise worthy or memorable,
nor had endeavored more then to make himself mighty in money: yet is not that
Captain to be misliked, that can with honor and good conscience purchase
wealth, for thereby he has mean and power to supply the wants, both of
private soldiers, and public scarcity. The office of a sovereign
Commander, may be compared unto the skill of him that governs well a private
house: which is to command things fit, to make men obedient, to reward the good
and punish the evil. In which offices, the one and the other of these
commanders shall not fail to find enemies, and therefore may be called a
war. Here may we also remember that the Mauritanes being confederate with
Iustinianus the Emperor, consented that no man should be their General, but
such a one as was a friend unto the Romans, or had received the Ensigns from
a commander of the Roman army, which were these: A staff of silver gilded: a
cup of leather ornified with silver: and a white vesture of small price.

The Romans called these officers Magistri militum, or Praefecti, when they
were sent to govern an army against the enemy, or to give counsel in the
war, or had in charge to dispose of the camp: for so was it decreed by
Honorius and Theodosius Sometimes also their lieutenants were called Praefecti,
having in charge the defense of a particular province against the enemy, and
were in authority equal to him that led the army called Dux, and before the
Proconsul. To this dignity, Cabades being restored unto the kingdom of Persia,
preferred Selanem a man of great fame and reputation in the war, and
therefore called him Seosen, which is the title of that Magistrate who
commands all sorts of soldiers, as the Constable does in France, and the
High Marshall in England. The office of the Tribunes in Rome, was, to hold the
soldiers in order, to see them trained, to keep the keys of gates, to survey
the watch, to dispose of the vittaile, to correct false measures, to punish
offenders according to the quality of their faults, to behold often the order
of the army, to here the quarrels in question between soldiers, and to visit
the sick. For in deed the office of every commander consists in doing
justice and observation of discipline. He is also to be spare in giving license
unto Soldiers, or to permit any horses to pass out of his country, neither
should he suffer them to be employed in hunting, hauking, or such like
exercises, a matter specially inhibited by the discipline of Augustus. A
sovereign Magistrate military, ought also to remember, that after his
commission be expired, he ought not to depart the place of his charge, within
the space of fifty days: for so doing without license of his superior, he
incurreth an offense capital: such was the instruction which Zeno the Emperor
did give unto Sebastianus, notwithstanding his authority was ceased, and a
successor come to receive charge of the Army.

THE Second Book. OF KNIGHTHOOD.
The Contents of this Book.
THE Prooeme. Of Knighthood. Cap. 1. The original of Knighthood given as a
dignity, and what Princes have authority to make Knights. Ca. 2. The manner of
making Knights about the year of our Lord 500. near which time King Arthur
reigned in England. Cap. 3. The order of disgrading Knights in those days.
Cap. 4. Knights of the Round table. Cap. 5. How actions Aduenturous ought be
admired, not discredited. Cap. 6. The office and duty of every Knight and
gentleman. Cap. 7. Of Honorable Ornaments given unto Knights. Cap. 8. Knights
of the Garter. Cap. 9. Knights Bannerets. Cap. 10. Knights of the Bath. Cap.
11. Knights Bachellers. Cap. 12. Ceremonies of degrading of Knights in England.
Cap. 13. Knights of the Toison. Cap. 14. Knights of S. Michael Cap. 15. Knights
of the Annunciation. Cap. 16. Knights of St. Esprit. Cap. 17. Knights Templers.
Cap. 18. Knights of S. Iago. Cap. 19. Knights of S. John Jerusalem, called
knights of the Rhodes, and now of Malta. Cap. 20. Knights of Calatraua. Cap.
21. Knights of the Band. Cap. 22. Knights of Alcantara. Cap. 23. Knights of
Montesio. Cap. 24. Knights of Redemption. Cap. 25. The original of the knights
Teutonici. Cap. 26. Knights of the Sepulcher. Cap. 27. Knights of S. Mary. Cap.
28. Knights of S. Lazaro. Cap. 29. Knights of S. Steffano. Cap. 30.
The Prooeme.
FOrasmuch as the Actions of Arms (chiefly on horseback) are, and ever have
been used of Noble personages, and Gentlemen of best quailitie, whom the
Romans in their flourishing time by a general term called Equites, and are
presently of the Italians and Spaniards named Caualieri, without respect of
private dignity, or other distinction: we will for this time (yet with
respect, and under correction) adventure to English the word Eques, a Gentleman
that professes honor, virtue, and Arms, or any of them: particularly
discoursing of what quality he ought be, as follows.

First, he must be of good constitution and convenient strength to endure
travel in Actions appertaining to Soldiers.

Secondly, he should be well favored of face and comely: for commonly God and
Nature gives beauty to such persons as are destined to command, and from
others borne to obey, he has withholden that favor, which moved some writers
to affirm, that the princely presence of Priamus did show him to be worthy of
government, and to command other men.

Thirdly, he should be of bold aspect, rather inclined to severity then
softness: which countenace the Swisses and Turks do much affect.

Fourthly, he must be sober, and discreet, not inclined to vain delights or
effeminate pleasures.

Fifthly, he ought be obedient: for of obedience proceeds that the meaner
are content to be commanded by the better, and the ignorant by those that
know. This virtue was greatly embraced of the Romans, and occasioned their
often victories. For the punishment of disobedience inflicted by military
Magistrates, the Romans have left two most notable examples: the one of
Manlius Torquatus, who caused his own son, for that fault to be slain,
notwithstanding he had vanquished the enemy: The other of Papirius the
Dictator, who for the like offense was punished by Fabius Rutilius General of
the horsemen in the Roman Army.

Sixthly, he ought he vigilant, and patient: for in the one consists the
execution of warlike Actions: by the other all travails, pains, and
misfortunes are endured.

Seventhly, he must be faithful and loyal, which quality is required in all
sorts of subjects, but chiefly in soldiers: for thereupon depends his
Princes security, and State also, which moved Vegetius to say, That the safety
of a Prince consists in the well choosing his soldiers. This is the cause,
that men professing Arms, do commonly swear by the faith of a Soldier: The
French man, a foy de Soldat: The Italian, a fe di Soldato etc. Yea the Kings of
France do commonly use this phrase, a foy de gentil homme: a foy du cheualier.

Eighthly, he ought be constant and resolute, because resolution makes all
difficulties easy, and constancy or perseverance brings perfection in that
he professes.

Ninthly, that he should be charitable, because wars are not taken in hand
for the destruction of Countries, and towns, but the defense of laws and
people.

Lastly, he should be fortunate, since Fortune is the Lady of Arms, and
shows her power in nothing more then in the adventures of war.

CHAP. 1.
Of Knighthood.
WHo so desires to know the original name and dignity of Knighthood, it
behooves him to be informed, that the Romans, among whom Martial discipline
was first esteemed, and titles given to men for valorous merit, divided their
people into Patritij and Plebaei. After that time, another division was made,
as Senatores, Equites, and Plebs: as the French have at this day Les Nobles and
la populaire, or Gentiles hommes and villains. And we in England do divide our
men into five sorts: Gentlemen, Citizens, Yeomen, Artificers, and Laborers. Of
Gentlemen, the first and principal is the King, Prince, Dukes, Marquesses,
Earls, Vicounts, and Barons. These are the Nobility, and be called Lords, or
Noblemen. Next to these be Knights, Esquiers, and simple Gentlemen, which last
number may be called Nobilitas minor: for they in Parliament have no place
among the Lords; therefore the Barons or degree of Lords do resemble the
dignity of Senatores in Rome, and the title of our Nobility is like unto
Patritij, when the Patritij did signify Senatores aut Senatorum filij. But
that degree which we do now call Knighthood, is most like unto the title in
Rome named Equestris ordo. Yet other opinions there are, both of the beginning
and name of Knight, as well among the Italians as the Spaniards. But howsoever
it was, most certain it seems, that until Equestris ordo was erected in
Rome, there was no such degree of men as we call Knights, neither was that name
given with such ceremony and show of dignity, as since it has been used.
Yet some there are that fail not to affirm, that Knighthood had the original
from Romulus, in this sort.

That King having set led his government in Rome, partly for security, and
partly for magnificence erected three bands of horsemen; the first called
Romence after his own name, the next Titience after Titus Tacius, and the
third Luceria, whereof only I think Liuie makes mention. Hereupon they will
infer, that Knighthood begun under Romulus.

The Spaniards do hold opinion, that when faith and plain dealing decayed,
those men that made profession of war, every thousand did choose one man whom
they thought to be of greatest wisdom, courage, and courtesy among the rest.
That being done, they made choice of such an horse as was reputed to excel the
rest, for beauty, force, and other perfections, and forthwith gave that beast
unto that man whom they had chosen: as though their intention were to conioyne
that singular beast unto that notable man: naming him Caualiero, which
signifies Horseman, though we improperly English it Knight.

Thus much is said in general concerning gentlemen that make profession of
Arms, whom the Romans (as it seems) sometimes called Milites, and some
other times Equites: the Italians and Spaniards Caualieri, the French
Cheualiers: but in our language (as is now used) none are called Knights, but
only they that have that title given by the Prince or his Lieutenant, with a
ceremony thereunto belonging. And of Knights made according to the use of
England, are diverse degrees, as shall hereafter be declared.

CHAP. 2.
The original of Knighthood given as a Dignity: and what Princes have
authority to make Knights.
IT is affirmed by some writers, that Alexander the Great with the advice of
his learned tutor Aristotle, resolved to bestow upon such persons as performed
any notable service in the war, certain honors and aduancements, in token
of their extraordinary virtue and notable merit: and therefore he gave unto
some badges, to some chains, to some immunities, or some such other
demonstration of favor and honor.

The Roman Emperors in like manner sometimes before the beginning of a
service, and sometimes after, bestowed not only commendation, but also dignity
on those whose virtue they thought so worthy: as crowns of Bays, of Gold, of
Myrtle, or some other gift thought fit by the giver. They gave also horses,
swords, armor, arming coats, and such like: and they that received them as a
token of honor, kept them carefully in perpetual memory of their valor, and
the honor of the Prince that gave them. By this mean also they became much
admired and esteemed of other soldiers.

Afterward, for more encouragement of virtuous minds, other Princes thought
good that the memorable acts of soldiers should be in perpetual memory
written, and such privileges as were given them to be recorded, calling them
in those writings, Valiant men, Companions in Arms, Victorious soldiers and
Knights. Which manner of proceeding did encourage the men of war, no less
then the great pou^traitures which the most ancient Romans made for those that
had performed acts egregious.

Touching the making of Knights, we say, That every Prince sovereign has
power to give that dignity to what person it pleases him, as well in time of
peace as war. But here is to be noted, that the Knights made, are of more or
less reputation according to the quality of that Prince that made them. For
he that is made knight by a King, shall be preferred before a knight made by a
Prince of meaner title. To conclude therefore we say, that all Emperors,
Kings, Dukes and other Princes acknowledging no Superior, may make Knights,
and so may commonweals, as the State of Venice and Genoa. The Popes do also
sometimes make Knights for money: calling them commonly after their own names:
Caualieri di San Pietro, San Paulo, Guiliani, Pij. etc.

CHAP. 3.
The manner of making Knights about the year of Christ 500. near which time
King Arthur reigned in England.
IN that age, a Prince determining to make a Knight, did command a Scaffold or
Stage to be builded in some Cathedral Church of his kingdom, or other
spacious place near unto it. Thither the Gentleman was brought to receive that
honor: and being come, was forthwith placed in a chair of silver, adorned
with green silk. Then was demanded of him if he were healthy of body, and
able to endure the travel required in a soldier: also whether he were a man
of honest conversation, and what witnesses worthy credit he could produce so to
affirm. That being done, the Bishop or chief Prelate of the Church took the
Bible, and holding it open before the Knight, in presence of the King and all
others spoke these words: Sir, you that desire to receive the order of
Knighthood, swear before God, and by this holy book, that ye shall not fight
against this mighty and excellent Prince that now bestows the order of
Knighthood upon you, unless you shall be commanded so to do, in the service of
your own King and natural Prince: for in that case, having first yielded up
the collar, device and other ensigns of honor now received, it shall be
lawful for you to serve against him, without reproach, or offense to all other
companions in Arms: but otherwise doing, ye shall incur infamy, and being
taken in war, shall be subject to the pains of death. Ye shall also swear
with all your force and power to maintain and defend all Ladies, Gentlewomen,
Orphans, Widows, women distressed and abandoned. The like must ye do for
wives, being desired, and shun no adventure of your person, in every good war
wherein ye happen to be.

This oath taken, two of the chief Lords led him unto the King, who presently
drew forth his sword and laid the same upon the Gentleman's head, and said, God
and Saint George (or what other Saint the King pleased to name) make thee a
good Knight. Then came unto the Knight, seven noble Ladies, attired in white,
and girt a sword unto his side.

That done, four Knights of the most honorable in that presence put on his
spurs.

These Ceremonies past, the Queen took him by the right arm, and a Duchess
by the left, and led him unto a rich seat made on high, and thereupon set him,
the King sitting down on the right hand, and the Queen on the other.

After the King and Queen were thus set, and the new Knight between them, all the rest of the Lords and Ladies sat down also upon other seats prepared for
them, three descents under the kings seat.

Every Lord and Lady being thus placed, thither was brought a solemn collation
or banquet of delicate meats, whereof the Knight, the King, the Queen, and
whole company did eat. And so the ceremony ended.

CHAP. 4.
The degradation of Knights in those days.
IF any Knight at that time had been corrupted with money by his Princes enemy,
or committed any other notable fact against loyalty and honor, the other
Knights forthwith made humble suite unto the king that he might be punished.
Which request being granted, they apprehended the offendour, and caused him to
be armed from head to foot, and in such sort as if he were going to the field.
Then they led him up to an high stage made in a Church for that purpose, where
thirty Priests soung such Psalms as are used at burials, as though the Knight
had lien dead at their feet. At the end of every Psalm they took from him
one piece of armor. First they took off his Helmet as that which de^ended his
traitorous eyes, then his gauntlet on the right side, as that which covered a
corrupt hand: then his gauntlet on the left side, as from a member consenting,
and by peecemeale dispoiled him of all his Arms as well offensive as
defensive, which one after another were thrown to the ground: and at the
instant when any piece of armor was cast down, the King of Arms first, and
after him all other Heralds cried aloud, saying, this is the head-peece of a
disloyal and miscreant Knight. Then was brought thither a basen of gold or
silver full of warm water: which being holden up, the Heralds with a loud
voice said, What is the Knights name? The Purseuants answered that which in
truth was his name. Then the chief King of Arms said, That is not true, for
he is a miscreant and false traitor, and has transgressed the ordinances of
Knighthood. Thereunto answered the Chaplains, Let us give him his right name.
Then spoke the Trumpets, What shall be done with him? To which words the King
answered, Let him with dishonor and shame be banished my kingdom as a vile
and infamous man that has offended the honor of Knighthood. So soon as the
King had so said, the King of Arms and other Heralds cast the warm water upon
the disgraded Knights face, as though he were new baptized, saying, Henceforth
thou shall be called by thy right name, Traitor. Then the King with twelve
other Knights put upon them mourning garments, declaring sorrow: and coming
unto the Knight disgraded, put him down the Stage, not by the stayers he
mounted up when he was made Knight, but threw him down tied unto a rope. Then
with great ignominy he was brought unto the Altar, and there laid groueling on
the ground, and over him was read a Psalm full of curses.

CHAP. 5.
Of Knights of the Round Table.
ABout the year of Christ 490. there reigned in England (then called Britain)
a King named Arthur, whose valor was so great, and admirable, as many men now
living, do hold the same rather fabulous then credible. Yet whosoever shall
consider enterprises of later time achieved by private persons, may be easily
induced to think that a great part of praise written of that mighty Monarche,
may reasonably receive belief. But omitting to speak of his prowess (percase
already by others ouerlargely discoursed) I say that this most famous King
having expulsed out of England the Saxons, conquered Norway, Scotland, and the
most part of France, was crowned in the City of Paris. From whence returned,
he erected a certain Association or brotherhood of Knights: who vowed to
observe these Articles following.

First, that every Knight should be well armed, and furnished to undertake any
enterprise wherein he was employed, by Sea or land, on horseback or foot.

That he should be ever pressed to assail all Tyrants, and oppressors of people.

That he should protect widowes^and maidens; restore children to their right:
repossesse such persons as were without just cause exiled, and withal his
force maintain the Christian faith.

That he should be a Champion for the weal public, and as a Lion repulse the
enemies of his country.

That he should advance the reputation of honor, and suppress al vice,
relieve people afflicted by adverse fortune, give aid to holy Church, and
protect pilgrims.

That he should bury Soldiers that wanted sepulture, deliver prisoners,
ransom captives, and cure men hurt in service of their country.

That he should in all honorable actions, adventure his person, yet with
respect to justice and truth, and in all enterprises proceed sincerely, never
failing to use his uttermost force of body, and valor of mind.

That after the atteyning of any enterprise, he should cause it to be recorded,
to the end the fame of that fact might ever live, to his eternal honor, and
renown of the Noble order.

That if any complaint were made at the Court of this mighty King of injury, or
oppression, then some knight of the Order, who^ the king should appoint, ought
revenge the same.

That if any knight of foreign nation did come unto the Court with desire to
challenge, or make show of his prowess, that then (were he single, or
accompanied) these knights ought be ready in Arms to make answer.

That if any Lady, Gentlewoman, Widow, Maiden or other oppressed person did
present a petition declaring they were, or had been in this or other nation
injured, or offered dishonor, they should be gratiousty heard, and without
delay, one or more Knights should be sent to make revenge.

That every Knight should be willing to inform young Princes, Lords and
Gentlemen in the orders, and exercises of Arms, thereby not only to avoid
idleness, but also to increase the honor of Knighthood and Chivalry.

Diverse other Articles inciting to magnanimious Action of honor in Arms these
Knights were sworn to observe: which for brevity I omit. Nevertheless (being
used to lose my labor) I adventure to say this little: and the rather, because
this order of knighthood is ancient and English.

I do not read of any robe or habit prescribed unto these Knights, nor with
what ceremony they were made.

Their place of meeting and convocation was the city of Winchester, where king
Arthur caused a great round Table to be made, and at the same the Knights at
the feast of Pentecost, did sit and eat. The proportion thereof was such, as no
room could be thought of more dignity then the rest. Yet (as some writers say)
one seat thereof was called, the Sea perilous, reserved for that Knight that
did excel the rest in virtue. That place by consent of all the Knights was
allotted unto King Arthur, who for his valor surpassed other professors of
Arms.

Of officers and ministers belonging unto this Order, I do not read, but of a
Register, whose duty was to enter and keep records of all and every action,
enterprised, attempted, or performed by any or all these Knights; which records
were read and sung publicly to the eternizing of their honor and fame.

Whether the number of these Knights were many or few, I do not find, but it
seems imparted to a great many, all persons of high dignity or much
prowess. For at a city called Carlion, resorted unto king Arthur at one time,
ten kings and thirteen Earls, besides many Barons and other Knights of meaner
title.

As the conquests of this King were many, so was his bounty notable: for it is
written, that unto his chief Seneschal or Steward called Kay, he gave the
province of Anjou, on his Butler Bedwere he bestowed Normandy, and to his
cousin Berell he granted the Duchy of Burgundy, and unto many other Lords
and valiant Knights, he allotted other magnificent gifts, according to their
virtue and merit.

Some men have surmised, that the success of king Arthurs prosperous
proceeding in his enterprises, was occasioned by counsel of one Merlin, a man
in that time reputed a Prophet.

King Arthur having all his youth found fortune his friend, was notwithstanding
at length deceived by the treason of one Mordred his own cosen, to whom
(during his absence out of England) he had committed the government.

He was also at a city called Augusta encountered of the Romans and Saracens,
conducted by a Consul called Lucius: nevertheless Arthur by his great valor
slew Lucius, and forced his Romans to flee. In that battle also were slain
five Saracen kings.

After this victory, Arthur returned into England, and fought with Mordred. In
which conflict died Gawen a Noble Knight and cosen to king Arthur. Also in
landing, Aquisel king of Scots was slain; But notwithstanding the loss of
these valiant Knights, king Arthur landed, and Mordred fled to London: where
the Citizens would not suffer him to enter the City. Then he went into
Cornwall, where Arthur did slay him, and he himself was mortally wounded. So
great a slaughter had never ben before that day seen.

After this conflict, king Arthur was never found alive, or dead: but (as some
Poets have supposed) was taken up into the firmament, and remains there a
Star among the nine Worthies; which fancy is founded upon the prophecy of
old Merlyn, who many years before affirmed, that Arthur after a certain time
should resuscitate, and come unto Carlion to restore the round Table. There he
wrote this Epitaph: Hic iacet Arturus, rex quondam, rexque futurus.

CHAP. 6.
How enterprises aduenturous ought be admired, but not discredited.
TRue it is, as has been formerly said, that many enterprises in times past
attempted and achieved above the expectation of men, are now thought rather
fabulous then faithfully reported: either because we that now live did not
know, or see them, or that ignorant men cannot conceive how they might be
done, or that want of courage does disable them to take the like actions in
hand. Yet most certain it is, that diverse histories commonly reputed vain
fables, were at the first begun upon occasion of matter in effect true,
although some writers afterward, to show the excellency of their invention,
or make their works more vendible, have added many fancies and fictions which
are not indeed worthy to be believed. And who so shall well consider how
difficult a thing it is to write an history of so great truth and perfection,
as cannot be controlled, will easily excuse these writers that have taken in
hand matter so far from our knowledge and understanding. For like unto all
other men, moved with love, hate, profit, or other private passion, they are
either willing or ignorantly induced to increase or extenuate the actions and
merits of those men, of whom their histories have discoursed. How soever that
be, I verily think the Acts and enterprises of Ulysses, Aeneas, Hector, and
other famous captains (of whom Poets and profane Writers have written so many
woonders) were indeed of notable men, and some part of their doings such, as
writers have made mention. Much less do I doubt, that some egregious acts
achieved and written in the books of Amadis de Gaul, Ariosto, Tasso, King
Arthur of England, and such others do contain many things, which deserve not
to be discredited. But omitting to meddle with time so long since past, and
with countries so far from our Climate, we will remember some few Actions
which worthy men of our own Nation or our neighbors (as that of Hernando
Cortez, Pisarro, and others) have (within our knowledge) to the eternizing of
their fame and honor, performed. The greater part of which enterprises have
been achieved in this present age, and shall no doubt hereafter (when men are
less industrious) be thought rather fabulous, then matters credible.

Let us therefore say no more of matter so long before our days, and begin
with actions notable performed by men of our own Country, and they (for the
most part) persons of such quality, as were not forced with distress, but
with desire to advance the honor of their Country. We read in Authors
worthy credit, that at one time twenty thousand Soldiers of this most noble
Island (then called great Britain) traueiled from hence unto Judea, and under
the Emperors Vespasian and Titus, served at the siege and sack of Jerusalem.
The like enterprise was long after taken in hand by King Richard the first, who
in his own person traueiled to recover the same City from the Saracens. The
voyages and marueiles which Sir John Mandeuile reports, are accounted of many
men rather fables then reports of truth, yet of late years, some Sailers even
of our own nation, have found by experience they ought not to be discredited.
Who would have thought it possible to pass securely into Syria, Persia, Media,
and other far countries in the East and Southeast, until M. Anthony
Ienkinson, (a gentleman yet living, and worthy belief) performed those, and
other right notable Voyages? It is also certain that Thomas Windhame a
gentleman well borne and worshipfully descended, sailed from thence to Guinea,
and the kingdom of Benin, and since that time Captain Fenner performed the
same journey, so far as the Islands of Capo verde. All which Voyages with many
other were made by Princes, or persons of reputation, toward the South and
Southeast.

The like may be said of Voyages of latter time toward the North, and
Northeast Regions performed by sir Hugh Willowby, M. Ienkinson aforesaid, M.
Christopher Burrow and others.

Of voyages toward the West and Southwest countries, who has not heard the
Navigations of sir John Hawkins to Brasill, and the West Indias, of Roger
Bodname gentleman to S. John Vllua in the Bay of Mexico, of sir Francis Drake
to Nombre de Dios, sir Martin Furbisher to Meta incognita, sir Humfrey Gilbert
to the coast of America, sir Richard Greeneuile to Virginia, M. John Dauis
gentleman his discovery 200. leagues beyond sir Martin Furbisher to the
Northwest? I omit to make mention of many Merchants, Nauigators, and simple
Sailers of our land, that have not only attempted, but also performed
marvelous actions, to vulgar people and unskillful thought impossible. Yet is
it now publicly known that sir Francis Drake, and after him Thomas Candish
esquier, (a young gentleman scarcely known to Sailers) within the space of two
years and three months, effected a journey about the Globe of the whole
earth: an action no doubt, worthy all admiration, and such as before that time
had never been performed.

Here might we also insert how the mighty and formidable Armada of Spain, was
by her Majesty's Navy (conducted by the Earl of Nottingham) vanquished Anno
1588. being in foreign Nations thought irresistable. And more lately the most
noble and resolute assault and sack of the City ^. Cales, and other strong
places of Spain was executed by the virtue, and excellent valor of his said
Lordship, and the Earl of Essex, lately high Marshal of England. To these we
may also add the late, and last, (yet not the least) victory gained by the
noble Earl of Cumberland, who by his proper virtue, and at the particular
charge of him and his friends, assaulted and possessed the Isle of S. John de
Porto Ricco, a place both by nature and art reputed impregnable. These and
other notable adventures and victories were above the common opinion of men,
attempted, and achieved by worthy and excellent Captains of our country:
and the chief of them within the reign of our sacred Sovereign, by whose
counsel and princely prudence they were begun and ended.

Magna non possumus, quia nos posse, non credimus.

CHAP. 7.
The office and duty of every Knight and Gentleman.
FIrst it behooves him to fear God, and with all his power to maintain and
defend the Christian faith.

To be charitable, and comfort those that are afflicted.

To serve faithfully, and defend his Prince and country courageously.

To forgive the follies and offenses of other men, and sincerely embrace the
love of friends.

To esteem truth, and without respect maintain it.

To avoid sloth and superfluous ease.

To spend the time in honest and virtuous actions.

To reverence Magistrates and converse with persons of honor.

To eschew riot and detest intemperancie.

To frequent the war, and use military exercises.

To eschew dishonest pleasures, and endeavor to do good unto others.

To accommodate himself to the humor of honest company, and be no wrangler.

To shun the conversation of perverse persons, and behave himself modestly.

To be sober and discreet, no boaster of his own acts, nor speaker of
himself.

To desire no excessive riches, and patiently endure worldly calamities.

To undertake enterprises just, and defend the right of others,

To support the oppressed, and help widows and Orphans.

To love God, and be loyal to his Prince.

To prefer honor before worldly wealth, and be both in word and deed just
and faithful.

CHAP. 8.
Of honorable ornaments due unto men of virtuous merit, who were ever after
called Knights.
IN ancient Histories it appears that the old Romans did give rings of gold
unto men of quality, serving in the war, whom afterward they called Equites.
Such rings the Senators used also to wear, whereof may be inferred that
knighthood and ensigns of honor were given as well for Counsel, as Military
merit. Cicero seems to say that Captains general had in use (after every
victory) to make an Oration unto soldiers, commending their virtue: and to
those men that served with much valor were given rings of gold.

We read likewise in holy Scripture that king Pharaoh in sign of honor did
take a ring from his own finger, and gave the same to Joseph.

Some Princes also intending to honor their servants and soldiers did bestow
upon them spurs of gold or gilded: in sign they were men of virtue, and
professors of Arms on horseback: for spurs are only proper to soldiers of
that sort, and so it appears by the signification of the latin word Eques,
and likewise by the term Caualiero, ordinarily used of the Spaniards and
Italian.

In old time (as a token of honor and advancement) Princes did bestow girdles
and swords. And the law Civil seems to note that the girdle signified
administration or dignity, and whosoever did loose that girdle, should also
forfeite all privileges which the law allows unto soldiers. A sword was
always hanging at the girdle, and the hilts thereof either of gold or g^lt.
Hereof it comes that Princes in creating a Knight, do either gird him with a
sword, or with a sword touch him on the head or shoulder, thereby to signify
that as with the sword he is created a Knight, so with the sword he ought to
defend the Prince and country that did create him, without fear of death or
other danger. Hieramias with his right hand delivered a sword unto Judah, and
in the name of God made him a Knight, saying, Receive this sacred sword sent
from God, wherewith thou shall vanquish the enemies of Israel.

It has been also a custom ancient, that Princes did give collars as a
singular demontration of favor and honor.

Pliny reports that the Romans did give unto their confederates a collar of
gold, and to their own citizens a collar of silver.

When Manlius in single combat had slain a French man, he took from him a
collar of gold, all bloody, and put the same about his own neck in token of
victory. After which time, he was surnamed Torquatus, because Torques in the
Latin signifies a collar or chain.

The Emperors in like manner bestowed collars upon Captains and others that
served in the war, and deserved commendation.

In some Histories may be found, that collars were of two sorts: the first
called Duplares, the other Simplices. And with those collars the Emperors (for
the most part) did give provision of money or vittaile: to some more, to some
less.

For these reasons and by these examples it appears, that among the ensigns
and ornaments of Honor and Arms, the great Collar is of highest reputation.

It is also seen that Princes sovereign, do at this day bestow chains or
small collars upon men of virtue or favor, and in token thereof (for the most
part) a picture or modele of the giver is thereat pendant; which Collat the
Knight or Gentleman that receives it, ought carefully to keep during his life.

The ancient custom was, that Knights of mean degree, and such as were not of
the great Orders (whereunto particular habits are assigned) should in sign of
honor wear a garment of scarlet, because red represents fire, the most
noble element, and (next unto the Sun) of most brightness. It was therefore
among the old Romans decreed, That no man should wear any habit of that
color, but only Magistrates and men of dignity. Red does also betoken
boldness, magnanimity, and ardent love with charity. The element of fire is
also assigned to Mars, in respect whereof that color is most proper to
Knights, Captains, and all other professors of Arms.

Carol D Howard Com^ Notingham (...)



CHAP. 9.
Knights of the Garter.
EDward the third King of England, after he had obtained many great victories
of John the French King, and James King of Scotland, both prisoners in the
Realm at one time, Henry King of Castile the Bastard expulsed, and Don Pedro
restored by the Prince of Wales, did first erect this order in his kingdom
Anno 1350. upon no weighty occasion, as is reported. Notwithstanding the same
is, and long has been in so great reputation, as Emperors, Kings and Princes,
have and do desire to be companions thereof for their greater honor.

The patron of this Order is S. George, unto whom it was first dedicated.

The Sovereign of this Order is the King of England, his heirs and successors
for ever.

The number of this College of fellowship is 26. Knights with the Sovereign,
and when any of them die, another is chosen by consent of those Knights that
live.

The habit of these Knights is an under garment, or gown of Crimsin velvet, of
some called ak^rtle, over which he wears a mantle of Purple velvet lined with
white sarsnet, on the left shoulder thereof is embroidred in a Garter an
Eschuchion of S George, and over his right shoulder hangs his hood of Crimson
velvet lined with white, the Cordons to the mantle are purple silk and gold.

Above all which, about his neck he wears the collar of the order, being of
pure gold, made of garters and knots, and enamiled with roses white and red,
weying 30. ounces of Troy weight, with the image of S. George, richly garnished
with precious stones, pendant thereat.

About his left leg he wears buckled a garter enriched with gold, pearl
and stones, whereupon these French words are embrodered, HONEY SOIT QVI MAL Y
PENSE. Which may be thus Englished, Shame be to him that evil thinks.

The custom was long that these Knights did yearly hold a feast at the Castle
Windesor, where the same King Edward founded a Church, and gave unto certain
Priests and Prebends large stipends to serve there. And he ordained also that
thirteen poor aged and decayed Gentlemen by the name of poor Knights were
there for ever to be maintained and kept, invested in gowns and mantles of
cloth only, suitable with those of the Order, to pray for the prosperity of the
Sovereign and his successors, and all other Knights of the said noble Order.

It is not publicly known what moved the King to make this order: but thus
it is vulgarly reported, that King Edward dancing with the Queen and other
Ladies of his Court, happened to take up a blewe garter which fell from one of
them, and of some said from the Countess of Salisburie (of whom the King was
then enamored) which garter the King afterward wore about his left leg for a
favor. The Queen taking some offense thereat, it was signified unto the King
by some of the Lords the cause of her displeasure, at which he smiling said,
HONEY SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE. I will make of it yet it be long the most honorable
Garter that ever was worn, and thereupon instituted the order of the Garter.

Some rather think it was made to remunerate those Noble men and Knights, that
had best endeavored and deserved in his most Royal and Martial affairs of
France, Scotland and Spain, with all which Nations he then had war and
triumphed.

The Statutes of this great Order, for that they are sufficiently known, I
here omit.

The names of the first Knights.
KIng EDWARD the third Sovereign. Edward Prince of Wales. Henry Duke of
Lancaster. Thomas Earl of Warwick. The Captain of Bouche. Ralph Earl of
Stafford. William de Mounteacute Earl of Sarisburie. Roger Lord Mortimer. Sir
John Lisle. Sir Bartholomew Burgwash. Sir John Beauchampe. Sir John de Mohun.
Sir Hugh Courtney. Sir Thomas Holland. Sir John Gray. Sir Richard Fitzsymon.
Sir Miles Stapleton. Sir Thomas Wall. Sir Hugh VVrothesley. Sir Neel Loring.
Sir John Chandos. Sir James de Audley. Sir Otho Holland. Sir Henry Eme. Sir
Zanchet d'Abrigecourt. Sir William Paganel.
The names of those Knights that are this present year 1602. of the same most
noble Order.
ELIZABETH Queen of England Sovereign. Henry the fourth, the French King.
Charles Howard, Earl of Notingham. Thomas Butler, Earl of Ormond. Thomas
Sackuile, Lord Buckhurst. Gilbert Talbot, Earl of Shrewsbury. George Clifford,
Earl of Cumberland. Henry Percye, Earl of Northumberland. Edward Somerset,
Earl of Worcester. Edmond Sheffeild, Lord Sheffeild. Thomas Howard, Baron of
Walden. George Carey, Baron of Hunsdon. Charles Blount, Lord Montioy. Sir
Henry Lea, Master of her Mties Armorie. Robert Ratcliffe, Earl of Sussex.
Henry Brook, Lord Cobham. Thomas Scrope, Lord Scrope. William Stanley, Earl
of Derby. Thomas Cecil, Lord Burleigh.

The Officers appertaining (at this present) unto this most Honorable Order,
are these.
Doctor Bilson, Prelate. B. of Winchester. Sir Edward Dier, Chancellor.
Knight. Doctor Benet, Register. Deane of Windsor. William Dethicke, Garter.
Principal K. of Arms. Richard Conings by Esquier. Usher.
Officers of Arms, attendants upon the said Order.
W. Camden, Clarencieux. Kings of Arms. W. Segar, Norroy. Lancaster. Chester.
Heralds. York. Richmond. Windesor. Somerset. Rouge-crosse. Rouge-Dragon.
Pursuyuants. Portcullis. Blewmantle.
CHAP. 10.
Of Knights Bannerets.
OTher degrees of Knighthood there are in England: but because they we are no
garment, badge or sign to distinguish them from other gentlemen, they are not
known to strangers, yet among our selves we know them right well, because every
one having such dignity, is called Sir: As Sir Thomas, Sir John, Sir William,
Sir Simon, etc. But first of Knights Bannerets.

A Knight that is to receive this honor, shall be led between two other Knights
before the King or General, bearing his Pennon of Arms in his own hand: and
in presence of all the Nobility and other Captains, the Heralds shall say
unto the King or his General these words following, viz.

May it please your grace to understand, that this gentleman has showed
himself valiant in the field: and for so doing, deserves to be advanced unto
the degree of a Knight Banneret, as worthy from henceforth to bear a Banner
in the war.

Then the King or General shall cause the points of his Pennon or Guydon to be
rent off. And the new Knight shall go unto his tent, conducted between two
other Knights, the trumpets sounding all the way before him, there to receive
sees: viz. to the Heralds three pound six shillings and viij pence. And if he
were before a Knight Bachelour, then is he to pay also unto the Trumpets twenty
shillings. I suppose the Scots do call a Knight of this creation a Bannerent,
for having his Bannerrent.

Here is to be noted, that no Knight Banneret can be made, but in the war,
and the king present: or when his Standerd royal is displayed in the field.

A Banneret thus made, and every estate above him, may bear his Banner
displayed, if he be a Captain: and set his Arms therein as Barons do.

CHAP. II.
Knights of the Bath, according to the ancient use.
WHen an Esquier comes to the Court to receive this Order of Knighthood, in
time of peace, according to the custom of England, he shall be very nobly
received by the officers of the Court, as the Steward of Chamberlane, if they
be present, or otherwise by the Marshals and Vshers, and there shall be
ordained two Esquiers of honor, wise, and well learned in courtesy and
nurture, as also in feats of Chiualry: and they shall be Esquiers and
Governors of all which pertains to him, who receives the order abouesaid:
and if the Esquier do come before dinner, he shall serve the King of water,
or with a dish at the first course only, and then the Esquiers governors
shall lead the Esquier that is to be Knighted, into his chamber without any
more ado, at that time, and toward evening the Esquiers governors shall send
for a Barber, and he shall prepare a Bath, decked with linen, as well within
the Tubbe, as without, and that the tubbe be well covered with carpets and
mantels for the cold of the night, and then the beard of the Esquier shall be
shaven, and his hair rounded. This done, the Esquiers governors shall go to
the King and say, Sir it is evening, and the Esquier is ready at the Bathe,
when it shall please ye. Whereupon the King shall command his Chamberlain to
convey to the chamber of the Esquier the most gentle and wisest Knights that
are then present, to inform, counsel, and instruct him in the order and
feats of Chivalry, and likewise that the other Esquiers of that house with
minstrelsie do go before the Knights, singing, playing, and dancing to the
chamber door of the said Esquier.

And when the Esquiers governors do hear the noise of Music, they shall
unclothe the Esquier, and put him naked into the Bath. But at the entering of the
chamber the Esquiers governors shall cause the music to cease, and the
Esquiers also for a time. This done the Knights shall enter into the chamber
still without making any noise, and then the Knights shall do reverence one to
the other, who shall be the first to counsel the Esquier in Order of the Bath,
and when they are agreed, then the first shall go to the Bath, and kneeling
down before the tubbe shall say secretly, Sir, great honor may this Bath be
unto you, and then he shows him the manner of the Order that best he can, and
then puts some of the water of the Bath upon the shoulder of the Esquier,
and takes leave, and the Esquiers governors shall attend on each side of the
Bath themselves, and after that same manner shall all the other Knights do, one
after another, till they have all done, and then the Knights depart out of the
chamber for a season. This done, the Esquiers governors do take the Esquier
out of the Bath, and lay him in his bed, till he be dry, which bed ought to be
simple without curtens, and being dry, he shall rise out of his bed and
apparelled somewhat warm because of the coldness of the night, and over all his
apparel he shall wear a coat of Russet cloth with long sleeves, after the
manner of an Hermit, with an hood. The Esquier being out of the Bath and made
ready, the Barber shall take away the Bath, and all that is about the same,
as well within as without, and take them for his fees, and likewise the Collar
if he be an Earl, Baron, Banneret or Bachelor Knight, according to the
custom of the Court. This done, the Esquiers governors shall open the chamber
door, and let the Knights enter in, to lead the Esquier to the Chapel. And
when they are entered, the Esquiers singing and dancing shall be brought before
the Esquier with their melody to the Chapel. And when they are entered into
Chapel, then spices and wine shall be given to the said Knights and Esquiers.
And the Esquiers governors shall lead the Knights before the Esquier to take
their leaves. And he shall thank them altogether for their travel, honor and
courtesies. And so they depart: after whom the Esquiers gournours shall shut
the door, and let no man tarry in the Chapel, except the Esquiers his
governors, the Priests, Chandler, and Watch. And so he shall remain in the
Chapel till it be almost day, always in prayer, desiring God to bless and
increase his grace in him, to give him power and comfort to take this high
temporal d^gnitie, to the honor and praise of him, the holy Church, and order
of Knighthood. And when day appears they shall cause the Priest to say
prayers, and communicate if he will. And from the entering of the Chapel door
he shall have a candle of wax borne before him. Prayers being begun, one of
the Governors shall hold the candle before the Esquier till the reading of
the Gospel, and then the Esquier shall hold it himself till the Gospel be
ended, and then it shall be set before him till all the Service be ended. Then
one of the governors shall take away the hood from the Esquier. And when the
Gospel is read, the Esquier shall kneel down and offer money in the honor of
God, and him that shall make him Knight. Then the Esquiers governors shall
lead him into his chamber, and lay him in his bed till it be far day. And
whilst he rests in his bed he shall be covered; that is to say, with a
couerlet of gold, called Sigleton, and the same shall be lined with Kersie. And
when it seems good to the Governors, they shall go to the King and say unto
him: Sir, when it pleases your Grace our Master shall rise. And then the King
shall command the Knights, Esquiers, and Minstrels, to go to the chamber to
cause him rise, and to make him ready, and to bring him before him in his Hall.
But before their entering and noise of music heard, the Esquiers shall make
all things ready for the apparelling of him. One Knight shall give him his
shirt, another his hose, the third his dublet, another shall apparel him in a
kertle of red Tartar. Two other shall lift him out of his bed: two others shall
put on his black netherstockes soled with leather: two other to lace his
Manches: another to girde him with a girdle of white leather without any studs:
another shall comb his head: another shall put on his coife: another shall
give him a Mantle of silk, and Kertle of red Tartar, laced with a white silk
lace. But the Chandler shall have for his fees all the garments and others
wherewith he was clothed at the first entry, and also the bed and Sigleton;
for which fees, the Chandler of his own expenses shall find the coife,
gloves, girdle, and lace. Then the Knights shall mount on horseback, and
conduct him to the Hall, the music playing before him, his horse sadled with
black leather, the Arson white, stirrup leathers black, and stirrops gilt,
the pectorel of black leather with a cross paty of gold, hanging before the
horse feet, and without a crouper: the bridle of black leather with a cross
paty on the forehead: and then a young Esquier to ride before him without a
hood, who shall bear his sword by the point with the spurs hanging at the
hilts, which are white, studded with black, and a white leather girdle without
any studdes. When they come to the Kings Hall, the Governors and Marshals
shall be ready to meet him, and at his alighting the Marshall shall have his
horse, or else 100. sh. for his see, he shall be brought to the uppermost table
in the Hall, and there tarry till the Kings coming, the Knights on each side
of him: and the young man holding his sword between the two Esquiers. And when
the King comes into the Hall, and looks on the Esquier, ready to take the
high Order of temporal dignity, he shall demand the sword, and the spurs,
and the Chamberlain shall take the sword and the spurs from the young man,
and shall show them to the King, and then the King shall take the right spur
and shall deliver it to the most noble Lord, saying, Put this upon the Esquiers
heel: and he kneeling on that one knee, shall take the Esquier by the right
leg, and put his foot upon his knee, and make fast the spur to his right
heel: and the Lord shall make a cross on the knee of the Esquier, and kiss
him. This done, another Lord shall come and fasten the spur to the left foot
in the same manner. And then the King of his great courtesy shall take the
sword, and gird it about the Esquier: and then the Esquier shall lift up his
Arms on high, holding the Gantlets in his hands between his fingers and the
thumbes. And the King shall put his arm about the Esquiers neck, and lift his
right hand up, and smite the Esquier on the shoulder, saying, Be a good Knight,
and then kisseth him. And then the Knights do lead the new Knight to the
Chapel with great melody to the high Altar, where he kneeleth down and
puts his right hand upon the Altar, promising to defend the right of holy
Church during his life. And then he shall vngird the sword, and with great
devotion pray unto Almighty God that he may keep the Order which he has
taken upon him, and accomplish the same to the end, and takes a drop of wine.
And at his going out of the Chapel, the Kings master Cook is ready to take
away the spurs, and to have them for his see, saying, I am come from the King
being his master Cook, to take the spurs from you, and to show you, that if
you do any thing against the order of Chivalry (which God forbid) I will cut
away the spurs from your heels. And then the Knights shall lead him back
into the Hall, and he begins the table of Knights, and the Knights shall sit
about him, and he shall be served as the other are, but he shall neither eat nor
drink nor move, or look here or there, no more then one that is new married.
This done, one of the governors shall have a handkerchife in his hand, which he
shall hold before his face, when he will spit or such like: and when the King is
risen from the table, and gone into his chamber, then the new Knight shall be
led with a great number of Knights and Minstrels before him to his chamber, and
at their entering the Knights and Minstrels shall take leave, and he shall go
to dinner. The Knights being departed, the chamber shall be shut, and that
new Knight shall be dispoiled of all his abillaments which shall be given to the
Knights and Heralds, if they be present, or else to the Minstrels, with a mark
in silver if he be a Bacheler Knight, and if he be a Baron, then double
so much, if he be an Earl or higher estate always doubled, and the Russet
nightcap shall be given to the watch, or else a noble in money. And then he
shall be apparelled in a blew gown, with the Manches open in the manner of a
Priest, and he shall have at his left shoulder a lace of white silk hanging,
which he shall wear uppermost on his garment, so long till he have gained
honor in Arms: and be recorded by some noble Knights, Esquiers, and Heralds
of Arms for some memorable deeds done by him, as has been said before, or by
some noble Prince, or noble Lady, which may cut away the lace from the Knights
shoulder, saying, Sir, we have heard much of your renown, and what you have
done in diverse places to the great honor of Chivalry, for your self and him
that made you Knight: therefore reason would that this lace should be taken
from you. But after dinner the Knights and gentlemen do come after the Knight,
and do bring him to the Kings presence, and the Esquiers governors before
him. And when the new Knight comes into the Kings presence, he shall kneel
down before him, saying, Most noble and renowned Sir, I do thank you for all
the honors, courtesies and goodness which you have done unto me. And so he
takes leave of the King. And then the Esquiers governors do take leave of
their Master, saying, Sir, we have accomplished the commandment of the Kings
as he charged us, to the uttermost of our power, wherein if we have displeased
you, through negligence, or deed, during the time, we desire pardon. On the
other side, Sir, according to the custom of the Court and ancient Kings: we
demand Robes and fees for term of life, as Esquiers of the King, and
companions unto Bachelors Knights, and other Lords.

CHAP. 12.
Knights Bachelors.
FIrst it is to be remembered, that no man is brone a Knight of any title, but
made, either before a battle, to encourage them to adventure their lives, or
after the fight, as an advancement for their valor then showed: or out of
war for some notable service done, or some good hope of virtues that do
appear in them.

These Knights are made either by the King himself, or by his commission and
royal authority given for that purpose, or by his Lieutenant in the wars, who
has his royal and absolute power for that time. And this order may be
resembled to that which the Romans, called Equites Romanos, differing in a
sort, but in some other sort does agree with it: for seldom in all points one
Common wealth does agree with another, nor long any State accords with it
self. Equites Romani were chosen ex Censu, which is according to their
substance and riches; Even so be Knights in England for the most part,
according to the yearly revenue of their lands, being able to maintain that
estate: Yet all they that had Equestrem Censum were not in Rome Equites: no
more are all Knights in England that may dispend a Knights land, or fee, but
they only to whom it pleases the King to give that honor. In Rome the number
of Equites was uncertain, and so it is of Knights in England, at the pleasure
of the Prince. Equites Romani had Equum Publicum, but the Knights of England
find horses themselves, both in peace and war: Census Equester among the
Romans was at diverse times of diverse value, but in England, whosoever may
dispend of his free lands forty pounds starling of yearly revenue, by an old
Law, either at the Coronation of the King, or marriage of his daughter, or at
the dubbing of the Prince, Knight, or some such great occasion, may be by the
King compelled to take that order and honor, or to pay a fine: which many rich
men, not so desirous of honor, as of riches, had rather disburse. Some also,
who for good respect are not thought worthy that title, and yet have ability,
neither be made Knights though they would, and yet pay the fine of forty
pounds sterling, which (as silver is now prised) is 120. pound current money.
Where of this word Knight is derived, or whether it signifies no more then
Miles does in Latin, which is Soldier, I know not. Some hold opinion that
the word Soldier does betoken a waged or hired man to fight. Caesar in his
Commentaries called Soldiers, men devoted and sworn by band or oath to serve
the Captain, which order if the Almanes did follow, it may be, that they who
were not hired, but being of the Nation upon their own charges, and for their
advancement, and by such common oath and band that did follow the war, were
(perhaps) called Knights, or Milites: and now among the Almanes some are called
Launce-Knights, as Soldiers not hired, although they be wel-neere all hired.
Or it may be that they who were next about the Prince, as his Guard and
servants, picked, and chose men out of the rest, being called in the Almane
tongue Knighten, which is as much to say as daily servants, being found of good
service, the word afterward was taken as an honor, for one that professes
Arms. Now our language is so altered, that hard it were to give judgment
thereof* But sure it is, we in our English do call him Knight, whom the French
do call Cheualier, and the Latin Equitem, for Equestris ordinis. Touching the
making of these English Knights, the manner is this. He that is to be made
Knight, is stricken by the Prince with a sword drawn upon his back, or
shoulder: the Prince saying Soys Cheualier, and in times past, was added, S.
George. And when the Knight rises, the Prince says, Auance. This is the manner
of dubbing Knights at this present: and that term dubbing was the old term in
this point, and not creating. These sorts of Knights are by the Heralds called
Knights Bachelors.

CHAP. 13.
The Ceremonies in the degradation of Knights in England.
IT seems that the degradation of Knights has been used only for offenses
of greatest reproach and dishonor: which I conceive partly by the rareness of
such actions, and partly for that the men bereft of that dignity, were not
only degraded, but also by law executed. As in the reign of King Edward the
fourth it appeared a Knight was degraded in this sort.

First, after the publication of his offense, his gilt spurs were beaten from
his heels, then his sword taken from him and broken: That being done, every
piece of his armor was bruised, beaten and cast aside. After all which
disgraces, he was beheaded.

In like manner: Andrew of Herklay a Knight and Earl of Carlisle, was in this
sort disgraded. He being apprehended, was by the Kings commandment brought
before sir Anthony Lucie, anno 1322. apparelled in all the robes of his estate,
as an Earl and a Knight, and so led unto the place of judgment. Being thither
come, Sir Anthony Lucie said unto him these words: First thou shall loose the
order of Knighthood, by which thou had all thine honor: and further all
worship upon thy body be brought to naught. Those words pronounced, Sir
Anthony Lucie commanded a knave to hew the Knights spurs from his heels, and
after caused his sword to be broken over his head. That done, he was dispoiled
of his furred Tabord, of his hood, of his furred coats, and of his gird^e. Then
Sir Anthony said unto him these words, Andrew, now art thou no Knight, but a
knave, and for thy treason the King does will thou shall be hanged.

Maxitmilianus de Austria Dux Bur^undi^ R^m Im^. Ord^n^ Velleris Aurei Eques
(...) Fol. (...).



CHAP. 14.
Knights of the Toizon D'or, or golden Fleece.
THE Knighthood of the Toizon was instituted by Philip (surnamed the good) Duke
of Burgundy, and Earl of Flanders in the year of our Lord, 1429. being moved
thereunto with devout zeal that he had to undertake the conquest of the holy
land, albeit his valerous determination took none effect, by reason of many
alterations and losses which happened unto the Christians in the East at that
time. He elected for Patron of this Order, the Apostle S. Andrew.

The Sovereign of this Order is he unto whom the Dukedom of Burgundy does
lawfully descend.

The number of these Knights first elected were four and twenty, besides the
Sovereign, all men of Noble blood without reproach, and of virtuous merit.

The habit is an under garment of Crimson velvet, with a mantle of the same,
lined with white, it opens on the right side, and in the wearing is turned up
on the left shoulder, it is richly embrodered round about with a border of
flames, fusils and fleeces. The hood of crimson velvet the Knights we are on
their heads as by the figure appears.

The Collar of this Order, is of gold wrought of flames and fusils with the
Toizon hanging thereat. The Sovereign has authority in himself absolutely
to give, and bestow the same at this pleasure. This Collar, or the Toizon,
every Knight is bound to wear daily, or failing, shall incur a penalty. But
in time of war, or urgent affairs, to wear the Toizon only shall suffice.
Or if by mishap the Collar do break, it is permitted for mending thereof, it
may be carried unto a goldsmith. Or if any Knight traveling by the way shall
fear to be robbed, he may lay the Collar aside. Yet it is not lawful to
increase the quantity of the Collar, nor add thereunto any stones, or
workmanship, and most unlawful it is to sell it, or change it.

Whosoever enters into this Order, mustrenounce all other Orders of
Knighthood, of every Prince, Company or Religion; yet out of that law are
excepted all Emperors, Kings and Dukes, unto whom it is dispensed that they
may wear the Ensigns of this Order, if they be chief and Sovereigns of
their own Order. Yet to the end the truth may appear, a Council of Knights
shall be called to consent unto that dispensation.

These with other Statutes and Ordinances the Knights of this great Order are
sworn to observe and keep. And many of them have been, since the first
institution, enlarged, altered, ortaken away by the Sovereigns.

The day of assembly for these Knights, was at the beginning appointed on the
feast day of S. Andrew, but since altered unto the second of May, and that but
once in three years; unless it pleases the Sovereign otherwise to command.

To this Order do belong four principal officers, Viz. A Chancellor, a
Treasurer, a Register, and a king of Arms named Toizon D'or.

To this Order also appertains an Impreze: the inuenter thereof was Charles
Duke of Burgundy: whose high valor brought Lewys the xj. king of France unto
great trouble, as Monsieur d' Argenton writes.

The said Impreze or device was an Instrument made to strike fire, called an
Ansill, with these words, Ante ferit, quam flamma micet: meaning, he had power
to kindle great trouble before it were perceived, yet was the event unhappy:
for in the war against Lorayne and the Suysses, after the defeare of Morat
and Granson, his forces were utterly overthrown, and his person slain before
Nancy, the Even of the Epiphany. Whereupon Renato Duke of Lorayne being
victorious, and seeing the standerd of Duke Charles with the Impreze of the
Instrument of fire, said, That unfortunate Prince when he had most need to
warm him, lacked leisure to strike fire: which speech was pithie; and the
more, because the earth was then covered with snow, and by reason of the
conflict, full of blood. At that time was the greatest frost and cold that any
man living could remember.

The Toizon which these Knights do wear hanging at their Collar of Order, is
the form of a golden fleece, which Jason won at Colchos: others do suppose it
to be the fleece of Gedeon, whereof the holy Scripture makes mention; which
signifies Fidel^ie, or Justice uncorrupted.

The number of these Knights was much increased by the Emperor Charles the
fifth; who having the dukedom of Burgundy, elected into that Order persons of
greater Title then were at the beginning, and commanded the election should be
by consent. After him, King Philip of Spain did the like.

The names of Knights in the first election.
THe Duke of Burgondie Sovereign. William de Vienna of S. George. Rinieri Pot
Lord of Castile. The Lord of Rombaix. The Lord Mountacute. Orland de Vtquerque.
Anthony de Vergi Conte of Lignij. Hugh de Lanoij, Lord of Santes. John Lord of
Cominges. Anthony de Tolongion, Marshal of Burgondie. Peter de Luxemburg, Conte
of Beureine. Gilbert de Lanoy, Lord of Villerual. John de Villiers, Lord of
Isleadam. Anthony Lord of Croy and Renti. Florimont de Brimeu Lord of
Massincure. Robert Lord of Mamimes. James de Brimeu, Lord of Grigni. Baldwin de
Lanoij, Lord of Mulambays. Peter de Baufremont of Cargni. Philip Lord of
D'osteruant. John de Orequi. John de Croy Lord of Tours super Marne.
(...)



CHAP. 15.
Knights of S. Michael.
IN the year 1469. Lewis the xj. French King erected an order of Knighthood
whereinto himself with others the most principal Peers of France did enter.
It is said, the occasion which moved the King to entitle this Order with the
name of S. Michael, was the memory of an apparition of that Saint upon the
bridge of Orleance, when that City was besieged by the English, at which time
lived a certain maiden called Johan, a woman of so rare wit and valor in
Arms, as was reputed more then a mortal creature, or rather some enchantresse
of singular knowledge.

This Order is ornified with a great Collar, whereat the Image of S. Michael
hangs. The words thereon set, are these: Immensitremor Oceani.

The Sovereign of this Order is the French King and his successors.

The number of Knights to be elected into this Order is 36. But of late years
that number has been much increased, and thereby the order become of small
reputation: yet it is said, that the great Collar and Robe is bestowed only to
that number, although the Michael be given unto many. Howsoever that be, sure
it is, that th'entent of that King was to make choice only of the most noble
personages of his own blood, and others, who for virtue and honor were
accounted worthy: as by the first election appears: who were these.

KIng Lewis the 11. Sovereign. Charles of Spain Duke of Vienna. John Duke of
Burbon and Auerne. Luys de Luxemburg, Conte of S. Paul and Constable of France.
Andre de Laual Lord of Ioheac, Marshal of France. John Conte de Sanserre Lord
of the Forr^t and of Plessis Mace. John de Tonteuille Lord of Castiglione.
Lewis Bastard of Burbon, Conte of Rosiglione and Admiral of France. Anthony of
Chiabanes, Conte d'Ammartin, and Grandmaster of the Kings house. John Bastard
d'Armignac, Count of Cominges Marshall of France, and Governor of Delfinato.
George de Trimouille, Lord of Craon Seneshal of Vienna. Luys Lord de Cursol,
Seneshal of Poylon. Gilbert de Gabanes Lord of Croito^; Seneshal of Vienna.
Taniqui de Castello, Governor of the Province of Rossiglioni and Sardenna.
The rest of Knights to be chosen into this Order was deferred until the the
next meeting.

The place of assembly of these Knights, and where their Arms with other
Ensigns of Knighthood should be preserved, was appointed to be the Church on
Mount S. Michael.

To this Order belongs a Treasurer, a Chanceller, a Register, and an Herald
named Monsanmichaele.

The feast ordained for these Knights was on Michaelmas day to be kept yearly.

The Statutes appertaining to this Order, are to be seen in the book,
entitled, Les Ordinances de France.

In the reign of Henry the second French King, the habit of this Order of S.
Michael was altered in manner following, as to this day is continued.

First his dublet, hose, shoes, scaberd, with the band of his cap, and feather
were all white. His surcoat of cloth of silver, with the sleeves on. Over that
he wore a mantle of cloth of silver tied over the right shoulder, and turned
up over the left, it was bordered about with a rich embroidery of cockles and
knots; Over the right shoulder lay his hood of cloth of silver, spreading over
his back, the tippet hanging before, and over all, the Collar of the Order of
S. Michael.

^mmanud. Philib^^tus (...) Dux Pr^^^ps Pe^emontij Ord S. A^^un: ciation Equ^
(...) Fol. 8^.



CHAP. 16.
Knights of the Annunciation.
THis Order was also about the same time begun by Amedeo Count of Sauoy,
surnamed I^ Verde, in memory of Amedeo the first Earl, who having valorously
defended the Island of Rhodes against the Turks, wanne those Arn^es which
deseruingly are now borne by the Dukes of Sauoy, Viz. Gules a cross Argent.
The Collar appertaining to this Order is made of gold, and on it these four
letters engraven, F. E. R. T. which signifies, Fortitudo eius Rhodum tenuit.
At the said Collar hangs a Tablet, wherein is the figute of the Annunciation.

The Church appointed for ceremonies appertaining unto this Order, is called
Pietra, within a Castle in the Diocese of Belleis, whereunto was given (at the
foundation of this Order) certain lands for the sustentation of fifteen
Chapleins.

For continuance of this Order, at the time of the constitution were made many
honorable ordinances to be kept by the Knights presently elected, and after to
be elected. The chief of them are these following.

First, that he the said Duke and his successor should be Lord and Sovereign
of the said Order.

That every brother and companion of the said Order should at all occasions
favor, love, and maintain one the other: and also defend and protect his
person and estate against every other person or persons whatsoever.

That if any question or controversy should arise between two Knights, then
they to submit the ordering thereof unto two or more of the fraternity, and
after to observe the same unviolated.

That for avoiding of suite in Law, whenever any cause of Action was
between the Knights, then the censuring thereof should be referred unto four
other companions of the Order, to the end the matter might be determined
without charge or expenses. And if the question depending were difficult, then
the Knights that were to consult there of might call unto their assistance, two
Doctors, m^n of approved honesty and understanding.

That every Knight at his death should give toward the maintaining of the said
Church an hundredth Florins to be delivered into the hand of the Pryor for the
time being.

That at the death of every Knight the rest of the companions should assemble
at the Castle of Pietra to bury the dead in good and honorable order, and
every of the said Knights to wear a white gown, and so make their offering.
Or if any of them could not be present, then with what convenient speed might
be, to come thither after.

That every Knight at his burial should give unto the Church a Collar, a
Banner, his Armor, and coat of Arms, if he be a Banneret; or not being, he
ought to give a Penon of Arms, a Collar, and coat of Arms. All which shall be
offered on the day of entertainment at the Church in memory of the dead.

That every Knight should at his own charges come unto the burial accompanied
with two servants, and bring thither four great wax Candles or Torches,
weighing one hundredth pounds.

After this Order of Knighthood was ordained at the Castle of Pietra the third
of February Anno 1434. by Amadeo first Duke of Sauoia, these Statutes were
added.
THat every Knight after the death of any of the brethren, should (during
certain days) be apparelled in black, and not wear the Collar for nine
days next after the Knights decease signified.

That the Sovereign should at the burial offer up his collar.

That every Knight in going to offer should proceed according to his ancientie
without other respect.

That no Knight should be received into the Order, that was a person noted for
any dishonorable reproach: or if after he were received, any fault should be
committed, then presently was forced to forgo his collar, and never more to
wear it, but return it unto the Soueragine within two months. And if he
failed so to do, then to abide the censure of his companions, and by an
Herald be summoned to send the collar unto the Sovereign, and be enjoined
never after to wear it.

That every Knight should be sworn to wear the Order daily and not to accept
any other. Some other Statutes there are, which for brevity I omit.

(...)

Henricus Borbortius. ^ Rex Francia et Nauarta^ Ordin. S. Spiritus Eques
Su^^^mus. F^l ^6.



CHAP. 17.
Knights of St Esprit.
THE Order of St Esprit, was instituted by the right Christian King of France,
and Poland, Henry the third of that name, containing a hundred and five
Articles. This Knighthood was instituted in the year of grace 1578. and in the
fifth year of his reign.

It was called the Order of the S. Esprit, for that on the day, and feast of
Pentecost, it pleased God (as they say) by the inspiration of the holy Ghost,
to unite the hearts and wills of the Polish Nobility, at an assembly of Estates
general of that puissant kingdom, together with the great Duchy of Lituania,
to make choice of the said Henry for their King, and afterward upon the same
day, and feast, to call and accept him to the rule and government of that
Crown.

In commemotation whereof with the advice and consent of the Queen his mother,
the Princes of his blood, and other Princes Officers of his Crown, and Lords
of his Council, he instituted this Military Order of S. Esprit to be
continued for ever, with all Ordinances and Statut^ therein mentioned
irreuocable.

The number of persons contained in the said Order are one hundred, besides the
Sovereign, which is ever the King: in which number are comprehended four
Cardinals, five Prelates, the Chauncelor, Provost, Master of the Ceremonies,
great Treasurer, and Scribe, who are called Commanders. So that never after for
any cause or question whatsoever, the said number should be augmented, nor upon
the vacation happening of any of the places of the said Cardinals, Prelates, or
Officers, any other may be admitted to supply their room or service, unless
he be a man of like quality and condition.

The oaths, ceremonies, pensions, accounts, and other duties I leave to be
seen in the printed book of the Order, where they are discoursed of at large:
I only will set down the time of their feast, their Officers, the manner of
their habits and solemn proceeding, as most fitting and pertinent to our
purpose.

Every year the feast of the Order is celebrated the first day of January, in
the Church of the Augustines in the city of Paris. And if for the public
affairs of the Realm, the king in person can not be there present, then the
feast is to be celebrated, where he shall personally be, and in the greatest
Church, where he is to be assisted with the Cardinals, Prelates, Commanders,
and other officers of the said Order, except any of them have commandment by
the Sovereign to the contrary. And as they shall in number repair to the
Court, they are to advertise the Provost of the said Order, to the end he may
prepare their Escuchions in the Church, where they are to solemnize their
Ceremonies, which begin the Even of the said day, and where they all
accompany the Sovereign from his Palace to the Church, as follows, viz.

The Vsner marches foremost, the Herald after the Viher, then the Provost,
great Treasurer, and Scribe, the Provost taking his place between the two
others. The Chauncelor goes alone, the Commanders two and two after their
degrees. After whom proceeds the Sovereign, or great Master, who is followed
of Cardinals, Prelates, and other of the Nobility, being of the said Order. The
said great Master, and Commanders are apparelled with long Mantels, made after
the fashion of those which are worn the day of S. Michael, of black velvet
embrodered all about with gold and silver, the embroderie made of flowers de
Liesse, and knots of gold, between their sundry ciphers, of silver, and
flambes of gold seamed.

The said great Mantle is also garnished with a mantelet of green cloth of
silver wrought over, with the same manner of embrodery of the great Mantle, and
the said Mantle, and mantelet, are both lined with ^atin of Orange color. They
wear the said Mantle, turned up over the left side, and the opening over the
right, according to the pattern, which is here expressed, their hose and
d^blets are white, their bonne^s black with white plumes. Upon the said
Mantles, they openly wear the great Colla^ of the Order, which was given them
at their reception.

Touching the Officers, the Chancellor is invested as the Commanders, b^t
that he has not the great Collar: he wears only the cross sowed before on
his Mantle, and that of gold hanging at his neck by a blew riband. The
Provost, great Treasurer, and Scribe, have also Mantles of black velvet, and
mantelets of green cloth of silver, but they are onel^ bordered about with
flambes of gold, having the cross sowed on their Mantels, and that of gold
hanging at their necks. The Herald and V^her have Mantels of Satin, and
Mantlets of green velvet, bordered with flambes as those of the other Officers.
The sa^de Herald shall carry the cross of the said Order at a Schuchion of
Arms ename^ed hanging at his neck. And the Usher the like cross, but
somewhatlesse in form, then those of the other Officers.

At their return from the Vespres, or Euensong, the Commanders and Officers,
go to confession to be prepared for the Sacrament, which they are to take the
next morning.

The next day the Cardinals, Prelates, Commanders and Officers, accompany the
Sovereign, in like Order and Habilement (as aforesaid) to the Church to hear
a solemn Mass, where the Sovereign offers as many crowns, as he is veeres
old, and every Commander for himself one crown, which offerings are given to
the Nou^ces of the Augustines for their better entertainment and erudition.

The service ended, they conduct the Sovereign to his palace, whereas the
Cardinals, Prelates and Commanders, with the Chancellor of the Order, dine all
at one Table. The Provost, Treasurer, Scribe, Herald, and V^her, at an other
Table, and in a place apart.

The hou^e of Vespres being come, the Sovereign, Cardinals, Prelates,
Commanders, and Officers, by Order (as is said) wearing Mantels and mantelets
of black cloth, except the Sovereigns which is of scarlet, or deep mortey,
having the cross of the said Order sowed thereon, go to the Church to hear
the Euensong.

The Herald of this Order, called King of Arms, at his election making
profession of that Religion, is known to be a man of good renown, grave,
expert, and fit for such a charge. He has 400. crowns of the sun yearly
for his ordinary wages. He is bound to make abooke, in which are truly to be
pa^nted, the Arms and Creasts of all the Cardinals, Prelates, Commanders and
Officers of the said Order, and under their Arms their names, surnames,
signiories, imvlovments, and qualities. And for the same to be done, every one
of the said Cardinals, Prelates and Commanders, are enjoined to give him a
mark of silver at their reception. When occasion serves that he is to
denounce, or signify any message to any of the said Commanders and Officers,
he is to report unto the Sovereign in open Chapter the answer which has
been made him, and what else he has learned in his voyage, concerning the good,
honor and service of the said Order.

It is to be noted that this Herald or King of Arms has nothing to do with
the Order of S. Michael: for there is an express Officer for the same: nor
either of them both are to meddle with any action of Arms, but such as may
precisely concern their Orders. There are for the Kings services (otherwise
provincial Heralds which carry their names of the Pairedomes: as N^rmana^,
Aniou, Britain, etc. They have a College at Parris, where they all meet at
the assembly of the States general, otherwise they abide in their several
Provinces.

The Usher of the said Order assisteth the Ceremonies with a Mace, which he
bears on his neck, which is expressly made for the service of the Order: he
has 312. crowns of the Sun Per annum, which is paid him by the Threasu^er
of the Order: his Office is also to keep the door at the Chapiters which are
holden, as all other things that belong to his charge. Both the Herald and
Usher when they are chosen take their oaths, and receive their eschuchion and
cross at the hands of the Chancellor.

These five Orders aforesaid, viz that of the Garter in England, that of the
T^izon in Burgundy, that of S. Michael in France, that of the Annunciation in
Sa^cy, and that of the S. Esprit last erected in France, be reputed most
honorable, and are adorned with great Collars, in token they excel all other
degrees of Knighthood.

Godfredus Adelmar^ Institut. Ordin: Tem: plariorum. Fol. 98.



CHAP. 18.
Knights Templars.
IN the year 1117. nine Gentlemen who happened to meet in the Holy land, (of
which number was Godfredus Aldemaro Alexandrino, and Hugo de Planco de Paganus)
among themselves determined to erect an Association or brotherhood. And being
come unto Jerusalem, they consulted upon the estate of that country, being
informed, that in Zaffo (a town anciently appertaining to the family of
Contareni in Venice) there remained many thieves that used daily to rob such
Pilgrims as resorted unto the holy Sepulcher. They therefore resolved (as a
service acceptable to God) to hazard their lives in the suppression of those
robbers, whereby the way unto Jerusalem might become secure. And because the
Christian army was then employed in recovery of the Holy land, no order was
taken for safe passage. To encourage these Gentlemen in so praiseable an
enterprise, a lodging in the Temple of Jerusalem near unto the Sepulcher, was
appointed; of which place they took the name of Knights Templars. Also the
King and Patriarch much liking an action so honorable, furnished them with
many necessary provisions. To them also resorted many other Christians, so as
in short time the number became much increased: yet no habit, sign, or rule
was agreed upon. Notwithstanding, the Gentlemen persisted in their vow nine
years, and grew to so great reputation, that Pope Honorius at the suite of
Steven Patriarch of Jerusalem, prescribed unto them an order of life, whereby
they were enjoined to wear a white garment; and Pope Eugenius added thereunto
a red Cross.

After which time, they elected an head or great master, like unto him that
commands in Malta. The number of these Knights daily increased, and their
enterprises became famous: not only for guarding the way and passages, but
also they undertook war against the Infidels, both by Sea and land. And the
Christian Princes moved with love of their virtue, in sundry provinces
assigned unto them houses and great revenues to be spent in Gods service. In
process of time they became so potent, as in every Christian kingdom they
were owners of Towns, Fortresses, and Castles, and wheresoever the great
Master did go, a mighty army did follow him.

It pleased God afterward to permit, that Jerusalem and other places of the
Holyland, through discord among the Christians, and negligence of Princes not
sending thither any aid, was conquered, about ninety years

CHAP. 19.
Knights of San Iago.
NExt unto the Knights aforesaid, for honor and estimation are these Knights
of S. James in Spain, by the Spaniards called Caual^eri di San Iago. The
original of which Order was this.

At such time as the Arabians had well near conquered the Country, the
remainder of the Spanish people refusing to live under the Laws of that
barbarous nation, retired themselves unto the mountains of Asturia, and there
settled a government.

After some years of their abode there, certain gentlemen consulting
together, determined to make an association, and begin a war upon the
infidels, and Moors. These gentlemen to the number of thirteen, being all
Barons and men of great quality, agreed also upon certain religious rules of
Knighthood, yet reserving unto themselves liberty of marriage.

The Ensign which they resolved to wear was a red Cross in form of a sword.

This Order was erected at such time as the King Don Ramiro wanne the victory
against the Moors in the province of Compostella, at which time great
possessions and privileges were given to S. James of Compostella, Anno 1030.

This Order has one chief governor, who is called great Master: he with
thirteen other Knights have authority to choose or remove any Knight at
their discretion.

Upon the feast day of all Saints these Knights do use to meet, and consult
upon matters apperteining to their estate.

The revenues belonging to these Knights is marvelous, amounting to many
hundred thousand ducats.

Many Popes have given their alowance to this Order, yet either they could not,
or would not reserve a greater tribute thereof then ten Malachini yearly.

Thomas Docwra Ordinis. S. Iohis. Hi^rosolom. vulgo de Malta. Pras. in Anglia.
and Eques vlt. Fol 94.



CHAP. 20.
Knights of S. John Jerusalem: called Knights of the Rhodes: and now of Malta.
IT is written (I know not with what warrant) that at the City of Amiens in
Picardie, a Province of France, there was borne a certain Gentleman, who in
his childhood had been brought up in learning: and being grown to man's estate,
disposed himself to the exercise of Arms, and there in long time continued.
Afterward having attained riper years, he despised the world, and framed
himself to a solitary life, as one fully resolved to live in contemplation,
unseen of any but God alone. Having sometime remained in that solitary sort,
a sudden desire he had to visit the Sepulcher where Christ was buried, which
shortly after he did. And to the end he might with security pass the
Barbarous Nations, he apparelled himself like unto a Physician; by which mean
without impediment he performed his journey. Thus having passed the difficulties
of travel in diverse strange Countries, he arrived at Jerusalem, and being
there, fell into acquaintance with Simon, Patriarch of that City, and in
lamenting wise informed him of the oppression and cruelty offered and daily
used by the Infidels toward the poor Christians in those Countries.
Whereunto Simon answered, that albeit the Christians in those countries endured
great outrages, yet they of Jerusalem suffered much greater, and should be
forced to more, if God did not defend them.

By this conference, the Patriarch conceived Peter the Hermit (for so he was
called) to be a man of good understanding, and apt to execute any action of
importance, that should be committed unto him. Whereupon the Patriarch
determined to make him a messenger unto the Pope, unto whom by letters he
imparted the great calamity and afflicted estate of the poor Christians,
inhabiting the Holy land.

Peter having received his instructions, and letter of credence, returned into
the West: first unto the Pope, and after solicited other Princes: in such
sort, and with so good success, as by his persuasions, many great Kings and
Potentates, consented to take in hand the recovery of the Holy land from the
oppression of the Infidels, and some of them furnished that enterprise with
men, some with money, and some did go in person. Among which number (as the
chief) was Robert Duke of Normandy, son to King William of England, Godfrey
Duke of Lorain, with two of his brethren called Eustace, and Baldwin, Robert
Earl of Flanders, Hugh surnamed the Great, brother to the French King: with
diverse other Princes, Dukes, Earls and Barons. Also thither went Beaumond Duke
of Calabria, who for zeal to that service (or desire of honor) resigned his
Dukedom unto Ruggiero his brother, taking with him so many of his subjects as
would voluntarily follow him, of whom (with such other Captains and soldiers
of Italy as came unto him) he assembled more then twenty thousand, all choice
men and young, fit for war.

All things in this sort prepared for the journey, Urban the second (then Pope)
sent unto the Captains a white Cross, with commandment that all the
soldiers should wear the like, calling that enterprise La cruciata. It is
said that the Christians, as such time as this war was proclaimed in
Cleirmont (a city of Auergna) endeavored themselves universally to animate the
soldiers, and joined in general prayer for their good success, giving them
meat, apparel and furniture, unasked or required. Moreover, those that were
indebted, were forgiven, and such as had been banished, were pardoned. The
women also (contrary to their custom) willingly and with much joy consented
their husbands and sons should pass in this enterprise, and for their
furniture gave them their Jewels, Chains, and money. The French King likewise
sent them great treasure, and gave privileges to the soldiers lands and
wives, in their husbands absence. And many great Princes, and other Lords sold
and impawned their Patrimonies to further this action. So as the Army
assembled for this holy enterprise, amounted unto three hundred thousand
footmen, and one hundred thousand horse, who presently marched toward
Constantinople, where they passed the Strait called Bosphoro Thracio, and
landed at Calcedonia.

For the first enterprise they besieged Nicea in Bithynia, which within fifty
days was yielded: and the fouth of July at the foot of certain mountains
near unto that city, the Christians fought a battle with a Turkish Army,
which in number exceeded ours, and thereat was present Solomon the Emperor of
Turkey, but the Christians had victory, with the loss of two thousand men: of
the Enemies were slain forty thousand.

This victory gained, the Christians following their enterprise, within short
time won an hundred cities and towns of account: and among them the great
Antiochia, before which they begun the siege the twentieth of October, and
took it the last of May following, where they found Corbona King of Persia,
and Cassiano, Lord of Antioch. Near unto that place in one other conflict were
slain more then one hundred thousand Turks, with the loss of four thousand
of ours.

The cause of this victory was (in that time of superstition) imputed to the
virtue of a bloody Lance found in Antiochia, which they supposed to be a
spear wherewith Christ was wounded on the Cross. It was also said, that the
Turks did see (or imagine) another great Army coming against them from the
mountains, conducted by three Captains mounted upon three white horses, the
beholding whereof occasioned their flight.

This victory being had, a Navy arrived from Genoa and from Venice. Also with
them came certain ships conducted by one Vymer of Bullein in Picardie, a
notable Pirate, who repenting his former like, determined to follow that
honorable Action.

The Christian forces thus increased, they marched toward Jerusalem, and
besieged it, and notwithstanding the city was of great force, yet by Gods
help, and the valorous adventure of the Christians, it was assaulted, and in
the end yielded, Anno 1099.

This City thus conquered, the said Peter (as the chief procurer of the
enterprise) was highly honored, and Godfrey Duke of Lorayn elected King of the
Holy land.

But to return to the Original of these Knights, I say, that somewhat before
the Christians conquered the City of Jerusalem, they had obtained of the
Saracens leave to dwell near unto the Sepulcher of Christ, and there builded
an house, calling it the Hospital of Christians, whither all other Christians
daily resorted. After that, the number of Christians increasing, they builded
another houses for women, calling it S. Mary Magadelens. And at length they
made a third house, calling it S. John Baptists, where for the keeping of good
order they appointed an officer whom they called Rector.

Some time after was elected to that fellowship, a governor called Gerardus,
who commanded that he, with all others of that house, should wear a white
Cross upon a black garment, which was the original of the Order, and ever
since has been used.

Afterward one other Rector or great Master was elected, whose name was
Raimondus, to whom authority was given, that he should govern and command all
Knights of this Order, where soever they were dispersed.

Many years after these Knights conquered the Isle of Rhodes holden by the
Turks, Anno 1308. which was the cause they were commonly called Knights: and
diverse princes seeing them martially inclined, gave unto them great lands and
possessions: and they became greatly esteemed for their service, chiefly
against the said Turks, and the Sultan, king of Egypt and Jerusalem.

The said Isle of Rhodes (during those Knights inhabited there) was four times
assaulted, yet by Gods help, and the valiancie of the Knights, it was defended
Then Mahomet Otoman Emperor of Turkey, Anno 1480. with an excessive force of
men, and an hundred Sail of Galleys (conducted by a Bassa borne in Greece,
descended of the raze of Paleologi sometime Emperors of Constantinople) did
besiege it, but after 89 days of continual battery, they were forced to
abandon the enterprise, and for their farewell, in the last assault, the
Knights slew more then forty thousand Turks.

But in the year 1523. in the month of January, the Turks again invaded
the Island, and after three months Siege prevailed: for the rest of
Christendom never vouchsafed them either aid or relief.

Since the loss of Rhodes, these Knights have remained in the Island of Malta,
and often defended it against the enemies of Christendom, but chiefly in the
year 1565.

The first erector of Statures and Rules for the government of these Knights,
was the said Raymondus, calling himself, Raimondo di Poggio, Seruo dipoueri di
Christo, e custode dello spidalle di San Giouanni Battista di Jerusalem.

No man might be received into this Knighthood, until he had proved his
gentilitie, in presence of the great Master, and other Knights.

Nor no man descended of a Moore, a Jew, or Mohammedan, might be admitted,
although he were the son of a Prince.

And every Knight of this order was sworn to fight for the Christian faith,
do Justice, defend the oppressed, relieve the poor, persecute the Mahometans,
use virtue, and protect Widows and Orphans.

Diverse other Articles there be: but for that they are full of superstition, I
omit them.

CHAP. 21.
Knights of Calatraua.
BY imitation of the Order of S. Iago aforesaid, was this Knighthood of
Calatraua begun in the year (...) 30. The inuenter thereof was Don Santio King
of Toledo.

They were called Knights of Calatraua, of the province and place where they
were made and settled, which was where anciently the chief Church of Templars
had been, who not being of power sufficient to resist the Saracens, were forced
to yield the place unto these Knights.

The habit of these Knights is a black garment, and upon it in the breast is
set a red Cross.

These Knights have also exceeding great possessions, and many commandries in
diverse places of Spain.

Alphonsus Rex C^stili^ Institut^r. Ord. Rubri Balt^i. vulgo. de la banda dict.
Fol. 98.



CHAP. 22.
Knights of the Band.
THis order was first erected by Alphonso King of Spain, son to Ferdinando
and Queen Constanza in the year 1268. And to give the said Knighthood
reputation and honor, the King himself with his sons and brethren
vouchsafed to enter thereinto: with them were also admitted diverse other
gentlemen of best quality and greatest estimation.

The cause that moved the King to name them, Knights of the Band, was, for
that he commanded every man elected into the Order, should wear a certain
red Scarf, or Lace of silk the bred^th of three inches, which hung on their
left shoulder, and was tied under the right arm.

No man might enter into this Knighthood, but such as the king did specially
admit: neither was any person capable of that dignity, unless he were the
son of a Knight or some Gentleman of great account, or at the least such a
one as had served the King by space of ten years in his Court, or in the war
against the Moors.

Into this Order no Gentleman could be received being an elder brother, or an
heir in possession or appearance, but only such as were younger, without land
and liueload: because the Kings intention was to advance the Gentlemen of his
Court that had not of their own.

At such time as any Gentleman was admitted a Knight, he promised to observe
these Articles following, which I have thought good particularly to express,
and the rather because they tend only to entertain the minds of men in the
offices of Courage and Courtesy, without any mixture of superstition, whereof
almost all other Orders in those days tasted.

First, that he should speak unto the King for commodity of the commonwealth
and the defense thereof, so often as he were thereunto required; and refusing
so to do, shall for feit all his patrimony, and be banished his country.

That he should above all things speak the truth unto the King, and at every
occasion be faithful to his Majesty.

That he should not be silent whenever any person should speak against the
Kings honor: upon pain of being banished the Court, and deprived of his Band
for ever.

That he should be no great speaker, and in speaking to utter the truth: but
if he should say or affirm an untruth, then for a punishment, to in the
streets without his sword, for one whole month.

That he should endeavor himself to keep company with wise m^^ and persons
experienced in the war: for being found to converse wi^^ merchants,
artificers, or base people, he should be therefore greatly reproved by the
great Master, and for one month be commanded to keep his house.

That he should maintain his own word, and faithfully keep promise with his
friends: and being found to do otherwise, to be enjoined to walk and go
alone, unaccompanied of any other of the Kings Court, and should not presume to
speak or come near unto any other Knight.

That he should always have good armor in his chamber, good horses in his
stable, good lances in his hall, and a good sword by his side: or otherwise to
be called Page, and no Knight, for one whole month.

That he should not be seen mounted upon any Mule, or other unseemly hackney:
neither walk abroad without his Band, nor enter into the Kings palace without
his sword, nor eat alone at home, upon pain to forfeit for every such
offense, one Mark toward the maintaining of the Tilt.

That he should be no flatterer of the King, or any other person, neither take
delight in skoffing, upon pain to walk on foot for one month, and be
confined to his house another month.

That he should not complain of any hurt, nor boast of his own acts, nor in
curing his wounds cry Oh: for if in vaunting wise he uttered any oftentatious
speeches, he should be reproved by the great master, and let alone unvisited of
all his companions.

That he should be no common gamester, chiefly at the dice, nor consent that
others should play in his house, upon pain to forfeite for every such offense,
one months pay, and for one month and a half not to be seen in the Court.

That he should not in any sort lay to pawn his Armor or weapons, nor play
away his garments, upon pain to be imprisoned in his own house a whole
month, and for two months following, to go without the Band.

That he should be daily apparelled in fine cloth, and on Holy days in silk,
and on high feasts wear gold in his garments if he pleased, without being
compelled so to do. But if he did wear buskins upon nether stocks of cloth,
the great Master should take them from him, and give them in alms to the poor.

That in walking either in Court or City, his pace should not be swift or
hasty, upon pain to be reproved of his fellow Knights, and punished at the
great Masters discretion.

That he should not speak any thing unfit, or offensive to his fellow in
Arms, upon pain to ask him forgiveness, and to be banished the Court for
three months.

That he should not commence or enter suite of Law against the daughter of any
Knight, upon pain never to have Lady or Gentlewoman of the Court to his
mistress or wife.

That if he happened to meet with any Lady or Gentlewoman of the Court, he
should forthwith alight from his horse, and offer her his service, upon pain
to loose one months wages, and the favor of all Ladies.

That if any Lady of honor required service at his hand, he refusing to do it
(having power) should be called for ever, the discourteous Knight.

That he should not eat alone, nor at any time feed upon gross meats.

That he should not enter quarrel with any of his fellow Knights: or if any
such disagreement did happen, that he nor any other Knight should make party,
but by all good means seek to reconcile them, upon pain to pay a mark
toward the charge of the next Iusts.

That if any man not being of this Order, should presume to wear the band,
that then he should be forced to fight with two Knights: but vanquishing them,
should be also a Knight himself: and being vanquished, should be banished the
Court, and never to wear the Band.

That if at any Iusts or Tournaments in the Court, a Gentleman being not of the
Order, should win the prize, then the King was bound forthwith to make him a
Knight of the Band.

That if any Knight of the Band did offer to draw his sword against any of his
fellows: for so doing he should absent himself two months, and two other
months wear but half his band. And if a Knight did hurt his fellow in Arms,
he should be imprisoned one half year, and the next half year, be banished
the Court.

That no Knight for any offense should be punished or judged before he were
brought to the King, and his pleasure signified.

That he should be ever furnished to attend on the King, whenever he went to
the war: and if any battle were stricken, then ought these Knights jointly to
give the charge: and if in any such service a Knight performed not his part, he
should loose one years pay, and one other year wear but half the Band.

That no Knight should be enforced to serve in any war, save only against
the Infidels: Or attending on the King to any other war, to wear no Band:
and if he served any other Prince in his war, he should loose the Band.

That all the Knights should assemble three times a year to consult upon
matters pertaining to the Order. The assembly was at such place as the King
pleased to appoint, and there they awaited with their horse and armor; the
first meeting was in April, the second in September, the last at Christmas.

That all the Knights of this Order, should fight at the Turney at the lest
twice every year, Just four times a year, play at the Canes six times a
year, and manage horses every week. And who so failed to perform all, or
any one of these Knightly exercises, should attend on the King one month
without a sword, and one other month without a Band.

That if the King did come to any city or town, that then the Knights within
eight days after, should prepare a place for the Iusts and Tournaments: they
should also exercise all other warlike weapons: and if any Knight were
negligent in these things, he should be confined to his lodging, and wear but
half the Band.

That no Knight might remain in Court without a mistress, with intent to
marry her, and not dishonor her, and whenever she pleased to walk, he was
to attend on her on foot or horseback, to do her all honor and service.

That if any Iusts were holden within ten miles of the Court, every Knight to
be there, under pain to go without his sword one month, and without his Band
another.

That if any of these Knights were married within twenty miles of the Court,
all the rest should accompany him to the King to receive a gift, and from
thence to the place of wedding to exercise feats of Arms there, and every
Knight to present the bride with some gift.

That the first Sunday of every month, all the Knights should show themselves
armed before the King, ready to perform any action in Arms at the Kings
pleasure: for the King would not have them be only Knights in name, but in deed
also.

That in no Turnament there should be more Knights then thirty on one party,
and so many on the other party, and that no sword should be brought into the
place, but such as were rebated both of edge and point. And that upon the sound
of trumpet, the fight should begin, and at the sound of the Clarions, every man
to cease from fight, and retire, upon pain that who so failed, should never
more enter into that combat, and be banished the Court for one month.

That at every day of Iusts, each Knight should pass four Carieres, before
four Knights appointed for Judges, and they who brake no staves in those
courses, should pay the charges of the Iusts.

That if any Knight were sick and in peril of death, all other his fellow
Knights should visit him, and exhort him to godliness. And if he died, to
accompany his course to the grave. Also to mourn in black one whole month,
and absent themselves from the Exercise of Arms, for the space of three
months, unless the King should otherwise command.

That within two days after such funeral, all the Knights should assemble,
and present the Band of the dead Knight unto the King, making humble suit for
some of his sons to succeed, if any of them were meet, praying it would
please his Majesty to be good to the mother, that she might live according to
her honorable calling.

CHAP. 23.
Knights of Alcantara.
THese Knights living in effect under the ordinances and rules of the
Calatraua, do wear a green Cross.

Near unto the city of Alcantara, in Castiglia upon the River of Tago, they
have a Church of great beauty endowed with rich possessions.

CHAP. 24.
Knights of Montesio.
IN Valentia are the Caualieridi Montesio, a place also seated in that Province.

These Knights do wear a red Cross, and their order begun about the same time
that the Knighthood of Calatraua took beginning.

CHAP. 25.
Knights of Redemption.
THese Knights were erected in the Kingdom of Arragon by King James, who
conquered the Islands Maiorica in the year 1212.

Their garments are white, and thereon a black Cross.

The office of these Knights, is to Redeem Prisoners, whereupon they are
called Caualieri del redentione.

The chief governor of them remains at Barcellona.

CHAP. 26.
The Original of the Knights Teutonici.
THese Knights do not much vary from the Knights of the Rhodes, for their
custom is to entertain Pilgrims, and at occasions to serve in war.

The beginner of this Knighthood' was a certain Almane, who after the taking
of Jerusalem by the Christians together with diverse other of that Nation
remained there. This Almaine being exceeding rich and married, kept a frank and
liberal house, relieuing all passengers and Pilgrims that traveled to
Jerusalem: insomuch that his house became as an Hospital or place of ordinary
access. At length he builded nere unto it a fair Church, which (according to
the use of that time) he did dedicate to our Lady.

Not long after many Christians resorting thither, as well for love of the
Christian Religion, as to visit the sick, they resolved to erect a
fraternity, and having chosen a great Master to be governor, ordained that
every man of that association, should be apparelled in white, and upon their
uppermost garment wear a black Cross, voided with a Cross potence.

It was also agreed, that no man should be admitted into that order, save only
Gentlemen of the Duch nation: and they to protest at all occasions to adventure
their lives in defense of Christ's Gospel.

About 88 years after Jerusalem had remained in the Christians hands, it was
taken again from them by the Saracens in the year 1184 since which time it
never was recovered. For which cause these Knights retired to Ptolemaida, where
they remained.

At length Ptolemaida, being also taken by the Saracens, they returned into
Germany their natural country; where, after some short abode (as loathing
rest and idleness) they went unto Frederick the second then Emperor in the
year 1220, to let his Majesty understand, that the people of Prusia used
incursions upon the confines of Saxony, adding that those people were
barbarous idolaters without the knowledge of God, and therefore besought his
Majesty to grant them leave to make war upon them at their own charges, yet
with condition that whatsoever they gained, his Majesty would give the same to
the maintenance of that Order.

The Emperor allowing of that suite, presently granted them the country, and
under his seal confirmed the gift.

These Knights by this donation much encouraged, forthwith took Arms, and
within short space subdued all that province, and then passed the river of
Vistola, and conquered other people, who became their subjects, and were made
Christians.

Within short space after, these Knights builded diverse Churches, and among the
same Cathedral Temples, making them places of residence for Bishops, who were
also enjoined to wear the habit of that Order.

Near unto the river Vistola was a great Oak, where these Knights builded the
first Castle and Town, which with time was increased and called Borgo di Santa
Maria, or Mareenburg, where is now the chief Church appertaining to this
Order: there unto belongs so great riches and revenues, as these Knights may
both for men and money compare with diverse Princes.

This country of Prussia is great, and much thereof bounded by the river of
Vistola: and is also confined by Sarmatia, the Massagets, and Polonia.

These Knights are also Lords of Liuonia, which was likewise by them brought
to the faith of Christianity, and is with Christians inhabited.

CHAP. 27.
Knights of the Sepulcher.
THis Knighthood is now extinct, or rather conjoined unto the Order of Malta.

The Ensign belonging to these Knights, was two Red Crosses united.

CHAP. 28.
Knights of S. Mary.
IN the life of Pope Urban the fourth (at which time was great war among the
Princes of Italy) certain rich Gentlemen of Bolognia and Modona, desiring to
eschew the present troubles, and be exempt from public charges, desired of
that Pope to permit them to live in contemplation, and erect a new Order of
religious Knighthood, which for money they obtained, calling themselves Knights
of Saint Mary.

The habit of this Order was very pompous, and thereupon a red Cross wrought
with gold round about.

They were specially inhibited to wear gold in their spurs and horse
harness.

They made profession to fight against the Infidels, and all others that
offended justice: notwithstanding they lived ever at home in rest, with their
wives and children.

They were commonly called Caualieri di Madona: but because they lived
continually in ease and pleasure, men termed them Fratri gaudenti: as much in
our language, as Good fellow brethren. It may be some of them are yet extant.

CHAP. 29.
Knights of S. Lazaro.
THese Knights of this Order do plead great antiquity, saying they were in
the time of Saint Basil, and their profession has been confirmed by sundry
Popes. They also affirm that Frederick the Emperor surnamed Barbarossa, gave
them great possessions in Sicilia, Calabria, Pugilia, and Terra di Lauoro: and
to those lands diverse Popes did add much. Notwithstanding time that wears
all things away, did also consume these riches, and the Order well near
extinct, till of late years Pius quartus the Pope did revive it: who made
Gianotto Castiglione a Noble gentlemen of Millaine, great Master.

These Knights do profess to be obedient unto their great Master, and other
officers of the Order: they promise also to live chaste, or at the least
continent, and content with one wife. Also to be charitable, and liberal,
chiefly to poor people infected with leprosy.

Moreover, every Knight promises to wear a green Cross, and before they
enter into this Knighthood must prove himself to be borne in lawful
wedlock, and a Gentleman both by father and mother, and to bear Arms. Also
that he is descended of ancient Christians, and no Morrano or Turk. That he
has of rent at the least 200 crowns, wherewith to maintain his dignity.
That he and his ancestors have ever lived as Gentlemen, without use of any
base or mechanical occupation. That he has not been suspected of any notable
evil fact, or is defamed for any vice. That he be not indebted, nor is wedded
to any widow, or has had more then one wife. But besides these passable
protestations, he must undertake to say five and twenty Pater nosters, and so
many Aue Marias, with other superstitious things not worthy the writing. This
Order has of late time been much favored by the Dukes of Sauoy.

CHAP. 30.
Knights of S. Stephano.
IN the year 1561. Cosmo Duke of Florence and Sienna, having settled his
government, and living in peaceable estate, erected this religious Order of
Knighthood, calling those that entered thereunto, Caualieri de San Steffano. To
these Knights he gave a red Cross, bordered about with gold.

The Statutes annexed to this Order, are not unlike to those appertayning to
the order of Malta: saving that these have liberty to marry.

The chief place of their resiance is the city of Pisa, where the Duke
prepared them a Church, and builded for them a palace wherein to lodge. And
because near to that City is a Haven fit to receive the Galleys wherein these
Knights should serve, it seemed good to that Prince to settle them there.

The Duke himself and his successors is Great master of this Order, and under
him are diverse other Officers of reputation.

This is the last Order or degree of Knights, that I have seen or read of.

THE THIRD BOOK. Concerning Combat for life, Iusts, Turnements, Triumphs and
Inaugurations of Emperors, Kings and Princes.
The Contents of this Book.
THe Prooeme. Of particular Combats with their original. Ca. 1. Whether Combats
may be justly permitted. Ca. 2. When and how Combats were in use. Cap. 3. What
exceptions or repulses may move the defendors to refuse the Combat. Cap. 4.
Whether a man of mean quality may challenge his superior. Cap. 5. What sorts
of men may not be admitted to trial of Arms. 6. Who was anciently accounted
victorious in Combat. Cap. 7. What was anciently due unto such men as were
victorious in public Combat. Cap. 8. Of the disequalitie of Gentlemen. Cap.
9. Of the quality and disequalitie of great Nobility, and the privileges due
to all men professing Arms. Cap. 10. Of Arms offensive and defensive. Cap.
11. Of the Election of weapons. Cap. 12. Certain questions, opinions and
judgments, upon accidents in trial and exercise of Arms. Cap. 13. Of honor
gained or lost by being disarmed in sundry places, and sundry pieces. Cap. 14.
Of honor gained or lost by hurts given or taken in Combat for life or triumph.
Cap. 15. Of Combats ancient. Cap. 16. The order of Combats for life in England
anciently recorded in the Office of Arms. Cap. 17. Of Triumphs ancient and
modern. Cap. 18. Of Triumphs and their Original. Cap. 19. Of the manner of
Triumphing, and the habits of the Triumpher. Cap. 20. Of the diverse quality of
Triumphs in Rome. Cap. 21. In what Order the Romans triumphed. Cap. 22. Of
other furniture and pomp appertayning to Triumphs in Rome. Cap. 23. Of the
Triumphal going of Darius to meet Alexander the great. Cap. 24. The Triumphal
entry of Xerxes K. of Persia into Greece, yet afterward forced for fear, to
fly into his own kingdom. Cap. 25. Of Triumphs in Germany. Cap. 26. Of
Triumphs at the enteruiew of Pope Alexander, and the Emperor Frederick
Barbarosa at Venice. Anno Dom. 1166. Cap. 27. An admirable Triumphal show at
Venice, to congratulate the recovery of Cypres. Anno 1366. Cap. 28. A Triumph
in the reign of King Richard the second, Anno 1590. Cap. 29. A Triumphal
passage of Charles the v. Emperor through France. Anno 1540. Cap. 30. A
triumphal entry of Philip Prince of Spain at Millan. Anno 1548. Cap. 31. A
Military challenge in Italy. Anno 1555. Cap. 32. Of triumphal challenges in
France. Cap. 32. Of one other Military action between five English gentlemen,
and five French. Cap. 34. An other like action. Cap. 35. An other challenge of a
French gentleman in Spain. Cap. 36. An other notable challenge in France. Anno
1390. Cap. 37. An other most noble challenge. Cap. 38. The triumphant interuiew
of the Kings of England and France. Anno 1519. Cap. 39. A triumph celebrated in
France. Anno 1559. Cap. 40. A Military triumph at Brussels. Anno 1549. Cap.
41. The Inauguration of Carolus Magnus King of Italy Anno 773. Cap. 42.
Carolus Magnus Inauguration being made Emperor, Anno 1800. Cap. 43. The
Inauguration of Pope Gregory the tenth. Cap. 44. The Inauguration of Henry the
fourth King of England. Anno 1399. Cap. 45. The Inauguration of Charles the
French King at Rhemes Anno 1380. Cap. 46. At the Inauguration of King Henry the
third French King, three notable things observed. Cap. 47. The Inauguration of
Charles the fifth. Cap. 48. Ceremonies appertaining to the delivery of Prizes at
Iusts and Turnements. Cap. 49. Of Iusts and Turnements, and how the Accidents
in such exercises are judged in the kingdom of Naples. Cap. 50. Iusts and
Turnements how they were anciently judged by John Tiptoft Earl of Worcester,
high Constable of England in the Reign of King Edward the 4. Cap. 51.
Triumphs Military for honor and love of Ladies, brought before the Kings of
England. Cap. 52. A triumph before King Edward the third. A triumph before King
Edward the fourth. A triumph before King Henry the sixth. A triumph before King
Henry the seventh. A triumph before King Henry the eight. Of like Actions in
Arms since the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. Cap. 53. The Original occasions of
yearly Triumphs in England. Cap. 54. The Authors conclusion.
The Prooeme.
ALbeit, in ages more ancient, Princes were sometimes pleased to admit private
Combat and trial by arms: yet even then the laws determined, that no man of
base calling could be allowed to fight with any Gentleman, or other person by
long service or virtue become Noble.

It behooves therefore to know what Nobility and Gentilitie is. Be therefore
informed that Nobility is (as some have defined it) ancient riches accompanied
with virtuous qualities. Others affirm that riches (being of their own nature
vile) cannot make men Noble; concluding that virtue alone suffices Bartholus
says, that virtue only makes a man Noble, and riches is an ornament thereof.

Others do think, that Nobility proceeds from the ancient honor, fame and
title of Predecessors: because (other wise) a bondsman (being virtuous) might
challenge that honor. Some also have thought, that as before God he is most
Noble and worthy, unto whom he has given most grace, even so is he most
Honorable among men, whom Princes or laws have advanced unto dignity.
Howsoever it be, most sure it is, that no man gives unto himself any title,
but it behooves him to receive it from others. Therefore Bartholus concludes
that to be made Noble, it is requisite the Prince should bestow some sort of
dignity, office, or title upon the person that is ennobled, to the end he may
be known from other men. But our opinion is, that men may be reputed Noble by
three means. First by nature or descent of Ancestors, which is the vulgar
opinion. Secondly for virtue only, which the Philosophers affirm. Thirdly by
mixture of Ancient Noble blood with virtue, which is indeed the true and most
commendable kind of Nobility. For seeing man is a creature reasonable, he
ought be Noble in respect of his own virtue, and not the virtue of others,
which moved Ulysses to say unto Ajax, boasting of Ancestors, Et genus, and
Proauos, and quae non fecimus ipsi, Vix ea nostra voco. etc.

But for manifestation that natural Nobility mixed with virtue, is most true
and perfect, thus may it be proved. The Almighty has created all things, both
in generality and specialitie, with a certain excellency and bounty, one
more perfect then the other, one noble, another ignoble. For among stones some
are precious, others of no virtue, and of the better sort of them, some more or
less precious: Even so among living creatures, both in generality and
specialitie, we find some courteous and gentle, others rude and uncivil. Much
more is the difference of nature in men, among whom the eternal God has
dispensed his grace, to some more, and to some less, according to his divine
will and pleasure. Wherefore they seem to err much, that think Gentility in
nature has no force, when experience proves that of one race we see wise,
just, valiant, and temperate persons. Yet because in ordinary observation we
find, that neither the horse of excellent courage does always beget another
of like quality, nor that the virtuous man has ever children resembling
himself, we do not (having proof of their degeneration) esteem the one or
the other: as Iuuenal says, Malo Pater tibi sit Thersites, dummodo tu sis
Aeacidae similis, Vulcaniaque arma capessas,
Qua m te Thersitae similem producat Achilles.


Seeing then that either by nature, nurture, or endeavor, some men are more
virtuous then others, therefore ought they be reputed more Gentle, Noble and
worthy honor, then are those which are void of noble Ancestors, good education
and industry. No rule is so general or certain, but sometime receives
exception. Yet appears it, that Nature in her own operation does seldom
digress from the order thereof. The Faulcon never (or very rarely) brings
forth other bird then a Faulcon. The Greyhound engendereth a whelpe like unto
himself. Nevertheless, if either that bird in shape resembling her Dame, has
not in her like virtue: or that whelpe does prove in delight, diverse from his
Sire, they thereby become either contemned, or little esteemed: Even so is it
among men descending from Ancestors of honor and virtue: for if neither by
celestial grace, nurture nor endeavor they aspire unto the habit of virtue,
then become they thereby unfit for all public action, unprofitable to
themselves, and consequently disdained, or at the least, lightly regarded, what
Pedigree, Arms, or Badges soever are to warrant their Ancient Nobility
Wherefore estsoones concluding I say with the Poet, Tota licet veteres
exornent vndique cerae
Atria, nobilitas sola est atque vnica virtus.
Paulus aut Cossus aut Drusus moribus esto.
Hos ante effigies maiorum pone tuorum
Praecedant ipsas illi te consule virgas.
Dic mihi Teucrorum proles, animalia muta
Quis generosa putet nisi fortia? nempe volucrem
Sic laudamus equum, facili cui plurima palma
Feruet, and exultat rauco victoria circo
Nobilis hic, quocunque venit de gramine, cuius
Clara fuga ante alios, and primus in aequore puluis.


CHAP. 1.
Of particular Combats, with their Original.
THe Graecians called a private fight Monomachia, and the Law Civil Duellum, (as
it were) the fight of two persons. The first use thereof was among the
Mantineians in Greece: where they that entered into such Combats, did for the
most part appear in pompous apparel, with feathers, and other ornaments of
great magnificence. Those fighters also used Emblemes and Emprezes. This kind
of fight seems very ancient: for Homer and Virgil make thereof mention.

CHAP. 2.
Whether Combats may justly be permitted.
THe Popes of Rome have long since inhibited all Combats. The Laws Civil also
do seem to reject that kind of trial. Yet is it reasonable, that a martial
man justly challenged, should (without offense) appear in the field, and with
sword in hand defend his honor: for by law of Nations it is lawful he may so
do. Yet ought he not (without license) to fight within his own Princes
dominion, if without loss of reputation he may do otherwise. And in the
Roman state (without the Magistrates allowance) the law did absolutely forbid
such fight. Therefore as without license combat was unlawful in Rome, so was it
with the Princes permission auowable: for by such warrant Valerius Coruinus,
Marcus Torquatus, and others did fight.

We read also that Princes themselves, contending for kingdoms, by that mean
(to avoid effusion of blood) have determined their right: whereof we have
ancient examples, as the combat of Charles Duke of Anioy and Peter of Arragon,
contending for the Isle of Sicil; of Corbis and Osua brethren, upon their title
to Carthage; of the Duke of Bohemia and the Duke of Lancaster: and in holy
Scripture, of David and Goliath.

CHAP. 3.
When and how Combats were in use.
ALbeit the laws both Canonical and Civil have inhibited Combats, yet by use
and ancient custom (in some countries) they were permitted; chiefly among the
old Lombards. For whensoeur matters of great importance had been duly
examined, and the truth could not appear otherwise then by Gods judgment; in
such cases the combat was granted: yet with this caution, that the combatants
were first sworn, that without fraud, and for trial of truth, the same
should be performed.

The matters of those combats were chiefly these.

If a man were accused of treason.

If a reconciled enemy did break his vow.

If a man for desire of inheritance, were charged to murder his father.

If a man were touched with adultery: or a woman accused to procure her
husbands death.

These and some other doubts, moved the Lombards to grant combat, if by other
just proofs the truth could not appear: neither does it seem barbarous or
unseasonable in those cases, to admit combat. This custom the Frenchmen also
(with little difference) approved: as it appears by a constitution of King
Philip the Fair, yet extant in these words: Siquis occulti criminis
capitalisque reus sit, atque ita de eo constet, vt quaecstioni subijci possit,
condemnari non possit, is arbitratu accusatoris duello experiatur. Since those
days combats have been more considerately granted in Italy, for the people of
that Nation (being jealous of their honor) upon light occasions (and almost
for every lie) would resort unto a Prince for security and license, for combat.

CHAP. 4.
What exceptions or repulses may justly move the Defender to refuse the Combat.
AChalenger may be refused in respect of his person, being known a man wicked
or infamous. For as it is not reasonable, that any man of good fame should
hazard himself to fight with him that is infamous; so a general rule it is,
that no man of so vile quality shall bear Arms. Unlawful also it is, and
forbidden by law, that any murderer, these, or other vicious person should be
allowed to accuse or fight with any gentleman or other person of reputation Quid
says, Nulla lex iustior qua^necis artifices art perire sua.

Of no better estimation ought he be that is a fugitive, a seditious person, a
traitor, a forsaker of the Army, a perjured man, a traitor to his master or
friend, a bawd, or noted of any crime, that is accompanied with infamy.

CHAP. 5.
Whether a man of mean quality may challenge his superior.
FOr answer to this question, I will use the opinion of Ioannes Iacobus
Triuultius, who being Colonel general of the French Kings forces, hearing a
man at Arms to refuse the challenge of a foot soldier, said that he ought
not, because every soldier being enrolled, and in the Kings pay, is reputed a
gentleman: quontam ex militia oritur nobilitas. Every small disequalitie ought
not make difference chiefly where God is Judge: before whom is no difference of
persons. Moreover if that exception were generally admitted, no challenge
should be at all, because none, or very few are equal; for some are
honorable, as they that have received dignity from the Prince: other are
gentlemen, whose title the Arms of their Ancestors do warrant. Others for
vertuc have deserved same, and are reputed noble. Plancus and other ancient
writers do say, that Nobilis est, quasi notus. Hardly therefore are gentlemen
found, that by all these means can warrant their Nobility. Better it is
therefore to justify honor by Arms, then incur suspicion of viletie, or
stand upon curious points of pedegrees. What good could Plancus have, when
puffed with pride, he boasted himself to descend of the high house of Drusis.
And Iuuenal says: Nobilitas veraest atque vnica virtus.

Much doubt has also been made, whether a man of meaner title may challenge a
greater: as when an Earl challenges a Duke, whether lawfully he may so do. Of
this matter diverse men have thought diversely. Paris the doctor says, That a
gentleman borne, and of three descents, may fight or challenge a Duke upon any
injury to him done. The reason thereof is, That a Duke offering injury,
makes him to whom it is offered his equal, and able to encounter him in
Arms, which otherwise he ought not be.

But this opinion the Lawiers of later time do not allow. For as in
controversy criminal, persons illustrious, and of great title, may answer by
Proctor, so may they in combat appear by Champion.

Otherwise it ought be, where both the Challenger and Defender be Illustri and
tituler personages; for in that case, although they are not even of one degree,
yet being both Noble, the greater Lord cannot refuse to fight with the
inferior. For which reason an Earl may not be repulsed by a Marquize, or a
Duke, because they are both Right honorable, though of diverse title. Yet is it
not fit, that private Gentlemen or Barons should challenge a great Marquize. A
Gentleman of three descents, and such a one as has employed his life in Arms,
ought not be refused to fight with men of worship, because the inequality of
their dignities is not great: and such is the opinion of Paris.

CHAP. 6.
What sorts of men ought not be admitted to trial of Arms.
FOrasmuch as the trial of Arms appertains only to Gentlemen, and that
gentilitie is a degree Honorable, it were not fit that any persons of meaner
condition, should thereunto be admitted. Wherefore, as the Judges of civil
trials do ordinarily reject the testimony of such as are accounted infamous,
even so in Martial trial, a person honorable ought not by men of base
quality be accused: for how can he charge another with any crime, that has
himself committed an offense against his own reputation?

It has been therefore ordained and determined, that no man having committed
treason against his Prince or Country, shall be admitted.

He also may be repulsed that has had intelligence or conference with the
enemy of his Prince or Country, or that being taken of them, does there
remain, having means to return unto his Princes service.

He that becomes a Spy, or explorator for the enemy, or that takes an oath
against his Prince, or that takes a Princes pay and departs before he has
served the full time.

He that abandoneth the Army of his Prince, and flees unto the enemy, or
being discharged, does go unto the Enemy in the time of skirmish or fight,
shall be reputed as infamous, and also a Traitor.

He that abandoneth the Ensign of his Prince or Captain, or that either by
day or night shall maliciously depart from the place of his charge about his
Princes person, or in the camp.

Among these we will account all thieves, beggars, bawdes, victualers, persons
excommunicate, usurers, persons banished the Army, and every other man
exercising an occupation or trade, unfit and unworthy a Gentleman or Soldier.

Finally, whosoever is defamed of any notable crime, or is by the law of the
land not admitted to bear witness, may be numbered among them that lawfully
are repulsed: these men I say, challenging any Gentleman or soldier, ought not
only be refused, but of every honest persons to be abhorred, because in
fighting with men of such condition, a man of good reputation does equll
himself unto persons utterly unworthy. Yet true it is, that whosoever
repulseth a person for cause of infamy, must assuredly know, that he has been
for such crimes condemned, or at the least the same is a thing so notorious, as
the party repulsed cannot deny it. But if any such infamous man be challenged
by a Gentleman or soldier, he may not after be refused, unless that after
challenge, he commits some infamous fact, which is to be observed as well in
the challenger as the defender.

CHAP. 7.
Who was anciently accounted victorious in Combat.
AT such time as combats were in use, by permission of Princes, and publicly
performed, the order was thus. If the Challenger did not vanquish the Defender
in the day of fight, before the Sun setting; he himself was judged
vanquished, and could not after challenge any other Gentleman. This victory,
and this privilege is only due unto the Defender: all other favors were
common to both the fighters.

The next kind of victory was, when any of the Combattants did yield unto his
enemy, either by confessing himself not able to defend, or yielding himself
prisoner, or when he uttered any other speech tending to submission.

The third was, when any of them did expressly deny, or unsay that he
affirmed, or repent the words whereon the quarrel did grow.

Fourthly if he did run away, and abandoned the lists or field, where the
fight was to be performed. And this was the most base and dishonorable sort of
vanquishment.

He was also without victory and vanquished, that was slain within the Lists
or sield: yet was that sort of vanquishing least dishonorable, though by
ancient custom no man slain in public combats should be buried among
Christian bodies.

CHAP. 8.
What was aunciently due unto such men, as were victorious in public Combats.
ALbeit I am not ignorant, that this discourse is little or nothing pertinent
to private Combat or quarrel; yet for that it concerns a matter pleasant
unto us, and glorious for those that have been victorious, I will briefly set
down what was due by ancient order of Arms, unto such Gentlemen as in
public combat were victorious.

Whosoever was vanquished within the Lists, was the prisoner of him that did
vanquish. To him also was due all Arms, both offensive and defensive, garments
and horse, with all furniture brought thither, either for ornament or use.

The person of him that was vanquished, was by honorable custom given unto
the Prince of the place, or else unto some other Prince whom the vanquisher
served or loved: but this was done by use, not of duty.

The vanquished also might be compelled to pay the charges of the vanquisher:

The vanquished might be forced to pay ransom, no less then if he had been a
prisoner of the war. But if the prisoner did serve the vanquisher, the space
of five years, in services meet for a Gentleman, then was he set at liberty
without payment. And if in the mean time he were employed in any base action
or service unworthy his degree, then was it lawful for him to escape and
break prison: Or if it happened that during the imprisonment, any land or
other wealth did come unto him, yet was it not lawful for the victour to
increase the ransom.

If the victor did die within the time that the vanquished was a prisoner, then
should his heir have the same title and interest.

If a prisoner was suffered to go at liberty upon his faith, he did or ought
in any wise return, being called, unless the victor in the mean time did
become a Traitor to their common Prince, or were excommunicate, or that
between them were some new enmity, for in those cases, it was lawful not to
return.

If being in this sort at liberty, he happened to become a Prince, or a Lord,
then was he not bound to return, but pay ransom only.

If during the time of imprisonment, he were not well used, he was likewise
excused: yet did he pay a convenient ransom.

If the prisoner did happen to save his taker from any great peril, during the
imprisonment, then was he, by law, forthwith set at liberty.

CHAP. 9.
Of disequalitie among Gentlemen.
OMitting to speak of Emperors, Kings, and Lords of great title, Let us only
remember what order was anciently observed when one Gentleman or soldier
happened to challenge another.

It behooves therefore to consider, that every Gentleman either he has
office, or he has none. If he has office, as government of Countries, Towns,
Embassage, or command in the war, then his authority or employment does
continue for time, or life. In which case the custom was anciently thus.

If an Officer for time were called to answer by arms, then did he defer
the Combat until the expiration of that Office.

If this Office were for life, and his quality superior to the Challenger,
then did he fight by Champion.

If the Officer challenged were not superior, then did he ask leave of his
Sovereign and fight. But if he could not obtain license, yet did he appear
in person, and with arms answer his enemy, for (in those days) the
obligation of honor was preferred before all other respects.

Whosoever was borne Noble (under which word is comprised all sorts of
Gentlemen) then were they ever reputed equal. Yet note here, that a Gentleman
borne, is he, who has his descent from three degrees of Gentry, both of the
mothers and fathers side. So says Paris.

If the Office or authority of the desender were such as ought to command the
Challenger, then might he fight by Champion.

A Gentleman of any Noble house (not having jurisdiction or commandment) might
in those ages be challenged by any other private Gentleman. And because the
profession of arms is honorable, an old soldier without reproach, was
accounted a Gentleman.

Ascholler also having taken degrees of school, was not denied the title of
Gentry.

A simple soldier of honest same, might fight with any Corporal, Sergeant or
other Officer, (the Captain excepted)

Every Captain might challenge another Captain, unless their charges were
such as the one did command the other. And this rule served through all degrees
of soldiers. Yet men of arms being the most honorable soldiers, might not
be refused to fight with any private Captain of footmen, being of equal birth
and authority.

CHAP. 10.
Of the equality and disequalitie of great Nobility, and of the privileges
due to all men professing Arms.
A King uncrowned may lawfully challenge a King crowned, unless the King
uncrowned be unlawfully aspired, or a tyrant. The number of Christian Kings are
14. of whom only four were anciently crowned by the Pope, that is, the French
King, the King of England, the King of Jerusalem, and the King of Sicil. All
the other Kings were crowned by their own Prelates. Thus says Paris.

An Earl being a Prince absolute, and not subject unto the Empire, or any
other Potentate, may refuse to fight with any person being a subject
notwithstanding he has the title of Prince, Duke or Marquess. Here is to be
noted, that these titles of honor were at the first given in office, as the
title of Duke was proper unto him that was a General of the Army. A Marquess
was he unto whom the confine or marches of a country or kingdom was
committed. An Earl or Count was a Judge or commander in peace, and of them in
the ancient Emperors service were diverse, as the Countes Palatine were as
stewards of the Emperors house, of his court, or stable, and every of them
might challenge any Prince, Duke, or Marquess being a subject, because they
are in respect of subjection, reputed none other then Barons.

A Gentleman well borne, and descended from Parentage of four degrees, may
fight with any Earl or Baton, in case of treason to his Prince or Country,
and also murder and infidelity: because they are (besides their dignity) none
other then Gentlemen, and Gentilitie or Nobility is hereditary and cannot be
taken away, but dignity may. But in other quarrels of less importance, the
Earl in respect of his dignity, may fight by Champion, but in the cases
aforesaid he shall fight in person, unless he be aged, lame, or otherwise
disabled.

A Captain General of an Army Imperial or Royal, may not be challenged by
any Gentleman or Lord, neither ought the governor of and City, Town, or
Castle, because no public commandment may be abandoned for private respect.
The like is to be understood of Ambassadors, who in regard of the place they
hold, may (during their commission) repulse the challenge of any Gentleman or
other subject whatsoever.

A Soldier basely borne, having lived in continual exercise of Arms by the
space of ten years, without committing any disobedience, or other reproachful
act, ought be admitted to fight with any Gentleman borne.

A Gentleman, who either by his own fault or his ancestor, has committed any
treason against his Prince, may be repulsed to fight with any other Gentleman,
unless the said offender or his ancestors were restored in blood, or is in
descent three degrees from the ancestor that was attainted.

A Gentleman that is known Spy for the enemy, or bewrays the secrets of his
own Princes camp, abandoneth his ensign, or commits any other military
offense, may be repulsed to fight with every other gentlemen of good fame and
reputation. And by ancient custom, men blotted with such a note, might not
live in any City or Town where the Emperor or other Prince remained.

A Gentleman that has made profession of Arms, by the space of twenty years
in the Court or Camp of his Prince, without infamy or reproach, may (not
withstanding he be dismissed, re^ired, or cassed) fight with any other
Gentleman that lives in present pay.

A Gentleman having aspired unto any title or dignity, and is either in respect
of age or infirmity retired to his own house, ought nevertheless to enjoy
all his honors, and shall be ever (unless he commit some dishonorable fact)
reputed worthy the honor he received in Court or camp, and fight with any
other Gentleman whatsoever.

An Artificer following the camp, and exercising his Artor Mystery
(notwithstanding he be also in pay) may be repulsed to fight with any private
Soldier that makes particular profession and exercise of Arms.

No man under the degree of a Gentleman, ought be received or allowed for a man
at Arms on horseback: for by the Imperial laws the Regiment of Lances was
called Equestris ordo, and they whom we call light Horsemen, were named Celeri.

CHAP. 11.
Of Arms both offensive and Defensine.
IT has been before said, that by the law of Lombardie, every Combat (unless
upon quarrel of infidelity) should be tried with shields and staves, and with
no other weapon. But the matter of their Combats was only for trial of
truth, without respect of honor. Howsoever it were, besides that custom must
be received for law, it seems to me that either in public or private
fight, such weapons ought be used as are commonly worn of Gentlemen and
others professing Arms. And touching Arms defensive, it has been also the
use, that as they are thought allowable in war and all general fights, so in
particular trial of Arms, they ought not be rejected, because fortitude
accompanied with prudence is much the more commendable, seeing he that unwisely
or inconsiderately aduentureth himself, is not to be reputed valiant, but
furious: neither is he accounted valiant, that without counsel or cause,
delights in dangers, but he that never does shun any generous action, tending
to public benefit, or his own private reputation. And Aristotle says, that
a valiant man does neither fear all things, nor dare do all things. For these
respects it has ever been thought fit, that in particular Combats, the
Fighters should be allowed Arms defensive, and not perform the same naked,
and utterly disarmed, with swords and daggers only, as is in this part of the
world now used. And since the peril of life is no less in particular then in
public fight, it seems very reasonable that defensive Arms should be
allowed, yet so as both the challenger and defender be equally armed and
weaponed, which in truth ought be at the election of the defendant, as
heretofore has been discoursed. But because the custom of the land is, and
happily also law forbideth that any man should be armed save only in the
war, I think no Gentleman ought to refuse to fight disarmed. And here will I
not omit to remember an abuse which hardly is discontinued, I mean that some
English gentleman are so obstinately addicted to custom, as notwithstanding
they do themselves enter quarrel and be challengers, yet will they use that
sort of weapon only which please themselves. An opinion contrary unto reason,
and the use of all other people, as though ancient use made that weapon only
allowable, which reason will also prove vice as good as virtue, because it is
no less ancient.

CHAP. 12.
Of the election of Weapons.
FOr good and reasonable causes, many advantages are due unto him that is
challenged, because he being accused and constrained to fight, just and true
reason wills that he should enjoy all honest favor. It has been therefore
well determined, that whosoever is defender, does sufficiently acquit
himself, and ought be reputed victorious, if he be not victored. But on the
other side, he that challenges, must not only escape to be vanquished, but
also vanquish his enemy: for otherwise he shall be reputed as victored, and
lose the quarrel. Which seems very reasonable, because his office is to
prove: But the defender is not bound to more then defend.

Another favor also appertains to the desender, which is, the election of
the weapon, because, if another man will voluntarily call me to trial of the
sword, the choice of the weapon ought of right to be mine. Yet true it is, that
no defender ought to make election of other Arms either defensive or
offensive, then such as are lawful, and worn ordinarily by gentlemen and
Soldiers. Therewith also is to be observed, that if the question whereupon the
Combat or fight grows may be decided by civil trial, that then no trial of
Arms ought be enterprised. Much more also may be added touching the equality
or disequalitie of the persons that enter into fight, and likewise of the Arms
as well defensive as offensive: but because public Combats are now almost
generally forbidden, and in this land most rarely used, I speak only of those
things which are to be known for the performance of private Combat and fight
between particular gentlemen.

CHAP. 13.
Certain questions, opinions, and judgments, upon accidents happening in
trials and exercise of Arms.
IF two men at Arms do covenant to fight on horseback, and run ten courses
with sharp Lances, and that he who worst performs those courses, should be
judged victored and prisoner to the other: It happens that at the second
course, the one of them falls from his horse, and suddenly recovering to
horseback offers to perform the rest of the courses. The question is,
whether it be lawful for him so to do, or by the fall be reputed a prisoner?
Whereunto is answered, that in a challenge for life and death, no man ought be
accounted vanquished unless he be slain, or forced with his own mouth to
yield, or deny those words whereupon the quarrel grows: yet otherwise it is,
when the challenge or Combat is for honor only, love of Ladies, or exercise
of Arms, because in that case notwithstanding the Runners be determined upon a
certain number of courses, yet if at the first, or after (before those courses
be all performed) any of them do fall, he that receives the fall shall loose
the honor, and the other depart with victory.

Two gentlemen being come into the field to fight for life, the one in fighting
happens to fall, the other presently sits upon him, and says, Yield thy
self; He that lies under, says like words, and therewith wounds his enemy
lying upon him, who feeling his grief mortal, strikes the other in the
throat. He that was first fallen, arises and walks, shortly after they both
die. The question is, which of them ought to be judged victorious. Albeit no
dead man can require judgment of victory, yet to the of them ought receive
most honor.

Hereunto may be said, that the hand being a member most necessary for fight,
and placed much higher then the leg: therefore the loss thereof is of more
importance, and consequently dishonorable. On the other side is alleged, that
seeing the leg is of as great necessity, so as without it he is disabled to
serve either on horse or foot: therefore he who becomes hurt and lame in that
part, receives most dishonor; and the more, for that no Art can supply that
want, as in the hand it may. But I refer the true deciding of this doubt unto
the wise and learned reader.

Two Gentlemen come to fight for life: the challenger being left handed is
maimed on that hand, the other being right handed loses it. Which of them
ought receive most dishonor?

It seems that in this case the losses and harms are equal: for he who was
left handed, being maimed on that side, is deprived of that hand which he used
chiefly, and was no less apt for him, then the right hand is unto the enemy.
And since it is the office of the Challenger not only to maintain, but also
offend and prove in not doing more to prejudice the defender, then that harm
himself receives: therefore the chalenger (although he loses but a left
hand) is in this case most dishonored. Yet because the exercise of these men's
hands were of like necessity, I think (under correction) the judgment ought
to rest as indifferent.

Two Gentlemen in performing a combat on foot, are hurt in places equal: the
question is, whether of them is victorious.

We have in the former question said, that where two fighters be equally hurt,
the challenger should depart with dishonor, because he has not proved that
which he took in hand, which is to vanquish the defender: therefore the
drawing the enemies blood, and the manner thereof is to be considered. If then
the one be hurt on the right arm, and the other on the left, it may seem
there is none advantage: for as the right hand is apt to offend in fight, so
the left hand is no less fit to defend. Notwithstanding, for that the use of
the right hand is both more necessary and ordinary, he who is hurt thereof,
ought to be adjudged unto most dishonor, chiefly in combat for life. For in
the exercise of Arms for honor only, the judgment ought lie dead, or else he
shall be thought victorious that most manfully performed his part, or that
regards least the wound, or that most cunningly does handle his weapon. The
quality of the hurts is also to be considered, which of them is more or less
mortal; likewise which member is more or less to be regarded.

Four Gentlemen determined to fight on horseback for trial of truth and
life, did enter into the Lists: the one party do both charge one of the
adversaries reputed a man of small force, yet valiantly defending himself, did
hurt one of the assailers: and his companion seeing the matter so handled,
suddenly dismounteth, and with his Lance wounds the other of his enemies in
the back, and forces the one of them to deny his words: he that denied,
flees out of the Lists, persuading his fellow being first hurt to abide there,
saying it was more honorable to die within, then without the Lists. He who
forced the enemy to flee, pursued him, but not able to take him, a question was
moved, which party ought be accounted victorious, because on either party one
was hurt, and the other two went out of the Lists without license of the Judge.
Whereto may be said:

That he who denied, ought with his companion to loose the honor: for albeit
one of the enemies did also leave the Lists, yet his intent therein was to
pursue his foe being fled thence: and for so much as the combat was for matter of
treason, it suffices not only for the victorious to vanquish the enemy, but
also to bring him into the power of the Judge to be punished. And it is plain,
that seeing of the one party one was hurt, and the other fled, they ought to be
judged to loose all honor, and be condemned as guilty of that whereupon the
quarrel was moved.

Seven Gentlemen do compound with seven other, to run certain courses at the
Tilt for honor and love of Ladies: in which match, it happened that five of the
one party did commendably acquit themselves, but the other two of that side
were overthrown. On the other side, two only performed their courses well,
and the rest of that company exceeding evil, losing many Lances, and running
very foul: whereof a question grew, whether unto five well doers, and two
evil, or unto two well doers with five evil, the honor ought to be allotted.

Albeit in this case much may be spoken: yet for that the question is not of
any particular man's merit, but which party in general performed best the
enterprise, it may be alleged, that the party wherein were most weldoers
ought to have the honor, notwithstanding the fall of two of their companions:
yet for so much as the fall from horseback by the enemies force or virtue is
most reprochefull, it seems that the misaduenture of two men only, may
reasonably be the loss of honor to all the rest. And therefore we leave the
judgment of this doubt unto wise men, better experienced in Arms.

Two gentlemen being in combat for life, the Challenger takes the sword of the
Defender from him, notwithstanding the Defender most valiantly defends
himself with his arm and hands all the whole day, during which time he could
not be forced either to deny, yield, or be slain. A question thereupon arose,
whether of them was victorious.

Forasmuch as this Combat was for life, and that in every fight of such nature,
no victory is fully gained until the Defender is slain, or else forced to
yield or deny; it seems that he is not to be judged guilty, not having done
any of these, although his sword were lost, which indeed in all martial
exercises, and feats of Arms is a thing much to be discommended. But most
certain it is, that in all Combats and actions, for honor, love, and praise
only, whosoever loses his sword, must presently also lose the honor and
victory.

Two Gentlemen fighting for life within the Listes, the one yields himself a
prisoner. Whether may the Prince of the place (who in combat is elected a
Judge) save the life of him that is vanquished. Hereunto may be answered:

That albeit every prisoner appertains unto his taker, yet has it commonly
been used, that the victorious have presented their prisoners unto the Prince,
to be disposed at his good pleasure, who in recompense thereof, do use
according to the magnanimous minds of such persons, not only to pay the
charges of the victorious, but also in sign of clemency and mercy, set the
unfortunate prisoner freely at liberty. As did the noble King Edward the third
of England, unto John Visconti, who in his presence was vanquished by Thomas de
la March base son unto the French King. And Philip Duke of Millain did the
like unto an unfortunate Gentleman vanquished by a Neoplitane Knight.

CHAP. 14.
Of the honor gained or lost by being disarmed in sundry places, and of sundry
pieces.
A Man that loses his sword in fight, is more reproched then he that loses
his shield. For he gains the greatest honor that wins the chief weapon
from the enemy, which is the sword, seeing therewith the Emperor and Kings
do create their Knights, and the sword is borne before them in in sign of
authority and Regal power.

He that loses his headpiece in fight, is more dishonored, then he that
loses his shield, because the Helmet defends the most principal part of man,
but the shield armeth a lower place.

He that loses his Gauntlet in fight, is more to be blamed, then he who is
disarmed of his Poulderon. For the Gauntlet armeth the hand, without which
member no fight can be performed, and therefore that part of Armor is commonly
sent in sign of defiance.

He that is cast out of the Saddle by violence of his adversaries encounter,
shall be more reproved, then he who falls by the default of his horse, the
breaking of Girthes, or any such like accident.

CHAP. 15.
Of the honor gained or lost by the hurts given or taken in Combat for life, or
in triumph.
HE that in fight loses his eye, shall thereby receive more dishonor, then he
that loses his teeth, because the eye is a member serving the most necessary
sense, but the teeth are only instruments of the mouth. He that loses his
right eye, is more to be reproached, then he that loses the left eye, because
the right side is in better opinion of men. The like is to be said of the
hands, of the arms and legs. If a man having but one eye do fight with
another man that has two, in losing that one eye, he shall be more blamed,
then he who has two eyes, although he loses one. He that loses his whole
hand shall be more reproached, then he who loses one eye. And he that loses a
foot, is more disgraced then he that loses one hand.

CHAP. 16.
Of Combats ancient.
TOo long it were to tell the causes, and event of Combats heretofore
performed, by Princes, and other persons of honorable quality.

Nevertheless, who so desires to know what was anciently done in matter of
such quality, let him read the Combats of David with Goliath. Of Romulus with
Acron: of Marcellus with Virdimarus king of France. Of the Horatij and
Curiatij. Of Satibarzanes with Erigius. Of Horrates with Dioxippus a Champion.
Of Alexander with Porus king of the Indians. Of Titus Manlius with one other
Frenchman, of Marcus Valerius with one other Lord of that Nation. Of Ionathas
the Jew with Pudentus: of a Duke of Bohemia, with the Duke of Lancaster. Of
certain Christians with a like number of Barbarians. Of Seanderbeg alone,
against three other men. Of Valares a Gothian, with Artanas an Armenian, and
many others.

CHAP. 17.
The order of Combats for life in England, as they are anciently recorded in
the office of Arms at London.
FIrst the Cartell or Bill of Quarrel, as well of the Challengers behalf as of
the Defenders, was brought into the Court, before the Constable and Marshall.
And when the truth of the cause of quarrel, could not be proved by witness,
nor otherwise, then was it permitted the same should receive trial by force of
Arms, the one party by assayling, the other by defending. The Constable as
Vicar general unto the King assigned the day of battle, which was to be
performed within forty days next following, whereunto both the Challenger and
Defender condscended. Then were the Combattants commanded to bring in
sufficient pledges for suertie, that they and every of them should appear, and
perform the combat, betwixt the sun rising, and going done of the day
appointed for the acquirall of their pledges, and that they nor any of them,
should do or cause to be done any molestation, damage, assault or subtlety
against the person of his enemy, either by himself, his friends, his
followers, or other person whatsoever.

In what sort the King commanded the place of Combat to be made.
THe Kings pleasure being signified unto the Constable and Marshal, they caused
Lists or Rayles to be made, and set up in length threescore paces, and in
breadth forty paces. The place where the Lists were appointed, was ever upon
plain and dry ground, without ridges, hills, or other impediments. At either
end of the Lists was made a gate or place of entry, with a strong bar to
keep out the people. For the guarding of either gate one Sergeant at Arms was
appointed, and commanded not to suffer any man to approach within four foot.
The one gate opened toward the East, the other toward the West, being
strongly barred with a rail of seven foot long, and of such height, as no
horse could pass under or over the same.

In what sort the King did sit to behold the Combat.
ON the day of battle, the King used to sit on a high seat or Scaffold
purposely made, at the foot whereof was another seat for the Constable and
Marshall, who being come thither, called before them the pledges as well of the
Defendant, as of the Challenger, to be showed and presented unto the King,
there to remain within the Lists as prisoners, until such time as the
Chalenger and Defender were come, and had performed all their Ceremonies.

In what sort the Challenger used to present himself to Combat.
THe Challenger did commonly come to the East gate of the Lists, and brought
with him such armors as were appointed by the Court, and wherewith he
determined to fight. Being at the gate, there he stayed until such time as the
Constable and Marshall arose from their seat, and went thither. They being
come to the said gate of the Lists, and beholding the Challenger there, the
Constable said, For what cause art thou come hither thus armed? and what is thy
name? unto whom the Challenger answered thus: My name is A. B. and am hither
come armed and mounted, to perform my challenge against G. D. and acquit my
pledges. Wherefore I humbly desire this gate may be opened, and I suffered to
perform my intent and purpose. Then the Constable did open the visor of his
headpeece to see his face, and thereby to know that man to be he who makes the
challenge.

These Ceremonies ended, the Constable commanded the gate of the Lists to be
opened, whereat the armed man with his necessaries and council entered. From
thence he was brought before the King, where he remained, until such time as
the Defender was come thither.

In like manner the Defender appearing did make request unto the Constable and
Marshal, desiring they would be pleased to deliver and discharge his pledges.
Whereupon the said Constable and Marshall did humbly desire the King to release
them, because the Defender is already come, and presented before his Majesty,
there to perform his duty.

But in case the Defender did not come at time convenient in the day appointed,
then did the King deliver his pleasure unto the Constable, and he reported the
same unto the Marshall, who forthwith did give order unto the Lieutenant, that
the Defender should presently be called to appear by the Herald Marshall of
the King of the South, called Clarencieux: and in case the Herald Marshall of
the King of the South was not present, then was the proclamation made by some
other Herald. But if the combat were performed in the North, on the other side
of the River of Trent, in the circuit of the King of the North called Norrey,
then was his Marshall to make proclamation. The words whereof were to this
effect.

Oiez, G. D. Defendant in this Combat, appear now, for in this day thou have
taken upon thee to acquit thy pledges in presence of the Lords, Constable and
Marshall, and also defend thy person against A. B. who challenged thee to
maintain the cause of this Combat.

This Proclamation was made thrice at every corner of the Lists: but if at the
second time the party appeared not, then the Herald did add these words: The
day passes, and therefore come without delay. And if in case the said
Defendant appeared not before noone, but stayed until the third hour after,
then did the Herald by commandment of the Constable and Marshall, in the
beginning of the proclamation say, A. B. appear in haste, and save thine
honor, for the day is well near spent, wherein thou did promise to perform
thine enterprise.

It was also used that the Constables Clerk, should in a book record the
hour of the Combattants appearing within the Lists, either on foot or on
horseback, in what sort they were armed, of what color the horses were, and
how they were in all points furnished.

It was also anciently used, that the Constable moved the King in favor of the
Combattants, to know whether his Majesty were pleased to appoint any of his
Nobility or other servants of reputation, to assist them for counsel in combat.

The Constable and Marshall did survey the Lances and other weapons, wherewith
the combat should be performed, making them equal, and of even measure.

The Constable also appointed two Knights or Esquires unto the Challenger, to
keep the place free from impediments: the like was also done for the Defender.

The Constable did also move the King, to know whether his Majesty in person
would take the Oaths of the fighters, or give him and the Marshall authority
to do it out of his presence.

The Constable also did send the Marshall unto the Challenger, and his counsel
to make ready his Oath, declaring that after that ceremony all protestations
should be void.

After these preparations, the Constable caused his Clerk to bring forth the
book, whereupon the Combattants were solemnly sworn.

The first Oath.
THe Constable having caused his Clerk to read the Challengers bill, and
calling him by his name, said, Do thou conceive the effect of this Bill?
Here is also thine own Gauntlet of defiance. Thou shall swear by the holy
Evangelists, that all things therein contained be true, and that thou maintain
it so to be, upon the person of thine adversary, as God shall help thee, and
the holy Evangelists.

The Oath thus taken, he was led back unto his former place, and the
Constable did cause the Marshall to produce the Defender, who took the like
Oath. This Oath was ever taken the parties kneeling, unless it pleased the
Constable and Marshall to pardon that duty.

The second Oath.
THe second Oath was also indifferently propounded to either of them, viz. That
they had not brought into the Lists other Armor or weapon then was allowed,
neither any engine, instrument, herb, charm, or enchantment, and that neither
of them * should put affiance or trust in any thing other then God, and their
own valors, as God and the holy Evangelists should help them. That done they
were both sent to their places of entry.

The third Oath was thus.
THe combattants being again called, were commanded by the Constable to take
one the other by the hand, and lay their left hands upon the book: which done,
the Constable said, I charge thee A. B. challenger upon thy faith, that thou
do thine uttermost endeavor and force to prove thine affirmation, either by
death or denial of thine adversary, before he departs these Lists, and
before the Sun goes down this day, as God and the holy Evangelists shall
help thee.

The very same Oath in like manner used, was offered unto the Defender, and
that done, the combatants returned unto their places, their friends, and
counselors.

These ceremonies ended, the Herald by commandment of the Constable and
Marshall, did make proclamation at four corners of the Listes, thus: Oiez,
Oiez: We charge and command in the name of the King, the Constable and
Marshall, that no man of what estate, title, or degree soever, shall approach
the Lists nearer then four foot in distance, nor shall utter any speech,
word, voice, or countenance, whereby either the Challenger or Defender may take
advantage upon pain of loss of life, living, and goods, to be taken at the
Kings good pleasure.

Then the Constable and Marshall assigned a place convenient within the Lists,
where the Kings of Arms, Heralds, and other Officers should stand and be
ready if they were called: for afterward, all things were committed unto their
charge as well on the behalf of the defender as the challenger, as if any
thing were forgotten in their confessions, either touching their lands or
consciences; or that any of them desired to eat or drink: all those wants
were supplied by the Heralds and none other.

But here is to be noted, that no meat or drink might be given to the
Challenger, without leave first asked of the Defender, who commonly did not
deny the request. And after the Herald went unto the Constable and Marshall,
and made them privy thereunto, desiring their favors, that the combattants
might eat, drink, or ease their bodies, if need were.

After these orders taken, the Constable and Marshall did avoid the Lists of
all sorts of persons, save only one Knight and two Esquiers armed, to attend
the Constable: and the like number to await on the Marshall, either of them
having in his hand a Lance without head, ready to depart the Combattants, if
the King did command.

Of more ancient time the Constable and Marshal used to have certain
Lieutenants and servants within the Lists. Also the one part to keep order on
one side, and the others to look unto the other side. And if the Queen
happened to behold the combat, then the Constable and Marshall awaited on the
Kings side, and their Lieutenants attended on the Queen.

Then did the Constable alone, sitting down before the King, send his
Lieutenant to the Challenger to come unto him, and the Marshall with his
Lieutenant did accompany the Defender.

The Constable thus set, did pronounce his speech with a loud voice: Let them
go, let them go, let them go, and do their best.

Upon which words pronounced, in the Kings presence, the Challenger did march
toward the Defender to assail him furiously, and the other prepared himself
for defense, as best he might.

In the mean time, the Constable and Marshall with their Lieutenants, stood
circumspectly to hear and see if any word, sign, or voice of yielding were
uttered by either of the fighters, and also to be ready if the King should
command the Lances to be let fall, to depart the fight.

The Constable and Marshall did also take regard, that the Challenger and
Defender should appear at the day and hour appointed, whether they had about
them any engine, or other unlawful things, as charms or enchantment: yet was
it lawful both for the Challenger and Defender, to be as well and surely armed
as they could. And if any of them would have his sword shorter then the
Standard, yet was not the other bound to ^aue his cut to that measure, if he
required that favor of the Court. But if either the one or the others sword
passed the Standerd, then was that inequality to be reformed, or if they were
both over long, both ought be reformed.

It had been also in more ancient time used, that the Constable and Marshall
should foresee, that if the Kings pleasure was to depart the fight, and suffer
the combatants to rest before the combat ended, that they should be parted in
due time, when no advantage were. Likewise that they should take heed that none
of them should privately speak unto the other of yielding, or otherwise. For
unto the Constable and Marshall appertained the witnessing and record of all
things.

And in case the combat were for question of treason, he that was vanquished
should be forthwith disarmed within the Lists, by commandment of the Constable
and the Marshall. Also the armor and weapons of the vanquished was in one end
of the Lists defaced, to his disgrace; and after, the same drawn out together
with his horse. From thence also the man vanquished was drawn unto the place
of execution, to be there headed or hanged, according to the custom of the
country.

The performance of all which punishment appertained only to the Marshall, who
ought see all things done in his own presence. And in case the Chalenger did
not vanquish the Enemy, then ought he suffer the same pains that are due to
the Defender, if he were vanquished. But if the quarrel were upon a crime of
less importance, the party vanquished should not be drawn unto the place of
execution, but only led thither to receive death or other punishment,
according to the quality of the crime.

If the combat were only for trial of virtue or honor, he that was
vanquished therein, should be disarmed, and put out of the Lists without
further punishment.

If it happened that the King would take the quarrel into his hand, and make
peace between the parties without longer fight; then did the Constable lead
the one, and the Marshall the other out of the Listes at several gates, armed
and mounted as they were, having special regard, that neither of them should
go the one before the other. For the quarrel resting in the Kings hand, night
not be renewed, or any violence offered without prejudice unto the Kings honor.
And because it is a point very special in matters of Arms, that he who
leaves the Lists first incurreth a note of dishonor: therefore to depart the
Lists in due time was ever precisely observed, were the combat for treason, or
other cause whatsoever.

It is also to be remembered, that without the principal Lists were ever
certain counterlists, betwixt which two, the servants of the Constable and
Marshall did stand. There stood also the Kings Sergeants at Arms, to see and
consider if any default or offense were committed contrary to the proclamation
of the Court, against the Kings royal Majesty, or the Law of Arms. Those men
were ever armed at all pieces.

The servants of the Constable and Marshall had charge of the place, and good
order thereof. The Kings Sergeants took care to keep the gates of the Lists,
and be there ready to make arrest of any person, when they should be commanded
by the Constable or Marshall. The fees of the Marshall were all horses, pieces
of Armor, or other furniture that fell to the ground, after the Combattants
did enter into the Lists, as well from the Challenger as the Defender. But all
the rest appertained to the party victorious, whether he were Challenger or
Defender.

The Bars, Posts, Railes, and every other part of the Lists were also the
fees of the Marshall.

Certain Combats granted by the Kings of England.
EDmund of the race of West Saxons, fought in Combat with Canutus King of
Denmark for the possession of the Crown of England. In which fight, both the
Princes being weary, by consent parted the land betwixt them. Anno 1016.

Robert Mountfort accused Henry of Essex of treason, affirming, that he in a
journey toward Wales near unto Colshill, threw away the Kings Standerd, saying
the King was dead, and turned back those that went to the Kings succor. Henry
denied the accusation, so as the matter was to be tried by Combat; The place
appointed for fight, was a little Isle near unto Reding. In this Combat Henry
was vaquished, and fell down dead, and at the suit of friends, license was
obtained that his body might be buried by the Monks of Reding. But it happened
that the said Henry recovered, and became a Monk in that Abbey. Anno 1163. In
the reign of King Henry the second.

Henry duke of Hereford accused Thomas Mowbray duke of Norfolk of certain
words by him spoken, as they rode between London and Braineford, tending unto
the Kings dishonor. Thomas duke of Norfolk denied to have spoken any such
word, but Henry affirming his accusation, the King granted the Combat, to be
performed at Couentry the seventh of September 1398. Anno Rich. 2. but the
combat was not performed, for the one and the other party was banished the
Realm.

A combat was fought at Westminster in the Kings presence, between John Ansley
Knight, and Thomas Catrington Esquier, whom the said Knight had accused of
treason, for selling the castle of S. Saviors, which the Lord Chandos had
builded in the Isle of Constantine in France. In which combat the Knight was
victorious. Anno 1374. Rich. 2.

A combat was granted unto an Esquier borne in Nauar to fight with an English
Esquier called John Welsh, whom the Nauarrois accused of Treason. But the true
cause of the Nauarrois his malice was, that the said Welsh had dishonored his
wife, as (being vanquished) he confessed. The King gave sentence he should be
drawn and hanged. Anno 1344. Rich. 2.

A combat was fought between sir Richard Wooduile, and one other Knight borne
in Spain. After the third blow given, the King stayed the fight. Anno 1441.
Henrici 6.

A combat was granted unto John Viscount borne in Cypres, and Thomas de la
Marsh Bastard son unto Philip King of France, in the reign of king Edward
the third at Westminster.

CHAP. 18.
Of Triumphs Ancient and Modern.
Triumphs have been commonly used at the Inauguration and Coronation of
Emperors, Kings and Princes: at their Marriages, Entry of cities, Enteruiewes,
Progresses and Funerals. Those pompous shows, were first invented and
practiced by the Romans: whom d^uers other Princes have imitated: though hard
it was, (and happily impossible) for any Prince to equal them in magnificence.
Yet read we may, that Xerxes, Darius and Alexander the great, were Princes of
marvelous puissance, and for triumphs admirable. Howsoever those matters were
handled, certain it is, that albeit our Princes of Europe (in respect of
Christian religion) do, in some sort, contemn excess of Mundane glory, yet
have they ever lived royally, and at occasions, triumphed, with princely honor
and greatness; according to the measure of their Empires; as shall hereafter
appear.

But first we have thought good to speak of Roman Triumphs, and briefly to
touch in what order they triumphed: for to report them at large were a labor
almost infinite.

CHAP. 19.
Of Triumphs and their original.
VArro says, That Princes and great Captains being returned to Rome with
victory, were allowed to pass with their army through the city unto the
Capital, singing Io. Triumph: Io. Triumph.

The first inuentour of Triumphs was Liber Pater, as Pliny says. Yet certain
it is, (and so by law provided) that no man should be admitted to Triumph,
unless he had vanquished full five thousand enemies.

Cato and Martius (Tribunes of the people) by law also decreed, that who so
untruly reported the enterprise he had done, should incur punishment.
Therefore entering into the city, every Triumpher did first come before the
Questors, and deliver his actions in writing, and swear they were true.

It was likewise by law provided, and by custom also observed, that only for
recovery of dominion, no man should be permitted to triumph. Which was the
cause that neither Publius Scipio for the recovery of Spain, not Marcus
Marcellus for taking of Syracusa, were suffered to triumph.

The first that imitated Liber Pater in triumphing was Titus Tatius, when he
triumphed for victory of the Sabini, yet was that no full triumph, but (as they
called it) Ouante, because his victory was not great, and without blood. For
the same reason the crown he ware, was made of Myrtel, which ever after was
the crown of all Captains that triumphed for victories of mean reputation.

In that age also it was unlawful for any man to triumph, unless he were a
Dictator, a Consul, or a Praetor. Therefore L. Lentulus being Proconful,
although he had performed great services in Spain, yet was he not admitted to
enter Rome, but Ouante.

Afterward Scipio most instantly required to triumph, having deserved great
glory, but till that time no man (without office) had triumphed.

Likewise C. Manlius, by the base people elected the first Dictator, by their
commandment also without allowance of the Patritij, did triumph.

And Gneus Pompeius a Gentleman Roman, before he was of age to be Consul,
triumphed twice.

Another law or custom there was, that no Captain might triumph, until he
had brough back the army: and therewith also delivered the country of his
charge, quiet, into the hand of his successor. For Lucius Manlius the Consul,
having effected great victories in Spain, was (in the Hall of Bellona) denied
to triumph, because the country where he commanded, was not in peace, as Liuie
reports.

CHAP. 20.
The manner of triumphing and the habits of the Triumpher in Rome.
THe Prince or Captain that triumphed was ever drawn in a chariot, as
appears by the Arc Triumphall of Titus and Vespatian, and likewise by that
of L. Verus Antoninus made of marble, yet extant in Rome. This Arc was drawn
by four white horses. Others used in their chariots white Bulls or Elephants.
As Pompei triumphing of Africa had in his chariot Elephants only. But Caesar
surpassing all others in pomp was drawn by forty Elephants, and in the day
time conducted to the Capitol, with torches, when he triumphed over the Galli.

Some writers have said that the Emperor Aurelianus was drawn with four
Hearts or Stags, and being come to the Capitol, he caused them all to be
slain, and sacrificed to Jupiter Optimus Maximus.

Other Historians have noted, that some triumphs have continued more then one
day: As Titus Quintius Flaminius held his triumph of the Macedonians and
Grecians, three days. Likewise Suetonius triumphed four days in one month:
and Augustus triumphing of the Dalmatians, Acciaci, and Alexandria, had three
chariots for three days.

The Triumpher also used to carry in his chariot his own children, which
custom Cicero seems to confirm in his Oration for Murena, saying that
Aemilius Paulus carried in triumph his son, who within three days after died.

Adrianus having obtained of the Senate to triumph, he modestly refused it,
saying, that honor was due to Traianus. And so (as a good Emperor) he caused
Traianus picture to be carried in the chariot, fearing that after his death, he
should loose the honor of the triumph.

Marcus and Lucius Antonius being brethren, and triumphing together, they
carried in their chariot the daughter of Marcus a young virgin.

Commodus the Emperor, a man of immodest manners, and unworthy of all Imperial
honor, being returned to Rome carried in the chariot with him his vicious
Anterus, who being placed near his person, as he passed the city, he ofttimes
kissed him publicly.

Far otherwise did Seuerus Afer, who being victorious of the Parthians was
offered the honor of triumph: which he refused, alleging he was vnhealthie:
and therefore desired his sons might be set in the chariot to triumph in his
place.

Thus appears it that the Romans accounted no honor too much or too great
for those that had in their service virtuously employed themselves. After the
triumphall chariot followed the chief prisoners bound.

Then came many captains and soldiers wearing boughs of Laurel, in sign of
victory. Being also persuaded that by virtue of that tree they were purged of
man's slaughter. Laurel is also a cause of good fortune, and a sign of
prosperity, because it is ever green and flourishing. As Pliny writes,
saying, Laurus triumphis dicatur: Caesarum Pontificumque sola domos exornat,
and ante limina excubat. Yet the same Pliny says that in times more ancient,
he that triumphed, did use a crown Etrusca of gold, which by a servant was
carried, and on his finger a ring of iron, to signify that the fortune of him
that triumphed, and his servant, was alike. In this manner Caius Marius
triumphed of Iugurtha* yet in his third triumph he ware a ring of gold.

Tarquinius Priscus at his triumph ware a coat of gold, as Pliny and others
affirm.

One other custom the Romans had, and was no ordinance or law, yet precisely
observed; which is, that whosoever in any civil war had gained victory (how
notable soever) he should not be admitted to triumph: because men therein
slain, were Citizens, and no strangers, which was the reason that Nasica
having vanquished Tiberius Gracchus and his folowers, nor Metellus suppressing
Caius Opimius, nor Antonius defeating Catilina, were admitted to triumph.

Nevertheless when Lucius Sylla had surprised the cities of Graecia, and taken
the Marian citizens, he was allowed in triumphant wise to carry with him the
spoils gained in those places.

CHAP. 21.
Of the diverse quality of Triumphs in Rome.
SOme Triumphs were full and entire: others of less pomp and state, they were
called Ouanti. But why they were so called, writers do not agree.

Triumphs absolute have been formerly discoursed. Now are we to speak of mean
or half triumphs.

Plutarch seems to think, that who so in this kind triumphed, did sacrifice
in the Capitol a sheep: but he that was allowed a full triumph, did offer a
Bull.

Dionysius says, that Ouatio, differs from Triumphus by this mean. He that
entered the city Ouans, had no chariot, nor used any regal garment but marched
with the Army on foot. Plutarch likewise writes they ware in their Crown no
Laurel, but Myrtle.

This kind of Triumph was instituted in Rome in the year 253. ab vrbe condita.

Dionysius and Plutarch, are not of one opinion, why this sort of Triumph was
called Ouante. Yet this seems the cause.

Posthumous being Consul, in his service of the war proceeded coldly and
sparing of blood.

Also in one other expedition before, he fought most infortunately, with loss
of many men, and by fleeing saved his own person.

Other causes do seem of this Triumph Ouante: as if the war was not justly
pronounced, or the enemy of base reputation, as a Pirate, a bondsman, or a
coward.

So as the victory obtained, does appear unworthy much honor. Either else if
the war received end by word, and no violence. Or if the service were done in
a foreign country, by authority of another Prince, or without lawful
aut^ority.

Whether the Triumpher Ouante did enter the city on horseback or foot, is a
question.

Another use also the Soldiers had, which happily will seem strange; that
following the triumphall chariot, often times they uttered scoffs and jests
against the Triumpher? Such was the behavior of Caesar's folowers at his
Triumph. For among other speeches they used these words: Gallias Caesar
subegit, Nicomedes Caesarem: and Ventidium Bassum Parthici triumphi die secuti
milites decantarunt; Qui mulos fricabat, factus est Consul.

In Rome it was by law provided that no Captain should come into the city
before his triumph: So says Plutarch in the life of Paulus Aemilius.

We read likewise, all Triumphs were celebrated in Rome only, two excepted,
which seems strange. For in those days Milan, Aquileia, and Constantinople
were cities of great fame.

Papirius Cursor triumphed first in Monte Albano, for his victory against the
Corsi: as Pliny reports. And Papirius Maso, not permitted to triumph in the
city, he triumphed in Monte Albano.

Paulus Orosius the last that has written of the Roman Empire, says that the
number of triumphs in Rome is 320.

CHAP. 22.
In what order the Romans triumphed.
THe first triumph in Rome, was that of King Tatius.

Next to him Tarquinius Priscus the King triumphed. But in what sort these
Kings did triumph, we cannot find.

After the expulsion of the Tarquinij, and the death of Brutus, Publius
Valerius the Consul triumphed.

Then, with greater pomp and admiration the Dictator Camillus triumphed, who
sitting in a chariot drawn by two white horses, entered the city. Which manner
of triumph was never before seen, therefore moved much envy.

Many years after was the triumph of Papirius Cursor Dictator, who triumphed
for victory of the Samniti.

Quintus Fabius also triumphed of the Galli, Etrusci and Samniti.

Then followed again the triumph of Papirius Cursor the Consul, when he
brought home the Army from Samnio. He furnished his triumph with many
prisoners both horsemen and footmen, with crowns Ciuicae, Vallarae, and
Murales, cariyng with him spoils of the Samniti, and leading many honorable
captives: he brought with him also two hundred thousand and thirty three
thousand pound weight of treasure. All which money was delivered into the
treasury, and no part thereof given to the soldier.

With greater joy the two Consuls, Claudius Nero and Liuius Salinator,
triumphed for their victory, having defeated Hasarubal and slain him, yet was
this triumph in magnificence far inferior: but the treasure they brought to
the city was an hundred thousand pound weight, whereof 23. thousand was divided
among the Soldiers.

But far more magnificent was the triumph of Scipio, who being returned from
Libya triumphed at Rome, in this sort. First he caused certain Trumpets to
sound: after them followed chariots laden with spoil: then were carried towers
of wood, made for models of those cities which were taken. Next were the
cariages of gold and silver, part whereof was unwrought, and part coin: next
were certain crowns carried in sign of honor at the winning of cities, which
were followed with white Bulls and Elephants: after them came the captive
Princes of Carthage and Numidia. Before Scipio his person, marched his Lictori
or Mace-bearers apparelled in purple, and accompanied with diverse sorts of
music and singers. These men had on their heads crowns, wearing also
garments of silk cut. In marching every of them one after another, sung some
verse in praise of the victory; making also gesture to move mirth. The chariot
of Scipio was richly wrought with gold, and near to his person also many
sweet perfumes were burned. The horses of his chariot were white, and on their
heads they ware crowns: their foretops and maynes were curled, and dressed with
gold, and precious stones.

Scipio himself was apparelled in purple, embroidered with stars of gold,
according to the Roman fashion. In the one hand he bare a scepter of Iuory, in
the other a branch of Laurel, which among the Romans were signs of victory.
About him were carried certain young boys and virgins, and at his stirrup
marched some young men of his blood. Lastly followed his guard, and their
Ensigns, with the army divided into squadrons. The Soldiers of best service
carried in their hand abranch of Laurel; and certain Musicians did sing their
praise. Others of no merit bare no Laurel, as persons noted of infamy. By
which manner of Triumph, the honor or disgrace of every one did appear.

Scipio being thus arrived in the Capitol, laid aside his pomp, and (as the
custom then was) feasted his company in the Temple.

Some time after, Marcus Porcius Cato triumphed of Spain, with honor
comparable. He brought with him twenty five pound weight of unwrought silver,
and of gold one thousand five hundred. To every footman he gave two hundred and
seventy pieces: and to every horseman thrice so much.

About that time, Lucius Quintius triumphed three days.

The first day he showed the Armor, weapons, and ensigns taken from Philip
and his cities.

The second day he showed the silver and gold, both wrought and unwrought. The
silver unwrought was eighteen thousand pound weight, and the gold two hundredth
seventy thousand pound weight. Besides treasure, were many vessels of all
sorts; with them also were many head-pieces, excellently and artificially
wrought: ten targuets of silver, and one of gold: besides great pieces of coin
of incredible poize; among which, was of king Philips coin in gold, fourteen
thousand and five hundredth and fourteen pieces.

The third day he showed the crowns of gold, and the gifts of cities,
wherewith he had been presented. Before h^s chariot marched many noble
prisoners, among whom was Demetrius the son of King Philip, and Armenes the
son of Nabides the Lacedaemonian.

Then Quintius in person entered the City, his chariot being followed with
great numbers of Soldiers. Then much treasure was divided, one part to a
footeman, two parts to a Centurion, and three parts to a Horseman. Those
prisoners that were exempt from bondage, ware their heads polled in sign of
liberty.

After Quintius, Pub. Cornelius Nasica triumphed for victory of the Boij.

The pomp of Cornelius was numbered among the triumphs of mean magnificence.
He brought with him the Arms, Ensigns, and Pillage taken from the Gauls.
Also certain noble prisoners and troops of horses taken from other enemies.
Besides these spoils, he showed chains of gold: and one thousand four
hundred seventy pound weight of silver, of gold 246. pound weight: in vessels
of the French fashion 360. pound weight.

He had likewise pieces of coin whereon was imprinted a chariot drawn by two
horses. Of them were a hundred thirty and eight thousand, which were given to
the Soldiers.

Now may we not omit the triumph of Marcus Flauius, who determined to triumph:
but hearing Aemilius was coming to Rome, he fell sick, and deferred his
triumph to avoid contention. The next January he triumphed of the Etoli and
Cephalonia. Before his chariot were carried crowns of gold weighing an hundred
and twelve pounds, of silver 83. pound weight, with other spoils incredible.

Over long it were to tell of all the Roman triumphs, and their magnificence,
being greater then can be expressed.

Let us only remember the triumph of Gaius Manlius, who brought into Rome 200.
kings crowns of gold, 220. thousand pound weight of silver, with other coins
of diverse Nations. He carried also great spoils, taken from King Alexander,
and from the Gauls. In this triumph he set before his chariot two and fifty
captains prisoners, and rewarded his own soldiers abundantly.

CHAP. 23.
Of other furniture and pomp appertaining to triumphs in Rome.
IN those ancient times, the Triumphs were also ornified with Arks, Pillars,
Obelisks, Pyramides, and diverse demonstrations of magnificence.

Who so had prosperously prevailed in the war, and obtained victory in any
foreign Country, did commonly erect an Arc triumphall, whereon was graven or
painted his proceeding in the victory. Pliny writes that in his life, these
triumphall Arkes were first made, and by the Triumphers offered to Jupiter in
the Capitol.

The most ancient Arc now extant in Rome, is that of Titus, before whose days
Portratures, and many other triumphal ornaments were in use; whereof to speak
now were tedious.

CHAP. 24.
The triumphall going of Darius to meet Alexander the Great.
TO speak of all Roman triumphs were a matter infinite: we will therefore
cease to say more of them, and speak of others performed elsewhere. And first
how Darius marched to meet with Alexander.

The Persian use was, that so soon as the Sun shined in the morning, a
trumpet was sounded in the Kings Pauilion, which warned every man to come forth.

Upon the roof of the Kings Pauilion, an image of the Sun closed in
Crystal was set, which shined exceedingly, and might be seen many miles.

The order of the Kings company, when he marched, was this:

First the fire (which they called holy and everlasting) was carried upon Altars
of silver.

Next to those Altars went the Magi or sorcerers, singing certain Persian
verses.

The number of the Magi was three hundred three score and five.

After them followed 365 young men, in Carthagenian attire, for the Persian
year contains even so many days.

Then a chariot consecrated to Jupiter did follow, ever drawn by four white
horses of exceeding greatness: they called those, Horses of the Sun. Their
raines were of gold, and their furniture white.

Not far from this chariot, were twelve other chariots ornified with gold and
silver.

Then marched more horsemen of twelve diverse nations, diversely armed, and of
diverse quality.

Next to them were ten thousand men, whom the Persians called immortal. Some
ware chains of gold, others had coats with sleeves embrodered with gold, and
set with rich stones.

Not far off were fifteen thousand men, whom they called the Kings cosins:
which number was furnished rather richly (like women) then well armed: they
were called Doryphori.

Next to this troop were other men apparelled like Kings. They went before the
Kings chariot he being carried up higher then any other. These chariots were
laden with Images of the gods, made of silver and gold.

Between the Images a partition was set with rich shining jewels: the one side
represented a war; and likewise the other.

Among these things they sacrificed an Eagle of gold spreading her wings: but
of all things, the Kings attire was most admired.

His apparel was of purple parted in the mids with white: and over it he had
a short cloak like a woman's garment, embrodered with Sparow-haukes of gold,
very strangely.

His girdle was womanlike small and girt: whereat hanged a Scimiter, or crooked
sword: the sheath thereof was set with precious stones.

On his head he ware a royal cappe, called Cidaris, which all Kings of Persia
do use. It was tied on his head with a lace, part of sky color and part
white.

After the chariot, followed ten thousand Lances, adorned with silver: and next
to the chariot certain choice men carried Darts gilded. Also on either side,
his nearest of blood did accompany him.

This troop contained thirty thousand footmen, whom five hundred of the Kings
horsemen followed.

About one acre distance from them the chariot of Sisygamba King Darius mother,
did come, and in one other his wife.

All the Ladies and other women belonging to both the Queens, were on
horseback.

After them other women did come (whom they called Armamax:) they exceeded not
the number of fifteen.

In that company were the kings children, with their governors. Also a number
of Eunuchs, being persons of some reputation among the Persians.

Then the Kings Minions being 360 were carried in chariots: their apparel was
princely and rich.

After them the kings coin was carried by six hundred Mules and three hundred
Camels guarded with Archers.

The Kings Concubines and his kinsmen were next to them. And they being past,
the Cooks, Sculions, and other base people did follow.

Last of all came certain Captains and soldiers lightly armed, to force the
troops to march in order.

CHAP. 25.
The Triumphall entry of Xerxes King of Persia into Greece: yet afterward
forced for fear, to flee into his own kingdom.
FIrst he sent before, all his carriage, and all those people that were combred
with any burden or other impediment.

After them followed seventy hundred thousand men of sundry Nations: who
marched in no order, but confused. Among whom was eighty thousand horsemen.
All these passed a good distance before the Kings person.

Then marched a thousand Gentlemen Persians, and with them so many Launcers:
who carried the point of their lances backward.

The next troop was only ten horses most richly furnished: being of the raze
of Nicae: beasts of exceeding greatness and beauty.

These were followed with a chariot, consecrated to Jupiter, and drawn by
eight white horses. The man that did drive those horses, went on foot, holding
the reins in his hand. In this chariot unlawful it was for any mortal man to
sit.

After it, Xerxes his own person was carried in a chariot drawn by horses of
Niscaea. The driuer of them walked before on foot: his name was Patiramphus
the son of Ota, a Persian. In this sort Xerxes went toward the Sardi,
sometimes sitting in his chariot, and sometimes on horseback.

Next to him followed the brauest and best men of Arms in Persia, carriyng (as
it were) half lances.

Then came ten thousand Persians on foot: one thousand bearing pikes, and on
the points of them (in stead of crowns) were silver apples. Some of them that
went next to Xerxes, had apples of gold upon their pikes.

These were followed with ten thousand other Persian horsemen.

Last of all, about two acres of ground behind, was a multitude of people
without order or number.

CHAP. 26.
Of Triumphs in Germany.
HEnry the first Emperor of that name, who for his great delight in hawking
and fowling, was called Auceps, being advertised of the often incursions of
Hungarians into Germany, thought good to assemble the Princes Anno 935. and by
force of Arms to repulse them: which design, with the assent of those Lords,
by public proclamation he made known: commanding that every Prince with his
best furniture upon a day certain should appear at Magdeburg, which was
performed.

First, the Count Palatin of the Rhene appeared. The Bishop of Treuer: The
Bishop of Colein: The Bishop of Leyden. The cities Imperial, Mentz, Aquisgran,
etc. All which companies the Palatin presented unto the Emperor: and under
every of those Princes colors, other meaner Princes and Lords also appeared.

Under the Ensign of the Palatine were the Duke of Elsatia, The Duke of
Thungren. The Duke of Limpu^g. The Marquis of Pontamonson, with six other
Dukes.

Under the Ensign of the Duke of Sueuia, were twelve other Lords.

The like under the Ensign of Franconia, and all other chief Princes.

And last of all, were the Emperors companies. So was the number of Princes,
Lords, Knights and Gentlemen 6240.

The whole army was sixty nine thousand strong.

These Christian forces (assisted by the Almighty) defeated the Hungarians,
and slew the greater number.

The victory obtained, and the Emperor with his Princes returning homewards,
were in all places feasted. And they desirous in some sort to honor the Ladies
of those countries, where they passed, were willing in triumphal wise, to make
Iusts, Turneaments, and other Military pastimes. Which being pleasing to the
Emperor, and acceptable to all others; His Majesty with consent of the
Princes, commanded that public triumphs should be proclaimed; whereunto all
Princes, Lords, and Gentlemen might resort, to show their valor. And this was
the original of German triumphs.

Then was there a Counsel and commission granted to certain Princes and
other Lords, to invent orders for the future Iusts, and appoint places fit for
their celebration.

The Commissioners considering what glory might of these exercises accrue unto
the German Nation: and therewith knowing that the exercise of Arms was no
small help to inform Gentlemen, and make them meet for serious services: not
forgetting also that Noble Ladies would take delight in such royal sight: they
greatly commended that invention unto the Emperor, who presently agreed that
Laws might be made and observed in those Actions.

His Emperial Majesty commanded that at every Triumph 4. chief persons should
be chosen to give direction, and by their authority all Ordinances to be made.
Those men were called Reges Ludorum. The first Kings were elected at the
Triumph of Meydburg.

1 Charles Lord of Hohenhuwen, of Sueuia. 2 George Lord of VVolffartshausen of
Bauaria. 3 Meinolphus Lord of Erbach, of the Rheyn. 4 Ernestus Grumbach
Esquier.
The Actors in the first Triumph, whose names were enrolled, and presented unto
the Emperor, were in all 390. Among whom, These were the Emperors band.

The Duke of Holland. The Prince of Pomeran. The Prince of Saxon. The Prince of
Thuringia. The Burgraue of Meydburg. The Prince of Witten. The Prince of
Russia. The Prince of Delmantia. The Count of Thuringia. The Marquis of Staden.
The Prince of Ascania. The Earl of Aldenburg. The Earl Valesius. The Earl
Harracortius. The Earl Schuuartzburg. The Earl Weissenfels. The Earl
Gleichen. The Burgraue of Leisneck. The Earl of Eberstein. The Earl of
Eysenburg. The Earl of Rotel. The Earl of Winssenburg. The Earl of
Wunssdorff. The Earl of Vffen. The Earl of Louenrode. The Earl of Rochlitz.
The Earl of Piedmont. The Earl of Alenconius. The Earl of Bren. The Earl of
Leisneck. The Rawgraue of Cassell. The Earl Woldenburg. The Earl of
Eskersberg. The Earl of Pein. The Earl of Arnsshag. The Earl of Lobdiburg.
The Earl Nortingen. The Earl of Ployssigk.
After the Emperor followed the Palatine of the Rheyn with his band,
containing 80. persons, among whom were 7. Princes and 16. Earls, viz.

The Duke of Alsatia. The Duke of Barry. The Marquis of Pontamonsa. The Duke of
Lymburg. The Duke of Burbon. The Duke of Limburg. The Earl of Burgondy, and
others. Next to him followed the Duke of Sueuia with his band, containing 82.
persons, of which number 9. were Dukes and Princes. Next followed the Duke of
Bauaria with his band containing 69. persons, of whom 8. were Dukes and
Princes. Next followed the Duke of Franconia with his band, containing 80.
persons, of whom 4. were Princes.
Besides these Bands appertaining to the Emperor, and the 4 principal Princes
of Germany (being the chief Nobility and Gentlemen) yet other Princes also
offered their Bands. viz.

Otho Duke of Thuringia the Emperors eldest son, presented 112. persons: of
whom 8. were Dukes or Princes. Likewise Arnoldus the Emperors second son
presented 85. persons: among whom some were also Princes.
To conclude, the number of Princes, Lords and Gentlemen that appeared in these
triumphs (before the fourth triumph was ended) amounted unto two thousand
persons.

Then was there charge and commission given to Georgius Scuuabenlant to be the
Herault and pronouncer of all Orders and Ordinances concerning those affairs.
He also took notes how every man was mounted, armed and furnished. To him also
appertained the publicatio^ of what honor or dishonor every man deserved: and
therewith to persuade that no malice or quarrel should be among the Actors,
but every one with an honorable emulation to do his best.

This Officer also proclaimed the privileges, and what Arms were to be used:
and that done, he assigned place where every band should attend, and in what
order they should run: which were long to be rehearsed.

The troops of Lances thus marshalled, the beholders were permitted to enter.
But first of all the Princes, Ladies and women of honor did take their places,
of whose beauty, pomp, and rich attire no man needs to doubt. These women
thus prepared, in passing to their places (with due reverence and thanks) set
them down: and the courses being run, desired that every Actor might receive
the praise he deserved. Therewith also, that the chief prizes might be allotted
to the 4. Kings appointed for the next triumph, which should be celebrated at
Rauensburg upon S. James day Anno 941. which was 3. years after this present
triumph.

The prizes were delivered according to the praises and pleasure of the Ladies.

This triumph and the ceremonies thereof ended, it pleased the Emperor to
pronounce the first Article to be observed in all future triumphs, viz.
IT should be lawful for all Gentlemen well borne, to enter and fight in
these exercises of Arms; ever excepting such as in word or deed had
blasphemed God, or done or said contrary to our Christian faith. Of whom if any
shall presume to enter the Lists, we will and command, That the Arms of his
ancestors, with all other his furniture, shall be cast out, his horse
confiscate, and in lieu of honor (which arrogantly and unworthily was sought)
his person shall be expulsed with perpetual infamy.

The second Article was pronounced by the Pallatin: the effect whereof was.
THat if any Lord or Gentleman whatsoever, has or shall wittingly or willingly
say or do any thing in prejudice of the dignity Imperial or profit thereof,
he shall be repulsed from these exercises, and suffer the punishments thereunto
due.

I also ordain and pronounce Meinolphus of Erbach to be King in the
celebration of the next triumph, and the chief leader of all my Nobility of
the Rhein.

The third Article was pronounced by the Duke of Sueuia, viz.
THat if any Gentleman (of what title soever) has by word or deed dishonored
any virgin, widow, or other gentlewoma^: or has by force taken or detained any
goods or lands to them or any of them belonging, he shall be judged unworthy to
receive fame and honor in these triumphs, he shall also forfeit his horses,
and with infamy be expulsed the Lists. Such is my censure irreuocable. I
likewise constitute Carolus Lord of Hohenheuuen to be a King in these triumphs,
and Leader of the Nobility of Sueuia.

The fourth Article was pronounced by the Duke of Bauaria, viz.
THat forasmuch as nothing was more agreeable to the glory of God and honor of
the holy Empire, then truth; I require that all men (of what dignity or title
soever) being known unjust in their doings, and liars, should during their
lives, remain infamous. And if any person of such quality shall offer to enter
the Lists, I command him to be with dishonor dismounted. I likewise pronounce
George of Wolffarthuusen in my name, to be King of the Province of Bauaria.

The fifth Article was pronounced by Conradus Duke of Franconia, to this effect.
THat whosoever has betrayed or forsaken his master in the field or in his
journey, or has procured any other man so to do: or if he has not defended
his country, his subjects and others committed to his charge, as is the duty
of a good man: or if wickedly he has procured the trouble of any person, or
not defended him, but left them as a pray to the enemy, then I command that
every such person shall be for ever repulsed from the celebration of these
triumphs: he shall also forfeit his horse, and endure the ignominy due to men
infamous. I also pronounce Ernestus of Grumbach Esquier, to be King of the
triumph within my circuit of Franconia.

These Articles pronounced and written, the Emperor called before him 15 men
appointed to be Curatores ludorum (as we may term them) Superuisors of the
Triumph, to whom he said, That forasmuch as he allowed and much liked the
pastime, his intention was to impart the same to all Kings, Princes, and
Potentates Christian: to the end that if any of their Nobility were lovers of
Arms and honor, they might appear in our Triumphs with all things needful, on
Monday next after S. Matthew the Apostle. At Meydeburg.
THen his Majesty was pleased with the advice of the four, and the fifteen
men aforesaid, to add diverse other Articles, as follows: That If any man had
either openly or secretly slain his wife, or had aided or counseled another
man to kill his master, he should forfeit his horse, and be expulsed the Lists.

If any man had committed sacrilege, by spoiling of Churches, or Chapels, or
had by force taken the goods of any widow or Orphan, or not defended them to
his power, he should forfeit his horse, and be punished with infamy.

If any man without warning had assaulted his enemy, or by indirect means had
procured him to be robbed of corn, wine, or other provision feloniously, he
should forfeit his horse, etc.

If any man in the Empire or under the Empire, rashly and without license of
the Emperor, did impose new and unaccustomed tributes, whereby the people might
be damnified, he should forfeit his horse, and be taxed of infamy.

If any man had been convinced of notorious adultery, having himself a wife,
or being a Batcheler had by force defloured any matron, virgin, or religious
woman, he should forfeit his horse, and remain infamous.

If any Gentleman borne being the Owner of lands and revenue, and not therewith
contented, did exact or oppress his Tenants; or being the Officer of a Prince
or other great Lord did wrest from his subjects, to enrich himself: for so
doing he should forfeit his horse, and be excluded from the Lists with infamy.

All which Articles being publicly read and approved, were by his Imperial
Majesty confirmed as Law.

CHAP. 27.
Of Triumphs at the interuiewe of Pope Alexander, and the Emperor Foedericus
Barbarossa, at Venice. Anno 1166.
ADuertizement being given to Venice, that the Emperor resolved to come
thither, Piro Zinzano the Dukes son, was sent with six long Galleyes to
meet him at Rauenna. After them were dispatched a great number of less
vessels.

The Emperor being arrived at Venice, the Pope was set in a rich chair at the
Church door, and there tarried his coming. Before the Popes feet, a carpet of
purple was spread upon the ground.

The Emperor being come to the said Carpet, forthwith fell down, and from
thence (upon his knees) went toward the Pope, to kiss his feet: which done,
the Pope with his hand, lifted him up.

From thence they passed together unto the great Altar in S. Marks Church,
whereon was set the Table of precious stones, which at this day is reputed one
of the richest treasures of Europe.

Some have reported, that there the Emperor did prostrate himself before the
Altar, and the Pope set his foot upon his neck.

While this was in doing, the Clergy sung that Psalm of David, which says:
Super Aspidem and Basiliscum ambulabis.

Which the Emperor hearing, said, Non tibi, sed Petro. The Pope replied, Et
mihi and Petro.

After some days abode in Venice, the Pope departed by sea to Ancona, and the
Emperor toward Germany by land, either of them accompanied with Gentlemen
Venetians in great number.

CHAP. 28.
An admirable triumphal show, at Venice, to congratulate the recovery of
Cyprus. Anno. 1366.
AFter thanks given to God for the recovery of this Island, every man
endeavored to make demonstration of gladness; wherein no cost in banqueting or
other solemnization was omitted.

Among these shows of triumph and iolitie, two sights there were most
admirable, and never before that time seen: the manner of the one was a
representation of Iusting on horseback.

For certain portratures or images of men and horses were so made, of skins
clothed in silk, with Lances and Shields, as the wind by a straight line
forced them to run one encountering the other, like to a course of the field.

The other was like unto a combat: where armed men did seem to fight, both
which shows were in the street.

In the first the Actors were only 24 young Gentlemen Venetians, for personage,
apparel, and years very commendable. The inuentor and director of these
pastimes was Thomasso Bambasio, who for such devises and action was in Venice
esteemed, as in old time Roscius had been in Rome. Surely it seems strange,
that so many men richly attired, and so many horses bravely furnished, could be
managed with so great dexterity: and one having ended his courses, another was
presently ready to supply that place. In the mean while the Lances did seem
broken, and the splinters fly about.

The duke with all the Nobility of the city, beheld this miraculous sight, and
so did a multitude of people.

Among these beholders (as mine Author says) were diverse Noble men of England,
who travailed to Venice, purposely to see the manner of this Triumph, and the
Actors.

CHAP. 29.
A Triumph in the reign of King Richard the second, 1390.
THis noble Prince being advertised, with what magnificence and pomp, the
Queen Isabella of France had made her entry into Paris, thought good to
appoint a military triumph at London, wherein appeared sixty Knights, and so
many fair young Ladies of his Court sumptuously apparelled.

With this troop, his Majesty rode from the Tower of London unto Smithfield:
and passing through Cheapeside a proclamation was made, that on Sunday and
Monday next following, these Knights would attend there to challenge all
comers.

For him that deserved best in this Just (if he were a stranger) the Queen and
her Ladies had prepared a crown of gold: or if he were any of the sixty
English Knights, he should receive a rich bracelet.

The English Knights likewise promised to give unto the stranger of best
desert, a fair horse with his furniture: or if he were an English man, he
should receive a Falcon.

This challenge and these prizes had been by a King of Arms formerly
proclaimed in England, Scotland, France, Flaunders, Brabant, Henault, and
Germany: which moved many persons of Honor and reputation to come hither.
Among whom was William of Henault Earl of Oye or (as some did call him) of
Ostrenant, a young Prince much delighting in Arms.

This Noble youth desirous to honor the King of England his kinsman, drew into
his company many Gentlemen of his Nation, with whom he passed into England.

Then resolving to perform that journey, thought good to take the consent of
Albert his father, Count of Henault, Holland, and Zeland. Of whom with great
difficulty he obtained leave.

The like desire to honor the King, moved the Earl of S. Paul, who had
married the Kings sister. And he brought with him a great troop of gallant
Knights.

These two Princes came first unto Calis, where they found English ships ready
to transport them. But the Earl of Oye passed over first: and being come to
London had access to the King: of whom he was with great joy embraced. The
like courtesy he found in John Holland the Kings brother, and all other Lords
of the Court.

The day of triumph being come, the King and the Queen attended upon by the
troops of men at Arms and Ladies aforesaid passed through London from the
Tower to Smithfield.

Being come thither, the King, the Queen, the Ladies, and other honorable
personages, settled themselves in such places as were prepared, and sorted with
their degrees.

Then were the men of Arms marshalled, and set in such order, as they should
run.

The first courses were allotted to the Earl of S. Paul and his Band: who were
with great courage encountered by the English. Between them the first days
Iusting was spent: and that night his Majesty, the Queen and all the company
supped and lodged in the Bishops house, near to Saint Paul's Church.

The chief honor and commendation of that first fight, was (among the
strangers) given unto the Earl of S. Paul: and among the English the Earl of
Huntington had the praise.

This magnificent supper ended, every one resorted to his lodging (the King and
Queen only excepted) who continued their lodging in that house all the time
of that triumph.

The next day, after noone, King Richard himself in complete Armor appeared
in the field, being followed with the whole band of English Knights.

Thither also came the Queen with her train of Ladies, and was set in that
room, where the day before she had been placed.

The first (of the strangers) that offered to run, was the Earl of Oye: who
presented himself, and his company most pompously furnished. And after him
followed the Earl of S. Paul, with his troop of Frenchmen.

The Knights strangers, being entered and ready, were forthwith incountred by
the English. The conflict continued till dark night, with equal honor.

The Iusts of that day ended, the King returned to his lodging, accompanied
with the Noble strangers, and there supped.

The chief commendation of that day (on the strangers part) was allotted to
the Earl of Oye, who by his virtue, without favor, so deserved.

Likewise among the English, a Gentleman named Hew Spencer was highly praised.

On Tuesday also, the men at Arms resorted to the Tilt, and continued the
exercise, with great admiration of the beholders.

On Wednesday the runners intermingled themselves, and every one did run as
he thought good.

On Thursday the King conuited all the men: and all the women supped with the
Queen.

On Friday the whole company was feasted by the Duke of Lancaster.

On Saturday the King and the Queen, accompanied with the Earls of Oye and S.
Paul (in great state) rode to Windsor: where they were most honorably
intertayned: and the Earl of Oye received the Garter. From thence every one
returned home.

CHAP. 30.
The triumphall passage of Charles the fifth Emperor, through France. Anno 1540.
IN the month of December this Emperor arrived at Bayon, where the Dolphin,
and Duke of Auuernia with great pomp received him. Being in the town, he
behaved himself as King, pardoning offenders, and deluering them from prison.
From thence with like Majesty he passed to other cities, accompanied with the
said Dolphin and Duke, where he used the same authority.

In January he came to Castelloaldum, where the King in person with much
magnificence entertained him. From thence he passed to Amboyse, where King
Charles the 8. had built two great towers, the walls whereof are so large, as
Mules and Carts may pass upon them.

The King then to the end that Caesar's entry in the night should be the more
magnificent, furnished those towers with an exceeding great number of lights,
so as they might behold all the Country, as if it had been fair day. But when
Caesar was going up, by great mishap, the tower fell on fire; the flame and
smoke whereof became so great, as every one feared lest the Emperor should
have been smothered. Whereupon all men there present labored by fleeing to
save themselves. Some that were suspected to have done this fact were
apprehended, and the King did command they should be hanged, though indeed no
proof appeared: but Caesar would in no wise they should die, so were they
pardoned.

After this disaster, the King conducted the Emperar to Bleas, and from thence
to Fountainableu, where they hunted, hauked, and beheld certain Iusts and
Tournaments; in conclusion, no sport or solace was omitted.

From thence the Emperor attended by the Dolphin and Duke, went to Paris.
Before he entered the city, the Burgesses and Citizens of all sorts, came
forth, and received him with no less ceremony then if the King had been
present: there he also set at liberty all prisoners. From thence he passed
unto the Constables house, and was there most honorably lodged. At last he
went into Picardy, and so to Valentia, which is the first town of his
jurisdiction in Belgica: unto which place the Dolphin and Duke did follow him.

CHAP. 31.
The triumphall Entry of Philip Prince of Spain, at Milan. An. 1548.
THis Prince entered at the gate toward Pauia: where the citizens had made a
stately bridge, whereupon they showed diverse Pageants and Arkes triumphal,
adorned with verses, and sentences very markable. About three of the clock
after noone, he entered the city, where the most reputed citizens did attend
him in Burgo della Trinita, as they call it.

Being passed that place, he was saluted by Caesar Gonzaga, the Count John
Treuultio, the Count Charles Belgioso, and many other noble persons richly
apparelled.

After them Mutio Sforza presented his reverence, being accompanied with a
great troop of Gentlemen of the Country, clad in white silk, and bearing in
their hands Pollaxes: the heads of them were gilt, and the staves covered with
white silk.

Then followed the Doctors, and scholars, accompanied with 300 horsemen
apparelled in yellow coats. And immediately appeared two other troops of men
lightly armed, which company guarded the ancient Lords and Noblemen of the
country: among whom were some Princes, Earls and Barons. That troop was so
great, as two hours sufficed not to see them pass.

They that rode next unto the Princes person, were the Duke of Alba, the Duke
of Sossa, the Marquess of Pescara, the Admiral of Castilia, the Marquess
Milo, Ferdinando Gonzaga.

On the one side of the Prince the Cardinal of Trent, on the other the Duke of
Sauoy did ride. Behind them followed five companies of men at Arms, apparelled
in silver and gold, conducted by Count Alexander Gonzaga, Count Francisco
Somaia, Count Philippo Tornello, and two other noblemen.

I omit to tell of diverse shows, Arkes triumphal, and other sights wherewith in
every street the Prince was entertained, by Italians only.

These Complements ended, the Prince came unto the chief Church: at the door
whereof were excellent Paintries.

The Prince in his entire to the Church, was by the Senate and people of Milan
presented with a basin of gold full of double Ducats, to the number of ten
thousand (as was reported)

The Prince thus entertained, and settled in the city, Iusts and Tournaments
were brought before him.

The Actors in that triumph were apparelled in silk of diverse colors,
garnished with gold. The first of them did come unknown clad in white,
supposed to be the Prince himself.

Mutio Sforza, in Ash color. The Count Philippo Tornello, in sky color. The
Count Francesco Beneuentano, in yellow. Ramando Cardona, in Green. Alessandra
Gonzaga, in Murry. Count Caetano, in White and Black. Ferdinando Noya, in gold
color. The Castellan of Cremona, in Black. Nicolao Rusterla, in Wax color.
Il Signior della Trinita, in Blew.
From Milaine this Prince passed into Germany, followed with these Lords and
Gentlemen, whose names are under written.

The Duke of Alba. The Duke of Sessa. The Admiral of Castilia. The Marquess
of Astorgo. The Prince of Ascoli. The Marquess of Pescara. The Duke of
Ferendina. The Duke of Monteliano. The Count of Lunensa. The Count of Cifanta.
Lodouico Dauila, gran Commendator. Gomesio a Figureia captain of the guard.
Officers of Household.
Don Francesco Astense. Marchio a Naue. Comes Oliuarius. Don Iacobo da Azeneda.
Gualtero Padillano.
Gentlemen of the Chamber.
Don Antonio Rosano. Rogomes a Sylua.
Gentleman Courtiers.
Don Gabriel a Cuenta. Marchio Falcesio. Don Barnardindi Mendoza. Don Alphonso
Fonario. Don Iacobo di Cardona. Don Iacobo di Achuna. Don Henrico Erugues. Don
Barnardo Manriques a Lara. Don Iuaro a Seiauerda. Don Michael a Luna. Don
Lodouico a Cardona, with others, to the number of 97. Lords and Gentlemen,
twenty Pages, besides Officers and Grooms: Harquebuziers two hundred, Lances
an hundred.
CHAP. 38.
A Military challenge in Italy 1555.
AT such time as the French king with his army remained at Ast, the Imperial
camp not being far from thence, certain French Lords challenged the like
number of Italians to break sharp Lances for their mistress love: in which
action they would hazard both honor and life. The Imperial Lords accepted the
challenge.

Thus the match was concluded: yet the French fearing some subtlety (because
the country favored the enemy) procured Monsieur de Thermes with five hundred
horse and 200. footmen to lie near the place, to the end he might defend his
friends, if need should require.

The first courses were performed between the Duke de Nemours and the
Marquess of Pescara, who having ended their courses with honor, they embraced
one the other, and so gave place.

The next that presented himself, was Monsieur de Classis son and heir of
Monsieur de Vasey, a Knight of the Order and Captain of fifty men at Arms:
against whom came the Marquess Malespina, who in that encounter was sore hurt
and dyed.

The third courses were between Monsieur de Mauns a Leader in the French Army,
and a Spanish captain called Alba. In which reencounter the Frenchman was
wounded in the neck, and the fourth day after died.

The last was between Monsieur Monshany, and the Earl Caraffa a Neapolitan,
whose encounter was so violent, as with his Lance he pierced through the Armor
and body of the Frenchman, so far, as an Ell thereof was seen at his back,
whereof he presently dyed. So was both parties partakers of misaduenture.

CHAP. 33.
Of Triumphant chalenges in France.
NOw to the end it may appear, that our Gentlemen of England have been no
less desirous to honor their Nation in foreign countries, then willing to
advance the renown of their Prince at home: it shall not be (as I think)
offensive to remember some triumphal actions by them performed in foreign
countries, as writers have well observed: wishing our English Armorists and
Historians, were of like care to conserve al memorable actions, tending to the
honor of their own Prince and country. Of which acts it seems there are
many worthy to be remembered. For when the Duke of Buckingham, or (as mine
Author calls him) the Earl of Buckingham, remained governor of the Kings
Army in Bullonoys, a certain Frenchman approaching the Camp, with a loud
voice asked if any Gentleman there had a mistress, or other beloved Lady, for
whose sake and honor, he would break three Lances, and adventure three
encounters of his sword. This proud Challenge being heard by the English men,
one Ioachimus Cathorius (as the Author calls him) a brave English Gentleman
stepped forth: which the Lord Fitzwater (then Marshall,) seeing he forthwith
sent word unto the Frenchman (whose name was Gauuenus Micelleus) that he should
be presently answered. Whereof the French Gentleman very glad, returned to his
friends, and furnished with three Lances, three Maces of iron, three Swords,
and three servants to bear them, presented himself before the English Army.
The English seeing him in this sort prepared to maintain the challenge, much
marueiled thereat, supposing that no Frenchman had dared to encounter the force
of an English Soldier.

The brute of this brauado forthwith was dispersed through the Army, and at
last the General became thereof informed, who desirous to behold the combat,
mounted on horseback, accompanied with the Earl of Stafford, and the Earl or
L of Devonshire.

The Duke and other beholders thus assembled, the Challenger and Defender begun
their courses: but by default of the horses, their Lances missed at the first,
and at the next encounter very lightly the one touched the others Armor.

The Duke beholding in what estate the matter stood, and perceiving night at
hand, commanded the conflict should cease til an other day: and in the mean
space required the Frenchman might be well entreated.

The next day of trial being come, the one and the other appeared, and with
much commendation brake their Lances. That done, they came to the sword, the
one assaulting the other furiously, till they were both hurt; which the Duke
perceiving, caused them to be parted, and the Frenchman by an Herault was
safely sent home to his friends.

CHAP. 34.
Of one other like Military action between five English Gentlemen, and five
French.
ABout the same time, and in presence of the said Duke of Buckingham, one other
conflict on horseback was performed between five French Gentlemen, and the
like number of ours, who gained the chief honor.

I dare not (for fear of mistaking) set down their names in English, but thus
I find them in Latin: On the French party was Nothus Clarus a Pimontesse,
Tristamus Iailleus, Ioannes Castelmorantius, Galleus Aunoeus, Dom, Hoyauius
Ameus.

The Englishmen were Edwardus Bellicampus the son of Roger, Johannes
Ambreticortius, Ionaquinus Clitonius, Gulielmus Clitonius, and Gulielmus
Francus.

CHAP. 35.
Of one other like Action.
IT happened that certain English Gentlemen having served in the war of
France, determined to return home, and obtained license of the Constable that
so they might do. Their names do seem to be John Fitzwarren, William Clinton,
John Burley, and Nicholas Clifford. They being upon their way, one (whom mine
Author calls Ioannes Boucmelius a French Gentleman) did overtake them: and
having before that time spoken with Nicholas Clifford touching matter of Honor
and Arms, asked him whether he could, before he departed, consent to make
trial of his virtue, by breaking of three Lances. With all my heart (quoth
Clifford) for so have I long desired to do: and no time more fit then now, when
the Constable and his company may be judge; Yet such is my hap, as I have no
Armor at hand. For supply of that want (quoth Boucmelius) I will take order
that two Armors shall be brought unto us, and of them the choice shall be yours,
with every other thing fit for our purpose.

This agreement made, they imparted the same unto the Constable, and obtained
his license: yet with condition, that they should attend upon him the next day,
at which time he would, with other noble men, see what should be the event of
that Action.

About the hour appointed these Champions did appear, and at the first course
Clifford with his Lance pierced through the Armor and body of Boucmelius, of
which hurt he presently died.

This accident much grieved the French, and Clifford himself was not a little
sorry: which the Constable perceiving, said unto Clifford, Be not dismayed, for
this is the fruit of like adventures: and if my self had been in thy place,
I should have done the same: for better ever it is to do, then suffer at the
hand of an enemy.

The Constable having ended his speech, conuited Clifford with his company to
dinner: and then caused them to be conducted to the next town in safety.

CHAP. 36.
An other Challenge of a French Gentleman in Spain.
IN the Army of the King of Castile, there was a French Gentleman, young of
years, and in Arms of great reputation: men called him Tristram de Roy. He
seeing the wars ended between the Kings of Castile and Portugal, determined
to return home. Yet desirous by some means to gain honor, before his arrival
in France, procured an Herald to go unto the English Army, and proclaim,
That if any Gentleman there would break three Lances, he would challenge him.

This challenge being heard in the English camp, a brave young Gentleman named
Miles Windesor accepted thereof: hoping by that occasion to merit the honor of
Knighthood.

The next day according to appointment, he appeared in the field, accompanied
with Matthew Gorney, William Beuchamp, Tho Simons, the L. Shandos, the L.
Newcastle, the L. Bardolf, and many others.

The French Challenger appeared likewise honorably graced with friends: and
thus both parties in readiness to run, the Lord Souldichius bestowed the
dignity of Knighthood upon the said Windsor. Which done, the one charged the
other: and the two first courses were performed with great courage, yet
without any hurt. But in the third course the armor both of the one and the
other was pierced through; yet by breach of the lances, both of them escaped
more harm.

CHAP. 37.
One other notable Challenge in France, Anno 1390.
IN the reign of King Charles the sixth, three noble young men of great hope
and much affecting the war lived in that Court. viz. Mounsier de Bouciquant
the younger, Mounsier Reynaut de Roye, and Mounsier de S. Pie, all Gentlemen of
that Kings chamber.

In the same time also there was in England a Knight for valor and military
virtue of great fame: men called him Sir Peter Courtney: He having obtained
license, passed the sea, and traveled to Paris. After a few days rest in that
city, he challenged Mounsieur Trimoulie, a noble Gentleman in great
reputation: who accepting the defy, obtained license to answer, appointing a
day and place. The time being come, the King accompanied with the Duke of
Burgundy, and many other great Estates went to behold that conflict.

The first course was performed exceeding well, and either party brake his
lance with commendation. But the second lance being delivered into their
hands, the King inhibited more should be done: seeming somewhat offended with
the English Knight who had made suit, that he might be suffered to do his
uttermost.

This Action by the Kings commandment was stayed, and Sir Peter Courtney
therewith grieved, thought good to abandon that Country, and so desired he
might do.

The King well pleased he should depart, sent unto him an honorable gift, and
the Duke of Burgundy did the like. The King also commanded Mounsiuer de Clary
(a great Lord) to accompany him to Callis.

By the way, they visited the Earl of S. Paul, who married King Richards
sister of England.

The Earl in most courteous manner welcomed Sir Peter, and the rather, for
that his Lady had formerly been married to the Lord Courtney his kinsman, who
died young.

This Sir Peter Courtney being well entertained, the Earl and he with their
company supped together: in which time (as the custom is) they communed of
many matters. Among which the Earl asked of Sir Peter, how he liked the Realm
of France, and what conceit he had of the Nobility.

Whereunto Sir Peter with a sour countenance answered, That he found in
France nothing to be compared with the magnificence of England: though for
friendly entertainment he had no cause to complain: yet said Sir Peter, I am
not well satisfied in that matter, which was the chief cause of my coming
into France. For I protest in the presence of all this Honorable company, that
if Monsieur de Clary, being a Noble Gentleman of France, had come into
England, and challenged any of our Nation, he should have been fully answered:
but other measure has been offered to me in France: for when Monsieur de
Tremoulie and I had engaged our honor, after one Lance broken, the king
commanded me to stay. I have therefore said, and wheresoever I shall become,
will say, that in France I was denied reason and leave to do my uttermost.

These words much moved Mounsieur de Clary, yet (for the present) he
suppressed his anger, having charge to conduct Sir Peter safely unto Calis.
Notwithstanding this heat (quoth the Earl) let me tell you Sir Peter, that
in mine opinion you depart from France with much honor, because the King
vouchsafed to entreat you, that the fight might stay: whom to obey, is a
certain sign of wisdom and praise worthy. I pray you therefore Sir Knight,
have patience, and let us proceed in our journey.

Thus Sir Peter having taken leave of the Earl, passed forth toward Calice,
accompanied with Mounsieur de Clary; who so soon as they were entered into the
confines of the English Dominion, Sir Peter most heartily thanked him for his
company and courtesy. But Clary having made an impression of such sour
speeches, as Sir Peter had uttered in the Earls house, said thus: Having now
fully performed the Kings commandment conducting you safe to your friends, I
must, before we part, put you in mind of your inconsiderate words in contempt
of the Nobility of France. And to the end you being arrived in England, shall
have no cause or color to boast that you were not answered in France: Lo here
I my self (though inferior to many others) am this day, or to morrow ready to
encounter ^ou; not for malice to your person, or gloriously to boast of my
valor, but for conservation of the fame and honor due to our French nation;
where never wanted Gentlemen to answer in Arms, when any English man should
challenge.

Well (quoth Sir Peter) you say well; and with good will I accept your
challenge: and to morrow I will not fail to attend you armed, with three
Lances, according to the custom of France.

This agreement being made, Sir Peter went forthwith to Calice, there to
furnish himself of Arms fit for the Combat. And making the Lord John Warren
(then Governor) privy to what was intended, the next day he returned to
meet Mounsieur de Clary between Bullaine and Calice: thither also went the
Governor, and other English Gentlemen to behold.

The courses between these Champions being begun: at the first encounter
either party brake well: but in the second encounter by default of the English
Knights Armor, he was hurt in the shoulder, as other English Gentlemen did
well see: which moved the Governor of Calice to say unto Mounsieur de Clary,
You have dealt discourteously, to hurt Courtney when his Armor was broken.

I am sorry (quoth Clary) but in my power it is not to govern Fortune: what is
happened to him, might likewise have come to me.

The matter standing in these terms, Mounsieur de Clary returned into France,
supposing he had deserved great commendation. But being come to the Court, the
King, the Duke of Burgundy and Trymoulie himself blamed him: and the Counsel
of France gave sentence that his goods should be confiscate, because the King
having commanded that Sir Peter should be without offense peaceably conducted
to Calice, the matter was otherwise handled. To be short, Clary was brought to
the Kings presence, and by the Counsel asked what reason he had to take Arms
against amy man whom the king expressly had commanded to defend.

These words much perplexed Clary, and the kings offense did greatly amaze him.
Notwithstanding with a good courage he said, that what was enjoined him to do,
he had most faithfully performed: But Courtney with insolent speech taxed him
and all the French nation; which without dishonor might not be endured: He
therefore thought not only to have been free from blame, but also merit
commendation. yet (quoth he) seeing my expectation fails me, I submit my
self to the censure of the Constable and Marshals of France. I also will
endure the judgment of Courtney himself and all other men of Arms in the
kingdoms of France and England. All which excuses and submissions
notwithstanding, he was committed to prison and his goods confiscate, til at
the humble and earnest suit of Mounsieur de Coucy, the Duke of Burbon, the
Earl of S. Paul, and the Englishman (to whom he had done wrong) he was
restored to liberty. Then said the Constable, Do thou think ( Mounsieur de
Clary) to have done well or honored the French nation by taking Arms against
Courtney, who was recommended unto thee? If ought has been by Courtney spoken
in prejudice of the French Nobility, thou ought have complained thereof to the
king, and then have proceeded by his Majesty's direction. But the matter was
not so handled by thee, which is cause of thy punishment. From henceforth
therefore be more advised, and for thy liberty give thanks unto the duke of
Burbon, Mounsieur de Coucy, and the Earl S. Paul, who have exceedingly
entreated to compass this favor. Such was the end of this military Action.

CHAP. 38.
One other most noble Challenge.
THe strange event of the former conflict between Courtney, Trimolie, and
Clary, moved the Ladies of the French Court to incite Bouciquant, Roy, and S.
Pie, to attempt some new feats of Arms upon the confines of the King of
Englands possessions in Picardy.

This generous motion proceeding from the Ladies, was easily apprehended by the
French Lords and Gentlemen; and chiefly those three aforesaid, being (of all
others) most desirous of same and military glory. The King being made privy to
this intention, commanded those three Gentlemen to frame a form of Challenge
in writing, which should be allowed or reformed, as to his Majesty should be
thought good: which was done accordingly, containing this in effect.

THe great desire we have to know the noble Gentlemen inhabiting near the
kingdom of France, and therewith longing to make trial of their valor in
Arms, have moved us to appear at Ingueluert the 20. of May next, and there
to remain 30. days. We also determine to be accompanied with other noble
Gentlemen lovers of Arms and Honor, there to encounter all comers with
Lances either sharp, blunt, or both: and every man shall be permitted to run
five courses.

We likewise hereby give you to understand, that such order is taken, as every
one of us shall have his shield, and Empreaze hanging on the outside of the
Pauilion: to the end if any of you desire to run, then the day before you may
with a wandor such a Lance as you intend to run with, touch the shield. And
who so meanetb to try his fortume both with blunt and sharp, must touch the
shield with either, and signify his name to him that has our said shields in
keeping.

It is moreover ordered, that every Defendor may bring with him one other
Gentleman in lieu of a Padrin, to encounter us both, or single, as it shall
please them. Wherewith we pray and desire all noble and worthy Gentlemen (of
what Nation soever) to believe, that no pride or malice has moved us to this
enterprise, but rather an earnest desire to see and know all such noble
Gentlemen, as are willing to make proof of their virtue and valor, without
fraud or couin. In witness whereof every one of us have signed these Letters
with our seals and Empreaze. Written and dated at Montepessolane the 20. of
November 1389.

Subscribed. Boucequaut. Roy. S. Pie.


THese Letters showed to the King, were imparted to his Counsel: who
considering their tenor, deemed them to be presumptuous (chiefly in respect the
place appointed was near unto Calis: which happily might call into question the
truce taken for three years.) Whereupon some of the most ancient Counselors,
thought it unmeet to permit the Challenge. But others perceiving the Kings
inclination, did allow thereof, because the words of challenge, were modest and
reasonable.

The matter thus debated in Counsel, the King called into his chamber all the
three Challengers, to whom he said thus, Bouciquaut, Roy, and you S. Pie,
behave your selves well, and with respect both to private and public
comeliness, perform what you have in hand. As for charge, spare not, for of
our bounty we will bestow upon you ten thousand Florins, to be discreetly spent
to your own honor. Then after most humble thanks given unto his Majesty,
they determined to send the proclamation of their Challenge into diverse
countries, but chiefly into England.

The proclamation being in all places published, every courageous Lord and
Gentleman put himself in readiness: and first of all the English, being
persuaded, that in respect they were nearest, it behooued them to appear
soonest. Therefore before all others, these Englishmen determined to make
proof of their fortune. John Holland. The Earl of Huntingdon. John Courtney.
John Goulonfee. John Russell. Thomas Scrope. William Clifton. William Clinton.
William Tailboys. Godfrey Seten. William Hacklet. John Dabridgcourt. Henry
Bewmount and others, to the number of one hundredth or more,
went into France to show their virtue in that Challenge. Besides them also
many others did pass the seas, to see what should be done.

The first Englishman that passed the Sea, was John Holland brother to the King
of England, having in his train Noblemen and Gentlemen of note, about 60. who
were all lodged within the town of Calis.

The Challengers then having prepared themselves, arrived at Bullaine, in the
beginning of May, and were lodged in the Abbey where they were informed of the
excellent furniture which the English had brought; Whereat they rejoiced and
made the more have to their business. Then they caused there green Pauilions
to be set up, between Calis and Bullen.

At the door of every Pauilion, a shield was hanged, which any man (desirous
to fight) might at his pleasure touch.

The order of this Triumph was thus.
THe twenty and one day of May, the Challengers appeared at the place ready
armed and mounted.

Shortly after the English men came from Callis, some to try their fortune, and
other to behold.

First of al John Holland with his Lance touched the Shield of Bouciquaut, and
forthwith he came out of his Pauilion, and mounted on horseback. which done,
the one charged the other, without more hurt, then that the English Lords shield
was pierced through.

The second course was also without harm: And the English man preparing for a
third course, Bouciquaut denied to do more that day; which the English Lord
hearing, turned himself to the shield of S. Pie and touched it.

Then presently he came forth courageously, but the first course proved foul,
for that the horses kept not their right path. Notwithstanding Holland disarmed
the head of S. Pie.

The second course was performed better, and the lance both of the one and the
other broken upon the Shields.

At the third course, both their Headpieces were stricken off, and all the
lookers on might see their faces. Nevertheless the Lord Holland desired that
for his mistress sake he might break one Lance more. Which courageous offer
both French and English commended.

Next to these, Roy and the English man called Earl Marshall charged one the
other, with much commendation.

The third courses were performed by Bouciquaut and the Lord Clifford, cousin
to the Lord Shandois, a man expert in Arms and of great fame.

The fourth English man that ran, was Henry Bewmount, a Knight of good
reputation.

The seventh encounter was between S. Pie and the same Bewmount.

The eight encounter was between Roy and Peter Courtney.

The ninth encounter was between Bouciquaut and Courtney.

The tenth between S. Pie and Courtney, who had touched all their shieldes.

The next encounter was allotted to Goulowfer and Roy.

The next courses were between S. Pie and John Russell.

The next was between Bouciquaut and Peter Scrope, a young Gentleman of great
courage, but of no long practice in Arms: yet was his encounter so violent, as
forced Bouciquaut to bleed at the ears, and retire to his pauilion all that
day.

But Scrope not contented with the honor of his success against Bouciquaut
touched the shield of S. Pie and presently the one encountered the other. But at
the second course (by misfortune) the English Knight fell down, and though
(with some help) he recovered his horse, yet ran he no more that day. Such
was the success of the first days Iusting.

The second meeting.
THe second day Gulielmus Clysetonius, an English Knight, expert in Arms,
encountered Bouciquaut, with equal fortune. The next encounter was between the
L. Clinetonius and S. Pie, either of them performing his part well.

The third encounter was between William Stamartius cousin to the Earl of
Huntingdon, and Raynol Roy, who seemed to deserve best.

The 4. encounter was between Lancaster and Bouciquaut with small advantage.

The 5. encounter was between S. Pie and Taylbois a Gentleman very young.
Either of them was disarmed on the head, and so returned to their Pauilions.

The 6. encounter was between Godfrey Seten and Roy: at the first course
Lances being strong, their horses were forced to pauze. At the second (for the
same reason) the one and the other let fall their Lances, without breaking. At
their third course the one and the other was hurt: so as Roy was sore bruzed, and
Seten pierced into the shoulder. Which wound he endured with great patience,
and without show of grief, suff^ed the Surgeon to draw back the Lance,
and search the wound, which courage was highly praised.

The 7. encounter was between an English man called Blanquetius and S. Pie.

The 8. encounter was between Thomalinus Messidonius and Bouciquaut. This
English man was richly armed, and at the first course pierced through the
shield of Bouciquaut: But at the third course he was unhorsed.

The 9. encounter was between Nauartonius and Bouciquaut with equal fortune.

The 10 encounter was between Sequaquetonius an English Knight and Roy. This
Knight was of experience in Arms, and at the first course wel-neere unhorsed
his adversary. But at the last meeting the French Taint was so strong, as the
Englishman was wel-neere borne down: and so they departed. Thus ended the
second days Triumph.

Note here that the French King (being disguised) was present at all these
exercises.

The third meeting.
THe third day likewise these noble Knights both English and French appeared.
The weather was fair, calm, and fit for Military action. The first courses
were performed between John Savage and Roy: who at the first encountered so
furiously, as both the one and the other was almost forced to fall from his
horse. The rest of their courses were honorable.

The second encounter was between Gulielmus Basqueneus cousin to the Earl
Marshall, and Bouciquaut. At the third course they were both disarmed on the
head.

The third encounter was between an English Knight called Scot, and S. Pie.
Their first course was fair on both sides, and so was the second. But at the
third course the French Knight lost his headpeece, and the English Knight
unhorsed.

The fourth encounter was between Barnard Stapleton, and s. Pie, and either of
them at the third course lost his headpeece.

The fifth encounter was between John Arundel and Roy. This English Knight was
reputed for horsemanship, dancing, and singing, excellent. The one and the
other of them performed their courses with commendation.

The sixth encounter was between Nicolas Stoner and Bouciquaut, who in their
third course lost both their headpeeces, and so bare headed, went away.

The seventh encounter was between John Marshal and Bouciquaut, who was
somewhat hurt with a splitter, and the other disarmed of his headpiece.

The eighth encounter was between John Clifton and Roy, with equal fortune.

The ninth encounter was between Roger Lea and S. Pie, either of them being
disarmed on the head, departed.

The tenth encounter was between Aubrigcourt and Roy. This Aubrigcourt was not
borne in England, but brought up in the Court of the most noble King Edward. At
their first course they were both violently stricken on the head, and in the
next on the breast, and so they parted. But Aubrigcourt not so contented,
challenged Bouciquaut: who answered him two courses with equal fortune, and
the third course they were both disarmed on the head. Such was the success of
the third days meeting.

The fourth meeting.
ON Thursday (which was the last) these noble Knights returned to the field,
where Godfrey Eustace made the first encounter against Bouciquaut, and were
both hurt on the head.

The next encounter was between Alanus Burgius and S. Pie, with being both
disarmed on the head.

The next encounter was between Johannes Storpius and Bouciquaut, in which
courses the English man's horse was said to fall down.

The next encounter was between Bouciquaut and an English Knight called
Hercourt, belonging to the Queen of England, but not borne in England. At the
first course Bouciquaut missed, and the English Knight brake cross, which is
an error in Arms: and thereupon much disputation arose between the French
and English. For the French affirmed, that Hercourt by law of Arms, had
forfeited his Horse and Arms: but at request of the company, that fault was
remitted, and he permitted to run one course more against Roy, who had not
run that day, and therefore willingly consented. The courses between these
Knights were exceeding violent, but the Englishman being wearied was utterly
thrown from his horse, and as a dead man lay flat on the ground: but
afterward he revived lamenting that disgrace.

The fifth encounter was between Robert Scrope and S. Pie, who after three
courses gave over, without loss or gain.

The sixth encounter was between John Morley and Reginaldus Roy: for the first
blow was so violent, as forced their horses to stand still in the place of
meeting.

The seventh encounter was between Johannes Moutonius and Bouciquaut: both of
them at the first meeting had their shields pierced, and after were disarmed on
the head.

The eight encounter was between Iaqueminus Stropius and S. Pie. At the first
course both their horses went out. At the second they brake both on the head.
At the third, both their Lances fell from them: and at the last the Englishman
pierced through the Adversaries shield, but was himself dismounted.

The ninth encounter was between Guilielmus Masqueleus and Bouciquaut. These
Knights with equal courage and skill performed well their courses.

The last encounter was between Nicolas Lea and S. Pie: the one and the other
of them brake their Lances well, till at the last they were both disarmed on
the head.

The Challenge thus ended, all the troop of English Knights having attended
that business full four days, thanked the French Knights for being Authors of
so honorable a triumph. On the other side the French much thanked the English
for their company: and the King who was there secretly, returned home, where
he informed the Queen what honor had been done to all Ladies.

CHAP. 39.
The triumphant Interuiew of the Kings of England and France. An. 1519.
THese most excellent Princes having occasion of conference, appointed a
meeting in Picardie. The day drawing near, the king of England passed the seas
and arrived at Calice: from whence (having reposed himself) he removed to
Guynes. The French King likewise being come lodged at Ardes.

Between the one and the other of those towns (as it were in the midway) a
place of meeting was appointed.

Thither went the one and the other of those Kings most royally mounted, and
followed with so great magnificence, as in an hundred years before the like
sight had not been seen in Christendom.

Some writers have in vain labored to set down the royalty and exceeding
pomp of those Courts, which might be seen, but not expressed.

At the place of meeting, two Pauilions were erected, the one for the French
king, the other for the King of England.

These Princes being come, embraced one the other: and that done, they went
together into one Pauilion.

The French King was accompanied with his Lord Admiral, called Boniuett, his
Chancellor, and some few other Counselors.

The King of England had with him the Cardinal of York, the Duke of
Norffolke, and the Duke of Suffolk.

Then having set in counsel, and returned to their Pauilions, they bethought
them of entertainment, sports and princely Complements.

For which purpose, commandment was given, that a Tilt should be erected:
where Iusts, Tournaments and other triumphall exercises, continued about
fifteen days: for so long those Princes remained there.

One day the King of England conuited the French King, and feasted him in his
Pauilion, which was a building of wood, containing four rooms, exceeding
large, and so richly furnished, as happily the like had not been seen in
Christendom.

That Frame was purposely made in England, and after the feast, taken down to
be returned.

One other day the French King feasted the King of England in his Pauilion,
wherein hanged a cloth of Estate marvelous large, and so rich as cannot be
expressed.

The ropes belonging to that Pauilion were make of yellowe silk and gold,
wreathed together.

The Kings being ready to dine, there happened so great a storm of wind, as
fearing the Pauilion could not stand, they removed from thence to the place
where the Fortress is now; and bears the name of that banquet.

The apparel, Jewels and other Ornaments of pomp, used by Princes, Lords and
Gentlemen awaiting on those Kings, cannot be esteemed: much less expressed:
for, as mine Author says, some carried on their backs the prise of whole
woods, others the weight of ten thousand sheep, and some the worth of a great
Lordship.

CHAP. 40.
A Triumph celebrated in France. Anno 1559.
WHen the marriage between the King of Spain and Elizabeth, eldest daughter of
Henry the French King, was concluded: in sign of congratulation and joy, a
royal Triumph was proclaimed and prepared at Paris: whereunto the Nobility of
all France, Spain, and the Low countries repaired: which done, a solemn
Just, and other military sports were taken in hand, wherein the King in his
own person, the Duke of Ferrara, the Duke of Gwyze, and the Duke of Nemors
were Challengers.

The place for performance of that Action was appointed in the street of S.
Anthony in Paris, and there a Tilt with every furniture fit for such a feast,
was prepared.

To that place (as at like occasions it happens) resorted an infinite number
of people to behold: for whom scaffolds and stages were ready to receive them;
and those places not capable of so excessive a number, many of the people
bestowed themselves on the sides and roofes of the houses.

The first courses were performed by the French King, to his great glory: the
rest of the Challengers also very honorably did the like. Then the Lords and
Counselors besought the King that in respect the weather was exceeding hot,
his Majesty would be pleased to moderate his motion, and for that day cease
from running: adding this persuasion, that it was unfit a King should in such
disports hazard his person; which persuasion for the present prevailed. But his
Majesty (as it were drawn on by fatal force) would in any wise the 3. day
return to the Tilt, either to make further trial of his valor, or thereby
(as some supposed) to honor his daughter, to the uttermost of his power.

That day his Majesty in all princely pomp appeared: his person and horse
also being more richly furnished then any pen can express.

The first courses his Majesty performed fortunately, with marvelous applause
of the beholders.

At the fourth course, by marvelous misaduenture, he became hurt with a
splinter of the adversaries Lance, which pierced his eye so deep, as thereby
his brain was much bruised. Thus was the Nuptial feast disturbed, and joy
converted to sorrow. Such is the state of worldly things, gladness is ever
followed with sadness, and pleasure accompanied with pain.

The rest of the troop there ready to run, were with that accident
marueilously amazed, and not knowing what to do, every man let f^ll his Lance,
and cursed all such triumphs.

Some preassed to carry his person home, and others (as touched to the heart)
shut up their eyes from seeing a spectacle so lamentable.

The Ladies likewise and Gentlewomen of the Court, turned their faces from
beholding, and closed up their eyes with tears. To conclude, the whole number
of Courtiers were stricken with sorrow not explicable.

The Citizens likewise, and generally all the subjects of that kingdom, were
perplexed, to see the tragical event of that disastrous triumph: which was
intended to congratulate a new peace and an honorable alliance.

The form and face of the city thus converted from exceeding joy, to
unspeakable sorrow; some held up their hands to heaven, others made haste to
the Churches, and every one with abundance of sighs and sobs, cried out,
beseeching God to grant the King recovery: as if every man's well doing had
thereon depended.

How unpleasing these news were to the King of Spain, every one can conceive.

Then the Physicians and Chirurgions, not only of France, but of the Low
countries also came thither to show their skill, using all Art and endeavor that
might be: but the splinters of the Lance had pierced the Kings eye so deep, as
the tenderness of the place could not suffer it to be taken out, nor seen,
(the brain also being pierced) no mean there was to cure the wound. The King
therefore tormented with extreme pain, fell into a burning Fever, whereof in
the end of eleven days he died In all which time he did never weep, or speak
any word that might be imputed to pusillanimity; but most magnanimously took
leave of life: Only thus he said, that seeing he was destined to die in Arms,
he would have been much better contented, to have lost his life in the field,
then in those domestical pastimes. Let this accident therefore remain an
example to all princes never to adventure their own persons unnecessarily,
considering their only lives is the welfare of infinite others.

CHAP. 41.
A Military triumph at Brussels, Anno 1549.
A Fained fortress, with Trenches, Baracadoes, and other furniture of defense
was erected. On the root whereof a sword of gold was set, adorned with precious
stones.

This Castle was environed with water, like to an Island: and impossible it was
to mount unto the walls, but by degrees and stairs exceeding steep.

This yland was called Insula Fortunae, which is the isle of Fortune: others
named it Insula periculosa: the perilous yland.

Upon the water which environed the Castle, a ship of gold did always ride at
Anchor, with sails of red silk and gold. Neither was any thing else wanting to
illustrate the beauty thereof.

On the first gate was painted a roaring Lion of gold, which picture shined
very gloriously: and near to it was a posterne gate, the name whereof was
Porta terroris: which is the gate of terror.

Between the water and the gate was a large Court: and there hanged a large
white Shield, and therein was painted a black Eagle.

Near to that place was a Turret, whereinto no man could come, until he had
passed many doors: it was called Transitus periculosus, which is, the perilous
passage.

Not far from thence was a Pillar of no great height, yet broad and square,
and thereon was painted a red Griffin, under which sign were graued the Laws
of that yland in three tongues.

The first passage to the Castle was kept by the Knight of the red Griffin:
who was indeed the Earl Aringberg.

The second passage was kept by the Knight of the black Egle: that was the
Earl Hoochstrat.

The third passage next the yland, was kept by the Knight of the golden Lion:
which was the Earl of Egmond.

Within this Castle, called Arxtenebrosa; remained the L. Corbaron governor
to the Prince Aurasina, who had before won it by art Magic: and now by
converting the letters of his name backward, named himself Norabroc.

Before every of the foresaid gates, a magnificent Pauilion was erected, and
therein the Earls with their troops attended their enemies.

Then was there a petition presented to the Emperor, against Norabroc the
Magician, for that he by his devilish art and force of the enchanted sword,
had surprised many noble personages and worthy Knights, now prisoners in the
Castle of darkness.

And for so much as it has been prophesied, that the glorious expugnation of
this Castle is destined only to the most virtuous and fortunate Prince living
under the sun (who can be no other then the excellent Prince of Spain) son
to the most invincible Emperor Charles) they humbly desired, that he with his
Knights might attempt the enterprise.

The Emperors license obtained, the three Knights within the dark Castle,
came forth to encounter all those that durst assail them.

The first that appeared, called himself the Dark Knight, followed with one
only servant to carry his lance. His armor was black, and his apparel
course: Of the same color was the attire of his servant, and the furniture of
his horse. But the assault no sooner was made, but he retired into the Castle.
Norabroc had ever six Gentlemen apparelled in red and yellow, ready to
receive such Knights as went out or in.

Those six were attired after the Hungarian fashion, wearing on their heads
Turbants.

These men had charge of the bridge, to let in every Knight that would fight.
This Dark Knight was the Lord Chaumont: and he that encountered him was the
Knight of the red Griffin, otherwise called the Earl of Arenberg. His armor
was all gilded, and over it he ware an arming coat of silver cloth, very
rich. In his crest he also ware feathers white and vermilion.

The Dark Knight thus retired to the Castle, three other Knights appeared in
coats of black cloth of gold, and in their crests they ware feathers of many
colors. Before them rode a young man apparelled like to a woman, after the
most anticke fashion.

That woman was mounted upon a fish, and by her a footman did run. She
complained and bitterly cursed one, by whom she had been injured.

Then the Knights who accompanied her, promised to be revenged, and presently
determined to assault the Island.

The first of these three Knights bearing many colors, was Yuan Cunia the
Spaniard: who at the second course, hurt the Earl Arenberg very sore; and
having lost the use of one finger on his right hand, he ran no more. In his
place therefore succeeded, a Knight unknown, wearing the sign of an horn.
Then came the Earl Hochstrate in white silver: wearing on his breast a rose.
And although he performed his part well, yet was he forced to dismount.

The Earl Arenberg being wounded, in his place one other of three knights
errant, did come: who was the Lord Hubermunt of the Emperors Chamber.

The third Knight was Peter Ernest Earl Mansfield, calling himself Knight of
the white Moyle. Against him came the Knight of the golden Lion: upon whom the
Earl Mansfield brake three swords: but the fourth sword by misaduenture fell
out of his hand, and thereby he forced to become prisoner. And this was the end
of that days conflict.

The next day soon after dinner, out came the Lord Pelous of Burgundy called
the Knight of the green Shield: he and his horse were furnished with gold and
green. The first three encounters he made against the Lord Thourlo, were to
good purpose: but being come to the Sword, it was by force wrested from him,
and he carried to prison.

Then followed Rodorigo Bassano a Spaniard, called Pedro Vermandesio, who
within three encounters was taken.

The Lo. Courlan a Burgundian, called Knight of the three Stars, all in
green, desiring to be revenged, was also made prisoner.

The next day Peter Ernestus Earl Mansfield desired again to try his fortune,
calling himself the feathered Knight. But at the second encounter his
adversaries Lance brake the sight of his headpeece, and cut his nose,
wherewith he fell down dead: yet because the armor was good and the violence
of the blow broken, he recovered.

After Mansfield, followed the L. Noyel a Fleming: who after a little fight
before the tower of Terror, where he fought with great courage, was forced to
yield.

Then Iacomo di Leyua a Spaniard (called the Indian Knight) attired in black,
after the second course yielded himself.

Next to the Spaniard entered two Knights in red cloth of Tissue, richly
embrodered with gold: they called themselves Knights of Hungary. The one was
the Prince of Ascoli, who at the first encounter yielded himself: neither had
Giacobo a Cunia (called also Gonartus a Stella tenebrosa) better fortune: for
at the first course he was taken.

The first that entered the Island by force, was John Guixada surnamed Gulielmus
Superbus: He, apparelled in black tissue embrodered about with gold, by force
of Arms brake into all the passages; and then by aid of the Lord Bossuuio
master of the Emperors stable, was received into a Bark, having sails of
white and red silk. So being landed in the I Will, he attempted to win the
precious sword. And though his attempt proved vain, yet in approbation of his
valor, the Queen did give him a crown.

Next to him his brother, with equal fortune, entered the Island: men called him
John Lodouic Guixada, who for his hardy enterprise received also a garland.

The like success had the Duke of Arscot his brother, who with the Marquess
of Cieura (called Knight of the red Shield, whereon were painted three Mores
heads) entered the I Will. Likewise Ferdinando della Zerda a Spaniard (called
fortunes Knight) having slain the guard, was also crowned.

The next day also Monsieur de Chaumont, called the sudden Knight, and one
other Knight named Florestan which was the Lord Valous, both Flemings, yielded
their charges.

The fifth man that entered the I Will, was Lodouico Zapatta a Spaniard: his
garments were of yellow cloth of gold. But John Zeuendio a Spaniard also,
called the sorrowful Knight, was forced in the first straight to alight, and
was presently led into the dark fortress. The like fortune had Monsieur de
Moncean named Knight of the Mistie mountain.

The sixth that entered the I Will was the Earl of Megen, otherwise the Knight of
the Sun. His apparel was black cloth of gold. The like good hap was like to
befall unto Monsieur Champagni, but his horse encountering an enemy at the
chocke, amazed him so much as he fell down and was taken prisoner.

The seventh garland Gaspero Roblesio a Spaniard gained. He being called Knight
of the Moon, recovered the second passage, complaining unto the Earl of
Egmont, that the Judges without desert had given honor to Monsieur de Truilier
a Frenchman.

But Monsieur Querenaut a Knight errant, encountering Monsieur Preux called
Knight of the Rose, took him prisoner. Then Garna ab Ayala a Spaniard, called
the Knight of Death, all in black poudered white, came forth to fight. Before
^im the Queens Musicians went singing a funeral tune; which prognosticated
his misaduenture: for at the first encounter he was taken.

Then appeared one called Knight of the Bas^lisco, being indeed Monsieur
Myngoual, who in a fight on foot gained great honor: but at his first
encounter on horseback he became prisoner.

The eight garland Monsieur de Mally a Flemish Gentleman, and a follower of the
Duke of Arscot, obtained. That Knight was bravely furnished in white silver,
and called himself the furious Knight.

Last of all, the prince of Spain with his Band of Knights appeared: their
attire was vermilion cloth of gold, wrought with flowers of silver, and guarded
about with lace of gold. The Caparisons of their horses were of the same. Also
the Saddles, the Petrels, Croopers, and Girthes were of vermilion silk, mixed
with gold; so was every man's scaberd, and all the favors in their Creasts were
made of white and vermilion red. The chief Knight of the princes company was
the Marquis of Pescara, son to the Marquess of Guasta in Italy, who called
himself Knight Anonius; a beardlesse young man, yet so valorous, as in that
fight he received a crown.

Next to him was the Baron, Noirquerk, a Fleming, called Knight of the the
Rose: a gallant Gentleman, yet at the first encounter taken prisoner.

The third was the Marquess of Monte, Knight of the Sky, because his Armor
was of that color: He passed the Strait, but further he could not go.

The fourth was the Prince of Piemount and Duke of Sauoy, whose virtue merited
a garland, but his sword could not gain more ground, but only to enter the
Island.

The fifth was the Prince of Spain, who brake his two first Lances with great
courage: and the third was torn with so great violence, as thereof ten pieces
were seen to lie on the ground.

These courses furiously performed, he drew forth his sword, and with
marvelous speed pierced further into the Island: till in the end of three
assaults, he gained the place where the fatal sword was: whereof having laid
hold, he flourished over his head, and forthwith the misty clouds of darkness
vanished: so, as every man might see all places of the Castle.

The darkness of the fortress thus driven away, the Prince with his enchanted
sword touched the walls: and immediately they fell down.

The castle thus demolished, the Inchanter Norabroc, with a Turkish cap on his
head, came forth: and kneeling on his knees, desired the Princes pardon.
Therewith also he set at liberty all the knights whom he held in prison, and
they being free, in triumphant wise fo^lowed the Prince to his Court.

CHAP. 42.
The inauguration of Carolus Magnus King of Italy, Anno 773.
WHen Desiderio King of the Lombards was taken prisoner, and the people of
Lombardie yielded to Charles, he proclaimed himself King of all Italy: which
title by law of Arms he justly claimed to be his. The same was also by the
decree of Pope Gregory confirmed. Then was he also by the Bishop of Milan
crowned at Modena. The crown he recei^ed, was of iron: for of that metal he
commanded it should be made, enioyning all his successors to do the like.

The order and ceremonies of that coronation, remains recorded in the Rota at
Rome: and is to this day observed at the Inauguration of all Emperors, when
they are elected King of Romans.

The morning when this Charles was to be crowned, certain Bishops were sent to
conduct him from his chamber unto the Church, and being come thither he was
brought before the high Altar.

Then the Archbishop, after he had said certain prayers, turned himself to
the people, and asked them whether they did consent to receive that Prince for
their King, and whether they determined faithfully to obey his laws and
commandments.

So soon then as the people had pronounced their consent, the Bishop with holy
oil anointed the Kings head, his breast, and shoulders: therewith praying God
to bless him, and grant him good success in Arms, with an happy succession
of children.

These Ceremonies being ended, the Archbishop delivered into the Kings hand a
sword, and ornified him with a bracelet, a ring and a scepter. Also upon his
head he set the crown aforesaid. All those things being done, he kissed him (as
a sign of peace) and so departed from the King.

CHAP. 43.
The Inauguration of Carolus Magnus, being made Emperor, Anno 800.
WHen the people inhabiting the confines of Beneuento had much molested that
Country, and were subdued by Vinigesius the son of Charles then Duke of
Spoleto: Leo the Bishop of Rome in the time of prayers, when all the people
were assembled, the Barons of Rome also present, did consecrate and anoint
Charles, before the Altar Basilica, where he also received the Ensigns of the
Empire. From thence he was conducted to the chief Altar of the Temple, and
there anointed, when he had reigned in France 33 years: before which time, no
Emperor in three hundred and thirty years, had been seen in Italy. This
order of coronation has ever since been observed.

At every such coronation, the people with one voice did cry: Carolo Augusto,
Magno, and Pacifico vita and victoria.

The same time also Pypin his son was anointed, and by solemn decree of the
Pope declared King of Italy.

CHAP. 44.
The Inauguration of Pope Gregory. x.
IN the year 1268. Pope Clement the fourth died at Viterbo. After whose death
the Papacy (by discord of Cardinals) was void two years, and nine months.

The Cardinals then present in Court, were seventeen, whose disconformitie
continued the seat void almost three years: yet did they assemble often, but
every one ambitiously affecting the Papacy for himself, nothing could be
concluded: for in those days the Cardinals were not shut up in the conclaue,
(as since has been the use) but every one went at liberty and at his
pleasure.

The creation of the Pope thus deferred, Phillip the Frence King, and Charles
king of Sicill came unto Viterbo, to solicit the election: yet they prevailed
not.

One day, these Kings being present in the Conclaue, the Cardinal of Porto
seeing the frowardness of the other Cardinals, who seemed to pray aid of the
holy Ghost in that action, said unto them: My Lords, let us until the roof of
this chamber, for it seems the holy Ghost cannot enter, if the house be still
covered. And so soon as he heard that Gregory was pronounced Pope, he framed
these verses of that election, viz.

Papatus munus tulit Archidiaconus vnus,
Quem patrem patrum fecit discordia fratrum.
This Pope before his ascension was called Theobaldus, an Archdeacon, no
Cardinal: being also, at that time, beyond the sea at Ptolemaida in Syria:
whether he was gone with Edward the King of Englands eldest son. From thence
they intended (among other pilgrims) to go unto Jerusalem. But hearing he was
pronounced Pope, returned from Syria into Italy: and being come to Viterbo he
received the Ensigns of Papacy. From thence he passed to Rome, and was there
crowned by the name of Gregory the tenth. He lived Pope six years, six
months, and ten days: and finding fault with some orders of the Church,
chiefly in electing the Pope, he framed diverse Canons of which these are part.

First that the assembly of Cardinals for choice of every new Pope, should be
at a place fit for the purpose, and where the Pope defunct, with his Court, did
die. But if the death hapened in any village or small town, then the next
city to be the place of election.

That no election of any new Pope should be, till after ten days that the
other Pope departed, to the end the Cardinals absent might appear.

That no Cardinal in his absence should be permitted to have any suffrage or
voice in the conclaue.

That every Cardinal absent, and every other person of any condition, should be
capable of the Papacy.

That no Cardinal entered into the Conclaue, should go out, before the new Pope
were created.

That no Cardinal or other person should ambitiously endeavor to compass the
Papacy by money or other corruption, upon peril of the Popes curse.

CHAP. 45.
The Inauguration of Henry the 4. King of England 1399.
THis King, called before Duke of Lancaster, came first to Westminster, and
from thence he went unto the Tower of London, accompanied with the Nobility
and the rest of his Court: there he made nine Knights of the Bath, and 46.
other Knights.

The next day after dinner, he returned to Westminster in great pomp: he
himself riding through London, kept his head bare: and about his neck he ware
the collar appertaining to the Order of France.

Before the King, went the Prince his son, six Dukes, six Earls, and
eighteen Barons, besides other Lords, Knights, Esquiers, and Gentlemen to the
number of 900. or thereabout.

By the way awaited the Lord Mayor with his brethren, and officers of the City.
Also the companies of every Hall in their Liueries, which number amounted to
six hundred.

All the streets where the King passed, were hanged with cloth of gold,
silver, or rich Arras.

That day and the next, all the conduits were full of wine, some Claret, and
some White.

The night before the Coronation, the King washed his body: and the next
morning prayed, in the presence of three Prelates.

The next morning, the Clergy in great numbers attended the King to the Temple
of Westminster: and from thence all the Lords and Knights of the Order in their
robes awaited upon his Majesty to the Palace, who all that way marched under
the Canopy of State.

On either hand of the King a sword was carried: the one represented the
Ecclesiastical, the other Political jurisdiction.

The Ecclesiastical sword was borne by the Prince of Wales the Kings son:
the sword of Justice, Henry Percie Earl of Northumberland and Constable of
England, did bear: which office was lately taken from the Earl of Rutland and
given to him. The scepter was carried by the Earl of Westmerland Marshall of
England.

In this order, and thus accompanied, the King came into the Church, where he
found a place of State prepared in the mids: there he set himself down, being
furnished with all his rich and royal ornaments, the crown excepted.

The Archbishop of Canterbury preached, and showed the Kings person unto the
people, saying, Behold him here that is to reign over you, for so God has
ordained: Will you (quoth he) consent he shall be crowned your King? whereunto
they answered, Yea: and holding up their hands, offered to be sworn.

Then the King went down from his seat, and kneeled before the high Altar,
where two Archbishops and ten Bishops did take off his royal garments, and
annoint him in the presence of all the multitude: viz. on the crown of his
head, on the breast, on the shoulders, on the palms of his hands: which done,
they set his cap upon his head.

Then the King put upon him a garment like unto a Deacon, and girt the same, as
Prelates use to do. Then they buckled upon one of his feet a Spur, and drew
forth the sword of Justice, which they delivered into the Kings hand, and he
put it up into the sheath: when it was put up, the Archbishop of Canterbury
girt it unto his side.

Then was the Crown of S. Edward brought thither, and by that Archbishop set
upon the Kings head.

All these ceremonies, and Divine Service finished, the King with the same
pomp he came to the Church, returned to the Palace: in the mids whereof was a
fountain which flowed with wine, white and red.

At dinner, the King did sit at the first table: at the second sat the five
chief Peers of the kingdom: at the third, the Mayor and Aldermen: at the
fourth, the nine new made Knights: at the fifh, the Knights and Gentlemen of
the Kings house.

So long as the King did sit, the Prince of Wales stood on his right hand,
holding the Ecclesiastical sword: and on the left hand stood the Constable of
England, shaking the sword of Justice: under them stood the Marshall holding
the Scepter.

At the Kings table, besides the King, two Archbishops and three other Bishops
did sit.

In the dinner time a Knight well mounted and armed at all pieces, came into
the Hall: and before him rode an other horseman, that carried his Lance; his
name was Dymmock.

This Champion having his sword drawn, and a Mace also ready, delivered unto
the king a scroule of paper: wherein was contained; that if any Gentleman would
deny that Henry there present, were not the lawful King of England, he was
ready by Arms to maintain it, where and when the King should command.

This Cartell was delivered to a King of Arms, and by the Kings commandment
proclaimed in the palace, and in six places of the City: but no man found to
say the contrary: and so the ceremony of this Coronation ended.

CHAP. 46.
The Inauguration of Charles the French King, at Rhemes, 1380.
THis Charles the 6. King of France of that name, being twelve years old, was
crowned in the presence of the Dukes of Anioy, Auuernia, Burgundy, Burbon,
Brabant, Berry and Lorayn: the Earl of Piedmont, the Earl of Marcury the
Earl Eu, and William Lord of Namur being present: the Earl of Flanders and
Bloys sent their deputies.

The King entered the city of Rhemes, with a marvelous troop of Lords and
Gentlemen: having before them thirty trumpets sounding.

His Majesty alighted at our Lady Church: and thither resorted unto him his
cosins of Albert, Navarre, Barry, Harecourt, and other young Princes and Lords
of the blood, whom the next day he dubbed Knights.

On Sunday after, the King went unto the Church, which was most sumptuously
prepared. There the Bishop crowned his Majesty, and anointed him with that
oil wherewith Saint Remigius had anointed Clodoueus the first Christian King
of France.

That Oil was miraculously (as is reported) sent from heaven by an Angel,
purposely to anoint Clodoueus. And being preserved ever since a glass,
although all the kings have been therewith anointed, yet is the quantity thereof
no whit decreased.

The King being come before the high Altar, did honor all the young men
aforesaid, with Knighthood: and that done he kneeled upon rich foot Carpets
that were there spread: at his feet the young Princes (newly made Knights) did
sit: and Oliver Clisson, newly also advanced to be Constable of the kingdom,
performed his office; and there (amids the nobility) with all pomp possible,
the King was crowned.

Then to the end that all men might have cause to rejoice, the King was pleased
to remit and forgive all taxations, subsidies and impositions by what name
soever, lately invented.

The Coronation finished, his Majesty returned to the palace, where his table
was prepared, and hereat (besides the King) did sit the Dukes, his uncles, viz.
the Duke of Brabant, Anioy, Auuernia, Burgundy, and Burbon, and on his right
hand sat the Archbishop of Rhemes with other Lords of the Spiritualty.

Touching meaner Lords of the kingdom, they shifted for place where it could
be found.

The Admirals Coucy, Clisson, and Tremoly had their tables equally covered with
Carpets of Tissue.

The next day the King dined, according to ancient use: and the charge of the
Inauguration was defrayd by the Citizens of Rhemes.

These ceremonies being consummate with great pomp, triumph, and joy, he
returned to Paris.

CHAP. 47.
At the Inauguration of King Henry the third French King, three notable things
observed.
FIrst when he should have been anointed with the holy oil, there was none
found in the ceremonious Horn, which for many years had been preserved by
miracle as a relike sent from heaven.

Secondly, when in the royal seat the Crown was set upon his head by
certain Bishops, (as is accustomed) he cried out twice, Oh it hurts me.

Thirdly, when he kneeled before the Altar during Mass, the Crown fell from
his head, all which seemed ominous to the beholders, and so it proved both to
himself and others.

CHAP. 48.
The Inauguration of Charles the fifth. Anno 1520.
THis Emperor having given order for his affairs in Belgica, required the
Electors, that they would come to his Inauguration at Aquisgran, where the
plague then happened to be; which moved them to desire, that the celebration
might be elsewhere. But his Majesty at the Citizens suite, (who had prepared
with great cost) resolved not to alter, alleging also that Charles the fourth
his predecessor, had made a law, that the Emperor ought of necessity be
crowned at Aquisgran.

The 21. of October the Archbishop of Mentz, Colein and Treuer appeared.

The Marquess of Brandenburg came after, and the Duke of Saxony being sick,
stayed at Colein.

The next day all these Princes rode to meet the Emperor, and when they came
near unto his person, they alighted; which done, with all reverence the
Archbishop of Mentz (in the name of them all) spoke unto his Majesty, and was
by the mouth of the Cardinal of Salisburg courteously answered.

All those troops so united, proceeded to the City.

Without the gate, the Palatin of the Rheine also did meet them, so were the
Electors companies about one thousand six hundredth; some Lances, and some
Archers.

The Emperors own troop was two thousand, very magnificently furnished.

Thither also came John Duke of Cleue, with 400. men well armed: and much
discord there was between the Cl^uoys and the Saxons, who should preceed. The
like pomp had not been seen in Germany.

On the one side of Caesar rode the Archbishop of Cullein: and on the other was
the Archbishop of Mentz.

Next to them followed the Ambassadors of the King of Bohemia, the Bishops of
Sedun, Saltsburg and Croy, all Cardinals; and with them were the Ambassadors of
all Kings and Princes: saving of the Pope, and the King of England, which was
supposed to be of purpose; lest the deputies of the Germane Princes should
preceed them.

The Emperor being come to Aquisgran, alighted at our Lady Church: and there
(after prayers) he talked particularly with the Electors, who followed him to
his lodging.

One other day they met again in the Temple, where the throng was so great, as
hardly the Guard could make room.

In the mids of the Temple, a great Crown was hanged, and under it carpets
were spread, whereupon Caesar did prostrate himself, till the Archbishop of
Collen had ended certain prayers.

Then the Archbishop of Mentz and Treuer did take him up and led him before our
Ladies altar: where again he fell down upon his face, and after prayers, they
led him to his throne of State.

When these ceremonies were ended, the Bishop of Cullen begun the Mass, and
having said a part thereof, he asked the Emperor (in the Latin tongue) If he
would conserve the Christian faith? defend the Church? do Justice? protect the
Empire? defend widows, fatherless children, and people distressed? Whereunto,
when he had consented, he was led to the Altar: and there with a solemn oath,
confirmed the words he had spoken, and returned to his throne.

After the oath taken, the Bishop of Cullen said other prayers, and then put
oil upon his head, his breast, the bending places of his arms, and the palms
of his hands.

Being thus anointed, the Archbishops of Mentz and Treuer led him into the
Vestry, where they apparelled him as a deacon, and in that habit brought him
forth, and placed him in his throne, where after more prayers, the Archbishop
of Cullen (in presence of the whole Clergy,) delivered into his hand a naked
sword, and recommended to him the Common weal.

Caesar having the sword in his hand, put it into the sheath: which done, they
put upon his finger a Ring, and on his shoulders they cast a Regal cloak.

They also delivered to him a Scepter and a Ball, to represent the form of the
whole world.

Then all the three Bishops laid hand on the Crown, and set it upon the
Emperors head.

When all these things were done, he was again brought unto the Altar, and
there sworn to perform the duty of a good Prince.

That oath taken, the Emperor accompanied with those Bishops, went up higher,
and there sat in a seat of stone. Then the Bishop of Mentz (in the Germane
tongue) spoke alowd, and wished that his Majesty and people to him subject,
might long live in health and happiness. After which words, in sign of
public joy, the Quoristers and instruments of Music made melody.

At all these solemn prayers the Lady Margarita aunt to the Emperor, and
gouernesse of the Low countries was present.

In the end of these complements he received the Sacrament: and made many
Knights, which honor (as mine Auctor says) was anciently the reward of virtue
and approved valor: but now the custom is, that if a King do lightly lay his
sword upon any man's shoulder, that favor alone, without more ceremony or other
merit, shall make him a Knight: which is the cause, that title is given not
only to Gentlemen well borne, but also to Merchants and others, that
ambitiously do seek it.

All these things being done in the Church, the Emperor returned to his
Palace, which was most magnificently prepared. There he dined: and so did the
Electors: every one sitting at a table by himself.

The dinner being ended, and the tables taken away: the Bishop of Treuer took
place right against the Emperor, for so the law of Charlemaine determined.

In ages more ancient, an oxes body filled full of small beasts and fowls, was
roasted, on the day of Caesar's Inauguration, whereof one part was served at his
table, the rest given to the multitude. Two Conduits were likewise made to
run wine all that day.

Dinner being done, the Emperor retired into his chamber, and there he
delivered the seals of the Empire unto the Archbishop of Mentz: and the next
day all the Electors supped with his Majesty.

CHAP. 49.
Ceremonies appertaining to the delivery of Prizes at Iousts and Tournaments.
AT every public triumph before a Prince, it seems the use heretofore has been, that the Prizes of best desert should be given by the hand of the Queen,
notwithstanding it were in the Kings presence: but first a solemn proclamation
to be made by the Heralds, to this effect.

Oyez, oyez, oyez: Be it known to all men by these presents, that by authority
of the most high, most excellent, and most puissant Prince H. by the grace of
God King of England, France, and Ireland, etc. That of those which have Iousted
on the Challengers side, A. B. has deserved the prize, and to him let the same
be given as due, by the censure of the Queen, with the assent of her Ladies,
Gentlewomen, and all others of her Highness Court here present.

Likewise on the party of Defenders, C. D. has Iousted well, E. F. better, but
G. H. best of all: unto whom the prize is judged by the most mighty, most
excellent, and virtuous Princess with consent aforesaid.

This was the form of delivering the prizes, at the most noble and triumphant
Iousts performed by King Henry the eight and Francis the French King, with
their Nobility and Gentlemen of Arms, at their enteruiew in Picardie, where
the Proclamation in form aforesaid was pronounced in English and French.

It seems that in ages more ancient the use was, that the Prince did also
give a letter of attestation to such persons as gained any prize, either in
combat for life or honor: for my self have read such a one granted by a King
of France unto an Italian Gentleman, in these words following: whereunto was
added an honorable ceremony.

NOi Filippo per gratia di Dio Re di Franza, etc. Notifichiammo a tutti coloro,
a quali perueranno queste nostre littere, and che lo haranno a grado and in
piacere, e generalmente a Imperadori, Re, Duchi, Marchesi, Conti, Principi,
Nobili, Caualierie Gentilhuomini, Come hauendo noi celebrato le nostre feste a
honor, a laud, and a gloria di nostro Signor Dio, and ad honor di tutti i
Caualieri che sono venuti a combattere a tutto transito in questo honorato
passo di Armi. Vogliamo che siano riconosciuti coloro che si saranno
valorosamente portati, senza essermai vinti pure vna volta, poi che si debbe
dar l' honor a chi merita, and ch' esenza menda. Pero, per queste ordoniammo,
commandiammo, e sententiammo, che a gloria, a honor, a laud, and a fama del
egregio, e virtuoso Caualiere N. esso sia publicato in tutti quatro i cantoni
delle lizze and sbarre, dai Re d' armi, Araldi, and Passauanti, con trombette,
e Sonatori, con consentimento nostro and delli giudici del campo,
rappresentanti la persona nostra per lo miglio^e di tutti i Caualieri de nostro
regno. Et command^ammo che sia posto sopra un cauallo tuito bianco, e che tutti
coloro che vi si truoueranno, cosi done, come huomini, vengono con esso not
tutti a Piedi, e sia fatta processione generale e N vada sotto il baldacchino
fino alla chiesa. Appresso commandiammo and ordoniammo, che vscendo della
chiesa, si vada per tutte le lizze, and sbarre, e N. ne prenda la possessione,
e per i Re d' Armi gli siano date tutte le ch^aui delle debt lizze in segno di
vittoria. Et ancora commandiammo, che siano celebrate feste che durino quindeci
giorni, a laud and gloria del vittorioso N. E perch ciascuno conosca la real
verita di questo fatto, habbiamo segnata la present carta con color vermiglio,
e suggellata col nostro Real Suggillo. Data nella nostra Citta di Parigi, a 4.
di Luglio, etc.

The same in English.
PHilip by the grace of God King of France, etc. Be it known to all men to
whom these Letters shall come, and to every other person that take delight or
pleasure in Arms; and generally to all Emperors, Kings, Dukes, Marquesses,
Earls, Princes, Barons, and other Gentlemen, That we have celebrated a solemn
triumph, to the honor, praise, and the glory of God, and the commendation of
such as did fight in this honorable action of Arms. And being desirous that
they who have valorously performed their parts without receiving blame or
disgrace, should be known; to the end honor may be given to every one
according to his merit: Therefore we have hereby ordained, commanded, and
judged, for the everlasting honor, praise, and glory of the excellent and
virtuous Gentleman N. his name shall be proclaimed in all the four corners of
the Lists or place of Iousts by the king of Arms, the Heralds, and Pu^seuants,
and by the censure of the Judges of the field, representing our person: whereby
all men may know, that the said N. is the most excellent and most virtuous
Gentleman of Arms in all our kingdom. We moreover command, that he shall
be mounted upon a white horse, and that every person present, as well women as
men, shall with us follow him in procession on foot. And that the said N. shall
ride under a canopy unto the Church. We likewise ordain and command, that in
return from the Church, he shall pass through the place of Iousts, and there
take possession of the keys, which shall be delivered unto him by the king of
Arms in sign of victory. Lastly we command, that the celebration of the
feast shall continue the space of fifteen days, to the commendation and glory
of the victorious N. And in witness of the very troth in this matter, we have
signed these Letters with red ink, and thereunto set our Royal Seal. Dated
in our City of Paris the 4. of July, etc.

CHAP. 50.
Of Iusts and Turneaments, and how the accidents in such exercises are to be
judged in the Kingdom of Naples.
IT is written, how at a triumph in the noble city of Naples, a Gentleman
called the L. Peter Count of Derise, received so furious an encounter by the
Lance of another that ran against him, that therewith he became at one instant
disarmed of his shield, his Curats and Headpeece, so as he being utterly
disarmed, was left on horseback in his doublet only, without other harm. In
requital whereof, the said Peter gave unto the other Gentleman so violent a
blow, as therewith the girthes of the horse were broken, and the man cast
headlong on the ground.

Whereupon a question was moved, which of them had merited most honor, or
rather which of them deserved least reproach? Whereunto was answered absolutely,
that he who fell from the horse, was most dishonored, for (next unto death) to
fall from the horse is most reproachful.

Yet it is less disgrace to fall with the horse, then to fall alone: and
therefore, albeit a man does run never so well, if in the end he does fall
from the horse, he can by no means receive honor for that day, but shall
rather depart with disgrace.

Who so fights on foot at Barrier, or in any other exercise of Arms, is by
the force of his adversary constrained with his hand to touch the ground, shall
thereby lose all commendation.

He that on horseback directs his Lance at the head, is more to be praised,
then he that touches lower. For the higher the Lance hitteth, the greater is
the Runners commendation.

Whosoever runs low is not only unworthy praise, but also meriteth reproach. And
he who so carries his Lance comely and firm, is more to be praised, although
he break not, then he who misgouerneth his horse, or unskillfully handles his
Lance, although he does break.

He that uses to run high, sits steadily and moves least in his course,
accompanying his horse euenly and justly, is in running worthy all commendation.

He that falls with the encounter of the adversary, although (as is before
said) the same be a great disgrace: yet is it more excuseable, then if he
remains on horseback amazed, suffering his horse to wander he wotteth not
whither.

He that with his Lance takes away the rest of the adversaries Armor,
meriteth more honor, then he that takes away any other ornament.

He that breaks his Lance on the pomel or bolster of his adversaries faddle,
deserves worse then he who bears his Lance well without breaking.

He that breaks on the face or other part of the horse, meriteth worse then
he that breaks not at all.

He that hurts an horse, shall not receive honor, although before he has
run well: for he that hurts an horse is in like predicament with him that
falls, who cannot on that day receive any honor.

He is worthy small estimation that cannot govern his own horse, or that
sits loose in his saddle: but much is he to be praised, that with his force
disordereth his adversary in the saddle.

He that lets his Lance fall, can claim no commendation. And less worthy
praise is he that knows not how it should be charged.

He that breaks the Lance furiously in many pieces, is more reputed, then he
that breaks it faintly in one only place.

He that conueyeth his Lance into the Rest in due time, is worthy commendation:
but he that carries it shaking in his hand, or vnstayedly in the Rest, meriteth
blame.

He that dexteriously carries the Lance long on the arm, and skilfully
conueyeth it into the Rest nere the time of encounter, is more allowed, them he
that suddenly and at the first setting out does charge it.

To conclude, he is worthy all commendation, that bears himself well on
horseback, that sits comely, that fitteth his body well with Armor, that
has his person so disposed, as if it were without Armor, that can endure to
wear it long, and that till the end of the day disarmeth not his head.

He that performs not all his determined courses, ought not receive any prize
or honor.

He that hurts or touches an horse with his Lance, shall neither have prize
nor praise, for he is in case as though he had fallen.

He that does fall, may not run any more in that day, unless he falls on his
feet standing right up, and be also a Challenger: for in that case he may
return to horse and answer all comers, because on that day he is so bound
to do.

CHAP. 51.
Of Iusts and Tournaments, how they were anciently judged by John Tiptoft Earl
of Worcester, high Constable of England, in the reign of King Edward the
fourth.
FIrst, who so breaks most spears, as they ought be broken, shall have the
prize.

Who so hitteth three times in the height of the Helm, shall have a prize.

Who so meets cronall to cronall shall have a prize.

Who so bears a man down with the force of his Spear, shall have a prize.

Here follows wherefore the prize shall be lost.
FIrst who so strikes an Horse, shall have no prize.

Who so strikes a man, his back turned or disgarnished of his spear, shall
have no prize.

Who so hitteth the Toil three times, shall have no prize.

Who so vnhelmeth himself two times, shall have no prize, unless his horse
fail him.

Here follows how spears shall be allowed.
FIrst who so breaks a Spear between the Saddle, and the Charnell of the
Helm, shall be allowed one.

Who so breaks a spear from the Charnell upward, shall be allowed one.

Who so breaks and puts his adversary down, or out of the saddle, or
disarmeth him in such wise, as he may not run the next course after, shall be
allowed three spears broken.

Here follows how Spears broken shall be disallowed.
FIrst he that breaks on the Saddle, shall be disallowed for a Spear
breaking.

Who so hitteth the Toil once, shall be disallowed for two.

Who so hitteth the Toil twice, for the second shall be abated three.

Who so breaks a spear within a foot of the Charnel, shall be judged as no
Spear, but a Taynt.

Of prizes to be given.
FIrst, who so bears a man down, and out of the Saddle, or puts him to
earth horse and man, shall have the prize before him that strikes Curnall to
Curnall.

He that strikes Curnall to Curnall two times, shall have the prize before him
that strikes the sight three times.

He that strikes the sight two times, shall have the prize before him that
breaks most Spears.

At the Torney.
TWo blows at passage, and ten at the joining ought suffice, unless it be
otherwise determined.

All gripes, shockes, and foul play forbidden.

How prizes at Turney and Barriers are to be lost.
HE that gives a stroke with a Pike from girdle downward, or under the Bar,
shall have no prize.

He whose sword falls out of his hand, shall have no prize.

He that has a close Gauntlet, or any thing to fasten his sword to his hand,
shall have no prize.

He that stays his hand on the Bar, in fighting shall have no prize.

He that shows not his sword unto the Judges before he fights, shall have
no prize.

Having here spoken of foreign triumphs, I think it not impertinent (and
happily my duty also) to remember what honor has been by like Actions done
unto the Kings of England our own natural Souereigns. For albeit the Romans,
the Persians, and Syrians being heretofore the most mighty Monarchs of the
world, and consequently of greatest pomp, yet in later time (and chiefly
within these 500. years) no Prince Christian has lived more honorably then
the Kings of England. And as their prowess in Arms has been great, so their
Courts for magnificence and greatness needed not give place to any, which may
appear by the often and excellent triumphs celebrated before Kings and
Queens of this land. Yea certain it is, that neither France, Spain, Germany
or other Nation Christian was ever honored with so many Military triumphs,
as England has been, chiefly in the reign of her Majesty who now lives: as
hereafter shall appear. For besides other excellent triumphal Actions, and
Military pastimes since her Majesty's reign, a yearly (and as it were
ordinary) triumph has been celebrated to her Highness honor, by the noble
and virtuous Gentlemen of her Court; a custom never before used not known in
any Court or Country. And albeit (as has been formerly remembered) the
Triumphs of Germany were of great pomp and notable, yet because they were
furnished with the whole number of Princes and Nobility of that Nation, (and
the celebration rare) they seem to me less admirable then our own, which
have continued more then 30. years yearly, without intermission; and
performed chiefly (and in effect only) by the Princes, Lords and Gentlemen
daily attendant upon her Majesty's Royal person. Whereby the honor of those
Actions is indeed due to her Highness Court only.

CHAP. 52.
Triumphs Military for Honor and love of Ladies: brought before the Kings of
England.
A Triumph before King Edward the third. 1343.
THis King being the most warlike and virtuous Prince that lived in his days,
happened (as mine Author says) to fall in love with a noble Lady of his
Kingdom, and desiring both to honor her, and please himself with her
presence, conuited all noble Ladies, to behold a triumph at London, to be there
performed by the Nobles, and Gentlemen of his Court. This intention his
Majesty did command to be proclaimed in France, Henault, Flanders, Brabant
and other places: giving Passeport and secure abode to all noble strangers,
that would resort into England. That done, he sent unto al Princes, Lords and
Esquiers of the Realm, requiring that they with their wives, daughters and
cosins, should at the day appointed, appear at his Court.

To this feast came William Earl of Henault, and John his brother with many
Barons, and Gentlemen. The triumph continued 15. days, and every thing
succeeded well, had not John the son and heir of Vicount Beaumount been
there slain.

In this triumph also appeared the Earl of Lancaster, and Henry his son. The
Earl of Darby. The Lord Robert of Artoys. The Earl of Richmount. The Earl of
Northampton. The Earl of Gloucester. The Earl of Warwick. The Earl of
Salisbury. The Earl of Pembroke. The Earl of Hartford. The Earl of Arundel.
The Earl of Cornwall. The Earl of Norffolke. The Earl of Suffolk. The
Baron of Stafford with others.

In the reign of the same King Edward, a Royal Just was holden at Lincoln^ by
the Duke of Lancaster, where were present certain Ambassadors sent by the King
of Spain, for the Lady Ioane daughter to the King, who should have been
married unto that King of Spain: but meeting her on the way, she died.

A triumph was holden at Windsor before the same King Edward, whereat was
present David King of Scots, the Lord of Tankeruile, and the Lord Charles de
Valoys, who by the Kings license was permitted to run, and had the prize.
Anno 1349.

In Smithfield were solemn Iusts in the same Kings reign, where was present a
great part of the most valiant Knights of England and France. Thither came also
noble persons of other Nations, and Spaniards, Cipriots, Armenians, who at that
time humbly desired aid against Pagans. An. 1361.

A triumph before King Edward the fourth.
IVsts were again holden in Smithfield, where Anthony Wooduile Lord Scales did
run against the Bastard of Burgundy. Anno 1444.

A triumph before King Henry the sixth.
ONe other notable Action of Arms was personally performed in Smithfield,
between a Gentleman of Spain called Sir Francis le Arogonoys, and Sir John
Astley Knight of the Garter. For after the said Sir Francis had won the
honor from all the men at Arms in France, he came into England and made a
general challenge, but by the great valor of Sir John Astley lost the same
unto him.

Triumphs before King Henry the seventh.
AT Richmont was holden a solemn triumph, which continued a whole month,
where Sir James Parker running against Hugh Vaughan, was hurt and died. 1494.

One other triumph was in the same Kings days performed in the Tower of
London. Anno 1502.

Triumphs before King Henry the eight.
But far exceeding all these, was that magnificent Just and Tournament at the
meeting of the two excellent Princes, King Henry the eight of England, and
Francis the French King, who choosing unto them fourteen others, did challenge
to run at the Tilt, and fight both at the Tourney and Barrier with all comers.
The Challengers were, the King of England, the French King, the Duke of
Suffolk, the Marquess Dorset, Sir William Kingston, Sir Richard Ierningham,
Master Nicholas Carew, and Master Anthony Kneuet, with their Assistants, Sir
Rowland and Sir Giles Capel: with these were so many other French Gentlemen as
made up the number aforesaid.

For Defenders thither came Mounsieur Vandosme, the Earl of De^onshire, and
the Lord Edmond Howard, every of them bringing in a fair band of Knights well
armed.

This most noble challenge of these two mighty Kings accompanied with fourteen
other Knights (of either nation) seven, they caused to be proclaimed by Norrey
King at Arms, in England, France, and Germany, Anno 12* Henrici 8.

One other most memorable Challenge, was made by the same King: who in his own
royal person, with William Earl of Devonshire, Sir Thomas Kneuet, and Edward
Neuel Esquire, answered all comers, at Westminster. The King called himself
Caeur Loyal: the Lord William, Bon Voloir: Sir Thomas Kneuet, Valiant desire:
and Edward Neuil, Ioy^us Pensier.

The Defenders were.
THe Lord Gray, Sir William a Parr, Robert Morton, Richard Blunt, Thomas
Cheyney, Thomas Terrel, Christopher Willoughby, the Lord Howard, Charles
Brandon, the Lord Marquess, Henry Guilford, the Earl of Wiltshir^, Sir
Thomas Bullin, Thomas Lucie, the Lord Leonard, the Lord John, John Melton,
Griffith Done, Edmond Howard, Richard Tempest.

After this Challenge was ended the prize appointed for the Challengers party
was given unto Caeur Loyal: and among the Defenders to Edmond Howard.

Another solemn Challenge was proclaimed and performed by certain English
Knights, viz. Sir John Dudley, Sir Thomas Seimor, Sir Francis Poynings, Sir
George Carew, Anthony Kingston, and Richard Cromwell. Anno 1540.

Another action of Arms published in the Chamber of Presence at Westminster
by a King of Arms 25. of November in the 1. and 2. of P. and M.
FOrasmuch as ever it has been a custom, that to the Courts of Kings and
great Princes, Knights and Gentlemen of diverse Nations have made their repair
for the trial of Knighthood and exercise of Arms, And knowing this Royal
Court of England to be replenished with as many noble Knights as any kingdom
in the world at this day; It seems good to Don Frederick de Toledo, the Lord
Strange, Don Ferdinando de Toledo, Don Francisco de Mendoca, and Garsulace de
la Vega, That seeing here in this place, better then in any other, they may
show the great desire that they have to serve their Ladies by the honorable
adventures of their persons, They say that they will maintain a fight on foot
at the Barriers with footmens harness, three pushes with a pike, and seven
strokes with a sword, in the place appointed before the Court gate on Tuesday
the 4. day of December, from the twelfth hour of the day until five at night,
against all comers, Praying the Lords, the Earl of Arundell, the Lord
Clinton, Gartilapez de Padilla, and Don Pedro de Cordoua that they would be
Judges of this Triumph, for the better performance of the conditions following.

First, that he which comes forth most gallantly, without wearing on himself
or furniture any gold, or silver, fine, or counterfeit, wouen embroidered, or
of goldsmiths work, shall have a rich Brooch.

He that strikes best with a Pike, shall have a Ring with a Rubie.

He that fights best with a Sword, shall have a Ring with a Diamond.

He that fights most valiantly when they jointly fight together, shall have a
Ring with a Diamond.

He that gives a stroke with a Pike from the girdle downward, or under the
Barrier, shall win no prize.

He that shall have a close gantlet, or any thing to fasten his Sword to his
hand, shall win no prize.

He that his Sword falls out of his hand, shall win no prize.

He that strikes his hand in fight on the Barriers, shall win no prize.

Whosoever shall fight, and not show his Sword to the Judges before, shall
win no prize.

The Prizes given. The Prize of the fairest and most gallant entry.
THe Marquess de Valle came into the field very well appointed in armor and
apparel. The Kings Majesty better then he. Don Frederick de Toledo best of
all; to whom the Queens Majesty awarded the prize of the Brooch.

The Prize for the Pike.
THe Duke of Medina Caeli performed valorously, Don Pedro de la Zerda bettered
him, Don Diego Ortado di Mendoca did best of all; to whom was given by the
Queens Majesty a Ring of gold with a Rubie.

The Prize for the Sword.
SIr George Howard fought very well, Don Adrian Garcias performed better, Sir
John Parrat best of all: to whom the Queens Majesty gave a Ring of gold with
a Diamond.

The Prize at the Pike in rank.
THomas Percy acquitted valiantly, Carlo di Sanguine with greater fortune,
Ruygomez best of all, to whom the Queen gave a Ring of gold.

The Prize of all together in rank at the foil.
LOrd William Howard L. Admiral with high commendation, Marquess di Toro
Mayore exceeded him, the Kings Majesty exceeded all: to whom the Queen gave
(in highest honor) a Ring of gold with a rich Diamond.

In all which, and other the like triumphant Gests performed by the English
and Spanish Nobility, it was ever held honorable and prizeworthy to appear
within Listes most gallant and fairest armed, and yet with least superstuous
cost of gold, silver, embrodery, or curiosity of workmanship.

CHAP. 53.
Of the like Actions in Arms since the reign of Queen Elizabeth.
ONe solemn Just, Tournament, and fight at the Barrier was holden at
Westminster, wherein the Duke of Norffolke, the Earl of Sussex, the Earl of
Warwick, the Earl of Leicester, the Lord Scroope, the Lord Darcie, and the
Lord Hunsdon were Challengers, and with great honor answered all comers. The
Defenders names are not extant. 1558.

A royal Challenge was also there proclaimed before her Majesty; wherein were
Challengers, the Earl of Oxenford, Charles Howard now Lord Admiral, Sir
Henry Lea, and Sir Christopher Hatton, now Knights of the Garter; the one
Master of her Majesty's Armorie; the other (at his death) Lord Chancellor.

The Defenders were.
THe Lord Stafford, the Lord Henry Seamor, Edward Harbert, Sir George Carry,
Thomas Cecil, Henry Gray, William Howard, Sir Jerome Bows, Henry Knowles,
Henry Kneuet, William Norris, Richard Bulkley, Thomas Kneuet, Willliam Knowles,
Rafe Lane, George Delues, Robert Colsel, Lancelot Bostock, Brian Ansley,
Henry Mackwilliam, Thomas Bedding field, Thomas Moore, William Worthing to^,
Richard Blunt, Thomas Connesby, Robert Alexander, Roger Clopton.

This Triumph continued three days: the first at Tilt, the second at Turney,
and the third at the Barrier.

On every of the Challengers her Majesty bestowed a prize, for the recieuing
whereof, they were particularly led armed by two Ladies, unto her presence
Chamber.

The prize at the Tilton the Defenders party was given unto Henry Gray; at the
Tourney, to the Lord Henry Seamor: at the Barriers to Thomas Cecil. Before them
went Clarencieux King of Arms, in his Rich coat of Arms.

This magnificent triumph was performed, Anno 1571.

An honorable Challenge was likewise brought before her Majesty, by the Earl
of Arundell, calling himself Callophisus, who with his assistant Sir William
Drurie, challenged all comers. Anno 1580.

The Defenders were,
THe Earl of Oxford, the Lord Windsor, Phillip Sidney, Edward Norris, Henry
Knowles, Robert Knowles, Fulk Griuell, Thomas Kneuet, Thomas Kellaway, Rafe
Bows, George Goring, George Gifford, Anthony Cook, Henry Bronkard, Edward
Denny, Richard Ward, Thomas Parrot. The prize was given to the Earl of Oxford.

To these actions of Arms, we may add a notable Tourneament on horseback,
solemnized within her Majesty's palace at Westminster: which became the more
rare and memorable, because it was performed in the night. The manner whereof
in brief was thus.

It pleased her Majesty, (according to her Princely custom in the
intertainement of noble strangers) to conuite unto supper the Duke Memorancie,
chief Marshall of France, at that time come thither to receive the honorable
order of the Garder. This magnificent supper ended, it pleased her Highness
(the weather being warm) to walk out of her chamber into the open Tarrace,
whither also (awayting on her) went the said Duke, and all others of the French
Nobility, with the Ambassadors, Lords and Ladies of the Court. At her
Majesty's coming to the North side of the Tarrace, there were prepared and set
rich chaires, cushions and carpets. In which place it pleased her to stay,
entertayning most graciously the said Duke, and other Noble strangers. Next
unto them were placed the Ladies, Lords, Counselors, and other persons of
reputation, according to their degrees and conuenience of the room. So as the
said Tarrace was on all sides beset with Lord, Ladies, and persons of quality,
sumptuously apparelled, and richly furnished, and among them (both above and
under) stood many of the Guard in their rich coats, holding an infinite number
of Torches: and so in the preaching place: by which mean, those that beheld
the Tarrace in this sort furnished, deemed it rather a Theater celestial, then
a palace of earthly building.

The place with this Royal presence replenished, suddenly entered Walter Earl
of Essex, and with him twelve Gentlemen armed at all pieces, and well mounted.
The Earl and his horse was furnished with white cloth of silver, and the rest
in white satin, who after reverence done to her Majesty, marched to the East
side of the Court, and there in troop, stood firm. Forthwith entered Edward
Earl of Rutland, with a like number, in like sort armed and apparelled all in
blew: and having presented his reverence, stayed on the West end. Before either
of these bands, one Chariot was drawn, and therein a fair Damsel, conducted
by an armed Knight, who pronounced certain speeches in the French tongue, unto
her Majesty. These Ceremonies passed, The Queen commanded the armed men to
fall unto fight: which was performed with great courage, and commendation,
chiefly in the Earl of Essex, a noble personage, valorous in arms, and all
other ways of great virtue. Truly this Action was marueilously magnificent,
and appeared a sight exceeding glorious to those that were below looking upward
to the Tarrace, where her Majesty, the Lords and Ladies stood, so pompously
apparelled, iewelled and furnished, as hardly can be seen the like in any
Christian Court, as my self saw, and other the Actors (at occasions staying
from fight) with great admiration did behold and think.

Of the Actors names in this Triumph (it seems) no note is kept: yet are many
of them living.

Not inferior, but far exceeding in princely pomp and quality of Actors
was that Royal combat and fight on foot before her Majesty the first of
January, Anno 1^81. where Mounsieur brother unto the French King, the Prince
of D' Aufine, the Earl of Sussex, the Earl of Leicester, the Count S. Aignon,
Mounsieur Chamuallon, and Mounsieur Bacqueuile were Challengers.

The Defenders were,
THe Lord Thomas Howard, Sir William Russell, Mounsieur Brunis, Mounsieur S.
Vincent, Sir Thomas Cecill, Henry Gray, John Borough, Lord Windsor, Walter
Windsor, Le Boylere, Le Cheualaier, Ambrose Willoughbie, Sir William Drury,
Thomas Radcliffe, Lord Sheffeeld, Robert Gray, Rafe Lane, George Carew, Fulke
Greuill, William Knowles, Francis Knowles, Thomas Bedingfeild, Thomas Kneuet,
Lord Darcy, Anthony Mildmay, Rafe Stauerton, Lancelot Bostock, George
Beeston, William Worthington, Thomas Kellaway, Sir George Carey, Rafe Bows,
Henry Windsor, John Wotton, George Goring, Edward Moore, George Gifford, Thomas
Borough, Anthony Cook, Hercules Meutas, Richard Skipwith, Henry Bronkard,
John Parker, Francis Darcy, John Tirrell.

They are not here placed according to their degrees, but as they were called
to fight: and with such titles as they then had.

After these particular Triumphs, we may not forget the ordinary exercises of
Arms, yearly used in memory of the applause of her Majesty's Subjects, at the
day of her most happy ascension to the crown of England. In which Actions
diverse chief Lords and Gentlemen of the Realm (and some strangers also)
appeared, though (indeed) the greatest number (and in effect all) were
ordinary attendants upon her Majesty's Court.

CHAP. 54.
The Original occasions of the yearly Triumphs in England.
HEre will we remember also (and I hope without envy so may) that these
annual exercises in Arms, solemnized the 17. day of November, were first
begun and occasionaed by the right virtuous and honorable Sir Henry Lea,
Master of her Highness Armorie, and now deseruingly Knight of the most noble
Order, who of his great zeal, and earnest desire to eternize the glory of her
Majesty's Court, in the beginning of her happy reign, voluntarily vowed
(unless infirmity, age, or other accident did impeach him) during his life, to
present himself at the Tilt armed, the day aforesaid yearly, there to
perform in honor of her sacred Majesty the promise he formerly made.
Whereupon the Lords and Gentlemen of the said Court, incited by so worthy an
example, determined to continue that custom, and not unlike to the ancient
Knighthood della Banda in Spain, have ever since yearly assembled in Arms
accordingly: though true it is, that the Author of that custom (being now by
age overtaken) in the 33. year of her Majesty's reign resigned and
recommended that office unto the right noble George Earl of Cumberland. The
ceremonies of which assignation were publicly performed in presence of her
Majesty, her Ladies and Nobility, also an infinite number of people,
beholding the same, as follows.

On the 17. day of November, Anno 1590. this honorable Gentleman together with
the Earl of Cumberland, having first performed their service in Arms,
presented themselves unto her Highness, at the foot of the stairs under her
Gallery window in the Tilt yard at Westminster, where at that time her Majesty
did sit, accompanied with the Vicount Turyn Ambassador of France, many Ladies,
and the chiefest Nobility.

Her Majesty beholding these armed Knights coming toward her, did suddenly
hear a music so sweet and secret, as every one thereat greatly marueiled.
And hearkening to that excellent melody, the earth as it were opening, there
appeared a Pauilion, made of white Taffata, containing eight score else, being
in proportion like unto the sacred Temple of the Virgins Vestall. This Temple
seemed to consist upon pillars of Pourferry, arched like unto a Church, within
it were many Lamps burning. Also, on the one side there stood an Altar covered
with cloth of gold, and thereupon two wax candles burning in rich
candlesticks, upon the Altar also were laid certain Princely presents, which
after by three Virgins were presented unto her Majesty. Before the door of
this Temple stood a crowned Pillar, embraced by an Eglantine tree, whereon
there hanged a Table; and therein written (with letters of gold) this prayer
following.

Elizae. etc.
PIae, Potenti, Foelicissimae virgini,
Fidei, Pacis, Nobilitatis vindici,
Cui Deus, Astra, Virtus,
Summa deuouerunt omnia.
Post tot Annos, tot Triumphos,
Animam ad pedes positurus
Tuos,
Sacra Senex
affixit Arma.
Vitam quetam, Imperium, famam
Aeternam, aeternam, precatur tibi,
Sanguine redempturus suo.
Vltra columnas Herculis
Columna moueatur Tua.
Corona superet Coronas omnes,
vt quam coelum foelicissime nascenti Coronam dedit,
Beatissima moriens reports coelo.
Sum, Sancte, Aeterne,
Audi, exaudi,
Deus.
The music aforesaid, was accompanied with these verses, pronounced and sungs
by M. Hales her Majesty's servant, a Gentleman in that Art excellent, and for
his voice both commendable and admirable.

My golden locks time has to silver turned,
(Oh time too swift, and swiftnes never ceasing)
My youth against age, and age at youth has spurnd.
But spurnd in vain, youth waineth by increasing.
Beauty, strength, and youth, flowers fading been,
Duty, faith and love, are roots and ever green.
My Helmet now shall make an hiue for Bees,
And lovers songs shall turn to holy Psalms:
A man at Arms must now sit on his knees,
And feed on prayers, that are old ages alms.
And so from Court to Cottage I depart,
My Saint is sure of mine unspotted heart.
And when I sadly sit in homely Cell,
I Will teach my Swains this Carrol for a song,
Blessed be the hearts that think my Sovereign well,
Cursed be the souls that think to do her wrong.
Goddess, vouch safe this aged man his right,
To be your Beadsman now, that was your Knight.
The gifts which the Vestall maidens presented unto her Majesty, were these: A
veil of white exceeding rich and curiously wrought: a cloak and safeguard set
with buttons of gold, and on them were graven Emprezes of excellent devise: in
the loope of every button was a noble man's badge, fixed to a pillar richly
embrodered.

And here (by way of digression) let us remember a speech which this noble
Gentleman used at such time as these buttons were set upon the garment
aforesaid: I would (quoth he) that all my friends might have been remembered in
these buttons, but there is not room enough to contain them all; and if I
have them not all, then (said he) those that are left out, may take exception.
Whereunto another standing by, answered: Sir, let as many be placed as can be,
and cause the last button to be made like the Caracter of etc. Now Godamercie
with all my heart (quoth the Knight) for I would not have given the Caetera of
my friends for a milion of gold.

But to return to the purpose, These presents and prayer being with great
reverence delivered into her Majesty's own hands, and he himself disarmed,
offered up his armor at the foot of her Majesty's crowned pillar; and kneeling
upon his knees, presented the Earl of Cumberland, humbly beseeching she would
be pleased to accept him for her Knight, to continue the yearly exercises
aforesaid. Her Majesty graciously accepting of that offer, this aged Knight
armed the Earl, and mounted him upon his horse. That being done, he put upon
his own person a side coat of black Velvet pointed under the arm, and
covered his head (in liew of an helmet) with a buttoned cap of the country
fashion.

After all these ceremonies, for diverse days he ware upon his cloak a crown
embrodered, with a certain motto or device, but what his intention therein
was, himself best knows.

Now to conclude the matter of assignation, you shall understand, that this
noble Gentleman by her Majesty's express commandment, is yearly (without
respect unto his age) personally present at these military exercises, there to
see, survey, and as one most careful and skillful to direct them; for indeed
his virtue and valor in Arms is such as deserves to command. And touching
that point, I will let you know the opinion of Monsieur de Champany, a
Gentleman of great experience and notable observation, who at his being
Ambassador in England for causes of the Low Countries, and writing to his
friends there, in one of his intercepted Letters, among other occurrents these
words were found: I was (quoth he) one day by Sir Christopher Hatton Captain
of her Majesty's guard invited to Eltham, an house of the Queens, whereof he
was the guradian: At which time I heard and saw three things that in all my
travel of France, Italy, and Spain, I never heard or saw the like. The first
was a consort of music, so excellent and sweet as cannot be expressed. The
second a course at a Bucke with the best and most beautiful Greyhounds that
ever I did behold. And the third a man of Arms excellently mounted, richly
armed, and indeed the most accomplished Caualiero I had ever seen. This Knight
was called Sir Henry Lea, who that day (accompanied with other Gentlemen of the
Court) only to do me honor, vouchsafed at my return to Greenwich to break
certain Lances: which action was performed with great dexterity and
commendation. Thus much was the substance (and well near the whole
circumstance) of Sir Henry Lea his last taking of Arms: wherein he seemed to
imitate the ancient Romans, who having served a convenient time, and claiming
the privileges due to old Soldiers (whom they called Emeriti) did come into
Campo Martio, every man leading his own horse; and there offered his Arms
unto Mars in presence of the chief Magistrates: which ceremony, Scipio,
Cassius, the great Pompey, with many other noble Captains, disdained not to
do.

Summarily, these annual Actions have been most nobly performed (according to
their times) by one Duke, 19 Earls, 27 Barons, 4 Knights of the Garter, and
above 150 other Knights and Esquiers.

The Authors Intention.
NOw fora much as all that which has been hitherto said, does tend to extol
the excellency of Arms and honor, with the dignities to them appertaining:
Yet for not being mistaken in my meaning, I have thought good to say, that the
commendation due unto learning, is of no less desert then that which belongs
to Marshall merit. And indeed very rarely does any man excel in Arms, that
is utterly ignorant of good letters: For what man unlearned can conceive the
ordering and disposing of men, in marching, incamping, and fighting, without
Arithmetique? Or who can comprehend the ingenious fortifications or instruments
apt for Offense or Defense of Towns, or passing of waters, unless he has
knowledge of Geometry? or how may Sea service be performed without skill to
know the Latitude of the place, by the Pole, and the Longitude by other
Stars? which must be learned of Astronomers. Yea, learning is of such
necessity, that no common weal without it can be well governed, neither was
any State ever well ordered, unless the Governors thereof had studied
Philosophy: chiefly that part, that entreats of manners: for that only
informs, first, how every man should govern himself: Secondly, how he
should guide his own family, and thirdly teaches, how a City or Common weal
may be well ordered and governed, both in war and peace. Which moved Plato to
say, That happy is the common weal where either the Prince is a Philosopher,
or where a Philosopher is the Prince. And although it cannot be denied that
Empires and Kingdoms are both won and kept, as well by force and manhood, as
by wisdom and policy: yet is the chief of that policy attained unto by
learning. For in all governments, the wiser have authority above the rude and
unlearned: as in every private house or town, the most discreet and best
experienced are preferred; so in all Nations they that be most civil, learned
and politic, do find means to command the rest: although in force, they be
inferior. The experience hereof was apparently seen in the Grecians and
Romans; among whom, like as wisdom and learning was most esteemed, so their
Empires were spread furthest, and continued longest. And to prove that
excellency of learning in those Nations prevailed against others equal to
them in manhood and courage, we also will use this only example: That albeit
this Realm before any conquest thereof, was (no doubt) inhabited with people
of great courage; yet for that they were uncivil, or at the least, without
policy and learning, they were brought under the subjection of other Nations:
as the Saxons were last by the Normans, and the Romans by the Saxons before
that, and the Britains by the Romans first of all.

And albeit diverse men have been and yet are, both wise and politic without
learning, and some also that be learned (in respect of wordly policy) be very
simple: yet I say, that such wise men should have been more excellent, if they
had been learned, and the other more simple and foolish, they had been utterly
without learning.

Exercise in war makes not every man fit to be a Captain, though he follow
Arms never so long: and yet is there none so unapt for war, but with use is
more perfect, and the rather if he be learned. For if experience does help,
then I am sure that learning helps much more to the increase of wisdom. We
will then determine, that experience, because it does further Wisdom, may be
called the father thereof, and Memory the mother; because she does nourish and
preserve it: for in vain should experience be sought for, if the same were
not held in remembrance. Then if both experience and memory be helped and
increased by learning, it must needs be confessed, that experience helps it.

Every man sees that the experience of an old man, makes him wiser then the
younger, because he has seen more. ^et an old man sees only things in his
own time; but the learned man sees not only his own age and experience, but
whatsoever has been in long time past; yea since the first writer took pen in
hand, and therefore must needs know more then the unlearned man, be he never so
old: for no memory can compare with writing. Besides that, if the unlearned do
forget any thing seen, hardly shall he reduce it to memory again: whereas
the learned man by turning his book, has mean to call to remembrance, what
he happens to forget. Therefore as he that lives fourscore years, must
needs have more experience then he that lives forty: so he that sees in
books, the actions of men a thousand years, knows more then he, that by
living one hundredth years could attain unto. In like manner, if he that
trauaileth many Nations, be of more experience then others of like age, that
never went from their native Country: so he that is learned, by Cosmographie,
histories, and other learning, sees the manner and usage of every country in
the world, yea of many more than is possible for one man (in all his life) to
travel through: and of those he trauaileth, much better does he learn, by
small abode there, then an other by longer experience that is altogether
unlearned. By this learning also we may conceive the situation, Temperature,
and quality of every Country throughout the world. Also through the Science
of Astronomy we know the course of Planets above, and their aspects and
conjunctions, which the learned men in times past attained unto by long
conference and observation: but we by perusing their books only, may learn
it: yet without that help we could never. To conclude, there is nothing either
of profit or necessity for man's life, but by learning is taught more
perfectly, than it can be compassed by experience, or other mean whatsoever.

But leaving the commodities of learning to be discoursed by those that are
learned in deed, this only I say, that the endeavor of Gentlemen, ought be
either in Arms or learning, or in them both. And in my poor conceit, hardly
deserves he any title of honor, that does not take pleasure in the one or the
other.

For as no living creature is borne to idleness, so is there no doubt, but God
and nature has destined each one, for some commendable business.

And like as base occupations are fit for folk of base fortune, so valiant and
venturous minds, in actions of honor and virtue should be employed. And if in
this earthly life any there be that meriteth fame or favor, surely the same is
a virtuous life and valorous endeavor. Whereof Iuuenal says: Res gerere and
captos ostendere ciuibus hosts,
Atting it solium Iouis, and caele^ a tentat.
Principibus placuisse virus non vltima laus est.


The Authors conclusion.
WE have said in our former discourse, that no man of any quality or fortune,
is borne or destined to ease, idleness, or unprofitable occupation: we have
likewise touched the commodities of such learnings, as are required in actions
both Civil and Martial, whereby may appear, how necessary it is for all
Gentlemen to endeavor themselves in the one and the other, as those knowledges
whereby men are made worthy of honorable title. Notwithstanding, through
corrupt custom or bad education, the greater part of our English gentlemen,
are not only ignorant, what honor and virtue means, but consequently do
disdain (or at the least wise lightly regard) those labors whereby they might
and ought become comfortable to friends, and serviceable to their Prince and
country: which happily moved the Poet to forewarne fathers to have care of
their childrens education, saying, Gratum est quod patriae ^iuem Populoque
dedisti,
Si facis vt patriae sit idoneus, vtilis agris.
Vtilis and bellorum and pacis rebus agendis.


And continuing the consideration of this matter, I am occasioned to be sorry,
that our English youth do not only earnestly affect vain pleasures, and
improfitable pastimes, as recreation: but also use them with daily labor, as
their chief business, and special profession. And to speak plain, I am
more then half persuaded, that great sort of our Gentlemen (chiefly those that
have had their nurture at home with their own ignorant parents) do take more
comfort to be called good Faulkoners, or expert woodmen, then either skillful
Soldiers, or learned Scholars. Yet who so observes, shall find, that the
same men by secret instinct of gentle nature, do not a little glory in the
ancient badges, titles, and services of their Ancestors, supposing those
passed merrits (supported with riches) ought, without further sufficiency,
make them more worthy then others, whose own proper labor and virtue have
indeed deserved much honor. But as no foul flies with the wings of another,
nor no horse does run on legs not his own, so should no man be praised or
admired for the virtue or good merit of another. And albeit the fame of
Ancestors honor, may (for some short space) maintain a certain hope of
virtue, (chiefly where no vice appears) yet time, which does distinguish
things indeed, from those that only appear, will also (like unto counterfeit
metal) bewray the want or worth of every man, and for such a one he shall be
known and esteemed, of what name, house, parentage or predecessor soever he is
descended. It therefore behooves every Gentleman well borne, to embrace the love
of virtue, and in the actions thereof to employ the course of his whole life
For what can be more pleasing to a generous mind, then the study of wisdom?
whereby to know good from evil, and truth from falsehood, the one to be
followed, the other eschewed.

What may be more blessed then Justice? whereby we refrain from all injuries,
and give unto every one that which to him appertains: what is more noble then
fortitude? which conte^neth all wordly accidents, and with invincible courage
fights for equity and right. And what is more beseeming a noble personage
then temperance? which teaches comelines and moderation, governing the
passions and perturbations of mind, to the quietness of man's life, and
contentation of others. These, with other virtues on them depending, have from
base birth and poor parentage, advanced many to great titles and dignity: and
as those virtuous endeavors have preferred them, so discontinuance did utterly
deface that honor in their posterity. Virtue (I say) is that, which from mean
estate has raised the lovers thereof to great reputation and glory. Among
infinite examples (omitting men of meaner fortune, yet worthy much honor) we
have Agathocles, Eumenes, Pertinax, Dioclesian, Valentinian, with other
Emperors, Kings, and Captains. Of like fortune in birth was M. Tullius, Cato,
Horace, and diverse most notable learned men: yea Socrates himself (who by the
Oracle of Apollo was judged the wisest man alive) had no great parentage. And
Julius Caesar, that both in arms and learning excelled, was the first Emperor,
and from low degree aspired to excessive glory. Notwithstanding, through
protraction of time, and the degeneration of posterity, not only their own
houses and names are vanished, but also the honor and renown of the nations
where they lived, is utterly decayed and extinguished: which the Christian Poet
Palingenius did well express in these verses.

Nempe diu res nulla manet, nempe omni^^ semper
Deteriora solent fieri, in p^iusque referri,
Naturae imperio, and fatorum lege perenni:
Deinde iterum ex alio faetu instaurata renasci.
Thus have we heard the means of aspiring unto honor, and by what occasion
the same is lost and decayed. But well I wot, that unto these reasons and
examples produced to incite our English youth, they answer, That were they
sure to attain unto the least part of that fortune these great personages, and
many others their inferiors have come unto, then would they not fear to
adventure their labor and lives to the uttermost: but because the pains and
perils are certain, and the success doubtful, they think it more wisdom to
Hunt and Hawke at home, then hazard their bodies abroad, or beat their brains
about that, which happily shall never turn them to profit. This silly allegation
compounded of sloth and pusillanimitie, may easily be refelled, but rarely
reformed: notwithstanding (for that I am used to loose my labor) I will reply
thereunto thus: That seeing no reward is due before desert, and that honor is
the recompense of virtue, it may not be looked for, until some virtuous
testimony be first showed. What Soldier is so simple, as entering into pay, will
at the first day look to be made a Captain, or have promise within few
years to become a General? what Scholar will at his first coming to study,
demand the degrees due unto Art, or shortly after (with little learning) will
challenge to be a Doctor? Yet true it is, that sometimes the simplest Archer
does hit the mark, which many an excellent shooter misseth; yet hardly will
any wise man be brought to lay money on his side, or hope of such success.
Even so, in the attaining of Honor, although favor and fortune often times
prefers the unworthy: yet the true way and most likely mean thereunto, is
true virtue and industrious life. Wherefore concluding, I say, that every noble
and magnanimous mind, does not so much covet the reward of virtue, as it takes
delight therein. As the Poet says: Propter se virtus petitur, non propter
honorem,
Ipsa licet proprie, ac vere, mer^atur honorem.


THE FOVRTH BOOK: Of Precedencie, and places due to great Personages, Civil
Magistrates, and others of reputation.
The Contents of this Book.
THe Prooeme. Of Honor in general. Cap. 1. Of Honor in particular, And with
what Complements men are honored. Cap. 2. Of Ensigns Royal and Military.
Cap. 3. Of Emperors. Cap. 4. Of Kings. Cap. 5. Of Queens. Cap. 6. A Prince.
Cap. 7. An Archduke. Cap. 8. A Duke. Cap. 9. A Marquess. Cap. 10. An Earl.
Cap. 11. A Vicount. Cap. 12. A Baron. Cap. 13. Of Esquires. Cap. 14. Of
Gentlemen. Cap. 15. How Gentlemen are to take place. Cap. 16. Privileges
anciently appertaining to Gentlemen. Cap. 17. Of diverse dispositions of
Gentlemen according to the humor of the Country wherein they inhabit. Cap. 18.
Of Kingdoms, and how Kings are to precede, according to the Council of
Constance. Cap. 19. Of Magistrates. Cap. 20. Of Officers and their Precedencie
Cap. 21. Of Honorable places due to great Estates, their wives and children.
Cap. 22. The proceeding of Parliament. Cap. 23. The placing of great Officers
according to the Statute Anno 31. Hen. 8. Cap. 24. The Queens Majesty's most
Royal proceeding to Pawles, Anno 1588. Cap. 25. Of Precedencie among persons
of mean and private condition. Cap. 26. Of Funerals, and Order to be therein
kept. Cap. 27. Of Monuments and Epitaphes. Cap. 28.
The Prooeme.
ALbeit the ranks and places appointed to honorable Subjects, ought ever to
be at the Princes disposition and pleasure, (for so do we find in sacred
Scripture Hester cap. 6.) Yet the Majesty of our present Sovereign has ever
consented, that all noble personages, Magistrates, and others of dignity should
precede according to order anciently used in the reigns of her most noble
predecessors. Howsoever it be, true it is, that in diverse ages, and upon diverse
considerations, some alteration has been: As sometimes the Prelates have taken
place before Princes, and all other Lords: and some other times the Temporal
Lords and Officers did march next unto the King. In some other time the chief
precedence was given to Dukes, Marquesses and Earls, without respect unto the
Kings blood, his Alliance or favor. So as no absolute order, or precise rule
has been on that behalf observed, and is the cause that questions and
confusion do often times arise at the assembly and meeting of great personages,
and others of dignity and reputation. For avoiding of which inconveniences, it
may please her royal Majesty, by princely power and sacred wisdom, to
signify her pleasure on that behalf; to the end that persons of dignity,
Magistrates, Officers, and other subjects of quality, may be martialled and
ranged accordingly. For as good order is an ornament of great excellency: so
confusion causes discord, and is the root of many most dangerous questions:
which moved the Philosophers to say, that the loss of worldly wealth is less
grievous to men of generous mind, then the privation of place and honorable
estimation. If then order in precedencie be a matter of so much consequence,
among persons of reputation; great heed and r^gard ought be had thereunto, to
the end that Princes, Prelates, Magistrates, Officers, Ministers, and all other
of honorable and honest quality, should take due places, without prejudice to
their superiors or equals. For so great is the force of ambition, as
oftentimes private ostentation seeks to put back true dignity, and impudent
presumption presumes to step before virtue, honor, and honorable merit.

CHAP. 1.
Of Honor in general.
HOnor, says Cicero, is the reward of virtue, and infamy the recompense of
vice: whosoever then desires to aspire unto Honor, it behooves him to come
thereunto by the way of virtue, which the Romans covertly expressed in
building the Temple of Honor, so as no man could pass thereunto, but first he
was forced to go through the Church dedicated to Virtue. But because the
greatest number of men, are not well informed what Virtue means, it shall be
expedient to say, that Virtue is a good habit, and true perfection of reason;
whereunto whosoever will attain, it behooves him to consider, what and how many
the moral Virtues are, chiefly those few, of the which the rest have
dependence. Therefore to begin with that which of all others is most necessary
for preservation of humane society, I say that Justice is a virtue which
enformeth every man to rest contented with so much as to him appertains, and
give to all others that which to them belongs. This is it which conserueth
peace, and whereof men be deseruingly called Good. Next thereunto we think
Temperance or modesty, ought to accompany every wise man, and chiefly him
that has authority over others: For no man there is that can rightly judge,
how to direct the manners of other men, that knows not first how to govern
him self. The rule whereof is this virtue of Temperance: which teaches a
moderation of hope, and fear; and of joy, and sorrow; with every other
affection or perturbation of mind. Next unto these (in every man truly
honorable) Fortitude deseruingly requires her place, as that which protecteth
and defends the actions both of moderation and Justice. This is that virtue
which enformeth valiant men to fight for Justice, and not to offend others,
unless injury shall thereunto enforce. These I say are the chief and most
honorable of all moral virtues. Yet for that every of them requires the aid
and excellency of Prudence (being a virtue intellectiue) we wish that all
honorable personages should be therewith endued, considering that the force
thereof is a certain natural skill to distinguish the good from evil, to
desire the one, and detest the other, to say that is fit to be spoken, and
conceal that which is unfit to be uttered: to prosecute that which is worthy,
and forsake that which is vicious and vile. Yea, the excellency of Prudence is
such, as without it no other virtue can proceed: Which moved some Philosophers
to affirm, that Prudence alone included the force and power of all virtues.
But omitting to discourse more largely, I say, that whosoever is possessed with
so excellent graces, does justly deserve to be accounted good and honorable:
For albeit riches and authority be vulgarly reputed great honors, yet whosoever
has most high Titles, or dignities, unless his proceedings be such as are
consonant to Justice, he may be accounted a man of more authority then virtue.

Likewise, he that immoderately and vntemperately pampereth his own body, not
confining his sensual pleasures, unto the bounds of reason, does seem rather
subject to bestial voluptuousness, then virtuous moderation: and consequently
both unable to govern himself, and unapt to command others.

Many other virtues there are fit to be found in every honorrable personage,
but among them, piety, liberality, mercy, and affability are excellent
ornaments in every noble and generous mind. It is not therefore as ignorant
persons and unskillful folk do surmise, that great riches, or titles of
dignity, do make men honorable, unless they be accompanied with the virtues
and perfections aforesaid: for riches (albeit they are a great ornament to
illustrate virtue) yet are they not any efficient cause to make men honorable.

Neither are dignities in descents of noble blood, enough to advance men unto
Honor: for whatsoever is not within us, cannot be justly called ours, but
rather the graces and goods of fortune.

And who so pleases to have thereof more perfect proof, let him lay before
his consideration some mechanical man, that by providence or parcimony has
aspired unto excessive riches, or by undeserved favor is advanced to high
titles: yet in the opinion of those that do indeed know how to distinguish of
every man's merit, he shall be deemed rather notable for his imperfections, then
worthy of true Honor.

CHAP. 2.
Of Honor in particular, and with what complements men are honored.
THe scope and mark of each man's endeavor, is either profit or honor. The
one proper to men in bare or mean fortune, the other to persons of virtue and
generous mind. But now we will in this work entreat only of the last: For as
one man is more worthy then another, so ought he before others to be preferred
and honored. It therefore behooves to know that Honor is a certain testimony
of each man's excellency in virtue, and who so desires to be honored, must
endeavor to win some apparent note of worthiness, either before God or men.
In the first case no humane skill or conjecture can judge. Neither is it
lawful for any man to call him Honorable, that has not by virtuous merit
acquired some exterior title, or made proof of honorable merit either in
words or deeds. The signs or notes of Nobility are these, Notitia, Laus,
Ciuilis excellentia, Generositas. Some learned writers therefore have said,
that Honor consists signs exterior. And Aristotle calls it, Maximum
bonorum exteriorum. Others affirm, it is a certain reverence in testimony of
virtue. Lucas de Penna defines Honor in these words, Honor est administratio
reipub. cum dignitatis gradu sieve cum sumptu, sieve sine sumptu. And S. Austen
speaking of Honor in his book de Ciuitate Dei, which Cicero also in his
Offices cites, says, Honos alit arts, omnesque incendimur ad studia gloria.
Diverse other definitions of Honor there are, which for brevity we omit.

Touching the worth or prise of Honor, it ought be valued above all earthly
wealth, and is more precious then silver or gold: and I suppose that hope of
honor and fear of punishment, be the breeders thereof; the one inciteth man's
mind to honest endeavor, the other suppresseth leaud inclination, and makes
bad motions obedient to reason. Marcus Tullius studying to restrain the force
of audacious youth, ordained by law eight diverse punishments, calling them
damnum, vincula, verbera, talio, ignominia, exilium, mors, seruitus.

But here is to be noted, that Honor and Reverence are in nature differing:
because reverence is only the first motive to honor, which after becomes
honor absolute. The like difference is between honor and praise, for honor
is of it self, and in it self: but praise ten death to a further end.
Moreover, honor is a testimony of excellency, chiefly in virtue: therefore
according to each man's virtue and merit, honors are bestowed, and ought not be
given to the unworthy: so concluding with Aristotle, I say, Prauus honor non
est dignus.

Thus much of Honor and the nature thereof. Now we think fit to say, that
the power and authority to bestow honor rests only in the Prince. For the
Law says: Honorandus est, quem Princeps honorat: adding, quem Princeps iudicat
dignum, and nos iudicabimus: nam nullus debet esse tantae superbiae fastigio
tumidus, vt regalem sensum contemnat. Cap. de priuilegijs eorum, qui in sacro
palatio militant.

It seems also expedient to know how men become honored, and by what means
they aspire thereunto: for Aristotle says, Honor est praemium virtutis. Some
are also honored for their dignity, as Princes, Prelates, Officers, and other
men of great place or title.

Others are honored for their age or anciencie: and so is it commanded in
holy Scripture, Coram cano capite consurge, Leu. 19.

Others are honored for their function, as Preachers and Ministers of the
word. And some be honored for magistracy or authority in the commonweal: As
Casaneus remembers, That when the son of Q. Fabius Max. was Consul, and
sitting in the seat of magistracy, he commanded his father from his horse
being mounted in his presence, according as it was instituted by the ancient
Romans, That no man on horseback should approach the Consul, but for honors
sake he should first alight, as Val. Max. in tit. de Instit. antiquis,
reports. Fabius therefore being so commanded from his horse by his son,
pronounced this most excellent sentence: Nolui ante iussum tuum descendere, non
vt imperium tuum contemnerem, sed vt experirer an scires consulem agere.

Others are honored as Parents, to whom their children and nephews do owe
all duty and obedience: as is commanded in the book of Proverbs, Honora
patrem and matrem, vt sis long aeuus super terram, 28.

To these, many other causes of Honor may be added, as subjects to honor
their Prince, servants their masters, inferiors their superiors. And diverse
demonstrations of honor are also due by external countenance, words, and
gesture; as by attentive hearing of him that speaks, by rising to him that
passes, etc.

He that sits does receive honor from him that stands: yet a man of
dignity in presence of Judges ought to sit and not to stand as other common
persons do, unless his own cause be pleaded. So says Baldus.

A man that sits at the table is more honored then he that serves, and he
that sits on the right hand is more honored then he that sits on the
left hand.

He is also honored that sits next to the Prince, or nearest to him that is
of greatest dignity. We also account him honored that stands or walks in
the mids of two, or a greater number, quia mediocritas in electione loci maxim
probatur.

He is likewise reputed most honored, that sits at the chief end, or in
the hiest place of the Table: because the most worthy ought to begin: which
happily moved Virgil to say, A Jove principium Musae.

He is most honored that walks next the wall (unless they be three in
number) for then he that is in the mids, is in the worthiest place, as has
been formerly said. And he that sits next the wall, has the higher place.
But if three of equal quality do walk together, then (for not offering
Indignity one the other) sometimes one, and sometimes the other, ought to take
the middle place, which Order the Spaniards and Venetians do precisely
observe: affirming the right side to be most Honorable.

Among brethren the eldest is always to precede. And so are their wives to
take place: In pari dignitate. Except by some peculiar dignity the younger be
graced.

In like manner where many are of one company or fellowship, as in the Innes of
Court, or the Universities, the more ancient is ever most honorable, and shall
precede others, In pari dignitate.

Men are also honored in their diet, for the more honorable the ghest is, the
more delicate ought his fare be. Likewise the apparel of men ought be
differing, according to their degrees, to the end the profession and quality
of every one may be known: as an arming Coat best becomes a Captain, a
Tippet is seemly for a Priest, a Gown is meetest for a Scholar, because each
man's attire ought be like unto the State, profession, and office he bears: as
appears by that caution which Seneca did give unto the Empress, mother of
Nero. His words are these, Indue te, charissima vxor, delicate, non propter
te, sed propter honorem Imperij.

A man is also honored, when his Prince or other superior is pleased to salute
him by word or writing, or to grace him with gift of any Office or dignity.

Men are honored when for any egregious act, they are permitted to erect
Images of themselves: as Porcius Cato, Horatius Cocles, Mutius Scaeuola and
other notable men were suffered to do.

Men are honored by drinking in gold, and wearing of purple, also by being
styled the cousins of Princes.

Men are honored by bearing Arms: For who so has Arms from ancesters, is
more honorable then he who is the first Gentleman of his race, and
consequently ought be placed in a more worthy seat. Note here that to every
title of great dignity, a particular ensign or ornament is appointed. An
Emperor has his Diadem or Infula, a King his Crown, a Bishop his Mytre, and
Archbishop his Mantle, a Doctor his Baretum. As Lucas de Penna writes, Ca^de
Murilegulis.

CHAP. 3.
Of Ensigns Royal and Military.
POlydorus in his book de Inuentoribus rerum lib. 2. cap 3. says, That the
Ensigns of Roman Kings were Fasces cum securi, Corona aurea, sella eburnea,
trabeae curules, phalerae, annuli, pal^damenta pretexta, togae pictae, tunicae
palmatae; which Ensigns may be called in our English, a bondle of small wands
with an hatchet, a Crown of gold, a saddle of luory, a kirtle of State,
trappings of horses, robes of State (ever burned with the Kings body) which
ornament was also (after the expulsion of Kings) worn by Consuls and other
Magistrates, who pronounced no sentence, but in that garment. Togae pictae I
suppose were long gowns painted, or wrought l^ke unto Damask, or embroidered
about: and Palmatae were garments wrought with Palmetrees in sign of conquest
and peace. It seems also that no other Ensign of Majesty, that might
illustrate a Kings greatness and gravity was there wanting. These Kings had
also 12* Littori (as we may call them) Sergeants who carried before them the
bondles and Hatchets aforesaid

A Diadem, a Crown, and a Scepter are likewise Ensigns appertayning to
Emperors and Kings. But of Crowns there were anciently diverse kinds. And
Polydor in his book aforesaid speaks of many, affirming that Liber Pater was
the first inuentor of Crowns, and ware upon his head a Crown of Iuie. Yet do
we read that Moses (many years before) caused Crowns of gold to be made, as
Josephus has written: and of all antiquity the Egyptian kings have had
Crowns. Test Coelio.

The first use of wearing Crowns was in Tragedies and gladiatory combats, at
which time they were made of boughs and trees, afterward they were composed
of flowers of diverse colors, in the Plays Flo^eall, and in the Pastoral
Comedies also, and by imitation of them, others were framed of slender bars
of tin, or some other metal gilded: so as in process of time many kinds
of Crowns were invented and much esteemed, chiefly among the Romans, and in
the time of Consuls.

The chief Crowns were Military, and with them Consuls and general
Commanders, in their triumphs were crowned. At the beginning those crowns
were made of bays: which tree shows mirth and victory, and after of gold.

The next they called Corona Muralis, given to him that first was seen upon
the wall of the Enemies town. This Crown was also of gold wrought with
certain battlements like unto a wall.

The third they named Corona Castrensis likewise of gold: being given to him
that could break the wall of the enemy, and enter the town or castle. The
points of this Crown was made like Towers.

The fourth was Corona Naualis also of gold garnished with forecastles, given
to him that by force and virtue first boarded the enemies ship.

The fifth was Corona Oleaginea bestowed upon them that were victorious in the
Olympian Plays, or for repulsing the enemy.

Corona Oualis was made of Myrtle, and given to them that entered a Town, taken
with little resistance, or yielded upon composition, or when the war was
proclaimed, or made against slaves or pirates only.

Corona obsidialis was given to a General leader that had saved his army
distressed. That Crown was made of grass growing where the Army was
besieged. Such a one the Senate and people of Rome bestowed upon Fabius Maximus
in the second war against the Carthagenians.

Corona Ciuica was also of high estimation, being given to him that saved a
Citizen from the enemy. This Crown was made of Oaken boughs, and reputed an
ensign of exceeding honor. Of which opinion Antoninus Pius seemed to be,
saying: Malo vnum ciuem seruare, quam mill hosts occidere.

Corona Haederalis, was given to Poets. Corona Populea was given to young men
industrious and disposed to virtuous endeavor.

Other ensigns Military the Romans used, and were bestowed in token of
dignity: as chains of gold, gilt spurs, lances, and white rods, the one a
token of war, the other of peace. We will also speak of Crowns of later
device given to great Estates.

CHAP. 4.
Of Emperors.
IMperator dicitur quasi Imperij Rator fortasse, vt legislator. Ita and Imperij
lator. Id est, Imperium supremamque maiestatem habens, non armis solum munitam,
sed and legibus moderatam. The name of Emperor was first in use among the
Romans, and by them invented, not for Princes, but chief Leaders and
Captains of the war. At the beginning they were yearly created in January,
and ended their authority in September: which custom continued until the
Battle of Pharsalia, wherein Pompei was defeated by Caesar: who being
returnened to Rome, the Romans consented he should enjoy that title of
Emperor during his life; the which his nephew Octauian, succeding him in the
Empire continued and made it hereditary to his successors, with the surname of
Augustus, for his happy government: which name has been ever since used by all
Emperors to this day. So appears it that the title of Emperor began in Rome,
Anno mundi 3914. or as others say 3963 ab vrbe condita 706. And before the
birth of Christ 47.

This Emperor and his successors continued their seat at Rome until the
reign of Constantine the great, Anno Christi 310. by whom the Imperial Court
was transferred to Constantinople. So the Empire became divided into two
Empires, one Emperor governed at Constantinople in the East, the other at Rome
in the West. Which order continued from the reign of Carolus magnus until
Constantinus Paleologus. In whose time Constantinople was besieged, and taken
by the Turks.

The West Empire after the death of Charlemaine, has in diverse ages been
governed by Princes of diverse nations, as Frenchmen, Saxons, Sueuians, and
Austrians, who presently hold that dignity.

In the reign of Otho 3. (with the consent of Pope Gregory 5.) the election of
the Emperor was taken from the Italians, and granted unto seven Princes of
Germany, viz. the Archbishops of Mentz* Treuer, and Colein, the Count Palatin
of Rheine, the Duke of Saxon, the Marquess of Brandenburg, and the King of
Bohemia, then called Duke of Bohemia. This order was after confirmed in the
reign of Charles the fourth, about the year 1378.

Among Princes secular, an Emperor has anciently been reputed worthy a chief
place, and to precede all other Princes, which is the cause that Baldus called
an Emperor the Vicar or Vicegerent of God upon earth: and therefore when other
Princes are crowned with one only Crown, an Emperor has ever had three.

The first Crown is of iron, which he receives at Aquisgran, by the hand of
the Archbishop of Colein, within whose Diocese that City is seated.

The second Crown is of silver, which he takes at the hand of the Archbishop
of Milan, in the City of Modena, after he is arrived in Italy. Yet true it is,
that the Emperor Henry received it at Milan in S. Ambrose Church: and happily
so have some other Emperors. Silver signifies cleanness and brightness. Yet
some writers have said, the first Crown is of silver, and the second of iron,
which Cass. denies.

The third Crown is of pure gold, wherewith he is crowned at Rome by the
Pope, in the Church of S. Peter, before the Altar of S. Mauriee. Gold is
accounted the most excellent of all metals, and of such perfection in Justice
Emperors and Princes ought be. In these three metals all Tributes and other
duties were anciently paid unto Emperors.

At the Inauguration and Coronation of an Emperor, putting upon him his
mantell, these words are pronounced, viz. Thou ought to burn in the zeal
of faith, and so long as thou do live, endeavor to preserve peace.

When the Scepter and sword are delivered into his hand, it is likewise said
unto him: viz. By these signs thou art admonished to correct subjects with a
fatherly chastisement, extending thy hand of mercy, first unto the ministers
of God, and next to widows, and fatherless children: so shall the oil of
mercy never fall from thy head, and both in this world, and the world to come,
thou shall be rewarded with an everlasting crown.

CHAP. 5.
Of Kings.
REx dicitur a regendo, quia dignus est regere populum suum in bello, eundemque
ab inimicis sua magnanimitate and virtute defendere. For the better conceiving
of that which follows, it shall not be impertinent to know, that Kings,
Princes, and other sovereign Commanders, did in the beginning) aspire unto
greatness by puissance and force: of which number Cain was the first, as Austen
lib. 15. de ciuitate Dei cap. 20. writes. This Cain to the end he might with
more commodity command his people, builded a city, calling it by his sons
name Enoch: and was the first city in the world, as appears in Genes. cap. 4.

After the flood, the first King that reigned, was Nimrod descended of the line
of Cham, as we find in Genesis 9. whose son builded the Tower of Babel,
intending to make the same of height equal to the heaven. But the Lord
offended with his ambition inspired the people to speak in diverse languages,
for before that time, all men had only one tongue, Genesis cap. 9.

These and other Princes were oppressors of people, and displeasing to God, for
which cause they received unfortunate end. The first King of Barbary,
exercising the art Magike was slain by the devil. In like manner other
ancient Monarkes reigning tyrannically, ended their lives by violence. As
Pharaoh (whose heart being hardened against the Lord) was drowned in the red
sea, Exodus 14. Also Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, swallowed up by the earth, Numb.
16. Antiochus eaten of lice, 2. Mac. 9. Saul the first King of Israel,
disobedient to David, and other ministers of the Lord, was wounded of the
Philistims, and in the end desperately stabbed himself to death with his own
sword, 1. Kings. 31. And Absalon the son of David, rebelling against his
father, was slain by Ioab, 1. King. 14.

Too long it were to tell by how many means the Almighty Lord has punished
the ungodly and impious oppressors of people, and with what power and grace he
has protected those Kings and Princes that governed with Justice, and
maintained people in peace: for indeed there is no power but from God, as
Christ speaking to Pilat said: Non haberes potestatem aduersum me vllam, nisi
datum tibi esset desuper. Ioh. 19. It appears also that good Princes do
deserve divine honor, as S. Austen seems to affirm. And the Apostle in his
Epistle to Timothy says. Qui been praesunt, duplici honor dignisunt. Good and
godly Kings therefore have received from God divine virtue above all other
creatures. As was scene in Saul: who being made King by Samuel forthwith
became inspired with the gift of Prophecy, and the Spirit of God did enter
into him, whereby he prophesied with other Prophets. 1. King. cap. 10.

We read likewise that Solomon being created King, obtained the excellency of
wisdom, 1. King. 3.

If seems also that Kings, are divinely inspired with diverse other parttcular
graces and virtues: as the kings of England and France (by touching only) do
cure an infirmity called The Kings evil, and the Kings of Spain (as some
writers affirm) have power to cast devils out of men's bodies.

Kings anciently were crowned with crowns floreall: but at this day, their
crows are both floreall and Archall, with an Orb and Cross.

CHAP. 6.
Of Queens.
NExt and nearest unto the King, his Queen is to take place, because the
wears a Regal Crown, which no other person but a King may do.

It seems also that a Queen ought to sit on the Kings right hand: which
honor the sacred Scriptures do allow, Psalm. 45. Astitit Regina a dextris tuis
in vestitu deaurato. And if she be a maiden Queen Sovereign, and absolute,
she is In pari dignitate with a King, and may precede him also according to
the dignity of her kingdom. And if she be a Queen of three entiere kingdoms
(as our Sovereign is) she may assume the title of an Empress.

Also Officers and ministers appertaining unto a Queen absolute, are
privileged equal with the Officers of Kings, and may take place accordingly
Lu de Pen. Ca. de priuilegijs.

Note also that albeit a Queen be the daughter of a Duke or an Earl, or any
other inferior degree, yet shall she be called Queen by the dignity of her
husband. And if she be the daughter of a King, superior to her husband, then
may she also retain the dignity of her fathers daughter. Iac. Rebuff. and
alij dig* lib. 12. which was the reason that the Lady Claudia daughter unto
King Lewis the 12. did take place before the Lady Loysia of Sauoy,
notwithstanding she was mother to King Francis the first. So did the daughter
precede the mother.

Yet some do hold that a Kings mother ought be preferred before all others:
alleging the Text, Positus est thronus matris iuxta thronum Regis, the 3. of
Kings. We read also in the same place, that King Solomon beholding his mother
coming toward him, adored her, and caused a Throne to be set on his right
hand. Which seems indeed to be her place, in absence of the Queen, not
otherwise: as mine Author writes.

CHAP. 7.
A Prince.
LIke as the splendent beams of the Sun, do spread themselves in giving
light, heat and comfort, unto all living things, without any dimunition of his
proper virtue, either in substance, course, or brightness: so from the sacred
power, and Regal authority of Emperors, Kings, and Queens, all earthly
dignities do proceed, yet their own Princely and sovereign power In sua
prima sublimitate does not suffer or sustain any blemish or detriment.

The first place and chiefest, degree therefore (after the Estates aforenamed)
appertains unto the Prince, or eldest son of the King, in respect he is the
first borne child of his father, and may claim to sit on the right hand, as
Baldus seems to affirm, saying, Primogenitus sedet ad dextram patris, by
imitation of the Christian belief.

Note that the eldest son of a King has ever a title of greater dignity,
then his other brethren, viz. In England he is called Prince of Wales, in
France the Dolphin, in Spain, L' Infant, etc.

Princeps dicitur quia est quasi prinicipalis in s^renuitate post Regem. In
Enland he is borne Duke of Cornwall, and therefore needs no ducall creation:
when he is made Prince, he is presented before the King in Princely robes, who
puts about his neck a sword bendwise, a cap and Coronet over his head, a
ring over his middle finger, a verge of gold in his hand, and his Letters
pattents after they be read.

The second place is due unto the first son of the Kings eldest son. So as
the nephew seems to precede the uncle, which has been a question of great
difficulty, and left unto trial of the sword. Yet in France it has been
diverse times, diversely judged, but for the most part in favor of the Nephew.
And in England the Nephew was preferred before the Uncle, as Baldus notes.

CHAP. 8.
An Archduke.
THe third place belongs unto the Kings brothers, Uncles, and Nephews, who
are reputed as Archdukes, because they precede all other Dukes, being not of
the blood Royal: yet have I not read or heard, that ever any such dignity
has been in England, by the name of Archduke. This title is of highest note in
the Empire, and proper only to the house of Austria. For as Archbishops are
preferred before all other Bishops, in respect of the word Archos, id est,
Princeps Episcoporum, so it seems the Archduke may reasonably claim place
before all other Dukes.

Some hold opinion that this title of Archduke may be assumed by the eldest
brother of every Ducall family in Germany, and has been by custom so used, as
a title of greatest dignity among brethren.

But Tillet says, that in France, when any great Duke had the conduct of an
Army, and thereby commanded other Dukes under him, then was he called Duke of
France, that is to say, Duke of Dukes. The which office for that it had so
great a superintendencie, was afterward called Meyer du Pallays. This Meyer or
Mayor, had the authority of a Viceroy, and commanded in all causes both
Military and Civil.

To this degree of Archduke belongs a Surcoat, a Mantle, and a hood of
Crimsin velvet, wherewith he is invested at his Creation, he has also a
Chapeau or Ducal cap doubled Ermin indented, with a Coronet about the same, and
one arch of gold with an Orb, he also bears a Verge or rod of gold.

CHAP. 9.
A Duke.
THe fourth degree in Precedencie is a Duke, who at the first was ever a Leader
of an Army Emperial or Regal: He was called Dux a ducendo, quia ob suam
fortitudinem and magnanimitatem per se exercitum ducere dignus erat. He was
anciently chosen in the field, either by casting of Lots, or common voice. The
Saxons (before their conquest) called this Leader an Hertzog, and was
afterward taken for the Constable of England, whose office was to be chief
Leader of the Kings battle. But the truth is, that during the turbulent state
of conquering, and wandering Nations, their degrees of Dukes were in chiefest
force; But since Kingdoms and Principalities have been settled, they are
become only dignities given by Emperors, Kings and Princes, to men of great
blood or excellent merit.

These Dukes are ornified with a Surcoat, Mantle, and Hood: at their Creation
they wear also a Ducall cap doubled Ermin, but not indented. They have also a
Coronet, and Verge of gold.

Note here that in England all Dukes of the Kings blood, as his son, brother,
uncle, or nephew, ought be reputed as Archdukes, and precede all other Dukes.

Note also, that he who is a Duke tantum, shall take place before any Lord
that is both a Marquess and an Earl, notwithstanding they be two dignities
But he that is a Duke and Marquess, or a Duke and an Earl, shall march before
a Duke tantum.

CHAP. 10.
A Marquess.
THe fifth estate is a Marquess, called by the Saxons, A Marken Reave, that is
to say, a Ruler of the Marches. This great Officer (in the Kings battle) was
chief Captain of the Horse camp, and next it authority unto the He^tzog or
Constable, so that it should seem he was in degree, as our High Marshall is in
England.

To this estate is due a Surcoat, Mantle, and Hood, with a Coronet of gold
Fleury.

CHAP. 11.
An Earl.
THe sixth in Precedence is an Earl, which the Saxons called an Elderman. id
est, Iudex. He for gravity in counsel was called Comes Illustris, a comitando
Principem: or as some say, a comitiua, quia dignus est sua strenuitate ducere
comitiuam in bello, and ipsam sua animi fortitudine regere, and defendere. The
dignity of Earls is of diverse kinds: for an Earl acknowledging no
superior, is equal to a Prince; but if he acknowledge a superior, he is but
in degree with a General. And as Earls for their virtues and heroical
qualities, are reputed Princes, or companions unto Princes: so ought they
(according to their calling) to be richly apparelled, honorably followed, and
served, and with badges of honor, titles, and princely ceremonies to be ever
dignified.

In the Empire at this day are sundry sorts of Earls, which they call Graves:
as Landgraues, id est, regionum Comites. Margraues, id est, certarum marcarum
seu districtuum vel agri, ciuitatis, aut regionis alicuius finium Comites.
Palatins, qui sunt Iudices regni edomiti. Burgraues, quasi (...) Comites.
Rheingraues, qui praesunt rusticis.

In the Court Imperial, Comes was anciently the title of sundry officers: as
Comes Largitionum, Comes laborum, Comes Consistorianus, Comes Palatij. Comes
Palaij had Iura Regalia, and thereby might erect Barons under them, as Hugh
Lupus first Count Palatin of Chester made eight Barons, and had that Earldom
given unto him by the Conqueror: ita libere ad Gladium, sicut ipse Rex tenebat
Angliam ad Coronam.

The County of Lancaster was made County Palatine by King Edward the third,
and had Barons, Chancerie, and Seal, and so had the Bishoprics of Durham and
Ely. The Offices of these Barons were to sit in Council and Parliament with
the Earl in his Palace, and to honor his Court with their presence. Also for
more magnificence, these Earls kept their Grandiours, and festival days, as
absolute Princes in their provinces.

Comes Marescallus Angliae, is an Earl by office, and so is no other Earl of
England but he: he is in the vancancie of the Constable, the Kings lieutenant
General in all marshall affairs. His office is of great commandment, and
endued with many honorable privileges. King Rich. the second in the 21. of
his reign granted to Thomas Holland Duke of Surrey Earl Marshal of England,
Quod idem Dux ratione officij sui habeat, gerat, and deferat quenda^ baculu^
aureum, circa vtrumque finem de nigro annulatum, non obstante quod aliquis
alius ante haec tempora, baculum ligneum portare consueuerit.

To the degree of an Earl belongs a Surcoat, a Mantle, and a Hood, with a
Coronet of gold with points only, and no flowers.

CHAP. 12.
A Vicount.
A Vicount is in degree and dignity next unto an Earl: it was anciently a name
of Office under an Earl, and called Vicecomes or Subcomes; and this office was
to hear and determine causes of difference, and to execute Justice in the
Earls County. The Saxons called him the Shyre-Reue, and in the Norman speech
Vicount. He is of greater dignity then a Baron: as is the Vicount de Thureyn,
and the Vicount of Combre in France; or as the Vicounts Mountacute, and
Vicount Howard of Bindon in England. This degree has a Surcoat, a Mantle, and
a Hood, and a Circulet without either Flowers or Points, as appears in the
Margent.

CHAP. 13.
A Baron.
NExt ensues a Baron, which dignity was called in the British tongue Dynast,
in the Saxon Thayn, in Latin Baro, which signifies Vir grauis: for Albertus
de Rosa in his Dictionary expressing the signification of the word Baro, says:
Barons dicuntur graves personae, a Graeco vocabulo Baria, quod idem est quod
autoritas grauis. Likewise Calap. in his Dictionary says, Baro est vir fortis,
a quo fit diminutiuum Barunculus. Men in this dignity were ever of great
reputation; for Hortensius speaking of Barons (whom Dominicus de S. Gemi.
calls also Capitanius) says, Non solum militare, sed prudenter atque
grauiter ipsis ducibus consulere officium est Baronis.

Barons were also anciently accounted companions to Earls and others of higher
dignity, and therefore reckoned of that number, called Peers, or Pares regni,
or Pares homines, of some men pronounced Parhomines, and corruptly Barons,
converting the letter P. into B. as Libard for Leopard.

The dignity of a Baron is thus defined. Baronia est quaedam dignitas inter
nobiles, habens quandam praeeminentiam inter solos simplices nobiles, post
principatus, ex consuetudine introductam, and ex quodam mod^ vtendi diuer
simode diuersas patrias* Cass.

It seems also that a Baron in diverse Countries is diversely esteemed: for in
England they are to proceed according to their segniority; but in Burgundy
they be reputed the greatest Barons that are of greatest possessions. And as a
Duke had anciently under him ten Earls or Earledomes, and an Earl 10
Baronies, so a Baron ought be commander of some competent company of
Segniories, and the greater the number be, the more his honor. Quanto maiora
qu^^tractat, tanto ipse mayor est. David. Likewise Salustius in his Prooeme of
Catelin said, Maxima gloria, in maximo Imperio.

In the kingdom of Naples all Gentlemen having jurisdiction appertaining to
their lands and castles, are called Barons: yet in diverse places of France no
Segniory is reputed a Barony, unless it has belonging unto it four Castles,
one Hospital, one College with a Chruch: having also a Seal autentike: Which
dignity is preferred before the title of Gentlemen, yet is inferior to all
Countiships: such is the opinion of Cassaneus, lib. 8.

One other degree of great estate and titular dignity there is, called Princes:
although in England I have not seen or read of any such in that kind yet where
that title is in use, they precede Barons: Some of them have Iuraregalia, and
therefore do hold that dignity either by custom or privilege: as the princes
of Orange, Piedemont, and Achaia have Iura regalia. But others do hold that
title by custom, which is of great force, as Baldus affirms saying,
Consuetudini standum erit.

A Baron has not Potestatem Principis, yet is he numbered among noble
personages, and some Barons (by reason of their Baronies) have so much
authority over their own vassals as if they conspire against them, that
offense is called treason, in respect whereof, the title of Baron is so much
the more honorable.

Note that a Baron having Iura Imperialia or Iura Regalia, is reputed equal
unto an Earl, notwithstanding the Earldome, or Barony do differ in dignity.

Note also, that Barons do participate of diverse privileges and Immunities
proper unto other dignities aforesaid; they are Lords of the Parliament in
England, and of them it is called the Barons Court. For the Parliament makes
not Barons, but Barons Parliaments.

The title of Barons in France, was (anciently) general, as well to Princes of
blood, as all others holding immediately of the Crown So do we call the greatest
estates of England by the names of Barons, Lords Spiritual, and Temporal. Of
Barons in England there has been also anciently diverse sorts. Some were Barons
in name, but not noble, as the Barons of the five Ports, and Barons of London
whom Bracton makes mention of in these words, Coram Baronibus London. And in
another place, Sicut Barons London coram me testantur. The Barons of the
Exchequer are of like condition.

Other Barons both in name and dignity, yet not called honorable, were Barons
created by the Earls Palatines.

Of Barons honorable, are three degrees, viz. by Tenure, by Creation, and by
Writ.

Barons by Tenure, are Bishops chiefly caled Lords Spiritual, and ever reputed
honorable, not in respect of noblenes in blood, but for their function and
office, they are Peers and Barons of the Realm. They are also first in
nomination, and take place on the Princes right hand in the Parliament chamber.
They are also called Right honorable Lords, and Reverent Fathers in God. They
have been likewise capable of Temporal dignities, as Baronies, and Earledomes.
Some of them be accounted Counts Palatine in their proper jurisdiction.

Barons by writ, are summoned by their proper surnames, as A. B. Cheualier,
although (indeed) he be no Knight. And all those Barons so called by writ, the
dignity is invested in their own surname, and so in their own persons, and
not in their Castles, Houses, Manors, or Lordships.

Barons by creation, are either solemnly created by another name, then their
own, as in the right of their wives or mothers. Or else by the names of some
Castle, House, Manor, or Lordship.

In which diversities although Barons be diversely made, yet are they all alike
in their callings, and though in show some of their dignities be of a place
certain, yet is the right dignity in the person of the Baron. For admit a
Baron should ^ell, or exchange the place, whereof he is called, yet shall he
still hold the name, and be written and reputed thereby, and have his place,
and voice in Parliament by the same name he was first called or created.

Of Knights and Knighthood we have at large discoursed in the second Book,
only this is to be remembered that the form of dubbing of Knights, both in
war and peace, is not now observed, as it has been: Nam Milites tunica
suorum armorum, and torque indui, gladio cingt, and calcaribus auratis
ornarisolebant, and the Prince in the action thereof pronounced these words:
Soyez loyal Chlr. en nom de Dieu, and S. George.

Miles dicitur, quasi vnus electus ex mill, olim inter Romanos mill homines
strenui and maxim bellicosi electiinter caeteros fuerunt, and quilibet eorum
dictus fuit miles, quasi vnus ex mill.

CHAP. 14.
Of Esquiers.
AN Esquier or Escuier (commonly called Squier) is he that was anciently called
Scutiger, and to this day in the latin is named Armiger. These men, as sir
Thomas Smith in his book de Rcip. Anglorum, does describe them* are Gentlemen
bearing arms, or armories, as the French do call it, in testimony of the
Nobility or race from whence they are come. Esquiers be taken for no distinct
order of the common weal, but go with the residue of Gentlemen: save that (as
he thinks) they be those men who bear Arms, in sign (as I have said) of
the race and family whereof they are descended. In respect whereof they have
neither creation nor dubbing, unless it be such as hold office by the Princes
gift and receive a collar of SS. Or else they were at the first, costrels or
bearers of the Arm^ of Lords or Knights, and by that had their name for a
dignity and honor, given to distinguish them from common Soldiers, called in
Latin Gregarij milites. So is every Esquier a Gentleman, but every Gentleman
not an Esquier, unless he be such a one as bears Arms, which Arms are
given either by the Prince, as a testimony of favor, or a sign of his virtue
that received them, or both: either else by donation of the Kings of Arms, who
by the Princes Commandment or Commission have authority at their discretion
to bestow such honor, with consent of the Earl Marshall.

Somerset Glouer, that learned Herald, makes four definitions, or several
sorts of Esquiers according to the custom of England.

The first of them, and the most ancient, are the eldest sons of Knights, and
eldest sons of them successively.

The second sort, are the eldest sons of the younger sons of Barons, and
Noble men of higher degree, which take end, and are determined when the chief
Masles of such elder sons do fail, and that the inheritance goes away with
the heirs females*

The third sort are those, that by the King are created Esquiets by the gift of
a Collar of SS. and such bearing Arms are the principal of that coat Armor,
and of their whole race, out of whose families although diverse other houses do
spring and issue, yet the eldest of that coat Armor only is an Esquier, and
the residue are but Gentlemen.

The fourth and last sort of Esquiers are such, as bearing office in the common
weal, or in the Kings house, are therefore called and reputed to be Esquiers,
as the Serieants at the Law, the Escheators in every shire, and in the Kings
house, the Serieant of every Office: but having no Arms, that degree dies
with them, and their issue is not ennobled thereby.

Mounsieur P. Pithou, in his memories of the Earls of Champagne, and Brie
says further, that among the Fiefes of Normandy, the Fiefe called Fiefe de
Haubert, was that which in Latin is Feuda Loricae, or Feuda Scutiferorum the
very original of the name of our Esquiers, coming of the Arms, and service
which they ought to Knights, for they held their land of a Knight by Scutage,
as a Knight held his land of the King, by Knights service. And such Fiefes
were called Vray Vassaulx, being bound always to serve their Lord (by reason
of their Fiefe) without pay.

There are also in England other sorts of Esquiers, which courtesy and custom
have made, among which they are reputed Esquiers that are able at the Musters
to present a Lance, or light horse, for the Princes service, not unlike the
manner of the Spaniardes, where all freehoulders are called Caualieros, that
do keep horse for the Kings impolyments.

CHAP. 15.
Of Gentlemen.
GEntlemen are they who in the Greek are called Eugeneis, in Latin Nobiles or
Ingenui, in the French Nobles, in the English Gentlemen. Gens in Latin
betokens a race, a surname, or family: as the Romans had Traquinij, Valerij,
Quintij, Claudij, Cincinnati, Fabij, Cossi, and such like: so have we in
England certain names, which for their continuance in reputation, virtue, and
riches, may be in Latin called Agnati or Gentiles, that is, men known, or
Gentlemen of this or that name and family. But let us consider how this
Nobility is defined, and by how many means men do thereunto aspire.

Iudocus Clicthouius defines Nobility thus: Nobilitas est generis velalterius
rei excellentia ac dignitas, Tract. Nobil. Cap. 1. Nobility is the excellency
of gentle race, or of some other good quality. And Bartholus discoursing long,
whether Nobility and Dignity be but one, concludes they are not: yet (said
he) the one resembles the other, Lib. 1. Cap. de Dig. adding, That as he to
whom God has vouchsafed his grace, is before his divine Majesty, noble; so
before men, who so is favored by his Prince or the Laws, ought be received
for noble. This Nobility therefore is thus defined: Nobilitas est qualitas
illata per Principatum tenentem, qua quis vltra acceptos plebeios honestus
ostenditur: Nobility is a title bestowed by him that holds place of the
Prince, and makes him that receives it to be of better reputation then other
men.

Of Nobility (or as we call it Gentilitie) diverse divisions by diverse men have
been. Bartholus says, That of Nobility there are three kinds, viz. Nobilitas
theologica seu supernaturalis, Nobilitas naturalis, Nobilitas politica.

The first is a certain Nobility known to God only: and they that be so
ennobled, be noble for integrity and virtue.

The second Nobility may be considered in two respects, as Bartholus affirms:
For, both creatures unreasonable and they that are senseless may (in some sort)
be called Noble, as we see Birds even of one Espece or kind, some prove noble
and some ignoble; as of Falcons, some are Gentle and some Haggard. Likewise of
fourefooted beasts, some are Noble, as the Lion; some ignoble, as the Wolf:
which Ovid in his book de Tristibus well expresses: Quo quisque est mayor,
magis est placabilis irae,
Et faciles motus men's generosa capit.
Corpora magnanimo satis est prostrasse Leoni,
Pugna suum finem, cum iacet hostis, habet.
At Lupus, and turpes instant morientibus Vrsi,
Et quaecunque minor nobilitate fera est.


Politica nobilitas, is that honor which the Prince gives: as has been
formerly said.

Aristotle in his 4. book of Politikes makes four kinds of Nobility, viz.
Diuitiarum, Generis, Virtutis, and Disciplinae: that is, noble by riches, noble
by ancestors, noble for virtue, and noble for learning. But leaving to say more
concerning the quality of Nobility, let us return to those persons that we
formerly called private or simple Gentlemen. We say therefore that they ought
be preferred before all other men without dignity, whenever any comparison is
made. For this word Gentleman or Nobilis, id est, nos cibilis, is a name of
pre-eminence to distinguish men of virtue from base people. We read in holy
Scripture, how Moses constituted certain Judges, and called them Sapientes and
Nobiles, Deuteronomy. 1. Samuel was also called Nobilis for his excellency in
prophesying. It is likewise in Eccles. Beata terra cuius Rex nobilis est. And
Aristot. in his Polit. says, Nobilitas apud omnes in honor habetur. And
Seneca says, Habet hoc proprium generosus animus, quod concitatur ad honesta.
Now for so much as Nobility or Generositie is the first degree or step
whereby men ascend to greater dignity, it seems fit to be informed how that
title is acquired. We say therefore, that some are Gentlemen by blood of
Ancestors, as appears in the book of Wisd 3. Gloria hominis ex honor
patris sui, and contumelia filij pater sine honor. Also, Gloria filiorum
parents eorum, Prou. 18. Yet is this to be understood, that the word Parents
signifies the Nobility of fathers, not of mothers, as Bal. affirms Cap. de
Seruis fugiti. Of which opinion Cicero in his Offices seems to be, saying,
Optima haereditas a patribus traditur liberis, omnisque, patrimonio
praestantior gloria virtutis, rerumque gestarum.

Secondly men are made Noble for wisdom: for in true wisdom Nobility
consists, Sap. 7. And Prudence ought be preferred before all riches, yea
nothing desirable can be thereunto compared, Prou 8.

Thirdly men are advanced for learning in the Laws Civil: hereof it comes,
that Doctors of Law are to be honored so highly, as no other man (how
honorable soever) shall presume to call them Fratres, but Domini, Le. 1. Cod.
Yet Bonus de Curtili in his treatise of Nobility says, That in the opinion of
Bartolus, knowledge or learning does not make a Gentleman, unless he be
dignified with the title of Doctor, or graced by some office of reputation, and
if that be taken away, he shall be reputed a common person.

Item, men placed in Offices Judicial, are thereby made noble: for every Judge
ought be reputed a Gentleman in regard of his Office. Also every officer under
the Prince, I mean, having any Office of honor or worship, is thereby made a
Gentleman. Dignitas and nobilitas idem sunt Bart de Dig li. 12.

Item, men become noble for virtue, and chiefly Justice: which moved Lucas de
Penna to define Nobility thus, Nobilitas nihil aliud est, quam habitus
operatioque virtutis, in homine. And another old writer summarily says,
Nobilitas hominis, est men's Deitatis Imago.
Nobilitas hominis, virtutum clara propago.
Nobilitas hominis, humilem releuare iacentem.
Nobilitas hominis, mentem refrenare furentem.
Nobilitas hominis, nisi turpia nulla timere,
Nobilitas hominis, Naturae ^ura tenere.


Item, if any common person by his virtue or fortune do chance to be made a
Duke, and Earl, a Baron, or do aspire to any other dignity of honor or
worship, he thereby becomes a Gentleman. Or if he be made a Captain of a
Country or castle, having pension or fee appertaining thereunto, he ought be a
Gentleman: For which reason, every man of dignity is a Gentleman.

Item, they are Nobilitated to whom the Prince grants any honorable Fee
farm, Pension, or intertainement for life: chiefly if the same be ancient.
Quoniam feodum nobile nobilitat suum possessorem. And that Fee is indeed
ancient and Honorable, which by custom is used to be given by the Prince to
Gentlemen only, and if the same be granted to any ignoble person, that
donation does not presently make the receiver noble: Quoniam nobilitas ictu
oculi non nascitur. Bal. Praeludij Feodoru^ Lucas de Penna says, that if a
Yeoman do buy an honorable Fee, he shall not thereby become a Gentleman. The
reason thereof is, Res a persona sumit co^ditionem, and honore^, and non e
contra.

Item, by common opinion some ignoble persons are called Gentlemen. Of these
the number is infinite, yet are they not indeed Noble, but vulgarly so
esteemed: as Lucas de Penna says.

Item, men are ennobled by the Princes grant, as Baldus affirms, Yet if a
simple subject, being made a Gentleman, do not exercise the qualities
beseeming that dignity, he ought be deprived of that title: Or if he converse
with base men, or apparel himself and his wife in garments unfit for their
degree, they shall not be accounted Noble. Quia habitus demonstrat qualitatem
and dignitatem personae deferentis. And as these persons made Gentlemen, in not
exercising the professions of that degree, do loose the benefit thereof: So
Captains and Soldiers discontinuing the war, do by Law loose their
reputation. Milites not exercentes militiam, non gaudent priuilegijs militum.
Bal. in lib. 1. Cod.

Item men may sometimes become Noble in respect of the place where they were
borne: For the Citizens of famous Towns may reasonably be thought more worthy
then villains. Yet if a Gentleman do inhabit his village, he shall
nevertheless continue Noble. Quia nobilis a rustico, non loco, sed genere
distinguitur.

Item, all men in the princes ordinary service and household are thereby
ennobled, and ought be Gentlemen. The words (...) the Law be these. Omnes
famulantes principi sunt in dignitate and ideo nobiles: cum dignitas and
nobilitas idem sunt. Bart. lib. 1. Ca. de Dignit. 12.

Item, some Gentlemen do hold that dignity by prescription, not having other
proof, then that they and their ancestors were called Gentlemen time out of
mind. And for this reason it seems that Nobility the more ancient it is,
the more commendable, chiefly if the first of such families were advanced for
virtue. Which Nobility is that whereof Aristotle means, saying, Nobilitas
est maiorum quaedam claritas honorabilis progenitorum. Likewise Boethius de Con.
says, Nobilitas est quaedam laus proueniens de merito parentum.

Item, Nobility is often times gotten by marriage; for if a Gentleman do marry
a woman of base parentage, she is thereby ennobled. Text est in leg. in
mulieres Ca de dig.

Item, of riches (chiefly if they be ancient) men be called noble; for commonly
no man is accounted worthy much honor, or of great trust and credit, unless
he be rich; according to the old saying, In pretio pretium nunc est, dat census
honores,
Census amicitias, pauper vbique iac^t.


Yet Seneca says, Id laudandum est quod ipsius est. Nevertheless, Bonus de
Curtili accords with the common opinion, saying, Nobilitas sine diuitijs
mortua est,

Item, men be made noble for their service in war, if therein they have
acquired any charge honorable. For no ordinary Soldier without place of
commandment is reputed a Gentleman, unless he were so borne, as Lucas de
Penna says, Simplex militia dignitatem non habet.

Item Doctors and Graduates in Schools, do merit to be ennobled and become
Gentlemen.

Item, in England whosoever studieth liberal Sciences in the Universities, or is
accounted learned in the common Laws, and for the most part, who so can live
idly, and without manual labor, or will bear the port, charge, and
countenance of a Gentleman, shall be called Master (for that is the title which
men give to Esquires and other Gentlemen) and shall be taken for a Gentleman.
For true it is with us, Tanti eris alijs, quanti tibi fueris. So does it
appear, that (in England) the King needs not to make Gentlemen, because
every man may assume that title, or buy it better cheap, then by suite to the
Prince, or by expense in his service. And who so can make proof, that his
Ancestors or himself, have had Arms, or can procure them by purchase, may be
called Armiger or Esquier. Such men are called sometime in scorn Gentlemen of
the first head, as Sir Thomas Smith pleasantly writes.

CHAP. 16.
How Gentlemen are to take place.
A Gentleman that has two or three titles, shall precede him that is a
Gentleman only. As a Doctor being also a Gentle man borne, shall precede all
other Doctors of meaner birth. Likewise a Gentleman Graduate shall take place
before him that is a Graduate tantum. But this is to be understood: Data
paritate temporis.

A Gentlemen that is both a Knight and a Doctor, shall go before him that is a
Knight or a Doctor tantum.

A Gentleman well qualified, and well borne, shall precede a Gentlemen of good
quality or of good birth tantum. Quia duplex dignitas fulget in eo, propria,
and suorum.

A Gentleman ennobled, for learning virtue and good manners, is to be preferred
before a Gentleman borne, and rich. Quia Sapienti, Scientia and virtus sunt in
anima. Luc. de penna. Of which opinion Ovid seemed to be, saying, Non census,
nec opes, nec clarum nomen auorum,
Sed probitas magnos, ingeniumque facit.
Sed virtus magnum reddit, and ingenuum.


A Gentleman advanced for virtue shall be preferred before a Gentleman by Office,
Quia dignitatibus ex virtute, non virtuti ex dignitatibus honor accedit.
Boethius 2. de Cons.

CHAP. 17.
Privileges anciently appertaining to Gentlemen.
IN crimes of one quality, a Gentleman shall be punished with more favor then
a common person: unless the offense be Heresy, Treason, or excessive
contumacie.

In giving witness, the testimony of a Gentleman ought be received and more
credited then the word of a common person. Qu^a promissa Nobilium, pro factis
habentur.

In election of Magistrates, Officers, and all other Ministers, the voices of
Gentlemen are preferred.

In commitment of portions appertaining to persons Lunatike or Orphans, the
Gentlemen of their blood are to be trusted, before any person of meaner
quality, and likewise in their marriages.

If a Gentleman be an inhabitant of two Cities, and called to Office in both:
it shall be in his choice to go unto the more noble, or otherwise at his
pleasure.

A Gentleman ought be excused from base services, impositions and duties, both
real and personal.

A Gentleman condemned to death, was anciently not to be hanged, but beheaded,
and his examination taken without torture.

Diverse other Privileges and Immunities the laws Civil have heretofore
granted unto Gentlemen.

CHAP. 18.
Of the diverse dispositions of Gentlemen, according to the humor of the
Country where they inhabit.
FIrst it is to be remembered, that Gentlemen (which title comprehends all
degrees of dignity) are either attendant upon Princes, or Officers in the
State, or else do live privately upon their own possessions.

These men, as they are diverse, so are they diversely affected.

The Romans anciently delighted in Arms, but in times of peace occupied
themselves in Agriculture, as an exercise honest and commendable. Which Titus
Liuius seems to affirm, by these words: Bonus Ciues, and bonus Agricola.

The Neapolitan stands so high upon his puntos d'honor, as for the most part
he scorneth Merchandise, Physic, and all other professions profitable. Yea
his disdain of base parentage is such, as a Gentleman Neapolitan accounts it
more honorable to live by robbery, then industry: and will rather hazard his
daughter to incur infamy, then marry her to a most rich Merchant, or other
ignoble person.

The Venetian, albeit he reputeth himself the most noble Gentleman of the
world, being capable of all offices in that Common weal, yet he holds it no
dishonor to traffic in merchandise.

The Genoues do hold the self same opinion: though true it is, that some of
them have Castles, and houses upon the mountains, and there at occasions do
inhabit.

The German Gentlemen, does (as it were ever) abide in his Country house or
castle, and is not much ashamed to better his reuenew by robbery and pillage.
Yet some of them do serve or follow Princes, and thereby become the better
nurtured.

The French Gentlemen, almost generally do inhabit their houses in the
Village, and manure their own lands, which course was anciently accounted most
commendable. For Lycurgus King of the Lacedaemonians made a Law, enioyning all
Gentlemen to dwell in the Country, the more commodiously to endeavor the
exercises and virtues Military.

Much after that manner the English Gentlemen that lives privately, does
dispose his life: as one that accounts it no honor to exercise Merchandise:
neither did they (in times past) repute the practice of Law or Physic, so
commendable as now they do. For their ancient endeavor was agriculture, and
feeding of cattle, to maintain honorable hospitality, being persuaded, the
more rich they were, the more they were esteemed.

Among the Grecians there was not anciently any mean to be advanced, but only
by the Emperors service: wherein whosoever did continue any time (were he
never so basely borne) should notwithstanding be made a Gentleman.

The Egyptians and Affyrians would not admit any man to have the title of a
Gentleman, unless he were a soldier, and skillful in Military affairs. The
rest of the people lived as slaves without reputation.

The Tartarians and Muscouites do hold no man worthy the name of a Gentleman,
unless he be a man of Arms, a Captain, or at the least, a soldier of
extraordinary account. For learning is there of no price.

CHAP. 19.
Of Kingdoms, and how Kings are to precede according to the Council of
Constance, in the time of King Henry the fifth.
WE read that anciently the greatest, and most noble Kings of the world were
these: viz. The King of Sycionia, the King Egypt, and the King of Assyria; but
of them, that of Assyria of greatest power. For Ninus the son of Belus, had
conquered and brought to his obedience all the people of Asia, (India
excepted.) Others affirm he commanded the one half of the world, and some
say he was King of a third part. So writes S. Augustine li. 17. cap. 17. de
ci. Dei.

It is likewise by other writers said, that in ancient time were four mighty
Kingdoms (by Daniel) compared to four metals: viz, That of Assyrians in the
East was likened unto gold: that of the Persians and Medians to silver: that of
the North Regions to brass: that of the Romans in the West to iron. But the
kingdoms of the East were most honorable, though (at length) it pleased God
that the Empire of Rome (resembled to iron) both in longitude and latitude
exceeded all others: For as iron does cut and decrease all other metals, so
the dominion and power of Romans abased and eclipsed all other Regal
puissance. Howsoever that were, the glory and greatness of the Roman force
(in tract of time) did also become of small force, weak and feeble: according
to the prophecy of Daniel, ca. 2.

But leaving to speak more of times so ancient, we say that in Asia the chief
Kingdoms are Catai, Tharses, Turnester, Corasina, India, Persia, Media,
Georgia, Syria, Cappadocia, Ethinia, etc.

In Africa, is Ethiopia, Libya, Arabia, Judea, Cilicia, Mauritania, Numidia
and others.

In Europe are likewise many kingdoms, but of them, these are most potent:
viz. England, France, Scotland, Spain, Portugal, Denmark, Moscouia, Sweden,
Poland. etc.

Now touching the Precedence of these Princes in Europe by diverse writers it is
affirmed, that the King of France may justly claim the chief place.

First, for that it pleased God to send from heaven unto Clodoueus the first
Christian King of that Nation, three Lilies (as a Divine favor) to be from
thenceforth borne in the Arms of that kingdom, before which time the Kings
Arms was three Toades.

Secondly, they allege that France is the most ancient kingdom of Europe, and
that Suardus was King of that Nation in the reign of Alexander.

Thirdly, because the King of France is anointed: which indeed seems a mark
of much preeminence.

Fourthly, for that the French King bears the title of Most Christian.

Lastly, because it has been in sundry papal Consistories decreed, that the
Ambassadors of France should precede the Ambassadors of Spain.

Others hold that Precedencie appertains to the King of Spain.

First, for that he is entitled, The most Catholic King.

Secondly, because he is King of many kingdoms, and consequently of most
honor, according to the proverb of Sal. In mulitudine populi dignitas regis:
which reason Salust seems also to confirm, saying, Maxima gloria in maximo
Imperio.

But we say the chief place of honor, and Precedencie in Europe, appertains
to the King of England.

First, in respect of ancienty. For albeit Alexander first King of the
Grecians, and of Persia, called himself King of the world: even at that time
Brutus was King of England, and (as some have said) Suardus was then King of
France. But Gaquinus in his Chronicle of France, makes no mention thereof, not
records his name among the number of French Kings.

Secondly, the king of England is anointed, and so is no other king, but the
French King, the King of Sicil, and the King of Jerusalem.

Thirdly, the King of England is crowned, which honor the King of Spain,
Portugal, Aragon, Nauarra, and many other Princes have not.

Fourthly, the King of England is a Prince most absolute, as from whom is no
appellation, either in jurisdiction Ecclesiastical or Civil.

And albeit Enqueranus Monstellet writes that in the year 1420. at the
Interuiew of the Kings of England and France, making their entry into the
City of Paris, the French King did ride on the right hand, and kissed the
Relikes of Saints first: Yet is that no proof of his right in precedence: for
Quilibet rex seu Princeps, in suo regno in culmine sedere debet: so says
Corsetus de potestate Regia.

And admit that in time more ancient, the Kings of France had precedence before
England, yet since the Conquest, and famous victories of Henry the fifth, and
Coronation of Henry the sixth in Paris, the Kings of England may justly take
place: neither is the title of most Christian any proof of ancienty, being
only an honor given for certain services done by King Pepin and Charlemaine to
the Church of Rome.

As for the allegation of Spain affirming that the King Catholic is owner of
many kingdoms, and therefore of most honor: that reason is of no consequence.
For so is also the King of England, whose only kingdom of England is by nature
inexpugnable, and so plentifully peopled as suffices not only to defend it
self against all other Nations, but also to invade, and conquer, as both
Spain and France has made experience.

But the last and most effectual reason in favor of England, is, that the
King and people thereof received the Gospel and faith Christian before France
or Spain. Also the Bishops with the Ambassadors English had precedence in the
greatest general Councels of Christendom, as particularly appeared at the
Council of Constance, where the Bishops of England were present and honored
accordingly. At which time it was doubted whether Spain should be admitted a
nation, but in the end the Spaniards were allowed for the fifth and last nation.
And all the people there assembled were divided into five classes or ranks,
viz. Germans, French, English, Italians, and Spaniards.

The Germane rank contained themselves, Bohemia, Hungaria, Polonia, Dalmatia,
Graecia, and Croatia.

The French had place alone, as a nation absolute.

To the English Nation, Scotland, Norway, Denmark, Sweden, and Cyprus were
adjoined.

The Italians had all the Kingdoms subject to Rome, Sicily, Naples and Argier.

With the Spaniards were the Ambassadors and Bishops of Castilia, Arragon,
Maiorca, Nauarra, Portugal and Granado.

This assembly contained the Legates and Ambassadors of 83. Kings. Besides the
person of the Emperor, and King of Romans, two Popes (for one died there,)
five Patriarchs, three and thirty Cardinals, forty and seven Archbishops, a
hundredth forty and five Bishops, and 83. Suffragans.

Thirty and nine Dukes.

Thirty and seven Earls being absolute Princes.

An hundredth and thirty inferior Earls.

Seventy and nine free Lords or Barons.

Knights of all Nations fifteen hundred.

Gentlemen twenty thousand, besides Doctors, Licentiats, and Scholemen
infinite.

For the King of England appeared Richard Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, with him
were four Bishops, viz. Sarisbury, Chester, Bathe, and Bangor. Sarisbury died
during that Council, and living took his place above all other Bishops, as an
Archbishop, and for the time was placed last in the rank of Archbishops.

The Earl of Warwicks attendants, were as follows.
Hurting de Clough Knight. John Waterton Knight. John Seton Knight. Piers Craft
Knight. John Roch Knight. James Hermford Knight. Beringer de Beaumont Knight.
Gentlemen.
Nicholas Serpon. William Newland. Geffrey Offley. Walter Hungerford. Hugh
Holdbach. John Fitton. Thomas Wileot. Richard Dutton. Oliver Dunley. Petrs
Craft. John Lantsdon. John Roche. Thomas Fanhes. William Newland. John Merbory.
John Otlinger. Ralfe Rainscroft. Henry Vessey. William Vessey.
Scholemen of Cambridge.
Henry Abundy. John Wells. John Sheirford. Doctors in Divinity.
Thomas Palton. Robert Appleton. John Stokes. Ciuilians.
Scholemen of Oxford.
The Lord Prior of Orsestry. Peter Rodley. Priamus Farbach.
CHAP. 20.
Of Magistrates.
NExt under Emperors, Kings and Princes Sovereign, are four degrees of
Magistrates.

Some are called Magni and Illustres.

Some are Medij and Spectabiles.

Some are Minimi and Clarissimi.

And some are Infimi.

The first may be named Magistrates sovereign, as they who acknowledge no
superior, but the Majesty of the Prince.

The second are they that yield obedience to them, and command other
Magistrates their inferiors.

The latter two are such as cannot command any Magistrate, but have power only
over particular subjects within the limits of their jurisdiction.

Touching the first that have authority to command all other Magistrates, and
acknowledge no superior but the Prince, they are fewer at this day then
heretofore. Yet certain it seems, that some Roman Emperors authorized one
Magistrate or Lieutenant (without any companion) to command all other
Magistrates of the Empire, and to him all Governors and Magistrates did
appeal: Which Magistrate they called Praefectus Praetorio. True it is, that at
the beginning he was of no greater quality then Captain of the Legions
Praetorian, as Seius Strabo, under Augustus, and Seianus under Tibertus; until
other Emperors succeeding by little and little increased their authority, as in
the end the Praefectus Praetorio became Lieutenant general, and judge of all
questions and causes whatsoever, by which occasion, that office was given unto
men learned in the Law: as Martian under Otho, Papinian under Seuerus, and
Vlpian under Alexander. All which came to pass, before Arms were divided from
laws, and Iusticers from Captains. Afterward, this great office became
imparted unto two, and sometimes three persons, purposely to abridge the
excessive authority of one.

But touching the Precedencie of Magistrates, albeit they cannot aptly be
ranged with those of the Empire, yet may they (in some sort) be placed
according to the dignity and degrees of those titles which the Romans
anciently used. And touching their authority, it shall not be amiss to know
that a Magistrate is an Officer having power to command in the common weal:
among whom in the Roman Empire, the Praefectus Praetorio was the chief,
having authority above all other Officers, to whom also every one did appeal.

To this Praetor or Prefect we may compare the Grand Mayor du Pallais in
France, who in times past did in that kingdom bear chief office. To him also
in some sort we may resemble the high Seneschal of England, under King William
the Conqueror, and other Kings his successors. These Magistrates might
therefore be reasonably called Illustrissimi chiefly in the Kings absence. For
sure it is, that in presence of the King all power of Magistrates and
Commissioners also does cease: For during that time, they have no authority of
commandment either over other subjects, or other Officers their inferiors. But
this mighty Magistrate is no more either in England or France, yet during their
authority they were called Illustrissmi: which title signified a certain
preeminencie above all Magistrates that were Illustres, either Honorarij or
Administrantes. Nam accidentia denominant Subiectum.

Next to these Illustrissimi or Maximi, the chief place of Precedencie is due
unto those whom we called Illustres, and among them the L. Chancellor is
chief: etiam in dignitate impari: as one whose excellent virtue ought be
preferred before all other officers.

Likewise the Lord high Constable or Lord Marshall is a Magistrate Illust. the
Lord Treasurer, Admiral of England, the Lord Chamberlain, and all others of
the Kings privy Council may assume the title of persons Illust. or (as we
commonly call them) right Honorable. So says Cass.

It seems also that Doctors who have read in school the space of twenty
years, may be called Illustrissimi as Purpuratus notes.

To these Illust. or right Honorable personages, the laws Imperial have
granted many great privileges, as the same Barthol. discourses.

After these, the Magistrates (whom we formerly called Spectabiles and may in
our tongue be termed Honorable) ought to follow: as commanders in Arms,
Judges, Governors, or Lieutenants General of Provinces and Cities, etc.

The fourth place appertains to them that anciently were named Clarissimi or
Right worshipful, who are inferior Iusticers and Ministers, Colonels,
Captains, and mean Officers, etc.

Lastly are they whom the Romans entitled Infimi, and in English
Worshipful, as Captains of particular Castles, Judges in Towns corporate,
where no action is triable above 3000 shillings.

Note here that every Magistrate is an Officer, but every Officer is not a
Magistrate: and of all Magistrates the Lord Chancellor has ever had
precedence, not only in England and France, but of all anciencie in every
other place: for read we may, that Eginardus who wrote the life of Carolus
Magnus, was his Chancellor. Likewise Tribonianus was Chancellor unto the
Emperor Justinian; Iosaphat was Chancellor to King David, 2. of Kings; Vlpianus
to the Emperor Alexander; Seneca to Nero: and in France, the Chancellor has
so great pre-eminence, as he precedeth the Constable, unless he be the Kings
brother or his son. For the better memory of the degrees aforesaid, Lucas de
Penna speaking of titular dignity, has left these verses underwritten.

Illustris primus, medius spectabilis, imus
(Vt lex testatur) clarissimus esse probatur:
Et superillustris praeponitur omnibus istis.
CHAP. 21.
Of Officers, and their Precedencie.
OFficers serving Princes are of diverse sorts: among which, some do attend the
Princes person, others have charge of his Treasure; some are ministers of
Justice, and some are commanders in war.

For the better conceiving of our intention therefore, and the order of that
which follows, it behooves to know, That the first places of dignity do
appertain to those that are attendant and administrant in office illustrious.
The second is due to them that have heretofore borne office of dignity, and are
now vacant. The third belongs to those that have obtained an office of
dignity in reuersion.

These diverse degrees were in the Imperial Court called Administrantes,
Vacantes, and Honorarij.

The officers Administrant are to precede; next to them the Vacants, and then
the Honorarij or officers extraordinary: in which order they are ever to take
place, In simili dignitate, non in dignitate dispari.

But to begin with Administrants and their order among themselves, thus it is:
He that was first placed or sworn, ought ever to precede, and so in order from
the first to the last, In paridignitate. As for example: a Gentleman of the
Kings Chamber in ordinary attendance, shall take place before all other
Gentlemen, in part dignitate.

The like order ought be observed by the Vacants: for he that has been longest
vacant, may take place before him that is less ancient in vacancie. As for
example: He that was a Viceroy or an Ambassador ten years past, shall sit
before him that served since, in pari dignitate.

The same course is to be kept among the number of Honorantes or servants
extraordinary. As for example: He to whom any office or other place of
dignity is granted in reuersion, being first therein placed or sworn, shall go
before all others of his rank, in pari dignitate. As for example: A Master of
Requests extraordinary must precede all others that have since obtained that
dignity; yet true it is, that an officer extraordinary may be by birth or
otherwise so privileged, as he shall take place of a Vacant, and sometimes
also of an Administrant.

Note also that every office or dignity granted by the Prince in his own
presence, shall be of greater reputation then if the same were given in
absence, or sent unto him that receives it, data paritate in reliquis.

The same law also commands that a Vacant shall be preferred before an officer
extraordinary: and men of Arms serving in any Imperial or Royal Court,
shall be privileged before others in pari dignitate. Johan. de Platea.

Note likewise that these officers (whom we call Vacants) are of two sorts:
The one are they that have absolutely quitted their offices, or consented their
places may be supplied by others: the other are they, who had office in some
City, Court, or Country, where now no such office is: as the Counselors of
Milain, when that State was subject to the French king, are now no more
officers in that City, being subject to the King of Spain: yet do they hold
place of other Vacants, in pari dignitate.

Likewise an Officer Administrant may sometime precede an Officer
Extraordinary, etiam in dignitate dispari. But otherwise it is with a Vacant or
extraordinary officer, for he is never preferred in pari dignitate. We call him
Extraordinary, that has only the name of an Officer, without administration
or fee: yet shall he go before all others of that place, being his punies or
men of no place. As for example: A Gentleman waiter Extraordinary shall not
only precede all other Gentlemen of less ancientie, but also sit before all
other Gentlemen not the Kings servants, in pari dignitate. And consequently
every man Extraordinary in the Princes service, shall take place before all
other men without office, and in pari dignitate.

It is also to be remembered, that in every office near the person of the King,
or in his Royal house, there is ever one supreme and superlatiue officer above
the rest: and after him other Honorable officers of diverse degrees. The rest
are equal, yet with respect that he who was first preferred, shall take place
first. As for example: The chief Officer of the Emperors house was called
Praefectus sacri Palatij, and under him were certain Comites; as in the Court
of England her Majesty's supreme Officer of household is the Lord Steward, and
next to him the Treasurer, Comptroller, and Cofferer: in France, Le Grand
Maistre: in Spain, El Maggior domo, etc.

Likewise those Emperors had one Praefectus sacri Cubiculi: another Stabuli,
with their Comites: as our Sovereign has a Lord Chamberlain, a Master of the
horse, and diverse officers inferior to them. The rest of her servants in every
particular office, are to proceed as equals, having respect to ancienty: For
he that was first advanced ought always to take place first, in pari
dignitate. Which rule may direct every man to go, as becomes his quality,
and consequently eschew all occasions of offense, or presumption. Whereunto we
will add one thing (perhaps by every one not observed, or to all men not
known) which is, that all men serving near unto the Princes person (in what
office or place soever) are thereby privileged and honored. The words of the
Law are these. Adhaerentes lateri Principis, and eidem in officio seruientes,
nobilitantur, and nobiles efficiuntur. Omnes famulantes principi sunt in
dignitate, and ideo nobiles: cum dignitas and nobilitas idem sunt. Bart. Cap.
de dignitatibus.

CHAP. 22.
Of Honorable places due to great Estates, their wives and children.
A Duke.
A Duke must go after the auncienty of his Ancestors creation, so that he be
of the same blood and stock. And the Duchess his wife to go according to
the same. But if he be a Duke of new creation, then he is to proceed as a new
Duke.

He is to have in his own house a cloth of Estate, and in every other place,
out of the Princes presence, so that the same come not to the ground, by half
a yard.

A Duchess (likewise) may have her cloth of Estate, and a Barronesse to bear
up her train in her own house. And no Earl ought to wash with a Duke, but at
the Dukes pleasure.

A Dukes eldest son is borne in the degree of a Marquess, and shall go as a
Marquess, and wear as many powdrings as a Marquess, and have his assayes,
the Marquess being present, saving he shall go beneath a Marquess, and his
wife beneath a Marchioness and above all Dukes daughters. But if so be a Duke
has a daughter, which is his sole heir, if she be the eldest Dukes daughter,
then she shall go before and above the Dukes eldest sons wife.

Also a Dukes daughter is borne equivalent to a Marchioness, and shall wear
as many powdrings as a Marchioness, saving she shall go beneath all
Marchioness and all Dukes eldest sons wives. They shall have none assayes in
the Marchionesses presence. And if they be married to a Baron, they shall go
according to the degree of their husbands. And if they be married to a Knight,
or to one under the degree of a Knight, they are to have place according to
their birth.

Note that a Baron, is an Estate of great dignity in blood, honor and habit, a
Peer of the Realm, and companion of Princes, and therefore no disparagement
unto his wife (albeit a Dukes daughter) to take her place according to her
husbands condition.

All Dukes younger sons be borne as Earls, and shall wear as many powdrings
as an Earl, saving they shall go beneath all Earls, and Marquesses eldest
sons, and above all Vicounts. And their wives shall go beneath all
Countesses and Marquesses daughters, and above all Vicountesses, and next to
Marquesses daughters.

Also all Dukes daughters shall go one with another, so that always the
eldest Dukes Daughter go uppermost, unless the Princes pleasure be to the
contrary.

A Marquess.
A Marquess must go after the ancienty of his Ancesters creation. And the
Marchioness his wife according to the same.

He is to have a cloth of Estate in his own house, so that it hang a yard
above the ground, and in every other place, saving in a Dukes house, or in his
Souereignes presence.

He may have no assayes in a Dukes presence, but only his cups covered. Neither
may a Marchioness have her gown borne, in a Duchess presence, but by a
Gentleman; for it is accounted a higher degree to be borne by a woman, then by
a man. But in her own house she may have her gown borne up by a Knights wife.

Also there ought no Vicount or Vicountesse to wash with a Marquess or a
Marchioness, but at their pleasures.

A Marquess eldest son is borne in the degree as an Earl, and shall go as an
Earl, and have his Assaies in an Earls presence, and wear as many powdrings
as an Earl, saving that he shall go beneath an Earl, and above all Dukes
younger sons, and his wife shall go beneath all Countesses, and above all
Marquesses daughters.

But if the Marquesses daughter be his heir, and she the elder Marquesses
daughter, then she shall go above the younger Marquesses eldest sons wife.

Item, a Marquesses daughter is by birth equal to a Countess, and shall wear
as many powdrings as a Countess, saving she shall go beneath all Countesses
and Marquesses eldest sons wives. But they shall have none assaies in any
Countesses presence.

And if they be married to a Baron, then they shall go according to their
husbands degree, vt supra. And if they be married to a Knight, or under the
degree of a Knight then they shall take place after their birth.

Item, Marquesses younger sons be borne as Vicounts, and shall wear as many
Powdrings as a Vicount, saving only he shall go beneath all Vicounts and
Earls eldest sons, and above all Barons; and his wife shall go beneath all
Vicountesses, and Earls daughters, and above all Baronesses.

Item, all Marquesses daughters are to go one with another, so that always
the eldest Marquess daughter go uppermost, unless the pleasure of the Prince
be to the contrary.

An Earl.
AN Earl shall go after the ancientie of his Ancesters creation, so that he
be of the same kindred and stock. And the Countess his wife shall go
according to the same. He may have none Assayes in a Marquess presence, but
only his Cup covered. Neither may any Countess have her gown borne in a
Marchionesses presence, by a Gentlewoman, but by a Gentleman.

Also an Earl may have in his own house a cloth of Estate, which shall be
fringed round, without any pendant. And a Baron ought not to wash with an
Earl, but at his pleasure.

Item an Earls eldest son is borne equal to a Vicount, and shall go as a
Vicount, and shall wear as many Powdrings as a Vicount. But he shall go
beneath all Vicounts, and his wife beneath all Vicountesses, and above all
Earls daughters. But if she be the Earls daughter and heir, and the elder
Earls daughter, then she shall go above the younger Earls eldest sons wife.

Item all Earls daughters be borne as Vicountesses, and shall wear as many
Powdrings as a Viscountesse, yet shall she go beneath all Viscountesses, and
Earls eldest sons wives. And if they be married to a Baron, or to any other
above a Baron, then they shall go after the degree of their husband. And if
they be married to a Knight, or under the degree of a Knight, then they are to
go, and have place according to their birth.

Item, all Earls younger sons be borne as Barons, and shall wear as many
Powdrings as a Baron, saving they shall go beneath all Barons, and Viscounts
eldest sons, and above all Baronnets. And their wives shall go beneath all
Baronnesses and Viscountesse daughters, and above all Baronets wives.

Item, all Earls daughters to go one with an other, the elder Earls daughter
to go uppermost, unless the pleasure of the Prince be to the contrary.

A Viscount.
A Viscount must go after the ancientie of his own Ancestors creation, and
the Viscountesse must have place according to the same. He may have in his own
house the Cup of Assay holden under his Cup while he drinks, but none Assay
taken.

He may have a Caruer and Shewer with their Towels, when they set their service
on the Table. The Viscount being there present, and all Viscountesses may have
their gowns borne up by a man, in the presence of a Countess. Also they may
have a Trauerse in their own houses.

Item, Viscounts eldest sons be borne as Barons, and shall wear as many
Powdrings as a Baron, saving he shall go beneath all Barons, and above all
Barons young sons. And his wife shall go beneath all Baronesses, and above
all Viscounts daughters.

Item, Vicounts daughters be borne as Baronesses, and shall wear as many
Powdrings as a Baronnesse, saving she shall go beneath all Baronesses, and
Viscounts eldest sons wives, and if they be married to a Baron, they shall
go after the degree of their Husbands. And if they be married to a Knight, or
an Esquier, they are to take place according to their birth.

Item, Viscounts younger sons, shall go as Bannerets, and wear as many
Powdrings as a Banneret, saving they shall go beneath all Baronets.

A Baron.
A Baron must go after the ancientie of his Ancesters creation, so that the
eldest Baron go uppermost, and the Baronnesse his wife must go after the
same: she may have her gown borne up with a man in presence of a Vicountesse,
and the Baron may have the cover of his cup holden underneath when he drinks.

Item, a Barons eldest son shall go and have place as a Banneret, and take
the upper hand of a Banneret, because his father is a Peer of the Realm: and
by the same reason all Barons younger sons shall precede all Batcheler Knights.

Item, all Barons daughters shall go above all Bannerets wives, that is to
say, she shall have the upper hand of Bannerets wives and Knights wives.

Item, all Barons daughters to go one with another, so that the eldest Barons
daughter go always uppermost: unless the Princes pleasure be to the contrary.

Note that if any of all the degrees above written be descended of the blood
Royal, they ought to stand above and precede all others that are in pari
dignitate of themselves: as a Duke of the Blood above all Dukes not of the
Blood, and so the like in all other degrees, except the Princes known pleasure
be to the contrary.

A Dukes eldest son and heir of the blood Royal shall have place before a
Marquess, and if he be not of the blood, he shall have place above an Earl.

An Earls son and heir of the blood Royal shall precede a Vicount: and if
he be not of the blood, he shall have place above a Baron.

CHAP. 23.
The proceeding of Parliament to Westminster, from her Majesty's Royal Palace
of White Hall.
FIrst, Messengers of the Chamber. Gentlemen two and two. Esquiers two and two.
The six Clerks of the Chancerie. Clerks of the Star Chamber. Clerks of
the Signet. Clerks of the privy Counsel. The Masters of the Chancery.
Esquiers of the Body.
The Trumpets.
The Queens Attorney and Soliciter. Sergeants of the Law. The Queens Sergeant
alone. The Barons of the Exchequer two, and two. Judges of the Common Pleas.
Judges of the Kings Bench. Pursuyuants.
Pursuyuants.
The Lord chief Baron, and the Lord chief Justice of the Common Pleas. The
Master of the Roules, and the Lord chief Justice of the Kings Bench. Batcheler
Knights. Knights of the Bathe. Knights Bannerets. Knights of the Privy
Counsel two and two. Knights of the Garter. The Queens Majesty's Cloak and
Hat borne by a Knight or an Esquier. Noblemens younger sons, Heralds.
Heralds.
and heirs apparent two and two. The principal Secretary, being no Baron. The
Vice-chamberlaine. The Treasourer and Comptroller of the Household. Barons in
their Robes, two and two. The youngest form ost. Bishops in their Robes, two and
two. The Lord Admiral, and the Lord Chamberlain of Household together, if
they be Barons, and In pari dignitate.
Norroy King of Arms.
Viscounts in their Robes, two and two, the youngest foremost. Earls in their
Robes, two and two, they youngest foremost. Marquesses in their Robes. Dukes in
their Robes. The Lord President of the Counsel, and the Lord Privy Seal.
Lord Steward of the Queens house, and the Lord great Chamberlain.
Clarencieux King of Arms.
The Almner. The Master of Requests. The Lord Chanceler, and the Lord Tresurer
of England together. The Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Archbishop of York
together. Sergeants at Arms. Sergeants at Arms.
Garter chief King of Arms barehead.
The Cap of Estate borne by the Marquis of Winchester, and with him on the left
hand the Earl Marshall of England with his gilt rod. The Sword borne by an
Earl.
THE Queens Majesty on horseback, or in her Chariot with her Robes of
Estate, her Train borne by a Duchess, or Marchioness.
The Pensioners on each side of her Majesty bearing Poleaxes. The Lord
Chamberlain, and the Vize-chamberlaine on each side of the Queen (if they
attend out of their rank) but somewhat behind her. The Master of the Horse,
leading a spare Horse next behind her Majesty. Ladies and Gentlewomen,
according to their Estates, two and two. The Captain of the Guard with all the
Guard following, two and two.
CHAP. 24.
The placing of great Officers according to the Act of Parliament made, An.
31. H. 8.
THe Lord Vicegerent shall be placed on the Bishops side above them all.

Then the Lord Chancellor.

The Lord Treasorer.

The Lord President of the privy Counsel.

The Lord Privy seal.

These four being of the degree of a Baron, or above, shall sit in the
Parliament in all assemblies of Council above Dukes, not being of the blood
Royal, viz. The Kings brother, Uncle, or Nephews, etc.

And these six.

The Lord great Chamberlain of England.

The Lord High Constable of England.

The Earl Marshall of England.

The Lord Admiral of England.

The Lord great Master of Steward of the Kings house.

The Lord Chamberlain of the Kings household.

These six are placed in all assemblies of Council, after Lord privy Seal,
according to their degrees, and estates, So that if he be a Baron, to sit above
all Barons: and if he be an Earl, above all Earls. And so likewise the Kings
principal Secretary, being a Baron of the Parliament, has place above all
Barons, and if he be of higher degree, he shall sit and be placed according
thereunto.

Note, If any of the Officers above mentioned, be not of the degree of a Baron,
whereby he has not power to assent, or dissent in the high Court of
Parliament, then he, or they are to sit on the uppermost Wolsacke in the
Parliament chamber, the one above the other in like order as is specified.

The Nobility Temporal are placed according to the auncientie of their
several creations, and so are the Lords Spiritual, saving, The Archbishop of
Canterbury, So placed of dignity. The Archbishop of York. Bishop of London.
So placed by Act of Parliament. Bishop of Durham. Bishop of Winhcester.


The rest of the Bishops have their places according to the senioritie of their
several consecrations. And this for their placing in the Parliament house.
Howbeit when the Archbishop of Canterbury sits in his Provincial assembly,
he has on his right hand the Archbishop of York, and next unto him the Bishop
of Winchester, and on the left hand the Bishop of London. But if it fall out
that the Archbishop of Canterbury be not there by the vacation of his See,
then the Archbishop of York is to take his place, who admits the Bishop of
London to his right hand, and the Prelate of Winchester to his left, the rest
sitting as is before said, as they are elders by consecration.

CHAP. 25.
The Queens Majesty's most royal proceeding in State from Somerset place to
Paul's Church. Ann. 1588.
ON Sunday the 24. day of November, Anno 1588. our Sovereign Lady Queen
Elizabeth rode with great solemnity in her open chariot from Somerset house in
the Strond, to the Cathedr^l Church of S. Paul in London: where, at the West
door before her Majesty's entrance in, there was provided a rich Chair of
Estate, and the ground being spread likewise with tapits, her Majesty kneeled
down against a deske covered with very Princely furniture, and said the Lords
prayer: and then the Bishop of London in his Cope, delivered her a book
containing all the Orders, Charters, and Privileges belonging to the said
Church: which her Majesty receiving, did confirm and redeliuer unto the Bishop
in the presence of all the Prebends and Churchmen, who attended her Highness
in very rich Copes: and so with the whole Quire singing before her, she
proceeded up into the Chancell, where within a Trauers she rested until the
Procession and other divine Anthems were sung. After which, her Majesty entered
into the place ordained for the Duchy of Lancaster, which at that time was
newly reedified with fair and large glass windows, in which she stayed
during the Sermon preached at the Cross by Doctor Perce then Bish. of
Salisbury; where, with the whole assembly of the people she gave God public
thanks for that triumphant and ever memorable victory over the Spanish Fleet,
proudly by them called Invincible. The Sermon being done, her Majesty went to
the Bishops Palace, and there dined: and toward evening returned unto Somerset
place by torchlight.

Against her Highness coming in the morning, the streets were railed and hung
with Blew broad clothes for the several Companies in their Liueries to stand,
and every Company distinguished by Banners, Standards, and Penons of their
Arms richly painted, and illumined. The Gentlemen of the Innes of Court
likewise (being placed nere Temple Bar) stood orderly within their railes. All
the fronts of houses were covered with rich Arras and Tapistry, and the
windows and streets replenished with all sorts of people innumerable, who with
great applause, and joyful acclamations, both graced, and honored her
Majesty's most Royal proceeding.

The Lord Mayor (which was Alderman Calthrope) delivered his Sword to her
Majesty at Temple Bar, who receiving it, gave him a Mace or Scepter to
bear, and delivered the Sword to the L. Marquess of Winchester, who bare it
before her Highness all that day.

Here follows the List or Roll of all Estates that were in this Princely
proceeding, according as they were then marshalled.
Messengers of the Chamber. Gentlemen Harbingers. Servants to Ambassadors.
Gentlemen, Her Maiestics servants. Esquires,
Trumpets.
Sewers of the Chamber. Gentlemen Huishers. The six Clerks of the Chancery.
Clerks of Star chamber. Clerks of the Signet. Clerks of the Privy Seal.
Clerks of the Council. Chaplens having dignities, as Deanes, etc. Masters of
the Chancery. Aldermen of London. Knights Batchelers. Knights Officers of the
Admiralty. The Judge of the Admiraltie. The Deane of the Arches. The Soliciter
and Attorney General. Serieants at the Law. The Queens Serieants. Barons of
the Exchequer. A Pursuy. of Arms.
Judges of the Common Pleas. A Pursuy. of Arms.
Judges of the Kings Bench. The L. chief Baron, and the L. chief Justice of the
Common pleas. The Master of the Rols, and the L. chief Justice of the K.
Bench. The Queens Doctors of Physic. The Master of the Tents, and the Master
of the Revels. The Lieutenant of the Ordinance. The Lieutenant of the Tower.
The Master of the Armorie. Knights that had been Ambassadors. Knights that had
been Deputies of Ireland. The Master of the great Wardrobe. A Pursuy. of Arms.
The Master of the lewel house. A Pursuy. of Arms.
Esquires for the Body, and Gentlemen of the Privy chamber.
Trumpets.
The Queens Cloak and Hat borne by a Knight or an Esquire. Barons younger
sons. Knights of the Bath. Knights Bannerets. Lancaster.
Vicounts younger sons. York.
Barons eldest sons. Earls younger sons. Vicounts eldest sons.
Secretaries of her Majesty. Knights of the Privy Council. Sommerset
Richmond.
Knights of the Garter. Principal Secretary. Vicechamberlaine. Comptroller and
Treasurer of the household. Barons of the Parliament. Chester.
Bishops. (...)
The Lord Chamberlain of the house, being Barons. The Lord Admiral of England,
Marquesses younger sons. Earls eldest sons. Vicounts. Dukes younger sons.
Marquesses eldest sons.
Norroy King of Arms.
Earls. Dukes eldest sons. Marquesses. Dukes.
Clarencieux King of Arms.
The Almner. The Master of Requests. The Lord high Treasurer of England. The
Archbishop of York. The Lord Chanceller of England. The Archbishop of
Canterbury. The French Ambassador. Garter King of Arms. The Mayor of London.
A Gent. Huisher of the Privy Chamber.


The Queens Majesty in her Chariot.
Her Highness train borne by the Marchioness of Winchester. The Palfrey of
Honor led by the Master of the Horse. The chief Lady of Honor. All other
Ladies of Honor, The Captain of the Guard. Yeomen of the Guard.
CHAP. 26.
Of Precedencie, among persons of mean and private condition.
BArtholus, in his discourse de re Militari and Duello, divides men into three
degrees: viz. great personages advanced to dignity, men of reputation without
dignity, and common or ignoble persons. Of whom Iac. Faber in his discourse
upon Aristotle's politickes, makes nine sorts.

The first are husbandmen, whose endeavor is employed, about the fruits of the
earth.

Secondly, artificers occupied Arts either necessary, honest or pleasing.

Thirdly, victualers, retailers of wares, and chapmen.

Fourthly, Mariners and sea soldiers.

Fifthly, Fishermen.

Sixthly, Watermen and Ferrymen.

Seventhly, Masons, and laborers in stone.

Eighthly, workmen of little substance, and Laborers.

Lastly, Bondmen and slaves.

Among common persons in every Province or Town, the Governor or Captain is
of most reputation, notwithstanding he be of a common birth, yet in some
Cities, the Mayor or chief Judge has that chief honor, and is superior to
the military Officer, but generally men in Office, are of more reputation then
others without office, and Officers for life are preferred before Officers
annual or time certain: Data paritate in alijs. Raynutius.

Note also that every man during the time he bears office is to be respected
and honored, as Purpuratus writes: And to say summarily, all wisemen having
place of rule in any Province, City, or Town, must be preferred before
others, albeit they are advanced above the measure of their virtue. For no man
is so evil, but sometimes he does well, Laudabilia multa etiam mali faciunt.
Pli.

Men married are ever to precede men unmarried, in pari dignitate. And he who
has most children, or lost the greater number in the war of his Country, is
to be most honored, Lex Iuli^. The like order ought be observed among women
married, in pari dignitate: and in Rome maidens did anciently go before
widows, and wives also: and sons before their Fathers.

Men having land of inheritance are to precede other having none: and Citizens
that are householders, must be preferred before others having no habitation,
chiefly in such Cities and Towns where their Ancestors and families have been
of continuance in reputation of merchandise, or other possessions. For next
after Gentlemen and Magistrates they are to take place, in pari dignitate. Yet
here is to be noted, that if any Burgess, Merchant, or other man of wealth do
happen to purchase a Barony, yet ought he not be a Baron, nor have place among
Barons, Iac. Rabuff.

A father whose son bears any Office, shall give place to his son in all
public meetings and services: but in private affairs, the order of nature
ought be observed: and in domestical conversation, the father shall go and sit
before the son. Likewise a Bishop must do reverence unto his father at home,
but being in the Church the father shall follow him. So for diverse respects the
one and the other is honored.

Between two equals, he that is in his own jurisdiction shall precede: as if an
Archbishop or Cardinal do come into the Diocese of a Bishop, notwithstanding
they be persons of more dignity, yet ought they give honor unto the Bishop,
because their presence does not cancel his authority.

A Citizen or dweller of any chief City, shall take place of other Inhabitants
of meaner towns or cities, when soever they meet in any place indifferent: yet
he who finds himself within his own Liberty or Jurisdiction, shall be
preferred: which moved Caesar to wish himself to be rather the chief man of
a little village among the Alps, then the second person in Rome.

Among common persons also (chiefly where no dignity is) fathers are to precede
their sons: Honora patrem tuum, and gemitum matris tuae ne obliuiscaris,
Eccles 3. Likewise among equals, age is to be preferred in respect of wisdom
and experience. Many privileges and immunities are also due to old age, and
they in counsel ought to speak first: Loquere mayor natu, decet enim te,
Ecclesiast. 2.

In the number of men mean borne, they that be learned deserve most
reputation, chiefly when both for Arms and Civil government they deserve
praise, because such men be meet, as well for peace as war. Also among
learned men the first place is due to Divines, the next to Ciuilians, and the
third to Physicians. But Arnoldus de Villa Noua, says, Primus locus in
mensasolet seruari Sacerdoti, and Medico, in domo infirmi.

After men learned, Judges of inferior Courts, Notaries, and Clerks do seem
worthy of respect and preferrement: for more credit is to be given unto a
Notary or Scribe then to other men: Super faciem Scribae imponet honorem,
Eccles.

Also among popular persons, they that be virtuous ought be most esteemed:
because it were injury to take reward from men of good desert. Honor est
praemium virtutis, Arist. 8. Ethic.

Men of good and charitable mind, are also worthy honor: for actions of
Justice and piety, are universally praised: and the more, because men endued
with virtues intellectiue, are not many, Perdifficile est bonum esse, Pittacus.

In this number of Plebeians, to be naturally borne of the country or town
where a man dwells, is also reason he should be esteemed: for Cicero says,
Potiores sunt Ciues quam peregrini.

They are likewise worthy of respect, that are persons of good fame and name:
Bona fama impinguat ossa, Eccle.

Among strangers, they ought be preferred that are borne in civil and noble
Nations: for by observation we see the people of some countries are prone to
infamous conditions, and others inclined to honest endeavor. Apuleius calls
the Egyptians learned, the Jews superstitious, the Scythians poor of corn,
the Arabians rich in sweet odours: and Liuie notes the Carthaginians for
their perfidie, and Cicero taxes the Spaniards for their crast, but praises
the Graecians for skill in Arts. Horace says the Brytons are stout men, and
frank housekeepers, and the Persians promise breakers, etc. Howsoever it be,
experience proves that all countries are inhabited, and every man prefers
the place of his birth: Dulcis amor patriae, --

Among Citizens and inferior persons, they are not to be neglected that
descend of honest parents: for a^be it every man's mind be his own, yet the
temperature of the parents complexion gives a certain aptness to virtue or
vice, whereof we presume the child good or evil. And verily albeit one man
begets another, yet rarely one mind brings forth another of like
capacity and quality. Non men's, vt corpus, patrio de semine manat. Pall.

Also rich men are to be preferred, because the more a man possesses in the
State, the more careful he will be to conserve it: but poor men defiring to
better their fortune, are apt to innovation.

After rich men, persons honest and industrious ought be esteemed: for idle and
unprofitable members in every Commonweal deserve rather to be punished then
esteemed. Omnis arbor quae non facit fructum bonum excidetur, and in ignem
mittetur: Mat 3.

Among these sorts of men, beauty and seemly proportion of body do promise
much good, and are to be preferred: of which opinion Plato seemed to be,
saying, Optimumest been valere. Secundo loco formosum esse. Tertio habere
diuitias bono modo partas. And Ovid. Gratior est pulchro veniens de corpore
Virtus.

Likewise of these men some deserve preferment for excellency in the Art they
profess, and some because they are employed in Arts more necessary and
commendable, as Architectors, and such Artificers as are entertained by
Princes, for they are dignified by their place, according as the Prince
affects their faculty, which moved Martial speaking of Cooks serving
Princes, to say, Non satis est ars sola coquo seruire palato,
Namque coquus domini debet habere gulam.


CHAP. 27.
Of Funerals.
AS man (above other creatures) is honored in life, so ought his burial be
decent and honorable: Wherein we are to follow the example of our Savior
Christ being both God and man. For albeit he subjected himself to worldly
contumelies, and death ignominious, yet was his Funeral notable and glorious,
according to the prophecy of Esaias, saying, Eterit sepulchrum eius gloriosum
pro vt sepulchra Adae; Abrahae, Isaac and Jacob, and eorum vxorum, and aliorum
plurium patriarcharum fuerit gloriosa Cap. 11.

It seems also (of all ancientie) that burying of the dead has been much
commended: For we find in Eccles. Mortuo non negabis gratiam, id est,
sepulturam. We read likewise that Tob. did bestow sepulture upon men dead and
slain.

The Romans likewise used many ceremonies in burying of the dead, anointing
their bodies, and in burning them caused many sweet spices to be cast into the
fire. For so was the corpse of Sylla buried. This custom was also observed
among the Egyptians, as appears in the last of Gene. where Joseph commanded
his Physicians, that they should embalme the body of his father Jacob. In
performing of which Ceremony they spent forty days, and thirty in mourning. In
like manner, the people of Israel mourned for Moses thirty days. Deuteronomy. 34. And
Valerius tit de Seruata relig. Makes mention that after the battle and
slaughter at Canna, the Senate of Rome commanded that every Matrone of Rome
should mourn thirty days, and not longer. Other customs among other Nations
have been used: for some were enjoined to end their mourning within forty
days: some others within three, and some in seven. But in France and England
the use of mourning has ever been thirty days, chiefly among persons of
honor, as may be conceived of a sentence given in Burgundy by an Official
there, who having cited before him a Lady called Iaquelina de la Trimoille
daughter to the Kings Lieutenant general in Burgundy, upon certain promises
matrimonial, she answered by Proctor, her appearance ought be excused, in
respect the thirty days of her fathers death were not expired: During which
time she might not go out of her house, which Plea was allowed.

By that which has been formerly said of the last of Genesis we may observe three
particular honors appertaining unto a funeral, viz. the embalming of the
body: the solemn mourning, and the concourse of friends when the corpse is
carried to interrement. For Joseph assembled all his chiese kinsfolk and
friends of the house of Pharaoh to accompany his father unto the grave: which
custom is still continued specially among persons of State and reputation. And
indeed no Nation is so uncivil or savage, as utterly to contemn the honest
burial of men's bodies. Yet do we read that the Lotophagi do cast their dead
bodies into the Sea, affirming it makes no matter whether they consume by
earth or water. Which custom the excellent Doctor Modestinus reproves in
these words: Laudandus est magis quam accusandus haeres, qui reliquias
testatoris non in mare secundum ipsius voluntatem abiecerit, sed in memoriam
humanae conditionis sepulturae tradidit. Neither do I like the conceit of
Solon, who dying in Cyprus commanded his heirs, that the bones of his body
should be burned, and the ashes dispersed throughout the Country.

In old time, the Albanoys thought it no point of piety to take care of the
dead: which Christians may not allow, as has been formerly said: Noli mortuo
denegare gratiam, Eccl. 2.

The Scythians were wont to eat the flesh of dead bodies at their feasts, as
a dish of great delicacie and honor: and the Hircani kept dogs purposely to
devour dead men's carcases. Likewise the Parthians seeing any dead body, of
man, beast, or bird, did forthwith tear off the flesh and then buried the
bones.

The Massagetae used to beat old men's bodies to death with a cudgel, and then
gave them to be eaten by Shepherds dogs, and such as died of sickness were
devoured by wild beasts. All which customs do deserve to be abhorred.

But the Athenians were so careful of Funeral duty, as if any man did
neglect to bury a Captain slain, he was capitally punished. And the
Egyptians in building of their houses, did never forget to make their Tombs
with pyramides and other ornaments of excessive cost: and they dying, their
bodies were embalmed and kept therein: as Cicero in his first book of
Tusculane questions seems to affirm.

The first great Prince that begun to bury bodies of men slain in the war,
was Hercules: and such men are much commended by the Prophet. Vos benedicti a
Domino, qui fecistis misericordiam hanc cum Domino vestro Saul, and sepelistis
eum. Also Maccabaus, commanded his enemies slain, to be buried as appears,
2. Maccob. cap. 10. 12.

Darius being slain, and his body brought to Alexander, was sent unto his
mother Tumbrudina: and Hannibal caused the carcass of Paulus Emilius to be
buried. In like manner Gracchus and Marcellus were buried by their own enemies.
Valerius lib. 5. de humanitate. And Baldus says: Expedit reipub, non minus
mortuos humari quam viuentes conseruari.

It is also extant, how Cyrus, by his testament, commanded his own body
should be buried in the earth: and so did the Emperors Caesar and Alexander; as
Leonardus Aretinus has written Epist. 94.

But omitting these Rites and Customs of time ancient, and people to us
unknown: we see that at the burial of our Princes and persons of honor all
their friends and domestical servants do assemble, and carry in their hands
the Arms, Pennons and other Hatchments appertaining unto the defunct. Which
ceremony (for the most part) is performed the 40. day after the decease of the
defunct according to the example of ceremonies used at the burial of Jacob, as
in the 50. of Genesis at large appears.

By consideration of which Chapter, it may be conceived, how pompous the
Funerals were in the old Testament, and how magnificent houses and Tombs for
that use were allowed, as appears, 1. Macchab. 13 cap. Et ^dificauit Simon
super sepulchrum patris su^, and fratru^ suorum ^dificiu^ altum visu, lapide
polito, retro and ante, and statuit septem pyramides, vnam contra vna^, patri
and matri, and quatuor fratribus: and his circum posuit columnas magnas, and
super columnas arma, ad memoriam aternam: and iuxta arma naues sculptas, quae
viderentur ab hominibus nauig antibus mare.

It appears also in holy Scripture, that the body of Christ was buried with a
great ceremony; and how Joseph and Nicod^mus carried him honorably. John 19.
Venit ergo Joseph, and tulit corpus Jesus. Venit autem and Nicodemus quivenerat
ad Iesum nocte primum, ferens mixturam myrrhae and aloes, quasi libras centum.
Acceperunt autem corpus Jesus, and ligauerunt cum linteis, cum Aromatibus, sicut
mos est Iudaeorum sepelire etc.

We read likewise in Tob. 12. Sepelire mortuos est opus pium. By which
examples it seems that pompous and honorable Funerals are not displeasing to
God, but allowed in all civil nations; with this caution, that no man should
be so superstitious as to believe these external complements to be
propitiatory unto the soul. For S. Augustine in his book de ciuitat Dei
says, Sepulchroru^ memoria sumptum funeris magis viuorum est consolatio, quam
defunctorum vtilitas. And S. Ambrose in his sermons says thus. Quid proficit
sepulchrorum superbia? damna sunt potius viuentium, quam subsidia mortuorum.

Thus much touching honorable burials: whereunto we will add, That forso
much as diverse degrees of men do usually and casually meet at our funerals in
England, it seems necessary that in accompanying of every corpse, heed should
be taken that no indignity be offe^ed unto any Mourner, but each man to march in
such place, as is meet for his estate.

The Heralds therefore by their skill and care, are to take a List or Roll of
all Mourners, then to marshall them into several classes, by their diverse
titles, as Gentlemen, Esquires, Knights, Barons, Vicounts, Earls, etc. ever
preferring her Majesty's Officers and servants before all others, in pari
dignitate. And if none of her Majesty's servants be there present, then every
one to proceed according to his antienty in pari dignitate.

In this point also it behooves the Herald to be heedfull and provide that no
man exceed in expenses or charges superfluous, but every one to confine his
cost within the bounds of his ability: for otherwise doing, the executors or
heirs of the defunct, shall hereby receive prejudice. For some times we have
seen the burial of an Esquire more costly then was fit for a Knight, and a
Knights funeral such as might become a Lord. To avoid which excess I could
wish, that excepting the number of poor who are commonly so many as the
defunct was years old, her Majesty or Lord Marshall would be pleased to
prescribe a certain number of Mourners to every degree, and that no man of
greater title then the defunct should be permitted to mourn, so as the chief
mourner may ever be in pari dignitate with the defunct, and all the rest of
meaner quality. As at the burial of an Esquire, only Esquires, Gentlemen,
and other inferior persons to mourn. At the funeral of a Knight, only
Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen and their inferiors. The like order to be taken at
all burials of higher estates. Provided nevertheless, that if the defunct be a
Knight of the Garter, a Knight of the Privy counsel, or a Lord by office, then
it may be permitted Noblemen to mourn, because they are reputed persons
honorable and in pari dignitate: for as has been formerly said, Dignitas and
Nobilitas idem sunt Barthol de dig.

Nota, That an Officer of Arms wears the Kings coat at th'enterrements of
Noblemen, and others of dignity and Worship, not only for the ordering of the
funerals, and marshalling of the degrees, as aforesaid, but to the intent that
the defunct may be known to all men to have died honorably in the Kings
allegiance, without spot of infamy, or other disworship to his Name, Blood,
and Family: And that his heir, if he have any, or next of whole blood, or some
one for him (which commonly is the chief mourner) may publicly receive in the
presence of all the mourners, the Coat armor, Helm, Creast, and other
Atchieuements of honor belonging to the defunct: whereof the King of Arms of
the Province is to make record, with the defuncts march, issue and decease for
the benefit of posterity.

CHAP. 28.
Of Monuments, and Epitaphes.
NOw to close up these discourses of Honor and humane glory, it shall not be
impertinent, to wish that among other things, whereby the memory of Noble
Princes, and other great personages is preserved, that some care were also had
to save their Tombs, and places of burial from ruin and violation A matter
of more consequence, then every one marketh, yet necessary to be looked unto,
both for public, and private respects.

Marcus Tullius in his Oration against Varro tells how Scipio did think
Portratures, Pictures, and other Monuments were devised to ornifie Temples,
Cities, and Princes palaces. In an other place also he says, they were made
to retain in memory, the excellent Actions of such men, as had lived
honorably, and died virtuously.

Another respect public, to continue Monuments in reputation, is that thereby
diverse Arts of good quality (as Grauing, Caruing, Masonry, Painting,
Imbossing, and other commendable knowledges, be exercised. For by such
industry, many princely buildings be beautified, and many Artificers do aspire
to great fame and riches: as Teledius and Theodorus his brother: Lysias and
Mentor, who framed the portraitures of Jupiter Capitolinus, and Diana Ephesia,
for which labor, the Poet Iuuenal vouchsafed him this commendation: Multus
vbique labor, rarae sine Mentore mensae.

But that which persuades me most to allow and commend the Sciences of
sculpture and work graven, is this: We find in holy Scripture, how Besaleel
the son of Vri, and Ooleab the son of Achimesech received from God the
Spirit of knowledge, how to make all manner of graven works in gold, silver,
and other metals, as appears in Exodus cap. 35.

Seeing then that these Arts of pourtraying, painting, and sculpture, are by so
great authority approved, in vain it seems to remember the praises which
profane Histories have given to Phidias for making the portraiture of Iupitre
Olympius, or Archesilaus that graued the Image of Diana: works of more
excellency then can be expressed. The like praise is written of Lysippus,
whose hand only was permitted to make the pourtraiture of Alexander the Great:
as Horace seems to affirm.

Edicto vetuit, ne quis se praeter Apellem
P^ngeret, autalius Lysippo duceret era
Fortis Alexandri vultum simulantia.
The Laws Civil having regard to the preservation of monuments, did provide,
that if any bondsman or other servant do break or deface any Tomb, or other
funeral monument, he shall be condemned to the galley or forced to grind in a
mill (the fact being done by his own election:) But if he were thereunto
commanded, then he shall be banished only. And who so does convey or take away a
part or piece of any tomb or grave, the same shall be confiscate unto the
Prince, 2. of Cod.

If a Judge or other Magistrate be informed of any such fact, and does not
punish the offender, he shall forseit twenty pound in gold: and every person
having committed such a crime, shall pay ten pound in gold, and endure such
punishments as the laws have prescribed. Cod. 3.

Note also that every offense of this quality is reputed equal to peri^rie:
and whosoever purloyneth any thing appertaining to a grave or place ^ sepulture,
shall be deemed guilty both of theft and sacrilege.

So does it appear, that the violation of Monuments funeral, has eu^ been
reputed a crime infamous: and every generous mind desiring* eternize the
memory of his own virtue, or the honor of his noble Acestors, cannot endure
so great indignity: for as infamous persons en^^uour to bury their vices in
oblivion, so excellent spirits do care that ^e fame of virtue may continue
ever: saying with the Christian Poet: Tradite me famae, ne prorsus inutilis olim
Vixisse videar, pereamque in funere totus.


The Kings of Turkey, notwithstanding their misbeleefe and barb^^ me, have by
law commanded, that no man upon pain of death shall bre^ the tomb of any
Turk, Moore, Jew, Arabian, Persian, Gentile, or Cl^tian, and that law is most
strictly observed: for when Soliman Emperor^ ^urks marched with his Army into
Egypt, passing through Iudaea, (...) of his Soldiers (near unto the city of
Gaza) did break open the ^aue of a certain Physician, supposing to find
treasure: for which fact, ^the Emperors commandment they were apprehended and
fourte^ of them hanged, and three others pierced through their bodies with
(...), as persons that had committed sacrilege.

The same Emperor also coming into a Chapel at (...) where the monument of
Godfrey of Bouillon remains, and thereupon this inscription, commanded that
no stone thereof should be taken or touched: Hie iacet inclytus Dux Godfrey,
Duc de Bouillon, qui totam istam terram acquisiuit cultui, cuius anima regnet
cum Christo, Amen.

And since we are here occasioned to speak of these matters, it shall not be
amiss to say somewhat of Epitaphs, being indeed Monuments of no less glory
and perpetuity, then the greatest Obeliskes and Pyramides of the world.

Of Epitaphs be diverse kinds: some are praiseworthy, some partial, some
inuectiue, some conceited, some Poetical, and some Moral, according to the
sundry humors and passions of several writers.

The ancient Romans did make their Epitaphs brief, plain, and true, using
only a few letters for words: but in these our days no words are thought
praises enough, nor no praises can suffice unless they do exceed.

My self have seen Epitaphs, wherein an ordinary Orator has been compared
to Cicero, a mean Poet to Virgil, and an audacious captain to Caesar, Pompey,
Scipio, Cyrus, and all the Worthies.

Julius Caesar had no Epitaph at all, but under his pourtraiture some few
^nscriptions: as this, Parenti optime merito. And on the tomb of Pompey the
Great, were these words only, Hic situs est magnus P. Of Cyrus thus, Quisquis
es mortalium, and vndecunque aduenis (aduenturum enim te scio) Cyrus ^um qui
Persis imperium quaesiui. Hoc igitur humi paululum, quo meum corpus ob^egitur,
mihi ne inuideas: Plutarch. Also of Scipio, only these few words are ^ound:
Deuicto Hannibale, capta Carthagine, and aucto
Imperio, hoc cineres marmore tectos habes:
Cui non Europe, non obstitit Africa quondam,
Respice res bominum, quam breuis vtna premit.
And of later time for Charles the fifth, it was likewise said: Liquisti
exuuias gelido sub marmore, sed non
Quantum Caesar eras, marmor and vrna capit.
Pro tumulo ponas orbem, pro tegmine coelum,
Pro facibus stellas, pro imperio empyreon.


Aepitaph (says Garzon) should remember the name of the defunct and progeny
truly, his country and quality briefly, his life and virtues ^destly, and his
end Christianly, exhorting rather to example then vain (...). And thus much
concerning Epitaphs, the kinds whereof being diu^, and the examples infinite,
we will therefore conclude with one general. Nascendo morimur, vita altera
morte paratur:
Vita haec mors, mortis funera finis erunt.
Or thus: ^uid? Omnia. Si Nihil; cur Ominia?
^^id Omnia? Nihil. Nihil; vt Omnia.


FINIS.

