A Detection and Querimonie of the daily enormities and abuses committed in
physic, Concerning the three parts thereof: that is, The Physicians part, The
part of the Surgeons, and the art of Poticaries. Dedicated unto the Two most
famous universities Oxford and Cambridge. Now lately set forth by John
Securis physician.

Non ferit haec medica praestantes art Securis,
Nec medici officio qui been functus erit.
Non ferit insignes chirurgos, nec myropolas,
Ars, quibus and pietas, sunt been iuncta simul.
1566.

CORDATISSIMIS, IM pendioque venerandis vtriusque Acade^ miae, Oxoniinimirum
and Cantabrigiae Archigr^^ mateis, Rectoribus, Decanis, Praesidibus, Docta
ribus and Magistris: Johannes Securts Medicus Academiae quondam Oxonienus
alumnus, salutem in Christo Jesus.
IAmpridem in animo me cum constitueram (viri long clarissimi) genio nescio
quo, nisi forte optimo (quatum certe mihi persuadeo) instiga^te permotus, de
abusu ac corruptela artis nostrae Hippocraticae, commentariolum quendam in
lucem edere. Hoc tamen negotii eousque, distuli ac fere semper detrectaui,
quousque, nec humanitas, nec literaru^ decus, nedum ipsa musarum maiestas, nec
impostorum medicantium versutia, and praestigiae, amplius me tacere, eaque
silentio praeterire quae aduersus pestile^tissimum hoc hominum genus adduci
possunt, permitterent. Ta^ta siquidem vbique gentium sed in hoc potissimum
regno viget prestigiatoru^, agyrtarum, inca^tatoru^, veneficaru^, veteratorum,
atque adeo carnificu^ me dicorum turba: qui quotidie huic sese arti vi and
viole^tia intrudu^t ac insinua^t, adeoque sua, (proh nefas) in multorum necem
ac perniciem experimenta faciunt: vt mirandum multis modis sit, quin potius
impense dolendum, ta^tam idque impune fieri Reginae subditorum stragem, tanta
co^mitti piacula, ta^crassos, ac foedos in sancta ac christiana republica
(laxatis velut hahenis effrenatae licentiae) errores persistere, nedum
reperiri. Verum quum pensiculatius rem tota^ introspicio, quum id quod res est
mecum perpendo, ac arctissime me^te reuoluo: Non hoc vtique vsquendeo nouum
esse, nec recens natu^ comperio. Quinimo a multis iam retro seculis, (si diuino
Hippocrati credimus) contigit hanc celeber rima^ medicinae artem, male
tractatam fuisse, ac foedis male feriatorum hominu^ technis ac delyramentis,
etia^ Hippocratis aeuo, etia^num Galeni aliorumque veterum medicorum fuisse
aetate corruptam, conspurcatam, atque polluta^ Nam vt Galeni verba ex primo
lib. Therap* methodi iam subticea^: Hippocratem long Galeno vestutiorem in
medium proferam in libello cui lex titulus estita loquentem. Medicina (inquit)
omnium artium praeclarissima est. Verum propter ignorantiam eorum qui eam
exercent, and ob vulgi ruditatem quod tales iudicat and habet: eo ia^ res
deuenit, vt omnium artium long vilissima censeatur. At vero hoc peccatu^ ob
ha^c potissimu^ causam mihi co^mitti videtur: Soli na^que medicinae nulla poena
in rebus publices sta tuta est praeterque ignominiae. Veru^ baecipsa non
afficit neque contingit eos qui ex composito personam ipsius induerunt.
Simillimi enim huiusmodi medici sunt personis quae in tragoedijs introducuntur.
Quemadmodum enim illi figura^ quidem and habitum ac persona eorum quos
referunt, habent: illi ipsi autem vere non sunt: Sic and medici fama quidem and
nomme multi, re autem and opere valde pauci. Idem Hippocrates in lib. de
decenti ornatu, sic ait: Raptores medici sunt qui fora frequentant, ruditate ac
inscitia sua imponentes, and in circulis ciuitatum versantes. Cognouerit autem
quis ex vestitu and alijs lineamentis. Quamuis enim fuerint splendide ornati,
multo magis fugiendi sunt, and a conspicientibus odio habendi. Haec ille. His
itaque iam perspicue satis superque constat, apud veteres etiam primaeuae
aetatis viros, fuisse in art medica errones multos ac impostores. Vtcunque
sit, hoc consta^ter adseuerare non dubito, no^ tot olim medicastros, non tot vt
ita nominem Theriacarios, no^ tam multos fucatos, personatos, atque phaleratos,
idque vtriusque sexus medicos fuisse, q^ nu^c nostra aetate oppidatim, immo
vicatim sunt, and videntur. Istuc proculdubio admirari nunque desino, quod
leges cum diuinae tum Cesareae in omnes si offenderint caeterarum artium
homines animaduertant, in solos autem medicinae spurios gnatos, imo gnathones,
and sycophantas non animaduertunt.

Faxit precor Deus Opt. Max, aliquando, vtigrauissimo ac sapientissi mo
augustissimi Senatusconsulti decreto: sacrosancto Episcoporum patrocinio ac
consilio, atque vestro pariter (consultissimi Academiaru^ proceres) pio
vnanimique suffragio, semel velut postliminio reuocetur sincera, vera and
germana rerum medicinalium administratio, verus vsus, and sic demu^ vera cu^
solida doctrina me thodus. In rebus quide^ multis, praeci pueque quae ad
religione^ specta^t, refor matio ia^pride^ facta est. Cur no^ perinde in
medicame^tarijs facta sit* Sed ita res habentur humanae, vt quum nihil mali
(hoc est nullus morbus) nos vrgeat, de malo profligando tan quam nimium securi
non cogitamus. Plerique fere omnes dum sani degimus sanitatem non moramur nec
magni pendimus. At vbi primum sanitas euanuerit, tum demum velut Phryges, sero
sapere inchoamus, ac quid tum sanitas, and quam preciosus in tota vita
thesaurus fuerit, cum nostro saepe periculo igaui ac socordes percipimus.
Caeterum, vt nunc tandem colophonem his dictis imponam, hoc opusculum quod iam
vernacula lingua perstrinxi, vobis (clarissimi iuxta ac reuere^diss. Doctores
ac Magistri) tanqua^ strenuissimis ac optimis in hac causa futuris patronis,
offerre nominatim, nuncupareque constitui. Munusculum sane fateor indignum
tantis viris, nihilosecius tamen, qua^do pio beneuoloque profectum sit animo,
benigno itide^ animo, obnixe vos precor, suscipere ne grauemini. Obsecro nunc
tandem Deum patrem Seruatoris nostri Jesus Christi* vt semper in virtute verbi
sui vos regat, protegat ac tueatur, vestra omnia dirigat opera, omnes actus,
verba, negotia, literas ac studia: vestra^ vtramque denique Academiam promoueat
magis magisque in omne decus* virtutem and dignitatem prouebat: ad honorem,
laudem and gloriam sacrosancti nominis sui in sempiternum.

Amen. Idem vobis supra memoratus, and nunc and olim de uotissimus, Johannes
Securis Medicus.
This book shall be divided in* to three principal parts.
The first part shall entreat of the manyfolde erroures and abuse of false
and unlearned physicians.

The second entreats of the ignorance, presumption, and quid pro quo, of
unjust Apothecaries.

The third part shall discuss of the rashenes and lewd temeritie of a great
many Surgeons.

The first part entreats of diverse and sundry errors and abuses of the
unlearned and wicked sort of Physicians.
THAT excellent man and great clerk Aristoteles, who for his incomparable
doctrine is of all learned men named the prince of philosophers has this
saying in the.vii. book of his Ethikes: Non oportet tantum verum dicere, sed
etiam causam falsi assignare, that is: A man may not only tell the truth, but
he must also show and declare the cause of falshod and error. As who should
say: The truth can never so well appear, as when it is compared to his
contrary, which is error, lie, and falshode. Quia opposita semper iuxta se
posita, magis elucescunt: Contrary things set one against an other, are always
a great deal better known.

The philosophers of ancient time as it appears plainly in Aristotle and
Galen, ye and in the holy doctors of the church. In many of their works, had
in a manner more adoo to confute the false errors, sophistry and cauillations
that were then used and imagined as true doctrine, the^ they had to write the
very truth it self. The great mercy of God had never be^ so well known if the
fall and transgression of man had not ben. And as S. Paul says in ye. v. chap.
to ye Romans: Vbiexuberauit peccatu^, ibi magis exuberauit gratia, Where syn
has exceded there grace has the more exceded. And Christ in S. Luke ye vii.
cha. said of Mary Magdaleu: Many syns ar forgiven her, because she loved much.
Now therefore, before I speak of ye abuses and enormities of phisike, I will
show and declare first, what is the part office and condition of a good
Physician. Thus doing I will first allege Hippocratis Iusiurandum, that is, the
oath that Hipocrates would yt every physician should take before he practice any
phisike. I will not recite ye hole chapter, but ye chiefest part first in
latin, then in english. Caeteru^ quod ad aegros attinet sanandos, dieta^ ipsis
co^stitua^ pro facultate, and iuditio meo co^modam, omneque detrimentu^ et
iniuria^ ab eis prohibebo. Neque vero vllius preces apud me adeo validae
fuerint, vt cuipia^ venenu^ su^ propinaturus, neque etia^ ad hanc re^ co^siliu^
dabo. Similiter aute^ neque musieri talum vulnae subdititiu^ ad corrumpendum
co^ceptum vel foetu^ dabo* Porro praeterea, sancte vitam and artem mea^
conseruabo. Nec vero calculo laborantes secabo, sed viris chirurgiae operarijs,
eius rei faciendaelocu^ dabo. In quascunque aute^ domos ingrediar, ob
vtilitatem aegrotantiu^ intrabo, ab omnique iniuria volu^taria inferenda, and
corruptione cu^ alia, tu^ praesertim operum venereoru^ abstinebo, sieve
muliebria, sieve virilia, libe rorumue hominu^ aut seruorum cor pora mihi
co^tigerint cura^da. Quaecu^que vero inter curandu^ videro aut audiuero, imo
etia^ ad medicandum non adhibitus in co^muni hominum vita cognouero, ea
siquidem efferre non contulerit, tacebo, and tanqua^ ar cana apud me continebo.
The english is this: And as concerning the curyng of the sick, I will ordeyn
and devise for them as good a diete as shall lie in my power and judgment. And
I will take heed yt they fall in no damage nor hurt. Nor yet any man's prayers
shall so much preuail with me, that I give poison to any man, neither will I
counsel any man so to do. Likewise I will give no manner of medicine to any
woman with child to destroy her child. Moreover I will use my life and
science godly. I will not cut those that have the stone, but I will commit that
thing only to the Surgions. In what house so ever I shall come in, my coming
shall be for the pacients commodity and profit. And I will refrain willingly
from doing any hurt or wrong, and from falshode, and chiefly from venereous
acts, what kind of bodies soever it shall chance me to have in cure: whether it
be of me^ or women, of fre or bond servants. And whatsoever I shall see or hear
among my cures (yea although I be not sought nor called to any) whatsoever I
shall know among the people, if it be not lauful to be uttered, I shall keep
close, and keep it as a secret unto my self: Again* the same Hippocrates
says in the book or chapter called Lex. (To eschew tediousnes I will leave the
latin) who soever says, he will truly get him the knowledge of phisike, he must
satisfy his mind, and as it were be accompanied with these guides, with
nature, science, a place mete and convenient for study and lerning, an
institution from childhod, a labor and peinful diligence with a long tune. Ite^
in his book de me dico, he says: The physician must be of a good color, and
comely countenance, and of a good disposition of the body: he must also be
had in estimation among the common people, by comely apparel, and by sweet
savors (so that he be not suspected of to much excess) for by such means
the pacientes are wont to be delited.

In like manner the Physician must see and study, that he be of a modest and
sobre mind, and not only as concerning modest talk, but also in other
things concerning his behavior, he must be well disposed: for there is nothing
yt gets a man better estimation and authority then to be endued with an
honest life and good manners. His countenance must be like one that is given to
study and sad, and yet not over much, for so he should be taken to be
stubborn and scornful, and like one yt disdaineth other men's company: but on
the contrary, he that has always a laughing contenance, and is given to too
much iesture and mirthe: is taken for a lewd person. And therefore this must
needs be eschewed. Also he must be just and bear him self upright in all his
busynes and affairs. etc.

In his book De decenti ornatu he says: a Physician being a Philosopher is
equal in a manner unto god. Item it is decent that the physician be gentle and
curteis, for rudeness and churlishnes are greatly misliked, as well of the whole
as of the sick. He must often visit his pacie^t and be diligent. He may not
declare all things to his pacient, but some things he must keep close from
him, and must conforte him with a lively and merry countenance. And sometimes to
withdraw him from his fond desiers, he must rebuke him, in resisting with
sharp words: and sometimes again he must entreat and conforte him, with a
dexterity and gentle persuasion. And yet notwithstanding he may not always
tell him of his present state, nor what shall become of him.

Thus much I have brought out of Hipocrates to testifye and declare the office
and condition of a Physician. Now some thing will I bring out of Galen, who in
his book entitled quod optimus medicus idem e^^ et Philosophus, declares
plainly by the very title of ye book it self, what learning a Physician ought
to have. He says also in his book de Antidotis, That a Physician if it be
possible ought to have the knowledge of al herbs, if not, at the least he
ought to know those which be commonly used. Again in the commentaries upon
the first book of Hippocrates de morbis vulgaribus: The Physician says he
ought in any wise to have a respect to pro fit and help his pacientes, and if
he can not, then at the least wise that he hurt them not.

Item upon the vi. book de morbis vulgaribus he says: Albeit that the
physician be gentle and curteis, sober and also merry, yet nevertheless he ought
not to minishe his gravity, for unless the paciente have in reverence and
estimation his phisicio^ as a god, he shall never follow and obey his counsel,
it will be therefore very decent that ye physician do not so abase him self and
flatter, that he bring him self in a contempt: Nor again, as it were an
other a Eallianactes, show him self hoggish and rude. And that shall he easily
bring to pass, if in his countenance and talk and al his honest behauior, he
retain the gravity of a physician, and so do persuade his pacient to follow
and keep those things that he appoynteth and ordayneth for him.

But now lest I should be to tediouse in alleging many authors: I will come to
those of our time, and namely I will bring that man of high learning and famous
memory master doctor Siluius, who sometimes was ye public reader of physic
in the university of Paris, having daily at his Lecture little lack of a M.
auditors (or as they call the^, scholars) of the which I being one, may plainly
testify it to be true The same Siluius says in his book De ordine legendi
libros Galeni e^ Hippocratis, that a good Physician must have al these
properties.

First, he must be naturally bent and given to only truth, all the days of
his life, he must be circum spect, discrete, and of a good pregnant wit and
memory.

Secondly, he must have a sound and, healthye body, and must be able to abide
great pain in studying.

Thirdly, he must be endued with great richesse, or at least he must have
sufficient to live by.

Fourthly, he must have and get his learning of the best learned me^ of his
time, who diligently, even from his childhode must instruct him with these
sciences: grammar, Logic, music, Astronomy, and chiefly (as Plato
counsayleth) Arithmetic and geometry, and also Philosophy.

Now to come to my chief Intent and purpose, and (as they are wont to say) to
the principal: These things above rehearsed, well wayed and considered: what
hope may there be conceived? what foundation and stay may be had? yea what
security and sauegard is there in these sort of fellows: which now a days
almost in all places so rashly, so fondly and so wickedly do abuse the noble art
and science of Physic. Where is their great and manifold knowledge of the
tounges, of the liberal sciences, of Philosophy, of anatomy, of the simples,
of the compou^d medicines, and of the temperatures or co^plerions? where have
they studied? of who^ have they learned their science? (if I may call it a
science) what authors have they seen or red. Many standed without logike and
natural philosophy. For Aristotle says Vbi desinit Physicus, ibi incipit me
dicus, A man must first peruse natural Philosophy, before he enter into
phisycke.

I do not deny but to have some books of phisike in english specially of the
Simples, well and cunnyngly set forth for Surgeons, Apothecaries, yea and for
sober and wise men, that delight to read in such things, and know not the
Latin tongue, is not unmeet nor hurtefull. Although I would not wyshe, nor
it is not decente, that either Surgion or Apothecarie, or any other manne,
being no physician should practice or use any inward medicine without the
learned and approved physicians counsel. For as the two Proverbs says:
Falcem ne mitt^^ in messem alienam, Etne suitor vltra^ crepidam, Let no man
meddle with an other man's corn, but with his own. Let the shoemaker meddle
with his shoes.

But to the purpose, do you think to have in your English Books, all the
perfect knoweledge that is required in Physic? Yea, have you the tenthe
part only? We could never have it yet in Greek and Latin perfectly (not
wythstandynge we have it no we better then ever we had before) how then
should you have it: If English Books could make men cunnyng Physicians, then
pouchemakers, threshers plonghme^ and cobblers might be Physicians as well as
the best, if they can read.

Then were it a great folly for us to bestow so much labor and study all our life
time in the schools and universities, to break our brains in reading so
many authors, to be at the lectures of so many learned men, yea and the
greatest follye of all were, to proceed in any degree in the Universities with
our great cost and charges, when a sir John lack latin a peddler, a weauer,
and oftentimes a presumptuous woman, shall take upon them (yea and are
permytted) to mynyster Medicine to all men, in every place, and at all times.
O tempora, O mores, O Deum immortalem, To what purpose have the universities
benerected and founded in times paste? To what purpose have they so many goodly
privileges granted unto them of al princes successively from all ages? what
does it prevail for us that be learned to proceed (as I said) in any degree of
master, of bacheler, or doctor, and so to be allowed and have authority to
use our science? when every man, woman, and child that list, may practice and
use phisike ( idque impune) as well as we? and so, many times not only hinder
and defraud us of our laufull stipende and gaynes: but (which is worst of all
and to much to be lamented) shall put many in hasarde of their life, yea and be
the destruction of many. Is this tolerable? will the magistrates always wynke
at this? shall there never be no reformation for such abuses? God of his great
mercy grant that ones they may be reformed. For if they be not, verily it
will greatly discourage men of learning hereafter to apply them selves to the
study of Physyke, whereby the healpe; succor and sauegard of many a sick man,
woman, and child shall be hyndred and secluded: yea and many shall fall in
danger, and be sick which otherwise might be preserved from al sickness by the
right ministry of physike. For physyke is appointed not only to expelle
sickness, but also to preserve the body in health.

But now to the third part I answer: you say that you heal many times by
the gift of Nature: I pray you tell me what you mean by nature. Perhaps
you understand by Nature; a natural inclynation or dysposition, given by the
influence of stars and planettes, (as I do not deny but that we may be the
better moved and inclined to any art by their influence) yet is it not a mere
gift, but only a disposition, and as it were a dexterity and natural
towardness to heal some kind of disease: which thing notwithstanding is
oftentimes done more by chance, then by any certain Method or Reason. For
verilye have you never so good a wit, disposition and inclination to any
art: yet if you apply not that art and exercise your self in it earnestly,
and continually, and specially in this science of physike (which can never be
well used without great study, and the knowledge of diverse other sciences, as
I have said before) your doyngs shall be but rash vain, and of small effect.
For as the philosopher says: Scientiae nobis, non innascu^tur, sed
acquiru^tur, The sciences are not infused in us at our birth, but are gotten
afterward: And science is thus defined in Logic: Science is an habit, (that
is) a ready, prompt and bent disposition to do any thing, confirmed and gotten
by long study, exercise and use. Therefore the natural inclination by the
influence of the stars can profit but little, unless you apply your self
with great diligence and study to that kind of science or art that you intend
to practice and follow.

But if you understand (by Nature) God: I say plainly, that god does not give
the gift of healing to any wicked people, but only by a special privilege to
those only that be of a most pure, sobre, and holy life, as we read of the
apostles, and some of the Prophets. And as saint Paul says in the first
epistle, the.xii. chap. to the Corinth. To some is given the gift of healyng
by the holy ghost. So that to hele by this manner of means, is not commonly to
use herbs, roots, or any other drouges bought at the poticaries shop, or to
take any money or other reward for the healynge. For this kind of healyng is
the mere gift of god workynge in those (to whom it pleases God to give it)
without any labor or study. We hear of none now a days that has this
gift of nature (I mean of God) saving only the kings of England, and the
French kings, which as the Excellent doctor should be better and more
honestly truly and justly used and ministered then it is now in these dais.

And because that I would that every man should see and know, what articles
they be that I delivered, I have thought it good to take a copy of them (which
notwithstanding I have somewhat altered) and rehearse them here in order.

Seven Articles concerning the ministration and use of Phisike.
The first.
It were very mete, expedient and necessary that no physician should practice
physic in any dioces, unless he were first allowed by some university: or at
the least having sufficient learning in the said science, he were allowed
and licensed by the bishop or his chaunceloure in that dioces wherein he
dwells.

The second.
It were good and necessary that no Surgion should practyse his surgery,
unless he could read and write, and had knowledge and experience in the
simples belonginge to his art. And that he presume not to let blood or
undertake any hard cure, without the physicians counsel, if he may
conveniently have it.

The third
That no Poticarie should minister of his own head, or ordeyne any purgation
or other composition of Physic for any man: or that he should prepare and
make any purgation or notable confection, without the Physicians advise and
counsel, unless that the Physician had first seen and vewed the Ingredientes,
whereof the compositions are made, and specially the purgations.

The fourth.
It is not decent nor profitable for the common weal, that any ignorant lewd
or ill suspected person, be he man or woman, should be suffered to make, sell
or minister medecines to any body, but that such kind of persons (being duly
examined and conuyeted by the learned Physicians of the dioces) should have
condign punishment appointed them by the Bishop or his chauncelour.

The fyfthe
That no Physician do take upon him the name of any degree of Schole, as
bachelour, master of Art, or doctor: or cause and permit any writer or
printer so to term him, unless he can approve it to be so in deed by any
university.

The syxte.
That no midwife should disdain to come ask counsel of the Physician, as
often as any woman being in labor of child, is in danger. It were good also
that the midwiues were first sworn to the bishop, before they take upon them
their office.

The seventh.
It were also good and expediente that (as the use of London is, granted by an
act of Parliament) that the Physicians in every other dioces one or two, or
more, should have license of the bishop, to search and vewe the poticaries
shop once a year at the least, and see whether their stuff and medecines be
good and lawful or not.

These Articles above rehearsed I thought good here to allege, (although gora,
the root of Gentian: for Hmatites, A methystus: for Semperuiuum minus, the
herb called thrist or great Stonecrope, they have taken little Stonecrope in
making their Populeum,

To the purpose, where as the act presupposes a speculation or practice, they
practice at a venture a thing which they know not, whether it be cold or
hot, dry, or moist.

Item, where as the Act gives them license to mynister drynkes for the stone,
strangurie, and agues: They know not the stone in the back, from the stone in
the blader: neither whether the stone may be wasted and broken by drinks and
powders, or had out by incision. Moreover they know no difference between a
colyke and a stone: for they name them both one, where as they be two sundry
diseases. They know not what Stranguria is, nor how many manner of ways it may
be engendered in the body. They can scant discern a tertian ague from a
quotidian. As for the mixed and complicate agues, they know not what to make of
them They call them new diseases, because they can give them no other name.

Now in good faith, if these ioly fellows had but that knowledge only, which
the said act presupposes them to have: it were not so great a danger, if they
some times were permytted to give some medicines for the foresaid dyseases.
But I pray you, how many of them have that little knowledge? which knowledge
is but little in deed in comparison of many other sciences, which be not only
profitable, but also necessary to attain the noble science of phisike. If the
other acts which has been made for the reformation of Physike, be well scanned
and conferred together one with an other, it shall plainly appear, that the
before named act, shall not make so greatly for their purpose, who by ignorance
and rashness do use to practice phisike at their pleasure.

Verily I much marvel at one thing that many which be of the higher sort,
reputing them selves to be of no small gravity and wisdom will sometimes give
credit to such lewd persons, counterfayting the physicians. In deed I
suppose that they be partly deceived by the vain persuasions and fair
flattering speech of such fellows. Their communication is so fair, sweet,
gentill, pleasant and amiable: and their promise and waranting so earnest and
great, that they will go nigh to deceive the wisest man that is, if he have not
the more grace, and be very ware of them. And the better to allure the simple
people unto them: They will say to him who^ they do take in hand: Sir, I will
nonne of your money no we until you be whole: I will have money only of you for
the medicines, which I must occupy for your disese. They will lightly warrant
every manne to heal him, of what discase soever he has: And for all diseases
they have commonly but two or three sorts of medicines, and yet most commonly
they be purgations or vomites.

They purge so much and so often, that they purge many times as well the soul
out of the body, as the money out of the purse.

Moreover, these fellows will also (to have the more credit given unto them)
name them selves after some great learned man's name. Somtunes they fain them
selves to be of some strange country, and will counterfayte their language
(As I know one in Salisbury) and look to be called by some name of dignity or
worship: as Master, gentylman, domine, doctor, and al to deceive the people.

O I would wyshe, that every man would take heed, and I beseech God that every
man may be ware of such false Physytions, which may be lykened to wolves or
foxes, clothed outwardlye with lambs skyns, but inwardly are full of subtlety
and deceit. Many perish through the year at their nands, whereby the good
science of physike is brought into an obloquie and reproach.

Many learned doctors of our time have in their works inueyed greatly against
these abuses, and have wished some punishment to be establyshed by the
Maiestrates, unto such as wickedly and without all reason mysuse and practice
this science.

Here I could also somewhat touch some of the learned sort, which although
they bear themselves never so stout, and appear to me^ to do all things well:
yet nevertheless, they halt sometimes on both sides: They se and know many
abuses in ye poticaries shops, and yet they wink at the matter, and are loath
to displease the poticarie, who perchance is their friend. But the proverb
says: Amicus Socrates, amicus Plato, Amica tamen magis veritas, The truth
ought to take place in all things, and above all things.

There be also many physicians, that thinks them selves so profou^dly learned,
that they believe that no man is able to match with the^ in lerning, they be so
arrogant and scornful, that although the pacient himself be content to have the
cou^ sail of two or three other physicians, to consult and confer together
of his disease: yet they will not wyllyngely grant to it, but rather disdain
to confer with any other, the which perchance are sommetymes a greatte deal
better learned then they are. They remember not what Hippocrates their master
says, in his book de preceptionibus, who being in Latin translated says
thus: Nec vero indecore se illegeret medicus, quiin rei praesentis augustia
circa aegrum aliquem, et imperitia tenebras offunde^te, alios quoque accersere
iusserit, quo ex co^muni consideratione, res circa aegrum inquirantur ac
cognoscantur, and illi cooperatores fiant ad auxilli ferendi facultate. The
english is thus: That physician shall not do amiss, nor behave himself
uncomely, which being as perplex in the business about his paciente, and
doubtful for want of perfect knowledge: do cause other physicians to be
called, that by common deliberation, and conferringe one with an other, ye
pacientes affairs may be dewly examined and known, so that they may be as
coadiutors (yt is to say, helpers one to an other) to provide for some remedy.
Some there be also (lest I wene that other men should learn their cunning)
that will rather scrible the^ write a recept, and will make such dashes and
strange abbreuiations in their bills, that their writing seems rather to be
arabicke, or like the writings of the Cabalistes, then Latin. I fear me that
they that write so, are ashamed of their own occupation, and fear least that
if they should write plain, their errors and faults should be espied. He
that is a plain man will deal* playnelye, will speak plainly, and write
plainly.

Some there be also that be so stiff necked and heady in their opinions, that
they will be of no man gainsayde in no wise, no and if you bring them never so
good a reason, although you allege them never so many authorities.

But I say, Plus vident duo oculique vnus. All the wit of the world lies not
in one man's head. Therefore to confer together upon a matter, it does
oftentimes great good, and no man (be he never so well learned) ought to
refuse it, as often as time, place, or any other occasion shall serve.

Item, some physicians there be, that be so greedy and of so an insatiable
desire, that they care and pass not in what danger they cast them selves in,
what shame and damage they sustain, so that they may have many cures, where
sometimes one would suffice the^ well enough and be more perchance then they
can well bring to pass. They be so covetous that they would have all, and do al
them self, and they have envy many times at other honest men having cures,
when they have none. This doing verelye they bring them selves in great
contempt, and does as it were abate and blemishe the honorable science of
physic, which requires rather to be sought earnestly with great suit, with
humility, reverence and prayinge, then to be offered, and as it were objected
indiscreetly to every man, and in every place, like a blind harpers song or a
Pedlars pack. The common proverb says, that offered service stynketh. And I
have hard oftentimes say, that physic unless it be earnestly sought and well
paid for, it will never prosper nor work well with the pacientes, I mean
not by this but that the Physician must be always liberal and merciful to
the poor, on whom his living depends not but on the rich Now to conclude
and finish this first part, I will leave to entreat any more of physicians,
(except as occasion shall serve) and now in the next part followinge I will
speak of poticaries, and touch somewhat their abuse and negligence. Whosoever
will read any more of the tokens and qualities of folishe and blind physicians:
Let him read a little book of mine, printed about a dose^ years past, which is
entitled: A great Galley lately com into England out of Terranoua, laden with
physicians, poticaries and surgio^s. etc. made in form of a dialoge.

The Second part entreats of the ignorance and presumption of certain
Poticaries.
IT is not unknown to many me^, and specially to those that be truly and
exactly learned in physic, that there has been, is now, yea and shall be (if
some good order be not taken) great abuses among poticaries, in handling,
keeping, chosing and dressing their drouges and medecines. In so much, that it
is suspected of most part of men (and I pray god it be not so in deed) that
among all other mechanicke arts or occupations, the greatest and most crafty
deceate that is, is or may be in poticaries. Howbeit, I am not ignorant, but
that within these few years, some poticaries, by the help and counsel of
good Physicians, have gotten and provided for better stuff and simples to make
their compositions, then they were wont to have before.

And I believe verily, that if every poticarie would endeavor himself to bye no
stuff, but that should be pure and good: there would be a great meany, that
would give better credit to physicians and Poticaries, and have a better hope
in them, then they have now a days, and all because they mistrust and suspecte
so much the Poticaries stuff and confections. In deed, as covetousness is the
root of all evil, so many poticaries there be, that more for lucre sake and
gredines of worldly goods, do prepare their medicines, then for any care that
they have, to deal truly with the poor pacientes and sely souls that be in
pain. The physician many times shall ordeyne his counsel, and appoint
certain medecines for his pacient: which medecines he knows certainly shall
do him good, being taken and used according to his counsel, yet the same
medecines being taken and bought at the poticaries, and made many times of
noughty stuff, or not well prepared, shall not only do little or no good at all,
but shall also sometimes put the sick body in hasarde of his life, whereby
shall no small trouble and shame redounde unto the physician, and yet was he
not the occasion thereof, nor in any fault at all. Some perchance will allege
against the physician, that he may be in the fault, for as much as he ought
to have seen the stuff first, whereof the compositions are made, and ought
also to have been at the making and preparyng of the medicines which he
ordeyneth.

In deed it ought to be so, if all things went well, and specially if the
poticary be suspected to have somewhat a large conscience, or that he be of a
slender learning and negligente, and passes not what he doothe, so that he
may receive money. But you must understand that the physician can not alwais be
present at the making or delyuerynge of such medicines as he has appointed.
For somtymes he has mo pacientes to look to then one, and perchance he may be
twenty or forty miles from the poticatie, when he sends his bylle to him,
and therefore can not be present. Many other occasions there be, that lets
the presence of the physician at the making and delyueryng of medicines.

But if the apothecarie be an honest man, of a good conscience and learned: Or
that he has such a one under him to serve the shop that is of like
qualities: It is not then so greatly necessary for the phi sytion to be
present, so often as he ordeyneth his counsel for any paciente. For even as
a good tree will always bring forth good fruit: So will a good poticarye
make and deliver nothing at any time, but that that is lawefull and good. But
this question (if a man moughte be so bold) I would feign ask, how many
good apoticaries be there in England? how many do their duties as they
ought to do? How many are learned: how many are faithful? and how many
are willing and desirous that the physicians should see their drouges, and see
the making of their composttions? Many there be, that disdayn that the
Physicians should be present at the making of their medicines, and who more
then the ignorant, covetous and co^tentious sort of poticaries. The ignorant
thynkes (following their barbarous Nicolans) that their knowledge (which is mere
ignorance) far excellethe and surmounteth the knowledge of all Physicians.
The covetous ar aferd, lest if the physitio^s should be present they should find
a great deal of their stuff to be sophisticate, corrupt and naught.

There be also an other sort of Poticaties, which be so arrogant and scornful
(by reason that they de grown in great richesse God knows how) that they
disdayn the Physician, and have him in no estimation, where as in the ancient
time, the poticaries (as Galene and other witnesses) were but as servants
and ministers unto the Physician. Galen in the commentaries upon the.vi. book
of Hippocrates, de morbis vulgaribus says thus: The ministers of the
physician, are gatherers of herbs, oyntemente makers, cooks, plaster makers,
clyster geuers, scarifiers, letters out of blood. etc. but if we (meaning of
physitio^s after yt we have learned these things, do also sometimes the like* we
do no otherwise then even as a master or gouerner of a ship, which having
knoweledge in rowyng, do row when he list, and get up to the top of the mast,
and does all other things belongyng to the mariners art and office. Thus
much Galene.

I need not to allege here the xxxviii. chapter of Ecclesiasticus, where
every manne is exhorted to honor the physician: how much more then should the
poticarie honor and reverence him, which has chiefly his ^uyng by means of
the physician. I speak not this because I or any physician should seek worldly
honor, or vain glory* For above all things: Soli Deo fit honor and gloria. yet
not withstandyng, according to Saint Paul's doctrine, we ought to give
honor, to whom honor belongs. I remember that whenne I was yet in a manner
but a boy in age, studying beyond the sea, after a year or two that I had
studied in physic: I would somtymes (for to have the better knowledge in
symples) resort to some poticaties shop or other. But I should no rather
come into the shop (specially of learned and honest men) but that immediately,
The poticatie would welco^me and receive me with all curtessye and humanity*
and rise from his seat to give me room, and so would entertayn me with all
gentylnes that he might. This did they to me being then but a scholar* what
would they do think you to the masters and doctors of phisike? What makes
many poticaries now a days to set so little by the phisitio^s: This is one chief
cause: They play the physicians them selves, they give and minister medicines of
their own devise (god wot a mad devise) indifferentely unto all me^: yea and
the more ignorant they are, the more bolder they be. For who is so bold as
blind bay ard? Many of the^ will not stick to look in waters, and be not
ashamed even in the physicians presence, to ordeyn this or that medicine for
any kind of disease: If any physician do gently admonysh the^ of their fault
and specially of geuyng of medicines after their own brain: They will say,
that they may as* well prescribe medicines, as Physicians somtymes do use to
make them. They may play (say they) as well the Physicians, as the physicians
play the poticaries, as though a physician and a poticary were all one. In deed
a physician may be a poticarie, and have a poticaries shop within himself in
his own house or may be a Surgeon, and heal wou^des or sores, or let blood
him self: Sed none diuerso. A Poticatie or Surgeon being only of that art
may not be a physician, unless he abuse and falsely exercise against all
reason and conscience, (as many do now a days) the science of physike.

To prove that a physician may make or cause to be made in his own house, any
kind of medicines: it may partly appear by the authority of Galene before
alleged, and also by diverse other famous authors of our time, and specially by
Manardus and Siluius. Manardus in the prologe prefixed to the annotations upon
Mesue, has these words: In times paste says he, the physicians themselves
prepared the medicines at their own houses, and so kept them ready made, the
which as often as need required, according to their discretion and the
necessity of the sick, they used. But sins these five hundred years or there
about, this kind of business has been committed, or rather derived from the
physicians (not without as I believe the danger of the pacientes) unto
certain, which are called spicers, or Poticaries. etc.

Iacobus Siluius in his book de medicamentorum simplicium delectu, in the
beginning, whereas he speaks of the dewty of a Poticarie: declares, that as
well Galen as other physicians did oftentimes prepare the medecines them
selves. It is lawful then for the physician (if he list) to prepare the
medecines for his paciente him self: but not lawful for the poticarie, to use
or practice physic for any man, of his own head.

I would wish that the poticarie, as he is desirous of gain, so he would provide
for all things necessary for his shop, and chiefly and first of al, for the
chief guide and Instrument, that should rule all the roast, I mean the book of
Bernardus Dessennius Cronenburgins, de compositione medicame^torum: The
perfectest in my opinion, and most excellent book I believe, that ever was made
for poticaries, Howbeit, because that some physicians uses the compositions of
other authors: I would wish also, that ye poticarie might not be without the
dispensatories of Valerius Cordus, of Euchsius, or Nicolaus Mirepsus, or
the.ii. books of Siluius, contening the chosinge, kepinge, and making of
medicines commonly used: or Examen tam simplicium q compositorum, Antonij
Musae: and not to follow still their blind Nicolaus Praepositus, which is
full of errors. It were mete and convenient also, that the Poticaries had
diverse fearces to searce their powders in, for some powders would be sea(...)ed
very fynely, as they that be diureticke powders, and most part of
Electuaries: some more grossye, as the most part of laxatiues, except agaricke
and colocinthis.

a pound of sugar, to an ounce of powder. And to say my fancy and opinion: it
were good that the physician should determine and appointe in his byll, how
much sugar he would have to be put with the powder. For sometimes it layneth
that he ordeineth a purgation in losengis: sometimes he uses some bitter
powder, or very hot powder, that requires of sugar more or less: but
commonly bitter or very hot pouders require more sugar: and pleasant and
temperat pouders require less: but many poticaries are very liberal, which
spare for no sugar, when they make losengis, because they have more respect to
their profit, then to the pacientes health. Again they love to make all
things pleasant and sweet, so that sweet money may come in. And it is most
commonly seen, that the most part of sick folk abhor sweet things.
Wherefore, they should know of the physician (unless he determine it him self in
his bill) how much sugar he will have to the ma king of the medecines.

Now at the last to conclude, because that poticaries shall know partly what
their dewtie is, I will here recite what Siluius says in the place before
alleged, of the poticaries duty. And thus I have translated his preface into
english.

Although that the Poticarie be endewed with many things, commonly agreynge
with the Physician: as with natural discretion, a perfect knowledge of the
medicines, a great diligence in all such things as belong to his office, and an
honest behavior: yet nevertheless many things are in a manner peculiarely
appropriated unto him, the which sometimes were also proper and belonging unto
the physicians, at what time they them selves prepared the medicines, as it
appears that Galen should have done it, in many places by his writings. Now
such things as be proper to the poticaries are these: The cho singe of
medecines gotten by discretion and long experience, afterward the manner to
keep them, and to know the time when they are in their power and force, or
when they are destitute from all virtue and corrupt. Also, how and in what
manner each of them ought to be used, either by it self alone, or else to sethe
it, or to bruise or break it with other, or to prepare it after an other sort
and manner. It is also convenient and necessary for a poticarie to know his
grammar, because he may the better understand the compositions of the aunciente
writers, and also the daily writings (which commonly they call receptes or
bills) of the Physicians. In the which writings, if perhaps they have
written any thing more or less then need is, or more vnplesaunt then the
poticarie coniectureth in him self, to be mete and convenient for the pacient:
he then may gently tell and warn the physician of it.

Moreover we would that the poticarie knew perfectly the art and science to
choose the medicines, to prepare them, and to compou^d the^ together. We would
also have him to be contented with a mean apparel, to be merry and pleasant
in communication after an honest sort, dilligent in the pacientes business, to be
no covetous, no lascivious, no dronkerd nor contentious person: all which
things are even in like manner to be observed of the physician as of the
poticarie, as Hippocrates testifies in his book called the office or duty of
a physician.

And if the poticarie be indewed with such perfections of spirit, of the body
and also of fortune: he will never give any medecin (specially being of any
great operation) to any man, unless he be of the counsel of some cunning
physician, nay nether will he give any thing, be it of never so little effect,
knowing not the virtue of it. For oftentimes certain remedies, although they
seem but weak, yet nevertheless through quantity, quality and space of
time being unwholesome, or the occasion many times of great diseases, and takes
away the right and true way of curation: In so much that under such remedies,
the body being in cure, will sone afterward bear greater and stronger
remedies, but not convenient to the purpose. Moreover he shall not commit any
crime or fault, either for love or favor, or for hatred or fear: nor he may
not be seduced by money or led by ignorance. Neither shall he give at any time
any poison, or things procuring abortion, any thing that is to old or out of
use, things altered and sophisticate, or any quid pro quo. But he shall ask
counsel, (as often as need shall require) of a well learned Physician, what
simple or compounde medycyne is to be substytuted and taken, for lack one of
the other. Nee shall not augment nor fortify the quantity of any strong
medicine, to the intent that by a greater euacuation ensuyng, men should
suppose him to have better poticaries stuff then any other.

Oh I would the Apothecaries of these days would frame them selves to this
rule, and the Physicians likewise on their side, phisycke should not then be
so little regarded and set by, as it is now adays: yea by opprobrious words
and tantes despised of a great many. Now I beseech the Almyghtye and living
God, that ones he would make the Physicians and Apothecaries to be of that
desire and mind, that each of them would rather wysshe to be in deed, then
to seem or to be called a right, good, and honest physician, a right good and
honest Apothecarie.

And if they do^ neglecte that goodlye gift and grace, I pray God that ones
some punishment may be appointed by the kings laws and statutes for them,
which will enterprise to practice a science (so healthy to man's body, when
it is well mynistred, and again so hurtefull and daungetous, when it is
ignorantlye and rashely handled) before they know it. Thus much Syluius. And
here I will make an end of Apothecaries, now to the Surgeons.(...) and some
there be that can scante let a man blood (which is a handsome and pretty
feate, and yet not so hard a thing to be done) nor well apply a ventose
called otherwise a cupping glass, unless they put the man to pain and
trouble. There be some that esteem themselves so well exercised and perfect in
the art, that they think that no cure can come amiss to them: They will
enterprise and take in hand all manner of cures, be they never so hard or
incurable: for they have fear of nothing, but rashely go to work in all
things. They will cut, they will lance, they will canterise (which they
call searyng with a hot burning iron) they will saw of a leg or an arm of
the body, they will use corrosiues that shall pearce even unto the hard bones,
and they will make an issue almost for every trifle, and for every disease,
without considering the circumstances of the whole matter, not weyeng the
strength, the age, and the complexion of the body, besides many other things
that are greatly to be considered in such cases. And possible it is many times
that the paciente has need of some inward medicine, which the surgion can
nor may well give without the Physicians counsel

And in deed it were very mete and necessary, that the Surgion should
undertake no hard or dangerous cure, without the phisitio^s advise. Howbeit as
I see now a days, the most part of them do al things, followynge only their
own fantasies.

They stick not to give Electuaries, syropes, and other medicines them selves,
yea and purgations al so: which thing me seems is very uncomely. It is not
reason that he that should be but as a minister unto the physician (as I
alleged before out of Galen, when I entreated of Poticaries) should use the
part of a master and philosopher, and ordeyne such things as he knows
nothing the nature of. It is not unknown, that many pore pacientes perishes
under such rash and lewd surgions.

But to say the truth, the fault is not so much in them, as in those that
give credit unto them. For as the world goes now a days, if a physician or
surgion has a faixe tongue, and has also some what a comely body, and can
speak (I will not say flatter) indifferently on every man's side, gratifying
each man according to his quality, desire and mind: every man unless he be
very wise and circumspect, will lightly give ear and credit unto him, and
account him for a discret and conning man. Such a one shall lack nothing, he
shall be welcome, he shall have much courtesy and pleasure showed him, finally
he shall have his whole hearts desire, (yt is money enough) For such fellows by
their subtyltie and fair tongue, will allure more people unto them, and get
themselves more treasure in one quarter of a year, then shall an honest and good
physician in the space of three years, and all by their fleringe face and
flattering words.

I would to god that al men would beware of such fellows, and remember the
proverb that says: Dulci sub melle saepe venena ^atent. Under sweet meats is
many times a poy son hid. And as Virgill says: Hinc procul o pueri fugite,
later anguis in herba, Take heed and flee far hence O children, for the snake
lies privily hid under the grass.

It is written in the ancient authors of Physic, that in the old time, the
physicians were wont to exercise surgerie themselves. How beit it has been
now of a long time, that the Surgions do only exercise this part of physic
for many considerations, and chiefly for this occasion, as Hippocrates says
Vita breuis, are vero longa The life of man is short in comparison of the
science of Physic which is long. Therefore because the Physicians can not
well give them selves to study diverse other sciences: which be necessary to
physic and make medecines, and use also surgerie, and go and visit their
pacientes: It has been thought good that other men called Surgions (and yet
having sufficient knowledge) should have the office and ministry to use and
apply outward medecines, and not to enterprise and use all medecines for all
diseases both outward and inward, as some does, for in so doing they go beyond
their bonds.

Surgerie although it be a manuell art, yet it has his speculation, which
can not be had without reading of diverse authors, and specially Hippocrates,
Galen, Aetius, Paulus Aegineta, and of the latter writers, Tagaultius,
Hollerius, Bologuinus and others. As for Johannes de Vigo, whom the Surgions of
our days do now most follow, I would not that they should so greatly trust
him, because that he is not to be followed and read without great discretion and
Judgment, for the obscurity and doubts, yea and errors that be in him. He
brings in many things in his book, which belongs rather to the physician
to know and practice, then to the Surgion: as Electuaries, potions, purgations
and many other inward medicines. If the Surgio^ have knowledge in Physic, I
mean that he know the complerions, the nature of simples, and the effect and
operation of compositions: he may use them, else not. For if he do, he shall do
as the blind man sho teth at the hare, he shall work at al adventures, and many
times with the danger of his pacient.

I much marvel, why the surgion should disdain to come ask counsel of the
Physician, when he has any hard or doubtful cure, it can be no hindrance to
him, and to say the truth, it is no great profit to the physician, unless it
be for some rich man. The good physician will use the poor as the poor: and
the rich partly for his money as well as for his love and friendship. For the
physician must have his living by some kind of persons. And not only the
physician, but also the poticarie and Surgion should deal charitably with the
poor, and use every man according to his capacity. But this I have spoken,
Velut obiter, as by the way: Now to the purpose.

Many perchance will say(...) plye any thing to the swellinge, without
considering whether the body must be let blood or not? whether the swellinge or
phlegmon be yet in fluxu, that is a breding: or in statu, that is in the worst
case that it can be: or in the declination? whether or when he ought to use
repercussiues, resolutions, or both together? The general rule of Physic
says, that in the beginning of all inflammations, we should use repercussiues,
that is medecines to repel and drive back the fluxion of humors: But I put
the case that the swelling be in the Emunctories, or that one has the
pestilence: The surgion perhaps folowinge the general rule, will lay a
plaster to repel the said inflammation or swellinge. Does he well think you?
he does so well that cyther he puts the pacient in great ieopardy, or else he
kills him quite.

Wherefore the surgion must think that a great many things must be considred mo
them one, as often as he undertakes any cure of weight And must think it no
shame nor reproach, to counsel with a Physician in such matters. For verily I
say (to conclude in few words) that no man, be he surgion or poticarie,
shall never work well without a true method and learning. For look what
thing so ever he takes in hand, what cure so ever he has: he being
destitute of learning, shall never bring it well to pass, without the aid,
help and counsel of the learned Physician: for if he chance to do any
notable cure, it shall be peradventure more by hap hasard, then by
procurement and diligence. Here I could bring in many other abuses of
surgerie: as how some pretend and exercise physic (to their shame,
deceauynge the people) under the cloak of Surgerie: some drive of and linger
out the time, to have the more money. Some be so presump tuous, that will
warrant every pacient: when oftentimes many by their negligence (and for lack
of a good diet, or some other good medecines which should be appointed by the
physician) dye upon their hands. Some when they have done all that they can, and
see that their pacient begin to go to wrack, the^ immediately with all speed,
they will run to ye physician with their pacientes water, and then to ask
counsel when it is to late: and all because they will shake of the burdeyne
from their own shoulders, to cast it upon the Physicians neck, and to put all
the fault in him, if any thing chance otherwise then well: that so they may be
clean discharged and unburdened from all manner of blame and reproach. Some
from town to town, from market to markette, to utter their tromperie (their
ware I would have said) and to show their cunnyng among the homely and simple
people of the country.

But all these wily and deceatful fashions are not yet thoroughly known, nor
can never well be, until such time as a reformation be made by some law or
statute, which I pray God to grant shortly, to his glory, and the Queens
majesty's honor, and the profit of we her subjects and common weal.

Amen.
To both the Universities, Oxforde and Cambridge, a Peroration.
THus much I had (right worshipful) to say,
And to declare most plainly to you all:
The great abuse committed every day
In this our art, which phisike men do call.
The chiefest points I have in general
But only touched in this my little book:
He may know all the matter in special,
Who so to it more narrowly will look.
I marvel much and sore lament to see,
That such abuse has been suffered so long:
And is now yet, (it will none other be.)
You and we have (me thinks) great wrong:
Therefore ye should no more the time prolong,
But seek some means the learned to defend,
With privileges, that to you do belong.
And thus doing, you shall no man offend.
I ever had, and have yet at this hour,
A great despre, both in my heart and mind:
That every good physician to his power
Do all things well: so worship shall he find.
But now there are physicians so unkind,
To God and man, that they pass not a straw.
Which of both ends go before or behind,
They are so void of truth and fear of law.
This sort will now inueye with force and might,
Straight against me, and this poor sely book,
(Wherefore I pray, defend me and the right)
They will lay wayt for me, and always look
What time the^ may destroy me with their hoke
I mean their tongue so venomous and sharp:
But by gods grace and your help I shall broke
That well enough: and not come in their trappe.
Mollibus haec non est, sed duris dura Securis, Dura secat, damnum mollia nulla
ferunt.
FINIS.
LONDINI, In aedibus Thomae Marshi.

1566.


