TITLES of HONOR By John Seldom.

Lucilius. Persium non curo legere: Laelium Decimum volo.
LONDON, By William Stansby for John Helm, and are to be sold at his shop in
S. Dunstans Churchyard.

M. DC. XIV.

To my most beloved Friend and Chamberfellow, M. Edward Heyward.
SIr, Had I not been such a remote stranger to Greatness, yet, beyond you,
scarce should I have sought a Name to Honor this place. Being, as fortune has
placed me, I well could not, without charging my Freedom of spirit with what,
as the worst in Manners, it ever hated; Flattery. But I was resolved, that, as
the Architecture of old Temples, you know, was either Dorique, Jonique, or
Corinthian according to the Deity's several nature, so in analogy, should
Gifts of this kind be to the Receivers, and that Books should most fitly be
consecrated to true lovers of Goodness and all good Learning. I would call Books
only those which have in them either of the two objects of Man's best part,
Verum or Bonum, and to an instructing purpose handled, not what ever only
speaks in Print and has its little worth ending in its many words. In this of
Mine dealing with Verum chiefly, in matter of Story and Philologie, I give you
the greatest interest, that in a thing of so Public right may be enjoyed.
Your more noble Studies, Virtue, Learning, and your Love, to what ever is in
those Names, made you most capable of it. And to speak here freely, the
special worth of your Quality and of some more (luti melioris) compared with
that world of Natures infinitely varied by baseness of Spirit, Daring
ignorance, Bewitched sight, worst of inclination, expressions of scarce more
that is not Bestiall then what Clothes and Coffers can, and the like have made
me, I confess, doubt in the Theorie of Nature, whether all known by the name
of MAN as the lowest Species be of one Form. So Generous, so Ingenuous, so
proportioned to good, such Fosterers of Virtue, so Industrious, of such Mould
are the Few: so Inhuman, so Blind, so Dissembling, so Vain, so justly Nothing,
but what is Ill disposition, are the Most. Our long society of life, and the
special Desert, which you know you may truly challenge of my Endeavors, entitled
You to it as from Me. Never shall I not confess you to have been to me (...).
Some year since it was finished, wanting, only in some parts, my last hand;
which was then prevented by my dangerous and tedious sickness; being thence
freed (as you know too, that were a continual, most friendly, and careful
witness) by the Bounteous humanity and advise of that learned Phisician
Doctor Robert Floyd (whom my Memory always honors) I was at length made able
to perfect it. And thus I employed the breathing times, which from the so
different studies of my Profession, were allowed me. Nor has the Prouerbiall
assertion, that the Lady Common Law mustly alone, ever wrought with me farther
then like a Badge of his Family, to whom (by the testimony of the wisest man)
every way seems full of Thorns, and that uses to excuse his labor with a
Lion's in the way. I call you not my Patron. Truth in my References, Likelihood
in my Conjectures, and the whole Composture shall be in steed of One, and of all
else which, like inuocations of Titulina, might be used. It comes to you only,
that, if it live, it may be an enduring testimony of our Loves and your
Desert. Happiness ever second your wishes.

Uiue diu nostri Pignus memorabile Voti. with you, at the Inner Temple,
September. XXIII. M. DC. XIV.
To that singular Glory of our Nation, and Light of Britain, M. Camden
Clarenceulx.
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
J. Seldom.

(...).
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
BEN: IONSON TO HIS HONORED FRIEND Mr JOHN SELDOM HEALTH.
I Know to whom I write: Here, I am sure,
Though I be short, I cannot be obscure.
Less shall I for the art, or dressing care;
Since, naked, best Truth, and the Graces are.
Your Book, my Seldom, I have read; and much
Was trusted, that you thought my judgment such
To ask it: though, in most of Works, it be
A penance, where a man may not be free,
Rather then office. When it does, or may
Chance, that the Friends affection proves allay
Unto the censure. Yours all need does fly
Of this so vicious humanity:
Then which, there is not unto Studie' a more
Pernicious enemy. We see, before
A many' of Books, even good judgments wound
Themselves, through favoring that, is there not found:
But I to yours, far from this fault, shall do;
Not fly the crime, but the suspicion too.
Though I confess (as every Muse has erred,
And mine not least) I have too often preferred
Men past their terms; and praised some names too much:
But 'twas, with purpose, to have made them such.
Since, being deceived, I turn a sharper eye
Upon my self; and ask, to whom, and why,
And what I write: and vex it' many days,
Before men get a verse, much less a praise.
So, that my Reader is assured, I now
Mean what I speak; and, still, will keep that vow.
Stand forth my object, then. You, that have been
Ever at home, yet have all Countries seen;
And, like a Compass, keeping one foot still
Upon your center, do your circle fill
Of general knowledge; watched men; manners too;
Heard, what past times have said; seen, what ours do;
Which Grace shall I make love to first? your skill?
Or faith in things? Or, is it your wealth, and will
To inform, and teach? Or, your unwearied pain
Of gathering? Bountie' in pouring out again?
What Fables have you vexed! What Truth redeemd!
Antiq'uities searched! Opinions disesteem'd!
Impostures branded, and Authorities urged!
What Blots and Errors have you watched, and purged
Records and Authors of! How rectified
Times, Manners, Customs! Innouations spied!
Sought out the Fountains, Sources, Creekes, Paths, Ways!
And noted the Beginnings, and Decays!
Where is that nominall Mark, or real Rite,
Form, Art, or Ensign, that has escaped your sight?
How are Traditions there examined! How
Conjectures retriu'd! And a Story, now
And then, of times (beside the bare conduct
Of what it tells us) weau'd in, to instruct!
I wondered at the richness: but, am lost,
To see the workmanship so exceed the cost.
To mark the excellent seas'nings of your style,
And masculine elocution; not one while
With horror rough, then rioting with wit;
But, to the subject, still the colors fit:
In sharpness of all search, wisdom of choice,
Newness of sense, antiquity of voice.
I yield, I yield. The Matter of your praise
Flows in upon me; and I cannot raise
A bank against it: Nothing, but the round
Large claspe of Nature, such a wit can bound.
Monarch in Letters! Amongst thy Titles shown,
Of others Honors; thus, enjoy thine own.
I, first, salute thee so: and gratulate,
With that thy Style, thy keeping of thy State,
In offering this thy Work to no Great Name;
That would perhaps have praised, and thanked the same,
But naught beyond. He, thou have given it to,
Thy learned Chamber-fellow, knows to do
It true respects. He will, not only, love,
Embrace, and cherish; but, he can approve
And estimate thy pains: as having wrought
In the rich mines of knowledge, and thence brought
Humanity enough, to be a Friend,
And strength, to be a Champion, and defend
Thy gift'gainst Envy. O, how I do count
Amongst my commings in (and see it mount)
The gain of two such Friendships; Heyward, and
Sela^n, two Names, that so much understand:
On whom, I could take up (and nere abuse
The credit) what would furnish a tenth Muse.
But here is nor time, nor place, my wealth to tell;
You both are modest: so am I. Farewell.
THE PREFACE.
Contents of it.
Gentry or Civil Nobility. Children like their Parents. Degenerating Issues.
Some have respected only one Sex in the Descent. Paradogium. Temple of Honor
and Virtue. Images, wherein the old Nobility of Rome consisted. Carrying those
Images in Funerals. Images annexed (as we say) to the Frehold. Ennobling by the
Emperors. Nobility of the Grecians. Their regard to the Name. Names of the
Romans, and the Imposition of Names. The Gothique Hanses. The Prerogative of
the old Sueuians to be in the Vantgard; as also of our Kentishmen, and those of
Wiltshire, with Cornwall and Devonshire, to be in the Rere. Coat Armors. When
they began to be born hereditarily. The Patent of Rich. II: to John of
Kingston, giving him a Coat, and making him Esquire. Certain Notes of Generous
Families among the Romans and other ancients. The Autor's bearing himself in
this Work. (...). Interpretation of one of Pythagoras his Symbols. Of the
Sophi. Ius Capillitij of the old French Kings. (...). The Epigram to our
William the first, Caesariem, Caesar, etc. explan'd. Bearing of Fi^e before
some Princes anciently. Some old but obsolet Ensigns of the Empire. Sealing in
white Wax. First beginning of the profession of the Roman Civil Laws in the
Western parts about C D L. years since; In Bologna. Not lawful to read them as
a Professor elsewhere then in Rome, Constantinople, or Berytus, by Justinians
constitution. The first volume of the Canon Law, when made. The answer of
Robert Grossetest to Henry III. questioning him how he could so well instruct
young Courtiers.

Bless me Mercury from thy old Enemy, the Daring Ignorant! I know his hate
to thee. And when he would seem to love, as sometimes he would, yet is he as
unhappy in performing what is due to thee, as if he should sacrifice with a
cole black beast, in the darkest night, the throat pressed downward, to thy
brother Apollo; or then for safety of his sheep or gain, with blood to thee,
when thou Antipater Epig. a. cap. 48.
art -- Best pleased with Milk and Honey.
(...)
(...)
Thou know the unfitness of Both, and Him. I could not but wrong thy honor,
should I, so near mention of thy Name, speak to him. Thy worth, from him,
protect me! To all thy ingenuous favorites, in thy presence, as thou directest
me, thus. Out of the Title, Table, and Contents of the Chapters (you have them
presently after this Preface) the Sum and Method discover themselves. The
Purpose extended from the Highest title to Gentry, exclusiuely. That of
Gentry, or the same in another word, Civil Nobility, is, by which, as the
first degree above the Multitude, an honoring distinction is made, either by
acquisition from the Prince (every Prince or State, having general Power to
make Laws in their Territory, may ennoble) or by Descent from Noble
Ancestors. Or indeed you may not amiss comprehend hereditarie Nobility in
that first kind, because a Gentleman, by birth, is not only so in regard of his
Ancestors, Sed quia, ob eam Originem, Princeps illum suis legibus nobilitat, as
In C. tit. de Incolis l. 9. Mulieres.
Bartol will have it. The Prince, as it were, supposing that if the Father be
Noble, the issue will resemble him. Which the Persians were confident on, where
the Queen was never so much as suspected Plato in Alcibiade a.
of inc^ntinence, because the King was always esteemd of so truly royal
parts, that the Nature of her issue by another, would discover if she had
changed the Father; as, on the other side, the Spartan Ephori most iealously
guarded their Queens, lest any but of Hercules posterity should govern: both
States concluding Nobility from their Ancestors worth, which has its ground
in the natural supposition of likeness twixt Children and those which get
them. (...) (s^ith De G^nerat. Animal. 4. cap. 3.
Aristotle) (...), (...). For, one not like his Parents is, in some sort, a
Monster, that is, not like him that got him, nor any other of the ascending or
transuerse line; because its thought, that, in the Seed are always potentially
several indiuiduating De hac re^ inprimis consulendus Andreas Laurentius
Anatomic. lib. 2: quaest. 30.
Qualities derived from diverse of the near Ancestors, which by the formatiue
power of the Parents may be expressed in the Children, with respective habitude
to either Sex; although the later Grecians foolishly inquired only in geneseos
Luitprand. lib. 5. cap. 5.
Nobilitate, non quae Matter, sed quis Pater (following the old Diodor. Sicul.
(...). 2. De Lycijs vero Herodot. lib. 1. et Plutarch. (...), apud quos in
Materna Origin constitit Nobilitas, necnon adi Vlpianum, l. 1. ff. ad
Municipalem; septem Familias Louanij queis de I^psius L^^^n. 1. cap. 12. and
Tiraquell. de Nobilitate, cap. 18.. 20. and seq.
Egyptian Custom) and thought a Kings issue by any Concubine, as good as one
by the Noblest Queen. But, indeed, both are even equally to be regarded. The
Consequent of this was long since disputed in that of the Minds inclination
follows the Bodies Temperature; whereof Galen has a special Treatise. But
because this likeness is often times to a remote Ancestor, as well as the
Father, therefore, it seems, is the special regard to be had to the number of
Discents in Gentry. He that is so both (...) and (...), i. both descended
from truly Noble Parentage, and withal following their steps, or adding to
their Name, is the Gentleman that may lawfully, glory in his Pitle. N^bilitie
in him being rightly (...), the Virtue of his Fathers, from whom he derived
what he means to propagat. So, the fairer is his worth, because (...), as one
Maxim. Tyr. Dialex. (...).
says, (...), i. it flowing, from Virtue, as from a pure Spring, continues
genuin, and like the first head. But, the Ancestors Nobility in a degenerating
issue, gives no more true Glory, then Phoebus his name did to RP. Sixtus
Quintus, who was wont to jest on himself, that he was Cicarella in Uit.
Pontific.
domo natus illustri, because, being of very mean Parentage, he was born in so
totterd a house, that the roof every where admitted the Sun beams.

Cur Iuuenal. Satyr. 8.
Allobrogicis, and magna gaudeat ara
Natus in Herculeo Fabius lare, si cupidus, si
Vanus and Euganea quantumuis mollior agna?
And

-- Perit Lucanus in Panegyrico.
omnis in illo
Nobilitas, cuius laus est in Origin sola.
So that, Merit by Quality, both in the first acquiring the Princes favor, and
in his issue, are the true causes of Nobility, as if the original collation
of the Dignity were so made, that the first deserving, and his begotten
heirs, such only as were deserving, should enjoy it: and then is the Ciuilians
definition of it enough comprehensiue, that it is qualitas illata per
Principatum tenentem, qua quis vltra plebeios honestos acceptus ostenditur,
which many Canonists also follow; and so will it include as well that which the
barbarous Ciuilians call Paradogium (by mis-reading for Constit. Feud. tit.
Quis dicatur Dux, Marchio. Alias Nobilitandi causas vide apud Luc. de Penna in
C. tit. de Dig. L. Mulieres.
Paragium, as most learned Cuiacius persuades me, that is, Feudall Nobility,
grounded on possessing a Noble Fief, whence the tenant is one of the Pares
Curtis) as Personal honor. Virtue plainly ennobleth not ciuilly, but is a
deserving cause of it only, whereof the Prince must judge. If Honor and
deserving Virtue accompany not each other, its his Fault or Error. They should
always so. And they were Temple-fellowes in old Rome. Been (says Symmach.
lib. 1. Epist. 21.
one) ac sapienter Maiores nostri, vt sunt alia aetatis illius, Aedes Honori
atque Virtuti gemella facie iunctim locarunt; commenti, ibi esse praemia
Honoris vbi sunt Merita Virtutis. But in ancient Rome their Nobiles (a thing
not unworthy to be here noted) were only those which could show the Images of
such their Ancestors, as had born a State Office (the Aedilitas Curulis, or any
above it) which were of Wax Polyb. Hist. 6. Plin. lib. 35. cap. 2.
expressing the Face and Body only to the shoulders, kept every one in
several cases of Wood or Closets, and subscribed with the name of the Dead
(they called it Titulus or Index) and additions of his Place or particular
Worth, as Tacitus Annal. 16.
G. Cassius his, which one of the Family kept under Nero, had DVCI PARTIVM; or
DVX, as out of a Ms. Tacitus, Lipsius notes. And these were carried at the
Funeral of him that had them as his Ensigns of Nobility. The Relation of
Drusus his Funeral gives a most special form of it. Funus Imaginum pompa
(says Tacitus) maxim inlustre fuit, cum Origo Iuliae Gentis, Aeneas, omnesque
Albanorum Reges and Conditor Vrbis Romulus, post Sabina Nobilitas, Appius (or
Lips. ad Ann. 12. not. 58.
Atta) Clausus, caeteraeque Claudiorum effigies longo ordine spectarentur.
There were also other Images of Noble Parentage set with affixt spoils of the
enemy for Trophies of Virtue about the Entries and base Courts, which were so
annexed to the Freehold (as our phrase is) that they past always in conueyance
of the House, neither was it lawful for the Buyer to deface them: Eratque haec
stimulatio (are Plinies words) summa et ingens, exprobrantibus tectis, quotidie
imbellem Dominum intrare in alienum triumphum. And as Reuersing of Coats, or
the like, has been in later Times, so with them the Images, of men condemued
capitally for matter against the State, or censured in such a Degree, were
broken, or, at lest, omitted in their pompous Funerals. Therefore in the last
Rites performed to Iunia, wife to C. Cassius, and sister to M. Brutus, among
the Images of twenty several Noble Families, Cassius and Brutus were not
born, yet praefulgebant, as he says of them, eo ipso quod effigies eorum non
visebantur. One of these Images gave Nobility. Ancum Sabina Matre ortum (so
Liuie) Nobilemque vna Imagine Numae. The rest which were first in those
Magistracies were homines Noui, and this distinction was both in the Patricij
and Plebeij. But, under the Caesarean Empire, the bestowing of Consular
Ornaments, and the like, supplied in diverse, the Magistracy it self, and the
Emperors so did ennoble by Rescript or Patent, as it seems by that of Celsus a
Professor of the Arts in Rome, whom Theodosius the first was Symmach. lib. 10.
Epist. 25.
requested adiudicare Nobilibus, Pignore Dignitatis, cum praerogatiua scilicet
Consulari. And the like, by several C. tit. de Profess. et passim, l. 12.
Constitutions, was given to many, whose issues only, by the ancienter form,
were Noble, themselves only Noui. As in Rome the Imagines, or ius Imaginum,
were the only Ensigns of hereditarie Nobility, so in Greece the descent, from
Noble Ancestors, preserved; whence their Gentlemen were called (...), i.
descended from worthy Parentage, which was noted in the particular names of
their Noble Tribes, as, in Athens, in the Pandionidae, Acamantidae,
Hippothoontidae, Heraclidae, and others; to the making up of Noblesse, Demosth.
in (...). Epitaphio, et Plato in Alcib. (...).
in whose posterity, was a Concurrence of (...), and (...), i. Birth,
Education, and continual affectation of good Studies. But how much honor
consisted among them, specially in the Name, appears also in that of Pixodorus
a poor shepherd, one of whose Rams, in fight, missing his adversary,
struck on a stone, and, breaking of a piece, discouerd it most white and fit
for building of Diana's Temple, about which, and of what kind of stone to make
it, the Ephesian State, at that instant, sat in Council; whereupon he
presently came into their Court, and showed the piece. They, to honor him with
public rewards, changed his name Vitruu. lib. 10. cap. 7. (...), i. Qui
fausta nuntiat. De nominibus vide nonnulla, part. 1. page 67.
into Euangelus, to whom, after his death, a yearly sacrifice was made in the
place. You may remember the Jest upon wealthy Simon by Lucians Cock, in that
he thought himself, because he was grown very rich, worthy now (...), i. to
have a name of four syllables in steed of one of two syllables, that is, I
think, Simonides, because it was both a name of honorable note, and as a
Patronymique expressing some Noble descent. There are which make the Tria
nomina in Rome a note of their Nobility. To that purpose does Calderin
interpret Iuuenals -- Tanquam habeas tria Nomina -- which is rather indeed to
be expressed in, as if you were an Ingenuus or Libertus, or as if you were a free
Man: which fits well the place, as the learned Politian wills. For the having
of three Names was not common either to all Times, or all Persons, of the Free
or Noble Romans, but some had Two only, as Numa, Hostius Hostilius, in
ancienter time, others One, as Romulus, Remus, Hersilia, Tatius, and, afterward
the mixture of the Sabins and Romans gave the double Names; and, by retaining
De Nominibus Romanorum Titus Probus (sieve is sit Julius Paris, qui designati
libri author est) consulendus, alij. Atqui, ante alios, Iul. Scaliger in lib. 4.
de cause. Ling. Lat. cap. 92. quem tamen septimum diem Nominibus imponendis
destinatum tradidisse valde miror, cum et Festus in Lustrico, et Macrobius 1.
Sat. cap. 16. vno fere ore refragentur. Recte autem Titum Probum reprehendit de
Togae Virilis tempestate.
the name of the Family, giving the Forename (which was imposed the eighth day
on Females, and the ninth on Males; as among the Grecians on the tenth Suidas
in (...). and in (...), et Scholiast. in Aristoph. Aues.
day from the birth, and fifth from the Amphidromia) and adding the surname,
which sometimes was from the Ancestors also, they had usually three Names, two
of which every Bondsman manumitted commonly had given him from his Lord or
Patron. So is the Testimony of Tertullian Quod vide page 326. transcriptum, et
consulas Ios. Scalig. ad Fest. in Curiales.
; so that Dream of the Bondsman which thought he had had Tria Pudenda, and was
soon after set free, because (as Artemidor. Onirocritic. 1. cap. 47.
it was interpreted) his freedom gave him two Names, which made three
(signified in the dream) with his own, that was, as to other of his kind, most
usually one. So that Ingenuitie, not Nobility, was designed by the three
Names. In most other Nations (I think) until particular ennobling, by the
Princes authority, came in use, was a kind of distinction of Nobility, and
most near to that in Greece. None so barbarous, but had the like; witness the
Gothique Anses; a Name interpreting Half-Gods Iornandes de Reb. Getic. cap. 13.
and Abb. Vrspergensis.
, or men above common human fortune, and applied by them to their Chieftains
valorously bearing themselves in the Wars, and their posterity. Whence good
conceit, of many, deriues that Name of the Hanfiatique Society, beginning
Chytraeus Chronic. Sax. et Vic. aliq. Gent. lib. 23.
about M. CC. of Christ some while before Frederique the second. But, it seems,
they had no more or other known Ensigns of Nobility, then as the Sueuians,
who had anciently Prerogative in Omni Lamb. Schoffnaburgensis.
expeditione Regis Teutonici, exercitum praecedere, and primi committere, in
like sort as among our old English the Kentish men Io. Sarisburiens. de Nug.
Curial. lib. 6. c. 18.
had the honor due to them always of being in the Vantgard, and those of
Wiltshire, with Cornwall and Devonshire, in the Rere, which they all might
challenge by the continual worth of their performance. That was their Badge,
therein their Glory. But, after that Arms grew hereditarie in Europe among
Christians (for Turks paint them not, Septemcastrens. cap. 10.
says my Author) by a general consent (which is, upon good ground, thought to
have had its beginning from the Holy Wars, the Posterity thinking it a
special Glory to bear the same Coat which the Ancestor had displayed or
showed in his Shield in defense of the Christian Name; and so with us Clarent.
in Reliq. page 180.
about Henry III. they became more hereditarily established) when the Prince
ennobled any, he usually gave him the particular of his Bearing in Blazon. An
example thereof in England, it being also, to another purpose, worth
observation, I here insert. Richard II. gave one John of Kingston a Coat, and
made him an Esquire, so to ennable him to perform some feats of Arms with a
French Knight. The Copy of the Part. 1. Pat. 13. Rich. 2. Memb. 37. Consimile
Bernardo Angennine Consiliario Regis in Ducatu Aquitaniae, Rot. Vascon. 23. Hen
6. Memb. 7.
Record is thus literally. Le Roy a tous ceux as queux cestes lettres
viendront, salute. Saches, que come un Chiualer Franceys a ceo que nous sumus
enformes ad challenge un nostre liege John de Kingston a fair certains faits
and points d'Armes, ouesque le dit Chiualer, Nous a fyn que le dit nostre liege
soit le meulz honorablement resceuz and fair puisse and perfourmir les dits
faits and points d'Armes, luy auons resceuz en l'estate de Gentile home and luy
fait Esquier, and volons que que il soit conus per Arms and port
desorenauant, cestassauoir, D'Argent one un Chaperon d'Azure ouesque un Plume
d'Ostriche de Geules. Et ceo a touts yceux, as queux y appertient, nous
notisons per ycelles. En testmoynance de quelle chose, nous auons fait fair
cestes nos Lettres Patents, dones souz nostre Grant Seal a nostre Paleys de
Westminster, le primer iour de Iuyll. Per Brief de Privy Seal. Neither was,
in ancient Rome, wanting a kind of hereditarie Ensigns peculiar to Families,
as the Torquis or Collar to the Torquati, the Hair, or a kind of Ius
Capillitij (it seems) to the Cincinnati, the surname of Great to the Pompeys,
which is plain by that relation of Sueton. lib. 4. cap. 35.
Caligula: Vetera Familiarum Insignia Nobilissimo cuique ademit, Torquato
Torquem, Cincinnato Crinem, Cncio Pompeio Stirpis antiquae Magni Cognomen. So,
all of the Draconteum Hygin. Fabul. 72.
genus about Thebes were known by a special note on their bodies, and Seleucus
Justin. Hist. 15.
his posterity by the form of an Anchor on the thigh. Filij, Nepotesque eius
Ancoram in femore (says Justin) veluti notam Generis naturalem habuere.
Neither was any one admitted to pretend himself of the Pelopidae, if he had
Julian. (...).
not (...), i. that token for an Ensign of his Family, that is, the Iuorie
shoulder, or one as white. But these were the Notes only of their Family, not
of Nobility, consisting in Rome only in the Images, as, that of our times, in
Coat-Armors, which, as Images, express the worth of such as have born them, it
being supposd (in warlike Nations especially after those Martial successes
against the professed enemies of Christianity, about CD. and D. years since)
that the Wars was Synes. Epist. 104.
(...), i. as if you should say, an exact trial of a Brave spirit. And hence,
of later time, both Men of the Sword and Gown, Gens de Rob court, and Rob
longue, as well Togati as Armati have this Note of Arms given them for their
Ensign of Nobility; although clearly a Prince may ennoble without that (it
being the sign, not substance, or cause) as you may see in that Ordinance, to
this purpose, of Ordonnances du France, Tom. 3. tiltre 5.
Henry III. of France in M. D. LXVI. The Disputation of Civil Nobility, with
the particular appendants thereon, commonly discussed, would take up more room
then this Volume. Its, at large, enough in Andre Tiraquel specially. Here only
are those titles which have precedence of this of lowest Gentry. In delivery
of them, I have used Autorities of best choice, without the vain ambition of
citing more then I needed. The Best or First I took always for Instar Omnium;
and, when common course of Times would tell an understanding Reader where I had
my Relation, I discharged my self of reference to the Reporter. Taking
liberty also of being jealous, where ever my inquisition might aid, I vent to
you nothing quoted at second hand, but ever loved the Fountain, and, when I
could come at it, vsd that Medium only, which would not at all, or least,
deceive by Refraction. Multum, creed Mihi, refert, a Font bibatur
Qui fluit, an pigro quae stupet vnda Lacu.
But where ever I was driven to take up on other men's credits, I acknowledge
it. Nor if, that Aristophanes which was the only sufficient Uitruu. inpraesat.
ad lib. 7.
Judge at the Trialls, of worth in Learning, instituted by Ptolemie
Philadelphus, were present at my Recitalls, should he once find me play the
base Plagiarie. There are, which have in part handled some of my Titles, and as
their Purpose. I abstain from comparison. Those which have done well, justify
themselves; and them my Page or Margin often thanks. Diverse, I know, have
aduenturd on pieces of the Subject, and come off with small merit in the state
of Literature. In regard of comprehension, I dare challenge precedence and
primacie. Both the Mahumedan States and the European Christendom, their
Titularie Honors and the appendant Ensigns are what with curious Examination I
have delivered. Nor doubt I, but that to Stories also of the Middle and Ancient
times, both Greek and Latin, hence may be some good Light had, and that not
unworthy their eyes which merit their Place in the learned Rank. Why not? How
ere my sufficiency be, some of them know, that the understanding of (...), i.
Tata, in holy Ies. cap. 14. com. 23.
Writ is referd by the Kimchi in Rad. apud Reuchlin. in verse. R. Nathanis
Mordechai.
Rabbis to a Chambermaid that asked her Mistress for a (...) to sweep the
house withal, whence one of them hearing her, before not knowing what it was,
collected it was a Broom, and that the Verb was to sweep. As in her question,
so in my Discourses may occur what many a knowing man, if ingenuous, will
thank me for. Alius Auson. in Epist. ad Symmach. in Eidyll. II.
enim alio plura inuenire potest, Nemo omnia. To Others, which are but lovers
of this kind of learning, I dare promise much of what they never before met
with, not without reformation of diverse errors, possessing them with the
vulgar: Perhaps with the Learned. As in diverse like that of Crowns and Diadems,
which all have hitherto taught to have been among Royal Notes most anciently
in Europe. I presume I have sufficiently manifested the contrary, and answered
their urged Autorities, producing also one out of Euripides his Orestes,
seeming stranger against my part then any other: which, when I was to use, and
having not at hand the Scholiast (out of whom I hoped some aid) I went, for
this purpose, to see it in the well-furnisht Library of my beloved friend that
singular Poet M. Ben: Ionson, whose special Worth in Literature, accurat
Judgment, and Performance, known only to that Few which are truly able to know
him, has had from me, ever since I began to learn, an increasing admiration.
Having examined it with him, I resolud upon my first Opinion, and found, as I
guess, a New but more proper Interpretation of the Place, wherein I was
confirmd afterward also by the judicious approbation of a man very learned
(but especially in the Greek) and of most ready memory, M. Arthur Best, to
whose continual Kindness and Instruction too, I shall always acknowledge my
self much bound. And hence may you be confident, that the interpretation of
Pythagoras his (...), or (...), is not to be referd to Royal Diadems, or
Kings, as some will, unless he meant it to those of Asia, with whom indeed
he had spent some time. Either he wished in it that you should not take from
another his Crown, Reward, or Palm, or that you should not wrong or corrupt
the Laws, as S. Hierom In Respons. aduers. Ruffin. Epist. 41.
expressly interprets it, by Leges Vrbium conseruandas; which is well
justified by a Pythagorean, concurring therein, and giving Malchus in vita
Pithagorae.
the reason, because (...), i. The Laws are the Crowns or Enclosures of the
Commonwelth. In promising more such, I will perform my word. If I leave
untouched something, which may be looked for, of the Mahumedan States, refer it
rather to my wants of Instruction then Negligence. As they are far from us,
so Relations of them are often uncertain, and of a cozening Credit, especially
those of the Middle times, when Ignorance rode in Triumph. And, until that most
learned Leunclaw and Busbeque, what of them was well known? Little, especially
to our purpose. Nay, even in this European Light of understanding, how current
went that idle Deduction of the Persian Sophi from Woollen Tulipants? It having
Origination in the Sophilar, Sophi, or Suffi (lar is but the Turkish
termination plural) that were both of a reformd or separated Religion, as also
a special Sect in Philosophy, Quorum scientia est per infusionem ab
Intelligentijs, non per acquisitionem Doctrinae, as In Auicenn. de Anima
Aphorism. 9. and de ijs plura in eiusdem lib. de Definit. et quaesitis. V. page
107. infra.
Andrew Alpag, well skilld in their Tongue and Learning, according to their own
conceits, says of them. How the Ethiopian Emperor (whom we corruptly call
Prester John; and Elias Masoreth Hammasoreth praefat. 3. Vide part 1. page 88.
Leuita writs him (...) Priti Joan) has been ignorantly wronged by such as so
mist both his Name and Territory, is seen in too much Testimony. But of
these, and the like, in due place. In our Europe, as Writers afforded occasion,
I have been large: omitting, I think, no obsolet Title, the knowledge whereof
may help to the understanding of those in present use. The like I say of
Ensigns. But such as were merely proper to their times, and have not so much
as their shadow left, I have willingly forborne. Among these, is the ancient Ius
Capillitij in France, whence you must interpret the Story of Q. Crothild,
that, when her sons, on whom she purposd to have settled the Crown against
Hlothar and Hildebert, were brought to her from them with a pair of Scissors
and a Sword, by Arcadius offering her the choice, whether she would have them
shaven or put to death, answered Greg. Turonens. Hist. 3. cap. 18. Aimon. de
Gest. Franc. 2. cap. 12.
Satius mihi est, si ad Regnum non eriguntur, mortuos eos videre, quam tonsos.
For the shauing or cutting their Hair was a putting them into the condition of
subjects. (...) (says Agathias) (...), i. It was not lawful for the French
Kings to cut their hair, but from their Infancy it was continually permitted
to grow, which they ware hanging down their backs, curiously combd, and done
with diverse (...).
such things as were fit for keeping it in neatest fashion: and this was (...),
a special Ensign and honor of the Royal Line, which no subject, in whom the
hope of Succession was not, might wear; and hence took the vain Grecians
occasion of that fabulous assertion, wherein they supposd those of the French
Line to be bristled on the back like Hogs, and called them (...), i. as if you
should say, Bristle-backt. (...) (are the words of George Cedren) (...), i.
those of the Royal Line were called Cristati, quod interpretatur (so are the
words of an Landulph. Saga^ Miscell. 22. ex Theophane forsan, vnde and Cedrenus
forte.
old Historian exactly interpreting this out of a Grecian) Trichorachati. Pilos
enim habebant in spina veluti Porci: which the rather I cite, to show that
Hotoman's conjecture upon that place of Cedren, thinking it to be corrupt, is
idle. Neither need it move, that they so ill interpreted Cristati. What Is more
common among them then mistaking of like kind? This Custom of wearing long
hair continued in the French Kings, till about Jews the younger, when Circ. A.
M. c. I. X. Author Reliquiarum.
Peter Lombard, Bishop of Paris, dissuaded them from it. It was in fashion also
to be worn long amongst our Soueraigns till Henry v. as is collected by their
Seals. And by that of France, may be interpreted the Henr. Huntingdon. hist.
6.
Distich to William the first, Caesariem, Caesar, tibi si Natura negauit,
Hanc Willielme tibi stella comata dedit
Made upon the Comet appearing in Easter week before Harold's overthrow,
expressing, as if the Author had first played on Caesar's baldness, and then by
Apostrophe told the Conqueror, that the Comet or Faxed Star (as the old
English and most significant word is) portended him Caesariem or Capillitium,
alluding to the Ius Capillitij of France, as it was a note Royal. For, common
opinion then supposd the Comet a token of his future Conquest. Of this nature
is that of the old Emperors Herodian. lib. (...). Xenoph. Cyropaed. 8. et v.
Lips. ad 1. Tacit. Annal. number. 42.
having Fire in a Lamp carried before them, which the Persian Kings also had.
And likewise those the Spear, Crown of Thorns, Nails of the Cross, Sword,
Robes, and Diadem of Charles le Maign, all which Annal. Boior. 5.
Auentin thus remembers: Germani Imperatores apud Proauos nostros, Hastam,
Coronam spineam, Clauos (quibus Christum seruatorem nostrum excruciatum
constat) insuper Ensem, Purpuram, Diadema Caroli Magni progerere secum
solebant. But he says, that Sigismund the Emperor laid them A. M. CDX.
to be kept, as precious Relics, at Norimberg, where they are to be seen,
having been all before usually carried with the Emperors, vt peculiaria
sacrosancti Imperij Penetralia, Caesareaeque Maiestatis Auspicia. These, the
strewing of the Emperors way with Gold-Dust and the like, as obsolet I am
silent of, as also such as are so particular (rather of Custom, then
Greatness) that this place not so well fitted them. As that of Sealing in
white Wax appropriated by the French to their King. Il n'y a autre Prince
Chrestien (says one Du Haillan liver 3.
of them) que seel in Cire blanch que luy, les autres seelent en cire rouge ou
verde (he might have added ou iaune) and touts les autres Potentats sont armez
en leurs seels, and nos Roys seuls aux leurs, sont vestus d'habits Royaux, and
en Roys iusticier non armez. This sealing in White Wax was permitted to Rene
King of Sicilie by Jews XI. in M. CD. LXVIII. But matters of this nature are
scarce more belonging to our Chapter of Royal Ensigns (for thither, if any
whither, they should be referd) then that of the rosting the whole Ox at
Francfort, at the Emperors inauguration, or such like. In most of what I have
done, Testimonies of Times past are my Warrants. Securus licet Aeneam,
Rutulumque ferocem
Committas: nulli grauis est percussus Achilles.
For more safety, I observed that admonition. This jealous Age would make a
man do it where he needed not. But my Reader shall miss nothing the more of
what may, to the proposed end, furnish him. If where I dispute of Dukes,
Marquesses, Counts, and such, you find not so much out of old Ciuilians (I mean
the elder Doctors and Commentators) as might be heapt up from them to that
purpose, blame me not. I profess not the reading them, yet could have used
them, but was not willing to load my Margin with their names. Where they talk
of Meum and Tuum, when their Authority is requisite, they deserve to be heard.
In things, of this nature, to be extracted out of Story and Philologie, they
cesse to be Doctors, nay, are scarce Alphabetarians, even the whole Rank of
them; until you come to the most learned Bude, Alciat, Hotoman, Cuias,
Wesenbeck, Brisson, the Gentiles, and some few more of this Age, before whom
the Body of that Profession was not amiss compard to a fair Robe, of Cloth
of Gold, or of Richest Stuff and Fashion, Rablais l^ure 2. chap. 5.
Qui fust (saving all mannerly respect to you, Reader) brodee de Merde. The
reason of the Similitude is known to any that sees such impudent barbarism in
the Glosses on so neat a text, which from Justinian (he died DLXV.) until
Lothar II. (he was Emperor M. C. XXV.) lay hidden and out of use in the
Western Empire, nor did any there, all that time, profess or read it. But
when Lothar took Amalfi, he there found an old Copy of the Pandects or
Digests, which he gave as a precious Monument to the Pisans (hence it was
called U. Ang. Politian, lib. 10. Epist. Marquard. Breisacio.
Litera Pisana) from whom it has been since (in M. CD. XC. VI.) translated to
Florence, where, in the Dukes Palace, it is, almost with Religion, preserved,
and never brought forth but with Torches, Light, and other Reverence. Under
this Emperor Lothar, began the Law to be professed at Bologna, where Odofredus
apud Sigonium de Regno Italiae, lib. 11. et 7.
Irner or Werner (as Conrad a Lichtenaw calls him) first made Glosses on it
about the beginning of Fr. Barbarossa, in M. C. L. and by the favor of this
Lothar, was Bologna, upon the advice of Irner, it seems, constituted to be
Verba Lotharij ap. P. Merul. Cosmog. part. 2. lib. 4. cap. 33.
Legum and Iuris Schola vna and sola. And here was the first Time and Place of
that Profession in the Western Empire. But Justinian expressly ordaind, that
none should teach the Civil Laws, except Constit. de Iuris docendi rat.. Haec
autem.
only in Constantinople, Rome, and Berytus: which, although Bartol interprets
(as of necessity he was driven, to maintain his Profession) with Nisi tempore
ius Academiae sit quaesitum, yet why then was Bologna no place for the Laws
under. Justinian? for, they pretend there, to have been as an University from
the Grant of Theodosius the younger in CD. XXIII. Plainly under Justinian, who
ever had taught out of one of those three Cities, was Denarum librarum About
thirty pounds of our money.
auri poena plectendus, and to be banished out of the City where he durst so
profess. Neither would the matter of being a University have helped it. But
before Lothar, the Government was by the Salique, Sigon. de Reg. Ital. 4. et 8.
sub A. 1007.
Lombardian, and Roman Laws (the Roman being some piece of what had been vsd
in Rome) every one living according to either of them as he would make
choice. About the same time also the two Bastard brothers (by whose worth, and
of the third, Peter Comestor, their Mother thought she should be saved,
neither would repent, but trusted to her merit in bearing three so famous)
Gratian a Monk in Bologna, and Peter Lombard at Paris, one made the Decree, the
first Volume autorised for Can on Law by Pope Eugenius III, and the other the
Sentences. Such as since have written on the Digests (...) Code, until the
cleerer light of Learning began among our Fathers talk for the most part like.
Rablais his Bridoye. Some, most honored of later time, that understood their
Text, and studied the Laws, as well because they would curiously know, as be
merely Continual Practisers.
(...) have, with judgment, instructed in part of this Purpose. The Margin
confesses, without blushing, their and all other men's helps. If either Envy or
Ignorance question how I, bred from the bottom of Obscurity, and so far
from Court-Custome, should dare at these Honors, let it know, I learned long
since from a Great Clerk (that Robert Bishop of Lincoln under Henry III) That
there was, in Libraries, greater aid to the true understanding of Honor, and
Nobility, then among Gold and Purple outsides. He being demanded by the
King, Vbi Io. de Aton in Constit. Othoboni tit. de Bonis Intestat. verb.
Baronum.
Moraturam didicit, qua Filios Nobilium Procerum Regni, quos secum habuerat
Domicellos, instruxerat, cum non de Nobili prosapia, sed de simplicibus,
traxisset originem, fertur intrepide respondisse, that he was taught it in the
Courts of greater Princes then the K. of England, meaning of those Ancients,
whose Courts were represented in his Volumes of Story. In Conjectures I durst
not be too bold. Where but mere fancy can direct, it were ridiculous to
regard them; but when they seem to offer themselves, they deserve the choice of
Judgment. That Religious abstinence of the old Jews, who referd all such Dignos
vindice Nodos, as were too difficult for their humanity, to Elias his
resolution, were good to be proportionably more observed in all Learning,
especially by those which are (and too many are) so unfortunate in their
ghesses, that on the apparently worst of diverse they often insist. Malicious
Censure I regard not, Ingenuous I honor. Reader, Farewell.

The sum and first Pages of the Chapters.
(The chief Matter only of them; the particulars being in the Contents before
every Chapter)
Of the first Part.
CHAP. I. THe beginning of a Monarchy, the first King. page 1 CHAP. II.
Difference of King and Emperor, and much of them. the great Duke or Emperor of
Muscouy or Russia. page 18. CHAP. III. Lord. Lord of Ireland. Shah, and the
like. page 46. CHAP. IV. Caesar Augustus. Pharaoh. Most Christian King.
Catholic King. Defender of the Faith, and such like. page 68. CHAP. V. Prester
John. Cham or Chan. Chaliph. Amir Almumenin. Of the Alcoran. Persian Sophi.
Schach, Xa, Saa, and the like. pa. 85. CHAP. VI. Particular forms of Speaking
to or by great Persons. Majesty. Speaking in the Abstract or Concret. Worship,
and (...). page 114 CHAP. VII. Anointing of Kings. Crowns. A disputation
against received opinion of Crowns. Tulipant. Crowns of several Princer.
Scepters. Globe and Cross. Croissant of the Mahumedans. page 128.
Of the second Part.
CHAP. 1. PRinces apparent successors. Caesar. Rex Romanorum. Despot. Daulphin.
Monsieur. Etheling; Clyto. Prince of Wales. Pr. of Scotland. Infanta. Prince of
Astura. page 168. CHAP. II. Dukes. Of them, Counts, and Marquesses, as the
names were anciently confounded. Archduke. Conjecture whence the several
forms of Crowns for subject Princes came into these Western parts. Dukes in
several Nations. page 182. CHAP. III. Marquesses, in several States. page
209. CHAP. IV. Counts and Earls. Graffes. page 219. CHAP. V. Counts Palatin,
the special beginnings of every of ours in England. page 241. CHAP. VI.
Viscounts, and Vidames. page 250 CHAP. VII. Barons, the Notation of the word,
and its several Notions. Thanes. Vauasours, and diverse like. p. 258 CHAP.
VIII. The beginning of Feuds. Of the old Saxon Tenures somewhat. page 293.
CHAP. IX. Knights, and ancient and later forms of Knighting. A Knights Fee,
and Furniture. Ius sigilli. Aureorum Annulorum. Seals. Aides. Miles. Degrading
a Knight. page 305. CHAP. X. Esquyer. Armiger. Peers. page 340. CHAP. XI.
Bannerets. Baronets. Knights of the Bath. Of the Collar, or the particular
Orders of Knighthood, with their beginnings and chief particulars. page 352.
CHAP. XII. Turkish Dignities. some of Tartarie. Clarissimus, Spectabilis,
Illustris, Superillustris. Patricij. pa. 376.
Reader,
At the end are some Additions which I would have you read with the context.
The Pages there noted and the Lines will direct you. page 387.

Then follow
I. The Faults of the Print corrected, and by them mend your Copy; and where
Points, Accents, Letters inverted, or otherwise, and the like are amiss (as
sometimes they are, neither could I prevent it) let your humanity excuse both
Mc and the Workmen. In page 13. of the Preface li. 22. read stronger. And pa.
19. l. vlt. Torch-light. And also read Wite for We in page 389. page 391. II.
A collection into a Table of all the more special Autors, whose Testimony we
have vsd, with direction to those places where we have either transcribed old
Mss. Records, Charters, or the like, as also, where any ancient Writer is, not
vulgarly, explaned, or amended. III. The words of the Eastern Tongues more
specially herein interpreted. IV. Such of the Greek words (most of them being
Barbarous and unusual) as have herein their explanation. V. A direction to the
places where any thing, more particularly pertaining to our Common Laws,
occurres. VI. A general Table for the more ready finding out of the Contents
by the Pages.
TITLES OF HONOR.
FIRST PART.
Out of Nature and a Democracie, a Monarchy derived. (...). The first King or
Monarch, whereof any good testimony is. Shinaghr and Babel. The variableness
of the Europeans from the Asians in Asiatique names. Nimrod was not Ninus, but
Belus. Continuance of the Babylonian Monarchy. The time of Nimrods Kingdom,
against common opinion. Peleg. Nimrod and Abraham, lived not together.
Semyramis built not Babylon. Nimrod (not Ninus or Ashur) built Nineneh. Why he
is called Belus. How sacred statues came first to be worshipped, and the true
beginning of Idolatry. Bell or Baal the same with Apollo, Pan, and the like,
and was the Sun. Belenus or Abellio, among the Gauls and Britons, was
Apollo. How the Jews worshipped the Sun. The Persian Salchodai and Mithra,
what they are. The Gods of those Eastern parts adored in our Western. Jupiters
Tomb and Epitaph in Crete, and why the Cretans are called, always Liers. Some
make Nimrod to be honored in Orions name among the Constellations. How they
agree in name and actions. Orion and Cynosura the two Princes of the Heavens in
old Astronomy. Homers Astronomy explaned. The supposition of the golden
world, idle. As idle that observation, that (...). i. a prescribed law, is not
in Homer. Use of singing Laws. The Fables of the Chaldeans and Grecians, with
the Annian impostures, rejected.

CHAP. I.
Community of life, and Civil Society, beginning first in particular
Families, under Oeconomique rule (representing what is now a common-welth) had,
in its state, the Husband, Father and Master, as King. Hence many Colonies;
which, whithersoeuer deduced, were Cities, Towns, Villages, or such like. In
them, deserved Honor added to the eminency of some fit man's Virtue, made him
by public consent, or some by his own ambition violently got to be what every
of them were in proportion to their own Families; that is, over the common
state, and as for the common good, King. Thus came first Cities to be governed
by Kings, as now whole Nations are. And in the Heroique times (before the
Olympiads, when most of the Grecian fables are supposed) such, as showed
themselves first public benefactors to the Multitude, either by invention of
Arts, Martial prowess, increasing of Traffic, bettering or enlarging the
Country, or such like, were (says Aristotle) by several Nations, constituted
Kings over them, and, by general consent, left lines of hereditarie
succession. So that naturally, all men, in Oeconomique rule, being equally free
and equally possessed of superiority, in those Ancient propagations of mankind,
even out of nature it self, and that inbred sociablenesse, which every man
has as his character of Civility, a Popular state first raised it self,
which, by its own judgment, afterward was converted into a Monarchy; both by
imitation of as well the subordinat as Supreme Rule, wherevnder the whole
Systeme of the world is governed, as taking also example from unreasonable
creatures; in whom, because the liberty of discourse was wanting, Nature it
self had placed that instinct of choosing always One for their Prince or
Leader. Hardly was any so Idolatrous that could not upon mature consideration
(as Theophil. Antioch. ad Autolyc. lib. 3.
Orpheus did in his last Will and Testament) confess a unity of Nature in
that multiplicitie of Names, which fabulously they applied to the Deity, and
acknowledge that Apuleius de Mundo. and idipsum author libri qui eo nomine
Aristotelis falso nuncupatur.
quod est in trir^mi gubernator, in curru rector, praecentor in choris, lex in
vrbe, dux in exercitu, Hoc est in mundo Deus, which was long since affirmed, by
such, as knew not how to worship the true God, yet were resolved of his unity.
Hereto are according diverse and frequent testimonies, of the ancient Gentiles,
dispersed both in Macrob. Saturn. 1. Justin. Martyr. (...). Lactantius de falls.
relig. cap. 5. alij.
profane and holy Writers. Hence they could not but think, that the
imperfections of the giddieheaded multitudes government would be much repaired,
if they subjected themselves to some eminent One, as they saw themselves, and
what else was to be in regard of the unseen Creator. In a Trism^gist. in (...).
Idem fere apud E^phant. Pythagoric. Stob. (...). 48.
Tract attributed to Hermes (whom some dare affirm ancienter then Moses; and
the Egyptians accounted as a God) Isis is personated thus instructing Horus:
Whereas, my son, there are four places in the Universe subject to an
immutable law and command; that is, the supreme Heaven, the (...).
Orbs, the Air, and the whole Earth. Above, my son, in the supreme heavens
the Gods (understand Angels and ministering spirits) have their habitation; who,
as all things else, are ruled by the Maker of all things. In the Orbs, the
Stars are; governed by their great enlightner the Sun. In the Air are
souls, over whom the Moon has command. In the Earth are Men and other living
creatures, whose Governor is He that for the time is King. The very pattern
of a royal State, you see, derived out of the worlds fabrique and its
particular subiections; although I importune you not to credit the supposed
antiquity of the author, nor his whole assertion, being, in part, impious. And
confirmation of the fitnes of this unity in government, they had from Senec.
Ep. 91.
irrational creatures: among whom that one Kind specially, which is
commended, in both profane and holy authority, to man, for its exemplary
qualities, has herein preeminence. That of Bees. All honor, assist, and obey
One:

Ille Georgic. 4.
operum custos: illum admirantur and omnes
Circumstant fremitu denso, stipantque frequentes.
Et saepe attollunt humeris, and corpora bello
Obiectant, pulchramque petunt per vulnera mortem,
as the divine Virgil of them. And the Grecians have a proper word for the King
of Bees, whom they call (...); and, by translation, Callimachus calls Jupiter
(...). Neither is in a humane Monarchy what has not in their Common-welth
some most remarquable proportion, if that curious searcher of Nature, our
Arist. (...). lib. 9 cap. 40.
Philosopher deceive not. Hence, as Cyprian. tract. 4. de Idol. van.
some, among other arguments prove this aeternall unity in the true Deity,
so those, who first tried the inconueniencies of popular rule, saw that in
their government likewise should be some One selected Monarch; under whose
arbitrarie rule their happy quiet might be preserved. I know the usual
assertion, that makes the first of those three kinds of States a Monarchy.
Great Philosophers dare affirm so, and Principio rerum (says Justin) gentium
nationumque imperium penes Reges erat: quos, ad fastigium huius maiestatis, non
ambitio popularis, sed spectata inter bonos moderatio prouehebat. But that
cannot, in my understanding, be conceived as truth, otherwise then with a
presupposition of a Democracie, out of which, as is related, a Monarchy might
have original: no more then can be imagined how an Aristocracie should be
before the Multitude; out of which, such, as make in their less number the
Optimacie, must be chosen. Aristotle's Commenters, Bodin, Machiauel on Liuy,
diverse others disput(...) this point: But, out of Machiauel, satisfaction may
be easily received, as is here delivered. And so must that be understood of In
Boeoticeru^ initio.
Pausanias: All Greece was anciently under Kings, and no Democracies.
(...). Not that the States were first Kingdoms, but anciently so, and not
under popular government, as in later time they were. Well I allow, that a
Family, being in nature before a public society or common-welth, was as an
exemplary Monarchy, and, in that regard, a Monarchy is ancienter then any
State: but as it is applied to a common society of many families and to what
we we now call a Kingdom, it cannot but presuppose a popular State or
Democracie. The first Monarch of a Nation, we read of, is that Nimrod (nephew
to Cham) the mighty hunter before the Lord. His Kingdom was in Babylon, Erec,
Accad, and Calna in the land of Sinaghr, which is called usually Senaar; by
which name also the Babylonian Monarchy was known. For, where Genesis 14. com. 1
Moses speaks of Amraphel K. of Sinaghr, the Paraphrase of Onkelos has
expressly K. of Babel. His time was about M. DCC. XX. from the Creation.
Josephus calls him Nabrodes, and makes him first author of the building of that
Tower of confusion of Tongues. In profane story you find not his name,
unless, with common error, you make him Ninus, in whom Trogus, Ctesias and
from him Diodore with other begin the Assyrian or Babylonian (for to this
purpose I admit them as the same and one) Monarchy. If likelihood would well
endure it in Story, it might not be hard to make Nimrod and Ninus one name.
Greater changes are in words of Oriental language expressed in European
characters. Their Iehezkel is Ezechiel, Ruben Rubel, Mosche Moses, Nun Naue,
Esarhaddon A^bazarith, and in Arabique propagated from Ebrew, our Hispalis is
Civil in Spain. To show also how differently they express our Names, in the
lives of the four Evangelists, published by P. Kirstenius in Arabique,
Uespasian, and Domitian are called Asubasianuusu, and Damthianuusu, and Nerua
is Neirune Alshaghir, that is, according to them, little Nero. Such like more
occur in ancient and later Story very frequent, in so much that scarce any
community oftimes appears; as in Cyaxares and Assuerus or Achaswerush; which
name is Xerxes also, and Oxyares. But the first Babylonian Monarch is not
called Ninus, but Belus. And his son is, by consent of best authorities,
Ninus. It follows then that Nimrod was father to Ninus. Justin indeed delivers,
Primus omnium Ninux Rex Assyriorum veterem and quasi auitum gentibus morem noua
Imperij eupiditate mutauit. But regard the testimony of those which out of the
more ancient authors have transcribed their Chronologies, as Julius African,
Cedren, and others, and Ninus will appear clearly the son of Nimrod, that is,
of Belus, the first of that State. And although erroniously in Historians for
the most part Ninus be the root of Chronologique calculation, whereupon Justin
expressly affirms that this first Monarchy remained in the same blood
Constantinus Manasses hallucinatus hunc numerum a Belo auspicatur.
M. CCC. years, and then ended in Sardanapalus (otherwise called
Tonosconcoleros or Conosconcoleros) and was by Arbaces then transferred to the
Medes, so that if you reckon back from the beginning of Arbaces (Arbactus and
Pharnaces he is also written) that number of years, you shall fall near exactly
upon the beginning of Ninus according to some, and that most curious,
Chronology: yet withal, take the years of Belus his reign being, as some
will, LV. but as August. de Ciu. Dei. lib. 16. cap. 17. and 56. anni ad hanc
rem sunt apud Glycam ex alijs antiquioribus. Annal. part. 2.
others LXV. (which seems lest distant from truth) and add them to the M. CCC.
and then take the whole number out of the year of the world, which was at
Sardanapalus his death, the residue will fall near the first year of the
Chaldaean Epecha (placed in the beginning of that Empire) then which, what can
more properly design out Nimrods beginning, being about LXV. before Ninus?
which is well enough confirmed also by that number of M. CCC. LX. delivered by
Diodor. Sicul. Bibliothec. 3. vnde pro (...) lege apud Agathiem. hist. 2.
(...), vbi is de hac re.
Ctesias for the continuance of this Monarchy, as also by De Ciu. Dei lib. 12.
cap. 10.
S. Augustine. Regnum (says he) Assyriorum in Epistola Alexandri (he means an
Cyprian. de Idol. van. and ipse Aug de Ciu. Dei 8. cap. 5. huius memirunt.
Epistle of Alexander to his mother Olympias) quinque millia excedit annorum.
In Graeca vero historia mill ferme and trecentos habent ab ipsius Beli
principatu: quem regem and ille Aegyptius (that was one, from whom Alexander
had his instruction) in eiusdem regni ponit exordio. By this supputation,
Nimrods Kingdom began some LXII. years after the Flood, that is, M. DCC.
XVIII. from the Creation. Howsoever (if Belus were he, as is most probable, and
that Belus reigned LXV. years only, which is the greatest account) the common
error of those which place Nimrod and Abraham together seems intolerable.
Witness holy Writ, which affirms that in Pelegs days the earth was divided,
by dispersion of the people. That division was immediately after Babel built,
and by most likely conjecture the same year that Peleg was borne; for Moses
relating his name to be Peleg, adds for in his days the earth was divided; as
if, according to the Jewish custom, he had had his name imposed presently
upon his Peleg (...) est diuidi^. Genesis 10. 25.
birth, by reason of that Division. And how could his name be by reason of the
Division, before it? And, it is questionles, that Peleg was borne CI. years
after the Flood, which falls (by this calculation) into the XXXIX. of Nimrod.
But Abraham plainly was borne CXCI. years after Peleg; how then could Nimrod
and Abraham be coetaneall? I know, the accounts of diverse ancient writers are
in this point of the continuance of this Empire (out of which as a posteriori,
the beginning is found) much differing both among themselves, and from what is
before delivered, as those which occur in V. Lips. ad 1. Vell. Paterculi and
(si placet) Thalum ap. Lactant. Instit. 1. cap. 23.
Paterculus, Eusebius, Orosius and others; and some Grecians have made Nimrods
beginning to be Cedrenus, Glycas, alij.
DC. XXX. years from the Flood, others more, against apparent truth of
Scripture: others of later times placing him diversely. But I see none so near
most probable conjecture as the learned Christopher Heluicus, whose laboriously
composed and most useful Historical Theater, in this and other of this
nature, affoords instructing helps. And, whereas the fabulous traditions of
some Europeans make Semyramis the author of Babylon; it was delivered, for most
false, long since by Joseph. 1. ad Appionem.
Berosus (he was Belus his Priest in Babylon) and some Q. Curt. lib. 5.
ancients of this part of the world also, have justly followed him, attributing
it to Belus, which even holy writ proves to be the work of Nimrod. So some will
have Ninus the builder of Nineueh (which profane Story also calls Ninus)
whereas upon good reason out of greatest authority Nimrod was he that built
it. In Genes. x. He went out of the land (he means Shinaghr) into Assyria and
built Nineueh. But I know the usual translation has it otherwise, that, out
of the land went Assure and built Nineueh. But, Assure is not, before that time,
as a proper name of a man, spoken of in holy Writ, neither in that passage is
there a declaring of Sems posterity (in which Assure was) but of Chams only.
And the holy tongue endures either of the interpretations, as has been by the
learned heretofore observed. It may possibly be, that its name was from Ninus
successor and son to Nimrod. For in that Nation the first City built was
titled according to the name of the builders son, as appears in the Story
of Came and Enoch. The Ebrew orthography of it is (...) composed, as it were,
of Nin and Neueh, which may well signify the Habitation or City of Nin, being
easily (according to the European course) turned to Ninus. And Josephus
Archoeolog. Iudaic. 9. in hist. Ionae.
expressly calls it, (...) and (...), which words without difficulty give the
same sense with the Ebrew. All this is in a manner confirmed by an ancient and
most learned D Hieronym. Tradit. Ebraicis.
Father, delivering that the Assyrians, ex nomine Nini Beli filij Ninum
condiderunt, vrbem magnam, quam Ebraei appellant Niniuen. Which is as if he
had said Nimrod had done it. For what were the Assyrians but his subjects? The
first Empire then began in Asia under Nimrod (the same with Belus, called also
Arbelus or Arbylus) King over the Babylonian and Assyrian territories chiefly,
having in them his two Cities royal, but extending his power over the greatest
part of the inhabited and neighboring country. Why he was called Belus, is no
wonder. Take it not as a name proper to him while he lived. But refer it to
an effect of Idolatrous application after his death. For, whether adoration of
Statues began in Sherugs days (as is usually delivered out of Eusebius. in (...).
Epiph. in prolegomcnis.
ancient authority) or whenever; it is certain by all probability, that
sacred Statues were first such as had been made in memory of some best beloved
and most honored great men or of their fathers, ancestors, children, wives, or
dearest friends being Hinc idolu^ dictum est (si Diophanti fides apud Fulgent.
Mythologic. 1.) (...), quasi, species doloris. Quod sane linguae sanct^ optime
conucnit, in qua (...). i. Dolores simulachia dicuntur. Psalm. 106. 38. and 39.
and alibi. Originatio autem idololatriae ad hunc modum docetur. (...). cap. 14
ab Epiphanio in prol^gom. and Iul. Firmico de errore Profan. Religionum, alijs
v. si placet, and Ciceronem de consolatione.
dead. To these were, at length, by flattery of servants and sycophants of
such as had erected the Statues, given divine worship and ceremonies with
suffumigations, crowns of flowers, and other rites which to the dead, of later
time, by the Gentiles have been used: being at first invented by them for such
as they styled Gods. And, as the ceremonies due to their Deities, so, as a
consequent, grew the names of them also at last to be applied to those whom the
Statues had first honored. Now, it is not unknown to any that the Babylonians
held their greatest God to be Bell, which is the same with the Phoenician and
Punique Baal (the difference proceeds only out of the Ebrew and (...)
Chaldaeis; Ebraice au^em i. Punice (...) dictus est. Elementu^ n. (...)
Chaldaeis saepius excidit, and a Grammaticis obseruatur. D^minum vero
interpretatur.
Chaldean dialects) and was first understood for the Sun, whom they called
Sanchoniathon apud Eusebius. Parasc. Euangelic. (...).
Baal-samaim, that is, the Lord of Heaven (and in substance, even by Idolatrous
origination, was the same with Jupiter Olympius, Pan, Apollo and the rest of
their greater Gods, differing in name only, as Baal-pheor, Baalzebub, Molo^h
and the rest did in Palestine) whence, it seems, the Lacedaemonians had their
(...) for the Sun, as Hesychius is author, and perhaps the Phrygians and
Thurians Scholiast. ad Aeschyli Persas and Hesych. in (...).
their word (...) for a King, and the Western parts their Belenus, Belinus,
(...), as Herodian calls him, or Scalig. Auson. lect. 1. cap. 9.
Abellio, as an old inscription found in Guienne. For all these names that
Apollo has, which the Gauls and Britons worshipped, and to whom the Druids
sacrificed at the cutting down of their Mistletoe, expressing him, in their
language, Plin. hist. Not. 16. cap. 44.
Omnia sanans, which every. Schoole-boy knows also to be proper to Paean the
same with Phoebus. And, that Belin is no other then Apollo, is both proved out
of an old Ausonius in profess. Burdegal.
Poet of Gaul, calling his Priest Phoebitius;

Necreticebo senem,
Nomine Phoebitium,
Qui, Beleni aedituus,
Nilopis inde tulit.
as also from a Append. Dioscorid. cap. 652.
testimony, delivering that the herb called Apollinaris (some take it for
Henbane) is the same which the Gauls named Bilinumtia, being at this day
Vulcan. ad Glossar. Latino Graec.
in Spain titled Velenno, as from one original; both having the steps of
Belin; which also in British (as our most learned Antiquarie, and light of
Britain, Camden Clarenceulx observes) with Melin and Felin (the difference of
orthographie proceeding from the tongues idiotism) signifies yellow, a color,
as all men know, even proper in attribute to Apollo. And most likely it is that
the Topique God of the Northern parts of this Kingdom, called in ancient Camden
in Cumbria.
monuments Belatucadre, had hence part of his name. Neither is the most
superstitious regard which those Eastern people had to the Sun in particular,
unknown to any, which has observed the R. Leui Bengersom. and RR. Cimchi and
Irachi, Equis and Quadrigis, dum solemn Orientem adorabant, ab introitu Templi
vsque ad cameram Nathanmalech, solenni pompa vectos fuisse Adnotant. Verum and
videsis Sext. Pompeium Verb. October de Rhodijs. nec Rabbinis hic adsentior.
Horses and Chariots dedicated to his Deity by the Idolatrous Jews, and
mentioned in II. Reg. XXIII. or those Sunne-images ((...) De ijs optime (vt de
omnibus) Ios. Scalig. ad Catull. Epig. 91. sed Rabbi Solomon, figuras ad Solis
imaginem fictas fuisse, est male Commentus ad loc. designatum.
) in II. Paralipom. XXXIV. 4. or the adoration of the Morning in Ezech. VIII.
16. or such like, derived from the Babylonians, Persians, and others; whence
the Persian period of CXX. Solar years, and the product of that multiplied by
XII, that is, CI^. CCCC. XL. their great period used before their Iezdigerd, as
also the Suns revolution in Astrologicall directions, are, and have been of
ancient time by them called Sal chodai, i. the year of God (as the most noble
Scaliger teaches me) as if the Sun were the chiefest Deity; whom they styled
also Mithra from their word (...) Ios. Scalig de Emendat. lib. 5. (...)
which interprets the same with Baal or Beli. a Lord or Governor; their
significant name for the Sun being both (...).
Coreshed (whereupon Ctesias, and some following him, delivered that Cyrus in
Persian was the Sun) and quod and in vetust. Glossis Arabicis.
Aphethaab. Neither was it strange that they, being ignorant of the true God,
so worshipped the Sun, when as even the greatest Aristot. de Sap. secund.
Egypt. lib. II. c. 4.
Masters of Philosophy had not a better means to design out their first
Mouer and Maker, or the Son of what is Good (as divine De Repub. lib. 6.
Plato expressly) then by the name of Light, or the Sun. Nor is it hard to
believe that the chief Deity of the Gauls and our Britons should have its
origination from the so far distant Eastern nations. For beside the reasons
of conjecture, there has bin found in Apud Conseranos in Nouempopulonia extat.
Gaul a stone thus consecrated; MINERVAE BELISAMAE SACRVM Q. VALERIVS
MONVM.....

Where questionles is the very name (differing in termination only) of the
Goddess Astarte or Ashtaroth, whom they called (...) dicta Philoni Bibliensi
iuxta Phaenicum idiotismum. (...) vero Megastheni, secundum Chaldaeorum formam.
Belihsamaim, that is, the Lady of Heaven, the Moon. The same is confirmed also
out of diverse inscriptions conceived DEAE SYRIAE, and DIS SYRIS both in Italy
and this Island anciently found. But (to return to the reason of that name in
Nimrod) when court flattery amongst them grew so servile, that nothing, but the
most obsequious respect that possibly might be, and the highest honor that
imagination could invent, was thought worthy of the first author and progenitor
of their royal line, which their obsequious baseness would not any longer
endure to be accounted mortal, they gave the title of their God to his statue,
and their sacrifices, and ceremonies; they made his Sepulchrall monument his
Temple; and at length so confounded their God Bell and first King Bell into one,
that they admitted no difference. Thus came also the Phoenician Belus; thus the
Cretan Jupiter (whom the Stephan. (...) vero ridiculum illud etymon apud eum.
Sane nonne Marnas (...) loquitur? i. Dominus, vt cum Belo quadret.
Grecians make the same with Marnas the God of the Gazaeans in Palestine) to be
both a God and a dead man, in ridiculous confusion. For they gloried always of
his burial and Epitaph on his Tomb, which they showed for his and their
antiquity, thus;...... (...).
Indeed it may be Englished, Jupiters Tomb; but the worn out place should have
Scholiast. ad Callimach. hymn. 1.
been supplied thus: (...).
that is, the Tomb of Minos the King; for so I rather English it, then Minos
Jupiters son. Although, I know, his Epitaph there, is delivered very
differently by Lactant. de falls. relig. cap. II (de cuius ms. consulas. I.
Obsopaeum in Sibyllin. orac. 8.) and Porphyr. up, Cyrill. aduers. Julian. l. 10
others, yet it is certain that the Cretans are most fit examples herein to
show what the Babylonians did. Where, by the way, note that this false
tradition among them, was the ground of that true imputation wherewith
Epimenides, an ancient Poet and Priest (cited by S. Paul to Titus) brands
them, and, after him, Callimachus. (...) --
i. The Cretans always are liers; and, to that Acrostich somewhat altered,
Getullic. Epig. 3. cap. 22. aliam de hoc Cretensium opprobrio historiam habes
ap. Ptolem. Hephaestionem.
one expressly, long since, joined that misunderstood Epitaph: (...)
But, this turning of Kings into Gods, receive elegantly delivered by Tractat.
4.
S. Cyprian. Reges (says he) olim fuerunt, qui ob regalem memoriam coli
apudsuos postmodum etiam in morte coeperunt: inde illis instituta Templa; inde
ad defunctorum vultus per imaginem detinendos expressa simulachra. Nam and
immolabant hostias, and dies festos, dando honores, celebrabant. Inde posteris
facta sunt sacra, quae primitus fuerunt assumpta solatia. And even in this
sort, came the ancient Martyrs of the Christian Church to be accounted by some
even as Gods; the error proceeding D. Hieronym. Epist. adu. Vigilantium: and ad
Riparium. D. August. lib. 8. de Ciu. Dei. cap. 27.
from the solemnities used at their Shrines to the true God, in honor only of
their constant profession. And, you see it grew usual in later times among
other nations, to make every Emperor almost, a God after his death, and some in
their lives; with application to them, of names known proper to ancient
Deities. Some also have given the name of Saturn to this Nimrod; and who knows
not how usually Belus is titled by interpretation Saturn, as others call him
Jupiter? For those names, as they signified Gods, are with the rest of that
nature in an inextricable confusion. The Assyrians (says Cedren, out of some
ancient author) made him a God, and placed him among the Stars; calling him
Orion. Indeed Orions quality well agrees with Nimrods attribute, of being a
(...).
mighty hunter. The fabulous traditions of the Grecians suppose Orion a
hunter, both living and dead; and Ulysses Odyss. (...).
in his return from hell reports as much. Which is as plainly justified by the
Astronomicall description of him. For he is not without his Dog there by him
(which they call Procyon, and the Arabians Celebalatzaijr i. the lesser dog,
known also by the name of Algomeiza, and among the Damosc. in vita Isidori ap.
Phot. in Myriobib. Cod. 242.
Egyptians, was this referred also to Orion) neither is the dog without his
game, having a hare before him. And, among other names, in Arabique he is
called Algebar i, mighty or strong, the word coming from the Ebrew root used
by Moses in describing Nimrod. Beside these, the old Astronomy supposed him
also the chief Leader of all the Southern constellations. And as, in their
Northern descriptions, they began at the lesser Bear or Cynosura (whose
position and motion the Phaenicians observed for their Sea-direction, as the
Greeks did Helice or the greater Bear) so, of their Southern Images, Orion was
always first. Hoc duce per totum decurrunt sydera mundum.
says Manilius, following this course I speak of, as Aratus had directly
before him; both being Theon. in Schol. ad Aratum.
justified by an allusion in Odyss. (...).
Homer, speaking of the Bear: (...).
as if he had said, that she had, as the Princess of the North, observed and
looked at Orion Prince of the South: without which interpretation, how will you
understand Homer? Arctos and Orion aduersis frontibus ibant.
says Manil. Astron. 1.
another by imitation. There being also twixt those two Constellations such an
agreement in Longitude, that one great circle, drawn through the Poles, cuts
them both, to make, as it were, a lineall and direct regard twixt them. They
are both (if you respect Cynosura's stars next the Pole) between L. and LX.
degrees. But doubtless this application of Nimrod to Orion proceeded rather from
Grecian vanity. And those Eastern people had another name for Orion, if
Interpreters deceive not, which in Amos. 5. 8. Job 10. 9. and 38. 31. perquam
variae autem sunt de (...) opiniones, and apud Iudaeos. vti videre est in Baal
Aruch. praeter R R. adi si vis Hug. Grotium ad Imagines Arati.
Holy Writ, turn (...) Orion; and in such things the Assyrians and Jews had
most community. But, of our first Monarch, thus much. Yet it is not to be
doubted but that before him and the Flood there were, among his ancestors, some
Monarchique States, but not of any large extension perhaps. To what other end
was Cain's building of Enosha (the first City in the world) but for his own
supremacy among the Citizens? But the large and supreme Government of a
Nation, is that which must give the honor of a King, as we now take it. The
supposition of that age of Kings in the Heroique times, or golden world is most
idle, as it is delivered especially in Fables and Philosophy. What Hesiod,
Ovid, Virgil, and other have of that kind, children know. Et Officium erat
(says Senec. Ep. 91.
a Philosopher) imperare, non regnu^. Nec erat cuiqua^ aut animus in iniuria^
aut causa: cum been imperanti been pareretur, nihilque Rexmaius minari male
parentibus posset, quam vt abirent e regno. And, the like, or rather what was
nearer to perfection is largely and in example delivered by In Uiro Ci^il, and
in Minoe.
Plato, who (had he read Moses, as some think he had; for long before his time
was the Aristobul. (ap. Eusebius. de Prepar. Euangelic. 13.) in Epist. ad Ptol.
Philadelphum.
Pentateuch turned into Greek) would not, I think, have given that indulgence
to fabulous relations. Nothing is more ridiculous to truth then those Golden
ages, when also Populus nullis legibus (as Iustins words are) tenebatur; but
arbitria Principum pro legibus erant. Can we beleeu that in Humaniue this
could at all continue? Inbred corruption never endured it. The absolute power
of the one, and the unlimited liberty of the other, were even incompatible,
unless they be referred to some short time in the beginning of States, when,
by necessity, no laws were but only the Arbitrament of Princes, as ff. de
Orig. Iur. l. 1.. 2.
Pomponius speaks of Rome. Yet, I know, it is observed that Homer, writing of
the Heroique times, has not Joseph. adu. Appion. 2. and de hac re Plutarch.
lib. de Homcro.
the word (...), i. a prescribed law, but only (...), i. an arbitrary rule. And
I wonder, how learned men durst make such use of that Observation. Read Plato's
Minos, and there you shall have Talus his laws in Crete written in Brass. And
Talus is made coetaneall with Rhadamanth son to Jupiter, whose time although
uncertain, yet must be far ancienter then any Greek testimony. Nay, and Homer
himself has Odyss. (...).
(...), and In Hymn. ad Apollinem. eius ^n. authorem sunt qui faciu^t
Cynaethum. Scholiast. ad Pindar. Nem. 2.
(...). the law of Music, which Singers and Players were strictly bound to;
and (...) absolutely are songs so called, Aristot. Problem. sect. 19.. 28.
(...), i. because they used to sing their laws before invention of Letters,
lest they should forget them, as, in Aristotle's time, the Agathyrsians did.
And, were not Letters in use in the Heroique times? If no other authority were,
yet Proetus his privy Iliad. (...).
letters, to the King of Lycia, for Bellerophon's death, would justify it. Its
well known also, that (...) is no stranger in Hesiod, being both Suidas in
Hesiod. v. Lips. ad Paterculi hist. 1.
Kinsman and nearly coetaneall with Homer; nay, as some think, before him. Which
were it true, how vain were that Observation of Homers not having it? The
Greeks also have (some Apollon. Argonautic. 3.
of them) left written, that Prometheus King of Thessaly (Deucalions son) was
the man (...)
(...)
that first built Cities and Temples, and was the first King on Earth. Others
of them tell of Lycosura Pausan. lib. 8.
in Arcadie to be the first City erected under heaven. Nay, some of later
Constant Manasses in Annalibus.
times, and Christians, have translated the title of the first Monarchy into
Egypt, as if they had not read holy Writ, but rather followed Trogus hist. 1.
them, which tell us that Uexoris King of Egypt, and Tanaus King of Scythia,
preceded the Assyrian Monarchy. Indeed the story of Abraham iustifies great
Antiquity in the Egyptian Pharaoh's; and in Europe, that Aegialeus K. of the
Sicyonians rightly challenges perhaps as much. But, we can rely for truth
herein only upon Moses; and must slight both those fabulous reports of Grecians
and others, as also what occurres in the fragments of the true Berosus,
Hestiaeus, Alex. Polyhistor, Adiaben, Julius African and the like, touching who
reigned before Nimrod and the Flood. For, the Chaldeans (from whom some of
these had their original relations) pretended that they had a true story
remaining in Babylon of (...) (...). Alex. Polyhist. ap. Eusebius. in (...).
CL. M. years (Diodore and Cicero speak of a far greater number, but this is
enough) in which they reckoned discents of Kings, part whereof yet remain's
incapable of likelihood in some of those autors. As them, for this point, so
much more have we here neglected those Annians and counterfeits, Archilochus,
Xenophon, Berosus, -- and autres, quimenteurs
Abusent du loisir and bonte des lecteurs
as, the noble Du Bartas of them.

King and Emperor. Whence, and what was Emperor. How the Roman Emperors
reckoned their Years. The Hate in Rome to the name of Rex. How their Emperors
abstained from it. Who of them first ware a Diadem. At length, others called
them Kings, but they wrote themselves always Emperors. The two Titles, as
indifferent. (...) a usual word for Emperor. The Coat of Constantinople, and
its signification. Differences twixt the Emperors of the East and West, about
the titles of Basileus, and Rex, and Emperor, and letters twixt them about it.
The King of Bulgaries prerogative. To the Prince of Sicily, anciently, Rex
hereditary. Emperor used by other Princes; By the Kings of England (Their
Supremacy, from Papal power, free, anciently.) By the K. of Spain. The
Flattering Rules of Ciuilians touching their Emperor. Notaries in Scotland;
which with other Kingdoms has as suprem power, respectively, as the Empire, in
making them. The Duke, King, or Emperor of Russia or Moscouy. Czar. To whom he
used not in his title, King or Emperor. Subiect-Kings. Bohemia made a Kingdom.
A Sword usually given in making a Subiect-King. Danemark. Letters of Ph. de
Valois touching Ed. III. his not stiling him King. To whom the title of King is
truly due. The English Heptarchie, always under One supreme. England how and
when named. The King of Man. Of the Wight. Of Ireland subiect-Kings. Henry
III. his Letters to the K. of Man. King of Kings, by whom used. The story of
Judith unknown, but from Europe, to the Jews. The Great King. Custom of
giving Earth and Water in acknowledgement of subjection. Herbam dare. Liuerie
and seisin of England to the Norman. Rex Regum used by the Kings of England.
Edgar and Athelstan their greatness. Particular right of the title of Emperor
anciently in the Kings of this I Will. Constantine the Great was born in Britain,
with more special authority for it, then any has used. Honor to the
Emperors, in Kissing their Feet, Hands, Knees. Kisses of salutation among the
Persians. Adoration what it is properly. Kisses of Civil Duty, in most
Nations. Osculum Pacis, and after Prayers. In Homages. An act that none should
Kiss the King in Homage. The Notation of our words King and Queen. The British
Cuno. Words in diverse languages for King.

CHAP. II.
BY King and Emperor, have been, and still are most supreme Princes titled. Yet
so, that, for continued Majesty, and note of powerful Rule, in both those
affections of State, Peace, and War, the first was, of ancient time, the
greater; and that of Emperor ((...) i. Imperator, or (...) i. the General of
an Army) was for any which had to him committed supremacy in Martial
dscipline, although but for some particular host. In the Roman story,
occurres frequent testimony of it. And thence came it that Julius Caesar,
being Dictator, and a General, after he had gotten even the Monarchy of Rome,
wrote himself in his Edicts and Coins AYTOKPATOP, and DICTATOR PERPETVO and
IMPERATOR, the first and last of which titles, continued in his successors. But
it is obseruable to this purpose, that by neither of those were the years of
their Empire reckoned, but a long time by their Tribunitian Power (beginning in
Octauian) whence they were as sacred against all violence and wrongs. Amongst
many, one Coin thus inscribed shows it. IMP. CAESAR AUGUST. PON. MAX. TR. POT.
XVI. COS. XI. IMP. XIIII. which was made in the XVI. year from the States
giving him that inviolable title. The number added to IMP. being only so often
increased in his and others Coins, as they had by themselves or their Generals
performed some Dio Cassius hist. 53.
great matter in the Wars. In the infancy of their Empire they abstained
purposely from the name of Rex or King, being a word grown odious to Roman
liberty after Brutus his plucking it out of Tarquin's hands. In solemn
memory whereof they yearly celebrated on the VII. kl. of March (the XXIII. of
our February) their feast Regifugium. As also they provided that no concurse
for Merchandise in the City should ever happen upon the Nones of any month
(Seruius Tullius his birth day, they knew was in the Nones, but not of what
month, and therefore they provided it) Macrob. Saturnal. 1. cap. 13
Veriti ne quid Nundinis collecta Vniuersitas, ob regis desiderium, nouaret.
And to palliat some part of his ambitions I. Caesar himself being saluted King
by the multitude, but, withal perceiving it very distasteful to the State, by
the Tribun's pulling off the white fillet from his Laurel, answered, Caesarem
se non Regem esse; refusing utterly also, and consecrating the Diadem, which
Antony would have often put on his head, to Jupiter. For the same reason, did
Octauian abstain from the name of Romulus which yet he much affected. Alike was
the dissimulation of the next Tiberius, under whom were eadem magistratuum
vocabula (as Tacitus his words are) which were before, but the sum and sway of
things was ingrost and cunningly kept under One, differing in name rather then
nature, from a King, as he well observed that subscribed Julius his statue
with Brutus quia Reges elecit, Consul primo factus est.
Hic, quia Consules eiecit, Rex postremo factus est.
The more proper name of them and their Greatness, was Princeps and Principatus;
and, one of their own Tranquil. in Calig. cap. 22.
Writers, of Caligula thus. Nec multum abfuit quin statim Diadema sumeret
speciemque Principatus in Regni formam conuerteret. For these royal
habiliments; they were at length used by In Epitome: sed videsis cap. vlt.
huius libri plura de hac re.
Aurelian (about CC LXX. after Christ.) Iste (says Victor of him) primus, apud
Romanos, Diadema capiti innexuit: gemmisque, and aurata omni vest, quod adhuc
fere incognitum Romany moribus videbatur, vsus est. Yet nor he, nor others
long after him, used the title of King in their Letters, Commissions,
Embassages, nor otherwise but always (...). Imperator.
Emperor. Which expressly is deliuerd by Synes. (...).
one living under Arcadius, in CCCC. of Christ, showing also that it was then
usual in others writings and speeches of them, to have them styled Kings. (...)
(says he to the Emperor) (...). i. We think you worthy of the Name, and so
call you V. Lamprid. in vita Alexa^d. Seueri and versus ibidem de lepore.
Kings, and write you so. But you, whether you know so much or not, yet
agreeing to custom, have seemed to dislike so swelling a Title. And indeed, the
autors of the Augustan Story, before that time, have Regnum, for the State of
Rome; The dislike of Rex growing out of fashion, as specially appears in the
choosing of Regillianus General in Illyricum to be Emperor, as it were on a
sudden jest, when one had derived his name in declining Rex, Regis, Regi,
Regillianus, the acclamations presently Trebell. Poll. in 30. Tyrannis.
following Ergo potest nos regere; Ergo potest Rex esse. This was about
Gallien's time, some CCLX. after our Savior. Vlpian (a great Lawier under
Alexander Seuerus) calls it D. de Constable. Princip. l. 1.
Lex Regia, which transferd the peoples power to the Emperor. And the Grecians
called them Athenagor. in inscript. Apolog. and alij passim.
(...) i. Kings, as, by their own men, they have been in middle times often
titled; and by the Ebrews. The learned Druse Praeteritor. lib. 9.
notes that he had a book, inscribed (...) i. the Roman Kings, being the lives
of the Emperors. And in Luke III. where the original is in the XV. (...), i.
of the Empire of Tiberius, the Syriaque turns it, of the (...)
Reign or Kingdom. Paul's appeal, according to the Act. Apost. ex Arabic. per
Fr. Iunium c. 45
Arabique, is Regem Caesarem ego appello, agreeable to the Emperors (...)
titles, in the lives of the four Evangelists, in that language, Nor could the
Constantinopolitan Emperors find greater titles for themselves or fitter, then
King. If you regard how others under them applied the name, examples are
famil^ar in the Council. Ephesin. and ibi Cyrillus. He si^^ius (qui sub
Anastasio floruit) in Constantinopoleos descript. Procopius, alij.
Acts of their Counsels, Histories, and such like. If how they themselves,
read the titles of Justinians Nouells (which they call Authentiques) and in
them it will appear, that the names of (...) and (...) were indifferent,
although the Latin Translation has him always by name of Imperator. The same
is justified by Theophilus his Greek translation of the Institutions. And that
great Volum of Laws, published by their Emperor Leo (about DCCCC.)
comprehending a collection out of the Digests, Code Nouells, and other
Imperialls, was titled Harmenopul. in praefat. ad (...). and Cuiac. Obseruat.
6. cap. 9. de ijs plura.
(...), as if you should say, the Kings
Laws, where(...) an Epitome is now Synopsis (...), a Leunclauio edita.
only left; and, in that, the Laitne Lib. 2. tit. 6. vbi. l. 31. ff. de leg.
and Sen. and alibi.
Princeps or Imperator is often turned into (...). Which, their supposed Coat
also, of later time, being four Betaes, iustifies. The Betaes are Bodin. de
Rep. 1. cap. 9.
interpreted as the sigles of (...). (...), i. the King of Kings reigning over
Kings. So that at length the name of Emperor and King grew to be as one,
although the Romans so much (for remembrance of their liberty) at first
distinguished them. But in the divided Empires, upon new occasions, came much
affected differences of these names. The Western Emperors, in regard that the
States of the Goths, Lombards, and Franks which had ouerrun and possessed much
part of the Empire, were called Kingdoms, and their Heads, Kings, rather
desired the name of Emperor, as a note, in account, of greater majesty. After
the translation of the Empire from Constantinople to the French, the Eastern
Princes continuing still their name of (...), which they supposed the greater
title, and were, at first not much against the allowing of it to the Western
Emperors, as appears in the Ambassadors, of Michael Curopalata to Charles the
great, who for confirmation of a league, came to him at Aix and scriptum pacti
(as my Auonym. in Annal Franc. ann. 812. and Vit. Caroli Magni.
Author says) ab eo in Ecclesia suscipientes more suo, id est, Graeca lingua
lauds ei dixerunt, Imperatorem and Basileum appellantes. Which was a name
afterward (although mere Greek) bestowed on Charles his successors by their
Monks, preferring it far before the Latin Rex. One Abbo Floriac. de Obsid.
Lutet. 1.
of them thus, of Charles surnamed Crassus; Vrbs mandata fuit Karolo nobis
Basileo,
Imperio cuius regitur totus prope Cosmus.
Which is an essay also of that ages unhappy affectation of Greek patchs,
frequent in many of that kind. But, when Basilius Macedo a Constantinopolitan
Emperor A. DCCC. LXXI,
had received Letters from Pope Hadrian the II. wherein Jews the 11. then
Emperor of the West, was called Basileus, or Imperator; he caused that
Honorary title to be Ms. hist. Longobard. ap. Baron. Tom. 10. A. 871. and
Goldast. in Constit. Imperial. tom. 1.
scratcht out of the letters, and, concerning his challenge to it as his own
solely, dispatched an Embassage to Jews. This, Jews answers by one Autprand
Rempert, and, out of his Letters the effect of both may be discovered. He first
tells Basilius that he knows no reason of his dislikes toward him Nisi forte
super Imperatoris nomine velit haec cuncta sentiri. Verum apud nos (says the
Western Emperor) multa lecta sunt, multa quidem indefesse leguntur; nunquam
tamen inuenimus terminos positos, aut, formas, aut praecepta prolata, neminem
appellandum BASLEA nisi eum quem in vrbe Constantinopoli Imperij tenere
gubernacula contigisset, cum, gentium singularum monimentis interim
postpositis, sacrae nobis affluenter historiae monstrent, plurimos fuisse
Basileos. -- Et noli vel nobis quod dicimur inuidere, vel tibi singulariter
vsurpare, quod non solum nobiscu^ sed and cum pluribus Praepositis aliarum
Gentium possides. -- Sed nec hoc admiratione caret quod asseris Arabum
Principem Apomazar (potius Achmet) Onirocritic. cap. 18. and historici
Orientales. verum Protosymboli Vezirazes sieve Vezirum primos magis denotant.
consulas licet Leun^lau. Pandect. Turcic. cap. 14. and nos de hoc vocabulo mox
plura.
Protosymbolum dici, cum in voluminibus nostris nihil tale reperiatur, and
vestri Codices modo Lego Archicon. (...).
Architon, modo Regem vel also quolibet vocabulo nuncupent. Verum nos omnibus
literis sacras S. preferimus, quae, David, non Protosymbolos, sed Reges Arabium
and Sabae perspicue confitentur. Cbaganum vero, non Praelatum Auarum, non
Cazarorum aut Northmannorum nuncupari reperimus, neque Principem Bulgarum, sed
Regem vel Dominum Bulgarum. Verum iccirco ab ijs and ab omnibus Basilei debitum
vocabulum adimis, vt hoc tibi soli non tam Proprie quam violenter inflectas.
Then he proceeds (for, of those other titles more anon) with the Translation
of the Empire from Constantinople to the Fra^ks, ob ignominiam Graecorum, who
were not able any longer to defend the Church: and, whereas Basilius would have
him titled only Rex (or Riga, as the Grecians had barbarously made that word in
their fourth cafe) he adds further, that the true interpretation, of their
Basileus, was in that word Riga; as indeed, children know it is. Neither was it
given or taken as any dishonor when Baldwin Earl of Flanders, Jews Earl of
Blois Arnold. Alb. Lubecens. Slauorum hist. 6. c. 19.
and diverse other wrote to Otho IV. Emperor, with this inscription;
Excellentissimo Domino Othoni Dei gratia Romanoru^ Regi and semper Augusto.
Upon Gloss. Grae^obarbar. I. Meursij.
less ground then those Imperial Letters, it has been observed that the
Eastern Emperors did, in contempt, style the Western Reges only; allowing their
Basileus to none, but themselves and the King of Bulgarie, who had also I.
Curopalat. in Tzimisce apud Meurs.
his Crown of Gold, his Tiar of Silk, and Red Shoes, for his royal, being
also imperial, habiliments. And so Georgius Logotheta, published last Spring
Mart by Theodore Douz, always names the King of Bulgarie (...), but the King
of Hungary and Sicily (...) and (...), and the Prince of Achaia only (...).
But, under favor, I think it proceeded not so much from contempt, as use, bred
amongst them, to call, foreign dignities, by the names of the Princes Country,
to which they were applied: as appears in Sultan, Ameras, Amermumnes, and
Mumnes, Chagan (the same with Chan) and the like copiously mentioned by
Simocatta, Anna Comnena, Codin, Apomazar (or Achmet) Cantaeuzen, and the more
obuious Oriental autors. And, they never agreeing willingly to that
Translation from them, but supposing themselves as Emperors of new Rome (for so
Constantinople was called) to be as the legitimat successors of that
maiestique Title Lord of the World.
(...) (wherewith Antoninus long before blazoned Volus. Maetian. ff. ad leg.
Rhod. l. 9.
himself to Eudaemon) could hardly but endeavor such distinction of names,
that, One might be peculiar to their own Greatness. Which, how could they better
do, then by keeping their own to themselves (that is, Basileus) and giving
other Princes the language of every one's own Territory? And the Princes of
Sicily received of Constantine the Great (take it on my Niceph. Gregoras hist.
7.
autors credit) Rex for an hereditary Title. Indeed, that Basilius had more
reason to take hereof greater care, being the first of them, after the
Translation to Charles the Great, that was likely to have regained his
Predecessors glory. And therefore his Bishops in that VIII. General Council
at Constantinople did also nomen imperiale (as one Anastas. de vit. Pontific.
in Hadr. 2.
says of the VVestern part) nostro Caesari penitus inuidere; to which affected
Greatness an old Annal. incert. auct. sub anno 876. Edit. a Pitbaeo. eade autem
Sigebertus.
author alludes, speaking of Charles the Bald King of France; that Omnem
consuetudinem Regum Francorum contemnens Graecas Glorias optimas arbitrabatur.
Et vt maiorem mentis suae elationem ostenderet, ablato Regis nomine, se
Imperatorem and Augustum omnium Regum, Cis mare consistentium, appellari
praecepit. But in later times, the difference was less respected; which is
plainly seen in those Letters of Otho Frisingens. de gest. Frederic. lib. 1.
cap. 24.
Calo-loannes to Conrad III. thus inscribed: Toannes in Christo Deo Fidelis
Rex, Porphyrogenitus, sublimis, Fortis, Augustus, Comnenos, and Imperator
Romanorum ad Nobiliss. Fratrem and Amicum Imperij mei. And answered by Conrad,
calling himself Romanorum Imperator Augustus, and Calo-Ioannes, illustris and
Gloriosus, Rex Graecorum. Whence also it is evident, that, Rex was not a name
of contempt at Constantinople. For then would not Conrad have called John by
that name. Neither, for that point, is advantage to be taken of the word Rex
in the Eastern Emperors style. For, it is most likely that his Greek (out of
which I suppose, my author had it translated) was their (...). Some of the
German Epistolae Henrici IV.
Emperors also (as it seems) thought not Rex alone unfit for themselves in
prescribed titles of their Letters to other Princes. And on the other side,
those of other. Nations have justly taken to themselves Imperator. Our ancient
Edgar in his Charters, called himself Albionis and Anglorum Basileus; and,
Pat. 1. Ed. 4. part. 6. memb. 23. Et, Totius Albionis Monarcha and Basileus,
saepius in Diplomatibus Monast. Crowlandensi consignatis.
in one to Oswald Bishop of Worcester: Cunctarum Nationum, quae infra
Britanniam includuntur, Imperator and Dominus; which one of his successors long
since as rightly challenged. For, when Anselm, Archbishop of Canterbury, having
incurred William the second's displeasure, durst yet adventure to ask leave of
him to go to receive his Pall of P P. Urban 1 1. when Rome was even bleeding of
her wounds taken in that great Schism about Wibert Archbishop of Rauenna, whom
Hen. IV. taking upon him the imperial supremacy, would have invested in the
Popedom; the King, at the very name of the Pope, was extremely moved; and thus
was his reason. Dicebat (says Matthew Paris) Imperator sui officij esse quem
vellet Papam eligere, nec erat alterius Apostolicum etiam nominare. Rex
Willielmus allegauit eandem rationem, quod nullus Archiepiscopus vel Episcopus,
regni sui Curiae Romanae vel Papae subesset, praecipue cum ipse omnes
libertates haberet in Regno suo quas Imperator vendicabat in Imperio; which
withal shows how false that of Bertold of In ap. ad Herm. Contract. ann. 1084.
Circ. M. C. L.
Constance is, slandering William the first with slavish submission of England
to the Sea of Rome. So when Alfonso the VII, King of Castile, had gotten most
of Spains territories under him, rediens (says the Roderic. Toletan. lib. cap.
7.
Story) Legionem, imposuit sihi Imperij Diadema, and vocatus fuit deinceps
Imperator. Which notwithstanding is against the flattering rules of the
Imperial and barbarous Bartol. ad Con. ff.. Om^em.
Ciuilians, who, of the German Emperors, have durst deliver, that Ratione
Protectionis and Iurisdictionis, Imperator est Dominus Mundi, quia tenetur
totum mundum defendere and protegere, sed Particularium rerum non Dominus sed
Princeps. As if that weaker Greatness extended in any of their times beyond
Italy and Germany (For, that long since spoken of the Roman Empire, that it was
Lamprid. in Alex. Seuero.
Imperium quod tenet Imperium, long since also failed) And, in those countries,
has not been so gelded, that scarce any King is, but has his power nearer to
his name. The Tramontan Doctors have been of another opinion, as they had
reason living in other States. They allow the Chassan. Catal. Glor. Mundi part.
5. consid. 27 Vide, si placet, Alciat. de Sing. Certam. cap. 32.
Emperor to have supremacy, but not over the King of France, nor Spain; they
might well add, nor of England, Scotland, Danemark or the like, which by
prescription of time, regaining of right, or Conquest are (as the other) in no
kind subject or subordinat to any, but God. And therefore, by an act P^rl. 5.
Jacob. 3. cap. 30.
of Parliament of Scotland, it was long since ordained, Sen our souerain Lord
hes full jurisdiction and Free Empire within this Realm, that his hienesse may
make Notares and Tabelliones, quahis instruments sall have full faith in all
causes and contractes, within the Realm: And in time to come that na Notar be
maid, or to be maid, be the Emperors authority, have faith in contractes
civil within the Realm, less then he be examined be the Ordinar and
apprieued by the Kings hienesse. Which act, it seems, had it not been for the
Imperialls there in use, according Bald-in Feud. quis dicatur Dux. Et
Wesenbech. in Paratit. ff. De fide instrument.
to which, Public Notaries are to be made only by the Emperor, his
Palatines, or such like, need not to have been made. For what might not a King
(absolute in regard of any, superior) do, which the Emperor could? And, in
England that constitution of Public Notaries Regist. Orig. fol. 114. b. in
breu. de Deceptione.
was long since without scruple, or any Act for it. Therefore, as the name of
Emperor was (notwithstanding some particular differences) lawfully given as
well to him of the East, as of the West, and allowed so by the VVestern Act. 8.
Synod. Oecumenic. Did. 63. c. Hadrianus vide vero Capitis 5. extremum; vbi
Foedus, quod icerunt Rodulph. 11. and Achmetes Turcarum Imperator.
part; in like form it is or may be without difficulty applied to, or used by
any which is truly a King. The Dukes of Moscouy anciently had no other title
then Weliki Knesi i. in Russian, Great Dukes. But Basilius that governed there
about M. D. XX. (Grandfather to the last Theodor) took to himself the name of
King or Emperor i. Czar, not derived from Caesar (which interpreters mistaking,
wrote him Emperor; and thence is it that we now usually call him Emperor of
Russia, because Caesar is grown as it were proper only to an Emperor) but a
mere Russian word, they using Kessar expressly and anciently for the Emperor
of Germany, different from Czar. Yet this title he used not to all Princes. In
his Letters to the Emperor, the Pope, the King of Swethland and Dane, the
Governors of Prussia and Liuonia, and to the Great Turk, he used it, but not
to the Polonian. Neuter n: (says my Sigismund. Com. Rer. Moscouitic. and Ga
guin. Moschou. cap. 5. Imperator totius Russiae in titulo dictus, apud I.
Fabrum in Epist. ad Ferd. Archiducem.
author) horum alterius literas nouo titulo auctas accipere dignatur. They are
neighbors, and therefore the more suspect each other. But that Basilius held
himself rather the better man being compard with the Emperor, Nomen suum and
titulum Imperatorio semper praeponens, sieve loqueretur sieve scriberet. With his
precedence, I meddle not. But I see not reason why he might not use either the
name of King or Emperor out of his own authority, as well as the Emperor.
Neither needed he have written to the Pope for the name of King, as some affirm
he did; But Sigismund beleeus it not, because he was ever an enemy to the
Pope, and the best title he could find for him was never above Doctor. For that
of King in Letters to the Polack, this Basilus his son (says Gaguin) used it
to him, that is, John Basiliuitz, sed a Polono nunquam (says he) nisi MAGNI
DVCIS titulo honoratur. Other Lit Reg. Elizab. ap. Hakluit. part. 1. page 339.
Princes give him sometimes the title of Emperor, sometimes Great Duke and King.
But you shall very often meet with the name of King given to those which were
in Clientela Imperatoris, as, of old, the Princes constituted by the Romans, in
Parthia, Armenia, Arabia, Persia, Jury, and other parts of the world. For they
had (as Tacitus In vit. Agricolae.
says) instrumenta seruitutis and Reges. And in later times the Emperor
created Kings, as other titles. Frederique Barbarossa in M. CLVIII. made
Radeuic. lib. 1 cap. 13. verum titulo Regio a Philippo Anti-Caesare donatus est
Primislaus M. C. XCIX. Arnoldus Lubecensis Slauor lib. 6. cap. 2.
Ladislaus, Duke of Bohemia, King of the same Territory. For, that which Otto
de S. Blasio has of it, under M. C. LXXXVI. is to be referred to that time.
And other such examples are. These may be and are called Kings, and had in
them (potestatem gladij) power of life and death as, in the ceremony of their
inuestiture, is expressed, which was by delivering a sword. Est n. consuetudo
Curiae (writes an Otto Frisingens de Frederic. 1. lib. 2. cap. 5 vbi librarioum
fortean Typographi incuria Sueuus and Guuto perperam leguntur.
ancient Bishop) vt regna per Gladium, Prouinciae per Vexillum a Principe
tradantur vel recipiantur. Petrus vero, accepto ab ipsius manu regno,
fidelitate and hominio ei obligabatur. Ita corona Regni per manum Principis
sibi imposita, in die sancto Pentecostes, ipse coronatus gladium Regis sub
corona incedentis portau^t. He means, by this Peter, Sueno IV. King of
Danemark (for he was known by both those names) twixt whom and his cozen Cnuto
was great controversy, for the Kingdom, determined thus by the Emperor at
Martinesburg in Saxony. The mention of the like made in Otto de S. Blasio,
must be understood of Waldemar I. who received both this and Swethland of the
Emperor at Bisonce. And King Harold, before that, when Helmold. bist. Slauor.
1. cap. 9.
the Danish Nation was first Christened, received it of Otho the great. Now it
acknowledges no superior. But so many as have, or do, as feudataries to other
Princes, are excluded out of their rank which before are indifferently titled
Kings or Emperors. The K. of Bohemia (when it was in another hand, from the
Empire) although he were crowned and anointed, yet, being in a manner the
Emperors Aur. Bull. Caroli 4. cap. 8.
Subject, wanted perfect Supremacy for it; as also, they of Sicily when they
had inuestiture from the Pope, they of Cyprus being anciently as Tenants (yet
crowned) to Arnold. Lubecens. Chron. Slau. lib. 5. cap. 2
both Empires, and such like; even as much almost as that Perseus, who, when L.
Aemilius Paulus had spoiled him of his Kingdom of Macedon, and compelled to
flight, yet was so ambitious of his former title, that he made the inscription
of his letters to Aemilius thus: Liu. Decad. 5. lib. 5.
Rex Perseus, Consuli Paulo S. it being, at that time, under Aemilius and the
State of Romes arbitrament, whether ever he should be King again or no.
Wherefore Aemilius would not so much as give answer to his Messengers, until
they had brought him letters inscribed with a meaner title. As, on the other
side, when Edward III. besieged Tournay, and sent letters of challenge to a
single combat, to the then pretended French K. he would not call him King, but
only, Philip of Valois, whereupon he had this answer: Ex ms. vet. sed Latin
literas habet Th. Walsing. sub ann. 1340.
Philip per la grace de Dieu Roy de France, a Edward Roy D'Engleterre. Nous
auons vous letres apportes a nostre Court enuoyetz de par vous au Philip de
Valois, en quels letters estoient contenuz ascun requests que vous fezistes au
dit Philip de Valois. Et pur ceo que les dits letters ne veignant pas a nous,
and que les dits requests ne est^yent pas faits a nous, come appiert clerement
per le tenure des letters, nous ne vous en fesons null response. You know that
Martial. Epig. 18. lib. 2.
upon Maximus Esse sat est Seruum: iam nolo Vicarius esse
Qui Rex est, Regem, Maxim, non habeat.
Therefore did Francis the first of France much dislike, that, Charles the v.
should Bodin. de Repub. 1. cap. 9.
call himself King of Naples and Sicily, enjoying them as the Popes Vassal, or
Tenant. And, when PP. Pius IV. would have made Cosmo de Medici Duke of
Florence, of the same State King, the neighbor Princes endured it not, and the
Emperor Maximilian II. answered directly to the French Kings Ambassador about
it, Non habet Italia Regem nisi Caesarem. And in that Heptarchie of our Saxons,
usually six of the Kings were but as subjects to the supreme, whom they called
Anglorum Ethelwerd. l. 3 c. 2. Beda hist. eccles. 2. cap. 5. Circa DCCC. XX
Rex Primus, or such like, which was as well given to others (the first, that
had it, being Aella King of Sussex) as to that Egbert, whose glory and
greatness consisted rather in the swallowing up of the other subject Kingdoms
into his own Rule, and in the new naming of the Heptarchie England in one word
(for he in Parliamento, says my Ex Instrum. lib. Hospital. S. Leonardi
Eborms. Idem fere in Alred. Rhtuallensis Vita S Edwardi. Verum ab Anglorum
aduentu ita dictam scribit 10. S^risburiensis Policratic. 6. cap. 16. alij ab
Hengisto, vt Hector Boet. Scot. hist. 7. and 10. Gower Epig. in Confess.
Amantis, and Harding^s.
author, apud Wintoniam mutauit nomen Regni, de consensu populi sui, and iussit
illud de caetero vocari Angliam.) then in being of larger Dominion then any
was before him. Those inferior Kings are like in some proportion to those of
Man, who have had it always by a tenure from their soueraigns, the Kings of
England, especially ever since Henry IV., possessing it by the forfeiture of
the Lord Scrop, invested Henry Percy Earl of Northumberland in it, in fee
simple, to hold it per seruitium portandi diebus Coronationis nostrae (as the
Patent Pat. 1. Hen. 4. Rot. 2. and Th. Walsingbam.
speaks) and haeredum nostrorum ad sinistrum humerum nostrum and sinistros
humeros haeredum nostrorum per seipsum aut sufficientem and honorificum
deputatum suum, illum Gladium nudum, quo cincti eramus quando in part de
Holdernesse applicuinus, vocatum I ancaster Sword. It has been since, by
Escheat, in the Crown, and was bestowed on the noble Family of the Stanley's,
by the same K. Henry, and in their Camdenus.
Posterity, being Earls of Derby, it continues. So was Henry of Beuchamp
Earl of Warwick, by Henry VI. crowned K. of the Isle of Wight; and in him also
that title ended. But all these are little otherwise Kings, then Dukes or Earls
are. They bear the name, but not the true marks of Royal majesty; rather to
be styled Reguli then Reges, being subjects in respect of those whose Majesty's
they were bound to observe, and obey. For me thinks it looks like false Latin,
where our Henry II. grants Roderico Transactio inter Hen. 1^. and Roderic. apud
Roger. de Houeden.
ligio homini suo, Regi Conactae (in Ireland) that he shall have his
territory paying a certain tribute, and quamdiu ei fideliter seruiet, vt sit
Rex sub eo Paratus ad seruitium suum sicut homo suus. Yet in grants Claus. R.
Ioh. 6. memb. 18. 17. Ioh. Chart. memb. 3. 6. Hen. 3. Chart. memb. 2. in Arce
Londinens.
made by K. John and Henry III. to the Kings of Conaght, and Tesmond, the like
title of Rex is; which is observed also by the learned Sr John Dauis Knight his
Majesty's Attorney General for Ireland; as also that in the Pipe Rolls of Hen.
III. his time, yet remaining in Bremighams Tower in the Castle of Dublin,
sometime Oneale Rex (upon accounts) sometime Oneale Regulus occurs. And when
Reginald K. of Man had done his homage as a tenant to Chronic. Mannae.
K. John, and likewise to Henry III. yet thus Henry III. speaks in his Pat. 3.
Hen. 3. memb. 1.
Letters of him. Sciatis quod dilectus and fidelis noster Reginaldus Rex de Man
venit ad fidem and seruitium nostrum, and nobis homagium fecit. Et ideo vobis
mandamus, quod in terram ipsius Reginaldi Regis de Man, saluo and secure
veniatis, and negotia ibidem expectatis, quamdiu fuerit ad fidem and seruitium
nostrum. T. Domino P. Wintoniensi Episcopo, apud Nouum Templum Londini XXIII.
die september. anno etc. III. These kind of titles misgiuen or mistaken was the
cause of that great Attribute, of King of Kings, used by some supreme Monarchs.
It first was in the first of the four Empires. Nabuchodonosor Daniel cap. 2.
(...) Ebraice (...) quo nomine Romanum Imperatorem vetustiss. Rabbinis dictum
notat. CL. V. and literarum (dum vixit) praeses IS. Casaubonus ad Trebel.
Pollionis Valerianos.
is so styled in holy Writ, being then King of Babylon. And, it seems, in
Moses, as much is signified; whence he, reciting the wars of diverse petit
Kings, begins, Genes. 14.
And it came to pass in the days of Amraphel K. of Shinaghr (i. of Babylon)
that the other Kings did thus and thus. Keeping his note of time, under his
name, which was King of those Kings. And after the translation of the Empire to
the Persians, Artaxerxes Mnemon in his commission to Ezra, for restitution of
Jerusalem and the Temple, thus Ezra cap. 7.
salutes him. Artaxerxes (or Arthahastha, as in the Original) King of Kings to
Ezra the Priest. And on the great Cyrus his Tomb was for an Epitaph written in
Persian characters, if you beleeu Eustath. ad Dionys. (...). and Strab.
Geograph. 15.
the autors, (...) Rex Regum.
(...).
which title also that conquering Diodor. Biblioth. a.
Sesoosis K. of Egypt (the same with Sesostris in Herodotus) attributed to
himself in his erected columns of Victory. The like had Artaxerxes Longimanus
of Persia in Hippocrat. in Epistolis.
letters to and from him, who is in them also styled (...). the great King.
This of Great King was used in the first Empire, as you read it in the story
of Judith cap. III. Thus says the Great King, Lord of all the earth. But that
whole relation seems rather a holy Poem then a Story, as, by comparing of
Times, in it and authentic writ, appears. Neither is any such matter known
among the Ebrewes but from Europe: although they have her name in Brought. in
Concent.
another report of some CL. before Christ, which has scarce any community in
matter with this. For better authority, take this of the Esa. cap. 36. 4 (...)
Prophet: So says the Great King, the King of Assure. The same, applied to the
Persian, has Herodotus, Xenophon, Josephus, the Apocrypha of Esther, and
Aeschylus. And the bare Scholiast. Aristophan. in A (...).
name of (...) i. The King, without addition, is specially used for the
Persian, whence the nation is Dionys. Afer. in (...).
styled also -- (...). So that both those titles were common to both those
Emperors (of the two first Empires) but not that ceremony of Supremacy (which
by the way I note; because it falls among things here treated of in story) of
demanding a portion of Earth and Water, by their Heralds, of such Princes or
People as should acknowledge themselves under their subjection. That is often
spoken of as done by the Persian, and a special example of it is in Darius
Herodot in Melpom.
Letters to Indathyrsus King of the Scythians, where he first inuites him to
the fiield, but, if he would not, then, (...) THN (...), i. bringing to your
soueraign as gifts, Water and Earth, come to a parley; and, one of Xerxes his
Ambassadors, that came to demand Polyb. hist. (...). in orat. Lucisci. and de
hoc more, Plutarch. in Themistocle.
Earth and Water of the state of Lacedaemon, to satisfy him, was thrust into a
Well, and Earth cast in upon him. But referred to the Assyrians I find it not,
except only in Judith cap. II. where the King commands Olophernes that he
should bid all the Western Nations (...) i. prepare me Earth and Water. But I
guess, the composer of the story, in a later age, was bold hither to
transfer it, as a fit form of command for his supposed Nabuchodonosor:
Although I know, a most Drus. Obseruat. 12. cap. 20.
learned man of this time, makes it indifferent to both Empires, grounding
himself on that of Judith, which indeed, without special regard to profane
story, cannot be understood. Nor is this custom altogether a stranger doubtless
to that which Hist. Not. 22. cap. 4.
Pliny speaks of; Summum (says he) apud antiquos signum Victoriae erat,
Herbam porrigere Victos, hoc est, terra and altrice ipsa humo, and humatione
etiam cedere: quem morem etiam nnnc durare apud Germanos scio. Whence came the
phrase Herbam dare, or porrigere for yielding, applied Nonius and Festus.
most of all to such as lost in Games of running, leaping, wrestling, and such
like. In Agonibus (says In Antiquitatib. apud Seruium in Aeneid. 8.
Varro) herbam in modum palmae dat aliquis ei cum quo contendere non cupit, and
fatetur esse meliorem. And the taking up of fish amongst water out of a Well
was interpreted as a promise of the Dominion Semus ap. Athen. Dipnosoph. 8.
of the Sea, to the Athenians in their sacrifices in Delos; as also, when
William the Norman first landing at Hastings in Sussex, fell down, stumbling as
he came out of his Ship: Tenes Malmesbur. de gest. Reg. 3.
Angliam Comes (said one of his Knights) Rex futurus; and, espying that Hist.
Normanic. ap. Camd. in Reliquijs.
he had brought up Sand and Earth in his hand, added; Yea and you have taken
Liuerie and Seisin of the Country. But, this somewhat out of the way. That of
King of Kings has been used by other States beside any of those Empires. After
the Persians, their neighbors the Parthians had it. Regem etiam Regum and
exercitatione venandi and conuictu Megistanum abstinuisse, quod apud Parthos
iustitij instar est, Is the report of In Caligul. cap. 5. Vid. Treb. Poll. in
Valeriano. and ibi Casaubon.
Sueton upon the death of Tiberius. whence, it seems, it was left long after to
Constable. Porphyrogenit. de administr. Romans Imp. cap. 44.
the Prince of Armenia, styled (...), i. Trebellius Poll. in Valerian. Princeps
Principum.
the Prince of Princes, as the elder Valerian was expressly titled in letters
of an Eastern King. Of the Egyptian Sesostris, before. How the Western Emperors
affected it, I remember not: only, as you know, the jest, of Maximilian, was,
that whereas others were Reges Hominum, he was Rex Regum, because his subjects
would do what they list. Its found among the titles of our Soueraigns
Ancestors, when under them they had Kings for subjects. In a Charter made to
the Abbey of Malmesbury, in DCCCC. LXXIV. you may read: Ego Edgarus totius
Albionis Basileus, necnon maritimorum seu Insulanorum Regum circumhabitantium.
And in Pat. 1. Ed. 4. part. 6. memb. 23 Pro Pr. and Conuentu Wigorn.
another DCCCC. LXIV. the subscription is: (...) Ego Edgar Basileus Anglorum
and Imperator Regum Gentium. Note the Majesty of his title, well justified by
his own conquests. Ille cum ingenti Class (says Florence of Worcester)
septentrionali Britannia circumnauigata, ad Legionum Vrbem (understand Chester;
not Leicester, as some idly) appulit. Cui Subreguli eius octo Kinathus scilicet
Rex Scotorum, Malcolmus Rex Cumbriae, Maccus plurimarum Rex Insularum (this
Maccus is, in Malmesbury, called Maccusius Archipirata; I suppose him then a
King of Ireland, Man, or some adjacent Isles) and alij quinque Dufnallus,
Siffrethus, Hudwallus, Inchillus, (all Kings of Wales) vt mandarat,
occurrerunt, and quod sibi fideles, terra and mari, cooperatores esse vellent,
iurauerunt. Cum quibus die quadam scapham ascendit, illisque ad remos locatis,
ipse clauum gubernaculi arripiens, per cursum fluminis Deae, perite gubernauit,
glorying afterward to his Nobility, tunc demum quemque suorum successorum se
gloriari posse Regem Anglorum fore, cum tot Regibus sibi obsequentibus
potiretur pompa talium Non Bonoru^: vt in vulgat. Cod. Florent. Wigorn. page 359
honorum. The like almost being before in his uncle Athelstan, who (as
Malmesburies words are) Ludwalum Regem Omnium Wallensium (I read Occidentalium
Wallensiam, as Florence of Worcester and Roger of Houeden peswade; and that
Ludwal was Howel Dha.) and Constantinum Regem Scotorum cedere Regnis compulit.
Quos in. non multo post miseratione infractus in antiquum statum sub se
regnaturos constituit, gloriosius esse pronuncians Regem facere quam Regem
esse; not much differing from that Martel of France, on whose Tomb was Hierom.
Bignon, De l'excell. des Roys. liver 3.
written; Non vult Regnare sed Regibus imperat ipse:
imitated in more true verse thus: C'est ce Martel le Prince de Francois
Non Roy de nom, mais le maistre des Roys.
For that of Athelstan, because some slight the report and endure V. Buchanan.
Rer. Scotic. 6. Reg. 75.
not usual autorities hereof, you may see the concent of Ethelwerd, Houeden,
Florence of Worcester, Marian the Scot (which for good part, is very Florence
of Worcester; his common Chronicle, published, being but a Defloration composd
by Robert of Lorrain Bishop of Hereford under Hen. (...).) Huntingdon and other
ancients. But those commanding honors in Edgar, added enough also to the
allowance of the title of Emperor, which, you see, he used. Others by making
our Soueraigns as successors (in this part) to Constantine the great, confirm
it. Its the more to be regarded coming from a great Lawier and a Palatine
Basing stoch. hist. 2. not. 20.
Doctor, who commenting upon a piece of that fabulous Oracle of Diana given to
Brute, Hic de prole tua Reges nascentur: and ipsis
Totius terrae subditus Orbis erit
makes it fulfilled in Constantine, and cites S. Gregory writing to K.
Ethelbert of Kent, and eum quasi Constantini Magni successorem alioquentem. I
confess, his Genius must have better understanding of S. Gregory then mine,
or else there is no such matter to be collected in him. You may see his Gregor.
lib. 9. Epist. 59. and 60.
Epistles. But he may not be blamed for insisting upon Constantines birth
here. Its most likely that, in Britain, he was born. Liberauit ille (says
Panegyric. dixerint licet and v. Panegyric. Facerem.
one to him, speaking of his father Constantius) Britannias seruitute, tu etiam
nobiles, illic Oriendo, fecisti: which Testimony I prefer before Nicephorus
Callistus, affirming his birth at Drepanum in Bithynia; or Mathes. lib. 1.
Julius Firmicus, that says, at Tarsus; or Cedren, that writes, in Dacia. I
doubt not, but the Panegyrist could as well know, as any of them, and better,
save only Firmicus, whose passage thereof may well be thought corrupted. The
other two being of much later time. Lipsius here De Magnit. Romans 4. cap. 11.
erroneously follows Callistus, and one Leuinaeus, a new Scholiast upon the
Panegyriques, after him. His mother was De hac Heroina, post alios innumeros,
consulas Luitprand. Ticinen. hist. 1. cap. 8. vbi legendum, Britannica matter,
non Ritannica, vt in procusorum nonnullis.
Helen (she is honored in the Church to this day, in the Feast of Her
Invention of the Cross) a British woman, and, as is supposed, daughter to King
Coil. But for his birth in this Isle you shall have imperial authority of
which, as used to this purpose, I dare challenge the maidenhead. Constantine
Porphyrogennetes (he was Emperor of Constantinople about DCCC. XX.) aduising
his son Romanus that he should by no means marry a stranger, because all
Nations dissonant from the government and manners of the Empire, by a law, of
Constantine the Great, established in S. Sophies Church, were prohibited the
height of that Honor, excepted only the Franks, adds reason of the excption
(...) (i. Constantine the Great) (...), because Constantine was born amongst
them: which could aim at no other country but Britain. For where, in Europe,
has any man supposed him born, but here, or in Dacia? And the barbarousnes of
Dacia in those times could not admit the exception, by all likelihood. And who
knows not that familiar use of Franks for Western Europeans, among the
Constantinopolitans of later times? The tradition then acknowledged by his
successors, preserved among us, and appearing in such monuments of ancient
times cannot easily be impugned. And, for men of this age, Our light of
Britain, most learned Camden Clarenceulx, and that great Chronologer Cardinal
Baronius are confident on this part. Hereto take an antique Robert.
Glocestrens. ms. hist. metrica.
rhyme spoken as to King Arthur:

Now it worth iended that Sibile the sage sed biuore,
That there ssold of Brutaine three men be ybore,
That ssold win the Aumpire of Rome; of tweyydo it is
As of Belinus.
Belly and Constantin, and thou art the thread iwis.
But none of these so really justify the supreme title of Emperor in our
Soueraigns, as their own immemorially possessed Right. Remember what I have
before of William II. and observe that unreasonable and most unjust request of
the Emperor Jews of Bauiere to our Edward III. in their mutual salutations of
State at Cologne. The Emperor thought much quod Rex Angliae (says Walsingham)
non se submisit ad oscula pedum suorum. Cui responsum fuit quod Rex Angliae Rex
erat inunctus, and habet vitam and membrum in Potestate sua, and idcirco non
debet se submittere tantum sicut Rex alius. Which I the rather cite in regard
of that use among some of the Roman Emperors to be honored by a Kiss to their
Feet. For, whereas it was usual either to kiss Cicer. in Verr. act. 5. de
Herculis statua. and Lucret. lib. 1. saepe salutantum etc.
the Images of their false Gods, or adoring to stand somewhat off before them,
solemnly moving their right hands to their lips, kissing the Apuleius Miles. 4.
and Plin. hist. 28. cap. 2. alij. and videsis 1. Reg cap. 19. 18. and Job. 31.
com. 26. and 27.
forefinger joined with the thumb, and turning about their bodies on the fame
hand (of which form, a good relic is in the Courtsalutations used in most
places at this day, as learned P. Pithaeus Aduers. 1. cap. 7. and Lips. Elect.
2. cap. 6.
men have observed) it grew also, by custom, that Princes being next to
Deities, and, by some accounted as Deities, had the like done to them, in
acknowledgment of Greatness. Nay, it was not wanting to some of the Roman
Generals, before the Empire began, as the Story of Cato Minor proves, whose
Hands the Army, in special honor of him at his departure, kissed, being a
favor which few Plutarch. in Cat. Min. de hac re vide eum in Bruto, vbi de
coniuratis in Caesarem.
of his place in those days received among the Romans. But, for kissing the
mouth (to omit that of Samuel to Saul in his anointing) its apparent that in
the Julian Empire it was very usual at first. Oscula cottidiana (says Sueton,
of Tiberius) prohibuit edicto. Yet his Edict against them, so took not the use
away, but that it was frequent, after him, in their salutations. The reading of
Martial alone tells every man enough of that. But, when some of his successors
could not content themselves with the name of Man, but would be called Jupiter,
be supposed carnally to lie with Uenus and the Moon, and with infinite such like
fanatique conceits seemed to themselves Divine, they were not satisfied with
that usual custom, but thought him much to wrong their majesty which in
kissing presumed above their Feet, although some permitted their Hands, and
Knees to the better rank. Examples of the Feet and Hands are in Dio Cass. hist.
59.
Caligula (and in him first) and of the Knees, Feet, and Hands in the younger
Maximin; yet his father, the elder Maximin although a tyrannical and most
wicked Prince, would Capitolin. in Maximino Iuniore.
suffer none to his Feet; Dij prohibeant (were his words) vt quisquam
ingenuorum pedibus meis osculum figat. But Diocletian (as Pomponius Laetus
writes) constituted by Edict, vti omnes, sine generis discrimine, prostrati
pedes exoscularentur: quibus etiam venerationem quandam adhibuit exornans
calciamenta auro, gemmis, and margaritis. As the Bishop of Rome does for those
which kiss his Foot; being in a crimson Basingst^ch. hist. Brit. 6. not. 9
velvet shoe with a golden cross on it. A ceremony anciently used to other
Casaubon. Exercit. 14.. 4. in Baronium.
Bishops and great Prelates as well as the Pope. But, of this custom to the
Emperors, Et Tenu ere (says Lipsius) superbum, ne dicam impium hunc morem
(quid n. homo, infra hominem, hominem abijcis?) Principes aliquot secuti, sed
non e bonis. And of one of their best Princes, Alexander Seuerus, is delivered,
Lampridius in eius vita.
that Salutabatur nomine, hoc est, Aue Alexander. Siquis caput flexisset, aut
blandius aliquid dixisset vti adulator, vel abijciebatur, si loci eius qualitas
pateretur, vel ridebatur ingenti cachinno, si eius dignitas grauiori subiacere
non posset iniuriae. That, to the Knee, was of later time in the Helmold. hist.
Sclauor. 2. cap. 15. edit. Reineccij. v. Cantacuzen. hist. 1. c. 16.
Eastern Empire, which Conrad III. extremely dislikt at his enterview with
Emanuel Comnenus, neither would he, for honor to the Person he did bear (being
Emperor of the West) so much as permit the Emperor Emanuel to sit and receive a
kiss of salutation from him standing. Whereupon the matter was composed by
their Counselors on both sides, so, that in Equis se viderent, and ita ex
parilitate Conuenientes sedendo se and osculando salutare^t. Neither would
Muleasses, King of Tunis, kiss Pope Paul III. his Foot, but Knee only. Kissing
the Hand is yet usual by Inferiors, or by those which give token of their
serviceable love to Great Persons; as it was anciently Arrian. in Epictet. 1.
cap. 19. Senec. Ep. 119. alibi.
also. And some reason for it may be collected out of that in Pliny. Inest
(says Hist. 11. c. 45.
he) in alijs partibus quaedam religio, sicut Dextra Osculis auersa appetitur,
fide porrigitur. It has been, it seems, derived out of Asia into Europe. When
the old Persians meet (says mine Herodot. in Clio.
author) you may know whether they he Equal or not. For in Salutation they
kiss each other, but if one be somewhat inferior they kiss only the cheeks:
but if the one be far more ignoble ((...) Hac fere phrasi vtitur D. Matthew.
cap. 4. com. 9. atque ide^ est quod Curtio lib. 8. procumbere.
(...)) he falls down and adores the other. Where, note by the way, the word
(...) i. adoro. And as Adoro has its deriuation from putting the hand to the
mouth, quod ad ora sieve ad os manum (or rather digitum Vide vero Hesychium in
(...).
salutarem, whence the forefinger had that name a salutando) admouemus, which,
against other idle Etymons, will be justified, so (...) is truly interpreted in
Adosculor (if the composition be lawful) or Adoro; both signifying to honor
by kissing the hand. Qui n. adorant (says S. Defens. contra Ruffin. lib. 1.
Hierom) solent deosculari manum and capita submittere -- and Hebraei, iuxta
linguae suae proprietatem, deosculationem pro veneratione ponunt; whereupon he
turns (...) in Psalm. 11. Adorate filium, which others make Osculamim filiu^.
And, that in this sense, Adorare is alone taken, this passage in Historiar. 1.
verum etiam adorare and (...) no^nunquam pro corpus humi prosternere antiquitus
accipitur, vt videre est in Esth. Apoc cap. 13. com. 20. Aemilio Probo in
Conone, alibi.
Tacitus will enough explane. Nec deerat Otho protendens manus adorare vulgum,
iacere oscula, and omnia seruiliter pro Dominatione. But, the Falling down,
added to the Adoration, was the greatest and the Persian honor used toward
their Potentats and Kings. Thence have you adorari more Persarum and (...).
Which is expressed by Euripides thus personating Phrygius, to Orestes, (...)
(...) --
And Ipse (says Lampridius of Alexand. Seuorus) adorari se vetuit (that is
with the Divine respect of kissing the hand) quum iam caepisset Heliogabalus
adorari, Regum more Persarum. Another of Trebellius Pollio in 30. Tyrannis
videsis Theophil Ad Autolic. lib. 1. de adorando Caesare.
Zenobia: Adorata est more Regu^ Persaru^. Whence, Seneca De Beneficijs 2. cap.
12.
speaking of Caligula's offering his foot to kiss, says, he was homo natus in
hoc, vt mores liberae Ciuitatis Persica seruitute mutaret. But, in Alexanders
turning the Grecian liberty into this servitude, Q. Curtius expresses it by
venerari procumbre, and humi corpus prosternere. And thereof says Justin,
Retentus est a Macedonibus mos salutandi Regis, explosa adoratione. Whereas
plainly Adoration, and Salutation with a kiss of the hand, is all one in the
right sense of the word. How much the greatest kind of adoration is used to the
Great Duke of Moscouy, the King of Calecut, the great Chan, the Turk, and such
more you may easily see in Relatio^s of their States. How the Jewish Nation
avoided it, the story of Haman and Mordechai discouers. And you may remember
Pet. Vict. Hist. septenarie liver. 1.
Philip II. of Spain his answer to the Ambassadors of Germany, reproving him
because he would have every man speak to him kneeling. He excused it, only lest,
he being so short, his taller subjects should be above him. But among the
Persians Xenoph. Cyropaed. 1. and 5. and in Agesilao.
also it was in use to Kiss at their Farewells, as likewise among the Genesis 31.
28.
Jews. And some think that it was, as an honor, in the Roman state, to their
women whom their Plutarch. problem. Romans 6. v. cum de virt. Mulier. Plin. lib.
14. cap. 12. alios.
kinsmen only (not others indifferently as the use was betwixt Men) kissed at
their salutations, although diverse other reasons are delivered for that matter.
And when Eumaeus, in the fields, first saw his young master Telemachus, newly
come home,

-- Odyss. (...).
(...)
(...),
(...) --
he met him, he kissed his head, his eyes and both his hands. And when the
Argonautiques came to Chirons Den to see Achilles, Chiron entertaind them, and
-- Orpheus in Argonautic.
(...).
kissed every one of them. Where, and in other examples, it appears that a kiss
given and taken, was accounted as a speaking and mutual sign of obsequious v.
si vis, C. de Domestic. l. 1. and ibid. DD. vbi ad osculum admitti, honos
maximus.
or peaceful love, according to the quality of the Persons receiving and
giving. And in Greek (...) is both to love and to kiss, as it is also to this
purpose observed, I remember, somewhere in Xenophon. So I understand Laban's
kissing of Jacob, and Esan's also, although a Jewish Rabbi Ianna ap. Buxtorf.
Thesaur. Gram. 1. cap. 5.
fable supposes, that he fell on Jacob to bite him, and that Jacobs neck
presently became as hard as marble, and so resisted his teeth. In like manner
understand that of the D. Luc. 7. com. 45.
Evangelist, Thou gave me no kiss, but she from the time I came to her,
ceased not from kissing my feet; and sufficient analogy is twixt this kind,
and the Holy Kiss, or Kiss of Charity, in the Primitive Church which is
spoken of in the holy Epistles, and, with which Christians after Tertullian.
lib. de Orat. and Origin. lib. 10. in Epist. ad Romans c. 16.
their solemn prayers, used to salute each other. In the story also of Thomas
of Canterbury under our Henry I (...) soft (as elsewhere) occurres, the
receiving him in Osculo Pacis. It has been used to the Feet in Homages done
upon inuestitures, as you may Ms. vet. apud. Camd. and vide G. Gemiticens. lib.
2. cap. 17. De fide data, osculo libato, and porrecta dextra vide Suid. in
(...).
see in that of Rollo or Robert, first Duke of Normandy, receiving the Duchy
from Charles the simple, and such more. Hence at this day it so far
continues, that when the Tenant does Homage to his Lord or King, he is, among
other ceremonies, to kiss him, whereupon in time of Henry VI. a great plague
Rot. Parl. 18. Hen. 6. artic. 5^.
being about London, a peticion was put up in Parliament, desiring the King for
his own preservation To ordain and grant (so are the words of the Roll) by the
authority of this present Parliament, that eueriche of your said lieges, in the
doing of their said Homage, may omit the said Kissing of you, and be excused
thereof, at your will (the Homage being of the same force as though they kissed
you) and have their letters of doing of their Homage, the kissing of you
omitted notwithstanding; and the subscription is Le Roy le voet, as the usual
words of his consent are. And for the subjects to kiss their King; I read, R.
Abenezra ap. Drus. Obseru. 2. cap. 16.
it was usual in India, whereas on the other side those of Numidia, more
gentis suae, nulli mortalium osculum ferebant. Which my Ualer. Max. l b. 2.
cap. 6.
author commends in them, and gives this his reason, Quicquid n. in excelso
fastigio positum est, humili and trita consuetudine, quo sit venerabilius,
vacuum esse conuenit. But, of Kissing, too much. It must be then concluded,
that to such Princes as have their own right next under God (as our Soueraigns,
and diverse other) may well be challenged, with respect to what they Rule, any
Title, that the Emperors have had to express them as Monarchs or great
Potentats; those other Kings having their Monarchies (regarding the particular
liberty of every ones Country as in supreme and sure right (...) Aristot.
Politic. 3. cap. 10.
(...) i. by reason of their lawful succession, as any Emperor possibly could
have. The Latin, Greek, and the chief Eastern tongues for KING are before
mentioned. In the Provincial languages or Romances (as the French and Spanish
are called) Il Re, Roy, and Re are plainly from Rex. But the Dutch, Danish, and
English word Coning, Konig, or King (which is but a contraction of the first)
is of a particular notation, and by original of its own. It signifies Mighty
or Potent: not so much Wise or Valiant as some will. Who sees it not in our
common word, Can, for Posse? So that Coning or King is literally Dynastes.
Hence some will have our word Queen (for the Kings wife) as contracted of
Konigin or Cunigine, which would be strange in her, if it be interpreted Stout
or Valiant words rarely applied to that Sex. I rather guess it from Quen,
which by pronunciation became Queen. Quen interprets a Companion, and is the
same with Comes. Take for it, this testimony out of an old Siperis de Vineaux
chez, Claud. Fauchet en l'orig. dez Dign. 2. c. 5.
Romaunt:

Le Conte de Lancastre, qui et a nom Henri,
Met a conseil le Conte qu' on dit de Warwic
Sire Quens, dites moi, per Dieu ie vos en pri etc.
And, who knows not, that, in our French statutes our Queens are ordinarily
called Le compagnon nostre seignior le Roy, or Company as it is in Britton, and
sometimes in Latin Consors nostra? And, in the Civil law, the Empresses are
Consortes Augusti. Agreeing with this exactly is the old Dutch, wherein Vulcan.
in specim. ling. septent. page 65. and 66.
Gomman and Quena are Man and Wife. A word somewhat near, among our ancient
Britons, signified King or some such like; I mean Cuno, being so often in
their and the Gaulish Kings names, as, in Cunobelin, Cuneglas, Cyngetorix,
Cunedage, Congolitan, which occur in Caesar, Tacitus, Dio, Polybius, and
others; and Cynoc in British (so, most learned Camden teaches me) is Chief or
Principal. But their special word for King is Brennin or Uhrennin. In old
Indian (...) was a King, if you beleeu some Io. Tzetz. in Chiliad. and Mes.
(...). in (...).
Grammarians thence deriuing Dionysius (that is Bacchus) from (...). But, I
remember, the Phoenix Scalig. animaduers. in Eu-Euseb. page 41.
of learned men slights it as a toy of Daring grammaticasters, as questionles
he might well. In the Ionique, (...); whence Lycophron calls Jupiter (...); and
Is. Tzetz. ad Lycropron.
Hipponax, (...). The Lybians, if you credit Scholiast. Pindar. Pythionic.
(...) and Herodot. (...).
authority, used for him the word (...). In the holy tongue of the Egyptians
(...) expressed this Title, as Manetho apud Joseph. adu. App. 1.
some say. In Ethiopian, Negush; In Turkish and Persian, Padescha. In
Slauonique n Cral, and, the Queen, Cralna, which the Polonians call Crol, and
Crolna. Whence the later Greeks have Georg. Acropolit. Chron. Constant. and ad
illum Theodorus Douza.
(...) and (...), for the King of Seruia and Hungary, and (...), and (...) for
Queen.

Title of Dominus or Lord prohibited by some Emperors. Dominus and Rex used in
ordinary salutations. First Emperor that permitted himself to be called
Dominus. First that writ himself so in his Coins. (...) and (...). Amera.
Maranatha. A Jewish sect allowing Dominus to none but the Almighty. A
coniecturall reason of their error. Adonai. The Tetragrammaton name of God,
when and how it was spoken amongst the Jews. (...) absolutely. Signior, and
Senior for Dominus, or a superior Gouerner. Alsheich, and Sheich among the
Arabians. The Persian Schach, and Saa. Dominus. Spanish Don. Punique in Plautus
amended. The Phoenician, Syrian, and Grecian Salutations or Farewells. Women
called Dominae after XIV. How Femaleheirs were wont to be in Ward in England.
Lord of Ireland; how it began in our Soueraigns Ancestors. Pope Hadrians letter
to Hen. II. about Ireland. Constantins Donation to the Sea of Rome. A Ring se^^
to Hen. II. as token of inuestiture in Ireland. The Petit Kings of Ireland,
anciently. A Crown of Peacocks feathers to Prince John being Lord of Ireland.
The Dominion of Ireland anciently Royal. The Act which alterd the title of
Lord into King. Lord, whence its original. Lar and Lartes. Lauerd. Louerd. An
essay of a very ancient rythmicall translation of the Psalms. (...), and
Truchtin. Milordi. The name of Gods to Princes. Antiochus his spoiling the
Jews Bibles which Baconbroth. The name of God impiously given to, and taken by
Princes. Swearing by Princes, and by their Genius, and by their Majesty; and
that among Christians. Punishments of Perjury committed on the Kings name.
Names of Idols in Princes and Great men's names. Nergal. Siris, Nilus. Cosmas a
Patriarch swearing by his own name. Names of great men not communicated to the
baser multitude. Alexanders name by his request imposed on all the Priests
children for one year.

CHAP. III.
For increase of Titulary Majesty, other attributes were anciently given to
Supreme Princes, which you may call Essential names, as the other before
spoken of. These were chiefly Domini and Dij, Lords and Gods: which, by
participation, were communicated also to their Magistrates, and, private men's
Greatness. That Sesosis King Diodor. Sicul. Piblioth. a.
of Egypt, on his columns, inscribed, with King of Kings, Lord of Lords, to
himself. (...); a title too high for humanity, and proper D. Paul. ad Tit. c.
6. com. 25.
indeed to the Great and Almighty King of Heaven. The Roman Octauian utterly
refusd the name of Dominus, or Lord. Domini Appellationem (says Sueton) vt
maledictum and opprobrium semper exhorruit. Cum spectante eo ludos,
pronunciatum esset in Mimo O DOMINVM AEQVVMET BONVM: and vniversi quasi de ipso
dictum exultantes comprobassent: and Statim manu vultuque indecoras adulationes
repressit, and insequenti die, grauissme corripuit edicto, DOMINVM QVE se
posthac appellari, ne a liberis quidem aut nepotibus suis, vel serio vel ioco
passus est: atque haiusmodi blanditias etiam inter ipsos prohibuit. For it was
usual (especially somewhat after Augustus) to salute ordinarily each other with
the flattering language of Lord and King, as diverse places of Martial make
apparent. Take this one Martial. Epig. 68. lib. 2. ide^. l. 1. Epig. 113. l. 4.
Epig. 84. etc.
to Olus;

Quod te nomine iam tuo saluto,
Quem Regem and Dominum prius vocabam,
Ne me dixeris esse contumacem.
Tiberius would not endure this Title neither, not so much as in common
salutation. Whereupon that Noble Tacit. Annal.
Historian and Statesman observes, vnde Augusta and lubrica oration, sub
Principe, qui libertatem metuebat, adulatione^ oderat. And, of Domitian, sings
one Papinius Syluar. I. in K. December.
of his time.

Tollunt innumer as, ad astra, voces
Saturnalia Principis sonantes,
Et dulci DOMINVM fauore clamant;
Hoc solum vetuit licere Caesar.
which yet must be either referd to mere flattery or dissimulation; or else to
the infancy of his Empire. For, by his express command the Titles of his
Letters and such like were Sipeton. in Domit. cap. 13.
Dominus and Deus noster sic fieri iubet. After this Domitian, the first that
enduid the Title was Diocletian. He se primus omnium Caligulam post (says
Aurelius Victor) Domitianumque, Dominum palam dici passus, and adorari se,
apellarique vti Deum. That Apostata Julian after his counterfeited fashion In
Misopogone.
prohibited it also. But howsoever in public salutations it might be so much
avoided by both good and bad Princes before Diocletian, it is certain, the
attribute was to diverse before him. Festus Lieutenant of Jury in the point of
S. Paul's Act. Apost. 25. com. 26. (...).
appeal, calls Claudius absolutely Lord. Eudamon in his petition to Antonuius
Moetian. ff. ad leg. Rhod. (...). and, Rogo Domine Imperator, eidem. ff. de his
quae in testam. delentur. l. 3.
calls him (...) i. Lord Emperor, and the Emperor in his answer styles himself
Lord of the World; as is before observed. And, in a golden Adolph. Occo page
537.
Coin, of the Great and Religious Constantine, stamped with his picture sitting,
and his Cour-tgard about him, this inscription is FELICITAS PERPETVA AVGEAT REM
DOMIN. NOSTR. Whereby, and the like our most judicious Camden. Brit.
Antiqnary obserud, that he first in Moneys and Public Titles was inscribed
Dominus Noster. In the X. of Coecilius his Epistles, Traian is for the most
part called Domine: although his Panegyrique, to him, has Principis sedem
obtines, ne sit Domino locus. And Rerum Domini they were after called: -- Mea
Gallia Rerum
Ignoratur adhuc Dominis --
says one Sidon. Apollinar. Panegyric. ad Maioran.
living when the Western Empire was even at the last gasp. Neither these only
but Herus also was given them, as the most learned Casaubori observes on
Sueton's Octauius. For later times, frequent testimony occurres in the
Imperial story. And the Greek Constitutions and other Monuments of the
Constantinopolitan Emperors, commonly give them the name of (...) i. Lords, for
which in their later corrupted idiom you shall often have (...), sometimes
Quomodo, ex isthoc corrupto vocabubulo, errores, apud Latinorum quosdam aeui
Barbari, irrepserunt, videsis in Notis Theodori Douzae ad Georg. Logothetae
Chronic.
(...) and (...). The like is and has been in every Kingdom of our Europe, as
also in the Mahumedan state, where they have the name of Ameras, Amir, or Amera
(applied to their great Sultan) which truly (as that of Sultan does) may
express Dominus or Lord, derived perhaps into their Arabique from the Caldee
(...) i. a Lord, whom that kind of excommunication 1. ad Corinth. 16. 22.
Maranatha i. the Lord comes (otherwise to the same purpose called Semtha or
Sematha, as it were Aliter alij, and Elias Thisb. in (...). v. Drus. Praeterit.
4 ad D. Ich. cap. 9.
(...)) has its origination. But, of Amers, and Sultans more in their place.
As some of the Emperors refused this name, either because it seemd a relative
to seruus i. a bond slave, or in respect that it supposed (if ill interpreted)
the subject and his substance in the property of the Emperor (for, in a
Vlpian. ff. de S. C. Silaniane l. 1.. 1.
Lawyer of the Empire, we read, Domini appellatione continetur qui habet
Preprietatem etsi vsus fructus alienus fit; and Augustus, that so much refused
it, could yet be very well contented to be made a God while he yet lived.) So
an old Jewish sect, moved in point of conscience with error, would by no mean's
acknowledge it to any Earthly Prince, affirming, it was only proper to the
Monarch of Heaven; God himself. The author of this sect was Joseph. (...). 18.
cap. 2.
Judas of Galilee under Tiberius. He and his followers so peruersly stood for
this nominall part of liberty (being, in other points, mere Pharisees) that no
Torments could extort their confession of this Honorary title to to the
Emperor. This Judas is mentioned in the Act. Apost. cap. 5. com. 37.
New Testament. Their Heresy thus generally is spoken of by diverse receiving
it from Josephus. But I Consulas de hoc Judah Cardinal. Baronium Annal. Tom. 1.
and Casauben. Exercit. 2.. 19.
cannot be easily persuaded that they merely stood on the word Lord, Dominus,
(...) i. Rab or (...) i. Adon, which signify to this purpose near alike. For
what is more common in their and our text of the old Testament, then the name
of Adon or Lord, given to far meaner men then Princes? Thus shall you say
(the words of u Jacob) to my Lord [(...)] Esau. And in their salutations and
addressed speeches, by both Testaments it appears, that, Master, Lord, or Sir
(expressed in the words which we have remembered) are familiar. I guess, they
superstitiously did it rather out of that dreadful respect, which the Jews
always had to the Tetragrammaton name of the Almighty, that is, (...) (now
commonly expressed Jehovah) which none ever durst openly, nor any Rabbi Moses in
More Nebuch. part. 1. cap. 60. verum expendas Numer. 6. com. 23. and seq.
might but the high Priest sometimes pronounce, and that only in the feast of
Reconciliations celebrated on the tenth of their month Tisri (as it was
instituted Leuitic. XXIII. com. 27. and only in the Sanctuary in his
Benediction. And always when it occurred in reading, they spoke Adonai i. Lord,
for it, unless Adonai went before or followed it in the text, and then they
read it Elohim i. God, and upon this difference pointed it (when they had their
Points) either with the Points of Adonai or Elohim. It will so appear in
infinite examples, where our idiom has the Lord God, the Latin Dominus Deus,
and the Greek (...). Whereupon with a respect only to the translations, a most
learned and ancient Tertullian aduers. Hermogen. qui sane and Dominum appellari
noluit Imperatorem, nisi (vt inquit ille) more co^muni. Apologetic. cap. 34.
Father observes: Deus quidem quod erat semper Statim nominat; In principio
fecit Deus coelum and terram. Ac deinceps quandiu faciebat quorum Dominus
futurus erat, Deus solummodo ponit. Et dixit Deus, and fecit Deus, and vidit
Deus, and nusquam adhuc Dominus. At vbi vniuersa perfecit, ipsumque vel maxim
Hominem, qui proprie Dominum intellecturus erat, Dominus cognominatur. For
indeed it is true that until Genes. 11. com. 4. after the Creation perfect, the
Tetragrammaton is not added to Elohim, but there first occurres (...) which
they read Adonai Elohim i. The Lord God. As also from the Ebrew (...), the
Psalm. 20 Arabic.
Arabique uses for it, Alrabbu i. Lord or Prince. Considering then their Jewish
superstitions, and how curious in ceremonies, syllables, titles, words
defective either in point or letter, they were, you may with probability
conjecture that here was the ground of that Galilaean sect: thinking it not
fit, perhaps, to style any Mortal by that Honorary title, by any other then
which the greatest, Dreadful, and (...) and (...), and ineffabile passim
dictum. v. Apocalypse. 19. com. 12.
unspeakable name of the CREATOR was never openly expressed. Manifest dixerunt
sapientes (says More Nebuch. part 1. cap. 60.
Rambam) quod istud nomen separatum (that is Semhammephoras i. nomen explicatum
aut separatum, as they usually call the Tetragrammaton) quod est quatuor
literarum ipsum solummodo est significatiuum substantiae Creatoris, sine
participatione cuiuslibet alterius rei. And (...) (says a later Cantacuzen.
Apolog. (...). aduers. Mahomet.
Grecian) (...), i. indefinitly or absolutely the name of Lord is only due to
God, but Man has it (...) i. With some particular addition of Person or place,
In regard of which he is so Titled. But now, and from ancient time, without
scruple, not Kings only, but their Nobles and subjects are usually saluted and
written with the attribute of Lord or Dominus. Yet not so much as it is a
relative to interest of Property (much less to servitude) but in a notion
whereby it interprets a Superior, Ruler, or Governor. For we see that in
Italian, French, and Spanish it is turned Signior, Seignior, and Sennor, which
are words in Dominij ac principatus significatione vsurpato, and nimirum (as
one Marian. hist. Hisp. 5. cap. 11. and in Constit. Feud. 1. Tit. 27. Seniores
pro Dominis; vti and iure nostro.
says) seniores imperare equum est, vnde consequenti tempore tum in monimentis
Hespaniae tum in Conciliorum actis, praesertim quae Caroli Magni aetate in
Gallia habita sunt, Domini ac Principes Seniores nuncupari caeperunt. So the
Jewish Sanedrim were called (...)
Seniores, or Elders, and Abraham's chief servant, (...) Genesis 24. com. 2.
the elder of his house. And the Arabians Mahumed Ben-Dauid in Alagsarumit. and
ibid. P. Kirsten.
have their title of (...) Alsheich, Shah or Shach, i. Senior or Elder for men,
it seems, of the better Condition: and the Epistles of S. John, published by
that learned linguist, Mr. Bedwell, out of an ancient Arabique copy, have that
word for (...) i. The Elder. It is attributed to their Princes and great Lords:
Schachi apellatio (says Pandect. Turcic. cap. 81.
Leunclauius) vel Regum vel magnorum est Principum, praesertim apud Persas:
sicut apud Hispanos Doni vocabulum in usu est. The present Sophi is called
Schah Abas i. Lord or Signior Abas. So Thamas and others before him have been
titled. It is the same with Saa ((...)) occurring in some Greek Agathias hist.
4. cui Vararanes Rex (...) Persice dictus i. (...).
passages of the Persian State, and has like signification with them (so the
incomparable Joseph Scaliger Canon. Isagog. lib. 3.
instructs) as Monsieur or Seignior are with Europaeans, or Domnus among
Writers of middle times, which is used often in Cassiodore and such more,
corrupted from Dominus, and is in different copies frequently so written. Of
Pipin K. of France, says Landulph. Sagax. Miscell. hist. 22.
one of them, Primus erat in omnium dispositione rerum gentis Francorum, quibus
videlicet olim moris erat Domnum i. Regem secundum genus principari. And the
Empress by Oppian in his Cynegeticon to Antoninus, is, in like form, corruptly
styled (...), and (...) CEB. is often in Coins of Seuerus, which remains almost
yet in the Italian Donna i. Lady or Mistress. But whether the Spanish Don have
hence its original, or from Adonai perhaps derived through the Maurish Arabique
into Spain, I doubt. The community of the ancient African with Ebrew or
Phoenician is known to the learned, as also that, the Prouincial Spanish is
exceedingly mixed with that African Arabique which the Maures use; and I have
read the censure of a most judicious linguist, that the fourth part, at least,
of it, is Maurish Arabique, which has its chief root in Punique or Ebrew. Now,
the Punique or Phoenician Salutation was with the word Donni (doubtless from
Adon or Adoni) as appears, if no more authority were, in Plautus his Poenulus;
AG. Saluta hunc rursus Punice, verbis meis.
Mi. Ano Donni, hic mihi, tibi, inquit verbis suis.
Where note by the way, you must read Auo or Hauo Donni i. Viue, or Salve
Domine from (...), which is Viue, and remains almost in the Latin Have used in
salutarion; and by corruption its likely they pronounced it Haudoni (as in some
copies it is) whence that Antholog. lib. 3. cap. 25.
Epigram upon Meleager, expressing the several forms of Salutations or
Farewells of the Syrians or Ebrewes, Phoenicians and Greeks, (...), (...) i.
Pax tibi, Ebraeis vsitatissimum.
(...),
(...).
is corrected by the divine In not ad Beros. and alior. fragmenta.
Scaliger, reading, for (...), made of Audoni or Hauo donni. Observe withal
the agreement of the Phoenician and Punique salutations with the Roman and
later Grecian. Of the Romans somewhat, in that kind, is before. And, I remember,
Seneca somwhere notes that such, whose names occurd not, were usually called
Domini; for the later Grecians, the Epigram of Pallada Antholog. (...). cap.
(...).
shall serve, where he says that, if his friend receive any thing of him, he
presently styles him (...) Domine frater, but if nothing, then frater only, but
says he -- (...)
(...).
i. I will none of the DOMINE, for I have nothing to bestow. The conceit
failing, if you strip it out of its own tongue. As men Domini, so were women
after XIV. years of Epictet. Enchirid. cap. 62.
age called Dominae, Ladies or Dames; and in the Civil Law, ff. de leg. and
fideic. 3. l. 41.
Peto a^te Domina vxor, and ff. de annuis leg. l. Titia 19.. 1.
Domina sanctissima are words used by Husbands, in their last Wills and
Testaments to their wives; and in one place is found Iulia. ff. de legate. 3. l.
Pater. 19.. 4.
Domina without respect to Husband or other, whereupon a great Lawyer Cuiac.
Obseruat. 3 cap. 18. and videsis Authentic. 74. cap. 4.
notes Matronae dicuntur etiam Dominae, non respectu maritorum duntaxat, quo
modo ipsi quoque mariti ab vxoribus Domini appellantur, sed etiam per se. So is
that noble Lady, to whom the II. Epistle of S. (...).
John is directed. And the Constantinopolitan Empress Irene, wife to Alexius
Comnenus, is, in their Anna Comnen. Alexiados 3.
story, called, simply (...). And John Bishop of Euchaita has an Epigram
(...); the like occurring often in later Writers of those parts. With us
anciently, marriageable women were called Dominae. One of the inquities ^ract.
lib. de Corona cap. 1. and in Rot. placit. Hen. 3. de Itinere, saepius. and
Roger. de Houed n in Rich. 1. sol. 445.
in Eire was, De Dominabus quae sunt and esse debent de Donatione Domini Regis,
sieve sint maritatae sieve non. There being another article, de valectis and
puellis qui sunt and esse debent in custodia Dominij Regis, which was touching
women within the age of XXI. years. For the Law seems, that their Idem lib. de
acq. rer. dom. 2. cap. 37.. 3.
Wardships so long then continued; and that was their plenaria aetas. But those
Dominae were chiefly such, as were out of Ward for their lands, yet in the
Kings bestowing. For the ancient law, here, was, that although after XXI.
years, the Lord had not to do with the marriage of his male Ward, yet, for
female heirs the Lords were to provide marriages at any age, and as often as
they were to marry; and, although the ancestors were yet living, yet must
their consents have been had; the reason being given, in respect that the
services must be done by the husband, Glanuil. lib. 7 cap. 12.
ne de inimico suo vel alio modo minus idonea persona Homagium de feodo suo
cogatur Dominus recipere. But this law was alterd into what it now is, for
common persons, by the Statut of Westminster. 1. cap. 22. vide, si de hijs velis,
Joan. Briton. lib. 3. cap. 67.
III. Ed. I. And, for the King, by XXXIX. Hen. VI. And in our old English
Poets, Dames (i. Dominae) is often for Women in general, as a special honor
for that Sex; being not out of use with us at this day, nor with the French; as
also among the Italians, Done for them, is familiar. How Dominus was usually
wont to be the title of every Curat, added to his Christen name, and is now
familiar for Sir to every Batcheler of Art in the Schools, all men know, and
may therein observe the most different notions and uses made of it. Ciuilians
will have it so proper to their profession, that all their Doctors must be
styled by it. Nec debent ab alijs (says Lucas de Ad Cod. tit. de Professor ib.
L. vnica.
Penna) quantumcunque Maximis, in eornm literis appellari Fratres sed Domini.
Contrarium facientes puniendi sunt. You cannot but here look for somewhat
concerning Our Soueraigns ancestors their Title of Dominus, Signior, or Lord of
Ireland, which continued until Hen. VIII. For this, you must know that their
title to Ireland is deriud from Henry II. although long before, I mean in K.
Edgars time, good part of it was under the English Crown. Edgars own words, in
a Charter dated the VI. of his reign, and DCCCC. LXIV of Christ, are Inspeximus
Pat. 1. Ed. 4. part. 6. memb. 23
Mihi concessit Propitia Diuinitas cum Anglorum imperio omnia regna Insularum
Oceani cum suis ferocissimis Regibus, vsque Norwegiam, maximamque partem
Hiberniae, cum sua nobilissima Ciuitate Dublina, Anglorum regno subiugare; quos
etiam omnes meis imperijs colla subdare, Dei fauente gratia, coegi. But this
continued not in his successors. Afterward the Isles grew too full of Petit
Kings, some of them converting their Government into intolerable Tyranny,
which, others not enduring, made such a divided State in it, that occasion, to
invade them, might thence soon be taken by their neighbors. Hereon a desire, of
the whole dominion of the Isle, possessed our Henry II. for which (so were the
times and servile opinions, then) he sent Ambassadors to Pope Adrian the IV.
(this Adrian was his natural subject, born at Langley in Hertfordshire, and
had to name Camden. in Cattieuchlan.
before he was Pope, Nicholas Breakspeare) entreating vt sibi liceret (as the
words of Matthew Paris are) Hiberniae Insulam hostiliter intrare, and terram
subiugare atque homines illos Bestiales ad Fidem and viam deducere veritatis,
extirpatis ibi plantarijs vitiorum; and it was granted by a Bull, among other
things, thus speaking, and illius Terrae Populus Te recipiat and sicut DOMINVM
veneretur, iure ecclesiarum illibato and integro permanente, and salua B. Petro
de singulis Domibus annua vnius Denarij pensione. Sane omnes Insulas, quibus
Sol Iustitiae Christus illuxit and quae documenta Fidei Christianae
susceperunt, ad ius S. Petri and Sacrosanctae R. Ecclesiae (quod tua etiam
Nobilitas Recognoscit) non ost dubium pertinere; Which notwithstanding, he
and all his Cardinals would never have been able to prove. John of Sarisburie
(cited ordinarily, as he was, John Bishop of Chartres) had chief place in this
Embassage, being a man most deerly respected by the Bishop of Rome. His
Metalogic. 4. cap. 42.
report, of this matter, is: Ad preces mees, Illustri Regi Anglorum Henrico
secundo concessit (speaking of the Pope) and dedit Hyberniam iure hereditario
possidendam; sicut literae ipsius Testantur in hodiernum diem. Nam omnes
Insulae de iure antiquo ex Donatione Constantini, qui eam fundauit and Dotauit,
dicuntur ad Romanam Ecclesiam pertinere. By the way, for that of Constantin's
Donation (a vexed question) if you read Vlrich Hutten, Valla, the Cardinal of
Cusa, Hierom Catthalan, and others of that kind against this Donation, but
especially that Bodin. de Repub. 1. cap. 9. Consulas Diphona Othonis Imp.
editam inter Epistolas PP. Syluest. 2. page 73.
note out of the Vatican, where it, being written in golden letters by one
Ioannes Cognomento Digitorum, is subscribed with this Quam Fabulam longi
Temporis mendacia finxit.
you will scarce beleeu it for a truth, no more then Eugubin's translation of
it into Greek (for it was extant only in Latin till that imposture) to be
legitimat. But John of Sarisbury goes on. Annulum quoque per me transmisit
aureum, smaragdo optimo decoratum quo fieret inuestitura iuris ingerenda Locus
deprauatus forte l. ingrediendae Hberniae.
Hibernia. Idemque adhuc Annulus in l. Curiali.
curali archio publico custodiri missus est. All this was about II. Hen. II.
But nothing was executed. Some years after, Dermut Mac Morrogh K. of Lemster,
being distressed by the K. of Connacht and Orereck M. C. LV.
K. of Meth (whose wife he had, but not against her will, dishonord) requested
aid of the English, and had it; and was chiefly restord by the valor of R.
Strongbow Earl of Penbroke. The Earls Greatness in little time, within the
Isle, grew suspicious to K. Henry. To avoid that, he acknowledged the Dominion
of his Conquest in the King, who some XVII. years, after the Popes Bull, entered
the Isle with an army, subdued good part of it, and had homage of those petit
Princes, which retained, as before, so after this acknowledgment, the name of
Kings. Yet they were not Ordinati. solennitate alicuius Ordinis (as the Apud D.
Io. Dauies, Regiu^, apud Hibernos, Procuratorem.
Black book of Christ-Church in Dublin speaks) nec Vnctionis sacramento, nec
Iure haereditario, vel aliqua proprietatis successione, sed vi and armis
quilibet regnum suum obtinuit. This K. Henry, it seems, following the syllables
of the Bull, and his successors hence titled themselves Lords of Ireland, in
their style putting it before Duke of Guienne. And, in the Annals of Ireland,
you read: Ioannes filius Regis Dominus Hiberniae de Dono patris, venit in
Hiberniam anno aetatis suae duodecimo (which was the XIII. year from the first
entrance of Hen. II.) and in Ex Synod. 1. and 2. Cassiliens. and Armach. ap.
Camd. De Pauonum pennis in texendis Coronis Consulas Paschal. de Coron. lib.
10. c. 13.
confirmation of his title Pope Urban III. sent him a crown of Peacocks
feathers: As likewise Hen. III. made Prince Pat. 52. Hen. 3. memb. 9.
Edward (afterward Ed. I. Lord of Ireland. How King John had obedience of most
of the Princes there, and established English Laws, Officers, and such more
notes of supreme Majesty, Matthew Paris may best instruct you. Plainly,
although some succeeding Princes wrote themselves but only Lords of Ireland,
yet their Dominion was merely Royal. They had their Justices, or Custodes, or
Lord Lieutenants or Deputies (as at this day they are called) of Ireland, which
were, as Viceroy's, by Patent, with most large Power delegat in the very rights
royal: then whom, no Lieutenants in Christendom (as our most judicious
Antiquary observes) comes nearer Kinglike State. And. Richard II. being himself
but in Title Dominus, yet created Pat. 9. Rich. 2
Robert of Vere (being then Earl of Oxford) Duke of Ireland, with Commission
to execnte most inseparable prerogatives royal. Which had been ridiculous if
in substance he had not been as a most perfect King of it. But, in later time,
under Henry VIII. in a Stat. Hibern. 33. Hen. 8. cap. 1
Parliament held at Dublin (Sir Anthony Senitleger then Lord Deputy) Forasmuch
as the King our most gracious dread Soueraign Lord, and his Graces most noble
progenitors Kings of England, have been Lords of this land of Ireland, having
all manner Kingly Jurisdiction, Power, Preheminences, and authority Royal,
belonging or appertaining to the Royal estate of majesty of a King, By the
name of LORD OF IRELAND; where the Kings majesty and his most noble
Progenitors justly and rightfully were, and of right often to be Kings of
Ireland, and so to be reputed, taken, named and called (it being further added,
that through want of use of the just title and name, diverse attempts of
disobedience had been in the Irishry) it was enacted, that the Kings Highness,
his heirs und successors, have the name, style, title, and honor of King of
this land of Ireland, with all manner honors, preheminences prerogatives,
dignities and other things whatsoever they be, to the Majesty and State of a
King Imperial appertaining or belonging. And that his Majesty be from
henceforth, his heirs and successors, named, called, accepted, reputed, and
taken to be Kings of this land of Ireland, to have, hold and enjoy the said
style, title, majesty and honors of K. of Ireland, with all manner
preheminences, prerogative, dignities, and all the premises unto the Kings
highness his heirs and successors for ever, as united and knit to the
Imperial Crown of the Realm of England. Thus much Pope Paul IV. afterward
confirmd to K. Philip and Mary with de Potestatis plenitudine, Apostolica
autoritate, Regnum Hiberniae perpetuo erigimus. And in the style of their
Parliaments it was henceforth called Regnum or Realm, being before only Terra
Hiherniae: Of which, enough. In origination of our English name Lord, whereby
we and the Scots style all such as are of the Greater Nobility i. Barons, as
also Bishops, its not easy to satisfy you. In our ancient Saxon it was written
hlaforde, and was a relative to theow and theow man i. a Servant or Bondslaue
and Tenant, not any Title or Dignity. To talk of Allodium or Allodius, to this
purpose, as some do, is more then idle. It would be nearer our present
pronunciation if you drew it from Lars or Lartes (for so also is the first case
used by Lartes Tolumnius Philippic. 9.
Cicero) an old Tuscan word signifying Prince, or such like, as a Ios. Scalig.
ad Propert. 4.
great man delivers by conjecture, whence you have Lartem Porsenam and Lartem
Tolumnium in Liuy, Plutarch, and Halicarnasseus; and Aremoricus Lars, in
Ausonius. But Lar Lartis (says an old Tit. Prob. Epit. de Nom. Rat.
Roman) praenomen est sumptum a Laribus; Tuscum autem creditum est praenomen
esse. It were not much stranger, at first sight, to suppose this Lar or Lartes
to be hither transferd, then that Lar should yet remain (as I have seen
somwhere noted) a word, for a chief house, about Bayeux in France. And many
worse etymolegies make their authors proud of them. But I know you cannot but
laugh at this, and I will so, with you; touching it only as there is such
community of name twixt it and our present idiom, or rater twixt the Scottish
Lairds, a degree next beneath Knights among them. It was afterward pronounced.
Lauerd and Louerd, as you shall see among other testimonies, in this, being a
metricall translation of the first Psalm, transcribd out of the whole Psalter
so turned and fairly written (about Edward II. his time, as the Character
persuades) which I have. Some wicked hand, by cutting the first Capital, left
it thus In Bibliotheca Bodleiana Oxonij exemplar Psalmoru^ huic nostro per
simile and coaetaneum, nec tamen mancum (ni fallat memoria) extat.
imperfect.

I
Hely
ely beerne that naught is began...
In the red of wicked man,
And in street of Sinful noght he stood
......... of Scorn vngode
II
Bot in the lagh of Louerd his will be ai
And his lagh think he night and day.
III
And al his lif swa sal it be,
As it fares be a tree,
That streme of water se^tt is nere,
That gifes his fruit in time of year,
And lefe of him to dreue noght sal,
What swa he dos sal soundfull al.
IV
Noght swa wicked men noght swa.
Botals dust that wind the earth tas fra.
V
And therefore wick in dome noght rise,
Ne sinful in read of rightwise.
VI
For Louerd of rightwise wot the way
And gate of wick forworth sal ay.
Gloria Patri.
Bliss to Fader and to the Sone,
And to the holy Gast with them one
Als first was, is, and ay sal be,
In werld of werldes unto the three.
and in the xv. Psalm,

I
Louerd who in thy Tilt for Tent.
Teld who sal wun
In thy heli hille or who rest mun?
II
He that incomes Spotless.
wemles,
And ever wirkes rightwisenesse.
The more willingly I inserted them also, that by this occasion you might taste
an essay of our Ancestors neatnes in their holy meeters, which, howsoever
abounding with liberty and the character of their times, yet have, I confess,
my admiration. Lauerd and Louerd indifferently occur in old Robert of
Gloucester. But note, in the more ancient English, Saxon, or Dutch, not hlaforde
is vsd for Dominus, where Dominus is attributed to the Almighty, But usually
Drihten or Truchtin, being the same words varied, as Legib. Aluredi.
Drihten waes spraeen thaes words to Moyse i. The Lord spoke these words to
Moises. And Vulcan. in Specim. Ling.
Giwihit si Truchtin Gat Israelo i. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel; and, in
our Ladies Magnificat Mikkilso min Sela truchtin. i. My soul does magnify the
Lord. Now since this Truchtin seems to have somewhat of Truth or Faith in it, and
that Loof or Loef, in old Saxon or Dutch, signifies Faith also, as one of that
Country, I. Goropius Hieroglyphic. 8.
phantastiquely ravished with the word to other purposes, tells me, could I
assume liberty, as he does in deriuation, I might with casting about, frame the
nature of Feuds, or Patronage, which consist in mutual faith twixt the tenant
or client, and Lord or Patron, out of the word. But I will not, nor dare I. One
Verstegan. cap. 10.
deriues it from hlafe-afford, as if it were essential to the name, that he
which bears it should be a lafe, lofe, or Breadgiuer, and so Lady from
hlafe-die i. a Bread seruer or diuider, referring his conceit to ancient (now
worn out) hospitality. That satisfies me not; if it do you, then will you
less impute to my ignorance, that I have not here furnished my self with any
probable origination. In these and the like, where I see no better ground, for
certainty of conjecture, I abstain from further inquiry. By reason of this word
Lord, which particularly applied we make My Lord, diverse outlandish writers
call our Noblemen Milords and Milortes; the ridiculous use proceeding from
their ignorance of our language. Its no where so frequent as in the Epistles of
that Spaniard Anthony Perez to the late Earl of Essex. Touching the name of
Dominus, Lord and Signior, hitherto. That of Dij or Gods plurally, attributed
to Great Princes, none that has read the old Testament can not but know. Yet
good Cyrill. aduers. Julian. lib. 8.
authority makes in most of those passages, to be rather noted the general
dignity of Mankind, then titular supremacy of Princes. It were hard to endure
such impious flattery, as to give them the name as it is truly significant; as
the dissembling and unconstant Samaritans did to Antiochus Epiphanes, Joseph.
Archaeolog. 12. cap. 7. and lib. 19. cap. 7. de Herod.
stiling him, in their Epistles, God, who pad indeed to his utmost, profaned
the holy Temple of the true God, most cruelly handled the Jews, and in Diodor.
Sicul. in excerpt. apud Photium.
contempt of their law and Divinity, compeld them eat Hogs flesh against their
institution, and with the liquor straind, wherein it was boiled, daubd and
abusd as many of their Bibles, as his wickedness could light on. So the
base-minded Jews, with acclamations, affirmd Herod Agrippa no longer Man but a
Deity; a touch whereof S. Act. Apost. 12. com. 22.
Luke has. The Persian Kings title challenged as much to him in Amm.
Marcellin. hist. 17.
that: Rex Regum Sapor, Particeps syderum, Frater Solis and Lunae, Constantio
Caesari Fratri meo salutem plurimam dico. And that Rutilian Mezentius commanded
Cato in Orig. ap. Macrob. Sat. 3. cap. 5.
his subjects to offer to him all such sacrifices as they had destinat to the
Gods, thinking indeed that no Deity was above himself, whence he is titled
Contemptor Diuum in Virgil. To these, like may be added of the Roman Emperors,
made or accounted Gods in their life time (for of their (...) after their
death, nothing belongs here to us) as Augustus, and diverse worse after him; and
that of Belus Is. Tzetz. ad Lycophron. and Io. Tzetz. Chiliad. 139.
remembered in the first chapter; with much such more among the Grecians, where
(...) or (...) signified both Gods and Kings. And Alexander, you know, would
needs be Jupiter Hammons son, and so had his picture made with Rams horns
like Jupiter Hammons Statue; as scorning mortal progenitors. But, for all
these and the like, a most learned and ancient Tertullian. Apologetic. c. 33.
Father thus; Non Deum Imperatorem dicam, vel quia mentiri nescio, vel quia
illum deri(...)ere non audeo, vel quia nec ipse se Deum volet dici, si homo
sit. Interest Homini Deo cedere. Satis habeat appellari Imperator. Grande and
hoc nomen est, quod a Deo Traditur. Negat illum Imperatorem qui Deum dicit.
Nisi homo sit, non est Imperator. And in their Trium(...)hs, a solemn
admonition always was to the Emperor, Memento te Hominem esse, which great
Aelian. (...). 9. c. 15.
Philip of Macedon had every morning remembered to him before he admitted any,
but him only whose office this was, to his presence. And Tertullian speaking of
those passages where mortals are styled Gods, adds Aduers. Marcion. lib. 1.
that also ipsa idola Gentium Dei vulgo; sed Deus nemo ea re, qua Deus,
dicitur. But, as the supremacy of Princes and their Government is delegat from
the Highest, their judgments being also called His, so in a general name are
they titled Gods even by God himself, because here on earth they should (for
their power) be his Sthenid. Pythagoric. apud Stobaeum Sermon. 48 de ea re plura.
Imitators. And in Artemidor. Onirocritic. 4. cap. 71.
Onirocriticisme, dreams of superior Deities were referd to such as had rule
and command. It being at this day among the Moschouitique Christians, in use
to account their Great Duke rather a God then a Man. This respect, added to an
obsequious impiety, caused, as well in the Christian as Heathenish times and
States, the subject, to continue that ill custom of Swearing by their
Harmenopul. (...). l. 1. tit. 7.
Princes. And if by them, they did forswear in a suit (For if out of a sudden
heat, they were pardoned) the punishment, for perjury was inflicted, that was
Fustigatio i. (as if you should say) bastinadoing (the Greek Lawiers called it
(...)) and whilst the officers beat him, they used this formal admonition;
(...) ff. de Iureiur. L. si duo. 6.
(...), i. Take heed how you swear. But if the perjury were committed against
God and his name, no punishment followed by their customs, because they supposd
God would sufficiently revenge the Ita Veteres existimasse vltionemque, dum in
viuis existerent periuri, expectasse Confirmat illud Horatij Carm. 2. Od. 8.
abuse of his Deity, expressing it thus: I (...) (says Constantine
Harmenopulus) (...); although it were certain by their Canon Law that Church
penances, but no other infliction was Can. 64. Basil. Harmenopul. Epit. sect.
5. tit. 3.
provided for the periurd: as also, if, in any suit, the party had forsworn
upon the holy Evangelists, his tongue was cut out. This Harmenopulus whom I
cite was a Judge in Thessalonica (now called Saloniche) under Emanuel Comnenus,
about M. CXLIII. after Christ, as is Marquhard. Freher. Chronolog. ad Ius
Graeco Romanum.
coniectured. But all this (touching swearing by the Prince or Emperor, and his
Genius) had its original out of Paganism. For, that punishment of Fustigation
was, it seems, Vlpian. ff. de Iureiur. l. 13.. 6
instituted by Antoninus and Commodus, when it was usual to swear per Genium
Principis, and per Principis Constable. Alex. Seueri C. de reb. credit. l. 2.
videsis Cuiac. Obseru. 2. cap. 19.
Venerationem, as it is in a rescript of Alexander Seuerus, under whom the
learned Apologetic, cap. 28.
Tertullian vpbraids the Romans with; Citius denique apud Vos per omnes Deos,
quam per vnum Genium Caesaris peieratur. And Athalarique the Goth, in a
profession of future good government, to the Romans: Cassiodor. Variar. hist.
8. Epist. 3.
Ecce Traiani vestri clarum seculis reparatum exemplum. Jurat vobis, per quem
iuratis nec potest ab illo quisquam falli, quo inuocato non licet impune
mentiri. Take, withal, that of Epist. 2. lib. 1.
Horace speaking to Augustus: Iurandasque tuum per nomen ponimus aras.
which well fits with the name of those Maiestique Pauillions, under which the
Emperors sat usually. They called Vt notauit Casaubon. ad Suetonij Neronem.
cap. 12.
them (...), as if you should say, Little heavens. And for the Christian times,
agreeing, with what is already showed, was that form of their Militiae
sacramentum, the soldiers oath; Iurant autem (says my author, living about
CCC. LXX. from our Savior) Per Deum and Christum and S. Sanctum and per
Maiestatem Imperatoris, g Vegetius de Re. Militar. 2. cap. 5. sub Valentiniano
and Gratiano.
quae, secundum Deum, generi humano diligenda est and colenda. Nam Imperatori,
cum Augusti nomen accepit, tanquam presenti and corporali Deo, fidelis est
prestanda deuotio, and impendendus peruigil famulatus. Deo enim vel priuatus,
vel militans seruit, cum fideliter eum diligit, qui Deo regnat autore. This use
was anciently, among the Egyptians as is apparent by Joseph's swearing, by the
life of Pharaoh. And, in later days, a Rabbin, that lived Abr. Aben Ezra in
Decalog.
about M. C. LXX. affirms, that if a man had sworn in his time in Egypt (it
was then governed by Caliph's) (...) i. by the Kings head, and had forsworn, he
was subject to capital punishment, neither could he redeem the guilt for his
weight in Gold. And when Shach Ismael, the first Sophi, got the Persian Empire,
no oath Leuncl. Musulmanic. hist. lib. 16.
amongst them was so great, as to swear by his head. Thus it appears, how,
both among Christians, Mahumedans and Heathen, a certain Sanctitas Regum (as
Sueton. in Iulio cap. 6.
Julius Caesar calls it) was specially regarded. Whence, it seems, the
frequencie of having a Deity's name in the Kings, was so familiar amongst the
ancients. The Tyrian or Phoenician Princes had usually the names of
Beleastartus, Abdastartus, Ithobaal, and many such like ocurring in the
fragments of Menander, and other annals of those parts; from their Deity Baal
and Astaroth, which Holy writ speaks of. Nebo Isai. cap. 46. com. 1. vbi Lxx.
(...).
a Babylonian Idol was a part of Nebuchadonezar, Nabopollassar, Nabonitus,
their Kings. In Neriglosser, is Nergal the Deity of the Cuthaeans, which the
R. Solomon Iarchi ad. 2. Reg. 17. (...). n. interpretari potes, fontem,
tumulum, forte and Sphaeram Ignis. and cum Magorum (vnde Cuthaej) (...)
conferas.
Jews idly say was a Cock, but, without any great scruple, will be proou'd to
be the Sun, or some perpetual fire, honored with respect to the sun, and
in the names of the Jewish Kings is usually one of the names of the true God,
as you see in Ahaziahu, Amaziah, Azariah, and diverse such more. Among the
Egyptians, Busiris, Petosiris, Osiris, Kings, all of them having the greatest
Deity of that people in their names. That is Siris or Seiris, which was the
same with Nilus: For in Isai. cap. 23. com. 3. ^irem. ca. 2. com. 18.
Holy writ it is called (...) (which by the Ethiopian Idiom, is pronounced
Sihri, says the noble Scaliger) signifying black, according as the Greeks
styled it Odyss. (...).
(...), and, with them, the Latins Melas Festus in eo vocab. alij.
of the same interpretation; and, from that Eastern word, questionless came
the Greek (...) for it, (...) --
says Dionysius Afer. Where, his Commenter Eustathius has other, but
frivolous, Etymologies of it. The fashion in Britain anciently, is touched
where we speak of Belin in the first Chapter. But indeed the composition out
of these names of Deities were not only proper to Kings. Their Great men and
more honorable subjects, had often times the like; as you see in Ierem. cap. 39
verse. 3. and cap. 52. 30.
Neregal, Samgarnebo, and Nabuzardan, with such more, and in Daniel, whom the
Babylonian King named Beltishatzar Daniel cap. 4. com. 7.
according to the name of his God. Neither was that swearing by their names
proper only to them. I remember Cosmas Patriarch of Constantinople, in the
controversy twixt him and Eustratius, about the Coronation of Irene Empress
and wife to Alexius Comnen, Anna Comnena Alexiad. 3.
swears by himself (...) i. By Cosmas. But, that of Divine names among them,
as it was communicated to Nobility, so very likely was not extended to the
Vulgar, or ignoble. For we see often a special regard had among the ancients,
that Princely names should not be borne by base Persons. One cause, why
Domitian put to death Metius Pomposianus, was for that he had given his slaves
the names of Mago and Hannibal; that of Hannibal having plainly in its
composition (as Asdrubal, Adherbal, and the like) the Phoenician or Punique God
Baal. In the Scripture you have the very name, but inuerted; Baal-Hanan in Genesis
cap. XXXVI. As on the other side one of Alexanders chief requests to the high
Priest of the Jews, they say, was, that he Abrah. Ben-Dauid in Cabald
might so much be honored, as to have his name imposd on every of the Priests
children that year born. Although it be certain that slaves sometimes had the
names of greatest Kings. And in Athens Agell. lib. 9. cap. 2.
the names of Harmodius and Aristogiton were not suffered to be given to any
bondman. The Turks Georgieuitz de Cerem. Turcar.
have their several names usually proper for their Sultans, Beglars and
slaves, if my author deceive not. But for that of giving a King the title of
GOD (without respect only to his delegat power and substitution) you may note
Anaxarchus his jest upon Alexander pretending himself a God, and lying
dangerously sick: (...) (said Aelian. Var. hist. 9. cap. 37.
Anaxarchus) (...); i. the hope of our God lies now in a spoonful of Potion.
And when Hermodotus in his Poems Plutarch. lib. de Isid. and Osiride.
styled Antigonus the son of Phoebus, and a God, the King well answered his
flattery: But (says he) the Groom of my close stool denies me to be so.
Astrologers approper certain stars to Kings only, and great men, in their
significations, and some of them place those Regiae Stellae, Firmicus Mathes.
6. cap. 1
as they call them, in the dodecatemories only of Taurus, Leo, Scorpio, and
Aquarius; others otherwise. They have deliuerd also, that every King Apud
Cantacuzen. Apolog. aduers. Mahomet. a.
has a singular star for the Ruler of his Royal life, common persons having
only the mixtures of several influences, according to their Genethliaque
figures. I note it here as it touches their accession of special and a kind of
holy honor to Princes. Regard it at your pleasure; if you will, but as I, then
read it for a Relation, but also laugh at it.

Caesar. Whence derived into the Roman Emperors title. It signified an Elephant
in Punique. The Maures, a Colony out of Chanaan in time of Ioshuah. An
inscription of a Column erected in those times in the now Barbary. Children
cut out of their mothers, sacred to Apollo. Augustus. When, and upon what
occasion it began in them. Other Kings titled by it. Denomination, to the Roman
Emperors, from Provinces, which they either conquered or settled. Their
abstaining from names, of that kind, which were ridiculous. Pharaoh among the
Egyptians. In Josephus an error. The Queen of Saba. The Egyptian Kings
afterward called all Ptolemies, and whence. Time of Ptolemy the Mathematician.
Patronymiques of diverse Royal lines. Agag, and Amalek. A passage in the
Apocrypha of Esther. The Western part of Asia, called Greece. A place in S. Mark
explaned. The Parthian, Indian, Bithynian, Hagaren, and Lombardian Princes.
Cleta. The great honor to the name of Constantine in the Western Empire.
Teggiurlar. How the Romans affected the name Antonin in their Emperors. Lazars,
Bulcoglar, Bulcouitz, Crateuitz, and such like. Most Christian King. When first
in the French. First Christian King in Europe. Filz aisne de l'esglise.
Defender of the faith. When and how first in Our Soueraigns. Catholic how and
when first in the Spanish. Porphyrogenetus often in the Constantinopolitan
Emperors title. Camaterus his Astrology Ms. The true reason of that name of
Porphyrogenetus. Emperors children received in Purple at the Birth. Purple,
when first made proper to Kings.

CHAP: IV.
HItherto of such Titles as are Essential to Majesty. There are also, which
are particular for several States, and merely Accidental. Of them, in the
first rank, stand those which proceeded from the first autors of Empires or
Monarchies. To none, is unknown the continuance of Caesar in the German
Emperors Title, deriud through the Franks and Romans from their C. Julius
Caesar first Emperor. But not first which bare that name, as some Glycas,
Etymologic. mag. Cedrenus, alij Graecorum. Necnon Ebraei vt videre est in Elia
Thisbit. in (...)
ignorantly have deliuerd. Nor had he it, because he was cut out of his Mothers
belly. It may be true which Pliny Hist. not. 7. cap. 9.
says, that primus Caesar a caso matris vtero dictus, qua de causa and
Caesones appellati. But others were so called before him; and, from the Punique
or Maurish word Coesar, interpreting an Elephant, most Ap. Ael. Spartia^. in
Ael. Vero Seru Honorat. ad 1. Aeneidos. Constable. Manass. in Annalit us.
learned men have anciently deriud it quod auus eius in Africa, manu propria,
occidit Elephantem. Others at Rome deducing it from Caesaries, quod cum magnis
crinibus (as Spartians words are) sit vtero parentis effusus; others quod
oculis caesijs and vltra humanum morem viguerit. Understand them, of him which
first bare the name. I like that from the Elephant. Analogy will hardly endure
any of the rest. And in an old Coin stamped on the one side with DIVVS JULIUS,
the other has S. P. Q. R. and an Elephant: which although some refer to the
Plays and fights of Elephants, Plin. hist. 8. cap. 7.
showed by the favor and cost of Julius, yet perhaps it has allusion to that
African original. But, how it could be Punique is not so well justified: The
Punique being but a slip or branch propagated from the Ebrew, wherein (as that
admired, and great President of the Muses the most learned Casaubon has also
noted) not Caesar, but (...) signifies an Elephant (as also in Arabique) which,
by transposition of letters, is even the same with the Greek and Latin Elephas.
He therefore thinks the word was Maurish, as Spartian affirms it was. But,
under favor, was not the old Maurish the same with Punique or Ebrew? Good
authority Procopius de Bell. Vandalic. 2.
tells us that in the Tingitana Mauritania (where the now Barbary is) at
Tingis, were two white columns of Stone erected anciently with an inscription
in Phoenician letters (they were, some say, very near the Ionique or Greek, and
Terpsichore. and de hijs videas Ios. Scalig. ad Eusebium page 102.
Herodotus expressly affirms so, which had seen both kinds) to this effect: We
are fled from the presence of Iosuah Ben-Nun the spoyler. Then which, what can
more apparently show the Maures at first to have had their immediate original
out of Canaan where Ebrew was the language? And take then this annotation of
the noble Casaubon in another Animaduers. in Tranquil. 1.
place. In Targum Ionathanis (says he) (...) extat, notione affine, pro Scuto
vel clypeo. Et fortasse inde est quod, Punica lingua, Elephas Caesar dicebatur
quasi Tutamen and praesidium Legionum. But also special reason is given for
the deriuation, from being cut out of his mother. Read this of Seruius Ad
Aeneidos 10.
Honoratus; Omnes qui secto matris ventre procreantur, ideo Apollini consecrati
sunt, quia Deus Medicinae est per quam, lucem sortiuntur. Vnde Aesculapius eius
fictus est filius. Ita n. eum esse procreatum supradiximus. Caesarum etiam
familia ideo Apollinis sacra retinebat, quia, qui primus de eorum familia fuit,
exsecto matris ventre natus est. A too daring conceit, and tasting ill of
Grammatical arrogance! But, whencesoeuer the name is, its taken as the most
honorable in the Imperial Title; and Justinian expressly of it, in his
Letters (...).
to one John, his Lieutenant of the East, (...), i. We are graced with this
note of Imperial Majesty, more then with any other. And the Germans at this
day use the word Keyser (from Caesar) for the Emperor generally. From Julius,
his Nephew Octauius had this name left to him by Testament: In ima cera (says
Sueton) Caium Octauium in familiam nomenque adoptauit. Afterward this Octauius
in the Senate was honored with the Title of Augustus (...); as Dio's words are,
i. as if he had been somewhat more then Humane. And non tantum nouo (so Sueton
speaks) sed etiam ampliore cognomine: quod loca quoque religiosa, and, in
quibus augurato quid consecratur, Augusta dicantur, ab auctu vel ab auium gestu
gustuue; and, for the word, cites that of Ennius Augusto augurio postquam
inclyta condita Roma'st.
Some xv. years, after Julius slain, on Censorin. de Die Natali cap. 21. Se
VII. and Vipsan. Agripp III. Coss.
the XVI. Kl. of February, that is the XVII. day of January, upon motion of L.
Munacius Plancus, this Title was given him, and thence is the Epoch of the
Anni Augustorum (as they call it) to be accounted. The Greeks turn Augustus,
(...), i. Venerable. Certainly it came from Augeo, being a word proper in
Sacrifice; as Augere Hostias, which the learned Casaubon remembers. I add also
that in just like form the Greeks had their (...). Isthmiac. Od. 4
Pindar has (...): as if he had said Augemus hostias, or inferias. And, in
Sextus Pompeius, Augustus is interpreted Sanctus. For, things sacrificed have
venerable respect toward them, and diverse Inscriptions to Gods and Goddesses
are extant with Augusto or Augustae. The name has been applied to others then
only the Roman Emperors: some Testimony Guilielmus Nothus Augustus dictus. 10.
Bodin. de Rep. 2. cap. 2.
has given it to our William the first. And the French had their Philippus
Augustus; in the description of whose life, an Rigord. in prooem. ad Vit.
Philippi Aug.
Ancient thus salutes his Reader. Miramini, quod, in prima front huius operis,
voco Regem AVGVSTVM. Augustos n. vocare consueuerunt scriptores Caesares, qui
Remp, augmentabant, ab augeo auges dictos. Vnde iste merito dictus est Augustus
ab aucta Republica. Adiecit enim Regno suo totam Viromandiam (i. the
territory, about S. Quintins) quam praedecessores sui multo tempore amiserant,
and multas alias terras; redditus etiam regni plurimum augmentauit. This Philip
reigned about M. CIXXX. Frederique Barbarossa then Emperor. And long before
this Philip, their first Christian King had it. Ludouicus Rex (says Sigebert;
so he calls K. Chlouis) ab Anastasie Imperatore Codicillos de Consulatu and
Coronam auream eum Gemmis and Tunicam blatteam accepit, and ex ea die Consul
and AUGUSTUS dictus est. These two of Caesar and Augustus continued in their
successors, and do at this day. The Romans had another kind of multiplying
surnames to their Emperors, by denominating them so often from Countries or
Provinces, as they had done some brave Imperial act in composing, ordering, or
vanquishing any of them. Examples of it are every where. Thence has Justinian
such a Title with Alemanicus, Gotticus, Francicus, Germanicus, Anticus,
Alanicus, Vandalicus, Africanus. Question not, but they had of these, oftimes
by their Countries flattery more then desert. Appellatus est Commodus (they
are Lampridius words) etiam BRITANNICVS ab adulatoribus, quum Britanni etiam
Imperatorem contra eum deligere voluerunt. If the denomination were subject to
a ridiculous interpretation, some of them abstaind from it. As when Aurelian had
the day of the Carpi (a people upon the River Donaw in the now Hungary) and
heard that the Senate would needs name him Carpicus, he presently writes to
Flau. Vopiscus.
them Superest P. C. vt me etiam Carpisculum vocetis. For indeed, Carpisculus
interpreted a kind of shoe, which made him dislike the Equiuoque. Although on
the other side the wicked Caracalla was proud of his title Germanicus, AEl.
Spartianus.
not only as it respected his German victories, but withal as it alluded to
the murdering of his brother, signified by Germanus: affirming, that if he had
conquered the Lucani he would have been called Lucanicus; as ridiculous a
denomination, as Lucanica, signifying a kind of Hogs-pudding, whence the Romans
called such as were great eaters Amm. Marcellin. hist. 28. Lucanicus cum Pordaca
etc.
Lucanici. The Egyptian Kings in holy writ until Salomons time are all called
Pharaoh's. It was no proper name, but only a title which every one of them had.
For, in profane story, you have other particular names for them. Him under
whom Joseph was prisoner, some make Themosis; others, in errors of Chronology,
supposing Themosis to be the Pharaoh drowned in the red Sea, and that, his
fathers name q Manethon. apud Joseph. adu. App. (...).
was Alisfragmuthosis. But later and more curious computation places the
Israelites coming out of Egypt under Armais Pharaoh; and Cedren under
Petisson. He which took Sara is called Joseph. Haloseos 6. cap. 11.
Nechias; and, in the Egyptian Annals of Manethon partly preserud in Josephus
and Julius African, enough such more occur. After Salomons time they are
remembered with the like in holy Writ; as in Pharaoh 2. Reg. cap. 23.
Necho, Pharaoh Ierem. cap. 44.
Chophra (the same perhaps which Herodotus calls Apries) and 2. Paralip. c. 11
Shisac the same with Sesostris, Sesoosis, or Sesonchosis. But the reason of
that difference, upon another credit (I will not warrant it) thus take. Hence
is it (I interpret to you Josephus Archaelog. lib. 8. cap. 2.
his words) that Herodotus Halicarnasseus, when he tells of CCCXXX. Egyptian
Kings succeeding after Menis that built Memphis, speaks not of their names,
because they were all called Pharaohs. For (...).
when after them a Woman had the Crown, he names her Nicaule, because that of
Pharaoh was only for Masles, not for feminin capacity; wherefore it was
requisite to give her a special name. And I have found in the stories of my own
Country (remember he was a Jew) that after Pharaoh, Solomon's Father 1. Reg.
cap. 3. com. 1.
in law, none of the Egyptian Kings were called any more by this name
(understand, by Pharaoh, without addition) and that, after him, that Woman came
to Solomon, she then being Queen of Egypt and Ethiop. For her being Queen of
Ethiop and Egypt, it will perhaps be more hardly justifiable, then the
supposition of that Queen whom Herodotus remembers to be coetaneall with
Solomon. The Queen of Saba, me thinks, might best be referd to the Sabaeans in
Arabia Foelix. But, for that point, see specially Luis de Vretta his Ethiopique
history, in Spanish, lately published; and our next chapter. Neither is
Herodotus his (...) habet Herodotus Sesostreos successorem in quo sane (...)
Vestigia.
Queen namd Nicaule, but Nitocris. And, I am much deeciud, if that Moeris,
which he remembers there in his Euterpe, be not one of those CCC. XXX. whose
names he rather omits, because of their want of memorable acts, then for
Josephus his reason, as the story easily persuades. The Ebrews write the name
(...); and deriuations are of it, but none worth trusting to. Some think it
signified a King in the Egyptian idiom. (...), says Josephus, i. Pharao among
the Egyptians signifies a King. So affirms African, others. And in Apomazars
(rather Achmets) Onirocritiques, out of Egyptian monuments, that name often
occurres, signifying plainly a King generally. After the Grecian Monarchy
divided among Alexanders great Courtiers, Ptolemy the son of Lagus took Egypt
and Afrique, and, from him, his successors were all called Ptolemies with some
other addition; as Ptolemy Philadelphus, Euergetes, Philopator, and such like:
which gave occasion of a foolish error in some, supposing, through community of
name, that Ptolemy, the author of the Quadripartit, was one of the Egyptian
Kings, and Philadelphus; which Haly Aben Rodoan confutes against Albumazar and
others. Indeed, he was an Egyptian of Pelusium, but liud under the Roman
Emperors, which Haly thence proves because his hypotheses of the stars places
in his Almagest, are of that time. Its certain, he was under the first Antonin,
and a private man; but, as foolishly, called Pheludianus in the translation of
Haly, in steed of Pelusiacus. According to this continuance of a name in
succession, are in a manner those Patronymiques of Achemenidae in the Persian
Kings, Aleuadae in the Thessalian, Cecropidae in the Athenian, from Achemenes,
Aleuas, Cecrops. So were the Danish Kings anciently titled Skioldungs from
their great King Skiold. The French had their Merouings, the old Kentish
Kingdom here its Oiscings, from Merouee and Oisca. But as to the Egyptians,
Ptolemy, so among the Amalekits, Agag was a name for every Moses Gerundensis
ap. Munster. ad Number. cap. 24. v. 1. Sam. cap. 15. 8.
of their Kings, derived into them from Agag the son of Amalek. For where in
holy Writ, is found Haman the son of Hammadetha the Agagite, Josephus calls
him the Amalekite, and the Targ. 2. Esth. cap. 3. 1.
Chalde Targum (...) i. of the Posterity of Agag son of Amalec, which withal
conuinces a piece of Apocrypha, where Haman is called a Macedonian, in the
letters of b Apoc. Esth. cap. 16. com. 8.
Artaxerxes. Unless you take it that Artaxerxes (Ahasuerush) living Eastward
in Susa of Persia might call the more Western, but far distant, parts of
Asia, by the name of Macedon, as the Grecians did the Western Europaeans,
Celts, and as the Constantinopolitans now do, Franks or Latins, whereas those
names in truth are of much narrower comprehension. If Artaxerxes letters had
been written after Alexanders conquests, that interpretation might have been
permitted the better. For since his time its well known that the Western Asia
and Greece or Macedon are names confounded. The author of the first of the
Macchabees cap. 1. says that Alexander overcame Darius King of the Medes and
Persians, (...). and reigned first in his steed in Greece. All men know, Darius
reigned not in any Europaean Greece, therefore Asia may be understood. For after
Alexanders Dominion there, being a Greek, and his leaving it to Grecians or
Macedonians (to this purpose, twixt them, is no difference) it became
denominated from the Rulers Country. And hence may that in S. Mark cap. VIII.
be best understood: where a woman is affirmd to be (...) i. a Grecian a
Syrophoenician; as if the Evangelist had said, of the Western part of Asia, a
Syrophoenician. And in the I. Drus. ad Hasmon. cap. 1. and Praeterit. 2.
Ebrew story of later times (...) i. Greece is often used for Syria. Yet how
this later use can salve that of Esthers Apocrypha I conceive not, unless it
be supposd that it being written in a newer age, the words of the time were
inserted. The place rather may be thought corrupted: But this, out of the way.
The Parthian Princes were from Arsaces, their first great Monarch, titled by
his name with some other proper to every particular. Cuius memoriae (says
Historiar. lib. 41.
Justin) hunc honorem Parthi tribuerunt vt omnes exinde Reges suos Arsacis
nomine nuncupent. The Alban Kings in Italy had every of them the addition of
Sylulus, as you see in the Roman story. And the old Indian Kings Strabo
Geograph. 15. and 12.
had to their proper name always added Palibothra, which was their chief City.
Most of the Bithynian Kings were called Nicomedes. And, in steed of Caesar, it
was purposd by Ataulph King of the Alexand. ab Alex. Genial. Dier. 1. cap. 2.
Westgothes in Italy, that, posterity should call the Roman Emperors, by his
name, Ataulphs; and after their King Flauius Antharis, all the succeeding Kings
had that Paul. Warnfred. de gest. Longobard. 3. cap. 16
Fore-name. Upon that of Lycophron, (...)
Isaac Tzetzes notes that from this Cleta (an Amazon) all the Queens which
reigned there afterward bare her name. He means the City Cleta in the inferior
Calabria. And the Princes of the Hagaren Ios. Scalig. Emendat. Temp. lib. 2.
vide 2. Machab. cap. 5. Com. 8.
Arabians had the common name of Areta. Of this kind, more may in ancientest
story, be observed. In later times the Constantinopolitan Emperors much
affected to give their children and themselves the great name of Constantine,
not as imposd, but as an addition to the proper. Of a Constitution Circa Ann.
DCXX.
of Heraclius, thus begins the Preface. In the name of the Lord Jesus Christ,
our God. Heraclius and Heraclius (...). Heraclius the Son is styled New
Constantine, being taken in as a partner of the Empire by his Father. And in
the Monastery of Suluna at Constantinople, is painted Michael Palaeologus and
his Empress Theodora, with three inscriptions, the one being (as Leunclaw
Pandect. Turcic. cap. 51.
remembers it, in Latin) thus conceived: MICHAEL IN CHRISTO DEO FIDELIS REX ET
IMPERATOR DVCAS ANGELVS COMNENVS ET NOVVS CONSTANTINVS.

And the Turks use to call all those Constantinopolitan Emperors Constantins,
as their name; but also Teggiurlar in derision (Teggiur signifying a Lord of
some small territory) not thinking them in their later times worthy the name of
Emperor. But this of Constantin was no otherwise then the Romans vsd the name
of Antonin. Ita n. nomen Antoninorum (says Caracalla.
Spartian) inoleuerat vt velli ex animis hominum non posset: quod omnium
pectora velut Augusti nomen obsederat. And Diadumeno, and Capitolin. in Opilio
Macrino de hoc nomine.
Lampridius to the same purpose: Fuit tam amabile illis temporibus nomen
Antoninorum, vt, qui eo nomine non niteretur, mereri non videatur imperium.
Whereupon, it seems, was Seuerus his purpose Spartian. in Geta.
grounded, that all his successors should have been called Antonins as they were
Augusti. And when Alexander Seuerus was by those turbulent acclamations urged
to the name of Antonin, he earnestly and often refused it, lest the very name
might breed in them expectation of what he should not in his Empire perform.
It was a surname of the Arrian Family, and first in Pius when his grandfather
(T. Arrius Antoninus) on his mothers side adopted him. But, when they had given
him the surname of Pius, it grew to be his name thus: T. Antoninus Pins. Others
in continued succession after bare it, and with affectation, either in
Forename, Name, or Surname, until the Maximins, and, as some of the old
Writers would, till the Gordians; all deriuing the honor of it from Pius and
Marcus. The Princes or Despots of Seruia, the Turks call Lazars, from Lazar or
Eleazar Bulk (these two being both one name) which first got that territory
upon Donaw from Calchondyl. de reb. Turcic. lib. 6. and Leunclau. Pandect.
Turcic. cap. 46. and 54 Lazarus ille vixit, A. M. CCC. XC.
Stephen King of Bulgarie. As also sometimes Bulcoglar, i. the sons or
posterity of Bulk, which the Seruians express, according to their Slauonique,
Bulcouitz. So from Crates, the Bulgarian Princes were Crateuitz, as in like
analogy, the Dalmatian Cernonitz; the Albanian, Karolouitz, deriuing their
title out of the French Carolin stock. But most of these proceed from the
autors of the family or predecessors, and are rather Honorable from that private
beginning, then notes of public Majesty. Therefore have I briefly run them
over, and come to such attributes which expressly interpret in particular
Princes highest Honor or Greatness. The French Kings have anciently, as still,
been known by that addition of Most Christian. When it began in them is
uncertain. Some fetch it from Rome to Charlemaine. But so it should rather have
remaind in the Empire. Some refer it to the Council of Orleance, held, under
K. Jews or Clouis their first Christian King, about the year D. But there are
no other words, to that purpose, then Domino Tom. 2. Council. Aurel. 1. cap. 2.
Suo, Catholico Ecclesiae Filio, Clodoueo gloriosissimo Regi, Omnes Sacerdotes
quos ad Concilium venire iussistis. In-Indeed in S. Remigius or Remy's
Flodoard. hist. Remens. 1. c. 18. Papam, hunc titulu^, in Ferdinandum v.
Castellae Regem, transfer, in animohabuisse memorat, ex Comi^aeo, Mariana
hist. Hispanic. lib. 26. cap. 12.
Testament (he was first Archbishop of Rhemes) that Clouis is called
Christianissimus Ludouicus, and was the first Christian K. of Great note and
Empire, although this corner of the world, our Britain, above CCC. years before
him had K. Lucius which was in Europe absolutely the first Christian K. that
story makes mention of, unless, you think, Tiberius was so, because he
somewhat inclined to Christianity, and perhaps had embraced it, had the Senate
well likt it. Of him, see Tertullian and others since. To the French, diverse
bulls of the Pope have been anciently sent, stiling him with that title. And
for the credit of that Nation in this kind, one that lived Agathias Histor.
(...).
above M. years since, affirms of them then that (...) i. they are all
Christians and most Orthodoxall. He is also called the Eldest son of the
Church, Filz aisne de l'esglise, which came to him, it seems, from that his
predecessors were Emperors. For the Emperor Camden. in Reliq.
was accounted Mayor Filius Ecclesiae, the K. of France, Filius Minor, and of
England, Filius Tertius and Adoptiuus. Of these and particular messages to him,
in proof hereof, and such like, his own subjects Du Haillan, Hierom Bignon,
Claude Fauchet, Du Tillet and others have more. But it is also certain that in
letters from Rome our Soueraigns have been titled with Christianissimus, which,
it seems, was before custom had established it as proper to the French. The
English Monarchs have had, ever since Henry VIII. the title of Defender of the
Faith. He in those awaking times twixt Romanists and Lutherans, wrote a volume
against Luther in defense of Pardons, the Papacy and the supposed VII.
Sacraments. Of this work the Original is yet Francisc. Swert. in Delicijs Orb.
Christ.
remaining in the Vatican at Rome, and, with his own hand, thus inscribd.
ANGLORVM REX HENRICUS, LEONI X. MITTIT HOC OPUS ET FIDEI TESTEM ET AMICITIAE.

whereupon says Sleidan, Pontifex honorificum regi cognomen tribuit,
Defensorem appellans Ecclesiae, which is the same with Defender of the Faith:
And one, in his Io. Faber. Orat habit. Londini ad Reg. and Proceres.
speech to Henry VIII. about holy Wars to be undertaken against Mahumedans,
has in, non frustra, diuino inspirante spiritu, hunc and talem titulum quem
Rex nullus habet, adeptus es, vt Christianae Fideae Defensor scribaris,
tenearis, and sis. It was given him about the XII. year of his reign.
Catholic is as a Surname to the Spanish King; which Pope Alexander VI. gave
as an inheritance to Ferdinand V. King of Castile and Arragon. Observe the
Jesuit Mariana's relation. Ab Alexandro Pontifice, says he, Ferdinandus
puellae pater (he was father to Joan wife of Philip Archduke of Austira)
CATHOLICI Cognomentum accepti in posteros cum regno transfusum stabili
possessione. Honorum titulos Principibus diuidere Pontificibus Romany datur.
Erat in more vt in literis Apostolicis adscriberetur, REX CASTELLAe ILLVSTRI;
Ergo deinde noua indulgentia adscribi placuit, REGI HISPANIARVM CATHOLICO, non
sine Obtrectatione and invidia Regis Lusitani, quando Ferdinandus imperio
vniuersam Hispania^ non obtineret; eius tum non exigua part penes Reges alios.
Here then according to him was the beginning of it, as a title properly
denominating and hereditarie, although Alfonso (son in law to Pelagius by
marriage of his daughter Ormisinda) and Recared or Richard, Kings of
West-gothique blood, there long before enjoyed it: the first, as a surname for
his religion, and Martial performance against the Maures, the other by
acclamation in the III. Council of Toledo. And in the old Roman Provincial, a
Catalogue of Kings, is, expressing Rex Castellae, Rex Legionis, Rex
Portugalensis, Rex Aragoniae, with diverse others of other Territories, and then
REX CATHOLICVS by that general name. The Provincial was written (I am sure my
Copy was) before Alexander VI. yet I cannot understand who is there meant by
Catholicus, except their King of Astures, whose Dynastie was joined about M. XX.
with Castile. For Castile, Leon, Portugal, and Aragon are reckoned beside, and
that Alfonso about DCCXXX: had the Asturian Kingdom, and to him, most refer the
original of Catholicus. Diverse of the Constantinopolitan Emperors were wont to
have, as part of their title Porphyrogenetes or Porphyrogenetus; for although
there be one of them known by the special name of Constantine Porphyrogenetus:
that is, he which held part of his Empire with Alexander, about DCCCC. X. and
was son to Leo VI. and whose admonitions of State, Constitutions, and Themata
are yet extant and published; yet plainly that was no name proper to him in
particular. For he himself calls other De administrando Romans Imp. cap. 45.
Filium item Romanum in libri titulo hoc nomine compellat.
(...). And Basilius his Nouels are yet extant, being before them the same
name. So Emanuel Comnenus in his inscription, to the Western Emperor Conrad
III. uses it. And, in the Bodleian Library at Oxford, is a Ms. written some L.
years since by a Cretan Scribe in Paris, a work of one John Camaterus about
Judiciary Astrology, with this insciption; (...) Quid sit (...) haut inter
doctos satis constat. Maximae sane dignitatis Officium fuisse liquet, and a
Magno Contostaulo secundu^: tametsi le cum eius ignotum tradit Georg. Codinus;
ad quem consulas Fr. Iuniu^. Sed Gregentij verba, Meursio citata, perpendas,
and Cancellarium fuisse forte non iniuria dixeris. Si de Loco testimonium
quaeris, adi Iuris Grae^o-Romani lib. 2. p. 184. v. Radeuic. de gest. Frederic.
1. lib. 1. cap. 47.
(...). Who this Camaterus was, or to what Emperor he wrote I confess I cannot
tell: but it appears he took this title so fit that, using only but the name
of Emperor besides, he thought it Tittle sufficient for his dedication. Yet you
must not take it as solely proper to the Emperors. To diverse of the nearer
blood imperial its found attributed. John Palaeologus, nephew to Andronicus,
first Emperor of that both name and family, is called Curopalat. de Offic.
Constant.
the son of Porphyrogenetes. So Constantius, son to Constantine Ducas has
it in the Lady Anna Comnena her Alexias. This Lady Anne was daughter to Alexius
Comnenus the Emperor, and wrote her fathers acts and affairs of War and
State, in the later and corrupted idiom of the Greeks. Her copies being very
corrupt and maimed. She is also in the title of her book styled Anna
Porphyrogennetes. Thomas, brother to their last Emperor Constantin surnamd
Dragasis, in a confirmation Turco-Graec. lib. 4. Ep. 50.
of a sale of lands, subscribes himself with it. More examples occur in
George Phranzes, and others. The reason of the name, learned men have mist. But
it is plain, in truth, that it comes from a Palace, built (as Luitprand. Hist.
1. cap. 2.
some say, by Constantine the Great) chiefly to this end, that there the
Empresses should be deliuerd and keep the solemnities of Childbirth. The Lady
Anne whom I rememberd shall justify it. She speaking of Robert Guiscards death
(he is always called, in her story, Rompert) and her fathers Triumph, wherein
he returned to Constantinople: says that there he found Irene the Empress,
her mother, in travel in a house anciently appointed for the Empresses
childbirth. (...) (says Alexiados l. 6.
she) (...), i. They call that house, from ancient time, Porphyra whence the
name of the Porphyrogeniti Latin in Porphyra geniti.
came into the world. With her herein, expressly agree Constantin Manasses,
and Luitprand; and a place in Anastasius touching Constantin VII. depriud of
his eyes by his ambitious mother Irene. Incluserunt cum (are the words) in domo
Pupurea, in qua and natus est. Hereto I doubt not but special allusion is in
that of a Greek Io. Euchaitens. in Hypomneum. (...).
Poet, although a Bishop, yet writing in a courtly form of Flattery, to Zoe,
Empress and wife to Coustantin Monomachus about M. L. of Christ: (...)
(...).
and so, Anna Comnena calls her self (...), for she was born in that Palace.
Briefly (...), or (...), in Purpura natus, i. born in the place so called are
all one, and assumd by such as were there born. Neither is any question to be
made of this reason of the name, although Pontanus (who for the Oriental story
has well deserud) still leaves it as a doubt; not understanding Nicetas Hist.
5. Tmemat. 6. Pontanus vero ad Phranz. l. 1. c. 6. de hac re dubitat, and
Uulcanius ad Themata Constantini quod miror. Diu vero est cum doctissimus
Cuiacius rem docte tetigerit Obseru. 6. cap. 9.
Choniates, where he speaks of the Empresses being near her time of delivery,
and adds that (...), (...). the Palace Porphyra was prepared to receive the
Birth. But Pontanus turns Porphyra by purpura, as if it were for Purple cloth,
in such a sense Claudian de Nupt. Honorij and Mariae.
as in that -- sic natus in Ostro
Paruus Honoriades genibus considat auitis.
which I the rather cite because out of it, the reason perhaps of the
imposition of that name on the Palace, may be had. If the Emperors issues at
the birth were received in Purple cloth (as it seems they were; others Ceion.
Posthum in Epistola apud Iul. Capitolin. in Clod. Albino Filius mihi natus est,
ita Candidus statim toto corpore, vt linteamen, quo exceptus est, vinceret.
children in other colors) what could be more proper in translation, then to
give the name of that special kind, wherein at the first instance of their
infancy, they were receiud, to the place appointed only for that receipt? And
howeuer it be supposd that the Phoenician Hercules first finding out the
pleasing color of Purple by the Dye of his Dogs mouth, that had bitten the
fish whence it is, gratified his Sweetheart with it; yet a tradition is among
the Grecians, that he presented it to the King of Phoenicia, who by edict
prohibited all but Mich. Glycas Annal. par. 2. cap. de Turris extructione.
himself to wear the color, whence the beginning of it as proper to Greatness
(our Scarlet g Iul. Pollux. Onomastic. 1. c. 3
being now its successor) is derived. In the Preface to Camaterus his
Astrology; (...).
Where in like sense as in the other testimonies, a compound is made of
Porphyra. The Princes, Dukes, or Kings of Moscouy were called, they say,
anciently white Kings, or white Princes. Credo autem (says Sigismund) vt
Persam nunc propter rubea tegumenta capitis Kissilpassa, id est rubeum caput
vocant: ita illos propter alba tegumenta, Albos appellari. But I remember
Muscouy is called Russia Alba, and Poland Russia Nigra; there may be the names
original. But Gaguin gives the reason, quod incolae omnium Regionum ipsius
imperio subiectarum, vestibus albis and pileis plerunque vtantur.

Prester-Iohn. By error so called. His true name, whence that is corrupted. The
Abassens whence. Their vulgar, and Chalde language. Belul Gian. Beldigian.
Iochabelul. How the names of Prestigian in the East Asia, turned into
Prester-Iohn, was applied to the Ethiopian Emperor. Prestigiani. The Ebrew
Epistle of Preti Ian to the Pope. The Ethiopique Emperors title. Cham or Chan.
Why the Eastern Emperors of Asia are so titled, the Turk, and others. Always
Victorious. Carachan and Gylas, two dignities. Car in Scythian, and Carpaluc.
Carderigan a Persian dignity, whence. Chanaranges. Chaianus, Chaganus,
Capcanus, whence. A conjecture upon Fr. W. de Rubruquis. Vlu Can very ancient
in the Tartarian or Sarmatique Empire. Canis in the Scaligeran family. The
Great Chans Seal and title of later time. The Mahumedan Caliphs. Bagded, not
Babylon. The division of the Chaliphat and end. The signification of Chaliph
and Naib. To whom Chaliph applied. To the Grand Signior in our days, and why.
A piece of an old French Letter from an Othomanique Chaliph. Seriph, Iariffe.
Sultan. The Turkish Salutations. Aphentis, and the Turks title. Amir. Amir
Elmumenin. Amermumnes, Miramolinus and such like corrupted in Story. The Turks
allow the Pentateuch, and the Evangelists; but say that we have seratcht
Mahumeds name out of them. Their letters dated with their Hegira, and the year
of Christ. The Azoars of the Alcoran. The solemn beginning of every Azoat, vsd
by them most superstitiously. An error of Georgeuitz. Our K. John would have
been a Mahumedan, and sent for the Alcoran. Padischach. Musulman. Caesar,
Augustus, Caesarea maiestas attributed to the Grand Signior. Hunggiar. Ismael
Sophi. The hate and difference twixt the Turkish and Persian Religion, whence.
Imamia and Leshari. The beginning and cause of the Persian title Sophi.
Kissilbassilar. Enissarlar. Persian Magi. The Magi, not Kings in Persia (Nor
those, in S. Matthew, Kings) but in contempt till Artaxerxes. (...). Elam.
Elamits. How the Persians might well be Magi, by the interpretation of their
first authors name. What Magus is. Ignorant Franciscans naild Friar Bacons
books to the desks. Shach, Schach, Shah, Sa, Xa, Shaugh, Cheque (all one) a
special attribute to Persian Greatness. What it is. An error in Bodin about the
title of Dominus under the Chaliphs. Gelal Eddin. Aladin. The large title of
Chosroes. The league twixt the last Rodulph and Achmet the present Sultan,
touching their Titles.

CHAP. V.
OVt of Europe we come into Afrique and Asia where also, the Grand Signior,
notwithstanding his Court and residence at Constantinople is fittest to be
placed. But first, of that Ethiopian Emperor or Prince of the Abyssins, which
is commonly titled Prester John, and, in Latin, Presbyter Ioannes, as if it
were Priest John. But, by testimony of Zaga Zabo an Ethiopian Ambassador to
the last Emanuel K. of Portugal, the name is corrupted from Precious Gian. For
his Ethiopique thus expresses it. (...)
(...) i. Gian Belul, quod sonat (says the translation published by Damian a
Goes) Ioannes Belul, hoc est Ioannes preciosus, sieve altus; Et in Chaldaica
lingua, Ioannes Encoe: id, si interpreteris, etiam Ioannis Preciosi sieve alti
significatum habet, so that Gian Belul is of their true Ethiopian tongue, which
they use in common speech, not that which is spoken and written in their
Liturgies and holy exercises, and known, among them, by the name of Chalde;
but, more specially, styled (...)
Giaein i. Liberty, quod nimirum (as the noble Scaliger yields the reason) ea
sola vterentur Arabes illi victores, qui Aethiopiam insiderunt. For he most
learnedly (as in all things else) deriues them thither from the Abasens in
Arabia, whence Sept. Seuerus had his denomination of Arabicus, as in one of his
Hub. Goltz. These. page 129.
Coins appears, inscribd with (...), of whom mention is made by Ap. Stephan.
(...). in (...).
Vranius, an old author of Arabique affairs, placing them in Arabia foelix,
which happily salues their deriuing themselves from Melech son to Solomon (as
they fable) by Zaga Zabo ap. Damian. a Goes.
Maqueda the Queen of the South. For, where v. Psalm. 72. Com. 10.
Saba is, were those Abassenes, whence the Latins have their Sabaei and Tura
Sabaea. Thus, me thinks, those things concur as it were to make up on both
sides that truth, at which learned men have been very purblind. And, by
likelihood how should they fitter have a special tongue for their writings and
holy ceremonies utterly differing from their vulgar, then by being transplanted
out of some other Nation, and bringing it thither with them? there being in it
also a mixture of Ebrew, Chalde, and Arabique; but it is, by them, called
Chalde, whereupon Zaga Zabo says that Helen one of their Empresses wrote two
books of Divinity in Chalde, and tells us furthermore that their Prince is not
properly styled Emperor of the Abassins but of the Ethiopians. The Arabians call
them Terra Hhabas, Ethiopia. Ben(...)min. Tudelens, Itinerar. page 101.
Elhabasen from the same reason, as we Abassins; but they are known to
themselves only by the name of Ithiopiawians. Of this Belul Gian, is made that
Beldigian, by which, Luis de Vretta a Spanish Friar says, they call their
Emperor. But Bodin notes in his margin to his 1. de Rep. cap. IX. that his
name is Iochabellul i. gemma pretiosa, as he says. I cannot but prefer the
testimony of Zaga Zabo an Ethiopian Priest, which in this could not deceive.
But plainly as the name of Presbyter Ioannes is idly applied to him, so it had
its cause upon another mistaking. For, in the trauails of such as first
discouerd to any purpose those Eastern States (as they were of later time) is
mention Pol. Venet, l. 1. cap. 51. and seq. Ioh. de Plano Carpini. c. 5. and
Will, de Rubruquis. Itinerar.
made of one Vncham or Vnchan a great Monarch in those parts where now the
Great Cham or Chan of Cathay has his Dominion; and him, they call Presbyter
Ioannes; and write that one Cinchis, whom they fained to have been begotten on
a poor widow by the Sun beams, as chosen King among the Tartars rebelling
against this Vncham, overcame him; and, from this Cinchis the Tartarian
Monarchy has its original. And some more particulars of it you have in the
life of S. Jews of France, written by De Ionuille, a noble Baron of France,
that was with him in the holy wars. He calls him in his French Prebstre
Iehan. This relation is of about M. C. XC. and has made the readers confound
the corrupted names of both Princes, twixt whom, too great distance was to have
the one deriud from the other. And some Aloys. Cadamust. Nauigat. cap. 60. and
Lud. Vartomann. Nauigat. 2. cap. 15. vide, si placet, Gerardi Mercatoris
Geographiam.
travelers into those parts, have expressly deliuerd them both as one. But
the Divine Scaliger teaches, that, the Asiatique Vncham and his predecessors
were called (...) Prestigiani, that is, in Persian, Apostolic, and so had the
name of Padescha Prestigiani, i. Apostolic King, because of his Religion
(being a Kind of Christian, as Beldigian is also) which, in Ethiopique-Chalde
must be expressed by Negush Chawariawi. Doubtless the community of sound twixt
Prestigiani, Presbyter, and Precious Gian was a great cause of this error,
which, until the Portugalls further acquaintance with the Ethiopians, always
possessed Europe. But I wonder how the learned Munster was so much in this matter
deceiud, that he supposes the Ebrew Epistle printed in his Cosmographie,
beginning (...) i. Ego Pristijuan, to be as sent from the Ethiopian Emperor;
especially since he took notice of both the Asiatique and African Prince abusd
in the name of Presbyter Ioannes. The Prestigians affirming in it, that Thomas
the Apostle was buried in his country, makes plain enough that it came from the
Eastern parts, if not counterfeited. The title likewise is much differing from
what the Beldigian uses I will only add one example out of Beldigian David
his Letters to Damian. a Goes.
Pope Clement VII. in Latin thus: In Nomine Dei etc. Has literas is ego Rex
mitto, cuius nomen Leones Venerantur and Dei gratia vocor Athani Tinghil (that
is, the Frankincense of the Virgin) Filius Regis David, filius Solemonis,
filius de manu Mariae, Filius Nau per carnem, filius Sanctorum Petri and Pauli
per gratiam, Pax sit tibi just Domine, etc. The like is in diverse Letters
thence to the Kings of Portugal. But, for that name of Cham in the Tartarian
Empire, it signifies Lord or Prince, and that Cinchis, or Cangius, Cingis, or
Tzingis (for by these names he is known) was called Cinchis Cham his son and
successor Hoccota Cham, or rather Chahan or Chan; although a Matthew. a Michow de
Sarmat. Asian. lib. 1. c. 8.
Polonian, which seemd to have much knowledge in that his neighboring country,
long since deliuerd thus: Imperator eorum (Tartarorum) Ir Tli Ki lingua
ipsorum, hoc est, liber homo dicitur. Dicitur and Vlu Cham quod sonat Magnus
Dominus, sieve Magnus Imperator. Vlu n. magnus, Cham vero Dominus and Imperator
est. Eundem aliqui magnum Dog. Imperator Canis dictus est, vbique Odorico in
Itinerario, and I. de Plano Carpini.
Canem dixerunt, and male interpretati sunt, quia Vlu Cham non significat
magnum Canem: Cham etenim cum aspiratione Dominum and Imperatorem: Et Came, sine
aspiratione, cruorem and nunquam canem sermon Tartarorum designat. For the
translation of Haithon Ar^^ floruit Monachus sub A. 1290. C^r^h^nus item
dictus, and Antonius.
Haithon the Armenian out of French into Latin by Salconi, A. M. CCC. VII.
has usually Can not Cham. And the Turkish, which is but Tartarian, interprets
Prince by Chan, not Cham; and Chanoglan, with them, is the Son of the Prince
or Lord. Yet in Chambalu i. the Court of the Tartar, the m is well permitted,
because of pronunciation. The Turks also call this Emperor Vlu Chan in the same
signification as a Michow has written, neither do their Grand Signiors abstain
from this title of Chan. Amurad or Morad the III. vsd it ordinarily thus:
Sultan Murad Chan bin Sultan Selim Chan elmuzaferu daima i. Lord Murath Prince,
son to Lord Selim Prince, always Victorious. Where note, with Pandect.
Turcic. cap. 3. and hist. Musulmanic. 2.
Leunclaw, the agreement of their Always victorious with semper Augustus,
semper innictus. In their Ottomanique line is one Carachan (Kara Han in R.
Zaccuth) son of Cutlugeck, which had hence, that last part of his name. And
in those great Epist. Petr. Arch. Russiae ap. Matthew. Paris page 875.
irruptions of the Tartars, about the beginning of the Othomanique Empire,
occur the names of Great Princes, Tartar Chan, Thesyr Chan, Chuis Chan, and
such more. But amongst them diverse are m^^printed with Than for Chan, and one
is called Chiarthan, which I doubt not but should be Chiar or Car Chan. So in
Friossart, you have Lamorabaquin, plainly for Almurath Chan, and, in De
Ionuille, Barbaquan Verum and Aggeres Militares, idiomate illo Opientali,
Barbicanae dictae (vnde forsan illud nomen.) Albert Aquens. hist. Hicrosolym.
6. cap. 10.
Emperor of Persia, whose last termination is perhaps this Chan. Constantin De
administ. Romans Imper. cap. 40.
Porphyrogenetus speaking of some Turks which anciently planted themselves in
the Eastern part of Europe, ^^ies, that over them as Judges were two Princes
called Gylas and Carchan. But, says he, Gylas and Carchan are not (...) i. not
proper names, but Dignities. What Gylas is, I confess, I have not yet learnd,
but my author affirms that it is (...) i. greater then Carchan. Unless perhaps
in bold deriuation it might be fetched from the Turkish word Giul est Rosa
Turcice. Megiser. Lexic. Turcico-Latin.
Guzel i. Fair. For why might not one guess, that Gylas may com from some such
an etymon seeing that Carchan is Cara-chan i. Black Prince or Lord in that
language, as all agree. Fair, as well as Black might denominat. Yet, of it, I
dare put no assertion. There was a large Territory whence those Turks came,
called Will. de Rubruq. in Itinerario.
Cara-Cathay i. Black Cathay. But I cannot, out of that, see reason for the
name of Cara-Chan. Why might not it interpret praefectus Vrbis? a place of high
note in the old Roman State. For in that Sarmatian or Scythian (mixed with
Turkish) language which held largest Territories in Asia, Car, or Carm (as, in
our British, Caer, and in Ebrew Kiriath) signified a City, if you beleeu the
testimony of a later Io. Tzetzes Chiliad 8. cap. 224. floruit sub Eman. Comneno
circa 1170.
Grecian, telling us that Maeotis (the now Mar delle Zabache) is called in
Scythian, Carpaluc i. the City of Fishes, and thus expressing it in his
Politic verse: (...)
i. Karm, in Scythian, is a City, and Palue, Fishes. Indeed the Turks at this
day call a City Scheher, which is near Car. But, this conceit hardly holds.
You know Pliny Hist. Not. 6. cap. 7.
teaches that the Scythians called it, Temerinda, quod significat (says he)
matrem Maris; and at this day the Turks name the Mare Maggiore (the old Pontus
Euxinus) next to the Mare delle Zabache, Caradinizi i. the black Sea, which
perhaps, being so in Tzetzes his time, may help justify the name of Carpaluc,
in or near Delle Zabach. But in these and the like, till I can truly instruct
my self, I remain a Sceptique. Howsoever, that name of Carchan was of great
dignity also, but not supreme among the Persians. For I imagine their title of
Carderiga corrupted (as it falls out) in our Western idioms, to be the same.
Cardarigas (says an Landulph. Sagax Hist. 17.
ancient) non est nomen Proprium, sed Dignitas maxima apud Persas, speaking of
the self same, which Theophilact Simocatta (he liud under Heraclius A. DC.
XXX.) names (...) Cardarigan. (...) (says Maurician. hist. (...). cap. (...).
he) (...). i. This is a dignity of the Parthians (you may with him here
confound Parthians and Persians.) And the Persians love to be called by their
Dignities, in some sort disdaining those names imposd on them at their Births.
He uses Cardarigan in the first case, which is near Charchan, and perhaps ill
turned into Chardarigas by the Jesuit Pontan. I guess the self same to be that
Official Dignity of Chanaranges, rememberd in De bello Persic. (...).
Procopius; and the Armenian that was in the Roman Camp under Narses,
Justinians Lieutenant, called Agathias hist. Tom. (...). and (...).
(...) Chanaranges, may well be supposd to have had that name only according
to Simocatta's relation of the Persian custom: And what is (Zamergan (...) or
(...)) that greatest Prince of the Hunns in Justinians time but Zamer or Zaber
Chan? Plainly Chaganus or Chaianus occurring in Simocatta, Landulphus Sagax,
Cedren, Callistus, and others, is nothing but Chan. So is that Princeps
Hunnorum Capcanus in the life of Monach. Engolism. vit. Carol. Magni.
Charlemain. But I wonder at that in Friar William de Rubruiquis, where he
says, Can nomen dignitatis, quod idem est qui Diuinator. Omnes Diuinatores
vocant Can. Vnde Principes dicuntur Can quia penes eos spectat regimen populi
per Diuinationem. Unless you read Dominatores and Dominationem, I understand
not why he says so. He was in those parts A. Chr. M. CC, LIII. But
questionles, Cedren well knew the signification of Chan in writing, that the
Emperor Theophilus (...) Georg. Cedren. page 433.
(...) 1. receiud an Embassage from the Chagan or Chan of Chazaria: as if he
had said the King or Prince of Chazaria. This Chazaria or Gazaria, is that
which the ancients call Taurica Chersonesus, almost inisled by the Seas Delle
Zabache and Maggiore. For the Asiatique Sarmatians or Scythians which Simocat.
Mauric. hist. 7. cap. 8. and Agathias. lib. 5.
anciently under Justinian planted themselves about the River Donaw, and in
this Chersonesse, called their Prince, as in their own country language, a King
or Lord was styled. And Chersonesus Taurica hodieque (says Leunclaw) habet
suos Chahanes. The word is rather Tartarian, then Slauonique, although, I see,
great men say it is Windish, that is, Slauonique. But those tongues are much
mixed, doubtless with each other. Those ancient Tartars, and the Northern
Scythians by them, in that large Tract from the East of Asia even to the River
Don (anciently called Tanais) had long before the Tartarian Empire of Tzingis,
their Emperors honored with that title of Vlu Chan, which perhaps is but
corrupted in him they call Vmchan. For above M. years since, one of most large
territory in those parts, thus inscribes his letters to Maurice the Roman
Emperor. (...). i. To the Emperor of the Romans the Vlu Chan (or Great Chan)
Lord of seven Nations and Ruler of the seven Climats of the World. So my author
Theophil. Simocat. hist. (...).
expresses it in Greek, but by all likelihood the original called him, as they
do now the Emperor there, Vlu Chan. In the Scaligeran family or De la Scala,
deriud from the house of Verona (being by original Gotthique) one of the line
is called Canis, which, they say, had from Ios. Scalig. de vita Iulij, in Epist.
ad Ian. Douzam.
this word vsd in Slauonique its beginning. In the Great Chans Seal (as Friar
John de Plano Carpini, that was sent Ambassador into those parts by P P.
Innocent IV. in M. CC. XLVI. affirms) was written this interpreted. Deus in
Caelo and Cuine Cham super Terram; Dei Fortitudo. Omnium Hominum Imperatoris
sigillum. And his Ap. Vincent. in Epecul. lib. 32. cap. 28.
title was usually Dei Fortitudo, omnium hominum Imperator. And Simocatta
remembers more anciently a Prince of those parts which they v sed to call Et
Nicephor. Callist. hist. Ecclesiast. lib. 18. cap. 30.
Taisan, that is (take it upon his credit) the son of God. In Turkish or
Tartarian, I think Tangeroglan is the same. But of Cham, Chan, or Chahan thus
much. Diverse of the titles vsd in the Northern Afrique, and under the Grand
Signior, are the same; the Princes there being either out of one root and
nation, or, at least deriuing themselves so. In the beginning of the Mahumedan
Empire in Bagded and Damascus, Mahumed's successors were called Chaliphs. This
Bagded is not Babylon (as many erroniosly think) but the old Geograph. Arabs
ap. Scalig. Can Isagog. lib. 3. and Plin. lib. 5. cap. 26.
Seleucia seated near the confluence of Euphrates and Tygris, new built by
Abugepher Almantzor Chaliph there, about DCC. LX. after our Saviors birth;
and, by the Doctrine of Triangles, if Ptolemy deliver their Longituds and
Latituds right, making Babylon Longitud LXXIX. Latitud XXXV. and Seleucia Long.
LXXIX, Scrup. XX. Lat. XXXV. Scrup. XL. then is the old Babylon and this Bagded
distant about XLIV. English miles; if you put nee^e LX. of our miles to every
Degree of Latitude. But Benjamin Ben-Iona, who saw and obserud them both, says
they are distant but XXX. miles. Whilst the Chaliphat remaind undivided, this
was the suprem and sole title of him which as successor to Mahumed, had
Dominion over Syria, Assyria, Arabia, Egypt, Afrique and Persia; Afterward
about the year of Christ DCCC. LXVIII. Syria and Egypt was taken from the
Chaliph of Bagded, by Abrah. Zaccuth in Chronic. Caeterum de primo Apud
Aegyptios Chalipha Consule^dus Will. Arch. Tyrius Hist. Ecctes. 19. cap. 19.
and 20. and Jacob. de Vitriaco lib. 1. cap. 8.
Achmad Ben-Tolon, assuming to himself the dignity of Caliph of Egypt, The
chief Caliph's Amirs also and Lieutenants, constituted in Africa, reuolting
took the Name: and those which in Spain about Justinian. Rhinotmetus his time,
planted themselves, as it seems, likewise. Between M. CC. XL. and IX. The
Caliphat in Bagded and Egypt ended. That of Bagded ended in Musthaitzem, when
those numerous Theophan. ap. Constant. Porphyrog. cap. 21.
armies of Tartars (out of whom the Turks are) ouerran most part of Asia. And
the Mamaluchs (that is, a kind of Equestris Ordo, or Military Tenants or
servants of State; as the Ianizaries in Turkey or the Timariots.) got the
supremacy in Egypt. An old Monk speaking of the Tartars Matthew. Paris page 1278.
victories over the Saracens, Arabians, and the rest of Asia under the
Caliphat, says factique sunt eisdem Tartaris multitudo Gentium in Tributum,
Soldani videlicet, Admirabiles, and Principes, etiam Caliphi. Where he
comprehends three of their special titles (although somewhat mistaking in one)
and therefore the rather I added his words. But the meaning of this of Caliph
is, out of its interpretation, Successor or Vicar, although Megiser in his
Turcico-Latin Dictionary, turns it Princeps. Chalipha (says the Canon. Isagg.
lib. 3.
great Scaliger) est Vicarius, and ita vocari Vicarios Praefecti Praetorij
nihil impediret, si quidem Arabice appellandi essent. Sed quum Naib idem sit
quod Chalipha tamen Pontifices soli dicti sunt Chaliphae, Legati autem and vice
Principum Prouincias regentes vocantur Naibin, vt Naib Essam, Legatus Syriae.
And, hoc nomine (says Benjamin Ben-Iona, who, during the Chaliphat at Bagded,
was there) Caeteris omnibus Ismaelitis Regibus (so Arias translates him)
suspiciendus venerabilisque habetur: Praeest n. omnibus illis vt summus quidam
omninum Pontifex. The name then as it signified successor, in supremacy was
proper to the Sultan or chief Emperor, and as it respected Mahumed; withal it
was communicated, it seems, to subjects, that were Mahumeds Priests. For in
Cantacuzen's orations against the Alcoran, he speaks of one of their Doctors,
which being dead was found with a Crucifix about him, by reason whereof the
Mahumedans would not bury him where they used to lay (...) i. their Chaliphs,
and said that the Doctor was (...) i. a Caliph by dignity, which I interpret a
Priest or Vicar among them. But perhaps Cantacuzen means the Caliph of the
Egyptian State, under the Mameluchs (for that was in his time) which indeed
should by right have had the Sultans place, but at the inauguration of a new
Sultan the Chaliphs among them vsd for fashions sake to make a solemn and
imaginary sale or resignation of the Chaliphat (that is the true right of
being Emperor) to that Sultan, who of the Mameluchs, or by their authority was
to succeed. By Legate. Babylonicae lib. 3.
Peter Martyr its thus expressed: A summo eorum Pontifice Mammetes confirmatur.
Habent n. and ipsi snmmum Pontificem, ad quem huius imperij machina, si
Aegyptij homines essent, pertineret, (for the Mameluchs were originally
Christians Apostataes; first taken up as the Ianizaries) Ius suum, vt caeteri
consueuere, Mammeti Cairi Regiam tenenti, M. Pounds in our money.
trium millium auri drachmarum pretio Pontifex vendidit. Is CALIFFAS dicitur. E
tribunali, Soldano stanti pedibus, vitae necisque liberam potestatem praestat.
Ipse descendit seipsum spoliat, Soldanum Imperaturum induit: abit priuatus,
permanet in imperio Mammetes. He speaks of the inauguration of one of their
Sultans, Mahomet or Mahumed whom he calls Mammetes. Yet the Chaliph there
retaind his name still, and continued afterward as high Priest to the Sultan.
For Martin a Baumgarten speaking of the presence of their Sultan, and stately
attendance of XX. M. Mameluchs, says that not far from the Sultan or Sultan,
sedebat loco depressiore Papa eius, quem ipsi CALIPHA Nominant. And among the
Persians at this day some inferior Cartwright. Peregrinat.
Priests are called Caliphs, subject to their great Mustadeini. And to one of
them the inauguration of the Sophi (heretofore in Cafe, now in Casbin or
Hispaan) belongs, as among the Mameluchs it did to the Egyptian Sultan. And a
like form of an imaginary Caliphat at Bagded since the Tartarian state began,
as that of Egypt or Cair was, is reported by Writers Pandect. Turcic. cap. 237.
of those parts. Yet both in regard of the Spiritual succession (if that word
may be allowd among those wicked impostures) as well as of the Temporal, the
supreme Sultans bare it, whereupon Roderic. Toletan. lib 7. cap. 10. Matthew.
Paris page 170. Robert. Monachus. Hist. Hierosolym. 6. alij.
old Writers interpret Chalipha by Papa expressly, knowing they had both
challenged the title of Supreme Vicar. And the Persian Sophi also has as Vicar
or successor to Ali the disposition of all his Churchmen, as if he himself were
ecclesiastical. And anciently the Caliph of Bagded is Seig. de Ionuille
Chroniq. de S. Loys, chapit. 74.
styled L'Apostole des Sarrazins. And, although the Othomanique be not of
Mahumed but mere Turkish, yet the Sultans of it have used the title of Caliph;
so expressly affirms Leunclaw of Amurad III. whose Letters to Rodulph 11. he
had seen contain it, and Osmanicis (says he, using that word for the
Othomaniques) persuasum est principem suum esse Caliphen huius seculi. It was
discontinued in the two Selguccian Hist. Musuluanic. 1.
Families, but by the Oguzian, whence the present Othomanique is, renewd; and
used, and in the very infancy of their rule was affected by them. Its
justified by this imperfect title of Orchan Giazi (son to the first Othoman)
his Letters to the States of the Adam Myrimuth. Chronic. Angl. Ms.
Saracens in Afrique and Spain, for their innasion of the Christian Spain,
written about M. CCC. XL. and translated by a Captive Saracen into Latin, and
thence into Spanish, and afterward into French, and sent in certain Letters of
State intelligence to our K. Edward III. I will not alter a letter otherwise
then my Ms. author directs me. De moy GOLDIFA, un ley EXERIF, SAVDAN, seignior
sages fort and puissant Seignior de la mesen de Mek du seint hautesse and en la
sue saint virtue fesant Justices hauts and basses, constreignant sur toux
constreignants, seignior du Railm di Turkey and de Percye, retenour des terres
de Hermenye, seignior de la (...)
Dobble and de les dobbles de la mere meruailouse, per ceinor de les febles ore
auutz en laseint ley Mahomet, seignior de la fort espee de Elias and de David
que tua -- my book instructs me no further, but is here torn. But without
doubt, that Goldifa is but Chalipha. How easily the difference comes, any man
may see. I have faithfully transcribd it, but confess, I understand not all
the words in it. The matter is apparent. The word Chaliph is deriud into
Arabique from the Ebrew (...) which, with difference of dialect is the same in
Syriaque, and properly signifies vice or (...). For, where in S. Matthew cap.
11. it is rememberd that Archelaus reigned (...) i. in stead of Herod, the
Syriaque has (...) Chealaph Herodes. In Arabisme it is (...) Chaliph i. (says
Raphalengius) Successor, Vicarius. Imperator. And the Persian Sophi has vsd
this title. The first, Schach Ismael, on one side of his Coins had stamped
Ismael Caliph Millah i. Ismael the successor or Vicar of God. Why in those
letters, he is called Un ley exarif, I wholly conceive not. But plainly that of
Exarif is the title of Xeriph or Sheriph, which is sometimes put in their
styles. Notum (says the painful and learned Pandect. cap. 3.
Leunclaw) quanto sint apud Mahumetanos in honor qui recta linea tam a
Propheta Mahumete, quod ab Ali Mahumetis genero, descendunt, aut se fingunt
descendere. Hi Turcis Tartarisque SEITHI vulgo dicuntur, Arabibus autem
SERIPHAE: quos maxima sane veneratione atque obseruantia quum prosequantur,
etiam ipsi Sultani SERIPHARVM Idem est quod Iariffe in Litt. Imperatoris
Maroci, Hispanice editis ab Hackluito Tom. 2. part. 2. page 118. and 119.
adpellatione velut Augustiores se reddere volunt. The word interprets High or
Noble. The late published Lexicon thus: (...) Sheriphun. Celsus, llustris,
inclytus, nobilis, Augustus. But, to make Seriph equivalent in analogy with
Syncellus, which was the next degree in Constantinople to the Patriarch, and to
have like regard to Chaliph (as some have done) is but, I think a piece of
Grecian vanity. The name Saudan is there, what elsewhere is often Sultan, but
should be prorounced Sultan. And the Grand Signior is sometimes styled Sultan
Olem i. Lord of the World. But Sultan is usually in his style, and signifies
only Dominus most properly. (...) in Eccles. cap. 8. com. 4 est potentia, sieve
Dominiu^ a (...) i. Dominari. and Com. 8. (...) Potens, sieve Dominus.
(...) Sultan i. Rector or Dominus. And, as in Rome, the Salutations were by
Domine, so in Turkey they say Sellam aleich Sultanu i. Peace be to you Sir, as
Georgiuitz delivers. The word occurres in Writers both Greek and Latin of
later times, very often. The Latins have it Saladinus sometimes. In Letters from
Selim the II. to the state of Venice, sent about M. D. LXX. of Christ, and
written in most barbarous Crus. Turco-Graec. lib. 4. Epist. 60.
Greek, thus is he styled: (...) with a large reckoning up of Provinces and
Dominions, (...). i. Sultan Selim Prince of Constantinople, New Rome etc. Lord
and King of what is comprehended in our sight under the Sun. That Aphentes is
but a corrupted word from (...), which the later Grecians call (...) i. a Lord
or such like; their custom being usual in proper names and diverse other words,
to make the termination in (...). In Letters lately sent from Achmet the now
Grand Signior, to the States of the Low Countries, he is only styled Sultan
Achmet Cham; as the English Copy speaks, and in their Coins the attribute of
Honor is Sultan only. But most commonly their Titles were wont to be exceeding
copious of attributes, with which or the like they now use to ouer-load those
Princes to whom they write; whereof in the end of this Chapter, more. To Selim
the first his statue, in his son Solymans Bedchamber was added Lonicer.
Chronic. Tom. 1. lib. 1.
an inscription, thus expressed in Latin, Soldanus Selimus Ottomanus, Rex Regum,
Dominus Omnium Dominorum, Princeps omnium Principum, Filius and Nepos Dei. But
Sultan is not proper solely to the Grand Signior. As most of the other names,
and the like in other States, it is communicated. He styles himself sometime
Amir also, i. a Lord or Prince. In Arabisme (...). I know this is often given
most anciently to Chaliphs and Lieutenants, and such like, and is at this day
to others. Of Vide supra page 49. Et cap. vlt. lib. secundi.
Amirs more anon. But it being put with the maiestique addition of Great, only
signifies the Grand Signior. A Persian and a Mahumedan, Sampsat. Sphach.
Musulman. Epist. ad Melet. Monachum.
living near the beginning of the Ottomanique Empire, calls all Turkey i. The
Country of the Great Amir.
(...). And (...) alone is found in the Lady Anne her Alexias, Phranzes and
such more; and Cedren, speaking of Abubachar the first successor of Mahumed,
says that (...) i. He was Amir 11. years and a half, and then died. At this
name, Matthew Paris ghest in his Admirabiles, other in their Admiralli,
Ammiralli, and the like, which the autors of the holy wars are full of, and
Admiraulx, as De Ionuille always calls them. But the most ancient and proper
title they vsd is with addition thus: Amir-elmumunin i. Rex Orthodoxorum, or
Fidelium, which the Arabique thus expresses: (...), in the same sound and
sense. And Mahumed in the Alcoran is often called the chief of the Believers.
And where Benjamin Ben-Iona speaks of the Chaliph of Bagded, whom he calls Amir
Almumanin Alghabassi, it must be understood that none of all that was his
proper name. And that of Alghabassi ((...)) is only one of the Abassilar
Family, which is famous among the Chaliphs. Therefore, under favor, Arias his
interpretation of Alghabassi was little to the purpose, or rather against the
Autors purpose. An old Writer Rigord. in vit. Philipp. Augusti. idem Iacobus de
Vitriaco lib. 1. cap. 9. and Marin. Sanut Tors. lib. 3. part. 3. cap. 5. qui
tamen vtrique hoc Chaliphis Africanis maxim Tribuu^t.
of France long since well interpreted it. Hemiromomelin (says he) i. Rex
Credentium. But the same author not long after in the self same Treatise is
much to blame, when he writes, Rex quidam Saracenus, qui dicebatur Mumilinus,
quod, lingua eorum, sonat Rex Regum. For plainly Mumilinus was but corrupted
from this we speak of, as also Amiromomenius which often occurres in Roderique
of Toledo his Spanish story, and the like other ancients of the Holy War.
This the middle Grecians call (...) (for so is it nearest the right) although
sometimes its in the self same author, (...). Lately (says Ap. Constant.
Porphyrog. de adm. Romans imp. cap. 25.
Theophanes a Chronologer of middle times in Greece) the Amir of Persia or
Chorasan became an absolute Prince, by reason of the declining state of the
Amermumnes of Bagded (whose Lieuetenant he had been) (...). i. and called
himself Amermoumnes, and wore the Alcoran about his neck with little plates (so
I interpret it) like a chain, and supposd himself descended from ALEM. Where
note that all the Mahumedan Princes reuolting from the Sea of the first and
chief Chaliphat which was at Bagded, refer themselves to Alem or Ali Mahumeds
son in law. So did those in Egypt, and Afrique: where, they were called
Phatemits from Phateme, Mahumeds daughter married to Alem. And this hanging the
Alcoran about his neck, was a very Emblem of his assumed name; the Orthodoxall
religion of them (if among them any religion may be said to be) having its
chief root in the Alcoran, although beside they respect the Peutateuch, which
they call The writings of Moses. Vide Iac. de Vitriaco li. 1. cap. 6. and
Oliver. Scholastic. de Captione Damiatae.
Mussalkittabi, (out of which diverse relations, but most absurdly connext, are
inserted in their Alcoran) and the new Testament also; affirming that our
Savior was a great Prophet, and that he promisd in it to send his Prophet
Mahumed (O blasphemy!) but the Christians (the Gaurlar in their language)
(...), as my author Cantacuzen. Apolog. (...). 4. Sampsat. Pers. in Epist.
Meletio. and Alcoran. Azoar. 71.
says, i. in spite have taken that out of the Gospel, wherein they, say b
Doctr. Machumet.
Mahumeds name was once written, as likewise on the right hand of the Throne of
the Almighty. But there, they say he is called Achmet, and in Paradise
Abualtrazim, and on earth only Mahumed. And in their Dates, sometimes they use
the year of Jesus, as they call it, as well as of their Hegir est (...), sieve
persecutio, atque in hac re dictum, quasi religionis gratia fugisset Mahumed.
Hegira i. Mahumed's flight out of Mecha in DCXXII. of our Savior. So I have
seen letters to the late Queen Elizabeth of most happy memory, dated DCCCC.
XCVIII, of Mahumed, and M. D. X C. of Jesus. And in a letter in Italian from
the Sultan Anurad's chief wife to Q. Elizabeth, the Ap. Hackluit. part. 2. page
311.
year of M. 11. Del Propheta i. of Mahumed, and di Jesus M. D. XCIV. So in the
Waser. de Antiq. Nummis. lib. 2.
League twixt Rodulph II. and Amurad III. Remember, they use Lunar years, as
the old Arabians did, and that their Epoch is in July, otherwise you may doubt
of the concurrence of those numbers. And the Almumens, that is true Mahumedans
are (beside their general profession) so superstitiously addicted to that
foppish volume (the Alcoran) that in every action almost they undertake of
great or slight nature, they use the formal beginning of the Suareths or
Azoars i. the chapters of it. Of those Azoars, are in their books CXIV. only;
the translations amongst us, being divided into CXXIV. but, after the VI.
(which is in the Latin the XVI.) agreeing in that point, with the Original.
Every of those Azoars begin with Besemi Allahi alrrhehmeni alrrhehimi i. In
nomine Arab. vero qui Christo nomen dederunt, libros suos a Nomine Dei Patris,
Filij and S. S. semper auspicantur. Vti Manuscrip ti codices veterum
Monachorum, Assit Principio Sancta Maria meo, plerumque front gerunt.
Dei Misericordis Miserantis, which they solemnly speak. And the King of
Morrocco puts it in the beginning of his letters most commonly, as those
examples which I have seen, justify. In omni operis principio (says
Georgiuitz in the person of a Turkish Mahumedan) vbique vtimur nos Musulmani
istis By sem n. in numero omittitur, vt quod ad contextum solummodo adhibetur.
tribus verbis; Cum assedimus mensae vt edamus haec praemittimus verba: cum
abluimus manus, euntes ad orationem, and caetera membra corporis. Insuper
peracta lotione ter repetendo haec tria verba, aqua aspergimus capita, dicendo
By sem Allahe elrahmane Elraoahim. Georgeuitz so expresses it, and makes the
last word signify spiritus eorum, wherein he was much deceived, although
indeed Raohaim might in our characters and pronunciation be understood so, and
the Arabique in this passage might endure to have it so by us written. But in
the Original, its apparent, no such construction can be. For the titles of the
Azoars, which I saw first in a most neat and anciently written Alcoran,
remaining in that famous Bodleian Library in Oxford, are thus in Arabisme (...)
where any man which has tasted these kind of Letters, may see that the last
word has a Radical (Mim) which is not in Ruach, signifying a Spirit. The
three words have over the Aliphs their point Vashlu, which some Arabians
superstitiously observe, as a token denoting that so many words concurring as
have that point, are to be pronounced with one breath, which, they say, must
be don although a man stifle himself about it. But this, by the way. This
Amerelmumenin is plainly interpreted in that of the Tartar Haoloh (so some call
him) to the last Chaliph in Bagded, rememberd by Haithon the Armenian. Tunc
dixit Haolonus Calipho: Tu diceris Doctor Omnium Credentium, in falsa secta
Mahumeti. One of our Matthew. Paris in page 324. A. M. cc. XIII. Reg. Ioh. XVI.
Monks calls the King of Marocco, and those parts, Admiralius Murmelius,
stumbling at his name. It may be not unpleasing to read the whole place where
it is. Misit ergo nuncios (he means our K. John) secretissimos cum festinatione
summa, videlicet Thomam Herdintonum, and Radulphum filium Nicolai milites, and
Robertum de Londino Clericum ad Admira ium Murmelium, Regem magnum Africae,
Marrochiae, and Hispaniae quem vulgus Miramomelinum vocat (it was the better
word of the two) significans eidem quod se and regnum suum libenter redderet
eidem and dederet, and deditum tencret ab ipso si placeret ei, sub tributo.
Necnon and legem Christianam quam vanam censuit, relinquens, legi Mahometi
fideliter adhaereret. A strange design! but the Amir there told the
Ambassadors, that he lately had been reading S. Paul's Epistles, where he
found many things which likt him; only this, he much dislikt S. Paul, for that
he followd not that Religion under which he was born. And of that also in K.
John's request, he took a very ill conceit, affirming that if he had been
without a religion, of all other he would soonest have embraced Christianity,
but that every man should live in that Law and Religion under which he was
born. And so discharged them. To this day the successors of that Emperor in
Fesse and Marocco keep the addition of Amirelmumenin, as the Divine Canon.
Isagogic. lib. 3.
Scaliger, who was wont to interpret their Letters to the United Provinces,
instructs us; which is also to be seen in some of Mully Hamets Letters,
translated into Spanish, and Ha^kluit Tom. 2. part. 2. page 118.
published. The Grand Signior rather has in later Barth. Georgouitz. cap. 3.
times used the title of Padischah Musulmin i. Great King of the Musulmans.
Padischah is, in Turkish and Persian, great King; and they call the German
Emperor Urum Padischah, the French King Frank Padischah. Quare (says my author)
non attribuitur inferioris conditionis Magnatibus nisi Imperatoribus and
Regibus. A professor of Turkish, turns Musulman by circumcisus. But the word is
plainly Arabique (...) Musulmin, plurally, i. (as Mumenin) Orthodoxi, Fideles,
or qui sincere credunt, as the learned Raphalengius interprets it. Hence is it
made singular in Musulmanus and (...): often occuring, specially in Sphachanes
the Persian, and the Emperor Cantacuzen's works; whence they have their Verb
(...) i. to turn Turk or prosesse that Religion. The Amurad so titled himself
in Letters to the King of Poland, and so have I seen him written in Letters to
our Q. Elizabeth. But the greatest attribute which they vsd since the taking of
Constantinople (thereby having seated themselves in an Empire of greater note
then worth in the later times) is Huncher, Hunchier, or Condichiar ap.
Spanduginum.
Hunggiar, as Leunclaw writes it; Id proprie (says he) titulo nostrorum
Augustorum respondere volunt, quo se imperatores Caesares appellant. And there
have been letters sent from this Lit. Elizab. Reg. Dat. 1579. apud Hackluit.
part. 2. page 138. Et saepius Caesarea Maiestas nostra occurrit in Foedere icto
inter Dn. Elizab. R. and Turcarum Imperatorem, quod videsis apud eundem page
141. 94. v. page 158. and in Literis Mustaphae Chausij, Amurades dicitur
Augustiss(...) mu Caesar. page 171.
State in Latin, calling the Grand Signior (Amurad III.) Augustissime and
inuictissime Caesar. Which his own country men by their Interpreters have also
given him. And in Sinan Bassa's Letters to Q. Elizabeth of happy memory,
Caesarea Celsitudo is often for Sultan Amurad. The first that vsd this Hunggiar
was Mahumed II. which took Constantinople; and, after him, his son Baiazeth
and Selim imitated him. Whereupon, says my author, Ismael Schah the Persian
Sophi, both in dishonor of the Grand Signiors, as also to vpbraid their
superstitious abstinence from Swines flesh (for that Jewish ceremony was wont
to be of so great moment and regard amongst them, that, when they took a solemn
oath for confirmation of any league or the like; to the two execrations, first
that they might be as much dishonord as he that for his sins goes in pilgrimage
to Mahumed, bare-headed, secondly as he that had cast off his wife, and taken
her again, they added this third, that if they stood not to the Covenants of
State, ilz fussent dishonorez and deshontez, come le Sarazin que mange le chair
de Pourceau, as De Ionuille that was amongst them with S. Jews, speaks)
Ismael, says he, for that reason was wont to keep a very fat Hog and still
call him by the name of that Turk which then reigned, thus: Hunggiar Baiazeth,
or Hunggiar Selim. This Ismael was the first Persian King, that bare the now
famous name of SOPHI. And its origiginall thus take. Besides the four
associats of Mahumed (Abubaker, Omer, Othman, and Ali) which presently after
him were the propagators of his sensles traditions, there are other ancient
Doctors forsooth of that Church (they call them Imamlar) as Cantacuzeno sunt
alia nomina, little qui Mahumedis Doctrina^ dilatarunt, atque vti P^tres aut
summ^ Doctores praefuerunt Orat. (...).
Ebuhanifem, Imam Malichim, Imam Schoaffim, Imam Achmet, and others; all which
four the Persians deadly hate, nor admit they of their doctrine. Neither will
they allow of any traditions from Abubaker, Omer, or Othman; they are
altogether for Ali, to whom, they say, the Angel Gabriel should have given the
Alcoran, but by error, in stead of him he took it to Mahomet, and that Ali
should have been the general Chaliph, but that the other three, by aid from
some which ill bare themselves in that holy state, cosend him of it. A
controversy worth examining! Not a book or monument of the doctrine of either
of those three, but when they find it, they burn it. This Sect from Ali was
deduced into Persiae by the doctrine of one Schach Sophi, who deriud himself
from Ali, and liud about M. CCC. LXX. But an African Lib. Elfacni. ap. Leon.
Afric. hist. 3. Atqui memineris hic quae habet Will. Tyrius hist. Hierosol.
lib. 1. cap. 4. and lib. 19. cap. 20. de Sunni and Schia (vt impressi Codices
loquuntur) atque eum insuper de Ali consulas, quin and Ionuillanum in Vit. S.
Ludouici cap. 30. and 57. and mira sane est inter Scriptores de hoc
pseudopropheta, ac de eius sequacibus discrepantia. quam hic occuratius
euncleare non est operae pretium.
expressly affirms that in Mahumedisme were anciently LXXII. Sects, and now
but two; that is, the Persian, which he calls Imamia (namd from the doctrine,
it seems, deliuerd by Imamlar i. Priests or Doctors, and Ali was specially namd
Imam) and Leshari which those of Afrique, Turkey, Egypt, Spain and Arabia
follow. What his Leshari is, I know not, unless those which follow Aser Ben
Cheter (of whom Cantacuzen speaks, as of one of their special ancient Doctors)
be thereby understood But all of that Alian Sect are so hated by the
Othomaniques, rhat their Turkish Muftis (that is their Patriarchs or
Archbishops) have deliuerd, that its more meritorious, in Mahumedisme, to kill
one Persian then threescore and ten Christians. From that Schach Sophi through
diverse descents came one Haidar (Prince of Erdebill) living about M. D. of the
only Savior, and taught his ancestors new dogmaticalls, showing withal the
Othomanique heresies. Upon the new doctrine (as it happens) great conflux was
to the new Doctor, who grew so far into opinion, which creats greatness, that
Vsun Chasan then King of Persia, gave him in marriage his daughter Martha,
descended out of the Greek house of the Commnens Kings of Trapezond. By Martha,
Haidar had a son namd Ismael. Vsun Chasan left his son Iacupheg, or Sultan
Iacup (as he is called) his successor. Iacup began much to suspect his brother
in law Haidar's son, and his multitude of followers. To prevent further
danger put him to death. His nephew Ismael hardly escapt him, but fled with his
mother to his fathers friend, one Pircul a Lord of great rank about the Caspian
Sea (The Turks call it Culzum Denizi i. the close or shut Sea; its usually in
our Charts Mar de Bachu) and there had his education according to his fathers
Religion. Sultan Iacup the King was poisoned by his wife; Aluan or Almut (as
some call him) succeeding. Ismael now, pretended the challenge of his fathers
estate, place, and his own inheritance invaded part of Persia; had the day
against Aluan; slew him; put his brother and successor Amurad Chan to flight;
and upon his death got the Persian Empire to himself. To him being thus one of
their Sophilar (a Sect coming from that Scach Sophi) and descended from both
Ali und the Schach Sophi, first author of the Sect, ab Osmanidis (says my
Leunclau. Pandect. Turcic. cap. 81. and 188. Circa A. D. M. D. XX. Nec tn:
Pandectis acquiescas nisi optimi Viri etiam Historia^ Musulmannicam inspicias
lib. 16.
author) SOPHI cognomentum, and KISELIS BASSAE per ignominiam fuit inditum, a
SOPHI Arabica voce quae Lanam signisicat. Quippe cum Mahumetani and presertim
Osmanici, more veteri, Tulipanto lineo subtilissimi operis caput inuoluant,
noua isthaec Sophilariorum religio praecipit inter alia, ne caput fastu quodam
lineis eiusmodi spiris ornetur: sed vt tegumenta Capitum e Lana, non magni re
pretij, conficiantur. Et qnia laneum hoc tegumentum capitis, quo praeter
aliorum Mahumetanorum morem, hi nunc vtuntur, plicas habet duodecim, and
Arabica vox Enasser (I think he should rather have said Etzenaser) duodecim
significat, etiam aliud nomen Enasserlariorum consequuti sunt, ac si Graeco
vocabulo dicas Dodecaptychos, aut Latino Duodecimplices. Quod deinque tegmen
eiusmodi rubro duntaxat color tinctum gestare soleant, Kisselbassilarij quoque
dicti sunt, veluti Capita rubra: The Persians being before called by the Turks
Azemlar, and their Territory Aiem or Azeim. Thus came this Schah Ismael and his
successors to be called Sophi and Kessel bassae also. Thus he; and in the
deriuation from Wool diverse follow him. But, says most judicious De Emendat.
Temp. lib. 5.
Scaliger, Quod quidam SOPHI a flocco lanae dictum volunt, hoc leuius est ipso
flocco lanae. He therefore deriues it from (...) Tzaophi i. Pure, elect, holy,
one of a reformd Religion; which they profess against the Othomaniques, with
like hate as the Samaritans had against the Jews. I am easily persuaded to be
of Scaligers mind for the reason of the name. But the whole story of Ismael is
diversely deliuerd. Leunclaw differing in his Musulmanique story from what he
had in his Pandects deliuerd of it; thinking withal that the Alian or
Sophilar's heresy is not from that Ali which was Mahumeds son in law, but
from Ali Abasides, whose Genealogy you may see in him. Deijs, alij eadem
affirmant. Sed an Sophilarij Mahumedem excrantur? minime certe Ismaelis n.
Nummi inscriptio erat, Mahumed Resul Allahe i. Nuntius Dei. Leuncl. Musulmanic.
lib. 16.
In De Ionuille his life of S. Jews Ali is called always Hely, and uncle to
Mahumed; and his followers, Beduins which accounted all Mahumedans (says he)
miscreants. But the name of Sophi had its original in that Shach Sophi, who, I
doubt, had some other proper name; for, Sophi by all likelihood was given him
with regard to his reformd profession, as the word interprets, yet Ismael
dicitur (...) Hist. Politic. Constantinop. a Zygomal. transcript.
Haidar (who I guess is called Erdebil or Arduelles, as Iouius or Surius writ
him, but from the place Erdebil Arduille or Ardobille where he and, his
ancestors were Schachs) may be affirmd the author of the Sect, as it is now
Royal amongst them, because in his time began the King to oppose it, which
opposition was there cause of Ismaels following greatness. What Ramusius,
Minadoi, Iouius, Osorius, Tarik Mirkond, and most other have of this matter at
large, you may find compendiously deliuerd in that Late work, composd by great
industry out of infinite Reading, by my learned and kind friend Mr. Purchase.
Their variable discourses of this point fit not this place. That deriuation,
from Tzoaphi, plainly howeuer continues. But its said that in Persia they call
not the King the Sophi, but usually the Schach i. the Lord, or the Signior. It
may well be so: for indeed every man is truly there a Sophi, if not a Mahumedan
herotique; that is either of Shach Sophi his Sect, as he should be, or of the
Othomanique Religion. But why it should be abstaind from amongst them as
disgraceful (which some Ap. Hackluit. Nauig. Part. 1. fol. 397.
affirm, because Sophi signifies there a Beggar) I conceive not, no more then
why the King of Spain or France should dislike the title of Catholic or most
Christian. Its certain (according to our pronunciation) it signifies both
Wool, and also Choice, pure or reformd. But Tzodki, not Tzophi in their
learned tongue, is a Beggar. And our famous Q Elizabeth wrote to A. Chr. M. D.
LXI. 3. Elizabethae.
Schach Tamas their Emperor with this title, Potentissimo and inuictissimo
Principi Magno Sophi Persarum Medorum, Parthorum, Hircanorum etc. in Letters
copied into Ebrew, and Italian, and so sent; although in some others to him, it
be omitted. Its idle to fetch it from (...), as some have done. Yet verbally it
may be deduced to us from Magus (which interprets (...)) if you can beleeu
that the old Persian Kings were called Magi, as a Title proper to their
Majesty; which some ignorantly have thought as truth, supposing the Magi i.
the wisemen of the East in S. Matthew to be Chaldaei Reges dicti Claudiano in
Epigrammatis v. Psalm. 72. Com. 10. Caeterum, quo sensu Reges dici possint,
docebit V. Cl. Is. Casaubon. Exercit. 2. 10. in Ann. Baronij.
Kings, and that of old Persia. There are at this day which would prove it and
labor at it. They cite Apuleius Apolog. 1.
his words: Quippe inter prima Regalia docetur (Magia:) nec vlli temere inter
Persas concessum est Magum esse, haud magis quam regnare. He speaks of
instructing the Kings children, which was done by the Plato in Alcibiade. nec
aliter intelligo Ciceronem lib. 1. de Diuinat. Nec quisquam Rex Persarum potest
esse, qui non ante Magorum disciplinam scientiamque perceperat. v. Plin. lib.
30. cap. 2.
Magi, and in their profession. But, is every one with us, that a Priest reads
Divinity to, a Priest therefore? Nay, it seems the Persian Kings never had that
name or title after the death of Prexaspes and Smerdis (so Herodotus calls
them, Ctesias and Justin otherwise) which were Magi. For, in honor of those
which freed the Persians from their usurped authority, an annual feast was
instituted by the State called (...) i. the slaughter of the Magi, in which,
(...) Herodot. in Thalia.
(...) i. it was not lawful for any of the Magi to be seen abroad; but they
all kept their houses. Could this have been, if the Kings had been then Magi?
And until Artaxares got the Kingdom (about C C. XXX. after Christ under
Alexander Seuerus) from Artabanus, the Magi continued as contemned of the Great
ones, and the (...) was still celebrated. But Artaxares (so my Agathias histor.
6.
author calls him) had before he was King, been a Magus or Priest of that kind
among them. And so afterward, as it happens, till the time of Othman Ben-Ophen
successor of Iezdigird, the Magi were again in great honor, but by no means
can they be found to have reigned about our Saviors Birth. This Othman (which
others call otherwise) began in the year of Salvation DC. XXXII. Indeed, for
another reason, both they and their nation might have been called so, if proper
names may be translated. For from A Elam ((...)) the son of Seth, the old
Joseph. Archaeol. (...). cap. 7. corrigendi etiam Codices illi qui 1. Maccab
cap. 6. com. 1. habent, (...). Elymais n. ipsa Regio Susianae adiacens. Lege
igitur (...) etc. atque ita Josephus (ni fallor) Archoeol. 12. cap. 13.
emendandus. Vrbs vero illa sane oppidum Charax, in Elymaide ab Alexandro
conditum, vt videtur, de quo Plin. lib. 6. cap. 27. Vide Ptolem. Geograph. 6.
cap. 3. Stephan. Bizant. in (...). and Elymaeos Susianam inhabitare ait
Marcian. Heracleot. (...). veru^ and consulendus Benjamin. Tudelens. Itinerar.
page 78.
Persians were, and thence are the Aelamits; Aelam is Doctus, Sagax, Magus,
(...), as every man may know from S. Luke. But Elymas (says the Text) the
Sorcerer (for so is his name by interpretation) withstood them. (...); and
thence, says Glycas, as his translation is, Persas Magos appellari lingua ipis
Vernacula constat. But Magus or Aelam is not so much a Sorcerer as a Natural
Philosopher, or a searcher into curiosities; not of necessity implying in it
any unlawful Art, although ignorant ages have vsd to take all for Devilish
invention and practice with Spirits, which they understood not, as the example
was in our Friar Roger Bacon: whose works of abstruse learning, lying in the
Franciscans Library at Oxford, were by lubberly Friars and Scholars there
(under the mistie time of our great Grandfathers) utterly despairing that ever
their lazines could understand the^, very learnedly, to the perpetual security
of their wits quiet, fastened with long nails to the deskboards; where, being
consecrat to the use of Worms and Mothes, they were consumd. I know the Ebrew
of S. Matthew (but not authentic) has, for the Magi, (...): which is taken
for Sorcerers (as we now use that word) Witches, and such like. I rather
understand them Astrologers (Astrology in it self, not abusd: being a most
honorable art) to whom it pleased the Lord to permit such knowledge of that
Means of Salvation, to Mankind, signified, for this purpose (as some will) in
Balaam's prophecy Numer. cap. 24. Comm. 17.
of the Star arising out of Jacob. But, that Ismael is usually called Ismael
Schah, Shah or Shach, by the Grecians Hist. Politic. a Th. Zygomal. ad Crus.
missa.
(...). Schah is nothing but an addition of greatness to the name, as Lord or
Don or Monsieur (whereof, somewhat is Page 51. and 52.
before) and truly interprets Signior; it is written (with the particle Al)
(...) Verum Abrahae Zaccuth Scribitur (...).
Scheich i. Senex, which might easily be confounded in our Characters with
Leunclaw's word Sheiches for a Priest; but that is (as I guess) in all
different characters, to be written Keshish rather, which in reading of his
excellent works of the Musulmanique Empire, must be specially observed. Keshish
Raphaleng in Lexic. Arabic.
signifies an old Priest, which, I confess, Sheich may do also; but then I
conceive not his difference in the writing of it. You may see his Onomasticon
Et Pandect. Turc. cap. 34.
at the end of the Musulmanique story. This Schah or Shah, is often vsd as an
addition to Persian greatness. Cossorassath, in Haithon the Armenian, is
thought to be corrupted from Cosroes Shach. And an Egyptian Sultan is
rememberd in old De Ionuille by the name of Scecedun, filz du Seic qui vault a
tant adire en leur langage Comme filz de Vieil, where note he makes Shach to
signify Old (as it does) not only Lord. And that Solimanus filius Solimani
Veteris, or Senioris Baldric. Hist. Hierosylom. lib. 2 Robert. Monach. lib. 3.
alij eiusdem farinae.
in some autors of the Holy Wars, I doubt not but might well be turned Soliman
the Son of Soliman Shach. But it is not proper to suprem Princes (but by
special excellency) no more then our word, Lord; as the noble Monsieur de
Thou well takes it, affirming Thuan. Hi. stor. lib. 18.
that it is alone applied often to such as have small Dominions, and are as
Reguli, or the like. Some interpret it Linschot. lib. 1 cap 27.
out of the application, King, but the nearest to exact truth is that which we
have before out of Scaliger, with whom Theodore Spandugn Apud Crusium in Hist.
Constantin. page 66.
agrees expressly. And in the title of Muhamed Ben-Dauid's Alagsarumith, he is
called (...). sieve senex.
Alsheich (being this very word (...) Sa, Saa, Schah or Schach) as by an
attribute of dignity. It is written often Shaugh, Xa, and also Cheque. Out of
Achmet's Onirocritiques, the great Scaliger Canon. Isagog. 3.
cites (...) i. Saa Nisan King of the Persians. And here, says he, est aliud
nomen multis Principibus Persarum commune, NISA. id eorum lingua est HASTA. And
Senigar Saa filius Saa Regum omnium Persarum Imperator, is in Benjamin
Ben-Iona, and Vararanes a Persian King, is called Agathias. hist. 4.
(...) from his being before Lord or Governor of Cerma. About M. LXX. after
Christ the Persian King is in Abraham Zaccuth namd Sultan Melich Sa (the same
which a Greek calls Chrysococces ap. Scaliger. vbi supra. Idem est, nifallor,
Malicsach apud Leon. African. hist. 3.
(...)) after whose death, he says, the Chaliph of Bagded, Mutkadi Ben Kain,
at this Sultans wives request, permitted his son Mahumed to reign, which I
the rather also note, because Bodin De Repub. 1. cap. 9.
affirms that the Chaliphs permitted not the name of Dominus to any, but
themselves having, at first, supremacy over all those parts, and speaks of a
Text in the Alcoran against it, which I could never meet with. There may be
some such thing perhaps in some other of those Zunas i. Counsels or Laws,
which were after Mahumed, composd by the Chaliphs commandment at Damascus. But
doubtless no better word for Dominus can be then Sultan, by which here this
Prince of Persia, under the Chaliphat is styled. This Sultan is called Ignat.
Patriarch. Antioch. ad Scalig. quem Consulas de hoc Imperatore lib. 4. de Emend.
Sultan Gelal eddin Melic Sa (but his proper name was Albu Ersalan) from whom
the Persians have their annual account, whose root is A. Chr. M. LXXIX. in the
XIIII. of our March, and is called the Ver. Nouus dies: si verbum interpreteris.
Neuruz of Gelal Sultan Melic (says Scaliger) est Rex, Sa vel Scha Persis est
nomen attributum Regibus. Gelal is Majesty in Arabique, and so he turns Melic
Sa Gelal eddin, into Melic Sa Maiestas Religionis. From this word Edin, is the
name Aladin in the Oath(...)anique race, which as Leunclaw says, signifies
Divine; but he allows not Reineccius coniecturing that all the Turkish Sultans
had the name of Aladin as a surname or title of Honor. From Scah in the Persian
title, they have money called Schahlar, as the Turks have Sultanlar, which we
call Sultanins. Of Schah, is Padischa a compound, whereof, before. The Persian
titles more ancient, are already elsewhere touched. As a corollary, take here
another of them in the middle times; (...) Theophylact. Simocatta hist. 4. cap.
8.
(...) etc. i. Chosroes King of Kings, Lord of Potentates, Lord of Nations,
Prince of Peace, Savior of Men, Among Gods a good and eternal Man, but, among
Men, a most Famous God. Most glorious Conqueror, Rising with the Sun, Giving
eyes to the Night, Noble by Birth, a King that hates war, well deserving,
having the Nonne Ausonios 1. Italos innuit?
Asonae under Pay, and keeping the Kingdom for the Persians. To Baram a
General among the Persians, and our friend. Baram having before written to
Chosroes in almost alike fashioned style. It was about D C. of Christ, under
the Emperor Maurice. It the rather is obseruable, because both African and
Asiatique Princes do yet, even as Chosroes, sometimes load themselves and other
Princes to whom they Ex literis Amuratis III. ad Sereniss. Elizab. Reg. A:
1579. datis constat. quae sunt apud Hackluit. Itinerar. part. 2. page 137.
write with strange, and doubtless by their Secretaries hardly invented
attributes. But in that league of M. DC. VI. twixt Rodulph II. and the present
Grand Signior Achmet, it was among other things concluded, That the Mercur.
Gallo-Belgic. Tom. 5. lib. 4.
Emperor and the Great Sultan in all their Letters, Instruments, and Embassages
should not style themselves by any other additions, but by the names of
Well-beloved Father and Son, to wit, the Emperor calling the Great Sultan his
son, and the Great Sultan the Emperor (in respect of his years) his father.
And that in the beginning of their Letters they might both take upon them the
name of Emperor respectively.

Speaking in the Plural number. Why (...) is for any barbarous Nation to the
Jews. The Rabbis reason of the Plural. Inferiors honored, if namd by
Superiors. Otherwise if Superiors namd by Inferiors. An example in our English
law for the Plural. Dei gratia. By whom vsd. The Princes of the Empire their
Royalties. Dei Gratia anciently vsd by Bishops and Abbots. Expressing of
Princes by the Abstract of their quality. Tua Maxima Fatuitas, to the Pope.
Majesty anciently in Rome, how afterward vsd. Celsitude, and Serenitie, to
Dukes. No proper word for Majesty in Greek. The Goddess Majesty. Crimen
Maiestatis. (...) in later Grecians for Majesty. The Despot, Sebastocrator,
and Caesar; how they were formally to be spoken to, or of. Majesty, to our
Soueraigns, when first. Grace, and Excellent Grace. Worship, and Worshipful.
Souerain Lady, to a Duchess. The disserence of speaking in the Concret or
Abstract. The Spanish Pragmatica for the formality of the Kings style in
directions to him.

CHAP. VI.
OTher appendants of Majesty are, which give a special form to the expressing
of Titles. Speaking in the Plural Number is one obseruable. As, We command: in
the Person of One being a Monarch. Its certain that among ancient Latins the
plural Number often was for a singular Person in common language. and (against
rules of Grammar) ioind with a singular word. Not with Accius, Naeuius, or
Plautus only, but in later. Catullus has Insperanti Nobis; and Tibullus, to
his false Mistress: Perfida nec merito Nobis inimica merenti.
But these, not to our purpose. You shall as often find the Persian and Greek
Emperors in Esther, Ezra, the Macchabees, Hippocrates his Epistles and such
more, to use the singular as Plural: Sometimes is a mixture of Both: as in that
of Ptolemy Philopator to his Egyptians Lib. 3. Macchab.
(...). i. I am well my self and so are Our affairs. The Jews say that in
their language for the plurality of Virtues and Power ((...)) supposd in a
superior, they use the Plural number to or of one Man. Their Adoni is plural,
yet often vsd as singular. Every tongue (says one of Aben-Ezra in Genes. cap 1.
them) has its property. As it is honorable in the Italian (so usually (...)
is interpreted; but questionles (...) was indifferently, at first, used by them
for any strangers or Gentiles Elias Thisbit. in (...), omnes linguas, praeter
Ebraeam, ita dictas scribit.
Country where their Religion was not, having its being out of the sigles for
(...) i. Cultus alienus sieve extraneus, or Idolatry, which they commonly
express by (...) in abbreuiature, and sometimes (...), for secundum cultum
extraneum) as its honorable in the Italian for an inferior to speak to a Great
man by the plural number: so in the Arabique (the Ismaelitish he calls it) it
is honorable for a Great man, as a King, to speak in the plural. So likewise
in the holy tongue it is honorable to speak of a Potentat Plurally, as Adonim
and Baalim. For they say (...), i. Domini durus, and also (...) i. Et accepit
Domini eius. And upon this conceit do they interpret the plural of Elohim
ioind with a singular Verb, which most of our Men take for a mystical
expressing the Holy Trinity. Their Grammarians make it an Enallage of Number,
chiefly to express excellency in the Persons, to whom its referd. With this,
well agrees that which is observed upon Juno's ruminating on Aeneas his too
good fortune; -- Mean incepto desistere victam?
Nec posse Italia Teucrorum auertere Regem?
Rex est (says Ex Ms. Fuld. excerpt. and Seruio Danielis inter alia additum.
Seruius) and mire Aeneam noluit nominare. Honorantur n: Minores a Maioribus si
suo nomine fuerint nominati. Contra, Contumelia est si Maiores a Minoribus suo
nomine nominentur. For the speaking to them, in the singular Number, is very
proportionat to their proper names. The use of this for the Plural, is known
common at this day, but not proper to supreme Princes. In our Law-annalls, a
29. Ed. 3. fol. 44.
Quare impedit being brought by the King for the Prebendary of Oxgate, in the
Diocese of London, the Writ was Praecipite Michaeli de Northumbergam, against
which the Serieants except, as against False Latin. But, says Thorp, False
Latin it is not, for it is a word of the plural number, and therefore is of
greater reverence; and this is a common Fashion for the King to send to a man
by the word, VO BIS. But, says the Counsel on the other side, a man has not
seen such reverence made to a Sheriff. And afterward, the Writ was looked on by
the Judges, and they saw it was Praecipite, and at the end Habeatis ibi nomina
Sammonitorum etc. Whereupon it was adjudged to abate. They held, it seems, the
plural Number not to be formally applied to any, but, at least, of the greater
Nobility. That of adding DEI GRATIA in styles, Apud Ortelium in Theatro.
is now more proper to supremacy. The Earldom of Flanders, has diverse
prerogatives, among which, one is that its Prince may write himself Dei gratia
Comes Flandriae, which is a part of Royalty. Et sunt alia pleraque leuissima
(are the words of a great Bodin. 1. de Repub. cap. 10.
Politician) quae Principum propria ducunt, vel ad Decus vel ad Dignitatem, vt
Rescriptis addere DEI GRATIA; The use whereof, as he reports, Jews XI.
Prohibited Francis then Duke of Bretagne, as a form proper to a Kings Title,
and so a French Lawier Rebuff. ad Constit. Reg. Tom. 2. vt Benefic. ante vac.
art. 2.
expressly affirms it. Yet Ferdinand brother to Charles v. and Archduke of
Austria has it in In Edit. Freheriana Sigismundi Baronis de Herbestein.
his Letters to the Emperor. And the Duke of Saxony uses it, being a Prince of
the Empire, and acknowledging to it a kind of supremacy, as Others like him.
His Andr. Knichen. in Comm. Iuris Saxon. Duc. Sax. cap. 1.
Chancelors words are these; Cum illud non fiat in despectum Domini
concedentis, sed ad Amplificandam Maiestatem eius and dignitatis concessae
tuitionem recte immemoriabili interstitio Principes nostri saepe dicta
locutione (he means DEI GRATIA) vsi sunt and etiamnum vtuntur. Neither do I
conceive, why Princes that want not the substance, but as it were the name of a
King only, should of necessity abstain from it. In more ancient times it is
familiar in the styles of far meaner Persons then supreme Princes. Rex
Venerabili in Christo Patri I. eadem Gratia Dunelmensi Episcopo; and Guilielmo
eadem Gratia Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi, are amongst Fitzh. Not. ^r. fol. 132.
and 2. E.
our Writs. And, in the Epistles of John of Sarisbury, is Rogerus Dei Gratia
Eboracensis Archiepiscopus and Apostolicae sedis Legatus Uenerabili Fratri H.
Dei gratia Dunelmensi Episcopo. And from John of Sarisbury himself, Venerabili
D. and Patri Carissimo Willielmo Dei Gratia Senonensi Archiepiscopo. The like
is often in the Epistles of Fulbert Bishop of Chartres, Gilbert of Vendosme,
Anselm, and such more of the old times. So B. de Blancesfort Epist. Regum and
Principum Edit. in Tom. 2. Orient. Hist. page 1176.
Master of the Temple uses it in his Letters to S. Jews K. of France. Its
frequent in the Chronic. Richerspergens. sub ann. M. CL. and seqq.
Charters of the Archbishop of Saltzburg, and other Churchmen of meaner note
in those times. And in a Leiger book of the Abbey of Malmesbury I have seen
Johannes Dei Gratia Abbas Malmesburiensis and eiusdem loci conuentus salutem in
Domino. All these show that heretofore those curious differences of Prouidentia
or Clementia Dei, which are now vsd by Bishops and inferior Princes, were not
so distinguished from Dei Gratia, as later times (whose beginning I know not)
have made them. To express them by ABSTRACTS from the Concret of their
quality, is Ordinary. As Majesty, Highness, Grace, etc. But the Form is not
proper to them; it being usual in old autors with such Substantives to design
out the subject denominated of the Adjective; as Virtus Horat. lib. 2. Satyr. 1.
Scipiadae and Mitis Sapientia Laeli.
for Scipio and Laelius, which are but as Cicer. lib. 3. Fam. Epist. 7.
Appietas and Lentulitas, For the induidualite, as it were, of Appius and
Lentulus, or Patauinitas Asinius Pollio apud Quintilian. lib. 8. cap. 1.
for Liuies style. In like form (...), and (...) are familiar for Hercules and
Telemachus. And wanton Catullus, comparing a heavy fellow, unworthily blessed
with a Delicacie in his marriage bed, to a log, has this Ithyphallique: Talis
iste meus Stupor nil videt, nihil audit.
such more often occur, and, especially, in Epistles of later times, written
with Probitas, serenitas, Sanctitas tua, and the like; where, by the way, you
may remember that of Philip le Beau of France Mart. Polon. Chronic.
to Pope Boniface the VIII. Sciat tua maxima Fatuitas, Nos, in Temporalibus,
Alicui non subesse. The occasion Rolewinck in Fascicul. Temp. sub anno 1294.
was from this most arrogant Pope his calling himself Dominus Totius Mundi tam
in Temporalibus quam in Spiritualibus. And for Bishops, its noted in old
Annals, that Leuderique Adam Bremens. hist. Eccles. cap. 20.
Bishop of Breme (about DCCCXL.) was a proud fellow, because he would sometimes
title himself Custos, sometimes Pastor Bremensis Ecclesiae. Whereupon, (says
Metropol. lib. 1. cap. 32.
Crantzius) Uide Temporum simplicitatem quod non paterentur PASTORIS Vocabulum.
Quid facerent, si ritum nostrae aetatis ambitiosum cernerent, vbi ex ore
Episcopi insonare audirent, Nostra gratia, Nostra Pontificalis Dignitas, and
reliqua his etiam gloriosiora. But in this kind some abstracts are proper notes
of Sovereignty: as Majesty which is now competent to none but supreme
Princes; And that, in substance, very anciently. For, in Rome, the highest
power of Government being in the People (not the multitude but the whole
Common-welth) as, in an absolute Monarchy and (...), in the Monarch; the word
Majesty was proper to them. As Authoritas in Senatu, Potestas in Plebe,
Imperium in Magistratibus, So Maiestas was in Populo, which Orat. pro. C.
Rabirio.
Cicero with others, will justify. And Maiestatis Crimen (says ff. ad leg.
Iul. May. l. 1.. 1.
Vlpian) illud est, quod aduersus Pop. Romans vel aduersus securitatem eius
Commititur, which well agrees, with what was in that State before the Emperors.
Intentio est (as for an example De Inuentione lib. 2.. 10. Et Orat. Partit.. 50.
Tully faines) Maiestatem minuisti, quod Tribunum Plebis de Templo deduxisti.
And Maiestas est Magnitudo quaedam Populi Romans in eius potestate and iure
retinendo. But when the sum of all things was transferd into the Emperors
from the People, the Crimen Maiestatis became chiefly against them and their
State. Lex Iulia Maiestatis (so Instit. tit. de Public. Iudicijs.. 3.
Justinian) in eos qui contra Imperatorem vel Remp. aliquid moliti sunt; suum
vigorem extendit. And then, toward the declining times, they took to
themselves Perennitas nostra, Eternitas C. Theodos. tit. de Fabricens. l. 3.
Nostra, Numen Nostrum, Tranquillitas Nostra, Screnitas Nostra Maiestas C. tit.
de Silentiarijs l. 1. and de Age^t. l. Nulli.
Nostra, and such like often occurring in the two Codes of Theodosius, and
Justinian. But long before that, although not with the first person, yet it was
attributed to them. Sueton reporting that Augustus after the civil wars
would not himself, nor suffer his near kindred to call his soldiers
Commilitones, but Milites, gives the reason; because he did think it
ambitiosius, quam aut ratio militaris, aut temporum quies, aut sua Domusque
suae Maiestas postularet. And in Claudius he speaks of leuior Maiestati
Principali titulus. And, one Plin. in Panegyric. Traiano dicto.
that lived in Sueton's time under Traian, to Traian. Huius (he means Crimen
Maiestatis) tu metum penitus sustulisti, contentus Magnitudine, qua nulli magis
caruerunt quam qui sibi Maiestatem vindicabant. I know, Trebellius In Gallicnis.
Pollio seems to make against this. He, speaking of Gallien's brother Valerian
slain about Millan, and of the doubt whether he had been a Caesar or not, adds;
Constat de Genere, non satis tamen constat de Dignitate, vel, vt caeperunt alij
loqui de MAIESTATE. As if Majesty had then been a word first vsd for Dignity.
But as the most learned Casanbon observes, that must be understood of the
Greater Roman Dignities beside the Empire. So that then first Court-flatterie
began to style the Dignities of the Emperors fauorits and such as were of
higher Note, with Majesty. For plainly to the Emperors, as you see, it was not
before unusual. And, until this time of Trebellius, it may be well affirmd
proper only to supremacy amongst them. Let it not move, that Maiestas in
another sense, was common to others, as Maiestas Pueritiae, and Maiestas
Matronarum obserud in Liuy and Pliny. That was in a regard of their private
Quality, not public Dignity; and in a sense of that nature has Valerius
Maximus the last chapter of his 11. book titled de Maiestate. Est quasi (says
he) priuata censura Maiestas Clarorum Virorum, sine Tribunalium fastigio, sine
Apparitorum ministerio, potens in sua amplitudine obtinenda -- quam recte quis
dixerit longum and beatum honorem esse sine honor. But, this Majesty,
publicly applied, was an expressing of Power and high place, not admiration
only of quality. So it may be well seen in that of a noble Grecian,
delivering Polyb. (...). in Foedere Aetolorum.
the Majesty of the Pope of Rome by (...), i. the Empire and Power of the
People of Rome. And this Public Majesty was after the dimminution of the
Peoples liberty, conveyed solely to the Emperor; and (howsoever that new
application in Pollio's time, was) the Ciuilians since have referd the proper
Crimen Maiestatis only to the Wesenbech. in Paratit. and ff. ad leg. Iul.
Maiestatis vide and Gothofred. ad dict. tit. and ad C. eodem, l. 5.
Emperor. So, at this day, they do by the Imperialls alone, as in France and
with us, in respect of our Soueraigns only. But, by their leave, its not easily
conceiud how Crimen Maiestatis must not be referd to Princes acknowledging
indeed the Emperors supremacy, But withal having all Regal and Imperial
right in their Dominions; as diverse of the German Princes have: although they
abstain from this abstract in their titles, as, of the Dukes of Saxony,
Bauier, Sauoy, Lorraine, Ferrara, Florence, Mantoua, and such accounting
themselves as absolute as any that have but the Name of Duke, Bodin De Repub.
1. cap. 10.
affi^ms; and that they are Celsitudinis verbo contenti, aut Serenitatis, quam
sibi Dux Venetorum tribuit. But this title of Serenitas, Excellentia,
Sublimitas, and the De his consulas licet G. Panciroll. ad Notit. Dignitat.
cap. 3. v^iid genus pluria.
like many are anciently given by Emperors to their Lieutenants and others
indistinctly, as you may see in the Codes, Nouells, and Epistles of Cassiodore.
Its among the Greeks (...) Harmenopul. (...). 5. cap. 9.
(...) i. Nostra Serenitas. So Schol. ad Constantin. Tom. (...).
(...), i Serenissima Maiestas Sacratorum Imperatt. Nostrorum. If, at least,
(...) be Maiestas. Its hard to find a better word interpreting it. But indeed,
as Casaubon observes, Greek has not an express word for Majesty. Some have
Glossar. Vet. Graeco-lat. v. 2. Petri cap. 1. com. 16. (...).
turned (...), Maiestas and Magnitudo, but it properly signifies the last, not
so well the first, which comes plainly from a Comparatiue. Maiestas itaque (are
Casaubons words) si verbi proprietatem spectamus, Numinis est solius: quod
omnibus ijs, quae magna dici possunt, est maius. Usurpatio est cum Principibus
maiestas tribuitur. But observe their tradition of the Godesse Majesty. They
fained that at first there was no distinction of Place or Precedence among the
Gods, but that the meanest would sometimes sit in Saturns own Throne. And this,
they say, Ovid. Fastor. 5.
continued

Donec Honor placidoque decens Reuerentia vultu
Corpora legitimis imposuere toris.
Hinc sata Maiestas, quae mundum temperat omnem,
Quaque die partu est edita, Magna fuit.
Nec mora consedit medio sublimis Olympo,
Aurea purpureo conspicienda sinu.
As Majesty was there bred of Honor and Re^uerence, so proportionatly among
men, and thence the word applied to the supreme of Men. But also they vsd Numen
Imperatoris, and Oracula Augusti, for Edicta, and (...) for (...), as if you
should say diuinitus sancimus for statuimus. And before this great
communicating of Majesty, the Emperors Paul. ff. de legate. 2. l. 87.. Lucius
and Scoeuola ff. lib. 40. tit. ^1. l. 3.
had the attribute of Sanctissimus, and such like. These beginning under
Heathenisme, continued after Christianity. Whence, when they speak of the
Crimen Maiestatis, they Athaliat. tit. (...). 66. and Glossar. Vet. and
Sanctitas Regum ap. Iul. cas. in Tranq.
use (...) or (...), which may be interpreted, a judgment or accusation
touching what is committed against a thing sanctified or sacred. But I think
(...) will be most proper, in substance, for Majesty; although George Codin
translated has always Regnum for his (...): Under favor, not without error.
They had also their Codin. and Meurs. Gloss. Graeco. Barb. in (...).
(...) i. sacred Majesty: which was proper only to the Emperor, and that when
others spoke to him; he himself in modesty omitting Sacred, and speaking only
(...). But Majesty expressed in this word was communicated also to the Despote,
Sebastocrator, and Caesar. The Despot was the heir or successor apparent of
the Constantinopolitan Empire (understand, of the times since Alexius Comnenus,
though before him it were a general name, as My Lord) the Sebastocrator the
second from him in dignity, and next the Caesar, Protosebastus and so forth.
But, to our purpose, receive this out of their Curopalat. (...). quem tamen,
absque Iunij Restitutione locorum, ne legas.
traditions. Before the Emperor they called the Despote, My Lord ((...)) and
Majesty was applied to him: the Sebastocrator, My Lord ((...)) Sebastocrator:
the Caesar, my Lord Caesar, in those words as the other; and to both these also
was Majesty ((...)) applied. But if any other Great men about the Court
((...)) had occasion to use the Despot's name to the Emperor, they thus; My
Lord ((...)) Your son the Despote. If they speaking among themselus mentioned
him then: (...) i. Our Lord the Despote. For in later Greek (...) is Our,
either corruptep from their ancient own, or induced by Tartarian or Turkish,
wherein Babamus is our Father. If a great man spoke to the Despote, he might
either call him My Lord the Despote (with the word last remembered) or, for
greater honor, Our Lord the Despote. If any of the Despot's servants or
followers, vsd his masters name to the Emperor, he might not call him (...),
or (...) (which I interpret to be in fashion the same with Our, My Lord, when
we speak indifferently of any Nobleman) but (...) i. My Lord and Master, your
son the Despote. For so I think, (...) is best here translated. If a man
spoke to any of their other Great men ((...)) he never vsd (...), but (...).
On the other side (...) was never vsd to the Despote, but (...). Neither could
they render reason for all those, but because use and custom had brought them
to it. Neither has the Grammatical difference of (...) and (...): any thing
to do here. For our Kingdom; Majesty (says the learned Author of the
Remains) came hither in time of Henry the Eight, as Sacred Majesty lately in
our memory. Understand him, as it was commonly in use, and properly to the King
applied. For in the Epistles of John of Sarisbury, is Maiestas tua, diverse
times to Henry Fitz-lempresse, under whom he lived, and the same is there vsd
also to Pope Adrian. Grace among us began in time of Henry IV. and Excellent
grace, as you read in the Remains, under Henry the Sixth. High and mighty Prince
under Edward the fourth. But, about those times it was not solely proper to the
King, as it seems by the Concord (touching the title of the Crown) twixt Henry
the sixth, and Richard Duke of York, made in XXXIX. Henry VI. in Parliament at
Westminster, with this title, Betwixt the most High and most mighty Prince,
Henry the fixed, King of England and of France, and Lord of Ireland, on the one
party, and the right High and mighty Prince Richard Plantagenet Duke of
York, on the other party; and the Duke of Gloucester under Henry the Parl. 3.
Hen. 6. art. 1. and 26.
sixth, is called High and mighty Prince and the Duke of Excester, Hault and
Puissant Prince. Anciently how our Soueraigns were, in this kind titled, may be
obserud, upon these examples. Au Tresnoble and treshonorable Prince and son
trescher Seignior si luy pleist Monsieur Edward per la grace de Dieu Roy d'
Engleterre, Signior D'irland, and Duc D' Aquitaine le sone Henry Percy
reverence and honeurs: In a letter Rot. 25. Ed. 1. in Arce Londini de Rebus
Scotiam tangentibus memb. 4. 6. and saepius.
to Edward 1. written from Dunwich; and the like, in diverse other Records, is.
And there the Barons of the Exchequer send to the King with Nous maund a vostre
hautesse, etc. But also in times later then Edward 1. titles and notes of
Greatness being not in that distinction or Curiosity as now, some such as are
with us mean, were competent to highest Princes. I remember, I once saw a
Petition by a Bishop to Henry v. subscribd with Your Worships Beadsman. About
the same time a treatise written of the order of the Coronation, has thus:
After this the King shall be clothed again with other clothes, and Worshipfully
shall go to the Auter of Seynte Edwardes shryne; and the King is there called
Worshipful Prince. So the Monk of Bury, Dan Lidgat speaking of Henry the fifts
commanding him to writ the Trojan War, says The which emprise anon I ginn
shall
In his Worship, as for memoryall.
He usually calls him Most worthy, or worthy, or Noble Prince, and Soueraign
Lord. And plainly worship is but an abstract from worthy, and signifies, as
estimation, properly. to wuruld wurthscipe sy he thegen lage wyrthe i. To
worlds worship (i. in worldly estimation) he shall be in equal degree with a
Thane, says a Canon of Canutus his laws, speaking of a Priest that liud free
from incontinencie: and in those so ancient times it was a general title, but
according to the person qualified. In an old Saxon Ap. Lambard. in Peramb. Kant.
tradition of their Nobility; Then were the wisest of the people
weorthscipeswyrtha aelc be his mathe Eorl and Ceorl, thategn and thateoden i.
worshipworthy, every one in his Dignity, the Earl and Cheorl, Thane, and
Vnderthane. So in later times Dukes and Earls have had Worshipful and Right
worshipful applied to them. An Epitaph Camden. Brit. Edit. Anglic. Idiomatis.
and in Reliquijs.
is at Warwick in S. Mary's Church there, in part, thus. Pray Devoutly for the
Soul, whom God assoile, of one of the most Worshipful Knights, in his days,
of manhood and cunning, RICHARD Rothomagi fatis concessit A. M.CD.XXXIX.
BEAVCHAMPE late Earl of Warwick, Lord Despenser of Burgaueny, and of many
other great Lordships, whose Body rests here under this Tomb.

And his daughter the Countess of Shrewsbury was buried in S. Faith's under
Paul's, with Here, before the Image of Ihesu, lies the Worshipful and right
Noble Lady Margaret Countess of Shrewsbury, etc.

But now every Gentleman of better (rather richer) Rank is saluted Worshipful.
And, on the other side, what now is one of our particular Notes of Majesty,
not given to any but the supreme, I mean Soueraign Lord or Lady, has been
anciently bestowed on others. The preface and dedication of Alexanders life,
written under Henry VI. by a Dominican Friar thus speaks,

To my souerayn Lady benign and honorable,
Discrete, full of wisdom, of Gloucetre Duchess,
I simple servant, though I be unable,
With devout heart with all my business,
Send joy, worschepp, wealth, pess, and stabylnesse,
Betwix you and yowre euere more to lest,
And so be schad widde we grace that it never breast.
What, that hater of Monarchs, Buchanan has in his malicious dislike of giving
titles and attributes of great honor to Princes, I omit, and leave him to his
error, convinced by the general consent and allowance of Antiquity. But,
touching these, it has been Christoph. Becman. Schediasm. Philologic.
questioned, which is the more both elegant and honorable to speak in the
Concret or Abstract. That is, whether to say Serenissime Princeps a te peto, or
A Serenitate Vestra peto. And some have thought the first form the best,
because in that the Accidents and Subjects are together expressed, in the other
the Accidents only being the note of Honor. But howsoever for elegancie, it
seems the Abstract tastes as if it were more honorable. For that quality
denominats, and, from it inherent in the Person, is the Honor given. Now, as it
is inherent, and not predicated of the Person, its best expressed for its own
Essence; Neither is it otherwise (as Logique teaches) properly in any
Predicament. As Album, although in a formal signification of the thing
designd, it express a Certain Ens per se, yet as the formal and material or
connotatiue signification, of it, is, it is Aristot. Metaphys. 7. cap. 6. text.
21.
Ens per accidens, id est, aggregatum quid ex ijs quae diuersis Praedicamentis
ponuntur. And Albedo is the Ens per se. Then, where the quality is, nearest to
its own single essence, expressed, that is in the Abstract, it seems, the Person
is with somewhat more honor saluted, then if it were only connotatiue as they
call it. For, Vir excellentissime does but connotatiue, or by way of consequent
speak excellentia; as indeed in every Concret, but in like form and by an
accidental consequence, is both the ^^cident and the substance. But this is a
most frivolous disquisition, which I had not spoken to, if I had not seen it
questiond. I add out of the Spanish Pragmatica, published under Philip II.
against the multiplicitie of Titles given both to the King and other great Men,
in the year (...). D. LXXXVI. the VIII. of October, at S. Lawrence; that the
King there would have no other title in the beginning of any Letter to him, but
Senor; in the subscription only his name that wrote it; in the end of the
Letter, only God preserve your Catholic Majesty; and the superscription, To
the King our Lord. The petitions to the Counsels, Chanceries, and Tribunals,
might be titled with Most mighty Lord, but no more. The signing of Letters,
scedules, and such like should be only with By the King our Lord. Diverse other
particulars are in it, touching these kind of Titles to Other Great men, which
in their more due place shall succeed.

Anointing of Kings. How Unction in Heathenisme was vsd, to sanctify. The Old
Roman Provincial expressing what Kings were to be anointed, anciently. The
use of Unction in the Eastern Empire; In France; Their Oil from Heaven; in
Britain; the first King there anointed by the Pope; but a conjecture against
the consent of old Monks. The Tale of a box of Oil given by our Lady for
Unction of the English Kings, to Thomas Becket. Crowns, and their beginning.
First vsd only to Gods. Whence Corona. An examination whether Crowns (except
only the Cloth Diadem) were in more ancient times, among the Gentiles, for
Royal distinction; and a Conclusion against common opinion. A place of
Euripides interpreted, against the Vulgar, and his Scholiast. Crown Radiant,
and the XII. beams of the Sun supposd in Antiquity. A place in Polybius
examined. Pharaoh's Diadem. A passage in Clemens Alexandrinus examined. (...).
When the Cloth Diadem, or Fillet came first to be a Royal Ensign in Europe.
White proper to the Kings Diadem. Cidaris, or Cittaris. (...). Tiara. Diadema.
The Tulipants, or Turibants of the Princes of later time, in Asia. Error of
Bodin touching them. Hasta pro Diademate. The Crown or Diadem in the Roman and
Constantinopolitan states. Of the Form, and Materials of Crowns, somewhat. The
Duke of Moscouy's Cap. The Radiant Crown of the Duke of Florence. The Crown of
British, English, and Scottish Kings. The Scepter. Caduceus. Birds and other
things born in the Top of Scepters. Eagles upon the Emperors Shoes. Their Red
or Purple shoes, and Boots. Gilt shoes to the Roman Consuls. Swearing by
Scepters, very ancient. The moving the Scepter was an Oath. The beginning of
that Oath, upon Seruius his credit. The Globe and Cross. Pomum Imperiale.
(...). The first Emperor having the Globe and Cross. When vsd by our Kings.
The Cross, and Labarum. The punishment by the Cross, and, the picturing it on
the ground, forbidden. (...). The Croissant or half Moon of the Mahumedans. The
reason of their use of it. The great Respect and Honor given to the New Moon
among Turks and Jews. (...) Alilat and (...). Eilethyia. Lucina. What the
lews writ upon the walls at a Childbirth. The Croissant among the Romans.
Lunata Planta. Croissant set upon Images of Gods. (...). Cubar. Venus. The
Sun upon the Tents of the ancient Persians.

CHAP. VII.
OF Nominall attributes, thus much. You may call other Real Ceremonies, which
consist either in Action, or Ensigns. In Action; as chiefly that of ANOINTING
at the inauguration. For Anointing, receive this out of the ancient Ordo
Roman. de Divine. Offieijs.
form of doing it. Tunc Dominus Metropolitanus (suppose other concurring
ceremonies, at a coronation, past) vngat de Oleo sanctificato Caput, Pectus,
and scapulas, ambasque Compages Brachiorum ipsius, ita dicendo. VNGO te in
Regem de Oleo sanctificato in Nomine Patris and filij and spiritus sancti. Et
dicant, Amen. Pax Tibi, and cum spiritu Tuo. Deinde vngat sibi manus de Oleo
sanct^ficato, ita dicendo: VNGANTVR manus istae de Oleo sanctificato, vnde
vncti fue^unt Reges and Prophetae, and sicut v^xit Samuel David in Regem, vt
sis Benedictus, and constitutus Rex in Regno isto super populum istum. quem
Dominus Deus tuus dedit tibi ad Regendum ac gubernandum. As its here expressed,
every man must needs refer the Original of Anointing to the Decret. tit de
sacra Unctione.
Jews; which continued (some say) among them from their first Saul until
Hircanus, from whom the Kingdom was transferrd by Augustus to Herod. And by
this they Cedren. page 149. v. Casaub. Exercit. 1.. 2. and 3. Adu, Baronium.
interpret that of Daniel; The Anointed shall be taken away, after the end of
his weeks. But there were certain Interregna twixt Saul and Hircanus, of which,
howsoever the anointing was, regard in this assertion must be taken. From this
Anointing, could not but a most honoring regard come to the Prince, among
those specially which by effusion of Oil made consecrations to the Almighty.
Jacob erected the stone he had slept on in Luz, poured Genes cap. 28. com. 18.
Oil on the top of it, and called it Beth-el i. the house of God. Whence the
Gentiles, by all likelihood, had their Damascius in vita I sidori ap. Photium.
and Scalig ad Eusebius. de Baetulo consulendi.
Baetulus; and perhaps deriud their anointing of stones, whereupon Apuleius
reckons Lapis vnguine delibutus among his sacred objects. And Arnobius his
Aduers. Gent. lib. 1.
Lubricatum lapidem and ex oliui vnguine sordidatum, wherein was comprehended
both their Bounds and Marks of Territories, which vnguento velaminibusque and
Coronis Coronabant (as Siculus Flaccus his words are) and also Minut. Faelix in
Octauio. Videsis Pithoeu^ Adu. 2. cap. 14.
their other sacred Triuiall Statues. And Theophrastus, in his Character of
Superstition, remembers for a part, the pouring of Oil upon anointed stones
or statues in the high ways. Hence the old Christians also by example (says
Quest. 83. in Genesim.
Theodoret) vsd to anoint the Shrines of their Martyrs, and Chancells. The
Jewish Priests Exodus cap. 39. com. 7.
consecration was with Oil. And often occurres the name of the Lords
Anointed. In our Europe, how sacred a Material it was anciently accounted,
appears to every one that has but heard of Extreme Unction, and the like. But
of Christian Princes, the old Provincial of Rome thus: De Regibus Catholicorum
and Christianorum. Et sunt quidam Coronandi and quidam non. Tamen illi qui
Coronantur debent inungi; and Tales habent priuilegium ab antiquo and de
Consuetudine; alio modo non debent Coronari nec inungi sine istis, and si
faciunt ipsi, abutuntur indebite. Et sic incipiunt Nomina Regum Christianorum
Fidelium hoc modo.

Rex Hierosolymitanus Coronatur and inungitur. Rex Francorum Christianissimus,
quod nonnullis recentioribus in hoc loco catalogi citatum habes, exemplari meo
Ms. deest.
Coronatur and inungitur. Rex Anglorum Coronatur and inungitur. Rex Ceciliae
(Siciliae) Coronatur and inungitur. Rex Castellae Non Rex Legionis Non isti
sunt coniuncti.
Rex Portugalensis Non. Rex Aragoniae Non. Rex Nouargiae (Noruagiae, it seems)
Non. Rex Nauarrae Non. Rex Danorum Non. Rex Boemiae Non. Rex Vngariae Non. Rex
Armeniae apud Rebuffum.
Armaniae Non. Rex Sorbiae (perhaps Seruiae) Non. Rex Cypri Non. Rex Sardiniae
Non. Rex Vide supra page 80.
Catholicus Non. Rex Comagiae (its likly, it should be Consulas pagin. 57.
Conactiae) Non. Rex Nimianiae (Momoniae, it seems) Non. Rex Vltoniae Non. Rex
Collen Non. *

Et sciatis quod hodie Non sunt plures Reges Christianorum, nisi de Nouo
Crearentur. So are the words of my Ms. Copy, anciently written, which supposes,
you see, but four Kings honored with Unction, the Hierosolymitan, the French,
English, and Sicilian, and the two Emperors of the East and West. In the
Coronation of him of the Cantacuzen. bist. 1. cap. 12. and Curopalat. (...)
OF(...).
East, the Patriarch, at the instant of making a Cross with the Oil on his
head, crying aloud, (...), i. Holy, and then (...), i. Worthy. Which was, it
seems, the reason why the Constantinopolitans cried Gunther. bist.
Constantinopolit. id est A (...) (...) (...) i. sanctus Rex Marchio.
Aijos Phasileos Marchio at the taking of the Empire by Baldwin Earl of
Flanders, when they thought verily that Boniface Marquess of Montferrat should
have been their Emperor. The Marquess being then with the Earl. There is a
Provincial Apud Rebuffum in Praxi Beneficiorum part. 3. Extat.
printed, wherein others are reckond that are not here, and some omitted that
mine has. And after Rex Bohemiae follows in that, In Ibernia. Catholicus. Rex
Coloniensis. Comachiae. Rex Minauiae Menae, Cathelinae. Ibi hodie non sunt
Reges, sed Tota Hibernia est sub Rege Angliae. What Catholicus does there I
understand not, nor what in my Copy, unless you interpret it as I have, with
doubt, coniecturd where I speak of the King of Astures. The corruption of Names
is such, that you may well think, the credit of the Monument, often changed and
transcribed, has been long of the decaying hand. But time (and that long
since) has brought the ceremony to every crowned Christian King, although
withal he be a kind of subject, as the King of Bohemia; who when he was a
mere Prince of the Empire, was crowned and Aurea Bull. Carol. 4. cap. 4.
anointed. The French would needs challenge Propriety of Anointing to their
Soueraigns before other Princes. They talk of Oil descended from heaven in a
vessel kept at Rheims, wherewith their Kings have ever bin anointed, and
refer it to a miracle in the Baptism of King Chlouis or Jews I. about D. of
Christ. Of it, one of their Poets, when Apollo was from home, speaking of Guil.
Brito Philippeid. 1.
the Coronation of Philip Augustus;

-- sceptrifero fulsit redimitus honor
Magnanimus sacro Rex delibutus Olino,
Quo Deus, Angelicis manibus virtute parato
Diuina, nostris concessit Regibus vti:
Vt sacrentur eo soli specialiter illi,
Qui successiue Francorum sceptra capessunt.
Quo mayor Nostri patet excellentia Regni
Dignior vt vere Rex noster Rege sit omni.
Quem sacrare suis Remorum Metropolites
Cum Compraesulibus habet illo Crismate sacro,
Hoc ad opus solum, quod caelica fudit Oliua.
But no good authority will justify this. Is it likely that Gregory of Tours so
much given to the Relation of Miracles, would have omitted it? One more Du
Hailan des aff. du Fr. liver 1. Idem fere Tillius.
judicious, and not flattering the idle traditions of his own Nation, denies
(and not alone) that there were any de la primiere lignee, oinct ny sacre a
Rheims, ny ailleurs (that is, of the Merouingian line, which continued till
about DCCC. of Christ. But its expressly remembered in story that Pipin, the
first of the Carolin stock was anointed) mais de la second and troisiesme la
plus part ont este sacrez and oincts en auters lieus q' a Rheims, quoy que les
Archeuesques de Rheims debattent ce droit appertenir a eux and a leux esglise.
By the second and third line he means the Carolin, and Capetan; the Carolin
succeeded the Merouingian. And I wonder why Hierom Bignon De l' excel. des
Roys liver. 4.
a French Antiquary, now living, taks it so clear, that their Royal unction
began in Chlouis. We could give better authority for the Kings of this I Will, of
near M. years since, and much more according to Vixit Gildas A. Cnr. 470. Si
fides habenda Autori vitae eius in Biblioth. Floriac.
some. Gildas speaking of the errors in Religion, and neglect of all Goodness
among the old Britons, adds, Et Galfrid. Monumentens. lib. 9. cap. 3. ex
epistola Gild. hoc memorat.
Ungebantur Reges, non per Deum sed qui caeteris crudeliores extarent, and
paulo post ab Vnctoribus, non pro Very examinatione, trucidabantur, alijs
electis trucioribus. But I will not be confident that it proves Unction in
those times. The Phrase might be vsd by him, as at this day an Hereditary King
after his Ancestors death, is said to be Rex or Imperator salutatus: which
alludes only to the old Roman form of salutation in making their Emperor; as
we say also in Imperium euectus est, derived from that Custom of taking the
designed Emperors up on Shields in the Camp. The first of our Kings anointed,
that best of ancient authority speaks of, is Alured. He, in the life of his
father Ethelulph, being sent to Rome, was there in Confirmation made Pope Leo
IV. his godsonne, and specially anointed as a future King. So the consent of
Asserius Meneuensis, Ethelwerd, Malmesbury, and the rest of our old Monks,
iustifies. But with what discretion or honesty should the Pope anoint a child
of v. years old, as a King, in hope of succession, while his father was living,
and three elder brothers also, Ethelbald, Ethelbert, and Ethelred? I rather
incline to beleeu that the Chrism vsd in Confirmation, and only perhaps to that
purpose, by the Pope, was, afterward by English Monks, not without sufficient
cause admiring this brave Prince when hecame to the Crown, taken also as a
designing Omen of his following greatness, and, that so they might speak the
best and largest of what the Pope did, and thereby give a special honor to
their King, supposd for an Unction in Regem. But howsoever, you may see what
was thought of it by this old Rob. Glocestrensis.
honest rythme.

Alfred this Noblemon, as in the ver of Grace he nom,
Eyghte hundred and sixty and twelve, the Kingdom,
Arst he add at Rome yhe, and vor is great wisdom
The Pope Leon him blessede, tho he thuder come,
And the king is Croune of this land, y^ in this loud yut is:
And Oyled.
Elede him to be King, ar he were King ywis.
And he was King of Engelond, of all that there come,
That verst thus yeled was of the Pope of Rome,
And sutthe other after him of the Erchebissop echon,
So that biuore him, thur King was there non.
None of this excludes Unction before, but only wills him the first anointed by
the Pope. But we need not much blame the French Tradition of their Heavenly
oil. Our English have as good a Tale. That Our Lady gave Thomas Becket Archb.
of Canterbury, being in banishment under Hen. II. a Golden Eagle full of
precious Ointment, inclosd in a stone vessel, commanding him to preserve it,
and foretelling quod Reges Anglorum qui vngerentur hoc vnguento pugiles essent
Ecclesiae, and Benigni and terram amissam a parentibus pacifice recuperarent,
donec Aquilam cum Ampulla haberent. He committed it to safeguard in a Monastery
at Poiters, where Henry the first Duke of Lancaster, under Edward the Third in
the wars of France, had it delivered to him, by a Holy man (they say) which
found it by Revelation. The Duke gave it the Black Prince. He sent it to the
Tower, there to be safely kept in a chest strongly hoop't with Iron, where
Rich: II. son to the Black Prince, in searching for his fathers Jewels,
lighted on it, and much desired to be anointed with it. But the Archbishop
answered him, sibi sufficere quod semel per manus suas sacram suscepit in
Coronatione pristina Vnctionem, quae habere non debuit iterationem. The King
notwithstanding carried it with him into Ireland, purposing, perhaps, there to
have been anointed with it, but, in his return, at Chester he delivered it to
the Archbishop, confessing, that he did resolve it was decreed, he should not
be anointed with it, and so indeed it fell out. For, after him deposd, Henry
IV. was honored with this supposd divine Ointment in his Coronation. Then need
not the French argue their Kings Honor from the Celestial Unction, Vnguine cum
Reliqui sacrentur materiali,
as Brito says; Heers as good and Divine an Ointment for the English. But I
think, Reader, if you can Judge, you believe both alike, I relate this of our
Lady, as I find it; And credit it as I do the stories of Numa's being
instructed by Egeria, Minos or Talus by Jupiter, or indeed like the story of
that Vitreus Ordinationis liber, given by an Angel to Saint Columba for the
form of Adamann. Scot. Vit. S. Columb. lib. 2.
making Aidan King of Scots, about the year DC. and such more. Pretense of
Holiness and Particulars received from Saints or Angels wrought much, among
the Multitude, in establishing State Greatness. Examples are obuious. For more
Particulars in Unction of Princes, I send you to the diverse published
Coronations. Inunguntur Reges (says Thomas Epist. id Hen. 2. ap. Matthew. Paris.
Becket of Canterbury) in Capite, etiam pectore and brachijs, quod significat
Gloriam, Sanctitatem, and Fortitudinem. And it was long since said in 33. Ed.
3. tit. Aid de Roy. 103.
our Law, and applied to our Kings, that Reges, Sancto Oleo Vncti, sunt
Spiritualis Iurisdictionis Capaces. Neither is this anointing much
disproportionat to that which Alex. ab Alex. Genial. Dier. 1. cap. 27.
is deliuerd of a kind of initiating the old Persian Kings, at their
inauguration, with ceremonies of Religion. Of Ensigns external, the chief are,
CROWN or DIADEM, SCEPTER, GLOBE and CROSS; with other more particular to some
only, which by the way we shall also enough touch. Quis omnino Regum (says
Tertullian upon Aduers. Iudaeos. cap. 11.
that in Esaias cap. 9. 5.) insigne Potestatis suae humero praefert, and non aut
capite Diadema, aut in manu Sceptrum, aut aliquam propriae Uestis notam? So you
must read it, not aliqua proprietate vsus noua, as the Published Books (before
Pammelius his Edition) are in that place. I wonder how Beatus Rhenanus, and
Francis de La bar could not see it. Compare it with the like words of the
same Author in his III. against Marcion cap. 19. and you shall see most plain
reason for the correction. For CROWNS; To speak of them and all their several
ancient uses, were to stragle exceedingly out of the purpose. So different are
they, and far from the present matter. If you desire to know how they had
place in Bankets and feasts, among Lovers, in sacrifices and solemnities of
Gentilisme, rewarding deeds both Martial and Mercuriall, with such varieties,
Read the large discourses of them in Athenaeus, Pliny, Tertullian in his De
Corona Militis, Clemens Alexandrinus, Agellius, especially the diligent and
learned Paschalius. The ancientest mention of a Crown is in Moses, speaking of
the High Priests accoultrements, with his golden Triple (...) Exodus cap. 28.
and 39. Joseph. Archaeol. 3. cap. 8.
Crown, more particularly describd by Josephus. Tradition among the Gentiles
makes Bacchus the first inuentor of a Crown or Diadem. He, they say, first
made him one of Iuy (the same perhaps which he gave Ariadne) and by example of
his Maenades and Mimallons wearing such in his Orgia, Other Priests and
Sacrificers Crowned themselves with Herbs and Plants, dedicated to their
several Deities. Antiquitus (says Hist. Not. lib. 16. cap. 4. and lib. 7.
cap. 56.
Pliny) nulla nisi Deo dabatur. Ob id Homerus Coronas Gentium Dijs tributas
habes apud Ierem. in Epist. Baruchi. prophetiae subnexa.
Caelo tantum eas, and Praelio vniuerso tribuit. Viritim vero ne in certamine
quidem vlli. Feruntque primum omnium Liberum Patrem imposuisse Capiti suo ex
edera. Postea Deorum honori sacrificantes sumpsere, victimis simul coronatis.
Nouissime and in sacris certaminibus vsurpatae, in quibus hodieque non Victori
dant, sed Patriam ab eo Coronari pronuntiatur. Inde natum vt etiam
Triumphaturis conferrentur in Templis dicandae, mox vt and ludis darentur. But
in all these the honor was chiefly referred to some Deity, not to the Person
crowned. And those set by Lovers on the Posts of their Mistresses door, or else
where, were not so much to hirselfe as to Cupid or her Genius. Florea serta,
Meum Mel, and haec tibi Carmina dono,
Carmina dono tibi, serta tuo Genio.
Says Apuleius to his sweetheart. From the use of them in Sacrifices and
Dances sacred to their Idols, came the name Apion. ap. Athenaeum, Dipnosoph.
15. ex Simonide (cuius ibi citata carmina cmendatiora, vide apud Is. Casaubon.
In dictum locum) and Festus.
Corona, anciently written Chorona, and made Latin from (...) (signifying the
same that (...), i. a Crown) which they will from (...) or (...), i. the
Dancers or Singers, and number of the solemnizing Sacrificers; whereto
questionles Isidor Origin. lib. 19. cap. 30.
had respect in his, Nomen Coronae haec ex causa vocatum quod initio circum
aras curreretur, atque ad imaginem circuitus vel Chori est formata. Thus, by
ancient authority, that which is in our Idioms Corona or Crown had its
original. But how a Crown (except the Cloth Diadem, whereof presently) by that
name was among the Gentiles anciently for a Royal distinction, I conceiu not.
The Rewards given in the Grecian Games, Roman Wars, and elsewhere, show the
contrary. Demosthenes his Crown, about which so much Rhetorique was spent,
twixt him and Aeschines, and that of Hippocrates Dogma Athen. inter Hippocrat.
Epistolas. Vide quod Thueydid. hist. (...). habet de Brasida aurea Corona
donato, and taenijs ornato.
given him at Athens for his helping their Great Plague, and such more seem to
do as much. But Hippocrates his was of Gold and in value ((...)) DCC. L. pounds
of our Money; which plainly was not fit to be worn. But the value, being his
reward had this name (as other examples are and) as that Tribute was called
(...), which was paid to the Romans and other States by such as gave (...) as
Suidas his words are, i. not rather a Tribute to their Superiors, then a Crown
to their Friends. And (...), says he, (...), i. they call STEPHANICON
(CORONARIVM) what ever is given as a Reward or Benefit. And hence is it that in
the Embassages of sorrein Nations to Rome, so often occurres for presents,
(...). And a golden Crown was one special, among the Rewards given by the
Romans; their Murall, Castrensis and Nauall were Agell. lib. 5. cap. 6. Polyb.
hist. 6. alij.
of Gold, and in later time the Triumphall. I know some make the golden Crown
amongst them and the Graecians also, an old Ensign Royal. And Dionysius
Archaeolog. 3.
Halicarnasseus expressly delivers that the Hetrurians, amongst other Notes of
supremacy given to Tarquinius Priscus, furnished him with a golden Crown. So
in Euander's Aeneid. 8. and 12.
speech to Aeneas. Ipse Oratores ad me Regnique Coronam
Cum sceptro misit, mandatque insignia Tarchon.
And that Great Poet in another place,

-- ingenti mole Latinus
Quadrijugo vehitur curru, cui Tempora circum
Aurati bis sex Radij fulgentia cingunt
Solis aui specimen --
Which the learned Paschalius interprets for a Crown Radiant, and as a note of
supremacy. It might seem out of In Oreste.
Euripides his words, that among the Graecians it was so too. He speaking of
Atreus brother to Thyestes says: (...)
(...) --
Which is interpreted in the published books Cui dans Coronam, destinauit Dea
(Fatum, sieve Lachesis) Discordiam, which is well enough iustifi'd by Aresenius
the Greek Scholiast on that place interpreting (...) for (...), i. a Crown
proper to Kings. And Seneca In Agamemnone.
personates Thyestes with

Hoc est Vetustum Pelopeiae limen domus,
Hinc auspicari Regium Capiti Decus
Mos est Pelasgis --
Using in his Tragedies of those times the word Vincula for the Diadem or
Crown. And, of Agathocles in Egypt under the Ptolemies, Histor. 15.
Polybius, as Perott turns him, speaking of Aristomenes the Protector, has
Vocato ad se Agathocle Coronam Auream soli ex illis qui praesentes erant
imposuerat; id quod solis Regibus fieri solet. But none of these proves what
some learned would collect, although the chief of these testimonies are indeed
omitted by such as have labourd the question. To that of Halycarnasseus, may be
answered; he, being a Gracian and knowing that in his time the Triumphal
Ensigns had among them a Gold Crown, and that most of the rest were derived
from the Hetrurians, soon thought that thence the Golden Crown also had its
original. But Festus: Triumphales Coronae sunt, quae Imperatori Victori Aureae
praeferuntur, quae temporibus antiquis propter paupertatem Laureae fuerunt. If
they were of Baies anciently, how then were they of Gold? For here Festus must
be understood of Baies only in them, without mixture of Gold plates, which in
later time was used; as also to have both the Laurel and Gold Crown, as
Bullinger well obserus. And, then Dionysius his assertion, that the Crown and
other things there mentioned, were such as the Lydian and Persian Kings used,
being referred to the Crown, is false. For they used a Diadem of cloth as anon
we show. But the relation is better in Florus. Duodecim (says he of Tarq.
Priscus) Tusciae Populos frequentibus armis subegit. Inde Fasces, Trabeae,
Curules, Annuli, Phalerae, Paludamenta, Praetexta. Inde quod aureo curru
quatuor equis triumphatur. Togae pictae, Tunicaeque palmatae, omnia denique
decora and insignia quibus Imperij dignitas eminet. Where are included, it
seems, the Laurel and other such, but not as special Notes of Royalty; rather
of particular Triumphs, and communicated dignity. Could the Romans otherwise,
so much hating the name of a King, have tolerated Laurels and such Crowns so
soon after their Regifugium as they did? And for that of Tarchon, the
Exposition of Seruius Honoratus is directly against what others collect. He
interprets Regnique Coronam, by Insigne. Non reuera (are his words) Coronam,
quam Tusci Reges nunquam habuerunt; ergo species est pro genere. What can be
more plain? For that of Latinus his Twelve golden Beams on his head, who sees
not that they were as a Crest imitating the Sun, whose Nephew Latinus was by
Circe? That was no more a note of Royalty in him, then the like of Aetes, King
of Colchos, of whom in the Argonautiques attributed to Orpheus; (...)
(...) --
i. his head had a Radiant helm on it; for (...) and (...) is, to the
Ancients, an helm, as Corona also to the Seruius Honorat. ad Aeneid. 5.
Latins. And was not Aetes son to Phoebus, or the Sun? Both he and Latinus,
in memory of their Ancestors, bare on their helms those beams, as Caesar in
his coins did his Grand Dame Venus, as Parthenopaeus did his mother Atalanta,
or as Alexander did the Rams horns of Jupiter, Hammon (his supposd father)
whence he is called Dhilkarnijn, that is, double horned. And in Antiquity the
beams of the Sun, with a reference, it seems to the XII. Signs, were of the
same number, as the most learned Virgil expresses. That is justified out of the
old Interpretation of Dreams. One dreamed that he was a Sun, and had eleven
beams; the success was, that he became a General of an Army, but soon in this
Greatness died, because (as they Artemidor. Onirocrit. 4 c. 51
said) his dream containd not the perfect number of Beams: and the Lady
Martian. Capella de Nuptijs Philolog. lib. 2.
Philologie, at her Marriage with Mercury, says to Phoebus;

-- Radijsque sacratum,
Bis senis perhibent caput aurea lumina far,
Quod totidem menses, totidem quod conficis horas.
For that of Euripides, me thinks his Scholiast Arsenius talks as if he could
not see wood for trees: he confesses that (...) signify's (...), i. the wool
that goes about the distaffe, circling it as a Crown; for, as well wool as
hempen staff was so spun. And what then can (...) signify better then Carding.
i. Carminans? and, the whole thus interpreted, Cui, lanam carminans, neuit Dea
discordiam, Well iustifies the Noble Poets using and continuing the known
fiction of the Destinies in their spinning out of men's Fortuns. Nay, what could
be more proper in the allusion, then to suppose her first card or pull the
wool in pieces, and then make her web of Discord? And, for that of Seneca, who
knows not the common liberty of good Poets, in not keeping themselves to the
exact properties of their Tragedies or Comedies age, nor of the place of their
Scene? Though it be a great fault, yet it is an ancient one. And worthy Seneca
(living in a later time, when it was known that a Diadem was a Note Royal)
has not this example alone of that kind. What ever Perot has, Polybius
himself proves no such thing: His words are these, (...). i. he invited him
to a feast, and, among all then present, gave him only a golden Crown, which
by custom was allowd only to Kings. Because he had a crown of gold as proper to
a King at the feast, it follows not, that therefore it was an ornament Royal,
as it was a Crown, but as it was gold. For children in Philologie know that, at
feasts always, they all sat Crowned. This passage discouers that the King had
his Crown of gold, and therein Adi, si vis, Lips. ad 1. Annal. Tacit. Number. 129.
and Justin. lib. 18. de legatis Romany in Aegyptum missis.
differed from the ordinary Guests. The old Egyptian Kings honored their heads
with images of chosen Diodor. Sic. Biblioth. C.
beasts, not gold Crowns. And if the story of Moses his letting fall Pharaohs
Diadem Joseph. Antiq. Iud. 1. cap. 5.
be true, it may be well coniectur'd that it was a fillet, such as the
Asiatique Kings had, for otherwise had it been gold, Pharaohs discretion would
have been much desired, for putting it on a sucking child's head, the weight
would hardly have fitted the infant. And if Agathocles would have been like the
Macedonian Kings (which the story perswads enough that he would) he must have
had the cloth Diadem. Briefly, had the Ancient Heroes vsd any Crowns, as
Royal Notes, Homer would not have been silent of it. In his time, says a
learned Clem. Alex. Paedagog. 2. ca. 8.
Father, the Grecians had not use of Crowns. For neither the wooers nor the
delicious Phaeaces vsd them. And in Games, at first, the Reward was of such
things as were proposd ((...) Ita, hunc locum optime (vt omnia) emendauit. U.
Cl. Is. Casaubonus in Suetonij Neronem.
) then came in use ((...). i.) a gathering from the spectators, thirdly,
followd the casting of Flowers on them ((...)) and at last ((...)) the Crown.
Yet I beleeu not this whole Assertion. For plainly Homer has the word (...)
and (...), but to other purposes; and therefore, as the learnd have Casaubon.
Animad. in Athen. 1. cap. 16.
observed, knew what a Crown (as it was vsd) was. For a word in its proper
sense always is in being, before it can be made a metaphore. And in the
Heroique times, good authority expressly tells us of Crowns in their kind.
Hesiod says that the Horae-(...). i. Crowned with Spring-flowers Pandora. And
Hesiod is thought, by some, ancienter then Homer. But what is more obuious then
the Olive brought out of Northern Scythia by Hercules, and planted in the
Pantheion at Elis, whereof, the institution was that, all Crowns should be
made for Victors in the Pindar. Olymp. 3. Pausanias E^^ac. ae. and v.
Scholiast. ad Eurip. Hecubam.
Olympians? This they specially called Scholiast. Aristoph. ad Plutum. locus
vero ille Aristotelis, Scholiasti citatus, est in (...). vnde and legendum,
(...), non (...) (quod deprauatum apud Scholiastem) vti and Suidas in (...)
scripsit. Nec, vtrum e Pantheo an ex Hyperboreis, planta fuerit translata, hic
disputandum est.
(...), that is, whose leaves and twigs were fit to make a fair Crown. The
fabulous referring of the Original of Crowns to Bacchus, or Promotheus show
how ancient their use was. Nonnulli (says Hygenus, in his Poetical Astronomy,
of Prometheus) Coronam habuisse dixerunt, vt se victorem impune peccasse
diceret. Itaque homines in maxima laetitia doloreque Coronas habere
constituerunt. Id in exercitationibus and Conuiuijs perspicere licebit. But to
conclude the purposed point, Remember the relation of Diogenes Epicuretus. He
requested Alexander to Athenaeus Dipros. lib. 5.
give him the honor of wearing a golden crown with Virtues picture on it, whose
Priest he professed himself; Alexander did so, and Diogenes presently gave it to
his sweetheart Lysiodos, and she without exception ware it. The golden crown
(especially in some part of Asia, as Causabon observes) was an ensign of
Priesthood, and in that regard desird by Diogenes professing to be Priest to
Virtue. What thought was of it amongst them as it respected Royalty? These
testimonies as well proou that Crowns in both the Roman and Grecian state were
not anciently notes of a King, as also give light to answer other like
occurring arguments against it. For many are, but all I think of such kind, as
those before remembered. Its to be inquird how in other states. If you take a
Crown and Diadem as One (which may well be in respect they are both but Vincula
Capitis, and differ originally because only the Diadem was of cloth properly,
or a fillet of such stuff, and the Crown was of Gold, Baies, Olive, Oak,
Grass, Parsley, Iuy, and infinite more the like) then may you affirm that first
in Alexanders time the Crown or Diadem Royal was vsd in Europe. He, after his
Persian victory, habitum Regum Persarum (says Justin) and Diadema insolitum
antea Regibus Macedonicis, velut in leges eorum quos vicerat transiret,
assumit. And Q. Lib. 6. and 3.
Curtius: Purpureum Diadema distinctum albo quale Darius habuerat capiti
circumdedit. But whereas here Curtius says the Diadem was Purple distinguished
with white, in another place he writs Cydarim Persae Regium capitis vocabat
insigne: hoc, Caerulea fascia Albo distincta circuibat. So that the fillet
which was wreathd might have in it any fair good color (for so does Purpureus
signify, as Purpurea Nix in Pedio Albinouanus his Elegy to Liuia, and
purpurei Rami, for Oaken boughs, in Catullus) but for the King, of necessity
it must have been distinguished with white, which was a color in this more
proper to Majesty, it seems, then the right Purple in Robes; although he
Longinus apud Eunapium in vit. Philosophorum. Vid. page 83.
which named Porphiry in Greek Porphyrius, that is Purpureus, because in Tyrian
(Porphyrius was a Tyrian) his name was Melic, i. a King, did as if Rex and
Agathias, hist. 3.
Purpureus had been conuertible. But the Kings of the Lazi (a Scythian people)
might wear no purple but only white Robes. The Cidaris or Cittaris was the
same with what others call Suidas in verb. (...).
the Tiara, that is a kind of folded Cap, ending in a Cone, near like the
Eastern Turbants (or Tulipants) and is the same by translation with (...) i. a
Cocks comb. Thus is one anciently Aristoph. in (...) fab.
personated, speaking of the Cock, (...),
(...).
i. therefore to this day (the fiction supposed anciently in the first of time,
that Birds were Kings over men.) The Cock only as the Great King (that is, the
Persian) goes attired on his head with a Right Tiar or Cyrbasia. Where note
also another difference, that as the white fillet, so the standing up right of
the Tiar was proper only to the King, which the Scholiast upon that place out
of Clitarchus delivers. For it was common to the Persians to wear Eustathi. ad
Dionys Perieges. Tiaras exuere, ait Persis fuisse (...).
a Tiar, which in salutation they vsd (as we our hats) to pull off, but all
others were it (...), i. folded and inclining forward, as the Scholiast speaks,
which agrees with the report of Demaratus his request to Xerxes, vt Sardis
Seneca de Benefic. 6. cap. 31. Tantundem, Arrian. (...). 3.
maximam Asiae ciuitatem curru vectus intraret, rect^m capite Tiaram gerens: id
solis datum Regibus. But the white Diadem was proper only to him (except
Xenophon Cyrop. ed. 8.
some of the nearest blood Royal) and was not any part of the Tiar, as in what
before cited, appears, as also in that of Darius his fastening his Scepter
into the ground, putting on it his Martial Robe and Tiar, and Polyaenus
Stratagem. 7. cap. 8. and Videsis Sueton. lib. 6. cap. 13. de Teridatis
diademate.
binding them about with his Diadem, when he praid to Apollo for success. In
Plutarch's Lucullns, one hangs her self with a Diadem, which shows of what
nature it was. Therefore, whereas Justin, Curtius, and Diodore say that
Alexander used the Persian Diadem, I wonder why (...). 4. (...).
Arrian (he wrote about Adrians time) affirms that he took the Cidaris, from
which, being the same with the Tiara, it seems by Plutarch. in Alexan.
others, he generally abstaind, and ware the white Diadem upon his Causia: so
was the name of the Macedonian Suidas in (...).
Cap or Helmet. Perhaps Arrian took Cidaris for the Diadem, as Agathias does,
it seems, where he reports that after the death of Uararanes, his wife being
with child of a son (which the Magi had foretold, and therefore no question
was made of it) the Cidaris was put on the womb, as a ceremony of inaugurating
an unborn King, who afterward was Sapores or Sabores; the words of Agathias are
(...). Neither only the Persian, But most of the Asiatique Princes had this
kind of fillet or cloth Diadem, as of Mithridates of Plutarch. in Lucullo.
Pontus, Tigranes of Armenia, Attalus Idem in Apophth. Regum, vbi de Eumene.
of Lydia, and others, is reported. Yet an old coin of one of Attalus his
successors, is yet Scalig. Animad. ad Eusebium, page 321
extant with the head circled with a chaplet of some kind of leaus, and
circumscribed thus (...).
which I rather refer to the honoring of some Deity, to whom those leaves were
sacred, then any way take it for part of a Royal habit. The Princes of Asia in
later times (I mean chiefly the Chaliphs) have neither had the Diadem or Crown,
as Royal. Yet not for the reason which Bodin De Repub. 1. cap. 9.
gives, making such difference twixt the later Sultans there and the old
Chaliphs: whereas indeed the present Grand Signior reckons himself for a true
Chaliph, as is before shown; and as other suprem Princes in Mahumedisme,
challenges at his pleasure all rights of the old Chaliphs. But it seems the
Tartars (whence, the Turks) vsd, all of them, Tulipants before their Kingdom
established at Bagded, and therefore their Princes also having not before in
that kind any distinction, unless in price and greatness, continued to this
day, their first form. But the Saracen Caliphs, before their Othomanique
Empire, had (as its probable) the old Tiar or Cidaris richly set with stones,
and in it the Diadem. I affirm not absolutely so. But refer you to conjecture
from what was in those parts anciently so usual; and withal take this report
of one of those old Chaliphs (called by my Benjamin Tudelens. (Vt ab Aria
Montano versus) in Itinerario. scripsit circa, 1180.
author Alghabasi Ilhaphtzi, which I think to be Mustezi of the Abasin family:)
Vehitur ille mula, Regijs vestimentis ex auro and argento contextis indutus,
caput Cydari ornatus incomparabilis pretij lapidibus splendenti. Super Cydarim
vero nigrum sudarium gestat, quo gestamine saeculi huius verecundiam
profitetur. Whether this Cidaris had a Diadem or no, he expresses not. Of the
Othomaniques, its reported, that their first Author Othoman lies buried at Prusa
(chief City in Bithynia) having upon his Tomb, extrinsecus superimpositum
Leunclau. Ind. Libitinario.
Tulipantum, vetus, non admodum magnum, quodque spiras subtilius and maiori
artificio circumvolutas habet, quam in ijs Tulipantis videamus, quae Turci suis
nunc gestare capitibus solent. And this kind of Tulipant, they dare say, Joseph
the Patriarch first invented and vsd. The Great Sophi has at his inauguration
a kind of miter horned Cartwright in Peregrinat. vid. and Leunclau. Musulmanic.
1.
put on by his chief Chaliph, at his inthronization which was wont to be at
Caphe near Babylon, but since the Turkish Emperor won Assyria from him, at
Casbin sometime, and sometime at Hispaan it is performd. And its reported that
the Egyptian P. Martyr. Legate. Babylon. l. 3.
Sultans (after the Mameluchs had there ended the first Chaliphat) vsd to wear
a ridiculous Tulipant made of some Lx. or more yards of thin stuff diversely
folded, and so, that VI. Horns stood out of it, whereof four were about a span
length, and twixt them, the other two of a cubit long, like Snailes horns. But
the like also did all their great men of the chiefest Rank wear. Neque enim
(says my Author) postquam supremum gradum ascendit (Sultanus) dissonum ab
optimatum ornatu, de quorum ordine creatus est, habitum sumit. Neither might
any use this hornd Tulipant but the Sultan, the Mart. a Baumgarten Pereg. 1.
cap. 17.
Chaliph (or chief Priest) and those Princes which were of highest note. It was
negligently done therefore of Bodin to infer their not wearing of Crowns,
out of a supposd Canon made by the Caliphs, as if the later Princes had not in
account been true Chaliphs. Neither does he better in speaking to this purpose
of the Israelitique Kings. Its true they had Crowns and of gold, and were
anointed. They had those two, as the Priests. But, what other Asiatique Kings
vsd the like? As they were a peculiar people to God, so were their
Institutions, for the most part in every thing different from their Neighbors.
They had Gold, others Cloth. (...) Nobilem Valor. Maxim. lib. 7. cap. 2.. 5.
magis quam foelicem pannum: An ancient King said of the Diadem deliuerd to
him; and many other testimonies make it a white cloth fillet. -- Cinguntur
tempora Vitta Albente -- says Silius De Bell. Punic. 6.
Italicus of Massanissa, because he knew it was proper to a King. That alone
then being traduced out of Persia by Alexander, gave the times after him, the
name of Diadema, for the most special Note of Royalty. Hence is Interpreted
that in the Roman story, where a Laurel was set upon Caesar's statue wreathed
with a white fillet, or band, and the two Tribunes Marullus and Flauius
commanded the fillet to be plukt off, and him, that put it on, to prison, for
such wrong to Roman liberty in giving his statue a Diadem. Antonies Page 19.
offer is before remembered. And Pompey was suspected as one affecting a
Kingdom, for binding himself about the thigh with a white fillet, or Diadem
(they vsd then no breeches; but to cover a scar he had there receiud, he ware
the fillet, as others in Cas(...)on. in Sueton. lib. 2.
other times did in steed of Breeches) and thereof, its related; Ei candida
Valor. Maxim. 6. cap. 2.. 7.
fascia crus alligatum habenti, Fauonius, Non refert, inquit, qua in part
corporis sit Diadema. Exigui Panni cauillatione regias eius vires exprobrans.
For as the Name of King, after their Regifugium, so that sole Ornament Royal
was extremly hated by them, as these and enough other examples testify;
although the Athenian Democratie perhaps Iul. Pollux. Onomastic. lib. 8. cap.
12.
not so much fearing it allowed to their chiefest Magistrates the Nomophylaces
this white fillet, for the Ornament of their Dignity. But the Roman Emperors,
a long time daring not adventure upon so an apparent diminution of the peoples
liberty, vsd only Laurel or Gold Crowns which were never thought of or
suspected for, nor were Royal. Liberty of bearing a Laurel continually, was
first granted to Julius Caesar, by reason of his baldnes. After Augustus, at
every Imperial Triumph, the Laurel was taken only Xiphilin. in Nerone. Plin.
lib. 15. cap. 30. Sueton. in Galba
from the Plant of that kind which Liuia Drusilla took from the white Hen
brought into her lap by the Eagle, and set at Ad Gallinas, and which was noted
to wither away at the end of the Julian family in Nero, as the progeny of the
Hen did likewise. But the succeeding Emperors vsd not always to bear it.
Tiberium Principem (says Pliny) tonante coelo coronari ea solitum ferunt,
contra fulminum metus. Then always he ware it not. Remember here that
Antiquity held the Laurel to be exempt from all danger of Jove's Thunderbolts.
Plutarch and Dionysius, say, that Romulus was Crowned with Laurel as in triumph
after his victories. If he were, it was not as he was King, but as he triumphed.
But if all their Triumphall Ornaments came from the Tuscans, to Tarq. Priscus,
how then had Romulus any of them? The truth of those times, I think, as
uncertain, as any story whatsoever. But most probable and according to what is
already deliuerd, says Justin Historiar. 43.
of those Kings, Per ea adhuc Tempora Reges Hastas pro Diademate habebant; quas
Graeci Sceptra dixere. Nam and ab origin Rerum pro dijs immortalibus, veteres
Hastas coluere, ob cuius religionis memoriam adhuc deorum simulachris Hastae
adduntur. Which well agrees with their Name Quirinus, and Quirites, fetched from
Curis in the Sabin Tongue, signifying Hasta, or a Scepter. Curis Sabine Hasta
(says Festus) vnde Remulus Quirinus qui eam ferebat, est dictus. But the first
of their Emperors which ware a true Royal Diadem, was Aurelian, Victoris, de
hac re, verba superius habes, cap. 2.
about CCLXX. after our Savior: yet says Paul Warnfed of Diocletian: that he
Ornatum gemmarum vestibus calciamentisque indidit. Nam prius Imperij insigne in
chlamyde purpurea tantum erat, reliquaque communia. But Traian, Gordian and
others before him, were stamped in their coins with Laurels and Radiant Crowns
of Gold. But of Constantine the Great, (...) (says Cedren) (...). i. They say
that he first of all the Emperors vsd a Diadem. Yet Justinian speaks of his
Imperial Crown by the name of Infulae, which is the same as Fascia or Diadema
Seruius ad Aeneid. 10.
in the proper and first fense. His words C. de quadrienn. praescript. l. 3.
been.
to Florus are these. Quae ergo pro Augusto honor and cautela res
accipientium, nostra statuit aeternitas, haec tam sublimitas Tua, quaem caeteri
omnes Iudices nostri obseruare festinent, ex eo tempore valitur, quo nutu
diuino Imperiales suscepimus Infulas. But the Infulae were, it seems, those
strings or bands, whereby their Crowns made of precious stones, and gold, in
diverse fashions were tied on. For (as the Lips. de Cruc. 3. cap. 16. verum and
qui Numismata ediderunt haec copiole oftendunt.
pictures of Zeno, Justinian, Valentinian, Anastasius, Phocas, Constantin, and
diverse others, which we have out of their Coins, discover) their Crowns, and
Diadems were very different in form, but all of them tied behind with fillets,
as it seems, going round the head as the Crown or Diadem; as it is in that of
Heraclius more specially; which, being of gold, and raisd with variety of
conique plates, and the outmost circle not much differing from our Dukes
Crowns, but closd on the top more like what we call Imperial, is tied together
with a kind of Riband behind. Hence is it that George Curapalates said, that
what they of late called (...), was wont to be (...), i. Vinculum, which word
they left off, when the fashion of tying it with ribands ended. Their pictures
will better instruct you in the several forms, then my expressing can. But as
the Asiatiques anciently, and Macedondan Kings had their cloth fillets, as the
Turkish and Mahumetan Princes at this day their rich Miter or Tulipant: so from
the beginning of Christianity in European Supreme Kings and Emperors, the Gold
Crowns in those various shapes with which they are described, have bin in use.
And their differences now are of Close, and Archt, and Open, and the like. But
what is before transcribed out of the Roman Provincial, is here to be
Rememberd; and, that the Pope in giving the Kingdoms of Sardegna Act. Vatican.
ap. Bodin. de Rep. 1. cap. 9.
and Corsica to the King of Aragon, vsd the words of Per Capam Auream realiter
inuestimus. But all Supreme Monarchs, in later times, of right, use archt
Crowns, and as truly Imperial as the Emperors, but differing in composture.
For, the Emperors is thus described by Marcell. Corcyrens. lib. 1. Ceremon.
Sect. 5. and de Imperiali Corona. Pasch. lib. 9. cap. 8.
one who saw it. Differt forma Coronae Imperialis ab alijs: nam ea sub se
Tiaram quandam habet in modum fere Episcopalis mitrae, humiliorem tamen magis
apertam and minus acutam: estque eius apertura a front, non ab aure, and
semicirculum habet per ipsam aperturam aureum, in cuius summitate crux paruula
eminet. Eam Tiaram aliae Coronae non habent. And the bearing, or the top of the
Arch, in the Emperors, and in our Sovereigns, is a Mound and a Cross, in that
of the French King, a Fleur de lis, on the Popes a Cross. For he as a
Temporal Prince also bears his Crown upon grant pretended from Constantine
Uide vero Platinam in Syluest. 1.
the Great. The words of the Donation, as it is offered to the worlds sight, are
these: In praesentiarum tradimus primum quidem Lateranense nostri Regni
palatium, quod omnibus in Orb Terrarnm Palatijs praefertur and eminet:
Deinceps Diadema id est Coronam capitis Nostri. But the credit of this Donation
is before Page 56.
touched. And the Monks have affirmed that Sigebert. Gemblac. sub anno 510.
the Popes Crown, called Regnum, was that which the Emperor Anastasius sent for
a present to Chlouis the first Christian King of France, and that Chlouis then
bestowd it on the Pope. The general consent among Christian Princes in
wearing them of gold, proceeded from the Kings of Gods chosen people, who using
Crowns of gold and precious stones (...) (says an ancient Clem. Alex Paedagog
2. ca. 8.
Father) (...). i. Being anointed, bare Christ symbolically on their, head. He
alludes to the Ointment pourd on our Savior, and the gold offered to him as a
King. How well then this must fit a Christian Prince, appears plainly. Yet upon
occasion other Crowns have so metimes by them been worn; and that, Chaplets of
leaves, which you see in the example of Frederique Barbarossa, whose Chaplet or
Crown of Rue remains yet borne bendwise upon the Baries of the Dukedom of
Saxony. For, when Bernard son of Albert Urso, Marquess of Brandeburg, and
brother to Otho, the then Marquess, and to Sifrid Archbishop of Breme, was
made Duke of Saxony by the Emperor, he desird the Emperor to have some
difference added to his Arms, that so his might be distinguished from his
brothers, Tunc imperator (says Saxon. lib. 4. cap. 37. and lib. 9. cap. 19.
Krantzius) vt erat Coronatus per aestum, Ruteam Coronam iniecit ex obliquo
supplicantis Clypeo, which afterward (says he) was born so on their Coat,
being before barry Sable and Or. The Moscouite or Russian Emperor being
Christian, and of the Greek Church, and titling himself a King, as is already
showed, wears no Crown of gold or other metal, but only a Rich Cap of Paul.
Oderborn. vit. Theodori. 1.
Furple, if my Author deceive not; and for his Ornaments, you shall hear an
Sigismund. Liber in reb. Moscouitic.
Ambassador from the Archduke to Basilius then Emperor there, thus describing
his presence of State. Princeps in loco eminentiore ac illustri, pariete
imagine Diui cuiusdam splendente, aperto capite sedebat, habebat que a Dextra
in Scamno pileum (Kopack) sinistra vero baculum cum Cruce (Posoch) atque peluim
cum duobus gutturnijs, adiuncto impositoque mantili. Aiunt Principem cum
Oratori Romanae fidei manum porrigat, credere homini se immundo and impuro
porrigere, atque ideo co dimisso manus lauare, which, for that special
custom, the rather I cited. But out of what is here deliuerd, may well be
collected that Victor, or Warnfreds Assertions of Diocletian and Aurelian
(which others follow also) may stand with that of Cedren touching Constantine,
if you so interpret Constantins Diadem, that he was the first that in imitation
of the Jewish Kings, took a Crown of their kind of Vide si placet, Card.
Baronium, tom. 3. qui and coniecturae huic nostrae, adamussim, antiquorum
numismatum fide nixus astipulatur.
Materials, for a Royal Diadem, before whom the Cloth or Fillet was vsd
among his near Predecessors. For it might well be so in him that was so much
an Author and Propagator of Christianity in his Empire: And his Nation have a
tradition of a Crown and other habiliments sent him Constant. Porphyrog. cap.
12.
from heaven, the relation whereof I willingly abstain from, but for this
matter, add that I guess, the Jewish Kings had their's Radiant, upon that of
our Saviors of Thorns. For, since they purposd in their mockeries to imitate
in their marks of Royalty, the Crown, Scepter, and Robe of a true King, what
in a Crown of Thorns was better resembled then a Crown Radiant? Near what the
Duke Paschal. de Coronis. l. 9. c. 13.
of Florence his is by gift from Pope Pius Quintus. More of their forms will
appear in fitter place, when we speak of them as they are the ornament Of
other, but Inferior Dignities. Some Galfred. Monum. lib. 1. and 9.
authority is that Dunuallo Molmutius, wore a gold Diadem among our old
Britons, and that Athelstan, the first of Saxon Kings, I am too suspicious of
my Author, to make you beleeu it as a truth and; Ethelwerd that lived in
DCCCCL. of Christ, speaking of Edward, successor to Alured, and predecessor to
Athelstan, expressly says that he was Coronatus stemmate Regali, which was
but XL. or L. years before Ethelwerds time, who being a Great man, and of the
blood Royal, might easily in that know what he said. The traditions of
Scotland are, that until King Achaius, the royal Crown, from their first
Ferguse, was of Gold, Militaris valli Hector. Boet. Hist. 2. and 10. Circa An.
800.
forma, or plain; But that he added to the plain Circular Crown, quatuor
lilia aurea, quatuor cum salutiferae Crucis aureis signis paribus interuallis
discretis, lilijs paulo eminentoribus. And to this Achaius is attributed the
addition of the Bordure fleury about the Scottish Lion, Significans (says
Hector) Francorum opibus, quibuscum foedus inierat, Leonem exinde muniendum. Of
the Westgoths in Spain, its expressly deliuerd that the first Roderic. Tolet.
lib. 2. cap. 14. and Marian. lib. 5. cap. 13.
which Regia (...)signia atque instrumentum principale, Trabeam, sceptrum,
Diadema gestauit, was Lewigild about DLXXX. of Christ. Nam ante cum (says
Isidore) and habitus and consessus communis vt genti ita and legibus erat. I
have here differd from what Alexander ab Alexandro, Paschalius, and others
deliver of Crowns and Diadems. But I imagine it is easier for me much to
justify my assertions, then they those of theirs, against which mine are here
opposd. I appeal to my cited autors: But more proper to Royal Majesty, from
all antiquity, has the SCEPTER been. Although Homer give his Kings no Crowns,
yet he specially gives them Scepters, and calls them (...). i. Kings with
Scepters. And he makes Agamemnons only note of supremacy a Scepter, which he
says Vulcan made and gave Jove, from whom Mercury receiud it, from him Pelops,
from whom Atreus, from Atreus, Thyestes, who left it to Iliad. (...). and recte
(...) apud Apollon. Argon. 4.
Agamemnon: -- (...)
(...)
therewith to rule all Peloponnesus and many Isles. The like in proportion has
Uirgil. The Argonautiques of Orphous (as we call them, but indeed of
Onomacritus) expressly adorn Aetes with a Scepter. And the Egyptians, to
Macrob. Saturn. 1. cap. 21.
paint their Osiris (the sun, and suprem King in course of created nature)
drew an Eye and a scepter. But more ancient authority then any of this, is in
holy writ where you Genes. cap. 49
have, The Scepter shall not depart from Judah nor a Lawgiuer between his feet
until Shilo come: which was to confirm the perpetuity of a Jewish supremacy
(not of one tribe it seems, as most learned men have affirmed) amongst that
Nation until Christ came. Which yet was satisfied as well in the Priests, and
those Aichmalotarchae (they are called Capita Captiuitatis in Arias his
Benjamin) as in Kings. For, almost CCC. years after the Babylonique
captivity, was no King there: the first which wore Joseph. Antiq. Iudaic. 13.
cap. 19. and Vide Hoseae cap. 3.
a Diadem, after that, being Aristobolus son to Hyrcanus. And as (...) in
Greek, so as exactly agreeing in the holy tongue, a King is Amos cap. 1. Com. 5.
called (...) i. one that has a Scepter. And for the old Roman state, what we
have before out of Iustine, is sufficient. From this antique symbol of
Sovereignty, is that interpretation of Mercuries bearing a Caduceus (which is a
rod or little staff wreathed about with two Snakes) quod Mercatoribus (as
Fulgentius his words are) det aliquando Regnum, vt Sceptrum, and Vulnus vt
Serpentium. Of the Persian King, to this purpose, the story of Esther has
enough. The ancientest Scepter among the Graecians Scholiast. ad Pythionic. et
vide si placet, and Prophet. Baruchi cap. 6 com. 13.
must forsooth be supposd to Jupiter, who bare his Eagle on the top of it, as
Juno did a Cuckoo on hirs, Minerua an Owl, Apollo a Faulcon; although upon a
particular reason, the statue of Jupiter Labradeus in Caria held an Plutarch.
in Problem. Graec. 45.
Axe not a Scepter. But you must conceive that King of Birds assumd by him upon
the good fortune of War he had against the Titans after an auspicious
Anacreon ap. Fulgent. Mythol. 1. Isidor. Origin. 18. cap. 3.
flight of an Eagle toward him in the field. So they fable. In imitation of
this Tradition, ensuing Princes vsd to have Eagles and other Birds on the top
of their Scepters, but most specially Scholiast. ad Aristophanis (...).
Eagles. And its delivered that most of the old Herodot. in Clio.
Babylonians ware seal rings and bare Scepters (or little staves) usually, but
none without something on the top; either an Apple, Rose, Lilly, Eagle, or some
such like. I guess the Eagle was most proper for their Kings; which amongst
the Persians Xenophon. Cyropaed. 3.
also was the Ornament of their Standard. Hence came the Eagle to be borne by
the Romans in the field (not upon a banner as now, but) in an image upon the
top of a spear or long piece, fixed at pleasure in the earth, or borne, whereof
neat Lipsius at large in his Commentary on Polybius. And it was one of the
marks Consular or rather Triumphant in Rome, to have an Iuory Scepter with an
Eagle on the top of it, which Iuuenal means in that Da nunc and volucrem
sceptro quae surgit eburno.
So they bare it in their triumphs; whereof Origin. 18. c. 2. and Appian. in
Punicis.
Isidore: Super Scipionem autem aquila sedebat, ob indicium quod per victoriam
quasi ad supernam magnitudinem accederent: and the chief ornament of great men's
tombs has bin in the image of an Eagle set on them as the Antipater Antholog
lib. 3. cap. 4. and cap. 33.
Epigrams upon Aristomenes and Plato show us. From this ancient honor of the
Eagle was derived it seems, the wearing of Golden Eagles painted on the Eastern
Emperors shoes: Georg. Phranz. lib. 3. cap. 18.
and its reported that only by this note of greatness, the body of Constantine
Dracosis the last Greek Emperor there, in the taking of the City by the Turks,
was found out. My autors words (upon Pontanus his credit in the translation,
for he is not published in his own language) are these. Abluebant capita
occisorum plurima, si forte and Imperatoris noscitarent: nec poterant, nisi
quod corpus exanime inuenerunt, idque ex imperatorijs calciamentis agnouerunt,
in quibus (vt Imperatoribus consuetum erat) Aquilae Aureae depictae visebantur.
Yet its certain, the having Eagles so painted was not solely proper to the
Emperors. Both the Despote and Sebastocrator had so. George Codin is my
witness. It was allowd them by the Emperors among their ensigns of Honor; as
they had also other marks which in story are as appropriated to Imperial
greatness. As, Heraclius was known Anastas. Biblioth. hist. 18.
ex rubris Ocreis. i. by his purple Buskins in the field twixt him and the
Persian; yet it is plain, that in later times it was given as a liberty of
special honor to wear Purple or Zathi Regi Lazorum indulgetur. Agathias hist.
3.
Red shoes; which Nicetas Choniates calls, as it were, the Right (...). And the
old Alban Kings had the like, whom, I. Caesar Dio hist. 43. and videsis V. Cl.
I. Casaub. in Suetonij lib. 1.
deriuing himself from them by Iulus, imitated. But the Roman Consuls had their
gilt Shoes, if Cassiodore deceive not, whose authority, I think, is sole in this
point. Consulatus te decoramus insignibus (are his Variar. lib. 6. form. 1.
words) Pinge vastos humeros vario color palmatae, validam manum victoriali
Scipione nobilita, lares proprios etiam Calceis Auratis egredere. And Lipsius
thinks hereupon that they were a special Ornament Consular; but its certain
that in Rome both Purple, golden, and variously colored shoes were in a more
common use, as Enchiridij cap. 61.
Epictetus his touching that Vanity discouers. But, for the Scepter, remember
that of Politic. lib. 3. cap. 10.
Aristotle, where he speaks of the Heroique Princes which gouernd (...). i.
Some vnsworn, others being sworn; but their Oath was the lifting up of the
Scepter. And thereupon, has In (...).
Suidas, (...). i. the sacramental Scepter whereby Kings did swear; which
custom some old Monk had obserud when he made Ex ms. historiae de Gest. Alex.
calce, haec cum alijs Epigrammatis transcripsimus.
these upon Aristotle and Alexander, aided truly by a special Muse for those
times:

Magnus Alexander bellum mandarat Athenis:
Infestus Populo totius vrbis erat.
Ibat Aristoteles caute temptare tyrannum,
Si prece vir tantus flectere posset eum.
Quem procul intuitus Sceptrum Capitisque salutem
Testans; non faciam, si qua regobis, ait.
Mutat Aristoteles causam subtiliter; Vrbem.
Obsideas, frangas, maenia Mart petas.
Poenituit iurasse Ducem, Bellumque roganti
Dat Pacem, lusus calliditate Viri.
You shall hardly meet with an allusion among those lazy Monks of so much
antique property as this. Although notwithstanding the author mistook the story;
for it should have been of Pausanias in (...).
Anaximenes, and the Lampsacens, not Athenians, nor of Aristotle. And also its
expressly reported in the Greek story that he swear by the Gods of Greece.
But howsoever for the truth, this conceit of the Scepter was both learnedly and
wittily vsd by him. For also old Homer makes Achilles Iliad. (...). et ibi
Eustathius.
swear (...) --
Truly by this Scepter: and calls it (...) the great oath. Which Virgil imitates
in the league twixt Aeneid. lib. 12.
Aeneas and Latinus, where the reason is given because the Scepter is for the
presence of Jupiter, whose statue was wont to be touched in those solemn Oths.
Seruius thus: Vt autem Sceptra adhibeantur ad foedera, haec ratio est, quia
Maiores semper simulacra Iouis adhibebant: quod cum toediosum esset praecipue
quando fiebant cum long positis gentibus, inuentum est, vt Sceptrum tenentes,
quasi imaginem simulacri redderent Iouis. Sceptrum enim ipsius est Imperium.
Vnde nunc tenet Sceptrum Latinus non quasi Rex sed quasi Pater patratus. In
Christianity there is now appropriated to supreme Princes a GLOBE, and an
infixt CROSS, which you see usually pictured in their hands, as also anciently
and at this day in the top of our Soueraigns Crowns. The Chief Elector the
Count Palatine of Rhine bears it at the right hand of the Emperor of Germany
at his inauguration and such solemn Processions, as the Duke of Saxony carries
the Imperial Sword before him, and the Marquess of Brandeburg the Scepter on
the left. The Bull of Charles IV. calls it Pomum imperiale, whereto the Greek
stories agree naming it (...), and the bearer (...), as if you should say, one
that bears the Apple. By that very name were a thousand known of the Persian
Kings guard in ancient time, which bare golden Apples on the top of their
Spears, (...), as Dipnosoph. lib. 12.
Athenaeus describes them. Poliaenus, Aelian and others remember them. But the
Globe and Cross is first, as my observation has instructed me, in Theodosius
the first his coins thus deliuerd by Occo: CONCORDIA AVGG. G. B. CONOB. Statua
galeata sedens; dextra pomum cum Cruce, sinistra rhabdum. He was Emperor CCC
LXXX. after our Savior. The later Graecians have given a reason of the bearing
it. When Justinian 1. had encreast the glory of S. Sophies Church, and adornd
it with diverse columns and Statues, he placed also there his own holding in
its left hand a Globe ((...)) with an infixt Cross Codin. Orig. Constantinop.
(...). Procop. de aedificijs Iustiniani lib. 1. Suidas in Iustiniano. nec
omittendus hic Theodorus Douza in Chron. Georgij Logothetae, page 70. Meminit
and Statuae Iustinianeae Globique and Crucis Guilielmus de Badensel in
Hodoeporico.
(...) i. as being become Emperor of the whole world through Faith in the
Cross. For the Globe is the Earth, being of a globous figure. Faith is
signified by the Cross, because Christ was naild thereunto. It is thus expressed
in the Coronation of Frederique II. of Danmark, father to the present
Christiern:

Tandem etiam Malum, cui Crux infixa nitebat
Aurea, laeua capit Regis, praesente sacrorum
Praeside quod faciem effigiabat totius Orbis
Vt discat quae iam latissima regna capessat
Esse sibi gestanda Manu quasi, Durior olim
Si qua premat Miseros sors regni forte Colonos:
Imperiumque vni, quem Crux designat, Jesus
Acceptum referat, solus qui temperet Orbem
Arbitrio and nutu Celestem torqueat Axem.
But the figure of Justinian in his coins has this Globe and Cross in the
right hand, as also have diverse other of the Emperors. But how conceit came
afterward to make this an Apple I understand not, unless with like imagination
as Jupiters statue in Constantinople with three Apples was interpreted for his
supreme power over the three parts of the world. But when it became first to be
an Imperial ensign given at the inauguration, as the Crown and Scepter are, I
know not, unless you refer it to Henry II. the Emperor to whom Pope Boniface
VIII. gave it for an Imperiale insigne, A. M. XIII.
and as it seems by my author, first causd it to be vsd as a property of
inauguration. It Is Rodulphus Glaber that speaks of it, and in these words: Anno
igitur Dominicae Incarnationis Ita legit and recte sane Illust. Cardinal.
Baronius Tom. 11. deprauatum illum Glabri locum. lib. 1. cap. 5.
Milesimo decimo tertio licet insigne illud Imperiale diuersis speciebus prius
figuratum fuisset, Venerabili tamen Papae Benedicto sedis Apostolicae Al. Visum.
iussum est admodum intellectuali specie. Qui idem insigne praecepit fabricari
quasi aureum pomum atque circundari per quadrum pretiossimis quibusque gemmis
ac desuper Auream Crucem inseri, and this the Pope gave him, which he bestowed
on the Monks of Clugny. If the credit of the British Arthurs seal pretended
anciently for a most special monument in Westminster Abbey, were sufficient,
it would follow that our Kings had vsd it as soon as the Roman Emperors. For
until Justinian it seems it was not ordinary in their statues. He was Emperor
in DXXX. and then was our Arthur King of Britain. Neither can any question be
of his reign, although much is and justly, of his abusd victories. But his
form in that seal of his, is thus, by Leland. Assert. Artburij.
one which saw it, described. 'Purpura regaliter indutus Princeps sedet super
hemicirculum, qualem videmus pluuium arcum. Capite coronato fulget. In dextera
consurgit Sceptrum ipso liliatum vertice. Sinistra vero orbem Cruce insignitum
complectitur. But the Globe was, before Theodosius, usually held in the hands
of Emperors, as their Coins witness. And the Cross also alone amongst those
which were not Christian has been found, by like testimony. Figura stolata
cum Cruce and Victoriae super Basim, is the description of one of Gallien's
Coins by Adolph Occo. But the addition of the Cross to the Globe, and
religious use of it in Diadems, Statues, pictures, Banners, and such like
proceeded from the Great Constantine his so much honoring that divine Symbol.
For, when Maxentius usurped the Imperial name against him, he Sollicitudinibus
constitutus in somnio vidit Crucis signum Coelo splendide collocatum;
mirantique visionem (the words are Tripartit. hist. 1. cap. 4. Sozom.
Cassiodor's) adstiterunt Angeli dicentes: O Constantine (...).
IN HOC VINCE. Fertur autem and ipsum Christum apparuisse ei, signumque
monstrasse Crucis, ac praecepisse vt figuram similem faceret, and in praelijs
auxilium hoc haberet, quo victoriae iura conquireret. Others supposing it at
noonday appearing to him and his Army, not speaking of the dream. But all
agree that hereupon he made his (Labarum) most conspicuous with the Cross.
This Labarum was a long Spear or great Eusebius. de Vita Constantin. 1. cap. 25.
v. and Metrophanem ap. Photium Cod. 256.
Pole expressing the figure of a golden Cross; on the top whereof a Crown of
precious stones and gold was fixed. Under the Crown in a Banner was expressed the
two letters of our Saviors name Christ; the one crossing the other, that is X
and P. So doubtless, as the monuments of those times persuade, must the place of
Eusebius reporting this, be understood, although some by
turning (...) into, in quo (whereas they should have made it iuxta quod or sub
quo) offer an imposture to their Readers, which places the X and P in the
Crown, not in the Banner; whereas that Crown is no essential part of the
Standard, but sometimes v. Lipsium de Cruce. 3. cap. 15. and Iconas ibidem.
wanting; the Banner only comprehending those two Elements of that most saving
Name. Hence Contra Symmach. lib. 1.
Prudentius (who liud some LXXX. years after Constantine under Honorius) by
Apostrophe to Rome:

Agnoscas Regina libens mea signa necesse est,
In quibus effigies Crucis, aut gemmata refulget,
Aut longis solido ex auro praefertur in hastis.
And, of his name signed by (...) mixed,

Christus Purpureum gemmanti textus in Auro
Signabat Labarum; Clypeorum insignia Christus
Scripserat; ardebat summis Crux addita cristis.
-- Tunc ille Senatus
Militiae vltricis titulum, Christique verendum
Nomen adorauit quod collucebat in armis.
Understand the name, by. For about those times alone was a known Julian. in
Misopagone.
sigle for our Savior, which yet they would not, it seems, without P use,
because of another interpretation of ill note, which the learned know, by the
old Graecians was applied to it. After that in his wars against Maxentius,
this great Emperor had by those holy auspices such success, that Maximam
Cassiodor hist. Tripartit. lib. 1. cap. 9.
culturam sacratissimae Crucis haebebat. -- Denique supplicium Crucis, quod
primitus apud Romanos erat in vsu, lege prohibuit. In figurationibus autem
solidorum and in imaginibus, hoc signum iussit inscribi semper and figurari.
The Apostata Julian took from the Labarum those notes of Christianism, but they
were (as is found in Baronius Tom. 4. fol. 146. and 334.
ancient testimony) restored by Ualens and Valentinian. By Edict of C. lib. 1.
tit. 8. and de Iudaeis l. 11. and Synod. in Trull. can. 73. ap. Harmenop. Epit.
Theodosius II. and Valentinian III. signum saluatoris Christi Nemini licet vel
in solo, vel in silice, vel in Marmoribus humi positis insculpere vel pingere;
sed quodcunque reperitur tolli; whereto a Publication Landulph. Sag. Miscell.
17.
of Tiberius II. agrees. Neither was any subscription or Note (without letters)
among them, or of such authority as this Venerabile Signum, as C. de Iure Delib.
l. 22.. 2. (...) vide Leonis ^mp. Novel. 73.
Justinian to this purpose, calls it. And, as it was in the Standard, it is
usually in later Greek stories, titled (...); as if you should say, the Palm
of Victory. How frequent it is now and of ancient time has been in Diadems,
Coat Armors, Temples of Christians and the like, every man may see or know.
But, as with us it is the common ensign of every Church, Religious house,
Christian Prince, and Army of the holy wars (whereupon, in ancient time, the
very erecting of a Cross gave Stat. West. 2. cap. 37.
privilege against Temporal Right) as a testimony under whose banner we
fight, so with the Mahumedan Turks, the Croissant or half Moon, as a Religious
symbol, is as commonly set on the top of their Meschits, Seraglias, Turrets
and such like; which is not unfitly here remembered, being the chief Imperial
Enfigne of those miserable Professors. Neither, I guess, can it but please, if
something be added here of the reason and original of that superstition. It may
be referd to this fabulous and most ridiculous relation. Mahumeds followers,
they say, looking on the Moon when she was toward Cantacuzen. (...). Sermon. 2.
and vide Alcoran. Azoar. 64.
conjunction (at what time she is as a Croissant also in form, although of a
contrary posture in heaven) desired him to show them some Miracle. He with his
two fingers pointed at her, whereupon she presently fell in two pieces; the one
piece falling down on the hill Elcais in one part of Mecha, the other on the
Red hill in the other part of Meca: but at length both pieces came together
into Mahumeds lap, or In Manicam Camisiae Machometi Epitom. Sacror. Bell. apud
Canis. Antiq. Lect. Tom. 6.
his shirt sleeue, and so he put her whole into heaven again. But this is as
true, as, that Doctrine. Machumet. ab Hermann, translata.
Gabriels wing touching the Moon was the only cause why she differs so much
from the Sun in light. Laugh at these, and you shall have a better inquiry.
The Ancient and present Arabian account is by Lunar years, as infants in
Astronomy know. In the Root of their Hegira (which is as much as Persecution,
and in the Alcoran occurrs by the name of Alhegire; and supputated from the
flight of Mahumed, out of Mecha, being under Heraclius A. Chr. DC. XXII. is
always vsd for the date of the Grand Signiors letters as before is remembered)
it so fell out that the New Moon of theit first Month Mucharam (whence as we
from March, they account; saving the unsteadfastness happening by intercalations,
which Lunar years must have) reckoned by their annual course of Mean Motion,
then differing, in this Hagaren year, near three days from the True Motion of
the Moon, was the third day after the true Conjunction or Change: at which time
commonly in our Croissant form her apparition is in any climat. Neither could
the New Moon of that Hagaren year otherwise fall out, it being the XVI. of our
July and Friday. Vnde sine dubio (says Divine De Emendat. Temp. lib. 2.
Joseph Scaliger) hodie omnes Muhamedistae in fastigijs summis Turrium illarum
e quibus Lunam nascentem speculantur, imponunt Lunam Corniculatam pro Insigni
quemadmodum Christiani Crucem. For it could scarce be likely but that they,
who so religiously had fabled of their Impostor Mahumed, and regarded his
particular Actions with such superstition, must, with all Reverence, observe
and honor the Moon, in that form as she appeard when their great Prophet was
persecuted, when as their whole generation have with such Scaliger. Can.
Isagog. lib. 3.
acclamations of joy, dancing, leaping, and hope of foreshown happiness, always
entertaind her first, and every monthly apparition, calling her then Nalka i. a
Horseshoe, from the likeness of figure. But that is not without example from the
Jews, who most anciently held their New Moons (as Ante alia vero consulas
Psalm. 81. com. 3
testimony of holy Writ frequently shows) which Horace calls their Tricesima
Sabbata. And at this day (so In Prolegomenis ad Emend. Temporum.
Scaliger teaches me) as soon as they see her after Conjunction, they
presently cry (...). i. Good Fortune to us and to all Israel; as the old Greeks
were wont to salute their Lights brought to Table with Good Light Varro de
Ling. (...)t. 5.
(...), somewhat like our custom in the same matter. Idem (that is, as the
Jews, says my most noble author) faciunt and Muhammedani, quamuis Neomaenias
ex scripto indicere soleant. But the most ancient Arabians had their chief
Goddesss Alilat (by Herodotus interpreted Urania) which by all likelihood was
but the Appearing Croissant known to this day among the Mahumedans by the name
of (...) i. Halilat, whence Alilat is plainly made: unless rather from the
spurn Lilith (...) mentioned in Isa. cap. 34. La(...)a est Interpretibus,
(...)x, and similia.
holy Writ, which the Jews say is a Spirit very Dangerous to young Children or
Women in Childbirth, whereupon their custom is (especially of the German Jews)
at the Elias in Thisbit. verb. (...) ex Ben Sira.
Birth-times of their Women, to chalk out on every of the walls of the Chamber
in a Circle, this charm: (...)
i. Adam, Heue, Hence (or out) Lilith. And in the inner door of the chamber
they write the names of three Angels, Senoi, Sansenoi Samanegeloph (preseruers
of young children) which they learned once of Lilith when they would have drowned
her in the Sea. A learned and discreet tradition! Whether with this Alilat,
Lilith, or Halil, the name of Ilethyia, being, in Pindar somwhere (...), for
Lucina, among the Gentiles, had the same origination, I inquire not here. Their
offices and attributes are common Theocrit. idyll. 28. -- (...)
enough, to offer persuasion, which may induce you to think so. Children know
that Lucina and the Moon are as one: and Lilith had (I doubt not) its beginning
from (...) or (...) i. the Night, and is, if the later Iod be turned into Vau,
the plural Number of (...), whence Jonathan Ben-Vziel makes it expressly in
his Chaldee (...), as if he should have said Nights; and that Halil in
Arabisme is but Noctiluca from the same root. Whence (under great Scaligers
favor) I am near persuaded that their honor to the Croissant is more ancient
then the Hegira. And have we not authority beyond exception, that the Camels of
Zaebah and Zalmunna Iudic. cap. 8. com. 21.
two Midianit (or Ismaelitique) Kings slain by Gideon, had about their necks,
as acknowledging their Royal Masters by their ensigns, (...), which the
Rabbis interpret the Images of the Moon. Crescents also were worn upon the
Senators of Shoes in Rome, which is best deriud from their descent out of the
Arcadian Nation, which called themselves (...) i. Antelunares; not that they
faind themselves more ancient then the Moon (as some idly) but because they
would undertake no matter of moment before the New moon, as the Lacedaemonians
would not till the Full. Kinds of superstition common to the old Germans,
Gauls, and others. Hence is the Lunata planta in Martial, the like in others.
And Syluar. 5. in Protreptic. ad Crispin.
Statius Sic te, clare puer, genitum sibi Curia sensit,
Primaque Patricia clausit vestigia Luna.
How much the Crescents or (...) i. little Moons were wont to honor statues and
Images may be seen in Aristophan. in (...). and Scholiast.
Greek Antiquities. Although, I know, the most noble and learned Comme^t. ad
Priapeia. vide si placet, H. Grot. ad Arati Imagines.
Ios. Scaliger supposes them set on rather to keep the statue from being
defiled by Birds sitting on them, then for addition or note of honor; and he
finds fault with Painters, which in Christianisme also set them on pictures,
where that use of them cannot be. But, I am sure, in diverse old coins, you
shall have them on the fronts of the faces; to what purpose, I cannot judge,
unless for a mark of Honor. Yet some learned Busbeq. and Lips. Epistol^c.
quest. 1. Epist. 16
men have thought that it was a proper Ensign of the Constantinopolitans or
Byzantins, because diverse pieces have been found with a Croissant, and inscribd
(...). And thence they imagine the Grand Signior took it, vt signum victae
Gentis penes quam (as Lipsius speaks) Orientis imperium esset. But I must not
subscribe to them. How much, even since the blessed propagation of
Christianisme the New moons have been, and superstitiously, regarded, is known
out of their Harm^nopul. Epit. Canon. sect. 3. tit. 3. ex Synodo in Trullo
habita and v. Chrysostom. Homil. 203. Edit. Ducaeana. aduersus (...).
Bonfires and such iollities vsd at them. But for the Mahumedans, and Hagarens,
questionless to their Moon, Alilat, Halil, Nalka (which are all one) you may
reduce their Uenus, on whose week day their law is supposd given, and to her
Planet, the change or continuance Petr. de Alliacode did. leg. Cap. 1.
of it is by Astrologers (I inquire not how well) referd as Christian
profession to the Sun, the Jewish to Saturn, and the like. But Historians
think falsely their Venus to interpret Cubar or Cobar so famous among them. For
Cubar or Cobar is nothing by interpretation but (...), Potens, Mighty, and so
is but Halil, Lunus, or Luna, and by no means (as I guess) Venus, if you take
Venus, as we do, for the first Planet, but well enough, if you consider the
name, as designing only a Goddess or Star of sight generally, which Cubar
will well endure. And those Eastern parts had ever anciently the Moon under
both Sexes in their Devotions. Lunus Spartian. in Caracall. vbi and consulendus
V. Cl. Is. Casaubonus.
and Luna. Which seems not of younger beginning then the adoration of the Sun
among the Persians: which as the Crescent now to the Mahumedans, was in some
sort used, and set upon their Royal pauillions. Patrio more Persarum (says
Curt. lib. 3. and Xenophon. lib. 8. Cyropaediae.
Curtius) traditum est orto sole demum procedere: die iam illustri, signum e
tabernaculo Regis buccina dabatur. Super tabernaculum vnde ab omnibus conspici
possit, image Solis crystauo inclusa fulgebat. But of their Moon thus much. And
thus much of the External Ensigns of Majesty. Other particulars there are to
this purpose. But either so obsolet, that our Age has not to do with them, as
the carrying of Fire before the Persian, and Roman Emperors; the Ius Capillitij
of France, and the like. Or so peculiar to some only, that they are rather to
be referd to the Countries custom and Ceremony, then Royal Majesty.

TITLES OF HONOR.
SECOND PART.
PRinceps, and Princeps Iuuentutis. Caesar, when first the Title for the
apparent successor. Rex Romanorum. Despote, Sebastocrator, Caesar,
Panhypersebastus, in the Eastern Empire. The Despotes Crown. An Innominat Title
before Despote. Daulphin. The beginning, cause, and signification of that name
in the French heirs. Humbert Daulphin his Epitaph in Paris. The Salique law,
and its interpretation. Goropius his coniesture why the Franks allow not Women's
government. Monsiuer, title of the Brother and heir. The custom of the French
Peers being at the Queens Childbirth. Clyto, Clitunculus for the Saxon Princes.
Etheling, or Adeling. Errors of Polydore. Duke of Normandy. Prince of Wales,
when begun as proper to the Eldest son and heir of England. Duke of Cornwall.
Prince of Scotland. Duke of Rothsay. Steward of Scotland. Earldom of Rosse by
Act of Parliament made as Appanage to the second sons, in Scotland. Infanta
of Spain. Prince of Astura. The Pragmatica of Philip II. for writing to the
Infanta of Spain.

CHAP. I.
TO avoid the danger of an ensuing Anarchie, as well in Elective as Hereditarie
Monarchies, a designation has usually been of the next APPARENT HEIR or
successor: and that by some honorary name. In In the first of the Roman Empires
infancy, successors were by adoption appointed, and styled Principes
Iuuentutis. The first example was in Octauian his adoption of Caius and Lucius,
sons of his daughter Iulia by Agrippa. Yet (as is before touched) with them,
Princeps alone was equivalent with the name of Emperor. Otho to his Tacit.
Histor. 1. and Annal. 1.
Army. Nec priuatum me vocari sustineo, Princeps a vobis nominatus; nec
Principem, alio Imperante. And, of Augustus, the same author: Lepidi atque
Antonij arma in Augustum cessere. qui cuncta discordijs ciuilibus fessa nomine
Principis sub imperium accepit. Thence came Principatus and Tertullian. lib.
adu. Hermog.
Principium to be abstracts for their Power and Government. The affectation of
this Title by the Emperors sprang from the usual name of Princeps Senatus,
which was before the Caesar's, known among them. So did they in this prevent
innovation. Whereupon the dissembling Tiberius often Dio. hist. 57.
affi^md himself (...). i. Emperor of the Army, but Prince of the Rest. But
those who were constituted for succession, had always the addition of
Iuuentutis to Princeps; which Zonaras turns (...). i. Prince of the Youth. The
two, adopted by Octauian, are expressed by this name in a Coin, picturd with
them, circled thus: C. L. CAESARES AVGVSTI F. COS. DESIG. PRINC. IVVENT. in the
hands of that noble Mark Velser of Auspourg. Others like are extant, with that
Title; being, as is supposd, worn out of that Ancyran monument, where you read;
EQVITES. ROMANI. VNIVERSI. PRINCIPEM.......... HASTIS ARGENTEIS DONATVM
APPELLAVERVNT. The defect is supplied by conjecture of two great and most
learned Critiques, Casaubon and Lipsius, with IVV. C. for Iuuentutis Caium. And
as Princeps Senatus was chief in their Senatorian order in their free State,
before the Caesarean Empire, was the name of Princeps Iuuentutis for a chief in
the Ordo Equestris. So is the son of C. Curio named by Orat. in Vatinium
vide^ Lips. Elect. lib. 2. cap. 1.
Cicero. From Octauian until Hadrian this Title remained for the apparent
successor. Thence began Caesar, to that purpose. For, although others before
which were apparent successors had that name, yet in them it was as a note of
their family not of their hope to the Empire. But Hadrian by this name adopted
Aelius Verus. Of him, thus Spartian. Primus tantum Caesaris nomen accepit
adoptione Adriani, familiae principum adscriptus. And, a little after. Nihil
habet in vita sua memorabile, nisi quod primus tantum Iul. Capito^inus in Clod.
Albino docet and quibus insignibus vti Caesarem licuit, ex Epistola Commodi
Aug. Ad Albinum. and v. Capitolin. in Vero Imp.
Caesar est appellatus (so Casaubon reads, instructed out of a Ms. in the
French Kings Library) non testamento vt antea solebat, neque eo modo quo
Traianus est adoptatus; sed eo prope genere quo nostris temporibus a vestra
Clementia (he writes to Diocletian) Maximinianus atque Constantius Caesares
dicti sunt: quasi quidam principum filij Viri, and designati Augustae
maiestatis Haeredes. Which disproues the tradition of Aur. Victor, that in the
adoption of Hadrian by Traian, the name of Caesar first was the mark of
succession. Abhinc diuisa (says he) nomina Caesarum atque Augusti: inductumque
in Remp. vti duo, seu plures summae potentiae, dissimiles, cognomento ac
potestate dispari sint. Caesar was then what remains to this day in the Western
Empire, known more usually by REX ROMANORVM. Which began with the Translation,
it seems, of the Empire out of Greece into France. Of the inauguration of
Charles le magne, writes Sigebert; Karolo Regi Imperatorias lauds acclamant
eumque per manum Leonis Papae Coronant, Caesarem and Augustum appellant,
Pipinum vero filium eius Regem Italiae Ordinatum collaudant. But its obserud,
that after Charles surnamed Crassus (all the Emperors before him being merely
hereditarie, and enjoying their Title not so much by Coronation or Unction, as
right descendible) no other style was assumed till Consecration from the Pope,
but Rex Romanorum, and that it being had, thenceforth they were all written
Augusti and Imperatores; and so in their Charters was it by themselves obserud
with Anno Regni so much, Imperij so much: Quod omnes (says De Comitijs
Imperatorijs.
Onuphrius) postea eius (of Charles the Gross) successores vsque ad Nostra
Tempora religiose admodum obseruarunt. He, more at large, gives you a reason of
it in this Charles. But he was a child of the Romish part, and so, I know, you
respect him; yet was he one exceeding well deserving in our age, of the state
of this kind of learning, and in this gives you the truth. And this Rex
Romanorum was to be Crowned and anointed by the Archbishop of Cologne at Aix.
But in the Eastern Empire, Caesar continued for the next dignity to the
supreme, only till Alexius Anna Comnena Alexiad. 3. and Zonar. Annal. Tom. 3.
Quatuor Principes ratione Dignitatis Graeco vocabulo Sebaston dictos meminit
Author Expedit. Asiatic. Frederic. 1. apud Canis. Tom. 5. and Theodorus
Imperator (...). Georg. Logothet. Chronic. Constantinopol. page 20.
Comnenus. He when Nicephorus Melisenus had been before by him made Caesar,
created his brother Isaac a new title, and called him Sebastocrator; and made
him second from the Crown, and the title of Caesar, third. Afterward, the same
Emperor Alexius having one only daughter Irene, whom he gave in marriage to
Alexius Palaeologus, and no issue male, made the Sebastocrator to be as third
from him, and the Caesar fourth (whose State and Dignity was by him equalld
with the Panhypersebastus, another title of his making) and invested this
Palaeologus with the special Title of g DESPOTE, which thence remaind in that
State for the next after the Emperor, and well may be interpreted by the
French Monsieur, applied to the Kings brother and apparent heir. And as he is
the Monsieur for excellency in France, so the heir apparent in Constantinople
was called (...) the Despote, yet not otherwise but that (...) was also (as
Monsieur and Prince with us) communicated to the Emperors G. Codin. (...).
sons, sons in law and Brothers. When the Emperors son was invested with
this title of the Despote, he had a Crown decked with Diamonds put on his head,
by the Emperors own hand. This Crown they called Gyrata Corona.
(...), because it had four little arches ((...)) before, behind, and on the
sides. But if he were but son in law, then one only before. But it seems
afterward a greater Dignity then Despote was invented by Michael Palaeologus,
but not with any honorary title which story remembers. Only the Translation of
a later Cantacuzen. hist. 4. cap. 5.
Grecian, whose text is not published, calls it Vt esset Imperatori proximus:
quem honorem primus Palaeologorum Imperator Michael propter filium Constantinum
Porphyrogenitum inuenit; videbaturque ea dignitas Despotarum dignitati
antecellere. The son and heir apparent of the French King is known to all by
the name of DAVLPHIN. Good autors discord about the exact certainty of the
Beginning and Cause of that title. For the cause, receive thus: Under Philip of
Ualois about M. CCC. XLIX. (some will, under his son, King John) one Humbert
others call him Hubert Prince of that Territory, which to this day retains the
name of the Daulphine, bordering on Sauoy, Prouence, and Piemont, being possessed
with excessive grief for loss of his only son in the battle of Cressy,
resolud to leave all secular State, and commit his thoughts to the private quiet
of a religious Cloister, purposing also to institute the Sea of Rome, his
heir. But that design his people much dislikt, beseeching him that they might
rather follow the colors of a King then a Bishop, whereupon Placuit, filij
Regum (they are Paulus Emilius his words) vt quisque in proximam spem regni
suscepti essent, Delphini vocarentur, iuraque Delphinatibus redderent. Many
follow this, and deliver that it was given to continue in the Elder sons and
heirs apparent. But Du Haillan constantly denies part of it, affirming, that
this Humbert being without hope of lineall posterity, gave the inheritance of
the Daulphine to 'Philip Duke of Orleans, second son to Philip of Valois, and
for default of his issue to the sons of John Duke of Normandy, eldest son
to Valois (and afterward King of France) or of their successors Kings of
France, according as the same King or Duke John or their successors should
ordain, a la charge que celui que serra inuesti du dict Daulphine and ses heirs
and successors au dict pais, serroient tenus de se fair appeller DAVLPHINS DE
UIENNOIS (the Metropolitique City of that Territory is Vienna upon Rhosne) and
porter les arms du dict Daulphine escartelles auec les arms de France sans
pouuoir laisse le nom de Daulphin, ny les dits arms. and que le dict Daulphine
ne purroit estre vni au Royaume de France que l'Empire ny fust pareillement
vni. Whose syllables I the rather cite, because, against the Credit of many
other their autors and the common receiud opinion, he iustifies himself out of
the Instrument of that Donation, which, by his assertion, he had made use of.
So that neither John Duke of Normandy, nor his son Charles (afterward Charles
V. of France) were either of them constituted Daulphin (as some have deliuerd)
but this Philip Duke of Orleans, and second son to Valois, since whom that
State upon good reason has so ordaind, that it (being a neighbor Territory
to Sauoy and Italy) should never be further from the Crowns possession then in
the son and heir apparent. Although it seem true that Charles V. son and
successor to K. John was the first of their Kings which was Daulphine. For the
beginning of the Title: Its Andre du Chesne Ant. q. and Recerch. lib. 4. cap.
2. and autres.
affirmd that about M. LX. under Philip I. one Guy Earl or Governor of most of
that Territory, named it Dauphine, in favorable respect of a match twixt his
son and the daughter of Daulphin Earl of Albon and Viennois. So to perpetuat
a name which by alliance had honored his family. And Circe M. CC. X. Petrus de
Vineis lib. 2. Epist. 49.
Frederique II. writing to his Capitane of Sicily, speaks of Delphinus Comes
Viennae consanguineus and amicus noster. And another French Io. a Bosco
Coelestin. in Viennae Antiq.
Antiquarie says, that Daulphin was the surname of the Earls of Viennois,
Albon, and Aruerne, and that they bare for their Coat the Dolphin, which
afterward being controuerted twixt the divided house of Viennois and Aruerne,
it was orderd, that they should both bear the Dolphin, but with differences.
Therefore I can hardly think that the word Daulphin was in that part of France
(or Gaul) according to the idiom of the ancient Allobroges (they had their
seat here and in Sauoy) a special name for Prince, and Daulphine for
Principality. Notwithstanding that a most P. Aemilius histor. 8.
judicious author, of the French story, speaking of the marriage twixt one of
Philip the fifts daughters to the Daulphin of Viennois, says, ita suos
Principes vocitabant Allobroges. And in a Monastery of the ^acobits at Paris
(I speak it upon the credit of Cosmog. lib. 3. part. 2. cap. 40.
P. Merula) the Epitaph, of Humbert is thus conceiud: Cy gist le pere and tres
illustre Seigneur Humbert iadis Dauphin de Viennois: puis Laissant sa
principaute fuit fait friar de nostre order, and Prieur de ce Coue^t de Paris,
et en fine Patriarche d'Alexandrie et perpetuel Administrateur de l'
Archeuesche de Reims and Principal Bien-facteur de ce nostre Covent. Il mourut
l'an du grace, mil trois cens cinquante cinq.

Hence some collection may be that Daulphin or Dauphin is taken as signyficant
for Prince. But not every heir apparent with them is called Daulphin. Its only
the son and heir: which has indeed its ground in the first Donation. Every
other heir apparent (supposing their law Salique, which excludes Females) is
called the Monsieur; as, not many years since, Francis Duke of Alencon, and
brother and heir to Henry III. and in the memory of our Fathers, Francis Duke
of Engoulesme, brother to Jews II. and afterward King. For their law Salique
(because few know any thing of it, though all talk of it, and it belongs to
this purpose) a word or two. There are yet remaining, and in Edit. Optima ap.
Goldast. Constit Imperial. Tom. 3.
Print, Leges Salicae, composd (as they say) by four Counselors about
Pharamunds time; Wisogast, Bodogast (some call him Losogast) Salogast, and
Windogast or Husogast. In them you shall read thus: De terra vero Salica nulla
portio Haereditatis Mulieri veniat, sed ad Virilem sexum Tota terrae haereditas
perueniat. The best interpretation of Terra salica (although some will have
Apud Hadrian Iun. in Batauiae cap. 9.
it Regiam Terram and Dominium Coronae and Maiestatis Regiae Francorum) is by
our word Knights fee, or land held by Knights service. Some derive it from
Goropius Francic. ib. 2.
Sal, contracted from Sadel or Sadle, signifying alike with us and the old
Franks, which were Teutonique, and called also Salians. And not long since in an
Arrest in the Parliament at Bordeaux, upon controversy Bodin. de Repub. lib.
6. cap. 5.
twixt two Gentlemen for priority of their houses, a very old Testament being
produced, whereby the Testator had devised his Salique land, it was resolud in
point of judgment that this name interpreted Fiefs. And, who knows not that
Fiefs originally were military gifts, and as the same with our Knights Fees?
But, the Crown or any suprem Dominion cannot be called a Fief or Fee, whose
essence consists in being held by some tenure. And good Lawiers have thought
that the text extends no otherwise. Whereupon, I think, one, now living Hierom.
Bignon. de l'excellencie des Rois. liver 3.
at Paris, speaking of their Royal succession, by them allowd only to Masles,
makes it rather a perpetual custom then particular Law. Ce n'est point (says
he) un loye ecritte, mais nee auec nous, que nous n'auons point inventee, mais
l'auons puisse de Nature mesme qui le nous a ainsi apris and done cet
instinct. But why then is it called Salique? and why was that law so urged
against our Soueraign of famous memory Edward III. To be long and curious upon
this matter, fits not this place. But Goropius undertakes a conjecture of the
first cause which excluded Gynaecocratie (or femall succession and government)
among them, and ghesses it to have proceeded from their observation of a great
misfortune in War, which their neighbors the Bructerans (a people anciently
about the now Ouer-Isel one of the XVII Provinces, from near whom, he, as many
others, deriues the Franks) endured in time of Vespasian under the conduct and
Empire of one v. Tacit. Histor. 4.
Velleda, a Lady even of divine estimation amongst them. But, howsoever the
Law be in truth, or interpretable, it is certain that to this day, they have a
use of ancient time which commits to the care of some of the greatest Peers,
that they when the Queen is in childbirth, be present and warily observe least
the Ladies should privily counterfeit the enheritable sex, by supposing some
other Male when the true birth is female, or, by any such means, wrong their
ancient custom Royal; as of this Jews XIII. born on the last of September in
M. DC. is, after other such, Rodulph. Boter. Comment. 8.
rememberd. Before the title of Daulphin, I find not any special name for the
French heir apparent. Both He and his brothers are usually in their old stories
called generally Reges, as the Children of the Saxon Kings with us are V.
Ethelwerd. lib. 2. cap. 18. and recentiorum complures.
Clytones, or Clytunculi. Dedit etiam consilium Edricus, vt Clitunculos,
Eadwardum and Eadmundum Regis Eadmundi filios necaret, says Roger of Houeden.
This Clyto, Clito, and Clitunculus, they had from (...), i. inclytus, by which
they interpreted their Saxon word Etheling Etheling, i. Noble. One Nith.
Angilbert. hist. lib. 4. Atqui Vet. Saxonum Gens in Nobiles, Liberos, Libertos,
and Seruos dispertita est ab Einhardo apud Adam Bremens. hist. Eccles. cap. 5
and Abbat. Vrspergensem.
speaking of the German Saxons under Charles le maine, has: Gens omnis in
tribus ordinibus diuisa consistit. Sunt n. inter illos qui Edhilingi (that is
Ethelingi) sunt qui Frilingi, sunt qui Lazzi illorum lingua dicuntur. Latina
vero lingua sunt Nobiles, Ingenuiles, atque seruiles. And, that Edgar son to
Edward son of Edmond Ironside, the last heir to the Crown of the Saxon line
(not mixed with the Norman) is in Houeden, Marian, Florence, and others called
Clyto, Edgarus Clyto; whom Henry of Huntingdon, Matthew Paris, and such more
style Edgarus Etheling, (...) pro VV. Nobilissimis, and (vt videtur) Ducibus
sieve (...), sumitur. Canut. leg. cap. 55.
or Adeling; where, by the way, note Polydore's ignorance, titling him Edgarus
cognomento Ethelingius; his surname being no more Etheling, then the now
Englands Darling Charles his is Prince; or indeed, then Polydore's was
Ignorant. After the Conquest, no special title more then Primogenitus filius
Regis was for the Prince, until the name of PRINCE OF WALES came to him. Yet
Polydore, speaking of Henry the first his making his son William Duke of
Normandy, adds, hinc mos serpsit, vt Reges deinceps Filium Maiorem natu quem
sibi successorem optassent, Normanniae principatu donarent. But the time which
interceded Henry the first and K. John, under whom Normandy was lost, will not
justify any such thing as an honorarie Duty to the English Heirs. He
afterward in Henry III. his XXXIX. year, says, that in Parliament, Edwardus
Regis filius (he, which was afterward Edward I.) vt maturius ad res gerendas
grauiores experiens redderetur fit Walliae Princeps, simulque Aquitaniae ac
Hyberniae praefectus -- Vnde natum vt deinceps vnusquisque Rex hoc secutus
institutum Filium maiorem natu Walliae Principem facere consueuerit. It is true
that Wales with Gascoigne, Ireland, and some other Territories in England, were
given to this Prince Edward, upon his marriage with Elianor, daughter to
Alfonso King of Spain. Yet the Principality of Wales was not in that gift, so
special to this purpose. For, after the other, it comes in the Patent in these
words only, Archiu. 39. Hen. 3.
Vna cum conquestu nostro Walliae. When this Edward was King, he made his son
Edward of Caernaruan, Prince of Wales (a more particular course in policy vsd
about it, is in some of our stories, whither I refer you) and by that name and
Earl of Chester sommond him to Parliament. But all these made nothing to
inuest the Title perpetually in the Heirs apparent, although some have deliuerd
otherwise. For, this Edward of Caernaruan (afterward Edward II.) sommond his
eldest son, Prince Edward, by the name of Earl of Chester and Flint only.
But when this Prince was King (Edward III.) he in Parliament first creats his
son the Black Prince, Duke of Cornwall, and quod primogenitus filius Regis
Angliae qui foret hereditabilis Regno Angliae, foret Dux Cornubiae, and quod
Ducatus Cornubiae foret semper extunc primogenitis filijs Regum Angliae qui
foret proximus haeres predicto Regno, and gives him diverse possessions annexed
to the Duchy Pat. 11. Ed. 3. memb. 1. chart. 1
Tenendum eidem Duci and ipsius and haeredum suorum Regum Angliae, Filijs
primogenitis, et dicti loci Ducibus. Since when, the eldest sons of our
Soueraigns have been, by law, accounted Dukes of Cornwall, in the first instant
of their birth. Neither only, the eldest in respect of absolut primogeniture,
but also the second or other after the death of the first or former, on whom
this Title was so cast; as it was lately resolud upon good and mature reason,
grounded by diverse autorities and presidents, for the now most noble Prince
Charles. Not long after, the same Black Prince was invested in the Principality
of Wales, Tenendum sibi and heredibus Regibus Angliae, since when (neither is
the true beginning of this Title, of any other time.) The heirs apparent have
been honored with PRINCE OF WALES: some having been created in like form,
others only called so. The last creation was in that most hopeful blossom,
untimely cropped out of Britains Garden, Prince Henry; whose title also was often
Prince of Great Britain. In Scotland, the eldest son and heir is born PRINCE
OF SCOTLAND, Duke of Rothsay, and Stewart of the Kingdom. The title of Duke of
Rothsay has so been, since Circa c^^. cccc.
Robert III. first honored his eldest son Prince David with it. Yet Henry Lord
Darley had it also before his marriage with Queen Mary. And as Rothsay to the
eldest, so the Earldom of Rosse is in Scotland to the second son. Thus speaks
the Parl. 9. Jacob. 3. cap. 71.
act of Parliament under James III. Our Souueraigne Lord with consent of his
three Estaites of the Realm annexis till his Crown the Earldom of Rosse,
with the Pertinents, to remain thereat for ever. Swa that it sall not be
leiffull to his hienesse or his aires, nor his successoures to make alienation
of the said Erledome, or any part thereof, fra his Crown in any wise: saifand
that it salbe leiffull to him and them to give the said Erledome at their
pleasance till any of his or their secunde sons lauchfully to be begotten
twixt him and the Queen. So in a manner are the Appanages in France and the
Duchy of York with us, and the like. In imitation of the English honor of
Prince of Wales, the INFANT and heir of SPAIN (Infant is but Infantes dicti
passim Regum filij, Roderico Toletano, and Rod. Santio; vt Hispanice Infantes.
Son or Child, as in France, les enfans le Roy) had the title of Prince of
Astura, Principe de las Asturias, which began first in Henry (son of John 1.
King of Castile and Lions; and afterward Henry III. of that Dominion) to whom
John q Ita and Stephanus de Garibay in Compend. Histor. Hisp. lib. 15. cap. 25.
ab co vulgus quod Principem Hispaniae sieve Castellae compellant Haeredem Regni,
arguitur.
of Gaunts daughter Catharine was given in marriage. Some of their Roderic.
Sant. part. 4. cap 22. and Duque de Alencastre in Stephan. de Garibay.
Stories ignorantly style him Dux Alencastriae and Glocestriae; aiming,
questionles, at Lancastriae and Leicestriae; for he was Earl of Leicester. To
that Henry and Catharine, Vt Asturum Principes vocarentur datum (says Mariana)
more ex Anglia translato, vbi Regum filij maiores, Walliae Principes
nominantur. quod ab hoc initio susceptum ad nostram aetatem conseruatur, vt
Castellae Regum maiores Filij Asturum Principes sint, quibus, annis
consequentibus, Vbeda, Biatia, Illiturgisque sunt adiectae. In the Spanish
Pragmatica of c^^. D. LXXXVI. For Titles, it is ordered that the Infants and
Infantas of Spain shall only have the Title of Highness. And in the top of
Letters to them shall be only written My Lord (Sennor) and in the end, God keep
your Highness only, and upon the Superscription, To my Lord the Infant, Don N.
or To my Lady the Infanta, Donna N. And, that Highness, without addition, is
to be understood only of the Prince heir and successor.

Dux in the times before the Caesarean Empire. And, in it. Limitum Duces.
Ducatus. Tunicae Ducales. Ducianum iudicium. Comites, and the beginning of the
Honorary Comitiua under Constantine. His Counts of three Ranks. The President
of making a Count of the first Rank. Dukes and Counts of the first Rank made
equal. Comitiua Vacans; and Honorarie Titles without government or
administration given about the declining Empire. (...). The Kings Friend. (...)
in the later Greek Empire. Comitiua Secundi Ordinis. How the name of Count was
both equal and under Duke. Dukes and Counts at will of their supreme,
anciently. If a Duke then should have XII. Counties under him. The beginning of
this and other Titles to be Feudall, and hereditarie in the Empire. The
ceremony of giving Provinces by delivering of one or more Banners. The making
of the Marquisat of Austria, a Dukedom. The Archdukes name, his habit and Crown
in ancient Charters Imperial. Magnus Dux Lithuaniae. (...) hereditarily given
by Constantine the great to the Prince of Athens; upon weak credit. Power given
to the Duke of Austria (being made a King) to create a Duke of Carniola. The
difference of Dukes in the Empire. Who of them may wear a Crown, who only a
Cap. The beginning of this and that (equal) of Count, in the French state. The
Counts of Holland and Flanders. The Royalties of the ancient Dukes in France.
Their Crown. The reuniting of those ancient Dukedomes and equal Counties to
the Crown. The later kind of French Dukes, far inferior to the ancient. They
bear their Crowns on their Armories only. Whence the Crowns of Dukes, Counts,
and the like came in fashion in these Western parts. The Crowns of the
Sebastocrator and Caesar. Appenage. (...) in a Charter of Edward III. The
Ceremony of inuesting our K. John made Duke of Normandy. When Dux came to be
a special and distinct Title in France. When, in England. The creation of the
Black Pr. Duke of Cornwall. A ring sign of Principality given, and in
Coronation of Kings. Inuestitures of Bishops with Staff, or Rod and Ring. When
left off and remitted in the Empire, and with us. Error in Matthew Paris and
Matthew. of Westminster. Bishoprics to be given by the Kings letters patents
without Conge d'eslier, by act of Parliament. John of Gaunt made Duke of
Lancaster; the ceremony, and in making Tho. of Woodstock D. of Gloucester. The
chief ceremony at this day. Dux in the Saxon times. Duke of Northumberland by
that name then hereditarie. Dux then was properly their Eople. Wergild, What.
Thrymsa. The first Duke in Scotland. First Dukes in Castile. Ducall Crowns
there. Titles to be given to Dukes and their Grands, by the Pragmatica.
L'oyseau's error concerning Dukes of England (...) or Duke in Moses and in the
common assertion of the Rabbis.

CHAP. II.
NExt to the apparent successor in the Europaean States, are the Titles of Duke
and Archduke, Marquess, Count, (which we call Earl) Vicount, Vidame, Baron
and other more. Of whom in their Order. Two of them, DVKE and COUNT, Dux and
Comes, have their names most ancient, but differing much from what they now are
applied to. Philip of Macedon, having wasted the liberty of Greece, seeing
that a moderat use of his victory was fittest for establishment of his rights
of Conquest, ita vicit (says lustin) vt victorem nemo sentiret. Sed nec Regem
se Graecis, sed Ducem appellari iussit. The like did Scipio Africanus in
Spain, when Edecon and Andobal Polyb. histor. 10
saluted him King. Of whom also De Amicitia.
Cicero: Quanta illi, Dij immortales, fuit grauitas, quanta in Oratione
Maiestas! vt facile Ducem P. R. non Comitem diceres. And, in another Orat. pro
Cornel. Balbo.
place: Si qui sunt quibus infinitum sit odium, in quos semel susceptum sit,
quos video esse nonnullos: cum Ducibus ipsis, non cum Comitatu
assectatoribusque confligant. In the Caesarean Empire, Dux was next to
Imperator. The play of Ducatus and Imperia, like to our sports sometime vsd in
making a Prince with all his officers and dignities, was by that name Sueton.
in Ner. cap. 35.
known in Rome; which Trebellius Pollio calls fingere potestates. And Martial
Lib. 6. Epig. 83. and 91.
salutes Domitian with sum Ducum, and titles him summus Dux. In like sense
Iuvenal, Statius, others use this great attribute, which, in the more ancient
times, you see plainly was much before Comes, as the very signification of the
words show. Dux then properly was at first the General of an Army under the
Emperor. Afterward it became usually applied to such as had the military care
of Frontiers. As in Scythici limitis Fl. Vopisc. in Aureliano.
Dux, Orientalis limitis Dux, Illyriciani limitis Dux and Thracij, Rhetici
limitis Dux, Trebell. Poll. 30. Tyrann. in Posthum. and in Celso. huc sane
referri potest and quod de Legionibus, quae limitibus. praefuere sub
antiquioris aeui Impp. habet Dio. hist. 55.
Transrhenani limitis Dux, limitis Lybici Dux, and the like. And Spartian says
of Aelius Verus, that he was Pannonijs Dux ac Rector impositus. Their office it
self was called Ducatus. In an Epistle of the Emperor Tacitus to Probus, you
read; Nos tibi decretototius Orientis Ducatu salarium quintuplex fecimus. And
they had their Tunicae Ducales known by that name, as in Valerians speech to
Aurelian is remembered. And Ducianum Justin. Cod. tit. de appellat. l. 51.
quando. 38.
Iudicium in later time is vsd for judgment given by them. The precedent of
their Commission, as one by particular we are instructed, thus Cassiodor. Var.
7. fox. 4.
spoke --. Ideoque validum te ingenio ac viribus audientes, per illam
indictionem, Ducatum tibi credimus Retiarum: vt milites and in pace regas, and
cum eis fines nostros solenni alacritate circumeas. But in those times, Comites
were great men: such were in Comitatu Imperatoris, of whom Constantine the
great in his distinction of honors made some of the first Rank, some of the
second, and some of a third. (...), which is the same, in the words of Eusebius.
de vita Constantini. (...).
one that lived and wrote under him. The form of giving the greatest of these
honors is thus Cassidor. Variar. lib. 6. cap. 12
delivered. -- Quocirca prouocati moribus tuis Ita dictus Honos ille, Graecis
vero (...);
Comitiuam primi ordinis, ab illa indictione, maiestatis fauore largimur, vt
Consistorium nostrum sicut rogatus ingrederis, ita moribus laudatus exornes:
quando vicinus honor est Illustribus dum alter medius non habetar. -- Admoneat
te certe quod suscepta Dignitas Primi Ordinis appellatione censetur: vtique
quia te sequuntur omnes, qui Spectabilitatis honor decorantur. So that a Count
of the first rank seems somewhat before a Duke of a Province; yet both under
the same general note of Spectabiles comprehending both Dukes, Counts of
Provinces, and some other. But these Counts being of the Spectabiles (which
were between the Illustres and Clarissimi) imploid in military service or
state government abroad, had the name of Comites C. de off. rect. Prou. l.
Iustissimos 3.
per prouincias, and C. de Com. Rei. Mil. l. Eos. 2. and Consulas, ad hanc rem,
Novel. Constit. 27. de Comite Isauriae.
qui sub Comitiuae primi Ordinis dignitate peculiariter ad quamlibet prouinciam
vel prouincias defendendas, milit e credito, autoritate Imperatorij Nominis
destinabantur. The Graecians called the Counts of the first Novel. 43. c. 3
rank (...). But howsoever the difference of Duke and Count was at the first
institution of the Comitiua under Constantine, or about Justinians time (to
which refer that of Cassidore) it is certain they became not long after
Constantine, equal. Honorius and Theodosius in a Constitution. Qui C. de Com.
and Trib. Schol. l. vnic.
honor Comitiuae regimen fuerint nacti, absolutos militia, inter eos qui Duces
fuerint provinciarum numerari iubemus. And the same C. tit. de Com. and Archat.
Sacri Palatij. l. vnic. v. and de commit. Consistor. and lib. 1. tit. 38. l. 1.
Emperors. Inter Vicarios (that is, they which were under the Praefecti
Praetorio) and Duces qui administrauerint and eos qui Comitiuam primi Ordinis
meruerint, nihil intersit, nisi tempus quo quis administrauerit, vel Comitiuae
adeptus est insignia. Of these titles is frequent mention in that excellent
monument, the Notitia vtriusque Prouinciae composd (as Panciroll thinks upon
good collection) about the time of Theodosius the younger; Where the governors
of this I Will are remembered Comes Britanniarum, Comes Littoris Saxonici, Dux
Britanniarum, and others. But the title of Count was usually given without any
Office or government, as merely honorary; not so, that of Duke. In the grant of
the Cassiodor. Var. 6. for. 12.
Comitiua vacans (as they named it:) Hocmulto praestantius, adesse conspectibus
regijs and abesse molestijs, gratiam habere loci and vitare eontumeliam
Actionis. They which had it were Vacantes. Secundo veniant Vacantes (are the
words of an Imperial C. vt Dignitat. Ord. seru l. 2. Omnes.
constitution) qui praesentes in Comitatu illustris dignitatis Cingulum
meruerint. Whom Zeno C. vt senate. vel clariss. l. 3.. 2.
calls, qui sine administratione honorarijs decorati fuerint codicillis. And
hence came that obuious name of Comes in the, declining times of the Empire.
Herminio (...), for Comiti, Caesareo (...) and infinite the like are in the
inscriptions of Isidore of Pelusium his Epistles. He lived about CCCC. after
our Savior under the younger Theodosius. It being by it self but for one that
was honored with accompanying the Emperor, and even the same with (...) i. one
that liud with the King; by which honorary attribute Apochryph. Dan. cap. 14.
Daniel is styled under the Babylonian Monarchy not much differing in
substance from the Kings friend ((...)) which in the 1. Macab. cap. 10. ^om. 20
cap. 11. com. 27. alibi*
Macedonian Empire was of great and special honor. And Astrologers have
anciently delivered, that they who had Mercury in their Ascendent should be
Firmi^ Mathes. 8. cap. 27.
Regum amici, alluding to or aiming. I guess, at that old Title: Being in a
like sort given them which had anciently the Attribute of AMICI ET FRATRES ROMANS
IMP. as the Bataui (or Hollanders) and the Hedui (now called Burgognes) had
Antiq. Inscript. and Tacitus Annal. 11. Vbi videndus Lipsius.
in old time. But later time, in the Esterne Empire, vsd the word Comes or
(...) in another kind, transferring it from a dignity to an inferior military
office. (...) (says an Constantin. Porphyr. in Themat.
Emperor) (...). i. Comes is a Centurion. But indeed their Centurion was under
the Count or Comes; and the Count Leo in Tactic. cap. 4. 10. Gloss. Vett. Iuris
and Novel. c. 27.
was (...), or (...) i. the leader of a whole Band. They usually since D. after
Christ, and sometimes Isido. Pelusiot. lib. 1. Epist. 133. Strategio (...).
before, rememberd that of Duke by the name of (...) Dux, and made it their
word out of Latin; and the Constantinopolitan Empire had its: (...) i. the
great Duke for a special office of great place, under which the government of
the Marine forces, was; as under the (...), those on land. But none better
interprets what a Count being imploi'd in government was, then Suidas. (...),
says he, (...) i. Comes or a Count, is a Governor of the People. And agreeing
with him is Hesychius much more ancient. Therefore in the Cassiodor. Var. 7.
form. 1.
grant of a Comitiva Prouinciae, the words are Scito puniendi remedium datum
tibi pro salute multorum. Arma ista iuris sunt, non furoris. For he had his
military forces as well as a Duke, and with them kept his Province in
subjection, as the Duke. But whereas it was proper to the Duke to be chiefly
Martial, it seems, on the otherside, that the Counts government was chiefly
legal and in administration of justice, having his Army for Defense and
better execution; which was common to all that by this name had Provinces. Not
to them only which were of the first Rank. For, a Provincial Count, of the
second, had an Army, and was also a Civil Judge. The precedent of his
Commission goes Cassiodor. d. l. form. 26.
thus. Propterea, per illam indictionem, in illa Ciuitate, Comitivae honorem
secundi ordinis tibi, propitia diuinitate, largimur: vt and Ciues commissos
aequitate regas, and publicarum Ordinationum iussiones constanter adimpleas.
Such a one was much inferior to a Duke; and, as I guess, the original of such
as were, in succeding ages, Counts under Dukes, was from those of the second
Rank. For a Count, of the first was rather better, then inferior to a Duke. A
very ancient Leg. Baiuuar. cap. 5. art. 8.
law thus speaks: Si talis homo potens hoc fecerit quem ille Comes distringere
non potest, tunc dicet Duci suo, and Dux illum distringat secundum leg^m. Here
plainly the Count was under the Duke: yet had also his Army. For not long
after in the same laws. Comes tamen non negligat custodire exercitum suum, vt
non faciat contra legem in prouincia sua. and judges in the laws of the
Westgoths are ordinarily called Comites Ciuitatum. So that the chief of the
state government was in the Duke, but legal administration of particular
justice in that inferior kind of Count, which by that name was sometimes also
constituted by the Duke. In an ancient Leg. Aleman. cap. 41 and. 27.
law: Nullus causam audire praesumat nisi qui a Duce per conuentionem populi
index constitutus est, vt causa^s iudicet. I see no difference, if it had been
Comes constitutus est. And, among the same constitutions: siquis sigillum Ducis
neglexerit XII. Sol. sit culp. si autem sigillum Comitis neglexerit vel
mandatum cum VI. Sol componat. This Count is also called Iudex Fiscalis. Si
quis says an ancient Leg. Ripuarior. cap. 55. art. 1.
constitution, Iudicem fiscalem, quem Comitem vocant interfecerit DC. solid.
mulctetur. But, as these kind of Counts were inferior to Dukes, and as their
substitutes, by that name so were others known (you may understand this of the
times twixt D. and M. of Christ) which were the same in honor, power, and
jurisdiction with Dukes, and not so much differing from them, as the Counts of
Provinces of the first Rank. Comites plurimi qui Ducem super se non habebant
are App. ad hist. Fredegar. ap. Bignon, in Marculph.
rememberd under Dagobert. Under Charlemaine; Synod. Cabillonens. 2. Cap. 20.
Comites qui post Imperialis apicis dignitatem populum Dei regunt. Of
Burgundy, an ancient Ditmar. Chron. lib. 7.
author; In his partibus nullus vocatur Comes nisi is qui Ducis honorempossidet.
So in Castile, Ferdinand Consaluo, which became in power as King, and his
successors for a good time are called Castellae Roderic. Tolet. lib. 5. cap. 2.
and vide Rod. Sant. part. 1. cap. 11. and Marianam.
Comites only until the title Royal was thither translated out of Navarre, by
marriage. And what is more common in our English stories and other, then Comes
Normanniae, Dux Normanniae and Consul Normanniae for the Duke of Normandy. And
in M. XCV. letters from the holy wars, Fulcher. Carnotensis Gest. Pereg. Franc.
Cap. 15.
to the Pope, were entitled with Domino sancto ac venerabili PapaeVrbano,
Buamundus and Raymundus ^ancti Egidij Comes, Godefridus Dux Lothariensis, and
Robertus Comes Normanniae, which show the indistinct use of Dux and Comes; and
every man now calls Robert, Duke of Normandy. So William Archbishop of Tyrus
Lib. 8. cap. 12.
speaking of Godfrey Duke of Bulloigne, and Baldwin Earl of Flanders and this
Robert expresses them by Dux and duo supradicti Maiores Comites, where note the
addition of Maiores, for the equal title of Duke. And when Our Norman
Conqueror had for have his Coat of Male offered to be put on the wrong end
upward, he iested at it with Vertetur (as the Latin speaks it) Fortitud^
Ducatus mei in Regnum, and so Malmesbury, that calls him Comes, has it;
others, vertetur Robur Comitatus in Regnum that call Ma'mesbur. lib. 2. de Reg.
Ranulph. Higden, Polychron. lib. 6. cap. vlt.
him also Duke, and Comes Normanniae is obuious in the Epistles of Iuo Bishop
of Chartres, who yet names our first William Dux Normanniae, in his Chronicle.
Infinite like examples are. And these kind of Counts had the same office and
dignity with Dukes, as it seems, and their government might as well have the
name of Leg. Baiuuar. cap. 10. and Aleman. cap. 35.
Regnum, as a Dukes; which in ancient laws of Germany is applied to them. The
other kind being under Dukes, as Bishops under their Metropolitan; which
comparison, one Walafrid. Strabo de Reb. Eccles. cap. 31.
that wrote under the Carolin line, long since rememberd. This difference, I
know, agrees not with what diverse have written; but I think it more easily
justifiable then any other. But until the French Empire, they were rarely more
then mere personal, and as much or rather Official then Honorary, when the
Government of a Province was annexed to them. Neither did the Provinces make
them otherwise then Personal. For they were not annexed to them as Feudall, but
given into their Rule at the Emperors or Kings will for a certain time, or at
pleasure. For the Empire; the frequent examples in Cassiodore, which have
usually per illam indictionem make it manifest; that is, that during the time
of this Indiction they should continue. For the French State; their president,
Marculph. lib. 1. Formul. 8.
written almost M. years since shows it. -- Ergo dum and fidem (as the words of
it, are) and vtilitatem tuam videmur habere compertam, ideo tibi actionem
Comitatus, Ducatus, Patritiatus in pago illo, quem antecessor ille tuus vsque
nunc visus est egisse, Tibi ad agendum Regendumque commisimus, with a brief
declaration of the moral parts belonging to those offices and honors; which
all three by learned men Pith. des Comtes de Brie and Champ.
are thought in those times to have been but as the same. Of the time, before
this author, observe what the eldest of the Greg. Turonens. hist. 8. cap. 18.
and lib. 9. cap. 7.
French Historians has. Nicetius (says he) per emissionem Eulalij a Comitatu
Aruerno submotus, Ducatum a Rege expetijt, datis pro eo immensis muneribus. Et
sic in vrbe Aruerna, Ruthena, atque Vcetica Dux ordinatus est. And the same
Writer. Ennodius cum Ducatum vrbium Turonic^ atque Pictauae ministraret, adhuc
and vici Iuliensis atque Benarnae vrbium Principatum accipit. Sed enuntibus
Comitibus Turonicae atque Pictau^ vrbis ad Regem Childebertum, obtinuerunt eum
a se remoueri. Where express mention is of those inferior Counts subject to
Dukes, and also that one Duke had under him two Counts, as, in the other
example of Nicetius, three. Which disproues their assertions who tell us of
every Dukes right anciently to have v. Douz. Annal. Holland. lib. 5. and P.
Pith. Aduers. 1. cap. 8.
consisted in XII. Counties under him. Indeed its true that an App. Aimonij
lib. 4. cap. 61.
old Chronicle of France says that K. Pipin Grifonem more Ducum, XII.
comitatibus donauit; which if it be true (as Hierom Bignon well observes) it
must be understood of some special use under K. Pipin only; Other very ancient
Annal. incerti Autoris edit. a Pith.
autors leaving out the more Ducum, telling us that Griphoni in partibus
Neustriae XII. Comitatus dedit. Or why may we not think that more Ducum in that
barbarous time might be to express, that Grifo should enjoy the Counties as a
Duke should? Some such thing is by an old Robert. Monach. Hist. Hieresolym. lib.
4.
Monk spoken of as amongst the Turks. Prouincia (says he) est quae vnum habet
Metropolitanum, Duodecem Consules and vnum Regem, that is, One Admirald, as his
word is, or One Amir. But I think he there, as others here, were deceiud in his
Number. Others talk of other number of Counties under a Dukedom, but in vain
and without ground. About this time of Pipin in whom the Carolin line had its
original, this dignity (with that of Count equivalent to it) began to be
feudall for life, and annexed to the Territory given for which, the Duke or
Count did his fealty or Homage to the Emperor or King. Observe but these few
examples of that age, recorded by some then living. Tassilo was made Duke of
Bauiere by Pipin. He afterward tradidit Monach. Engol^sm. Vit. carol. M.
seipsum Domno Regi Carolo (that is Charles le maigne) manibus in manibus
Vassaticum, and reddidit ei Ducatum sibi commissum a Domno Pipino Rege, and
confessus est se omnibus peccasse and male egisse. Et denuo, renouans
sacramenta, dedit XII. electos obsides. Here plainly is the fealty Formulam
Fidelitatis habes apud Sigonium de Regno Italiae lib. 3.
or homage expressed and made by the Duke, until breach whereof, the Territory
remaind to him. And therefore, upon complaint by the Bauarians, that he had
broken his faith toward the Emperor, and his confession of it, he forfeited
the Fief. But indeed in Bauier specially, before this time were Dukes it seems
feudall, and hereditary, as Theodore, Theodobert, Huchbert, and Ottilo, who had
disposition of Fiefs in the Territory, as in their own right under the French
Kings, which I am persuaded to beleeu, by their Charters, Enfeoffments, and
Testaments recorded in old Arnolf. de S. Emmerammo 1. cap. 5. and Arno in
Episc. Saltzburg.
story, and, made to the Archbishoprique of Saltzburg and other Churches. And
perhaps other like may be observed, but for the most part they were, in that
age, for life. And, the Tenants are in those times styled Testament. Caroli. M.
Homines, and the granting to them Beneficiare, which under Jews, son to
Charlemaine, was, without scruple, for life. Villas Regias (says an Thegan. de
gest. Ludouic. Pij.
ancient) quae erant sui and aui and Tritaui, Fidelibus suis tradidit, eas in
possessiones sempiternas and praecepta (perhaps, perpetuas) Construxit, and
annuli sui impressione cum subscriptione, manu propria roborauit. Neither were
these grants, it seems, other then of the Dignities which we now speak of.
Another, Adhdemar. ap. Anonym. in Vita Lud Pij. Edit. a Pithoeo.
that liud under him, more particularly of his Father, thus: Ordinauit per
totam Aquitaniam Comites, Abbatesque necnon alios plurimos, quos Vassos vulgo
vocant, ex gente Francorum. -- eisque commisit curam Regni, pro vt vtile
iudicauit, Finium Tutamen, Villarumque regiarum ruralem prouisionem. Et
Bituricae Ciuitati primo Humbertum, paulo post Sturbium praefecit Comitem
(where note, although they were for life, yet, upon breaking of their fealty,
they were removed) porro Pictauis Albonem, Petragoricis autem Widbodum, and
diverse more such. And of Charles le maigne, after his victories against the
Lumbards Ampliata dcnique (says an old Adreuald. Floriac. de Mirac. S.
Benedicti cap. 18.
Monk) Regia Potestate, necesse erat Duces Regno, subiugataeque Prouinciae
praeficere, qui and legum moderamina and morem Franciae assuetum seruare
compellerent. Afterward, O tho surnamd the Great, about DCCCCXL. of our
Savior, having first settled the government of the free Cities of his Empire,
to the end also, that he might have some private men, whose worths were most
eminent, obliged to him by royal favors and honorable titles, bestowd in
Feudall right of enheritance, his Territories with particular Names of Dignity
annexed to them. The Dignities were Dukes, Marquess Count, Captains Vauasors
and Vauasins; of whom all, anon. Of Feuds and their Original, more, in the
VIII. chapter, where also you shall see that this distinction of Military and
Feudall Nobility, touching its being for life or enheritance, is to be referd
here but to the French and German Empires. But their Feudall laws Constit.
F^ud. lib. 2. tit. 10.
compild under Frederique Barbarossa, thus remember what a Duke was. Qui a
Principe de Ducatu aliquo inuestitus est Dux solito more vocatur. That Ducatus
or Dukedom was, as is before showed, the government of a Province, next under
imperial Power. Those Provinces were given by delivering of one or more
Banners, and in like form were resignd. Prouincia (says one that liud Otho
F^ising. lib. 2. de gest. Fred. 1. cap. 5. and 32. Otto de S. Blasio capite 6.
under Barbarossa) per vexillum a Principe traduntur vel recipuuntur. So was
the inuestiture of the Dukedom of Borussia or Prussia to Albert, by Sigismund.
K. of Poland per Orat. Vice cancel. Polon. Comitijs Lublini apud Chytraeum
chronic. Sax. lib. 22. sub anno 1559. and de Aquilis and Bannerio Pr^ncipibus
Pomeraniae solenni ritu traditis, mentio est apud Alb. Crantz. Wanda^iae. 6.
cap. 14.
Uexilli traditionem, when the Marquesses of Onolzbach and Brandeburg,
Frederique and Ioachim, at the same time laid claim to the Honor, and were
admitted in solemnity ad contactum extremitatum Vexilli eiusdem. And in the
Concord at Ratisbon touching the Dukedom of Bauiere, under Frederique
Barbarossa, thus you read. Henricus mayor natu (that was Henry Duke of Bauiere
the Emperors uncle) Ducatum Baioariae, per VII. Vexilla resignauit, quibus
Minori (that was Henry Duke of Sax^nie the Emperors Nephew) traditis, ille
duobus Vexillis Marchiam Orientalem (understand that which is now Austria) cum
Comitatibus ad eam ex Antiquo pertinentibus reddidit. Exinde de eadem Marchia,
cum praedictis Comitatibus, quos tres dicunt, iudicio Principum, Ducatum fecit,
eumque non solum sibi sed and vx^ri cum duobus Vexillis tradidit; that is, to
Henry, Duke of Bauier, his uncle, to whom the words of the Charter Henric.
Stero in Annal. A. M. CLVI. Et in Austria Cuspiniani.
were: Wadizlao illustri Duce Boemiae sententiam promulgante, and omnibus
Principibus approbantibus, Marchiam Austriae in Ducatum commutauimus, and
eundem Ducatum, cum omni iure, praefato patruo nostro Henrico and
praenobil^ssimae vxori suae Theodorae in beneficium concessimus; perpetuo iure
sanctientes, vt ipsi and liberi eorum post eos indifferenter filij and filiae
eundem Ducatum Austriae haereditario iure a Regno teneant and possideant. Which
was inserted chiefly to express what the purpose of both surrenders were, that
is, that Austria should not be subject any more to Bauiere, as, while it had
the name of Marquisat, it was. Where, by the way, you see the change of Austria
out of a Marquisate Male igitur de Austriae Ducatus initio Krantzius Wandal.
lib. 2. cap. 23.
into a Dukedom. Under this name it continued (except only the time wherein
Formulam, qua in Regnu^ mutauit Ducatum, habet Petrus de Vineis lib. 6. Epist.
26.
Frederique ^1. had made it a Kingdom, which endured not one Dukes whole life)
until he that was afterward Emperor Frederique III. (as Munster is author) vsd
the Title of Archduke, continuing in that Imperial family to this day. Yet the
name of Archduke was before in use, and applied to them. Some fetch it from the
time of Rodulph 1. whose elder sone Albert was, they say Chytraeus Chronic.
Saxon. lib. 12. sub ann. 1274.
honored with it in a Diet at Norimberg. But among the Ralisponae. Caeterum
Otho Imperator (956) Brunonem fratrem suum Archiepiscopum Coloniensem donauit
Ducatu Lotharingie, qui se Archiducis titulo inscripsit. Nec ante eum ea vox
aut Dignit as, n^c in Lotharingia post illum. An Archi ab Episcopo in Ducem
transtulit? Et insignia Lotharingie etiamnum Austriaci gerunt. U. Lips. Lonanij
lib. 1. cap. 9
prriuiledges given to the Duke by him that created the first there, it is
found: Si quibusuis imperij Curijs publicis Dux Austriae praesens fuerit vnus
de Palatinis Archiducibus est censendus: and nihilominus in consessu and
incessu ad latus dextrum Imperij post Electores Principes obtineat primum
locum. Where also his Ducall Habit, of that time, is described: Dux Austriae
(the words are) Principali indutus, vest supposito Pileo Ducali, Circundato
serto Pinnito, baculum habens in manibus, equo insidens, and insuper, more
aliorum Principum Imperij, conducere ab Imperio feuda sua debet. And, in the
Charter of Frederique the second: Concedimus etiam uostro illustri Principi
Duci Austriae, Crucem nostri Diadematis, suo principali pileo sufferendam. That
of Archduke is proportionat to the name of (...) (which by some Nicephor.
Gregoras Histor. li. 7
testimony) was given hereditarie to the Prince of the Athenian Territory by
Constantine the great. But I doubt much of the reporters credit therein, or
rather think he applied a name of his own time too far back to another age,
as he does in other. But if you take these Kings of the Empire (of whom in the
first book) for a special Title, it will follow that this of Duke is not next
to the apparent successor. For also when Frederique II. made Austria a
Kingdom. He gave the new King, by the same Charter, power to make a Duke under
him, that is of Carniolae his Petrus de Vineis l. 6. Epist. 26
words are vt de prouincia Carniole Ducatum, facias immediate tibi and pro te
nobis and successoribus nostris and Imperio responsurum. But I see no
difference twixt such a thing and a Duke, but in name. Lithuania or Leitow is
called Magnus Ducatus, and the Duke of it, that is, the King of Poland, Magnus
Dux Lithuaniae, because in it also are diverse other Dukedomes, by that name
described by such as have been in that state. Others therein like are by it, as
Prussia, Liuonia. What rights royal and even maiestique Supremacy some
Dukedomes have of the Empire, is best learned V. quae Andreas Knichen in Comm.
Iur. Saxonic. cap. 1. verb. Duc. Sax. collegi^ ad hanc rem.
out of Ciuilians, and such as have handled them in Politic discourses. I
mean those of Lorraine, Sauoy, Millan, Florence, Saxony, and such more:
whereof although some are challenged by the Sea of Rome, Yet I may call them all
Imperial. For, out of the Empire, their Original was. Touching them I add
only what a most Alciat de sing. Cerlam. cap. 32.
learned Ciuilian, of late time, delivers: Aliqui, (says he,) Regali
potestate decorati sunt vt Mediolanensis and Pannonniae superioris, quam
Austriam vocant, itemque Burgundus. Atque ideo gentilitijs insignibus Coronam
far ius illis est. Aliqui non sunt, vt quos Romans Pontifices in Vmbria,
Piceno, alijsque Italiae locis quandoque constituerunt. Hij, cum Pont fici
defer teneantur, nec soluti legihus sint, non Coronam sed He takes it (it
seems) for a Cap. v. de Birro Meurs. Critic. excercit. 2. lib. 4. cap. 3. Et
Pith. Aduers. 1. c. 16.
Birrum ostentant. The French commoly affirm Bodin. de Rep. lib. 3. cap. 5.
alij.
that this or other Dignity became not otherwise then at will of the King
among them till under the third, that is, the Capetan line which began about
DCCCCXC. of Christ. But I cannot assent to them, if they deny any to be before
in feudall right of certain Estate. For the first, that is, the Merouingian
line; Gregory of Tours has examples, enough to justify their Opinion. But,
for the Carolin; Was not the Duchy of Normandy given in Fee to Rollo by
Charles the simple about DCCCC. Whence the succeeding Dukes derived themselves?
And the Charter of Charles the Bald, which created (as the common opinion is)
Thierry or Theodorique first Count or Earl of Holland (being then as good a
title as Duke) thus Ar^hiu. Monast. Egmund. apud Ian. Douz. Annal. Holland. 5.
speaks: Iubemus vt sicut reliquis possessionibus quibus iure haereditario
videtur vti, ita and his nostri Muneris largitate rebus impensis valeat secure
omni tempore vitae suae frui ipse and omnis eius posteritas. -- Dat A. D.
DCCCLXIII. XVII. Kal. Iullas. And although the date in the transcript be
corrupted, as the noble Hans Douz thinks, and that it should be DCCCCXIII. yet
it so shall be referred to Charles the Simple, and to the second line of their
Kings. The Creation likewise of Baldwin firist Earl or Count of Flanders (the
name of Count in him being as great as Duke) is referred to Charles the Bald and
falls about DCCCLXIII. And the ancient hereditarie Counts of Bretagne far
exceed any of these. All which proves those kind of Dignities more anciently
feudall amongst them, then the Capetan line. But about that time, first through
the weakness of the Carolins, and then by example of Hngh Capet Count of Paris
which got the Diadem of France, most of those who before were honored with the
equal titles of Duke or Count for life, extorted or by arms established their
Dignities and Territories to themselves and their inh^riting posterity. Yet
so, that the more to secure their divided greatness* they acknowledged to the
King a Supremacy, and did him Homage as for hereditarie and patrimoniall
Fiefs. Being, as is said of the Dukes Guil. Gemeticens. lib. 7. cap. 45. and 46.
of Normandy, different from the King, in this only that the King did them no
homage, as they did to him. But in their Territories, they usurped all kind of
souerainty, as to make laws, Officers of the magistracle, to give judgment not
subject to Appeal, leuy military forces, Coin money, take imposts, subsidies,
and the like and vsd also a Crown such as in more ancient times the Kings did,
that is a Crown Fleurnoee, only differing from what is now a Royal one, in
that it was not arch't or close. Such kind of Soueraign Dukes were afterward
sometime there created. Thus an ancient Anthoin de la Salle chez Chapter L'Oys. des
Gr. sig. ca. 5.. 48. 49.
Author of that State: Quand le Roy fait un Duc il le Corone en sa meilleure
ville, tout ainsi que luy mesme a este couronne excepted' estre oint. and, for
more particular form of there Crown, the same Author. Le Duc est inuesty par
l'imposition d'un chappeau d' or Ducat, orne desperles. And the Coronation of
the Dukes of Bretagne (until it became united to the Crown) was with all
Ceremony as to a King, except Unction, as appears in that of Francis I. Duke
there in M. CD. XLII. crowned by Bertrand d' Argentre Hist. de Bret. liver. II
chap. I.
the Bishop of Rennes, with a Crown d' or a haults fleurons d'un Esgale
hauteur, qui estla Corone Royal. For indeed the Royal Habiliments remaind
there to the Dukes. But, those ancient Dukedoms, or Counties, being too great
in Soueraintie for a subjects hand, have by little and little been reunited to
the Crown, as Champagne, Brie, Bretagne, Normandy, and the rest like, not
without much desire and policy of the succeeding French Kings. Neither would
they ever make any new inuestitures, with those ancient Royalties. Neither is
there one of those so Kingly Dignities, yet under the French Empire, which has
not been drowned in the Crown, either by marriage, Treason committed, or some
such cause. But they have created a new Form, both by giving Appenages to the
younger sons, as also Dukedoms and Counties to others, reserving always
ressort and souueraintee as they call it (that is, their Royalties for
receiving appeals, and supremacy of seigneurie) and withal, in the Appenages,
the reuersion to themselves in default of heirs masles; which by an Ordinance
of Charles the ninth, was extended to all other Dukedoms and Counties in future
time to be erected. Wherefore the Dukes and Counts at this present, and of this
later creation in France, have no other mark ot participation of Souuerainty,
but only in that they bear (as L'Oyseau says) la Corone au tymbre de leurs
armoiries. And are not Seigneurs Souuerains but Suzerains. Neither have they
now the Crown as a part of their habit, but a formalitie only on their Armorie.
Ils ne portent pas en test, a present qu'ils ne sont plus que simples
seigneurs suzerains, ne leur estant aussi plus concedee, a present, en leur
inuestiture: and partant ils ne l'ont plus qu'en peinture au tymbre de leurs
armoiries; si ce n'est qu' ils soient Princes Souuerains, auquel cas ils la
pourroient porter en test. But whereas he upon a passage in Uillhehardouin,
thinks that the Crowns of the first kind of Dukes were not very ancient, I
rather guess them to be at least as ancient as near some c. years from the
beginning of the third line. For, about that time, in the Constantinopolitan
Empire under Alexius Comnenus, when the new titles of Sebastocrator and the
like were invented, he honored both the Sebastocrator (who was then at first,
apparent successor) with a Crown, as also the Caesar, being the next title to
the Sebastocrator. (...) (says his Anna Comnen. Alexiad. 3.
Daughter) (...). i. In a public Session he commanded that they should be
crowned, both the Sebastocrator and the Caesar, with Crowns differing much in
worth from that which he himself was crowned withal. The Sebastocrator's
perhaps was then, as the Despot's afterward. Of that in the first chapter of
this book. And the Caesar's as the Sebastocrator's in later time. Observe but
the succession of one of these titles into another place (whereof already) and
you may agree to the Conjecture. The Sebastocrators appears in the Emperor
Curopalat. (...).
Cantacuzen's inuesting his wives brothers Manuel and John with that Dignity,
and giving them Crowns (...) (as my author says) (...). i. having before only
one Arch. And it will not be absurd to think that in imitation of those Eastern
Princes, the custom of bearing Crowns, by such as were invested in so great
Honors, came into these Eastern parts. What community then was twixt the
Eastern and Western States, every man knows that has read the Holy wars of
that age. Some of the French derive their word Appenage from (...), expressing
in the Eastern Sacred. Du Haillan liver 3.
Empire, the sacred habitude twixt the Sovereign and Suz^raine. Why might not
imitation of their habits be, as well as of their language? Its more
anciciently noted of Charles the Annal. Incert. Aut. sub. A. 876. Edit. a
Pithoeo.
Bald, K. of France, that he too much imitated the Constantinopolitan Emperor,
and how that age, about Alexius his time, generally affected Helle^^sine and
such words of Greek as they could get them, is apparent in the Monkish stories
then written, in ancient Charters and other examples infinite. And afterward in
the Charter of the Black Prince his creation into Duke of Cornwall, under Our
Edward III, a mere Greek word is inserted by the characters of intimos
(misprinted in the Princes case, Rointimos) which is plainly (...). i.
honorifice or such like, and could not but ridiculously be vsd now for Latin.
Neither can their Crowns anciently be so much imputed to their then possessed
Souerainty. For then, why did our Corona cinctus 1. de Eltham Comes Corn^b^ae
F. Edw. II. VVestmonasterij Sepultus.
Earls (before any Dukes made in England) wear any such Crowns, and merely
such as are now Ducal? They were not Soueraigns, more then their posterity at
this day. Or why had both our Dukes, Marquesses, and Earls afterward Crowns to
their Creation, and as ornaments fi^ting their heads, not imaginary only or
forma^l upon their Armories? But for an example of the ceremony belonging to
those ancient Dukes in France, take this of our King John, Duke of Normandy.
Accinctus est (as Roger of Houedens words are) gladio Ducatus Normanniae in
matrici ecclesia (he means at Rouen) per manum Walteri Rothomagnesis
Archiepiscopi, and praedictus Archiepiscopus posuit in Capite Ducis Circulum
aureum habentem, in summitate per circuitum, Rosas aureas: which, Matthew
Paris, and the Annals of Ireland call rosulas aureas artificialiter fabricatas.
When it first began, in France to be a special and distinct title from Count,
is diversely affirmd. But they most truly deliver, that suppose it first proper
to the Dukes of Bretagne. To John the second, Governor of that Territory, the
Charter of Philip le Beau, dated in M. CC. XCVII. thus grants: Exstraict du
let. de Pairrie chez Berttand d'Argentre hist. de Bret. liver 4. chap. 31. and
Belleforest. liver 4. chap. 43.
Ducem ipsum qui Comes fuit aliquando nostris vocatus in literis, Ducem fore,
and Terram Britanniae Ducatum existere, ipsumque Ducem in posterum deberi
vocari autoritate regia ex Certa scientia declaramus and tenore praesentium
confirmamus. This John's predecessors being before usually known by the
indistinct name of Dux and Comes Britanniae, of whose equiualencie in ancient
time, already. Yet so that the Title was distinctly affected by them before
this time. Witness their Monuments deliuerd in Bertrand d'Argentre, and
specially the title of our old Earls of Richmond, being also Dukes there. For
in a Charter (which I have) of Geffrey Plantagenest, son to Henry II. being
possessed of both those Territories, made to one Richard the son of Reiner and
his heirs of Tronagium and Pesagium de Nundinis meis Sancti Botulphi, and
quicquid ad Tronagium and Pesagium pertinet, the beginning is, G. Regis H
Filius, Dux Britanniae, and Comes Richmundiae, where, it appears, he used Dux
as different and better then Comes. In England until Edward III. from the
Norman conquest (of the Saxon times, presently) the greatest Title, next to the
Prince. was Count, Comes, now called Earl. But Edward III. created his sonue
and heir Edward the Black Prince, Duke of Cornwall, per 11. Ed. 3. Camdenus.
Sertum in capite, Annulum in Digito, and virgam argenteam, which afterward was
vsd of gold. Richard the II. invested Thomas Earl of Notingham with the
Dukedom of Norfolk Pat. 21. Rich. 2 and Rot. Parl. 3 Hen. 6. art. 1.
per appositionem cappae suo Capiti and traditionem virgae aureae. The Sertum
was nothing but the Ducal Crown, as at this day, I think, Fleuronee. For that
of the Ring: it is familiar in most ancient story, that the delivery of a Ring
was a sign of Principality given; as in Pharaohs giving a Ring to Joseph; in
that of Ahaswerush or Xerxes, reported in Esther, to Haman; in Alexanders doing
the like to Perdiccas, which made some Q. Curt. lib. 10 Plutarch. in AAlex.
alij. and consulas 1. Maccab. cap. 6. com. 15. de Antiocho.
think him the truly designed successor. And, when the two Mahumedans, Alem or
Ali, and Muhauias, upon controversy for the Dominion of Syria, were contented
to submit themselves to the judgment of the old men; that so the arbitrators
might have a sufficient power judicial, they deliuerd to them their Rings
(...) (says my Theophanes ap. Porphyrog. de ad. Romans Imp. cap. 21.
author) (...). i. which is a sign of Principality among the Hagarens. And
Jews surnamd the Gross, of France, Filium suum Ludouicum annulo inuestiuit,
in part of his Kingdom, as one Sugar. Abb. Vit. Lud. Craessi.
that writs his life remembers. How a Ring, in the Coronations of Kings, is
used, the diverse and published orders of them show. Fac nobis reddi Coronam,
Annulum and purpuram, Caeteraque ad Inuestituram Imperialem pertinentia, are
the Helmold. Chron. Slauor. 1. cap. 32.
words of those Bishops which came to the Emperor Henry v. to depose him. Of
the Ring, we shall have more occasion to speak anon in another Vbi de iure
Annulorum Aur.
place. Both Rod and Ring were vsd anciently in Imperial and Royal
inuestitures of Bishopriques, which were proportionat to Counties or Dukedoms,
and therefore may be opportunely here rememberd. The great controuerfies about
it twixt that Henry v. and Pope Paschal the 11. and at length the same Emperors
remitting his right to Calixtus 11. are easily known out of the stories of
those times. The custom of the Georgius Phranz. lib. 3. cap. 19.
Constantinopolitan Empire was (as for the Staff) alike. And in this Isle, a
multis annis retroactis (says Iugulph Abbot of Crowland; he liud at the Norman
Conquest.) nulla electio praelatorum erat mere libera and Canonica, sed Omnes
Dignitates tam Episcoporum quam Abbatum per Annulum and Baculum, Regis Curia
pro sua complacentia conferebat. The rod or Pastoralis baculus as they called
it, was usually kept in the Bishoprique or Monastery, and at every new
inuestiture deliuerd by the King or other Patron (as the case was) to the new
elect. For, the Ita Malmesb. de Gest. Pontific. lib. 3. in Episcop.
Lindisfarnensibus and lib. 2. de gest. Reg. cap. 8. ex Archiu. Glascon.
Election was in the Clergy, but the confirmation by this means, with staff
or rod or Ring. And therefore, when K. Edgar most liberally gave new
privileges to Glastenbury, yet sibi suisque haeredibus tribuendi fratri Electo
pastoralem Baculum potestatem retinuit. Afterward, Henry 1. about that same
time when Pope Paschal so much opposd it in the Empire, (Anselm Archbishop of
Canterbury being a special age^t herein for the Sea of Rome) inuestituram
Annuli and Baculi indulsit in perpetuum; retento tamen (so says the Monk of
Malmesburie) Electionis and Regalium priuilegio. And De gest. Pontific. lib. 1.
de hac re and Turba Monachorum.
Concessit Papa, vt Rex homagia de electis acciperet, sed nullum per Baculum
and annulum inuestiret. In report whereof all our Stories consent. Which makes
me suspect this relation in Matthew Paris. A. D. M. C. XIII. Rex Henricus dedit
Archiepiscopatum Cantuariensem Rodulpho Londoniensi Episcopo, and illum per
Annulum and Pastoralem Baculum inuestiuit. This Rodulph or Ralph was successor
to Anselm, but was not Bishop of London, but of Rochester. Neither do the more
ancient Stories of Florence, Houeden, Huntingdon, Malmesbury, and the like
speak of this kind of inuestiture to him. Matthew of Westminster follows the
words of Paris; only he has in him, misprinted Richardo for Rodulpho. But,
after that remission by the King, its not likely he would so soon use the
ceremony about which so much difference and controversy had been. Neither
would the Sea of Rome have bin so silent upon such a Haeresis de Inuestitura,
eo aeuo nonnullis dicta. Goffrid. Abbas Vindocinens. Opuscul. tract. (...). v.
Anselm. Epist. 12. and Iuonem Carnot. Epist. 257.
fact, as, at that time specially, it so much impugned. But long after when
England discharged it self of that Romish yoke, this liberty of collation and
inuestiture (but not with these ceremonies) was resnmd to the Crown by act of
Parliament, Stat. 1. Ed. 6. cap. 2. quod rescidit Parliamentum 1. Mar. Sess. 2.
cap. 2. quod etiam caput Mariae refixit Parliam. 1. Jacob. Sess. 1. cap. 25.
constituting that without any Conge d'Eslier the King might bestow
Archbishopriques and Bishopriques by his letters Patents, which should be to
all intents and purposes as though Conge d'eslier had been given, the election
duly made and the same confirmed. This was under Edward VI. and repealed by Q.
Marie, whose act of Repeal stands now also repealed. But this out of the way.
How those Ceremonies, belong to Bishops now, especially of the Roman Church,
you may best learn from Durant. de Ritib. Eccles. 2. cap. 9. aly.
Writers whose direct purpose is of things of that matter. Yet some creations
of the time of Edward III. have nothing of the Rod. When John of Gaunt was made
Duke of Lancaster in Parliament, the King ceincta (as the Rot. Pal. 36. Ed. 3.
membr. 4.
Roll speaks) son dit filz Johan d'un Espeie and mist sur sa eeste un Cappe
furre and disus un Cercle d' or de peers and luy nosma and fist Duc de
Lancastre. Here is the Cap the Crown, the Sword; but no Rod. Under Rihard II.
Parl. 9. R'ch. 2. memb. 5. art. 15.
Thomas Duke of Gloucester is invested in Parliament p^r Gladij cincturam and
Pilei and circuli aurei impositionem, and a Charter delivered him; and diverse
others like occur in the Rols. But the Charters of Creation of them of later
times are Nomen etc. and Dignitatem Ducis N. damus and concedimus atque per
Gladij cincturam, Cappae and Circuli aurei impositionem in Capite, and
Traditionem virgae aureae realiter investimus. Where the Ring, as also in more
ancient times, is omitted; and the Sword, Cap, and Coronet rememberd. But long
before Edward the III. the name of Dux is in our stories and ancient Charters.
Yet hardly twixt him and the Norman Conquest. It seems it was the rather
abstaind from in that time, because the Conquerors title in Normandy, whence
he came, was at the best no greater. But in the Saxon Reign it is very
frequent. In a Charter of K. Edgar, to the Abbey Ingulphus.
of Crowland dated DCCCC. LXVI. is subscription of witnesses after the Bishops
Abbots and Abbesses, (but the precedence is not always obserud) thus: Ego
Orgarus Dux constitui. Ego Ailwnius Dux constabiliui. Ego Oslacus Dux affui.
Ego Alferus Dux interfui. Ego Elphegus Dux audiui. and according to this are a
multitude of Charters of those times; some of them having also their Provinces
annexed to their names, as in another of the same year and King: Ego Ordgarus
Dux Doneuoniae consignaui. Ego L. Elfegus.
Elfegus Southamtoniensis Dux consensi. and a writer that lived Ethelwerd. lib.
3. cap. 2. and v. Eundem lib. 4. ca. 2. Hengistus dicitur primus Co^sul and Dux
qui de Germania fuerat genti^ Anglorum.
in those times tells of one Hun Dux Prouinciae Sumorsetum, slain in a battle
twixt Egbert K. of Westsaxonie, and Beornulph K. of Mercland, and buried at
Winchester. This was proper to them which next under Supremacy Royal, had the
government of Provinces. You may see it specially in the Example of the
Northumberland Dukes beginning in Otha brother to Hengist, They, although very
great in power, yet for almost a hundred years would not assume the name of
King but Duke. Of them, this Will. of Malmesburie. Annis vno minus Centum
Northanimibri Duces communi habitu Contenti, sub Imperio Cantuaritarum privati
agebant; sed non postea stetit haec ambitionis continentia, seu quia semper in
deteriora decliui est humanus animus seu quod gens illa naturaliter inflatiores
anhelat spiritus. Anno itaque Dominicae Incarnationis DLXVII. post mortem
Hengisti LX. Ducatus in Regnum est muta. tus, regnauitque ibi primus Ida, haud
dubie Nobilissimus, aetate and viribus integer; verum vtrum ipsi pro se
Principatum invaserit, an aliorum consensu delatum susceperit parum definio,
quia veritas est in abdito. Yet in the Latin stories you cannot make
sufficient distinction twixt their Dux and Comes and Consul and V. Alcuin.
Epist. 2. and titulum Ethclwerdi, qui nempe Saxonicam conscripsit historiam.
Patricius all which, I doubt not, are sometime vsd for the same Dignity or
Office: But I am resolved that the Dukes, or chiefest Princes were in the Saxon
idiom known by the name of Eorles, which is our very word Earls. Their
Archbishops and Earls were in the same rank of worth; their Bishops and
Ealdormannes (Aldermen) in another. Testimony, beyond exception, proves it. In
the Laws of Leg. Athelstani cap. Be westum.
those times Archbishops and Earls Wergild is 15000. Thyrmsas. Bishops and
Aldermens. 8000.
AErcebisceopes and Eorles waergild bith xv. M. thrimsa. Bisceoths and
Ealdormannes VIII. M.


So Archbishops and Ethelings (of this word, before in the first Chapter) are
in another Canut leg. cap. 55.
law of that age ioin'd, and Ealdormannes and Leodbisceopes i. Aldermen and
Provincial inferior Bishops. But, that you may understand the transcribed
Saxon Law; Weregild among them was, as the Ciuilians Aestimatio Capitis or a
man's worth which in that age, was paid as the price of Death or other Faults,
and had its original from ancient manners of those people, whence the English
came (the Germans) among whom (as Tacitus of them, then) luitur etiam
homicidium certo armentorum ac pecorum numero, recipitque satisfactionem
vniuersa Domus. Neither does the expressing of so many Thrymsas (a Thrymsa Leg.
Aleman. cap. 6.
was a third part of their shilling; not three shillings, as some much mistake)
differ from Tacitus his relation of a cer. taine number of Beasts. Read his old
Law of the Lex. Saxonum cap. 64. and ad hanc rem consulas Leg. Ripuariorum c.
37. art. 12.
Saxons. Solidus est Duplex. Vnus habet duos Tremisses (i. Thrymses) qui est
Bos anniculus XII. mensium, vel Ouis cum agno. Alter solidus tres semisses (I
read tres tremisses) id est ^os XVI. mensium. Maiori solido aliae
compositiones, Minori homicidia componuutur. This Wergeld or Werigeld is often
met with in the Salique laws, those of Childebert and Clothar of the
Ripuarians, and such more. And in Regiam Maiestat. li. 4. ca. 19. and
priuilegium Macduffi familiae a Malcolmo III. indultum v. apud Buchanan de reb.
Scotic. lib. 7. and de Cro Scotorum videsis Reg. Maiestat. 4. cap. 24. and 36.
and 40.
laws published under David I. of Scotland; De vnoquoque fure per totam Scotiam
est Wergelt XXX. Vaccae and vna iuvenca, sieve fuerit liber homo sieve seruus.
And, that the ancient punishments, in the Roman state also consisted chiefly in
Sext. Pompeius verb. Ouibus. Agell. Noct. At^ic. lib. II. cap. I. alij.
mulcts of Oxen and Sheep, cannot be unknown to any obseruer of their
Antiquities. But it is here plain taht an Earl of those times was near of
double estimation to their Alderman. Of the Alderman, more anon. Neither is it
more to be doubted, but that no name properly can so fit the Latin Dux in
their Charters and stories as Eorle. But how it became since with us only for
Count or Comes, with its signification, shall, in due place, be manifested. In
Scotland some affirm that the Title of Duke amongst others, began under
Malcolm II. about m. XX. of Christ. If they mean that it was then indistinctly
also vsd with Comes, you may beleeu them. But the first occurrence, that I have
observed of it in their Monuments, is in Parliament of XI. of Robert III. at
Scone, ibidem vocatis, more solito, Episcopis, Prioribus, Ducibus, Comitibus,
Baronibus, libre tenentibus and Burgensibus qui de Domino nostro Rege tenent in
Capite. This was in the year m. CD. and its iudiciously delivered that this
Robert III. some II. years before, by creating his son Prince David Duke of
Rothsay, first brought this great note of distinct honor into that Kingdom. At
the same time he invested his brother Robert with Title of Dux Albaniae.
Marvel not, that his own and his brothers name were both Robert. His, at his
b^ptisme, was John. But at his taking the Royal government, either for the
vnluckines of the one name in the French and English, or for the good which
accompanied the other in his own predecessors, changd himself out of John into
Robert. The first Duke in Castile (as is Esteuan de Garibay lib. 15. cap. 27.
and 54. g Circa m. CCC. LXX.
affirmed) was Frederique bastard son to g Henry II. of Castile, by him
created Duke of Benauente. And John successor to this Henry made his second
son Ferdinand Prince of Lara, Duke of Pennafiel. Ferdinando minori Regis
filio (says Mariana) ^ui Lara Principatus erat, oppidum Pennafielis additum,
Ducis nomine. Corona Capiti imposita, nullis extantibus Floribus; quod Collatae
dignitatis insigne erat: tametsi nostra aetate non Duces sed Comites etiam
Coronam clypeis adijciunt Regis haud absimilem. But their Ducall Crown now is,
as in England, fleuronee (so was that of Ferdinando, says Stephen of Garibay)
and as a Kings, not archt, but that only the flowers are less and so even que
vna no suba mas que otra, as Esteuan de Garibay's words are i. that one be not
higher then another. And the ancient Dukes might wear it as well on their
heads, as Armories; and had diverse such prerogatives even Royal, when they
were all of Royal blood. But for the most part, now cessing to be so, most of
their prerogatives also cesse, says Garibay, at least in the Kingdoms of
Castile. In ancient time there, as well as in other places, this Dignity was
only for life. And to this day (my author is De Reb. Hispan. lib. 8, cap. 2.
Mariana) the steps of that Estate are in the Spanish Nobility. For none of
them Duke, Marquess or Count, use their titles after death of their Ancestors,
but Rege denuo annuente, unless some few such families only as by the Kings
special grant may do otherwise. Which, although here noted, as many other
things in this, Chapter, is applied to some Titles hereafter to be spoken of.
The Pragmatica ordains that none whatsoever shall have the Title of Excellent
or Excellency. But that the the Grands (all Dukes among them are Grands, and
some Marquesses and Counts) or such as may stand covered before the King shall
be honored with Vu^stra Sennoria i. your Lordship. And that in superscriptions
to any Duke, Marquess, or Count the place denominating his dignity shall to
it be added. To speak here of particular Dukedomes their rights, Regalties,
and such like were from our purpose. We have already rememberd that il Gran
Duca di Toscana the Duke of Florence had his Crown radiant and that Title of
Gran Duca by special indulgence from Pius Qnintus, who inscribd Cicarella in
Vit. Pontific.
his gift with, Pius V. Pontifex Max. ob eximiam Dilectionem ac Catholicae
Religionis Zelum praecipuumque Iustitiae studium donauit. There is a par^icular
form of Creation instituted by Paul II. which for the length, and because most
of the differing Ceremonies are as proper to that Church, I omit. But there is
no Crown but a Cap only (Biretum) and a Scepter. Yet what the Reporter Marcell.
cor^grens. Sa. Oerem. I. Just. 7.
adds for his difference of Dukes, I think may be worth observation. Et haec
quidem (says he) seruantur, si Dux est Magnae Nobilitatis and Potentiae vt
fuit Tempore Domini Pauli PP. II. Borsus Ferrariae. Si vero esset Mediocris
potentiae vt fuit Tempore D. Sixti PP. IV. (to this Pope this author was a kind
of Master of the Ceremonies) Fredericus Dux Vrbini, omnia seruantur, nisi quod
non duceretur a Cardinalibus, sed a duobus assistentibus Papae principalibus,
and sederet vltimus post omnes Cardinales, in Banco Diaconorum and eundo
incederet solus post Crucem ante omnes Cardinales. Quod si adhuc esset
inferior, tunc omnia alia seruarentur, nisi quod non daretur ei sceptrum, neque
sederet in banco Cardinalium, sed ad pedes Papae in supremo gradu, and eundo
incederet ante Crucem post Oratores and alios Principes. here you see his
triple distinction of them; and others have them by Maiores and Minores Duces,
whereupon says the learned De Coronis lib. 9. cap. 22.
Paschalius, that the Maiores omnes vnius ordinis esse Censentur, omnes
propemodum suspiciuntur vt Reges, longeque antistant illis quos voco Minores.
Neither can any not see much difference twixt those of Florence, Ferrara,
Sauoy, Lorrain, Saxony. Brunswic, and such more (which among them also
differently have so many imperial rights) and the French of late time,
English, Scottish, and Spanish Dukes which are all Seignieurs Suzerains subject
Lords, and many of them possessing their denominating Territory in Tit'e only,
not in government. Yet Charles L'oyseau idly minseth his difference to small,
where he makes our English Dukes to be a degree by themselves, and qui ne sont
qu' a vie come Officiers. What Dukes he means with us, I know not. But all men
may know that since Edward III. the Title has been Honorary and Hereditarie.
Nor does that frequent name of Duke occurring in Genes. XXXVI. belong to this
place. The word in the holy tongue is (...) which the Paraphrases of Onkolos
and Jonathan turn (...); both signifying a Lord, Prince, or great Ruler, and
the Rabbi S. Iarchi in Genes.; 6. Com. 15.
Ebrewes interpret them there (...) i. Heads of families or Kinreds, although
Alloph may serve also to express any great dignity under a King. The Rabbis
say that (...) i. Every Alluph is a Kingdom without a Crown, which Elias
interprets, that every King not crowned is (...) Dux.
i. a Duke. The Germans call them Hertzogen, and Hertochen (whence the
Hertochij, in that under the name of the Confessors laws) both signifying Dux,
as he is exercitui praefectus. Remember what is in the first book of the Duke
of Moscouie, for a Duke uncrowned, yet supreme Prince.

Ducis Limitanei. Marquesses, whence the name. Marque. (...) in old Gaulish.
Marcheta Mulieris the Brides maidenhead. Mareshall. usual application of names
of a later age to antique relations, by old English Poets. The deriuation of
Marquess a mari, idle. (...). How in one man Duke, Count, and Marquess was
anciently often expressed. The beginning of the name of this Dignity in the
Empire. Markgraue. Marchio Burgundiae, and Normanniae. His inuestiture by a
Ring. His Coronet. Presedence in France. Alciat's admonition in point of
Presedence. Marchiones in England. John of Sarisburie corrected. Snowdon.
Controversy twixt the Lords Marchers and the Barons of the Cinque Ports, about
bearing the Canopie. Earl of March. First Marquess in England. How the
Nobility liked the Creation of Robert of Vere. Richard I(...). expressly made
it a Dignity twixt Duke and Count. John of Beaufort's refusing the Title, as
too New. His Coronet, here. First Marquess in Scotland, John Hamilton. First
in Spain, when made, and who. His Coronet and prerogatives there.

CHAP. III.
OF Dux, Dux limitis, and Comes, as they were anciently about the declining
Empire, it is sufficiently disputed in the next Chapter before. And of their
equality of Office and Dignity; as also how from Dux came the now Honorary
title of Duke. From no other Original is the name of MARQVESSE to be deriud.
For such as were constituted Governors of Provinces bordering on some other
State or the Sea (whence also easier invasions might be feared) had the name
of C. tit de Venat. Ferar. l. vnic. and Constit. Theodos. and Val. edit. a
Pith. tit. 29.
Duces Limitanei or Limitum in Latin, and, from the old Dutch or French, in
later time, Mar^graues, or Marquesses. For in that tongue, as at this day,
Borders, Frontiers, limits, or bounds were called Marquis or Marches. Quotiens
(says my Boiar. leg. tit. de Term. Rupt. art. 8.
author) de Commarchanis contentio nascitur etc. i. as often as controversy
rises touchching Boundaries. And, in the French Annals, one speaking of
Carloman: Expulit Duces quibus custodia commissa c Anonym. sub anno 861.
erat Pannonici limitis and Cartani, atque, per suos, Marcam ordinauit. Hence
the ancient Marquess of Austria, is called Ditmar. Chronic. lib. 7.
Marcha inter Vngarios and Bauarios. So Normandy was Sugerius Abb. vita
Ludouici Crassi.
Margus Regni, and Normanniae Marchia. The reason of the name any man knows,
that knows how it lies. In the Testament of Charles the Great, Marcae is vsd
for Frontiers, and in writings of those times Marca Hispanica, Marca
Britannica, and such like infinite occur. And Adreuald. Floriac. de Mirac. S.
Ben. cap. 33.
Marchisi Britannici limitis. Marchiser in French being at this day to Border
or adioyne to. Hence the names of Danmarch, and (as some have thought) our
Mercia or Mercland in the Saxon Heptarchie; and the laws of Marque, or
Reprisales. Some great men have Alciat. de Singul. Certam. cap. 32.
deriud it from Mare or Marc i. a Horse; as if it should be in Latin Magister
equitum or a General over the Gensdarmerie of Horsemen. Its true that among
the old Gauls the word (...) Pausanias Phocic. lib 10.
Marc signified a Horse, as also in March. leg. Boiar. tit. de Vitios. animali
art. 11.
old French, and British or Welsh; we and the present Dutch retaining still
for one Sex the word Mare. Hence some will the Marcheta Mulieris in Scotland,
i. (from an obscene use of equitare) the first night, or Maidenhead of the
Bride, which by a law of Even III. King of Scotland was allowd to the King and
other Lords at the marriage of their Tenants daughters, and afterward by
Malcolm III. at request of his Queen, turned into a sum of V post Hectorem
Boetium lib. 3. Regiam May. lib. 4. cap. 31. and de Marcheta apud Nos,
consulas Henric. de Bract lib. 4. de Assiss. N. Diss. cap. 28.. 5.
money, yet remaining among their laws. But also with us in a Natiuo habendo
the Esplees is laid, among other, in Marcheta pro filiabus suis maritandis;
perhaps having like cause of name, although not the same ground of Law. But in
Scotland it extends to all Conditions as well Noble as other. And from the old
use of this Marc or Mare, must you derive Mareshall i. (as most say)
Mare-schalch, which literally is as much as Equi or Equorum praefectus i.
Master of the Horse. Which, without question, is the true etymology of the
great office of Mareshall ioind anciently in England with the Constable (i.
Comes stabuli) in their judicious place of the Court of Chivalry. But to
justify also, that Marquess is hence, one produces a piece of an old Romant,
thus speaking of Paris his company, in his embarquement for Helen;

Li Benois Chez Fauchet en l' Origin des Dig. nit. 2. cap. 3.
Chiualier and li Marchis
Ke Paris ot semont and pris,
Et ses freres Deifibus,
Et furent bien deux mil and plus.
And thinks that the author would not absurdly by Marchis mean such as are
among us feudatarie Marquesses; but that he vsd it for Horsemen; which in
later time was applied to this Dignity. Surely there was no necessity that
he should use the name for the one or the other, but generally for a Soldier,
because indeed the old Marquesses had in their Provinces Martial government.
Or if he did use it for Horsemen, as perhaps he might, what consequence is
there that thence this Honorary title should have its deduction. But howsoever,
he knows nothing of the old Monkish Rimes and Romants, that knows not how
usually they abusd words of Titles, Dignities, and state of their own age, by
application of them to Countries and Times where and when they were not. What
does Dan Lidgat the Monk of Bury mean, when in the destruction of Thebes, he
says that King Adrastus

-- set a Parliament,
And has his letters and messer gers sent
Through Greece to many sundry Kings,
Hem to enhast and make no lettings,
And round about, as made is mention,
He sent also to many a Region
For Princes, Dukes, Earls, and Barons?
It must, in charity, be thought that none of his Readers are so blockish as
to beleeu that the Titles of Dukes, Earls, and Barons, were in Greece. Much,
of that nature, is in Robert of Gloucester, Chaucer, Gower, and, elsewhere, in
Lidgat. The Constit. Feud. lib: 2. tit. Quis dicatur. and Marchiani dicuntur
Petro de Vincis lib. 2. Epist. 15.
Imperial Laws thus: Qui de Marchia inuestitus est Marchio dicitur. Dicitur
autem Marchia, quia Marcha and, vt plurimum, iuxta Mare sit posita. Its certain
iudeed that many of the Imperial Marquisats are in a maritime coast, yet
plainly had their names from being Land-marches of the State, and not from
their maritime situation. For although the Marca Anconitana, Taruisana, of
Ferrara, in Italy, as also the Marquisat of the holy Empire in Brabant, the
Marcha Normannica, and Britannica in France, are maritime, yet Misnia and
Lusatia, Brandeburg, Morauia, Austria, Susa in Sauoy, all under the name of
Marquisats, and then instituted when the Title had a real deduction from the
Provinces, are inland Countries. When Charles the great had a design of War
against the Saxons, he sent for all his forces in Guienne, and commanded them
thence, Adhdemar. in vita Ludouic. Pij.
relictis tantum Marchionibus qui fines Regni tenentes, omnes, si forte
ingruerent, hostium arcerent incursus. Plainly the defending of the Marches
interprets their name. Another very Helmold. Chron. Slauor. 1. cap. 8.
ancient, of the Emperor Henry I. (he raignd in DCCCCXX. of Christ) that after
his victories against Worm King of Danmarch, he apud Sleswich, quae nunc De
isto oppido consulas Ethelword lib. 1. page 474. and Malmesb. de gest. Reg. 2.
cap. 2 cui E^theisi, and Hurtheby (Librariorum incuria) dicitur.
Heidebo dicitur, regni terminos ponens ibi and Marchionem statuit and Saxonum
Coloniam habitare praecepit And Maiores nostri (says Annal. Boior. 6. and 4.
Auentin) vnumquodque regnum quo citeriora eius tutiora forent, iuxta Cardines
Coeli, in limits, quibus praefectos, cum praesidijs Militum, Equitum
imposuere, diuiserunt: illos Marchas, hos Marchigraphos appellant. The later
Grecians, from the Italian Marchese, call it (...). The Lady Anna Comnena names
Tancred (...), where the very Italian is. And one Nicephorus Greg. histor. 7.
of them, I know not why, says it signifies (...). i. The Kings
Standardbearer. They might well be deceiud in this Western name, as in others
they usually are. The ancientest testimony, which I have obserud of the name,
is about Charles the Great. In his Ap. Goldast. Constit. Imp. tom. 2. and in
Capitulari Carol. Magni cap. 5.
Constitution De legia Imperij Transalpini sede tenenda, are reckond Duces and
Marchiones; and in other writings of that age. Therefore is he much deceiud
that Krantz. in Wandalic. 3. cap. 16. and Saxon. 3. cap. 9.
says the first mention of Marchio, is in that of Henry I. Emperor, at
Sleswic; and perhaps as faulty, in that he interprets Marquisat by Districtum
vnius Villicationis aut Ditionis, because the Territories of Villages or Towns
(he says) the Dutch call Ueltmarcks. I doubt not but that Marck there also is
originally, as before we have delivered. But, as we have already showed of Dux
and Comes Primi ordinis, so, of them both and Marqueste, you must remember,
that all three, and that after the French Empire, were d^stinctions of Name
more then Dignity. They concurd even in one man. For the Roman times, all three
are plainly expressed in Sidon. Apollinar. Panegyric. Anthemio.
this:

-- Comitis sed iure recepto
Danubij ripas, and tractum limitis ampli
Circuit, hortatur, diponit, discutit, armat.
For the French: under the Emperor Jews II. Trachulfus (says an Anonym.
Annal. Franc. edit. a Pithoeo. sub anno 873.
Ancient) Comes and Dux Sorabici limitis, mense Augusto defunctus est. Comes,
and Dux limitis, every man may see, included, Duke Count, and Marquess. Diverse
such testimonies you shall meet with. But when other titles in the German
Empire under Otho I. were by feudall right made hereditary and Honorarie, this
also among them, had the same Change, being before, with them, for life. And
the Feudall Marquisats of Lusatia, Brandeburg, Brabant (that they called Of the
holy Empire) were, about that time, created. In their Language they name them
Markgraues, i. Comites Limitanei, or governors of the Frontiers, and thence
their Monks made their Latin Marggrauius-Obijt (says In Annal. Dominic.
Celmariens. sub Anno 1291.
one) Marggrauius de Missen; speaking of Frederique Marquess of Misnia. The
solemnity of Creating them (as of Dukes) in the Empire anciently was by
delivery of one or more Banners, as, in the example of Austria, is remembered,
where we speak of Dukes. When this Title became first distinct in France, I
know not. But there also the Count of Burgundy is anciently Frodoard. Chronic.
sub An. 921.
called Marchio Burgundiae; and Richard Duke of Normandy (twixt whom and our
King Ethelred Pope John XV. desired to make a peaceful composition, and sent
Leo Archbishop of Triers into England with letters of credence) in the Epist.
Ioh. Papae dat. Rothomagi 991. apud Malmesbur. de gest. Regum l. 2. c. 10
same letters is only titled Richardus Marchio. So an old Lips. Louan. 1. cap.
12. An. 1138.
Charter; Godefridus Dei Miseratione Dux and Marchio Lotharingiae, Comes
Louanij, etc. An ancient Author Anthony de la Salle chez L^oyseau des serg.
cap. 5.
of that Country, says the Marquess, Est inuesty auec un anneau de Ruby. But
the Ring is now turned into a Crown or Coronet, which they call m^slee, mixed,
that is, part Fleuronee, and part perlee, because the Marquess is as it were,
participating of both, twixt Duke and Count. Yet they have by a distinction
given presedence to some ancient Counts before some ancient Marquesses: as to
Counts of whole Provinces, before Marquesses of only Frontier Towns, and, to
those Marquesses, before other Counts or Governors of Towns; Nay, and some
have disputed and deliuerd that the Title of Count there generally is before
Marquess, and indeed the Marquess of Iulliers Froissart. Volum. 1. fueill. 24.
was (as for addition of honor) made Count, by the Emperor Jews of Bauiere.
Yet a late Author, Charles L'oyseau is confident, that (in regard all the
ancient Duchies and Counties, which were entire Provinces, are reunited to the
Crown, and that those of later time are but of such parts as it has pleased the
King to give, and under such limitations) the name of Marquess there is
generally before Couut. But for this and the like, remember that of the famous
and learned Alciat: Cum in Boijs (says he) and Liguribus plerique sint
Marchionis sieve Baronis titulum sibi arrogantes, vitae genere moribusque ab
Agrestibus parum differentes, Hos pro Ignobilibus habendos existimauerim, sod
omnino hac in re multum consuetudini tribuendum, quae plerunque non eadem
vbique est. Quapropter, in Gallia, Marchionibus praeferuntur Comites. Plurimum
vero Principalis ipsa concessio pollet. Siquidem omnes Dignitates ex supremi
ipsius Principis arbitrio pendent, qui, si velit, ea dignitate ornare Baronem
potest, vt Comitibus anteponatur, nihilque eam vulgarem sententiam facere, qua
tradiderunt aliqui, Comitem esse qui december Marchionibus, Marchionem qui December
Baronibus, Baronem qui december Capitaneis praesit. In England, as a Dignity
Honoratie it has not been of great antiquity. But, for the name: one that
Joan. Sarisburiens. de Nugis Curial. lib. 6. cap. 16.
wrote under Henry II. complaining of Cowardice in the English, uses the story
of those wives and mothers of the Persian army put to flight by the Medes,
which came all running to meet their sons and husbands, beseeching them
valiantly to renew the field, and finding them faint hearted, sublata vest (as
Iustin's words are, transcribed by this Author) obscoena corporis ostendunt,
rogantes Non vini, vt male codex meus typis excusus.
number in vteros Matrum vel Vxorum velint refugere: The army, for very shame,
retired, stoutly fought, and had the day; and then he adds, Vtinam sic faciant
Vxores and Matres nostrorum Marchionum, quacunque occasion patriam seruent
incolumem, and labem pudoris amoueant. But he means the ancient Lords Marchers
of Wales, in the same place speaking of Welsh irruptions. Niu^collinus (says
he,) not Ninicollinus, as it is ignorantly printed) indomitus insolescit,
inermes Britones intumescunt. Where, understand those Niuicollini for
Northwales men, denominated by him from that Snowdon hill in Caernaruan-shire,
which in another Dict. l. c. 6.
place he calls Niuium Collis, as the Welsh in like signification Craig Criry.
Of these Marchers, mention is in the Statute of Prerogative: Exceptis Feodis
Comitum and Baronum de Marchia, de terris in Marchia vbi breuia Domini Regis
non currunt. They were expressly called Marchionis Florilegus page 325. and 370.
edit. Londin. and lib. Rub. scac. and v. Camden. in Salopia, and Marchiones in
claus. 49. Hen. 3. dors. memb. 5. and W. Rishanger sub Ann. 50. Hen. 3.
Walliae also, and whereas in Matthew Paris his description of the Coronation
of Q. Elianor, wife to Henry the III. it is reported, that the Barons of the
Cinque ports carried the Canopie over the King, as their ancient right is, quod
tamen tunc scrupulo contentionis penitus non carebat, as he writes; the
opposition against them was by four Lords Marchers, John Fitz-Alan, Ralph of
Mortimer, John of Monmouth, and Walter of Clifford (then called Marchiones
Walliae) challenging that honorary office, per ius Marchiae, sed quodammodo
(says the red book of the Exchequer) friuolum reputabatur. Afterward, Roger of
Mortimer, being of great possessions and reckoning in this Trract, was, upon
the same Reason of Name, created Earl of March by Edward III. with which
others since have been enobled. But, in these, was only the name, not the
dignity, of Marchio. Neither were they in English styled Marquesses, but
Marchers, as the most worthy Camden Clarenceulx has observed. But the first
which had this in England, was the Earl of Oxford, Robert of Vere, Richard the
second's Mignion. He made him in Parliament Marquess of Dublin, and afterward
Duke of Ireland. How the State liked it, Thomas of Walsingham shall tell you:
Creata est (says he) in hoc Parliamento (IX. Richard II.) noua Dignitas
Anglicis insueta, nempe Comes Oxoniae D. Robertus de Veer appellatus and factus
est Marchio Dubliniae in Hibernia, caeteris Comitibus hoc indigne ferentibus,
quod viderent eum gradum celsiorem ipsis, Regis munere, percepisse, and
praecipue quia nec prudentia caeteris nec armis Valentior videbatur. But upon
the infallible credit of the Record, you shall have the form. Confirmauit
ipsum Parl. 9. Ric. 2. memb. 3. art. 17.
Marchionem de predictis titulo, nomine, and honor per Gladij cincturam, and
Circuli aurei suo capiti impositionem maturius inuestiuit, ac chartam tradidit.
-- Eum vultu hilari inter Pares Parlamenti in gradu Celsiori videlicet inter
Duces and Comites sedere mandauit, quod idem Marchio gratantius incontinenter
fecit. The same King made his Cousin-german John of Beaufort, son to John of
Gaunt, and Earl of Somerset, Marquess of Dorset, of which afterward Henry IV.
deprived him, and when a petition was in Parliament by the Commons for his
restitution, he himself was unwilling to be restored to this kind of newly
invented Honor, and, Engenulant, as the Parl. 4. Hen. 4. Mem. 18. art. 18.
Roll speaks, molt humblement, pria au Roy, que come le nome de Marquis fuyt
estrange nome en cest Royalme, qu'ilne luy vorroit ascunement doner cel nosme
de Marquis, qar iammais per conge du Roy il ne vorroit porter n'accepter sur
luy null tiel nosm en ascun manniere; mais nient meins mesme le Count mult
cordialment remercia les segneurs and les Commens de leurs bons coeurs, etc.
The Creation of Thomas Gray (of the family of the L. Gray of Ruthen) by Edward
IV. into Marquess of Dorset, was Patent. 15. Edward. 4.
per Cincturam Gladij and Cappae honoris and Dignitatis impositionem; and in
that of Henry VIII. his Patent. 15. Hen. 8.
making the Lady Anne Rocheford, (daughter to Thomas Earl of Wiltshire)
Marchioness of Penbreke, the words are per Mantellae inductionem and Circuli
aurei in capite appositionem, vt moris est, realiter inuestimus. That Circulus
aureus is a Coronet Meslee twixt our Dukes and Earls: as, of the French form,
is before spoken. Our present Sovereign King James, VI. of Scotland, was the
first Author of this Dignity there; what ever, by misconceit of that which is
affirmed of Malcolm II. may be otherwise imagined. He first honored the
Camden. Scot. in Damnijs.
ancient name of Hamilton with it, in John son to James Duke of Chasteau
Herald, and Earl of Arran. Spain has very many. But the first, there, was
Don Alfonso of Aragon, Count of Denia, made Marquess of Villena by Henry II.
of Castile, about M. CCC. LX. of Christ. So says Stephen of Garibay, and makes
a Duke and a Marquess, in hearing of the Mass and sitting by the King, of
equal prerogative; but adds, that the Marquess may not bear a Coronet on his
head, nor on his Armories, nor do diverse other things which he allows their
ancient Dukes, aunque cessando estas cosas en los Duques, con mayor occasion
cessan en ellos. But the Pragmatica allows Coronets upon the Armories' of
Dukes, Marquesses, and Counts, but upon none others. For when that was made
(under Philip II. M. D. LXXXVI.) it seems diverse of inferior note arrogated the
same Formalitie of Crowns.

Comes. Comes Matronae. Prouinciae. Comitatenses; Comites Consistoriani. Diverse
Counties under some Counties, as well as under Duchies. Grafio. Graffe or
Grave. (...). A Ring given in ancient inuestitures of a Count, in France. Their
Coronet, there. Comes, Dux, and Eorle in our Saxon times. Aethelings. Heriots.
Ealdorman. The Bishop of the Diocese and Ealdorman vsd to sit in the Turn.
When that was forbidden. Shirifes. Wittenagemotes. Aldermannus Totius Angliae.
The error of them which fetch Comites into our Saxons from those spoken of by
Tacitus. Earls and Comites under the Normans. Their denominating Territory.
Mabile daughter of Robert Fitzthaimon her standing on it to have a Husband of
Two Names. Henry the first's and her discourse together expressed in very old
English Rimes. Creations. The Third part of the Shrifwikes profits given to the
Earl of the County. The surrender of Hugh le Bigod his Earldom of Norfolk.
The supposd value (in our laws) of a Dukedom, Marquisat, and Earldom. That
having the Third part, under the Saxons: and in Hungary anciently; and to some
Visconts in France. A power in Earls anciently to make laws in their Counties.
It was anciently doubted whether an Earl might be su'd but in his own County.
The copy of a Record to that purpose. Earls of Towns and Cities. The special
Dignity of the Earldom of Arundell by reason of the Possession of the Castle.
An answer of the Judges in Parliament upon interpretation of an Act touching
the Earl of Arundell. Ceremony of their Creation anciently here, Girding with
the Sword. The Antiquity of that girding with a Sword in giving the Comitiua.
Bracton's description of Earls. Creations under Ed. III. and Rich. II. Their
Coronets. Their Coronet, vsd before we had any Dukes, Ducal. The Ceremony
expressed in the Charter at this day. When at this day only a Charter makes them.
Praecomes Angliae. Earls of Scotland. First Count in Castile. The ancient
Ceremonies (much differing from other places) in creation of a Count, there.

CHAP. IV.
COunt or Comes (which we now call EARL) is, in notation of the word, only as
much as a Follower, in that kind as we now use follower for such as are
attendant about Great men; and as the Ciuilians call him Comes Matronae, which
man's a Gentlewoman in the street, and give an ff. de iniurijs l. 1. Eclog.
Basilic. lib. 60. tit. (...).
action of the case, for wrong done against her worth, if her waiting man (the
Greek call him (...)) be taken from her. And after that the honorarie Comitiua,
with its diversity of Ranks, began under Constantine (which is already showed)
every great man in place about the Court, or substituted in Provinces, if
withal he were partaker of that Dignity, was titled Comes, with some other
addition of his place or office: and the name succeeded in room of Praefectus,
Rector, and the like. Comes sacrarum largitionum, for the Praefectus aerario,
Comes Officiorum for Magister Officiorum, Comes Prouinciae for Rector
Prouinciae, and such more are frequent in the stories of the declining Empire,
both the Codes, old Inscriptions, and the Authentiques: which if the most
learned Ludouicus Uiues had rememberd, he would not have made so strange of
that passage in De Ciuit. Dei lib. 5. cap. 6.
S. Augustine, concerning one of his Twinns, thus conceiud; Ille in Officio
Comitis militat and a sua domo pene semper peregrinatur. And afterward Comes
Cassiodor. Var. lib. 7 form. 14. and Lips. de Magnit. Roman. 3. cap. 10.
Romanus was he that had the care committed for seeing to the statues of Gold
and Silver dedicated to Gods and Princes in public. Hence was the Court namd
Comitatus, and the Guard Legiones L. contra C. de re Militari.
Comitatenses. And those of the Privy Council Comites Consistoriani, v.
Cuiaciu^ Obseruat. 7. cap. 13. Cod. lib. 12. tit. 10. et Cassiodor. 6. form. 12.
which were not (without special grant) of the first rank, if I understand
Cassidore. Of those of the first rank, and of the second (which in the Roman
Empire, were Comites C. Theodos. tit. Ne Com. and Trib. lau. praest. l. 1. and
2.
inferiores and minores) enough before; and of their creations by the Codicilli
honorarij. Neither is their origination in being Feudall otherwise to be
deriud, either in France or in the Empire, then is already deliuerd of them
and their Equals, ancient Dukes. But more to explane that equality, even in
Dignities of these times, you see that as some Duchies have under them diverse
Counties; as in France specially, Burgundy, Guienne, Aruerne, Burbon, Berrie,
and others; so also, in some Counties, have you inferior Counties, as, under
the County of Toulouse VI. And some under Artois. And XIII. under the Palatinat
of Champagne, whereupon, aduertendum est, says a Chassan. Cat. Glor. M. part.
5. consid. 46.
Lawier, quod hic Comitatus pottus deberet dici Ducatus, quam Comitatus,
quoniam sub se habet december and vltra Comitatus. So, in the Franche Comte of
Burgundy, are diverse Counties. But, to define a certain number of them fit for
a complet Dukedom, as is before touched, is without warrant, although diverse
and later Lawiers dare do it. Some will XII. some IV. some X. keeping the like
number of inferiors to every Dignity. But nothing more idle. If then, alike
sovereignty and government be in those Counts and Dukes, what difference of
Dignity is there? especially when both their Titles are grounded upon
continuance from that time wherein the Names were so confounded. Other examples
are of the same nature in the Empire. Therefore, as this was a Title next
succeeding in rank to a Duke, it must be applied to, and understood of the
inferior kind of Counts (I mean in those places where both sorts were) although
always the ennobling power of the Soueraign is here and in the like, to be
chiefly regarded. How their Province was anciently given, is rememberd in the
(...). chapter out of Otho of Frisinghen. For that is indifferently to be
referd to Dukes, Marquesses, and Counts. He that was a Count, under a Duke, or
Index fiscalis is known by the name of Grafio in the old laws of the
Ripuarians, where cap. LV. art. I. the title being, De eo qui Grafionem
interfecerit. The text is, Si quis Iudicem Fiscalem, quem Comitem vocant,
interfecerit. And, as the inferior kind of Counts were styled oftentimes
Comites in ancient story, as well as they of the first rank, and which were,
as I may say, Ducal. So in the Dutch or Teutonique idiom they were both, by
community of name, confounded, yet, by some addition, distinguished. As this
Grafio coming into Latin from Graffe or Grave in that language, expressed a
Count or Governor under a Duke, and also the first sort of Counts differing not
in rights of soueraintie from a Duke. Thence are the names of Landtgraue (i.
Comes Prouincialis) Pfaltzgraue (i. Comes Palatinus) Marligraue (i. Comes
Limitaneus) for Marquess, and the like applied to such in the German Empire
which, only excepted their kind of acknowledgment of Soueraintie, have all
Royalties: and Vet. Formul. edit. a Bignon. cap 7.
Grafia thence signified a County. For the etymon of the word, Quidam, says
Louany lib. 1. cap. 10.
Lipsius, a Canicie vocem petunt, quia Seniores in hoc munere, alij a fossis
quia ad Limits; ego malim, graecissante voce, quasi Graphiones dictos and quia
rara tunc inter Barbaros peritia scribendi, Iudicibus vsurpata. But I think
clearly (...) has not to do with it. Nor is the Element G any radical in the
word. Grave or Grieve is from gereue, where Ge originally has no more place
then in gemote for mote. So that the word should be Reave had not custom took ge
into it. And Reave or Reeu is praepositus. Their Burggraues have hence the name
and from Burgh or Borough, as in our language. But Metropol. lib. 6 cap. 22.
Crantzius doubts much how they are in Dignity to Counts; whether before or
under them. According to their Territories and Roialties, that must be judged,
although they differ not generally. For Burggraue is a Count of a Borough or
City, as Landtgraue, of a Province. In the later Eastern Empire (...) and (...)
(from the Italian Conte) is usually for a Count. But in Letters sent from
Ioachim Patriarch of Alexandria to a German Count, he is called Crus.
Turcograec. lib. 3.
(...) from Grave or Graffe. They had their Counts, whereof before. But such as
in more ancient ancient times were there known by that name about the Court,
were lately turned into (...) and (...); the name of Count chiefly comprehending
those which were under the Great Duke, Governor of the Marine forces: among
whom one was C^rop^lat. (...).
(...). i. the first or chief Count. But, they were all Officiciarie more then
Honorarie. For France: an old Anthony de la salle Chez L'Oyseau. cap. 5.
author; Le Comte est inuesty auec un anneau de Diamant. Which agrees wi^h that
of Withur, Count of Bretagne, constituted by Childebert, in his speech to Paul
afterward Bishop of Leon. Praedictum, says Vita Paul. Leonensis Biblioth.
F'oriacens.
he, Regem vbi adieris, literas annulo ipsius, quem mihi a se discedenti
donauit, signatas quasi tecum portabis, ei mox praebebis. Yet at this day they
bear Coronets; but only on their Armories. Of a Counts Coronet, L'oyseau
thus. Celle des Comtes est perlee, c'est a dire, que le desus du diadem ou
Bandeau est fait de Perles, sans ascuns fleurons eminents. In England, under
the Saxons, were diverse which subscribe in old Charters by the name of Comites.
For one example, out of infinite; in a Charter of Beored, King of Mercland, made
in DCCCLX. to the Abbey of Crowland, the subscription is, after Bishops and
Abbots: Ego Ethelredus Rex West-Saxoniae assensum praebui. Ego Alfredus frater
Regis Westsaxoniae censensi. Ego Edmundus Rex Estangliae procuraui. Ego
Edelredus Dux faui. Ego Osbirtus annui. Ego Algarus Comes istud deuote fieri
deprecans a Domino meo Rege gratiose impetraui. Ego Wulkelnus Comes adiuui. Ego
Adelwlphus Comes concessi. Ego Turgotus Comes consensi. Ego Alcmundus Comes
consideraui. Ego Diga Comes interfui. Ego Lefwinus Comes aspexi. Ego Burkardus
Comes conscripsi. Ego Ascerus Comes affui. Ego Thurstanus Comes stabiliui. Ego
Reinardus Comes consului. Ego Tilbrandus Comes conscripsi. and sometimes they
have the addition of their Counties, as in a Charter, more ancient, of
Ethelbald King of Mercland, to the same Abbey: Ego Egga Comes Lincolniae
consilium dedi. Ego Leucitus Comes Leicestriae assensum praebui. And the the
like. How Dux and Comes agreed in those ancienter times is already manifested;
and, questionless, no where was that confusion of names more then in our
Saxons Latin. Of their Eorle, as it was also Dux, somewhat is said, which
being then the supreme title next after the Prince is interpreted both Dux, and
Comes. V. Autorem Reliquiarum in Eadgaro.
From Ear or Ar i. Honor, and Arlic or Eorlic, i. Honorable (and that in
Danish; and some think the name came in with the Danes) this Title has its
Origination. The administration of Siward Comitis Northumbriae, is presently,
after those words, called Ducatus, in an old and Malmesbur. lib. 2. de Gest.
Reg. cap. 13.
judicious Monk. And Roger of Houeden speaking of Leofrique Earl of Chester,
calls him Leofricus Comes, Leofwini Ducis filius, and says that Ducatum eius
(Henry of Huntingdon has consulatum) filius suus Algarus suscepit. So
Comitatus Estsaxoniae, Comitatus Westsaxoniae, Comitatus Eboracae and the like,
rememberd by Ingulph, and Comes Merciorum, Comes Magesetensium, (that is, of
those about Radnor) and Comes Mediterraneorum (in Houeden and Florence of
Worcester) might have bin as properly styled, and perhaps more properly,
Ducatus and Duces, being referred to Godwin, Leofric, Edgar, and those which
were Eo^le^. and how familiar it is in those times to meet with Comes
Normanniae for Dux Normanniae, every man knows that has tasted our Stories;
and of it; before. But, for those their Eorles, whose name, remaining in our
Counts, is fitly to be here again spoken of; they were both Officiary and
Honorary, having the government of Provinces; and their title, in some parts,
hereditarie, as in Leicester and V. Rog. de Houeden, par. 1. fol. 243.
Northumberland; and from them, their wives were styled Countesses, as with us
in the subscription to a Charter of Thorold of Bukenhale to the Abbey of
Crowland, is, Ego Leofrieus Comes concessi. Ego Godiua Comitissa (she was his
wife) diu istud desideraui. These were the Ethelings, whereof, one in an old
Latin translation of K. Cap. 55. in edit. Lambard. and v. supra vbi de
Weregildo cap. 2.
Knouts laws: Qui fregerit plegium Archiepiscopi aut Reguli, quem Angli vocant
Aetheling. III. libris emendet. Neither were there with them any other created
titles, after the Prince or Etheling, Honorary, it seems, but this of Eorle,
and their Thanes, of whom in due place. For where the Heregeates, i. the
Heriots, of that age are set at a Canut. leg. cap. 69.
certainty, there are no other numberd. The Heriot was, what the Eorle or
Thane paid his Lord or King in nature of a Relief, and thence remains the name
with us in a different sense, it being then only such things as were for
martial furniture, as horses, spears, shields, money, and the like. And, in a
Pat. 18. H. 6. membr. 9. chapter 12. Iuspeximus part. 2.
Charter of the Confessor, for the possessions of Paul's: Edward King Great Mine
Besceops And Mine Eorles And All Mine Thegnes On Than Shiren Where Mine Prestes
In Paulus Minister Habband Land. Eorles and Thanes are here only mentioned, as
if none else, with Honorarie titles, had any thing to do with territories.
Neither in that catalogue of Archbishops, Eorles, Bishops, Ealdormen, Holds,
Hehgerefas, Messethegnes, and Werldthegnes, and Ceorles, in the laws of
Athelstan, is any Honorarie, but merely as he is Officiarie, except the Eorle
Quod and probari potest ex illo de Dignitatibus Monumento Saxonice edito a G.
La^bardo in Itinerar. Cantij.
and the Thegne or Thane. For the Ceorle, or or Churl, was ignoble, or the
yeoman. Yet it is most certain that, for Eal^o^man, sometimes Comes is vsd. An
old law: Gif hwa Leodbisceops oththe Ealdormannes borh abrece, gebete that mid
twam pundum; it is anciently interpreted, Qui fregerit plegium Episcopi aut
Comitis II. libris emendet, it is part of that before cited touching Aethelings,
and where amongst Knouts Collections, one is, that twice in the year the
scyregemot, i. the Shiremote (that which is now called the Shirifes Turn)
should be held, and that in it should sit the Bishop of the Diocese, and the
Ealdorman; the old Latin has In illo Comitatu sit Episcopus and Comes, qui
ostendant populo iustitias Dei and rectitudinem seculi. For the Bishop did, in
the same Edg^r. leg. cap. 5.
Court, under the Saxons, exercise Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, until William
the first altered that course. Propterea mando (says a. Patent Inspex. 2.
Rich. 2. pro decano and cap. Eccl^s Lincoln before habetur in Iano nostro. li.
2.. 14.
of K* William) and regia autoritate praecipio vt nullus Episcopus vel
Archidiaconus de legibus Episcopalibus amplius in Hundredo placita teneat; Nec
causam, quae ad Regimen animarum pertinet, ad iudicium secularium hominum
adducat; sed quicunque secundum episcopales leges de quacunque causa vel culpa
interpellatus fuerit, ad locum, quem ad hoc opus elegerit and nominauerit,
veniat ibique de causa sua respondeat, and non secundum Hundredum, sed secundum
Canones and Episcopales leges rectum Deo and Episcopo suo faciat. But this
makes apparent that the Ealdormen were merely Officiarie, and as our Shirifes
at this day. For what is the name of Shirife or Shriue, but their scyregereue
or Shyregreue? and what was Shyregreue but Alderman or Ealdorman? Among the
laws titled with name of the Confessor, thus you read: sicut modo vocantur
Greues qui super alios prefecturas habent, ita apud Anglos antiquitus
vocabantur Ealdormen, quasi seniores, non propter senectutem cum quidem
adolescentes essent, sed propter sapientiam. Yet remember also that, by a
testimony which I am not confident in, Ealdorman was applied to some of much
meaner rank; but as a general name, and with a more particular regard,
perhaps, given to Ealdormen of Provinces or Shires, whereof more, when we speak
of Barons. So that those which were ordained Civil Judges in Provinces, as the
inferior sort of Counts before treated of, had there this name of Ealdormen,
remaining to this day in diverse Corporations in a sense somewhat of the same
nature, and were wont to be assistant to the Kings of that time in their
Wittenagemots or Mikel Synods (they were as our Parliaments) with the Clergy.
In the Frontispice of Ina's laws, he says he made them with the assent and
help of his Bishops, and mid eallum minum Ealdormannum and tham yldestan witan
minse theode, i. and with all my Ealdormen, and the eldest wise men of my
people. Where the more honorary titles of his subjects are omitted, and thence
is it that in ancient Monks their Parlaments are called Procerum Synodus, and
Synodus Senatorum; the word Senator well enough translating Ealdorman. And as
the Judges of the Shires were called Ealdormen, so it seems, he that was as
Chief Justice of England had the name of Ealderman of all England. An Chronic.
Ramsci. apud Camden. in Huntindon.
old Epitaph: HIC REQVIESCIT ALLWINVS INCLYTI REGIS EADGARI COGNATVS TOTIVS
ANGLIAE ALDERMANNVS ET HVIVS SACRI COENOBII MIRACVLOSVS FVNDATOR.

Understand the Monastery of Ramsey in Huntindonshire. Neither do I think this
Ailwine to be any other then he which subscribes a Charter of Edgars in
Ingulph, with Ego Alwine Dux consensi. He is called Half-koning i. Half-king in
the story of that Monastery, and is thus rememberd in an old Aymon. Vit.
Abbonis Floriac. cap. 5. and v. Malmesb. lib. 4. de gest. Pontific. in Episc.
Lin. coln.
Author of France. Inter eundem spatium Regem adijt Anglorum ac eius Ducem
Hehelguinum, how easily Hehelguin is made of Ailwin, every one sees. Out of
these disserences twixt Eorles and Ealdormen (the one having suprem government
next after the King over the Province, in such sort as the Earls after the
Conquest, whereof presently; the other being but Judges, Iudices fiscales,
Shirifes, and like those Comites minores, inferior to Dukes) may be easily
collected, that in those subscriptions of the Saxon times, Comes is not always
to be took for one equal to Dux, but also sometimes for Ealdermen, as perhaps
in most of those Charters, where diverse precede by name of Dux; although that
precedence always make not the difference enough sure. Of Ealdormen somewhat
more, where we speak of Visconts. To derive into the Saxons, their Counts from
that of De moribus Germanorum.
Tacitus, Magna Comitum emulatio, quibus primus apud Principem suum locus; and
Principum, cui plurimi and acerrimi Comites, were (although some do it) but to
fetch the substance of this special title from that which Tacitus could by no
other word well express. He delivers it indeed of a people whereof our Saxons
were a fragment. But, under favor, those Comites can signify nothing there
but mere followers, neither did Tacitus ever dream of it as an Honorary Title
or Office, by that special name. Neither in Tacitus his time, was the name at
all Honorary or Officiary. He explains himself in the same place: Haec
dignitas (says he) hae Vires, magno semper electorum iuuenum globo circumdari,
in pace decus, in bello praesidium, and Turpe Principi virtute vinci, Turpe
Comitatui virtutem Principis non adaequare. Where both Comes and Comitatus (the
one proceeding from the other; neither is it more then ridiculous to derive
Comitatus a commanendo, as Otto Frisiagens. de gest. Frederic. lib. 1. cap. 13.
one does) occur, but not any way to give on origination to the present
inquiry. At the Norman invasion (the title of the Conqueror being before at the
best but Dux Normanniae, and oftimes Comes) to those Saxon Eorles were given
the names of Consules or Comites; but Comites only when in steed of that
dignity of Eorle, any creation was by the Norman Kings, and, in Autors of near
that age, such as were after created are styled Consules sometime, but rarely
occurrs any where Dux. Indeed De gest. Pontific. lib. 3.
Malmosbury speaking of Walker made Bishop and Count Palatin of Durham, under
William 1. says, he was Dux pariter Prouinciae and Episcopus. But it appears
that their Dignity under the Normans was like that of the Dukes and greatest
Princes under the Saxon Kings, otherwise why should they have retained the name
of Eorle? The Conqueror, William the first, putting all enheritances and
possessions both of the Church and Laity under his suprem dominion, nor
permitting any foot of land within this Realm to be free from either a mediat,
or immediate Tenure of him, created diverse into this title of Earl, making it
feudall, and hereditarie. And in some Grants made reference to the Saxon Times,
as in that to Alan Count Camd. in Brig.
of Bretagne, in giving him the Earldom of Richmond, by the name of Omnes
Villas and Terras quae nuper fuerunt Comitis Eadwini in Eborashira, cum feodis
Militum, and alijs libertatibus and consuetudinibus ita libere, and honorifice,
sicut idem Eadwinus eadem Tenuit. But in the Book of Domesday and long after
you shall often meet with the Christian name, and Comes, without any addition,
as Comes Alanus, Comes Rogerus, Comes Hugo, and the like, although the Dignity
was ever then given with a Territory, in which the third part of the Kings
profits of the Shrifewike was assigned to the Earl, and that Territory was as
the second name or surname of the Earl, as at this day, which is expressed in
that speech had twixt Maude or Mabile, daughter to Fitzhaimon, and Henry I.
touching her marriage with his base son Robert, afterward Earl of Gloucester.
Because the story is rare, and the Author never yet published, I will adventure
to give it the Reader whole for a monument worth receiving. Its thus described
in old English rymes by Robert of Gloucester.

He sede that She should.
heossolde His son.
is sone to her spausing anonge;
This maid was theragen and withsede it long.
The King of soght her suithe ynou, so that, atten end,
Mabile him ansuerede as good maid and hende,
Sire, he^ sede, well ichot, that your heart vpe me is,
More vor mine heritage than vor mi sulue iwis;
So vair eritage as ich abbe, it were me gretssame,
Uor to abbe an louerd, bote he add an Two names.
to name;
Sir Roberd le Fiz Haim mi fader name was,
And that ne might naught be his, that of his kin nogth nas;
Theruore sir vor gods love, ne let me no mon owe,
Bote he abbe an two name, war thoru he iknowe.
Damoysele, quath the King, thou seist well in this cas;
Sire Roberd le Fiz Haym thy fader tuo name was,
And as vaire tuo name he ssal abbe, gifme him may bise,
Sire Roberd le Fiz Rei is name ssal be.
Sire, quath this maid tho, that is a vaire name,
As woe seith, al is lif and of great fame,
Ac wat ssolde is son hot thanne, and other that of him come?
So ne might hii hot noght wereof nimeth gome.
The king understood that the maid ne sede no outrage,
And that Gloucestre was chef of ire heritage.
Damaisele, he sede tho, thy Louerd ssal have a name
Uor him and vor is eirs vair without blame;
Uor, Roberd Erl of Gloucestre is name ssal be and his,
Uor he ssal be Erl of Gloucestre and is eirs iwis.
Sire, quath this maid tho, well likes me this;
In this form icholle that al mi good be his.
Thus war Erl of Gloucestre first ymade there,
Ac this Roberd of all thulke that long biuore were.
This was Eleven. An. 1109. and 9. Hen. I.
endleue hundred yer and in the nith yer right
After that vr Louerd was in is mother ahight.
How much the having a surname was then respected, is hence to be observed,
which in those days and long after, was either from some personal note, or
posset Territory. Although also the Earls of ancient Families and names vsd
them both, and not only the Christian name, as now. so is Simon of Mountford
Corle on Leirchester, (for Leicester) witness to an old English Charter of
Pat. 43. Hen. 3. memb. 15.
Henry the third; and other like. The ancientest precedent of Creation, in
express terms, which our great Antiquarie and Light of Britain could ever
find, is that of Mandeuill's being made Earl of Essex by Maude the Empress.
Thus it speaks, Ego Matildis Filia Regis Henrici and Anglorum Domina do and
Concedo Gaufredo de Magnauilla pro seruitio suo and haeredibus suis post eum
haereditabiliter, vt sit Comes de Essexia, and habeat tertium Denarium
Vicecomitatus de placitis, sicut Comes habere debet in Comitatu suo in omnibus
rebus. So was Richard de Reduerijs made Earl of Ex Regist. Monast. Fordens.
ap. Camd. in Danmonijs.
Devonshire, with a grant of the third part of the Counties profits arising out
of the Shierifewike, by Henry the first, her father; and Hugh le Bigod, Earl
of Norfolk, by Henry the second. This Hugh and his posterity during the Raigns
of this Henry, Richard I. Henry III. and till XXX. of Edward I. enjoyed the
yearly revenue of XXXIV. Rot. Parl. 3. Hen. 6. art. I. vbi magna illa, inter
Comites Marescallum and Warwicensem, controuersia de locorum praerogatiua.
VI. s. VIII. d. Vt pro tertio Denariorum Comitatus Norfolciensis, vt pro
nomine Comitis eiusdem Comitatus, (as the l words of the Record are.) But Roger
le Bigod, Earl of Norfoolk under the first Edward, surrenderd his Earledom to
the King. A president in matter of Honor not obuious, therefore you wish
perhaps to hear it. Sciatis nos reddidisse, remisisse, and omnino quietum
clamasse pro nobis and haeredibus nostris Magnifico Principi and Domino nostro,
Karissimo Domino Edwardo Dei gratia Regi Angliae illustri, quicquid Iuris,
Honoris, and dominij habemus nomine Comitis in Comitatu Norfolciae and
Marescalcia Angliae, Habendum and Tenendum eidem Domino Regi and haeredibus
suis eum omnibus and singulis ad ea qualitercunque spectantibus quocunque
nomine censentur, quieta denobis and haeredibus nostris in perpetuum. Ita quod
nos vel haeredes nostri seu aliquis nomine nostri nihil luris vel clamij in
eisdem aut suis pertinentijs quibuscunque de caetero vendicare poterimus vel
habere. In Cuius Rei testimonium, Sigillum nostrum huic scripto duximus
apponendum. His Testibus Domino Iohanne de Langton Archiepiscopo Canturtensi
and Cancellario Angliae, Rogero le Brabazon Iustictario Domini Regis, Iohanne
de Dokensford etc. But withal observe what the most learned Clarenceulx has
out of the History of Canterbury touching this Surrender. Edward II. afterward
reciting this Surrender of Bigod grants the Honor and Marshalsie to his Brother
Thomas of Brotherton in Tail, with like manner of Rights in every kind as Bigod
had it; who enjoyed also the same sum of XXXIV l. vj sh. viij. d. as the third
of the Shrifwik. Yet remember that such a sum could not be as taken for the
value of the Earldom, nor in it did the Earldom consist. For the true value of
an Earldom was accounted CD. Pounds yearly revenue, as you may see in the Grand
Charter, where the Earls Relief is C. Pounds, the Relief being always the
fourth part of the Dignities supposd Revenue. And therefore according to that
proportion, a Ista adnotauit Iuris nostri Columen U. Illust. D. Ed. Coke part.
9. fol. 124.
Duke (although this law of Relief was before we had any Dukes) being
accounted by the double worth of an Earl, paies CC. pound Reltefe. And a
Marquisat reckond at the double value of a Baronie (a Baronie was CCCC. Marks
yearly) paies CC. Marks Relief. But that dividing of the Profits with the King
was usual in those ancienter days. And thence one that Geruas. Tilburiens.
Dialog. de Scaccario.
wrote under Hen. II. conceiues the name of our Counts. Comes est, says he,
qui tertiam partem and porcionem eorum quae de Placitis proueniunt, in Comitatu
quolibet, percipit. Summa namque illa quae nomine Firmae requiritur a
Vicecomite, tota non exurgit ex fundorum redditibus sed ex magna part de
Plaeitis prouenit, and horum terriam partem Comes percipit, qui ideo sic
dicitur quia Fisco socius est and Comes in Percipiendis. I cannot allow of his
deriuation. And indeed he might have known that when they were not always
called Comites, but Duces and Consules, this receiving of the third part was in
use. In that which we now call Domesday, made and collected under William I.
occurrs concerning Ipswich: Regina Edeua II. parts habuit and Comes Guert
Tertiam. And of Norwich. Reddebat xx. libras Regi and Comiti x. libras. And of
Jews in Sussex. Erant II. parts Regis, Tertia Comitis; and all plainly is
spoken of Times before the Conquest. But all of them had not this Third part,
but such only quibus Regum munificentia (as Geruase of Tilburies words are)
obsequij praestiti vel eximiae probitatis intuitu Comitem sibi creat, and
ratione Dignitatis illius haec conferenda discernit: quibusdam hereditario,
quibusdam personaliter. Neither was this division only with us. Otho of De
gest. Frederic. 1. lib. 1. cap. 3.
Frisinghen speaking of Hungary, in his age: Hinc est vt cum praedictum regnum
per IXX. vel amplius diuisum sit Comitatus de omni iustitia ad Fiscum Regium
Duae lucri parts cedant, tertia tantum Comiti remaneat, which is also the
right of some Vicounts in France. As they had this third f Charles L'oyseau des
Mediocres seig. cap. 7.. 19.
part of the Shriswike, so in the Shires of which they were Earls, it seems,
they had a kind of power of constituting Laws. For time after the Norman
invasion; William of Malmesburie mentioning William Fitz. Osbern made Earl of
Hereford under the Conqueror, says, Manet in hunc diem in Comitatu eius apud
Hereforedum Legum, quas statuit, inconcussa firmitas; vt nullus Miles pro
qualicunque commisso plus septem solidis soluat, cum in alijs Prouincijs ob
paruam occasiunculam, in transgressione praecepti herilis, viginti vel viginti
quinque pendantur. Of the same nature are examples in the Constitutions of the
old Earls of Cornwall and such like. And in those times, their denominating
Territory had a much different relation to them from what this later age uses.
For, then was that always accounted as their special possessions; and they
had Rogerus de Houeden in Iohanne R.
adminstrationem suorum Comitatuum: and their largest Revenue was in the same
Shire beside their third part of the Shrifewike. Which from no better authority
is to be collected, then the doubt arising under Hen. III. Whether an Earl
might be lawfully sommoned in any other County then that whereof he was Earl.
For then was John, surnamd the Scot, Earl of Chester and Huntingdon su'd in a
Writ of Right of Rationabili part for part of the possessions of Ranulph of
Blundeuill his ancestor Earl of Chester, in Northamptonshire and there, as law
now clearly requires, sommond, to the sommons and laying of the Writ, he first
excepts, upon the reason of his not being sommond in Huntingdon, but yet was
put to answer. It may be the In Fragmentis Temp. Hen. 3. quae Archiuo arcis
Londinensis seruantur. Orta est autem lis ista in 18. Hen. 3 quod satis constat
ex Placit. 18. Hen. 3. rot. 14.
record transcribed will be so acceptable, that I may well insert it. I will
so. Northt. Johannes Comes Cestriae and Huntingdoniae summonitus fuit ad
respondendum Hugoni de Albiniaco, W. Comiti de Ferrarijs, and Agneti vxori
eius, and Hawisiae Comitissae. Lincolniae, quare deforciat eis rationabilem
partem suam quae eos contingit de haereditate Ranulphi quondam Comitis
Cestriae, and vnde ipse obijt seisitus in Comitatu Cestriae, computa cum eisdem
Hugone Willielmo and Agnete and Hawisia part sua rationabili de terra quam
nunc tenet alibi de eadem haereditate. Et Comes alias respondit quod noluit
respondere ad hoc breue nisi Curia considerauerit, and consideratione Parium
suorum per Summonitionem factam in Comitatu Northamptoniae de terris and
tenementis, vel Comitatu Cestriae vbi Breuia Domini Regis non currunt. Et quia
vsitatum est hucusque quod Pares sui and alij qui libertates habent consimiles
sicut Episcopus Dunelmensis and Comes Marescallus respondent de terris and
tenementis infra libertates suas per summonitionem factam ad Terras and
Tenementa extra libertates suas; Ideo Consideratum est quod respondeat. This
suit was after the time that the Court of Common pleas was seuerd Mag. Chart.
cap. 11.
from the Kings Court, and appointed to be kept in some place certain, and
therefore the act on being Real and of its own nature merely a Common plea, the
Earl excepted also to the Jurisdiction (although, by law, too late) and the
Demandants reply, that quamuis Communia placita prohibeantur quod non
sequantur Dominum Regem, non sequitur propter hoc quin aliqua placita
singularia sequantur ipsum Dominum Regem, and petunt iudicium. Et dies datus
est Coram Rege. His Counsel thought, it seems, that because it concerned so
great a Family, and so many Noble persons, it was not within the Statut; but
erroneously. And the County of Leicester was given by Henry III. to Edmond
Crouch-back, to Pat. 49. Hen. 3. part. 1. memb. 2.
whom a Patent was, Militibus, liberis Hominibus and omnibus alijs tenentibus
de Comitatu and honor Leicestriae Senescalcia Angliae etc. -- Ideo vobis
mandamus quod eidem Edmundo tanquam Domino Vestro in omnibus quae ad praedictum
Comitatum honorem and Senescalciam (all these Simon of Montfort had possessed)
Terras and tenementa pertinent, de caetero intendentes sitis, and Respondentes,
sicut praedictum est. At this day, excepted the Counties Palatine and some few
other, in the denominating County the Earl has but only his Name (understand
as he is Earl) and what, in later Creations, is, as an annual sum and
competent, in lieu of that ancient third part, granted him out of the Kings
Farm or Custom of some great Town, or other places within the County; as also
a Duke in later times, has within the Shire of his Dukedom, and a Marquess in
his Marquisat. But not only of Shires and Counties, but of Cities and Towns,
have been and are as well Creations as the denominations of them. Salisburie,
Chichester, Bridgwater, Arundel. and the like show it. Although as anciently in
France, I doubt not but with us heretofore chief Citeis of a County have
denominated the Earls which were of the whole County. But that of Arundel has
been, by ancient resolution, singled out, as it were, for a special kind of
Earldom: the honor proceeding more from seisin of the Castle of Arundel, then
later Creations or Restitutions. For although it had a beginning (for Camden.
in Regnis.
the ti^le) from Maud the Empress to William de Albineto, to whom her son
Henry II. gave the Rape of Arundel, Tenendum de eo per seruitium IXXXIV.
Militum and dimid. and that Richard I. granted to William son to the first
William, the Castle of Arundel (which yet was, it seems, his enheritance
before, descended from his mother Adeliza daughter to Godfrey Duke of Lorrain
and Brabant) cum toto Honor de Arundel and tertium Denarium de Placitis de
Suffex vnde Comes est: yet in Parliament, in time of the Fitz-Alans (to which
noble Family it was transferd by marriage with a femal heir of De Albineto)
upon a Petition exhibibited by John Fitz-Alan then Earl, it was, after
deliberation, adjudged Rot. Parl. 11. Hen. 6. art. 32. 33. and seqq.
that he should have place as Possessor of the Castle, without other respect;
Considerato qualiter Ricardus Filius Alani consanguineus (ancestor to John) and
vnus Haeredum Hugonis de Albiniaco (the same with de Albineto,) dudum Comitis
Atundel fuit seisitus de Dicto Castro, Honor, and Dominio de Arundel in
Dominico suo vt de feodo, and ratione possessionis suae eorundem Castri,
Honoris, and Dominij, absque aliqua alia ratione vel Creatione in Comitem, fuit
Comes Arundel and nomen and statum and Honorem Comitis Arundel necnon locum and
sedem Comitis Arundel in Parliamento and Consilio Regis quandiu vixerat,
pacifice habuit and possedit absque aliqua calumnia, reclamatione, vel
impedimento. The Petition was in this form: Please au Roi nostre Souerain
Seigneur d' accepter vostre humble liege John Count d' Arundel ore present en
vostre service deins v^stre Roialme de France a son lieu pur seier en v^stre
Parliament come en vostre Counseil come Count d' Arundel, considerant que ses
ancestors Counts d' Arundel seigneurs del Castle, Honor, and seigneurie d'
Arundel ont ewe lour lieu a seier en les Parlements and conseilx de vos
tresnobles progenitors du temps d'ont memory ne court per reason de la Castle,
Honor, and Seigneurie auant dits as quex le dit nom de Count ad este vnie and
annexe de temps suisdit; des queux Castle, Honor, and Seigneurie le dit
suppliant est a present seize. This was in XI. Henry VI. and afterward in
XXVII. of the same King, a great controversy grew in Parliament, about
precedence twixt William Earl of Arundel (brother of this John) and Thomas
Earl of Devonshire. The matter, after that Act of XI. and other profes were
produced on both sides, was referd to the Judges of the Common laws. But they,
as the Rot. Parl. 27. Hen. 6. art: 18.
Record speaks, saien and declaren after their conceits that it is a matter of
Parliament longing to the Kings Highness and to his Lords Spiritual and
Temporal in Parliament by them to be decided and determined. How be it that
the said act mention but only that the said John late Earl of Arundel brother
of the said William, whose heir he is should have his sete, Place, and
Preeminence in the Kings presence, as well in his Parlements and Counsels, as
elsewhere, as Earl of Arundel, as in the same Act more openly hit appears, in
which act beth not expressed in writing the heirs of the same late Earl,
notwithstanding that he was seized and enherited to the Castle, Hononr, and
Lordship of Arundel, whereto the said name, Estate, and Dignity of Earl of
Arundel is and of time that no mind is has bin united and annexed, and by that
reason he been and had that name, and not by way of Creation, as the same
Judges understand by reason of the same Act. Hereupon the King and the Lords
determined that he should have his place in Parliament, and the Kings Council,
as Earl, by reason of the Castle Lordship, and Honor of Aru^del, as
Worshipfully (so says the Roll) as ever did any of his Ancestors Earls of
Arundel before this time for him and for his heirs for ever more, above the
said Earl of Devonshire and his heirs. For Arundel, thus much. As touching the
formalitie of their Creations: in the more ancient, it seems, nothing but a
Charter usually made them, with us. In King John's time remembrance is made of
the Sword of the County. He, at his Coronation, accinxit (says Roger of
Houeden) Willielmum Marescallum gladio Comitatus de Striguil (Striguil is in
Monmouthshire, and, from it, were the old Earls of Penbroke so called) and
Gaufridum filium Petri Gladio Comitatus de Essex, qui licet antea vocati essent
Comites, and administrationem suorum Comitatuum habuissent, tamen non erant
accincti gladio Comitatus, and ipsi illa die seruierunt, ad mensam Regis,
accincti gladijs. This form has ancient original. In one of Variar. Form. 1.
lib. 7.
Cassiodor's Precedents for the Dignity of the Comitiua Prouinciae, you read:
Tua Dignitas a terroribus ornatur quae Gladio bellico, rebus etiam pacatis,
accingitur. I imagine it was in use before King John, and that it was the
proper Inuestiture of that age. Houeden speaks not of it as a new invention.
And of them, what an Bracton de Rer. diuis. lib. 1. cap. 8.. 2. vide cum lib.
2. c. 16.. 3.
old Lawyer of England, near that time, has, I transcribe: Reges tales sibi
associant ad consulendum and Regendum populum Dei, ordinantes eos in magno
Honor and Potestate and nomine, quando accingunt eos gladijs, i. ringis
gladiorum. Ringae enim dicuntur ex eo quod Renes gyrant and circundant, and
vnde dicitur, Accingere gladio tuo, etc. Et Ringae cingunt renes talium, vt
custodiant se ab incestu luxuriae, quia luxuriosi and incestuosi Deo sunt
abominabiles. Gladius autem significat defensionem Regni and Patriae. And in
most of the ancient Creations in Parliament, the girding with a sword is the
chief and only ceremony with the Charter deliuerd. So was Edmund Rot. Parl 36.
Ed. 3. memb. 4.
son to Edward III. made Earl of Cambridge; and Michael de la Poole, Rot.
Parl. 9. Rich. 2. Memb. 5.
under Richard II. Earl of Suffolk. whom the King Gladio cinxit prout decet,
as the Roll says; and before any of these, Hugh of Audeley is created Earl of
Gloucester in Parliament, his Patent Rot. Parl. 11. Ed. 3. Memb. 14. chapter 34.
memb. 23. chapter 41. memb. 26. chapter 49.
thus speaking, Ipsum in Comitem Glocestriae praefecimus and de statu Comitis
per cincturam gladij de munificentia regia inuestimus, ad nomen and omen dicti
loci sibi and haeredibus suis perpetuo retinendum. In like form William of
Clinton is made Earl of Huntindon, William of Bohun Earl of Northampton, and
XX. l. annuity given out of the County, to be received from the Shirifes
hands. Many such are extant in the Records. And how the girding or delivery of
a^sword was in delegation of Imperium, or power of government, you may see in
the Roman Xiphil. in Traiano, and de hac re, affatim Pet. ber. Semest. 1. cap.
2.
Prefectus praetoriorum, and some other of that State. But in later time the
chief part of the Ceremony has been thus expressed in the Patent: Per Gladij
Cincturam, Cappae Honoris and circuli Aurei impositionem in signimus,
inuestimus etc. Yet it seems, that before any of these examples a Coronet was
vsd by them. For in S. Edmunds Chapel in Westminster, lies buried John de
Eltham Vide Apologiam G. Camden. page 13.
Earl of Cornwall, son to Edward II. with a Coronet on his head of a Ducall
form. Neither in his time could the distinction be of Ducall Crowns from
Earls Crowns (as now) because no Duke then was in England. His Coronet is now
Poinctee and Fleuronee. But these Ceremonies are not vsd when an Earldom is
given to one before possessed of a greater Dignity. Then, only the Charter
selves; as an example lately was in the making of Jews Duke of Lennox, Earl
of Richmond. As in the Eastern State they had their Officiarie Protocomes, so
in England that name once was in Praecomes Rot. Parl. 23. Hen. 6.
Angliae, which grew first and died in Henry of Beauchamp Earl of Warwick
under Henry the sixth. The Scottish stories assertion that Malcolm II. first
created this Title there, is well tolerable, the Dignities there before being
all under the name of Thanes; and Macduff, Thane of Fife, was first made Earl
of the same Territory. In Spain are now, as elsewhere, very many, and have their
Coronets on their Armories: But although diverse Officiary Counts were in their
Gothique times known by the name of Comites in their Monuments, yet, as a
granted Honorary Title, it began in the Kingdom of Castile, they say, but of
late time; that is, under Alfonso XII. He A. Chr. M. CCC. XXVIII.
made his special fauorit Don Aluar Nunnez Osorin, Count of Trastamara, Lemos
and Sarria. Hereof says Mariane: Nouum id exemplum fuit, nullis antea in
Castellae regno Comitibus. The Ceremony he describes thus: Tres Offae in vini
poculo oblatae, cum inter se Rex Comesque tertio inuit assent, vter prior
sumeret, a Rege Offa vna sumpta, a Comite altera. Ius Caldariae in Castris, in
Bello Vexilli proprijs insignibus distincti datum. In eam sententiam confectis
Tabulis, atque recitatis, consecutus astantium clamor plaususque laeta
faustaque nouo Comiti ominantium. Is instituendi Comites ritus fuit. In Poland
of late time, both this Dignity, and that of Duke began, but, to few,
Communicated. My Author thus Martin. Cromer. Polon. descript. lib. 1.
of that State: Est autem pari dignatione Polonica omnis Nobilitas; nec est
vllum in ea Patritiorum Comitumue discrimen, exaequata quodam tempore, omnium
condition. Nuper adeo paucis quibusdam, parentum, vel ipsorummet amplitudine
atque meritis, and Principum beneficio Comitum Decus denuo partum est. Ducum,
qui peculiares habeant dominatus vel Territoria nunquam aliud genus fuit apud
Polonos quam id quod a Boleslao Kriuousto Principe (this Krziuoust, as they
write it, began to reign in 1103.) propagatum fuit, cum is principatum inter
liberos diuisisset. Verum id iam defecit. But in Lithuania, Prussia, and
Liuonia are Dukedoms; Gaguin and others call them Ducatus. Neither, for that
State be satisfied here without seeing what we have in the next Chapter of
their Uaiuods and Chastelans.

Of Counts Palatin, two sorts in old story. Palatins generally. Counts Palatin
without Territory made at this day by the Emperor and Pope. Comes Palatij.
Curator Palatij. The office of Comes Palatij in the old French State.
Chaplains, whence so called. Maire Du Maison, and Count du Palais, not the same
anciently, against diverse that affirm the contrary. Maioratus and
Senescalcia. The true deduction of the name of Counts Palatin, differing from
the vulgar. Psaltzgraffe of Rhine. Landgraue. Rigordus amended. The Palatinat
of Champagne. Of Chester, Durham, Ely and Lancaster. The Curtan sword born by
the Earl of Chester at the marriage of Henry III. Franchise de Werk, in our Law
Annals. Hexamshire. Hengstaldemshire, its name in our Monks amended. Hexam
united to Northumberland. Palatins in Poland. their Vaiuods. (...).
Chastellans. Palatins in Leitow.

CHAP. V.
AS one division of Counts is into PALATIN and Provincial (The Palatins having
their denomination from Palatium, the Palace or Kings Court: the Pronincials
from their Provinces:) so, of Palatins, some had that general name for living
Cod. tit. de Priuil. eor. qui sac. Palate. Militant. and lib. 1. tit. 34.
in Palatia; as Palatina Officia; and Palatini Comitatenses, for the Emperors
Guard, and the like. Others were more specialy titled Comites Palatij, as chief
Judges and Vicegerents in the Court for administration of Justice, of whom most
mention is in the French story. Of those of the first kind is frequent mention
in both the Codes; but so that the word Palatins comprehend also whatsoever
officers were employed in the Palace. (...) (says an old Glossary of the Law)
(...). i. By a common name of Palatins are called all such as were Officers in
the Palace about the Treasury; and interprets it also by (...), Court
Officers. Of Provincial Counts, already. But all honored with the Comitiua,
and following the Emperor, might well be, and were styled among this first kind
of Palatins. Among these are reckoned such as have arrogated that name from XX.
years Profession of Grammar, Rhetorique, Law or the like in Constantinople, by
a C. lib. 12. tit. 15. and 13. vide Cassi dor Var. 6. Form. 19. and Symmach.
lib. 1. epist. 26. and 37.
Constitution of Theodosius and Valentinian, which, at this day, is in the
Empire made use of, as also those created Count Palatins, without any
Territory, both by Pope and Emperor, which have, with their Honor, Pith. des
Com. tes de Champ. luire 1.
the Prerogatives of making public Notaries, constituting Judges,
legitimating of Bastards, immunitie from Imposts and the like. It is written on
the Tomb of that famous Rowland, nephew to Charles le Magne, slain in the
battle of Ronciualles, and buried at Blauz in Xantogne, that he was Tho.
Leodius de Orig. Palate.
Primus Comes Palatinus; which I interpret, the Chiefest Courtier honored with
the Dignity of Count. But that other kind of Counts Palatins or Palazins (as
the old French called them) were as Chief Justices and suprem under the King,
for administration of right, in which Office I find them not under the Empire,
until Charles le Magne, in whom the French Empire began. For neither the Comes
Sacri Palatij spoken of in the Code, nor the Cassiod. Var. 7. Form. 5. and C.
L. vinca tit. de Com. and Tribunis Scholarum.
Curator Palatij come near that authority of the Counts du Palais of later time.
I see none which has better observed the true nature of them, then the learned
Hierom Bignon in his notes to Marculph, where he takes these words of old
Hincmar to witness: Apocrisarius qui vocatur apud nos Capellanus, vel Palatij
custos de omnibus negotijs Ecclesiasticis, vel Ministris Ecclesiae; and Comes
Palatij de omnibus secularibus causis vel iudicijs, suscipiendi curam instanter
habebant: vt nec ecclesiastici nec seculares prius Dominum Regem absque eorum
consultu inquietare necesse habeant, quousque illi viderent, si necessitas
esset, vt causa ante Regem merito venire deberet. What better shows the nature
of that Officiarie Dignity? And with this Count du Palais or Count Palatin,
the Kings of France of the first line vsd also to sit in Judgment, as in a
Precedent of that Ex Chronic. Diminens. apud Bignon. in Marculph. lib. 1.
age, touching the Abbey of Dijon, and thus speaking, appears: Cum nos in Dei
nomine (the words are as in the person of King Clothar III. about DCLX.)
Mosolaco in Palatio nostro, vna cum Apostolicis viris patribus nostris
Episcopis, Optimatibus, caeterisque Palatij nostri ministris, necnon and
Andobello Palatij nostri Comite, qui de ipso ministerio ad praesens nobis
deseruire videbatur, ad vniuersorum causas audiendas, iustoque iudicio
terminandas, resideremus, etc. The King and other great Courtiers sare, it
seems, sometime, but the chief authority delegat and iudiciarie was in the
Count du Palais; and before him as Chief Justice were all suits determined,
crimes examined, the Crown-reuenew accounted, and whatsoever done, which, to so
great jurisdiction was competent. Neither was there, it seems, always One
only in this Office, but sometime more. An old Tabular. S. Dionysij apud
eundem.
Monument, of Pipin's time, has, Vbicunque little iustitiam inuenimus sicut
Principes nostri, seu Comites Palatij nostri, vel reliqui legis Doctores
iudicauerunt. And a very ancient Walafrid. Strabo de Reb. Ecclesiastic. c. 31.
Writer, of the middle times: Qnemadmodum sunt in Palatijs Praeceptores vel
Comites Palatij qui secularium causas ventilant, ita sunt and illi quos summos
Capellanos Franci appellant' clericorum causis praelati. He compares the Counts
du Palais for secular business, to Arch-Chaplains constituted in those elder
times in the Court for Ecclesiastical matters. They were called Chaplains,
Cappellani, a Cappa Beati Martini, from S. Martin's Hood, which as a most
precious relic they kept, and the Kings ob adiutorium (as Strabo's words are)
victoriae, in praelijs solebant secum habere: quam ferentes and custodientes,
cum caeteris sanctorum reliquijs, Clerici Cappellani coeperunt vocari. They
much err which confound the Count of the Palace, with the Maire du Maison, or
Mayor Demus. This One authority both ancient Gregor. Turonens. hist. lib. 9.
cap. 30.
and beyond exception disproues their conjecture. Childebert the first sent,
into Poiters, Florentianum Maiorem Domus Regiae, and Ranulfum Palatij sui
Comitem, vt scilicet, populus, censum quem tempore patris reddiderat, facta
ratione, innouata re, readere deberet. You see they are expressly divided, by
one that lived in that age. And indeed, the Maire du Maison was of far
greater power, especially after the time of Clothar III. and ruled all as Post
Historicorum Turbam, consulas. Adreuald. Floriac. de Miraculis S. Benedicti
lib. 1. cap. 12. and 14.
King, the King himself being rather in Name only, then substance, a King. But
the Count du Palais his power was chiefly iudiciarie. Neither are they to be
admitted, which suppose the Seneschall or Grand Maistre to have succeeded into
the Counts Place. Both those names have been in lieu of the Maire; and an old
Hugo de Cleerijs de Maiorat. and Senescalcia.
Author of France, ioyns the words Maioratus and Senescalcia, as synonomies. The
nature of which Office with enough certainty the same Author describs. But by
reason of the phrases of Regebant Palatium, and such like, in ancient Monks
applied to the Maire du Maison, diverse good Antiquaries of that Country have
mistaken, and thence make a confusion of all these. Afterward in the German
Empire, this Office likewise was. And, as to some, Provinces were committed,
for Counties, to be governed by them, yet remaining subject to the
Court-Iustice of the Empire, or the Imperial Chamber (as at this day they call
it) or in such form that to the Count du Palais might be appeal, upon
judgment given by the Provincial Counts or their Lieutenants, so others were
created into the title of Counts du Palais, and Comites Palatij in their
Territory or Provinces, so that, what authority, jurisdiction, or Government
the Count du Palais of the Court had, in the Empire, the same should they have
in their Provinces; that is, in substance, all Royalties. For the Count du
Palais, in the Court, bare the Person of the King or Empire. Comes Palatinus
(says a German Io. Auentin. Annal. Boior. 5.
Antiquarie) vicem Caesaris praesidendo Senatui principali defungebatur, fidem
imperatoris Implorantibus aderat, iusque reddebat, Fiscum Augusti, praedia
Salica, Redditus regios procurabat, Caesarum censum exigebat. Nil citra eius
autoritatem Duci (Boiariae) aut decernere aut statuere licebat. Si
Senatusconsultum Reguli displicebat, ^tercedebat, ad Caesaremque referebat In
this form must the name of those which then were specially called Counts
Palatin, be derived, and from that second kind of Counts du Palais. For, if
from the first, and general name of Palatinus, it would follow, that every
Count living about the King were a Palatin, and also, that, with any regard to
a Province, none could be so titled. And thus, by the most learned Peter
Pithou, is deduction of the name made. To all this well agrees what an ancient
Joan. Sarisburiensis Epistol. 263. quem Consulas licet and lib. 6. de Nugis
Curial. cap. 6.
Bishop under our Henry II. wrote to one Nicholas then Shirife of Essex: Sicut
alij praesules (says he) in partem solicitudinis a summo Pontifice euocantur,
vt spiritualem exerceant Gladium, sic a Principe, in Ensis Materialis
communionem, Comites quidam, quasi Mundani iuris Praesules, asciscuntur. Et
quidem qui hoc Officij gerunt in Palatio, Iuris Autoritate, Palatini sunt, qui
in Prouincijs, Prouinciales. Whereto add but, that such as with Palatin
jurisdiction are constituted over Provinces, are Palatins in Provinces, and the
true cause and origination of the name is thence most manifest. For the Empire;
you see how this fits in the Palatins or Pfaltzgraffen of Rhine, of whose
Territory and State the learned and Noble Marquard Freher, Counselor to the
present Frederick v. has sufficiently instructed his Readers. That Prince
Palatin is by ancient institution, in Verba Aureae Bullae Carol. 4. cap. 5.
partibus Rheni, sueuiae, and in Iure Franconio, ratione Principatus seu
Comitatus Palatini priuilegio, Prouisor ipsius imperij, and administrator, in
the Vacancie of the Empire, but specially also Imperator sieve Rex Romanorum,
supra causis pro quibus impetitus fuerit, habeat (sicut ex consuetudine
introductum dicitur) coram Comite Palatino Rheni, sacri Imperij Archidapifero
Electore Principe respnodere, illud tamen iudicium Comes, ipse Palatinus non
alibi praeterquam in Imperiali Curia vbi Imperator seu Romanorum Rex praesens
extiterit, poterit exercere. And whereas some De Duce Saxoniae v. Marqhuard.
Freher. Orig. Palate. 1.
Dukes, Marquesses, and Counts, challenging and enjoy(...) almost all
soueraintie, have not this addition; you must remember that the first
institution of an honor, and continuance of the name vsd, are the main causes
of a distinct Title; not so much, usurpation of Royalties or lawful
possessession alone. The very word Landtgraue, among the Princes of the Empire,
is known of great Dignity and near the best of Soueraintie, yet it literally
interprets but Comes Prouincialis, although an old Rigordus in vita Philippi
Aug. page 207.
French author, regarding more the substance of it as its applied then the
signification, turns it into Comes Palatinus. Eodem anno (says he; that is M.
CCVIII.) quidam Comes Palatinus qui eorum lingua Landgraue (the printed books
have Landanga, but, questionles, erroneously) vocabatur, Philippum Romanum
Imperatorem interfecit. The like in proportion must be thought of an ignorant
Roger. de Houeden in Hen. 2. fol. 339.
English writer of the Monkish times, delivering that Prothosouastos (he means
Protosebastos) in Latin is Comes Palatij. He knew it was a great Dignity in
the Eastern Empire, and therefore thought so. In France until Thebault the
Great, Count of Champagne, about M. XXX. I remember not any Provincial Count
having this title of Palatin. But he then reuolting from Hen. 1. of France and
joining to the German Emperor Henry III. either took from the Emperor, or
arrogated to himself, the Title. In his Charters is read, Theobaldus Comes
Campaniae Palatinus; and in French; Thebault de Champagne and Brie Quens
Palazins, as Et voyes Andre de Chesne Antiq. and Recherch. liver 1. chap. 73.
Pithou delivers. That County is now, and long time has bin in the Crown, but
retains still good marks of Palatin souerainty. This Honor has bin and is in
England at this day. Chester, Durham, Ely and Lancaster are, famous by it. O^e
Hugh Wolf was made Earl of Chester by William I. and the County given him in
see, Tenendum sibi and Heredibus ita vere ad Gladium sicut ipse Rex tenebat
Angliam ad Coronam. And as the King, so he for his heirs there had their
Barons, by that name specially known. In a Charter of the same Hugh's
foundation of the Monastery of S. Werburg, he says, Ego Comes Hugo and mei
Barons confirmauimus. And, in Liberties anciently given by one of the
Ranulphs, Count Palatin there to his Barons, he Inspex 18. Hen. 6 part. 2.
memb. 34.
grants quod vnusquisque eorum Curiam suam habeat liberam de omnibus Placitis
and querelis in Curia Mea motis, exceptis Placitis ad Gladium meum
Pertinentibus. For their Barons, more anon. But the Soueraintie claimd by those
Earls may well appear in a relation of Earl John his carrying the Sword called
the Curtan at the marriage of Henry III. and Queen Elianor daughter to Raymund
Earl of Prouence. Comite Cestriae (says Matthew Raris) Gladium S. Edwardi,
qui Curtein dicitur, ante Regem baiulante, in siguum quod Comes est Palatinus
and Regem, si oberret, habeat de iure, Potestatem cohibendi, suo sibi scilicet
Cestrensi Constabulario ministrante and virga populum, cum se incrdinate
ingereret, subtrahente. This County Palatine has its Officers almost as the
King in Westminster Hall. Lancaster by Edward III. was created into a County
Palatin by express name the Charters and particulars whereof every Student
knows out of Plowden. These two (being both now in the Crown) may be called Lay
Palatinats with us; for also of great authority are the other two of Durham and
Ely, but both Bishopriques. That of Ely began to be so under Henry the first.
That of Durham, I think, under the Norman Conqueror. For, one Egelric being
there Bishop about his time, was, for offense to the State, deposd, and in his
steed one Walker put, qui esset and Dux pariter Prouinciae, and Episcopus (as
the Monk of De gest. Pontis. lib. 3.
Malmesbury says) fraenaretque rebellionem Gentis Gladio, and reformaret mores
eloquio. But the chief privileges of Durham have been anciently deriud from
the holy respect had to S. Cutbert Bishop of Lindisfarn (that is now called Holy
Island) whose body was thence, in the Saxon times, translated into Durham.
Therefore the Monks style it Cutberti Terra, and call the Hist. Dunel. apud
Camd.
country men Halywerk Folks, which is meant in one of our 5. Ed. (...). fol. 58.
pl. 88.
yeer-books where Durham is rememberd with the name of Franchise de Werk. For,
so you must read, not Franchise de Wrek, as the published books have. The case
is, in them, misreported and very imperfit. See the Tit. Jurisdiction 30.
Abridgment of it, which questionles was from a better copy, and you will
confess it. Neither, without that, can you find reason, why the Writ of Right
of Aduowson should lie at Westminster for an enheritance in Durham. The Bishop
is there called Count Paleys, and in another place 17. Ed. 3. fol. 36. pl. 4.
Count de Palais, and that he was 14. Ed. 3. tit. Error 6. vide Bracton. lib.
3. de Corona cap. 8. 4.
Come Roy. In the North parts anciently Hexamshire was reckond for a County
Palatin. It is the same which in the printed Monks occurrs by name of
Hangulstad, or Hangulstadeim and the like names corrupted. But my Ms. of De
gest. Pontific. lib. 3. videsis B(...)m Eccles. hist. lib. 4. ^ap. 13. and 28.
William of Malmesburie (it is that which belongd to S. Augustins in
Canterbury) of a very ancient hand, has Hengstadeheim and Hengstadeam, for
that which in the printed is Haugustaldehem, and Haugustaldem. And from
Henstaldehemshire came, it seems, Hexamshire. In it was a seat of a Bishop
under the Saxons. Fisco Regio famulabatur (says Malmesburie) quando eum
(locum) beatae memoriae Wilfridus a Beatissima Etheldritha Regina pro alijs
possessionibus commutauit. Afterward, before the Normans, it was the
Archbishop's of York. But under the late Queen 14. Eliz. cap. 13.
Elizabeth it was united to the County of Northumberland. How by the Statut of
Resumption under Stat. 27. Hen. 8. cap. 24.
Hen. VIII. most of the Royalties of our English Counties Palatin were
diminisht, and taken into the Crown, is not for this place to deliver. In
imitation of the Imperial name, Historians that have written of the state of
Poland, call the Governors of Provinces there, Palatini. Palatini (says
Cromer) munera sunt esse Ductorem Copiarum suae satrapiae in expeditionibus
bellicis: indeque nomen habet lingua vernancula, vt Voieuoda dicatur, quasi Dux
belli sieve Copiarum. That of Vaiuod or Uoiuod, vsd in other parts of the
Eastern Europe, being, I think, a Slauonique or Windish word, is by later
Graecians called (...). One of their Emperors Constantin. Porphyrog. de
Administr. Romans Imp. cap. 38.
speaking of the Turks coming to Chazaria, says that their first Vaiuod was
called Lebedias (...), i. Libedias the Voeuod or Vaiuod. (...). i. By the name
of his Dignity, as his successors, he was called Boebodus, which is plainly V.
plura de Uaiuodis infra, cap. vltimo.
Vaiuod. Under the Polak Vaiuods, are Chastellans. Uocantur ij vtr(...) (to
Cromer writes) vulgo communi vocabulo Dignitarij quasi dignitate and honor
praediti, addito fere satrapiae, seu terrae nomine. But in the Territory of
Cracow, the Chastellan is before the Palatin, which began and has continued
upon the dishonorable flight of the Cracowian Palatin, when King Boleslaus
Krziuousti about M. C. XXX. was in great danger of a Russian ambush. But no man
among them may be either Palatin or Chastellan in that Province, where he
possesses not in his private right some Territory. As Poland, so the great
Dukedom of Leitou or Lithuania is divided into Palatinats and Districtus, as
the Latin writers call them. Hi vero Districtus and Palatinatus (says Alex.
Gaguin) pro Ducatibus (vt quondam temporibus plurimorum Ducum erant) computari
possunt, and vnusquisque Palatinatus suum Vexillum quo in bello vtitur habet.
Eundem quoque Colorem and signum omnes Districtus sieve prouinciae, qui in eodem
Palatinatu continentur, in Vexillis suis repraesentant, nisi quod Palatinatus
Vexillum maius est, cum duobus Cornibus, Districtuale vero minus simpliciter
protensum cum vno cornu. But, I think, that, in name do they more agree with
our Counts Palatin, then nature.

Viscounts. In the Empire and France. How their Name and Honor came first
Hereditarie. Diverse sorts of them in France. Mediocres Seigneurs. Viguiers.
Missi. Vicedomini. Vidames. Le haut and moyenne Justice. Clergy men would not
judge of causes Capital. Saxon Ealdormen. Vicecomes with them. Their
Ealdordom. Geruase of Tilburie his reason of our Shirifs name Vicecomes. The
first Dignity of this name in England. His Coronet. His inuestiture anciently
in France. The first in Scotland. Prince du Seigneurie erigee en Principaute.

CHAP. VI.
WHat is before of Counts, must be rememberd here for the understanding of
VISCOVNTS. Both the names were first Officiarie, and thence grew Honorarie. And
such as the Counts ordaind under them as Vicegerents, or the suprem Prince
constituted to supply the room of Counts, that is as the Emperor C. de Offic.
eius qui vicem alicuius. l. 1:
Gordian says, qui vice Praesidis prouinciam administrabant, became at length,
as others having delegat jurisdiction, to be (some of them) of their own right,
and transmitted their Names and Towns or Territories to their posterity.
Understand this chiefly of the Empire and of France. Hence came that Honored
name of Viscounts in Millan. By L'oyseau its well coniecturd, that in France
about the time when Dukes, Counts, and Marquesses began to vsurp Soueraintie in
their provinces, the Lieutenants or Viscounts, and Chastellans under them did
the like; so that the most part of them which had the charge of Arms and
Justice in Country Towns, where their superiors left them, gaind to themselves
perfect Seigneuries, but withal, that such as liud in their superior's chief
Towns, and there with their superiors, having not like means or opportunity
for Greatness, remaind always, as at first mere, Officers; as also those in
Normandy at this day. And some, that from that ground of usurpation have turned
their ancient Office into Honorarie enheritance, yet possess but a few marks
of Seigneurie, nor meddle with administration of Justice, but have only a
certain part of the Royal profits, proceeding from the Kings Justice in their
Territory; as those of Burges, of Cologne, of Villemenart, of S. Georges and
of Fussy, which claim the third, as before is spoken of Earls. The same author
makes diverse kinds of Honorarie and Hereditarie Uiscounts in France. One is of
such as either by reason of their first institution, being placed vice Comitis
by the King, when no Count was, or by putting off their obedience to their
superior Counts, and acknowledging the King their only Lord, immediately held of
the Crown. Tous ces Vicomtes (says he) doiuent saus doubt estre mis au rang
des Grandes Seigneuries, pius qu' ils ont Fiefs immediatz de la Corone. Another
sort (and that most common) are they which hold of the Crown by reason only of
some County annexed to it; and a third which are under some County in a
subjects hand; which both last kinds he puts in the rank des mediocres
Seignieuries, that is of such as are arier fiefs, and hold of the Crown but by
a Mesnaltie, as our Lawiers call it. So then in France, as superior and
inferior kinds of Counts anciently were, so you may say of Uiscounts; the
regard of which difference instructs to the understanding of the Titularie
Honor. For, the inferior Counts had their Vicarij or Viguiers, qui per pages
statuti sunt, and their Missi, which were as Uiscounts. Of them, says Walafrid
De Reb. Ecclesiast. cap. 31.
Strabo: Comites quidam Missos suos praeponunt Popularibus qui minores causas
determinent, ipsis maiora reseruent. The name of Viguiers remains yet in
Languedoe, and is the same with Vicarij, both but varying the word Vicecomes,
or Comitis vicem Gerens. But Strabo makes the Viguiers Governors of small
Territories, and not like the Missi, whom he compares in Church State to
Suffragnas, and the Viguiers to Parish Priests. But as, in the Roman Empire,
was the Dignity and Office of v. C. lib. 1. tit. 39. and alibi.
Vicarius as great as Comes (but yet some difference twixt them) and was also
applied to an inferior sort of Slaves, which you see in that -- iam nolo
Uicarius esse, so in the French and German Empire I doubt not but Vicarius and
Viguier was not only for Judges of mean note subdelegat by inferior Counts, but
also sometime for such as the suprem Prince constituted in vicem Comitis, or the
superior and first rank of Counts made their Lieutenants. As also Missi were
not only a name for them which were under Counts, but also sometime for the like
in proportion under the King. Ante illustres (says an old Vet. Form. ad finem.
Marculph. 7.
Precedent) Viros magnificos illos and illos Missos Domini and gloriosissimi
illius Regis. And a Charter of Pipin, Maire dumaison, to the Bignon. in Not. ad
Vet. Form.
Abbey of S. Denis. Omnibus Episcopis, Abbatibus, Ducibus, Comitibus,
Domesticis, Grafionibus, Vegarijs (that is Viguiers) Centenarijs, vel omnibus
Missis nostris discurrentibus, seu quacunque Iudiciaria potestate praeditis.
But the confusion of these names (having regard to superiors as well as
inferiors) in old laws and story, allows not sufficient means of distinction
to know which always by them is certainly meant: yet withal makes us in
general truly know whence this Title of Uiscount with them had its original.
Its greatness there varying according to the quality of the next superior, as
well now it is Honorarie, as at its first beginning, when it was Officiarie.
And as they which vicem Comitis gerebant were called Vicecomites, Viscounts, so
the delegats of Bishops in temporal jurisdiction of that kind, were styled
Vicedomini, i. as at this day the word is, Vidames. That the Substitus of great
Clergy men for secular administration were anciently called so, appears both
out of passages in the Canon Epist. Greg. Did. 89. C. Volumus. and. Rescript.
Vrbani C. 4. q. 3. cap. Saluator. and Extrauag. de Simonia cap. Consulere.
laws, and also in very ancient Story. Bertigranus (the words of an old
Adreuald. Floriac. de Mirac. S. Benedicti cap. 6.
Monk) Episcopus Cenomanensis legatos mittit ad S. Benedictum Flodegarium
Archidiaconum and Arderadum Vicedominum suum. And as Viscounts from Officers
became Honorarie, and Seigneurall, so Vidames. Neither is there in France any
Vidame which holds not of some Bishoprik, unless that of Beauuais (so L'oyseau
tells me) which is united to the Bishoprique of Beauuais, and now called le
Vidame de Gerberoy. And from the chief Town of the Bishoprique are the Vidames
denominated; as the Vidame of Reims, of Amiens, Chartres, Man's, and the like,
where he notes also two special differences twixt Viscounts and Vidames.
First, One Duke or Count (especially of the superior sort and first Rank) had
diverse Viscounts Officiarie under them; but every Bishop one Vidame. Secondly,
the Viscounts had only their le moyenne Justice, as they call it, that is,
jurisdiction of some causes only, and them of the meaner sort (as we may say
of our Officiarie Vicecomites or Shirifes, which have diverse Actions
Visconti^l, and inquiry of criminal causes,) but the determination of
Criminal, and others of greater Memineris quod hoc capite habemus ex Strabone.
note were reserved to superior Judges which have le haut Justice, or a
delegation of a kind of Merum Imperium: understand this of their more common
sort of Viscounts reckond among their Mediocres Seigneurs, of which
notwithstanding, now diverse by usurpation have gained le haut Justice to their
Seigneuries. But the Vidames from their first institution had le haut Justice,
the reason being apparent, because Clergy men V. Cause. 23. de bello and re
militari, etc.
would by no means meddle with judgments Criminal, which were Capital, and
therefore had their Lay Delegats; which is the reason why in our (...). Ed. 4.
fol. 6. and saepius in Archiu. Parliament.
old Parlaments, when in them, Appeals and Judgments of Death were, the Lords
Spiritual vsd to make a Procurator, for that turn. The Office of Viscount
never yet became Honorarie in England, yet, before we speak of our first
Honorary Viscont, something of the Office also with us. Its already showed that
the Ealdormen of the Saxon Times were Uicecomites, and as our Shirifes; and
they were in those times by that name written in Latin also. A subscription to
King Edreds Charter, dated DCCCC. XLVIII. to the Abbey of Crowland iustifies
it. There after the Abbots, Dukes, and Counts (the Dukes and Counts perhaps
being of equal dignity) follows:

Ego Bingulph Vicedominus consului.

Ego Alfer Vicecomes audiui.

And in a Charter of Thorold of Bukenhale to the same Abbey, the last witness
is thus expressed: Ego Liuingus clericus istud Chirographum manu mea scripsi and
domino meo Thoroldo Vicecomiti tradidi: and in that before of King Edred to the
Abbey of Crowland, certain lands are discharged, Auxilijs Vicecomitum, by that
name; and in one of King Bertulph to Siward, Abbot of Crowland, you may read:
Praecepi Radboto Vicedomino Lincolniae, caeterisque ministris meis in illa
part constitutis, to make a perambulation of the Isle of Crowland. So at the
Conquest Act. public. apud Camden. in Cornauijs.
it was found, that in the Hundred of Oswaldshaw in Worcestershire, nullus
Vicecomes vllam habere possit querelam, nec in ali quo placito, nec in alia
qualibet causa. But yet the name of Vicecomes was not applied to the Ealdorman,
as if he had been under the Eorle, as in France or the Empire; but in such
sort as if he were placed in the Province by the King in vicem Comitis (that
is, as a Judge) to administer justice, and look to the Kings revenue; and out
of his Court, as at this day, Faux Judgment lay in the Kings Bench, neither was
there any mediat place for remedy. Therefore in one of their Ethelred. leg.
cap. 6. Be (...). b^ec.
Laws you read, that if the Peace be broken, he that is wronged should be helped
by the Townsmen, or Tithing; if they would not help him, that then the
Eal^o^man should (that is, the Shirife) and if the Ealdorman would not, that
then the King should, and if the King would not, that then the Shire should not
be bound to keep the Kings peace; for so I interpret Li^^^ Eal^o^^om on vn^^^e:
where the Vicountie or Shirifdom is called also an Ea^^o^^om, as the Superior
and Martial government of their Eorle was titled an Eorledome, the word Dome
signifying in that sense a place subject to a Superior, not only in Civil
Jurisdiction, but also Martial. Either then in imitation of other Nations, was
that name of Vicecomes applied to our Saxon Ealdormen, and Shirifes; because
their offices were somewhat like: Or else being constituted, qui vicem iudicum
sieve Comitum gererent, by the King, were properly as the ancient and best sort
of them in France, so called, or as the U carij in the Declining Empire, having
no Superiors which constituted them but the King. Howsoever the reason of the
name given by Geruase of Tilburie is much deficient, unless in it, by a nice
construction, you make him use Comes in several Notions. He is called Uicecomes
(says he) qued Vicem Comitis suppleat in placitis illis de quibus Comes ex
suae Dignitatis ratione participat. The errors of Polidore, and such that begin
our Shirifes at the Norman Conquest, are not here worth speaking of, or of
those which say the word Vicecomes was not here in the Saxon Times. But, of it
as it is with us Officiarie thus much; which I insert because of comparing our
Office of that name to the like in France, where the Honor proceeded originally
from the Office. For with us the Honor and the Office have no community.
Neither had we any of that Dignity (although the Office in some places has
been hereditary from ancient time) until Henry VI. He in Parliament made, by
Patent, John of Beaumont Viscount of Beaumont, with Pat. 18. Hen. 6. part. 2.
memb. 2.
these words of inuestiture: Nomen Vicecomitis de Beaumont Impominus ac ipsum
insignijs Uicecomitis de Beaumont realiter inuestimus, locumque in
Parliamentis, Concilijs, and alijs congregationibus nostris, super Omnes
Barons Regni nostri Angliae assignamus. What those Insignia were then, I know
not; but later time allows him a kind of Coronet (without Point or Flowrs) on a
Cap of Furre. But an old Author Anth. de la Salle chez L'oyseau, des seig. cap.
5.
of France says that Le Vicomte est inuesty auec un verge d'or. In Scotland
the first Dignity by this name was in Thomas Lord Ereskin created Viscount
Felton by our present Sovereign, their James the VI. Spain has some of this
Order and Name. Twixt Vicount and Count in France, is a special Dignity of
Princes. They have their names by reason of their Seigneuries erected into
Principalities.

Baro in Cicero, and Persius. Its signification in Hirtius and old Glossaries.
Magnus Homo. The true deriuation of Baro, as its now Honorarie: Mall and
Mollabergium. Sagibaro. Sake, or Sach. Wittiscalc, Saccabor or Sathabor. Plea
de sakebere. Sikerborgh. Hondhabend. Mainauer. Barigild. Baro for a man
generally; and Barons London, and the like. Ancient and late Barons of France.
Capitaneus Regis. Barn or Beern for a man-child. Baron for a husband, where
vsd. Cheorlbearn. Saxon Thanes. A Saxon Monument of their Dignities. Of
Eoldormen again somewhat. Canutus his Forest Laws misprinted. Liberalis and
Mediocris Homo. A Hyde of Land. Hydage, and Caruage or Carucage. A conjecture
upon Bracton. Terra Hydata and non Hydata. Minister. Minister Regis. Tainus.
The Relief or Heryot anciently in all Barkshire. Viro, Baro, Minister, Thanus.
But the name of Baron not in the Saxon times in England. How Barons had their
name then. The book of Modus Ten. Parliamenti. Barons, and Pares Baronum.
Illustres equites Romanorum. The Title of Prince not without Barons. Barons to
subjects; and Barons Regis. The Value of Reliefs of Dignities. When they began
certain for a Baronie. A conjecture when the value of a Baronie began. Court
Baron. Baronagium and Barnagium. Bernage. Baronie in our law for Seigneurie.
Tenere per Baroniam. CCL. Baronies reckond by Hen. III. His Ordinance touching
what Barons should come to Parliament. The ancientest sommons extant. The Grand
Charter first granted. A Parliament held XVIII. Hen. III. transcribd out of an
obscure Roll touching Assizes of Darrein Presentment, Iuris Vtrum, and
Certificat of Bastardie, with the Barons names subscribd. And therein, Bracton
amended. Barons by Writ and by Creation. Those two sorts now only in being. A
respect to the Tenure per Baroniam after the allowing them only the title which
were sommond. Barons ratione Officij, as Abbots, and Bishops. Chief Baron of
England. Barons called Lord or Domini. How in legal proceeding. Lords, Barons,
and Earls only by Courtesy, and Court language. Thanes of Scotland. Stewarts.
Abthan. The beginning of the Royal name of Stewart there. Tosche. Ochern. The
first mention of Barons in Scottish Monuments. What their Baron is. Pit and
Gallows. How the name is generally taken there. Acts touching which of their
Barons must come to Parliament. Commissares of the Shire. The difference of
their Lords and Lairds. The English and Scottish Parlamentarie Barons of a
superior note then the French. Los Ricos hombres. Valuasores and Capitanei
Regis vel Regni. The Feudalls interpreted otherwise then the vulgar opinion.
(...). Valuasores minores. Minimi. Valuasini. Vauasors in France. Vauassouries.
Sommage. (...). Vauasors in England. Countors. Subuasores in Scotland.

CHAP. VII.
NExt after Viscounts, follow BARONS. A title of frequent note in most parts of
Christendom, and about whose etymology most disputation and inquiry is.
Barons are in some Countries (in all anciently, where they were at all) Lords
of their denominating Territory, with some Judicial government, but beneath
the Dignities before spoken of, both in largenes of Territory, and neernes to
Soueraintie; and how they differ in substance from other Titles in their
Original, what we shall say of Particular States will best discover. But
first for the Name: The word alone is very ancient, and of pure Latin. In
Cicero you read; Epist. ad Attic. lib. 9. Ep. 11.
Apud Patronem and reliquos Barons te in maxima gratia posui, and hercule
merito tuo feci. And in another place; De Finibus lib. 2.
Haec cum loqueris, nos Barons stupemus; tu videlicet tecum ipse rides. And
two other passages in him (as Elias Uinetus reads them) have Baro in the
singular number, where some of the published books have, and that most properly,
Vero the conjunction. I will confess that as yet I have not thoroughly learnd
what Barons signifies to Cicero in his first place: yet I know, some have
dared to think it there vsd as near to what it now interprets in the Rank of
Dignities. They shall and may for me; I cannot. But in the second, I am
somewhat confident, that (if the Reading be not corrupt) it is not unfitly
expressed into our word Block-head, or the Latin Bardus. The Text of Tully there
iustifies it, and a Satyrist that Persius Satyr. 5. vbi and videsis Eliam
Vinetum.
that liud under Nero (by the correction of best Critiques according to best
copies) has

-- Iura. Sed Iuppiter audiet Eheu!
Baro, regustatum digito terebrare salinum
Contentus perages, si viuere cum Jove tendis.
Where the old Scholiast, Cornutus, reads Varo (how soon that difference might
creep in, any Vti B. and V. saepius inuicem Antiquis commutantur, videre licet
apud Ald. Manutium in Hirt. de Bell. Hispaniensi, alios.
nouice in Letters knows) and tells us that Varones dicuntur serui militum,
qui vtique stultissimi sunt, serui scilicet stultorum. He plainly iustifies the
interpretation; and perhaps in that first place of Cicero, so vexed among
Grammarians, some allusion is to this notion of the word. For how much he
persecuts the Epicurean sect is apparent in that of his De Finibus: and what
was Patro but an Epicurean? And how well might he lay that name on such as in
his judgment were so far from true Philosophy? Cum Patron Epicureo (says
Famil. lib. 13. epist. 1.
he) mihi omnia sunt, nisi quod in Philosophia vehementer ab eo dissentio. I
see not then but in both places it may be probably affirmed, that he meant by
Barons alike. Yet, to justify also that which the Scholiast of Persius
writes, the name is in an ancient, A. Hirtius or De bell. Alexandrino. Baro
item Cognomen Romany erat v. Inscript. Ep. Alciat. Parerg. 5. cap. 16.
Oppius. He for some kind of Soldiers or their servants, uses it. Concurritur
(are his words, speaking of the violence offered by Minucius Silo) ad Cassium
defendendum. Semper enim Barons (so some read, it being printed also Barons)
compluresque euocatos cum telis secum habere consueuerat. And Origin. lib. 9.
cap. de Ciuibus.
Isidore: Mercenarij sunt qui seruunt accepta mercede; ijdem and Barons Graeco
nomine, quod sint fortes in laboribus. (...) n. dicitur grauis, quod sit
fortis: cui contrarius est leuis and infirmus. And in an old Arabico-Latine
Glossarie: Barons, fortes in laboribus, which teaches how to mend Isidores
Glossarie, where its printed Bargines, Fortes in bello. Confidently read
Barons F. i. b. And well does this agree with our Bracton his deriuation.
Sunt, says he, alij Potentes sub rege, qui dicuntur Barons, hoc est Robur
belli. The learned Aduersar. subsec. lib. 1. cap. 8.
P. Pithou cites some old Glossarie, where Baro is (...) i. hatred. And Barosus
(...) i. Disdainful or Currish. These are testimonies of the signification of
Baro, as it was made a Denizen in the Latin Common-welth; for it seems to be
of a strange blood, and, as some will, deduced into Rome, or (in the middle
times) into Latin out of Gaulish, old French, or Dutch. But I conjecture,
although it be vsd by Tully for a block-head or a simple fellow, and so by
Persius, that yet the genuine signification of it was rather seruus Militis, or
Calo, or Cacula (which are what the French call les valets des gendarmes, i.
Soldiers attendants) then Fatuus or Stultus, as of Bardus also may be affirmd.
For, that is vsd for Fatuus, yet was in Gaulish a Poet. And the servile
quality of those attendants might well give occasion to apply the general
name of their Duty to the particular of their quality. As, because great, and
lubberly fellows are usually noted for imperfection in understanding, and
servile ability of mind, the Latins by the name of Magnus homo Meurs. Exerc.
Critic. part. 1. ad Plauti Milit. cap 4.
meant a foolish knave, or a foolish fellow. Nequam and Magnus Homo, Laniorum
immani canes vt says Varro de lingua Lat. lib. 6.
Lucilius and,
Magna quidem sequeris Pontice; magnus homo es,
with the like, is in Lib. 7. Epig. 99. v. and lib. 9. epig. 51.
Martial. Yet, neither did that properly interpret a Fool, no more did Baro.
The same in proportion may be said of it as it is turned in the Glossaries
Fortis or (...), and the like. For I take Fortis there, not for valiant, but
sturdie or strong, which well fits with our Baro, as he was Militis seruus or
Cacula. But that its deriud from (...), I must take long day to beleeu,
Doubtless it will be of another Family, another Climat. In the ancientest laws
of the Almains, Ripuarians, Salians, and the rest (which are supposd written
about CD. or D. after our Savior) Baro often occurrs for Man, as it
distinguishes the better Sex. And according to that it is Philoxen. in Vet.
Glossario.
turned into the Greek (...), i. a Man. Its likely then, that, as the Latins
have vsd puer, and sometimes Homo (in later ages of Barbarism, nothing more
common then Homo) for a Man or servant, the French, and those among whom Baro
or Baron was for Homo or Vir, applied it in the same fashion, and so called
their ministering servants; which also helps to justify the testimony of
Cornutus, by whom perhaps and by the Romans, the knowledge of some barbarous
words being chiefly learnd out of the Wars, this was thought only to signify
the servants of the Camp. That it was vsd by the French or Dutch for a
Minister, or Man, or such like, we may observe in this piece of the Salique
Salic. leg. cap. 96. and art. 4.
laws. Si quis Sagibaronem qui puer regius fuerit, occideret, etc. And then,
Sagibarones in singulis Mallobergijs. i. plebe quae ad vnum Mallum conuenire
solet (This Mall or Mallus occurrs often in the Salique laws and ancient
precedents, in like signification) plus quam tres esse non debent: and si causa
aliqua, ante illos, secundum legem fuerit definita, ante Grafionem remouere non
liceat. Here in Sagibaro the word Baro appears, and (until I am better
instructed) I shall think that Sagibaro was one of some kind of mean Justices or
Officers in the Country, before whom sometimes causes criminal and amendable
by amercements or mulcts were heard and determined, near like our Justices of
Oier and Terminer for Trespasses. And in this sense perhaps remains the names
of Barons to this day in the Judges of the Exchequer. For, Sagi I guess is
made out of Sath or Sake (a word known in our ancient laws, and coming from
Teutsch or Saxon) vsd for liberty of amerciament and giving amends in the
Court Baron anciently due to the Lord, both when the plaintiff faild in his
proof, or the defendants were subject to the Action, as at this day. Sak
(says an ancient Ms.) est placitum and Emenda de transgressoribus (I read
transgressionibus) hominum in Curia vestra; quia Sak Anglice, Encheson Roman
(he meant Francice; whence, works in the Provincial tongues of France and
Spain are called Romances) and inde dicitur Forsouth Sak, hoc est, est pur cel
encheson. Our law French uses encheson, as the present French their Achoison;
for an occasion or opportunity, and, I think, for accusation. You know the
word Sake is at this day with us for Cause. As, for Gods sake, and the like.
And Causa in Latin is taken anciently for a matter iudicially questiond. Why
then might not Sake be as that description before is, or, as our Itin. Noting.
Br. Quo Warranto 2. Itin. Ed. 3. Kel. fol. 145. alibi. nec aliter sane Vet.
leg. Ed. Confessoris cap. 22.
Common laws say it is, a Conisans of pleas, or liberty of amerciament, which
supposes a Conisans, and so applied to signify, as, in the genuin sense, it
interprets Causa, for a Controversy? And that so should the right meaning of
Sake be, is justified out of an old Itin. Temp. Ed. 3 fol. 150.. 44.
Eire, where the liberty of Sake is allowd to every Lord by common right.
Understand every Lord of a Manor. For every Manor has its Court. Every Court
its pleas: and in those, pleas amends and amerciaments (for certain actions and
selon la bas Justice) necessarily follow. Out of this may be conceiud what the
particle Sagi in Sagibaro, is; and that Sagibaro may be not ill turned into
Minister Mulctarum, or Iudex Causarum, or Mulctarum, or the like; which I the
rather believe, because in the ancient Constit. Burgund. cap. 76.
laws of Burgundy, one, whose Office is near what seems to have been as the
Sagibaro's, is called Witiscale, which is verbally to be turned Minister sieve
praefectus ad irrogandas mulctas, or so. For Wite (a word vsd by Chaucer and
others about his time) is a Punishment or Mulct, as in our words occurring in
old monuments, Blodwite, Frithwite, and the like. And Scale is a Minister,
Officer, or Servant, whence also the name Godsscale is the servant of God. So
that as Scale is in Witiscale, I suppose Baro in Sagibaro. I have thought that
in this name of Sagibaro (but differently applied) might be found that obscure
word of our laws, Saccabor, Sathabor, or Sacaburthe (for in all these forms it
is written in some Bract. de Corona cap. 32. and 35. Briton. cap. 15. and 29.
Bractons) or Sakebere, as Briton has it. I think so still. For it was no
unfit name to call him Sakebere or Saccabor (those come nearest to the right
Orthographie) for Sagibaro or Sakebar, which prosecuted fresh suit against the
thief, as the Saccabor did, and to that purpose is named; interpreting there
accusator, or the Man accusing or prosecuting. And from that sense may be
understood an Trin. 35. Ed. 1 Ms.
old Report, wherein one Piers brought his action against the Prior of M. and
se pleint q'il luy auoit distrain a fere corporel serement sains especial
commandment le Roy Encounter statut etc. And the Auowrie was because the Prior
ad sa Court ^en N. and View de Frank plege and poet pleder Sacrabar (plainly it
is for Sacabar) ou vint un W. le Moigne, and auoit embly un surcote and a la
suit un tiel fuit attache and que fellonissement auoit emblee cel surcote, ad
de bien and de mal se mit in bons gents de la Court; and la voloit il aver fait
P. and les auters veysins fere le serement, P. le Counterdit, per ont fuit
agarde que il fuit distrain etc. Demurrer was, and Metingham chief Justice thus
pronounces his Judgment: Home vos ad demand le quel le Prior ad cele
Franchise ou non, per la ne respones nient, and pur ceo nous and tenous
agraunt, and vous nestes Soun tenant, naues pas dedit, ne que la laroun ne fuit
prise oue Meynouere and qu' il se mist en la Court de bon and mal, and vous ne
voiles aler a serement; and Home ne doit estre perdue en tell case (perhaps
pendue) sauns serement de ces de la Court, pur ceo Agard cest Court que vous ne
pregnes ren per vostre breife, eins sees en la mercy and le Priour a Dieu. This
deriuation of it seems much more probable then that from Sikerborgh, which some
have; although I know in the old laws of Quoniam Attach. cap. 1. and 100. and
videsis skenaeum in Sacreborgh.
Scotland our Sakebere is expressly written in the printed books Siker-borgh,
which signifies a sure pledge. But the proper prosecution of Sakebere in this
sense was, before pledges could be found; and indeed was he that followd when
the guilty part was took with the main-auer (that is hondhabend, having the
thing stolen in his hand) which we corruptly now style to be taken with the
Meinouer in 1. Ed. 3. fol. 17. b. and passim in Itinere Cantij 6. Ed. 2. Ms.
male igitur, and ridicule Manuopere vocabulum illud translatum quod tamen
Antiquitus erat in vsu. P. 44. H. 3. rot. 8.
manner. They vsd for this also backberend i. bearing it on his back, in like
sense and words as (...) is among the Greeks. And it may be doubted that Siker
borgh has crept, of later time, and by some Critical mistaking, into the
Scottish laws, for this Sakebere or Sagibaro vsd anciently, it seems, for
plaintiff or appellant. I have seen those which otherwise think, but they
persuade me not. In like sort perhaps the old German Adnunc. Careli apud
Pistas apud Bignon. in not. ad Vet. Form.
Barigildi, where such as being charged with accounts upon receipt of the Crown
revenue of subsidies, had thence their name. For Geld or Gild is (among other
significations) a payment or Tax or Tribute. But this somewhat out of the way.
After those ancient laws the eldest authority of this name vsd for Men
generally, is in a French Append Greg. Turonens. sieve lib. 11. cap. 41.
story. Burgundiae Barons (the words are) tam Episcopi quam caeteri leudes
timentes Brunichildem etc. i. The Men of Burgundy, as well Bishops as other of
the Common people. For so Leudes signifies. And anciently with us here, the
Citizens of London were called Barons London. Cum impossible sit (says an old
Monument touching the pleas of the Crown held at the Tower, for the City)
Baronibus and vniuersis conciuibus London aliunde transire in placitis Coronae
quam per manus Regis and Iusticiariorum suorum, Necesse est Baronibus and
ciuibus vniuersis, gratiam and beneuolentiam eorum captare. And in a Writ of
Placit. Hill. 11. Hen. 3. rot. 12.
Dower brought for lands in the Suburbs, veniunt Maiores and alij Barons
London, et dicunt quod hoc spectat ad Communitatem Ciuitatis, and petunt
libertatem suam, and habent. So Rot. Claus. 3. Ed. 1. memb. 6.
Barons de Feuersham: and at this day, the Barons of the Cinque Ports. And
more such are in Records and Story, of those times. Neither did Barons so
signify otherwise then in later time Homines of such a Town, which is very
frequent and every where. Now as Comes, being indifferently in its own genuine
sense to others then they of the Dignity, was yet, by use of time, made a
special word for him which was Comes Imperatoris, so Baro originally
signifying a Man, and withal a Servant, or Minister, or Officer, grew at
length to denote specially the Kings Man, Servant, Tenant, or Officer, of
better note, constituted with some kind of Jurisdiction in some Territory,
which being less then either those of Dukes, Marquesses, Counts, or Viscounts,
was known only by the name of a Baronie, which also, as it expressed a feudall
Territory or Seigneurie, was a common name to all those other Dignities or
Seigneuries, which were immediate to the Crown of France or the Empire. The
French say Baronnie est toute Seigneurie premiere, apres la Souueraine, du Roy
mouuant directement de sa Corronne. But this, as their Baronies were anciently.
And accordingly was the word Baron with them extended, as in the Empire also
Capitaneus Regis vel Regni, which comprehended alike, upon the testimony of
the Feudall laws. Dux, Marchio, and Comes (say they) feudum dare possunt, qui
proprie Regni vel Regis Capitanei dicuntur, and also Valuasores maiores, of
whom more anon. But as Capitaneus and Ualuasor was also appropried to special
Dignities beneath a Count, so also Baron has been. These Titles indeed all
three being allowd, specially as the greatest for distinction, to such as
having Territory and Jurisdiction (or droit de Police, as the French call it)
were notwithstanding not to be honored with any of the superior: Whereupon that
of Baldus Ad C. I^not^it. tit. de Electione.
is, that a Baron is he which has Merum and Mistum imperium in castro aliquo
sieve oppido ex concessione 'Principis. And such, being at first only, whose
tenures were immediate from the Crown, have long since ceased in France. And its
anciently affirmd in their Grand Coustumier that of this kind there were then
but three in all France: that is Bourbon, Coucy, and Beauieu, which as the
other before like them, no longer now remain with the name and substance of
that former Title. By the substance, I mean their being immediate Tenancies of
the Crown, or as we say in Chief. And (that we may once admonish so) a Tenure
of the Crown is when its of the King as he is King and personal: but of the
King only, is when its of him by reason of some Seigneurie escheated, or by some
other means com to his hands, as by enheritance or the like. But when in the
superior Dignities, rights of Soueraintie were, for the most part, all the true
ancient Baronies became subject under those usurping Dukes, Marquesses, and
Counts, (...)else got to themselves as great Titles. And then they, and the
other Dukes and Counts, as a point of Soueraintie, also made Barons under
themselves, known by that name, and upon dissolution of those ancient Dukedoms,
and Counties (whereof already) those inferior Baronies became to be held of the
King, but not as of the Crown, and so at this day continue in all France.
Whence it follows (as L'Oyseau observes) that Barons there now are all (as
Baron is a special Title) mediocres Seigneurs, because none of the ancientest
and first kind remain, but all are as part or Tenancies of the reunited
Dukedoms or Counties. Thus then the word Baro signifying a Man (as some will a
Freeman) and also applied to a Servant or minister, became in the Empire and
in France to denote a Dignity and Seigneurie. Its vsd in Picardie at this day
(as also in our Common laws) for a husband, exactly therein agreeing perhaps
with Vir i. Man and husband. But its noted that in the Customs of Picardie and
elsewhere often occurrs, que la femme a son mary a Baron, which L'Oyseau
interprets, that the Wife is in manu potestateque Viri taking Baron there as it
signifies a Dignity or superior power. But if a feminin exposition should be
upon that text, its more likely that Baron should be taken for a Servant or
Minister, so that the Wife might be Master or Mistress. Here twixt Man and
Wife, I abstain from judgment. But withal remember the use of Barn or Bern in
our North parts for a Manchild as it respects the Sex: and an old Metrique
Translation has Heli Beerne that naght is began
In the red of wicked man.
For blessed is the Man etc. And Cheorlbeorn and Cheorlman in old laws of this
Kingdom are the same; both signifying an Ignoble man, and meanest Yeoman. The
Grecians of late time writ this name (...). One Count Albert is called Lit.
Ioach. Patriarch. Alex. apud Crus. in Turcograec. lib. 3.
(...) for Baron en scharpfeneok, and Anonym. de bello sacro apud Meurs. in
Gloss. Graeco-barbaro.
(...) they use for a Baronie. Every man that has seen the Stories or Writings
of the late semi-barbarous Grecians, knows how usually b is expressed by mp. For
England: the nearest name for Baron was that of Thane, anciently written also
Thegn thegen. Of their Thanes are two sorts rememberd in King Knouts v. Leg.
Canut. cap. 69.
laws. Cyninges thegen, and medmera thegen, i. The Kings Thanes and a Mean
Thane. Sometimes called Thegen and theothen i. Thane, and under Thane. The old
translation of the Saxon calls the Vnderthane or Mean Thane Mediocris Homo
sometimes Homo liberalis. Of them and other Dignities under our Saxons, an old
Ap. Lamb. in Itinerar. Cantij.
Fragment thus: The wisest of the people were (weorthscipe wyrtha) worship
worthy every one in his rank. Eorl and Ceorl, th^gn and theoden i. Earl Churl,
Thane, and Underthane. And if a Churl (called sometimes Cherlman, which, old
authority makes the same with Villanus; as Villanus c Merc. leg. verse. lat.
cap. 2.
is a poor servile Townsman, and understood in the Statut of Merton, cap. VII.
differing from Burgensis only as Uilla from Burgus; not as our law now uses it
for Quae seruos inter and Villenos erat apud Saxones nostros discrepantia,
videra est in Ingulph Notitia Abbatiae Crowlandensis.
Seruus, or a bondslaue) thriu'd, that he had fully five Hides of his own
land, a Church and a Kitchen, a Belhouse and (Burgeat) Gate (I have thought
that you might interpret it a free passage or resort to: setle and sundernotei
a Room and distinct Office in the Kings Hall, then was he thenceforth a thegen
rightesweorthe i. as a Thane. And if a Thane so thriued that he served the
King, and rode on his Journey as of his family, and if he then had a Thane
among his fellows that to the kings tax for Martial expedition (the Saxon is
to Cynges utfare) had five Hydes of land chargeable, and had served his Lord in
the Kings Court (on Cynges setle) and had gone thrice to the King on his Lords
errand, He (i. this less Thane or Vnderthane) might afterward, doing his
fealty (mid his v. Constable. Forest Canuti. 12
f^r^the) play his Lords part at any need. And if a Thane so thriued that he
became an Eorle he was thenceforth as an Eorle. And if a Merchant (Massere) so
thriued that he passed thrice over the wide Sea of his own Craft, he was
thenceforth a Thane. For the better understanding of this Monument, a word or
two. What an Eorle was, already. Touching the Thanes (by that name) I add
that the division of Them is expressly also in other of K. Cnouts Constit.
Forest. Canut.. 1. and 2.
laws, into Thanes and less Thanes. Sint iam deinceps (says he) quatuor ex
liberalioribus Hominibus qui habent saluas suas debitas consuetudines, Quos
Angli thegens appellant. So you must read, and not Paegened as the print is
corrupted. Then sint sub quolibet horum quatuor ex mediocribus hominibus, quos
Angli Non Lespegend vt perperam in vulgata Charta Canuti.
les thegens (i. less Thanes, which elsewhere is anciently translated also by
mediocres homines) nuncupant, Dani vero young men vocant, locati, qui curam and
onus tum Viridis tum Veneris suscipiant. Of these the first four seem to have
been as those which later time have styled Verderors of the Forest, and the
other four as Regardors. This last four had nothing to do with administration
of Justice in the Forest, but were as less Thanes, beneath in dignity to the
first called Thanes generally; yet were rankt in the comprehensiue name of
Eoldormen, which either were, as among these, of a far different note and
worth from those spoken of in the Chapter of Counts, or else the instructing
testimony is insufficient. Its words are thus: In administranda Iustitia
(says K. Cnouts Constit. Forest.. 3. and 21.
Constitution of those four less Thanes) nullatenus volo vt tales se
intromittant: mediocresque tales post Ferarum Curam susceptam pro Liberalibus
semper habeantur, qu^s Dani Ealdermen appellant. Plainly the Ealdorman, which
was for Shirife, and is sometimes called Comes, was of much better place and
(by his place) dignity then a Thane. For in Athelstans laws an Ealdormans
worth is accounted eight times as much as a Thanes. Therefore how can those
Officiarie Ealdermen or Shirifes be the same with these Ealdermen here, which
are beneath Thanes? I do as much suspect the text, as think that Ealdermen was
a general name for those liberales there spoken of. Yet also, as Aldermen are
now in Cities and Corporations, they are v leg. Confessoris edit. a Lambardo.
affirmd to have been in the Saxon times. But I confess I dare not with
certainty affirm hereof any thing, until I know more. But, that Alderman was,
since the Normans, extended much further then to those of Corporations or the
like, appears both in the name given to a petit Officer in some Manors, and
also (if I deceive not my self) in an old Roll of Placit. ap. Cicestriam 47.
Hen. 3. Rot. 48. and 49.
Hen. III. where of an Eire held at Chichester, the presentiments are, out of
every Hundred, set under his Rape, and over every Hundred is written (before the
Jurors) Alder. Iuratorum with a name prefixed, then Electores Iuratorum with two
names, and next the Presentors. What Alder. is, if not Aldermannus, I have not
yet at all understood. Touching the Hydes of land there spoken of: Diverse are
the opinions of the quantity of a Hyde, some make it a v. Roger. de Houeden
part. 2 fol. 443. post illorum Turbam, qui de hac re.
hundred Acres, others (and with them our Monks usually concur in their
Stories) the same with a Carue, that is a Plough land. What the certainty is, I
could not yet satisfy my self. But its plain that the ancient Taxes and
Subsidies extraordinarily paid to the Crown, were chiefly levied by Hydes, and
are called Hydagia or Hydagium; a word vsd in K. Edreds Charter to the Abbey of
Crowland dated DCCCC. XLVIII. where the print of Ingulphus has falsely Hydagro,
for Hydagio. By Hydes chiefly the land of the Kingdom was reckond in Domesday,
and the Aides taken in the infancy of the Norman State here, was Hydage. Every
one knows so, that knows the stories of that time. Sunt (says De Acq. Rex.
Dom. lib. 2. cap. 16.. 8.
Bracton) quaedam communes praestationes, quae seruitia non dicuntur, nec de
consuetudine veniunt nisi cum necessitas interuenerit, vel cum Rex venerit,
sicut sunt Hidagia, Coraagia (so is the print; I would willingly read Foragia,
serving well for the Kings provision, as in the Empire anciently Fodrum) and
Caruagia, and alia plura de necessitate and ex consensu communi Totius Regni
introducta. Here he makes a difference of Hydagia and Caruagia, whence it
should follow that Hyde and Carue are different. And so will it appear plainly
that they are, if you but observe that transcript of part of Domesday, inserted
by Ingulph in his story of Crowland. That Caruagium is also Carucagium. Eodem
tempore (says Matthew Paris, speaking of Hen. III.) caepit Rex Carucagium,
scilicet duas marcas de Caruca ad maritagium sororis suae Isabellae. She was to
be married to Frederique II. who had for her portion XXX. M. Marks. But,
whatsoever a Hyde properly was, resolve of two things touching it. First, that
it was not alike in all places, but, as a Yard land at this day, very
uncertain, varying according to custom of Countries, as indeed the Acre does a
so. Secondly, that it was anciently the chief note of extraordinary Taxation,
and that land subject to those special Praestationes (as Bracton calls them)
was named Hydata, and what was discharged, non Hydata. For testimony, receive
this out of a very ancient Court book belonging heretofore to the Abbey of
Ramsey, and now in my hands. Inquisitto facta Temp. Hen. 3.
apud Cranfeild die sabbati proximante festum Sancti Valentini Anno Domini
Ranulphi Abbatis XIIII super Terram Hydatam and non Hydatam tam liberorum quam
Villanorum and seruicia eorum and consuetudines per Robertum filium Katerinae,
Simon de la Bu^ne, Ricardum ad Ecclesiam etc. -- Dicunt quod nesciunt quot
acrae faciunt Virgatam quia aliquando XLVIII. acrae faciunt Virgatam and
aliquando pauciores. Quatuor V^^gatae faciunt Hydam. Dominicum non est Hydatum.
Persona tenet Terram sed nescitur quantam. Nihil inde facit Domino Abbati. Quia
est Eleemosyna non est Hydata. Willelmus le Heir tenet dimidiam Virgatam de
antiquo feoffamento -- dat Hydagium cum euenerit, nihil aliud facit. Ricardus
de la Bu ne tenet vnam Virgatam -- dat Hydagium quantum pertinct ad Virgatam,
cum euenerit; and thus of diverse: where less parcells then a Hyde, pay,
according to their quantity, Hydage. Then follows: Terrae quae sunt extra
Hydam, and quae non dant Hydagium, with a catalogue of diverse tenants names,
lands, and tenures, and subscription of Non dat Hydagium, nec facit Forinsecum;
and it seems that all of them were such as had discharge of Hydage by clayming
under the seisin of the Abbots, after the immunitie granted. But at a Court
holden there not long after, the presentment was expressly, In Cranfeild sunt
XII. Hydae, vna Virgata and dimidia, and vna Cotland, quae continet Tertiam
partem vnius Virgatae praeter Dominicum Curiae, quod, non scitur, quantum
contineat. Sic computatur quantum ad Abbatem. Tota enim Villata cum Dominico
computatur quantum ad Regem pro X Hydis. Quatuor Virgatae faciunt Hydam.
XLVIII. Acrae faciunt Virgatam. So that by their account CXCII. Acres made a
Hyde. I offer this to consideration about the Hyde, and leaving what others
have spoken of it, but to no sufficient satisfaction, I, for this place, also
leave it. Some other matters in that Saxon fragment, ingeniously I acknowledge,
pass my conceit; nor can I yet understand them. Those Thanes are in old
Charters comprehended (if I deceive not my self) under name of Ministri, and
Ministri Regis. In the subscription to K. Edreds, to the Abbot of Crowland,
after the Lords spiritual, the Eorles, and Eoldormen (by the title of Duces or
Comites, and Vicecomites) follow. Ego Harceus Minister interfui.. Ego
Athelwardus Minister aspexi.
and in one of K. Cnut, dated M. XXXII.. Ego Turkillus Minister Regis audiui.
Ego Alfgerus Minister Regis aspexi.
and diverse like are in others, the word (...), being truly interpreted by
Minister, or Seruiens, whence in the Princes word Ic Dien is, for Ic (...) i.
Ego seruio. They were called also Tanij. In Domesday: Tanius vel Miles Regis
Dominicus moriens, pro Releuamento dimittebat Regi omnia arma sua, and equum
vnicum cum Sella and alium sine Sella. Understand of the Kings Thanes in
Barkshire only; and note that Releuamentum is there only for the Saxon
Heregeat, as our Heriot, i. a Payment or Duty to the Lord. Its commonly
affirmd that before the Normans the name of Baron was not in use here. I will
not be against it, although, in K. Cnuts laws of the Forest, occurrs,
Episcopi, Abbates, and Barons non calumniabuntur pro venatione, si non Regales
feras occiderint. And, notwithstanding that in the Confessors laws Barons are
so reckond also after Comites, I impute both these testimonies to later time
and translation out of Saxon into Latin under the Normans, as also that of the
same Kings laws, cited by most learned Camden (to this purpose) in these words:
Exercituale Vitonis sieve Baronis Regis, qui est proximus ei, quatuor Equi.
Understand by Exercituale, a Heryot. But the Saxon of that remains, and speaks
in this manner. And syththan Leg. Canuti cap. 69.
Cynninges thegnes Heregeate the him nihste sindon IIII. horse: of which that
Latin is even a verbal interpretation. In our English thus: And let the Heryot
of the Kings Thane that is nearest to him be IV. Horse. And whereas Florence of
Worcester speaks of one Adelwald under K. Edward son to Alfred, by the name
of Minister Regis, Henry of Huntingdon expressy calls him Baro Regis. These
conclude the identitie of Thanes and Barons, in name. It next follows with a
cleerer passage, to show what our Norman Barons were. When the Conqueror
subjected most lands in the kingdom to Military and Honorarie Tenures, as in
making hereditarie Earls; he likewise invested others in smaller Territories,
with base jurisdiction, and they were Barons, and had their Courts called Court
Barons, whence, that name to this day, remains, as an Incident to every Manor.
Because, such as had not the dignity of Count, yet had special Territories
with jurisdiction given them, of part whereof they enfeofft others to hold of
them, as they of the King, generally were styled Barons, or the Kings Barons,
provided that their lands and Manors were of sufficient revenue and quality to
make what was accounted a Baronie, which was XIII. knights Fees, and a Third
part, whereof more anon where we speak of Knights. So that their Honor was not
in those ancient times given by Writ or Patent, but came a Censu or from their
possessions, and Tenure. When the beginning of this value of a Batonie was, I
find not, but plainly it was since the Normans; and, it seems, as Men of the
better rank and Citizens (as before is showed) were generally called Barons, as
they were Homines or Tenentes, so some more specially honored by the Kings
Bounty with so many Knights Fees, or possessing as much (I think) by mesne
tenures, were accounted for Honorarie and Parlamentarie Barons. Where note how
the Dignity differed from the general name. An old Treatise thus iustifies
it: Item summoneri and venire debent (ad Parlamentum) omnes and singuli
Comites, Barons, and eorum Pares, scilicet illi qui habent Terras ad Valentiam
Comitatus integri, videlicet viginti feoda vnius militis, quolibet feodo
computato ad viginti libratas quae faciunt Quadringentas libratas, in vel ad
valentiam vnius Baroniae integrae videlicet tresdecim feoda and tertiam partem
vnius feodi Militis quolibet feodo computato ad viginti libratas, quae faciunt
in toto Quadringentas Marcas, and nulli minores Laici summoneri, nec venire
debent ad Parliamentum ratione Tenurae suae nisi eorum presentia alijs de
Causis fucrit vtilis vel necessaria ad Parliamentum. This is out of the Modus
Tenendi Parliamentum, qui recitatus suit (as the title is) coram Willielmo
Duce. Normanniae Conquestore and Rege Angliae, ipse Conquestore hoc
praecipiente, and per ipsum approbatus and suis Temporibus, and etiam
Temporibus successorum suorum Regum Angliae vsitatus. But trust not to its
pretended Antiquity. It cannot be of the Conquerors age. Many men have copies
of it, but none has ever been seen very ancient. Yet it proves, that since the
Normans, all such as had the XIII. Knights Fees, and a third part, were Peers
to Barons, and upon the matter Barons; that is, to be sommond to Parliament. And
I guess, that the distinction of Barons, and Pares Baronum, is as much as if
you should say, such as being immediate tenants to the King, of that worth, were
the Kings Barons, and such as had alike possessions, but not honored with an
immediate Crown Tenure, were, as those Kings Barons, to be in Parliament: as in
Rome the Equites illustres, i. such as possessed a Senators wealth, had fair hope
of being Senators, and wore the latus clauus of Senators, were V. Lips.
Comment. ad Tacit. Annal. 11. number. 15.
pari, cum Senatoribus, gradu. Which makes me think (but with doubt) that
before Henry III. as well Barons v. Camdeni Northumbriam.
of Earls (if of like worth) as the Kings Barons came all to Parliament. For not
only the Counts Palatine had their Barons to attend on them in their Courts
(whereof see the learned Clarenceulx in his Cheshire) But, also other Earls,
and by that name. Willielmus Comes Glocestriae Dapifero suo and Omnibus
Baronibus suis and hominibus Francis and Anglis salutem, says a Deed, in my
hands, of William Earl of Gloucester under Henry II. And nothing is more common
in old Charters of Earls of those times, then Omnibus Baronibus, Militibus,
Hominibusque meis, which I would translate to all my tenants of whole Baronies,
to all such as hold of me by Knights service, and to my other Tenants. Neither
was the title of Prince due to any (by ancient opinion) which had not some
Barons under him. Yet Earls and all above them are clearly Princes. Therefore
in the Th. de Walsingham. A. 1278.
Concord twixt Lewhelin Prince of Wales, and Edward I. five Barons about
Snowdon, and their Homages were reserved to Lewhelin, quia se Principem
conuenienter vocare non posset, nisi sub se aliquos Barons haberet ad vitam
suam. And the King had Barons suos, so distinguished. An old Placit. apud
Theokesb. coram W. de Ralegh, ante Pentecost. 18. Hen. 3 rot. 1. in dors.
Sussex.
Record: Dominus Rex mandauit Petro de Riuallis, quod mitteret ei Willielmum
Filium and Heredem Iohannis de Breuse, eo quod debuit esse Baro suus, and Homo
suus ad Nutriendum in Domo sua. And Barons Regis and ipsius Archiepiscopi
atque illorum Episcoporum homines multi are rememberd in an old plea In
praefat. D. Ed. Coke ad Commentar. 9.
under the Conqueror between Lanfrank Archbishop of Canterbury, and Odo Bishop
of Bayeux. Therefore in the Graund Charter you read Si quis Comitum, vel Baronum
nostrorum, sieve aliorum tenentium de Nobis etc. because then were there diverse
Barons which were not immediate Barons Regis, yet, at that time, perhaps
Parlamentarie: where also is confirmd that value of a Baronie at CD. Marks
yearly revenue; the Relief of the Kings Baron, being by ancient custom of
England C. Marks. For the Relief is always in the Dignities of this State, the
fourth part of the Revenue, as every young Student knows, and is touched in the
Chapter of Counts. Yet note that as touching Barons and Counts that custom was
not till K. John (when the Grand Charter was first made) or K. Henry III. his
time. For De Baronijs (says Ita etiam Geruas. Tilburiensis in Dialog. de
Scaccario.
Glanuil writing of Reliefs under Hen. II.) nihil certum statutum est quia
iuxta voluntatem and misericordiam Domini Regis solent Baroniae Capitales, de
Releuijs suis, Domino Regi satisfacere. Where, observe the distinction of
Baroniae Capitales from such as were of like possessions, but Tenants and
Barons to subjects. And it might be collected, that until by this proportion
of Relief, brought to a certainty, and grounded upon the value of a Knights
fee (the Relief whereof was by Common law certain) the distinct number of
Knights Fees for a Baronie was not used. I am as yet of that opinion. Yet such
as neither held XIII. Knights Fees and a third part of the King or any other,
were notwithstanding, and by reason of their Dominion and Lordship, titled in
those times Barons, that is, every Lord of a Manor, whence, as before is said,
the name of Court Baron remains. For in the 9. Rich. 1. Houed. part. post. sol.
442. and 443.
report of the Aid and Hydage granted to Richard 1. the order was, that the
Collectors should cause to come before them Senescallos Baronum illius
Comitatus, and de qualibet villa Dominum vel Balliuum Uillae, and that for the
leuying of it, quilibet Baro cum Vicecomite facerct districtiones super homines
suos. And thus were there in those times three sorts of Barons by Dominion and
Jurisdiction. Barons Regis, whose Baronies were Capitales. The Barons of
Subjects: holding not of the King but by a mesnalitie (and both Parlamentarie
if possessing XIII. Knights Fees and the third part) but a third rank of such
as were Lords of Manors but not of so large possessions or Revenue. Out of
this may be understood why, and in what sense Baronagium Angliae Rex and
Baronagium suum, and sine assensu Baronagij sui, or Barnagij sui, so often
occur in our old stories; taken, as well for the King and the whole State
sometimes, as for the Greater Nobility. For although Counts had not then their
special creations into Barons, as of later time, yet having their Revenue of
CCCC. pounds, they were Comites or Comitum Pares, and so the lest value (which
was the possessions of the Baron, the lest of the Greater Nobility) being so
many Marks, that all might be comprehended, the general name of Baronagium,
sometimes Barnagium was applied: and in that kind by the name of Baronie, one
anciently Gower prolog. in Confess. Amantis.
speaks of the whole Nobility;

The Privilege of Regalie
Was safe, and all the Baronie
Worshipd was in his estate.
and. an old Chez Cl. and Fanchet d Orig. liver 2. chap. 5.
Romant of the French: De Courtoise and de Bernage
Ot il assez en son courage.
Where Bernage (for Baronage) is taken (says Fauchet) for Noblesse; perhaps
rather for Humanity. But sometimes Rex and Baronagium suum, is for the King and
all his subjects, or the whole Parliament representing them. And so it comes
from Baron as it interprets a Man or Tenant; as if you should say, Rex and
Homines sui. Out of this discourse is understood also why every Lord of a
Manor has his Court Baron, and why our Plea in the Common Law, of Horse de son
Fee, is expressed in Mich. 5. Ed. 2. fol. 66. Ms. Int. Temp. Biblioth. Cas.
Walton and Covvike.
ancient time by Horse de Vostre Baronie; and how a Tenure per Baroniam might
then be of a subject, as also what is West. 2. cap. 46. v. 23. Ed. 3. fol. 11.
Cas. 9.
tenere per Baroniam and per partem Baroniae, and what the demanding of a
Baronie by Writ, in our year-books, is, whereof examples are 1. Ed. 3. fol. 9.
b, Louedayes assise, 18. Ed. 2. tit. Assise 382. 2. Ed. 3. fol. 6. b. and such
more; and how the Tenures of all Baronies were in Case Seigneur Cromwell.
Report. 1. fol. 81.
Chief; if you understand (as you must) the Regiae, or Capitales Baroniae. Of
these it seems was that number of CCL. which Henry III. reckond in his
Devotions at S. Albons. Nominauit (says Matthew d Paris) Dominus Rex and
numerauit omnes Angliae, quarum ei occurrit memoria, Baronias, inuenitque
Ducentas and Quinquaginta. Of them only now, and Parlamentarie Barons; leaving
all other Notions of the word. It may easily be ghest, that when every one had
by his revenue of CCCC. Marks a place in Parliament as a Baron, they were very
numerous. Whereupon Hen. III. after his peace made with Simon of Montfort and
his faction, Statuit and ordinauit (as out of an ancient, the learned
Clarenceulx cites) quod omnes illi Comites and Barons Regni Angliae quibus
ipse Rex dignatus est Breuia summonitionis dirigere venirent ad Parlamentum
suum, and non alij nisi forte Dominus Rex alia illis Breuia dirigere voluisset.
This was in XLVIII. Hen. III. And the ancientest sommons of Parliament now
remaining among the Records, is in the Claus. 49. Hen. 3. memb. 3. part. 1.
year following. But we have Statuts and Parlaments of elder time, as that of
the Grand Charter first made in the XVII. of K. John at a Parliament (or what
was in those troubled times, as one) held in Runingmed, between Stanes and
Windsor XV. of June, and that at Merton in XX. of Hen. III. to omit the
Testimonies of the Saxon Wittenagemot^s or Micil syndod^s (as they called them)
and the Parlaments held under the Normans of ancienter time, as the I. and II.
Henry's, whereof our Stories enough. And in those Parlaments, as is showed, so
many Barons as would (by Barons I understand here all the Greater Nobility)
after notice of the Kings purpose, came and sat with him; whereof, because an
example is in the more obscure Rolls of those times, and since the Grand
Charter, giving light also to some old passages of our Common-laws, being
subscribed with particular names of Barons then assisting, and as yet never
published truly out of the Record, the fault of Digression, I suppose, will be
as none, if I communicate the form as it speaks. In a plea Roll in the Tower,
the bundle thus titled: Placita apud Theokesburiam coram W. de Ralegh, and
Godfredo de Crauwecumbe ante Pentecosten, anno Regis Henrici F. Regis Iohannis
XVIII. is found; Placit. 18. Hen. 3. rot. 15. apud Westmonasterium.
Prouisum est coram Domino Rege, Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi, Episcopis,
Comitibus, Baronibus and alijs Magnatibus and Consilio Domini Regis (by
Consolium, D. R. understand the Judges, which in the years of Ed. III. often
occur by the name of Counsel du Roy) quod nulla Assisa capiatur Vltimae
presentationis de Caetero de Ecclesijs prebendis, nec de prebenda (This of
Prebends is falsely under 19. Hen. III. in some of our 19. H. 3. tit. Darr.
Present. 23. Fitzh. Not. Br. and Regist. Origin. vide vero. West. (...). cap. 5.
Books) Item eodem die prouisum est coram eisdem quod omnes viri Religiosi
quicunque sunt and qui habent ecclesias parochiales in proprios vsus, habeant
de caetero Iuris Vtrum.
Assisas ad Recognoscendum vtrum seodum etc. sit libera eleemosyna etc. eodem
modo and per eadem verba secundum quod elerici Rectores Ecclesiarum illas
habent etc. and vocentur Personae in breuibus sicut and Clerici, exceptis
Ecclesijs conuentualibus and earum feodis, de quibus nullae huiusmodi Ita
Iudicatu^ est P. 15. Hen. 3 Bract. lib. 4. tractat. 5. cap. 2.. 2 cas. Prioris
de Jews and Gilberti de Aquila.
Assisae capiantur. And in the same Roll on the backside. Die Iouis proximo
post festum Sancti Dionysij anno Regis Henrici Filij R. Iohannis XVIII. coram
Domino Rege and a subscriptis, prouisum fuit and concessum a Domino Rege and a
subscriptis omnibus and alijs, quod de caetero cum talis Bastardia obijciatur
alicui in Curia Domini Regis, quod natus fuit ante matrimonium contractum inter
patrem suum and matrem suam, mittatur loquela ad Episcopum loci adinquirendum,
vtrum talis natus fuit ante predictum matrimoniam vel post, it a quod in
inquisicione illa, cesset omnis appellatio, sicut in simplici Bastardia, de qua
placitum transmissum erit ad Curiam Christianitatis, ita quod nulla appellatio
inde fiat extra Regnum. Et ideo de Cetero ita teneatur, tam de illis, de quibus
Iudicium est faciendum in Curia Domini Regis, quam de placitis, quae nondum
incipiuntur, cum talis bastardia obijciatur. All this is in Bracton, but as if
it were part of the Statut of Vide Stat. Merton cap. 9.
Merton it being indeed two years before. And how it differs from the Common
law in later times, every one sees, which knows that special Bastardie is
triable per Pais, and not by the Ordinaries certificat. The same of Darrain
presentment, and Iuris Vtrum, which is in the first side of the Roll, is here
again in some different words, but the same substance, added, with subscription
of

E. Cant. Archiepiscopus R. Cicestrensis Domini Regis Cancellarius. R.
Dunelmensis Episcopus Episcopus Eliensis Episcopus Norwicensis Episeopus
Londinensis Episcopus Bathoniensis Episcopus Exoniensis Episcopus Carleolensis
Episcopus Herefordensis Episcopus Roffensis. Comites. R. Com. Cornubiae and
Pictauiae. G. Comes Marescallus. I. Com. Lincolniae. W. Com. Warreniae. I. Com.
Cestriae. W. Com. de Ferrarijs. Th. Com. Warwici. H. Com. Kanciae H. de Ver
Com. Oxoniae. H. Com. Hereford. Simon de Monteforti. He was then Earl of
Leicester but not so there named. Radulphus de Thony Philippus de Albiniaco.
Radulphus Filius Nicholai. Herbertus filius Matthei. I. Marescallus. Galfredus
de Lucy. Richardus de Argentine. Hugo Dispensator. Willielmus de Say.
Willielmus Bardolf. Willielmus de Cantelupo senior. Willielmus de Cantelupo
Junior. Ricardus Siward. Godefride de Crauwcumbe. Almaricus de S. Amando
Bertram de Curia. Engelard de Eigong^y. Robertus de Muchegros. Rad. de Paunton.
Herbertus de Lucy. Ricardui filius Hugonis.
How these names are corrupted in Bracton, his printed De Exceptionibus lib. 5.
cap. 19.. 2.
copy shows. But he expressly and well calls all of these subscribed,
Barons. This by the way. After that Constitution under Henry III. which his
son Edward I. and his continued successors more specially observed, none have
been accounted Barons (as honorarie) but such as have been so called by Writ to
Parliament (of what revenue soever they be) or created into that Dignity by
Patent. But Creations by Patent were not in use till Richard II. who first made
John of Beauchamp of Holt; Steward of the Household, Baron of Kiderminster by a
Charter in XI. of his reign. The Patent Pat. II. Rich. 2. part. I. memb. 12.
thus: -- Sciatis quod, pro bonis and gratuitis seruitijs, quae dilectus and
fidelis Miles noster Johannes de Beauchamp de Holt Senescallus Hospitij nostri,
nobis impendit, ac loco per ipsum tempore Coronationis nostrae bucusque
impensis, and quem pro Nobis tenere poterit in futurum in nostris Consilijs and
Parliamentis necnon pro nobili and fideli genere vnde descendit, ac pro suis
Magnificis sensu and circumspectione, ipsum Iohannem in vnum parium ac Baronum
Regni nostri Angliae praefecimus, volentes quod idem Johannes and haeredes
masculi de Corpore suo exeuntes statum Baronis obtineant ac Domini de Beauchamp
and Barons de Kiderminster nuncupentur: In cuius etc. T. Rege apud Wodestock
10. Octobris. The Law has been since taken, that Baron or not Baron (as Duke
or Not Duke; and so of the other created Titles by Record) is triable only by
Record, and not by the Country. Whereas anciently when their Revenue and
possessions gave the Name, or made them Barons, it might be triable by the
Country. Yet in ancient time after Hen. III. the Tenure 22. Ed. 3. fol. 18. a.
24. Ed. 3. fol. 66. a. 48. Ed. 3. fol. 30. b. vbi Baro Parlamentarius per
partem solummodo Baroniae tenet. and consulas Stat. West. 2 cap. 46.
per Baroniam, was in Parlamentarie Barons specially respected, and perhaps
till the form of Creation by Patent came in use, none were (or few) called to
Parliament, but such as held per Baroniam, or (as Briton calls it) en Baronie,
which after that of Hen. III. very likely is to be always taken for Baronia
Capitalis, and immediate of the King. Neither was it likely that he would sommon
any but his own (the Kings) Barons: as at this day all the Parlamentarie are.
When they are at first summond or created, their denominating Territory is
always some Lordship or Manor, which sufficiently tastes of their ancient
being. And those two courses only of making them are at this day in use; which
notwithstanding is to be understood of Lay Barons, or Lords Temporal. For, the
Lords or Barons Spiritual have not now this Honor so much personal, as
feudall, and by reason of their Temporalties, being Baronies. They had not
(says Stanford a most learned Judge of the Common law) their names ratione
Nobilitatis, sed ratione Officij; and indeed ratione Baroniarum quas de Rege
tenent. So that in them Baro and Baronia (merely as it was, in most ancient
time, taken) concur as Coniugata; which in Lay men before that Constitution
of Henry III. had like being. These Spiritual Lords now are only Bishops.
Heretofore there were of them both Abbots and Priors; but all Bishops were ever
Parlamentarie Barons, not all Abbots and Priors. To some only was that allowd
and among them the Prior of S. John's of Jerusalem was Primus Camdenus.
Baro Angliae, and Froissart calls him Le grand Priour d'Angle-terre du Temple.
But in the Rolls sometime are many of them summond which elsewhere are as often
omitted. And in that of XLIX. Hen. III. are IXV. Abbots, XXXV. Priors, and the
Master of the Temple. Of those Ecclesiastical Fees being Baronies, thus
Matthew Paris, speaking of William I. Episcopatus quoque (says he) and
Abbatias omnes quae Baronias tenebant, and eatenus ab omni seruitute seculari
libertatem habuerant, sub seruitute statuit Militari, irrotulans singulos
Episcopatus and Abbatias pro voluntate sua, quot milites sibi and successoribus
suis, hostilitatis tempore voluit a sirgulis exhiberi. Et Rotulas huius
Ecclesiasticae seruitutis ponens in thesauris, multos viros Ecclesiasticos huic
Constitutioni pessimae reluctantes regno fugauit. But in their sommons, the Lay
Barons are never saluted Barons, but by the French word Cheualier, so expressed
in the Writ being in Latin. Only in ancient times where the Catalogues of them
are in the Rolls, two occur sometimes with the addition of Baro, that is, Baro
de Stafford, and Baro de Greistok. Neither have they in their Creation (except
their Robes) any more ceremony then a Charter given, expressing some place
denominating them Of their Banner, more where we speak of Bannerets. We usually
style them Lords, as the Dutch their Heeren, or Freeheeren. But that name with
us is but of courtesy. For, it includes not, of necessity, Baron, nor is any
distinct Dignity, as appears by a case where the Writ was Ita n. a
Iurisperitiss. intelligitur Casus ille 8. Hen. 6. fol. 10. v. Cas. Comitiss.
Rutland. Relat. part. 6.
Praecipe Iohanni Louell Militi, and the exception to it was, that John Louell
Knight was a Lord (Seigniour) not named so, but disallowed. Whereas the law had
gone plainly otherwise, if it had bin, that he was a Baron of Parliament not
named so, and the party had withal showed to the Court a Writ signifying the
same. Yet Seigniour is only vsd for a Baron in our 22. Ed. 4. cap. 1.
D'Apparaile
Statuts, and the word Dominus is that which the law uses in expressing a Baron
when he is either Plaintiff or Defendant, as Henricus Barkeley Miles Dominus
Barkeley, and versus Georgium Zouch, Dominum Zouch, Saintmaure, and Cantelupe,
which occur in Plowden. So that the name of Honor given to a Baron in legal
proceedings, is always but Dominus with addition of the denominating place.
But when the privilege of being a Baron is challenged, or exception for not
naming the party so, testimony of Record must be produced, that he is Baro
Regni, and that he has vocem and locum in Parlamento, as the books are. Which
Difference for the name of Lord is obseruable; and to be understood r 48.
Assiss pl. vlt. 48. Ed. 3. fol. 30. b. 35. Hen. 6. fol. 46. a.
chiefly of Temporal Barons. But also both that of Lord and Baron is at this
day by usual application of language, attributed with us to some which are
neither by law: as, especially since the use of making every Earl, first a
Baron of some place (which began, as most worthy Clarenceulx teaches, about
Hen. VIII.) it has been a custom to style their heirs apparent Lords and
Barons, with the title of their Fathers Baronie: so of Viscounts their heirs
apparent. But this is only a piece of Courtship and mere fashion; Yet allowd in
Heraldrie: wherein Tiptosts rule (he was Earl of Worcester, and High Constable
of England under Hen. VI.) is that the eldest son of every one of a created
degree is as of the next degree under him, which may be applied to Dukes,
Marquisses, and the rest. But in legal proceedings they enjoy no such matter,
nor have by their being heirs apparent, any prerogative of the Greater
Nobility. The same is to be affirmd of a Dukes son and heir, whom custom
titles by his fathers Earldome, as the example was in 38. Hen. 8. lit. Treason
2.
Henry called Earl of Surrey, and son to the Duke of Norfolk, under Henry
VIII. being attainted of Treason by a common Jury, and not by Peers or
Barons, because he was in law as one of the meaner or less Nobility. In
Scotland before Reguauit sub Ann. Christi M. X. alij haec Malcolmo III. ferunt.
is sub M. LX. rerum potitus.
Malcolm II. was no dignity above Knights, but only Thanes, which (it seems)
were with them as with our Saxons; Superioribus seculis (says Buchanan)
praeter Thanos, hoc est prefectos Regionum, sieve Toparchas, and Quaestorem
rerum Capitalium nullum honoris nomen Equestri ordine altius fuerat, quod apud
Danos obseruari adhuc audio. Some interpret their Thane by quaestor Hector Boet.
hist. Scotic. 12.
Regius, or Steward; and deliver that the chief Steward of Scotland was called
Abthan. Whereof thus Buchanan also. Hic magistratus (that is the Great Steward
of Scotland) census omnes Regios colligit: iurisdictionem etiam, qualem
conuentum praefecti, habet, ac prorsus idem est cum eo quem Priores Thanum
appellabant. Atque nunc sermon Anglico patrium superante, Regionum Thani
plerisque in locis Stuarti vocantur: and qui illis erat Abthanus, nunc Stuartus
Scotiae nominatur. Paucis in locis vetus Thani nomen adhuc manet. So he,
speaking of Walter nephew to Banquho by his son Fleanch, created Abthan or
great Steward of Scotland by Malcolm III. from whom that Royal name of Steward
or Stuart had its origination; and began first to be honored with a Crown in
their Robert II. the honor of the Office being part always of his birthright
who is Prince of Scotland. They have also, agreeable with the identitie of
Thane and Steward, certain Stewarties at this day. But the word with them
signified questionles as with us anciently, and was of the same Saxon root. For
their right Scottish or Irish Sken. in Reg. Maiestat. lib. 4. cap. 31.
called a Thane, Tosche, and the son of a Thane Mac-tosche. But after Malcolm
his bringing in of Barons, Thanes remained as a distinct name of dignity, and
vanished not at the innovation of new honors, as at our Norman Conquest. In
their Statuts of K. William, are reckond Comites, Barons, and Thani. He
reigned about M. C. LXX. after Christ. So in the Statuts of his son Alexander
II. In their laws a Thane was reckond equal with the son of an Earl, after
they had Earls. The Reg. May. lib. 4. cap. 36. and 38.
Cro and the Kelchyn of them were both alike, as the Merchet of a Thanes
daughter and an Ochern's: an Irish or Scottish name of Stat. Alexand. 2. cap.
15. and Reg. Maiestat. lib. 4. cap. 31.
Dignity, expressed by the word Ogetharius also. Yet it seems that the Baron and
Thane were often and most usually confounded, because where Earls, Earls
sons, Thanes, Ochierns and the like are distinguished by their Croes, the name
of Baron occurrs not. The eldest testimony of this Title with them is in the
laws attributed to Malcolm Mac-keneth, that is their II. of that name which
first divided (as they say) the Kingdom into Baronies. Dominus Rex Malcolmus
(the words are) dedit and distribuit totam Terram Regni Scotiae Hominibus suis:
Et nihil sibi retinuit nisi Regiam Dignitatem and The Mute Hill of Scone.
Montem placiti in villa de Scone. Et ibi omnes BARONS concesserunt sibi
Wardam and Releuium de haerede cuiuscuuque Baronis defuncti, ad sustentationem
Domini Regis. And to these Barons with jurisdiction he granted (says Hector)
Fossam and Furcam i. Pit and Gallows. Whereupon Skene, a curious searcher of
his own Country antiquities of this kind, tells us that In Scotland he is
called ane Barronne quha haldis his Lands immediatlye in Chief of the King,
and hes power of Pit and Gallows and Infangtheife Haec n. adiunxit ad Malcolmi
leges, ijs quae in De Verb. significat. habet, I. Skene. and videsis Parl. 6.
Jacob. 1. cap. 91. and leg. Malcolm. 2. cap. 9. and 13.
and Outfangtheife. The Gallows understand as Ours, and for men Theiues; and
the Pit, a place to drown Women Theiues. But generaliter, says he, in hoc
Regno Barons dicuntur qui tenent terras suas de Rege per seruitium Militare,
per Albam firmam per Feudi firmam vel aliter cum Furca and fossa: and
nonnunquam generalissime accipitur pro quolibet domino Proprietario rei
Immobilis. In which that State well agreed with ours anciently; and till of
later time, it seems, every Lord or small Baron, denominated from his
possession and jurisdiction, came to their Parliament, but that was altered (as
with us by Henry III.) by their James 23 Jacob. 1. Parl. cap. 101. A. Chr.
1427. and v Parl. II. Jacob. 6. cap. 113 and Parl. 5. Jacob. 6. cap. 275.
the first; and in steed of them, II. Commissaries of every Shrifdome, as our
Knights of the Shire, sent to the Parliament. The Act of this alteration thus
speaks at large. Item the King with consent of the haill Counsel generally
hes Statute and ordained, that the small Baronnes and free tennentes neid not
to cum to Parliaments nor general Councels, swa that of ilk Shirefdome their
be send, chosen at the head Court of the Shirifdome, two or maa wise men, after
the largenes of the Schirefdome (our taken the Schirefdomes of Cl^kmannan and
Kinrosse) of the quhilkes ane be send of ilk ane of them, the quhilk sal be
called Comissares of the Schire: and be their Commissares of all the Schires
salbe chosen ane wise man and expert called the Common speak^r of the
Parliament, the quhilke sal propone all and sundry needis and causes
pertaining to the Commounes in the Parliament or general Council the quhilkis
Commissares sal have full and haill power of all the laif of the Schirefdome
under the witnessing of the Scheriffis seal, with the seals of diverse
Barrones of the Schire, to hear, treat, and finally to determine all causes to
be proponed in Council or Parliament: The quhilkes Comissares and speakers sal
have Costage of them of ilk Schire, that awe compeirance in Council or
Parliament, and of their rentes ilk pound sal be vtheris fallow to the
contribution of the said Costs. All Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Dukes, Earls,
Lords of Parliament, and Banrents the quhilkes the King will be received and
summond to Council and Parltament, be his special precept. So that it seems
that before this act every lesser Baronne and Freeholder was bound to come and
assist with his presence at their Parlaments; which is confirmd also by other
Parl. 6. Jacob. 2. cap. 76.
Acts: one thus speaking. Item the Lords thinkis speedfull that na Freehalder,
that haldis of the King under the some of Twenty Pounds be constreined to cum
to the Parliament or general Council, as for presence, bot gif he be ane
Baronne, or else be specially of the Kings Commandment warned, outher be
Offi^^ar or be Writ. But under James IV. Parl. 6. Jacob. 4. cap. 78.
it was enacted that na Baronne, Freehalder, nor Vassal quhilk are within ane
hundredh marks of this extent, that now is be compelled to come personally to
the Parliament, bot gif it be that our sovereign Lords write specially for
them. And sal not to be vnlaued for their presence, and they send their
procuratours to answer for them, with the Baronnes of the Schire, or the may
famous persons. And all that are above the extent of ane hundredth marks to cum
to the Parliament, under the pain of the auld unlaw. Which Acts I have the
rather transcribed, because out of them fully appears the difference of their
Lords or Parlamentarie Barons and their Lairds or only Barons by name. For
those Freeholders not Parlamentarie, are no longer honorarie, or Barons in the
best degree, but merely as poss^ssors of a small Territory, and are (being
Lairds) beneath Knights; and with them reckond as our Commons, which consist in
Freeholders. But those other, which are part of the Lords temporal, are in
proportion with ours of England. But both theirs and ours are much different
from those of France, and of a superior note: for, as is already showed, the
French Barons are Seigneurs mediocres, and hold not of the Crown, whereas all
both Scottish and English, being Parlamentarie, have no other Tenure, if you
respect the dignity as held, or other original, if you regard their Creations.
In L'oyseau des droicts de Med. Seig. chap. 8.. 10.
France as Dukes, Marquisses, Counts and Princes have the privilege of bearing
a Coronet on their Armories, so Vicounts, Barons, and Chastellains have the
special honor of the Gilt Helmet, and bearing it open. But, says Paschal. de
Coronis lib. 9. cap. 13.
another of France, Barons may wear Non quidem laminam integram and latam sed
tenuiorem ac restrictiorem ac veluti circulum, sieve gracile vinculum aureum. In
Spain, their Ricos hombres, which had Knights Vassalls under them anciently
(the name, I think, not now vsd among them) were nearest as Barons in other
States, and, if I am not deceiud, are so now called. For a Corollarie to this
Discourse of Barons, we add (and that enough opportunely) the ancient title of
Vacuassours, or Valuasors. They questionles began in the Empire, when the other
Dignities of Duke, Marquess, and the like. In the name of Valuasores-Regis and
Regni and Maiores, were comprehended Duke, Marquess, Count, and Capitaneus;
howsoever others otherwise interpret. Read this in the beginning of the
Feudals: Dux Marchio and Comes feudum dare possunt, qui proprie Regni vel Regis
Capitanei dicuntur. Sunt and alij qui ab istis Feuda accipiunt, qui proprie
Regis vel Regni Valuasores dicuntur sed hodie Capitanei appellantur. Qui and
ipsi Feuda dare possunt. Some hence infer, that Ualuasores Regis aut Regni,
or Maiores, were such as had their Feudal Honor under and from Dukes,
Marquesses, or Counts; insisting upon the words sunt and alij qui ab Istis etc.
Where, under favor, Istis is to be referred to Regni vel Regis, as if the
Composers of those laws had said, there are others also called Capitanei and
Valuasores or Capitanei Regis have their best Dignity. Authority of the same
laws, in another passage, maintains it; where after an enumeration of the Three
chief Feudal Honors, is added: Qui vero a Prineipe vel ab aliqua potestate de
plebe aliqua, vel plebis part, per Feudum est inuestitus, is Capitaneus,
appellatur. And then, Qui proprie Valuasores Maiores olim appellabantur. What
can be more plain then that Valuasores Maiores are referd to Dux, Marchio,
Comes and Capitaneus. So that, as all Dignities above Baron is included in the
Baronage, yet Baron a distinct Title; so all were called Capitanei Regis, and
Ualuasores Maiores, yet Capitaneus (the same with Valuasour anciently) a
particular and separat Dignity. The name of Capitaneus occurrs sometimes in the
Epistles of Peeter de Vineis, Secretary to Frederique II. and the Dignity, in
abstract, is called Pet. de Vineis lib. 6. Epist. 22.
Capitania. It was the self same word, which we use in the Wars, Captain. And
thence had the later Grecians their (...) and (...), and (...); and for the
Office or Dignity (...). Neither in the Feudall law is any name more competent
to the Honorarie and Feudall Baron then Capitaneus Regis, or Ualuasor Mayor.
The Feudalls go on: Qui vero a Capitaneis antiquitus Beneficium tenent
Valuasores sunt. That is, as of necessity it must be understood, Valuasores
minores, or simply Valuasores, and thereby distinguished from the other. Qui
autem a Valuasoribus Feudum quod a Capitaneis habebatur, similit er acceperint,
Valuasini, id est, Minores Valuasores appellantur: where the great Lawiers
Hotoman and Cuiacius, not so much regarding the words of the text as the
substance of the matter, make the division of Ualuasours into Valuasores
Maiores (i. of the first Rank, and Capitanei) Valuasores Minores (simply here
called Ualuasores) and Valuasini, or Valuasores Minimi, which are styled here
Minores; as if in our language you should say, Lord Paramount, being at lest a
Baron (not King) Mesne, and Tenant-perauaile. And all these there were
accounted Titles Honorarie in the Empire, after such time as all Honor
discendible became Feudall, whereof more presently. There were anciently
Valuasores also in France. Ieffrey of Vendosme in an Goffrid. Vindocinens. lib.
2. Epist. 32.
Epistle: Praeter ista and multa alia damna Dominus Ioannes filius Comitis
Vindocinensis, and cum eo quidam Valuassores Milites de Castro Vindocini,
quandam Optimam Obedientiam nostram depredati sunt. Where Sirmond the Jesuit
notes this inscription among Sugerius his Epistles: Sugerio Abbati Domino suo
G. Mayor and Valuassores, and tota sancti Richarij Communia. And adds of his
own, that Valuasours are the same which they now call Nobiles atque incolae
Oppidi alicuius, whereto, without reference to a tenure, I assent not. And a
great Ex Butelerij sum. Rurali Hotomanus in Verbis Feudalibus.
Lawier allows of this definition (or rather description) of their Valuasor:
Valuasor dicitur Nobilis, qui summae Coercitionis, non etiam nundinarum and
mercatus ius habet. Un gentilhome qui a Seigneurie de haute Justice. Estque
(says Hotoman) Barone inferior atque ab eo feudum suum obtinet. In the old
customs De parties (...) heritage chap. 26. and 34.
of Normandy, the Tenancie of a Valuassour (understand chiefly of the meanest)
is titled Vauassourie. L'heritage (the words are) est appelli partable en quoy
le Seigneur ne puit reclamer nulle guard, sicome sont Vauassouries, and tout
auter tenement villain. Where the French Gloss says that you must take it
spoken des vauassouries non noblement tenus, affirming that other Vauassouries
there are noblement tenues. These ignoble Vauassouries are elsewhere in the same
Custamier rememberd, and thus described: Les Vauassouries sont tenues par
Sommage and per service de Cheual. Which the Gloss interprets: Parcemot [and
par service de Cheual] sont entendus Villains services qui se font a sac and a
sum lesquels on appelle co^munement sommages; so to distinguish this service
de Cheual from military service known by the name of Chivalry. For, that
Sum and Sommage is questionless from the Greek (...), i. that which is laid
on a Sumpterhorse, either as his burden, or as the Pack-saddle for easier
carriage. Whence they call such horses or other beasts so employed, Suidas and
Le^ Tactic. cap. 5.. 7. and cap. 6.. 29.
(...), and (...), because they bear (...), i. burdens. Hence had the Latins
their Lamprid. in Heliogabal. vbi and vide Is. Casaubon. quin and Isidor.
Origin. 20. cap. 16.
Sagmarij equi, caballus sagmarius, and mula Sagmaria; and those of the later
and more barbarous times turned it into Summarius, and Saumarius; from which,
Sommage and Chart. de Forest. artic. 14. videsis Bracton. lib. 2. cap. 16.. 6.
de vno equo and sacco cum brochia.
Summagium easily grew; vsd also in our Law. After the Norman Conquest,
Vauassors were in England, and by that name mentioned in the Laws of Henry 1.
and perhaps were a kind of feudall dignities twixt Barons and Knights. For
Bracton reckoning Counts and Barons, puts Vauasors before Knights, and thus of
them: Sunt and alij qui dicuntur Vauasores, viri Magnae Dignitatis, Vauasor
enim nihil melius dici poterit quam vas sortitum ad valetudincm. Special
remembrance of this Dignity in our English Monuments is seen scarcely, and the
Title long since worn away. Yet Chaucer describing his Franklein, whom he
makes a better Hous^keeper, then in have are among the best to be now found,
thus mentions the Name:

At Sessions there was he Lord and Sire,
Full often time he was Knight of the Shire.
An Poygnard.
Anlace, and Pouch.
Gipsere all of Silk
Hing at his girdle, white as Morrow milk.
A Sheriff had he ben, and a Countour
Was no where soch a worthy Vauesour.
It Is likely that he gave him this Title, as the best, and above what he had
before commended him for, Neither would he have put it as an addition of worth
to a Sheriff and a Countour, unless it had bin of special note and honor. For
a Countour was (if I am not deceived) a Sergeant at Law, knwn also then by both
names. Countors sont Serieants (says the Mirror ^bezle seigneur Coke en
l'epist. du 9. liver.
of Justices) sachans la ley del Royalm. and the Custumier of Normandy: Il est
appelli Conteur que ascum establist a parler and conter pour soy ea court. The
word is interpreted by Narrator. Often in the Plea Rolls of Henry III. you have
per Narratorem suum. In the old Scottish laws there are Subuasores, which were
as the Uauasini in the Empire. Illi qui Malcolm. Mackeneth. Leg. cap. 8.. 8.
tenent de Militibus qui vocantur Subuasores leges tenebunt, etc. and the
Valuasores minores of the Empire, were as the Milites or immediate servants to
Barons in Scotland. The Ciuilians commonly derive the word a Valuis, quia
asside bant valuis, i. portis Dominorum, on feast days. I am very suspicious
of their conceit. But it will be clear that it is composed (at least in part)
out of Vassi, or Vassal, whereof presently, speaking of Feuds.

The more common opinion of the beginning of Feuds Military. The Feudall
Customs by whom and when composed. Nobility of the Empire grounded on Feuds.
A better and more true opinion of the Original of Feuds, as they came into the
Empire. (...), in the Eastern Empire. Vassi and Vassal; Gaesa, or Gaisi.
Community of Gu. Qu. and W. Guassdewr. Vassallus, if a dimmunitiue of Vassus.
A kind of Feuds very ancient in the Roman Empire. The attendance of the Tenants
of the Empire at the Coronation, anciently. Military Fiefs in England, how
before the Normans. Expeditio, Pontis extructio and Arcis Munitio, usually
reserved in the most indulgent Charters of the Saxon Kings. Trinoda Necessitas.
Wardships, In England and Scotland, when First. Deriuation of Feudum and
Alodium. A Charter of King Athelstan in rhyme. The affectation of Riming
Charters in that age.

CHAP. VIII.
OF Feudall Dignities, thus much. I so call them, because their Origination as
they now remain Honorarie, is chiefly referd to the first disposition of
Territories and Provinces in Feudall right under the French and German Empires.
The beginning of Feuds cannot but be here necessary. The common opinion
supposes it in the Longobards or Lumbards a Northern Nation. Their incursions
into Italy (vnde iura Feudorum, says Bodin, in vniuersam Europam fluxerunt)
and greatness there began under Justin 11. about D LXX. of our Savior. Millan
was their seat Royal, and in it their first King Alboin inaugurated. And its
commonly affirmd, that they brought the more formal and frequent use of
Military Feuds thither with their other customs: having had among themselves
the use of them, very aucient. Which, it seems, the Cimbrians (under that name
all Northern people, of Europe specially, were anciently comprehended, and so
in it the old Longobards) thought of, as a matter usual in their Nation, when
heretofore being barred out of Spain and Gaul, they requested the Roman State,
Florus lib. 3. cap. 3.
vt Martius populus aliquid sibi terrae daret quasi stipendium: Caeterum, vt
vellet, manibus atque armis suis vteretur. For Military Feuds had therein only
their being, that the Tenants should be ready for defense of their Lords with
Martial accoultrements. When by the French Charlemagne the Lumbardian Kingdom
ended, these Feuds still remained, and under him they were usually given for
life, with Dignities annexed. And, when in A. DCCCXL
Otho the Great, the German Empire was, he made the Dignities Hereditarie in
Feudall right, as before is expressed. The forms of the Fealty and such like of
these times are extant, and inserted in Sigonius his Story de Regno Italiae.
Of them in general terms thus the Feudall customs: Antiquissimo tempore sic er
at in dominorum potestate connexum, vt quando vellent possent auferre rem in
feudum a se datum. Postea vero eo ventum est, vt per annum tantum firmitatem
haberent. Deinde statutum est vt vsque ad vitam fidelis produceretur. Sed cum
hoc iure successionis ad filios non pertineret, sic progressum est vt ad Filias
deueniret. Those laws and customs belonging to them were composd as they now
are, under Frederique Barbarossa about M. C. L. by Gerard Neger and Obert de
Orto, two Consuls of Millan. Which, it seems, was the rather done, because
about that time the Volumes of the Roman (i. what we call the Civil laws)
began to be newly in request, and, as it were, awakt out of that neglect,
wherein they had near D C. years slept, as of no reckoning among the Lombards,
and were now publicly read and professed in Bologna by Irnerius the first
public professor of them after Iustinian's time. Its likely that the Lombards
thought it presently requisite to put their Feudall customs into Writing and
form, and under Titles, as well as the Romans had don their ancient Laws. What
was then performed by the two Millanois, has since been betterd, and for
public use enlarged by that most learned Lawier Cuiacius, and is as a part of
the Civil law, for Feuds. Upon that innovation of Otho 1. in giving
patrimoniall and Feudall Honors, with prerogatives in the committed
Territories, Noua Nobilitatis ratio (says Sigonius) in Italiam est inducta, vt
ij demum soli Nobiles iudicarentur qui ipsi aut eorum maiores his atque
eiusmodi alijs honestati priuilegijs essent. nam hanc consuetudinem successores
eius non omiserunt, sed etiam multis partibus adauxerunt. He collected it
perhaps out of this passage in the Feudalls: Qui ab antiquis temporibus
beneficium non tenent, licet nouiter a Capitancis seu a Valuasoribus
acquisierint plebeij nihilominus sunt. Which some interpret, as if no other
Nobility had been but what had proceeded from the possessing an ancient Feud
by gift or inuestiture from the Emperor or some Valuasor. But I rather follow
the conceit of learned Hotoman, which collects thence only that a new purchase
of some Noble Feud, without ancient inuestiture, or many years continuance of
possession, ennobleth not. And doubtless other Nobility among them was, as
Gentry and Knighthood. But, indeed, none Feudall, except such as had its root
in some of those Titles bestowd. The common opinion, of the Original of Feuds,
thus. But under favor, they rather, to this purpose of Nobi^itie, should be
deriud out of France. For although it be true that among the Lombards they
were, and anciently, yet plainly, before the French Empire, in France they
were, and that hereditarie, if their ancient laws deceive not. For, what else
was their Terra Salica but as a Knights Fee, or land held by Knights service?
It was so adjudged in the Parliament at Bordeaux, as in the first Chapter is
rememberd. And those Salique laws are supposd much ancienter then the
Lombardian Kingdom in Italy. Under the Lombards also, such Dignities as they
had were, by Feudall right, given in inheritance, as in story is affirmd of K.
Autharis, that invested his Duces or Governors of Provinces, of their
Territories to them and their Heirs Masles, which was not imitated by the
French Charlemagne or his successors, nor in use till the beginning of the
German Empire. How then is it likely that the imitation of the Lombards Feudall
laws was cause of Feuds in other places? Refer them chiefly to the Salians or
French, and you shall come nearer Truth. The Salians from Pharamunds time, and
doubtless before had them; in France they continued: Charlemagne according to
the custom of his own patrimoniall State, brought them into Italy, where,
although they were before him, yet that continuance they then had is thus to be
referd to Charlemagne, that is, the giving of them for life with those
Dignities before spoken of, and the gift of them in inheritance, as they were
merely Fees Military: But the inheritance of them being annexed to Honorarie
Titles, may well be allowd to Otho's time, which yet could not be if their
Original and continuance were to be drawn through the Lumbards, by reason of
that example of Autharis. How much this differs from common opinion, men that
hauc read do know; and if they have well read, will, I conjecture, be of my
mind. Out of the Empire, by imitation, it seems, or by general consent of
Nations, most part of Europe took their forms of Feudall possessions: but by
imitation, doubtless, those Dignities of Feudall right. The identitie of names
in the Empire and other Kingdoms iustifies it. Neither was the Eastern Empire
of later times without Military Feuds. To this day remains a Constitution of
Harmenopul. (...). 1. tit. (...).
Constantin Porphyrogennetus, against alienation of them. They called them
(...) i. Militania. (...) (are the words of the law) (...) i. that it be not
lawful for Soldiers (Milites) to alien those possessions, by which Knights
service (so in our law you may interpret it) is maintaind. The Tenants of Feuds
in the VVestern Empire, and now every where in Europ, are known by the name of
Fideles, Homines, Uassi, Vassalli, and the like. The reason of all their names
except Vassi and Vassalli is manifest. Some derive them from Bas, which in
French and other languages of note, expresses an inferior. But the word is so
inferior to many which are denoted by Vassi or Uassalli, that I cannot be of
their mind. Even a King, if he hold a Dukedom of another King, is rightly
called his Vassal, or Vassus. Which (to leave frivolous conjecture) may be
deduced from the old Gaulish word Gues, Guas or Gais for a Valiant or Military
man, then by which name, what might one, that held his lands under a tenure to
be so, more fitly be titled? And, that those words were of such signification
among the Gauls (the ancient people of France before the French, and extended
far larger in name then all France) may be noted out of that of In Aeneid. 8.
Seruius upon Uirgils -- duo quisque Alpina coruscant
Gaesa manu -- --
Gaesa (says he) Hastas viriles. Nam etiam Fortes Galli Gaesos vocant. Now,
the community of G, Gu, and V for W in words made of Latin Idiom out of Dutch,
Gaulish or other language, is not unknown to any. Who sees it not in the
familiar use of the names, of Walter, Gualther, William, Guilielm, Ward,
Guardia, Uasto, Guasto, and the like? so our What is to the Scots Quhat, which
or whilke, quhilke: and how common G. and Q were in pronunciation, and among
the Latins, Lips. de Rect. pronunc. Ling. Lat. cap. 13.
the learned know. And the Latins having no such letter as W (in that sort as
the Gauls vsd it) were compelld to express such words as they began with W, by
Gu, as some do now by Qu. yet the omission of the u in Gaesa might not amiss
be, when they had in using it, pronounced G, as in Gu, or as g in Lego. Thus
might Gaisi, or Gaeisi easily be made of Guass or Wass, and then Uass, and
Vassi, in our now vsd sense, which is well confirmed out of that which most
^earn'd Clarenceulx has observed, upon Seruius his word Gaesi, in fitting to
it as a synonomie the British Guassdewr, signifying to them also a Ualiant or
stout man, and from that (for the identitie of Gaulish and British is no news
among Students of Antiquity) if one should derive, as little liberty in
pronunciation will permit, the word Vauasor, it were far more tolerable then
infinite of etymologies too daringly stood upon. A learned P. Pith. de les
Comtes de Champ. and Brie. lib. 1.
man likes well of this from Gaesi, and goes further, supposing that in their
God Hesus or Esus, (remembered by Lucan and Lactantius) and in the Ambacti
(mentioned in Antiquitus In Comitatu Engelberti Teutonice est In Engelbrechtes
Ambachte. Freher Orig. Palatin. 1. cap. 5.
Caesar, and Festus,) the name of Gaisus or Gaesus lies hid. But there I more
honor, then follow him. To talk here of a community twixt the Turks Bassas
and Vassi (as some very learned dare do) were but aduenturing upon much more
ridiculous deriuation. But when they tell us that Vassallus is a diminutiue of
Vassus, it may be beleft, although if Goropius his deduction of Salique from
Sal, which he makes the same with Sadle, be tolerable (as doubtless in his
phanatique doctrine, when the origination is indeed to be fecht from Dutch,
his conjectures are often commendable.) why might not Vassal be as if you
should say, Vir Equestris, or such like, or if Sale be Hall, and Hall the
proper name of the Lords Court (especially in our English Feuds) where we call
a Court Baron often Halimote, why might not Vassal be as Vir strenuus Curti
Domini inseruiens. But without surer ground I love to abstain from assertion.
Thus much for the Origination of Feuds, as they are derived out of the Empire,
or have been in use in these Western parts. But of their first being at all, a
more ancient root is found, and that under the Romans. It Is reported that twixt
Aeneas and Latinus, one head of the league Dionys. Halicarnas. Antiq. Romans
(...).
was that the Trojans should be always ready to assist him in his wars
against the Rutili. And in the Augustam Lamprid. vita Seueri, and V. C. tit. de
locato and Conduct. l. licet. 35.
story, it is delivered of Alexander Seuerus (his Empire began in CCXX. after
Christ) that sola, quae de hostibus capta sunt Limitaneis Ducibus and militibus
donauit, ita vt eorum ita essent si haeredes illorum militarent, nec vnquam ad
priuatos pertinerent: (priuatus is here opposed against Miles) dicens attentius
eos militaturos si etiam sua Rura defenderent. Addidit sane his and animalia
and seruos; vt possent colere quod acceperant: ne per inopiam hominum vel per
senectutem possidentium desererentur rura vicina Barbariae (he means the
Frontiers of the Empire) quod turpissimum esse ducebat, and somewhat like did
the Emperor Probus, in giving certain Fl. Vopiscus in Probo.
Territories in Isauria, to his old soldiers, addens, vt eorum filij ab anno
decimo octauo mares duntaxat ad militiam mitterentur. Here were a kind of
Feudall possessions, but all their old volumes of the Civil law have nothing
that touches Feuds, either in name or substance, as they truly are. The nearest
like them is their Emphyteusis and ius v. Mynsinger. ad Instit. tit. de de
locat. and conduct.. Adeo.
Emphyteuticarium, agreeing almost with our Fee Farm or socage tenure. Neither
of both which, according to the Emperialls, are to be called Feuds, although
they, as well as Military possessions, in our law, are so usually named. Some
others, I know, suppose Military Feuds. even as ancient as Roman Colonies, but
they deceive their Readers. The tenants of the Empire, as well mediat as
immediate, were all bound to be attendant in a place called Roncaliae upon Po,
not far from Piacenza, when the Emperor went to be crowned, and he that made
default forfeited his Fief. An old Otho Frisiagens. de gest. Frederic. lib. 2.
cap. 12.
author thus delivers it: Est consuetudinis Regum Francorum quae and
Teutonicorum vt quotiescunque ad sumendam Romani imperij Coronam, militem ad
transalpizandum coegerint, in praedicto Campo (Roncalijs) mansionem faciant.
Ibi ligno in altum porrecto scutum suspenditur, vniuersorumque equitum agmen
Feuda habentium, ad excubias proxima nocte Principi Faciendas, per Curiae
praeconem exposcitur: quod sectantes qui in eius Comitatu fuerunt, singuli
singulos beneficiatos suos per praecones exposcunt. At sequenti die quicunque
nocturnis vigilijs defuisse deprensus fuerat, denuo ad praesentiam Regis,
aliorumque principum vel virorum illustrium euocatur, sicque omnes omnium
Beneficiati, qui sine bona voluntate Dominorum suorum Domi remanserunt, in
Feudis condemnantur. And not only Lay, but Ecclesiastical Fiefs were subject
to this Military Tenure, and Forfeiture. In England, before the Normans,
plainly were military Fiefs, although not in like manner as since. That Canut.
leg. cap. 69. and vide leg. Confess. cap. 21.
law of K. Knout for the certainty of Heriots paid only in Martial Furniture,
proves it; and that their Earls and Thanes were bound to a kind of Knights
service. And, in those times so were, it seems, all the lands of the Kingdom
(except some privileged with greatest immunities) if, at least, held of the
King or Crown, mediatly or immediately. For although there be a Ingulphus, and
Malmesburiens.
Charter extant of K. Ethelulph, whereby Ecclesiastique freedom is granted
generally, and that the Church should be free from all secular service, and
sine Expeditione, and Pontis extructione, and Arcis Munitione (which yet may be
understood as for an exception) yet diverse Charters are anciently given as
great and religious favors by Saxon Kings, which usually reserve those three;
repairing of Bridges, Tax for War, and Castle guard, or repairing them: as of
what no land should or could be discharged. They are called by a special name
Trinoda Necessitas in a Patent Chart. Archiepisc. Cant. A. Chr. DCLXXX
by K. Cedwalla to Wilfrid first Bishop of Selesey, giving him Paganham (now
Pagham) in Sussex, and under the Diocese of Chicester, whither, from Selesey,
the Sea was translated. Whereupon it was well noted, when Pope 28. Hen. 3.
Matthew Paris. Consulas licet and hinc interpreteris Responsum Kniueti in 44. Ed.
3. fol. 25. a.
Celestin IV. endeavoring his grievous exactions from Church-liuings in this
State under Henry III. a consultation was about to what duties Churchmen, by
reason of their possessions, were subject, that the old Kings of England were
not so lauishly indulgent in their Grants to Churchmen, quin tria sibi semper
reseruarent propter Publicam Regni vtilitatem, videlicet Expeditionem Pontis
and Arcis reparationes vel refectiones vt per ea resisterent Hostium
incursibus. And Ethelbald K. of Mercland: Concedo vt omnia monasteria and
Ecclesiae Regni mei a Publicis vectigalibus, Operibus and Oneribus absoluantur,
nisi instructionibus Arcium vel Pontium, quae nunquam vlli possunt relaxari.
But these were not so much by reason of Tenure, as general subjection to
occasions of State, and accidental necessity, and supply of wants to common
good. Those kind of Military Fiefs or Fees as we now have, were not till the
Normans; with whom the custom of Wardships in Chivalry (they began not under
Hen. III. as most ignorantly Ranulph Higden the Monk of Chester, and Polydore
tells you) came into England. But before that, Wards were in Scotland, if their
Stories and laws of Malcolm II. deceive not. When he distributed the Kingdom
into Tenancies, then Omnes Barons (says his laws) concesserunt sibi Wardam
and Releuium, de haerede cuiuscunque Baronis defuncti, ad sustentationem Domini
Regis; although Buchanan rather guesses, that Scotland had this custom by
imitation of the English or Normans. But in this Malcolm's time, Wardships were
not at all in England. Of the original and use of Military Feuds thus much.
With the Roturier or base tenures, this place has not to do. Only a word or
two of the names of Feudum and Alodium. The deriuations of both are diverse. For
Feudum; I am somewhat confident that its root is in Fides, howeuer by different
writing thence varied: and from it is our word Field, which was anciently Feud
and Feuld, as in the names of Rotherfeud and Losfeuld (for Rotherfeild and
Losfeild) occurring with diverse like in old Rolls, is apparent. The Vassals are
styled Fideles in Latin, and Drudi i. True from the same word in Teutonique.
From what others herein multiply but rouing far from the mark, I purposely
abstain and from the conjecture of some, because they are too ridiculous.
Alodes or Alodium signified anciently what in the more strict sense Enheritance
does in our law, that is, lands descended from the ancestor; and Alodes and
Comparatum are Vide quae adnotanit H. Bignon. ad Marculph. Formul. lib. 1. cap.
12.
opposed often, as Purchase and Enheritance. Now every Feud or Fief paid a
Releif or Heriot upon death of the tenant, and the Heir or successor came in
always (as at this day) in some fashion of a new Purchase. But where no tenure
was, there the enheritance descended freely to the Heir, who claimd it always
merely from his ancestor. Out of this difference, I imagine, the names of Feudum
and Alodium were translated to make that distinction which is usually twixt
them: whence Alodium now abusiuely denotes chiefly lands possessed without
service or subjection, except only acknowledgment of superiority in the Giver.
This may hold better then that from Leudes, or any which I have seen. An
example of Alodes or Alodium the great Lawier Hotoman specially takes out of an
old Charter made to one Paulan, by our King Athelstan, which is Hector Boeth.
lib. 16.
rememberd to have bin found amongst the spoils of War in Westmerland, by
the Scots, under their Robert II. As the words were, I insert it:

I King Athelstan
Gives to Paulan,
Oddan and Roddan
Als guide and as fair
Als ever thai mine wair:
And tharto Witness Maulde my wife.
The simplicity of that age is even pictured in it. An age when misnomers,
misrecitals, being deceiud, and such like did not make void the Kings Patent.
Nor does it in substance differ from the Conquerors gift of the Palatinat of
Chester, whereof before. And both in this of Athelstan, that of the Apud
Camden. in Essexia.
Hundred of Dancing and Chelmer, by the Confessor to Randolph Peperking, and
others extant of about the Conquest, show the affectation that age had to
Riming in Charters. Whereas now Prose without difficulty makes not one
sufficient. This of Feuds belongs more specially to the Dignities already
spoken of, but also has its use in the understanding of the nature of our
ancient Knights (in regard of the tenure of their Fees) to whom we make the
next passage.

Knights. Time of taking the Virilis Toga. Custom of the Gauls in their
Childrens taking arms. Of the Germans. Adoption per arma. The Custom of the
Longobards for the Kings son sitting at Table with his father. Knighting; by
Girding with a Sword. Cingulum Militiae. Amittere Cingulum. Some not coming in
sight of the Emperor, but Cincti. Minerua Zosteria. Balteus. Knighting by a
blow given on the ear, anciently in the Empire. First Mention of a knight made
in England. The ancient and holy ceremonies in Knighting. The Marshall's fee
anciently at a Knighting. Kings Knighted by their Subjects. Subjects Knighted
by Subjects, although not Lieutenants. Eques Auratus. One Prince may Knight in
another's Territory. Infanciones. Freedom to a Villain by Knighthood.
Knighting by Los Ricos hombres in Spain. A Knights Fief, or Fee. Who may be
compeld to take the Order. Census Equestris. Miles sine Terra. Inquisition of
such as held Knights Fees, and yet were not of the Order. A Knight's Furniture
by our law anciently not subject to an Execution. The Arms of a Knight
descending to the Heir. Ius Sigilli, in a Knight. Gold Rings, and ius Aureorum
Annulorum in Rome. Their Equestris Ordo. Ancient fashion of Manumission in
England. Seals when first in England. The general use of them in most
Nations. The Jewish instruments of Contracts. Their (...) and the Starra in the
old Rolls. Trial by a Jury of Jews and Christians, and their oaths.
Difference of Paruum Sigillum, and Magnum Sigillum. Aid a fair Fitz Cheualer,
de Rancome, and de Marriage. Of what lands and when the first and third kinds
are to be levied. The name of Knight in most languages from a Horse. What it
is, and whence in our and the German use. Cnihtes. Rodknights. Miles and
Chiualer, one. Several Notions of Miles; opposed against Sokmans, Burgesses,
Villains, Tenants in Ancien demesne, and Seruientes. Liberi Homines. Solidarij.
Knights Bachelors. Some conjectures whence that name. (...), and Buccellatum.
The fashion of Degrading a Knight. The example of Sir Andrew Harkley. Of Sir.
Ralph Gray. Loss of the hand to a base fellow striking a Knight.

CHAP. IX.
HOweuer diverse Orders of Knighthood being, there are among them which take
precedence of KNIGHTS of the Spur, or those which generally are known by the
name of Knights, yet by institution and use of all States, They are the
ancientest, and shall here go first; because also the other Orders are but late
attributs, according to the several inventions of particular Princes. As in
Rome, Children until XIV. years of age (for so will the time be, although some
places of good autors misconceiud has persuaded some otherwise) using their
Toga praetexta, the ensign of Infancy, did then take VirilisToga, or
habiliment of manhood, according to the increasing hopes of their worth, so in
the Northern parts of Europe, about that age, the sons of Princes, and others
of Noble Rank, vsd to receive Arms from a superior, as a token of what they
would be, that is, Martial Knights in service for their Country, whereto
though all were bound, yet they specially by reason of those ennobling
ornaments. Of the old Gauls its in a manner, affirmd by De bello Gallico lib.
5. and 6.
Caesar, speaking of Induciomarus a Gaulish Prince about the Rhine. Armatum
Concilium (says he) Armati (ita mos gentis erat) in Concilium venerunt. De
Gallis Liuius. Dec. 3. lib. 1.
indicit. Hoc, more Gallorum, est initium Belli, quo, lege cummuni, Puberes
armati conuenire coguntur. And, of the Gauls in general: In reliquis vitae
institutis hoc fere ab reliquis differunt, quod suos liberos, nisi cum
adoluerint, vt munus Militiae sustinere possint, palam ad se adire non
patiantur; filiumque in Puerili aetate, in publico, in conspectu patris
assistere turpe ducunt. Which, although he make as proper to the Caules, yet
that large Nation of the old Germans, even bred out of, and continuing in their
Being through war, had almost the like custom. All they did, was while they
were accoultred with Arms; either Private or Public. Neither yet did any use
or bear them, until he was honored with a Spear and Target in their State
assemblies. Tacitus, of them, affirms it. Nihil, says he, neque publicae neque
priuatae rei nisi armati agunt. Sed arma sumere non ante cuiquam moris, quam
Ciuitas Haec fere verbatum habet 10. Auentinus Boior. Annal. 6. vbi Ludouicus
Dux. Boiorum arma suscipit militaria dono Frederici Imperatoris.
suffecturum probauerit. Tum in ipso Concilio vel Principum aliquis, vel Pater,
vel Propinquus, Scuto frameaque Iuuenem ornant. Haec apud illos Togae, hic
primus Iuuentae honos: ante hoc domus pars videntur, mox Reipublicae. For that
of their going always armed; it differs not from the more ancient use of the
Graecians, who Thucydid. lib. (...). and Aristot. Politic. (...). cap. 5.
before learning mollified them, and brought their Rudeness to a Civility,
continually (...) i. went armed, or ferrum gestabant. This form of taking Arms
by young men from Public authority, was in those days a ki^d of Knighting,
whence the fashion since, and now vsd, had questionles it is origination. And
among other of the Northern Nations, there was an Adoption by giving of Arms,
wherein the Adopted had approbation of his quality by the judgment of some
Prince, which agreed well with Knighting. So you may say that the King of the
Heruli was Knighted by Theodorique K. of the Ostrogoths or East Goths in Italy.
Per arma (says his Cassiodor. Var. 4. Epist. 2.
Letters of it, to him) fieri posse Filium, grande inter gentes constat esse
praeconium. Quia non est dignus adoptari, nisi qui fortissimus meretur agnosci.
In sobole frequenter fallimur. Ignaui autem esse nesciunt, quos iudicia
pepererunt. Hi (...)gratiam non de Natura sed de solis meritis habent. -- Et
ideo, More Gentium and Condition virili, Filium te presenti Munere procreamus:
vt competenter per Arma nascaris, qui Bellicosus esse dignosceris. Damus quidem
Tibi Equos, Enses, Clypeos, and reliqua instrumenta Bellorum: sed, quae sunt
omnimodis fortiora, largimur tibi nostra iudicia. Summus enim inter Gentes esse
crederis, qui Theodorici sententia comprobaris. This was their Adoptio per
Arma, which Justinian also vsd in Honoring of Idem Variar. 8. Epist. 1. and 9.
de Gesimundo.
Eutharique K. Athalarique's Father. Neither was, by this kind of adoption, any
possibility of succession or kindred gotten, but only this Military honor.
Which is confirmd out of that of Cabades the Persian King, who sent to the
Emperor Procopius de Bell. Persic. (...).
Justin, desiring him to adopt his son Cosroes. But the Emperor, being
persuaded by one of his Counselors, Proclus, would not do it in the form of
Roman adoptions, whence a kind of agnation grew, and hereditarie right, but
sentro the Persian after mature deliberation taken, that he would adopt
Cosroes, after the fashion of the Barbarous, by Arms; meaning doubtless this
custom here spoken; that so he might satisfy the words of the request, yet
prevent the succession of the Persian in the Empire, which was indeed what
Cabades mainly aimd at, and therefore took the answer as jest put upon him. To
that kind per Arma, respect must be had when you read the story of Audoin K.
of the Longobards, and his son Alboin: where after a glorious victory had by
the conduct of Alboin against the Gepidae, the Longobards desired Audoin that
he would be pleased that his son Alboin, eius conuiua fieret, i. might usually
sit at Table with him. But the King answered, that he could not permit that,
left he should infringe their National custom. Because the Kings son was not
to dine, or sit at Table with his father until he had taken arms at the hands
of some foreign Prince. Audoin respondit (says the Paul. Warnfred. de gest.
Langob. 1. cap. 23. and 24.
Story) se hoc facere minime potuisse, ne Ritum gentis infringeret. Scitis
enim, inquit, non esse apud nos consuetudinem, vt Regis cum patre Filius
prandeat (not procedat, as Pithou, it seems, did read) nisi prius a Rege gentis
exterae arma suscipiat. Hereupon, Alboin taking with him X L. young Gentlemen of
his Country, went to Turisend K. of the Gepidae (whose son Turismod he had
slain in that last victory) and showed him the cause of his coming. Turisend
nobly received him; placed him at Table with him, where Turismod was wont to
sit, and at length (notwithstanding the barbarous conspiracies of some of the
Gepidae, grieved still with their yet fresh overthrow) gave him Turismod's
arms, and sent him to Audoin, with whom, thenceforth he was as a Table guest.
Sumensque Turisendus arma Turismodi Filij sui ea Alboin tradidit, eumque cum
pace incolumen ad Patris regnum remisit. Reuersus ad Patrem Alboin, eiusdem
Conuiua hinc effectus est. These Testimonies compared prove that in the
Martial Nations of Gauls, Germans, and some neighboring States, the Honor of
taking arms (which in our present idiom may be called Knighting) was in their
Aristocracies given to all deserving it by age and worth, in their Public
Assemblies, as expressly that of Tacitus shows: and in their Monarchies most
likely it is, that the same kind of judgment and approbation of Valor and
Nobility which a foreign Prince used in that honorarie adoption to the son
of his neighbor Prince, or his neighbor Prince self, was to other subjects
vsd by the Princes themselves; thinking, and not without good reason, that it
was more honorable for their sons to take arms of some other, left affection
might seem to prevent judgment, when the father gave them. And at length both
Princes and subjects receiud the Order oftimes of subjects, as in examples anon
plentifully appears. Out of the customs of these ancient and Northern Nations
came it, that afterward Knighthood was by girting with a sword; and the
difference twixt making the Princes son, and other his subjects Knights, as
to this rememberd purpose, grew out of use. Frederique Barbarossa in M. C.
LXXII. held a great feast at Mentz, and that, vt filium suum (are the words of
an Arnold. Lubecens. hist Slauor. 3. cap. 9. v. Radeuic. de gest. Frederic. 1.
cap. 6. alios innumeros, aeui medij.
Ancient) Henricum Regem militem declararet and Gladium Militiaesuper femur
eius potentissimum accingeret. So in France, England, elsewhere, the Kings made
their sons Knights (as at this day) although sometimes they requested it,
keeping the steps of that Longobardian Custom, of a neighbor Prince; as
examples in their place shall show. And for that of Girding, I will not with
the vulgar derive it so much from Rome, as from a general consent, or rather
conueniencie among all people. It Is true indeed that in the Roman State the
Cingulum militiae was the special note of that honor, and was the same with
their auratus and constellatus Balteus i. a Belt decked with gold and stones,
which yet was not any denoting ornament of their Equites, but of all those who
had undergone their solemn oath of warfare, and were known (...). Suidas.
by the name of Milites or Militantes. And these when they sat in Court
Banquets, or with the Emperor, kept on their Girdles always, and so their
swords: especially after that of Salonin (son to Gallien), who on a time,
being a boy, slily stole away those rich Bel^s or Girdles which their soldiers
(Militantes) had laid off in the Court, when they sat to the Table, whereupon
at the next feast they all sat Girded, and being demanded why they put not off
their Belts, they answered Salonino deferimus, as if the fault were Salonin's,
lest he should steal them again. Atque hinc tractus mos (says my Trebel.
Pollio in Gallienis.
Author) vt deinceps cum Imperatore cincti discumberent. Hence in Law and Story
often occurres, (...), (...). 123. cap. 28. and (...) exautorare Herodiano, in
Iuliano. V. Codin. (...). pa. 100.
i. amittere cingulum militiae, for, to be disabled to have place or rank in
the field. And Cingulum Militiae, for the honor of a soldier, as also (...),
i. qui Cingulum deposuerunt, are under Synod. Nicena, Can. 1^.
Constantine the Great, such as had, for Conscience, left their Military Order,
in regard of the incompatibilitie of the then vsd superstitions in the Camp,
and Christianity. But more late times in the Empire, yet very ancient, have by
their Cingulum, not only verbally, but really expressed other committed or
created Dignities, as well as their common honor Military. Qui praesentes in
Comitatu, illustris Dignitatis Cingulum meruerint, aut quibus absentibus
Cingulum illustris mittitur Dignitatis, and such like, are remembered in a C.
tit. vt Dignitat. Ordo seru. l. 2.
Constitution of Theodosius and Valentinian; and King Theodorique to Count
Colosseus Cassiodor. Variar. 3. epist. 23.
gives the government of part of Pannonia, in these words: Proinde prosperis
initiatus auspicijs ad Sirmiensem Pannoniam, quondam sedem Gallorum
proficiscere, Illustris Cinguli Dignitate praecinctus, and the Comitiua primi
Ordinis Vacantis, is Idem. Var. 6. Formul. 12.
called Otiosi Cinguli honor praecincta Dignitas; and, qui, sine Cingulo,
codicillos tantum honorariae Dignitatis adepti sunt, are in that constitution
last mentioned. Diverse testimonies like will offer themselves, to any reading
the Codes. And, upon Salonin's stealing the Belts, the most learned Casaubon
observes that it respects the old custom of Magistrates, and others like
(understand such as with their Office or Dignities had ius gladij, or Military
rank) which never came in sight of their Prince, but (Cincti) Girded, and with
other ensigns of their Title. He notes it out of Homil. in 1. ad Corinthios 26.
Chrysostom: (...) (says the holy Father) (...), that no Magistrate or
Governor should presume to appear before the Emperor without his Belt and
Military Coat. In which sense an Bonifacius Cause. 11. quaest. 1. c. 8. Nullus.
old Popes Canon prohibiting that no Bishop should come before any Civil or
Military Judge, adds, Magistratus ne qui hoc i^b^re ausus fuerit, amissionis
Cinguli condemnatione plectetur. And in stories of other Nations, nothing is
more certain then the use and talking of being Girded (including the sword) for
well armed. In Thebes were two Statues of Minerua Zosteria by Amphitryo's; That
Title was given to Minerua there, as the Greeks reported, because in that place
Amphitryo took arms in his expedition against the Euboeans. For Zosteria comes
from (...) i. accingi, which the Pausanias. (...) Baeotic.
ancients vsd for (...), i. armis se induere, whereupon in the description of
Agamemnon, Homer Iliad. (...).
makes him like love in his visage, Neptune in his breast, but (...) --
i. like Mars in his Girdle, belt, or indeed, as it interprets, armor. So
(...), as if you said, Cingula Bellonae, is Callimach. hymn. ad Apollinem. v.
and 1. Macab. cap. 3. com. 58. (...).
very anciently for Men of War. And the Belt is thus by Isidore describd:
Balthus, Cingulum militare est dictus propter quod ex eo signa dependent, ad
demonstrandam Legionis Militaris summam, id est, Sex milium sexcentorum, ex quo
numero and ipsi consistunt. Vnde and Baltheus dicitur non tantum quo cingitur
sed etiam a quo arma dependent. As then, by consent of Romans, Grecians, and
other Nations the Belt, or being girded with a Sword, was both the main part
of Martial acoul^rement, and under it the whole was comprehended, so among
our Northerns (I mean from Italy Northward) it specially succeeded into the
room of that solemn taking Arms for a Knights outward ensign of Nobility: the
creating of a Knight in that kind, being but as an honoring his worth or hopes
with Princely allowance for the field, as Julian to Leontius Julian. in
Epistolis.
granted, (...) i vsum armorum. And so great was the respect had to Soldiers,
and such as were militiae cingulo honestati, in those ancient times (more
particulars of privileges and prerogatives you have in the titles De
Testamento Militari, and such like in the Imperial laws) that heretofore our
Knighting had in it the same, or one proportionat to the same, as its chief
ceremony, in which the honor by retaining, or dishonor by losing, consisted.
Where observe also, that as the Romans had their Cingulum dignitatis, and
Cingulum militare, and Otiosum Cingulum, so have some of our parts had their
Gladius Comitatus (whereof before) and Ducatus and such like, and in giving of
those Titles, the Cinctura gladij, which must not, as referd to that ancient
use of making Knights per Cincturam, be supposd to be both a Knighting and a
Creation of the other Dignities. But as in these confined usually to some
Province (so the old Comitiua was to special place in Court) the vti Imperium,
gladio solenniter dato, fuerit translatum docebit before P. Faber Semestrium
1. cap. 3.
ius gladij for government was, at lest partly, transferd, so in the girding
with a sword for Knighthood, the vsus Gladij, if I may so say, for service in
War; which difference is seriously to be thought on, and conferd with those
Cincturae in the Creations of Dukes, Earls, Marquesses and the like before
related. In the stories of about M. of our Savior, mention is very frequent of
such as were by Princes accincti gladio, for Knighted. But before that, in the
Empire was another ceremony with the Girding that was, it seems, a blow on the
ear given by the Prince to him whom he so honored. In the Reports of Friseland
its deliuerd that Charles le magne being very indulgent and liberal of his
bounty to the States there, granted by Constitution that their Governor might
make Knights by girding of them with a sword, and giving them a blow on the
ear, as the custom was. Eis gladium circumcingat are the words of the Dat.
Romae A. Chr. 8^2. Ex Mennenio.
Monument, and dato eisdem, sicut consuetudinis est, manu Colapho, sic Milites
faciat, eisdemque firmiter iniungendo praecipiat, vt deinceps more Militum
sacri Imperij, aut Regni Franciae, armati incedant. -- Qui Frisones signum suae
militiae a dicta Potestate (their Governor) recipere debent, in quo Corona
Imperialis in signum suae libertatis a nobis concessae debeat esse depicta.
Another like example is at large describd in Francis Mennens, by whom is written
that in the Archiu. Louaniens. Ann. 1260. and vide Lips. Louan. lib. 3.
Records of Louain a Constitution is, that none should be Equestri Balteo
cinctus, or knighted, until he had gone in three several voyages of Wars.
And note once by the way, that in the Empire as well as elsewhere, Miles was in
the more barbarous times both a Knight and any common Soldier, and one also
that held his Fief by Knights service, as out of the Feudalls you are
instructed. At this day in the Empire the solemnity of Creation consists (as
with us) chiefly in touching the deserving with a Sword, or laying it on him.
So, I think, in most places of Europe; although in Charles V. his victory
against Frederique Duke of Saxony, a great company of Gentlemen of good merit
in the late service were knighted by the Emperors acclamation of Sean todos
Caualieros, i. be they all Knights. But of them some obseruable particulars will
best appear, if we speak of them as they have been in other States created.
The ancientest testimony of any made in England is under Alfred that honored
his nephew Athelstan (afterward King) with this Dignity. William of Malmesbury
thus expresses it: Militem fecit, donatum Chlamyde coccinea, gemmato Baltheo,
ense Saxonico cum vagina aurea. But in succeeding times of the Anglo-Saxons,
more religion was vs^ in taking this Order. Neither was it done without a
solemn confession of sins, receiving the Sword from the Altar at the hands
of some Churchman, and such like, which also has Vide, si placit. Francisc.
Mennen. Symb. and Orig. Equest.
been in the Empire and France. An old Monk speaking Lambert. Schaffnaburg. in
Chronico.
of the Emperor Henry III. and the Archbishop of Breme, says that Goslariae
per concessionem Archiepiscopi primum se Rex arma bellica succinxit. And
Anglorum erat consuetudo (writes one that liud at the Ingulphus.
Norman Conquest) quod, qui Militiae legitime consecrandus esset, vespere
praecedente diem suae Consecrationis, ad Episcopum, vel Abbatem, vel Monachum,
vel Sacerdotem aliquem c^ntritus and compunctus de omnibus suis peccatis
confessionem faceret, and absolutus orationibus and Deuotionibus and
afflictionibus deditus in Ecclesia pernoctaret: in Crastino quoque Missam
auditurus, Gladium super altar offerret, and post Euangelium Sacerdos
benedictum gladium collo Militis cum Benedictione imponeret, and communicatus
ad eandem Missam sacris Christi Misterijs denuo miles legitimus permaneret.
And, according to this form was that most Noble Heward, Knighted by his uncle
Brand Abbot of Bury about the Norman invasion. But this kind the Normans much
dislikt. Hanc (says Ingulph) cousecrandi Militis consuetudinem Normanni
abominantes, non Militem legitimum talem tenebant, sed socordem Equitem and
Quiritem degenerem deputabant. Which makes me confidently refer that of Ne
Abbates faciant Milites, constituted in III. Synod. Westmonast. A. 1102.
Malmesb. de gest. Pontific. 1.
Hen. I to this custom. The Normans not liking it, in a Provincial Synod under
Anselm Archbishop of Canterbury, and Gerard of York then thus prohibited it,
and perhaps named only Abbots, because it seems, of inferior Churchmen none or
few would or did receive it, and the Bishops were by likelihood not willing to
take the power from themselves. But howeuer that was took from Churchmen, yet
the solemnitie's it seems, of taking the Sword from the Altar, and such like in
the Church, remaind afterward. For, John of Sarisburie speaking of an implied
oath that all Knights of his time took, as for defense of the Church, Iam
inoluit (says Policratc. lib. 6. cap. 10. and 13. and consulas morem illum a
Paulo 11. institutum apud Marcell. Corcyrens. lib. 1. sect. 7. and iuramentum
c^eandi Equitis apud Olaum Magnum Septent. Nation. 14. cap. 7.
he) consuetudo solennis, vt ea die qua quisque Militari Cingulo decoratur,
Ecclesiam solenniter adeat, Gladioque super Altari posito and oblato, quasi
celeberi professione facta seipsum obsequio altaris deuouerat, and Gladij id
est Officij sui ingem Deo sponderat famulatum: Neque necesse est vt hoc
profiteatur verbo, cum legitima professio Milites facto eius videatur inserta.
This Oath was, it seems, somewhat proportionat with that Militiae sacramentum
taken solemnly by the Roman Armies; without which, and at every new going a
Warfare a renewing of it, none might (iure Cicero de Offic. 1. de Pompilio and
Catonis filio. videsis Veget. lib. 2. cap. 5. Seruium ad Aeneidos 8. Polybium
lib. 6. alios.
pugnare cum hostibus) lawfully fight with the enemy. But these religious
solemnities wore away in ancient time. It grew afterward fashionable for one
King to send his son to another to take the Order, vt acciperent Arma
Militaria or Virilia, as the Monks usually express it. Which well agrees with
that of the Longobards before mentioned. Examples of that kind both here, in
Scotland, elsewhere are enough frequent. So one King of another, as in that of
Alexander III. of Scotland. He married the Lady Margaret daughter to to our
Henry III. The Nuptials being celebrated in Christmas at York, the King of
England Knighted his Royal son in law with twenty more. Where the Earl
Marshall of England, as an ancient right of his Place, requird the King of
Scotland's Horse and Furniture for his fee, which, although in those times it
seems, Statut. West. 2 cap. 46. De Marescallis.
the Earl Marshall had at the Knighting of any Baron or superior Nobleman, as
also at the Homages done by any such either Secular or Religious, yet it was
answered that from the King of Scotland no such fee was due because he might
have took the Order of any other Catholic Prince, or, at his pleasure, of any
of his own subjects of his Nobility. Responsum fuit (says the Matthew. Paris
35. Hen. 3.
Story) quod Rex Scotiae tali non subiacet exactio(...), quia si placeret ei,
potuit ipsa Arma suscipere a quouis Principe Catholico, vel ab aliquo Nobilium
suorum. -- Sed ob reuerentiam and honorem tanti Principis Domini ac vicini sui
ac soceri tanti, mallet ab ipso Rege Angliae Cingulo donari Militari, quam
aliquo alio. Et sic praecipiente domino Rege in totum die festo, omnimoda lis
conquieuit. And for that of the King of Scotland his saying that he might have
took it from a subject of his own; its true: and so in our State some of our
Kings have receiud it. Henry VI. was Knighted by John Duke of Bedford, and
Edward VI. by Edward S^imer then Earl of Hertford; and the like many more
occur. Nay in those ancienter times Earls (which were then the greatest
Nobles under the King and Prince) had a power of Knighting. Under Hen. III. the
Earl of Gloucester made his brother William Knight at a Tourneament. So did
Simon of Montfort Earl of Leicester, Gilbert of Clare. Some Tillius de Reb.
Gallic. 2.
like examples have been in France. And Los Caualleros vassallos de los Ricos
hombres i. Knights made by the Ricos hombres (anciently in Spain they were near
as Barons in other places) are rememberd by Apud Fr. Menenium, ex P. Salanoua
and alijs.
Spanish Antiquaries. And, against the Scottish Expedition Prince Edward of
Caernaruan, first Knighted by his father Edward 1. made diverse Knights of his
own authority at Westminster, by girding with the sword. But such also as were
neither Princes nor Earls (and that without any Regal authority transferd;
for if so, it were not worth observation) about the raigns of our first three
Edward's, sometimes made Knights in the Wars. Dominus Johannes filius Thomae
(say the A. 1313. 1314 1316. 1318.
Annals of Ireland) fecit Milites Nicolaum filium Mauritij and. Robertum de
Clonhull apud Adare in Momonia. So Edmund le Botiller, afterward Lord Deputy,
made XXX Knights at Dublin. And Richard of Bernimgham for the good service that
one John Husee had done in the Irish wars, gave him amplas terras and fecit
illum Militem, vt been meruit. And by the same authority, Uenit Dominus Rogerus
de Mortimer Dubliniam and fecit Dominum Ioannem Mortimer Militem cum quatuor
socijs. And indeed this Roger of Mortimer was then as Lord Deputy of Ireland,
and might the better do it. And in one of our yeer-books Thirning 7. Hen. 4.
fol. 8. Voyes Froissart ^ol. 1. fol. 185.
a Judge on the Bench relates thus: I have heard (says he) that a Lord had
issue a son and carried him to the Font, and presently, as soon as he was
baptized, took his Sword and made him a Knight, saying, Be a good Knight if you
can, for you shall never be good Esquire. It was a prerogative, it seems,
anciently challenged by such as were themselves Knights. For William of
Badensel a German Knight at the Sepulcher made two, by his own report. Supra
Sepulchrum Christi (says Guil. de Badensel Hodoe-Poric. in Terram Sanctam.
he) pulchram feci de Resurrectione Domini missam celebrari, and aliqui de meis
socijs Corpus Christi deuote susceperunt. P^st Missam feci Duos Milites Nobiles
supra sepulchrum gladios accingendo and alia obseruando, quae in professione
Militaris Ordinis fieri consueuerunt. This was in M. CCC. XXXVI. Now none but
the King, or one as his Lieutenant authorized, gives this Order; neither is it
done by girding with the Sword, but the deserving kneels, and a Sword is laid
or slightly struck on his shoulder by the king, using this French: Smith. Rep.
Angl. 1. cap. 17.
Soiz Cheualter au nom de Dieu, and then, Auancez Cheualier. This Ceremony
alone gives the Title of Eques Auratus, that of Auratus coming from their
right of wearing guilt spurs, which has been also a knights special
ornament. And under Edward II. Richard Anonym. Chron. apud Millium.
of Rodney was knighted by being girded with a Sword by Almaricus Earl of
Penbrok, and having one Spur put on by the Lord Maurice of Barkley the other
by the Lord Bartholomew of Badilsmere. That striking with the Tillius de Reb.
Gallic. 2.
Sword has been anciently the use of the Empire, and when Sigismund knighted
Signell a French Gentleman in France, to honor Signell with that name, the want
whereof was objected to him in a Controversy twixt him and P^stellan, he did
it by such striking of him kneeling, and giving him one of his gilt spurs,
and girding him with a girdle that had hanging to it, in stead of a sword, a
great knife. And this was done in France, neither Contra maiestatem aut ius
Regis, says du Tillet, tentatum est, quia ex Iure consultorum sententia,
Equites vbique and in Imperio, and in alieno dominatu institui possunt. For
Creation of a knight thus much: and, as every child knows, in personal
Creation only the being of knighthood is, neither has any man it otherwise.
Infanciones (says one Mich. Molin. ap. Mennenium.
of Spain: and Infancio is their hijdalgo, i. a Gentleman, perhaps from the
German or Gothique Edeling or Etheling) nascuntur apud nos; Milites vero fiunt,
which you may apply to all States. In elder times it was provided in the
Empire, France and Spain that none should receive this Order, except he were
before in some degree of Civil Nobility. A Grant is extant of Pet. de Vineis
lib. 6. Ep. 17
Frederique II. that a knight may be made quanquam pater suus Miles non fuerit,
and nostris constitutionibus caueatur quod milites fieri nequeant, qui de
genere Militum non nascuntur. In France, it was Belmanorian, apud Tilium lib.
1. vide Ranulph. de Glanuilla lib. 5. cap. 5.
adjudged anciently, that where the Lord of a Villain (I use the word as in our
law) had knighted his Villain being a Gentleman, he became free, and had the
honor lawfully; but if another had knighted him, nothing had been wrought by
it. For none could manumit him but his Lord. And till Manumission, or unless
knighthood had had Civil freedom for its ground, he was not capable of it.
Neither there might any great man confer this dignity upon one which were not
before a Gentleman, without grievous Mulct. But the king only might do it. And,
among old laws Ex legib. Hisp. Fr. Mennenius.
of Spain, Quil bet Infancio (every Gentleman, or hijdalgo) potest esse Miles
in Aragonia, alij vero non. Et si forte non Infancio promoueatur per Ricum
hominem ad Militiam, perdit honorem, quem tenebat, Ricus homo (one of their
Ricos hombres) vel si non tenebat, nunquam tenere debet. Et illi promotus
semper remanet villanus, sublato sibi equo and armis. Now, to the dishonor of
Merit and Noblesse, how many most undeserving either for quality or parentage,
bear this most honorable Title? But some ancient adjuncts to knighthood here
next offer themselves. They are chiefly, The respect of the Honor to
Possessions, Their Martial Equipage, Their right of using a Seal, The Aid a
fair fitz Chiualer, The Name and honorable regard to it, and Degradation. Of
them all in their Order. The Knights Feif or Fee is as commonly known by name
as Knight. But what it was or is, is not to all known. An old z testimony
makes it DC. LXXX. acres, consisting of IV. Hydes. Of Hydes, before, where of
Barons. Other certainties x Lib. Rub. Scaccarij.
are proposd for a Knights Fee anciently, but v. 4. Ed. 2. tit. Auoury 200.
in vain. Its nearest truth to set no number of Acres, nor quantity of
Territory, but only of Revenue out of land, which being XX l. yearly was the
value of a Knights Fee. Remember what is already deliuerd of an entire
Baronie, and the possessions of other dignities. In them the Relief always
expresses the fourth part of the annual revenue by virtue of the Grand
Charter, which, in this point, was made in imitation of what was common law in
the Relief of a Knights Fee, being (as appears by Glanuil and Geruase of
Tilburie) just c. shil^ings. What then more plainly could prove that the
knights Fee (that is, the Possession fit for the maintenance of a Knight in
those days) was exactly land of X X l. yearly? And they which had such an
estate might be compelled to take, and, it seems, of right demand a
Knighthood. Yet under Hen. the III. and Edward (...). some of less Revenue
were called to this Dignity. Anno sub eodem (1256) exijt edictum Regium (says
Matthew. Paris) praeceptumque est and acclamatum per totum Regnum Angliae, vt
quilibet qui haberet XV. libratas terrae and supra armis redimitus tyrocinio
donaretur, vt Angliae, sicut Italiae, Militia Roboraretur. Et qui nollent, vel
qui non possent honorem status Militaris sustinere, pecunia se redimerent.
Here XV. pound revenue was the same, and afterward all the Matthew. Paris page
1249. edit. Land. vbi legendum, pro december, quindecem.
Shirifes of England were amerced, every one at five Marks, in the Exchequer,
for not distraining the Tenants in their County according to that precept. And
other like examples are, in themselves unlike for value. But by the Statute of
Westminster 1. of Reasonable Aid, XX. pound Socage land, and a Knights Fee are
compared for like possessions, and in I. Edward. II. an act of Parliament was,
that if any were distrain'd to be made Knight, having neither in Fee, nor for
life, twenty pounds revenue, and the same were proved, upon his complaint, by
inquest, he should be discharged. Nor that any man should be compelled to be a
Knight before his full age of XXI. years. Yet after that the writs have bin for
such as had forty pound yearly, 19. Ed. 2. Claus. memb. 16. Dors. 7. Ed. 3.
tit. Auerment 37. and Claus. 7. Ed. 3. part. 1. Dors. memb. 7. and 22.
both in Ed. II. and III. their times, and of diverse succeeding. And under
Henry VI. the Chief Justice Babington 7. Hen. 6. sol. 16. C. Sir Richard
Haukesford.
of the Common Pleas says that the King might compel every man of xll. yearly
worth in lands, to receive Knighthood, by writ out of the Exchequer; and if
they appeared not at the first day, but come after to take this order, by
rigor of Law they are not to be received, but amerced for default. Where he
remembers, that, when writs in that kind went out, at the second day a great
Burgess of Southwork, able to dispend c. Marks yearly, appeared, on whom they
were unwilling that the honor should be bestowed, and after deliberation
resolved, that, because he came not the first day, he should not be Knighted.
This Census or Military value, has some proportion to that of the Ordo
Equestris in Rome. Their Ordo Equestris, or secundus Ordo (as they called it, in
respect of the Senators being Ordo primus) had it is known worth in possessions.
That worth was CD. M. of their Sestertij, in present estate; of our sterling M.
M. M. C. XXV. pounds, every M. Sesterij, or one Sestertium (which are all one)
reckoned at VII. pounds, XVI. shillings III. pence. Yet, in those more ancient
times of England, when the relief of a Knights Fee, and so a Knights Fee were
truly known (as now also, too frequently) this honor was given to such as had
not any land twixt them, and other, a difference is made in Roger. de Houeden
part. 2. page 424. and lib. Rub. scaccarij.
Richard I. his edict of Torneaments. Rex statuit Torniamenta fieri in Anglia
and charta sua confirmauit, ita quod quicunque torniare vellet daret ei
pecuniam secundum formam subscriptam: videlicet, Comes daret pro licentia
torniandi XX. Marcas argenti, and Barons december Marcas argenti, and Miles
Terram habens IV. Marcas argenti, and Miles non habens Terram II. Marcas
argenti. Out of this Military Revenue, and the right of compulsion, in the
King to make the possessors Knights, you may easily understand what Pro
respectu Militiae is in the Exchequer Rolls anciently: and why in Enquests of
Eires the presentations were of such as had a whole Knights Fee, and were not
Knighted, being of full age. In an Eire at Chichester under Placit. apud
Cicestriam in Com. Sussex Coram R. de Litleburie and socijs suis 47. Hen. 3.
Rot. 44.
Henry III. (to give one example like infinite other) the Jurors of the hundred
of Palings (it is that now we call Poling) in the Rape of Arundell, to the
article de Valettis (Valetti was vsd for young heirs or young gentlemen, or
attendants) dicunt quod Nigellus de Broke and Simon de Fering tenent integra
feoda Militum, and sunt plenae aetatis and nondum sunt Milites, ideo inde
loquendum. And diverse such more are in the same Roll and others concluding
sometimes ideo in misericordia. That Nigellus de Brok had good possessions then
in Eclesdon and Selkeden (the hamlet which now is Seldom, by Eclesdon) both of
the revenue of the Abbey of Fischamp. Thus much of their ancient possessions,
and liuelode competent to the honor. Their proper Furniture, as a supposed
incident to Knighthood, consisted in Horse and Armor. And as by our common
Westminster. 2. cap. 43. vide Regist. Orig. fol. 100. b.
laws the Equitatura, which is the Horse that any man keeps for his iournying,
is privileged from the Return of issues (as clothes and household stuff) and
beasts of the Plough from execution of debt, so anciently were a Knights Horses
and Armor (His Horses of martial Equipage) and that although he had been
indebted to the King. The law for that matter Geruase of Tilburie thus
delivers, speaking of the sale of the debtors goods to satisfy the King: Nota
quod si debtor ille qui soluendo non est Militiae cingulum semel obtinuerit,
venditis caeteris, Equus tamen ei non quilibet, sed vsus vsualium reseruabitur,
ne, qui dignitate factus est Eques, Pedes cogatur incedere. Quod si Miles
eiusmodi fuerit quem iuuat Armorum decor and iuuet vsus eorum, and qui meritis
exigentibus debeat inter strenuos computari, tota sui Corporis armatura cum
Equis ad id necessarijs a venditoribus erit liberrima vt cum oportuerit ad
Regis and Regni negotia armis and equis instructus possit assumi. Sed si hic
idem cui l^x in part pepercit, audita necessitate Regis vel Regni delitescens
se absentauerit, vel ad hoc vocatus non venerit, si tamen non proprijs sed
regijs stipendijs militet and euidenter absentiam suam non excusauerit, nec ab
hijs venditores temperabunt, sed solo contentus Equo (propter dignitatem
Militiae) sibi relicto inri communi v^uat obnoxious. Where, by the way, it
appears also that the exceptis Bobus and affris Carucae in an Elegit, was
ancient Common law before the Statut of Westminster the second. And it seems
that the Equipage and Armor competent to his person, was by the ancient law as
enheritance descendible to the Heir, and not, as other moueables, cast upon
the executors. An old testimony inserted among that which is styled the
Confessors laws; Non debent illa inuadiare (understand such as were bound
generally for defense of the Kingdom to have armor) nec extra Regnum vendere,
sed haeredibus suis in extremis legare, ad seruitium tenementorum suorum
Dominis suis explendum cum opus adfuerit. And although the words import as if
they should bequeath them, yet doubtless the meaning is that they should leave
them to descend; as what follows, persuades. Quod si qui (are the ensuing
words) eorum ^^redes vel parents non habuerint, dominus suus illa reciqiet. Et
si Dominum non haberent felagus suus, i. fide cum eo ligatus, si haberet, illa
recipiet, si vero nihil istorum haberet, tunc regni, sub cuius protectione and
pace degunt vniuersi, rex illa resumet. And when under Henry II. diverse Assisa
de armis 27. Hen. 2. apud Rogerum de Houeden.
Constitutions were for keeping of Armor, according to the quantity of men's
estates, one was Si quis Arma haec habens obierit, remaneant heredi suo, and si
haeres de tali statu non sit quod armis vti possit, si opus fuerit, ille qui
eum habuerit in Custodia, habeat similiter Custodiam armorum, and inueniat
hominem qui armis vti posset in seruitio D. Regis, si opus fuerit, donec haeres
de tali statu sit quod portare posset, and tunc ea habeat. Of their special
right of using a Seal, the only testimony I have seen is that of Richard
Earl of Chester, Chronic. ^^tust. Abindoniae, ap. Camd. and Millium.
under Henry I. in his conueyance of his lands in W^mondsley to the Abbey of
Abington, while he and his mother, the old Countess Ermentrudis, lay there.
For he sealed it with her seal, Cum, (nondum enim Militare baltheo cinctus
erat) literae quaelibet ab illo directae materno sigillo includebantur, as the
words are, as if one under the dignity of Knight might not in those days use
a seal: which, were it true, is somewhat proportionat to the ius Aureorum
Annulorum in Rome, chaleng'd and given to their Equites. For, as with us, so
there anciently was the chief use of Rings for V. tit. de Ord. Test. Dig^st.
Cod. and Instit.
sealing. Ueteres (says Apud Macrobium Saturnal. 7. cap. 13. vide sis Lipsium
ad Tacit. Annal. 2.. 4.
Capito) non Ornatus sed signandi causa annulum secum circumferebant. Yet, by
the way (because touching this Roman right of gold Rings some controversy is,
and few well understand it) you must not think, that only those which by the
Censor were made Equites, and truly in Ordine Equestri, had this Right, but
also others, and upon other several reasons; neither was it more then a
soldiers brag in Mago, when after the overthrow ad Cannas, he showed at
Carthage Modij.
three bushels and a half of gold Rings (some say but one bushel) taken from
the slain and captive Romans, and sent to Hannibal, affirms, so to lay the
greater name on the victory, Liu. Dec. 3. lib. 3. idem, de Senatoribus and
Equitibus tantummodo, adfirmat Dio bistor. 48. verum haud satis firma fide.
vide Plin. hist. Not. 33. cap. 1. and 2.
Neminem nisi Equitem, atque eorum ipsorum primores, id gerere insigne. For
Pliny doubts not but that then the use of them was promiscuous, and affirms,
that, afterward they became among the distinctions of the Ordo Equestris
Annuli distinxere (says he) alterum ordinem (that is, the Equestris) a Plebe,
vt semel coeperant esse celebres. And Annuli plane medium Ordinem tertiumque
Plebi and patribus inseruere, ac quod antea Militares Equi nomen dederant, hoc
nunc pecuniae Indices (so Lipsius conjectures it should be, not iudices)
tribuunt. Afterward under Tiberius, (then being Consuls C. Asinius Pollio and
C. Antistius Vetus) it was constituted, that none should enjoy this right of
gold Rings, nisi cui Ingenuo ipsi, patri, auoque Paterno sestertia CCCC. census
fuisset, and lege Iulia theatrali in XIV. Ordinibus sedenti, that is, unless a
perfect free Roman, who both himself, his father, and grandfather of his
fathers side had bin worth CD. M. festertij, (in our money M. M. M. C. XXV.
pounds) and had place in the XIV. ranks at the Theater, which were first
appointed for those which were truly Equites, as a distinction for their
dignity in that place, by their Lex Dio Coss. l. 36.
Roscia, and allowed afterward, but not without some alteration, by their
Sueton. in August. cap. 40.
Lex Iulia, under Augustus. Neither do these words any more then describe a
Roman Equestri dignitate, and of two discents, for the CD. M. sestertij (CCCC.
sestertia, all one) were the Census Equestris. Yet every one that had this
Census, was not Eques properly. None was so but such as were chosen by the
Censor and donati equo publico, and equo publico merebantur. Yet such as had
the Census were (if at least ingenuij Free men) Dignitate Equestri, and in the
rank of the Equites; as those of the Equites as had the Lips. ad 11. Tacit.
Annal.. 15. and de Amphitheatro c. 14.
worth of a Senator, they called Equites Illustres, and reputed them in the
rank of Senators. As also the Tribuni Militum (as it were, Field Marshalls)
were in the rank of the Equites, at the Theater. Now as the Census alone made
not the right Eques, no more did the gold rings given either by their General
in War before their Empire, or by their Emperors afterward. For the time
before, I refer you but to Cicero his III. Oration against Verres. For time
under the Empire, the Example of Uolteius Mena, Pompey his libertus or
manumitted villain (to use our language) whom Augustus Dio. hist. 48.
(...). i. honored with gold Rings, and made him of the Ordo Equestris, all
which was but a making him a perfect Freeman, and an ingenuus, which was as a
degree before a libertus, as appears expressly by Sueton delivering the self
same only in these words, that he was assertus in ingenuitatem. Which made him
indeed, being of fit worth, of the Ordo Equestris (or rather ready to be
received into it) because, in that, no liberius might be until acquired
ingenuitie, and in some sort Eques; as in that of this Mena, in Epodon. 4.
Horace, you see; Sedilibusque magnus in primis Eques.
Othone contempto sedet.
By Othone contempto, he means the lex Roscia theatralis (from Roscius Otho)
constituted for the Honor of the right Equites, whom the Censor had made, and
the honor of Equus publicus did denominat; but it was committed against by
Mena, that, out of his greatness in favor and worth of estate, durst sit in
the chiefest of the XIV. ranks at the Theater. He had the right of gold Rings,
but was not therefore truly Eques, yet in a more general notion bearing the
name. Diverse other examples like are, and nothing more usual then the breach
of that constitution under Tiberius. And by a later (...). on. and vide Cuiacij
Obseruat. 7. cap. 14.
Imperial law, every one manumitted has this right of gold rings, and
ingenuitie. But the promiscuous use of them in the more ancient Roman State is
constantly to be affirmd, I mean so prouiscuous, that it specially distinguished
not their Equites. And, that after their Empire, when the ius aureorum
annulorum was given by the Emperors, to liberti only ingenuitie was thereby
given, although by a rescript of Diocletian and Maximian, ingenuitie C. tit. de
iure Aur. Annul. l. 2. verum vide Vlpianum and Paulum ff. code^ tit. l. 4. and
5. and C. ad legem. Viselliam.
pass not by it. Tertullian of a servant (seruus) manumitted: Lib. de
Resurrectione carnis.
Et vestis albae nitore, and Aurei annuli honor, and Patroni nomine ac tribu,
mensaque honoratur. Nor are the words of Equestris Ordo, dignitas or Eques,
applied to such as were so honored, otherwise to be understood then that so
they were made fit, and as it were immediately capable of the true Dignity of
Eques, if also their estates endurd it. But were no more indeed Equites then
such as had given them insignia Consularia, Senatoria, or Quaestoria, were
therefore Consuls, Questors, or Senators; or then Abbots, to whom the Pope
granted infignia Pontificalia were therefore Bishops. The chief ensigns,
besides, of the right Equestris Ordo, consisting most of all in their apparel,
the Trabea (a Miltarie robe interwouen of gold and Purple) and the Augustus
clauus, or narrow guard in distinction of the latus clauus or broad guard of the
Senators. -- Papinius Syluar. 5. ad Crispinum, vti emendauit Lipsius.
sanguine Cretus
Turmali, trabeaque Remi, and paupere clauo
is a description of one descended from their true Eques. And it is obseruable,
that as their giving of ingenuitie was by an Ensign and note of their Equestris
Ordo, so with us anciently the enfranchising of a villain was by giving him
Arms. In the laws of the Conqueror (at least under that name published:) Si
quis velit seruum suum liberum facere, tradat eum Vicecomiti per manum dextram
in pleno Comitatu, and quietum illum clamare debet a iugo soruitutis suae per
manumissionem, and ostendat ei liber as portas and vias, and tradat illi libera
arma scilicet, lanceam and Gladium, deinde liber homo efficitur. Bt, as
touching the right of using a Seal to be proper to a Knight in our Nation, as
out of that of the Earl of Chester, it is collected; I doubt the Monk was
either deceiud or deceiues in reporting it. For it seems that from the infancy
of the Norman Empire here, Seals were lawfully vsd by mean men, and of all
sorts. For whereas the Saxon use was to subscribe Charters with names and
Crosses only, and so deliver them, the Normans changd that form into Sealing.
Ingulphus is witness. Chirographorum (says he) confectionem Anglicanam quae
antea vsque ad Edwardi Regis tempora fidelium presentium subscriptionibus cum
Crucibus aureis alijsque sacris signaculis firma fuerunt, Normanni condemnantes
Chirographa Chartas vocabant, and Chartarum firmitatem cum cerea impressione
per vniuscuiusque speciale sigillum sub instillatione trium vel quatuor testium
astantium conficere constituebant. Does not this allow all men, that would, the
use of Seals? and at the Conquest. And, that under Henry II. there were
inferior persons had them, is justified out of one that then Glanuill. lib. 10.
cap. 12.
wrote. Si debtor (says he) eartam suam non aduocat, duebus modis eidem
contraire, vel contradicere (creditor) potest scilicet ipsum sigillum in Curia
recognoscenda suum esse etc. The like out of that 33. Hen. 2. apud D. Ed. Coke
in praefat. ad lib. 3.
Fine in the County, twixt Walter of Fridastorp and Helias his son, and John
of Beuerley, levied under Hen. II. and sealed with the seals of the Father and
Son. Either then the Chronicle of Abingdon misinstructs, or else it wills that
the Earl of Chester being yet not of the order of Knighthood used his mothers
seal, that is, such a one as hers was without difference, because perhaps
after the order receiud, some change was to be added to his. For Du Tillet
cites an old judgment of the year M. CCC. LXXVI. wherein he says an Esquire
dicitur, cum Equestrem Ordinem suscipit, sigillum mutare. But he speaks it
only of Burgundy. Others, being moud by the Monkish Chron. Abb. de Bello apud
G. Lambard. in Itin. Cantij page 405.
report touching Richard Lucy chief Justice of England his finding fault with a
mean man for using a seal under Henry II. think that in those times they were
peculiar to men of the greater fashion, and that they became common not till
about Edward III. Indeed diverse Charters were in the Norman times, before that,
made without seals, yet an old Bracton lib. 2. de acq. rer. dom. cap. 16.. 12.
Lawier under Hen. III. requires them as an essential part of a Deed. Nor does
any one reason more move me to beleeu the ancient and promiscuous use of them
here, then because for the most part all Nations had them, and in their
Writings and Deeds in one sort or another vsd them. And howeuer Hist. Not. 33.
cap. 1.
Pliny affirms that Egypt and the East were only contented with letters,
omitting seals, yet its certain that the Jews had them, and in ancient time
often, when they made a contract, two Deeds were written, one containing the
contract at full, with all covenants and conditions, which was folded up and
sealed v. Ierem. cap. 32. and Ios. Scalig. Elench. Trihaeresij. cap. 11. and
(...). Tobit. cap. 7.
with the buyers seal, the other containing a general recital of what thing
only the Contract was; and this last was showed open to witnesses, who inscribd
their names on the backside of boh. That, so the Witnesses or standers by might
not know the sum, time of Redemption, or such like: yet be able to justify
the truth of the instrument comprehending them by the inscription of their
names. The Seal they called (...), and the Deed or instrument written (...),
Sephor which is a book also, but the Elias in Thisbite.
Rabbis express their Deeds, Releases, Obligations and the like by the name
of (...) Shetar or Setar, whence the word Starrum or Starr^ for Acquitances or
written testimonies of Contracts is vsd. So must you understand it in that Roll,
in the Tower, of Placita apud Scaccarium Iudeorum de Termino Paschae anno Regni
Edwardi nono; of Edward the first. Solomon de Stanford Iudeus recognoscit per
Starrum suum, occurres there; and an Acquitance or Release by the name of
starrum is there 9. Ed. I. Iudeorum Rot. 4. Pasch. Norff. and rot. 5. in dors.
and rot. 6. Sutht. and fere passm in Schedis illis.
pleded to have been tried before the Shirife at Norwich by a Jury of Sex
probos and legales homines and sex legales Iudeos de Ciuitate Norwici, and
found to have been the Deed of one Genta a woman Jew of Gloucester, whereupon
one Alice the widow of Clement of Poringlond was quit against the King then
clayming, upon special occasions, all duties which were owing to the Jews in
England. The like kind of trials are there in the case of one Eustace of
Peccham in Kent, of Solomon Bensalomon in Hampshire, and diverse others. Where,
by the way observe, it seems the Jews (of the Jury) were charged by oath taken
upon the (...) Liber legis.
i. the books of Moses, held in their arms, and by the name of the God of
Israel, which is merciful, with formal additions of words which they used, as
Christians upon the Evangelists. For a Rabbin that Rabbi Moses Mikotzi in (...)
praecept. 123.
liud in time of Henry III. says that so was an oath to be taken by his
country men, although in a judicial precedent, yet remaining, of Constantin
Porphyrogennetus (he liud about CCC. years before) diverse other and strange
ceremonies were to be used. If you desire them, search them, where they In lib.
2. Iuris Graeco Romani.
are published. The Romans had their Annuli signatorij and sigillaricij (as
Uopiscus calls them) destinat as well to sealing of writings, as use in the
house in steed of locks. Satyr. 13.
Inuenal:

Uana superuacui dicunt Chirographa ligni,
Arguit ipsorum quos litera, gemmaque Princeps
Sardoniches, loculis quae custoditur eburnis.
What Is gemma Sardoniches but the Seal cut in that stone? Of the Polyb. hist. 6.
Graecians, as plain testimony is. And of all, enough more. The seal being a
special ensign of credit, and therefore so fitly vsd. Nec plus habere quam
vnum licebat (says Ateius Macrob. Sat. 7. cap. 13.
Capito of Seal Rings and the ancient Roman times) nec cuiquam nisi libero;
quos solos fides decerneret, quae signaculo continetur. And its affirmd among
the Graecians, that before the invention of Seals cut in fit matter, the use
was to seal with pieces of wood, eaten and gnawen by Philostephan. apud
Hesychium in (...). and Is. Tzetz. ad Lycophronem.
worms ((...)) which could not but give impression; and that, Hercules first
vsd that kind of Seal, whence Lycophron has (...) i. a wormeaten Seal. I
persuade you not to be prodigal of your faith to such Grecian conjectures.
Think of them as they deserve. But among our ancestors, as the king had his
Great and less or Privy Seal, so, at least, Gentlemen and their superiors a
like distinction. A Conisance in the Kings Court anciently shall justify it.
Johannes de Burgo (says Hill. 44. Hen. 3. Placit. ap. West. Rot. 28. Staff.
the Roll) cognouit quod apposuit paruum sigillum suum cuidam scripto quod
fecit Decano and Capitulo de Lichefeild.
Lichefeud de confirmatione and quieto clameo de aduocatione de Herdel, and
apponet sigillum suum magnum praedicto scripto circa tertiam Septimanam post
Pascham. So much for Seals. Among the Reasonable Aides due from Tenants to
their Lords, one special is a fair fitz and heir Chiualer, to make the Lords
son and heir a Knight. Which is one of the three reserud in King John's Grand
Charter, to be levied without consent of Parliament. Nullum (so the words are
Charta ista est apud Matthew. Paris and in Annalibus Thomae Rudborne, Monachi
Wintonienses Ms.
in the Kings person) scutagium vel auxilium ponam in Regno nostro nisi per
commune consilium Regni nostri, nisi ad Corpus nostrum redimendum, and ad
primogenitum Filium nostrum Militem faciendum, and ad primogenitam filiam
nostram semel maritandam. Et ad hoc non fiat nisi rationabile auxilium. And in
the same: Nos non concedimus de caetero alicui, quod capiat auxilium de liberis
hominibus suis, nisi ad corpus suum redimendum and ad faciendum primogenitum
Filium suum Militem, and ad primogenitam filiam suam semel Maritandam, and ad
hoc non fiat nisi rationabile auxilium. That aid de Rancon (as it is called in
the Custumier of Normandy) occurrs not as I remember in our Law annals
printed, but in the not published years of 21. Ed. 1. fol. 66.
Edward 1. a release by one Robert of Bentham to the Abbot of Ford is pleded,
of all services forspris suit real and reasonable aid pur luy reindre horse de
prison ou ces heirs quel heur qu' ils fussent enprisones. From the Normans
until Edward I. these Aides were all uncertain, but to be levied with
moderation and according to the quantity of the Tenants worth ne Glanuil. lib.
9 cap. 8.
nimis grauari inde videatur vel suum contenementum amittere. Neither was any
certainty of Age in the son and heir, by the law, known. But in III. West.
1. cap. 36
Edward I. it was enacted, that, for the Knighting and marriage, of a whole
knights Fee should be XX. shillings given, and of XX. pounds yearly, so cage,
as much, and so pro rata: and that none should be levied until the son and
heir were of XV. years age, and the daughter of VII. But the King was not
bound by this Statut extending only to common persons, as appears by Records
Parl. 20. Ed. 3. Art. 45. alibi.
of interceding time, where the value levied was greater. Therefore by the act
of XXV. Edward III. the Kings Aides were brought to a like value. All lands are
subject to these Aides except only ancient demesne, and grand and petit
serieantie Tenures, as the law has been 11. Hen. 4. fol. 31. 10. Hen. 6.
Auowry 267. Anc. them. 11.
anciently deliuerd. One that wrote a little after the Statut of Westminster I.
speaking of Auowrie for reasonable aid, a fair fits eign Chiualer, allows as
good bars to the Auowrie, for the tenant, to plede that Briton Chap: de
prises de auers.
the Father himself is no Knight, or that the son is not yet of age pur order
de Chiualler prendre; so that one not knighted cannot claim this aid of his
Tenants. And the fit age to receive the Order is fifteen, according to that
Statut, although if the son and heir of a Tenant 5. Jacob. c. Sr Drue Drurie
D. Coke part. 6. Plowd. c. Ratcliffe. and D. Coke part. 8. c. Sr Henry
Constable.
by Knights service be Knighted in his fathers life time, at what age soever,
he is, at his fathers death, discharged of Wardship both of land and body, and
the Wardship of the body of one knighted within age after the death of his
ancestor, presently ends. For the King being suprem Judge of Chivalry, by
knighting his subject, adiudges him fit for Knights service, his deficiencie in
which kind, by reason of his age, is intended by the law until one and
Twenty, unless the king adiudge him otherwise. For their Name; that in all
places except England, has its original from a Horse (the most usual beast
of the Wars) as the Roman Equites were titled from their Equus publicus,
being also before called Iunius Gracchanus apud Plin. lib. 33. cap. 2.
Celeres and Trossuli. For to the Spaniards they are Caualleros, to the
Italians Cauallieri, to the French Cheuallers (all, in their provincial
tongues, from the Latin Caballus) and in the British Margoghs in like
signification. For, as now, so anciently Marc or Marg in that language (as
other more) interpreted a Horse. Whence every Knight with his two Esquires on
Horseback, in Brennus his army was styled Pausanias in Phocicis.
Trimarcisia, which, though it be applied to the Celts or Gauls (among whom
also Caesar specially reckons, as their chief lay Order, the Equites or
Margoghs) yet without much difficulty, it may be communicated to the Britons.
And the Germans call them Reytteren; that is, Ridars: a word in Buchanan. Reb.
Scot. lib. 7. in Malcolm. 3.
Scotland to this day used. Old Rimes of Ms. Of the Horse, Sheep and Goose.
Dan Lidgate:

Eques ab Equo is said of very right,
And Cheualier is said of Cheualrie,
In which a Rider called is a Knight.
Arragoners done also specify,
Caballiero though all that party
Is name of Worship, and so took his ginning
Of Spores of gold, and chiefly Riding.
As all these in this Western part express a special honor implying ability
of martial service with horse: so the old Greeks attributed not to a great man
a better name then what truly was the same with every of those. That is, (...),
whence Hecuba Euripid. in Hecuba.
calls Polymestor King of Thrace, (...); and in Homer (...) Nestor. So the
chief men and of best worth in Herodot. lib. (...).
Chalcis were known by the Title of Hippobatae i. Equites. But our English
calls them Knights, the word signifying a Minister, Scholar, or Disciple.
Leornung Cnihts is vsd for the Disciples in the old Evangelists of the Saxons,
as most worthy Clarenceulx has noted. And it was taken also for the younger
sort, Tyrones or such like. For where the Latin of venerable Bede has of King
Sigibert; instituit Scholam in qua Pueri literis erudirentur, the Habes and
apud Caium de Antiq. Cantabrig. lib. 1.
English-Saxon has he sceole gesette and on thaere cnihtas and and geonge men
gesette and getyde and laerde. i. he instituted a School, and placed in it
Cnihtes (Knights) and young men both furnished and learned. At this day a
Diener, servant, or vallet is both in Alemanique and Belgique called Ein
Knecht. And to this sense in Cnichtas, in the translation of Bid, perhaps has
tyro and tyrocinium allusion, in those Monks which thereby express sometimes a
Knight and Knighthood. But, as it goes for the Titularie name of this Honor, I
suppose it rather for a Minister or Servant, denoting that one which had
undertaken the Order was a Martial minister or servant, known and as it were
in perpetual service retained for the State. And that as Comes and Baro from
their more general significations became to be what they are, so this of Cnyht
or Knight. For plainly its applied to the office, to which their Honor bound
them, not to their age. As appears in Our old word Rodknights (that is, Riding
Knights, v. Verstegan. page 319.
or Knight riders) which were such as held their lands by the service to Ride
up and down with their Lords de Manerio in Manerium, which under Henry III.
before William of Ralegh was adjudged Bracton. lib. 2. de acq. rer. dom. cap.
16. and 35.
to be cause of Ward and Marriage, Stephen of Segraue being then (as he might
have good reason) of a contrary opinion. They were called also Kadknights; and
in one that translated diverse of the Saxon laws, they are thus rememberd: Si
hoc fit (he means if fighting were) in domo hominis quem Angli vocant
Radcniht, alij vero Sexhendman. The Sexhendman was the Saxon Sixhyndmon. i. one
whose worth was valued at DC. shillings. In our law they are styled Milites and
never Equites. Yet so that Miles is taken for the self same with Chiualer. For
in the Writs of Parliament being in Latin, to the Barons, Chiualer is always
as an addition so expressed in French, because it seems every Baron fit for that
Court is at least supposd to be a Knight, and most commonly is so. And where
in a Writ of 30. Ed. 3. fol. 18. a.
Mesne the Lord Paramount was namd Johannes Tournour Miles, and in the
distringas ad acquietandum, Johannes T. Chiualer, it was held in Court that no
error was by the variance. But in the common laws also Miles is as well taken
for others as for Knights. Sometimes it goes for Miles gladio cinctus, for one
indeed Knighted, as before, in the Magna assisa eligenda and elsewhere. Other
times and very often it is only for a Freeholder of lands by Knights service.
And against Miles and Tenant by Knights service, were liber Sokemannus,
Burgensis, Villanus, Tenant in ancien demesne, and Seruiens opposd. Sokemans
were but Tenants in socage, which held by service of the Plough, or such like.
Burgenses, Burgesses, men of Towns and Corporations, of personal only not
feudall worth. Villain near the like, although applied afterward to Bondslaues.
Tenants in Ancient demesne, although they had their large liberty of discharge
and quiet (as now) yet were reckoned so far from the worth of old Tenants by
Knights service, that they had not rank among the Liberi homines. Therefore in
the writ of Right Close, the Tenure must not be laid per liberum seruitium,
because (says the Register) no Free man may bring that writ, and whereas, by
the Statute of Merton, quilibet liber homo, may make an Attorney, it was Temp.
Ed. 1. tit. Attorney 102. and le case 21. Ed. 1. Ms. pluis plein and la est
adiudge.
adjudged that Tenants in Ancient demesne were not in those words comprehended.
And in an action of Disceit against Placit. coram Rege de Temp. H. Bigod Pasch.
44. Hen. 3. Rot. 17. Berk.
William Mamman and others, by the Abbot of Beaulieu touching the Manor of
Farendon, which the Abbot claimed as ancient demesne by the gift of King John,
the issue being whether part of it were Ancient demesne or no, the Defendant,
Petit quod inquiratur per Milites, and praeceptum est Vicecomiti quod venire
faceret coram H. le Bigod in proximo aduentu suo ad parts illas omnes Milites
praedicti Comitatus ad recognoscendum, etc. Where note, both Ancien demesne
triable by the Country, and also that Milites (vsd for libere tenentes) as it
were excluded the Abbots Tenants, being, by reason of their tenure, not inter
liberos and legales Homines, or fit to be in a Jury. These distinctions, even
still hold. By Seruientes ( 22. Ed. 3. fol. 18.
Seriants) were those understood which either by perpetual covenant, or
temporary pay, were bound to the wars, not by Tenure, as the Milites, or
tenants by Knights service. Nec miles nec seruiens litem audeat mouere, says
one of Radeuic. de gest. Frederic. 1. lib. 1. cap. 26.
Barbarossa's Military laws, and upon the writ of sending four Milites to see
the sick in an Essoin de Malo lecti, it is not sufficient (says Bracton) si
Vicecomes mittat seruientes, milites enim esse debent propter verba breuis. And
these, by reason of their pay, which by covenants was most commonly for life,
or diverse continual years, were also called Solidarij, (whence our word
Soldiers, the Spanish Soldado, the French Soldat, and such like) because of
the Soldata, or Solidata, (the proper name of their Salarie) which they
received. Soldata vero (say the Feudalls) dicitur quia plerunque in solidorum
donatione consistit: quandoque autem in Vino and annona consistit. I will not
derive here the Caesar. de Bell. Gallic. 3. Nicol. Damascen. ap. Athenaeum
dipnos. lib. 5.
Soldarij, or the (...), which are mentioned for such as lived as Deuoti,
Ambacti, or near followers about great men, among the old Gauls. I dare not,
what ever others. Yet the name of Miles notwithstanding has as well its fit
application to a common hired soldier, as to him that serves, by reason of his
tenure, and so comprehends both them two, and the personally honored Knight.
But them two, by reason of their service to which their continual rewards bind
them; the Knight, because that after out of his own worth, or hopeful
forwardnes, he is adjudged by some suprem Judge of Chivalry, worthy that
dignity, the character of his quality in his creation perpetually remains.
These Knights (it seems) were anciently called Baccalaurei, or Bachelors, a
name corrupted out of Batalarij, from the French Batailer, perhaps that so they
might be opposed against the Vexillarij, or Bannerets (of whom anon) because
the Bachelors displayed not a Banner, but only had good place of one in the
army, and so exercised themselves in Battle, whence the same name was, it may
Ludouic. Viues de Cause. corrupt. Art. lib. 2.
be, transferred to such as took the first degree (...) the Militia Togata, of
the University. The diligent and learned President of the Parliament at Rheims,
In Cons. Britan. art. 88.
Bertrand d'Argentre fetches the name of Bachelor from (...), so called in the
Eastern Empire, (...), i. because they followed the Army, and carried the
Victual. For (...), is, says Constantin. Themat. 6.
my Author, (...), i. a kind of Cake or such like of a circular form, named in
the C. tit. de erogat. milit. annonae. l. 1. and de excoctione, l. 2.
Code Buccellatum (and in some Graecians Eustath. Antecessor, (...), in (...)..
(...).
(...)) which Gothofred interprets by Biscuit. But I have not yet persuaded my
self to consent with this learned Bertrand, nor yet to beleeu that I know the
true etymon of Bachelor. Other conjectures are of it, but none that I dare
rely on. The name is occurring in old Story, as Chiualeirs ieunes Bachelors,
and Banniers and Bachiliers, for Bannerets and Bachelors in Froissart; and some
passages in Adam Myrimoth, and others. In no ancient Nation almost has been
wanting some honor proportionable to this of Knighthood. Of the Romans and
Grecians something already. The Carthaginians vsd for every Military voyage,
to give him, that had gone, a (...).
Ring. Every man among the Macedonians, until he had slain an enemy, went
girded with a (...).
Halter. And no Scythian Herodot. hist. (...). and Aristot. Politic. (...).
cap. (...). vbi and exempla caete^a.
might drink of a specially honored cup among them, until he had embru'd
himself in an enemies blood. Next, of their Degradation. The form of that will
best appear in examples. First of Sir Andrew Harkley under Edward II. made Earl
of Carliel, and soon turning traitor. The King sent his Commission to Sir
Anthony Lucy a Knight of that Country, to arraign him. The Acts and words of
Sir Anthony in this business, the rather because the degradation from another
Dignity is included in them, out of an old Fruct. Temp. Caxton. Ms.
English Chronicle I thus transcribe to you. The same Andrew was take at
Cardoill (Carleill) and led unto the Bar in manner of an Erl worthyly
arrayede, and with a swerd gert about him, and hosed and spored. Tho spoke Sir
Antonie in this mannere. Sir Andrew, quoth he, the King deed unto you much
Honor, and made you Earl of Cardoill, And Thou, as a traitor unto thy Lord the
King, laddest his people of this Country, that should have holp him at the
battaille of Beighland, away by the Country of Copeland, and thorugh the
Erldome of Lancaster. Wherefore our Lord the King was scom^ited there of the
Scottis thorugh thy tresoun and ^alsenes, and if thou had come betymes, he
had head the maistrye. And all that tresoun thou dedest for the sum of Gold
and Silver, that thou vnderfeng of James Duglas a Scotte, the Kings enemy.
And our Lord the King is will is that the order of Knighthode, by the which
thou vnderfeng all in honor and in wurshipe oppon thy body, ben all brought
unto naught, and thy State undone, that other Knights of lower degree, now after
the be ware the which Lord has the auanced hugely in diverse Countrees of
England: and all now take ensample by the, Their.
here Lord afterward for to serve. Tho commanded he a knave anoon to hew of
his spores of his heles, And after he let break the swerd over his heed, the
which the King him gafe to keep and defend his land therewith when he made
him Erl of Cardoill. And after he let him unclothe of his Furred Taberd, and
his hoode, and of his furred Cotys, and of his gyrdell, and when this was done
Sir Antonie said him; Andrew, quoth he, now ert thou no Knight but a knave. And
so gave judgment on him that he should be drawn, hanged and quarterd, and his
head set on London Bridge, which was executed. Walsingham in his Ypodigma
remembers this, but briefly. And one adds that he was Th. Auensburie apud
Camden. in Brigant.
Calceis and Chirothecis exutus also. Some difference is in that of Sir Ralph
Gray condemnd of Treason by the Earl of Worcester high Constable of England
under Edward IV at Doncaster. The I. Stow.
preamble of the judgment was thus: Sir Ralph Gray, for thy treason, the King
had ordained that thou should have had thy spurs stricken off by the hard
heels, by the hand of the Master Cook, who is here ready to do as was
promised thee at the time that he took off thy spurrs, and said to thee as is
accustomed, that and thou be not true to the sovereign Lord, he shall smite
off thy spurrs with his Knife hard by the heels; and so showed him the Master
Cook ready to do his Office with his weapon and his Knife. (Of this more
where we speak of the Order of the Bath.) Moreover Sir Ralph Gray the King had
Ordeind, here thou may see, the Kings of Arms, and Heralds and thine own
proper coat of arms, which they should tear off thy body, and so should
thou as well be degraded of thy Worship, Noblesse and Arms, as of thy order of
Knighthood. Also here is another coat of thine Arms reuersed, the which thou
should have worn on thy body, going to thy death-wards; for that belongs
to thee after the law. Notwithstanding, the disgrading of Knighthood, and of
thine arms, and Noblesse the Ring pardons that, for thy noble Grandfather,
who suffered trouble for the Kings m^st noble predecessors. And then he gave
De Degradatione Militum consulas licet Segarum lib. 2. cap. 4. huc non libuit
transfer.
judgment on him. For a Corollarie to our Knights, I add that of Iehan le
Breton in his Chapter De appels de Mayhems, speaking thus in the Kings person:
Ascuns trespasses sont nequedent pluis punnissables, sicome trespass fait en
temps de peace a Chiualers au a autres gentz Honorables par Ribaus and par
autres Viles persons, en quel cas nous volons, que si ribaud soit atteint a la
suyte de chescum Chiualer, qu'il eit seru par felony sans desert de Chiualer
que le Ribaud perd son poin d' ont il trespassa. That a base fellow should
loose his hand for striking a Knight, excepted in time of Ioustes or
Torneaments. Of other particular attributes to Knight, by reason of distinct
orders, presently: after we have first spoken somewhat of Esquire. That name
challenges the next place here, although not by precedence, yet because it is
not so peculiar to certain time or place, as the Orders, and no more then the
general name of Knight.

Escuyer. Scutifer. (...). Armiger. Attendance by Esquires on the ancient
Gaulish Knights. Schilpor. Shield-knapa. Knave. Grand Escuyer. Tzaggae. Five
ranks of Esquires. When in England it began to be honorarie. The Collar of S.S.
How Armiger became significant as in our days. Peers. Lex terrae, and Amittere
legem Terrae. Exposition of gents de lour Condition in the Statut de
Proditoribus. Richard Earl of Cornwall, brother to Hen. III. would not
acknowledge the English Barons his Peers. Trial by Peers. Amerciament by
Peers. How a Bishop partakes of the prerogatives of the greater Nobility.
Pares Curtis. Douze pairs du France. Their iustitution. Patricius. (...) given
to Joseph by the Egyptians.

CHAP. X.
AS most other Dignities had their beginning out of some Officiarie
performance, so that of ESQVIRE, as we call it, or, as the French, Escuyer.
Both doubtless coming from Scutifer or scutarius (this the later Grecians
have in their (...)) which denoted him that bare the Shield or arms of his
Knight. Thence also Armiger and Scutigerulus are so vsd by In Casina.
Plautus; and of Butes, -- hic Dardanio Anchisae
Armiger ante fuit fidusque ad limina custos.
says AEneid. 9.
Virgil. And Tacitus, of Cartismandua Queen of the Brigantes, a British people
about now Yorkshire. Spreto Venusio (is fuit maritus) Armigerum eius Vello
catum in matrimonium regnumque accepit. So among the Graecians, (...), and
(...) are (in Euripides specially of the ancients) of like signification. And
the old Gaulish Knights sat at their Round Table attended by their Esquires,
whom Posidonius calls Apud Athenaeum Dipnosoph. 4. and Pausan. lib. 10.
(...) i. bearing their Sheilds. Whom, I guess, the same with the two (...) or
Ministers which accompanied every Gaulish Knight in the wars. And that
attendance, on their Knights at Table, well agrees with Chaucers supposition of
his Squire, that Curteis he was, lowly and seruisable,
And kerfte before his fader at the Table.
His Father was the Knight. In Holy Writ it is expressed by 1. Sam. cap. 14 and
16.
(...) i. ferens arma. The Longobards and their neighbors called him Schilpor
i. a Shield bearer. Paul Warnfred, of Rosemond wife to Alboin one of their
Kings: Consiliumque mox cum Helmichi, qui regis Schilpor, hoc est Armiger, and
collactaneus erat, vt regem interficeret, inijt. In like sense was the German
Verstegan.
Schildknapa, or Shield-knabe, or Knave vsd. So Johannes de Temporibus is
rememberd to have been Shield-knaue to Charles le maine; Latin Story calls him
Armiger. For howsoever time has brought the word Knave to a denotation of ill
quality, it was the same with the French Garcon or Valet, or our English Boy
or Servant, and perhaps alone sometimes vsd for Escuyer (as the word literally
imports) in such sort as Genus is for species.

For none so proud that dare me deny
Knight nor knave, Chanon, Priest ne Nonne
To tell a tale plainly as they conne
says Dan Prolog. in excid. Th^barum.
Lidgate. And old Merchants tale.
Ieffrey:

As, for to spare in household thy dispense,
A true servant does more diligence
Thy good to keep than does thin own wife:
For the will claim half part all her life.
And if that thou be sick so God me save
Thy very own friends or a true Knave
Woll keep thee better, than she that waits aye
After thy good and has done many a day.
where Servant and Knave are as Synonymies. And knapa anciently, kn^^b and
knave are but different in pronunciation or orthographie. The name of the
French Grand Esouyer (he is Master of the Horse) had, by original, like
reason, howeuer some will otherwise. Lupanus calls him Magnus Scutarius, and
says that eius sunt parts Regi Equum ascensuro vel ex eo descensuro,
auxiliatricem praebere manum, eique ensem and balteum liliatos praeferre, vt
olim Scutum, quod nominis nomenclatura ostendit. He conjectures they so called
him by imitation of the Eastern Empire, where the (...) or (...) vsd solemnly,
in all places, and times, except special feast days (when it was the office
of the Tzaggae, that is those which provided the imperial Shoes called
Tzaggia) to bear before 1. Curopalat. (...).
the Emperor the (...) i. Diuum Velum or Standard (as the French Ori(...)mbe)
and the (...) i. the Emperors Shield in a case. But, why in disquisition
hereof, one need fly to imitation, I see not, when the thing self of bearing
the Shield was so common, and in like form, to most Nations. The reason of the
name in these apapears; and how it was first as others, officiarie, but became
thence to be merely honorarie. A fiuefold division of those whose dignities are
known by it, you have in that our most learned Clarenceulx. The first and
Omisit hoc primum genus Glouer Somerset in diuisione sua quadruplici apud
Segarum lib. 4. cap. 14. But, in reading this division, remember the late
decree about the Baronets, and the consequences thereof. See it in the nexr
chapter in part, and that Tiptasts rule before page 341
chief of them are Esquires of the Budie, the second, Eldest sons of Knights,
and their eldest sons successively. The third, eldest sons of the younger
sons of Barons, and others of the Greater Nobility. The fourth such to whom
the King gives arms with this title, or creats into it by honoring them with a
Silver Collar of S S. and siluerd Spurs, whence (says he) in the Western
parts, they are called White spurs for distinction from Knights that wear
gilt spurs. The right of primogeniture in their lineall posterity is
accompanied also with it. The fist such as have some eminent office in the
Common-welth, or serve in some place of better note in the Household. And, as his
observation instructs him, the name of Esquire began to be honorarie about
Richard II. And see in the Prefaee one made Esquire by patent with Arms given
under this Richard. For that of the Collar of SS; a Justice under Newton 14.
Hen. 6. fol. 15. vide si vis, Auctorem Reliquiarum, page 231. de S. Simplicio.
Henry VI. upon the bench, thus: If a writ of debt be brought against the
Serieant of the Kitchen, in the house of the King, or against the Sergeant of
an Office, in the house of the King, I shall name him Cook, and my writ is good
enough, and yet he has a Collar, and is a Gentleman, which I add, because
he makes the place and Collar to give but the name of Gentleman. Nor indeed is
an Esquire in Reputation now other then a Gentleman of the better Rank, having
his honor either from some particular of descent or Function, or created into
it by the King, as into the first step of eminency before common Gentry.
Neither rests there any community now with the name and the Dignity: as the
word imports. Neither can I believe that the interpretation of Armiger by the
bearing of Arms, in that sense as to bear arms in Blazon is vsd, is to be
admitted. The Arms signified in Armiger are the materials of Arms, and
another arms, not his to whom the word was anciently given. And no otherwise
was it in the ancienter times of States now remaining, then under the Romans,
and in such sense as in that of Valentinians indiscretion. Mortem (says my
Tiro Prosper. in Ch^^nico, edit. Pithoeana.
Author) Aetij mors Ualentiniani longo post Tempore consecuta est, tam
imprudenter non declinata, vt interfecti Aelij amicos Armigerosque eius sibimet
sociaret. And how Esquiors were by that name attendant on great men in the
field, the stories of Froissart specially and the like instruct, where the V.
Ordination. Classis Regis Fr. in Adam Myrimuth. Ms.
meanest of the Army also are titled by this name. And how Knights and
Esquiers attended on Noblemen, and of their liueries, and number, you may see
what is worth observation in that Apud I. Stouaeum in Notitia Londini, page 86.
account made by H. Leicester, Cofferer to Thomas Earl of Lancaster under
Edward the second. You may also remember the Retainer 13. Hen. 4. tit. Entri^
57. v. etiam Mar. Sanud. Torsel. Secret. Fidel. lib. 3. part. 7. c. 1.
in time of Henry IV. of one to be Esquire in time of Peace. But, because it
was the next to Knight, and both of them had their root in things of generous
performance, no name happened fitter to distinguish the better sort of
Gentlemen from Knight, and those (as I may say) of the vulgar Gentry.

These are all the general Titles superior to Gentry. Of the particular
Orders of Knighthood, by themselves, and those of Barons with the rest upward
we call the Greater Nobility, the others beneath them the Less Nobility.
And as Dukes, Marquisses, Earls, Vicounts, and Barons are Peers, and by that
name specially known; in like sort Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen and Yeomen
(being Freemen and Denizens) of all sorts in our Law are as of the same rank
for the Title of Paritie. Therefore in the Grand Charter where no Freeman is
to be imprisoned, disseised, vtlawd, banished, or otherwise made subject to any
Judgment nisi per legale iudicium Parium suorum, vel per legem terrae, i. but
by the lawful judgment of his Peers, or by wager of law. For so is lex
terrae, under favor, there to be interpreted: and amittere legem terrae, that
is, to lose the liberty of swearing in any Court is vsd by old Glanuil. lib.
2. cap. 3. and 19.
Autors of our Law, for the Punishment of the Champion overcome, or yielding,
in battle upon a writ of Right, and of Jurors found guilty in a writ of
Attaint. And Vadiare legem, and facere legem, are usual in every days records
of this age: neither in those elder times was any trial more frequent both in
Real and Personal actions, then Ley Gager, howsoever since it is restrained
to some two or three personal actions, as Det, Detinue, Account.) That Parium
suorum has been in cases, where trials of criminal matter in fact have been,
so always interpreted that, what lay Baron soever be arraigned by indictment
of Treason, Felony, or what is capital, he shall be tried by Barons (and
under that name I include all above Barons) and not by any of less Nobility,
the rest not being his Peers. But any inferior man in like criminal causes
has his trial indifferently by Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen, or Yeomen, which
in law are taken for Pares. The like interpretation upon exception, was made in
the Holinshed.
arraignment of Sir Nicholas Throekmorton under Q. Mary of the words soi^
attaint per gentes de lour condition. i. be attainted by men of their
condition, in the Statut de Proditoribus of XXV. Ed. III. and Gentlemen,
Esquires, and Yeomen were indifferently held as men of his condition, although
he had the honor of Knighthood. Nor is the common practice at this day
otherwise. Upon that privilege of the Grand Charter, Richard Earl of
Cornwall, son to King John, grounded his answer, when upon his opposition in
clayming his own interest, against a grant made by his brother Hen. III. to one
Waleram a Dutchman, of a Manor indeed belonging to his Earldome, he was, by
Letters required by the King to permit Waleram quiet possession, but with a
beseeming answer, he showed his own right, maintained it, and offered 28. Hen.
3. in Matthew. Paris.
Curiae Regiae subire iudicium and Magnatum regni. Rex vero and Iustitiarius
(the words are in Matthew Paris: and this Justice was Hubert de Burgo Chief
Justice of England, and then newly created Earl of Kent) audientes nominare
Magnates, maxima sunt indignatione succensi. Hereon the King very hastily and
much moved, inioyns his brother either to render quiet possession to Waleram or
depart the English soil. But the Earl, constantly: quod nec Waleramo ius suum
redderet, nec sine iudicio Parium suorum a regno exiret. Which was spoken with
more judgment then what he answered to the Baronage upon his return out of
Germany, where, by one faction, he was chosen Emperor. The Baronage required
his oath, for a peaceful aid and unity with them in ordering the State, and
the matters touching his stay in England, but he utterly refusd it, and with
looks of intermination, adds, Non habeo Parem in Anglia: Filius n. Regis
praeteriti sum and frater presentis, Comesque Cornubiae. For plainly, in the
Noble Baronage of England, all are Peers, Precedence of Birth, or title
notwithstanding; that is among themselves, not to the King. Which Bracton thus
affirms: Parem non habet (Rex) in Regno suo, quia sic amitteret preceptum, cum
par in parem non habeat imperium: and thereto one of our 22. Ed. 3. sol. 3 b.
and vide 25. Ed. 3. sol. 55. b.
yeer-books expressly accords making yet as if, I know not upon what ground,
that till Edward I. his time (who, they say, ordaind, he would be sued by
petition) the King might have been commanded by a Praecipe, as any other
subject, which includes some more Parity then Royal Majesty can admit. But,
as a most understanding Stanford in Prerog. Reg. cap. 15.
Judge has obserud, its not likely that ever the law could be so: and by
Bracton its manifest that under Henry III. it was not so. In whose name should
the Writ be directed? I know some question has been anciently touching the v.
K^lway fol. 171. in 6. Hen. 8 and Br. tit. Peticion 12. and tit. Prerogat. 31.
and Matthew. Par. fol 563. de Comite Cestriae.
high Constable of England for this point. I must not here dispute that. But
these Peers have, by interpretation of the Grand Charter and use of the Common
law, place only in criminal causes now, and capital, not in trial of common
pleas. And in Capital so only, that then Barons are tried by Barons when upon
Indictment they are arraigned. For if an Appeal of Murder, Robbery or the
like be brought against a Baron, he is (it being the suit of the party) to be
tried by a Common Jury. That difference has time produced; as likewise
another part of the Grand Charter touching the Amerciament of Earls and
Barons, per Pares suos, and secundum modum delicti, is, by use in the Videsis
Casum Griesly. Comment. 8. D. Coke fol. 40.
Common law, grown very diverse from what the words are. And the amerciament
(for the in misericordia) of an Earl, Baron, and Bishop is five pound in
certain, and the books give the reason where that amerciament occurres, because
they are Peers of the Realm. And since Dukes have been here, theirs is
accounted 19. Ed. a sol. 9. v. 38. Ed. 3. fol 31. a. 21. Ed. 4. fol. 77. Br.
tit. Amerciament. 47.
ten pounds. But for the Paritie of those which should amerce the(...) seems
that even when the Grand Charter was granted the Barons of the Exchequer and
the Kings lustices were held for their sufficient Pares. Out of Bracton, is my
Testimony. Comites vero vel Barons (says he) non sunt amerciandi nisi per
Pares suos and secundum modum delicti and hoc per Barons Scaccarij, vel coram
ipse Rege. Therefore in a Writ of Right brought against Henry Earl of
Northumberland 1. Hen. 6. sol. 7. a.
under Henry VI. where, upon Battle joined and default, judgment final was to
be given against the Earl, with the in Misericordia, the addition, in the
expressing of it on the Bench, says, Mes in tant que le Count est un Peer de
Realm il sera amercie par ces peers, solonque lestatute and pur ceo Nous
mittons amerciament en certain. And, although in this point of Amerciament, a
Bishop be in the smae degree with a lay Baron, yet for trial Temp. Hen. 8.
tit. Trial 142. de Episcopo Rosfensi.
by his Peers in capital crimes he is otherwise, because that is personal;
and his being a Baron is ratione Officij and Tenurae, not of personal
Nobility. Yet also in cases touching his estate, as in Real actions, or
personal (which may touch his Realtie) he has the prerogative of a lay
Baron, as not to have the Jury returned upon a 13. Ed. 3. Challenge 115. and
Enquest. 43. and 8. Eliz. Die. fol. 246. vide Plowd. Com. 1. c. Newdigat. and
14. and 15. ^lizab. Die. fol. 318. a.
Uenire facias without a Knight in it, which, for both lay and spiritual
Barons, is allowd for a good challenge to the Array, as a privilege of
Nobility. The reason of that double Parity in England, that is, that all
Barons and Dignities above them are Peers of the Realm, and all other under
them are Peers also among themselves, I imagined to proceed from the Feudall
Customs of Pares Curtis, Domus, or Palatij. For as all Tenants either Knights,
Squires, or Yeomen (Freemen) to the King or Subject, are in regard of their
Lords Court, and their own like Tenancies, Peers, known by that name of Pares
Curtis in the Feudalls, so Barons, Earls, Dukes, and the like, being with us
in England Tenants in regard of their Baronies, Earldomes and Dukedomes, only
(except those ancient possessors of XIII. Knights Fees and a third part, which
were so Pares Baronum also) to the King, or rather to the Crown, had among
themselves a special and distinct Parity, by reason of their Lords sole
Majesty; and might not amiss be styled Pares Regij, or Coronae, because the
very names of their Dignities supposd their Tenures of greater note, and of the
Crown necessarily and immediately. Whereas the other inferior Dignities as they
had to do with Tenures or express Offices, were far more common as they had
regard to subjects. Although in this difference, a sufficient exactnes of
reason be not, yet I suspect that a better is hardly found. The Pairs and
Pairries of France, or their Douze pairs are of another kind, and as by a
special honor of State so called. Of them were anciently VI. lay and as many
ecclesiastique. The lay were the Dukes of Guienne, of Burgundy and Normandy,
the Earls of Tholouze, Flanders, and Champagne. The ecclesiastique, the
Archbishop of Rheims (in regard of his prerogative of anointing the King,
chief of them all) the Bishops of Laon, and Langres (in reputation Dukes also)
the Bishops of Beaunais, Chalons, and Noyon, Earls. Of these, the Earldom of
Flanders being now in another Dominion, and the other five lay Dignities united
to the Crown of France, the Ecclesiastique only remain. But so, that the
pleasure of the State has since reordained diverse other Pairries (as they call
them) Bretagne, Du Haillan. liver 3. Du Tillet, Plusours.
Burbon, Aniou, Berry, Orleans, and others. Their Dignity claimed precedence
of what other Princes of the blood soever; and its reported that at the
Coronation of Charles VI. Philip the first of that name Duke of Burgundy had
place of his elder brother Jews Duke of Aniou, upon this reason. But at the
Coronation of Francis II. the Q. Dowager Catharine disliking that any of the
later instituted Peers (those ancient Cl. Fauchet de Dig. lib. 2.
being now extinct) should have preeminence of the Kings children, so ordered
that her other sons all clothed in the habit of Peers, should go immediately
after the King. The first creation of them by the common opinion is referd to
Charles le magne, and some neater judgments dare follow it. But its not likely
that they were instituted until the Dignities of Duke and Earl grew
Hereditarie, which was not till after Charlemagne. Much less should judgment
refer them to our British Arthur (a time more then M. years since) as some
do, persuaded by a tradition in our British story, which the great Lawier
Hotoman also assents to. Indeed in Geffrey of Monmouth they are spoken of by
the name of XII. Consules, in the life of Arthur; and Robert of Gloucester, in
Arthur, calls them the Douze Pairs.
Dosseperes of France. Another and a reformd opinion is, that about M. C. LXXX.
They were instituted by Jews VII. which I could have soon credited had I not
seen that the British story turned into Latin just about Jews VII. his age by
that Geffrey of Monmouth, as also Hotoman. Francogall. cap. 14. and Gaguin.
Chron. 4. cap. 1.
Geruase of Tilburie in his Otia Imperialia dedicated to the Emperor Otho IV.
even next that very time, had mentioned the XII. Peers generally, with
reference of them to Arthur. Which, it seems, they would never have don,
although their professions had been mere Poetical fiction, had the name been
in their present ages newly instituted. And many think (and not without good
reason) that the British story was, although of no great credit, yet ancient
before the translation. Others De Villiers ad Fulberti Ep. 96.
refer them to K. Robert or Rupert. He raignd twixt M. and M. XXX. I will
beleeu that about him they might have their original, because before him no
such testimony, as is sufficiently credible, instructs us of them and the
number. But I will rather here play the mere Sceptique. Yet that before this
Jews, France had its Cour de Pairs, or Conuentus Parium (which after the
institution of the Douze pairs kept the name) is plain by Fulbert Bishop of
Chartres his mention of that Conuentus in his Epistles. He liud under K.
Robert. Neither were they, by institution, Bodin. de Repub. 3. cap. 1. Tillius
Comm. de reb. Gall. lib. 2. alij.
otherwise then as special Privy Counselors of State. And doubtless had
their name of Pares from a proportionat place in Court to that of the Pares
Curtis in the Feudalls. And were titled from the Paritie twixt themselves,
whence an old Romant Gualter d' Auignon chez Fauchet de Dignit. 2.
calls them Compagnons: Assez de mal me fit vostre oncle Ganelans
Qui trahit en Espagne les douez Compagnons.
So do they both in France, with us, and elsewhere well interpret the Persian
Xenoph. Cyropaed. 2.
(...) i. as if you should say, compagnons en honeur. Some, and those of no
small note, have thought that the French name of Pairs came out of Patrices or
Patricij which indeed were of like Dignity in the Declining Empire, and first
Zosim. hist. 2. vide vero libri huius extremam.
instituted (far different from those occurring in the elder Roman story) by
Constantine the great. And howeuer in a Constitution of Theodosius and Novel.
tit. 46. edit. a Pith.
Valentinian, any that was twice Consul had precedence of a Patricius, yet
Sublimis Patriciatus honor (by the Emperor C. de Coss. l. 3. and v. C. de
Decur. l. 66.
Zeno) caeteris omnibus anteponitur, and in the gift of it to Cassiodor. Var.
3. epist. 5. vide Subscript. Priuilegio Tertulli Coenobio Casinensi.
Importunus by Theodorique, it is called munus plenarium Dignitatum. The
deduction of it is from Pater, and as if they were called the Kings or Emperors
Fathers. (...), says Authent. 81. in Praefat.
Justinian of them, which in a manner is interpreted in that of his also C. de
Coss L. S. Sancimus, V. Cassiodor. Var. 6. form. 2.
Qui a nobis loco patris honorantur. Whence a Patricius is called (...), i.
Father of the State, and Antholog. li. 4.
(...), and, by composition of the word, Luitprand. lib. 1. cap. 7. and 9.
(...), wherewith the Emperor Leo (about DCCCXC.) honored Zautzas father to his
delicate Concubine Zoe, (...), i. having newly invented this Dignity, which
was not before, as Cedren's words are. Neither was it new then (as to some
other Nations) but only in composition. For Haman in the letters of Artaxerxes
is said to have been so much Es^h. cap. 16. Comm. 8. and de hac re consulas
Plutarchum in Lucullo.
honored, (...), i. that he was called our Father: and that (...) Abrech
proclaimed before Joseph, is by Genes. 41. Com. 43.
the Chalde of Onkelos and Jonathan, and the Hierosolymitan Targum taken for
Father of the tender King, or tender Father of the King, although some
interpret it, kneel down. The title of Patricius was of such honor that Charles
le Magne before he was crowned Emperor, had it as an additament of Greatness.
That it was as the same with (...), or Magister anciently, as a learned Meurs.
Gloss. Graeco-barb. in (...).
man would, I have not yet persuaded my self. But of Peers and Patrices thus
much.

Bannerets. Chiualers a Bannier. Drappeau quarre. Baron. Of France. Bannerets
in England. The form of making Sir John Chandos a Banneret. Bannerets not
created by Patent. (...). Baronet. Baroneti for Bannereti in old Monks. A
Banneret discharged from being Knight of the Parliament. The new title of
Baronet created by our present Soueraign. The Decree of their precedence.
Knights of the Bath. France and England. The form of their creation with us.
The Riband they are to wear until some Prince or Lady pull it off. Knights
of the Collar. Torquati: Order of the Garter. S. George; special particulars
of him. The Round Table. Della Nuntiata. Order Du Toison d'Or. Of S. Michael.
De Saint Esprit. De l'Estoille. De Croissant. Some obscure and obsolet Orders
of France. De la Banda. Of S. Andrew. Of the Elephant. Of the Sword. Of the
Burgundian Cross. Di sangue di saluatore. Di Santo Steffano. Di S. Marco.
Peetermen. Why Religious Orders are here omitted.

CHAP. XI.
OF ORDERS, some are Religious only, and destinate to some particular actions,
as the Templars anciently, the Hospitalars, the Ordo Teutonicorum in Prussia,
and diverse other of like nature, since instituted in Italy specially and in
Spain, against the Turks, in such places where they are instituted, and being
under some Religious Order, and merely de la Croce, or of the Cross. I reckon
them rather as officiarie Knights then honorarie, and omit them, because also
they occur every where else. Others are merely Civil and honorarie. And, of
these, some are such as have their special honor in most parts of the Western
Christendom, others only in the particular Countries where their first being
was. The first sort of this last kind are BANNERETS, and of the BATH; and first
of them Bannerets, are Chiualers a Banier, Chiualers a drappeau quarre, or
Equites Vexillarij from their right of bearing a Banner, Standard, or Square
Ensign in the wars, with their Arms on them, whereas Knights Bachelors may
not do so. The Germans call them Banner-heers. In an old French Author: Anthony
de la salle chez L'oyseau des Grandes seig. cap. 5.. 50. and des Cheuale^s a
Bannier, vois Pasquier Recerch. du France Liu. 2. cap. 9.
Le Baron est inuesty auec un Drappeau quarre: and le Banneret auec un drappeau
in escusson, that is, the Baron is made by giving him a square Ensign, or
Banner, but the Banneret, by an Ensign in Scutchion fashion, or a Pennon. And
the Customs of Poictou, as L'oyseau, cites: Le Comte, Vicomte ou Baron peut
porter Banniere, qui est adire qu'il peut en guerre, and en armoiries, porter
ses arms en quarre: ce que ne peut le seigneur Chastellan, que seulement les
peut porter en form d'escusson. Yet now both with them and elsewhere the Square
Banner is a proper and denominating Ensign to the Banneret, which is one
(says the same L'oyseau) to whom the King has given power to advance his
Banner, although he be neither Baron, Viscont, or Chastellan, but he ought to
be of good possession, and have under him x. Vassals, and such means as are
able to maintain a troop of horse. Until about Edward III, they were not in
England, as the learned Clarenceulx well conjectures. That King ereated Pat.
15. Ed. 3. part. 2. memb. 22. and 23.
John Coupland a Banneret for his great service in taking David of Bruis II. of
that name King of Scots, in the battle at Durham. In the formal Creation of
them in ^ater time, the use is, that betwixt two ancient Knights vsher'd with
Trumpets and Heralds, the Deserving be brought before the King or his
Lieutenant, bearing a Pennon or Guydon charged with his arms, the end of
which, after some honorable speeches, is commanded to be cut off, that so it
may be a square Banner. Somewhat like is that in Froissart, only but in
cutting of the Pennon. Where the noble John Chandos, before the successful
war had by the Black Prince aiding Don Piedro of Castile. (Froissart
corruptly, as in many other, calls him Dampietre) against the bastard Henry,
brought his Banner charged with his Arms, and wrapped up to the Prince, with
these words: Monseigneur, voies cy ma banniere; ie la vous baille par tell
manniere qu'il vous plaise la desuellopper, and que au iourduy ie la puisse
lever: care (dieu mercy) i'ay bien de quoy terre and heritage pour tenir estate
ainsi come appartient a ce. Then the Prince and Don Piedro took his Banner and
gave it him unfolded, answering him, Iehan vees cy vostre banniere: Dieu vous
en laisse vostre preu saire. Whereupon the noble Chandos goes to his Company,
and with much joy on every side, his Banner was advanced and born by a Squire.
But no Knight Banneret (says Segar, now Garter) can be made but in the war,
and the King present, or when his Standard Royal is displayed in in the field.
Neither do the Rot. Vascon. 13. Ed. 3. memb. 13. pro W. de la Pool. memb. 1.
pro R. de Cobham, and Rot. Pat. 4. Ed. 6. pro Radulpho Fane.
Patents, which speak of any created into this Dignity, prove that by the
Patent they were made, but the recital is of the Creation, and some revenue
given to the maintenance of the Honor. So are those of Coupland, William de la
Poole, and Reginald de Cobham under Edw. III. and of Sir Ralph Fane for his
service at Mustleborough under Edward VI. where the recital is, by ignorance
of him that drew the Patent, Statum and Dignitatem Baronetti for Baneretti,
whereof more presently. In some old laws Parl. 7. Jacob. 1. cap. 101. and vide
Skene de Verb. significatiene.
of Stotland they are called Banrents (which some derive from the Banner being
rent when the Pennon is took off) but there mentioned as they are among the
number of Parlamentarie Lords. The name of Bannier and Banneret have both some
kindred with the old (...), whence (...) for a Standard Bearer, in the Grecians
of Middle times. Vexillum quod Bandum appellant, says Paul Warnfred. And
Suidas: (...), i. the Romans call their Ensign in war Bandum. It Is derived
out of the Carian language, Steph. (...). in (...).
wherein (...) signified Victory ((...)) into Latin, by some affirming that in
Latin it was vsd for Victory, or (...). The good luck, included in the
interpretation, might allow it, but I rather think, the name of (...) applied
to their Labarum (their Standard) bearing a symbol of our Savior, was the
cause that made any man think that Bandum signified Uictorie, which is
comprehended in (...). With this right of having a Banner, remember that which
is already spoken of touching the ancient giving of Provinces to Dukes,
Counts, and Marquesses, to which you may add that anon deliuerd, of the Turkish
Sanzacbeglar. Although those Dignities are different, yet may they be here
well thought on. That community of the right of advancing a square Ensign
charged with Arms, which both Barons and Bannerets enjoy, was the cause why the
name of Banneret and Baronet has been by some confounded, and the one
anciently written for the other. And therefore in a challenge to the grand
Assise 22. Ed. 3. sol. 18. a. tit. Challenge 119.
under Edward III. one was challenged pur ce que il fuit a baner (or as the
Abridgment has it, a Banneret) but it was not allowd, and the reason is given,
car s'il soit a baner and ne tient pas per baronie, il serra en l'assise For,
Barons are exempted from Iuries and Assizes and, it seems, this question
supposd a Banneret so near a Baron in Dignity, that nothing should have wanted
but the tenure per Baroniam. And in another year 35. Hen. 6. sol. 46.
Baronet is expressly for a Parlamentarie Baron, as, in the Annals of Sub A.
1302
Ireland, quadraginta Baroneti are for XL. Bannerets. And the like occurring in
other Monks and Story, of that kind, is to be so understood. No more of these
Bannerets, after I have transcribed a Writ of discharge of being Knight of the
Parliament, because he was a Banneret, directed to the Sheriff of Surry, for one
Sir Thomas Camoys under Claus. 7. Rich. 2. memb. 32. in dorso.
Richard II. It speaks thus: Rex Vicecomiti Surriae, quia vt accepimus tu
Thomam Camoys Chiualer, qui Bannerettus est, sicut quamplures antecessorum
suorum extiterunt, ad essendum vnum Militum venientium ad proximum Parlamentum
pro-communitate Comitatus praedicti de assensu eiusdem Comitatus elegisti, Nos,
aduertentes quod huiusmodi Banneretti ante haec tempora in Milites Comitatus
ratione alicuius Parlamenti eligi minime consueuerunt, ipsum de Officio
Militis, ad dictum Parlamentum pro communitate Comitatus predicti venturi,
exonerari volumus, and so commands him to choose another. But that of BARONET
became a new erected distinct Title under our present Sovereign, who, for
certain disbursments toward the Plantation in Vlster, created diverse into this
Dignitle, and made it hereditarie. The particulars of the Patent shall instruct
you. Ordinamus (says the King) ereximus constituimus and creauimus quendam
statum, Gradum, Dignitatem, nomen and Titulum Baronetti (Anglice of a Baronet)
infra hoc regnum Angliae perpetuis Temporibus duraturum, and then gives the
title to the Created, to him and his heirs Males of his body. And that he
shall have precedence in all writings, Sessions, and Salutations before all
Knights, as well of the Bath, as Knights Bachelors, and also before all
Bannerets, created, or hereafter to be created, excepted only illis Militibus
Bannerettis quos sub vexillis Regijs, in exercitu Regali, in aperto bello, and
ipso Rege personaliter present explicatis and non aliter creari contigeret.
And that their wives and eldest sons respectively have like precedence. That
they should be impleded, and sue by the addition of Baronet. And that to the
name of them, and the heirs males of their bodies in sermon Anglicano, and
omnibus scriptis Anglicanis praeponatur haec additio, videlicet Anglice, SIR.
And thar their wives have the titles of Lady, Madame, and Dame: with a grant,
quod nec nos nec Heredes vel successores Nostri de caetero in posterum
erigemus, ordinabimus, constituemus, aut creabimus infra hoc Regnum nostrum
Angliae aliquem alium gradum, Ordinem, nomen, titulum, Dignitatem, sieve statum,
sub vel infra gradum, dignitatem, sieve statum Baronum huius Regni nostri
Angliae, qui erit vel esse possit superior vel aequalis Gradui and Dignitati
Baronettorum praedictorum. And further, that after the proposed number of CC.
made, quod tunc nos non cre^^imus; vel praeficiemus aliquam aliam personam vel
personas in Baronettum vel Baronettos Regni nostri Angliae, sed quod Numerus
dictorum CC. Baronettorum ea ratione de tempore in tempus minuetur, and in
minorem numerum cedet and redigetur. Upon point of precedence a great
controversy grew afterward between these new Baronets and the younger sons of
Viscounts and Barons; and after the Counsel on both parts three several days
at large heard by his Majesty in person, it 28. Maij. 10. Iacobi Regis.
was decreed, adjudged, and established that the younger sons of Viscounts and
Barons shall take place and precedence before all Baronets. -- And that such
Bannerets as shall be made by the Kings Majesty, his heirs and successors under
his or their Standard displaied in an Army Royal in open War, and the King
personally present, for the term of the lives of such Bannerets, and no longer
(according to the most ancient and noble institution) shall for ever hereafter
in all places and upon all occasions, take place and precedence as well before
all other Bannerets whatsoever (no respect being had to the time and prioritie
of their Creation) as likewise before the younger sons of Viscounts and
Barons, and also before all Baronets. And again that the younger sons of
Visconts and Barons, and also all Baronets, shall in all places and upon all
occasions take place and precedenee before all Bannerets whatsoever, other then
such as shall be made by the King himself, his heirs and successors in person,
and in such special case manner, and form as aforesaid. -- And that the
Knights of the most honorable Order of the Garter, the Privy Counselors of
his Majesty his heirs and successors, the Master of the Court of Wards and
Liueries, The Chancellor and under Treasurer of the Exchequer, Chancellor of
the Duchy, the chief Justice of the Court commonly called the Kings bench, the
Master of the Rolls, the chief Justice of the Court of Common pleas, the chief
Baron of the Exchequer, and all other the Judges and Barons of the degree of
the Coife of the said Court^ now, and, for the time being, shall, by reason of
their Honorable order and employment of State and Justice, have place and
precedencie in all places and upon all occasions before the younger sons of
Visconts and Barons, and before all Baronets, any custom, use, ordinance, or
other thing to the contrary notwithstanding. But, that no other person or
persons whatsoever under the degree of Barons of Parliament shall take place
before the said Baronets, except only the eldest sons of Viscounts and
Barons, and others of higher degree, whereof no question ever was or can be
made. And in the same Decree his Majesty further granted to knight the present
Baronets which were then no Knights, and that the heirs males of the body of
every Baronet hereafter when he shall be of XXI. years, Upon knowledge thereof
given to the Lord Chamberlain of the Household or Vicechamberlaine for the time
being, or in their absence to any other Officer attending upon his Majesty's
person shall be Knighted by his Majesty his heirs and successors. And that the
Baronets and their descendants shall and may bear either in a Canton in their
Coat of Arms, or in an Inscutcheon at their election, the Arms of Vlster,
that is, a field Argent, a hand Gueules. And also that the Baronets for the
time being, and the heirs males of their bodies shall have place in the Armies
of the Kings Majesty his heirs and successors in the gross, near about the
Royal Standard of the King, his heirs and successors, for the defense of the
same. And lastly, that the Baronets and the heirs males of their bodies shall
have two assistants of the Body to support the Pall, a Principal Mourner and
four assistants to him at their funerals, being the mean betwixt a Baron and
a Knight. I have transcribed this, because out of it may be collected somewhat
touching other Dignities; and although a Baronet, being a descendible honor, is
not properly among Knights, yet, because, by the Decree, a Knighthood is so
due(...) it, I shall not be much subject to error of method for putting it
here, as occasion also was offered. Those of the BATH were anciently among the
old Franks. Prisci Franci (says Idem mos in Hispanis olim Hieronym. Roman.
apud Menen. in Equest. Ord. vbi de Banda. Ad equest^em dignitatem veteres ritus
and solennes reuocasse Franciscum 1. Galliarum Regem scribit Hadr. Iunius in
Batauiae cap. 19.
Du Tillet) ceremonias instituendis Equitibus multas adhibuerunt; vt prius
vigilarent diu, Balneisque and alijs rebus vterentur. -- Quarum ceremoniarum
vsus memoria nostra perstat in Anglia, vbi viros eiusmodi vocant Balneorum
Equites. The eldest creation of them among us rememberd, is at the Coronation
of Henry IV. (for to talk of Julius Caesar's knights of the Bath is the worst
of what is ridiculous.) He then in the Tower made XLVI. and at Coronations,
Royal Marriages, Christning or Knighting the Prince and such like were wont
many to be made. The particulars of the more ancient form of Creation, are at
large by others Segar, Honor Milit. lib. 2. cap. 11.
deliuerd; and I had rather refer you to them then transcribe so much. In these
times the chief ceremonies are (not much differing from the old) that such as
out of the fairest flowers of Nobility are to be thus honored, the Camd. in Ord.
day before the creation, heremit-like in ashcolour robes, in a hood and a
linen cap, and booted, go to Prayers, there to offer themselves first to God;
then, attended every one by two Esquires and a Page (remember here the
Trimarcisia which we speak of out of Pausanias) they sup together. Thence into
a chamber. Where every one has his bed furnished with red Covering, charged
with his Arms, and by, his bathing Tub couerd with linen clothes. In this,
after some devotions they wash themselves. Next morning they are raised with
Music. Then the Constable of England, the Marshall, and others hereto by the
King appointed, give every of them his oath, binding him to the specall honor of
God, his Church, and the King, and to the defense of Widows, Virgins, Orphans.
Then vsherd by the Kings Musicians and Heralds they go in their Heremit-like
weeds, to Morning Prayer, whence they are in like form brought into their
ch(...)er. There they change their habits, and put on a red silk robe, a white
hat, with like feathers upon a linen cap, and white Gloves. Then they take
horse, their horses bearing a Cross on the forehead. Before every of them,
their Pages on horseback bear a Sword hatched with gold in a Belt, and on it
gilt spurs hanging. The two Esquires riding on each side. Before them,
Trumpets. In this solemnity they go to Court, where, by two ancient Knights,
every of them is led to the King. The Page delivers the Sword and Belt and the
Spurs to the Lord Chamberlain, he, with great reverence, to the King. The
King girds the Knight with it, and commands the two ancient Knights to put on
his Spurs, and they were wont, says the learned Clarenceulx, to kiss the
created's knees, with an acclamation of best wishes. Then they dine all
together, sitting all on one side of the Table, every one under his Shield.
They go to Evening Prayer to the Chapel, there offer their Swords, and with
another Oblation redeem them. As they come back, the Kings chief Cook, showing
them his knife, warns them that they prove themselves good and faithful
Knights, which, if they do not, he menaces them to cut off their Spurs. On the
Coronation day they wear a blew robe, and wait girded with their Swords and
Spurred, having on their left shoulder a hood and a ribband or such like of
white silk: Of this ribband, thus Segar Charter, describing the old fashion. He
shall be apparelled in a blew Gown, with the Manches open in the manner of a
Priest, and he shall have at his left shoulder a lace of white silk hanging,
which he shall wear uppermost on his Garment, so long till he have gained
honor in Arms, and be recorded by some noble Knights, Esquires, and Heralds
of Arms, for some memorable deeds done by him, or by some Noble Prince or Noble
Lady, which may cut away the lace from the knights shoulder, saying Sir, we
have heard much of your renown, and that you have done in diverse places to the
great honor of Chivalry for your self and him that made you knight: Therefore
reason would that this lace be taken from you. This Order is now special and
in another Rank before common Knights, yet it seems that anciently none were at
all knighted but thus, if you regard only the chiefest of the ceremonies.
Remember what we have before out of Iugulph. And for the Vigils, see the
Florilegus sub A. 1306.
relation of them kept in the Temple at the knighting of Prince Edward of
Caernaruan. And I remember Nicholas Upton that wrote de re Militari under
Henry VI. speaks of that wearing the Riband as belonging generally to Knights.
Most Knights then were in the more ancient days as Knights of the Bath; for
the more ancient ceremonies of creation remain in them only. And therefore,
howeuer the name hold not so universally, its not amiss to make them (as
Bannerets) such as have, or have had their distinct honor not so much limited
to any particular State.

Those two, Bachelors and of the Bath, you may comprehend under the general
name of Equites Aurati, or Caualieri di sprone, as Sansouino calls them, i.
knights of the spur. And most of the other Orders, which are appropriat to
their particular Countries, you may with him style Caualieri di Collana, or
Equites Torquati, i. such as for a special ensign of their honor, have some
special Chain, Collar, or such like ornament denoting it. I iterat special,
because also others have the right of wearing Collars given them, as it seems,
in that of John Gower a Noble English Poet (under. Richard II. and Hen. IV.)
buried in the North side of S. Mary Ouerie^ Church in Southwark, with his
statue on him, his head circled with a Chaplet of red Roses, and about his neck
a Collar of S S. But they have them as special gifts of private favor, and as
additaments to their honor, not as a note of their Order, except only such as
are created Esquires by a Torquium dator dictus Athelstanus Antiquiss. cuidam
scriptori apud Henric. Huntingdon. lib. 6. and de Torquibus a Romanorum Impp.
datis non est vt quid hic quis expectet.
Collar of S S. given. Therefore Sansouino speaking of Knights Bachelors, or of
the Spur, Portano (says he) similimente la Collana come i Prencipi, come puro
dono de chi li crea, and non come Segno d'ordine alcuno di Caualeria regolata.
Such kind of gifts are anciently found in the stories of Pharaoh, Mordechai,
and passages of the Maccabees, and in the Torques, Armillae, the like of the
Romans. And after the battle of Caleis Edward III. wearing a rich Chaplet
Froissart. vol. (...).
on his head, made of gold and stones, gave it to a worthy knight Eustace of
Ribaumont, commanding him to wear it all that year as the Kings favor. Among
Knights di Collana four are of special and of most honor: that of the Gartier
with us, of the Anunciada in Sauoy, of the Golden Fleece in Burgundy, and of
S. Michael and de Saint Esprit in France. Of them and some others briefly. That
most honorable Order Periscelidis sieve Garterij Ordo.
of the Gartier was (as is truly supposd) instituted here by Edward III. soon
after his victories against the French at Caleis. About M. CCC. L. Some and the
most part affirm, that the King dancing with the Queen, or rather the
Countess of Salisburie (whom he much affected) a Garter fell from her. The
King took it up, and ware it on his leg, and, whether upon the Queens jealousy,
or his Lords merry observing it, told them Honey soit que maly pense. And that
he would make it the most honorable Garter that ever was worn. Others think the
Garter was vsd for some symbol before his successful battle. Howsoever, he
made of this an Order of XXVI. knights under the patronage of S. George, and
the Garter to be worn on the left leg inscribd by embrodering with those French
words. The Collar of the Order being of pure gold, made of Garters and knots,
and enameld with Roses white and red, weying about XXX. ounces Troy weight,
with the Image of George, richly garnished with slones thereat hanging.
Froissart, that has many particulars of the Kings affection to the Countess,
and then liud, speaks of no such thing as her Gartier, but in M. CCC. XLIV puts
the institution de la Confrairie Saint George, or de les Cheualiers de bleu
lartier as he calls it, and makes the number at the first Iousting, forty.
Which refer to that which we have anon out of Walsingham touching the Round
Table, under the same year, and more light will be given to both autors in
those passages. But in the book of the Camd. in A. tr^batijs. videsis Leland.
ad Cygn. Cant^onem.
institution of this, its mentiond that Richard Coeur de Lion purposd a like,
upon some comfort receiud, in his wars against the Turks and Agarens, from S.
George. Illabente (are the words) per Diui Georgij, vt opinatum est,
interuentum spiritu, venit in mentem vt quorundam electorum Militum cruribus
coraceum subfibulum quale ad manus tunc solum habebat, induceret, quo futurae
Gloriae memores ex condicto si vincerent, ad rem fortiter ac strenue gerendam
expergefierent, ad Romanorum instar, apud quos illa Coronarum varietas. The
Kings of England are Soueraigns of the Order, and Henry V. ordaind the King of
Heralds, Garter, for it. Many suprem Princes have been honored with it. Why this
was dedicated to S. George, may easily be known if you remember how universal
a Patron he is in Christianity. For although he be v. 10. Hen. 7. cap. 20.
Statut. Hiberniae.
now with us as particular as S. Denis in France, S James in Spain, S. Andrew
in Scotland, S. Mark in Venice, S. Patrike in Ireland, S. Antonie in Italy, yet
not only the Emperor Frederique III. Pope Alexander VI. and the State of Genoa
of later time ordaind certain Colleges of Knights de la Croce under S. George
against the professed enemies of Christ, and the Arms of the great Duke of
Moscouie are just as our S. George; but also this very name of the Saint is
usually taken for Christ himself, and his Serpent for the Devil. Its true
that our Edward III. made his invocation at the battle of Caleis Ha Saint
Edward, Ha Saint George, and that Rama, or, as others, Anna Comnena Alexiad. n.
and Malmesb. lib. 4. alij.
Ramel (where, in the Holy Wars about M. XCV. a Bishop in honor of him was
constituted, because in an Robert. Monach. hist. Hierosolym. lib. 8.
apparition Celestial, and of the Albati Milites he was affirmd to be the
Standard Bearer, or Antesignanus) is the place famous for his Martyrdom and
Shrine, and other particulars in the Legend occur to this purpose, yet
Georgij (says Pope Did. 15. c. 3. item gesta.
Gelasius) aliorumque huiusmodi passiones quae ab haereticis perhibentur
conscriptae, propter quod, ne vel leuis ordiretur subsannandi occasio, in
sancta Romana ecclesia non leguntur. In the Greek Menologie he is called
Tropelophorus, which is so cited by that great Cardinal Baronius. But I wonder
he mended it not. Plainly it should be Tropaeophorus. And an Eastern Ioann.
Euchait. in Hypomneum. (...). and page 51
Bishop writing to Constantin Monomachus, calls S. George (...)
(...).
And in another place he calls him (...), by which name to the Greeks he was
known. Of him you have enough in the Martyrologies in the XXIII. of April (on
which the feast of these Knights is celebrated with great solemnity at
Windsor, where the Chapel is dedicated to our Lady and S. George; the Dean
being Register of the Order) and you may see also Erhard Celly in his late
description of Frederique Duke of Witemberg his installation into it by favor
Of the Round Table.
of our present Soueraign. The Mahumedans honor Cantacuzen. Apolog. 3. (...).
him, as we. They call him Chederle, which one expresses by (...). Some talk of
S. George born by King Arthur in one of his Banners. But what is deliuerd of
that Prince is so uncertain, that even the truth of his honored deeds, is by
incredible reports of him, obscured. Yet by the way, his Order of the Round
Table must not here be forgotten. Some make his first celebration of it at
Caerleon in Monmouth, others at Winchester (where the Table is supposd yet to
be; but that seems of later date) and Camelot in Somerset is famous v. Leland.
Assert. Arturij alios.
by it. Of Winchester, and the marriage of Igerne to Vter Pendragon, father to
Arthur, Harding speaks as if Vter had begun it for Knights, and Joseph of
Arimathia for religious persons.

And at the Day he wedded here and cround
And she ferforth with child was then begone,
To comfort her, he set the Table round
At Winchester of worthiest Knights alone,
Approved best, in Knighthood, of their foone,
Which table round Joseph o^ Arimathie,
For Brother made of the Saint Sang Real i. Sangue Royal or, Christ's Blood,
see, if you will, the story of Arthur.
Gral only.
In which he made the sige perilous
Where none should sit, without great mischief,
But one that should be most religious
Of Knights all; and of the Round table chief
The Saint Gral that should recover and acheue
By adventure of his fortunitie.
Its like enough some such thing as Arthurs Order of this kind might be. For
out of Heger Earl of Mansfeild his being of it, the antiquity of Spangb. apud.
Ortelium in Mansfeild.
that Earldom in Saxony is deriud; and in Denbighshire, as Stow tells us, in
the Parish of Lansannan on the side of a stony hill, is a circular plain, cut
out of a main rock, with some XXIV. seats unequal, which they call Arthur's
Round Table. But many particulars of it, as the names of the Knights, the
certain number, their Coat Armor, and such more, whereof too largely are
testimonies, such as they be, extant, I beleeu as much as Rablais liver 2.
chap. 30.
him that says Sir Lancelot du lac fleas horses in hell, and that all these
Arthurian Knights are poor Watermen upon Styx, Acheron and other Rivers there,
to ferrie Spirits, and Devils up and Down, and that their fare is a fillip on
the nose, and at night a piece of mouldie bread. But, for the Round Table; it
seems it was in use for Knights to sit at among the old Gauls, as Posidonius
Athenaeus Dipnos. (...).
remembers; and that to avoid controversy about precedence. A form much
commended by a late Gemos. Halograph. lib. 3. cap. 9.
Writer, for the like distance of All from the S^lt, being Center, first, and
last of the Table furniture. Its certain that it has been in use since the
Normans among our Kings and in France. Matthew Paris speaks of it in Hen. III.
and Mortimer's under Edward I. at Kelingworth, is famous in story. But what
Thomas of Walsingham has of Edward the third's at Windsor (before the Garter)
and of Philip of Ualois his in France, receive out of his own words. Anno M.
CCC. XLIV. qui est annus regni Regis Edwardi a conquestu terty XVIII. Rex
Edwardus fecit conuocari plures artifices ad Castrum de Windsore (remember that
before out of Froissart) and caepit aedificare domum quae Rotunda Tabula
vocaretur: habuit aut em eius area a centro ad circumferentiam per
semidiametrum c. pedes, and sic diametrum c c. pedum erat. Expensae per
hebdomadam erant primo centum librae. Sed expost, propter noua quae Rex
suscepit de Francia, resecabantur ad XX. libras eo quod censuit pro alijs
negotijs thesaurum plurimum comportandum. Eodem tempore Philippus de Valoys Rex
Franciae hoc facto Regis Angliae prouocatus caepit and ipse Rotundam aedificare
Tabulam in terra sua, vt sic sibi attraheret militiam Alemanniae and Italiae,
ne ad Regis Angliae Tabulam properarent.

In the year M. CD. IX. Amades Count of Sauoy, of that name the VI. (for until
Amades VIII. it was no Della Nuntiata ^n Sa^o^a.
Dukedom) began the Order of the Anunciada. It was in memory and honor of a
victory had by Amades surnamd le Verd, one of his Ancestors against the Turks,
in winning of Rhodes, whereby also the Arms of that County and now Dukedom
became the Cross argent in a field Gueules, being the Cross of the
Hospitalars or Knights of S. John of Jerusalem, or of Rhodes. Their Collar is
of plates tied together with little chains of gold, interwouen in the form of
true-loues knots, upon every plate is the word or letters FERT. Which is
interpreted to stand for Fortitudo Eius Rhodum Tenuit. And to the Collar hangs
a m^dda^l of the Salutation. Their number is XIV. Their place of solemnity's
kept annually on our Lady day, in Pietro Castella. The Charter of the
institution is at large in Sansouino.

At the marriage of Elizabeth daughter to John K. of Du Toison d^or.
Portugal, in M. CD. XXX. to Philip surnamd the Good, Duke of Burgundy,
celebrated at Bruges, the same Duke instituted that of the Golden Fleece. The
Collar given is made as of Flints and Steels to strike fire, and to it is the
Fleece pendant. The number was at first XXV. with the Duke. He afterward made
it XXXI. and Charles the V. in M. D. XVI. at Bruxells increast it to 11. What
was truly alluded to in the Collar I understand not, nor can see that any else
sufficiently does. They talk of Gideon's fleece, and Iason's, and some of the
Philosophers stone forsooth as conceald in the Golden F^eece. But all satisfies
not enough.

Jews XI. in M. CD. LXIX. began the Order of S. De S. Michael.
Michael, at Ambois. The Collar is shells tied together, gold. S. Michael
conquering the Devil is annexed to it. The word is Immensi tremor Oceani. The
Ordinances du France tum. 3. ^ilt. 4.
institution is that every one of the Order (appointed of XXXVI.) should have
un Coll^er d'Or fait a Coquilles lacees l'un au^c l'autre d'un double laz,
assisses sur chainettes au maille d'Or, au milieu du quel sur un roch, aura un
image d'Or de Monseigneur S. Michael qui reuiendra pendant sur la poitrine,
which they should be bound to wear continually. Some think the allusion was
to the X. of Daniel. Others say he took S. Michael in regard of an apparition
of him to his father Charles VII. upon Orleans bridge in the wars against the
English.

Since this, Henry III. instituted the Order of the De Saint Esprit.
Holy Ghost: (the reason is made, because on a Whitsunday he was chosen King of
Poland) and gave Collars of Fleurs de lis, and flames, gold, with a Cross and
a Dove on it pendant. He made some mixture of it, and that of S. Michael, yet
so that both Orders remain. And by his institution (says Mennenius) the next
day after the Collar of the Holy Ghost is given, that of S. Michael should be
added, if the honored were not before of the Order. Another reason of this new
one was because that of S. Michael above became too common among the
undeserving. And what he did was somewhat like that of Charles VII. his
correcting the Order of the Star. That of the Star was begun by their King John
(about the time of our Garter) which when the same Charles VII. De L'estoille.
saw communicated to many of base condition, he Bodin. lib. 5. de Repub. cap.
4. Atqui ad loannem R. ipsum qui primo instituit referunt alij. Vide Girard.
Haill. lib. 2.
commanded every Yeoman of the Guard to wear in his cap a Golden Star. So was
the form of the Knights wearing. Whereupon presently the Knights left it off.
For no greater dishonor can be to virtue, then when her desert is so
prostituted. That both persuaded the King and also the Knights, to do what they
did. The King did it to take away the pretended Ensign of honor, without
direct compulsion. The Knights, because they would not be like the Yeomen of
the Guard. There was also in M. CD. LXIV. the Order of the Croissant ordained
by Renee Dake of Aniou and King of Sicily. De Croissant en Aniou.
To the Collar was pendant a Croissant; the word inscribed, Los en Croissant,
familiar afterward to Charles VIII. This with the house of Aniou ended, but is
in some sort renewed by the Marquess of Tyras among the Sicilians, as a
fraternity against the Turk. And in the Aremorique Bretagne, Francis Duke
there in M. CD. L. began the order of the Corn-eare, and gave Ord^ Spicae in
Britannia Aremorica.
Collars composed of Corn-ears gold, tied together with true Lovers knots.
Hereto hanged an Ermine. The Symbol Ama vie; which was the word of his
Grandfather Duke John, surnamed the Conqueror. This Order ceased when the
Dukedom was united to the Crown of France by Jews XII. his marriage with Anne
daughter and heir to Duke Francis. The Order of the Ordo Hystricis. Vide
Paradin. Symb. Heroicis.
Porcupine in imitation, perhaps, of the Golden Fleece, was about the same time
begun by Charles Duke of Orleans, and King of France, the VI. of that name, the
word was Comminus and Eminus, and the Porcupine hence became a symbol of some
French Kings. And then also Jews Duke of Bourbon made the Order of the Thistle
of our Lady, with a Collar of Fleurs de lis, and leaves of Thistles, inscribed
with Ordo Cardui. S. Mariae.
Esperance. But these with that of the Montmorencys Dog, and the Cock, now are
not. But the Arms of the Lusignans are often in a Collar made of Capital SS.
with a sword pendant with the point upward, crossed over with a winding scrol,
inscribed with Pour Loya^te maintenir. This was the note of the Knighthood of
Cyprus begun by that Family, but when it is uncertain. Ordo Cypri.


In Castile, by Alfonso XI. or, as others reckon, XII. the Order de la Banda
was instituted in the City Victoria, Los Caualleros de la Banda, ^n Castella.
in the year M. CCC. XXXII. The Banda was as it were a Girdle, red, some four
fingers breadth, worn from over the right shoulder under the left arm. None was
admitted to it, but such as served ten years at least in the wars or at Court.
It was long in great honor among them, but consequentium Regum ignauia (says
Mariana) rerumque humanarum inconstantia in desuetudinem abijt, vt ne vestigium
quidem extet.

The Order, of S. Andrew in Scotland, has a supposed Of S. Andrew in Scotland.
original very ancient. Some refer it to the victory had by Hungus King of
the Picts, against our Athelstan after an apparition of the Apostle and his
Cross to Hungus, who with his soldiers went barefoot, after the battle, to
S. Andrew's, and there all vowed se suamque (says Hector) posteritatem signo
Crucis Diui Andreae, quoties ad praelium fuerit proficiscendum, vt tam insignis
victoria parta diuinitus grata recordatione semper haberetur pro insigni
deinceps vsuros. Mansit Pictis and post eos deletos Scotis exinde hoc
institutum perpetuum. The Collar of it expresses Thistles, with S. Andrew
pendant to it. Certainty enough of its beginning as an order of Knighthood I
have not yet learned. That Apostle has been their Saint ever since Regulus
Albatus a Monk (about CCC. LXXVIII. of Christ) brought his relics thither out
of Constantinople, whence they were translated from Patrae (now called Patra)
where he suffered Martyrdom. Andrew was born also (...) a Collar or Garland of
Rue, as Francis Mennens specially remembers. The word applied to the Thistles,
Nullus me impune lacessit.

The Arms of Danmark, in Henninges and elsewhere, are inscribd in a Collar made
of Elephants, chargd Of the Elephant in Danmark.
with Castles; thereto hanging our Lady in a radiant Circle, and to that a
little round with three nails. This is the Collar of their Order of the
Elephant, begun very lately by one of their Kings. By whom certainly I know
not. Some say by Frederique, father to the present Christiern IV. In some of
his moneys the Elephant is a note Royal.

Mennen describes also the Collar of the Order of Of the sword in Suethland.
the sword in Suethland, made in form of four swords tied one at the end of
another, and so lets it about Arms proper to the Order. He tells no time of
it, nor I know none. Another there he remembers, and puts the Collar about the
Kings arms, of Seraphins and Cherubins Of the Seraphins there.
and Patriarchall crosses.

In what State to place that the Burgundian Cross given by Charles V. to
diverse that had well performd Crucis Burgundiae.
with him against Hariaden for Muleasses in the African wars, I know not. On
S. Magdale^s day in M. D. XXXV. the tenth Planetarie hour he gave it to be
worn hanging to a Collar. On the one side of the plate, because the X. hour
was Mercurie's, he was picturd, on the other the Burgundian (like S. Andrews)
Cross, with a Steel to strike fire (referd perhaps to the Toyson d'Or) and
circumscribd Barbaria. But it was not any certain Order, but merely personal
to them who were first honored with it.

Of late in Italy was erected the Order of the Blood of the Redeemer. Vincent
Gonzaga Duke of Mantoua Di sangue di Saluatore, in Mantoua.
when the marriage was twixt his son Francis now Duke, and the Lady Margaret
daughter to Charles Emanuel Duke of Sauoy, in the year M. DC. VIII. instituted
it in a number of XX. with consent of Pope Paul V. Understand, that in S.
Andrews at Mantoua (according to other tales of that part) are kept as a most
precious Quod habent Martyrologia de S. Longino Mart. 15. si placet, vide and
Aimoin. de gest. Franc. 4. cap. 92.
relic certain drops of our Saviors blood, with part of the Sponge. The
Collar has in it threads of gold laid on fire, and, twixt those plates, as it
were, interwouen these words, Domine probasti. The LX. Psalm is aimd at. To the
Collar is annexed two Angels supporting three drops of the blood, and
circumscribd with Nihil isto triste recepto. The Duke himself is chief of it,
and diverse other Princes were then ioind with him.

Neither, because also A^bert Mir^^ puts them among Di santo Steffano en
Fiorenza.
his honorarie Orders, will we omit here that of S. Stephan in Florence. In the
year M. D. LXI. Cosmo di Medici Duke of Florence with confirmation of Pope Plus
IV. instituted this of S. Stephan, as under Stephan, Pope, Martyr, and Patron
of that State. But it was under the rule of S. Bennet; only they have liberty
to marry. They were purposd against the Turks. Their Note, a Red Cross edgd
with gold. The Suprem or Master, the great Duke of Tuscanie or Florence. And so
are as partly honorarie, partly religious.

About M. CCC XXX. the Order of S. Mark began in Di S. Marco.
Venice, and was renewd in M. D. LXII. and honored with privileges. None but
Gentlemen of special worth in note and descent were to be admitted of it. The
Collar has S. Marks Image with Pax tibi Marce. Mennens is my author.

Its not amiss to reckon the Peetermen of Louain, or Homines de Familia S.
Petri, among these Orders. Petermanni Louanienses.
Their Original is from the war twixt Hen. I. Duke of Lorraine and Count of
Louaine in M. CC. XIII. against Hugh Bishop of Liege, and some neighbor Prines,
wherein the Duke was through the valor of those of Louain (their Ensign being
S. Peeter's Banner) rescued from most imminent peril, not without the loss of
M. M. Louanians. In reward whereof he honored them all with large privileges,
and called them Peetermen. Homines B. Petri Louaniensis (says an old Apud
Lips. Louan. lib. 2. cap. 4.
testimony) liberi and priuilegiati esse debent, and sunt prae alijs
hominibus. And Lipsius says he saw a Charter of the Patrices or Senate there,
dated M. CCC. XXX III. wherein one was exempted out of common jurisdiction,
that pleaded se esse Hominem S. Petri and ad familiam liberam Domini Ducis
pertinere. But now the name remains, the rights of liberty extinct, or as out
of use, although in the oath of the heirs and successors of the Earls of Lonain
their privileges be yet contained.

Here may be thought of those Tecuytles in some parts of America, which are
there a kind of Knights made with solemnity by the chief Priest, and boaring
them through the Nostrells with a Tigers bone and the bill of an Eagle. Nor
are, I think, any other of note, and not Religious extant, or worth
remembrance. More particulars of the habits of some of them, and of their
statuts you have in Sansouino, our Segar Garter his Honor Military. Of
Calatraua, Alcantara, S. James, and many such like more, I cannot think they
are any way so fitly put amongst Titles Honorarie. For, what they are, is for
what they do in a certain place, as for a stipend; and the name of their
Knighthood adds not any degree to them like those Orders of the Collar, or of
the Spur, which are mere honorarie notes of valor, and worth. Why then should
we not as well make a distinct Order and honorarie, of those which in the holy
wars did suscipere Crucem, anciently, and were buried crosselegd? They had
their Quae habes apud G. Nouoburgens. lib. 3. cap. 22.
Ordinances and statuts also. But that was only for one kind of service, as the
Religious Orders all are, and not truly honorarie. And how could the Templars
be accounted among Knights (such as fit this place) being not allowd by their
statuts Statut. Templar. cap. 72.
so much as at all to kiss any woman? Honorarie Knighthood and the favors of
Ladies even by ancient institution run together sometimes as Virtue and Reward.

Turkish Dignities. Amirs. Amiradia. Admiral and Ammirante, for governor of
the Sea, whence. Sigebert's difference of Amiras and Amiraeus. (...). Bassalar.
(...) and (...). Vezir. Vezir azem. Protosymbolus. Beglars, and Beglerbeglars.
Sanziacbegs. The Turkish Banners with horsehairs hanging from them. Ancient use
of Horsehaire in Military Ornaments. A Sword given with a Banner as in Europe.
Amir or Emir Halem. Their Globe on the top of a Spear anciently vsd, yet also
among them painted arms have been anciently born in the field. Timariots.
(...). Tegguirlar. Aphendis. Zelebis. Bans in Hungary. Zupans. (...) in
Hesychius. Boiarones in Moscouie. Dignities in Tartarie. Superillustris,
Illustris, Spectabilis, Clarissimus. To whom these belong. A touch of Equality
in challenge to the Duel. Secundus Ordo in Rome. Patricij.

CHAP. XII.
HItherto of such Dignities as are in this more Western world of like name, and
sometimes Nature. We shall conclude all, after delivery of those Titles vsd in
Mahumedism, and some other the more civil Eastern states, which so differ from
them already spoken of, that, but by unfit intermixture, no place except this,
could be assignd them. The chief among the Turks are Amir or Emir, Bassar,
Vezir, Beg, Beblerleg, Sanzacbeg, or Sangiac-beg, Tegguirs, Timariots (for
those I think fitly are to be reckond as a kind of honorarie Title) and the
names Aphendis and Zelebis. Of these in order. For their other Titles merely
Officiarie, as Cades, Cadilesckeris, or Casiaskers, Agilar, and such like I
purposely omit, which the rather I admonish, because those first reckond are
also Officiarie, and none so merely honorarie as ours of Duke, Count, or such
of this day, but very like the ancient Dukes and Counts set to govern
Provinces, of whom before. Of Amir something Cap. 5. partis primae and. p. 98.
already is spoken, and, for understanding of the word, enough. It was and is
both given the Grand Signior, and some of his Great ones, as Dominus or
prafectus. Amir Echur, is Dominus or praefectus or Comes stabuli with them;
there being two of them among the Turks, Buiuc Amir Achur, and Cudzuc Amir
Achur, as if you should say, the Great and lesser Master of the Stable or
Horse. And Dominus Potens.
Amir Quibir was the greatest Dignity in the Court of the Egyptian Sultans.
The Governors of Provinces under the Grand Signior, had this to them
communicated. And those Provinces in that regard were titled Thcophan. apud
Constant. Porphyrogen. de administ. Romans imp. cap. 25.
(...), whereof XIII. are reckond long since under the Chaliph of Bagdat.
Theophanes calls them (...), i. Ameradias magnas sieve Prouincias praesidiales,
as I interpret. Hence had the Eastern Empire (...), or Amiralius for a Governor
at Sea, composd of half Arabique and half Greek, of Amir and (...), as if you
should say Amir (...) i. praefectus Maris. And thence had Spain, France,
Italy, England, and these Western parts their Almirante, Amirall, Amiraglio,
Admiral, for the chief Governor of the Sea, which made some of our ignorant
Monks call the Great Amir and his subject or delegat Amirs, Admiralli,
Admiraldi, Amirauisi, and Admirabiles oftimes in their blockish phrase. But
remember that Amiralius in the Constantinopolitan Empire was not as our high
Admiralls having suprem jurisdiction next under the King, He was under the
(...).
Great Duke, and the great Drungar of the Navy but above the Protocomes, the
other Drungars and Counts, as Curopalata teaches. But, what made the old Monk
Sub A. D C. XXX. Christi.
Sigebert distinguish twixt Amiras and Amireus, as he does, is to me unknown.
Speaking of Mahumed, he writes, Hic in regno Saracenorum, quatuor Praetores
statuit qui Amirei vocabantur, ipse vero Amiras dicebatur, vel Protosymbolus;
and of Mabias or Muhauias successor to Otman or Othmen. Hotmen (he means Otman
or Otoman) Amira Saracenorum perempto Muhauias ex Amireo Amiras factus; and the
like distinction he usually keeps. As if Amireus and Amiras were two distinct,
like Emperor and Lieutenant. I confess (and I think I may do it with safe
confidence, that it can be no disparagement to my understanding) that I see no
difference possibly to be found twixt Amiras and Amireus, as they respect their
original in Arabique or any Eastetn tongue. For so it admits no such forms of
termination. But for the Greek, how often Amiras is for a great Lieutenant as
well as for the Grand Signior (to whom (...) is commonly added) every one
knows which has but acquaintance with Cedren, Zonoras, Nicetas, Acropolites,
Phranza, the Lady Anne, or others such. Indeed Alem and Muhauias pretending to
the Chaliphat, being Lieutenant Amirs, are expressly styled (...) (which is as
that Amirei in Sigebert) by Theophanes; but that ever a special distinction
was twixt Amiras and Amireus, I no where find. Its true that (...) is taken for
Imperare proper to the Great Sultan in that of the same author. (...), i. Mabias
(Muhauias) Prince of the Saracens died after he had been a General (that is,
Lieutenant in his Province) XXVI. years, and after he had been Amir (that is,
in this place, Great Sultan) XXIV. years. And Cedren in like sense uses (...),
but the use of Amiras and Amir, to subjects delegat with Lieutenantships, is so
common both in late and ancient Writers, that what difference is twixt Amiras
and Amireus, came by imagination or accident among our Europeans, not from any
reason in the Mahumedan Empire. Their Bassalar (the plural of Bassa) are no
more distinct by that name, then the Amirs. For both are as it were, general
titles. Bassa signifies a Head, and as the later Greeks had their (...) and
(...), in like sense and signification as the Latins their Capitanei, so the
Turks their Bassalar: all from the like root. But although (...) and Capitanij
(as our word Captain) were made proper to show a Commander of the war, whence
(...) is to lead a company in the barbarous Greek, yet under the name of
Bassalar are comprehended both the Uezirs, as also Beglerbegs. And the Captain
of the Tzauzes or Chauzes (that is, Noble Courtiers ready for performance of
such State business as the Sultan and the Vezirs shall commit to them) is known
by the name of Tzaus-Bassa. And other are with like addition. The Greeks from
Bassa have made their (...), and (...). The Vezirs are Counselors of State.
Their chief or President is called Uezir azem i. Consilarius supremus, which
indeed is the interpretation of that (...) vide sup. page 23.
Protosymbulus spoken of before. Neither is it much marvel that the Greeks
and some others thought it to signify the Grand Signior, or Princeps Arabum,
it being indeed Princeps Consiliariorum. This Vezir azem is by Zonaras called
(...). The Vezirs in barbarous Greek are (...). Mahumed II. Constantinopolit.
Hist. Politic. ab A. 1391. ad 1587.
(...) (says one) (...) i. had very wise Privy Counselors, Chalil Bassa and
Brei Bassa; for so you must interpret it. The abstract of the Dignity is
Uezirluc. Beg and Beglarbeg are both explaned in one. For Beg is Lord,
Beglar-Beg is Lord of Lords, that is, one which has under his government
diverse Begs of lesser Provinces. And Begluc is the Dignity of the one.
Beglarbegluc of the other. Begi nomen (says Hist. Musulmanic. lib. 4.
Leunclaw) dars solet omnibus officium vel munus aliquod a Rege vel Sultano
consecutis. In Asia, Afrique and Europ are many Beglerbeglucs, reckond by those
which have Pandect. Turcic. cap. 254.
published Turkish affairs. The Greeks have turned it into (...) i. Prince of
Princes, and (...) i. a General of the field. But they express the Turkish
name by Georg. Logotheta. Chron. Constant. and Hist. Politic. in Turco-graec.
lib. 1.
(...) sometimes, and (...). Under every Beglerbeg are diverse Sanziac. begs,
and under them Troops of Timariots. The Sanziacbeg answers to our word
Banneret, or Vexillarius; Sanziac being Vexillum. And in the stories of
barbarous Grecians I remember its (...). They are constituted by solemn
delivery of a Military ensign, being a Spear Pandect. Turcic. cap. 10.
bearing a gilt globe on the top of it, and horsehaire and whole horse tails
hanging down, and sometimes on the Globes are Croissants, which is their most
general Ensign. They are in lieu of our Banners. Three of this kind (says the
most learned Leunclaw) stand by the Mezari or Sepulchral Monument of Amurath
the first in the Suburbs of Prusa in Bithynia. Of them, he thus: Has Osmanei
suis in expeditionibus ad honorem memoriamque trium Barbarum (so you must read
his there misprinted Index Libitinarius) quasi fuerint Barbae trium Muhametis
sociorum successorum and interpretum Ebubekiris, Osmanis, and Omeris, secum
far gestareque solent. Some think it deriud from Alexander's military
Ensigns, that they use horse tails; his coins discovering, that his were like.
But its certain that in another kind horse tails were very anciently vsd and
commonly. That is in Crests (...)
(...) --
says Iliad. (...). and (...).
Homer of Paris; and the like of Achilles his Helm. And upon AEneid. 2. Meminit
and Synesius in Encom. Caluitij. memineris and quod habent Grammatici de (...).
i. Crista. verum ista docent Poetae passim. adeas, si placet, Etymologic. Mag.
in (...).
that -- oriturque miserrima caedes
Armorum facie, and Graiarum errore iubarum.
Seruius notes, Iubarum, pro Cristarum, quae de Caudis fiebant, vt est --
Cristaque hirsutus equina. But also the Turkish Calendarlar (a kind of Monkish
Order) wear in their Caps long Horsehaires hanging. And as the delivering of
one Banner or more was vsd in bestowing of European Dignities anciently, so in
this Mahumedan State. Osman vicissim Michaeli (says the Musulmanique story,
speaking of the first Osman or Otoman, and Michael Cosses) vexillum manu sua
tradidit, qua ceremonia Clientes Sultani Turcici suis in ditionibus confirmari
solent, ac magni pretij vestem iniecit. With the Banner (for so, for ought I
know, this their kind may be called) sometimes (it seems when the Province was
given as a Kingdom or Principality and partly hereditarie) a sword also was
deliuerd, which agrees further with European custom. After the death of Mahumed
Beg, Prince of Caramania, the great Sultan Amurath II. sent to Abraham Beg
(Ibrahim he is namd also) a Banner, quod ei suo nomine in manum (says the
story) traderetur, and Gladium quo cingeretur, vt hac inuestiturae, quam
vocant, ceremonia, ceu legitimus autoritate sua Princeps, in Regni Possessionem
missus agnosceretur. And, if Iouius his relation be true, Bajazet II. in
resigning as it were his Empire to his treacherous son Selim I. vsd. that
girding him with a sword. But not only the Sanziac-begs, but the Beglar-begs
are by this ceremony created and the great officer Emir or Amir Halem delivers
the Banners. Emir Halem (so Leunclaw) significat Dominum vexillorum, and
flammeolorum qui scilicet supremus est Sultani Vexillifer, and omnibus
Beglerbegis ac Sanzacbegis, quum creantur, vexilla sua porrigit. Magnus
Flammeolaris, Magnus Flammularis apud Graecos. You may soon meet with the
Greek (...) (whence those words, and the French Oriflambe) in Leo's Tactica,
Codin, Porphyrogenetes, and such more. By the way, as touching their Banners
with Globes on the top, their ancient use was so; which you see in that of the
holy War between m. XCV. and m. CC. where Robert Duke of Normandy slew one of
their great Amirs, whose Standard had Raimundus d'Agiles hist. Hierosolymit.
Baldricus lib. 4. alij.
in summitate Argenteae hastae pomum Aureum, which the Duke offered at the
Sepulcher, having bought it of one that took it, by right of war, for XX.
marks. And their superstition will allow no pictures of Septemcastrens. cap. 10.
Arms or such like; yet its reported that a great Soldier and Knight under the
Egyptian Chaliphat (being afterward Caliph or Sultan there himself; my author
calls De Ionuilie en la uie de S. Loys chap. 27. au pres l'an. 1240.
him Scecedun, and it was toward the end of that Caliphat) did bear in his
Banner the Arms of the German Emperor (from whom he had received Knighthood)
and of the two Sultans of Aleppo, and Babylon, that is of Egypt. The words of
the old author are; Il portoit in ses banieres les arms de l'Empereur qui
l'auoit fait Cheualier, and estoit sa bantere bandee, d'ont en lun des bands
il portoit pareillement les arms du Souldan de Hallappe: and en l'autre band
l'ung cost estoient les Arms du Souldan de Babylonie: which shows that
notwithstanding their Mahumedan precepts they have born painted Arms. Under
the Sanzac-begs are Timariots, but both under the Beglar begs, and ready for
service at their command. The Timariots are such as have lands (those specially
which are acquired by the wars almost as the Milites limitanei in the old state
of Rome) assignd to them to hold as it were by Knights service, and by reason
of the tenure are bound to the Wars. Of them, are reckond under that Empire
About DCCXIX. m. able fighting men. In Asia and Afrique some CDIXII. m. in
Europe some CCIVII. m. and in them and the A^zamoglas, that is children of
Christians taken up to make lan zaries, the chief strength of that State
consists. The name, as many other, came out of Greek into Turkish. (...)
Damascen. Studites apud Leuncl. Pandect. Turc. cap. 186.
has been used as (...) for a Stipend, Price, or Honorarie reward, and from
(...) questionles had its beginning. And Timar in Turkish is now as much as
Uectigal Megiser. Diction. Turcico-Latin.
or the like; whence these Timariots are by some Greeks called Chalcondyl. hist.
lib. 8.
(...). But me thinks Meursius does not well interpret that by Honorati,
unless he had added stipendio militari, or such like. For to that has all the
honor respect, which the Timariots enjoy. Of these, you shall see Osman or
Othman the first his Constitution, as the Musulmanique story has it in
Latin. Quicunque Timaria vel in Villarum vel aliorum praediorum Constituta
prouentibus liberalitate nostra consequutus fuerit, eis sic vti frui debebit,
vt illi absque iusta causa, neminis vlla sieve fraud sieve vi adimantur. Quod si
morte decesserit, eadem ipsius filio cedere volumus etiamsi minor adhuc, five
pupillus sit, illa tamen lege, vt belli tempore Pupilli loco, mittantur alij,
donec ipse Pupillus adoleuerit, and armis gerendis idoneus enaserit. And he
annexeth a terrible execration on those of his successors that shall any way
derogate from this law. The Timaria are hereby made hereditarie, but at this
day, as I think they are but for life. Some which have the government of a Town
or small Province they call Teggiurlar or Teggiurs, i. Presidents. Chalcondylas
expresses it by (...) a name in like sense vsd in the Lacedemonian state. And
in contempt, a little before the end of the Greek Empire, they called those of
Constantinople only Teggiurs, as if their declining greatness had deserved no
better. Their Aphendis written also by the later Greeks (...), is corrupted from
(...) i Lord. And by Zelebi (in the plural Zelibilar) is our word Noble or
Gentle understood. Those more special Dignities, Vezir, Beglerbeg and
Sanziac-beg, I confess are not less officiarie then diverse others here
omitted, as Cadilescheir or Cassi-asker, Agalar, Drungar, and others, but I
have therefore the rather showed them, because they are most honorarie, and that
as well by their names, as places in state. The like may be said of the
Hungarian Bans, which are Pandect. Turcic. cap. 174. and 71.
Presidents or Governors of some Kingdoms belonging to that Kingdom, as
Dalmatia, Croatia, Slauonia, Seruia, and others. And, as Sanzac-begs, or
Bannerets, have perhaps their name from Band or Banner. Whether any community
betwixt them and the old (...) or Guil. Tyr. de Bello sacro lib. 20. cap. 4.
vide vero and Meurs. Glossar. Graeco-Barb. in (...).
Suppani of the Slauonians, Seruians and other by, I know not. For Constantin
Porphyrogennetes speaking of the Croatians, Seruians, and their neighbors,
(...) (says he) (...). i. These Nations have no Princes, but only old Zupans,
as the other of the Slauonian Nation. But the same author seems then to make
(...) and (...) equivalent, which causes me think they are both near kin to
Ban. Which I doubt not but is meant in that of Hesychius. (...). Neither needed
Meursius to have enquird further for it as a Latin word, notwithstanding that
Hesychius speaks of Italians. Who knows not how universal the name of Franks
and Latins are, according to the later Greeks? There are Vaiuods which are loco
Regis administrationem habentes in aliqua prouincia, puta (says Leunclaw)
Transsiluania, Valachia Maiori, Valachia minori, sed ea lege tamen, vt
Gubernatore sit inferior. He interprets Vaiuod by Captain, or Tribunus Militum.
Of that somewhat more is in the v. Chapter before, where we speak of Polak
Vaiuods. But since the Vaiuods of Walachia (the mayor Walachia is what we now
call Moldauia, corrupted from Mauridauia, i. nigra Dauorum sieve Dacorum regio,
which is expressed in the Turkish Carabogdania) assumd liberty to themselves
against the Crown of Hungary, they rather affected the title of Despote or
Prince, which, with the miseries they have endured under Mahumedan Tyranny,
are somewhat incompatible. Of the Moscouian or Russian Knesi or Dukes, before.
One other kind of Dignity they have in the Boiari or Anne quid hic a Barone?
Boiarones. Neque alium gradum (says Sigismund) seu dignitatem habent post
Boiaros qui more nostro locum nobilium seu Equitum tenent. And for their use of
the word Great, Illud predicatum Magnus tribuitur omnibus excellentioribus
personis. Neque n. quenquam strenuum, aut Nobilem aut Baronem illustrem aut
Magnificum vocant, aut alio denique id genus titulo ornant. The same author of
the Tartars. Nomina Dignitatum apud Tartaros haec fere sunt. Chan Rex est.
Sultan Filius Regis. Bij Dux. Marsa Filius Ducis. Olbond Nobilis vel
Consiliarius. Olboadulu alicuius Nobilis Filius. For the Nobility in Poland,
see what we have before where we speak of their Uainods. Some proportion may
be found twixt the Mahumedan and Christian Dignities, yet none so certain that
it may deserve to be expressly noted. But, for a concluding Corollarie, it
will not be amiss to add the quadripartit distinction of Ciuilians which they
have, and applied to those Dignities of our Times and States. Their Doctors
make it in these four: Superillustres, Illustres, Spectabiles, and Clarissimi.
And comprehend them in those Lucas de Penna ad C. tit. de Dignit. proaemio.
barbarous verses,

Illustris Primus; Medius Spectabilis, Imus
(Vt Lex testatur) Clarissimus esse probatur,
Et Superillustris praeponitur omnibus istis.
Supposing this general Division, in the first rank of Superillustres, they
place the Pope and Emperor quo in numero (says De Sing. Certam. cap. 32. and
33.
Alciat) and Francorum Regem Collocandum, censeo, cum Imperatoris Fastigium
aequet, eique in regno suo obseruantiam nullam prestet. Nor do I see any color
of reason why all other Kings, such as we have showed to have rightly the
attribute of Emperor, should not as well be among the Superillustres. But the
Doctors generally too much flattering their Emperor, put all other Kings
(beside him) under Illustres, into a different degree from the Emperor. But
Alciat thinks it fit to add there such Dukes as have Royal Supremacy, nec ex
facto Caesaris potentiam formidant, and reckons of them, Dukes of Millan,
Austria, Burgundy, and Bretagne. Among the Spectabiles he puts other Dukes,
Itemque Marchiones, and Comites, and quos quidam Principes vocant, dum tamen ab
ipso Caesare Dignitatem suam acceperint. Why Dukes, Marquisses and Counts made
by other absolut Princes, should not be of that Degree, I know not. The
Clarissimi are Counts made under Dukes, Barons, Valuasours, and idque genus
(says he) Pagani Reguli. And he applies this to that question of the Duel
vtrum mayor ab inferiore, iure prouocatur, affirming in his opinion, that
equality enough is among all of every of those Degrees. As, that the Duel
should proceed upon challenge twixt two of thr Superillustres, or any two of
the Illustres, so of the Spectabiles; but that a Spectabilis may not challenge
an Illustris, nor the like be in the other Ra^ks. Ei vero, says he, qui ab
vsque Abauis sit Nobilis and in armis aetatem egerit, satis putarem per
mittendum vt cum Clarissimis congredi posset. Cum enim illorum vltimus sit
gradus, cum and Modica sit inaequalitas, haec exceptio non omnino locum sibi
vendicat. But Paris de Puteo thinks that a Gentleman of four descents may
challenge a Duke, or any beneath him, upon personal wrong; which, nor the
like, we dispute not here, but refer you to those Autors, Iustino
Mutiopolitano, and others; many also differing from this quadripartit
distinction. Which indeed, if examiud according to their Tex^s and Stories of
ancient times, wherein their great Doctors were too much strangers, will be
found to be merely their own, without original in their Justinian, unless
you call the abuse of his words the Original. For in the C. tit. vt Dig. Ord.
seruetur. and tit. seqq.
Code, you have Illustres, Spectabiles, Clarissimi, Perfectissimi, and Egregij,
and those times had Illustratus, Spectabilitas, Clarissimatus, and
Perfectissimatus, for abstracts, given as honorarie Titles; but with such
variety, that its hard to distinguish to whom every of them was proper.
Neither do I see any Ciuilian Consulas Alciat. Dispunct. lib. 3. cap. 4. and
Isidor. Origin. 9. cap. De Ciui-
able to extricat it enough cleanly. But he, nor the Code, nor any Text of
their law has that new made word Superillustris. And the old French Kings of
about a thousand years since in their Charters Aimoin. de gest. Franc. 2. cap.
20. alij.
take but the addition of Illustris or Illuster, as they wrote it. Plainly the
Illustratus was Cassiodor. Var. lib. 6. form. 12.
highest, and the Spectabilitas next. And so may that of Ausonius Eidyll. 9. in
Mosella.
be understood, speaking of such as -- Italum populos Aquilonigenasque Britannos
Praefecturarum titulo tenuere secundo.
The secundus Ordo in ancienter time, before Constantin (about whom these new
Titles and others began most in use) including the Flos Iuuentutis, or Ordo
Equestris, whence one under Papinius ad Marcell. Syluar. 4.
Domitian calls Septimius Seuerus a Roman Eques, by the name of Iuuenis inter
Ornatissimos secundi Ordinis. Neither was that distinction of Illustres,
Spectabiles, and the rest then known, howsoever its attributed to Photius
Patriarch. Biblioth. Cod. 244.
Diodore of Sicily, that he affirms (...). i. that the Dignity of the
Illustres was third from the Patricij. Some great mistaking has causd this
error. For Diodore liud before and in the beginning of the Empire. How then
could he talk either of Patricij or Illustres, neither of which names were as
yet, in their later sense, used? But the assertion, whenever thrust in there,
means, it seems, that the Illustres comprehended both Patricij, Consules, and
other Senatores and Praefecti, dividing all of them into three Ranks, whereof
the last was third from the Patricij. The words of ff. tit. de Senatorib l.
12.. 1. v. C. tit. Vbi Senate. vel Clarissimi.
Vlpian are: Senatores accipiendum est eos qui a Patricijs, and Consulibus,
vsque ad omnes Illustres Uiros descendunt; which the Synopsis Basilicon
expresses by (...). i. From the Patricij to the Illustres they are all
Senators; as if you should say, From the Patricij (which are the chief of the
Illustres) to the inferior in that Degree inclusiuely are all Senators. But if
that which Zosimus has of Constantin's first institution of the Patritiatus
(thereof before, where we speak of Peers) be true, how can that attributed to
Vlpian (who liud under Alexander Seuerus) be without suspicion? It has been
before now Panciroll. ad Notit. Orientis cap. 2.
much suspected, and by one that has best collected these Degrees of Roman
Dignities, from whom it is fitter to instruct your self in them, then here
expect them.

THE END.
ADDITIONS TO the Copy.
Add in page 25. l. 28. after
(...). But when this Conrad's successor, Frederique Barbarossa receiud letters
from Isaacus Angelus, Emperor of Constantinople, expostulating with him
touching his passage through Greece into the Holy Land, and demanding hostages
for security, with Expedit. Asiatic. Frederic. 1. inter Antiq. lect. Can sij
Tom 5. part. 2. Plura de Graecorum fastu, and in Romanorum Imperium in vidi a
habes in Luit prandi Le. gat. a Canis. Edit. and apud Baronium Tom. 8. sub A.
968. transcripta.
this Title Ysachius a Deo Constitutus, Imperator Sacratissimus,
Excellentissimus, Potentissimus, Sublimis, Moderator Romanorum, Angelus Totius
Orbis, Haeres Coronae Magni Constantini Dilecto Fratri Imperij sui maximo
Principi Alemaniae, gratiam suam and fraternam and plurimam dilectionem: he
much stormd at the Ambassadors, and told them that he scornd their Master's
favor, and de ipso non fero aequanimiter si tam arroganter me praesumat de
caetero salutare, and that he himself had, by established right, the n^me of
Romanorum Imperator and semper Augustus, wherefore their M^ster should rather
have called himself Romaniorum then Romanorum Moderator. Vpbraiding him with
Romania, the same which was called Thrace. Some of etc.

There line 30. after
Princes. But indeed it seems, both that and the example before of the Letter
to Otho IV. and the like are to be understood of the Emperors abstaining from
the title of Imperator till his Coronation by the Pope, whereof see more in the
first Chapter of the second Part. And etc.

Add in page 131. l. 22. after
Hand. In imitation of the Constantinopolitan Onuphrius de^ Comitijs
Imperatorijs.
Emperors (in whom Coronation and Unction by the Patriarchs, began, as its
thought, about Justinians time in Justin 11.) the Western Empire and other
Kingdoms receiud, and that in Charles le magne; before whom and Pipin K. of
France (anointed by Beniface Bishop of Mentz) next before him, no Royal
unction will be justified in the Western Europe. But time etc.

Add to page 226. l. 8. after
faciat. Neither let it move against this, that in the laws of Cap. 7. In Rub.
sub. Scaccarij.
Hen. I. you read Sicut antiqua fuerit institutione formatum salutari Regis
Imperio, vera nuper est recordatione firmatum, Generalia Comitatuum placita
certis locis and vicibus, and definito tempore, per singulas Prouincias
Angliae, conuenire debere, nec vllis vltra fatigationibus fatigari. Intersint
autem Episcopi, Comites, Vicarij, Centenarij, Aldermanni, Praefecti,
praepositi, Barons, Vauasores, Regis Grauij or Kings Reeues or Greeues.
Cunegreuij and caeteri terrarum Dominicarum intendentes, ne malorum impunitas
aut Grauiorum prauitas aut Iudicum subuersio solita Miseros laceratione
conficiat. Agantur itaque primo Debita v^rae Christianitatis Iura, secundo
Regis Placita, Postremo causae singulorum dignis satisfactionibus expleantur. I
say let not this move against that of the Conqueror. For those of Hen. I. were
restored (at least for fashion) as by the name of the Confessor's, or of the
old Saxon laws, and so was there in them mention of the Bishop and Eoldorman
and the rest together. And in the XXXI. Chapter of these, are the very words
almost translated, of that which we have before cited out of Edgar's to this
purpose. Yet indeed they were more and rather desired, then truly restored. But
this etc.

Add in page 244. l. 19. after
all these, Indeed some passages in their ancients, especially in the Monk
Saepius; verum maxim lib. 3. cap. 90. and 91. de P^otadio and Bertoaldo.
Aimoinus, make the Mayor D^mus, and Comes Palatij as one in express terms.
But I doubt their credits, and think rather they were deceiud in the words. How
easily might they in their Cells make Mayor Palatij, or Maire du Maison One,
both Offices being of special great note in the Court. And Comes being then a
word usual for general designation of any place or dignity. I know Aimoinus
wrote under the Carolin line, and above DCC. years since. Yet those other
autorities persuade me against him, and common opinion. And note also, they
deliver that there were diverse Idem. lib. 4. cap. 6. 38. and 39.
Maiores aulae in Neustria, Burgundy, Austrasia; which sauors as if there
plainly they meant Counts de Palais in our distinct sense, delegat for
jurisdiction, in such sort in every Province, as the Comes Palatij in the Court
had. But the Mayor Domus taken properly, as I think, was never multiplied
beyond one. Neither why Gregory of Tours should so distinguish them (he being
a Bishop might know better of state then Aimoin or Adhdemar, out of whom Aimoin
had much of his story, being Monks could) except by this may be given any
reason. Afterward etc.

Add to page 270. l. 5. after
understood. And indeed an old law iustifies it. Praesit (are the Leg. Henric.
1. cap. 8.
words) singulis hominum Nouenis Decimus and toti simul Hundredo vnus de
Melioribus and vocetur Aldremannus qui Dei leges and Hominum iura vigilanti
studeat obseruantia promouere. Touching etc.

Add to page 292. l. 9. and 10. after
valetudinem. And Habeant Vauasores (say those old laws of Cap. 29.
Hen. I.) qui liberius Terras tenent, Placita quae ad Witam vel Weram (Wite was
punishment by Mulct or Amerciament; Were is before Page 204.
deliuerd in Weregild, and is called pretium Redemptionis in the laws of the
Confessor, being indeed the Price or Ransom of any greiuous crime) pertinent,
super suos Homines and in suo and super aliorum Homines, si forisfaciendo
retenti (I doubt how to read it right) vel grauati fuerint. So in Domesday, of
Auiceston in the Isle of Wight, is Ibi manet quidam Vauasorius habens 11.
Vaccas. And Terra Vauasorum, is somewhere a title in that monument. But more
special remembrance of etc.

Add to page 303. l. 28. after
sufficient. But also the word Alodium and Alodiarius was not unusual
anciently here in England. Under the County of Chent (Kent) in Domesday, Si
quis prostrauerit arborem in via, Ramum, vel fossatum fecerit, quibus strictior
sit via, Centum solidis emendabat Regi. De Gribrige (I think, Grithbreche. i.
breach of the Peace) emendabat Regi VIII. li. etc. Has forisfacturas habet Rex
super omnes Alodiarios totius Comitatus Chent and super homines ipsorum. Et
quando moritur Alodiarius Rex inde habet Releuationem terrae, excepta terra
sanctae Trinitatis etc. Super istos habet Rex forisfacturam de Capitibus eorum
tantummodo. And there also; In Benindene mansit Godricus and tenet X X. acras
in Alodio suo. So in Sudsex (Sussex) In Cetelengeley (I guess Chedingley)
Alman tenuit de Rege E. sicut Alodium, and diverse more like. What properly the
Alodiarij and Alodium were with them, I confess I know not. For it seems
clearly, Alodium was not land only whereof no tenure was, as its proved thence
out of that under Sussex in Lansewice' Godwines tenet de eo, and de eo VII.
Aloarij for Alodiarij. Perhaps it was in regard of such tenures as were free
from performance of any chargeaable service. This of Feuds belongs etc.

Add to page 347. l. 26. after
Certain. Indeed all Judges were held anciently as Barons, which appears in an
old law of this state of Hen. 1. Regis Iudices sint Barons Comitatus qui
liberas in eis Terras habent per quas debent causae singulorum alterna
prosecutione tractari. Villani vere Cotseti, vel Ferdingi vel qui sunt viles
and inopes Personae non sunt inter Iudices numerandi. Whence both the reason of
this kind of Amerciament, as also why the Judges of the Exchequer are called
Barons, appears. And although etc.

Faults, escaped in the Print, correct thus:
CHap. 1. l. 4. read Oeconomique. Page 23. l. 3. read Autprand (as its reported
by on Rempert or Erempert, cited and first published by Cardinal Baronius)
and, out etc. l. 10. BASILEA. l. 22. Arabum. l. 23. Chaganum. p. 24. in marg.
Abb. for Alb. p. 32. l. 30. (...). p. 41. l. 26. procumbere. p. 44. Cunigine.
p. 48. l. 12. Antoninus. page 49. l. 7. whence that etc. p. 56. in marg. read
Diploma Othonis Imp. editum for that corrupted in some of the copies. p. 58. l.
3. Lieutenant. p. 63. l. vlt (...). p. 80. l. 7. Austria. p. 85. l. 11.
Artaxares. page 89. in the Margin Orientali. p. 96. l. 8 Othomanique line. p.
105. in marg. accuratius. p. 109. l. 11. (...). p. 112. l. 23. (...). p. 116.
l. 1. summonitorum. p. 124. l. 17. thy for py. so in l. 24. and in l. 25. for
thategn and thateoden read thegn and theoden. page 143. marg. Dipnos. p. 157.
in Carm. Rogabis page 182. l. 1. (...). page 173. l. 29. Daulphin. p. 184. l.
10. (...). and l. 15. honor. In marg. Ar^hiat. p. 185. In marg. (...). p. 193.
l. 33. King for thing. p. 195. I. Iulias. l. 29. Fleuronee. p. 199. l. 25. The
Prince, was. In marg. Bertrand. [Mend the pages after 200. into 201, 202. 203.
and then after 205, 206, 207. etc. and then in p. 201. l. 33. resumed p. 202.
l. 12. read sur sa test. p. 203. l. 17. Northanimbri. l. 20. Decliuis. l. 23.
muta-. l. 25. ipse. p. 205. correct the Saxon th thrice, and make it p. you may
easily see where. l. 19. cer-. l. 20. for his read this. l. 25 componuntur.
page 205. l. 16. libere. p. 207. in marg. Corcy rens. Sa. Cerem. 1 Sect. 7. p.
208. l. 23. Duces. Other diverse faults escaped in that sheet, by the imperfitnes
of a young Compositor, which every Reader will be able to correct.] page 209.
l. 29. Marquisat for Marquess. page 221. l. 19. Iudex. p. 239. in marg. Pet.
Faber. p. 242. in marg. Ex Chronic. Diuionens. p. 259. marg. Ap. for Ep. p.
277. in marg. Chez Claude F. etc. p. 189. l. 11. Vauasours. p. 292. l. 31. en
court. p. 297. l. 14. and 15. Militoria. p. 310. l. (...). (...). p. 311. l.
11. (...). p. 300. l. 32. Segar Garter. page 332. l. vlt. read through. p. 165.
l. 29. blot out of.

Some others are, which your courtesy must amend, and ^aster may, then my
labor.

The more special Autors, whose testimony we have used.
By the Numerall Figures are designed the Pages where some places, of the
Ancients, are either, not vulgarly, explaned, or amended. By the Numerall
Letters you are directed to the Pages, where old Fragments, out of ancient Ms.
Autors, Records, Charters, and such like, are transcribed.
Abbo Floriacensis: ita nimirum is, qui de Obsidione Lutetiae scripsit metrice,
nuncupatur, que^ tamen haut Floriacensem, sed Abbonem Monachum S. Germani a
Pratis apud Gallos fuisse ostendit Iacobus du Breul. Aben Ezra 65. Abraham Ben
David. Abraham Ortelius. Abraham Zaccuth. 93. 110. Achmetes; cuius tamen Oniro
critica sub Apomazaris nomine falso circumferuntur. 23. Acta Apostolorum ex
Arabico per Fr. Iunium. Acta Publica or Records, XXV. XXXI. XXXII. XXXV. XLIII.
LV. CXXIII. CLXXVIII. CXCIX. CCII. CCXVI. CCXVII. CCXXV CCXXVI. CCXXX. CCXXXI
CCXXXIV. CCXXXV CCXXXVI. CCXXXVII CCXXXVIII. CCXXXIX CCXLVII. CCLVI. CCLXIV
CCLXV. CCLXX. CCLXXV. CCLXXIX. and seq. CCLXXXI CCCXXI. CCCXXIX. CCCXXX
CCCXXXV. see in Geruase of Tilburie and Domesday, and Alexander
Salopesburiensis. Adam Bremensis 177. in margin. Adam Myrimuth XCVI. Adamannus
Scotus. Adhdemarus 190. and 191. Adreualdus Floriacensis. 253 Aelianus.
Aeschylus. 10. Agathias Scholasticus 7. in marg. 52. 91. 109. 111. 145
Agellius. Aimoinus Monachus 189. 227. 389. Alcuinus. 203. Alexander ab
Alexandro. Alexander Gaguinus. Alexander's life written in English verse by a
Dominican Friar, and dedicated to the Duchess of Gloucester, under Hen. VI. and
an Epigram on him, found at the end of his life in Latin. C. XXV. CLVII.
Alexander Salopesburiensis, or the author of the Red Book in the Exchequer,
written under Henry the third. CCCLXXXVIII. and CCCLXXXIX. Alcoranus Mahumedis.
100 101. and seq. 163. Albertus Krantzius. Albertus Aquensis. Aloysius
Cadamustus. Ammianus Marcellinus. Annals Colmariensium. 213 Annals Franciae a
Pithoeo editi. 213. Annals Hiberniae. 355. Anastasius Bibliothecarius. 82.
156. Ancyranum Monumentum illud apud Leunclauium and alios. 169. Anna Comnena.
82. 197. Anthologia. 13. 53. Andre du Chesne. Andreas Knichen. Andreas
Alciatus. Apulleius. 108. 129. Apollonius Rhodius. Arnobius. 129. Aristophanes.
144. Aristoteles. 157. 337. Artemidorus. 140. and in pref. Arrianus. 145.
Arnolfus de S. Emerrammo. 190. Arsenius Monembasiae Episcopus de quo. v. 138
Arnoldus Lubecensis. Asserius Meneuensis. 133. Athenaeus. 143. apud eum Semus.
34. Apion 137. Posidonius 340. and 341. Athaliates. 121. Athenagoras.
Augustinus 220. Augustus Thuanus. Aurelius Victor. 152. Aurea Bulla Caroli
quarti. 245. Ausonius. 10. 385
BAldricus Dolensis. 111. 379. Baldus. Baronius. Bartholomeus Chassanaeus.
Bartholom Georgeuitz. 101 Bartolus. Beda. 30. 333. Bertoldus Constantiensis
videsis page 126. Belleforest. Benjamin Ben-Iona sieve Tudelensis. 86. 99. 111.
146. 154. Bertrand d' Argentre. Bonauentura Uulcanius.
CAllimachus 311. Cantacuzenus. Capitolinus. Carolus Paschalius. Carolus
Sigonius. Carolus de Uilliers. Cassiodorus. 64. 156. and 157 183, 184, 306,
307, 310. Caspar Waserus. Catullus. 114. 117. 144. Censorinus. Chartae Antiquae
CCLXXV. CCCI. Chaucer. 292. 341. Chrysostemus, 166. 310. Christophorus
Becmannus. Christophorus Heluicus. Chronicon de Bello apud Lambardum. 328.
Chronicon Abindoniae apud Camdenum. 323. Chronicon Richerspergense. Chronicon
Manniae. Cicero 59. 108. 170. marg. 258. 315. Cicarella. Claudianus 83. Claude
Fauchet; a piece of an old Romant of Siperis de Vineaux 44. and of another of
Benois in him. 211. 277. Clemens Alexandrinus. 142 151. Concilium Aurelianense.
Constitutiones Impp. a Pithoeo editae. Constitutiones Imperiales a Goldasto
collectae. Constantini Donatio de qua page 56. Constantinus Manasses.
Constantinus Porphyrogennetus. 37. 81. 89. 100. 200, 249, 336. Codex Iustiniani
passim. Codex Theodosianus. Codex Canonum 310. Court Book Ms. of the Abbey of
Ramsey touching its possessions in Craunfeild and elsewhere of 23. Hen. the 3.
CC. LXXI. Coronatio Fred. 11. Damae Regis. Custumier de Normandy. 291.
Curtius. 143. Cyprianus. 13. Cyrillus.
David Chytraeus. Damianus a Goes. Decree touching the Baronets. De Ionuille
(he wrote the life of S. Jews K. of Fr. and in his time lived) 89. 104. 106.
110. Digesta sieve Pandectae Iuris Ciuilis. Diodorus Siculus. Dioscoridis
Appendix. 10. Dio Cassius, 324. and 325. Dionysius Afer. 33. 66. Dionysius
Halicarnasseus. 138. and 139. 299. Dionysius Gothofredus. Ditmarus 189.
Doctrina Machumet. Domesday (it was began in 14. William 1. and ended in XX.)
232. 272. Du Haillan. Du Tillet, or Tillius.
EDwardus Coke Primarius a Iudicijs Publicis apud Anglos Praetor, and Iuris
nostri Columen. Elias Leuita. Epist. Reg. and Pr. in Tom. 2. Orient. Historiae.
Epistolae Hen. IV. Imp. Epictetus. Esteuan de Garibay. Ethelwerdus. 30. 153.
203. 212. Eunapius. Euripides. 41. 138. Eustathius Scholiastes. Eustathius
Antecessor. 336 Eusebius apud eum Philo Bybliensis. 11. and 161. 183 atque
illud Eusebij Chronicon a Diuino illo and literatoru^ Principe Ios. Scaligero
publici iuris factum. Expeditio Asiatica Frederici primi.
FEstus. 34. 139. 204. Feudorum Co^stitutiones 212. 289. 295. and in
praefatione. Flodoardus. Florus. 139. 234. Florilegus sieve Matthaeus
Westmonasteriensis. 216. Formulae Vett. a H. Bignono editae 222. 252. Fragment,
of holy Oil given to Thomas Becket. CXXXIIII. Frodoardus. Froissart. 89. 283.
Franciscus Hotomanus. Franciscus Raphaleng. sieve Lexici Arabici author.
Franciscus Swertius. Franciscus Mennenius. Francesco Sansouino. Fructus
Temporum, sieve Caxtoui Chronicon. CCC. XXXVII. Fulbertus Carnotensis.
Fulcherius Carnotensis. 187
GAlfredus Monumetensis. 349. Georgius Acropolites seu Logotheta. 24. 45. 377.
Georgius Buchananus. Georgius Codinus vulgo Curopalata. 121. 122. 172. Georgius
Cedrenus. 13. 91. 152. Georgius Phranzes. 156. Geruasius Tilhuriensis. with the
common opinion, I took that Dialogus de Negotijs Scaccarij, known by the name
of the Black Book, to be written by this Geruase. But by the preface of
Alexander Archdeacon of Shrewsburie to the Red Book, it seems, it was rather
done by Richard Bishop of London (his name being Richard de Beaumes) under
Henry I. The words of that Alexander are these: Cum neque Nigellus quondam
Elienfis Episcopus Regis Henrici I. The saurarius vir quidem in Scientia
Scaccarij before instructus nec eiusdem successor Officij Richardus
Londoniensis Episcopus, licet in sui libelli tractatu superius multa De
Negotijs Scaccarij digereret etc. I confess it was first obserud to me by Mr.
Agard, a man known to be most painful, industrious, and sufficient in things
of this nature. CCXXXII. CCXXXIII. CCLV. CCCXXII. Gildas. 132. Glossaria Vett.
edita a Stephano and Vulcanio. Glossae Iuris Graece editae. Glossarium
Graecobarbarum I. Meursij. Goffridus Vindocinensis marg. 201. Gratianus
Monachus. 253. Gregorius Turonensis. 189. 243. and 244. 264. Guilielmus de
Badensel. 317 Guilielmus Brito. 131. Guilielmus Camdenus. Guilielmus
Gemiticensis. Guilielmus Malmesburiensis. 35. 188. 201. 212. 214. 224. 228.
233. 247. 248, 314. Guilielmus de Rubruquis. 91 Guilielmus Rishanger. 216.
Guilielmus Segar. Guilielmus Tyrius. 381. Guido Pancirollus. Guntherus. 131.
HAdrianus Iunius Haithon Armenius, 89. 102. 110. Hakluit. Haly Aben Rodoan.
74. Harmenopulus. vide p. 64. Hector Boethius, an old Charter in him. 303.
Helmoldus Presbyter. 200. 212. Henricus Huntindoniensis. Henricus Stero. 192.
Henricus de Bracton 263, 270, 281, 334. Herodotus 33, 73, 74, 109, 337.
Herodian 10. Hermes Trismegistus. Hesiodus 16. Hesychius Grammaticus 9 and 10.
382. Hibernorum Statuta. 58. Hieronymus. 8. 41. Hieronymus Bignonius.
Hieronymus Megiserus, sieve author Dictionarij Turcico-Latini. Hippocrates. 32.
and 33. Hirtius sieve Oppius. 259. Homerus. 14. 15. 66. 154. 157. 311. Horatius.
64. 117. 164. 325. Hubertus Goltzius. Hugh Broughton. Hugo Grotius. Hugo de
Cleerijs.
IAcobus Cuiacius. Iacobus de Vitriaco. 99. Ianus Douza. Inscript Vett. 11. 77.
79. 227. Ingulphus 200. 224. 270. 301. 314. 327. Ioannes Auentinus. Ioannes
Buxtorfius. Ioannes Bodinus. Iehanle Breton. 263. Ioannes Caius. Ioannes
Camaterus LXXXI. LXXXIII. John Cartwright. i. The Preachers Trauells. Ioannes
Drusius. John Dauies knight, Attorney general of Ireland. Joan. Euchaitensis.
82. 364 Ioannes Faber. John Gower. 277. Ioannes Goropius. John Harding author of
the English story in verse. 365 Ioannes Lelandus. John Lidgat. 124. 211.
CCCXXXIII. 341. Ioannes Mariana. Io. de Plano Carpini. Ioannis D. Epistolae in
lucem Arabice editae a Doctiss. G. Bedwello. 51. Ioannes Sarisburiensis, sieve
Carnotensis. 56. 215. 314. Ioannes Skenaeus. John Stow. Ioannes Tzetzes. 90.
Jonathan Ben Vziel 165. Josephus 73. 109. in margin. 141. and 142. Josephus
Scaliger. Isacius Tzetzes. Isaacus Casaubonus. Isidorus Hispalensis. 259.
Isidorus Pelusiota. Julius Caesar. Iulianus Apostata. 311. Julius Firmicus.
185. Justinius sieve Trogus. 56. 149. Iustus Lipsius. Iuuenalis. 155. 329. and in
praefatione.
LActantius 12. in marg. Lambertus Schaffnaburgensis. 313. Lampridius. 291.
299. Landulphus Sagax. 90. Leunclauius. Leges Alemannorum. 186. 204.
Anglo-Saxonum. 61. 124. 204. 224. 225. 255 334. Boiorum 186. Burgundiae 262.
Canuti 177. 267. 268. 269. 273. Caroli Magni. Ripuarioru^. 186. Salicae 261.
and vide part. 2. cap. 1. Scotorum 204. 264. 286. 302. Visigothorum. Those of
our Nation, in present force, and the like, I omit. Leo Africanus III. Marg.
Leo Philos. Imperator. 291. Liuius. 324. Linschoten. Liger Book of S. Leonards
in Yorkshire. XXXI. Literae Gallice conscriptae ab Edwardo III. ad Philippu^
Valesium. XXX. Lodouicus Vartomannus. Lodouicus Viues. Lucas de Penna. Luys de
Vretta. Luitprandus Ticinensis 37. 351. Lycophron. 76. 330.
MAcrobius. Mahumed Ben-Dauid. 51. 111. Manilius. 14. Marcianus Capella. 140.
Marcianus Heracleotes. Marcellus Corcyrensis. Marculphus. Marquardus Freherus.
Marinus Sanudus Torsello. 99. Martialis. 33. 166. Martinus a Baumgarten.
Martinus Polonus. Martinus Cromerus. Martiinus Crusius, si vis, magis eius
Turcograecia 98. 222. 267. Matthaeus Paris 89. 94. 102. 201. 216. 278, 283.
301. 315. 319. 330. and 331. 345. Matthaeus a Michow. (...). Mercurius
Gallobelgicus. Michael Glycas. Modus tenendi Parlamenti. CCLXXIIII. Monachus
Engolismensis Vit. C. M. 91. 190. Moses Mikotzi 329. Moses Aegyptius. Idem
nonnunquam Rambam i. Rabbi Moses Ben Maimon, and Maimonides appellatur apud
Scriptores. 50, 51.
NE (...) Iustiniani. 21. 309. 351. Nicephorus Callistus. 93. Nicephorus
Gregoras. 193. 212. Nicetas Choniates. 83. Nithardus Angilbertus. 177 Nonius
Marcellus. 34. Notitia Viriusque Prouinciae.
OLaus Magnus, Onkelos. Onuphrius Panuuinus. Orpheus (potius Onomacritus.) 42.
140. Ordo Coronationis Reg. Angliae. CXXIV. Ordonnances du France. Ordo
Romanus. Otho Frisingensis 29. 191 233. Otto de S. Blasio. 28. 191. Ouidius.
121.
PAnegyristae Vett. 37. Papinius sieve Statius 47. 166. 326. Pausanias. 332.
Paulus Oderbornus. Paulus Aemylius. Paulus Merula. Paulus Warnfredus qui item
Diaconus and Aquilegiensis dicitur. 307. Petrus de Alliaco 166. Petrus Faber.
Petrus Kirstenius. Petrus Mar tyr Legationis Babylonic. author. Petrus Pithoeus.
Petrus Rebuffus. Peter Victor auteur de l'historie Septenaire. Petrus de Vineis
193. 290 Philippus Lonicerus. Philoxenus 261. Photius 129. 385. Pindarus 71.
Plato 108. Plautus 53. 340. Plinius Caecilius 119. Plinius secundus Philosophus
10. 34. 40. 136. 324 Plutarchus 33. Polybius 33. 138. 141. Poliaenus 145.
Pragmatica Philippi Hispaniarum Regis de Anno 1586. Procopius 91. 307.
Prouinciale Romanum 80. 130. 131. Prudentius 161. Psalms M S. in English verse
very ancient. LX. CCLXVII. Ptolemaeus. Polydorus Vergilius.
QVintilianus.
RAdeuicus vide marg. 81. 335. Raimundus d'Agiles. 379 Ranulphus de Glanuilla.
276. Ranulphus Higden sieve Monachus ille Cestrensis author Polychronici. 188.
Raphael Hollinshed. Registrum Breuium. Richardus Uitus Basingstochius.
Richardus Uerstegan. Richardus de Baumes or Bishop of London the true author of
the Black Book. See before in Geruas: Tilburiensi. Rigordus 99. 246. Rober.
Glocestrensis, XXXVIII CXXXIII. CCXXIX. CCXXX. Robertus Monachus, 96, 189.
Rodericus Santius. Rodericus Toletanus, 96. Rodulphus Glaber, 160. Rogerut de
Houede^, 96. 233 237, 246, 277, 321, 323.
SAcra Biblia, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 32, 33, 41, 42, 49, 51, 66, 67, 73, 75, 76,
89, 97, 108, 109, 129, 154, 155, 164, 165, 185, 208, 328. 351. Solomon Iarchi.
Sampsates Spachanes, 99, 103. Saxonicum Monumentum apud Lambardum, and Alios de
Ordinibus illius Aeui. 268. Scholiastes Aeschyli. 10. Aristophanis 142. 144.
155 Callimachi 12. Pindari. Scotorum Statuta. Sebastianus Munsterus. Seneca
Trag. 138. and Philosoph. 41. 144. Seruius Honoratus. apud eum Varro 34.
Siculus Flaccus 129. Sidonius Apollinaris 213. Sigebertus Gemblacensis 375
Sigismundus Liberius. Silius Italicus 147. Spartianus 69. 170. Stephanus
Bizantius 12. 86 Stobaeus. Strabo 32. Suetonius 325. Suidas 137. 142. marg. 185
291 Sugerius Abbas 209. Synesius 20. Synodus Ephesina. Synopsis Basilicon.
Symmachus in Praefat.
TAcitus 41. 169. 204. 228. 306. 340. Targum Hierosolymitanum. Tertullianus 50.
64. 35. 326 Theganus. Theodoretus. Theophrastus. Theocritus 165. Theodorus
Douza. Theophilactus Simocatta 91. 92, 93, 112. Theon Scholiast. Arati.
Theophilus Antiochenus. Theophilus Int. Iustiniani. Theophrastus 129. Thomas
Leodius. Thomas Smith Knight. Thomas Millius. Thomas Rudborn. Thomas Walsingham
38. and literas illas Edwardi III. ad Philippum Valesium quas Walsinghamius
Latin habet, Gallice ex vetusto Ms. exhibemus, page 30. 275. Thucydides.
Tibullus 114. Tiro Prosper 343. Titus Probus. Trebellius Pollio 119. 183.
Tripartita Historia 161. 162
VAlerius Maximus, 147. 148. Varro. Vegetius 65. Vincentius, author Speculi.
Vincentius Lupanus. Virgilius 115. 138. 158. 298. 299. Vopiscus 72. 183. 299.
and 300. 340.
WAlafrid. Strabo, 243. 251. Wernerius Rolewinke, qui nempe Fasciculum Temporum
conscripsit, vt notat Tritemius, libr. de Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis.
XEnophon 145. Xiphilinus.
Zonaras. Zosimus. Zygomalas 107. Marg. 110.
These are the self Authors whose witness we have used. To cite them which are
in others only cited, not themselves extant, were to no purpose; and, to as
little, to collect all whom we have named, or taken common story out of.

The more special Words of the Eastern Tongues, to our Purpose, herein
interpreted.
Page 12 Maran (...) 49 Mara (...) 32 Malec Malcia (...) 20 Melci Romi (...)
103 Musulmin (...) 341 Nosha Cel(...)m (...) 8 Nineueh (...) 41 Naschu Bar
(...) 65 Nergal (...) 328 Sephor (...) (...) Chaldaeis soepius excidit 51. 9
Aetzebijm (...) 109 Aelam (...) Aebaedeh Zaereh (...) 114 ib. abbreuiat. (...)
69 Pil (...) 74 Pharaoh (...) Prestigiani (...) 87 88 Pristi Joan (...) et vide
in Praefatione. 107 Tzaophi (...) 69 Caesar (...) 49 Rab (...) 114 (...) Rabbui
hacuchoth 110 Shah (...) 165 Shehernim (...) 49 Shematha (...) 66 Shichur (...)
97 Sheriphun (...) ib. Sultan (...) 51. and 110. Alsheich (...) 328 Shetar
(...) Thomach Shabat (...) 154 351 Abrech (...) 49 Adon (...) 99 Alghabassi
(...) 208 Alloph (...) 99 Amir (...) 99 Amir Elmumenin 9 Bell (...) ib. Baal
(...) 11 Beleh (...) 13 Gibber Tzid (...) Gian Belul (...) 85 86 Gaijan (...)
208 Dux (...) 164 Halilath (...) 33 (...) Hamelic Hagadol 51 Zechen (...) 53
Haueh (...) 10 Chamanijm (...) 97 Chaliph (...) ib. Chaliph (...) 328 Chathom
(...) 50 Jehovah (...) Jehovah Elohim (...) ib. 75 Iauan (...) 11 Coreshed
(...) 14 Cesil (...) 70 Ceshira (...) 164 Lilith (...) ^14 Loghez (...)
Occurrit et in SS. Psalm. 114. Com. 1. 110 Machspijm (...) 11 Mithri (...)
Such of the Greek Words, both Pure and Barbarous, most of them being not
usual, of which, for the most part, as they occurred, is a more special
Explication.
A (...) 86 (...) 121 (...) 131 (...) 66 (...) 219 (...) 99, 100 (...) 375
(...) 375 (...) and (...) 99, 376 (...) 34 (...) 33 (...) 53 (...) 71 (...) 98,
112 (...) and (...), 18, and seq. (...) 381 (...) 98 B denotatur per (...). 267
(...) 10 (...) 354 (...) 382 (...) 21 (...), 32, 46, and 112 (...) 33 and 144
(...) 120 and 121 (...) 45 (...) 377 (...) 9 (...) 10 (...) 11 (...) 249 (...)
and (...) 336 (...) 120 (...) 33 (...) 222 (...) 45 (...) 46 (...) 54 (...) 122
(...) 62 (...) 52 (...) 53 (...) 185 (...) 165 (...) 109 (...) 75 (...) 4 (...)
62 (...) 91 (...) 381 and 382 (...) 15 (...) 121 (...) 330 (...) 333 (...) 121
(...) 142 (...) 197, and 198 (...) 81 (...) 91 (...) 90 (...) 89 (...) 111
(...) etc. 376 (...) 183, 185 (...) 222 (...) and (...) 45 (...) in praefat.
(...) 144 (...) 54 (...) 24 (...) and (...) 122 and 171 (...) and (...) 48
(...) 49 (...) 222, and 351 (...) 108, and seq. (...) 109 (...) 212 (...) 122
(...) 193 and 185 (...) ib. (...) 120 (...) 111 (...) 166 (...) and (...) 158
(...) and (...), 103 (...) and (...) 267 (...) 377 (...) 53 (...) 76 (...) 162
and 355 (...) 111 (...) and (...) 8 (...) and (...) 15 (...), apud Euripidem 41
(...) 33 (...) 350 (...) 64 (...) 120 (...) and (...), 241 (...) 90 (...) 45
(...) 198 (...) 351 (...) 377 (...) 82 (...) 83 (...) 81 and 82 (...) 98 (...)
64 (...) 169 (...) 24 (...) 40, 41 (...) 165 (...) 222 (...) 24 and vnde id
nomen Regibus datum a Graecis ib. (...) 63 (...) 111 (...) etc. 291 (...) 377
(...) 110 (...) 66 (...) 336 (...) 154 (...) 342 (...) 340. and seq. (...) 98
(...) 141, 150 (...) 172 (...) and (...) 137 (...) 18 (...) 185 (...) in
praefat. (...), and (...) 380 (...) 45 (...) 184 (...) 74 (...) 42 (...) 185
(...) 379 (...) 164 (...) 91 (...) 94 (...) 91 X and P 162 (...) 364 (...) 137
What occurres, most particularly pertaining to some parts of our English
Common Laws, is here, by it self, collected.
AIdes afaire filz Chiualer, File marier, and de Rancom. 330. 331 Amerciament
for trespass etc. v. page 204. 225. how it was anciently in Herefordshire. 233
Ancient demesne tenants 335. and tried by a Jury. ibid. Amittere Legem, what.
344
BAckberend. 264 Baronia, and Tenere per Baroniam. 276. and 278 Bishops how
anciently invested by the King, and that brought into use again, in substance,
under Edward VI. 201 Bishops wont to set in the Shrifes Turn; when that was
altered. 225 Bracton, a conjecture on him. 279. And see in the Table of Autors
under Henricus de Bracton.
CArucagia. 270 Chester. 247 Clergy men; see Bishops. used to make a
Procurator in Parliament, if judgment were to be given on life and death. 253.
Communia Placita non seq. etc. 234 County Court. 255 Crosses. 162
DArrain Presentment. 279 Distress to make oath in the Jury in a iberty of
Infangtheef, land a judgment in it. 263 Durham. 248
Earls made laws in their Counties. 233 Execution might not be in Debt of a
Knights Equipage, etc. 322 Eires. 321
FRanchise de werk. 248 Forest Laws of K. Knout amended; those in the Print.
268
HExamshire, 248 Heriots, 225. 272. 273 Horse de son Fee pleded by Horse de son
Baronie. 278 Hidata Terra and non Hidata. 271
IVris Virum. 279
KNights Fee. 274. 319 Knighting by Writ. 320. 321. See Execution.
MArcheta Mulieris. 210 Marshalls Fees. 315 Meinouer (Manor.) 264 Merton
statut of Bastardie. 280
NAtiuo habendo. 210
Plural number in Praecipite in a Writ. 115 Parliament. 274 Pares. 346. 347
REliefs. 232. 272. 273 276
SAke or Sack and Saccaber and Sathaber, etc. 261. 262 Seals. 328 Surrender of
an Erledom. 3 1 Summons of an Earl in another County. 233 Shrifes, 255. See
Turn and County. Starra Iudaeorum occurring in the old Rols of Hen. 3. and Ed.
1. 329 Statut of XX. Ed. 3. de Proditoribus expounded 345
THird part of the County. 231. 232 and seq. Trial by a Jury of Jews and
Christians, 329 By Ley Gager anciently in most actions. 345. of ancient Demean.
335 of a Bishop in Capital faults. 347 Turn de Vicount. 225
VVArdships. 54
THE TABLE.
A
ABassilar Family. fol. 99 Abasens, or Abissins. 86 Abellio, a Gaulish God. 9
Abbots and Priors invested. 200 wont to be in Parliament as Barons. 283. and
were Barons ratione Officij and Tenurae. 282. and 283 Abthan, an old dignity
in Scotland. 285 Abstracts and Concrets in expressing a great man's honor. 117
which best. 125 Abrech, which was given to Joseph by the Egyptians. 351
Abualtrazim is Mahomets name in Paradise. 100 Achaius King of Scots, added the
Bordure Fleurie about the Lion, as they affirm. 153 Achemaenides. 74 Achmet is
Mahomets name in heaven. 100 Adoration by kissing the hand, or forefinger. 38.
and 40. and 41. and whence Adorare. Adoration after the Persian manner. 41
Adoption per Arma. 307. Adoption desired by the Persian Cabades, of Justinian,
and how Justinian put him off. 307 Adon and Adonai, i. Lord. 49. and 50
Admirabiles, Admiralli, Admiraulx, Admirauisi. 99. and 189 and 375 Admirallus
Murmelius. 102 Admiral whence. 375 Adam, Heue, hence (or out) Lilith, written
on the walls, the woman being in childbirth among the Jews. 105 Adrian IV.
Pope, an English man; and his name before he was Pope. 55 Administratio
Comitatuum. 233 Aesculapius, why he is supposed Apollo's son. 70 Aella,
first that had the chief supremacy of State among the Anglo-Saxons, being
King of Sussex. ^0 Aelamites are Persians, and why so called: and how the name
of Aelam or Elymas agrees with Magus. 109 Egyptian Kings. 73 Aetes, son to
Phoebus (in the Argonautiques) had Sunne-beames on his head in memory of his
father. 140 Aetheling. See Etheling. Aegialeus, first King of Europe. 16 Agagit
and Amalekit all one. 75 Aiem to the Turks, is Persia. 106 Aichmalotarchae in
the Captivity. 154 Aijos Phasileos Marchio. 131 Ailwin a Saxo^ Earl, called
Halfking, the same with Hehelguinus in others. 227. Founder of Ramsey Abbey in
Huntingdonshire. ibid. Aides to make the son a Knight, marry the daughter,
and redeem the Lords body out of prison. 330 Algomeiza, Procyon. 13 Algebar.
13 Alexander, son to Jupiter Hammon, and his picture with Rams horns. 63.
whence he was called Dhil, karnaijn. 140. his being deceived by Anaximenes
expressed by an Ancient in Latin verse. 157 his request to the High Priest, for
his name to be given to the Priests children. 67 Albu Ersalan. 111 Alcoran of
the Turks, worn about a Chaliphs neck. 100. in it parts of the old Testament.
ibid. how many Azoars, Sureths, or chapters it has; the difference of the
Arabique one in that from the Latin. 101. the beginning of every Azoar. 102.
It was by error given to Mahomet by the Angel Gabriel. 104 Almumens. 101 Ali,
or Alem, Mahomets son in law. 100. how the Persians and other follow his
sect. 105. and 107 the Alian Sect from another Ali, according to some opinion.
107 Ali Abasides. 107 Alghabassi. 99 Aladin in the Turkish story. 112 Alfred,
the first King anointed in England. 133 Alilat, the same Goddess with Lilith.
165 Alexius Commen. the first creator of those Dignities, Sebastocrator,
Panhypersebastus, etc. 171 Alderman of all England under the Saxons. 227
Aldermannus Iuratorum. 270. and 389 Alderman. See more in Ealderman. Alodium,
Alode its deriuation. 302 Alodarij, Aloarij, and the like anciently in England.
390 Alsheich. 51 Alluph, i. Dux. 208 Amiras, Amera, Amir. 49. and 98. and 375
Amir Echur. 374. Amir Halem. 379 Amir elmumunin, i. Rex orthodoxorum. 99. and
seq. Amiralius. 375 Amiras and Amireus, if well distinguished. 375. and 376.
Amir amomenus. 99 Amir moumnes. 100 Amici Regum, and Amici and Fratres Romans
Imp. 185 Anaximenes. See Alexander. Annian Impostures rejected. 17 Anglorum Rex
Primus in the Heptarchie. 30 Anselm, Archbishop of Canterbury, would have gone
to Rome for his Pall, but William II. would not permit him. 26 Anaxarchus his
jest to Alexander pretending himself a God. 67 Anni Augustorum. 71 Antigonus
his answer to a flatterer, that called him God. 67 Antiochus sprinkled the
Jews Bibles with Bacon-broth. 62 Antonin, of what respect the name was in
Rome. 77 Anointing of Kings. 128. whence the original. 129. and 387.
Anointing of stones and statues among the Gentiles, and bounds. ibid. what
Princes were to be anointed by the Roman Provincial. 130. yet no anointing
of the old Irish Kings. 57. where it was first used in the western parts. 131.
Anointing with holy oil to the French Kings. 132. None of their Kings of the
first line was anointed. 132. British Kings anointed. 132. First anointed in
the Saxon times. 133. Anointing of the English Kings with holy oil given to
Thomas Becket, as the tale is reported. 134. Anointing makes Kings capable of
spiritual jurisdiction. 135 Andrew Harkley Earl of Carleil, his being
degraded of Knighthood, under Edward II. and the form of it. 3^7 Andrew S. 370
Apollo, to him were consecrate all children cut out of the womb: and why. 70
Apostle des Sarazins. 66 Apostolic King, a title to an Asiatique King. 87
Apple: so is the Globe called whereon the Cross is infixt. 158. Three apples in
Jupiters statue at Constantinople. 159 Appenages of France. 196. whence the
word Appenage. 198 Arbelus. 9 Arsacides. 76 Areta, a name of the Hagaren Kings.
76 Arduelles, or Ardebil. 107 Arthurs seal. 160. Arthur and his Round Table.
365 Arundel Castle. 235. Earldome of Arundel begun. 236. its essence by
reason of the Castle, and precedence. 236. and 237 Armories. Setting of Crowns
on them. 196. and 197. 206. See Crowns. when they began to be borne
hereditarily. in Praefat. and there of their being given by Patent, more. borne
by some Mahumetans painted anciently. 380 Arms of the Daulphine and France to
be quartered. 173. Of Moscouie. 362. and see in Beta. Of Saxony. 152 Arms
given in enfranchisement. 326. 327. and see in Knights. Of arms descendible to
the heir. 322 Archduke, how ancient the name. 194. Of Lorrain. ib. Arlic, i.
Honorable. 223 Armiger. 340. 341. whence the dignity has its name. 343
Archbishops worth. 204 Arabians. See in Vashlu. Assyrian Monarchy: and its
continuance. 6. and 7 Assure built not Nineveh. 8 Astaroth. 65 Astronomy of
Homer explaned. 14 Astrologers. 67. 166. and 185 Asia; the western part of it,
sometimes (beside what is truly Greece) called Greece. 75 Assit principio
Sancta Maria meo. 101 Asser Ben Cheter. 105 Astures, King of them. 80. Prince
of Asturia. 170 Ataulph purposd for a title in Empire. 76 Athelstans
greatness, thinking it more honorable to make a King, then be one. 35. his
Charter. 303 Athenian Prince called Great Duke. 194 Augustus would not be
called Dominus. 47 Augustus; why and how a title to the Emperor. 70. 71. its
deriuation. 71. used by other Princes. 71. and 72 Augere Hostias. 71 Aureum
Pomum, whereon the cross is borne. 160 Auratus Eques. 317. and 361 Aureorum
Annulorum jus. See in Rings.
B
BAal. 9. and 65 Baal Hanan, the same as Hannibal. 67 Baal-samaim, the same
with Jupiter, Apollo, Pan. 9 Banners given in inuestiture, and in committing
the government of a Province. 28. and 29. and 191. and 378. and 379 Banner
square: who may bear it with his Arms on it. 353 Bannerets: their Name, and
Creation. 353. and seq. a Banneret discharged of being Knight of the Shire.
355. and 356. and of their Precedence, ibid. See in Sanziacks. Bani of
Hungary. 381 Babylonian Scepters and Rings, 155 Babylon and Bagdet. 93 Bagded
is the old Seleucia, upon the confluence of Tigris and Euphrates. 93 Baetulus
from Bethel derived into the Heathen. 129 Babamus, in Turkish Our Father. 122
Bacon the Friar his books, spoild by ignorant Monks. 109 Baltheus, what. 311
Balteus auratus, and constellatus. 309 Basilius Macedo, the Eastern Emperor
his finding fault with Lews II. the Western, about the title of Emperor. 22.
and 23 Basileus. 21. and seq. 35 Barbaquan and Barbican. 89 Barons and Baronie,
the etymon of the word, 259. and seq. what they are. 265. 266. Of France. 266.
of England, before the Normans, 267. and seq. until 273. Barons after the
Normans, and Parlamentarie. 274. 278. and 280. 283. Value of a Baronie. 274.
and 232. Peers to Barons, i. Pares Baronum. 274. 275. Barons to Earls 247. 275.
without Barons the name of Prince anciently not supported. 275. Baronies how
many in England, under Hen. III. 278. First Baron created by Patent in England.
281. Baro, and Baronia, coniugata. 282. and 283. Primus Baro Angliae. 283 Baron
and Lord. 284. Baronie of Earls given to their heirs apparent. 284 Barons of
Scotland. 285. late and ancient 286. 287. difference of those of France of
later time, and Barons of England and Scotland. 288. Barons in France have the
right of wearing a Gilt Helmet. 288. and a Chaplet of gold. 289. Of Spain 289.
like Los Ricos Hombres in Spain, and Valuasors in the Empire, ibid. A Barons
ancient inuestiture, and Banner. 353. See in Cheualier: and in Grestock, and in
Stafford. Baro, in Cicero and Persius. 258 Barons of the Exchequer. 347. 391
Barons of the Cinque Ports. 216 Baronagium Angliae, and Barnagium. 277
Barigildi. 264 Barn, or Bern, and Bernage. 267 Bardus. 260 Barkshire, the old
custom there in paying Reliefs. 272 Bauiere the Dukedom anciently
hereditarie, and how under the French Kings. 190 Bachelor Knights; their
deriuation. 336 Batalarij and Baccalaurei. 336 Bandum. 354. 355 Baronetti in
old Story. 355 Baronets created by King James. 356 and 357. their precedence.
358 Bath. Knights of the Bath. 359. and seq. Bassa and Bassilar. 376 Beaumont,
first Viscount in England. 256 Beauchamp, first Baron by Patent. 281 Bell. 9
Belenus and Belin, who they were in the British and Gaulish Idolatry. 9. and
10 Belatucadre, a British Deity. 10 Belus was Nimrod. 6. and seq. how they
came to be the same 9. and seq. Beltishazzar the name of Daniel. 66 Beldigian,
the Aethiopique Emperor his title. 86. and 88 Belul Gian. i. Prester John 85
Belisama Minerua, a Goddess in an old Inscription. 11 Bees: among them an
exemplarie State. 4 Benauente, first Dukedom in Castile. 205 Beta's in the
Coat of Constantinople. 21 Berosus, the true one. 8. the false one. 17 Besemi
Allahi alrrhehmeni alrrhehimi, the beginning of every Azoar of the Al^oran, and
of the Mahumedans books, and spoken religiously in the beginning of every work
undertaken. 101 Beg, and Beglerbeg. 377. and 379 Begluc, and Beglerbegluc. 377
Bilinumtia. 10 Bishops anciently invested by the Staff, or Rod, and Ring. 200.
the making of Bishops without Conge d'eslier, given to Ed. VI. by Act of
Parliament. 201 Birrus. 194 Bishops, how Barons. 282. and 347. wont to sit in
the Sherifs Turn. 225. when that altered. ibid. and 388 Bishops titles. 118
Bishops, how they partake of the Prerogatives of the Greater Nobility. 347
Bij. 383 Black Prince. See Prince of Wales. Bohemia created into a Kingdom. 28
Britons, and Britain. A prophecy that the Britons should be Emperors of Rome.
38. Constantine the Great born in Britain. 37. See Christian, and in England,
and English. Breunin and Uhrennin, i. King. 45 Bretagne. The Dukes greatness
there 116. forbidden to write Dei gratia. ibid. Of that was the first Duke
known by the distinct Title in France. 149 Bructerans, where they had their
habitation. 176 Brutes Oracle. 36 Breeches, how in use anciently. 148
Buccellatum, what. 336 Bulk, Bulcoglar, and Bulcouitz. 78 Bulgarie, the Kings
prerogative there by indulgence from the Eastern Empire. 22. 23
C
CArpi, Carpisculus, what. 72 Caradenizi. 1. Mare delle Zabach. 90 Carachan,
and Carchan, a dignity. 89 Carathay. 90 Cardarigan, and Carderigas, dignities.
90. 91 Calendar. 378 Carniola Dukedom to be made by the Archduke. 193
Carpaluc, 1. Mare delle Zabach, in Scythian. 90 Cafe, the place heretofore of
the inauguration of the Sophi. 95 Cap of Purple of the Moscouite. 152 Cappa
Honoris. 207. 239 Capitaneus and Capitania. 265. 289 Caesar, and Caesarea
Celsitudo, given to the Grand Signior. 104 Caesar Iul. how he refused the name
of King. 19. Caesar, how that Title began in the Empire. 69. when in the
Successors apparent. 170. it signifies an Elephant. 69. and 70 Caesar, as it
was a dignity in the Eastern Empire. 171. and 122 Capitales Baroniae. 276
Capita Captiuitatis. 154 Capellani or Chaplains, whence so called. 243 Caduceus
of Mercury. 155 Caruagia, and Carucagia. 270 Causia, the Macedonian Cap. 145
Capcanus. 91 Canis in the Scaligeran Family. 92 Canopie, born by whom. 216 Came
or Can, See Cham. Caliph. See Chaliph. Caspian Sea, or Mer de Bachu. 106
Catholic, the Title of Spain. 80. and 131 Caualieri di Sprone and di Collana.
383 Celebalatzaijr, 1. the Procyon. 13 Celts, a general name for the
Europaeans. 75 Celsitudo. 120 Ceremony in making the Chaliph. 95. for
Ceremonies see in Anointing, in Banners, in Sword, in Bishops, and 152. and in
Earth, and Water, in Inuestiture, and 207 Cernouitz. 78 Chaldaeans their
incredible stories of 150000. years. 61 Chalde in Aethiopia. 86. 23 Chaganus,
whence and what. 91 Cham, Chahan, Can. 90. and 383 Cham, or Chan of Cathay, the
Title whence. 87. and seque his Title 92. and see 98. Champagne Palatins. 246
Chanaranges, a dignity. 91 Chanoglan. 89 Chaplets of leaves worn by Kings.
145. and 152 Chastellans of Poland. 24^ Chaliphs and Chaliphat, the ancient,
and their ends. 93. what, and whence Caliph. 94. 97. Chalifs inauguration. 95
Chaliph and Papa being the same. 90 Chaliph of Bagdet, his Tiar or Cidaris.
146. and 147 Chazaria, 1. Taurica Chersonesus. 91 Cheque, what. 111
Chondich^ar, a Turkish addition of greatness. 103 Children received at their
birth in purple. 83 Children like their parents, in Praefatione. Christ figured
in the two first letters of his name. 161 Christianissimus to the French. 78
Christianity, specially among the Franks, very ancient. 79 Christian King
first in Britain. 78 Chlouis of France was not anointed King 131 Childbirth.
See Adam. Chester, a Writ of Right for part of the possessions of the Earldome
anciently against John the Scot Earl there. 233. and 244. made a County
Palatin. 247 Cheualier: every Parlamentary Baron so called in his Writ. 283.
whence derived. 332. the same with Miles. 332. and 334 Cheorlborn, and
Cheorlman, among our Saxons. 267. and 268 Cinque Ports. 216. See Barons.
Cimbrians, who. 294 Cidaris, Citaris. 144 City first built. 14 and 16 Cingis,
or Cinchis Cham. 87. 88. 92 Cingulum Militis. 309. Cingulum Otiosum Dignitatis,
and militiare. 312 Cinctura. See in Dukes and Earls created. Clarissimus. 383
Clergy men not to judge in life and death. 253 Cleta. 76 Clito and
Clitunculus. 176 Cock. See in Nergal. Collar of SS. 343 Collars given to
Knights. 362. 333 Common wealth how it began. 2 Computation of years from the
beginning of the world. 6. and see in the Title of the old Roman Emperors 19.
of the late and Christian. 171 Persian computation from their Neuruz. 112. from
the Arabian or Mahomedan Hegira. 163 Compagnon le Roy. 44 Comes. 220. how it
differd from, or was the same with Dux. 182. 183 184. 186. 187. and seq. the
same with Dux and Ma^chio sometimes. 213 Comes Matronae. 219 Comites Maiores
and Minores. 187 and 220 Comes: See Counts. Primi, Secundi, Tertij Ordinis. 183
Comitiua. 183. 184. and seq. Primi Ordinis. ibid. Comitatenses Legiones. 220
Comites Consistoriani. 220 Comites, whence the word derived. 228. 232 Comitiua
Vacans. 184 Comes Palatij was not the same with Maire du Maison. 243. and of
them more there following. 385 Commarepani. 209. and 319 Consilium Domini
Regis. 279 Countors. 292 Constable of England. 216 Conge d'eslier. 201 Concret:
See in Abstract. Court Baron. 273 Constantinople, the Coat. 21 Constantine the
Great, first of the Emperors, writing himself Dominus publicly. 48. his
Donatio^ to the Sea of Rome. 56. 151. he first vsd a Diadem; how that is to be
understood. 149. 152. the apparition to him in his wars against Maxentius.
160. See in Crosses, and in Britons. his law about marriage of his Nation. 37
Constantine, a name much affected in the Eastern Empire. 76. The Turks call the
old Emperors there Constantins. 76. 77 Conuentus Parium in Fr. 250 Coronet. See
Crowns. Corona, Chorona: whence. 137 Counts. See in Comites Palatij. Counts
Palatin. 24^. whence the name. 244. See in Palatin. Cosmas, swea^ing by
himself. 66 Cossorassath for Cosroes Shach. 110 Cornwall Duchy. 178. and 199
Cornwall and Devonshire. 201 Cral and Cralna, i. King and Queen. and Crol and
Crolna. 45 Craunfeild. 271 Crateuitz from Crates. 78 Craig Eriry. 215 Cretans
always liers, why. 12 Cro of Scotland. 286 Cracouian Chastellan in Poland
before the Palatin: and why. 249 Crimen Maiestatis. 118. and 121 Cross on the
Globe. 159. when first vsd. ibid. and 160. how it was in the Emperors Diadems,
Standards, and the like. 160. 161. 162 forbidden to be made on the ground. 162
Croissant of the Mahumedans, whence. 162. 163. and seq. Crowns: the first
Inuentor. 136. 142 vsd anciently but to Gods. 136 whence Corona. 137. whether
it were a royal distinction among the Gentiles, before Christianity. 137.
and seq. A disputation that it was not. ibid. One given to Hippocrates of great
value for helping the plague. 137. Those in the Games, etc. ibid. and 142.
Triu^phall Crowns. 159. how they were in ancient Rome. 139. 140 at Banquets.
141. 142. whence the Crowns worn in the Olympians. 142. Crown given by
Alexander to Diogenes, and by him to his sweetheart. 143. of leaves, 145. 152.
Crown Imperial, how it differs from that of other Princes. 150. 151.
Constantins first wearing a Crown. 149. 152. Crowns of the Jewish Kings. 152
the Crown of thorns. 153. It was an ensign of the German Empire. See the
Preface. Crown Radiant of the Duke of Florence. 153. First of the British or
English Kings wearing a Crown. 153. Crown of Scotland. 153. First of the
Westgothique Kings in Spain. 153 See Diadem. Crowns by lovers set on their
Mistresses doors and posts. 136 Crowns for Dukes: and who of them may wear
them. 194. 195. 196. and 198. Of the Archduke. 193 Bearing of Crowns on
Armories. 196. 206. 288 Crowns: how their several form was in the Eastern
Empire: and how they came (by conjecture) to be so different among our
dignities. 197. 198. Crown of the Despot. 172 Crown of Peacocks feathers. 57
Crowns: see Marquess, Earl, and Vicount. Crowning of the Rex Romanorum. 170.
171 Culzum Denizi, i. Mer de Bachu. 106 Cut out of the womb are sacred to
Apollo. 70 Cutberti Terra. 248 Curis in Sabin. 149 Cunegreuij. 389 Cyrbasia.
144 Cyprus Kingdom. 29 Cynosura, Princess of the Notthern heaven. 14
D
DAnemark the Kingdom. 29 Daniel, named by Nabuchadnezar. 66 Dates of Turks
letters. 101 Daulphin and Daulphine. 172. the reason of the name. 173. and seq.
how the Daulphine is next to Crown. 173. Epitaph of Humbert Daulphin in Paris.
174 Dea Syria, and Dij Syri. 11 Defender of the faith. 79 Dei gratia: by what
Princes used. 116. anciently by Bishops, Abbots, Master of the Temple, etc.
116. 117 Despot, what he was, and how to be spoken to. 122. 171. he might
wear Purple shoes. 156. how he became the apparent heir. 171 his Crown. 172.
197 Delphinus. See Daulphin. Devonshire Earl. 236. those of Devonshire in the
Rereward anciently. in Praefat. Degradation of Knights. 337 Deputy of Ireland.
57. and 58 Dermut Mac Morrogh. 57 Dhilkarnaijn. See Alexander. Diadem or
Fillet. 19. and 20. it used mong the Europaeans before Alexander for a Note
Royal. 138 and seq. what kind of Diadem was Royal. 143. 144. what it was.
145. 147. 148. See in Crowns, and in Tiar. Digitus salutaris. 40 Dionysius, i.
Bacchus, derived. 45 Dignities, when they began to be Feudall. 189. 190 191.
192. 195. how they are taken after the death of the Ancestor, in Spain. 206.
The dignities of the old Saxons. 204. and 225. See in Thanes, and 268. Of the
Eastern Empire, see in Despot, Sebastocrator, in Caesar, in Panhypersebastus,
and Great Duke in Duke. Diogenes. See in Crowns. Districtuale. 249 Doctors of
the Civil Law to be called Domini. 55 Dominus, how vsd or refusd among the
Roman Emperors. 47. and seq. See in Constantine. A Sect that would not allow
the word Lord, or Dominus, to any earthly Prince. 49. The word vsd in
salutation. 47. and 53. Tertullians conceit upon the first occurrence of
Dominus Deus in Genesis. 50. and there the reason of the reading Dominus Deus.
Dominus Hiberniae. 55. how the Title began. 56. when altered. 58. Dominus among
the Chaliphs. 111 Dominae to women. 53. and 54 Domna. 52 Domnus. 52 Doctor
Omniu^ Credentium. 102 Dolphin. See Daulphin. Douze Paires. 349 Droit de
Police. 266 Druides their sacrificing. 10 Drichten, i. Lord. 61 Ducatus and
Imperia: a play. 182 Duces Maiores and Minores. 207 Dukes, whence their name.
182. 183. and seq. 191. how the same anciently with Comes, and how different.
186. 187. 188. etc. See Comes. Whether a Duke anciently had XII. or any
certain number of Counties under him. 189. Inuestiture into a Dukedom,
ancient and late. 191. 192. 195. 199. 200. 202. 207 A Duke to be made by the
Archduke. 193. Great Duke. 193. and 27. some Dukes, as supreme Princes. 120.
194. 195. 207. 383. and 384. First Duke in France, by distinct name. 199. the
Greatness of the ancient Dukes there. 195 196. 198. 206. First Duke in England.
199. Dukes before the Normans. 203. they were Earls. 204. First Duke in
Scotland. 205. First Duke in Castile 205. supposed Revenue, Value, and Releif
of a Duke. 232. Of Poland. 240. See Magnus Dux. Dukes in Genesis. 208 Dux and
Comes. See Comes. Dux and Duces Limitum. 183. 209. 213 Ducianum Iudicium. 183
Ducales Tunicae. 183 Ducall habit of the Archduke. 193 Durham made a County
Palatin. 228. 247. called Cutberti Terra. 248. See in Haliwerk and in
Franchise. Dublin. See Robert of Veer. Duel: challenge to it in point of
equality of dignity. 384
E
EAgles born on the top of Scepters: and why. 155. on the Emperors shoes.
ibid. and seq. and more of them. ibid. Earth and Water demanded in subjection
required: and a special disquisition about that custom. 33 Earldome
surrendered. 231 Earls value. 232. See in Comes, etc. before the Normans in
England. 203. 204. 225. Inuestiture of an Earl. 222. 238. 239. his Coronet.
198. 223. 239. 240. whence the name. 223. by what several names titled after
the Normans. 228. how their Territory was a part of their name. 229. 230. They
had the third part of the profits of the County. 231. 232. 233. the sword of
the County given them. 237. 238. It was douoted anciently, if they might be
summoned out of their County. 234. Denominated from Towns. 235. See Arundel.
Chief Earl of England by new Creation. 239. Of Poland. 240 Ealdorman. 204. his
worth among the Saxons. ibid. he was as the Sherif among the Saxons. 225. 254.
and sat in the Turn, with the Bishop. ibid. and 388. when that was altered.
ibid. Difference of Ealdormen. 226. 227. 269. 270 See in Alderman. Ealdordom.
255 Ebrew. See in Tongues. Eddin: what. 112 Edgar written Emperor. 25. and 35
rowed over Dee by 8. Kings. 35 his dominion. 55. Edgar Etheling. 177 Edward
III. writing to Philip de Valois King of France, would not style him King. 30
Eires and Enquests there. 321 Elamits. See in Aelamits. Elymaei. 109 Electors,
what they bear. 158 Elephant in Caesar's coin: and the word in diverse
languages. 69. See in Orders. Ely, made a County Palatin. 247 Eleutho, whence
for Lucina. 165 Elhabassen, i. Ethiopians. 86 Emperor, the beginning of the
name. 19. Those of the East and West, differing about the Title. 22. and seq.
and 387. used by the English Kings. 25. 35. and Spanish. ^6. Emperor of Russia,
how he uses that Title. 28. How the Emperor is Dominus Mundi to the
Ciuiuilians. 26. See in Britons. How the Emperors took their Surnames. 72.
Emperors. See in Computation, in Anointing, in Crowns. Empires ensigns
obsolet. in Praefat. Emperor of Germany, called Vrum Padischah. 103 Enessarlar.
106 Enosha, first City built of the world. 14 Englands King anciently claimed
quicquid Imperator in Imperio, in point of supremacy. 26. 38. Free from the
Pope. ibid. See in King, in Imperator. England, when, how, and by whom named.
31. see in Ang. and in Heptarchie. Entimos in a Charter of Edward III. 198
English Kings anointed. 133. when first. ibid. Crowned first. 153 See in
Britons, and in Arthur. Eorles, See Earls. Epitaphs. 124 125. 174. and 36.
Equites Romani. 324. the Ordo Equestris, as touching their Gold Rings, disputed
of. 325. the Notes of an Eques. 326 Equites Illustres. 275. and 324 Equus
Publicus. 325 Equestris Census. 320 Equites Aurati. 317. 361 Erdebil. See in
Haidar. Ereskin, first Vicount in Scotland. 256 Erlic. 223 Esau's kissing Jacob
according to Jewish Tradition. 42 Espee de David and Elias. 96 Escuyer. 340
Esquier. 340. whence the name, and how in our Languages. 341. the same with
Knave. ibid. five sorts of Esquiers. 342. One made Esquier by Patent, in
Praefat. One retained to be Esquier in time of Peace. 344. Esquiers attending
on Knights. 340 Ethiopian Emperor. 16. See in Tongues, and in Prester John.
Etheling. 176. 177. 224 Exerif. 1. Serif. 96 Excellentia Vestra. 120 Excellent
Grace. 122 Exercitualo. 272 Expeditio, Pontis extructio, and Arcis munitio,
reserved always in the freest of Sax. Charters. 301
F
FAtuitas tua Maxima, to the Pope in the French Kings letters. 117 Fesse and
Marocco Emperor his title. 103 Feuds, there beginning. 293. and seq. something
like them in the old Roman State. 294. 295. whether the Lombards were chief
autors of them. 295. and seq. against common opinion. 297. whence transferd to
other parts. 297. Nobility from Feuds. 295. and 296. Feuds in the Eastern
Empire. 297. deriuation of the word. 302 Feud: See Field. Feuds made
hereditarie. 295 Feuds not to be aliened. 297 Feuds in England before the
Normans. 300 Fealty. 190 Fief: See Feud. Filz aisne de l'esglise. 79 Filius
Ecclesiae Mayor, Minor, Tertius. 79 Fitzhaimon: See Mabile. Fire born before
the Emperors of Rome, and Persian Kings, in Praefat. Flauius, the forename of
Lombardian Kings. 76 Florence, where PP. Pius v. would have made Cosmo di
Medices King: but the neighbor Princes would not suffer it. 30. The Crown
Radiant given to the Duke by the Pope. 153. 206. and 207. the Inscription upon
the Crown. 207 Flanders Earldom, its Dignity. 116 its beginning. 195 Foragia.
270 Fodrum. 270 Forinsecum. 283 Franks, the general name. 37. and 75 Frater
Solis and Lunae, in a Kings Title. 62 France: See in Augustus, in Anointing,
in Dukes, in Bretagne, in Christianissimus, in Filius and Filz. A conjecture of
one, why they admit no woman's Government. 176. see in Salique. See in Grecian.
Frank Padischach, 1. King of France. 103 Frilingi, what. 177 Freeheeren. 283
Furca and Fossa: See in Pit and Gallows.
G
GAbriel the Angel, and his delivery of the Alcoran. 104. and 105 Gabriels
wing, cause of the Eclipse. 163 Gaurlar. 1. Christians. 100 Gaesi. 298 Gentry.
See the Praeface. George S. what. 363. called Tropaeophorus. 364. and Chederle.
ibid. Genius Caesaris. 64 Gelal. 110 Ge the Saxon particle. 222 Gelt. 264
Girding with the sword. 238. See in the Creations of Duke, Count, etc. Giul a
Rose. 89 Gian Belul. 85 Giaen the Chalde in Ethiopia. 86 Gloucester Earldom
began 130 Gladius Comitatus and Ducatus. 237. and 312 Gladij jus and vsus 312
Globe and Cross interpreted. 159. See in Cross. Globe in the Turkish Banner.
378 Gower the Poet, buried, and how. 361. 362 Golden world a mere fiction.
Gomman. 44 Gods of the Idolaters in Princes Names. so of the true God. 65. 66
Gods applied to Princes. 62. some stiling themselves Gods, ibid. Reason why its
a denying of a Prince his Title, i^ giving him the name of God. 63. Jests on
them which called their Princes Gods. 67 Grands. 206 Grafio, Grave, Grieve, 221.
226 Grafia. 222 Greistock Baron. 283 Grace. 123 Grand Maistre of France. 244
Grand Escuyer. 342 Greece, the ancient State of it. 5. the name of Greece
applied to some inward part of Asia. 75. and 76 Greek patches often affected by
old Monks. 22. Greek affected in this Western part in the middle times. 198
Grithbreche. 390 Grecians stiling foreign Dignities by the names of those
Countries to which they were applied. 24 Grecian glory affected by the French
Kings. 258. 298 Great King, by whom used 33 Gues, Guas, or Gais. 297. 298
Guassdewr. 298 Gylas a Dignity. 89
H
Have, 1. Salve, whence. 53 Haudoni (Haudonni) in Plautus. 53 Hannibal, the
name in Scripture. 67 Harmodius and Aristogiton, no bondsman to be called so. 67
Haman in Esther, of what country he was. 75 Han for Chan. 89 Haidar Prince of
Erdebill. 105. father to Ismael Sophi, ibid. why he is called Arduclles and
Ardebille. 107 Hautesse. Hastae for Diademata. 149 Halil, the Goddess Alilat.
165 Haeresis de Inuestitura. 201 Half-koning. 1. half king. 227 Haliwerk Folks.
248 Haut Justice. 253 Hhabassia. i. Terra Ethiopia. 86 Hamilton, first Marq. in
Scotland. 217 Hanses of the Goths. in Praefat. Hair long worn by the French
Kings. See in the Praeface, Hairs of horse tails in ancient and late use in
the wars. 378 Heptarchie of England under one. 30 Herbam Dare victos. 34 Helen,
mother of Constantine. 37 Herus. 48 Henry 11. his conquest and title in
Ireland. 55 Henry VIII. against Luther. 79 Hemiromomelin. 99 Hegira of the
Mahumedans. 100. and its Root. 163 Helm Radiant. 140. Helm Gilt. 288. 289.
Hehelguim. See Ailwin. Henty 1. See in Mabile. Hertzoghen and Hertochij. 208
Heriots. 225. 272 Hehgerefas. 225 Hexamshire its ancient names, and a County
Palatin. 248 Heeren. 283 Herefordshire Laws. 233 High and Mighty Prince. 123
Highness. 123 Hippocrates rewarded for curing a great Plague. 137 Hidata
Terra, and non Hidata. 271 Hide of Land. 271 Hidage, what. 270 Hippobatae. 333
Hlafe afford and Hlafford. 61. Hlafe-die for Lady. 61 Honor and Reverence,
Parents to Majesty. 121 Honor and Virtue their Temple, in Praefat. Honorarij
Codicilli. 185. 220 Holland Earldom when began. 194. and 195 Holds. 225 Holy
Island. 248 Horse, from it the name of Knight in all languages but English. 332.
333. See in Hair. Hunggiar a Turkish Title. 103. given to a great fat Hog by
Ismael Sophi in dishonor of Baiazeth. 104 Humbert Daulphin. 172 Hugh le Bigod
his surrendering the Earldome of Norfolk. 231
I
IAuan vsd sometimes for Syria. 75. 76 Iariffe, i. Seriph. 97 Iacupbeg. 105 Ic
dien. 272 Idolatry its beginning. 9 Jews their honoring of the New Moon. 164.
See in Sun, and in Childbirth. Their Oaths, Contracts and Seals. 328. 329
Jewish Kings Crown. 153 Ilethyia for Lucina, whence. 165 Illustres. 383. 385
Imperator the name. 19. 20. and seq. See Emperor. Imperator and Dominus to the
Kings of England. 25. 26. 35 Imperatori Proximus, a Title. 172 Images of the
Roman Nohilitie. in Praefat. Infulae. 149 Inferiors to superiors, their form
of speaking. 114. 115 In Hoc Vince. 16^ Infantes and Infanta. 179 Inuestiture
of Provinces. 1^1. See in Duke, Marquess, Count, etc. and in Bishops. Iudex
Fiscalis. 221. 227 Ioannes cognomento Digitorum. 56 John an unlucky name to
Kings. 205 Ioannes Belul, for Prester John. 15. 86 Ioannes Encoe. ibid. John of
Sarisburie under Henry 11. requested the Pope to give Ireland to Henry 11. 56
John afterward King of England, made Lord of Ireland with a Crown of feathers
sent from the Pope. 57. and afterward would have been a Mahumedan, and sent
for the Alcoran. 102 Iosuah Ben Nun remembered in old columns, erected by some
that fled out of Canaan, into Mauritania Tingitania, in his time. 70
Iochabelul, i. Prester John. 87 Ireland its Kings anciently. 31. 57. See in
Dominus, in Henry 11. in John of Sarisb. in John King. Subject to Edgar a good
part of it. 55 Ireland. Dukes of Ireland. 58 Jupiters Tomb in Crete, and his
Epitaph. 12. See in Baal. His statue vsd to be had in Oaths. 158 Jupiter
Labradeus his statue. 155, his statue in Constantinople. 159 Judith her story
examined, with conjectures on it. 33. 34. not known to the Jews, but from
Europe. 33 Julian Apostata forbidding to be called Dominus. 48 Judas of Galilee
Author of the Sect, which would not allow any Prince the name of Lord. 49
Iuliers made, of a Marquisate, a County. 214 Ius Aureorum disputed. 324. and
seq.
K
KArolouitz. 78 Karm in Scythian. 90 Keshish. 110 Kelchyn. 286 Kessar, i.
Caesar. 28 Keyser. 70 Kentish-mens Prerogative anciently to be in the Uantgard.
in Praefat. Kingdoms how begun. 2. 3. and seq. vsque ad. 17 King and Emperor:
their difference in the Roman Empire 20. and seq. See in Rex. Kings in
Clientela Imperatoris. 28 Kings subject to the Empire properly no Kings. 29.
and seq. King: whence, in several languages. 44 King crowned before born. 145
Kings Friend. 185 Kings see in Swearing, in Crowns, in Anointed, in Scepter,
in Cross, in Knighting, in Dukes, etc. Kings denominating their Nations. 74.
75. 76 Kissilpassa whence. 83. 106 Kissing the Emperors foot. 38. kissing the
forefinger or hand in adoration. 38. kissing the bands. 39 40 forbidden. ibid.
Hands, Knees, and Feet. ibid. Popes foot. 39. 40. why the hand was kissed. 40.
kissing at Farewels. 42. Head, Eyes, and Hands. 42. kissing of Jacob by Esau.
42, A Statute against kissing the King. 43. Numidian Princes why not kissed. 43.
after Prayers, and of Charity. 43. That Templars might not kiss a woman. 373
Kidermister, first Baronie in England by Creation by Patent. 282 Knights and
knighting. some Course in the ancientest times like knighting. 306. by giving
the deserving arms, and bauing him sit at his fathers Table. 307. 308
Knighthood received from whom. 308 Girding in knighthood. 309. 310. and seq. by
giving a blow on the care. 312. first mention of a Knighthood in England. 313
Knighthood given by Churchmen. 313. 314. Holy Ceremonies in the ancient taking
of Knighthood in England, and elsewhere. 314. Fees at the Knighting of a Great
man anciently. 315. Kings knighted by their subjects. 315. by other Kings.
ibid. Knighting by meaner men. 316. by a Knight, of his own power. 317. form
of knighting now. 317. a supreme Prince may knight in any Territory. 317. No
Knight to be made anciently unless descended of Noble Parentage. 318. a
Knights Fee. 319. and Relief. ibid. by what value one may be compelld to take
the Order. 319. 320 322. Knight with land, and without land. 320. a Knights
Equipage, House, and Furniture, exempt from execution and issues. 321. 322. his
Arms discendible to his heirs. 322. 323. Knights seal. 323. if that were a
Right of Knighthood. 323. Aids to knighting. 330. The Father being no Knight
shall not have aid to make the son a Knight. 331. Knighting discharges
Wardship, and how. 332. whence the name of Knight in several languages. 332.
Knights Bachelors. 336. and 337. Degradatio^ of a Knight. 337. striking a
Knight punished with loss of the hand. 339. See in Bath, in Banneret, in
Orders. Knighthood to a Mahumedan by a Christian Emperor. 380 Knecht. 333
Knave, how it anciently signified. 341 Knape and Knabe. 341 Knesi, i. Dukes. 27
Kneeling to Princes. 4^. the answer of Philip 11. of Spain in excuse being
saluted with kneeling. 42 Konigin. 44 Kopach the Russian Emperors Cap. 152
L
LAws wont to be sung, and thence called (...). 15 Laws Civil, when first
professed. in Praefat. Lauerd for Lord. 61 Lady. 61 Lars, Lartes. 59 Latins. 75
Lazar and Lazars. 78 Lamorabaquin in Froissart, what. 89 Laurel in Triumph.
139. whence it was taken, and of what tree. 148 for the Caesar's. ibid. against
Thunder. ibid. Lazi Kings might not wear purple. 144 Labarum, and its form.
161 Lazzi what. 177 Lantgraue. 221. 222. 246 Lancaster made a Palatinat. 247
Lancaster sword. 31 Lairds of Scotland. 288 Letters. 16. Jews 11. See
Basilius. Leo X. gave Henry VIII. the name of Defender of the faith. 79.
Leshari. 105 Leuderique, Bishop of Breme, taxed of pride for using the name of
Pastor and such like. 118 Jews XIII. of France, born. 176 Leicester Earldom.
235 Leod Bishop. 225. 204 Leudes, what. 264 Leornung Cnechts. 333 Leitou
Palatins. 249 Lewhelin Prince of Wales. 275 Liuerie and seisin in some sort of
England to the Normans. 34 Lilith what. 164 Limitum Duces. 183. and 209
Lithuania. 193. and 249 Liuonia. 194. and 240 Lindisfarn. 248 Lord. See in
Dominus, in Judas of Galilee, in Hlafford. and of the deriuation of the name.
59. 60. 61 expressing a Baron. 284 Louerd for Lord. 61 Loof and Loef. 61
Lodouicus and Chlouis the same. 71. 72. 78 London custom. 265 Lords in
courtesy. 284 Lombards or Longobards. 294 Lucanicus and Lucanica. 72 Lucius
first Christian King of Britain. 78 Lunus and Luna. 167 Lycosura first City
according to Grecian vanity. 16
M
MArnas a God of the Gazaeans. 12 Martyrs how they came to be worshipped. 13
Magnus Dux Moscouiae. 28. Lithuaniae. 194. See Great Duke. For Magnus see 382
Man the Isle, its Kings. 31 and 32 Maximilian his jest upon his subjects. 35
Martel of France. 35 Marian the Scot. 36 Maranatha. 49 Mauritania Tingitana
peopled by such as were driven out of Chanaan by Iosuah. 70 Maqueda the Queen
of Saba. 86 Mar delle Zabach. 90. 91 Moeotis. 90 Mare Maggiore. 90 Mamaluchs.
94 Mahumet and his Alcoran. 100. See Achmet and Abualtrazim. Mah. his Alcor.
his flight out of Mecha. See Hegira, and 163. See Moon. Mahumedans
superstition. 101. 105. See Ali: they allow the new and old Testament, but say
that Mahomets name was in it. 100 Mahumet Resul Allahe. 107 Magi and Magia,
108. Magic learned by the Persian Kings. 108. but they were not Magi, nor were
their Kings Magi about our Saviors birth. 109. what Magus was. 109. Slaughter
of the Magi, and a feast in remembrance of it. 109. a Magus had the Persian
Empire again. 109 Majesty. 118 Maiestas, how it was used. 119. 120 Majesty
the daughter of Honor and Reverence. 121. where Majesty was first vsd in
England to the King. 125 Magnitudo. 119 Marquess whence. 209. and seq. 212.
first Marquess mentioned, and the error of Crantzius. 213. Marquisats of the
Empire. 212. 213. 214. his Inuestiture. 214. 216. 217. his place in respect of
Count. 213. 214. first in England. 216. the name refusd as new in England. ib.
First in Spain. 217. and Scotland. ibid. Marchiones. 212. 215. 216 Marca. 210
Marc. 210 Marchisi. 210 Marchera Mulieris. 210 Marcshall, whence. 210. his fees
at a Knighting. 315 Marchis. 211 Marchgraph. 212 Markgraues. 213. 221 Marchers.
215 and 216 Margus. 209 Marggrauius. 213 Mabile, daughter to Fitzhaimon, her
discourse with Henry 1. about marriage with Robert his bastard son. 229
Marshalls Earldom surrendered. 231 Marquisat of Austria. 192. and of other
places diverse. See in Marquess. Magesetenses, who. 224 Martin the Saints Cap.
243 Maire du Maison, not the Count du Palais. 243. 389 Maioratus 244 Maioratus
and Senescalcia. 244 Magnus homo. 260 Mall, what. 261 Mallobergium. 261
Machtosch. 285 Margogh. 332 Manumission; the form in England anciently. 327.
and in Rome. 325 Marsa. 383 Mezentius. 62 Memento te hominem esse. 63 Melas for
Nilus. 66 Metius Pomposianus put to death for naming his bond-slaues. 66
Melech, Salomons son. 86 Melic Sa, or Melixa. 111 Melophori. 158 Messthegnes.
225 Mediocres Seigneurs. 253. 288 Meinouer, i. manor 264 Mithra. 11 My Lord,
Milordi and Milortes. 61 Minerua Belisama. 11. and Zosteria. 311 Mikel synods.
226. and 279 Missi. 251 Miles, and the different use of it. 334 Miles Terram
habens, and Terram non habens. 321 Miramomelinus. 102 Minister Regis. See in
Thane, and Thegne. Monarchy how begun. 23. See Kingdom. Moscouies Duke or
Emperor, and to what Princes he uses the title of Emperor, and to what Duke.
28 Moscouitique Kings, called white Kings. 83 Moscouit his Cap, and ceremony,
at the entertainment of an Ambassador. 152 Monsieur. 52. 110. 171. the Title of
the Brother of France, and apparent successor. 175 Moon fell in two pieces for
a miracle to Mahumet, with that tale. 1^3 Moon, why set on the Turkish
Meschits, and in such honor with them 163. 164. and 378. much honored by the
Jews also, and all Arabians. 164. whence that superstition, and how ancient and
large. 165 and seq. little Moons worn by the Romans descended from Senators,
on their shoes. 166. how President of the Saracen Law. 166 Moving the Scepter
an oath. 157 Moldauia. 382 Mustadeini. 95 Mumilinus whence. 99 Mucharam month.
163 Musulmin, what. 103. 104. 105 Mufti. 105
N
NAmes to Nations from Kings. 74. 75. Of Princes, composd names of Gods
usually. 65. 66. of Great men not to be given to slaves. 66. 67. For Names in
Greece and Rome. See more in Praefat. and in page 229. 230. Of Mabile danghter
to Fitzthaimon. See also in John. Naming a Superior by an Inferior, and e
conuerso. 115 Naib and Naib Essam, what. 94 Nalka. 164 Narrator. 292 Nergal,
what. 65 Nebo. 65 Negush Chawariawi. 87 Negush, i. King. 45 New Moon. See Moon.
Nimrod or Nabrodes. 5. Ninus, not Nimrod. 5. and 6. Nimrod how long after the
Flood. 7. Nimrod built Niniuch. 8. the same with Orion according to some. 13
Nicholas Breakspear. 55 Nicaulc. 73. and 74 Nitocris. 74 Nisan, an addition of
Dignity. 111 Nigellus de Broke. 321 Nilus: See in Melas, and in Siris. Nones,
or faires on that day in Rome. 19 Notaries to he made by whom. 27 Nomophylaces
their fillet. 148 Nostra Gratia, Nostra Pontificalis Dignitas, etc. 118 Nostra
Peremitas, Eternitas, Maiestas, etc. 119 Normannus Princeps. 177 Normandy
Dukedom made. 194. 195 the Inuestiture into it. 198. called Margus Normanniae.
^09. and the Duke Marchio. 214. the Duke commonly written as well Dux and
Consul. 224 Northumberland Dukes among the Saxons. 203 Nobility, Greater, and
Less. 344 Nobility in other Nations generally. See in the Preface.
O
OChern. 286 Ogetharius. 286 Oil poured, etc. 129. sent from heaven to anoint
the French Kings. 131. a like tale of Oil sent to our Kings. 134 Olbont. 383
Olboadula. 383 Olive to crown in the Olympians, whence, and what. 142 One
Deity supposd by the Heathen. 3 Oracle to Brute. 36 Orpheus his last will. 3
Ordo secundus. 385 Orion, see Nimrod. he is the Prince of the South. 14 Order
of the Garter. 362. 363. Round Table. 364. of the Nuntiada. 367. Of the Golden
Fleece. 367. Of Saint Michael. 367. of the Holy Ghost. 368. of the Star. 368.
of the Croissaat. 368. of the Corn-eare. 369. of the Porcupin. 369. of the
Thistle by the Duke of Bourbon. 369 of the Band. 369. of S. Andrew in Scotland.
370. of the Ele phant. 370. of the Sword. 370. of the Burgundian Cross. 371.
of the Blood of our Savior. 371. (...) S. Stephen. 371. of S. Mark. 372 Osiris
how painted by the Egyptians. 154. whence the name. 66 Osculum pacis. 43 Oaths
broken how punished. 63. 64. by the Emperor, by God, per Genium Principis. 64.
Oath of those which were bound to the Wars. 65. by the Kings head. 65. how
punished if broken. ibid. Oaths taken by the Mahumedans with what superstition.
104. by the Scepter, and in moving it. 157. 158. and whence the Scepter was
sworn by. Oath of the Jews. 329 Othomaniques hate to the Alians. 105 Othman
Ben-Ophen. 109 Otho the Great his making Dignitics Feudall. 19
P
PAdischah. 45. 87. 112 Palibothra. 76 Paradogium in Praefat. Paluc. 90 Papa,
i. Chalipha. 96 Paul found fault with by Amirelmumenin of Barbary, for not
continuing in the Religion wherein he was born. 102. 103 Padischach Musulmin.
103 Pantheion. 142 Pastor and custos. 118 Pastoralis Baculus. See Bishops.
Palatin of Rhin, his bearing the Globe and Cross. 158 Panhypersebastus. 171
Patritiatus. 188 Patricius. 203. when begun for a Title. 350. and 351. and 385
Palatin. See in Durham, in Lancaster, in Elie, in Hexamshire, and in Comes
Palatij. Palatini Archiduces. 193 Palatin, whence so called. 241. and seq.
Palazins. 242. 246. Count du Palais. 242. 243. Deriuation of the Nature and
Name otherwise then the Vulgar. 244. and 245. Of the Empire. 246. of France.
ibid. of England. 246. 247. 248. of Poland. See in Vaiuods. Palatinatus. 249
Palatij Custos and Comes. 242. 388 389 Parlaments. 226. 227. 274. 278. and see
in Barons, and Mikelsynods, and in Wittenagemots. Patro in Cicero. 259 Pares
Baronum and Comitum. 275. 277 Pares and Peers in attainder. 285 Pares and Peers
in Our Law. 345. 346. 347. and amerciament per Pares. 347. and Pares Regij. 348
Pares or Peers of France their number and Dignity. 349. See Peers. Parium
conuentus. 350 Pares Curtis. 348 Pagham or Paganham in Sussex. 301 Peleg. 7
Pentateuch in Greek before Plato. 15 Perseus King of Macedon his inscription of
letters to P. Aemylius. 29 Persian Empire, the special honor of it anciently.
33. See in Salutations, iu Ali, in Sophi, in Shach, in Ismael, in Nisan, in
Cafe, in Kissiplassa, in Othomaniques, in Aelamits, in Magi. Persian Kings
Title at large anciently. 112. and the inauguration. 135. See in Eagle, in
Tiar, in Melophori, in Sun, in Salchodai, in Mithra. Peacocks feathers Crown.
57 Peers at the Childbirth. 176 Peers. See Pares. Pesagium granted. 199
Peetermen of Louan. 372 Pfaltzgrauen. 221. 245 Phoebitius. 9 Philip of Valois
his letters to Edward III. about not calling him King of France. 30 Phoenician
letters what they were. 69. 70 Pharaoh. 72. and 73. the special names of those
Pharaohs in holy writ. 73. the word what it is. 74. Pharaohs Diadem. 141
Phateme, Mahumeds daughter. 100 Philetaerus his Crown and Coin. 145 Pit and
Gallows of Scotland. 286 Plato if he read the Bible. 15 Plural number why
used to or of a singular person. 114 Pope titled Doctor only, by the Moscouit.
28. if he gave him the Title of Emperor, ibid. See in Florence, in England, in
Anselm, in Fatuitas, in Leo, in Kissing. No Emperor writes himself more then
Elect or Rex Romanorum, till anointed by the Pope. 171. and seq. 387
Porphyrogenitus whence and what. 81. and seq. to whom given. ibid. Porphyra a
house for the Empress to be deliuerd in. 82. 83 Pontus Euxinus. 90 Posoch, the
Cross on the Muscouits Cap. 152 Porphyrius whence the name. 144 Pomum
Imperiale. 158 Polack Nobility. 240. 249 Prometheus the first that ruled and
was King, according to Greek vanity. 116. his having a Crown. 142. 143
Princeps and Principatus. 19 Prester John. 85. called Beldigian, Ioannes Enco,
Belul Gian, Iochabellul. 86. 87. not titled Emperor of the Abisens, but
Ethiopians. 86. Presbyter Ioannes, and Prester Iehan: how these names came to
be given him. 87. the confusion of the names of the Asiatique Prestigiani and
the Ethiopian Emperor. 87. his Title at large. 88 Prestigiani, i. Apostolic.
87. 88 Pristijuan. 88 Priti Joan. in Praef. Protosymbulus. 23. and 377
Provincial of Rome. 80. and 130. Princes of the Empire. 116 Pragmatica of
Spain, touching Titles and Dignities. 126. 180. 206. 214 Princeps Iuuentutis.
169 Princeps Senatus. 170 Prince of Wales when first in the heirs apparent of
England. 177. 178 Prince of Scotland. 179 Prencipe de las Asturias. 179 Prussia
given to the Duke. 191. Dukes in Prussia. 194 240 Protocomes Angliae. 239
Primus Comes Palatinus. 242 Protosebastus. 246 Principautes. 256 Punique. See
in Tongues. Purple how a Note Royal, and when first. 83. See in Shoes.
Purpureus what it signifies. 144 Punishment. See in Cross, in Oaths, in Pit
and Gallows.
Q
QVen and Quena. 44. and 246 Queen whence derived. 44 Quirinus and Quirites
whence. 149
R
RAdiant Helm. 140. For Radiant see in Florence, and in Sun. Rabbis
interpretation of the plural vsd in the beginning of Genesis. 114. learned of
a maid asking her Mistress for a broom, how to understand a place of
Scripture. in Praef. Ramsey Abbey sounded. 227 Rape of Arundel. 235 Radknights
what. 334 Ralph Gray Knight his purposed degradation. 339 Rex and Regifugium.
19. and 20. and seq. Regillianus his being made Emperor by his name. 20 Reguli.
31 Rex Regum. 32. 34. See in King, and in Sicilie. Reges hominum and Rex Regum.
35 Red shoes who might wear them. 24. and 156 Regiae Stellae. 67 Rex
Credentium. 99 Regnum, i. a Crown. 151 Rex Romanorum. 170 Rex Italiae. ibid.
Reges the general name of Kings children. 176 Regum Amici. 185 Reliefs. 232.
272 Rheims Bishop. 132 Reuersion of all Appenages, and Dukedoms, and Counties
in France, upon default of heirs males in the Crown. 196 Ressort and Souerante.
196 Riga for Regem or Rex. 23 Ring to Henry 11. sent from the Pope as an
Inuestiture of Ireland. 56. and 57 Ring an ancient material in giving of
dignity. 199. 200. See in Inuestiture, in Duke, Count, Marquis, and Vicount.
Rings of gold how and to what use in old Rome. 323. given at the giving of
Ingenuitie. 325 Right worshipful. 124 Richmond Earldom. 199. and 229 Ricos
hombres. 289 Richard Earl of Cornwall brother to Henry III. 345 Riders. 332
Rosse Earldom. 179 Rothsay Dukedom. 179 Robert of Veer made Duke of Ireland,
and Marquisse of Dublin. 216 Rowland. 242 Robert Grostest his answer to Henry
III. questioning him whence he so well was able, to instruct young courtiers. in
fine Praefat. Rodulph 11. Emperor his League with the Turk about their Titles.
113 Round Tables. 365. 366 Romanorum Imperator. 387 Rubeum Caput. 83. 84 Russia
Alba and Nigra. 84 Russian. See Muscouir.
S
SAlchodai of the Persians, what. 11 Salutations twixt, Emperors. 38. 40. in
Rome anciently twixt common persons. 47. flattering salutations forbidden by
the Emperor. 40. Persian salutations. 40. 41. Jewish 49. 52. Punique and
Syrian, and Greek. 53. Turkish. 98. See in Pragmatica, and in Superiors.
Sanctitas Regum. 65 Saba Queen whence. 73 Solomon, and Q. Maqueda. 86 Sabaei
and Terra Sabaea. 86 Sarmatians planted in Europe. 91 92 Saxony Dukedom. 116.
its Coat and inuestiture. 152 Sanctissimus. 121 Sacred Majesty. 123 Saturn
President of the Jewish law in Astrology. 166. See Belus. Salique law whence,
and when, and by whom composd. 175. and 299. Salica Terra what. 175. and 296
Saxon Nobility anciently. 177. 204 and 268 Sagibaro. 261 Sach or Sake. 261
Saccabor, Sathabor, etc. 263 Sagmaria. 291 Saumarius. 291 Sardanapalus. 6
Sanzacbegler. 355. 377. and 379 Scaligeran family. 92 Scepter how anciently a
token of Roialtie. 154. Eagles born, and other birds, on the top of it. 155. an
ensign of the Consuls. 155. swearing by it. 157. why and whence it was vsd in
oaths. 158 Scutarius. 340 Scales. 263 Scilpor. 341 Scotlands King free as the
Emperor. 27. knighted here in England, and his excepting against the Marshals
fees. 315 Sesostris, Sesoosis, or Sefonchosis. 32. 73. and 46 Septimius Seuerus
why called Arabicus. 86 Semper Augustus, and Semper inuictus. 89 Seat of the
Great Chan. 92 Seals, who might use them anciently with us 323. how among the
Romans. ibid. and 329. when they came first hither. 327. among the Jews. 328.
in white wax. in Praefat. Seleucia, Bagded. 93 Seriph or Seriffe. 97 Seithi. 97
Senior. 110. 111 Serenitas Nostra. 120 Sebastocrator. 122. 156. 171. 197 Senoi,
Sansenoi, Saminegeloph. 165 Seigneurs Suzerains. 207 Seneschal. 244 Setar, i.
starra. 328 Selefey in Sussex. 301 Seldom (anciently Selkeden) in Sussex. 321
Sexhendman. 334 Seruiens. 335 Semiramis built not Babylon. 8 Shinaghr. 5. and
32 Shach Sophi. 105. and 106 Shach, Schach, and Saa, etc. 52. and 111 Shoes
with Eagles. 155. See Red. Gilt Shoes. 156. and 157. See in Moon.
Shield-knaue. 341 Shiregemote. 225 Shrifes. See Ealdorman, and in Viceco^.
Viscou^t, and in Bishops. Sixtus Quintus his jest on himself for being born
domo illustri. in Praefat. Sihri. 66 Sikerborgh. 264 Sigillum Magnum and
Sigillum Paruum. 330 Siris, whence so called the River Nilus. Sicilie Princes
had Rex given them hereditarie. 24 Skioldungi, a Danish race. 74 Sultan,
Saudan, Sultan, etc. 94. 96. and 383 Sophi whence in the Persian Title. 107.
and in whom first. ibid. and seq. Sophi signifies not a Beggar. 108. See in
Praefat. Sophilars a Sect. 106. 107 Souerraign Lord or Lady, 125 Somerset
Earl. 217 Sops of wine given in making an Earl. 239. 240 Solidus duplex. 204
Snowdon. 215 Sommage and Sum. 291 Sons of Noble Personages, how some of
them are accounted in Rank. 284. 342 Solidati. 335 Soldiers whence the name.
335. 336 Spain. See in Emperor, and in Pragmatica, in Dukes, Earls, Viscounts,
etc. Spurs given in Knighthood. 317 Spectabilis. 383 Speaking or writing to
Great Persons. 116. 117. 119. 120. 121. and seq. See in Salutation. Stafford
Baron. 283 Statues and Idols how first worshipped. 9 Stuart, that name in
Scotland, when first Royal, and whence. 285 Starra the Jews written
instruments of Contracts, etc. whence, and where vsd. 328 Sun and its Images,
how worshipped by the Jews. 10. by the Easterns General. 11. and Persians. 167
supposd with 12. beams. 140. supposd in Astrology President of Christianity.
166 Sultan. See Sultan. Sultan Ole^, i. Lord of the world. 97 Sultan Gelal
Eddin Melic Sa. 111. 112 Sublimitas. 120 Sultanlar money. 112 Superiors
speaking to Inferiors. 114 Surname. See Names. Summon an Earl in his County.
233 Summarius. 291 Summagium. 292 Subuasores. 292 Sunni and Schia. 105 Sueuians
old Prerogative. in Praef. Suppani. 381 Superillustris. 383 Sword given in
making a subject King. 29. For Sword see in Cinctura, and Gladius, and in
Inuestiture of Dukes, Count, or Earl, etc. and in Knights. Swearing. See in
Oaths, and in Cosmas. Syro-Phoenician Grecian in S. Mark, what. 75 Synopsis
Basilicon. 21 Syncellus what. 97
T
TArtarean Empire. 87. 89. and 92 Taurica Chersonesus. 91 Tangergoglan. 93
Tanais. 92 Tetragrammaton name of the Almighty, whence, and how pronounced
among the Jews. 50. and 51 Teggiurlar. 77. and 381 Temerinda. 90 Tenure of the
Crown, and of the King 266 Tenure of the I Will of Man anciently. 31. of the
Tenants and Princes of the Empire. 300 Templars might nos kiss a woman. 373
Tecuytles. 372 Tiberius his dissimulation, 19. and 20. he would not be called
Lord. 43. inclined to Christianity. 78 Themosis, Pharaoh that was drowned in
the Red sea. 73 Thomas Apostle. 88 Tiara, what. 144. what kind of one the King
only wore. 144. it was pulld off by the Persians in salutation. 144 Thrymsa,
what. 240 Thanes and Thegnes. 225. 268. and seq. Thanus and Thainus. 285. and
272 Third part of the Counties profits to the Earls. 229. 232. 233 Tiptofts
rule. 284 Thomas Becket. See in Anointing, and in Oil. Timariots. 380
Timaria. 381 Tongues variation of the Europaean and Asiatique pronunciation. 5.
and 6. Punique and Spanish. 52. Hebrew and Maurish anciently the same. 69. the
Aethiopique Chalde. 86. Slauonique and Tartarian. 92 Tonosconcolerus. 6 Tosch.
285 Torniaments. 321 Toga Virilis, and the time of taking it. 305 Truchten, i.
God or Lord. 61 Triumphall Ornaments, whence. 249 Tronagium granted. 199
Trinoda Necessitas, reserved always in Saxon Feoffments. 293 Tropaeophorus.
364 Troplelophorus. 364 Turks names. 67. for them see in Mahumedans. Turbant or
Tulipant. 144. 146. 147 Turkish Banner. 378 Tzaophi, i. Electus: whence Sophi.
107 Tzodki, i a beggar. 108 Tzaggia and Tzaggae. 342
V
VAlecti. 54. and 321 Vashlu point, how superstitious the Arabians are in
reading it. 102 Vacantes. 184 Value of Dignities. 232 Vaiuods. 249. and 382
Valuasores, what. ^65. and 289 Maiores and Minores. ibid. and 290. 291. See in
Vauasour. Vauassories. 291 Vauasours in France and England. 292. and of England
in 389. and 390. whence the word. 298 Valuasini. 291 Vadiare legem, and amittere
legem. 344 Vassi and Vassalli, whence. 297. 298. and seq. Velenno. 10 Vezir and
Vezir azem. 23. 377 Veromandia. 71 Vitreus Ordinationis liber. 135 Viennois.
See in Daulphin. Viscounts whence, and what in France. 250. 251. his
inuestiture. 256. First in England, and Scotland. 256 Vicedominus. 253. 254
Viguiers. 251 Vicecomes, whence so called, for Shirife. 252 Vicarius. 252
Vidames, whence. 253 Virgata Terrae. 272 Viro for Baro. 273 Villain knighted.
318 Vlu Chan, what. 88. 89. 92 Vnchan or Vmcham. 86. 87. and 92 Unction. See in
Anointing. Volteius Mena Libertus to Pompey. 325 Vrum Padischach, i. the
Emperor. 103 Vsum Chasan. 105
W
W common with Qu. and Gu. 298 Wardships. 54. See in Knights. Wardships first
in England and Scotland. 302 Wales: See Prince. 173 Walter Bishop of Ely. 228
Werldthegnes, what. 225 White Kings. 83 White in the Diadem proper to Kings.
144. 145 Whitespurres. 343 Wiltshire-mens Prerogative. In Praefat. Witiscalc,
what. 262 Wite. 262. 263. and 389 Wittenagemotes. 226. 279 Wiseme^ of the East
not Kings. 108 Wife, putting her away, and taking her again, one of the
execrations in the Mahumedans Oath. 104 William Conqueror his arrival and
stumbling at the shore. 34. his subiecting Church lands to the tenures. 183
Will: 11. his denial of the Pope. 26 Wight the Isles Kings. 31 Worlds
government according to Hermes. 3 Women and wives called Dominae, and Ladies.
53 Women thieves drowned. 286 Wool. 107 Worship and Worshipful. 124
Worshipful Prince. 124
X
XA for Shach. 111 Xeriph: See in Seriph.
Y
Years: See in Computation.
Z
ZAga Zabo. 85. 87 Zamer Chan. 91 Zabergan. 91 Zelebi. 381 Zosteria Minerua.
311 Zuna. 111
The end.

