THE SECOND PART OF VOX POPVLI* or Gondomar appearing in the likeness of
Matchiauell in a Spanish Parliament, wherein are discovered his treacherous and
subtle Practices To the ruin as well of England, as the Netherlandes
Faithfully Transtated out of the Spanish Coppie by a well-willer to England and
Holland.

The second Edition.

Simul Complectar omni^

Gentis Hispanae decus



Printed at Goricom by Ashuerus Janss. 1624. Stilo nouo

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCES, FREDERICK and ELIZABETH, by the Grace of God,
King and Queen of Bohemia, Princes Palatines of the Rhine, etc.
AS ALSO To the most Illustrious and victorious, Maurice, Prince of Orange,
Count of Nassau, etc.
Most High Most Illustrious Princes,
THAT I have adventured in these unfaithful times, so full of suspicion and
danger, to pass (without leave) your guardes, and to press into your
Presence, I most humbly crave pardon, having I confess no other excuse then
that common one of the Country, it was out of my love, out of my loyalty, for
such (most gracious Q: Elizabeth) has heretofore your respect been toward
me (far unworthy God knows of any of the least favors from so Magnificent
a Princess) that ever since, I have contended with my self, to adventure and
Act something, that might have power still to preserve me in your Royal
Memory, but albeit I had the will, I find my self wanting in my Ability. And
most Illustrious, Prince Maurice, since I have had sometime dependence on your
Excellence, I hold it my Duty gratefully to repay, some part of what (I cannot
say iniustly) I have gained under you that is Observation, especially of the
double dealing, and cunning Iuggling of the Spaniard with all Nations. And
since a little Treatise of a Spanish Consultation (whether really acted, or
poetically feigned I know not) came to my hands, first written in Spanish, now
by my self translated into English, only for the behoof and love I bear
as well to England my native Country, as to the Netherlands. I have sent it
abroad, good it may do, hurt it cannot. Abundans. cautela non nocet: herein
you shall perceive the Curtain (though not fully) drawn, from before the
Spaniard, that the world may for certain see, that he is not so beautiful,
as many of our English (who so long have doated on him) would make him to be,
nor on the other side so terrible, that your Dutch need to fear him, how
grimme and terrible soever he looks upon them. But your Excellence knows him
(as we say) Intus and in cute; and can limne to the life better, then any pen
in the world can decipher him, wherefore I urge him no farther. I only leave
it to the world to think of (since he aymeth at the Monarchy of the West,
every thing else being to little for his Ambition (whose great Grand-sire the
Earl of Halspurge was within these ninescore years, of as mean estate and
revenue, as an ordinary knight of England,) how much I say, concerns it
England, and your united Provinces, to hold fast each by either, which now by
all means he labors to part and divide, not unmindful of a Matchivillian
and old Maxim; Divide, et Impera.
But I trust Almighty God (as he has already begun) will open the eyes of all
Christian Kings and Princes, in time not only to pry into, but effectually
to oppose, these his immense and ambitious designs, which else in time may
fall heavy upon our children and posterity, I end; humbly beseeching the King
of Kings and Kingdoms, the Almighty Lord of Hoastes: Most High, Most
Illustrious Princes, to protect the persons of your selves and children, with
his grace to multiply your Honors and Dignities, fourfold to restore your
estates, and after many years to crown you in Heaven, with the Diademes of
Glory and endless happiness.

Who is most devoted unto your Highnesses, in all Loyal affection T. S. of V.

THE SPANISHE PARLIAMENT.
Ingentibus exidit ausis.


AFter the shouts and acclamations of all true hearted English, for the safe
and single return of the Prince of Great Britain, had made the roof of
Heaven to resound, and with the noise hand shook such a terror into the ill
affected body of Spain, that a cold, and benumming fear, ran through her
joints, her friends began to bethink themselves, of a timely recomfort, to
find the means a fresh to rouse up her spirits, (by this time half repenting
her self of parting with so precious a pawn, (the possession whereof she
imagined, might have tied us to have precisely kept day, (though it were likely
to have had proved more fatal unto her, then ever was the gold of Thousouse
to Cepio's Soldiers) and as it falls out among sick persons, some of
sounder judgment then the rest, about her inparticular and every one in
general giving their best opinions, undertook (so she would be ruled) to rid
her off that sit and distempered perplexity.

And for this purpose appointing for a further consultation to be at Seuill in
Audaluzia, whether already the King with most of the Nobility had retired
themselves in regard (they said) the English who were in number about
seauen-score, had not long before eaten up all the provision in Madrid, and
within thirty miles about, there came as truest and old-friends to her estate,
the Archbishop of Toledo, the Dukes of Medina Coeli, of Braganza, of Ville
Hermosa, of Hijaz, D. of Infantado, D. of Cea, D. of Sesa, D. of Veragua,
Marquis of Malagon; Count de Penna-fiore, Count de Monterry, Count de
Sanstephano, etc. Escalona, the Marquis of Castello, Rodrigo the Admirant and
Constable of Castile, Count Olivares, Count Gondomar, Pedro de Toledo, Gonzales
de Cordua, Jews de Velasco, with sundry others of remarke and note, of the
chiefest Nobility, whither being come, and having made choice of a goodly and
fair Palace, anciently belonging unto to the D. of Beiar principal of the
family of the Zanigas, in a fair great Chamber hung with rich Arras, over the
leather gilded. Guara Mazilla's, after many an enterchange of complement, each
as his precedence required took his place, like a college of wise Physicians
to consult of the state of that body and Kingdom, how with medicines (as
Physicians call them) to prevent her future danger, withal for the present to
repair the ruin of her reputation and credit with the world, (since now her
plots and practices are smoaked, their gordian knots untwisted even by
children: Lastly, how to gain by strong hand, what all this while she could
not compass by arts and policy.

Being all set and silent, the Duke of Medina Coeli, stood up and spoke as
follows.

My Lords, it has pleased his Catholic Majesty the King our Mr. to give way
to this our meeting and Parlamentary assembly, to consult and advise among our
selves, what course is most fittest to be holden of us, in in these tempestuous
times, for the weather being changed, and the bright beams of our hopes
ouer-cast, we are from every side to expect rage* and storms. You are not
ignorant how there is now a Parliament holden in England, that bode us no good,
in Holland a daily consultation with present preparation, In France a Council
together with an vnaminity of Kings and Peers, for some great undertaking: How
nerely then concerns it us of Spain, to be vigilant, and to look about us:
first, for the maintenance and advancement of the Catholic Religion, and holy
Church: Secondly, for the defense of his Majesty's Kingdoms and Territories:
Thirdly, to hear the grieuances of the people groaning under the heavy burden
of exaction and oppression, though the couetuousnesse of public offices.
Fourthly, for the supply of the Treasury which a late has been much
exhausted, partly by preparation by Sea against our Common enemies, Turks, and
Hollanders, and partly by the extraordinary entertainment of Charles Prince of
Wales, the charge whereof amounted to 49. thousand Ducates. Fifth, and lastly,
for giving the world satisfaction, and the taking away of those vile scandales
and imputations, which even within these few days have been, and are hourly
cast upon us, especially, (as they give it out) in dealing doubly and
dishonorably with England, concerning the Treaty of the Match.

He having ended, the D. of Braganza the next began thus.

I am sorry that I live to see the day, that the Honor of Spain which was wont
to dazzle the eye of Europe with the insufferable splendour of its brightness,
should now be over cast with the black cloud of disgrace, and the name of a
Spaniarde so redoubted over the world, become branded with the infamous
attributes and epithites of false, ambitious, proud, and cruel, and those
Nations who were wont to adore us for our faith, contemn, and scorn us now
for treachery and falsehood. Certes loyalty and the Religious observance of our
promises and faith, was anciently held our prime virtue, insomuch that Fey de
Spagna grew into a Proverb, like the gold of Ophir out valewing any other,
that I speak no new thing, or untruth, you may plainly perceive it by the
multitude of discourses, pamphlets and pasquills that are daily vented against
us from all parts of the World, wherein we art iested at, derided, disgraced,
by verses and unseemly Pictures, especially of late days, from Holland,
France, and England: yea as I understand in songs and Ballades, sung up and
down the Streets in many places: whence this imputation, upon so just and
brave a Nation, so potent a Monarch (at the brandishing of whose sword Europe
trembles) should proceed, I cannot guess, yet desire to be satisfied herein,
in the King my Mr. and kinsmans behalf, my kinsman, for you all know my near
alliance unto his Majesty, and my Poesy may intimate no less unto the world
which is Pues vos, nos, after you, we, being next in blood if the issue Royal
should fail.

But I am a fraide the ill carriage of some private men at home, (perhaps our
Ambassadors in For. rain parts,) have thrown this aspersion upon us, having
either given abroad to many ouertures of our designs, or attempted their ends
with overmuch have and violence, which in time and by gentle hand might have
been easier won, as a bough whose fruit we mean to gather, is brought down
by degrees, which else might break and we loose our longing.

Surely, in the first, me think our Nation should not easily offend, we being
esteemed the most close and reserved to our selves in the world, as the event
of our greatest and most important actions have sufficiently shown. Did we not
in 88. carry our business for England so cunningly and secretly as well, in
that well dissembled treaty with the English near Ostend, whereto for us were
deputed, Aremberge, Champigny, Richardot and other, as in bringing our Navy to
their shores, while their Commanders and Captains were at bowls upon the hoe
of Plymouth, and had my Lord Alonso Guzman, the Duke of Medina Sidonia had but
the resolution (but in truth his Commission was otherwise) he might have
suprized them as they lay at Anchor, and the like. In Ireland when Don Ivan d'
Aquila had gotten footing in the Irish ground ere any of the mist. How were our
plots and correspondence with Biron carried, with infinite the like examples.

Touching the latter, the Spanish Nation has of all other in the world been
held for the most sober, stayed, and wise, and were wont never to attempt any
thing but upon great and long advice, accounting it with Quintus Fabius more
honorable to be accounted droanes or cowards, then to hazard our affairs, or
Armies, French like, only in a vainglorious hastiness to gain the Honor of
charging the first. So that it seems strange to me that we have I know not
upon what grounds incurred the hate and scorn of other Nations, and that we
especially of the Nobility should be thought ill of since of Nobility ours of
Spain, has been ever held the most illustrious and eminent of the world.

The Duke having made an end, Gondomar easily raising himself from his chair
wherein he sat upon two down pillowes, and resting himself upon a little
Brasill staff, spoke as follows.

My Lords, I can derive this slander of our Country, and hate of our selves
from no other fountain then the Fanaticall humors and distracted spirits of
some of the English, who find themselves not a little galled and vexed with our
politic delays heretofore, and now our final reiection, and (I hope)
shaking hands with that Heretical Nation for ever, for if your Alteses and
Honors will but consider what adventure and boot we have made by them, I
think you will say we might well endure these British Northen and cold blasts:
mean time in so suffering for our Catholic King, and in the Catholic cause
we ought to take such approbry rather as an Honor unto us then otherwise.

Moreover, if we shall consider who are the Authors of these lying Plamphlets,
we shall find to proceed from the pens of light and unstayed wits, with
intent either to win the opinion of good intelligencers and statistes
together with the aerie applause of the Vulgar, or to raise to their desperate
Fortunes, when the tempest is over, (as it often has happened) and now likely we
being fallen off from England, and the Treaty at an end.

Yea, but quoth the Duke of Medina Caeli, what should be the reason of that
inbred and Natural hate the common people of England should bear to us, and
our Country above any Nation in the world, the Hollanders, Turks, and Indians
excepted.

Arch. B. Toledo.
Quoth the Archbishop of Toledo, herein we are much deceived, for his
Catholic Majesty and our selves all have very many faithful and fast friends
in England, who would not stick to hazard their lives and fortunes in the
Service of his Majesty, might time and occasion be offered, yea, and some none
of the meanest.

The Marquess of Castello Rodrig, then arising up with a grave countenance,
and a deliberate utterance said, is it possible that any place in the world
should bring forth such a monster, as a traitor to his Country, or allow bread
to any own so unnaturally base, as to draw his sword, and side with an enemy
against her, I will say that for our Spain, I do not remember or ever had
read, that she afforded a Traitor, or so much as one that served a sworn
enemy against her Prince.

By your favor, quoth Jews de Velasco, what Countryman was he of Count John
of Nassau's regiment, that took the Admirant of Arragon prisoner at the
battle of Neuport.

It is true quoth Gonzales de Cordua, he was a Spaniard, but examples hereof
are very rare.

Quoth Gondomar, so they are, and though England be the colder Country, yet it
has bred more venomous Creatures of this Nature, then ever Spain, yea even
under the Sunshine of their mildest and most moderate gouerments.

Whence quoth the Duke of Escalona should this proceed.

I will tell you (quoth Gondomar) my opinion, the English naturally are
desirous of novelties, and innouations, and as it were sick in the soft beds
of their long liberty, peace, and plenty, (which they enjoy under as wise and
as good a King as ever lived) they suppose nothing wants to their full
happiness but change and variety: I must liken them to Giotto of Florence his
Ass, who when he went along with a rich saddle of beaten gold on his back
with a Crown and Scepter lying thereon, yet he could not choose but smell upon
a Carriers packe-saddle as it lay at an Inn door.

Hence are strangers the most admired and entertained amongst them, and if of
quality preferred many times to place and preferment before the English, though
perhaps their are many who deserve better. I have seen their a torn and
tattered French Lacquay, but as this day arrived out of France, and the next,
he has ietted in the Court in his Tissue or Scarlet at the least: what
preferment came that arch-hypocrite Spalato unto. Ascanio the Friar, who left
his wife in St. Martins lane, and ran again to his Order. And a poor and
ignorant Italian Mountebanke, sought after for his skill as if Aesculapius or
Machaon were again raised from the dead, yea, when but a Spanish gown
(happily of the Ambassadors Lady, or of her gentlewoman) how was it sought
after by Ladies, and Tailors for the fashion, happy was she that could first
get her into the Spanish fashion, to their no small charge, the Spanish
garments exceeding all other in fullness, compass, and length, which by this
time it may be they have converted into Cushions. My Lords, you would hardly
have forborne laughter, to have heard how I have been enquired after for
Masters for the Spanish tongue, (that I may say nothing of so many bills set
up in every corner of the City by Professors) nay I could have no service
almost done me of my Mullettors and Grooms, for being employed in teaching the
Spanish among Ladies and their maids, though I knew, I tell you, English must
be that they were to trust too when all was done.

Touching my self being Ambassador there from his Catholic Majesty, and the
sole instrument in the Treaty for the match, which the Catholics there so
long thirsted after, if I should relate unto you the particulars of mine own
entertainment, you would (I suppose) imagine I told you wonders beyond belief,
for beside the great and gracious respect I found, and favors I received from
his Majesty of Great Britain, and sundry of the Nobility, who seemed wholly to
be compounded of courtesy and Nobleness, there passed not a day wherein I was
not visited, by some of the best rank, or received some present or other, from
Catholic Gentlemen, or their Ladies, (so welcome was the very thought of the
Spanish match unto them) I returning them again, with thanks, large promises,
and apparent hopes of preferment, when the time should come.

And be it spoken among our selves, since we are falling off from England, I
made better use of their kindness then so, for there were few Catholics in
England of note, from whom in this regard, I wrested not out a good round sum
of money: Sir Robert Cotton a great Antiquary, I hear, much complains of me,
that from his friends and aquaintance only I got into my purse the sum at
the least of ten thousand pounds, I deny it not; and true it is, I borrowed of
the good old Lady W. of the Parish in St. Martins in the Feilds 300 pounds, or
thereabouts, promising her repayment (whereof I will not fail) so soon as
Donna Maria, the Infanta should arrive in England, and for the use hereof, I
promised to make her mother of her maids, persuading her, it was not fit that
so grave and good a Lady as her self should lie obscured in private, but
rather attend upon my young Mistress, the brauest and most hopeful Princess
of the World, upon these hopes she turned Catholic, and since I never saw
her. I sold moreover, the place of Groomesse, of her highness Stool, to six
several English Ladies, who were eager of it, only cause be they might take
place before their fellows: I lost nothing neither by a Noble Gentleman, whom
I caused to be known for a kinsman of the King my Mr. for that he was
descended from the noble and ancient family of Aiala in Spain, these are but
mites and crumbs in regard of those great presents, and many pentions I had sent
me underhand, from the Catholics from all parts of England during my aboade
there, had my finger but aked, or been ill disposed (as I often was in body) I
had sent me jewels, sweet-meates, perfumes, linen, Rosewater, and a thousand
of such trifles, only I returned them thenkes, and promised them or their
friends preferment, when time served.

If you were my Lord, so nobly entertained in England, quoth Braganza, whence
is it, or upon what occasion have we gotten to our selves the ill will and
distaste of that Nation.

I must confess, quoth Gondamer, the common people of England bear generally
an inbred spleen toward us, as it seems by many rude affronts, we were
offered there by the baser sort, contrary to the will and pleasure of his
Majesty of great Brittany, who published many Edicts and Proclamations in our
behalfes, punishing many times the offenders severely as they could be taken,
but why the name of a Spaniard should be so become odious unto them, is a
question I cannot easily resolve.

Some think that there is a natural antipathy or contrariety of affection
between our disposition and theirs, they living in the North, and we in the
South; which being (as Charron a French Author observes) nearer to the Sun,
the inhabitants are more crafty, politic, and religious, (though he his in
that) even to superstition and Idolatry, where as on the contrary, those of the
North (howsoever goodlier in person, better faced, and more beautiful then our
selves by reason of the coldness of the climate, preserving inwardly the
natural heat, and radical moisture,) are plain simple, nothing so religious
contemners withal, of the glorious ceremonies of our Church, wherewith we have
drawn more Heathen in either India to Christianity, in one year, then they
can with their Lutheran and Caluinisticall Sermons in all their lives.

This very self same thing (quoth Gonzales) I once urged by way of argument to
an Earl of Germany who was a professed Lutheran Heritique, and his reply
herein was, so are fools and children taken with bells, gilt pouches, and
colors, and our Ladies and fair Gentlewomen, (we see) oftentimes woed and
won, only with a brave outside on the back of a base knave, when an honest
man, and of deserving parts is rejected, in a plain and ordinary suite of
clothes, and not held worthy the looking after.

They talk as they are (quoth Gondomar) I am sure these drew more to my little
private Chapel in Holborne, then their best Preachers of Sermons could do to
any Church they had.

But quoth the Duke of Hijaz, it may be they hate us for the same cause, that
France, Germany, Italy, and the rest of the Countries of Europe, for that many
of us are descended of the Moorish race: wherefore we are termed of them in
Italy, Marani, and of other Moros Blancos, and Nue Vos Christianos: For indeed
it was but in the year 1492. when Granado was recovered from the Moors,
Mahomet surnamed the Little, and son of Muley Albohaceu being King thereof,
though Toledo and Cordona long before, and it may be they hold us still
infected with Moorish minds, and a spice of their manners, though they are
assured we are Christians, yea and the most Catholic too.

I hear (quoth Signior Gondomar) it is objected in their now present
Parliament, that in all treatises for the space of these two hundred years,
Spain has dealt with the English, fide punica, never kept touch with them in
any serious capitulation, but ever aiming at her own ends, used their aliance
and freindshippe but as a stale or stalking-horse over their backs to shoot
at others, or serve her own necessities for the present, and hereof their
Antiquaries (they say) have found many presidents. Among others they affirm
and prove, to the prejudice of our Treaty, that Charles the fifth was first
himself bethrothed to Queen Mary and I know upon what trick and policy he
untied himself again, and used the means to confer her upon Prince Philip
his Son.

But the very truth is, they carry a vindictiue resolution against us ever
since our intended conquest of them in 88. and peradventure the powder plot in
1605. which yet seems Manner alta mente repostum. Indeed Henry the 4. of
France, surnamed the GREAT, labored at one time a reconsiliation between us,
but he found the roots of eithers discontent so deep, and the sore so
vnsaluable, that he gave it over in the end. Touching mine own person, I was
generally hated, I confess, of the common people: for no other cause, I
imagine, then for the great grace and favor I was in with his Majesty, unto
whom I had free access at all times, and his gracious ear to any reasonable
suite or request I could demand, the particulars of the Service I did to the
King my Master (whom God long preserve) I think are not known unto you, I
omitting no one hour or minute of time wherein I did not benefit either him by
my service, my self by experience, or a friend by a good turn.

For during the time of my abode in England, and whilst I lay in London, I got
partly by the means of well affected friends, and partly by mine own
experience (for in sommertime, under the color of taking the air, I would
take view of the country) I had perfect knowledge of the estate of the whole
Land: for there was no Fortification, Haven, Creek, or Landing place about the
Coast of England, but I got a platform and draught thereof, I learned the
depth of all their Channels, I was acquainted with all Sands, Shelues, Rocks,
Rivers that might impeach or make for invasion, I had perpetually in a Role the
names of all the Ships of King James his Navy Royal, I knew to a hair of
what burden every ship was, what Ordinance she carried, what numbers of
Saylors, who were the Captains, for what places they were bound, which were in
repair and fit for service, and which not, I knew the strength of the Tower
of London, what Armor, Ordinance, small shot and powder it might afford. You
know moreover my Lords, I acquainted the King my master with Sir Walter
Raleighs intended voyge to Guiana, and every particular thereof, when it was
but in embroyne, and when he himself vowed only three were acquainted with
his purpose and resolution, but the fourth should never know what he intended
until he had set footing in America: yet I say, I knew what he aimed at, what
courses he meant to hold, where to land, what places he meant to surprise, what
forces he carried, and by what way he resolved to return: with all which
particulars, as I have already said) I acquainted you long ere he went, and he
was no sooner gone but I was assured I had his head at my devotion, to take it
when I listed (having sufficient matter to allege against him) and at last,
though his treason for which he stood condemned many years before) was the
hatchet, yet the hand was mine that gave him the blow: for it concerned us
above all the rest in case we should fall off from England, and burst out into
our old enmity, to make away with him, who would have proved the only
Boutifeu and Cendiarie of the world, in stirring up the hatred of the English
and other Nations against us, he being a darling of our late deadliest enemy
Queen Elizabeth, and one of the last men to be borne of those great spirits,
and experienced Captains the time of her reign produced. His Majesty (I
humbly thank him) took especial notice of this service of mine (and as it
was told me) gave me great thanks for it above the rest.

I was no less diligent for the discovery of the Inland, then for the Shores
and Seacoasts: For there was never a Sheire in England, but I better know the
estate, power and quality thereof then the Inhabitants, even the best of them
themselves did. I could in particular relate the nature of the soil, what
power of men and horse they were able to raise, who were the chief and of most
ability and credit in the country, who the most ancient Gentlemen, what they
were worth in their revenues and estates, how they stood affected in Religion,
who were Puritanes, and who Catholics, and among Catholics who stood for
us, and who (for such there were) were indifferent or against us. And which
moreover is of equal consequence, there was not a Sermon preached at Paul's
Cross, or indeed in any other Church of the City or place in the Kingdom,
that did but touch the hemme of my masters garment, or was any way
prejudicial unto us or the match (which we seemingly intended) but I had my
Leame-hounds ready in every corner to draw after them dry foot, and fetch the
Authors coram nobis, to their cost, as one Dr. Euerard of St. Martins, was for
his bold and malapert inueighing and continually preaching against us and the
match, silenced by my only means, for (I said) and often told my best
friends, till the mouths of such Rabshecahs were stopped, no unity or sincere
reconsiliation of either Nation: (for the effecting of which now was the time
could possibly be expected)* One whiting, besides a Dr. of deuinitie, Mr.
Clayton for his Spanish Ewe, in a Sermon at St. Paul's cross was laid up for
his lavish tongue, and had like before to have smarted for a Sermon he made
before his Majesty at Wansted in Essex in August some two years since, taking
for his Text, remember Lots Wife, Luke 17.32. And I think Ward of Ipswich
escaped not safely for his lewd and profane picture of 88. and their powder
Treason, one whereof, my L. Archbishop I sent you in a letter, that you might
see the malice of these detestable Heretics, against his Holiness and the
Catholic Church.

Neither was there any public speech made openly in any Court of Justice,
were it in either house of Parliament; Star Chamber, Country Assize yea,
nany times uttered privately in the Court, but I got an inkling, and made good
use thereof: yea, I was partaker of Gossips news in the City* brought to mine
own bed chamber by my well known and private friend, etc. Mrs. M. of
Fleet Street.

Indeed Signior Gondomar, quoth one, herein consists the pythe and marrow of
your service, but if you please proceed.

I again entertained, to my no small charge, Intelligencers in every Country
(indeed Catholic Priests) whose liberty out of prison I obtained for that
very purpose: for being abroad they did us a threefold service: First, they
gained souls to God, friends to the King my master, and money good store in
our purses: for I got out of English Catholics to mine own use threescore
thousand pounds at the least.

For the first, it has been certified me for a certain, and by report from
many of their own mouths, that the numbers of souls which they have gained
into the bosom of the Church since the remission of the penal Laws against
them, and their freedom by my means obtained, amounts to the number of
eight and thirty thousand and odd.

Secondly, they have confirmed the Catholics, and made them so fast for the
King our Master, that they have auowed unto me diverse times, that rather then
miss of the Match, they would make up the best part of the Infanta's portion
out of their own purses, yea, though it were with the selling or pawning of
all their plate and Jewels.

Within the City for a small matter, I feed certain discontented and
necessitous Catholics of the English* to walk the common and most frequented
places of the City of London as St. Paul's Church, the exchange, now and then
among the Ordinaries, to learn the Common news, out of which many times I
picked good matter.

Neither could the States of Holland, or the Ambassadors of any other Foreign
Prince carry their business so close, but with my Masters golden Key, I could
find a means to diue into their Cabbinets, reseale and seal again their
packets, without the help either of Arthor Gregory, or his old acquaintance
Phillips.

It was not one of my worst pieces, to hold the English in suspense, with an
apparent ouerture of the Match, and dilatory promise of Golden Mountains, with
the age of old Saturn again, when every oak on Greenewich park, Sudaret
roscida mella, till the pallatinate was lost beyond recovery, a matter of maine
consequence: for hereby Bohemia with the rest of the Emperors Territories
being secured above, our master may at pleasure call to his aid the Emperors
forces (who it seems for this purpose has made a League with the Turk for
these twenty years) together with the strength of Tilley, Die caese ^^^mer.
and the D. of Bauaria joined, and with his own forces suddenly (for now is
the time) give Holland such a Camisado, as the best wits of the So the Spaniard
scornfully calls the Hage where the States usually reside
Chief Chamber, will be to seek of their old-ward, and wonted policy.

Yea (quoth Don Pedro) but imagine this plot were resolved upon, shall we think
the Princes of Germany, King of France, and England, and other their old
friends and allies, will stand still as idle Spectators, and not run in with
their swords drawn to their rescue? Or that the Hollender who has been so
long weather beaten at sea, is not able to discern this storm a far off,
and take in his Sails ere it shall hazard his ship, yes without doubt; and
howsoever we may flatter our selves with the easiness of the Conquest, we
shall assuredly find it as hard a task as ever Spain undertook.

It is true, you say (quoth the Admirant of Castille) what have we gained of
them for these fifty years space and upward, ever since Don John of Austria,
the Duke of Alua, Jews Requesens, were Governors, and undertook the
Low Country Wars, but sound knocks, with the fruitless expense of many a
million.

Quoth (Jews de Velasco) a shorter cut for the Conquest of those Rebels, had
been long since taken, The error of the Duke of Alva.
had the Duke of Alva been so wise as to have secured himself of Brill,
Flushing, and the rest of the Frontier, and Sea-Townes, he then might have
been Master of all the rest within at his pleasure, for so long as they were
open and free, they were to the others, as the mouth to the stomach or body,
which could not possibly famish, so long as it was supplied continually from
England, and other places, but this by the way.

All what (quoth Gondomar) I have already said is but a praeludium or small
Preface, to those proiects I had in my brain, if (as unluckily it happened) the
Treaty had not suddenly broken off, but been spunne out a year or two
longer, which indeed was the maine plot, and had been effected, The Prince in
Spain before he was looked for.
had not the coming over of prince CHARLES in Person into Sraine, with the
Duke of Buckinghaus spoiled all, for howsoiner we made a seeming show of
rejoicing at his coming, and did him all honor beseeming so great and worthy
a Prince, yet to speak the truth my Lords, you all know we wished him a
thousand miles off; and I believe some of the English themselves were here
sorry that he had engaged himself in so long and teadious a Journey.

But quoth the Duke of Hijaz standing up and turning himself to the Duke of
Medina Coeli, and the Archbishop of Toledo.

How may it be conceived that the Prince of England his arrival in Spain,
should eithet praeiudice us, or the Treaty of the Match a whit, since he found
here the greatest content he could devise, he had a sight of the Lady Maria la
Infanta his Mistress, whose self known and seen exceeded her fame, he was
entertained and attended upon by the most complete and generous Nobles of
Europe, and had that entertainment, no Nation could afford the like. Lastly
Maiorem habemus fidem ijs quae occulis vsurpamus, quam quae auribus haurimus.

Quoth the Duke of Escalonia, the effect has fallen out quite contrary, for
the English report since their coming home, they never came into a baser
Country in their lives, where they could get meat neither for themselves nor
their horses, Great want of victual and provision in Spain.
nor saw so much as one handful of grass in two hundred miles riding, and if
they dined at one place, they were feign to go 30. or 40. miles ere they could
get any thing to their supper, He that surfers are a Spaniards Table, trust me
I will pay for his physic.
and then perhaps a piece of lean Kid, or Cabrito, a Tripe, Tone's or such
like, indeed I remember when the Prince lay at Madrid, we were feign to send
seauenteene miles off for a Calfe, for his Highness diet, as for Mutton we may
kill none without especial License from the King, for fish our Rivers afford
none, and we being most temporate our selves, how should our diet agree with
their stomachs, who are accounted the greatest feeders of the World.

I verily believe indeed (quoth Gondomar) that those places they call in
England, East-cheape, and Smith-field Bars, kills, and vtters more Beef and
Mutton in a month, then all Spain cats in seven years, which plenty our men
meeting withal, at our first coming over into England, and since some who
attended Don Iniosa (as I lately heard) did over eat themselves, and died
shortly after.

The poor and miserable surface of our Country, The Princes going over in
person, was happy for England.
(quoth Escalona) the scarcity of victual and hardness of lodging was not
all, the Prince of Wales by coming in Person discovered our plot, and found
how fair soever we pretended, we meant nothing less, when he thinking (as
also did the King of Great Britain his Father) nothing had been wanting to
the absolute consummation of the marriage, but the Rites of the Church, he
found all as Raw and as backward, as he had been all this while in a dream,
and no such matter ever thought of: so that he found the Honor of our glorious
entertainment to be but as a delicate sauce to help digestion.

The Marquis of Castello Rodrigo then stepping up, said, I will add one thing
more, and whereof if he lives, he vows not to be unmindful of; and that is as
I am informed, Add moreover the digging up of tho bodies of our buried dead,
casting them into the Sea.
some affronts done him by the Clergy, as that rude and barbarous putting him
out of a Church which his Highness came in to view: the arresting and taking,
away of a young youth a Page, who attended (I think) on Master Mounteague in a
manner from his heels, which young Gentleman (they say) cannot be heard of to
this day; with that (insolent and affrican pride) of restraining him from that
liberal access and converse, (not denied elsewhere to a mean person) with the
Lady Maria Infanta his Mistress (which Princes by their his own right may
Challenge, he being equivalent in birth, and the rarest endowments of body and
mind, to any Prince whatsoever in the world) with whom in all his time of his
being here, he had not above twice talked, and then before either the Queen,
or your self Signior Olivares, or some other, if he had any thing to say
afterward, it was by us to be penned to his hand, and to be spoken before
witness, we must assuredly think and expect that so great and eminent a
Prince, and the darling of that Nation, howsoever he could wisely smoother his
discontent among us in Spain, we may one day perhaps find the fruits of our
double dealing, and the effects of his haught and incensed courage, well
knowing how, like a young Lion, though yet in his Den, and scarce acquainted
with ranging, his teeth and nails are grown to that length, that he is past
jesting or playing withal.

Indeed my L. Olivares, you are much blamed for that discovery and light you
gave to Buckingham of our design, The Infanta by her Faherts will, bequeathed
to the Emperors Son.
and the secret and tenor of the last Kings will, wherein he charged us not to
match with England, But rather to hold a fair Treaty with them, having as you
all know bequeathed Maria the Infanta to the Emperors Son, so that now the
English suppose themselves manifestly deluded.

Quoth the Duke of Sesa, they know it well enough, and I believe we shall
find them so sensible of it, that we had been better to have played fair,
then to hazard the loosing of our rest by such an encounter.

Now I pray you let us take into our considerations, the mischeifes which are
like to follow.

First, it is thought hereupon they have called a Parliament which consists
of the King, Prince, all the Lords Spiritual, and Temporal, or the Gentry,
and Commons of the ablest judgments, and understanding in the Land, unto this
Parliament: the King (they say) has wholly referred himself, not only for the
examination and redress of all abuses and misdemeanors at home, but for the
discussing and searching into all plots and practices of others abroad, The
Unity and sweet consent of the King and his people in this present Parliameent
observed
that may seem any way to prejudice the quiet and well governed estate of his
Kingdoms, without interposition or mediation, so that the King and people go
all on and together, with that alacrity and constancy, in providing for the
good estate of the Kingdom, as the like has no been seen these nany
yeeares, Prince CHARLES himself being there early and late, assiduus and
accubuus, amongst them, whom (I am informed) with the Duke of Buckingham, we
have our prime and principal opposers. A diffiernce between the Duke of
Buckingham, and Count Olivars which the Papist give out (though falsely) to be
the first occasion of the breach of the match.


I must confess (quoth Count Olivares) there fell a difference between the
Duke of Buckingham, and my self, which some have rashly and inconsiderately
given out, to be the only cause of this breach, for they say before that time
all things went forward in as fair a way as might be.

Indeed quoth Toledo, the Catholics of England have so given it out, laying
all the fault upon the Duke of Buckingham, who is not guilty of any such
thing, I will excuse him, that piece was hammered upon our own Anuile:
Buckingham is a Noble, Wise, and Generous Prince, upon whom the King his
Master has deservedly conferred his grace, and those transcendent Honnors,
yea though for no other former merit else then the resolute and wise carriage
of himself, in the business of this Treaty amongst us, whereby he has not
only assured himself of the affection and heart of the King and Prince, but
infinitely for his faithful service (another Fidus Achates) unto him gained
the general love of the Common people, as it not long since appeared, when he
was ill after his tedious Voyage by Sea, (the Prince himself all the time
healthy and sound) for whose return the people had been excessive, and beyond
measure, had it not been somewhat allayed, and tempored with the report of
Buckinghams sickness, The Duke of Buckingham for his true service to the King
and Prince, and State, heartily beloved of the people.
they praying as heartily for his recovery, as if he had been some good
Landlord, or great Housekeeper amongst them, whose loss had been half
their undoing.

It were to be wished, quoth Don Mendosa, that the Prince of Wales, and
himself with the rest of the Parliament, were not upon just cause I confess,
so bent against us. I remember, quoth the Archbishop, when I was a young
Student, a saying of Seneca, Ingenuitas non recipit contemptum, Ingenuitie or a
generous spirit, can in no wise brook contempt, shall we imagine then a
Prince, yea such a Prince as CHARLES of Wales, and only Son to the King of
Great Britain, upon whom and whose action's as a bright blazing Comet Europe
begins to fix her eye, afraid and doubtful, where the fatal effect of his
discontent will light, will carry coals, and not cry quittance with his
enemies, yet doubtless, his mettle is of another temper, and not so flexible
as some take it; for mine own part I would not have him our enemy, if his
friendship could be had, though with the expense of many millions of Ducates.

Cuius contrari^^^ (...) est.
As if Spain, quoth Rodrigo, needed to fear that angle of the world England,
have not we evermore given them their hands full? have they not more feared our
Fleets and Armies, then we theirs? do we not equal them in men, and expert
Commanders, as well by land as by sea? do we not exceed them in Treasure, and
money from our Indian mines? that like euer-running Fountains, are never
drawn dry, that I may say nothing of the courage of our people, our wisdom
and policy whereby we have made our selves masters of so many goodly
Territories, and gained so many brave victories both at Sea and Land.

Had we an enemy, quoth the D. of Cea, of far less abillity and power then
England is, we ought not so slightly to contemn him, A quarrel about a load
of Calues-skins cost the D. of Burgundy the loss of his life and whole estate.
the woeful experience whereof our Nation naturaly haughty and opinionate of
their valor, as well as others, have proved, the Duke of Burgundy out of an
insolent pride so comtemned the Swisses, the quarrel arising betwixt them, but
for the tole of a load of Calves skins; that at the last by them, he was
deprived both of his estate and life, at that unfortunate encounter at Nancy.

Who could withold the Archduke Albertus, The Spaniards pride and contempt
of us, how dear it cost them at Neuport.
and our grand Captains from bidding Prince Maurice battle at Neuport: But
scorning the enemy in regard of his small number, in respect of theirs,
together being puffed up with that petty victory against the Scots the same
morning, they had the reward of pride and contempt of a weak adversary, for
the Archduke was forced to fly, saving himself very hardly, leaving dead
behind him, the oldest and best Soldiers Spain had. Let us believe the
weakest may do us a mischeife, as is wittily shown by Aesop, in that fable or
apoligy of his, between the Eagle and the Conies. But by your favor my Lord,
you are much mistaken in the estate and strength of England; and quallitie of
the people, and so you will tell me, if we shall have to do with them, as we
have found, and had in former times, let us think two of the accession of
Scotland unto that Kingdom, The strength of Ireland, at this present,
and how Ireland stands in good terms, and is at this time so well peopled
with English and Scottish, that there is not so much as a starting hole left
for Rebellion, or so much ground to spare in that Country, that might afford
any friends horse of ours a bottle of Hay, much less suffice for an Army to
martch over, and to be maintained upon.

I might hereto add the valor and sufficient fidellity of that Noble
Gentleman, Sir Henry Carry Lotd Viscount Falkland, the now present Lord Debuty
thereof, with many other brave Spirits, that are employed in his Majesty's
service in that good Country.

But to return to the Parliament of England, what effects hear you is it
likely to produce, or wherein is it thought to prove praeiudicious to the King
our Master, or to the Catholic Religion.

First replied Gondomar, it is likely to go worse with the Catholics then
ever, as who must expect no favor, but must prepare themselves to undergo the
sharpest censure, and animaduersion of the Law against them, yea whosoever
shall be found abettors, maintainors, concealors of their plots, or harberours
of their persons, shall suffer for the same in like manner; and I hear say,
that there is a Proclamation either coming forth, or published already to that
effect, and now they are to depart the Realm by a prefixed day.

But what (quoth Count de Monterey) will then become of them, or by whom shall
they be entertained? will they return to their Coledges again at Doway,
Rhemes, Room, Villadolid, The Seminary Colleges beyond the Seas, almost empty
at this time.
and other places, some whereof I have lately seen, and observe to stand emty.

Nothing less (quoth Gondomar) for I am persuaded though many will colourably
depart though return again shortly by new ports and new names more will
remain behind, (and since never likely again to have such an opportunity of
professing themselves openly, and execising their functions, which they could
do in a friends Chamber, and many times in the common Innes) for the better
avoiding suspicion, and concealing themselves; some will turn School-maisters
in private men's houses, as there are many in England, some Gentlemen Vshers
unto Collapsed Ladies are, some such there are in Drury lane: the L. T. in
Yorkshire has one follows her in that Nature, the L. S. not far from my
old house in Holborne in London, the L. M. near unto Stratford-bow: Some
Falconers whereof I know two, the one in Sussex, the other in high Suffolk,
only one I was acquainted withal, who was the keeper of a Park, and a good
Huntsman, and of whom I have had many a good piece of Venison, if he be living,
I know another Priest who having lived with an ancient Lady of great estate,
and of good credit, by reason he was environed with a pestilent crew of
puritans on every side, and the better to color his absence from the Church,
learned the art of Cookery, and is grown so expert therein, within a short
space, that he is able to dress a Dinner with such art, and good meat after
the English fashion, that never a Cook in all Spain, is able to set the like
by it, and his manner is, when he has laid his meat to the fire, to go and
say Mass, which finished by that time, or soon after his meat is boiled and
roasted, which with a clean Apron, and white sleeves with some small help of a
kitchen boy, he serves up to his old mistress.

Erasmus.
Quoth the Archbishop, this was the condition of the old Christians, The number
Priests and Iosuits in London only is ^55 in a manner for every parish two if
Mass were up again.
under the persecuting Emperors, of which times it is said; Ingeniosares fuit
illis temporibus esse Christianum.

Without doubt quoth Gondomar, they will be severely proceeded against in this
present Parliament, and that for many respects.

First, by reason of their number, and daily increase, whereby they became
formidable to the State.

God be thanked the house is well rid of them.
Secondly, because of the correspondence they held with us, for by their means
we understood the secrets of their State, knew what they did, or spoke in
their Parliaments; in a word they were our only instruments for any
employment, were it never so desperate.

Thirdly, (wherein I must needs say, they were to blame) they abused the Kings
grace, and Lenity toward them, The Kings lenity abused.
with their insolency and affronts often times brauing their Adversaries in the
streets to their faces, Preachers in their Pulpits, Judges and Justices on the
Bench, that had they so done with us in Spain, they should have soundly
smarted for it, of what Religion soever they had been.

For example, upon Easter monday last, in the after noone, Ask Maistes
Primrose of the truth hereof*
came a Jesuit formally attired in black to the Court, then at White Hall (the
day following, being the day of the Kings healing of that disease, they call
there, the Kings evil, what time a great throng of people of all sorts being
gathered together, at the door of Serieant Primrose, who was to take the
names, and to search such as had need of help) thrust into the Chamber, and
being demanded what business he had there, faining himself to be in drink,
made answer, he had none, neither knew he how he came there; they seeing him in
such a case, would have carried him into another room, and have laid him upon
a bed, but he refused it, and hearing by chance Mr. Primrose, and one Mr. White
confer in Latin together, he suddenly brake out, and said, know you not
such a one who attends upon such a Lord, he is my brother and a Catholic,
whereat Mr. White replied I pray get you gone, I care for no such company,
where upon he would have drawn his Dagger, and had not company been nigh, he
had doubtless slain him; and no sooner was he out of the Chamber, but he
returned with three or four more of his friends and acquaintance, daring him
to come forth, and deeply vowing to be revenged upon him and the rest within,
etc.

Fourthly, No treason commonly without a Priest or Jesuit at one end of it.
because (say the English) they are the only engines and complots of all
Treasons, authors of Tumults, and seditions within the land, they instance long
since the reb^ellion in the North, of late the Gunpowder Treason, Watsons plot
with that of St. Walter Raleighes, and many more the like.

Fifth and lastly, because their carriage not answering the reverend and high
dignity of their profession, they are grown odious (say they) to those even of
their own side, for indeed they are the only boon Companions about the
Town, loosing hereby much of their value, which I like not of. St. Francis was
reputed so holy a man, After the naming of St. Francis, you are to lick your
lips.
that the Popes Holiness ordained, that whosoever did but name St. Francis, he
should lick his lips after, so sweet and Saint-like was his life and
conversation: Yet now I remember at my departure out of England, I gave it some
of them in charge, to get what they could, of whom, or by what means soever,
because I foresaw their harvest would be short, and the money would stand us
all in stead, for indeed the greatest part was at my devotion, and to be
employed as I saw cause.

And this stirred up one Gee an Apostate Calvinist to publish a pestilent and
malicious against the Priests and Jesuits, residing in and about London,
wherein after he has discovered their practices, he sets down in a
Catalogue at the end all their names, with the places of their lodging, what
books they have at any time published, with the names of Catholic Doctors of
Physic, and Apothecaries, to their no small disgrace, and praeiudice.

The things my L. quoth Sesa, at your being in England, were by your means
wont to be severely looked into, and punished.

It is true, quoth Gondomar, either hanging or loss of the Authors cares had
ensued, or else I had missed of my aim; but the case is now altered, I was
then powerful, and in grace, and by my policy effected those things, which
were they now to be wrought again, would require the labor and all the
strength of Hercules.

But my L. quoth the D. of Braganza, what news lately from England, in what
state stands things there, and how does D. Iniosa carry himself among the
English, at this turbulent season, and amidst the deepest of their discontent,
and displeasure against us?

Well enough (quoth Gondomar) and the better if he be careful to observe some
directions I gave him, at my last departure, but for nouelty sake, I will
produce a Letter I received from him, written with his own hand, within these
few days.

My L. all health and happiness ever attend our Sovereign, his Catholic
Majesty, The Proclamation against Priests and Jesuits.
next your self and yours: You are much desirous to know to hear what the
English Parliament has already effected, or what they entend touching our
selves, and the Catholics, and the rather by your wisdom, that you might
prevent further dangers, which if foreseen, are ever the better encountered
withal, and withstood: Either house of Parliament with great vehemence against
the Catholics, having published a Proclamation for their final banishment*
and our selves every day grow more odious and in contempt with that Nation then
other, which I cannot remedy, I did what lay in my power, and according to my
direction, to break off this Parliament, So all the World supposes.
by laying an aspersion upon the Prince, and D. of Buckingham, to breed a
jealousy in the Kings Majesty, which is heynously taken of all the land,
whereupon I hoped that the Parliament would have soon been dissolved but my
art failed me; and I have gained nothing but disgrace, the enmity of the Prince
and Duke, together with the hate of the whole Land, insomuch that your self S.
Gondomar were wont to pass free and vnmolested, The better sort never gave you
ill use.
(except at once, or the second time, when the Offenders were imprisoned and
punished, we cannot pass (though no violence I confess is offered) but we
have the bans and reuilings of the multitude, I mean the baser sort, wishing
we had never come here.

The Devil drive us home again, withal I had three or four of the
Proclamations for the banishing of the Priests and Jesuits, pasted on my wall,
hard by my door: a Coachfull of my Gentlemen were by chance, hard by the Savoy
overthrown, but Lord what a shout was there among the multitude for joy; some
interpreting the same to be mal^m^men to our Nation, but Deo gratias there was
no harm done.

But are not these affrontes and unseemly dealing of the Common people with
Ambassadors, soundly punished.

Yes indeed (quoth Gondomar) it is much against his Majesty, and the will of
the State, who by public proclamation, have upon a severe penalty forbidden
any whatsoever, either by word or deed, to do them any affront or injury, but
it seems our dealing has deserved it, how happens it then that these are not
restrained, replied the M. of Mandesario.

Is it impossible (quoth Gondomar) to charm the tongues of a multitude, beside
they are people of the worser condition, No Nation more benign and courteous to
strangers, then English.
for of the better sort we are respected with all observance: but let us
proceed with the contents of my Lords Letter.

Here came forth about February likewise, a Proclamation for the banishment
of all Priests* etc. out of the Kingdom of Ireland, but it is to be hoped,
that there be so many of the chief Magistrates and Gentlemen in Ireland, so
well affected to the Catholic cause, that it will do us no great hurt in
those parts, though the crack be terrible.

Count Man's field arrived not long since in England, and had great
intertainment, but what his errand or bussnesse was, I could never learn, A
notorious practice of the Spaniards to discover the business of a Turkish
Ambassador with the estates, at the Hage in Holland.
though I tried all the means I could to know, I am wanting in nothing
insomuch as in some ingenious and good intelligencer. That (quoth Gondomar) is
a fault which must be remedied, I remember of late years, there came a great
personage, a messenger (call him Ambassador I may not) from a Vis^er in
Constantinople to the Estates of Holland, to the Hage, and there was sent from
Antwerpe to insinuat into his acquaintance, afterward into his service, a
natural borne Spaniard, who had been formerly a slave in CONSTANTINOPLE; and
spoke the Turkish tongue, as naturally as if he had been borne there, withal
he knew the friends and kindred of the said Turkish Gentleman, and could call
them by their names, and told him he was such a man's son of the City, who
being taken Prisoner when he was young by the Spaniards, Of the truth hereof
enquire of Cap. I. B.
he was detayned as a Galley-slaue amongst them many years, and having now
made an escape, fled to him for succor, and desired to serve him as an
Interpreter, he believing all true that he said, entertained him to attend on
him in his Chamber, it fortuned that on a time when the Estates of
North-Holland were invited by the Prince of Orange to a Supper or Banquet at
his Court in the Hage, and with them this Turkish Ambassador, one of the
Company a Dutch man, of North-Holland, observing his carriage and countenance*
and remembering that his garb and condition was Spanish, and moreover avowing
he had seen him in Spain, caused him in despite of his new master to be
searched, and at the instant found about him directions how to carry himself,
and which was the maine plot, to discover what was the Turks errand to the
Estates, hereupon it being the time of Peace, he was banished, and at Delft put
into a Boat and sent away, upon pain of his head never to return into
Holland again: but these diuises are like Stratagems in war, once eluded
never to be put in practice again.

Well to proceed, Provision for making ^kady the Navy.
he writes unto us moreover how and with what alacrity the Parlia^ment with one
consent have granted Subsidies for furnishing and rigging up the Navy, and
preparation for war.

But writes he nothing, quoth Velasco, where it is thought they will appoint
Sedem Belli, the home of that war.

That quoth Gondomar is a secret among them, but I think his Majesty will
reserve that to himself.

Why quoth Jews de Velasco, there should be nothing so secretly carried
amongst them, but we should know it.

The times (replied Gondomar) are not now as heretofore, and when I was in
England, our best intelligencers, and the Catholics are not in that grace as
they have been: we have had in times past many friends, even in the Parliament
House, but they have now so sifted and culled them out, yea if but suspected,
that we have little hope of diuing into their Actions.

The Prince of Orange with the Estates of the Low Countries, have taken the
same course, for whereas their intendments and resolutions, where and when to
make a war, was known in common to them all of the Council, (so that what
they determined or concluded of, we knew it the same night, or the next
morning, witness the surprise of Breda with a turfe Boat, and their
enterprise upon Antwerpe) the Prince of Orange reserues that within his own
breast, whereby things are now carried with far more secrecy, The enterprise
upon Bred^ in Brabant.
and good success then before. But how happened it quoth C. Monterey that
Breda (as I have heard) was surprised notwithstanding.

By mere accidents (quoth Gonzales de Cordua) for Antonio Lancavechia the
Governor, which happened not in seven years before, lay that night from home
(I mean the Castle) at Geertrudenberge six miles off, when the same night
came letters unto him from a friend, on the other side, The friend was
suspected to be Mounsier Barneuelt.
which revealed the plot, but leaving his son Deputy Governor he durst not
open them (for upon the opening once of a love letter that came to his Father
from a Lady, his Father charged him never to meddle with looking into any
letter that was directed to him again) but laying them up till his father came
home, the Castle and Town wherein were 5000. men horse and foot, with
threescore and ten hidden close under curses miraculously taken, the grief
whereof as some think, cost the Prince of Parma his life.

But quoth Castello Rodrigo, Signior Gondomar, if there remain any more news
from England, impart it freely, we are I hope of one mind.

Quoth the Archbishop of Toledo, I have heard that since this little time of
respite and freedom, wherein the Catholic Religion has taken breath a
little, there have been many miracles done in England.

Yes assuredly very many (quoth Gondomar) I heard it credibly reported for a
truth, that St. Patricke visibly appeared to many Religious Priests and Friars
at his Purgatory, This is as true as St. Francis cate a Spider, and scratched
her again out of his thigh.
confirming and preaching unto them daily, prophesing moreover, a great time of
percution ere long to befall upon them. Moreover our Blessed Lady appeared to
an English maid, arraied as bright as the Sun, with the Moon under her
feet, whereupon she became wholly to be converted Catholic.

No doubt quoth the Duke of Medina Coeli, many of this Nature are mere
impostures, what think you my L. Archbishop.

No question, quoth Gonzales de Cordua, I cannot be persuaded that, that which
they call the holy Blood of Boxall, which the Bradanders and all the
Netherlands visit in Pilgrimage, and every year looks as red and fresh, as if
it had been taken from the body but yesterday, can be the very blood of Christ.

Nor that a young married wife shall have a child the same year if she can
stride over at once Saint Rombauts breeches at Mechlin.

Nor that as many of the Hollanders hold that Mary was buried at Hueclom, for
which cause it has been in times past a place by Pilgrims much frequented
since we hold her Assumption into heaven, for quoth the Archbishop, Signior
Gonzales these are Contraria in eodem obiecto, you are a Soldier, and you know
for the most part they are none of the deuoutest men, I wish you rather
modestly and piously with the Church, that all these things are true. Abuses
may creep in by accident, but never to be publicly allowed by the Sacred
Authority of the Church.

No, how chanced it (replied Gonzales) that a Painter of Shertogenbosch (my
Lord of Gorbhendonck governor of the Town, I my self have often seen the
picture, though never worshipped it.
told me the tale) being deadly in love with a fair and beautiful Lady near
to Pirroy Huesden, and being to draw our Ladies Image for a Chapel, either
in St. John's, or some other Church in the Bosch, The Church of Rome like one of
her Images take off the golden coat of ceremony, underneath it is rubbish, or
a rotten block.
to insinuate himself the farther into this Ladies favor, drew her picture
with her young son in her arms, which he hung up for our blessed Ladies
picture, and is at this day worshipped with great devotion, as if her self
were descended from heaven, and were there in person.

I cannot believe (quoth the Archbishop) there was any such thing, if there
were) so long as it brings in good store of money to the poor Priests of the
Church, it may easily be endured: besides, if these things should be over
narrowly looked into, it would hazard the credit of the Catholic Church,
betraying to the vulgar and ignorant her greatest mysteries, and as it were,
pulling off her fairest plumes, expose her naked to vulgar scorn and contempt.

But the D. of Escalono, who had sitten silent this good while, now stepping up
said, the end of our present assembly, is not to trouble our selves about these
by* discourses and triuiall matters, now it stands us in hand to look to our
selves, to provide money, men, and all necessaries for the war with all
speed, holding it fit to call home our Ambassador, who I believe hereafter is
like to get no better answer concerning our affairs with England, then
Mendoza did of Henry Carry, Baron of Hunsdon, and Lord Chamberlain, in the
days of Queen Elizabeth, who being commanded by the Q. to give him his
answer, she denying him access, by reason (say the English) his demands were
insolent and unreasonable, told him the Queen has commanded me to answer
you, my answer is, Setting your Oranges and Limmons aside, a fig for your
Embassage, his meaning was, saving for sause for their Hens and Capons, they
could live, neither caring for us, nor our Country.

A Banquet sent out of Spain to Prince Charles, not long since.
It seems (quoth Villa Hermosa) they care not much for that neither, for when
as a various and a delicate Banquet, such as Spain afforded, was sent over,
whether by your self my L. Olivares, your Lady, or some other, to the Prince
of Wales, I heard that the Prince touched not any whit of it, but the figs
and other iunkettings were given some to one, some to another, and at last
refused, even of Boys and Pages, for fear there should be dropped in a fig,
or two worse rellished then their fellows.

Then Castello Rodrigo stood up and said, Spice the English are so bufie at
home to provide for themselves, and happily to offend some body else (whom yet
we know not) let us also timely provide least we be to seek, paries cum
proximus ardet, and like true hearted Patriots and loyal Subjects to our
Catholic King and Country, every one sincerely and freely deliver his
opinion, and reasons how our Religion, our selves, friends, and allies might be
best secured, in case the storm should fall on our heads, for this was the
maine end of our meeting.

Then quoth the Duke of Medina: Signior Gondomar, since you are best acquainted
with the state and affairs of England, give your advise what is best to be
done, whither to have open war with them, to wind them up still with new
pretenses and ouertures of the Match, or to entertain a (seeming) league of
amity and unity, and the Infanta to take her Fortune else where.

For the first, (quoth Gondomar) I utterly disallow it, that we upon no
apparent ground, Spain unwilling to be at odds with England.
and probable reason should prouoake so potent and irreconcilable a Nation, who
are content to let us alone, so that they may enjoy their peace and quiet, you
know the danger of awaking a sleepie Lion, but hereof by the way, I will tell
you a pretty and a pleasant accident of a sleepie dog, that happened at my
being in England, one D. W. well known about Paul's and Feete-streete in
London, (a place whereto I many times resorted) for some private occasion)
finding his Dog a great huge Mastiue lying fast a sleep by his Kitchen fire,
A tale of D. W. Dog.
said to a friend that stood by, my Dog is fast a sleep, I will (to wake
him) go hallow in his ear, he no sooner began to hallow, but the Dog (used
to no such alarmes) leaped up, and laying his forefeete on his Masters
shoulders, tare him down on either cheek from the eyes, almost to the mouth:
Let us by no means hallow in the ears of the English, For first, we are not
so well furnished with men, munition, or money, as the World imagines, or
Arsenalls Magazines and Storehouses in Sevill, Cadiz, Lisbone, being almost
dis^urnished of all manner of munition and necessaries, though they seem
otherwise.

How have our Fleetes miscarried of late years, Spain greatly endamaged of
late years.
some by distress and foulness of weather, others by depredation and piracy
of the Hollanders taken or sunk, Moreover, consider how our either Indies
(even at this present) do Laborare in extremis, We never (since the first
Conquest of the West by Columbus) in more apparent danger of loosing them,
then at this time, by the great and unexpected success of the Hollanders in
those parts, yea within these few months.

For the Fleet of Holland arriving at Lima in Perru, either took or sunk the
very best Ships of our Navy, or beaten the rest, so that they are unfit for
any service whatsoever, hereby they have now gotten footing (never known
before) within that goodly and golden Kingdom, and by the assistance and
courage of the Navy Indians, (to whom the name of a Spaniard is more hateful
and odious then Hell) have taken many strong holds and places of retract and
defense, The Hollanders go^^ in footing in Peru this last year.
from whence they are not easily to be undermined, or removed, their number
and strength daily increasing, and they finding the commodity so great. For of
all his Majesty's Kingdoms in Europe, Asia, or America, Peru is the prime and
Sovereign, being above any other in the World, most abounding in gold, silver,
and pearl, where gold, and silver is not as in other places, only with great
labor, dug and sought for, in deep and rockey mines, but here Nature has
dispersed and thrown it about in such plenty, that it is ordinarily found in
sands by the sea side, and upon the common ways, in wells, lakes, marshes,
among stones in the earth, cleaving to the ground under the roots of plants,
and trees, plucked or dug up, neither in scruples, or little and small
grains, but in lumpes, and solid mashes, weighing two or three pound weight a
piece.

The like success (we are certainly informed) they had but this other day
(replied the D. of Cea,) in going to the East Indies under their Admiral
Eremits, by surprising the strong Castle of Delreio, which they yet hold and
maintain (having sent back again unto Holland for a second Fleet to their
supply, which consists of 4000. mariners, whereof one ship (unknown to her
fellows) is fraught with handsome young wenches and boys for plantation)
these with the former making the number of fifty good ships, and for certain
it is reported that they are preparing for a third Navy to follow the other
two out of hand.

I think (quoth L. De Velasco) the Devil intends to gives them all the
kingdoms of the earth.

Great preparation of the Spaniards against the Hollander, but all in vain.
But replied the D. of Braganza, If I am not deceived, they were met withal by
the way, and fell far short of their reckoning, to what end else should his
Majesty this last year prepare so mighty a Fleet, both in Spain and
Portugal, sending for the shipping of Dunkerke, Winoxbergen and Oostend:
besides many merchant Ships arrested and stayed of England, France, Lubeck,
Hamborow and other places, to be joined with his Navy. Or what effect wrought
the consultation at Madrid, and the daily posting with letters from thence to
Bruxells.

All came to just nothing, quoth the D. of Sesa: for even in the heat and
threate of this great prepation, the Hollanders were so bold as to set upon a
goodly Ship of ours, whose lading was silver, which they took and brought
safely home to Horn: So that weighing all occurrences rightly, we shall find
it no time to think of an offensive war with England, for which we are not
in case, yet it is not amiss for us to pretend like Lions, and seem terrible
to the world, but necessity does admonish, notwithstanding we must eeke and
lengthen out our hides with Foxes tail.

Therefore in my opinion, it is best to make fair weather with England, in any
case so long at the lest, till we have tried the uttermost of our strength
against Holland which I hope his Catholic Majesty our Master will do this
Summer, and as I am informed, all those musters and taking up of Men which we
hear are in Naples, Sicilie, the Duchy of Millan, Spain, Artois, Henalt,
Luxenburge, and other places, are to that end. For the door being but half
shut we had yet room to enter, if we prolong the time we shall be so bard
and bolted, that there will be no hope of entrance at all, except (quoth Don
Jews of Velasco) as my Lord Duke of Sesa says in this interstitium or
twilight of Treaty, or suspense between War and Peace, we take to our
selves some notable advantage, and follow opportunity close at the heels, we
are like howsoever we flatter our selves with getting the game, to go away the
greatest loosers: For we see whatsoever we entend, the Hollanders are still in
action, daily getting ground of us. Did they not in August last recover Mogodor
in Aethiopio from us? did not shortly after Grave Earnest take Embden (which
Tilly supposed to be at his devotion) bringing in to the defense of the same
^8. pieces of Count Mansfields great Ordinance? has not the Prince of Orange
with his great industry and care as Spinola on our parts (presently after the
death of Obham the chief Admiral of Holland, who dyed this last year at the
Hage) taken view of all the Forts and Towers standing along the Mase Waell and
the Rheine, put in stronger Garrisons into Rauenstein and Gennop, and after
this, made up full the Army of Brunswick. Moreover has he not strengthened
and enabled to endure the longest siege Zutphen, Deuenter, Swoll, with the rest
of the Frontier Towns toward Frizeland, the passage we held ever to be our
easiest and rediest for the subduing of the Netherlands? did not those of the
Garrisons of Emmericke surprise and take Holden, a well fortified Town hard by
Dinxlaken, took all our Spaniards that lay there in Garrison, and brought away
the keys of the Town gate with them. On the other side, if we attempt any
thing, it is either discovered (so vigilant are the States) ere it be acted, or
fails in the manner and means of the action. As the enterprise of ours upon
Isendeke (notwithstanding we kept the gates of Antwerp shut for two days
together, and no man suffered to go out) which we intended upon the sudden to
surprise with our scaling-ladders, yet do what we could, they had notice of
our intent, that when we came before it we might (as they say) throw our caps
at it, for ever winning or coming within it.

And the like attempts (to no purpose) we made this last winter upon Bortagna
by Groening, and upon St. Andrews Scorn, had not the Prince of Orange, think
we, knowledge of Count Henry Vanden Berges Journey this last winter into
Frizland? yes doubtless, as the event showed. For he upon (my knowledge) was
secretly informed that the Spanish Horsemen had caused in Antwerpe and other
places all their horse-shoes to be altered, and as many new to be made as would
suffice for six or eight thousand horse, all calked sharp and frost-nayled of
purpose for travail over the Ice, whereby he knew (as he is most
circumspect and provident) that some enterprise was to be attempted upon either
Holland or Frizland: in that time of the great frost, The expeditio^ of Count
Henry Vanden-Berge, into Freezeland.
all Fennes, Rivers, and Marshes, being passible by reason of the thickness
of the Ice (for it froze continually) therefore he doubled the Garrisons within
the Frontier Town, sent certain Troops of horse, to observe and watch the
most suspected places for passage, and had ships abroad to bring him tidings
upon the least motion or occasion. Lastly, he sent in wagons six thousand
Skippers, and Water men, to break Ice in the most common and likely places of
passage, in the River of Rhine, Isell, the Wael, and about the ditches of
Towns, Marshes, and other places, neither did his prognostication sail him.
For Count Henry Vandenberg presently after our Consultation at Madrill, had his
Commission at Brussells for eighteen thousand horse and foot: with which, and
eleven pieces of Ordinance, and a great multitude of Wagons, he passed by
Emmerick, in exceeding bitter and could weather toward Frizland, but turning
another way between Duisburgh and Bronkhorst (a Castle belonging unto the Grave
of Stirumen which he took and spoiled) he came to the Isell with 4. pieces
of Ordinance, whereof one (the Ice breaking) sunk, the rest he lest at
Bronkhorst, having passed the River, he fortified his foot at Diterbusch,
with trees he filled up the River. The Estates believing he went directly for
Arnhem, they sent Marquet with troops of horse and certain foot Companies,
but Vandenberge saluting the Town with a volley of small shot, and beside,
making a shot or two into the Town with his great Ordinance departed, I heard
great (quoth Pennatiore) outrages were by him committed in that Journey,
wherein he spared neither Age nor Sex.

Cruelty (replied Gonzales) is natural and inhaerent to our Nation, for
except our victories be drowned in blood we cannot taste them. It is most true
that he gave way to his Soldiers in the depth and greatest bitterness of the
frost and snow this last winter, to turn men and women stark naked out of
their houses, to shift for themselves in the open fields, to ravish young
Girls not above eight or ten years of age, wilfully to beat out the heads of
their Wine and Bear Vessels, that they might drink only water in that
extremity of could weather, that many Infants (their parents flying away for
fear) at their return, were found either starued for food, or frozen to
death with the could, having neither fire, nor clothing.

What (quoth Don Pedro) slept the Prince of Oreng all this while? or was no
manner of reueng taken by the Dutch?

Yes, it seemed so (quoth Velasco,) for the most part of our Spanish Soldiers
were cut off, in their marching away and retreat, by the Garrisons of
Duisburgh, Arnhem, Dauentrie, Campen, and Zutphen, beside great numbers who
perished with extremity of cold, some having their noses, some their hands
frozen and rotted off, beside those that were starued for want of bread, so
that we cannot boast of this voyage, we staying in the Velue but seven
days, which a Spaniard had not seen in above thirty years before.

All this discourse (quoth Count Gondomar) had on all sides, I see tenderh to
no other end, then to intimate our disabillity and disproportion of strength,
if we should undertake a present War against the Netherlands, without either
making our selves masters of great Britain a thing which his Majesty's
Predecessors for this hundred years have aimed at (and we may truly say and
believe is a matter impossible) or by fair means entreat them, from the
Cliffes of Dover, to be but only Spectators, while we wrestle for the remnant
of our right in the Low Countries, wherefore at the last, to end and shut up
this our Consultation, I have (with Advise) drawn together certain Heads and
Conclusions, as Maxims of State, for the present and future securing of our
Countries and selves, which I humbly submit to all your gracious and honorable
censures.

Herewith Gondomar kissing the paper, delivered the same to the D. of Braganca,
which the D. again delivered to a Secretary of Estate, commanding him to
read them openly and distinctly before the whole house: the contents whereof
were as follows.

1 First above all things to maintain and uphold the Catholic Religion,
against Pagans, and Heretics, and to do our best to plant and propagate the
same in all places of the world.

2 To hold fast, with both hands (if we can) the friendship of his Majesty of
great Britraine, which setting and declining from us, let us labor to reassure
and gain by all means possible, upon what pretense or condition soever, for
hereupon depends the fortunate or ill success of all our affairs, either now
for the present or hereafter, imitating herein good Enginers or Workmen, when
they would build a Bridge, to keep off, or turn the maine Channel another
way.

3 That being effected, otherwise let us think never to take Weapons in hand.
Let (St. Gonzales) Spinola, with your self, break at an instant into Bra^ant,
and try your strength upon Breda, or Bergen op Zoome, giving them an alarm in
those parts, while Count Henry Vanden-Berge joined with Tillies Forces shall
by Wezell or Rees, passing the Rhine, come like an inundation upon them in
Freezeland.

4 That our Garrisons be doubled in Dunkerke, Ostend, and other Towns of
Flanders, and the havens well guarded and defended.

5 That the Emperor take a truce for six years with his deadly enemy
Bethlem Gabor, and that we hold good correspondence with the D. of Savoy, and
the Venetians.

6 That all shipping be slayed, whether English, French, Scottish, Hamburgers,
or of what Nation soever till our pleasure be further known.

7 That all our Magazins and storehouses be examined and furnished, with all
manner of provision, lead, powder, match, bullets, and cordage.

8 That a certain number of Ships be newly built and sent into the West
Indies, as well to secure and guard our Navy home, as to supplant those
Hollanders who have gotten sooting in our Kingdom of Peru.

9 That all strangers, of what Nation or Country soever, be banished the Land.

10 That we take an order for the relief of such Priests and Jesuits as
shall be banished England and Ireland, and to increase the number of our
Intelligencers.

11 That we bar the English, French, Dutch, Scottish, and other Nations
whatsoever, from all access to the Indies, either to traffic or plant.

12 That we set up and maintain the Inquisition in all our Dominions, and to
enhaunse our Customs.

13 That we make our selves able to encounter whosoever shall oppose, or stop
our passage on the narrow Seas, and that we give it out, (what ever our intent
is) that our Fleets pass that way only but for the chastising of the
Hollander.

14 That hereafter we entertain no English nor Scots, into our pay, but the
Irish only, to the intent after they have gotten experience, and are able to
command, they may stand us in stead, in case we should hereafter make any
attempt upon Ireland.

15 That we call in as much of our gold and silver as is possible.

16 That you speedily write to our Ambassador in England, to give notice to
all our trusty well beloved the Jesuits, and secular Priests, with some of
the best minded Catholics toward us, that they labor as much as in them
lies to take away all aspersion, and whatsoever may tend to our dishonuor, and
for this cause to give us notice of all scandolous Books, Pictures,
Inuectiues, Pasquills, etc. that shall be printed against us in Holland,
England, and other places.

That they curiously search into the proceedings of the Parliament, and send us
an abbreviate of all the passages thereof, with what forces, and how soon they
resolve to succor the Low Countries.

Lastly, that in the Name of their obedience to his Holiness, and observation
to his Catholic Majesty, they labor where ever they live, to educate and
instruct their friends Children in the Catholic Religion, and timely to enable
either their sons for our Seminaries, or their Daughters for our Nunneries,
so the houses shall be supplied still with novices, our Treasuries with money,
and we with friends and instruments at all occations.

Concerning these two last propositions, for a conclusion I will produce a
Letter unto me subscribed with the hands of many of the chief among them,
(whose pourtraitures with their names ye have here inserted) of the manner of
their proceedings, and that you may know they spend not their time in vain in
England, For I must my LL. tell you I hold intelligence with the wisest and
best learned among them, and where ever they are transeo per medium illorum.
Therefore I thought it not amiss by a draught to let you see them in their
Consultation, as they were wont to sit at the house of one L. a Goldsmith in
Fetter lane by Holborne in London this L. L. a Goldsmith; and one that
furthereth the-Printing of Popish Book^,
has for many years closely kept a Printing house, to the great furtherance
and increase of the Catholic Religion in that Land, for by his means
thousands and thousands of good Books has been dispersed over the Land,
which, albeit they are sold at an excessive rate, and he has been a great
gainer by them, yet are they printed and reprinted again, and much money
gotten by them though uttered at a third hand; but I will read the Letter, it
is not long: your Honors therefore daigne it the hearing.

Illustrious and excellent Lords, it is now (we all think) a long time since
we heard from your Honor, or recieued any instruction from you concerning the
business you wot of, we in England here are like shortly to groan under the
heavy and unsupportable burden of persecution, but we shall (I hope) the
better endure it, so long as our cause is warranted, and our constancy assisted
and increased by the prayers and suplications of the Church, we labor daily in
the Catholic Harvest, and recover, (with wonderful success) thousands of
souls from the Abyss of Perdition into the bosom of the Church, the only
difficulty is in con, cealing our selves and intendments, from that many headed
Monster Herisie. We walk openly and have our time allotted us till the 14 day
of June next, which is the utmost period of our stay, in the mean time we
desire to be advised by your Lordship, what afterward were fittest to be done
of us, for your Honors depth of Judgment and all admired policy, is the
compass by which we all Steer to escape present danger. Our Lord protect your
Honor to all our Comforts; and our blessing be upon you. From London this 3.
of May.

(...) have here se^^ the true portrature of the Jesuits and prist^ as they use
to sit at Counsel in England to further ye Catholic Cause.


D. Wright. D. Bristow. F. Barlow. D. Bishop. F. Fisher. F. Pattison. F.
Porter. D. Smith. F. Sweet. F. Ployden. F. Louett. F. Wothington. F. Heyham.
F. Palmer. F. Townsend, etc.
To this Letter I gave them this answer as follows.

Holy Fathers, I received your Letters to my great comfort, but I confess I am
nearly touched with the so sudden approach of your common calamity, but as
the greatest sore finds his salve, so the greatest affliction some
consolation or other in the midst of extremity; For mine own part know,
that I will not be wanting to your comforts in any thing that lies in me, or
that I can procure in your behalfes, either from his Holiness at Rome, or my
Master his Catholic Majesty here. The times are dangerous, carry your
selves therefore wisely with that perverse Nation, which scorns you, and
hourly consulteth, how to sweep you from the face of the earth, and even now
have they the broom in their hands, I mean the present Parliament, who will
leave no dust, or Sluts corners behind them, favor you are to expect none,
therefore with the Fox (when hunted out of breath) you must rely upon your
Arts, and subtle sleights. Of which nature may be these following. If your
credits be so good with any great or eminent personage, make him your
Instrument to sow dissension betwixt the Prince and people, imitating herein
Soldiers, when they would get an advantage of flying or running away, they use
to set fire on villages and their baggage, that they might escape unseen by
the benifit of the smoke. Learn or devise new and the most difficult
Characters for writing Letters, with all the sleights and devises of privy
conveyance; you may practice Physic as Doctors of Padua, or set up bills as
Mountebankes, venting collor'd Oils, Balsames, counterfeit Bezar, perfumed
Lozenges, Receipts for the toothache, with a thousand the like: get the perfect
and true receipt for any one disease or ach, it is enough to gain credit to
your practice, and make you pass for current. If you send any youths over to
our Seminaries let them be the Sons of the richest and ablest men, so shall
you not want a place for retraict, and means to relieve you at an extremity.
Young Gentlewomen, you may convey over to Bruxells, or whether you please, by
putting them in boys apparel, their hair being handsomely tied up with a
Fillet, and a wrought cap worn over it with a great broad-brimmd Hat. If you
would at any time convey over any Silver or Gold, the Searcher commonly may be
couzened, if you send it over in Pasties baked, provided that you have some of
flesh only to eat or give away, as a cullor for the rest. For the venting of
hallowed Oil, Beads, Agnus-Deies, Maddalles, Pardons, Crucifixes, etc. You
may do it by some one poor yet trusty Catholic or two, to go up and down
the Country in the habit and nature of Pedlers: this also is a good way to
hold intelligence with friends in many places. I have known some under the
color of selling Tobacco, have carried Letters handsomely preuily in the
balls or roules.

Also we advise you, if persecutions come upon you to fly into Scotland for a
season, and when you see your best time return again; for it seems by this
Proclamation you sent, that you are not bannished Scotland, therefore that may
be a good shelter unto you.

Be sure to have going in the North or west part of England, two Printers
presses at work, which let be well stocked; also a small rouling press for
little pictures of Saints, Veronica's heads, Crucifixes; and the like, much
money may be gained hereby.

Have a care whenever any Book or Picture comes out to our prejudice, set
some friends to buy them all up, though you burn them forthwith, except some
few, which fail not still but to send us of every sort three at the least, for
they will be unto us of great use.

Many more directions (Holy Fathers) there are which are alike necessary to be
thought upon, but I refer them to your own grave and pious considerations.
So committing you to the tuition of our blessed Lady, and my self to your holy
and devout prayers, I rest. From Civil this 6. of May.

Count Gondomar having made an end, they all with one voice applauded and
highly commended his directions and Counsel, not only for his particular
Letter, but for the wise carriage of himself heretofore in many and weighty
affairs that concerned the Catholic Religion, the honor of his Majesty,
and the general good of the Estate, Esteeming him worthily honored with the
Title of a Grande at home in Spain, and of his Masters Ambassador abroad,
having effected more by his wit and policy, then could have been wrought by
the strength of many Armies.

And now when they were almost come to a period, and full conclusion of their
Consultation for that time, there came a Messenger in post, who brought Letters
from the King, to Count Olivares his favorite, to call him to the Court upon
some special employment, what it was, could not be certainly known, but as I
heard, some complaint was lately come out of England, against the Ambassadors
resident there, and moreover that a great fight had been lately between nine
great Spanish ships, and 5. men (or ships) of war of Horn and Enchuisen in
Holland, wherein, the report went, the Hollanders had taken two, and sunk one,
whereupon, they all arose up together in a great confusion, every one hasting
to his horse which stood ready in a fair base Court without, they took their
way, some with Olivares to the Court, others to their own houses, where I
leave them, till we hear further of their proceedings.

TO THE ILLUSTRIOUS. MAGNIFIQVE AND GRAVE Assembly of the High Court of
Parliament in England.
HEre as in a little glass, may you (Most Honorable, Great, and Grave Senate)
view the epitome, or rather the effect of a seven years Treaty with Spain,
ye may plainly see the hold and assurance we were ever like to have had of
that Nation, yea, even when we thought our selves surest of them. Here we may
(to our warning of taking heed whom we trust) behold to the life the
Haughty-Pride, Thirsty-Couetousnes, and kind dissimulation of the same Fox
populi, Count Gondomar the For they say he is a Grande in Spain.
GREAT. Here may the Netherlands perceive, the imminent danger that hung-ouer
their heads, shortly without doubt to have fallen upon them, had not the
Spanish ambushes been timously discovered. Here may that Illustrious King,
and the most renowned and second Queen Elizabeth (for her constancy and
spirit) of Bohemia, and princes Pallatines of the Rhine, consider how assuredly
faithfully the surrendering of their Pallatinate should have been performed. In
a word, here may we all see the great Mercies of God toward us, whose
providence it has been, that we should clear our selves from these Spanish
Rocks, that all this while lay under water, and unseen, doubtless to our
ruin, had we not I say by immediate help from heaven been relieved. Let us
then, as we are one people of the same Language, Religion, Laws, Governed by
the same Gracious and good King, embrace with that wise Lord, and grave
Councellor (as in his Poesy) Vuam cor, vnam viam, then need not our Britain
so famous of old, for her triumphs and many victories over other Nations, nor
care a straw for the vain and windy threats of proud Spain, nor the menaces
of the most daring Adversary whosoever.

Your Humblest servant, who is, and ever shall be T. S.

FINIS.

