A GODLY AND FRVITFVLL SERMON PREACHED AT LIES IN Scotland by a faithful
Minister of Gods holy Gospel.

Psalm 74 10. O God, how long shall the adversary reproach thee? shall the
enemy blaspheme thy name forever?

22 Arise, O God: maintain thine own cause: remember thy daily reproach by the
folish man.

Printed. 1607.

To the godly, and Christian Reader.
IT every where goes heard with Christ's true Church as I hear, and fear.
Neither do men make that use of the miseries of it, that were fit, but even in
affliction either fall away, or become faint hearted, and careless. In Scotland
the Hierarchy prevails much, and then Christ's Discipline must needs be
thrust to the walls. Yet see notwithstanding how God stirs up some to make
opposition against that triple-headed Cerberus. This Sermon is one plain
proof of it, which was both preached, and written there, and came to my hands
by good means. I have caused it more plainly to speak English then the
Scottish phrase yielded; And yet God is witness to my soul, that I have done
it, as near as I could, without any diminution of, or addition to either
matter or manner. Such as it is, I present it to thee, aiming only at thy
benefit, and pleasure, specially spiritual. Farewell, and the Lord give thee
grace to use it to all good purposes.

A GODLY AND FRUITFUL SERMON, PREACHED AT Lies, in Scotland, by a faithful
Minister of Gods holy Gospel.
Gal: 5.1. Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us
free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage.
SEeing upon us the ends of the world are come, says Paul, 1 Cor. 10.11. and
now the end of all things is at hand, says Peter, 1 Pet: 4.7. and that day of
the Lord is coming like a thief in the night, in the which the heavens shall
pass away with a noise, and the elements shall melt with heat, and the earth
with the works that are therein shall be burnt up, 2 Pet: 3.10: and therefore
seeing Satan, that great red dragon, knowing that he has but a short time,
is upon his long chain, ranging, and raging, drawing down from the heave^s
even some of the stars, who should give light in Gods Church, and casting
the^ to the earth, Revel: 12. and raising up false Christ's, and false Apostles,
so that if it were possible the very elect should be deceaved, Math. 24.24: For
these causes we have made choice of this portion of holy scripture, whereby we
may be put in mind, and our hearts may be stirred up, to fasten our
affections fast upon that gracious liberty, wherewith the Son of God has
made us free from every spiritual thraldom, standing steadfast through faith,
not enta^gling our selves again with any yoke of bondage, until the crown of
that free kingdom be put upon our heads, in the great day of the glorious
appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ.

The chief butte the Apostle Paul shoteth at in this epistle, is, to establish
his doctrine concerning true Justification by the righteousness of Jesus, only
through faith, without any mixture of the works of the law whatsoever, moral,
or Ceremonial: against those false Apostles who had crept in among the
Galathians, studying to deceive, and bewitch them, that they should not believe
the truth, to whom the Apostle before had described Jesus Christ in their
sight, and as it were crucified him amongst them by the plain, and powerful
preaching of the gospel, cap. 3.1. For the law is excluded, and debarred in
the matter of Justification, faith only having place, apprehending, and
applying the imputed righteousness of Jesus Christ. But the law in the matter
of sanctification is admitted as the rule to which the christian man should
square this conversation, and as the lantern that should lead him in the
paths of the Lords commandments. The Apostle insisteth in this purpose, from
the beginning of the 3 chap. to the second part of this fifth: and after that
he has thoroughly reasoned, and in the end concluded in the last verse of the
chap: going before, that they were not the children of the bondwoman Hagar, as
Ishmael, that is servants, and slaves under the law through works, and so
lying under the curse thereof, but sons of the free woeman Sara, as Isaac,
that is, heirs of the promise through faith in Jesus; In these words, which
we have read, he infers, by way of a second conclusion of the premises, a
grave, and powerful admonition, that seeing they were free, and freed from all
the bonds and bondage of the law moral, and Ceremonial, their geeat care
should be to keep themselves so.

The admonition has 2 branches, The one an exhortation to stand fast in the
liberty; The other a dehortatio^ from the contrary, not to entangle etc.
Between these two is interlaced a reason or argument to persuade to the one,
and dissuade from the other, taken from the purchaser, and giver of this
liberty, who is Christ, and so from the excellency thereof. This is the
liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, therefore stand fast in it: This
is the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, therefore be not entangled
again with the yoke of bondage.

In the exhortation we begin at this word (therefore) which is a particle of
illation, relative of the last verse of the chapt: going before; upon the which
this whole admonition is enforced as a necessary consequent, and by a necessary
consequent: we are the children of the free woeman Sara etc. Let us stand fast
therefore in this liberty. We are not the children of the servant, let us not
therefore be entangled etc. we are the children of the fre woman and not of the
servant, let us therefore stand fast in the liberty, wherewith Christ has made
us free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage.

The second word is (liberty). There are sundry sorts of liberty, a natural
liberty, a civil liberty, a bodily liberty, a spiritual liberty. The first
three sorts we overpasse as not pertinent to this text, and purpose. The
liberty of which the Apostle speaks here is a supernatural, spiritual, and a
heavenly liberty, which is generally divided thus, into a spiritual internal
liberty, and a spiritual external liberty. The internal liberty is the
purchase, and gift of Christ to his own children, whereby he setts them at
fredome both in soul and body, immediately, from the spiritual thraldom of
sin, Satan etc: And this is twofold, the liberty of Justification, and the
liberty of sanctification. The liberty which justification brings consists
in these points; in perfect freedom from sin both original and actual, in
respect of mere imputation; Now ye are freed from sin. Romans 6.22. From the
guiltines thereof; Who will lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? Romans
8.33. From the punishment thereof, death and condemnation; There is no
condemnation to the^ which are in Christ Jesus Rom 8.1. From the law moral,
the revealer of sin and death, in regard of the curse, and condemnation it
denounces, the justification it proposes, the rigor of obedience it
requires, ye are not under the law. Rom: 6:14. Ye are divided from the law.
Rom: 7:6. The law is not given to the righteous man, 1. Tim. 1.9. From the law
ceremonial the witnesser of sin; Christ has put out the handwryting of
Ordinances which was against us, took it out of the way, fastened it upon the
Cross, Col. 2.24. and so from the traditions and precepts of men, or things
indifferent whatsoever, as binding the conscience; which is commonly called the
christian liberty, or commodity. Romans 14.16. Ye are bought with a price be not
the servants of men. 1. Cor. 7.23.

The liberty which sanctification brings is that spiritual privilege,
whereby Gods children are freed from the power and dominion of sin, Satan
etc: not perfectly, but in part, yet in all the powers, and faculties of the
souls, senses, and members of the body: The mind from the power of darkness,
the will from the power of disobedience, the heart from the power of deadnes,
the affections from the power of pollution, and corruption, the body and
members thereof from the power of sin, whereby they are made weapons of
unrighteousnes: that the renewed man thus freed, might, at the least concerning
the inner man, delight in the law of God, and in his mind serve it without
constraint, willingly, and cheerfully: The law of the spirit of life, which is
in Christ Jesus, has freed me from the law (that is the power and authority)
of sin and death, Rom: 8:2. This liberty of sanctification has two degrees,
the one is in this life imperfect, which may be called the liberty of grace,
the other after this life, perfect, the liberty of glory, Rom: 8.21. the
glorious liberty of the sons of God. The same Apostle to the Col: 1.13.
shuts up this twofold liberty of Justification and sanctification in a word;
The Father (says he) has delivered us from the power of darkness, and has
translated us into the kingdom of his dear son.

Now from this internal liberty follows that comfortable liberty, which the
Apostle in sundry places calls (Par^esia) whereby the soul of the freeman has
free access to the throne of grace, to receive mercy, and find grace to help
in time of need. Heb: 4.16. From this springs that peace which passes all
understanding, Phil. 4.7. Romans 5.1. That joy which Peter calls glorious and
unspeakable, 1 Pet. 1.8. Without this internal liberty there is nothing in the
soul and conscience of the sinner but terror, distraction, and doubting even
in the smallest matters etc.

The external liberty which is instrumental, and defensive in respect of the
former is likewise twofold; the liberty of the preaching and professing of the
truth of God, the true doctrine drawn out of the pure fountain of the word;
The liberty of the practice of holy Discipline following from the same
fountain: This may be called the liberty of the house of God, whereby it is
governed, which is the Church of the living God, the pillar and ground of the
truth. 1. Tim: 3.15. We call them instrumental, because they are Gods
powerful, and ordinary instruments, through which by his spirit he works the
internal liberty, continues, and keeps it. Take away these instruments, no
Justification, no sanctification. 1. Pet. 1.23. We call them dcfensiue, because
the guard the inward, which if they were not, would easily vanish, and Satan
would soon wear it out of the soul.

The third word in this exhortation is, that he desires to (stand) in this
liberty, yea to stand fast (as the word imports) as within a compass, or
station. There appears to be a Metaphore in the word, borrowed from the
custom of worldly warriors, who stand steadfast in the station in the which
their captain places the^, resolved without fear to fight, never to flee,
but courageously to confront their adversaries. So stand ye steadfast (says the
Apostle) and settle the affection of your heart fast in the liberty, wherein, as
in a statio^, your grave, and gracious captain Jesus has placed you,
resisting by faith that spiritual adversary the Devil, who will strive by all
means possible to draw you out of that liberty. This is the exhortation, in
the which the Apostle expressly mea^eth the internal liberty from the law
moral, ceremonial, sin, death etc. In the before said respects, and by
consequence of this, we infer the external defensive liberties. For if we
should stand fast in one point of this spiritual liberty, then we should stand
fast in all.

The dehortation is from the contrary. Be not entangled etc: The yoke of
bondage is opposed as contrary to liberty; the enta^gling with this yoke to the
standing in the liberty. This bondage is a spiritual bondage of the soul,
and conscience principally, and is answerable in the opposition to this
liberty in all the sorts, and points thereof, the bondage under sin, Satan,
death, the law moral, ceremonial, traditions of men, Antichrist the man of
sin in corrupt doctrine, and Discipline. We briefly pass it over, because it
is clear by the contrary in the words, be not entangled. And now there
appears also to be a metaphore borrowed from the custom of Oxen, or other
beasts, whose necks being once comprehended or contained (as the word
signifies) in the yoke, are forced to follow whithersoever the driver by word,
or by goad lusts. So, faith the Apostle, if you fall back to bondage, you
entangle your selves with such a heavy yoke that whither soever sin, or
Satan leads you, you must go.

This word (again) imports not, that the Galatians had been under the
Ceremonial law; for they were of the Gentills, and not Jews, to whom this law
was proper; but that they had been before under the yoke of bondage, the law
moral, engraven in their hearts by nature, albeit defaced by sin, the yoke of
sin, Idolatry, etc. So that, now to fall back to this bondage, or
whatsoever spiritual yoke, was to be entangled again.

This is the dehortation; in which the Apostle expressly means the yoke of the
law ceremonial, and moral; But by consequence all spiritual yokes of bondage
whatsoever are forbidden; for if we should not entangle our selves in a my,
then likewise in none.

The reason enterlaced betwixt the two branches of the admonition is drawn
from the purchaser, and giver, and so the excellency of this liberty, which
is so much the more excellent, by how much the contrary bondage is dangerous.
If ye ask who is the purchaser and giver of this liberty: the Apostle Paul
answers here, it is Christ. If the Son shall make you free, ye shall be free
in deed, says Christ himself of himself, Ioh: 8.38. If the Father be the
author of this liberty, the son is the purchaser and giver of this liberty,
the spirit is the worker, and sealer up of this liberty in our souls. If ye
ask whereby Christ has purchased this liberty, the Apostle Peter answers,
Not with corruptible things as silver, or gold, but with the precious blood of
Christ, as of a Lamb undefiled, and without spotte. 1 Pet: 1.18.19. If ye
ask, which is the register, or Charter of this liberty, in and by the which
our right of this liberty is set down, and made sure; we answer; The word of
the Old, and New Testament, principally the word of the Evangelists, in the
which this liberty, and all the sorts, and particular points thereof are
plainly, and plentifully laid out before our eyes. The word is truth: if ye
know the truth, the truth shall make you free, says Christ, John 8.23. For it
is both the Charter, and working instrument of this liberty.

Now the meaning of this whole admonition is this shortly and simply: Seeing ye
are once set at liberty, and so freed from spiritual thraldom, by Jesus
Christ, the Lord of life and liberty, stand fast to this liberty, and fall not
back again under the woeful misery of any spiritual bondage whatsoever. To
come to the doctrine. First we see, there is a liberty wherewith the Son of
God has privileged his people, whom Peter calls the people set at liberty,
1 Pet: 2.9. which is heavenly, spiritually, and supernatural, and in nature
far different from any earthly, or worldly liberty: which is, even in all, and
every one of the sorts and points thereof, the purchase of his own precious
blood, the free gift of his liberal love, the right whereof is conferred to
them by the charter of his blessed word, sealed up in the tables of their
hearts and co^scie^ces by the spirit of grace, which is delivered to us from
day to day by the public preaching of the word. Therefore neither Angel in
heaven, nor man on earth should take upon them to chop, or change, in this
liberty, or the meanest point thereof, without the warrant of the word; unles
they would that the purchaser of this liberty should be avenged of them for
the violation thereof. It is true, in outward or earthly liberties given by
men, or which are among men for outward society, or comodity, men may do as
they think meet, alter, add, impare etc. But as for this liberty, and the
particulars thereof, which come, as it were, immediately out of the hands of
Christ, let men take heed how they meddle with them, to add, to alter, to
impair, or to pervert, as they would wish that God should not meddle with them
in wrath. Yet such is the folly, and presumption of mortal men, that they
have often their head, and their hand in these inviolable liberties, altering, or
disanulling the^ for their own further liberty, or rather loosnes to the
flesh. Take an example from the Papists, who in effect overthrow this liberty
in all and every point thereof; The liberty of Justification and
sanctification by their freewill in nature, their preparations to
Justification, their good works chiefly of the outward man, their pilgrimages,
purgatory, and satisfactions, by the which they entangle themselves with the
yoke of the law, sin, and condemnation; the liberty of things indifferent or
humane traditions, by an heap of Idolatrous, and superfluous Ceremonies, thrust
upon the consciences of ignorant people, as a part of Gods worship necessary,
and meritorious; The defensive liberties by their unwritten verities, and
traditions, mixed and matched with the pure, and sincere word of truth; by
their Antichristian Hierarchy, and innumerable superstitious rites, defeating,
yea excluding the true Discipline, and comely order of the house of God. Thus
while they show themselves enemies to this liberty in all the particulars of
it, they also declare that all the linckes of this spiritual yoke of bondage
lie heavy upon the neck of their souls, which is a just and deserved
recompense of the violation of this liberty, wherewith Christ has made us free.
Therefore by their example we should beware of such: for we have great cause,
seeing within these few years (it may be, perceiving that we were inclyning
their way in our Church government) they are so increased, and encouraged, that
not only here they set up their heads, but also they have been bold (as you
know of late) to set out the public ensigns of Idolatry, as though their had
been neither Prince, nor Pastor in Israel; as though both the edge of the
civil and spiritual sword had been either broken or blunted; and yet they are
not much dashed, nor dismayed. As for us (my brethren) it becomes us always
in holiness, and faithfulness to preserve, and maintain every one of these
liberties, so far forth as our place, or power will extend, that we may stand
fast in them, seeing Christ by them has made us free, that we be not entangled
again with the yoke of bondage.

Secondly the Apostle shows that this happy privilege, which Christ has
purchased for us, is not a loosnes, but a liberty; not a loosnes, or a license
to sin, but a liberty in holiness, and righteousness to serve the Lord; not a
loosenes, or a loose rain to ru^ne whithersoever our vain, and raging lusts
lead us, but a liberty which is likewies a yoke; not like the yoke of bondage
which is hard, and heavy, a yoke of iron, but a golden yoke, of the which our
Savior Christ Math: 11.30. says, My yoke is easy, and my burden light; not a
loosenes that has no limittes, but a liberty which is bounded, and limited
by the Lord himself in his blessed word; which we shall easily perceive by
passing through shortly the particulers of this liberty. First the liberty of
Justification, and sanctification is not a loosnes, that they who imagine they
enjoy the^ may do what they lust, but a liberty which should not be abused as
an occasion to the flesh says the Apostle in this same chapter 13: which has
his own limitts prescribed by God in his word; Being made free from sin, yea
are made the servants of righteousness. Rom: 6.18. Being freed from sin, ye
are made servants unto God, having your fruit in holiness, Rom: 6:22. There is
a limitte of this liberty; righteousness, holiness, or the service of God. Ye are
a people set at liberty, that ye should show forth the virtues of him, who has
called you out of darkness into his marveilous light. 1. Pet: 2.9. There is
another limitte of this liberty further; The freedom from the law is not a
loosenes, as though we might cast the law of God behind our backs, as no way
perteyning to us; but a liberty limited. For albeit we be freed from the curse
and condemnation of it, yet are we not simply freed from the command of it:
Albeit we be freed from the correction of it, yet not from the direction of it:
It continues to be a director, and leader of us in the way of light. Oh how
far then are the Atheists, and Epicures of this age blinded, (who are so in
effect, albeit lurking under the shadow of outward profession) with all the
Hypocrites in these days; they (resting themselves upon the broken reed of a
blind conceit, that they are partakers of this liberty) cast of the law,
holiness, righteousness, and all, under covert, following, and fulfilling the
lusts. and vanities of a profane heart, as though it were a loosenes, or
licentiousnes, and not a holy and a happy liberty. Again liberty in things
indifferent, as in meat, drink, apparel etc: is not a loosenes, but a
liberty limited. The Argument of the bellygods, glutto^s, and vain glorious
is not good, who reason thus; Meat, drink, apparel are things indifferent,
therefore I may eat, and drink, when, and how often, and how much soever I
list, albeit excessively; I may wear what apparel I please, albeit never so
costly, or glorious. For so thou turnest this liberty to a mere loosnes. To
the which the Apostle Paul sets generally the limitts of order, comelines,
aedification, and that mutual charity which should be in christian society.
Again the liberty of preaching, and professing the truth of Gods word, is not
a loosenes, so that a man may preach, or profess what he pleases, taking to
himself a liberty of conscience (that so many wishes:) but it is a limited
liberty. We must preach the word, keeping our selves precisely within the
compass thereof; yea we must preach the word, as the word; there is a
limitation both in matter, and manner. Likewise your profession must be, both in
matter and manner, as the word prescribs. Lastly, the liberty of the
government, and Discipline of Gods house is not a loosnes, as though me^ might
set down what form there of they pleased, but a liberty which is bounded, and
limited, both in respect of the substa^tiall points thereof, which are fixed
and immovable, and the circumstantiall points thereof, which are variable and
changable. For the first, the limitts of the points fubstantiall is the word,
either express for the most part, or at least by necessary consequence; the
word, I say, particularly for every one of them; as the office bearers in the
Church, their sorts, degrees, authority, power, offices, calling thereto,
discharge thereof in preaching the word, administering the sacraments,
exercising of Discipline; as is evident out of the Epistles of Paul, and the
rest. Therefore that is not a good argument, this or that, (as the estate of
Bishops humane, or such other) is not against the word; there is nothing in the
word against it; therefore it is lawful. Suppose it were so, that it were not
against the word, yet it will not follow, if it be among the substantial
points, as concerning any office bearer, his office, authority, or such like,
which are perefctly and expressly set down in the word. But rather by the
contrary it will follow, by a sure consequence: It is not with the word, the
word is not with it; therefore it is not lawful. Otherwise this liberty is
turned to loosenes. For the second, the limitts of the points circumstantiall,
and ceremonial, is likewise by the word, but generally, bouu^ding all, and
every one of the^ in their use, with the foresaid three limitts, order,
comlines, and aedification. Where Ceremonies are placed in a Church, having
these three joined with them in peace, and wisdom, let them be retained
without superstition. Where Ceremonies are placed in a Church, breaking their
bounds, bringing in with them for order confusion, for decency uncomely and
vngraue disguyzing, for aedification offense of the weak in faith (of whom
there has been ever, and will be a number in the Church of Christ in all ages)
and confirming of others in their superstitions; let them, without contention,
in wisdom and authority be removed; otherwise this liberty is turned into
loosenes.

Therefore this is not a good argument; all ceremonies are in themselves
indifferent; therefore they may be retained, or removed, placed, or displaced,
according to our pleasure. It follows not, because there is a difference
betwixt the indifferency of the thing indifferent in it self, and the
indifferency of the use thereof: the thing indifferent in it self, and it own
nature (being nether inclyning to good, nor evil,) is, and abides always
indifferent (the Christian liberty thereof being in the conscience as a
benefit chiefly pertaining thereto) the authority of man, yea of Angels is not
able to alter, or change the nature thereof, by turning indifferency into
necessity; for this is only proper to God to change the quality of things by
the power of his precept. But the use of the thing indifferent is, and abydes
not always and at al times indifferent, in respect of the accidents that
accompany the same; sometimes offense, uncomelines, disorder following thereon,
which takes away the indifferency of the use, bynding, and restrayning the
exrernall work that it be not done, albeit nothing touching the internal
liberty of the conscience, which is ever free; Otherwise the abuse of the thing
indifferent comes in, of necessity craving reformation thereof. Sometimes
again the lawful authority of men, in a discrete commandment or precept of
Christian charity, accompanies the same, injoyning the use of the thing
indifferent; and so obliging, and bynding the external work to be done,
(although not the internal liberty and conscience) and that not absolutely,
but in case of scandal; otherwise the work without sin may be omitted.

If ye will say the law giver, by his superior power, concerning the external
use of the thing indifferent, will remove the offense followinge therein; It
will not, but rather aggravate it, because thereby the external work
appears to be bound to the offensive use of the thing indifferent, which
before was free. If ye will ask whether the superior power may not by
preceept injoyne the use of things indifferent; I answer yea, but with these
conditions: First that it be without the opinion of merit, and necessary Divine
worship; Secondly, that it be without the offense of the weak, or any of Gods
children whatsoever, and the strenghthening the superstitious in their blind
errors; Thirdly, that it be not imposed with the clause of perpetuity, as
though it were a thing necessary; but that it be left alterable, according as
the circumstance of time, place, and person shall require; Fourthly, that it be
not urged under the punishment of necessity. For example, if a law, or
Injunction should impose the use of the surplice in time of divine service, the
ring in marriage etc: under the pain of deposition, this is to make the use of
a thing indifferent necessary, for what other or greater shall be the punishment
of fornication, drunkenes etc: in the person of any spiritual office bearer.
So then of all this ye see, what a gracious liberty it is, wherewith Christ has
made us free; and therefore how steadfastly we should stand in it, not with a
loose, and licentious heart, but with affections fast settled by faith thereon,
that we be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage.

Thirdly, the Apostle lays out before our eyes the doleful misery, wherein
they inwrappe themselves, who for sake this liberty; they entangle themselves
with the fearful yoke of bondage. There is no mean between these two; but of
necessity he that stands not in this happy liberty, must be entangled with
that unhappie yoke of bondage. When we fall from the one, we fall into the
other, when we declyne from the one, we inclyne to the other. But this again
doubleth the misery. For if it were but the first yoke, and the first time
thereof, it were so much the more tolerable; But to be once yoked, and freed,
and after freedom to be yoked again, that is commonly a remediles yoke, which
is never removed: the last condition of that man is worse then the first. For
when, in the first bondage, only one unclea^e spirit possessed the house, that
is the heart; in the second, seven worse then the first enters in, and takes
possession. Where the first yoke was but single, the second shall be seavenfold,
bynding the heart so fast, that it can hardly ever return again to liberty.
For albeit there may be a yoke, and a yoke again, yet seldom falls it out,
that there is a liberty, and a liberty again. Many have been once yoked, and
after freed, (albeit not effectually) and yet yoked again; but few once freed,
and after yoked, are freed again. Besides that parable cited before out of
Math: 12: the Apostle Peter likewise cleares, and confirms this point. 2 Pet.
2.20. If once after they have escaped from the filthiness of the world, through
the acknowledgment of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are yet entangled
again therein, and overcome, the latter end is worse with them then the
beginning; for it had been better for the^ not to have known the way of
righteousness, then after they have known it, to turn from the holy
commandment given unto them.

As this is true of the yoke of sin, so is it true of the yoke particularly
mentioned in this text, and of every particular yoke of bondage whatsoever. Now
as concerning us, that may be said, which the Apostle says of the Ephesians
chap: 5.8. We were once darkness, but now we are light in the Lord; we were once
under the heavy yoke of bondage, both of sin, and of the man of sin; but
now we are, and have been set at ^iberty, principally from the bondage of
Antichrist, his darkened, and corrupted doctrine, and Discipline; and therefore
careful should we be to walk in that light and liberty, and stand fast
therein, that we be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage, and so our
darkness be doubled, our yoke seven fold strengthened, and that proverb turned
even upon us, The dog is returned to his own vomit, and the Sow, which was
washed, to the wallowing in the mire. 2: Peter 2:22.

If any will say we need not to be affrayd or such yokes, they are far from us
in this land, we are in no danger: well, if it be so, we thank the Lord; if
otherwise, we pray him to ridd us from them. Only this we say, that the
spiritual yokes of bondage use to come slipping, and slyding in very subtly,
and secretly, under the shadow, and cover of many fair prete^ses. For evil,
in the beginning and first entry, is ever almost in a mystery hid up. And this
is the craft of Satan, who, when he has any work of weight to do, can
transform himself, and his instruments, into Angels of light. Doleful
experience in times past teaches this, in the birth and growth of Antichrist
the man of sin, which the Apostle calls 2. These: 2.7. the mystery of
iniquity, which does already work. Behold the entry, and creeping in of this
yoke was evil, even in the days of the Apostle; the first degree and step
whereof is little different from our new moderators. It was not very sensible,
or apparent: upon which while this man of sin stood, he appeared little
higher then the rest, but stood equal with them upon the earth: yet by
progress of time, sincerity and humility passing away, covetousnes, and
ambition previaling, he did climb up step after step, from this to Bishop,
from Bishop to Archbishop, from Archbishop to Patriach, from Patriarch to Pope,
till he came to the top of this his pinnacle, upon the which he stands now in
his Antichristian greatness. Descend he will not the way he ascended, because he
is the man of sin, appointed for perdition. It rests there; for that Satan
(who carried him up) in Gods righteous judgment, and in his appointed time,
shall throw him down, and rid the Church of him. Therefore it is very
requysit that Gods people, (but principally the Pastors of his people to whom
the custody and chief care of this liberty is committed) be very wise, that
nothing, nether person nor policy, enter into the house of God, without a
narrow trial, examyning, and sifting every thing exactly, that under fair
colors, the subtle serpent slide not into the paradise of God, to ensnare,
and deceive simple Eva.

It was not for naught, that Christ himself, the purchaser of this liberty,
recommendeth to his Disciples, Math. 10:16. the wisdom of the Serpent, that
the old Serpent in his instruments should not beguyle them, and the simplicity
and innocence of the Dove, that the maliciousnes of that enemy, who was a man
slayer from the beginning, should not overcome them. Our Master and Savior
joins and mixes these two virtues together; because the Serpe^ts wisdom not
sanctified and marshalled with the Doves simplicity, will make but an
Achitophel, or a Matchiavel; and the Doves simplicity, not sanctified and
accompanied with the Serpents wisdom, will make up but a silly and deceivable
childishnes. Therefore he reco^mendeth to them, and to al his own, to the end
of the world (especially his servants in the ministry) an holy wise
simplicity, and a holy simple wisdom; that without malice and deceit they may
discharge the duties of their calling; suffering nothing to enter into the
house of God, prejudicial to this liberty, or to any sort or point thereof:
neither hyding up any such thing, under the colors or clokes of their
pretenses, which the Apostle Paul 2. Cor. 4.2. calls the clokes of shame, and
the carryer of them a walker in craftines: the clokes of shame, because the
cover a shameful and dishonest body; that is, plottes, and purposes, which if
they were seen in their own colors, the very authors and inventors of them
would be asha^ed of them: such clokes beseem not the Ministers of God; and the
Apostle in that same place, for his own part, renounceth such. They should be
cladd with holiness, wisdo^e, simplicity, sincerity, making their very hearts
and minds, in all the works of their callings seen sensible, and approuable
to the world, and walking even as though every one saw their heart as well as
their hand, in respect of their syncerity, and were witness to their mind, as
well as to their mouth. To this should be our study and endevor, that so we
might stand fast in that liberty, wherewith Christ has made us free, and not
entangle our selves again with any yoke of bondage.

Fourthly the Apostle tells us, that there is no keeping nor continuyng in
this liberty, unles we stand fast settled, and our affections fastened thereon:
this is the principal means, whereby we may keep this liberty. For often
times, as the word imports, there will be so many mighty adversaryes,
spiritual and temporal, so many strong temptations, both of terrors and
allurements drawing and dragging at this liberty, to pull it from us, that they
will prevail, unles we with all the powers of our souls, and all the strenght
of our hearts, renewed by the mighty force of the grace of the spirit of Jesus,
hold fast our hold. It is the loose holding of this liberty that loses it: It
is the fast and sure holding of it, that is the great and principal preserver
thereof. He that stands in this liberty staggering, or holding any one foot
up, ready to step out of it, if occasion do present either peril, or
preferment, and profit, he (I say) will be easily beaten from this liberty. But
he who fixes and fasteneth both his feet, his mind, and his heart thereon, will
abide the brunt, and battery of the stro^gest temptation, and yet keep his
standing.

Now, to strengthen us to stand fast, there are two things principally
required, Faith, and Love: Faith whereby we should be persuaded of this liberty,
and of all the sorts, points, and bounds thereof, as purchased by the blood of
Jesus, and registered in the word of God; the want whereof, or of that co^venient
measure thereof that is requisite for this assurance, makes us loose our
standing. For the least temptation, that lights upon a man of an unstable
mind, that is staggeri^g and wavering through doubt, will draw him away from
this liberty. If we begin once to doubt of our Discipline, or Church-goverme^t,
whether it be stablished by the sure warrant of the word, or whether it be a
thing alterable and indifferent, and that another form may be lawfully
received, (and many now a days think so, who would make their gain by such a
change) then our stedfastnes is gone, and we easily are drawn away by any
occasions.

Again, the unfayned love to this liberty makes our standing steedfast. Loath
would they be to turn from it, or the least point thereof, who love it well.
But if love be lacking, or that convenient measure thereof that is reasonable,
there will be little, or no standing to this liberty. But what is the requisite
measure of this love? To love this liberty better then all outward or earthly
things, yea better then our life it self. When we prefer these earthly
things, as profit, or preferment etc. in this world, and give to them first
and chief place in our affections, then we want this love, and so loose our
standing. A man that loves honor and commodity, better then this liberty, to
win a point of this worldly profit, or preferment, will loose a point of this
liberty, yea two, ere he will want it. Demas, of whom Paul says, Phil: 2.4.
that he was one of his fellow helpers, in 2: Tim: 4.10. he says crying out by
way of complaynt, Demas has forsaken me. Well, there then is a token of Demas
his loose standing: but what was the cause of it? Paul adds it ( and has
embraced this present world, says he.) A sensible sign he loved the world
better the^ his Ministry and this moved him to forsake the liberty of his
spiritual calling, when he saw the occasion of worldly profitt and preferment.
Surely if Demas heart be bent to embrace the world, loving it better then his
Ministry, it is meet he should even forsake Paul, and betake him to the thing
he loves best, rather the^ to hold the Ministry with the one hand, and grype
the world with theother; for these two grypes agree not well together, the one
loses ever the other.

If any will allege that the earthly prerogatives in a Minister get to him,
in his Ministry, credit, reverence, and authority; the Apostle 2. Cor. 10.4.
answers: The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, nor earthly, whereby we
purchase and get hearts in faith and obedience to Jesus Christ, in love and
reverence to our selves and our Ministry in him; but spiritual, and mighty
in God to this effect. They are grace, fidelity, sincerity, godliness in a
Minister which are the means of his advancement in the hearts of the
faithful. I am persuaded that we carry more credit, and are better accounted
of, in the hearts of those that fear the Lord, when we content our selves
(within the compass of our calling) with the styles of M: George, M. John,
Pastor of such, or such a place, then, when we borrow, through ambition, the
titles of worldly honor, and dignityes, loving the style of my Lord Bishop
better, then to be called a faithful and diligent Minister. So we see how
needful it is, that we should study to get faith, and grow in it, whereby we
may be persuaded in all the points of our liberty, and calling; and also to
get love, and grow in it, whereby we may hold fast, that neither it be drawn
from us, nor we from it, but that we may stand fast in the liberty etc:

And surely, if we should enter into a reckonyng of the reasons, and causes
that should move us to stand, it would require a longer time, then is allowed
to us. Therefore we shall only bring out a few. 1. This liberty, in all the
points of it, is the purchase of the precious blood of Jesus. It is dear
bought, the price is great, the worth is great, and such things (albeit
earthly) we use to keep well: should not we then stand fast in this liberty? 2.
This liberty is the free gift of Christ's liberal love. Now, ^he gift uses to
be liked, and kept, if it were but for the givers sake: Should not ^e then
stand fast in this liberty? 3. The ^ight of this liberty is made, and given
unto us in the sure charter of the word of God; registered in the books of the
Old and New Testament: there cannot be under the heavens a surer holding:
should we not the^ stand fast in this liberty? 4. (Which touches principally
the defensive liberties) we have them approved, and ratified by the
fundamental laws of our Country: should we not then stand fast in them? 5. We
have been many years in peaceable possession of them. Now, we know that the
meanest society in the land will be loath to loose the least point of their civil
liberties, having both right to the^ (and the same ratified by the Acts of
Parliament) and possession of them: yea they will admit no endeavor or
attempt, that may prejudice a circumstance of them, much less the substance.
Should we not then stand fast in this liberty, to the which we have right from
God, registered in his word, ratified by the laws of the land, so long by us
peacably possessed?

6. To these liberties, all estates of the land, King, Counsel, Nobility,
Pastors, People, have sworn, and subscribed. Sworn? Look the Confession of
faith. Whereby? By the great name of the Lord our God. Whereto? To continue in
obedience of the Doctrine, and Discipline of this reformed Church, and to
defend the same. How long? All the days of our lives. Under what pain? Under
the pain contained in the law, and danger both of body and soul, in the day
of Gods fearful judgment. How have all sworn and subscribed? Not secretly,
but solemnly; again, not ignorantly, or rashly, but (says the words) after
long and due examination, being persuaded in conscience through knowledge
wrought by the holy spirit, and not moved for worldly respects, in a through
resolution, willingly believing, confessing, subscribing, affirming before God,
and the whole world, that it is the only true religion, pleasing God, and
bringing salvation to man, and promising to maintain it both in the Doctrine,
and Discipline.

So that if any will allege that now they may alter, because they see greater
light: surely it may well be, greater livyng thou see, but greater light thou
can not see, to make thee alter. This is a strong reason to bind the loosest
heart, and make steadfast the most wa^dring soul; unles in the sight of God,
his Angels, and the world, we would be manifestly perjured, and make open
Apostasy, to the high blaspheming of that Gospel of grace, which we preach and
profess. 7. And lastly, we know not how long our God shall grant to us the
liberty of this present life. If, while we enjoye it, we likewise keep fast
this precious liberty purchased to us by Christ, and so long possessed of us in
peace, the certainly, in weal, in woe, in life, in death, we shall find the
fruit and comfort thereof. But if we forsake this liberty, and God come and cut
of the liberty of this present life; with what assurance shall we look for the
liberty of that better life. Therefore let us stand fast in the liberty
wherewith Christ has made us free, and not be entangled again with the yoke of
bondage.

Now, it may be that some will be reasonyng within themselves after this manner.
What needs all this a-doe of this liberty, the keeping of it, and standing in
it? Wherein is it hurt? And by whom? I answer to the first. If ye will compare
the state of our Church, as it was within these few years, with that which now
is, the graces and faces of ^aithfull men zealous for the house of God, their
unity, and amity, the order and comelines of their meetings, the co^curre^ce to
the Lords work which the^ was, with that which now we look upon with our
eyes, disorder, confusion, and division, your question will easily be resolved.
The time has been, when our Church and liberties have been as a defensed
city or house, but now doors and windows are partly cast open, partly
broken up, and enemies entered, so that the faithful keepers will be forced,
either to yield, or to suffer: but to suffer is far better, for if either our
liberties, through craft, be undermined, or through reward be given out of our
hands, it is likely the Lord will never honor us with them again. But if by
violence they be thrown out of our hands, then possess we a good conscience,
and, in our Gods great mercy, they shall be repossessed, when he thinks time. Was
not the glorious liberty of Doctrine and Discipline, exercised in this land,
sometime to it, that, which the Ark of God was to Israel; the glory, and
praise of it? which now is departing, and there is none (like Phinehas wife) to
mourn for it. Was not Scotland, albeit the meanest among many Nations, yet
renowned through the world, because Christ, in his Gospel of grace, was so
clearly borne out before our eyes in it? And, as Bethleem Ephrathah, albeit
little among the thousands of Judah, yet renowned, because Jesus was borne in it?
But now we are beating him down, putting him in ba^ds, covering his face as
though we were of purpose now to bury him again with the Jews. The Lord be
merciful to us: I need not insist in these things, which are more then
evident, whereof every one of us talks privily, albeit we speak no^ much of
them publicly.

I answer to the second question, that is, by whom our liberties are hurt? As
concerning our Sovereign, the Kings Majesty, he promised at his departure out
of this Country, and protested (as we hear) at that meeting late at Lieth^oe
by his Co^missioner, that it was no way his highness intention, to alter our
government, or to hurt our liberties. And to testify our entier, and sincere
love, reverence, and dutiful obedience to him, we preach with Christ, Math:
22.21: Give unto Caesar (our christian Caesar) that which is his, and unto God,
those things which are his. With Paul Rom: 13.1. Let every soul be subject
unto the higher power, which is of God, and ordained by him. With Peter 1. Pet:
2:17. Fear God, honor the King. We pray for him, that his throne may be
established with the Sun, and the Moon, in his own person, and Royal
offspring, till the Son of God set down his throne in the clouds, to judge
the quick, and the dead. And we will give to him more honor, then Saul
required of Samuel, when he desired, that he would but honor him before his
people 1. Sam. 15.30. Not only will we honor him before his people, but also
before the Lord in sincerity.

Well then, let us search out this hurt among our selves. The Lord has
appointed us to be the lights of the land, holding out his light, before this
darkened generation: to be the eyes for the body of his Church, to guide her
forward in the way of grace; but we have been, in a great measure, blind, and
darkness our selves. The Lord appointed us, to be the watchmen, set on the
walls of his Sion to see, foresee, blow the trumpet, and give warning to his
people, in time of danger: but we have been blind, and have not seen, and as
dombe doges who have not barked. The Lord appointed us to be builders of his
house, (the ground, corner, and headstone whereof is Jesus Christ) but we have
been breakers down of that, which our worthy predicessors, and we our selves
have builded up before, and so have made our selves transgressors, says the
Apostle Paul, Gal. 2.18 The Lord appointed us to be the keepers, and dressers
of his vineyard; but we, by our sloth and silence, have suffered the hedges
thereof to be broken down, and many wild grapes to grow therein. The Lord
appointed us to be the sheephards of his flock, to feed them, and lead them
out to the green pastures of his word and Sacraments: but we, in a great
measure, have been idle sheepheards, feading our selves, and forgetting the
flock, which Christ has purchased with his precious blood. Here is the cause
of our wounded and hurt liberties. This we confess in the sight of God, and
his Angels; for this we cry God mercy for Christ's sake. O that our heads were
full of water, and our eyes a fountain of tears, that we might weep day, and
night, and bewail this our misery, never ceasing and keeping silence, till our
God have mercy upon us.

But yet to search out more particularly the blame of our wounded liberties.
Albeit we be all inwrapped in the guiltines thereof, yet some are deaper in the
guiltines, then others. Who are these? Some of us not contented with our
standing in the Ministry, have clombe up to higher places both in Church and
Common wealth, then God has called us unto; through covetousnes seeking the
profitts of this present and perishing life; through ambition affecting the
preferments thereof, and imparity in power, and authority above their brethren;
who, to win to them preferment, have troubled the peace of Jerusalem, and
hurt the liberties thereof.

If any will say, it is parity (among Pastors) in power and authority, that is
the mother of confusion, and the breaker of unity; surely this is an unjust
sla^der of parity. For first it is the ordinance of God, who is the author both
of order, and peace. 1 Cor. 14.33. There was none of the Apostles in authority
above another: none of the Evangelists in authority above another: none of the
Pastors in authority above another; none of the Elders in authority above
another. For they who keep one ra^cke are in equal power. This practice has
the place of an ordinance. Yea examine that place well, Math. 20.25.26.27. and
out of Christ's speech to his Disciples, upon the occasion of the suit of the
sons of Zebedeus, by consequent ye shall draw out an ordinance. Secondly, if
any such thing fall out where parity is, the fault is not to be laid upon the
parity of power, but upon the imparity of spirits, which cannot satisfy
themselves with the place, and power, that God has give^ them. Thirdly, all
these imputations, may be laid justly upon imparity, which is the mother of
prid^ that never can keep unity, and peace Only through pride does a man make
contention, says Solomon, Prove. 13.10.

And if any will call to mind the times passed, when ever there has ben^ any
trouble or stir in our Church, they shall find, that the authors, and
instruments of it were ever some, who, through covetousnes and ambition (the
two banes of the church) have sought to themselves, a pre-eminence among their
brethren, whose deeds and Epitaphes may be a terror to those, who tread in
their footesteppes. And to strengthen the truth of this, we will borrow help
from the Evangelist John, 3. Ioh. 9.10. It appears that there was a great
stir in that Church, whereunto he writes; but who was the causer of it? One
Diotrephes says he. And what of him? He loved to have the pre-eminence among
them. And what did he? He pratled among them with malicious words. There is
his slander. What more? He received not the brethren, but ^orbad them that
would, and did thrust the^ ^ut of the Church. There is his injury. And it may
be also, he drew into the Church, against order, such as might be proppes to
his pride. Then if this one Diotrephes had been removed out of that Church, all
things had passed in peace, and quietness therein.

Now if we were charged upon life, and death, and in conscience before the Lord
(according to the weakness of our wit) to give a rule for the peace and
quietness of our Church; this it is: Either take away Demas and Diotrephes from
office in the Church: or take from them their evil humors of covetousnes and
ambition: or take away their honors, the objects of great benefices, and
Bishopprickes: and then if any be found, who shall trouble their heads to hatch
out an argument for the defense of so offensive a state; and if then peace
shall not be within the walls of Jerusalem, and prosperity within the palaces
thereof, we shall be content to bear the blame, and burden whatsoever.

Again if any will say, that all this may be mended by this one mean; to make
choice of the most wise, grave, godly, and zealous of the Ministry, and
promote the^ to those places (which make green, and unsettled wits quickly
forget themselves) and so all things shall go well, and be well governed:
Surely, we will not be so uncharitable as to think, that such men (albeit they
were lying at their feet) would stoop down to take them up, they being
clogged with so many inconvenie^ces. Again, as Paul says; Evil words
corrupt good manners; so we say, that evil courses will corrupt good men. For,
as long as a Minister keeps himself within the compass of his calling, in
humility and holiness serving the Lord his God, he has the gracious, and
fruitful blessing of his God attending on him, and his labors. But, how soon
soever he breaks the bounds thereof, seaking the world, and the profits, and
preferments thereof, the fruitful blessing departs, and the fearful curse
comes in the place thereof, to work upon him; and then we shall see, that, of
all men of the earth, such a Minister will become the most vain, worldly,
proud, and ambitious. And thus, of all this which has been spoken, we see,
that there is no preservatiue for us, but to stand fast in that liberty
wherewith Christ has made us free, that we be not entangled again with the
yoke of bondage.

Now to conclude this exercise; seeing we are met here to do the work of the
Lord, let us first remember, and consider from whence we are fallen, from what
degree of love, and liberty, that we may repent and do the first works, and
amend, least the Lord our God come against us shortly, and remove our
Candlestick out of his place. Again, If there be any consolation in Christ,
if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of spirit, if any compassion, and
mercy, let us be like minded, having the same love, being of one accord, and of
one judgment, that nothing be done through contention or vayneglory, but in
meeknes of mind, every one seeking not that which is his own, but that which
is Christ's etc. Thirdly, let our hearts and eyes be set upon the recompense
of the reward, that incorruptible crown of glory, which the chief sheapheard
Jesus shall bring with him in his hand, in his glorious appearance to crown
them who shall persevere, and be found faithful to the end; and not upon the
reward, that is in the hand of man, which is in it self corruptible, and
oftimes corruptes the minds of men, and draws them out of the right way.
Lastly, let us so speak here, and so do here, and so behave our selves here,
as if we were upon our last bed, making our last will, ready to give account,
not to man only, but to the Lord our God himself, both of the employment of
our life, and the using and keeping of this liberty, whereby our redeemer Jesus
Christ has made us free; To whom, with the Father, and spirit of grace, be
honor, praise, and glory for ever, and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

