THE LIFE OF THE MOST GODLY, VALIANT AND NOBLE Captain and maintener of the
true Christian Religion in France, JASPER COLIGNIE SHATIlion, sometime great
Admiral of France.

Translated out of Latin by Arthur Golding.

Imprinted at London by Thomas Vautrollier. 1576.

THE LIFE OF Jasper Colignie Shatilion, sometime great Admiral of FRANCE.
IN THE borders of Bresse not far from Burgundy, there is a Town of great
antiquity called Colonie, with a castle adjoining thereto, sometime of very
great strength, in respect whereof, in the time of our forefathers, it was
called in the vulgar tongue, the fortress, that is to say the bulwark or
defense of all the country about it. The Lords of that town and castle, were
after the accustomed manner of their auncetors, called the Lords of Colonie, but
afterward the name was corrupted among the Frenchmen, and they were called the
Lords of Colignie. It is an old opinion among the inhabiters there, and it
disagreeth not with Caesar's writings, that it is the same place wherein Caesar at
his arrival with his army in France, heard the Ambassadors of the Burgonions
and Niuernoys complaining of the Svvitzers for coming into France with an
army, and for wastinge their country. For the next hill retayneth the name of
Julius, and is called Iules mount unto this day, and the town hard by it is
named Cesaree. This is certain, that the Lords of Colignie had very great
lands and possessions in old time in that country, and that the Towns of
Nau^tua and Mouluet and all the territories of those Cities were under their
jurisdiction. Whereof many other things are a record, and specially the
standard of measures, which bear the name of Colignie measures, even unto this
day, in the Towns, villages and manors thereabouts, and are received from that
Colignie by the inhabitants of those parts, The arms or cognizance of the
house of Colignie, which they give after the ancient manner of noble and
worshipful families, is a crowned Eagle: and it is certain that that house
had the right of souereintie, (which after the custom of antiquity is called
Royalties) so as they had power of life and death over the folk of their
seniorie, with authority to pardon such as were condemned to die, and to coin
money stamped with the mark of the crowned Eagle, and to rayze taxes and
subsidies upon their tenaunts and fermors when need required. Therefore
according to their so great ability, they fownded a great number of Religious
howses whom they indewed with very great revenues: among which was the
Abbey of Marent, situate in the Earldome of Avvssone: the Abbeys of Momerline
and Shelliom in the Country of Bresse: and Colignie in Burgundy, all which
they indewed with like privileges and fraunchizes, as the house of Colignie it
self had: and so did they also to diverse towns, as Treffort, Iasseron, S.
German, Damberie, Amburney, and Pounsignie whose inhabiters hold still the
right given to them by the Lords of Colignie, even unto this day.

In the Abbey of Marent are certain ancient Registers that make mention of
Hubberd of Colignie, who in the year of our Lord a thousand a hundred and
sixandfortie, accompanying the Emperor Conrade the third then going with a
great army into the East to recover Jerusalem, came home again for certain
causes, and preparing himself soon after to return thither, carried with him
five Sons, Gvvirik, William, Hubberd, Gvvy, Dalmace, and Bernard. By the
same Registers and by the wrytings and Registers of other Abbeyes, it appears
that Gvvirik had a Son called Hubberd which was Lord of Colignie and Andelot,
who had issue Amedey, the father of Steven, who had issue John, and he another
Steven,, and he another John, of whom came James, and of him William which
obtained the Baronie commonly called Mount S. Iohnes in Burgundy, and was Lord
of the town and castle of Shatilion in France, which town stands upon the
river of Loyng.

Of this William descended John, and of John, Jasper the father of this our
Jasper. For this pedegre of that noble and renowned house conteyninge welneare
five hundred years, is kept safe in Registers, and in the wrytings of the same
family. Jasper the father of this our Jasper flourished under King Frauncis
the first, and had to wife Loys Memorancie, the sister of Annas Memorancie high
Cunstable of France: and because he had a house in the Castle that stands by
the Town of Shatilion he was called the Lord Shatilion, by means whereof the
same syrname is conveyed to his children and posterity. Of this man's prowess,
Martine Bellay a valiant gentleman which wrate the french stories of his time,
gives a notable testimony. For in the second book of his commentaries, he
writes in manner to this effect.

In the year of our Lord 1522, the Admiral Bonniuet had taken Fontarabbie in
the Marches of Spain. But as soon as he was returned into France, and had
brought home his power with him: the Spanyardes fell too beseeging of the Town
with a great army. By which seege when the Townsmen were brought too extreme
penury of all things, for it had continewed about twelve moonethes, and it is
certain that a great number perished through famine for want of food, so that
the matter stood in great extremity: the King having intelligence thereof,
commanded the Marshall Shatilion too leuye an army in all haste, and too go
too the reskew of them that were beseeged. The Shatilion having mustered his
army, sped him thitherward in all haste. Howbeeit when he came near Bayon, he
was taken with a sore sickness, whereof he dyed, too the great loss of the
Realm of France. For he was a man of great experience in Martial affairs,
and carried great countenance of authority with him. Thus much says Bellay.
This Jasper died in a town commonly called Ax the sixth of August in the year
1522. leaving behynd him three sons, Odet, Jasper and Frauncis.

As touching Loyse his wife, this is worthy of rememberance, that having led
a holy life, insomuch as she was counted an example of womanhod, and was
Lady of Honor (as they term it) too Queen Helenor wife of King Frauncis the
first: at her death she gave this record of the true and pure religion which
she had embraced. For whereas she had this saying of David's Psalm always in
her mouth, And his mercy indureth from generation too generation toward them
that fear him: she warned her eldest son Odet Shatilion, which was then
alredye made a Cardinal, and utterly forbade him too suffer any sacrifyzer or
massepreest too come in her presence, telling him that it was reveled unto her
by Gods singular benefyte, both how she should woorship him after a godly
manner, and also how she should depart out of the prizon of this body, unto
the heavenly country. She deceassed at Paris the year of our Lord.1547. in
the house which is now called Memorancie house. Odet the eldest of her sons,
was in the.xvj. year of his age created Cardinal, (as is said before) by Pope
Clement the seventh, (who thought the nobleness of that house fit for the
stablishment of his own estate in France) and rewarded with very great and
rich benefices by the King. By means whereof, the second son, whose name was
Jasper (as I said before) obtained the prerogative that was dew too the eldest
son. This Jasper was borne the year of our Lord 1517. the.xvj. day of
February, whom for the wonderful towardness of vertew and wit which he
showed being yet a child, his moother after the decease of his father, cawsed
too be brought up in lerning from his tender years, putting him too school
to Master Nicolas Berald, who bare the cheef fame for lerning in those days
through all France, cawsing him moreover too be trained up in feats of
arms, by the skllfullest teachers and masters of Chivalry that she could
get.

Jasper being trained up in such instructions, when he came to the.xxiiii.
year of his age, showed wonderful forewardnesse in the seege of Bains,
beseeged by King Frauncissis eldest son, commonly called the Dolphin. Bellay
in the tenth book of his History, reports that about the year of our Lord
1543, he was stricken in the throat by his enemies with a pellet of lead, as he
adventured too near the diche. The same year when word was browght too the
King, that the state of his affairs in Piemou^t was such, as it was like that
they should come too a pitched feeld with their enemies, he craved leave of
him, and ryding thither in post, gave great proof of his prowess in that
battle (which is commonly called the battle of Cerisoles) as the same Bellay
records in the said tenth book of his commentaries. By reason whereof, within
feawe years after, Henrye the son of King Frauncis, did put him in cheef
authority. For when Annas Memorancie the Uncle of Jasper, was General of the
men of arms, he gave this man the charge of the French footmen: which office
is in the common language called the Colonel of the footmen. He behaved
himself in such wyze in that room, as he purchaced himself great commendacion
for his Justice, Ualeantnesse, and wisdom within feawe moonethes after, and
got the good wills of all the people of France. For whereas erst it was grown
intoo a most wicked custom, that the souldyers might run gadding every
where under their antsignes, and make havoc and spoil of all things: Jasper
tied them too streyter orders of warlyke disciplyne, thereby too restreyne their
ouer-licentiowse dealings, and specially too repress the liberty of their
cursed swearing and blasphemy: wherthrough the seed of true godliness and
religion appeered alreedie in his heart. And forasmuch as those laws or orders
were very well lyked of all good men: shortly after, they were proclaimed by
the Kings commandment and in his name, and enrolled in the book of the Kings
laws. About the same time the same King advanced him too the honor which is
now utterly imbaced, but at that time was counted a room of great estimation,
namely too be one of the Knights of the order.

At the same season there fell a grudge between Henrye King of France, and
Henrye King of England for the Town of Bullen. Therefore when the King of
France distrusted the Inglishmen, he betoke the ordering of that Country, and
almost of the whole matter to the Shatilion. Upon the receyt of which
commission, he went immediately intoo Picardie, whither King Henrye had sent his
host too beseege the Town, and by singular policy bwilded a forte near the
Town, which might be both a defense too the Frenchmen, and a great let too
keep the townsmen from issewing out. That forte is yet still called the
Shatilion, of the bwilders name: and it was a great furtherance too the
winning of the Town. Therefore it was not long after, ere the Inglishmen began
too treat of composition: the commission of the making whereof was committed
wholly to the Shatilion, and too his uncle Mounsyre de Rochepote. When he had
dispatched these matters, he returned too the Court, and within feawe years
after was made Lord Admiral of France, which is counted the cheifest dignity
within the Realm, because he has the cheef rule of the Sea that beats
upon France, and the charge of the Kings Navy and of all his seamen and
seamatters. Also the King made him his Lieuetennant of two shyres, that is too
wit of Picardie and of the I Will of France, inhonoring him furthermore with the
Capteinship of the men of arms, and making him one of the Lords of his privy
counsel.

The next year following which was the.1554. the Emperor of Germany Charles
the fifth, and Marie Queen of England joining their forces together, made sore
and sharp war upon Henrye King of France. The Shatilion was chozen by the
consent of all good men, as the only man that was able to resist so great
enemies by his prowess and policy. Therefore the ordering of that most
sharp and terrible war, which concerned Picardie most of all, was committed
by the King to the Admiral, that he should rayze a power and govern the
marches of the Lovvecountrie. Through the li^king together of the forces of so
mighty enemies, and the opinion that was had of the Emperor Charles, who was
renowned over all the world, the whole realm of France was stricken in great
fear, because the King was utterly unprovided both of money and of other
things needeful for the mayntena^ce of war, and no man dowted but that
France was likely to go presently to wrecke, consideringe the great
distress of all things. Whereof when the Admiral had both advertised the
King, and communicated it to his friends, he thought it best to salve the
matter with sum truce. The King and his Counsel lyking well of this his
deuyse, committed the handling of the matter to him, and he wtin few days
brought it to pass to the incredible joy and gladness of all the Realm, and
to his own singular praise for preserving of his country, because the
conditions of the truce were both honorable and very profitable to the Realm.

About the same time the Guyses of the house of Lorrein, which made their vaunt
that the kingedome of Sicilie and Naples belonged to them of right, and that it
was wrongefully wrested from them by the Spaniardes, made the King believe, that
now of late years they had won the hearts of the most part of the
nobility of Naples, partly by liberality and partly by fair promises, and
that by their means the King should have easy entrance into ye Realm, so
that if he would grant them a part of his power, it would come to pass, that
those kingdoms should in short time be brought under his Dominion, without
any great truble. Thus through counsel of the Guyses,, the truce that was
sworn a few months before, was broken to the great dishonor of the
french nation: which falsehod the Admiral took grievously and sore to heart,
oftentimes protestinge that such periuries had always bred mischief in the
end, and that God had in all ages been a most severe revenger of such
forswearings. To the furtherance whereof, he was compelled by the Kings
commandment, to fall to practices of war in his province, against the peace
and against his own promise. Hereoutof sprung first privy hartburning,
afterward an entrance to the open hatred yt was betwixt them. Also this was a
furtherance thereof, that whereas the King had granted a combat between two
Gentlemen in the borders of Picardie, although the Duke of Guyse was then
present, yet the Shatilion thought it stood him on hand so to deal, as he
himself might be chief vmper in the matter, because the chalendge was to be
performed in his province. Moreover, another cause of the Guyses hatred is
reported to be this: that whereas in their youth they had been linked together
with singular familiarity, insomuch that to testify their friendship with all,
they went appareled in like raiment: the Duke of Guyse asked the Admiralls
advice how he liked of his brother the Duke of Aumalls intent, in purpozing to
marry the Seneschall of Valentinoes dawghter, who was highly in King Henry's
favor, and as highly diffamed among good men. To whom the Admiral answered,
that he made more account of an ynch of good name, then of never so great
riches: which saying of the Admirals the Duke of Guyse and the Duke of Aumall
took in great displeazure, as though it had been spoken to bar the house of
Gvvyse from greater power preferment and pre-eminence.

Howbeit when the King was aduertized that the Spaniards levied men of war
in the frontiers of the Low countries, and that their forces assembled into
one place: he thought it most for the safety of Picardie, to send the
Admiral thither out of hand with an army, whom we have showed already to have
btn the Lieuete^nant of that Country. He had scarsly marched two days
journey, but he was certified by his espialls, that the Spaniards were minded
to beseege S. Quintines a town of Picardie not vnrenowmed, and to batter it
out of hand with great store of dubble Canons. Therwithall he had word sent
him by Brullio the Captain of the Castle of Ham, that as soon as the
townsmen had tidings thereof, there rose such a fear throughout all the City,
that many householders left their wives, children and all other things behind
them, and took them to flight. When the Admiral heard that, yet he thought
it meet to conceal it among his men of war, and pretending great
lustiness of courage, marched on in great iourneys toward S. Quintines. When
Iernacke, and Lusarche whom the Admiral had made Lieuetenna^t of the men at
arms dissuaded him from it with many words, declaringe unto him that the
town was nether well fortified nor well vitteled, and moreover that the
townsmen were stricken in fear, and a great power of the enemies would be
come thither before any thing could be provided for the defense of the town,
and therefore it was more for their commodity and praise to maintain the
wars in the open field, than to study how to save them selves cooped up
within walls: the Admiral being no whit moved with those words of theirs,
continued in his purpozed exployt, declaring to them, of how great importance
yt town was, both to the puttinge back of the Spanish force from the
destruction of his country, and to the safety of his province: and how great
occasion of speech he should give to spiteful and malicious persons, if he
should alter his purpoze. The next day word was brought him, yt the most
part of the sowldiers which were appointed to him by the Kings commandment
for the defense of the town, and whom he had sent one night before him to
cheer up the hearts of ye townsmen, had hid them selves in ye next woods for
fear, and were slipped every man home too his own house by bywayes. That day
therefore there followed him no mo but a hundred and twenty, whom six score mo
followed the next day. Whereof the enemies having intelligence by their skowts,
came too the town in haste, and dividing their woorks, began too make a
trenche about it. When they had taken certain little cotages in the suburbs,
and drew near too the dyches with their wynding trenches: the Admiral making
a salye out upon them, commanded faggots and fyrebronds too be thrust intoo
those howses, and set them on fire, whereby he drove the enemy further of. The
next day when he had vewed all parts of the town, and found no bulwarks, no
rampyres, no towers of defense: he began too distrust the town, and too be
afraid of long seege. Nevertheless, forasmuch as the case stood so with him,
that he was driven either too defend the town, and too stop the rage of the
enemies from the destroying of his country, or else too dye manfully in the
quarrel: look what was possible for him too deuyze and bring too pass by
care, travel and watching, he did it: not ouerslipping any thing in making of
fortifications, in cutting of trenches, and in rayzing up rampyres euerywhere.
And too the intent too give example of peynfulnesse and travel too the
townsmen, and too his sowldyers, and too the Gentlemen that came with him: he
was the first man that did set hand too the woorks, and never departed from
them til they were ended. While he was in this perplexity, soodeinly unlooked
for, news was brought him that Mounsyre d'Andelot his brother (of whom mention
is made before) was comme intoo the town, and had browght about.500. sowldyers
with him. Besides this, the King being aduertized from him, intoo how great
peril the Town seemed too be browght, commanded the Constable too hye him
thither with certain Gwidons of horsemen, and too carry in vittells with him,
and too fortifye the town with a greater garrison. But the Spaniards co^passing
him with a greater company of Launceknyghts, and with a great power of
footmen, overcame him in battle, and took him prizoner, and having made a
great spoil of his men, drove the rest back agein further intoo France.
Upon the report of which news in the town, such a fear struck into the
hearts of al me^, yt the Admiral could scarce do any good with his
incoragements. Being moved with sorrow herat, and grieved with so great
peril of his country, he called his people toogither, and told them that more
regard was too be had of their country then of life: and thervppon he took
an oath of them all, as well the townsmen as his souldyers, that it should be
death for any of them too make mention of yielding, and that it should be
lawful for every man too kill such a one unpunished. He himself took the oath
first of all. The Spaniards being puffed up with so great a victory, returned
too the seege of the town, and never left beating of it with great ordinance by
the space of.20. days toogither, and moreover made wynding trenches about the
walls, wherein too comme covertly and privily to the ditches. When the Admiral
saw that the most part of the wall was cast down with the continual battery,
and a great breach open into the town, and the enemies ready to give the
assault: he encouraged his soldiers to abide that one brunt, saying that if
they foiled their enemies at that time, they would not be over hasty to
adventure again: and thereupon he him self stood to defense where he saw the
breach wydest, assigninge the other parts of the town to his brother and to
the rest of his friends to defend. The enemies beholding so strong a
cou^terforce on that side, assaulted the town on two other sides. Whereof when
tydinges was brought to the Admiral, he left such as he trusted best at his
standinge, and hyed him to the next, where he found his men driven away, and
the place gotten by his enemies, and a part of the City pestered with armed
men. There was with him a noble young gentleman called Auentignie, whom he had
brought up in his house of a child, and a page, and a child of a noble house
that bare his iauelin, which were suddeinly assailed and inclozed about by
certain Spaniards, who having knowledge of the Admiral, took him prizoner,
and after the winning of the town, conveyed him to Antwerp: where being
attached with sore sickness and vexed forty days with an agewe, at such
times as his fitts left him, he commanded a Bible to be brought unto him, to
ease the grief and sorrow of his mind with reading of it. And he studied so
much upon it, that he began from thensforthe to have a taste of yt pure
religion and true godliness, and to learn the right manner of calling upon God.

When he had paid fifty thousand pound for his ransom, and was come home
agein from captivity, having gotten some leyzure, and being weery of the
broils of the Court, he set his mind earnestly thensforth upon Religion, and
by the Kings permission gave over his Colonelship of the footmen to his
brother Mounsyre d' Andelot, and his Lieuetennantship of the I Will of France too
his Neuew the Marshal Memorancie, his sisters son by the Cunstable. And it
was not long after ere he sent a familiar free^d of his too the King,
certifying him in most humble wise, that he was minded too give up his charge
in Picardie, and beseeching him too look well about him too whom he committed
it. The King answered yt he thought this sewt of his very strange, and that he
dealt not wizely in dispossessing of him self of so many rooms and offices at
once. From thensforth many began to suspect the Admiral that he had changed
his religion, and in deed he showed a mind utterly void of all ambition and
desire of authority.

Within a while after, King Henry dyed, and his son Frauncis succeeded. This
Frauncis had taken too his wife Mary Queen of Scotts, the dawghter of the Duke
of Gvvysis sister, by reason whereof the house of Gvvyse grew in great favor
and authority with the King, and oftentimes bragged to him of the kingdom of
Ingland, which they affirmed to belong too their said kinswoman, so that in the
Court they were commonly called the Kings Uncles. The Admiral knowing their
cruel, barbarous, and feerce nature, and perceiving that they would never
desist from troubblesum deuyses, and specially that they would most eagrely
persecute religion, stacke to his accustomed purpoze, and determined to give up
his liefte^nantship. Heruppo^ he brake his mind to Lewis of Burbon a Prince of
the blud royal, co^only called ye Prince of Codey, who had married his sisters
dawghter, counselling him to sew to the King for yt charge.

So the Admiral being discharged of diverse cares, and set free from a number of
affairs, which withdrew his godly mind from the study of religion, kept
himself at home in his castle of Shatilion, and that so much ye willinglier,
because his wife Sharlot de Lauall a woman of a noble and ancient stock, was
wonderfully given to the following of godliness, (which he took too be a
singular benefit of God) insomuch that she even incoraged her husband too
forsake supersticion and the worshipping of Idols, and to embrace the
christian religion with his whole heart. When the Admiral perceived that she dealt
often and very earnestly with him in the matter, he himself also determined to
deal earnestly with her at once. And therefore he told her in many words, yt in
all his life he never saw or heard of any man either in Germany or in
France, but he was in danger too be overwhelmed with great miseries and
calamities, if he embraced the religion any thing earnestly: and that the Laws
of King Frauncis the first, and of King Henry the second, being looked to most
straightly in all Courts of Justice, commanded that all such as were condemned
of that Religion, should be burned quick in public places, and all their
goods be forfeyted to the King: and yet nevertheless he trusted that his heart
was so settled, as he should not refuze the common case of all the protestants,
nor fail of his dewtie. She answered that the case of the protestants of that
time, was none other then the case of the true Christians of all ages had bin:
nether dowted she but it should be the same still to the worlds end. When they
had plyghted their faithes on both sides each to other, the Admiral began by
little and little to frame his household and familiar friends to the knowledge of
God by godly speeches, and to deliver them not only the holy bible, but also
other books written of religion in french, to read, forbidding them all
swearing and blasphemous banning, commonly used in the Realm of France, but
specially among ye Courtiers. Moreover he set godly gouerners and teachers over
his children, so that wtin a few months ye house of Shatilion was of a new
hew and his other two brothers, Odet (whom I have showed before to have bin
made a Cardinal) and Mounsyre d'Andelot were greatly inflamed to religion by
that example. For ye Admiral had always even from his young years, bin
trained up in ye pleazures and corrupt manners of the Kings Court, and he was
not thought to have bin clear of that infection. Notwithstanding, when he once
began to have a taste of the true religion, there appeered sodeinly so great
an alteration in his life and conversation, as a man might easily perceive the
force of Gods spirit in that so sodein change, and find this saying of Christ's
too be most true, that they which are indewed with Gods spirit, are after a
sort borne ageine and made new men. And this seems worthy of memory, that
befell him before he durst prepare too the Christian feast and Sacrament of
the Lords supper. He had oftentimes talked with all the best learned Ministers
of the French Churches, not only of transsubstantiation (as the Sorbonists
term it) but also of consubstantiation: and like as the nature of man's wit
is too seek some local and bownded presence of the Godhead too be worshipped
in some certain places, after which sort God exhibited his presence in old
time in the arc of the covenant: so the Admiral required a certain mingled
presence of Christ's body flesh blud and bone in the bread and the wine. At
length when he had bin at a Sermon that was made privily to a few in the town
of Vateuille, at the end whereof the Lords supper was to be ministered, he
besought such as were present, that they would not be offended at his
infirmity, but pray to God for him, and therewith all he requested the preacher
to treat a little playnlier of the mystery of the supper. Then the preacher
spoke to this effect: namely that of the Lords supper there were two parts: the
one humane and natural, which is seen with the eyes of the body, and the
other divine and heavenly which is seen with the eyes of the mind: and that
the first consisted of the minister or giver, and of bread and wine, and
furthermore of the eating and drinking of them, whereof the whole action was
performed after an humane and natural manner: and this other consisted of God
the giver of it, and of the whole fruit of the crucified, requickened, and
glorified body of Christ, which fruit God gave in the supper, and moreover of
the faith and belief whereby ye said fruit was received of Christians, ye whole
action whereof was mystical, and performed after a divine, heavenly, and
supernatural mean. And furthermore that forasmuch as the same action was
ordained, not for the bread and wynes sake, but for the Christian man's sake,
and was to be referred too that end: it was in vain to be ouercurious in
seeking whether any thing be mixed in the bread, with ye bread, under the
bread, within the bread or about the bread. The bread and wine belonged to the
outward doing, like as water and the dipping in it, do in Baptim. Therefore the
minds of men ought too be lifted up too the heavenly and inward action, and to
consider what God woorketh in yt Sacrament, which thing Paul shows in these
words. Is not ye bread which we break the parttaking of Christ's body? and
they must cry out with him, It is a secret mystery, importing the conjunction
of Christ and his Church. And finally it is very trewly said of Austin yt to
eat the meat which perishes not, but abides unto everlasting life, is too
believe in Christ. Why preparest thou teeth and belly? believe, and thou have
eaten. And agein: prepare not thy jaws, but thy heart. That is it wherewith
that supper is to be eaten. Behold, we believe in Christ, whom we receive by
faith. By which words the Admiral being taught, gave thanks first to God and
secondly to the congregation, determining with him self too be present at the
communion as soon as it should be ministered agein, and too be made parttaker
of that most holy mystery. Whereof when the fame was blown abroad over all
France, it is wonderful to say how great joy and comfort all the
congregations conceived. For although that unto that time the followers of the
reformed religion were afflicted with most rigorous edicts of the Kings, and with
continual persecutions and punishments of the judges and Iusticers of the
Realm, so as they were feign too keep privy assemblies after the manner of the
primitive Churches: yet was religion maruelously spread abroad throughout all
the Shyres of France, whereof a man may see many records in the Edicts or
Proclamations of King Henry, and of King Frauncis the second, who make
complaint in them, that the more labor they took after the example of
Frauncis the first, in repressing the religion, ye more it krepeth foreward
from day to day, sheading it self into all parts of the Realm, and growing
still stronger and stronger.

Ere it was long after, there roze a commotion at Amboys, and many noblemen
conspyred the destruction of ye house of Gvvyse, whose ouerlustines and
lordlines a number of ye french nobility and Lords could no longer away with,
now when as the Prince of Condey seemed to aly that way, and there was so me
likely hode that his brother the King of Navarre would make some stir ere
long after: the house of Guyse thought it most expedient, that the King should
call an assembly of the noble men at the town of Fountaynbleavve, to know how
every man was minded concerning religion. When the day of that meeting came,
which was the xxiiii. of August 1560. and yt the King desired such as sat in
counsel with him to say their judgments: the Admiral rising out of his
place, and coming honorably unto the King, did put up two supplications
entitled after this manner: The supplication of such as worship God rightly
and godlily, throughout diverse provinces of this Realm. Both the books were
delivered too Mounsyre de l'Avvbespyne the Kings Secretary, to read them
alowd as they were written. This deed of the Admirals, for the strangeness
of the matter, and in respect of the former times that he had past, and of the
Kings mind which was most extremly bent against religion, and of the great
authority of the house of Guyse, seemed somewhat with the boldest, both to the
King and too the whole counsel. The effect of the books was this: That the
godly and right worshippers of God taking the opportunity of that time,
besought the Kings majesty most humbly to extend his clemency and
gentleness toward the greatest number of his subjects, who having thitherto
bin combred with many distresses, had abidden many miseries and bitter brunts for
religions sake: beseeching him most humbly, too vowtsafe too take intelligence
of their case, and too admit the holy scripture too the judgment of so great
controversies: for thereby he should eazely perceive how greatly they abhorred,
not only heresy, of which crime they had bin accuzed of late years, but also
sedition: forasmuch as in the uttermost extremity of all their mizeries, they
minded not too resort too violence and force of arms, but too the only
clemency and goodness of the King. Wherefore it might pleaze his majesty too
inhibit the judgments that were wont too be executed upon them, wherthrough
no part of his Realm had escaped these former years, vnimbrewed with the blud
of his subjects, by reason whereof their state had thithertoo bin miserable,
forasmuch as they were driven too plead their case before such judges, as
being the Bishop of Romes benefyzed and feed men, did rather bear the
persons of adversaries than of vpryght judges or indifferent vmpers: and
therefore they prayed him too have an eye to the great number of the calamities
of his friends and leege people, which had always acknowledged him for their
King and most merciful Lord, and earnestly and godlily honored him according
too Gods commandment, and would not refuze too spend their lives herafter for
the mayntenance of his estate, if need should require: in respect whereof it
was good right, that seeing God had committed them too his charge and trust, he
should defend them from the ouermyghtinesse and cruelty of their adversaries:
And their humble petition was, that thensforth they might with his good favor
openly woorship God in public places, and be instructed in the knowledge of
true godliness by their preachers, and enjoy the Sacraments that God has
ordained, least for want of being known, their religion might any longer lie
open too the malicious speeches of their adversaries, bycawse of their secret
meetings.

Upon the reading of these books, every man uttered his opinion, howbeeit
their talk was not so much of Religion, as of the great debt wherewith they
complained that the king was in manner oppressed and overwhelmed. But the
Admiral spoke many things very boldly, specially concerning ye men of war
which ye house of Gvvyse had gathered toogither in the heart of the realm,
under color of garding the kings person, as thowgh the King were in a
strange country, and not in his own dominion, and therefore needed so great a
guard for the safety of his person. Saying that the name of king was of so
great preeminence in France, that any herault coming with commission in the
kings name, was able too appeaze any uproar without further trubble. It is
certain that this speech of the Admirals sank very deep intoo the stomachs
of the Gvvisians, and that it kindled their hatred against him the more
vehemently. Diverse other were of opinion, that it were most convenient too
summon a general assembly of the whole Realm, which they commonly term ye
assembly of the States: and it was showed, specially by Marilliak archbishop of
Vien, and by Michaell de l'Hospitall, Lord Chauncelour of France, whose
authority bare greatest sway at that time, that the same had bin the most
ancient and co^tinewall custom of the Frenchmen, and yitnotwithsta^ding had
bin omitted by the space of.87. years, through the slanders of certain
flatterers.

About the same time dyed king Frauncis the second, and his yoonger brother
Charles the nyneth being about ten years old, succeeded him, and byandby the
old petition of Summoning a general Council was renewed. Untoo that time
Katherine Medicee the kings moother, a Florentine borne, had lived in such
state as Queens are wont to do in their widowhoods, that is too wit, as a
commau^der of her own women, and a keeper of the person of her son: but in
no wyze admitted too have too do with matters of the state: and at that point
was she hild most streytly by the Gwisians, as long as they bare chief sway.
Now forasmuch as at this time it seemed that the nobility of France woold not
any longer endure the burnings, tormentings, and other punishments that were
wont too be executed upon the protestants, and therefore it was too be
dowted least some new commotions woold ryze thereof: because the Queen moother
pretended a mind not ildispozed toward religion: The Admiral labored by all
means possible, and at length brought it to pass, yt she was matched as a
companion and partaker of yt great charge of government, with Antonie King of
Navarre, too whom the Protectorship of the Realm was committed. Which deuyce
of his, there were many men that loved well their country, which mislyked,
showing by the hystories of all ages, that the government of the Realm was
never yet committed to Queen Mothers, specially if they were strangers borne,
but it was too the undoing and destruction of the commonweal of France, and
a cause of civil discord.

When the day of the General Counsel came, he that spoke in the name of the
Nobility, did in the end of his Oration offer up a book of supplication too
the Kings majesty, requesting that the pure religion (which they term commonly
the reformed Re:ligion) might lawfully be haunted and exercyzed openly in
public places. Her against stood up an adversary called Quintin, a Doctor
of the Canon law, and a professor of it in Paris, who (not making, but
rehercing in writing, a very long oration in the name of the Clergy, not
without pro^pting of sum preests that stood ready at his elbowe, too whisper
him in the ear when he was at any stop): was so bold as too say, yt all
such as demanded public places too exercyze religion in, were worthy too
be punished as traitors and favorers of newfownd religion. Whereof when the
Admiral had complained too the kings Counsel: Quintin being afraid, confessed
that he had not spoken any thing of his own head at that time, but only
reherced the book as it was delivered him in writing by the Clergimen,
offering himself ready too protest and avow in the same open assembly before
the Kings Majesty, that he meant not any thing at all of the Admiral: which
thing was done within a feawe days after, and so the Admiralles demand was
satisfied. At the last, all Magistrates of France, and all that had commission
too execute Justice, were commanded by the kings authority, that they should
out of hand dismiss all such as were held in ward or prizon for religions
sake: and they were streytly forbidden too molest any man herafter for
religion. As towching the public places where it should be lawful for them
too have Sermons, the determination thereof was put over too another General
Counsel, which was appointed too be at Ponthoyse a town of Picardie, but not
performed. The month of January next insewing, a meeting of all the Princes
and noble men of France was summoned too be at S. Germans, and there by the
aduyce of certain counselors of every Parliament, an Edict was made by ye
kings authority, and proclaimed throwghowt all France, that it should be
lawful too exercyze the religion in the Suburbs of all Towns.

When this Edict was published, and the realm seemed too be settled in
quietness, and the common weal too have taken sum breath ageine, so as
Sermons began too be preached peaceably and quietly in the suburbs almost of
all great towns, yea and even of Paris it self: news was browght that the
Duke of Gvvyse, who had at that time withdrawn himself intoo Shampayne, had
made a slawghter about.200. men at Vassey, as they were at a Sermon upon trust
of the authority of the kings Edict, and were singing of Hymns after the end
of common prayer in a certain berne. The Duke of Gvvyse is reported too have
executed this butcherly cruelty, upon presumption of the new friendship of the
king of Navarre, whose weak mind he had drawn unto him by warranting him the
kingdom of Sardinia, and bownd him unto him by many other promises. Therefore
presuming upon that trust, within feawe days after, he came too the Court,
accompanied with his brothers and with a great train of armed men: and there
took the young king and his moother, who seemed too shun that violence with
great lamentation and weeping, whom he conveyed first too Melune, and anon
after too Paris.

In that time the Queen Moother sent messengers often times too the Admiral,
and also wrate with her own hand too the Prince of Condey, that he should
succor her and her young children, and have a care of the welfare of the
realm. The Prince being moved with these things, and moreover persuaded by the
intreatance of most of the noblemen of France, determined too put on arms,
and too make war upon the house of Gvvyse, too set the King at liberty:
protesting oftentimes openly, that he feared not the slanderous speeches of
some men, as thowgh he meant too enlarge the religion by force of arms, or too
make war against the king being a child. For a general assembly of the whole
realm had bin hild at Orleance, wherein both the commons and the nobility had
required the reformation of Religion, and afterward an Edict was made in that
great assembly, that it should be lawful too exercyze the same in suburbs
and villages. And what right in the kingdom of France, had the Duke of Gvvyse
being borne in Lorreine? Or upon what grownd should he presume, too execute
such cruelty upon the kings subjects? Finally, there was no good too be
done against force but by force: and therefore he himself did not move war,
but by war defend peaceable people against war made upon them. Saying it
was already bruted over all France, and also reported intoo Germany, that the
Duke of Nemovvrs at the provocation of the Gvvisians, had with fair words
intyced Henrye the kings brother a little child, (who since that time was
created king of Poole) too have conveyed him out of the precint of the Realm:
(which purpoze and drift the child bewrayed too his moother, and so that
discovery of yt matter was at yt time in all men's mouths) and that the
Gwisians despyzing the authority of ye general assembly and of the king,
executed butcherly cruelty at Vassey with extreme fury and pride: laid
violent hands upon the king and Queen moother, and carried them away against
their wills to Melune and Paris, as seemed most for the Gwisians commodity,
went intoo the borders of Germany a little before, and requested certain
princes of Almanie too be admitted intoo the number of the Protestants:
Invited Christopher Duke of Wirttemberg a prince of great courage and wisdom
too Sauerne a town next too Strawsborow: where the Cardinal of Loreine made
two such Sermons openly in the Church before the said Prince and a great
number of the professers of the religion, both Germans and Frenchmen, as he
persuaded very many, that both he himself and also his brethren embraced the
Religion, and were desirous too profess their names among the protestant
princes.

When these things were known, the prince of Condeyes enterpryze was so well
lyked in many places of France, that within feawe days diverse Cities yielded
themselves too him, and joined with him in society of the war. Among those
were Orleance, Bloys, Towers, Burgis, Roan, Lions, Vien, Valentia, Nemowrs, and
Mountalbon: which were the beginners of the Civil war, whereof the butcherly
slawghter of Vassey is certainly known too have bin the cawse. Now when as on
the part of the protestants, the cheef charge of the wars was by common
consent of all men put too the Prince of Condey: soodeinly the Prince with like
consent of all men, surrendered the charge of his government too the Admiral:
and for the singular opinion that was had of his Justice, gravity and wisdom,
ordained him too be his leeuetennant and deputy too rule in his sted. While
these things were a doing, the Queen moother began too treat of peace, for
the doing whereof she desired the Prince of Condey too come too her tent: and
to grant her the use of Boigencie, for a few days, which town has a bridge
over the river of Loyre, and therefore was (as she said) most fit for
communication. The Prince upon single promis made unto him, without taking of
any pledges, but only trusting to the faythfulnesse of his brother the King of
Navarre, and too the promises of the Queen mother, went to their Ca^pe. Only
he desired ye Queen, that the Cunstable, the Duke of Gvvyse, and the marshall
of S. Andrews, (which were commonly called the three rooters up of the common
weal) should depart out of the Camp while that communication lasted. Which
thing being done the garrison was withdrawn out of Boigencie and the town
delivered to the Queen. Byandby she manned it, and pretending a
communication, to outward show of peace and reconcylement, not only retained
the Prince, but also took the town and fortified it with all things needful
for the war. With which treachery the Admiral being sore moved, determined
not to fail in his dewtie toward the Prince, but went out of hand with his
horsemen to the Camp of his adversaries, and struck such a terror into them,
that the Queen commanded ye Prince too be delivered immediately. And within a
few days after, the Admiral leading his army too Boigencie woone the town
by force, and not without sum loss of his own people, recovered it agein.

About the same time, the Admiralls eldest son named Jasper being consumed
with sickness, dyed at Orleance scarce nine years old, but of singular
towardness, which cawsed the Admiral too take his death very sore to heart, In
the mean while ye Gvvysians seeing them selves forsaken of many Frenchmen whom
the case concerned, and perceiving that the most part favored the Prince of
Condey, minded too seek help of foreign Realms. And therefore sending money
into Svvisserland and into Germany, they hired footmen of the one, and horsemen
of the other: which thing the Admiral did oftentimes avow to be a most sure
proof of treason, and of their enemy like mind to the Crown of France. For
whither the case (quoth he) be to be decyded by the ancient manner of the
Realm, there are public decrees in force made by act of parliament, the
authority whereof is certainly known to have bin highest, ever since the
settling of the kingdom of France, or if the matter be to be committed to
rightful indifferency of challenge, who sees not that the greater part of
France is on our side? and that to call in foreign forces to oppress our own
countrymen, is not the nature of a frenchman, but the token of a barbarous and
savage mind, and a proof of an enemylyke heart. Notwithstanding, lest ye Admiral
might disappoynt the willingness of so many of his friends, and the expectation
of so many cities, which had joined in freendship with him: forasmuch as he was
aduertized late before of the singular good will of certain Germane Princes
toward the churches of France, to the intent to match strangers against
strangers: he desired his brother the Andelot to go to those Princes, and to
sew to them for their help: (which thing he did) and within three months
after, brought three thousand horsemen and six thousand footmen with him into
France.

While these things were adoing, word was brought to the Admiral, that certain
battering pieces of ordinance, and a great quantity of gunpowlder, were going
toward the Duke of Gvvyse lying then at the seege of Burgis, too assault the
City withal: and that the Master of that ordinance was one Thonne a
Lorreiner, a man not ignorant of warlike affairs, who for the better
safecondit of them, had six troops of horsemen and certain antsignes of
footmen assigned unto him. Upon the intelligence hereof, the Admiral having
gotten occasion of a noble exployt, hied him thitherward apace, accompanied
with a feawe horsemen. His enemies did scarsly abide ye first brunt, insomuch
that the most part of them began to throw away their weapons, and too take them
to their legs. The footmen vnharnished their horses out of the carts, and
leaving the Gunnes and the wagons laden with Gunpowlder, followed after their
fellows that were fled before them. Thonne was taken prisoner fighting. The
Admiral having gotten so great a pray, called his wits about hi^ how he might
carry it away, being utterly destitute of drawghthorses. Therefore he did as
necessity counseled him, he ouercharged ye pieces with powlder and put fire
too them to break them, which when it took not place, he pyled up the barrels
of powlder toogether with the Gunnes and all the carts and wagons into one
place, and putting fire too the powlder, made a terrible thundercracke in the
air, and marred what he could with burning.

As Soon as Mounsyre d'Andelot was returned out of Germany, and had brought yt
said three thousand horsemen and six thousand footmen with him: ye Prince of
Condey having gathered a meetly strong army of Frenchmen and Germans, marched
toward Paris. The Gvvysians likewise brought forth their power, (among whom
were the Svvissers in whom was their chief trust) and met with our men at an
old town which is certainly known too have bin the dwelling place of the
Druyds, and there joined battle the success whereof was indifferent on both
sids. For on the Duke of Gvvyse side the Cu^stable was taken prizoner, and on
the other side the Prince of Condey, who was the chef ringleader as is showed
before. Upon the receiving of this loss, whe^as our battle began too go by
the woors, and many of the footmen having cast away their weapons, partly lay
slain upon the ground, and partly yielded themselves to their enemies: the
Admiral gathering his horsemen together into ye next wood, and incoraging them
that they should not regard their lives more then their religion, their
country, and their honor, renewed the battle, wherein one of the marshalls of
France called the marshall of S. Andrews, a man of great authority in the
Court, and Mounsyre Brosse the Duke of Gvvyse Lieuetennant, and a number of
other Ge^tlemen were forthwith slain. The Cunstable who was General of the
feeld, and of very great authority, being taken prisoner by a valiant
gentleman called William Steward of Vesine, and being sought for by many
souldyers that would have slain him, was notwithstanding saved by him, for
that he was of kin to the Admiral, and for that the Prince of Co^dey was in
peril, and so he was conveyed safe to Orleance.

When things were thus grawen to a mischeef, and all hope of peace was past,
the Duke of Gvvyse encamped himself near to Orleance, and assailed it very
sore on the one side: during which time the Admiral leaving his brother the
Andelot behynd him to defend the City, took his journey into Normandy, and
beseeged the Castle of Caen, wherinto the Marquis of Elbevvf one of the Duke of
Guysis brother, had in those feawe days retired him self: who after the
taking of the City, began too treat for composition, and delivered up the
Castle with all the armure and furniture thereof into the Admiralls hand. There
was at that time in the Duke of Gvvysis Camp a young man called John Poltro of
the house of Merey a man of good worship: who having embraced ye religion, and
bin familiar many months with the Prince of Condeyes side, did suddenly take a
toy in his head at Lions, to kill the Duke of Gvvyse, whom as the butcherly
slaughterman of his country, and as the author of so great mizeries, he was
wont oftentimes too pray against most bitterly, in all his familiar talk.
Therefore having always this saying in his mowth, what skills it whither a man
use manliness or wiliness against his enemy? he determined too go intoo his
Camp as a reuolter, and too hunt for opportunity too accomplish his deuyce by
hook or by crook. For were I bownd too him (quoth he) either by way of
seruis, or by any kind of benefyte, or by any oath, nothing in the world should
make me too hazard my good name. But seeing that no bond tyeth me too him, why
should I not imitate the prowess of Sceuola in his enterpryze of killing King
Porsenna? When Poltro had continued a good while in this mind in the Dukes
Camp, at length upon occasion offered, he shot him throwgh the right shoulder
with a pellet of lead, of which wound he dyed within feawe days after, and
when he was once dead, peace did forthwith grow too effect without any
stop, so as the Edict was renewed, and liberty of following the religion was
permitted upon certain conditions, throwghout all France. Wheruppon all men
for the most part began too reason, that as Helene was to the Troianes, so the
Duke of Gvvyse was too the Frenchmen the cawse of all the great miseries that
befell them, forasmuch as the wars were so suddeinly whist and extingwished
by his death.

Howbeeit within a feawe months after, when the Admiral came too the Court
by the Kings sending for him, there was a new encounter stirred up against him
by a woman. For the Duches of Gvvyse falling down humbly at the Kings feet,
sewed with many tears for the reuendgement of her husbands murder, whereof
she auowed the Admiral too have bin the author and practizer. The Admiral
perceiving that, and smelling that that pageant was played by the motion of a
higher force, too the end that he which could not be ouercomme by battle,
might be intrapped by sum slightie conueyance: first showed too the King and
his moother and too all the whole counsel, that Poltro the author of that
murder being already apprehended, had bin arreigned and executed for it,
whither rightly or unrightly it was no time as then to debate, but howsoever
the case stood, as great a crime as it was, it had bin sufficiently, and more
than sufficiently reue^ged, by the extreme punishment of the same Poltro, who
was rent asunder alive with charyots at Paris. Moreover that they had such a
condemned person of him, as not only acknowledged the deed, but also
glorified and vaunted of it, assuring him self that that mind was put intoo
him by God, so as he dowted not but that he had done acceptable obedience to
God, and a singular and beneficial good turn to his country, in ridding such
a tyrant out of the world, as was always raging, always mad, and always
thirsty of christen blud. If Poltro had uttered any thing against him upon
promis of pardon, or intyced by fayer words, while he was in durance in the
common Iaile, he ought to have bin kept alive, like as he him self had required
by many letters and messages, while Poltro was yet alive in the common prizon,
that as soon as the wars were ended, he might have bin examined of him by
lawful order of Justice face to face, whereas now, seeing he is dead, nether
his confession nor his deposition ought too be of any importance in a case of
life and death, specially against a man of such state and calling as he was in
yt Realm. Furthermore albeeit that he or any other of his army had never so
much inuegled Poltro too that attempt: yet notwithstanding could it seem any
heinous fault for an enemy to deal enemylike with his enemy? Had there bin
any trewce at that time, or was the Admiral bownd too him by any covenant or
oath? To what purpoze should Capteines keep gards about them in their Camps,
(but too look too the safety of their persons?) To be short, though none of
these things were: yet since that time peace had bin reconcyled, not only
between the soldiers of both parts, but also much more between the capteines
and officers of the bands, too the benefyte of the common weal, too the which
public benefit and civil concord, this new kind of quarreling was a
hinderance. And if they would needs have that murder sifted out too the
bottom: he also would request the King, that he on his side might have leave
too prefer iudytements against them likewise. For it might be easily proved,
that the Duke of Gvvyse had executed unlawful cruelty against the kings
subjects, and broken all the holy decrees of the realm confirmed by the kings
Edict, and also committed high treason by making war of his own private
authority, and by usurping the whole state of the realm: and finally had
confounded all laws of God and man, and bin the firebrond of all the great
broils wherewith France had burned about 13. moonethes.

Upon the heering of this oration of the Admiralles, howbeeit that the same
process was renewed diverse times by the Gwisians afterward, at length the king
summoned the princes and nobleme^ of his realm, toogither with his grave
counselors and men of cheifest authority, too meet at the City of Molins.
The Cardinal of Lorreine taking too him his brothers widow, willed her too
speak for that part: and therwithall gave the Admiral leave too answer what
he could in his defense. When the matter had bin debated on both sides, the
king by the advice of his counselors, demanded of them whither there were any
of that assembly, whom they thowght partial and meet too be removed. They
answered that they lyked well of all. Then he demanded agein, whither their
desire was that he should do them justice in that case, and whither they woold
promis too stand too his judgment or no. When both parties had answered that
they woold very willingly stand too the kings determinacion: within a feawe
days after, the.29. day of January 1566, sentence was given word for word
in form following. The King having herd both ye parties, and considered the
matter with his Counsel, and perceiving that the verdites and opynions of his
Peers and Counselors consented and agreed all in one withowt any
variableness: gives definitive sentence that the Admiral Shattilion seems
clear and giltlesse of the murdering of the Duke of Gwyse, and thereof does
utterly acquit him. And therwithall commands his Attorney general, and all
others too whom such matters belong, never to speak more of it. Furthermore he
forbids them yt had bin the adversary parties in that case, and all other
his subjects, too be so bold as too have any speech thereof, and likewise all
judges and ministers of Justice, too suffer that matter to be called any more
in question before them: giving all men too understand, yt he has taken both
the parties intoo his custody and protection: and therefore gives the parties
straight charge, yt they should thensforth live quietly and friendly under his
obeisa^ce, and not practyze any thing one against another. If any of the
kinsfolk, countrifolk, acquaintance, or friends of the adversary parties do
against this Decree: he shall be taken for guilty of high treason as a traitor
too the kings person, in violating ye publik peace and tranquillity. And
therefore it is his pleasure that this sentence be proclaimed and enrolled in all
his Courts of Justice.

But now must we return ageine to the doings of the former year. Within a
feawe moonethes after, there happened a thing which (too my seeming) is not too
be let pass, bycawse it may be a record of a most gentle and meeld
disposition. There was a certain gentleman called Hamberuillier borne of a
woorshipfull house, whom the Admiral had interteyned many years in howsehold
very familiarly, and had used his seruis in his affairs of most credit and
estimation. A letter of this man's was intercepted in the Court, wherein he
wrate too certain whom it is not requysite too name at this present, that he
woold within feawe days dispatch the matter that was enjoined him, and give
the Admiral a drink too cast him intoo a dead sleep. When this letter was
browght too the Admiralles hand, he sent for the party, and willed him too
write certain verses with his own hand in a paper that was ready there: and
when he had compared them both toogither, he asked him whither he acknowledged
the letter too be his hand or no. Which when he had acknowledged, being
convicted of the wicked deed by his own conscience, he kneeled down byandby,
and besowght his master of mercy. The Admiral answered that he forgave him,
howbeeit upon condition that he should void his house out of hand, and never
comme in his sight more.

Herafter we must retire back too the practizes of the Court the last year.
For within a feawe moonethes after the Proclayming of the peace, the Queen
Moother determined too make a progress too Baion, to see her son in Law the
King of Spain, and too carrye her sons thither with her for a certain
purpoze, which being known too feaw at that time, did afterward burst out in
tragical eue^ts. First therefore she took her journey to Lions, which unto
that time was in the power of the protestants, by reason of the multitude of
Citizens and Country folks that favored the Religion therabowts. As soon as
she came thither, she gathered toogither the Italian Carpenters and Masons
euerywhere, and commanded a hold (which the Italians do commonly call a
Citadell) too be bwilded in all haste upon the next hill, too ouerlooke the
town. A little before, the plage began too grow whot, and had now cawght hold
of the Courtyers: and yet the Queen could not be persuaded too remove her
children from thence, until she had seen the fowndacion of the Hold laid.
When she saw that the plage was crept even into ye Court, She made one
Mounsyre Lossie gouerner of Lions, a cruel and barbarous man, and a most
deadly enemy of Religion, appoynting him a garrison of certain proud and
ruffianly souldyers, too vex the Citizens (which were given too religion) with
continewall wrongs and despites. Afterward, which way so ever the king made his
progress with that great train, intoo whatsoever City, town, village, or
Manor he was browght: wonderful it is too report, but yet most certainly
known and talked of in all men's mowthes, so great a plage followed the
kings train continewally, that for the space of three moonethes toogither, he
never lodged in any house, but the present peril of the plage drove him out of
it agein.

While these things were a doing, and the Queen mother communicated her
deuyces with her dawghter the Queen of Spain, and with the king her husbands
Ambassadors: the Marshall Memorancie (whom the king had left governor of
Paris) was certifyed that the Gvvisians wrowght secret practizes, too stir up
the commons of Paris against such as professed the true and uncorrupted
religion: and that the Cardinal of Lorrein woold be there within a day or
twain with a great train of armed men. It had bin forbidden diverse times
before by the kings Proclamations, that no man should journey with hargabusse or
pistolet, or have any about him. When it was told the Marshall that the
Cardinal and his company were come intoo the City, armed with such weapons:
by and by he went and met him with his garrison, and commanded them too lay
away their weapons. Which doing of his, the Cardinal and his brothers son
the young Duke of Gvvyse taking in great despyte and reproach, were herd
oftentimes afterward too say, that that deed should cost Memorancie his life.
When this uproar was stirred up in the City, where the Cardinal might have
rayzed threescore thousand armed men in one day too have slain Memorancie:
Memorancie thought it good too call his friends about him, and specially the
Admiral, who being accompanied with three hundred horsemen or therabowts, came
too Paris the.22. day of January: which thing did so scare the feeble hearted
people given woonderfully too superstition, and chiefly the Preests, Moonks,
and the Canons of the Cathedral Church, that a great sort of them began too
deuyze how too flee away, The next day Memorancie sent for the prouostes of the
Parliament, and for such as bare cheef authority at that time in the City,
home too his house. Too whom in the presence of the Admiral, he spoke of the
Cardinal of Lorreines ouerbold and seditiows enterpryzes, and of the flocking
toogither of certain Citizens, telling them that forasmuch as they had given
it out euerywhere, that the Admiral leuyed men of war, and practiced means
too sack that rich City, while the king was far of in his progress: he
thowght it best too call him out before them, that he might tell them plainly
what he minded too do. Then, I know wellynough already ( quod the Admiral)
what things are spread abroad of me by lewd and maliciowse persons, as who
should say, I sowght means too sack this City, which is known too be the
cheef fortress of the Realm, and the Noblest light of all France. These kind
of dealings are meet for such, as chalendge I wot not what kind of right too
the succession of the Crown, and bear the world in hand that certain
Dukedommes and Erldommes owght too be restored unto them. As for me, I put
you out of dowt, I claim not any manner of right too the Kingdom, nor too
any part thereof. And if I did, I believe there was never any Nobleman of
France this five hundred years, that had so good opportunity offered him too
trubble the state. Ye remember how great occasion of setting the matter
abroche, I had at such time as the Duke of Gvvyse was slain, and the Cunstable
my prizoner at Orleance, if I had bin minded too rebel. But I never sewed more
earnestlye too the Queen Mother, and too the Kings Counsel for peace, than
when I was in my cheifest prosperity. Who knows not that I sowght peace with
most earnest intreatance and sewte, at such time as a number of noble Cities
had alredye put themselves under my protection, and many mo both of Normandy
and little Britain, offered me their freendshippe and society unrequested?
Who knows not that whereas upon the conclusion of the peace, I might have
served mine own turn by ambitiowse craving of rooms of authority and
honor at the Kings hand, yet I choze rather too get me home, and there too
lead a private life modestly and quietly unto this day? But too let these
things pass, and too go forward with the things that we have in hand, being
called by the Marshall Memorancie, I made haste too comme unto you: not of
purpoze too make any innovation or trubble in any thing: but rather too
quench such broils, as were like too be stirred up a late throwgh sum
men's overboldness. I think there is none of you all but he knows, how
great credit the professers of the purer Religion do give me.

Surely a number of them being moved with these strange rumors, and put in
fear throwgh the factiows deuyces and enterpryzes of the Gvvisians resort
unto me daily, bringing letters intercepted, concerning the flocking
toogither of certain vndercapteines, which command their old souldyers too
be redye with their armor, that they may step forth out of hand whenever
need shall require. What needs many words? Certain letters were
intercepted written intoo Normandy, and fathered upon the authority of the
Queen moother, a Copy whereof I bring you here out of mine own cofers, and
will reherce one point thereof which is this.

There is no fitter way too restore the Crown of France too such as have
right too it by ancient inheritance, and too destroy the house and offspring
of Valoys, than by killing all the Hugonotes which are the vpholders thereof.
Therefore we must confiscate their goods, that the monny which is made of
them may yield us armor and treazure. And if the Hugonotes go too law for it:
the matter shall be so handled in judgment, as they shall have small list too make
any sevvt for domages.

Besides this, what shall I speak of the slawghters and robberies that are
committed almost day by day? It is sufficiently known, that since the
proclayming of the peace, above.500. protestants have bin slain in sundry
places, and yet the magistrates have not punished the murder of any one of
them. They that complain of it too the king or ye Queen moother, receive
nothing but words, or sum empty sheet of paper, or else sum skin of parchment.
Who knows not that a great slaughter was made alate of the protestants,
openly in the city of Turon, yea even with standerd and antsignes displayed,
even in the presence of him whom the Duke Mompaunser had sent thither to make
peace? And yet for all this, it is said yt diverse of your clergime^ are stricken
with so great fear of this my coming into ye city, that they co^sult how to
forsake it, yet notwtstanding, there is no place in all France, no town so
strong, no hold, no village, where Preests dwell more safe and sure, or where
they exercyze their ceremonies and massings more freely, then in mine own
manor of Shatilion. Uppo^ ye making of this oration the company was dismissed.

The next day came about a thirty of the chief merchantme^ of Paris to
Memorancy, and after them the Bishop of Paris with the Chauncelour of the
university and a great rabble of Clergimen: to whom the Admiral speaking very
courteously, bad them be all of good cheer, Also wtin a feawe days after,
being brought into the Parlamenthowse, he confirmed with many words, yt he wished
nothing more then the concord and quietness of the Citizens, nor undertook yt
journey upon any other purpose, then that, requyring them likewize, that the
City might be ordered peaceably and quietly. When things were thus set at a
stay, the Admiral at his return home was certified by his friends, yt one May
a man of bace calling which had a ferme not farer from ye castle of Shatilion,
and played the thief under pretense of Inkeping, was hired by the Duke of
Awmall the Duke of Gvvyse brother, to lay wayt for him, if he happened to go
abroad any whither a hunting, and that he had paid him a hundred crowns
aforehand in yt respect, and also given him a very goodly great horse. To the
furthera^ce hereof came this also, that ye Admiral being often told of his
theeuery, had threatened him to commit him upon felony, if he herd of those
things any more, and having gotten sufficient witnesses had lately before
indicted him of diverse robberies in ye parlame^t of Paris. When Mayes treachery
was known and bewrayed to the Admiral: there was a bayt laid for him, and
being apprehended wtin feawe days after, and brought forth to his arreignement
at Paris, he began to appeache ye Admiral and diverse others, as though they had
dealt with him to have killed the Queen mother, and had promised him a great
reward for so doing. Notwithstanding the Senators of the parliament of Paris
finding out the slander, and cawsing the indytement of felony too be
followed against him, condemned him too death, according to which sentence he
was executed upon the wheel in the cheef street of all Paris.

Ere long after, the Prince of Condey had a son borne, to whom ye King
intended to be Godfather, and to give him his name, after ye accustomed manner.
But forasmuchas he could not well do it because of his religion, it pleazed him
to give the honor thereof to the Admiral, willing him to cawse the infant to be
baptized and christened in his name: which thing was done with exceeding great
pomp and royal preparation, as is wont to be in Princes Courts. For at ye
feast, a table was laid for ye Admiral as if it had bin for the King himself,
whereat he sat alone as ye King is wont to do, and was served as a King, which
dealing all men constrewed to be a sure token of the Kings singular good will
toward him.

Anon after, tidings was brought that Ferdinando Duke of Alua was coming with
an host into nether Dutchland by the Spanish Kings commission and
commandment, to suppress the vprores that were raised there for religions
sake. Now forasmuchas he was to convey his army by the borders of France, ye
Admiral sitting with the Kings counsel, desired that regard might be had of
Burgundy, and that a garrison might be sent thither for defense of the
country, rather of Svvissers than of Frenchmen, lest perhaps sum broyle might
be made for religions sake. And it was como^ly thought at that time, yt the
said army of Svvissers, which consisted of six thousand men, were for none
other purpoze than to withstand the Duke of Aluaze force, if he should attempt
any thing in ye marches of Burgundy. But anon after, the Prince of Rochsurion
a Prince of the Kings blud, wrate to the Admiral, desiri^g hi^ to send hi^
privily sum friend of his who^ he might best trust, and he would bewray such
things unto him as did very greatly concern his welfare, and were not to be
uttered to all men's hearing. And so within a feawe days after, the Prince of
Rochsurion being friend to the Prince of Condey by reason of his alyance too
the Kings house, bewrayed unto him secretly, how consultatio^ was had at
Baion, to extingwish the religion commonly called ye reformed religion, and to
oppress such as were ye professers thereof: and that the hyring of the
Svvissers under color of fortifying the fruntiers of France against the Duke
of Aluaze power, was for the same purpoze.

The same time the Admiral was aduertized both by letters and by word of mowth
at many men's hands, that the army of the Svvissers was conveyed into the
borders of France, and into the innermore part of Burgundy. Upon knowledge
whereof, first ye Prince of Condey, and afterward the Admiral himself went to
the Court, and told the King, ye Queen mother, and the Counsel, that they
saw no sufficient cause to bring these armies of Svvissers into ye Realm,
except it were perchance to oppress them and a number of other honorable
howses, which professed ye religion: nevertheless that the number of such as
had professed themselves to be of the religion, was greater than it was commonly
taken too be: whereof they had trial in ye last wars, and therefore that if
they perceived their enemies to attempt any innovation of things, they would be
even with them, and not suffer themselves to be murdered at those cutthrots
hands: wherefore they prayed and besowght the Kings majesty, to be moved with
compassion, either toward so many howses of honor and worship, or at
leastwise toward his afflicted country, and the forlorn people of France.

Being shaken of in the Court, and vnhonorably dealt with, and moreover
understanding themselves to be in great danger of their lives, they took
counsel, not to fail themselves and so many christian churches, specially at
ye request of the most part of the nobility and gentlemen, and at the earnest
intreatance of an innumerable sort of their good countrymen, which complained
yt they were no longer able to abide ye wrongs, wherewith they were continually
vexed at the Magistrates hands. When they had determined upon that point,
forasmuchas they perceived tkat the Kings name would bear a singular sway
among the cities, and that therefore the Duke of Gvvyse had in the former wars
indeuered to have the King in his own tuicion: they communicated their intent
to very few, and took their journey privily to the court, to see if they could
by any means convey the King away from the custody of the Queen moother and
of the Gvvyses, that they might provide for ye common peace and concord, by
removing ungracious counsel from him. But being bewrayed of one of their
confederacy, they lost the opportunity of bringing that matter to pass: by
reason whereof they were driven to try ye matter by open war. When they ca^e
at Paris, they mustred their adherents, and found that there were on their side
sumwhat less then a thousand horsemen, and about a threehundred footmen. For
the Andelot had carried away the most part of his army with him too Poysye the
day before, to cut of vittels from the Parisians by taking the bridge over the
river of Sean, There went out of Paris fifteen thousand footmen, and mo then
six thousand horsemen, under the Cunstable, who joining battle with them was
sore wownded, and died within feawe days after. In that battle a man might
have seen the singular woorking of God in preserving the Admiral. For whereas
he rode upon an ouerfeerce horse, that would not in any wise welneere be
ruled, his muzrol brake asunder, and his horse carried him twice through the
battle of his enemies where they were thickest, and yet he was not hurt at
all, notwithstanding yt the pistolets discharged their shot at him on all
sides, with one of the pellets whereof his horse being hit, suffered him to bring
him back agein easly into his own battle.

After the receiving of great loss on both sids, but specially on the prince
of Condeis side, the Kings army was discomfited and driven into the City of
Paris, and it seemed best to the prince and the Admiral to take their way into
Lorrein, too the horsemen yt were sent the^ thither by ye appointment of certain
Princes of Germany. For they saw it was needful agein to impugn forreiners
with forreiners. In that journey, being overtaken by their adversaries with a
great power, whereof the General was Henry the Kings brother, then Duke of
Aniow, afterward King of Polland, and now King of France, who preassed
continually upon their reereward, they oftentimes received many harms. When
they came into Lorrein, whither Casimire the Palsgraue electors son was come
before them with a great host of Almaynes, there rose a new occasion of trouble
and incombera^ce. For there was owing to those Almaynes a certain times wages,
and there could no means be fownd to pay any piece of it, were it never so
little. Out of hand the Admiral found a remedy for that mischeef. He required
that all men as well the Rascals and Lackeys of the host, as the horsemen and
the common soldiers should be taxed by the poll, so far forth as every
man's ability would bear. First of all the Admiral himself cawsed five
hundred french crowns to be told out of his own cofers. The like was done of
all the rest according to every man's ability, and Collectors were sent to
every band to gather it up. And moreover look whatsoever silver the Prince of
Co^dey, the Admiral, and the Counties of Andelot and Rochfocawlt had of their
own, it was delivered eueriwhit of it to ye Collectors. Thus in very small
time there was gathered with the singular good will of al men, the sum of
fowerscore thousand pownds, and it was judged that by that counsel of the
Admirals, ye whole army was saved, which not only was persecuted by the
adversaries, but also threatened by ye Germans their leagefellowes and
succorers. When the powers of ye Germans and Frenchmen were once joined
together, the Adversaries returning suddenly back, went in great iourneies
unto Paris, which thing Henry ye ki^gs brother deemed to redownd to his great
dishonor.

The Prince of Condeies men being now well cheered and full of good hope, went
to beseege Sharters, which when they had beaten a good while with great
ordinance, and cast down a piece of the wall, insomuch that the Andelot was
now redye to have led them to the assault: suddenly the Kings Trumpetters came
in post, and sending a Herault, declared that peace was concluded. For
commissioners had met on both sides near Paris for the same purpoze certain
days before. Thus was the seege broken up, and the Prince of Condey dismissed
his power. While ye Admiral was kept occupied at that seege, his wife (of
whom mention is made before) who in the beginning of the wars had gotten her
self with her children to Orleance, being consumed with sore sickness, and
unable to bear out the brunt of it, departed out of this life. The Admiral
being aduertized of yt greeuousnesse of her diseaze, had left the Camp, and was
gonne too her in post, and taking the best phisicions to him that he could
get, performed the dewtie of a loving and faithful husband toward her. But
when he saw that the force of her diseaze overcame ye cunning of the
phisicions: he commended her departing soul unto God, and withdrew himself
into a parlour, whither a great sort of his friends and acquayntance came to
him to comfort him, of whom many remembered that he uttered these words with
great sobbing and tears. Wherein have I sinned, my God, or whereby have I
deserved that thou should chastize me so sharply, and ouerlode me with so
many miseries at once? Would God I could lead a holyer life, and give better
example of godliness. O holy father, let thy mercifulnes look upon me, and
assuage these my sorrows. Afterward being cheered by the godly talk of his
friends, he commanded his children too be browght unto him, and told them that
this so great loss of their mother owght too be a lesson too them, that
there remained no help for the^ under the son, whervntoo they might trust or
lean: affirming that howses and Castles, were they never so strong and
stately, are not given us for dwelling places, but lent us for bayting places,
nor tied too us for ever by purchase and freedeede, but granted too us for a
time upon courtesy: and finally, that all things in this world are flightfull
and transitory, saving only Gods mercy, whervntoo he woold have them too
commit themselves wholly, casting away all worldly helps, and then should they
not need too dowt, but they should have most sure defense in the same. The
next day he called Grelley his childrens schoolemayster, and told him that he
must needs return too the Camp, and he could not tell what should becomme of
him there. Wherefore he warned and desired him, too have a care of his children,
and too bring them up in religion, godliness, and all good arts, as he had
oftentimes charged him.

As concerning his Lady or late wife, she had always a singular and earnest
zele too religion as is showed before, and was indewed with singular constancy
in bearing out all calamities, as well her own as her husbands, so that it is
truly auowched of many men, that look what promis she made too her husband
for the professing of Religion, (as I have showed before,) she performed the
same most holily too the full. There were diverse vertewes and gifts of nature
commendable in her, and specially her singular louingnesse and liberality
toward the poor, and toward sick folks. Therefore inasmuch as she
continewally visited the sowldyers that were browght either sick or wownded
too Orleance: the Phisicions were plainly of opinion, that her diseaze was
cawght and bred chiefly of those ill sentes and stinking sauoures.

After that the Peace was proclaimed by the sownd of Trumpets in many places
(as is said before): the Admiral had scarsly tarried three days at home, but he
was certifyed from all parts of the Realm, both by letters and by messengers
from his friends, that the said Peace was not a Peace in deed, but a practis
too renew most horrible war. For they perceived so great preparation for
wars in all places, that if he looked not too it betymes, both the Prince of
Condey, and himself, and all they that had bin Capteines in ye late wars,
should be intrapped and abandoned too the cruelty of their enemies. The
tokens whereof were these, the bringing in of garrisons intoo Orleans, Auxerre,
Bloys, and the other yielded Cities: the keeping of all bridges, passages, and
foordes: the reteyning still of the men of arms in the heart of France: and
the keeping still of two Legions near abowte Paris, under pretense of garding
the Kings person. Upon the knowledge of these things, he thowght it most for
his safety too withdraw himself intoo the town of Tanlay too his brother the
Andelotte, and anon after to Noyers a town of meetly good strength in the
Prince of Condeyes territory, whither he had withdrawn himself a little before
with his wife and children and his whole howsehold for the same cawse. In that
journey there happened a thing, which bycawse of the strangeness thereof, is
not to be ouerslipped. Not far from the town of Molins as ye go too
Auxerre, there is a Lake: whervntoo when the Admiral was comme, a certain old
man of his company named Gripper, a man skillful by reason of many long
voyages by sea, and singularly faithful and loouing toward the Admiral,
espied a black clowd driven with the wynd beating very vehemently against that
part of the Lake: whervppon he began too warn the Admiral in the heering of a
great number, too put spurs too his horse, and too hye him apace too the
next village, least they might be over taken with the tempest at hand. As
soon as he had said so, thinking that the rest had believed him and followed
after him, he hyed him on before. He was scarsly out of sight, but suddeinly
there arose such a storm as the Admiral was passing the narrow banks of the
Lake, that many, not only men but also horses, were thrown down with the
whirlewynd, and diverse hurt with the violence and weight of the Hayle, and had
much adoo to escape with their lives. The wynd blew the Admiralles hat from his
head, which could never be fownd agein when the tempest was ceased. But one of
his company delivered him another: nether was he (for all that) hurt in any
part of him saving in his ancle, where the vehement dryuing of the hayle gave
him a good pretty pelt. Surely if the violence of the wynd had lain against the
head of the lake, no dowt but that day had bin the last of the Admiralles life
and of all his companies. When the tempest was alayd, the Admiral having
comforted his company, said: I thank thee O almyghtie God, whose present
miracle I deem too foretoken, that we shall shortly be pressed, howbeeit not
oppressed with many sorrows.

As soon as they were comme too Noyers, they sent often messengers with
letters too the King, informing him that they were daily aduertized of traynes
that were laid for their lives: wherefore they humbly besowght his Majesty, too
have respect of his Country already tired with two civil wars, and find
means that the fire which was kindled by the Gvvisians, might be quenched,
not with the destruction, but rather with the safety of his Realm, and with
his own wisdomme. And therwithall the Admiral directed letters too Margaret
the dawghter of the great King Frauncis, and wife too the Duke of Sauoy, (whom
he thought too be of credit and authority too wey much with the Queen
moother), beseeching her with all manner of intreatance, too deal so by her
authority, as she might turn away the tempest that was like by sum fatal
mischaunce too fall upon her afflicted and forlorn country.

When he saw no room left for peaceable remedies, and understood that
Tauanne (who anon after was made Marshal of France,) was bringing of his power
privily too Noyers, of purpoze too incloze him and his: he counseled the
Prince of Condey too get them thence, and too hye them too Rochell as fast as
they cowld: which town by reason of certain ancient customs and privileges,
had never received any garrison of sowldyers unto that day. In their way they
must needs pass the River of Loyre, and in their company there was the
Princess of Condey with six young children, whereof one was not past a year
old. After them, the next day followed the young children of the Admiral and
of the Andelotte, whom their keepers couueyed away in the dead of the night by
the Admiralles commandment, and passing the river of Loyre, browght them too
their company in the borders of Berrey. And there happened a wonderful
thing, whereof innumerable witnesses and beholders remain yet alive. Whereas the
Prince of Condey thowght too have taken two or three boats soodeinly on the
hitherside of the water, and so too have ferryed over secretly: as soon as he
came at the rivers side where it ronneth by the foot of the hill of Sanxerre,
there he fownd a foorde, at the which about a fifty horsemen that waited upon
him went over, when in the mean while the Lady his wife with her children and
her whole Nurcerye were conveyed over in botes. They were no sooner all wasted
over, but the river did so ryze in three hours space, (notwithstanding that
the day was most fair and clear): that the people of Sanxerre and all the
dwellers therabowts, acknowledged it too be the wonderful providence of God,
praying him to bliss those young children and babes krying in their Cradles.

The King having knowledge of these things, gave co^maundment by the counsel of
his Courtiers, that all his men of arms, specially which were in ye borders of
Santonge and Poytiers, should out of hand go too Rochell: and he sent his
brother Henry (of who^ we have made mention before,) too lead thither as great
a power as he might. In the mean season, the Protestants which had returned
home every man to his own City and country, upon the making of the peace,
and upon trust of the kings assurance: were every where oppressed and
murdered by ye multitude. While these things were a doing, Ioane Queen of
Navarre, who had hild her self at home in the former wars, abhorring now the
lawless and often renewed treachery: rayzed such power as she could with all
speed, and went too Rochell, carrying her son Henry with her, (to whom the
inheritance of the kingdom of Navarre descended after her death), and one
dawghter. When the foresaid matters were set at a stay as is said already, the
Admiral took certain pieces of ordinance out of Rochell, and went to beseege
the town of Niort, and within feawe days after took it by composition. From
thence he led his army too Angolesme. This town stands upon a high hill,
cut steep on all sides saving one, into the which Town the adversaries had
conveyed a great Garrison a feawe days since. The Admiral cawsed his
battery too be laid too that side of the Town where it might be cumne
unto, and when he had assailed it certain days, it was yielded unto him by
the townsmen.

Anon after there was a battle fowght at Iaseneul between the vawardes of
both the parties. The Captein of our vaward was the Admiral, who brake in
upon his enemies with such violence, that they being unable too abide the
brunt, sowght too save themselves by flight, and drew toward Lusignian,
leaving all their caryages behind them. The pray that was taken, was esteemed
almost at fifty thowsande Crowns. The next day a letter of one of the
Clerks of the Counsel named Fizie, written too the Queen Moother, was
intercepted: wherein he bewailed that loss, adding also that since man was
first made, never any son of France, (it is a vulgar phraze among the
Frenchmen) was in so great hazard of his life as he had bin. Not long after,
the Admiral going too Iarnacke a Town near by, was driven too fight whither
he woold or no: and he was even at the very point too comme intoo his
enemies hands. For his adversaries spies understanding, that he pourpozed too
pass the River that ronneth by the Town, which is not very broad, upon a
bridge of Boats: ambushed them selves secretly on the other side of the River,
and as soon as they perceived the Admiral too be there, by and by the
Hargabuts began too discharge at him, and other some indeuered too get over the
bridge by force. As God woold there was one Hargabutter that stopped their
brunte with his often shoting of of his piece, but yet was he strike^ through
with a number of shot, and fell down dead. About twelve other being stirred up
with his noyze, succeeded in his room. The Admiral himself stepping too the
bank, with his naked sword, (for he had no leyzure too put on his corslet)
did cut asunder the ropes wherewith the boats were fastened, during the which
time, his adversaries which hild the further side of the River, never left
shooting at him, which thing cawsed him too have a guard about him from that day
forth for the defense of his person against such suddein chances.

A two days after, when the adversaries had passed over the river of Sharent,
the Prince of Condey for fear of being inclozed by them, althowgh he had
lately hired three thousand swart Rutters, and had more over six thousand
Swissers, whom he had interteyned from the beginning of the wars: yet
notwithstanding being a man of a noble and stowte stomach in battle, he
determined too stop them of their passage, howbeeit not too fight in pitched
battle. In the mean while word came too the Admiral that his men which had
taken the Town next their enemies the day before, were beset and browght too
utter peril, but yet stood manfully still too their defense. The Admiral
minding not to abandon them, gathered certain horsemen quickly together, and
marched to them apace. Whom when ye enemies knew, they suddeinly cast
themselves in a ringe, and beset him rownd about with great force. Whereof the
Prince of Condey being certified, and being much redyer in courage then
fortified with strength, brake into the middleward of his enemies, and there
being oppressed with multitude, had his horse stricken throwgh, so that he was
overthrown and slain. The Admiral being soore grieved with the great loss,
and distrusting what might insew to the whole, retired with his brother the
Andelot intoo the town of S. John d'Angeli, And whereas the foil that he had
received in ye body of the Prince of Condey, he could have revenged upon the
bodies of diverse his enemies that were of greatest power and nobility, and
have requyted their dishonorable dealing with like for like: yet determined he
to hold himself within the bownds of nature and manhod, and to give the dead
their dewes: and in that mind did he continue as long as the war lasted. As I
told you before, Ioane Queen of Navarre was the same time at Rochell: who
hearing of the great loss that was received, went with all haste intoo the
Camp, where having comforted the cheef of the whole host, and incoraged the
sowldiers too be myndful of their ancient prowess, she told them that she
gave and delivered unto them her only son Henry (too whom the kingdom of
Navarre should descend after her dicease) to be their General: protesting
openly, that the life of her only son was not deerer unto her, then the
welfare of the whole army. Henry Prince of Condey the son of the foresaid
Lewis late deceased, was joined with him in society of ye honorable charge.
Nevertheless, the Lords and all the Capteines and under capteines betook the
charge of the wars, and the ordering of all martial affairs to the Admiral
with one consent, as to him that was known to be of greatest credit and
authority among the protestants. For besides his singular skill in martial
affairs, and besides his justice and his stayednes, it was well known to all
men, that he was the first of all the nobility of the Realm, which embraced
the true religion and professed it openly, which reformed the order of his
house according to the order of religion: which durst break with King Frauncis
the second (who was hild entangled with the alyance of the house of Gvvyse)
concerning the demands of the Churches, and put up supplications in their
names to the Kings counsel: which gave example of godliness to the french
nobility, whom al men knew to have bin most horribly infected with evil
manners, by reason of yt wicked custom of the Kings court. And it is further
known, that after he had once embraced the religion, he never gave any cause
of offense to the reformed Churches: and that whereas men resorted unto him on
all sids, in the name of those Churches, he always gave them the wyzest
counsel: and took weapon in hand, not to rebel against the King (as sum
reported of him) but at the request and intreatance of the Queen mother, which
thing nevertheless he did not upon his own head, or to satisfy the Queens
mind, but (bycawse ye King was not yet full twelve years old,) he grownded
himself upon the authority of the general counsel holden at Orleance (as is
said before) and also upon the Kings edict that was wrotten and proclaimed at
Paris within certain days after by the full consent of all men: whereas on the
contrary part it was by the Gvvyses procurement and counsel, that so many
honorable and worshipful howses were turned out of all their goods and
possessions: that so many flourishing and noble Cities were sacked: that so many
Princes, noblemen, Capteines and Masters of chivalry were slain, to the
exceeding great prejudice of the whole Realm: and (which is the cheef of all
other) that so many flourishing congregations were oppressed welneere in all the
towns of France and finally the Realm brought to that point, that it lay
open to any foreign Prince as a booty to pray upon.

These things were no sooner finished, but the Admiral had a sore mischaunce by
ye death of his brother the Andelot, who died of a suddeine diseaze in ye town
of Santon, not without suspicion of poisoning: which was so much the more
lykely, bycawse Birague the Uicechauncelour (who anon after was made
Chau^celour) a man of Piemount, was herd to say oftentimes in the Court, that
all these wars were too be dispatched, not by armed men, nor with so great
ado, and with so great losses, but by cooks and skullions with small adoo. And
forasmuch as the Admiral wrate a letter with his own hand a feawe days before
to his own sons and to the Andelots sons which were browght up all under
one Tutor, to comfort them, which letter of his written with his own hand I
have now presently in my keeping: I thowght it not amiss to translate it in
manner word for word, and too set it down here, in this place.

Although I dowt not (quoth he) but the death of my brother Andelot was a great
greef unto you, yet notwtstanding I thowght it good to put you in mind of your
happiness in that you be the Sons or Neuewes of so noble a gentleman, whom I
dare auow to have bin, both a faithful servant of God, and worthy of singular
commendacion and renown for his excellency in martial affairs. The
remembrance and example of which vertewes owght too stand always before your
eyes, that you may imitate them to the uttermost of your power. And I think
verily, yt I may well affirm this of him, that in all France there was not
any that went beyond him in matters of war, another do I dowt but that foreign
nations will yield him like record, specially such as have had experience of
his prowess heretofore. He purchaced not this so great estimation by sloth
and ydlenes, but by enduring of great peynes for his countries sake. Surely I
never knew man either iuster toward ye world, or more zealous of righteousness
to godward. another am I ignorant that it were not comely for me too report
these things of him among strangers. But I am the bolder to speak them unto
you, to the intent to incorage and sharpen you too the imitating of so great
vertewes: for I my self also do set this example before me to follow the
same, praying and beseeching our God and Lord, to grant me to depart as
godlily and blessedly out of this life, as I saw him do. And because I find
myself to have a great want of him: to the intent I may bear this greef of
mine the more patiently, I crave of you yt I may see his vertewes revive and
shine forth in you. For your better atteinement whereof, give your selves with
your whole heart to godliness and religion, and while you be in these years,
spend your time in the study of such learning as may lead you into ye way of
vertew. And although I can well abide that you should be from your books at
such hours as your master gives you leave too play: yet look to it that in
your playing you another do nor say ought that may offend God. Specially
reverence your Schoolemaister, and obey him no less then myself. For I am sure
that he will not give you any precept or counsel, which shall not be both for
your honor and profit. As concerning all other things if ye love me, or rather
if ye love your selves, so deal as I may always hear glad tidings of you:
and look as ye grow in years and body, so grow ye also in godliness and
vertew. God bless you all, and be your defense, and uphold you evermore with
his holy spirit. From Sauton the xviii. of May.1569. Shatilion.

Another was the Admirals stowt courage in bearing out the greatness of that
grief, unknown too strangers. For although he had forgone such a brother as
he knew to be peerless in godliness, Justice, valeantnesse, renown of
noble deeds, and co^mendacion of chivalry, insomuch that for his own part he
termed him his right arm: yet did he oftentimes protest among his friends,
that he himself rested upon ye providence of God. For he both understood and
also was wont to say oftentimes, that another the Church of God was gwided by
man's policy, nor the christian army ordered by the prowess of ye Capteines.
And in talking of his brothers death among his free^ds, he was wo^t to cry out.
O happy Andelot, which ended ye course of his lise so godlily and luckily.

About the same time word was brought of the coming of VVoolfgang Duke of
Bipount into France with a mighty army of Germans, whom he browght to our
reskew: and how he had already passed the Loyre with his power, and had woone
the town of Sharity, because there was a bridge over the river in yt town,
into Berrey. When the Germans were come to the town of Shalluce in the
borders of Limosin: the Admiral determined to join with them, the which self
same day the Duke of Bipount being oppressed with a sore sickness, departed out
of this life, and the cheef charge was by consent of all the Germans committed
to VVoolrade Earl of Mansfeld, who had bin his lieuetennant. The adversaries
were greatly abashed at this joining of the^ together, and there was no place
in all France where this opinion was not spread, that if the Germans and
Frenchmen might match together, the Kings power was like to go to wrecke, and
the Courtiers should be glad and feign to stoop to their adversaries. Also
such as showed themselves desirous of peace and of public quietness, did
openly both in the Camp and in the City curse the authors of falshod: saying
that it was never yet seen, but that the end of perjury was always
mischeuous. This was certainly thought of all men, that if the Admiral joining
his own power with the power of the Germans, had led them rightforth into ye
heart of France toward Paris, many cities would have yielded unto him, and
have committed themselves to his tuicion. This opinion was very greatly
confirmed wtin feaw days after. For at such time as Henry Duke of Aniow being
encamped near unto him, had given him battle, he was easily driven back, and
compelled to retire with the loss of a great number of his footmen, and with
the taking of Mounsyre Strossie ye Queen moothers sisters son, who had the
charge of them.

The Admiral hoping that upon the matching of so great forces together, the
King considering ye state of things would incline his mind to sum indifferency:
sent books of supplication unto him (for the Duke of Aniow would give him no
leave to send any messe^ger) wherein he prayed and besought him in the name of
the whole army, that he would not harden his heart any longer, but have
compassion of his afflicted and miserable subjects, and consider with how great
hinderance to the Realm, the twenty thousand forreiners or thereabowts, which
were come to ye succor of both parts, should rau^ge up and down through ye
realm of France, if the war were prolonged any long time. For the matter
was now proceeded so far forth, as the civil wars were not likely to come
to end by reconcylement of men's mynds or throwgh the love and compassion of
their country, but by the wasting of ye Realm: and therefore it was expedient
for him too spare his subjects that had endured so many discommodities and so
long continewing already, and not too trust overmuch too the Cardinals and
Italians, which bare to much sway in his court: for strangers would never rue
ye miseries of frenchmen as frenchmen would. The time was now most convenient
too treat of peace, while either part stood upon the trust of their own
strength. And the condition of peace was very eazie, inasmuchas the whole
number that were in arms with him, desired nothing but fre liberty to exercize
their religion, which had bin granted them so often, both by authority of
public counsel, and also by the Kings Edicts. Extreme was the madness of the
Italians and of a few others that were nearest about ye King, to warrant him
that two hundred thousand men of the reformed religion, might be dispatched and
rid out of the way with so small a do as they made of it: whereof the success
of the former times might be a sufficient proof. When the Duke of Aniow had
taken the foresaid foil, then by the aduyce of his friends, he dismissed a
great part of his army, and specially of his horsemen, for ye space of a
mooneth or two, commanding them to return home to refresh themselves. And
then VVoolrade Earl of Mansfeeld late leeuetennant to VVoolfgang, was set up in
his place with the full consent of all men.

When things were thus set at a stay, the Admiral called a counsel, wherein
all men thowght it good, that forasmuch as all the Cities and Countries from
the Haven of Rochell, and on all the Seacoast, were in possession of the
Protestants, those quarters should be fortified, and the winning of the Town
of Poytiers be attempted, that it might be as bulwark too defend and
maintain that whole Country. This deuyce seemed too be greatly furthered by
the yielding up of the Castle of Lusignian, which is the strongest hold in all
France, and yet notwithstanding was yielded up within a feawe days
beseeging, and so was news browght about the same time yt the town of
Chastelleraut had done the like. Anon after that the seege was planted before
Poytiers, and all things put in readiness for the assaulting of the town: the
Admiral being ouertyred with watching and travel, was taken with the bluddy
Flix, wherewith he was so pulled down for thirty days todgither, that he
could not be present at their doings, nor give them counsel how too deal.
By means whereof the Townsmen being refreshed both with vittelles and with
new and fresh succors that were daily sent in, and hartened with daily
salyes, and moreover incoraged by letters and messages from the king, bare out
the seege stowtly. But all men are certainly persuaded, that had not the
Admirals sickness hindered the matter, Poytiers had comme under his subjection.

About the same season, one Dominik Albio, a Gascon borne, and one of the
Admirals howsehold servant, which being taken by the Kings side, had tarried
certain months in their Camp and custody returned now home too his Master,
and resorting boldly agein too his house, began too be had in suspicion at
many men's hands, for his fond talk and for the inconstancy of certain
speeches that he cast forth, because he commonly agreed not with himself. By
occasion whereof being apprehended and examined, he brought forth a box of
poison, which he confessed too have bin delivered him by one Rivers, ye Captein
of the Duke of Aniowes guard, and by a certain other person which was the same
Dukes secretary, and that he was promized.2000. French crowns to kill his
master the Admiral therewith. Upon the knowledge whereof he was condemned too
death, and whereas most men deemed him worthy of greeuouser punishment, yet
was he but hanged with a rope, notwithstanding that his master sewed for his
pardon.

Before the Admiral was thoroughly rid of his disease, when word was brought
him that the town of Chastelleraut which was a.7. miles of from the Camp, was
beseeged of his enemies: he led his power thither, being carried himself in a
horselitter, and easily entering the Town with his sowldyers, did put his
enemies too flight, sleaing a great number of them, and specially of the
Italians: and he ceased not too pursew his enemies as they fled, till they
were past the River, which for the deepenesse thereof is in the vulgar tung
called the Crewse. In the mean while the young Duke of Gwyse, which had bin
Captain of Poytiers, issewing out of the town with a great company by
night, did send in other new and fresh fellows in their sted. And ere long
after, the Duke of Aniow having repaired a great army, not only of Frenchmen,
but also of Almanes and Swissers, came too Chinon. The army of the
Protestants began too be weerye of the long seege of Poytiers, for want of
vittelles and wine, and throwgh foul and stormy wether, matched with sickness
which had greatly anoyed the footmen, specially of the Germans. By reason
whereof many of the Santones had conveyed themselves home too refresh their
bodies, and diverse had slunk away intoo the innermore part of France, to
Sharitie and Sancerre, which were in possession of the Protestants. Which when
the Admiral understood, he thought it good not to be ouerhastie, and therefore
restreined the whote courage of his sowldyers from battle. Whervppon both ye
sowldyers and the petie capteines did cast forth threatening speeches, saying
that they woold return home, and shift for themselves: for it woold be more
for their ease to make war at home in their own cou^tryes, where they might
help themselves with their own household store, than in strange places:
specially seeing they had ye possession of certain towns in Aquitane and
Delphynoys, and by ye river of Loyre, wherinto they might resort, and wherowt
of they might make invasions, and easly waste the feelds of their enemies. Not
unlike these were the speeches of the Almane sowldyers, who having forborne
their wages now certain moonethes, kryed out that the matter was too be
committed too the sword, rather than too lie lingering so long from their own
countries and dwelling places. And it was almost comme too the point, that
certain nobleme^ of great authority were about too have forsaken the Camp, and
too have led a great part of the army away with them.

When it was once determined too put the matter too the sword, and that both
the armies drew near too Mongontur to incamp there: the Capteins of the army
of our adversaries, did soodeinly set upon our light horsemen that were the
foreriders, and upon certain bands of our foreward, whereof the Admiral had
the charge. The Admiral having sowght a good while for his harnes bearer, and
finding him not, did at length nevertheless adventure intoo the thickest of
his enemies. After him followed the foremencioned VVoolrade Earl of Mansfeeld,
who compelled the battle of the enemies too forsake their grownd. Here ran a
river which the adversaries labored by all means too pass. The Admiral being
guarded with certain Hargabuts, marched sumwhat before the foreward, and stayed
at the bank of the brook, and stopped the enemies of their passage, providing
there for all things necessary until the shetting in of the Evening, when as
notwithstanding, his enemies never left beating of that place of all the while,
both with great Ordinance and with small shot. And surely if they might have
passed the River at that time, and have broken in upon our army, it had bin
horrible too think what a slawghter they had made of our men. For they were mo
in number than our host by a third part. Besides this, they were fresh and
lusty, and our men faint and weerie at the joining of the battle: and therefore
it was but two days respit. For the third day when it came too hand strokes,
the most part of our footmen went too wrecke, and our horsemen were put too
flight. The Admiral giving charge upon six hundred Almanes, with two hundred
French horsemen, was shot at with thick shot of pistolets, and wownded on the
right side of his nozethrilles: insomuch that having his Beuer beaten too his
face, and being not able too spit out the blud that issewed from his wound, and
moreover having his sword stricken from him, and his sword girdle broken of
with the continewance of the Pistolet shot, and almost all the lethers of his
corslet burnt asundre with the heat of the pellets that lyghted upon his
armor, so as his brestplate hung but by the vppermoste thonges: he was at
length conveyed out of the battle by the help and faithful seruis of one
Ploriner, a yoongman of Normandy, whom he had browght up of a child in his
house, and after the overthrow of his host, was conveyed by his friends too
Partheney. Here a man may well wonder at the constancy and greatness of his
courage. For whereas upon the receiving of this so great loss, most men did
cast away both courage and hope: he took upon him too comfort and harten
every man, and calling all his secretaries and clerks unto him, sent letters
abroad into all parts of France, least the Protestants that were up in arms
in other places, should faint, or think the loss too be so great, as might
not be recovered within feawe days space.

The next morning he took his way too Niort, and when he had set things in
order there, he went thence too Santon, and abode there but seven days for the
curing of his wownd, which could not be healed thoroughly in less than.25.
days. While the Admiral was thus grieved with ye burdens of his former
travels, and with great heaviness and distress: news was browght him, that
he was atteynted of high treason by act of parliament, made at Paris the 13. day
of September.1569, and that whosoever could bring him alive too the king,
should have fifty thousand Crowns in reward for his labor. Welneere at the
same time it was told him, that one Martinengo an Italian, condemned of Treason
in his own country, was sent with certain antsignes by the king to
Shattilion, and that when he came there, he not only ransacked the Castle, and
spoiled and carried away the costly plate and household stuff that had bin laid
up there of many ages as an ordinary furniture of the house, too the value of
a hundred thousand Crowns at the least: but also did so burn up the Town
that stands under the Castle, as there scarcely remained any incling of a
Town. At the receyt of which news, the Admiral was so far of from
conceiving any greater grief of mind that could appall him in going foreward
with his affairs: that there appeered not so much as any alteration at all in
his countenance: insomuche that when his friends and kinsfolk resorted too him
too comfort him, he was wont too say stowtly unto them, that God of his
singular goodness had given him such a mind at the present, as could possess
the things that are termed goods, and not be possessed of them, so as his goods
were always subject to him, and not he to his goods. And therefore in all ye
civil wars whereas for the most part all the princes, noble men, gentlemen,
men of arms and footmen maintained the^ selves by ye wars, and lived upon
the pray from hand to mouth when ye king had seized their possessions: Only the
Admiral and a few other paid their hosts and vittelers always ready monny for
themselves and their retinewes: by reason whereof he had not only browght
himself far in debt by borrowing upon interest: but also had laid a great
part of his wives apparel, Iewelles, and ornaments too gage, and continewed
that trade so long, until that being in manner left destitute of all howsehold
helps, (which happened almost about the end of the third civil war) he
sewed in an assembly of the states, too have some releef granted too him also,
for the mayntenance of his howshold charges.

About the same time the Admiral wrate a letter with his own hand, too his
own sons, and too his brother the Andelots sons, which were browght up all
toogither under one Schoolemaister at Rochell, as is showed before. Which copy
and handwryting of his I having gotten, thowght it worthy too be translated
in manner word for word, and too be put intoo this place. It had ( quoth he)
bin most too my contentation, too have spoken these things unto you
presently, and to have seen you and talked with you. But forasmuch as I am not
able now so to do: I thowght it good too warn you too have godliness and the
fear of God continewally before your eyes, specially since trial and
experience may now teach you, that there is no great trust too be given to
the things that are termed goods. Our hope must be settled in another place
than in this earth, and other Arts are too be gotten than those which are
seen with eyes, and handled with hands. Howbeeit, forasmuch as that lies not
in our own power, we must humbly crave help at Gods hand, too bring us intoo
the surest and safest way: and you must not look that that way shall be
pleasant and delyghtfull, and flowing with all prosperity. We must follow
Jesus Christ which is gone before us, and is our Captein and sta^derdbearer. Men
in deed have taken from us what they cowld. If God continue always in the
same will, happy shall we be, and well shall it be with us. For their
woorking of this displeasure unto you, is not for any wrong or harm that you
have done them, but only for hatred of me, whereof I am sure there is none other
cawse, but that God voutsafeth to use my labor and seruis in susteyning his
Church. Therefore if we suffer harm and loss in that behalf, blessed are we:
and we shall have such a reward, as no man can have power over it, I have many
other things whereof I would write unto you if I had leyzure. At this time it
shall suffize me to warn you, and to beseech you in Gods name, to proceed
lustily in the study of vertew, and to show both in your doings and sayings,
and in all your whole life, how much you abhor all kind of vices. Obey your
Schoolemayster and all others that are set over you: yt if I may not enjoy your
presence and sight so often as I would, I may at leastwise often understand
that you be adorned with good and honest conditions. The last shall be this, that
if God will have us to suffer any inconvenience for his religion, either in our
bodies or in our goods, yet we count our selves happy and blessed. Uerely I
pray and beseech him to maynteyne you and to further you, and to defend your
youth. Fare ye well. From the town of Santon the xvi. of October.1569.
Shatilion.

When the Lords had sit often times in counsel in the same town of Santon
concerning their state: at length it seemed good by general consent, to set
sum stay among the Townsmen, and to leave certain antsignes of footmen in
garrison for defense of the town, and to go their way, with their lighthorsmen
into the borders of Tolowse where Mountalbane, a town very strong both by
nature and by hand of man, was in possession of the protestants, who had
gathered no small sum of money wherewith too pay the Almanes their wages. And
besides that, they hoped that if they were once past the two rivers of Gerownd
and Lotte, they should join with the power whereof the County Mountgomrye, a
man of great authority for his knightly prowess and skill in martial
affairs, was Captain, and by whose seruis he had pacyfied Bierne, a
territory of the King of Nauarres. In this journey, which was very peynfull
by reason of the vneeuennesse of the ways: althowgh that all the Cities were
manned with garrisons, and had cut asunder the bridges, and drawn the
ferryboats all to the other sides: yet was there none so bold as too assail
our sowldyers weeryed with the tediowsnesse of the ways, and (for the most
part) unarmed, or too stop them as they passed the ryuers and brooks on
bridges made of barges and boats. Therefore after a long and weerisomme
journey, they came at length too Mountalbane: out of the which town, the
Admiral sent messengers to the King and the Queen moother, with charge to make
earnest and humble suit in the behalf of all them that were in arms with him,
that they should not suffer so many valiant men too murder one another, as
were now ready in both the hosts too give battle, but of their clemency
make an end of those so great myseryes and inconveniences. For it was but the
counsel of certain Bishops and Cardinals which never came intoo the feelde
themselves, and of a sort of Italians which had no remors of Frenchmennes
myseryes: Nevertheless it was a point of stark madness for them too think,
that two hundred thousand Protestants, specially having so great a number of
noblemen and Gentlemen among them, could be intrapped and rid quite and clean
away withowt towche of breast: Nay verily, besides that, there were a great
number even of the Catholics themselves, which should not escape without
tasting of the common myseryes: insomuch that sum should perish by the sword,
and othersomme throwgh the ouergreatnesse and weerisomnesse of travel and
peynestaking, and the more part be sure to sustain great loss and hinderance
in their goods and possessions. Agein it was not beseeming the Majesty of a
King, that (as the Courtyers did commonly report of him,) he should not spare
his own people so he might oppress his adversaries: for it is the speech of
a Tyrant and not of a King, too say, Let friends perish, so enemies may goo
too wrecke with them. As for peace, the condition was eazie, namely that the
authority of the public Counsel which was hild at Orleance, and of the Edict
made at Paris, do take place, so as men might have liberty to exercyze the
purer Religion in sum certain places.

Upon the sending of this message, consultation was had there how to pass the
river of Gerownd, which was between Mountgomries host and ours, and seemed
very hard to be passed by reason of the depth, breadth and swiftness of the
stream. Therefore the Admiral gave counsel to take the town of Mariane
standing upon ye same rivers side. Which being done, forasmuch as the County
Mountgomrye possessed the other side, the Admiral deuyzed to make a bridge in
this wyze. First heauing out fowrteene pyles of timber, of four and twenty
foot long a piece, sharpened at the one end and armed with iron, he drove them
with rammers into the channel of the river, setting fowerteene mo full against
them in the upper part of the stream. Then upon every cupple that stood one
against another, he laid a beam well fastened with mortises and braces, and
likewize sidebeames from pair to pair, which he covered over with planks to go
upon. On either bank was made a little bridge upon two wheels, to convey
horses the eassier both of and on to the great bridge. And to strengthen the
work with all, he fastened either row of the pyles with cables and cheynes
tied to posts driven into the grownd on either side of the river. When the
work was finished, and two days spent in passing over of ye Almane horsemen: a
ship of great burden coming down the stream in the dead of the night,
dashed full against the bridge with such violence, that it shook the whole work
and made it fall asunder. This ship our men took and hild all that side of
the river, howbeeit for want of good looking to, bycawse they tied it not with
cables ynow, it was carried away with the violence and swiftness of the
stream. Therefore it seemed best to make passage for Mountgomrye with certain
bots and wherryes fastened together, whom the Almane horsemen which clozed up
his rereward followed immediately.

When the Admiral had given his sowldiers a feawe days respit to refresh
themselves, he led them to the City of Tholowse, and took many of the small
towns about it, whereof sum yielded themselves to his tuicion and
freendship, and sum were woone by force, and yet had he but two battering
pieces in his host, which he had browgt with him from Mountalbane. When he had
set those towns at sum stay, he determined to take his journey to Viuaret
and to the rivers side of Rhone. And bycawse many had put on armor in
Delphinoys that favored his side, and hild certain towns there, he sent part
of his army over thither, to attemp the wynning of mo Cities if he could. The
performance of which charge was committed to Lewis of Nassawe (of whom I have
made mention before) who passing over on a bridge of boats, did strike such a
fear into the rest of the people of Delphinoys, that they fled all of them
intoo the towns. Howbeeit forasmuchas he had no battering pieces, he thought
it was not for him to tarrye there any longer, but that he had done ynowgh for
the commendacion of his own valeantnes, and therefore when he had wasted their
feelds, he browght back his army agein safe to the Admiral within feawe
days after: which exployt of his purchaced him great praise, as well among
the Frenchmen as among the Almanes, both for the nobleness of his courage, and
for his skill in behauing him self.

Anon after, the Admiral being appalled with ouergreate labor, care, and
watching, fell sick, wherewith although he were sore cumbered, yet
notwithstanding forasmuchas he thought it best to come to the river of Loyre
with as much speed as might be, he determined to tarry long in no place, but
cawsed himself too be conveyed with his army in a horslitter. For a two
thousand men were assembled about Sharitie and Sanxerre, whom he thowght
greatly for his advantage too be joined with him: and that so much the rather,
bycawse Mounsyre Cossey the Marshall of France, whom the King had set in the
room of the Duke of Aniow after the victory at Santone, was reported too be
coming toward him with all the Kings power. To whom the Admiral sent word
by a Herault of his that was come intoo his Camp for the raunsoming of
prisoners, that Mounsyre Cossey should not need too take so much peynes too
come unto him, for he would visit him with as much speed as he could, and
ease him of the travel of that journey. When the army was come too the
Forest, behold there came Commissioners ageine from the King too treat of
composition and peace. For when the Courtyers heard that the Admiral (who a
little before seemed too be forlorn and past hope of recovery) had gathered so
great a power ageine and renewed his army: they were stricken in great fear,
least the Admiral joining with the power of Sharitie, should come ryghtfoorth
too Paris, and set fire upon the goodly howses and pleasant manours of the
Burgesses of Paris, and of the Courtyers near about the City, after which
manner they had heard that he had plaged the Burgesses of Tholowse. When the
Admiral had gone part of his journey by horslitter (as I said before) his
diseaze began to grow sorer upon him, and the phisicions let not to say,
that he could not long endure the force of it, specially being ouerloden with
so many cares. And therefore the talk of the Commissioners was broken of, and
the treaty of peace was let alone for a time, which intermission when certain
noblemen of great authority among the protestants, took in displeazure because
of the prolonging of the wars, and made complaint to ye Commissioners that it
was not meet yt ye communication of peace should be broken of for ye sickness
of the Admiral being but one man, for though he happened to die, he should
leave a great sort alive behynd him, with whom they might treat of composition:
the Commissioners made them answer, that they woondered very much to see, that
they perceived not of what estimation the authority of their Admiral was: for
if he should dye to day (quoth they,) tomorrowe we would not offer you a cup
of water, as who should say, ye knew not that the only name of the Admiral is
more worth among you, than such another army as great as this. Within feawe
days after, when the Admiral was sommewhat cheered, and strengthened, they
fell to consulting agein of peace, and certain were chozen too go with the
Kings Commissioners, and to carye these Instructions with them. That nothing
was more wished of the protestants than peace, nor nothing grieved them worse
than war: but yet there was not any of them, which minded not to adventure
much greeuowser peynes, yea and death it self, rather than to forsake Gods
Religion which they had professed. Wherefore if the king woold grant them
liberty too use the pure religion, as he had done in former years, and
privilege certain towns for the same: there was none of them all but he
woold most willingly and gladly lay away weapon for ever. The Admiral having
given these instructions too the Commissioners, dislodged his Camp, and ere
long after took ye Town of Reneleduc in his way, whither certain of the
foreryders of Mounsyre Cosseyes host were come. And from thenceforth there
escaped not almost any day without sum skirmish: and one day the hearts of all
the sowldyers were so inflamed too battle, that a little more woold have made
the matter too have coome too a pitched feeld, bycawse that whereas there was
but a Brook between both the hosts, Mountgomrey breaking the array of the
adversaries Uaward (whereof one Mounsyre Valet a Gascon, a man of great
estimation in his Country had the leading) did put them too flight.

Within feawe days after, the king sent Commissioners agein too the Camp, too
ask trewce, but so long till the things concerning the composition might be
dispatched. For the Burgesses of Paris (who were of very great estimation with
the king) were sore afraid of the wastings and burnings that were threatened
them: another is there any kind of people in all France, that is more feerce in
provoking war when it is far of from their doors, nor more cowardly in
accepting any conditions of peace when war commes home to them. When the
Commisioners had gone too and fro on both sides a good sort of times, at
length an Edict was browght from the King, whereby he gave men leave to exercyze
and maynteine the Religion in certain places, and for the assuring thereof,
gave the^ four cities in pledge, namely Rochell, Mountalbane, Conyak, and
Sharitie.

When this peace (which is reckened as the third) was made, and the Kings Edict
proclaimed over all France: the Admiral having first conveyed home the Almane
horsemen to the borders of Germany, browght back the two young Princes (of
Navarre and Condey) too Roehell too the Queen of Navarre, determyning too
abide there, until he might perceive that the peace was throwghly settled
euerywhere. Within feawe moonethes, trusting too the Kings promises, and too
the oaths both of the King himself, and of his brethren, and of all the
Parlamentes, forasmuch as he hoped that after the owtwearing of so many
toils, he should now get some rest, he inclined his mind too marriage agein,
at the persuasion of his friends, and specially being invited by the kinsfolk
of the Lady Iaquet of Moulet, the widow of the Lord Antonie Moulet, daughter of
the County Entremont, of whose modesty, godliness, and holy conversation he
had herd much a good while ago. Therefore being honorably browght unto him too
Rochell, he took her too his wife. And within a while after, he gave a
dawghter of his named Loyse, in marriage too Mounsyre Telignie, a young
Gentleman of great Nobility and singular vertew. No gentleman in all France
seemed more dear and delightful too the king, than this Telignie was, for his
singular towardness. And therefore it is the common brute among all men, that
this man's report was the only thing that persuaded the Admiral, too conceive
good opinion of the kings faithfulness and favor toward him.

Anon after, in the year of our Lord. 1571, the Admiral being invited by
most gentle and honorable letters of the kings, repaired too the Court then
lying at Bloys, and was requested too be the maker of the marriage between the
kings sister, and Henry the young king of Navarre: [for the better bringing
whereof too passe] the King had declared by his messengers and commissioners,
that there could not be deuized a more sure bond too link toogither the publik
peace and concord, nor a certeiner means too bring all the states too an
atonement. Within a feawe days after the Admiralles departure, the young Duke
of Gwyse being persuaded by the counsel of the Cardinal his uncle, and by his
moothers inticement, began too renew the old quarrel of his fathers murder.
The King therefore using his authority in the matter, did set down a form of
composition, which he determined too have them both sworn unto, and too
confirm it with their seals, so as all rememberance of yt dissension should
be utterly wiped away. Notwithstanding, when as the Duke of Gwyse came too
Paris within a feawe days after with a great train of armed men, and the
Admiral (who was then gone home too Shattilion,) being certified thereof by
Telignie his son in law, requested the king too give him leave to keep
sum convenient guard about him in his house: the King wrate to him with his
own hand, (which letter was delivered too Mounsyre Brikmavv, a man of great
estimation, too carry unto him) that he liked very well that he should take as
good heed too himself as he could, giving him leave too guard himself and his
castle with as great a company as he listed: and he required him too trust too
his good will toward him, and not too dowt but that he should both hope for
and look for as much maintenance at his hand, as any good subject might look
for at a good princis hand. This letter indicted with many words too that
purpoze, many men red with great pleasure, bycawse it was written with the
Kings own hand: and now they thowght that his good will toward the Admiral
was not too be dowted of any more. In respect whereof, Lewis of Nassaw, of
whom I have made mention before, thinking that it was not for him too let slip
this occasion of speeding his own affairs, began to break with the king (who
had invited him secretly too the Court) on the behalf of his brother the Prince
of Orendge, and told him how there were many Cities in Low Duchland, which
were so werye of the madness, lechery, covetousness and cruelty of the
Spanyardes, that if he woold reach them his helping hand, they woold willingly
and gladly submit themselves too his tuicion and jurisdiction. When certain
days had bin spent about this matter, at length the king made the County of
Nassawe faithful promis, that he woold send the Admiral thither out of hand
with a great power: and it was couenanted betwixt them, that if that war had
good success, then the King should have all the Low Country from Antwarp too
Picardie: and Holland, Zeland, and Fryzeland should be left too the Prince of
Orendge.

About the same time were letters intercepted from Cardinal Perlewe too the
Cardinal of Lorreine: the conteintes whereof were, that the king was never in
better mind, and therefore he was in very good hope of the prosperous success
of their common conceits, by reason of the singular earnestness of the king
himself, and of the Queen Moother, and of Henry the Duke of Aniow. For the
king had behaved himself much more wisely, and played his part far more
cunningly at the Admiralles coming too the Court, than any of them had looked
for: by means whereof the king had made the Admiral believe, that there was no
occasion left why he should suspect him, or think amiss of his good will
toward him, which thing the Cardinal of Lorrein knew well ynowgh too be the
growndwoork of all the deuyce which they had in hand. And whereas communication
was ministered of making war upon the king of Spain, and the king had
accepted the same with so free a courage, as the Admiral conceived very good
opinion of his good will toward him: those shifts were too be pursewed,
till their secret practyze might take his expected event. As for the king of
Spain, he was diligently informed of all things, and such means used, as he
should not mislyke of the preparature of war that was pretended too owtward
show, bycawse all those things were applied too the accomplishing of a
singular good purpose. Therefore whatsoever the Cardinal had herd too have bin
done before, or should here herafter: let him assure himself that the king
would not start from the thing that he had once begone. For whatsoever was
done or too be done, was directed and applied too the end of their
determined purpose: and there was not any thing whereof the king, and his
mother, and his brother had so great a care. Wherefore as soon as the matter
were dispatched, he woold write too the Cardinal of Lorrein with all speed,
and send him a sure and faithful messenger for the nonce. As towching the king
of Nauarres marriage, he hoped it woold be browght of a hand within a little
while. For that must set their matters abroche. In the which mean season,
the time that was appointed for the laying of the four towns too pledge woold
be run out.

He that sent the Admiral the copy of this letter, hoped that the reading
thereof woold forewarne him too take heed too himself, and too lay for ye
safety of his state. But he trusted so much too the kings faithfulness and
great good will toward him, (specially bycawse it was confirmed by the
continewall persuasions of his sonnylawe Telignie) that whereas in all other
things he seemed most sharpwitted, and of very great foresight, in this one
case he was by a kind of destiny stark blind. Howbeeit forasmuch as there is a
treatise set forth already, entitled the declaration of the Hellish slawghter,
containing the discourse of the whole matter, with the tragical issew thereof,
and the celebrating of the king of Nauarres marriage with all manner of pomp and
royalty of shows: I will as now set down no more but the things that
concern the last time of the Admiralles life, whereof I have gotten most
certain testimonies. Notwithstanding, I will first set down a copy of a
letter which he wrate the self same day with his own hand from Paris, too his
wife then great with child. For seeing I had the original copy in my hand,
which seemed to carry great weight with it for the setting forth of the truth
of the story: I thowght it was not to be let pass in this place. And therefore
I have translated it thus, in manner word for word. Greeting. This day (my
right deer beloved wife) is the marriage of the kings sister, and of the king of
Navarre celebrated. These next.3. days will be spent in plays, ba^kettings,
masks and triu^phs. The king has promised me faithfulli, yt afterward he will
bestow some time in heering the complaints yt are brought to him from sundry
parts of his realm for violating of his edict of peace. In which matter it is
good right that I should employ myself to the uttermost of my power. For
although I have great desire to see thee, yet would it be a greef both to me,
and to thee also (as I think) if my indeuer and duty should want in the
furtherance of that matter. Nevertheless, this let will not stay my departure out
of the City so long, but yt I may come away the next week. If I had no
further respect tha^ of my self, it were more pleasure for me too be with
thee, tha^ to tarry any longer in this Court, for causes which thou shall know
of me when I comme home. But I must have more regard of the common weal, than
of private love or commodity. I have diverse other things too impart too thee,
as soon as I may conveniently talk with thee, whereof I assure thee I am
desirous night and day. But all that I can tell thee of as now, is this. It was
this day past four of the clock in the afternoon, ere the marriage mass was
celebrated. While that was a singing, the king of Navarre walked up and down
with certain noblemen of our Religion which followed him, in a certain yard
with out the Church. There are a number of smaller things, which I will
defer till we may talk toogither. In the mean while I beseech God too
preserve thee my deerbeloued and most loving wife. At Paris the.18. of August.
1572. A three days ago I was diseased with the cholik and the stone. But (as
God woold) it lasted not past a.9. or.10. hours: and as now (such is Gods
goodness) I am free from all such peynes. I promis thee I will trubble none of
them in the thronges of their feasts and plays. Once agein Farewell. The
subscription of the letter was this: Thy loving husband, Shattilion.

The.5. day after the Date of this letter, which was the.22. day of August, as
the Admiral went homeward from the kings counsel about dinner time, and passed
by the house of Villemure a canon, scholemaister too the young Duke of Gwyse,
he was stricken with a hargabus shot out of a Lattiswindowe, and wownded in
three places. For the forefinger of his right hand was broken in pieces, and
his left arm shot throwgh with two pellets of brass: which thing the
foremencioned story of the hellish slawghter has breefly towched. Hervppon
the Phisicions and Surgions were sent for out of hand, among whom was Ambrose
Parey the Kings Surgion, which was takent too have great skill in Leachecraft.
He that was witness of the things insewing, did both see them and also hold
up the Admiralles arm as he lay upon his bed. The said Ambrose began his cure
at the broozed finger, and did cut it of not without putting his patient to
great pain. For inasmuch as his pinsons were not sharp ynowgh, he was feign to
open them thryce, and thryce to grype them ageine together. Afterward he
launced both the sids of his left arm where the pellets had perced through:
the pain whereof the Admiral abode, not only with a stowt courage, but also
with a steadfast cou^tena^ce. Yea and whereas they that hild up his arms and
behild those launcings were not able to forbear weeping: the Admiral
perceiving them too be dismayed, said unto them. Why weep ye my friends? I
think my self blissed in suffering these wounds for Gods name sake. And
therwtall looking upon Merline a minister of Gods word, my friends (quoth he)
these are Gods benefits. In deed I am full of peine: but I acknowledge this to
be the will of our Lord God, and I think his majesty that he has voutsafed
me so great honor, as to lay sum cross upon me for his most holy names
sake. Therefore let us pray him too grant me the gift of perseverance. Then
beholding Merlyne moorning and lamenting. My Merlyne (quoth he) why do thou
not rather comfort me? Ye say truth sir (answered Merlyne) another is there
any greater or surer comfort for you, than to think continually that God does
you great honor, in deeming you worthy to suffer these greefes for his name
and religions sake. My Merlyne (replied the Admiral) if God should handle me
according to my deserts and woorthynesse, and deal with me according too his
justice: I should have far other manner of greefes too endure. But blessed
be his Name for using his mercy and clemency toward me his most
unworthy servant. O Sir (quoth another) hold ye still in that godly mind.
For you have cawse too give great thanks too him for his goodness, in that
he has left you the most part of your body whole and sownde. Therefore you
have in these wowndes a greater warrant of Gods mercy, than token of his
wrath: specially since he has left you your head and mind unwounded. Then
answered Merlyne, You do very well too turn away your mind and conceyt from
your strykers, and from them that gave you these wowndes, unto God alone. For
surely it was his hand that laid these strokes upon you, and it is no time for
you too think now upon the cutthrots and murderers. As for me (quoth the
Admiral) undoubtedly I forgive freely and with all my heart both him that struck
me, and them that did set the striker to do it. For I am sure it is not in
their power too do me any harm, no not even thowgh they should kill me:
for I am out of all dowt, that death is too me a passage unto life, which
saying he repeted ageine anon after too the Marshal Mounsyre Damuyle, who came
too him too visit him, in the heering of Merlyne, who escaped the slawghter and
is yet still alive. And when the same Merlyne told him that the calamities and
myseryes which happen too godly men in this life, do commonly stir them up to
pray unto God the more earnestly, and quicken them up to reverence Gods power:
by and by the Admiral did burst out into these words with a loud voice and
vehement courage, saying: Lord God, heavenly father, pity me of thy mercy and
clemency, and remember not the wickedness of my former life. If thou look
upon our faults, and upon our lightness and unfaithfulness in breaking of thy
Laws, Lord who shall abide it? who shall be able to endure the force of thy
wrath? Setting aside all fabulous Gods, I call upon thee alone, acknowledging
and worshipping thee the etetnall father of the eternal God Jesus Christ,
Throwgh him I beseech thee to grant me thy holy spirit, and the gift of
patience. In thine only mercy do I trust. In that only is my whole hope
repozed. Whither it be thy will to give me present death, or to prolong my life
yet longer, behold, I protest my self to be ready unto both: nothing dowting
but that if I must die out of hand, thou will take me out of hand intoo thy
blessed and heavenly rest. And if thou suffer me too continewe longer in this
life, grant me O heavenly Father, that I may spend the rest of my time,
all wholly in spreading abroad the glory of thy name, and in the reuerencing
and observing of thy most holy religion. When he had ended this prayer, Merlyne
asked of him nevertheless, whyther it could like him that his Servants should
also join their prayers with his. To whom the Admiral answered, with all my
heart, and you Master Merlyne speak on in the behalf of this our
congregation. While Merlyne was uttering a prayer applied to the present case,
the Admiral lifting up his eyes to heaven, showed a wonderful earnestness of
mind in praying. After the end of the prayer, when Merline alleged the
examples of the ancient Martyrs, and told how that even from Abraham and Adam,
no man had ever employed his seruis notably to God and his Church, but he was
afflicted with many inconveniences: the Admiral interrupting his speech, said
he felt himself greatly confirmed by his talk, and took great comfort by
his rehersall of those Martyrs and godly fathers, and that his greef was much
assuaged by it.

Soon after, Mounsyre Cossey and Mounsyre Damuyle the Marshalls of France
came unto him, assuring him yt they were very sorry for his mischaunce, and
that there had not happened any thing to them a good while, that was a greater
greef and corzie too them: nevertheless it was meet and agreeable too the
wonted courage of his mind, that he should pluck up his heart and show himself a
man: for his own prowess had given him much more, than yt mishapp could take
away. Then the Admiral turning to Cossey, said: You remember what I told you a
while ago: undoubtedly you must abide as much your self. Then said the Damuyle,
my Lord Admiral, I will not take upon me either to comfort you or to incorage
you to valeantnes and constancy of mind. You your self are he from whom such
precepts of comfort and corageowsnesse are to be taken. But I pray you see
wherein my seruis may pleasure you. I marvel whence these things come. The
Admiral answered: other than the Duke of Gvvyse, I suspect none: and yet I
dare not affirm that for a certeintie. Notwithstanding, Gods goodness has
lately tawght me, to fear another mine enemies nor yet death, which I know to
be utterly unable to hurt me, and rather to be a blessed and everlasting rest.
For I know that God in whom alone I put my trust, is another deceytfull nor
untrue: howbeeit that in this my misfortune, nothing has happened more to my
greef, than that I see my self bereft of liberty, to show to the King how
much I was minded to have done for his sake: (his saying so, was in respect of
the matter concerning Flaunders.) Would God I might talk a little with him, for I
have certain things which it stands him greatly on hand to know, and I think
there is not any man that dares report them unto him.

In the mean season the King of Navarre and the Prince of Condey, complained
to the King of the heynowsenesse of the fact. To whom the King answered thus: I
swear by God whom I take too witness, that I will revenge this fact so
severely, as it may be an example too all that shall come after. The woman
that was fownd in the house (wherowt of the Hargabut was shot at the Admiral,)
and a boy of hirs were taken and cast in prizon. About two of the clock in
the afternoon, the King being certified of the Admiralls desire, went unto
him, accompanied with the Queen moother, the Kings two brothers, the Duke
Mounpauncer, the Cardinals of Burbon, Mounsyre Damuyle, Mounsyre Tauanne, and
Mounsyre Cossey Marshalls of France, ye County of Rhets, Mou^syre Torrey and
Mounsyre Meruey ye Damuyles brothers, after whom followed Gonzaga Duke of
Niuers. At the first the King commanded all that were of the Admirals howshold
to be shet out of the chamber, saving Mounsyre Telignie and his wife, and one
person that escaped alive from the slawghter, who marked aduyzedly what was
done and said at that time. When the king was come to the bedds side, I thank
your majesty most humbly (quoth the Admiral) that you have vowtsafed me so
great honor, and taken so great peines for my sake. The King pretending
gladness for yt great courage of his mind, willed him with very fair words to hope
well, and to be of good confort. Sir (quoth ye Admiral) there are three things
whereof I was desirous to talk with your majesty. The first is mine own
faythfulnes and allegiance toward your highness. So may I have the favor and
mercy of God, at whose iudgmentseate this mischaunce will peradventure set me
ere it be long, as I have ever borne a good heart to your majesty's person and
crown. And yet I am not ignorant how often maliciowse persons have accuzed me
too your highness, and charged me as a trubbler of the state. But (as God
would) the matter it self has sufficiently showed, thowgh I my self should
hold my peace, that the only cawse of all those great slanders is, that I
have withstoode those men's ouerboldnes and owtrage, and defended the
authority of your Edicts against their trubblesum and violent attempts, and
could not bear that they should break the promis which you had made so often
with oath unto your subjects. Of this my meening God is best witness, who
will examine the case between me and my backefreends, and decyde it according
to his righteowsensse. Agein, forasmuchas I have bin advanced to so great
honor and authority in this Realm by your majesty's father and graundfather,
and confirmed in the same by your bownteowsenesse: I cannot discharge my dewtie
toward you, without making humble petition to you, too vowtsafe too remedy
the great number of hurlyburlyes that have kept your Realm occupied now a
good while. Now come I too the Flaunders matter. Never any of your aunceters
had so notable an occasion of welspeeding. Many Cities of nether Dutcheland do
sew for your friendship, as you know, and are desirous to commit them selves to
your protection. This occasion I see to be openly skorned in your Court, and
to be taken from you throwgh ye fault of a feaw. Now alate, the army that
Mou^syre Genlys led, was surpryzed of the Duke of Alua by a train, and for the
most part discomfited and put too the sword. You know what a sort of
Catholics were in that army. Now what Religion suppoze you them too be of,
or what mind think you that they bear toward their own countrymen and
followers of the same religion, which make but a mock at so great slawghter of
them? A straw can scarce be stirred in your secret counsel, nor any voice be
uttered there, but it is byandby carried too the Duke of Alua, I beseech you,
can we hope for any thing, when they that are of the privy counsel with your
self or your brothers, do blow abroad even your secretest deuyces too
strangers, yea and to your enemies? Sir, I would very feign that you had a
care of this thing, and I beseech you so have hereafter. The last, which I
would wish you too have no less care of, is the observing of your Edict of
pacification. You know you have oftentimes confirmed it by oath: and you know
that not only foreign nations, but also your neybowrprinces and friends are
witnesses of the often renewing of the same oath. O Sir, how unseemly is it that
this your oath should be counted welneere but for a jest and moccage, as it is
now commonly taken. Will foreign Princes and nations make any account hereafter
of you or of your promis? Within these feawe days past, as a Nurce was
carrying home of a young babe from baptim not far from Troys in Shampayne, and
was returning from a sermon that was made in a certain village by you assigned
for the same purpoze: certain seditiowse persons which lay in wait by the
way, killed both the Nurce and the child, and sum of the company which had
bin bidden to the Christening,

Consider I beseech you how horrible the owtrage of that murder was, and how
well it may stand with your honor and dignity, too suffer so great owtrages
unrevenged and unpunished in your kingdom. Too this his oration the king
answered thus: that he never dowted of his faythfulnesse, but took him for a
good subject, a valiant man, and an excellent Captein, even for such a one as
none was comparable too him in all his Realm. And if I had had any other
opinion of you ( quoth he): I woold never have done as I did. It was marked
aduyzedly, that the King answered not one word concerning the Flaunders
affairs, and that he answered to the third point thus. That he meant nothing
more than that his Edictes of pacification should be kept faithfully and
severely: and that for the same cawse he had sent commissioners intoo all
parts of his Realm, for witness whereof he cyted forthwith the Queen his
moother, who turning too the Admiral, said, my Lord, there is nothing trewer:
Commissioners are sent forth intoo all parts. Yea ( quoth the Admiral) of
that sort of men which valewed my head at the price of fifty thousand Crowns.
Then said the King, my Lord Admiral, it is too be feared least this
contention impair your health, it is better for you too take your rest, the
hurt is yours, but the despyte is mine. But I swear too you by the life of
God, that I will punish this fact so severely, as it shall be remembered for
ever. We have a woman and a boy in prizon, which were taken in the house. Is
it your desire too have any too sit upon the examinacion and judgment of
them? As for that matter ( quoth the Admiral) I refer it too your majesty's
own discretion and justice. Notwithstanding, forasmuch as you require mine
advice, I would wish that Mounsyre Cauanie, and Mounsyre Masparotte were called
too the doing of it. Also the Admiral named a third person, but he that is
the witness of this talk has forgotten his name. The Admiral added, surely
I think there needs no far search too be made for the author of this deed.
Upon these words the king and the Queen Mother went nearer the Admirals
pillow, and talked with him softly. Of which communication he that stood by ye
beds side could here nothing else, but that at the last the Queen said,
Although I be but a woman, yet I am of opinion that it is to be looked too
betimes. The king at his going away, connseled the Admiral too be removed
into the palace: and so said the County Rets once or twice too the Admirals
sonnylaw, and too the other that stood at the beds side: adding further, that
he feared that the men of Paris woold make such a stir, as the king should not
well be able to appeaze. It was answered him that none of all the Surgions
allowed that deuyce, but were all of opinion, that the pain of his wounds
being so green, would increace by the shaking of his body. And as for the
Parisians, they were no more too be feared than a sort of women, so long as
the king continued his faithful good will toward the Admiral: For the name
of King was of such estimation every where throwghout all France, and
specially in Paris, that the very mention thereof woold out of hand appeaze the
common people, were they never so furiowse and out of their right wits. Then the
king would needs see the brazen pellet wherewith the Admiral was wounded, and
asked of him whither he felt any great peine when his finger was cut of, and
his arm launced. And whereas he that showed him the pellet, had the sleeue of
his cote alberayed with blud: the king demanded of him, whither that were
done with the Admirals blud or no, and whither much blud had issewed from his
wounds or no. Too whom the other answered as he thowght good: Then, I am sure
( quoth the king) that there is not a stowter nor a constanter man too be
found this day in the world: and therwithall he delivered him the pellet agein.
Which when his mother coming after him had behild, I am glad ( quoth she) that
the pellet is out of his flesh: for I remember, yt when the Duke of Gwise was
slain in his camp, some surgio^s told me, yt although there had bin some poison
mixed with it, yet there was no danger when the pellet was once out. Then said
another, Madame, we were not so contented, but we gave the Admiral a drink, to
help him betimes if any poison had bin mixed with it.

Anon after when the king was gone out, the Lord John Ferrers the Uidame of
Sharters entering intoo the Admiralles chamber, and comforting him with many
words, added at the last, that his enemies had openly bewrayed their
cowardlinesse, in that they durst not assail him otherwise than at a
Lattiswindowe: and that the Admiral was blissed and happy, in that he had hild
out in renown of so great prowess unto that age. Too whom the Admiral
answered: Nay, I think my self blessed in that God has vowtsafed too power out
his mercy upon me. For they be rightly happy, whose sins and wickedness
God forgiueth. Not long after, by the advice of the king of Navarre, and of the
Prince of Condey, the cheef Lords went toogither intoo a parlour underneath
the Admiralles chamber, too see what counsel might be taken as the matter and
time required. There the Lord Ferrers showed with many earnest words, that
the best was too get them spedily out of Paris, for it was not too be dowted,
but that this was as the first pageant of some tragedy, whereof the rest should
follow soon after. Others reasoned against it, saying it was ynowgh if they
demanded Justice at the kings hand, so as he should command an inquiry too
be made of the fact, and judgment too be executed accordingly: in which
opinion Mounsyre Telignie stood very stiffly, affirming that he knew the kings
mind throwghly and assuredly, and therefore that they owght not too think amiss
of his good will.

The next day, certain of the Admirals friends having aduertizement that there
was much huffling and shuffling in the City, and privy conueying of armor
and weapon together in many places: thought it very expedient too consult of
the matter betymes, and that no good was too be looked for of such turmoyling
and huddling toogither. Hervppon charge was given to one of them that are
witnesses of these things, too go too the king, and too certify him of the
stirring of the people and the clattering of armor, and therwithall too
request him too command sum competent number of his guard to keep watch at
the Admiralles gate, for his defense. As soon as the king herd that, byandby
being sore displeazed with it (as it seemed) and marueling at it, he began too
inquire of him who had told it him, and whither it were reported so too the
Admiral: and therwithall commanded the County Rhetes to call the Queen his
moother. The Queen was scarce come in, but the king being in a great chafe
(as it should seem) said, what a mischeef? What a do is here? This man
tells me that the people are in an uproar, and ready too put on armor. They
be in no uproar, said she, another do they arm themselves: but you know you
have given commaundment, that every man should keep himself within his own
ward till the break of day, least any tumult might perchance insew. That is
true ( quoth the king) but yet I gave charge that no man should put on armor.
Then the other man, too go throwgh with the rest of his errand, desired the
king too send sum part of his guard too the Admiral. Too whom the Duke of
Angeow, who was comme thither with his moother, said: very well, take Mounsyre
Cossins too you with fifty Hargabuttes. No ( quoth the other) it is ynowgh for
us if we may have but six of the kings guard with us. For they shall bear as
much sway with the people, as a greater number of armed men. Nay mary, ( quoth
the King) and so said the Duke of Aniow too, take Mounsyre Cossins too you: you
cannot chooze a fitter man. At which words, uttered (as it should seem) with
stomach enough, ye messenger who knew Mounsyre Cossins to be ye Admirals deadly
enemy, was notwithstanding stryken dumb. And ere he was gone far from the
chamber, he fownd Mounsyre Thorrey the Marshall Memorancies brother, who
whispering in his ear, said: there could not a more hateful keeper have bin
appointed too you. Too whom the other answered, you see how skornfully the king
commanded it: we have committed our selves too his courtesy: but yet you are
witnesses of my former answer too the kings appointment.

Within a feaw hours after, Mounsyre Cossins came too the Admirals lodging,
accompanied with 50. hargabutters: and choze two howses next it for himself to
place his warders in. And anon after followed Rambulet the knight Herbinger, who
according too the Duke of Angeowes mind, which he had given forth in his
former talk, commanded all the noblemen and gentlemen that were Catholics,
too remove out of that street, and too lodge sumwhere else, and distributed
those lodgings too the Admirals friends and acquaintance. Than the which device
none could be invented either more subtle or fitter for performance of the
things that came to pass afterward. Toward the evening there happened a
thing that gave many men no small occasion of mistrust. A certain lad browght a
cupple of borespeares to the Admirals lodging by the commaundme^t of Thelignie,
whom Cossins bade back, and woold not suffer the borespeares too be carried
in. The matter was reported to the king of Navarre, who was within with the
Admiral. Whereupon he came down and asked of Cossins how he durst be so bold
as to do so. Mounsyre Cossins answered him flatly, that he did it by the kings
commaundment and appointment. Nevertheless ( quoth he) seeing it is your
pleasure, let them be carried in. The same day the king [of Nauarre] had sent
secretly too his friends, and often warned them too repair as many as might
be, near unto the Admiralles lodging, and too fill all that ward. Within
feawe hours after, there was a counsel called under the Admiralles chamber,
Where Marline renewing the former opinion, was very earnest too have the
Admiral conveyed out of Paris, and that his friends and familiars should
depart with him: for he saw many things every hour, which did greatly
increace his mistrust of bad meazure. Contrariwyse, all the residew for the
most part were of opinion that Justice was too be demanded at the Kings
hand, and that request was too be made, that all the Gwisians should depart
out of Paris, bycawse they bare too much sway with the people of the Town.
Which opinion the king of Navarre, and the Prince of Condey, and well near all
the rest allowed, and refuzed the other: so much the rather, bycawse Mounsyre
Telignie auowched that the king should be wronged, if any man should dout of
his faithfulness and upright dealing: wherefore it should suffyze too demand
Justice meeldly and quietly at his hand: for the matter was yet green, and if
any ouergreat stoutnesse should be vzed, it were too be feared least the king
woold be offended at it. In that Counsel was present one Bucauan a Picard:
and it was marked that he spoke not one word, but hild his peace and noted
every man's opinion, which dealing did greatly increace the suspicion that had
bin conceived of him now long ago. For many thowght it strange, that he
professing the purer religion, should notwithstanding be so hyghly in favor
with the Queen Moother, and resort so often too the County Rhetes, and others
of the Queens familiar friends.

About the third hour of the night, there rose another occasion of suspicion
throwghe Mounsyre Cossins frowardness: who espying the Corselets of Mounsyre
Telignie, and Mounsyre Gvverchie too be browght in, did put back the bringer.
Upon the knowledge whereof, Gvverchie being of warlike disposition, and very
feerce of nature, went out too Cossins, and giving him evil language, was like
too have made a fray with him. But Telignie appeazed the quarrel with gentle
speech: for (as all men report) he was a yoongman of a meeld and meek
dispozition, and such a one as being deceived with the Kings fair words, was
wont to advance and commend his sincerity without meazure or end. Therefore
when as Gvverche and diverse others asked of him whither he thought it good for
them to tarry and keep watch all night in the Admiralls house, he answered
them all that it was labor more than needed, and gave them thanks with very
loving words. By means whereof it fell out, that none lodged in the Admirals
house that night, but only Cornaton, Labon, Yolette the Master of the
Admiralls horses, Merline the minister of Gods word, Ambrose the Kings Surgion,
the Admiralls chamberseruants, and a four or five other servants at the most.
For Telignie had gotten himself with his wife intoo his own house which joined
wall to wall to the Admiralls lodging. Nevertheless there watched five
Svvissers of the King of Nauarres guard at the gate of the owtter court, whom he
had commanded to tarry there all night for the Admiralles defense.

Sommewhat before daylyght, word was browght to Labon, that there was one at
the gate sent by the King to the Admiral, who desired too be let in. Labon
taking the keys ran too the gate out of hand and opened it. Byandby Cossens
cawght hold of him and killed him with his dagger: and being guarded with his
hargabuzers, he rushed forthwith into the house, and killed sum running away
amazed and othersomme as they met him: and set all on a noize and uproar. Then
brake he open the door at the stayers foot, and althowgh he slew one of the
Swissers with the shot of a hargabut: yet was he kept from coming up the
stairs, by setting certain chests in his way. The Admiral and they that were
with him, being waked with the noyze of ye pistole^s and Curriers, and dowting
not but that their enemies were broken in upon them, did forthwith fall flat
upon the ground, and began to pray for peace at Gods hand, and too call unto
him for mercy. The Admiral himself being lifted out of his bed, and having
put on his nightgowne, commanded Merlyne too make prayers before him, and he
calling upon Christ our God with vehement sighing, fell too commending of his
spirit intoo his hands, which he had received of God to enjoy. When the
witness of all these things came into his chamber, being demanded of Ambrose
the Surgio^ what noyze that was: he turned himself to ye Admiral and said:
Sir, it is God that calls us unto him. They have broken intoo the house, and
there is no way too withstand them. As for me ( quoth the Admiral) I have
prepared myself unto death before hand. Shift you for yourselues if you can
possibly: for it wilbee in vain for you too go about too save my life. I
commend my soul to Gods mercy. They that are the witnesses of these things,
noted that the Admiral did no more change his countenance at these doings,
than if no strange thing at all had happened unto him. All the residew
(saving only Nicolas Muskie, a right trusty servant of his, and his
interpreter for the Dutche tongue) getting themselves away intoo the garrettes of
the house, and finding a window in the roof, fell too shifting for their
lives by flight, and diverse of them escaped by the benefit of the night.

By that time Cossins having removed the chests, and the other stoppes that
were cast in his way, browght in first certain of the Swissers apparelled in
longcotes guarded with black, white, and green, whereby it was perceived that
they were of ye Duke of Aniowes guard. These beholding their four countrymen
upon the stayers, did hurt none of them. But Cossins being armed with a
Corslet and a sheeld, and brandishing his naked sword in his hand, did by and
by command the hargabuzere that was next him too shoot at them, with which
shot one of them was stricken stark dead out of hand. As Soon as they were
broken intoo the Admirals chamber, one Beheme a Germane, borne in the Dukedom
of Wirtemberg, (whose father (by report) was the master of the ordinance,)
being the first that stepped intoo the chamber, and seeing the Admiral sitting
there, said: Art not thou the Admiral? Yis I am he ( quoth the Admiral:) and
thou young man have regard of my hoar head and old age. But Beheme without
giving him any mo words, struck him on the head with his sword, and was the
first that imbrued himself with the Admiralles blud. After him followed
Cossins, Attignie, and all the residew. As for the rest of the things that
concern the murders and saccages yt were done in Paris those.2. whole days
together, they be recorded already in the foresaid discourse of the hellish
manslawghter. The Admiralls body being thrown down out of a window, was
trampled under foot by the young Duke of Gvvyse, and anon after tumbled into
the mire in the open street, and mangled and used with all the vilanie that
might be, and a three days after carried out of the City by the furious
multitude, and hanged up by the feet upon the gallows of Mountfalcon. There
it remained certain days as a banner of the people of Parisis victory, and
as a monument of their madness and cruelty, which they executed upon him
both quick and dead: which deed will not only never be forgotten, but also
be the destruction of Paris, as a number of wise and discreet men foredeeme.
But within a feaw days after, the Admiralls body was taken down in the night
by certain horsemen, and buried in a secret place.

Among diverse wrytings that were taken in the riffeling of his stuff, was
fownd his will, made a little before the end of the last wars, which ye Queen
moother commanded too be red before certain of her familiar friends. In the
same there was one article, wherein the testator counseled the King, that he
should not gine his brothers too great richesse, and authority. At the
heering whereof, the Queen turning too Frauncis Duke of Alaunson the Kings
brother, said: Lo here your odd friend the Admiral, whom you loved so dearly
and set so much store by. To whom the Duke of Alaunson answered: I cannot tell
how much he was my friend: but surely he has well showed, even by this
counsel, how greatly he loved the king. Not unlike too this was the Queen of
Inglands Ambassadors answer. Who, when the Queen moother told him that the
Admiral had cou^seled the king too be always gelows of the power of Ingland:
answered, surely that mind of his was evil toward Inglande, but singularly
good toward France.

When tidings of the slaughter at Paris was carried into Ingland, Scotland, and
Germany, too such as hild the same Religion of the Gospel which the Admiral
had done: it is incredible too tell how great hatred it procured too the king
and the Queen moteer, specially forasmuch as in those feawe days, almost ten
thousand Protestants being stricken in fear, and amazed with that storm, fled
intoo those countries: who making report that the Admiral was a noble
gentleman, a great and wise captain, and the glory of their country, blazed
the authors of that wickedness for rank murderers. Too the increace whereof
made also the speeches and complaints of diverse young Gentlemen of Germany,
who being sent into France too study there, and being stricken in fear with
the said storm, returned home for the most part spoiled and stripped out of
all that ever they had, and therefore cursed not only the owtrageous
heinousness of the fact, but also ye whole realm of France among their
parents and kinsfolk. Othersomme which had served the Admiral in the former
wars, commended his virtue euerywhere among the princes of Germany. For
(which is thowght too be the hardest thing in Martial affairs) he excelled
not only in counsel, but also in prowess, whereas commonly wisdom breeds
fearfulness, and courage breeds rashness. Furthermore, not a few which were
familiarly acquainted with the Admirals life and conversation at home in his
own house, going abroad among princes, commended him with singular praises for
his innoce^cie, stayednesse, mildness, and wonderful zelowsenesse in
following the religion: which thing might be chiefly perceived by the inward
conversation of his life at home, whereof I will add sumwhat here, which I know
for certeintie, partly by the record of other men, and partly by mine own
sight and beholding. At his first rizing in the mornings, (which was meetly
early adays) he woold cast his nightgowne about him, and kneeling down upon
his knees, take upon him too be as the mouth of his whole company in praying
and calling upon God. And so the residew kneeled all down after his example,
and Prayer was made in the same manner that is used commonly in the French
Churches. After the end of prayer, look what time was between that and the
Sermon time, he bestowed it euerywhit, either in hearing of the delegates of
the Churches that were sent unto him, or in the dispatching of other publik
affairs. For afterward, each other day there was a sermon at warning given,
and some certain Psalm of David was sung. When the Sermon was done, he
returned too his business, until dinner time. Which being ready, all his
household, saving a feawe that were occupied about dressing of the meat, came
together into the hall where the table was covered, and there (if there had bin
no sermon,) a Psalm of David's was sung in his presence standing at the table,
with his wife standing by his side, and the Table was blissed with ordinary
grace. Which kind of order he was wont too keep every day without fail, not
only at home and in time of peace, but also even in the Camp. Whereof not only
innumerable Frenchmen, but also a great number of Almaine Knights, Capteines,
and officers, which were oftentimes bidden too his table, can be witnesses. As soon as the table was taken away, byandby the Admiral rose up, and standing on
his feet with his wife likewise by him, and the rest of the company that sat
with him at his table, did either himself pronounce the prayer of thanksgiving
unto God, or cawse it too be done by the preacher. And at Supper times, not
only the same thing was done both in prayer and in singing of the Psalms:
but also forasmuch as he saw it woold be harder for him too get all his folk
together too nightprayer at bedtime, because that that time was uncertain by
reason of sundry businesses which they had too do: he commanded them too be
all with him immediately after supper, and caused the nightprayers to be said
as soon as the Psalm was ended. Through the which example, it cannot be
said how many of the French Nobility took up the same order in their
howses: the rather for that the Admiral warned them, that if the master of a
house intended to maintain godliness aright, it was not ynowgh for him too
frequent sermons, and too lead a godly and holy life to himself: unless he
did also bring his household and acquaintance too the same trade of life by his
example. Certain it is that his godly and holy conversation was had in so
great admiration even among them that were of the Catholic side: that if it
had not bin for fear of the horrible persecution and butcherie that followed
afterward: the greatest part of France had turned too the same religion and
reformation of manners. When the time of the Lords supper was at hand, he used
too call his household servants and reteiners about him, and too tell them
that he was too yield account unto God, not only of his own life, but also of
their ordinary dealings. If any jar were fallen among them, he appeazed it by
setting them at one. If any man seemed not altoogether so foreward in
understanding and reuerencing that great mystery as he owght too be: him did
he cause to be instructed more diligently in religion. If any seemed over
stubborn, he would tell them openly that he had lever to dwell at home alone,
than to keep a rowt of lewd lozels. Agein, he thought the institution of
schools, and the well training up of young children, to be the singular
benefit of God. This he termed the seedleape of the Church, and the Nurcerie
of godliness. Affirming that the want of learning had cast a mist, not only
upon the Common weal, but also upon Religion: and that the tyranny of the
bishop of Rome had bin bred and borne in that dungeon, who had reigned over the
blind and ignorant wretches, as father Dis is reported among the Poets too
have reigned over night and darkness. And therefore he founded a school in a
pleasant and wholesome place hard by the Shattilion house, and when he had
finished the building of it, at his great cost he maintained many children and
yoongmen there, and many learned Hebricians, Grecians, and Latinistes too read
those languages too them. Moreover, of his singular stayednesse this was one
proof: that whereas he was endowed with great offices of honor, and could have
sowght his own commodity, and gleaned riches too himself after the example of
other Courtyers: yet did he not purchase one Acre of grownd, nor increace his
fathers inheritance with one cotage. And although he played the good husband in
using and spending of his own goods: yet notwithstanding when any Princes,
noblemen, gentlemen, or men of any degree came unto him, (as they came unto
him from all parts of France about the publik affairs of the Realm:) look
whatsoever monny he had gotten before by his sparing, he spent it liberally
upon them in hospitality. By means whereof it is certain, that he left his
heirs or successors charged with the debt, of not so little as forty
thousand powndes, besides the yearly loan of six thousand powndes, which he
paid too his creditors for interest. And I must not here let pass in silence,
the incredible unity of mind, love, and concord, that was between the three
brethren Shattilions, which was so great, that there seemed too be but one
mind made of all the three.

The Admiral lived three and fifty years, six months, and eight days. He
was of stature meetly tall, of color ruddie, of all his members well
proportioned and agreeable, of countenance stable and cheerful, of voice
gentle and sweet, howbeeit of speech sommewhat slow and soft: of health
meetly good, of gesture and gate comely, specially when he was at home in his
gown, walking with his wife or his friends: a small drinker of wine even by
nature, measurable in meat and sleep, for commonly he rested not above seven
hours. And since the time of the last pacification, he suffered no day to
pass, wherein he entered not intoo his daybooke with his own hand, before he
laid him down too sleep, the things that seemed worth the noting in the
former civil wars. Which being fownd after his death, and browght too the
kings counsel, purchaced him great commendacion for his quiet and vncombered
mind, even among such as hated him most. Besides this, when the war was once
ended, and he had withdrawn himself too Rochell, as is said before: he let no
day pass without reading one of Caluins Sermons upon the story of Job both
morning and evening: which story he termed oftentimes the comfort of his
soul, and his necessary medicine at all assayes in all his adversities. By
his first wife he had five children, of whom he left alive, his eldest daughter
Loys married (as is said heertoofore) unto Mounsyre Telignie, who was murdered
in the same furiows slawghter, the selfsame night that his father in law was:
and also Frauncis Odette and Charles, of whom the two eldest were conveyed
speedily from the butcherly slawghter, and the third which was but seven year
old and eight moonethes, whom his father loved most intierly for his pleasant
conceytednesse, being taken by the adversaries, was tawght too bear Christ's
cross even from the pryme of his chyldhod. The Admiral left his later wife
with child of a dawghter, whereof she was delivered a four moonethes after,
and then returning home intoo the borders of Sauoy, was committed too ward
within feawe moonethes after, by the commaundment of Philibert the Prince of
that Country.

FINIS.
Laus and Honorsoli Deo, and filio eius Jesus Christo.

