THE Three Parts of Commentaries, Containing the whole and perfect discourse
of the Civil wars of France, under the reigns of Henry the second, Frances
the second, and of Charles the ninth. With an Addition of the cruel Murder of
the Admiral CHASTILION, and diverse other Nobles, committed the 24. day of
August. Anno. 1572.

Translated out of Latin into English BY THOMAS TIMME MINISTER.

Seen and allowed.

DEVTERON. 32. Remember the days of old, consider the years of so many
Generations, ask thy father and he will show thee, thine elders and they will
tell thee.

IMPRINTED AT LONdon, by Frances Coldocke.

ANNO. 1574.

R Regard not worldly wealth,
I In Christ repose thy trust,
C Consider well thy final end,
H How thou art but dust.
A Ask mercy for thy sin,
R Rejoice in virtues lore,
D Detract no time for to atchieue
B Beatitudes in store,
A Above where Christ does reign
K King of imperial power,
E Each Angel his triumphant praise
R Resounding every hour.
T. T.

bookplate
To the right worshipful, Sir Richard Baker, Knight, Thomas Tymme wishes
desired health and prosperity, with full perfection of Christian understanding
and godliness.
IN all Ages and times, there have been some godly and well disposed Fathers
that employed their time and travail in describyng the State of Christ's
Church and of the common wealth of the Lords Israel: As for example, In the
time of the law before Christ, Moses, Samuel, Esras, Nehemiah, and others:
After the law, since Christ, S. Luk, Theodoret, Sozomenus, Epiphanius, Nicepho
rus, John Sleidan, and in our time Master John Fox our Country man, (whose
godly labor has deserved great commendation.) As these fathers and godly
learned men, in their times, by occasion have labored and travailed to benefit
the Church of Christ, which through ignorance has been much endamaged: even so
that notable, grave, godly learned Father, Petrus Ramus, the Author of these
Commentaries of the state of the Common wealth and Religion of France (whereof
this book is but the first part) has taken no less pains to the same end:
and shall profitte in deed no less than the travail and pain of others,
taken that way. For in his Commentaries (beside the godly lessons both
concerning doctrine and manners, and otherwise) are contained many notable
examples of Gods great mercyes, in defending and preserving the Christian
professors of his name in France in extreme perils, and also diverse
experimentes of his severe judgments in overthrowing the cruel tyrants, and in
punishing the persecuters. In consideration whereof, I thought is good to
translate the same into our English tongue, both for that I thought it should
generally profit our countrymen, (and not those alone which understand the
Latin tongue, as your worship does:) and also for that I thought it a meet
occasion, whereby I might testify my good will and meaning toward your
worship, for the freendly inclination and willingness to benefit me, that I
have heretofore found in you. Desiring you to accept the dedicatio^ hereof,
though not for the worthiness of the thing given, yet as a sure testimony of
such a well willing mind, as by this which he here presents, declares what
he would do, if he had any thing of more price to give: and also to suffer my
travail to pass forth under your favorable protection and guard, to the
common profitte of our countrymen, and the glory of God, who send you long
life, increase of worship, and the perfect felicity of the life to come.

Your worships

Thomas Tymme.

The Authors Preface to the Reader.
WHat a great business and much ado there was of late years for Religion;
and that in the Kingdom of France, there is no man but he knows* yea all
men see the same to be such that it ought with diligence to be Cronicled for
ever: and to be sent to the borderers of the utmost part of the earth for all
posterities. But he which has taken this labor in hand of good will, desires
earnestly that it may generally take effect and turn to the profit of all men.
For (so far as I know) there is nothing extant to be read, but certain
writings which were put forth and set abroad, as the matter required, and
certain Commentaries in the French tongue: and if there be any thing, it is so
obscurely written that the same of all men can not be understood.

And truly there are certain reasons which stayed mamy men of great wisdom
and experience in these matters from that public writing. For who, not
knowing as yet what would come to pass, dare take upon him to set forth
openly a whole Tragedy or Comedy, without manifest danger to loose his
labor, or at the least to seem to lose it? Furthermore, who sees not, that
it is a thing at this time full of peril, and procuring envy and displeasure?
And beside all this, such labor at this time seems almost unprofitable. For
those matters are as yet fresh in memory, and more sensibly felt of a great
many, than were to be wished, and are noysed abroad by others in foreign
Nations. To conclude, this thing seems almost hurt full.

For when as these controversies have been stirred up tho rough diverse opinions
of religion, which controversies burst forth into so great perturbations and
troubles, the rehersall now of these things, shall not only seem pernicieus,
but also untimely and out of order. The which also seem to be other causes
which have discouraged learned men (who no doubt did diligently note and mark
the reasons and falling out of those matters, which wonderfully happened in these
our days) from laboring to set forth this history. For either the have is
unprofitable, or else the untimely coming forth ridiculous, of this so speedy
and unseasonable labor

Therefore least any man should think that it is our purpose, to write and
set forth a just and true History of the state of the Church of France:
we give to understand, that it is neither our purpose, nor yet agreeing to the
time. Howbeit, hereafter more copions and plentiful works of better learned
men, so soon as the troubles and lettes of these times be taken away, will
come abroad: and will also commit to those that shall come after, a perfect
and full memorial and Chronicle of matters.

Let this now be our beginning and entrance, and a certain declaration of a
greater work: that we may show some part of that large and ample argument:
and that we may reduce into these Commentaries a certain Uiew of the several
times of our Churches, both that we may stir up such of greater learning and
experience, as may happily hereafter take this matter in hand more fully to
handle the same: and also that in the mean time we may give some fast of the
greatest matters to Christian men, desirous to know the truth of this thing,
and to men of foreign nations, bewayling our estate and condition.

And in these three first Books of our Commentaries, we set forth unto the
reader, the first beginnings of the Church of France, being as yet but of
tender years as it were, and in the fire, or at least wise, even now by little
and little coming out of the fire.

Let the causes of the hatred and debate* by these very few things be
considered, with the which the Bishop of Romes men so outragiously and unjustly
are inflamed against ye faith full, and against the cause of the faithful. We
must not look here to have a description of the faithful and professors of
Christ, in arms, (as our adversaries do now object unto us) but rather of
the unarmed and naked members of Christ most cruelly afflicted, only for this
cause, because they prefer the true and pure doctrine of the Gospel now a
growing, before the ancient customs and traditions of men. The naked Church
in time past was vexed, and the Gospel did run as it were through the sides of
poor men, and brought them to death: then Christians were accounted as liars,
called heretics, and by all manner of means vexed and oppressed, then were they
cast in prisons and in bonds, then were they whipped, then suffered they
proscriptions and banishme^ts, yea and cruel deaths, without favor.

But now when it pleased the omnipotent God to appoynte unto his Church a more
clears and beautiful estate, and to qualify and quench those fierce fyres,
Satan not forgetting his old subtilties and sleightes, deuiseth a new
accusation, whispering into the ears of kings, that the Gospel will pluck
their Scepters out of their hands: and because the faithful throughout the
whole kingdom of France defend their liberty granted unto them by the Kings
Edictes, and by all lawful causes, with force of arms, a new crime is now
laid to their charge, namely Sedition, rebellion, and treason to the king and
country: and these crimes are objected against the godly, by those which
(abusing the Kings name and authority to exercise their own tirannie) ^eeke
most of all the destruction of the Kings majesty: and because they have been
let of their purpose by the faithful, therefore do they spewe out all the
poison of their hatred against them.

By these beginnings it shall evidently appear how obedient the Faithful have
been always to their Princes and Magistrates: that this thing being laid as
it were the foundation, it may plainly be seen who they be, which are the true
authors of so many troubles as have flowed thorough this whole kingdom.

God truly has armed and fortified his Church at this day with many
external helps and fortresses: yet for all that, the cause is not changed:
Christ is the self same Christ still, the Gospel is not changed, but it is
the self same Gospel, which was irreverently handled and dealt withal in
the persons of the Faithful, by the sharp punishementes of the wicked. The
Faithful are the same men still in obeying their Magistrates, and in
reuerencing their Princes that they were before. But they are rebels which
abusing the name and authority of Princes, and disloyally violating all Law
persecute the Church, go about to extinguish the Gospel, and as if they were
Giants, furiously fight with God.

And by the reading of these Commentaries, the Faithful shall find many
things which they may apply unto themselves, to stay and comfort themselves
in the midst of these troubles.

In these lamentable times, many dangers of most grievous calamities do
compass us on every side, many difficulties and new troubles do daily burst
forth also: But if we consider and weigh the times paste, we shall in very
deed have a guess now, what will come to pass hereafter in our time. For
seeing God has before time set and placed his Church in a strange and
wonderful order: We may gather, that the same God being a perpetual keeper
and defender of his servants, will apply his power and providence to
dispatche us out of these our troubles: the which is a most firm and
invincible argument.

Let us call to remembrance the thick mistes and dark clouds of the former
night: let us set before our eyes in what state the Church was in the days
of Francis, the first, Henry the second, and Francis the second. All things
were then full of fear. Infinite kinds of punnishmentes, and pains were
laid upon the Church, as banishmentes, proscriptions, and burninges: Then no
man durst so much as name the Gospel, without he would be counted a manifest
heritike: Few men or none, and that of the meaner sort, when they were in
their secret corners, durst not once mutter of the Gospel: men could not then
enjoy the liberty of the Gospel, except they would willinglye banishe
themselves their country, and wander into foreine Nations.

But who will not merueile herevppon at the issue and end of those afflictions?
Look what things were then hard of a few, did openly ringe in the ears of
all men: Look what things were rejected in some places, and greatly punished,
were publicly received of the greatest part of men: yea there were many of the
Nobles which sealed that doctrine with their blood.

By the deaths of Kings, the Gospel had passage, victory was gotten,
Triumph was made, and within few days, the Gospel went through the greatest
part of the Kingdom, by open sermons, by public Disputations, where most
men were assembled together, so that the Gospel had gotten many and singular
witnesses.

The places which had seen the tormenting fyres and ashes of the Faithful
before, saw now great assemblies and multitudes of the Faithful gathered
together to hear the word of God: and the Kings Edictes which were
altogether made for the hurt and destruction of the faithful, were at the
last, for all that the adversaries could do, made to preserve the faithful.

To be short, these Commentaries did bring to our remembrance and
consideration, such wonderful and strange matters (the like whereof we our
selves have not safely seen) that by the prosperous and happy issue and end
of these perturbations, we ought to conceive a sure and undoubted hope. The
matter was then tried by fire: but now by force of arms: he which quenched the
flaming fires by the death and destruction of those which were fully purposed
utterly to overthrow and destroy the Church, the same Lord of hosts and
graund Captain of battles shall direct and order these wars to the liberty
and peace of his servants. Therefore the examples of those things which were done
in time past, do plentifully show, that whatsoever shall happen at the length
(which in deed is not to be measured by humane reason) shall fall out for our
health and welfare: and that because God will not leave his work unperfected.
Wherefore I trust it is evident by the consideration of the things which are
set forth in this Book, what great profit shall come to those whom the
boisterous waves of these tempests have touched. And because this is not a
private matter neither appertains to every one man, but common to the whole
Church of God dispersed throughout ye whole world, we think also yt the
manifest and true knowledge of these things is looked for of many me^ of foreign
nations, and that the first beginnings of those things in these our
Commentaries shall not be read of them without some fruit. Neither do we dout
but that many when they have gotten peace and tranquillity after troubles, will
behold our miseries, not as though they themselves were quite out of danger of
the like, but being moved with the feeling of our afflictions, will truly
bewail our estate. For whose sake also we have written these things in Latin,
that they by some means at the least, may be generally understood of all those
which seek the glory of God, and the preservation of his Church*

Wherefore we trust if we be accused of rashness, as though we had unadvisedly
set forth these things which should have bin deferred till more convenient and
better occasions, we have to answer for our selves, and to make us clear
from that fault. For if in a matter commendable and deserving praise, simple
and small diligence ought not to be blamed, this may be a just defense for us
against learned and indifferent me^, namely, to will is sufficient in matters of
weight. It shall be no reproach or shame to us at all, that there be controllers
of a learned and perfect story. But this is the sum of our whole desire, that
ye very truth of those things which were done in France for religion, might be
known to all men, as, what is the goodness of the cause of the Faithful and
true churches, and what is the iniquity and injustice of their adversaries.

Let al me^ know for a surety that the Churches of France are not guilty of
sedition and rebellion, but are so called by the enemies of the truth and pure
doctrine, for defending the liberty of the Gospel. Let all men know, that
many thousands of faithful Christians, being spoiled of their goods, have,
like banished me^, forsaken their houses and country: let them know that by
war, and by other means, they have become true martyrs, and by the fraud
and deceyte of the Antichristian Guyses, are daily martyred, who violating and
breaking the most strayte law and faith of promises, have abused the kings
name and authority to exercise their tirannie and wickedness. To be short,
let al men know that France is fallen into these civil wars through ye
wickedness of aliens, not through the fault of the faithful.

Moreover (gentle Reader, which desire to be satisfied in the truth) we
testify and affirm thus much for our selves, that we have written all things
truly, simply, and uprightly, without any manner of parcialitie: not gathering
any thing by rumors or reports, but by certain and undoubted arguments: in
so much that we are not afraid to appeal to those that are yet alive, as too
eye witnesses, yea and to the very time it self. Farewell*

Edward Grant Schoolemaister of Westminster, to the Book.
WHo lists to lern the blustering broils, and fra^ticke fumes of France,
The troublous times in three kings reigns, that dolefully did chance:
May here survey a perfect platt, of pageants plaide in vewe,
That will enforce each Christian heart, most ruthfully to rue:
To see and hear the true discourse, of superstitious times,
That shattered pure Religion, with spytefull cankred crimes.
Where error blind and ignorance, true Christians did suppress,
And armed all her lungish loutes, the godly to distress:
To rage and fume against the Church, that lurking lay in fear,
With spiteful hate and infamies, of those that did it tear.
Christ's faithful spouse not suffered, through furious foes to shine,
Through rancour lodgd in Princes heads, that did from truth decline.
Gods chosen sheep and vassals true, raisd up to do his will,
In purity him for to serve, proud papists sought to spill.
Their throats to cut, their heads to poll, their corpse in fire to cast,
That to Gods pure Religion, came flocking wondrous fast.
Some choackt with gibbets, gabbet at, some murdered spitefully,
Some stabbed in with goting blades, and daggers wilfully,
And all for hating Romish rytes, and Belials bragging brood,
For cleaving to the Chrrstian church, that sore astonyed stood.
Among the superstitious troops, of Antichristian foes,
Stark blinded with the Popes delights, (behedgd with wailsul woes)
Starte up some chosen chieftaines stout, of Christ's disperpled band,
That did defy such beggeries, in France that famous land*
Which few at first did more allure, unto their sacred sawes,
To serve the Lord in Hymns and songs, according to his laws.
And secretly to pray and preach, to set forth his dew praise.
In corners and in hidden holes (for fear) his truth to raise.
Until the rage of hellish hagges, the common blinded crew,
Did spy and spite their godly ways, and many of them slew.
Accused them as Lutherans, before the Pee^es and Kings,
(Of Luther that reuin'd the same) with fond invented things.
Hereof came sects and taking parts, the people censt with rage,
By might mayntaynd, did spoil the just, the godly* and the sage.
Edictes were made to stay such broils, and Parliaments were held,
To let the faithful be at rest, but yet the enemy sweld:
And daily raged more and more, till faithful did increase,
And this reformed Religion some noble minds did please.
Whom God raisde up to aid his flock, his chosen sheep to guard,
Against th* assault of waspishe wolves: when their loud cries he hard.
For whose defense rose civil wars, and many a bloody day,
The Popish crewe by force did seek, Christ's pacient sheep too slay.
To root out this Religion (that planted) lurking lay.
And feared not the skalding threats, of the antichristian route,
But patiently abide the cross of Christ, with courage stout.
Though Antichrist the Popes proud grace, did rage and fume his fill,
And all his cankred Cardinals did joy their blood to spill.
They dread not all the Guisian gardes, that fierce and mighty be,
And perfecutors of the truth, that pyne and poute, to fee
Such valiant Captains of Christ's band, that do the truth defend.
And with the gaging of their blood, their friendly aid do lend.
A princely part here Conde played a prince replet with grace,
And all his house true Soldiers stood, the truth still to embrace.
Burgeus suffered loss of life, and feared not the fire,
For Gospels sake and truths defense, a lew of his desire.
Survey his life and trayning up, his constant faithful heart,
His zeal, and stout confession, he played a martyrs part.
Chatillon shrink not here a whit, a chieftane of the troop
Of Gods dispersed faithful flock, that made their foes to stoop.
Three times for this rife civil war, the papists showed their spite,
The true and trusty protestants stood stoutly in the right.
Their cause they manfully mayntaynd, Christ Jesus was their shield,
Sometimes they foyld their fretting foes, that against them rose in field.
Some Nobles slain, and valiant Knights cast down before their time,
And all in fence of Christ his cause, accused thus of crime.
Some goard with sword, some choackt with rope, some battred down
There many parents were dispoild of their beloved sons.
Their tong^ cut out when they should dye, for fear that they should speak with
guns
And more entyse unto their God. that always aids the weak.
Oh France thou famous realm before, and eke most populous place,
Thou art dispeopled, wasted, turn, thy own do thee deface.
Thy Cities cract, thy Towns bereft, thy men and nobles rackt,
Thy faithful subjects burnt and slain, thy wealth and strength is sacked.
Ah pity, pity for to hear, how altered is thy state,
Through tyrannous popish, cruel carles, that Christ his truth did hate
The Lord has justly plagued thee, for so defacing his,
Who in the end will aid his flock, thou may be sure of this.
If ever land might loath her luck, and lamed lowering state.
France thou have cause for to deplore and wail thy cruel fate.
One of thy own, a pearl of thine, by learned treaties loo,
And true discourse, thy mangled state, lets all the world to kno.
Thy Ramus here, thy Phoenix (France,) thy worthy learned clarke,
In volumes three conioind, displaces, thy broiles, that he did mark.
And like a good and natrall child, (lest things should be forgot)
Has painefully here pend thy brunts, that do thy glory blot.
And like enough through cruel spite, for these his learned pains,
Among the Popish crew of late, dashed out was Ramus brains.
Whose death each scholar may bewail, for learning had a fall,
When Ramus fell, replet with skill, thy chiefest clarke of all.
What chief in France some may object? there lives better still,
If I have mist, I pardon crave, I speak it for good will.
That I did learned Ramus lend, for his sure grounded skill,
In learnings lore: who for because he wrote in Latin style,
(Which only learned understand) well pew'rd with learnings file*
Tymme truly has disrobed him, of all his Roman tier,
And decked him in English clothes, with zealous good desire,
To profit all his country men, that they may see and view,
The stormy tempests of the French, and parts of Popish crew.
The whole three volumes painfully, Tymme has absolved here,
And offers them unto thy sight at last good Reader dear.
Which does contain the Civil wars, or true Religions cause
The spights of Papists that repind, against Gods sacred laws.
Worthy the sight, worthy the view, a mirror to behold,
Of Gods elect, of tirants fell, of Papists proud and bold.
How God his chosen Church does save among her perilous foes,
And cancred, cursed, currishe kind, that it oppress with woes.
Therefore good Reader here embrace, the founder of this frame,
And honor Ramus painful pen, the author of the same.
Give Tym that Tymme does well deserve, for Englishing this for thee
Whose pains do merit worthy praise, let praise then be his see.
And wail the wrack of frushed France, and give God h^rtie thanks,
That has preserved this Royal realm, from such proud popish pranks.
FINIS.
Robertus Rollus in Historiam de Gallicae Ecclesiae statu recens editam.
UExata est olim priscis Ecclesia seclis,
Carceribus, flagris, ignibus, ense, cruce.
Haud minor est hodie cedes: tu Gallia testis*
Sis dudum paribus sanguinolenta modis.
Qui fidei nuper multis fulsere magistri
(Proh pudor) indignam sustinuere necem.
Quoque magis possent inceptum absoluere factum
Nullum papicola preteriere scelus.
Pene datur sceleri lex, hoc qui credere posset
Vix (est tale nephas) vnus and alter erit.
Ante erat historia hec libris quasi manca duobus
Nunc prodit numeris vndique plena suis.
Si authorem spectes plena est, si rem quota pars est*
Omnia nam tangi tempora nostra vetant.
Ascraei verba illa senis (...)
Quam sunt huic mire consona dicta libro?
Nempe haec quae legimus quasi dimidiata supersunt
Et quasi de domini clade relicta sui.
Quaeque modo aspicimus librisque notata videmus
Debemus scriptis (Rame deserte) tuis.
Sed neque (Tymme) tua merita fraudabere laud
Cuique oneris pars est, pars and honoris erit.
Telos.
The sum of those things which are contained in these three first books of
Commentaries.
IN these three first books of Commentaries, we comprehend the space of four
years, namely from the year. 1557. unto the year 1562. which was in the
first motions of the civil wars: beginning at that time which seems to be
most fit for this purpose: the matter so aptly offering itself, that we may
very near begin at the same time in the which John. Sleidan, that learned John
Sleidan.
man, left and ended his Commentaries concerning the state of the Common wealth
and Religion. First of all we set forth that great destruction and loss of men
which is commonly called by the vulgar people, Jacobs slaughter, which Jacobs
slaughter at Paris.
seemed wholly to deface, not only the Church of Paris, but also the Churches
of France being now as it were, but in the swaddling clothes: then we show what
cruel afflictions came at that time upon the faithful, what the adversaries
did then, and what our men also did. We declare also that New devises to
abolishe the Gospel.
while new devises and practices are sought for to abolishe the Gospel quite,
now beginning to grow in France, the whole kingdom being moved and troubled
with new threatenings of Edictes and punishments, and the kings of France
and Spain being now in council concerning this matter, in the very league,
even in the midst of their consultation, when a scourge was a preparing for
the Church by the solemnity of marriage, eue^ at that time came the sodeine
death of Henry the king, of all men unlooked for. Then, how the ^uises had
the government of the Realm, during the time of the nonage of king Fraunces
the second: how Annas Burgaeus a noble Senator of the Parliament of Paris, at
that time, was cruelly burned, and what other persecutions there were also:
among which The tumult of Ambaxian.
persecutions, how the tumult of Ambaxian chanced, the causes and effects
whereof shall be declared. After this, the solemn assemblies had at the kings
house at Fontisbellaquaeum, to mitigate the tumultes, who agreed to call a
Parliament, and a National Council or Convocation, to stay the controversies
of Religion, of the which also we will entreat in order. Also how the king
set forth an Edict, The king^ Edict of pardon.
promising them to forget and forgive all former offenses committed for
Religions sake. Then, how the Guises went about to subvert and extinguish the
Gospel, coacting an assembly to be made at Aurelias for the same purpose:
how the deaths of the king of Navarre and the Prince of Conde were conspired,
the tumult and trouble of Ambaxian being maliciously and falslye laid to their
charge.

But while the Prince of Conde was straightly imprisoned, and his death a
preparing, we will show, how the sodeine death of king Fraunces the second
happened, to the great amasing Sodeine alteration by the death of king Fraunces.
and grieuance of the Guises.

Furthermore, we will declare what great alterations came to pass after this,
the young King Charles coming to the Crown: As the great peace and
tranquillity given and granted to the Churches by the benefit of the Kings
Edictes, the daily increase of the faithful, the flourishing of the Gospel in
every place, the defacing of the Popes doctrine by solemn Court of Parliament,
the truth also embraced of many of the Nobles. And here we will show what
seeds of dissension were sown by the subtle practices of the Guises between
the Nobles: Then I will speak somewhat of the Acts of the parling of
Possiacen. The Kings Edict commonly called the Edict of Ianuarye.


Last of all, I will declare the sum of the Edict of Ianuarye, by which
greater liberty was granted to the Churches: And because about that time
there were great troubles of wars, I will there make an end of this book,
leaving the declaration of the rest until a more convenient time:
Notwithstanding part thereof, (that is to say, the explication of the first
Civil wars) shall be declared in our three latter books, we looking to have
occasions offered to describe other matters which are behind.

The book of Commentaries concerning Religion, under the reigns of Henry the
second, Fraunces the second, and Charles the ninth.
THe doctrine of Religion, which in our time is amended and reformed, came at
the last into France. But they were hardly dealt withal which received that
doctrine, they were banished, burnt, and with all manner of torments vexed, they
were also called Lutheranes, which name then was made a common reproach to the
godly. Notwithstanding all this, that doctrine did more largely and vehemently
sprea^e it self abroad: and the more that men The name of Lutheranes.
were tori^ented, the more they came ^o the same by flocks. Many, to the end
they might escape the cruelty of their punishments, ^ might enjoy the free use
of religion, went unto those places ^n the which y^ same was purely and
publicly set forth: am^ng which the greatest part went to Geneua, Geneua a
sanctuary for the godly.
From whence many booke^s and letters being written, a great number were
brought to the knowledge of that doctrine. The which daily increasing more and
more, great matters afterward came to pass: those things which were done in
the beginning with fear and secretly, were afterward free, and common for
every man to use, until such time, as punishments being repressed, torments
taken away, and the fiery flames quite extinguished, that doctrine was
received of noble men, of Gentlemen, and of all estates: but on the other side,
the adversaries of the reformed religion Resisting y^ same, there arose great
tumults, which by mortal and civil wars vexed and much endamaged the great
and noble kingdom of France. But these first beginnings are particularly
touched in other books, in the which the noble and excellent triumphs of
Martyrs are described.

I will therefore begin at that year since the which, matters of Religion being
more openly set forth, and more vehemently again resisted, have more happily
and evidently appeared. And then, this was the state of the kingdom.

After sundry and long wars between Henry the second King of France, and
Charles the fyfth Emperor, at the length both their Legates, when they could
not by peace end the controversies, which were between them, concluded a
truce or peace for five years, the which being shortly after broken by the
Cardinal of Lorraine, the war began a fresh between the two kings. And
Fraunces Duke of Guise takes his journey into Italy with a great army. And
Philip king of Spain, and son of the Emperor Charles goes into Picardie:
who making have to the town of Sanquintine, gave the Constable (which came out
to mete him) a great overthrow, and took him with a great number of Gentlemen.

This overthrow and great slaughter of men was called Laurence day, because it
chanced at the feast of S. Laurence* After this, Sanquintine was taken, and
certain cities nere unto the same. So that what with the rumor of the sodeine
slaughter, and what with the fear of the enemy which now approached to Paris
the chief city of the kingdom, all men were wonderfully afraid.

While these things were thus a working, there began to be a great fame and
rumor of the increase of the Lutheranes, by reason whereof there followed a
notable persecution against them, which by the popular and vulgar name is
called, The winning of S. James street: and it was so called for Great
persecution in the Church of Paris.
this cause: When the faithful perceived the great peril and danger that
hong over the whole kingdom of France, by reason of this new plague and
punishment, they gave themselves to prayer, and therefore congregated themselves
together by a great number, the fourth day of September, Anno domini* 1557.
in certain houses of S. James street in Paris, and that in the night (for in
the day time they might by no means come together) minding to hear the word
preached, and to have the supper of the Lord celebrated. But they being
bewrayed, the common sort of people with weapons in a great tumult ran with
all haste to this street^ of S. James, where the faithful were assembled, who
being in those houses before mentioned, and seeing themselves to be compassed
on every side with the furor and rage of the multitude, had small hope to
escape: howbeit, part of them when they saw a way to be made for them through
a certain gate (which wonderfully opened for the safegarde of many, when the
houses on ^uery side were beset) repeated their former prayers, and escaped by
flight without harm, even as though God himself had gone before them: the
greater part were taken of the Magistrates, among whom were many noble women,
and women of great parentage, and as they were led away by the officers, were
shamefully entreated and unhonestly handled of the people.

Now, the matter being in question concerning this asse^bly, it was first
found, that when the people were assembled together, there was a Lecture of
the holy Scripture in the vulgar tongue: secondly, that all the congregation
kneeling, prayers were made by the Minister: thirdly, that the Minister
expounded the place of the eleventh Chapter of S. Paul's first Epistle to the
Corinthians, in the which, ye use of the Lords supper is declared: fourthly,
that then prayers were made for the King, for Princes and Magistrates, for all
estates of people, and for peace and quietness of the kingdom: and last of
all, that the bread end wine of the Lords supper was communicated and given to
those which were not judged unworthy. For these offenses they were taken.
Being therefore taken, and cruelly entreated of the people by the way, were
notwithstanding very v^courteously dealt withal in prison. For thieves and
murderers, and such as by the law deserved to die, were taken out of their
cold and noisome prisons, and these men put into the same in their stead, all
men forbidden to have any recourse unto them. Notwithstanding, it was brought
to pass by the singular providence of God, because every man could not have a
prison by himself, that some of them were thrust together into one prison, and
so it came to pass that one of the^ received comfort of another, in so much
that the prison in the which they were, sou^ded with the prayers and Psalms
uttered and song by them.

But to make these men the more to be hated, diverse rumors were every where
spread, namely that ye Lutherans did assemble themselves together in the night,
and being on a heap together without candle light, did fulfill their wandering
lusts one with another, killed their young infants, and committed other
wickednesses. The Monks, they made exclamation of this thing in every place,
to inflame the people to revenge the same. And not only the common sort of
people were stayed with these rumors, but the same also of these things came
eue^ to the ears of the Peers of ye realm, Wicked slanders devised against
the faithful.
in so much that one of the Inquisitors, or Commissioners, durst avouch before
the King, that Tables spread, and great provision of dainty cheer was found
in that place, where the faithful had assembled themselves. The which report,
so inflamed the Kings mind, that he sought nothing more than the destruction
of the faithful: yea, and the minds of all men did so boil in hatred against
them, that he thought himself to excel that could best conspire the death
and destruction of the faithful.

At the last a commandment was given by the king, that some meet man should
be chosen to know and consider their causes which were taken. Now at Paris
there was a Magistrate, a Citizen called Munerius, a man (as it was commonly
reported) very apt for all manner of fraud and deceyte. At this time this
Munerius was as a Batte in the night, and did seldom openly show himself,
because he was accused of falsehood, in the matter of the Countess of Senigana,
or Seniguen, the which he pretended to have committed, Duke Arscotus a
Brabantine.
that Duke Arscotus, who was then taken and in hold, might escape.
Notwithstanding, to this man this office was committed. And because by this
means he hoped to have pardon, and should be restored to his former dignity
he was so forward in his business, that within few days, many of their
causes which were taken prisoners, were brought to have sentence and judgment.
In the mean time, those relics which remained behind of that vaste and
great shipwreck of the faithful, were cast into great distress and sorrow,
notwithstanding, they thought it not good to faint or quayle in those
extremities. For they which were the chief governors of the Church, went
about every man's house, exhorted every one to be of good cheer, and persuaded
that nothing had happened without the singular providence of God, by which also
it came to pass, that many escaped that danger: moreover, they said that they
remained to defend the other parts of the Church which were left: and that
this calamity should not be the ruin and quite overthrow of the Church: and
on the other side, that the same is the way to increase and enlarge the
Church, which God both by his word has showed, and also by experience
approved, for the gathering together of the Church. And thus when they had
exhorted and comforted one another, and had committed themselves and all things
else to the providence of God, first of al they appointed that in every house
there should be extraordinary prayers made, and that those fa^e rumors should
be put away by Apollogies and aunsweres of defense, and also that the brethren
which were taken, should be confirmed and strengthened, so often as might be,
with letters, and also with words.

Therefore they write letters unto the king, and bring to pass, to have them
carried secretly into the Kings chamber, by which they meant to pacify the kings
mind, to remove the same from the evil opinion which it had conceived of An
apology for the faithful captives.
them, and to obtain the hearing of their cause. They affirm in their letters
that they are falsely accused and slaundered with such slanders as are not
newly devised, but with such as long before had been objected against the
Church, by which Satan went about to make Kings and Princes to hate the same:
and are now again put forth by those only which desire to have the truth
oppressed, to the end they may freely enjoy the riches and goods which they
have usurped and wrongfully gotten by wicked deceit. And that be ought to seek
to have sure and undoubted proves of every matter, specially in business of so
great weight. For if it were sufficient to condemnation to accuse, who should
then escape an innocent? Wherefore, if he would vouchsafe diligently to search
out the truth of this matter, it should well appear that they assembled
themselves together for no other end and purpose, than to pray unto God for
his prosperity and the peace of the kingdom. Also that their doctrine did not
maintain sedition, neither was an enimye to the obedience of Magistrates: the
which thing they had always hitherto showed, never refusing to obey, although
they were many in number, when they were evil entreated, only for following
the word of God. And that this was their only desire, that Christ might
appear to be the chief and head alone: and that the inventions of men being
abrogated, God might be obeyed and served according to his prescript will.
Wherefore, if it would please him to understand their cause, he might, if he
would, make some public disputation between some one of those that were in
prison, and the Sorbonistes or others which might dispute of those things now
in controversy. In the end, they do pray and humbly beseech him that he
would not suffer the innocence of good men, their cause not being heard, to
be condemned, seeing that wicked men, and such as do most deeply transgress,
obtain so much liberty, as to show their cause, and answer for themselves.
These letters were read before the king, and those also which were then
present, but small fruit or profit came thereby, certain of the Cardinals
then crying that they were lies and tales: so that notwithstanding their
reasonable suite and request, they had not so much granted unto them as
liberty to answer for themselves.

After this, there was yet another letter sent to the king, the effect whereof
was, yt all men did confess that these calamities with ye which the christian
common wealth was vexed, proceeded of the just judgment of God, being offended
that so many he resies and corruptions should take place: But the greatest
offense to consist in this thing, namely, that none of those, to whom the care
and charge of the Commonwealth was committed, had any regard at all, to
discern heretics, by the word of God, from Christian maintayners of the
truth. And yet notwithstanding, that it did belong unto the King to apply
himself to know this thing, according to the example of the good Kings
Ezechias and losias. And after certain notes put down of true and false
religion, it began in manner as follows.

Weye and consider with your self your estate, and you shall find that all
things have happened ouertwha^tly unto you, ever since you have gone about to
vex the Lutheranes. When you set forth the Edict made at Cast ellobrian, then
began wars. But when you inhibited and forbad the execution of that Edict,
and were an enemy to the Pope, in sending a power into Germany for the
liberty thereof, because of the afflicted religion, your business had very
prosperous success. But what has happened unto you ever since you entered into
friendship with the Pope, taking the sword of him, by which, truce being
broken, wars might begin a fresh? God undoubtedly shall turn thy felicities
into those calamities which are now ready to fall upon thee and thy dignity.
To what end went the army of the Duke of Guise into Italy, when he had served
Gods enemy for hire? went he not to this end, that when he returned home
again; he might utterly destroy the Churches of the valleys of Pedemonte, and
might so offer and dedicate his victories unto God? Surely, the end and
success shows, that God does bring the devises and counsels of men to
naught, when they turn to their own destruction: as appears by the slaughter
which happened on S. Laurence day of late, at what time he derided and
frustrated the proud threatninges The arrogant threatenings of the Constable.
of the Constable, which boasted that if he returned home again a victor or
conqueror, he would root out and utterly destroy Geneua.

Thus after the repeating of many examples, in the which the judgments of God
did appear against ye adversaries of his truth (whose memory also was yet
fresh in ye heads of al men) this letter at ye length concludes: that
afflictions cannot abolish and destroy ye Church of God, seeing that (as
Tertullian says) The blood of Martyrs is the seed of the Church: and that it
is the office of a King to take upon him the care of religion, ye which all men
might see by diverse ways to be contaminated and neglected, and that this might
lawfully be done by calling a Council. In the mean time, that their cause as
yet being unknown, and not certain, they may be peaceably, and not cruelly
entreated, which protest that they follow Gods truth: and that so holy a name
cannot in such wise be contemned, but some inquisition must be made: also yt
judgment ought to be had, not from the devises of men, but from the word of
God, the only and most certain rule of truth. Therefore (say they) if we be not
convinced by Gods word, it is neither fire, nor sword, nor any manner of
punishment that can terrify us. These shall be the triumph and victory of our
faith, that by being overcome, we shall be ouercommers at the last: by this
Chariote, we shall come at the length to the haven of everlasting life.

But that Edict which was made at Cast ellobrian (of the which we have made
mention before) was very strait and cruel against Religion, in the which,
among many things these were the special sentences: First, that all former
Edictes concerning the putting of heretics to death, should be confirmed:
That no man should be admitted to any public office, before he had made his
confession agreeable to the Catholic and Romish faith: That in every
Parliament, and in the third month also, there should be assemblies made,
which are commonly called Mercuriales: and that first of all, matters
concerning Religion should be handled, and that there should be special
regard and eye had to the assembly of the Parliament, least some corruption or
heresy might secretly creep in.

There was also another Apology set forth for all men to use, so written, that
the ancient form and state of the Church being represented, and compared to
that which is at this day, the ancient fathers themselves also by their own
words and writings, might defend and maintain the very self and same cause
which they now defended: and in such wise, that they which said, that they
reverenced and embraced antiquity, might hear antiquity defending and
supporting the cause of the reformed Church (so called.)

These things truly, are plentifully set forth in this writing, but the sum
is this: That it was against right, that the faithful should be accused for
well doing: but more injurious, that they should be condemned, their cause not
being heard. Notwithstanding, that the Church of Christ before this time long
since, had felt the same injuries: and therefore no marvel, if they, whose
cause was like, were made equal to them in trouble: Howbeit, that Satan and
his Ministers should so little prevail, that for all their force, the Church
should arrive through the midst of their temptations to the safe and quiet
haven: and the thick and dark Clouds being blown over, the light of
innocence should appear, and the enemies of the same be found liars. After
this, those slanders and reproaches which were objected against them, being
particularly examined and considered by them, were also fully answered
altogether out of the writings of the Fathers, that their Apology or defense
might plainly appear to be true and sound. Furthermore, many letters were
written to the brethren which were in prison, yea, and Churches of far
Countries, bewayling their estate, did comfort them with their letters: so that
hereby they were wondefrully confirmed. And among other Churches or
congregations, the congregation of Geneua showed the duty of the faithful
brethren, insomuch that they did not let, by all means possible, to do them
good.

While those things were provided for of the faithful, the adversaries on the
contrary part sought by all means possible to work the death of the
faithful which were in prison, so soon as they could: and in this matter
Munerius the civil Magistrate was not a little diligent, and the people for
their part greedily gaped, and continually looked for the same. Now, there came
forth a commandment from the King, that all other matters set apart, for a
time the senate should wholly apply themselves to understand the cause of the
faithful, and to judge of them according to the evidence that should be
brought against them by Munerius the eiuill Praetor. Notwithstanding, the Kings
commandment herein, the whole Senate or assembly of the Court refusing and
rejecting this Munerius, both for that he withstoode the ancient custom of
the Court, and also because (as is before said) he was accused of falshoode,
concluded that by the relation and report of any one man which should come
forth and give evidence, the judgment and sentence of those Judges that were
put in trust, should be ordered. The whole Senate therefore, although they
were not a little troubled with the great number of prisoners, yet
notwithstanding, what by the express commandments of the King to them, and
what with the old and (...)spyte they vare to Religion, so greatly prevailed
within few days, that their causes in deed came to judgment. Of the which,
they which constantly held the confession of the true doctrine, were condemned
by great consent of the people to dye, and were burnt with fire: and suffering
most excellent Martyrdom by death, they woonderfullye triumphed of the
cruelty of their enemies. The which things, because they be specially touched
in another Book, it shall not be needful here to speak any more of them.

Many delivered themselves from death by diverse means and ways that were not
lawful. But they to whom this charge and trust was committed, boldly doing
their office, and being nothing slow to exercise cruelty, certain of their
friends which (...)in hold, propounded causes of refusal against the Judges,
desiring that there might be other Judges set in their places. This thing for a
time stayed the rage of the persecution. Notwithstanding, the king being
certified hereof, sends letters, by which he declaring those refusals to be
nothing, commands that all other things set apart, they give their diligence
only to intend upon this thing: and that the Nobles which were in authority,
should choose out, according as they thought good, Counselors to supply the
places of those that were absent: and that in the Praetor Munerius ^oume
(because for the causes before alleged he was removed) other should serve:
and to be short, that final judgment might be given of those matters: howbeit,
that he might have warning before any matter were ended. These letters did
again displease and anger the minds of those judges, which took it heynously
yt they were refused. So that choler was then set on fire against many: and
for this cause seemed as though it would rage and burn in the new year
following. For the adversaries went about of late to Anno domini. 1558.
establish and bring in the like inquisition that was in Spain, (which they
thought was ye only way utterly to overthrow the gospel) and letters at the
last being obtained from the Pope, by which three Cardinals were appointed
chief inquisitors, they went about all that they could to set forward this
devise. The king for his part consented. Notwithstanding, ye senate of Paris,
having better consideration of the matter, greatly withstode this new
practice, and alleged these causes to ye king of their withstanding and
prohibition, saying: If this thing should be brought to pass, look how much
the power of the ecclesiastical Judges and Inquisitors should be enlarged, so
much should ye supreme authority of the king be diminished: Secondly, that it
was a matter of great weight, for the natural subjects of the king, to be made
destitute, and after a sort, deprived of their King, and to be brought to the
power of foreign Judges, and to be made subject to an Offy^ciall or
Inquisitor: Thirdlye, that it should be a defrauding of the kingdom, but
specially of the subjects, to be spoiled of the help and safegarde of the
king, and to be themselves, and all their goods, judged and disposed, after
the supreme judgment of an ecclesiastical Judge: Fourthly, that it would come
to pass, that when they had gotten infinite power, and the greatest part of ye
kings authority, that is to say, when they had gotten power to judge of life
and death as the^ listed, without further appeal to any higher Court, they
might easily abuse their offices. For (say they) the liberty to appeal, is
the only sanctuary and defense of innocence: Fifthly and last of all, they
say that the King to who^ the appeal should be made, is the revenger, and the
defender of violated and wronged innocence, and that, injury should be done,
if this thing went forward, not only to the people, but also to Princes, to
Dukes, to Nobles, yea, and to the Kings nere kinsemen, who also should be
bound with this bond.

By this prohibition and resista^ce, the matter was delayed for a time: at the
length, when the Kings Court was at Paris, the very same adversaries of the
truth brought to pass that those letters were confirmed of the King, as he
went to the Senate or Parliament, for this cause.

Thus when they had gotten the law into their own hands, and had written new
Edictes, appointing mortal punishments for the faithful, (whom they called
Sacramentaries, Sectaries, and such like) every man looking now for grievous
persecutions, it pleased God for a time to disappoint those cruel practices
and threatenings, by troubling the kingdom with war and other business.

Neither is it to be buried in silence, by what means God showed his
vengeance upon many of those persecutors Certain examples of Gods vengeance
showed upon diverse persecutors of the Church.
which were the chief Capitaynes in S. James slaughter. That Munerius the
Praetor which was the first that dealt with the causes of the faithful, and had
many ways cruelly entreated them: being afterward at the length condemned of
falshoode in the cause of the Countess of Senigana, suffered by the decree of
the Senate punishment openly in diverse places: and being thus led from place
to place to be made an open spectacle for all men to behold to his great
infamy and reproach, was also banished his country. This man while be was kept
in prison, said, that he knew that the punishments which he suffered, were a
just reward and recompense to him for his evil entreating of the Lutheranes:
and that he would never after seek to do them any harm. In like manner one of
the Counselors which were appointed to understand and judge of the causes of
the faithful, not long after died by sudden death. Another of them likewise
being suddenly stricken with a most grievous sickness, and being also at the
point of death, said, I see plainly that I have grievously sinned against the
Lutheranes, which so godly pray unto the Lord. In like manner, two other which
were very cruel against the faithful in the slaughter that was made on S.
James day, suddenly dyed in the sight of all men. Moreover, two other when they
returned from the murder of the afflicted faithful, fell at contention
within themselves, and at the last were slain one of another. Thus the Lord
showed many examples of his just vengeance upon his adversaries.

Then the Church obtained peace for a time, and some Persecution stayed for a
time.
occasion to rest and breath for a while* by reason of those tempests. They
which were before, as it were discouraged through that former great slaughter,
received now heart and courage again: many others which were either confirmed
by the constancy of those blessed Martyrs which suffered, or else were lately
brought to the knowledge of God, joined themselves to the Church: they also
which to fly persecution went aside from out of the city, were not altogether
unfruitful. Among these there was one which came to a town called Crucillum in
Britayne, near unto the sea coaste, the which town was at that time greatly
given to superstition, but it was brought to pass by his means within short
time after, that many of the townsmen were called to the acknowledging of
truth, insomuch that there was a congregation there. At the which good success
Satan was greatly grieved. Therefore when the fame of this thing Examples of
injuries done to the faithful.
was spread abroad, the Bishop of N^auetensis or N^auntes, with a certain
power of his men, came thither, whom he had gathered together for this matter:
he gives commandment that clothes of tapistry work and other ornaments be
hoong forth of every house, upon the solemn day in the which he with his
wandering power should pass through 16. leaf.
the City, thinking by this means to find out, who they were that were
Lutheranes: then he commands the Drum to be stricken up, and a sign to be
given for men to prepare themselves to sight, and thus he fills the City
with armor and tumult.

There was then present a certain noble man, who was appointed by the Kings
commandment to press and muster men for the war: this man admonishes the
Bishop into what perils he may bring the City, the English men their enemies
approaching near, who, if they had knowledge of these troubles, might easily
obtain the Cuie: but his persuasion prevailed so little, that he was also in
danger of his life, and hardly delivered himself from the mad rage of the
common people. Therefore the frantic people through every corner of the
City, are as it were drunken mad by the guidance and leading of the Bishop:
and do besiege and forciblye set upon the houses, in the which there were
nineteen of the faithful congregated to make their prayers unto God. But the
faithful earnestlye beseech the people to be quiet, and if there were any
thing to be objected against them, they were ready to put themselves into the
hands of the magistrate: The Bishop answers that the cause of their coming
was only to have the Minister, which they knew to be among them. The
faithful entreat that the Magistrate of the City might be called forth, and
he should understand the truth of the matter. When the Praetor or Magistrate
of the City had entered the houses, and made diligent search through the same,
he declares that the Minister is not there. Notwithstanding the Bishop
commands the soldiers to set upon and assault the houses: the which thing
the people did with all the force they were able to make, seeking also to
undermine the houses. But all in vain: for the faithful that were in the
houses, affirmed that unless they would depart, they would drive them away.
And thus they being nothing dismayed or troubled, commended themselves unto God
in Psalms and songs. The Bishop hereat being more angry, commands them to
yield themselves: the faithful refused not to come forth to him, if the
people might depart, saying that they were ready to make answer to those
things whereof they were accused. But for all this the gunnes and other
instruments of war were set to, and bent against the houses. The faithful
seeing into what straytes and extremities they were brought, thought now
within themselves, that there was no remedy but that they must defend
themselves: but because it could not be done without great slaughter of the
people, if they did rashlye fall to offer strypes, they thought it good not so
to defend themselves until the very extremity came. Notwithstanding, when
the people ran with haste into the houses through the holes of the walls
which they had made with Gunnes and other weapons, the faithful shot at them
with Crossebowes, by force whereof many of them being stayne, the minds of the
other were so discouraged, that by and by the whole multitude ran away, and
great quietness was made throughout the whole City.

They therefore being thus miraculouslye delivered, came forth singing the
hundredth and four and twentye Psalm, as they went through the midst of the
City, and so escaped. The next day following, the people being gathered
together again, ouerthrewe those houses in the which the faithful had been,
yea, and their houses also whom they suspected to be favorers of their
cause. The Bishop understanding that the Senate of Paris dislyked of this his
fact, went to the King, and brought it so to pass by the means of them that
were companiens and confederates with him in the same his wicked furo^, that
the King allowed all that he had done. So little was the equity of the cause
of the faithful esteemed.

And very near about this time also there seemed to be given a new occasion
to scirre up affliction. For at Paris in a medowe or field nere adjoining to
the same, commonly called the Clearks field* many of the faithful, when others
were busy at their sport and play, began to sing Psalms, little thinking
that others would be stirred up to do the like by their ensample.
Notwithstanding, at the length it grew to this, that when this* exercise had
been used certain days, many, and men also of great estimation and fame, came
together to hear the sweet and pleasant harmony of the singing multitude.
They which could not sing, and which had not as yet the knowledge of God, went
into the most convenient places of the field, to hear that which was soong:
and hearing the same, confessed that it was wickedly done to forbid the singing
of so honest and godly songs. But while this went forward, the adversaries,
as though they were utterly spoiled, went to the king, and declared to him that
the Lutheranes had moved sedition at Paris: that they were ready to thrust his
majesty out of his kingdom: that a great number of them were gathered
together in armor to conspire against him: and therefore they requested him to
provide for this mischief: for (say they) the Catholic Church, and your whole
kingdom is in great danger. When the King heard this, he commands that
there be prohibition and stay made by a public Edict, that men sing no more in
that place, nor in that company: and also that there should be inquiry made
of those which had soo^g. They which were the chief of the reformed Church,
seeing into what suspicious those companies were brought, give admonition to
their friends, that they never again gather themselves together in that place
to sing as they did before: if they would sing, to sing at h^me. In the mean
time, many for this matter were apprehended, who notwithstanding afterward for
the lightness of the cause were set at liberty. At the last, when the Bishops
preachers saw that the king did favor them, they persuaded with the people,
that it was an atteptable thing unto God, and a meritorious work (as they call
in) for a man ^o kill a Lutherane. And truly, the beastly rage and madness of
that people by these persuasions, was provoked, insomuch that the reins of
temperancie loosed, they ran headlong to commit what mischief they could: of
the which matter, among many, we will bring certain examples*

On a certain day, after a Sermon, it so fell out, that two men contended
together by words in the Churchyard of S. Innocents, the one of them, to the
end he might stir and procure hatred to the other, by a reproachful and
odious name, cried that the people might hear, which were now going out of
the Church, a Lutherane, a Lutherane: when the people heard this, they fell
straight way upon him, and pursued him into the temple, whither at the length
he fled as to a sanctuary and place of refuge. A certain Noble man by chance
passing through the Church, with his brother with him, who was a Priest, and
hearing that the people were about to kill a man, ran in all the haste unto
them, and sought by gentle words to turn the minds of the people from their
wicked purpose, that thereby he might deliver the man out of their hands. But a
certain Mass priest cries out, saying, that he was the man whom they sought
for, being one that durst take upon him to defend a Lutherane, at the hearing
whereof, the people run upon the Noble man, using violence, and at the first
beating him with their fists. The Noble man's brother, which was with him, began
to entreat for him: but the people were more vehement and mad, by his
entreaty, insomuch that they bring them both violently out of the temple,
least it should be defiled with blood, or profaned. One of these two, namely
the Noble man, being stronger and better able to shift for himself than the
other, escaped their hands, and fled into the Curates or Parish Priests
house hard by. The other, which was (as we said before) a Priest, was not so
soon out of the Church, but he was thrust through with a dagger: of the which,
he being now like to die, calls upon Saints, and desires to be confessed of
his sins, (whereby it might have appeared of what religion he was) and at the
length being wounded with other strokes, he was quite dispatched of lyse. And
yet this stayed not their rage and madness: for when he was stark dead, they
did all to bemangle and cut his dead carcas: yea, and some of them thrusting
their hands into the green wounds, did afterward brag that they had
dipped their hands in the blood. This man being thus dispatched, they beset
the house of the Parish Priest round about, least the other brother should
escape away, being fled thither (as is said before) for succor and
defense: saying that they would offer the like violence to the Magistrate,
yea, and to the King himself, if so be he would help a Lutherane. But at the
length the night coming, they forsook their siege, and so the noble man
escaped.

Not long before this time, there happened another thing, which also I thought
good here to insert. There was a certain Sorboniste, or Popish Doctor, whom
men called the Soul of Picardie: This fellow was a famous blower forth and
moouer of sedition: being oftentimes very vehement to inflame the people
against the Lutheranes, persuading them that it was a very good and acceptable
work before God, to shed the blood of the Lutheranes, and that they should
no less deserve at his hands thereby, than did the children of Israel in
slaying the Idolatr^us Cananaeans: adding moreover, that in so doing, the
hands of the godly Catholics should be consecrated and hallowed.

Therefore as this man on a time, was preaching to the people, a certain
devout man which canie to heat his sermon, upon some occasion, or co^ceite
that he had in his mind, laughed unto his fellow that late next unto him. The
which an old woman there present, saw, who cri^d that there was a Lutherane in
ye Church, which did deride and laugh ye preacher to scorn. When the multitude
that were there assembled, heard this, they suddenly start up, and reasoning no
further of the matter, they drew the man out of the temple, and putting forth
his eyes, and pashing forth his brains, most cruelly flew him. These were the
fruits of these seditious sermons preached by the Sorbonistes and Papisticall
Doctors. The The fruits of the sermons of the Papists.
faithful being thus miserably handled, were accused to the King, and to all
the people, of sedition, and were accounted and taken for seditious persons.

About this time also, Andelotius the brother of the Admiral Castillion, or
Sha^ilion, was taken for religion, and put in hold, by this occasion. At what
time entreaty was made for peace, between the Kings of France and Spain,
Granuellus Bishop of Atrebate^sis or Artois, made complaynt to the Cardinal
of Loraine (for these were the Ambassadors between both Kings) that France
was greatly infected with Lutheranes, in so much that the Noble men of the
Realm also were polluted therewith: among whom, he said, that Andelotius had
sent a book to his brother the Admiral, in the which book he did grievously
condemn the Mass: the which talk and communication was carried by the same
Cardinal of Lora^e to Henry King of France: and Fraunces Duke of Guise,
going with an army to Thionuilla, said unto the King, that he did not look
to have prosperous success of his army, if Andelotius were General of the
footmen, which charge in deed was before committed unto him. When the King
heard this, being desirous to retain the friendship of the Constable, he
commands the Admiral Castillio^, brother to Andelotius, and Marescallus
Momorencius, to persuade Andelotius, that he should give unto him a reverent
answer concerning the Mass. The King (as he was instructed by the Cardinal
of Loraine) demands of Andelotius, what he thought of the Mass. To the which
question, he answers freely, saying: Whereas the Mass is called a sacrifice
for the quick and the dead, which only belongs to the sacrifice of Christ
(being once offered for all, and never to be offered again) I think yt it is a
detestable Idol fained by the brain and invention of men. The King hearing this
answer, took it in very evil part, and being angrye, forbad him his
presence, and commanded that he should be put in ward: and another to be
made General of the footmen in his stead. But after the return home again
of the Constable, Andelotius was restored to his former office, and reconciled
into the savor of the King again.

At the length the peace before spoken of, was concluded, between the two
Kings, the chief and special point of the which peace was, that the two Kings
should procure forthwith a general Council to be holden, to the rooting up
and destroying of heresies. It was reported among the common sort of people,
that the Kings made a peace to this end, that they might join in force
together to war against the Lutheranes, who mightilye increased dailye in
both their Realms. They were greatly confirmed in these opinions, by the
Cardinal of Loraine, and also by Granuellus Bishop of Atrebatensis* commonly
called Artois who within a while after was made a Cardinal by the Pope.
Notwithstanding, the number of the Lutheranes newly increased from day to day,
the blame and fault of the which increase was laid upon the Judges, and
specially upon the Senate of Paris, as though they had been to favorable in
their dealing. For the which cause it was appointed that there should be a new
assembly made to consider of the Edict of Castellobrian: The parliament at
Paris.
(of the which we have spoken before, and that they should first of all deal
with matters concerning religion. The company therefore being asse^* bled and
called together, the Kings Solicitor propounded unto them these matters: First,
that there were diverse opinions in matters that co^cerned Religion, found
lately in the Senate, disagreeing and contrary one to another: as, when lome
condemned heretics to be burnt, other some would not have them to be burnt,
but mittigated the pa^ne by banishment: the which would redounde to the
reproach and shame of the Senate: Wherefore he required that their sentences
and judgments might be conformable and agreeing ever hereafter with the
prescript and tenure of the Edictes which appointed the punishments of death.
The which in deed was the most speedy and ready way to detect those Judges
that were suspected of religion, as after truly it came to pass. For when
every man freely vttred his mind and opinion, as the custom is, there were
diverse judgments: some would have no punishment by death, but banishment:
other some, before any thing was determined, would have it known whether they
were heretics in deed, which were counted heretics. Also he said that it was
the Kings will that heretics should be punished: and the office of the Senate
to see and find out who they were that were guiltye of heresy. And for this
cause he willed them to make supplication unto the King, that according to the
first article of the peace concluded, he would cause a lawful Council to be
assembled, to judge of these controversies: and that they should in the mean
time leave off to punish. But some said that it could not be hid, but was
apparent for all men to behold what great corruptions had invaded the Church,
and how needful and requisite it was, a reformation to be had, and that by
the word of God, which is the only rule of verity, and not custom,
antiquity, or the opinions of men. Furthermore they added, that there was
danger, and therefore great heed to be taken, least while they (whom they
called Lutheranes) were condemned, Innocents also should be put to death. For
(say they) the Lutheranes (as we term them) have probable reasons to defend
their doctrine withal: whose life is irreprouable, and without blame, using
themselves oftentimes to pray devoutly and zealously to God, as it has well
appeared to the Senate: to be short, such is their constancy, that thereby
they show themselves not to be such manner of men as they are said to be, among
the common sort of people. Thus at this time, some spoke one thing, some
another: howbeit, the greatest part, would have either the punishment to be
mittigated, or else the men to be quite discharged. Many feared least this
sentence and determination of those that spoke in the behalf of the
Lutheranes, should take place: whereupon two of the Council (as it is
credibly reported) namely Egidius and Minardus, went to the King, and declared
the matter wholly unto him, before the Court had concluded what should be done
(against both law and ancient custom) saying unto him that the matter was
now come to such a strait, that great remedy must be provided for the same,
otherwise great perturbations and trouble would ensue: adding moreover, that
the boldness of some was such, that they durst arrogantly deride the ancient
religion, and as for the Edicts of the King, they made no account of them at
all.

The King being inflamed and greatly stirred with this news, came the next day
into ye senate: where he declared that he having now obtained at the hands of
God, the most excellent benefit of peace, and confirmed the same with the
society and sure knot of matrimony, there wa^ted yet one thing which he
greatly desired, namely, ye setting of matters concerning religion, in a good
and uniform order: and for this cause he said that he came into ye Court,
namely to understand, both in what state the matter stood, and also to comfort
and encourage them by his presence. And so he signified by the keeper of the
seals, that he would have them to follow that order which they had begone, in
showing their opinions. Therefore of the^ which resisted, some were more cold,
fearing some subtle practice to be in hand, other some notwithstanding* spoke
their fantasies and opinions, with no less boldness than they did before,
especially concerning the lawful calling of a Cru^cel or Parliament. And among
others, Anoas Burgaeus, a man very godly and well learned, when he had first of
al given thaks unto God, that he had so wrought in the heart of the Prince, that
he would be a witness and indifferent Judge of so weighty a matter, and when
he had exhorted the King to bend his mind, and give good ear to so great and
urgent cause (being in deed the cause of our Lord Jesus Christ, which ^ught to
be defended by the patrocinie and guard of Kings) very boldly and freely
uttered his mind, affirming at the length that he d^d wholly give his consent
and agree that there should be a counsel called, and that the punishments then
used toward ye Lutheranes, for that time should surcease. Others also after
him, affirmed ye like. When the King had heard thief men, he making first his
preamble, said: that to his grief and sorrow he saw corruption to be crept in
eue^ into his Court, being very sorry that any of his Nobles should be stained
therewith: the good he knew, as for ye others, he said he would* so punish, that
he would thereby extirpe and quite pull up by* ye roots that mischief which was
now a growing. These threatenings ended, and talking a while with those that
stood with him, he commanded that Annas Burgaeus and Lodouicus Faurus should
be taken: y^ which his commandment was streightway executed by Mo^gomerie
Captain of the Guard, After this, others also were taken, as Fumaeus Foixius,
and many others. And those yt were Foixius.
of these opinions, loking to be handled as they were, got the^ out of the
city: but afterward they were openly proclaimed.

About the same time almost, a Synod was held at Paris, many ministers of the
Churches (which were the^ called the reformed Churches) being then called
together for this matter, in the which both the doctrine of the faith, and also
Ecclesiastical discipline, were copiously and largely entreated of* and truly
as the time required, the form of discipline which was already appointed, which
was also afterward by many Synodes and Councels enlarged, and examined by the
rule of Gods word, and the approved* customs of the ancient Church brought
much profit: all which matters here to declare, is not our purpose. Howbeit,
these things following The first synod of the Churches of France.
were the principal points thereof.

1 First, it is agreed, that the confession of the doctrine, which may
testify* the common consent of the Churches, be registered, to the end that no
strange opinions craftily be conveyed in. 2 That all things be done in order
in the Churches. 3 That so often as might conveniently, there should be
Councels, Synodes, or Parlings, of those Churches that were not far often. 4
That there be diligent eye and heed given, specially to the doctrine, and also
the manners of Ministers. 5 That no Minister usurp superiority or
principality by any manner of means among his fellow Ministers, but that all
things be done indifferently, and soberlye among them. 6 That all offenses and
stumbling blocks be taken away. 7 That the faithful be taught their duty, and
also instructed in the purity of the word, and in the chaste rule of
discipline* 8 That nothing in this discipline be rashly altered by one man, or
by one Church without the authority of the general Council.
But now when the most excellent and famous Princes Protestants of Germany,
understood of the great punishments and intolerable afflictions laid upon
the faithful for the Gospels sake: they sent their Ambassadors with their
charge and letters unto the King, beseeching him that he would inhibite and
stay those grievous persecutions: of the which their letters, this was the
effect and sum as follows.

When they understood and weyed with themselves, The sum of the letters of
the Princes of Germany sent to the King.
that men in all ages, estates, and times, suffered imprisonment and bonds for
professing the doctrine of the Gospel, which is contrary to those
superstitions which are of the most part observed: and that for the same cause
only, they were extreemely punished both in body and goods: they also knowing
themselves to be members of the same head Christ with them, whom they heard
to be so cruelly handled, and being persuaded, that they were bound in
conscience to help them so much as they might: they thought good for these
causes to send their Ambassadors unto the King with those letters.

And that the King might not think that the matter is not thoroughly considered
off of them, they signify unto him that they know for a surety, that those
men which were restrained from their liberty, did maintain or defend no
seditious opinions, nor any thing else that is contrary to the true and
Apostolical articles of the Christian faith. And because they themselves did
take no less labor and pain than the King himself, to root out and
abolishe all those things which were against the glory of God, and did only
desire to defend the true invocation of his holy name, and the sincere
doctrine of the Catholic Church, contained in the writings of the Prophets,
Apostles, and Fathers: and also did severely punish the maintainers of false
doctrine, and men of impure and dishonest life: and to be short, because they
themselves did acknowledge and worship one God, as the highest and Lord of all:
these were the causes which had moved them to write those letters of entreaty,
for the releasing of those captives out of misery, whose doctrine they knew
to be far from all falshoode, heresy, and sebitious opinions: the which
thing might evidently appear by their confession, the which they sent unto the
King to that end: There is no man but he will confess that many corruptions
are crept into the Church, and have prevailed, partly by error, and partly by
covetousness, to root out the which (say they) that diverse good and godly
men have taken great pain of late: and that not long since also, certain
virtuous and singular learned men in the university of Paris, as William of
Paris, Gersone, VVestelus, and others, had done the like: and also that they
themselves have reformed errors in their dominions, for the which, they are
not a little joyful: Moreover, that his father king Frances of happy memory,
a Prince of singular wisdom and virtue, purposed to have made the like
reformation, following herein the examples of his auncelors the Kings of
France, who would oftentimes themselves find out the controversies that
happened in the Church: The which way he ought to follow in ending these
matters, rather than to suffer the cruelty of many against their brethren and
his subjects: assuring himself of this, that he should so smallye prevail
in suppressing the doctrine of the Gospel, by those sharp and cruel
punishments, that contrariwise the blood which was shed for the same, should
be the seed more and more dailye to increase the number of christians: and
furthermore* that by this means, namely, by shedding of blood, he should
have the greatest part of his faithful subjects cut from him. Eeside all
this, that God does threaten to take vengeance of the blood of Innocents
unjustly shed, and will severely punish those which shall reject the perfect
knowledge of his doctrine and truth. Moreover, they signify unto the King in
their letters, that they did of late sue unto him, and require the self same
thing of him that they do now, by their letters then, and Ambassadors also,
and were almost persuaded by his answer again that he would never more
suffer the miserable Christians so to be afflicted and appressed with those
injuries: Notwithstanding, that they understood that the same affliction, by
all manner of punishment was as great in his kingdom, as ever it had been
before. Insomuch, that in this point they did greatly bewail, (so much as
Christian Charity required) the state and condition of his good and faithful
subjects, who for this cause were only afflicted, for that they followed that
doctrine which they retained sure and firm in their Churches, and in the which
they grounded their faith: The which wonderfully grieved them, not only
because they saw that it was prejudicial and hurtful to them, but chiefly
because they perceived the glory of the most mighty God to be defaced, and as
it were derided. And because Charity with the which his subjects were beloved
of men, did provoke them also to wish their peace and tranquillity, and above
all things to desire that the King might behave himself in that thing which
appertained to the glory of God and souls health, that he might not provoke
the wrath of God against him: they most heartily beseech him that he would
prudentlye expende and weigh all the circumstances of this fact: and specially
that he would consider the causes why his miserable subjects should be so
greatly troubled: and that he would endeavor himself that the Church of God
might be pourged from all these corruptions with the which it had been a long
time contaminated and infected: in so doing he should satisfy the honest
desire of a great number in this point. And because he could not come to the
knowledge of those things which were of so great weight, without the hearing of
the judgments of godly learned men, they persuaded him so call unto him out
of hand, men expert in knowledge, and desirous of Gods glory, after the
ensample of his Elders, by whom the matters now in controversy might be
vprightlye and peaceably decided and determined by the rule of holy Scripture.
Also, that while these things were in hand, and until it were fully
concluded of the matters in controversy, his subjects which follow the
doctrine agreeing to their confession which latelye they defended, might go
untroubled, and vnconstreyned to do any thing against their conscience: that
nothing might be devised to put them in peril of life and goods: and that
they which were in prison, might be set at liberty. To conclude, they
affirm, that they perceive that their earnest requests shall no less
prevail with him, than the cryings and importunity of the adversaries of the
truth has done. The which, if it come to pass according to their expectation,
he shall fulfill the commandment of the son of God, who specially
commits his Church, which he has redeemed with his most precious blood to
Princes: and also shall show great mercy and compassion, and be very
beneficial toward his subjects, if so be he would give them leave to
invoke and worship God aright. In reknowledging whereof, they testify
themselves to be ready, and upon this condition, will constantly avide for ever
the Kings friends. To these letters subscribed the Earl of Palatine, the
Duke of Sax^nie, Marchio of Brandeburge, VVolfgangus Earl of Weldentsius, and
the Duke of Wirtemberge.

The king when he had suluted the Ambassadors, according to the manner and
custom, makes a very short answer, in this form, saying: that he will
forthwith send such an answer, that he trusted thereby sufficiently to
satisfy them. But notwithstanding, the Ambassadors of the Princes were as yet
scarcely departed, but that the fire of persecution, which seemed to be
extinguished before, by their coming, burned the faithful a fresh, Moreover,
the Annas Burgaeus examined, condemned, and judged to dye.
causes of those Counselors, who (as we said before) were taken in the Senate
of Paris, came now in question. Judges also were chosen, which should consider
the cause of Annas Burgaeus, but not indifferent Judges, but such as were great
enemies to that which he defended. And among others, the Bishop of Paris, and
Demochares the Inquisitor were chosen for this purpose: the which Judges when
Burgaeus refused, desiring that he might be judged of the whole fellowship and
assembly of the Senate, according to the ancient and accustomed law of the
Senate of Paris, he was commanded by the Kings letters patents to answer
before those judges. The which letters when he had heard them red, he
affirmed, that for obedience sake to the King, he would answer, otherwise he
would have made no answer at all: therefore, they demanding of him, he made
answer to all those principal points of Popish religion, which are at this
day in controuersis: as to the traditions of the Church, to invocation of
Saints, to Purgatory, to the Mass, and to the rest. All the which he
dislyking and gaynsaying, was at the last condemned by the Bishop of Paris, for
an heretic: and because he had taken certain orders (as they call them) the
same Bishop gives commandment that he should be disgraded, and so given
over to the secular power.

The which sentence as it was falslye given, so Burgaeus appealed from the same
to the celestial Judge.

And now at this time those outrageous storms of persecution did seem to
beat upon every corner of the church of Christ. The King sent new letters to
every Parliament, in the which he commands that the Lutheranes should be
most severely persecuted. Heretofore (says he) in the troublesome time of
wars, the Lutheranes greatly increased: but now that he had inioyed and
gotten peace, he would wholly bend himself and all his force utterly to race
and destroy them: wherefore he exhorts them to use the same diligence in
doing the like. If they want power and strength, he promises that he will
provide for them a band of soldiers, to be ready to aid the^ at al need. In
any wise he willed them not to be cold in their business, as some began to
be, for if they were, he would first begin with them, and make them feel the
smart of punishment prepared for others.

Therefore all the Courts, Senates, and Assemblies being with this general
commandment of the King moved, they thunder out, and shake* both heaven and
earth with new threatenings and Edicts. In the midst of this great distress
and troubles of the faithful, there was great joy, triumph, solemnity, and
feasting, for the peace confirmed between the two Kings by the knot of
matrimony: all which joy and pleasure, was by and by, suddenly turned into
great sorrow and woe. For King Henry to solemnise the matrimony, willed a
Iusting or running at Tylt to be prepared, the which being done, and diverse of
his Peers and Nobles armed in a readiness, he himself desired, among all
others, to run against Momgomerie Captain of his guard: who being very loath
and unwilling so to do, was commanded earnestly of the King to run against
him, the King himself putting a spear into Momgomeries hand: and running
together in a broad way that leads to S. Anthonies street, not far from
the Castle into the which the two Counselors (of whom we spoke before) were
put, a piece of one of the Spears or iusting staves, by the great force and
violence of their running, struck the King through the helmet into the eye, and
so to the brain, The death of king Henry.
wherewith he was sore hurt. Then the wounded King, after much bleeding, was
carried into the house called the small towers. Many men report that he said in
his greatest grief and pain, that he greatly ^eared, that he had committed
wickedness, and done injury against his two Cou^sellers: but the Cardinal of
Loraine did labor earnestly to turn his mind from that opinion, often crying
and inculcating these words into his ears: The adversary of the faith
tempts thee: persevere constantly in the faith. The King by the earnest and
continual persuasion of that Cardinal, had been very cruellye minded and
bent against those Counselors, in so much that threatening, he spoke these
words: I my self will see the burning of Burgaeus. It was noted of many,
that the King was wounded and stayne by him, whom he commanded to carry
Burgaeus to prison: who was (as is said before) Momgomerie, a mortal enemy
at that time to the reformed Religion, the which he vehementlye persecuted upon
the strait commandments and charge given unto him for the same purpose. But
afterward he was brought to the knowledge of the truth, and became a very
profitable member of the Church of Christ. And thus king Henry being weary of
his mortal life, through extreme grief and pain, surrendered the same again
to him that gave it, in the year of our Lord God. M. D. LIX. the. x. day of
August.

By this sudden chance, the joy and mirth was turned into sorrow and
beauinesse, all men woondring to behold so sodeyne an alteration and change.
The Court which was seeled, pergitted, sumptuouslye decked, and prepared for
dancing, leaping, and other pastyme, to make a pleasant and joyful marriage,
was now converted to another use: namely, to keep the Kings dead body.
There, bewaylings were made, with doleful and lamentable songs in black and
mourning garments, the space of forty days, and forty nights.

But notwithstanding this time of mourning and sorrow, the afflictions moved
against the Church, which seemed by that wonderful chance of the King to
cease, could not be assuaged by any means: neither did the adversaries cease
to prosecute and follow the law against these two Counselors. Therefore when
Burgaeus had oftentimes appealed from them, his appeals being pronounced by
the Court to be nothing and of no force, he was at the length condemned by the
Bishop of Paris, from whom before he had appealed: and was also disgraded. The
which he taking in very good part, as might appear by his cherefull
countenance, spoke these words: To day (says he) it is brought to pass by
the singular goodness of God toward me, that to the end I might never more
have to do with Antichrist, the badges and marks of that great beast are
taken from me.

Diverse thought Burgaeus used many appeals to put of his adversaries, yt
thereby he might delay the time and prolong his life: notwithstanding, he
writing letters to ye church of Paris, affirmed yt he did it not to preserve or
prolo^g his life, ye which he would willingly bestow for the gospels sake, but
rather ye he might seem not to pretermit any thing which appertained to
defend his right. And therefore thinking that he had not done sufficiently by
his plain and manifest answers, he writes also a confession, in the which he
professes plentifully and plainly what he thought of every special point of
religion.

Notwithstanding, afterward by the earnest persuasions and importunity of his
friends, he was brought to that point, that he propounded and delivered to the
Judges a certain ambiguous and doubtful confession: in so much that then
there was great hope that he should be set at liberty. Of the which thing
when the heads and governors of the reformed Church had intelligence, being
very careful for Burgaeus, notwithstanding, being sorry that he should after
that manner be delivered out of prison, and from death, commanded one of the
Ministers, to put Burgaeus in mind of his duty. And certainly their friendly
admonitions did so much prevail with Burgaeus, that he by and by earnestly
acknowledging his sault, desired at the hands of God, pardon for the same: and
quite alters that which before he had done. Therefore he offers to his
Judges again another suppliant book, by which he reueketh his doubtful and
last confession, affirming that he stands to his first confession, and
requires that he may have judgment of his cause thereby, and that the last
sentence either of condemnation or deliverance may stand thereupon.

That confession is truly more large, notwithstanding, so well deserving to be
remembered, that I thought good here The sum of the confession of Burgens.
to insert the same* And first of all in that confession, he affirms himself
to be a Christian, that is to say, such a one as embraces the doctrine of God
the father, and his true son Jesus Christ, of one substance and coeternal
with the father, and also of the holy ghost, who is all one with the father and
the son, being the very power of the father and the son. Secondly, that God
created man after his own Image and similitude: who notwithstanding by the
suggestion of ye Serpent, that is to say, of Satan, fell from God, and made
not only himself, but also al his posterity partakers of grievous
punishments, sin also cleaving to his seed unto the end of the world.
Thirdly, that there is but one way to salvation, namely Jesus Christ, who
being the very son of God, became perfect man, and took upon him all our
infirmities, sin only excepted. This second Adam has fulfilled the law for
us, and made us thereby partakers of everlasting righteousness: he lived here
a time on earth, died, and was buried, and after he had overcome death, he rose
again the third day: ascended into heaven, and sits at the right hand of
the Father, making intercession for us daily to him, until he shall come to
judge the quick and the dead. Fourthly, that he does lean and stay himself
only upon Gods word (that is to say, upon the books of the old and new
Testament) penned, pronounced, and uttered by the holy ghost, the Prophets and
Apostles being only instruments. And that this is the only and everlasting rule
of truth: to add unto the which, or to take any thing therefro, is great
wickedness. Therefore all the laws and Ceremonies which Popes and others have
made, cannot bind the consciences of men. And when he had laid this
foundation, he says that he does detest the constitutions of the Pope, by
which he would seem to be more wise than the most prudent and mighty Lord:
being also most contrary to all truth: the which thing he makes A comparison
between the doctrine of the Gospel, and the Romish doctrine.
more manifest, by comparing the commandments of God with the traditions of
the Pope. God (says he) commands us to work six days, and to rest the
seventh day: but the Pope to add thereto his devise, exempteth certain days
in the which he forbids to works. God permits unto us the use of all
meats with giving of thanks: but the Pope forbids the same. Our Savior
Christ commands that they which have not the gift of continency should
marie: but the Pope most severely forbids his Clergy to marie, against the
custom of the ancient Church. God forbids Images to be set in churches,
but the Pope commands the contrary. And therefore he concludes that he is
very Antichrist, and very lively described of the Apostle Paul so to be* After
this, be answers 2. These. 2. 3.
to every one of the Articles of the interrogatories one by one: as to
invocation of Saints: to the placing of Images in the temples: to the
Sacraments: to Purgatory, and to the rest. I therefore (says he)
acknowledging by what superstitions and errors I have been hitherto led and
blinded, do now affirm, that I do vnfeynedlye abjure and abhor them all,
even from the bottom of my heart, as things contrary to the doctrine of my
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, which is the word revealed by the holy spirit
of God, and written by the Prophets and Apostles. The which word, I receive
and embrace as the rule of my whole life, even as in old time, the fiery
pillar led the children of Israel through the Desert to the land of promise.
I protest that I will direct and frame my whole life according to the prescript
rule of that word, by the assistance of Gods holy spirit, which shall be with
me, and order all my ways: without the which I can do nothing, and by which
all things are possible unto me. Insomuch that I am persuaded that all things
shall happen to the glory of the Lord, to the enlarging of the kingdom of his
son, to the building of his Church, and to my souls health, which I commend
unto him: to whom I give most hearty thanks: whom I most humbly pray in the
name of Jesus Christ his well-beloved son, that he will strengthen and
slablishe me by his holy spirit in this faith unto the end: and that it will
please him to grant me-strength, for his mercies sake with my heart and mouth
boldly to confess his holy name, both before the faithful, and also before
Infidels, tyrants, and murdering butchers of Antichrist, even to the shedding
of the utmost drop of my blood. All my desire is to live and dye in this says,
being fully persuaded that the same is grounded upon the word of God alone,
and that all the Saints, Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles, did live and dye
therein. This is the only true knowledge of God, in the which the undoubted and
eternal felicity of men is placed. This I say, is the faith in the which I
will both live and die. To this confession I have subscribed with my own
hand, being ready also to seal the same with my blood, for the defense of
the doctrine of the son of God: whom I pray to open the eyes of your hearts,
that at the length (if it be his will) ye may know and understand the truth.

Therefore when he had wholye confirmed that confession, and had with his own
mouth plainly testified the same before his Judges, then was there no hope
left that Burgaeus should be delivered. For he had great and mighty
adversaries, among whom, his chief and principal enemy was the Cardinal of
Loraine, who left nothing undone that might by any manner of means hasten his
death. For he feared, least at the length he should be delivered by the King.
For many Noble men, as Frederick Earl of Palatine Prince Elector, and others,
had very earnestly written to the King for him.

All things therefore being so appointed, as we have showed, his adversaries
thought that they had many just reasons, by which they might condemn him to
dye. And therefore on the twenty day of December, they pronounce the sentence
of death against him: namely, That The sentence of death against Burgaus.
Burgaeus being condemned of heresy, should be burnt with fire, until his
body were consumed to ashes. The which sentence Burgaeus heard, and received
cherefully: and when he had heard it, he gave thanks unto God that had suffered
him to see so joyful and happy a day: and prayed also unto God, that he
would pardon and forgive his Judges, who had judged him according to their
own conscience and knowledge, but not according to the true knowledge and
wisdom of God. Many words be uttered unto them at that time, which were so
rhetorical, weighty, and sentencious, with vehemency vttred, that it might
well appear, the holy ghost rather to speak than he: the which his words here
to repeare, shall be nothing from our purpose.

Has (says he) that fraudulent message of hell full of all guile and deceyte,
and an abominable lie, with deadly hatred, still striving against the truth,
so prevailed, that being accused unto you falslye for those men which we are
not, shall so be condemned? We, I say, are the sons of God, whom we know
to be our father, with whom there is no respect of persons: with whom we are
able to do all things, and without whom, nothing: he it is, whom you ought
to hear, speaking now unto you, otherwise he threateneth unto you death and
destruction. It is (truly) the part of great and intolerable boldness, for
men to dare presume so much against the holy and in^tolable commandment of
God.

Shall we suffer our redemption, and the blood so plentifullye shed for our
sins, to be trodden under foot? Shall we not obey that our most mighty King,
who would have us to defend his cause, who seeks us, who sustaineth us, who
is also our* Captain in fight? What shall we do then? shall fear make us
unconstant, or drive us from doing our duty? No, we shall rather be strong and
valiant, seeing we encounter with so weak an enemy. But behold what this
wicked generation commands? that we suffer God to be blasphemed: that we
betray the truth of God, and such like: the which because we will not do, we
are counted execrable and wicked, yes, we are called seditious. Ye are (say
they) rebels to Princes: and wherefore? because we will not offer unto Baal. O
good God, how long will thou suffer the unbridled lusts, and ambitions wills
of men to have their swaye. In the mean time, most merciful and loving father,
till it shall please thee to restrain them, have mercy upon us: lead us
forth, and govern us, in defending of thy truth, to the utmost of our power.
Make it to be known (O Lord) that they themselves are rebels in deed to
Princes: and I for my part while I have breath, will not let to tell them so. Is
this to play the part of a rebel, for a man to give unto his Prince both body
and goods and whatsoever else, to be at his pleasure? Is this the part of a
traitor and Rebel, to pray unto God for the preservation and prosperity of
the King and the kingdom, and that he and his Ministers, Counselors, and
Magistrates, may truly and faithfully do their duty, that all false worship
being taken away, God may be glorified alone, and of all men purely worshipped?
Is not this rather, rebellion, to deface Gods glory, and to give that honor
due unto him to creatures, and to follow the devises and fantasies of men in
worshipping him, to count it a virtue, to rent and tear the name of God with
blasphemous oaths, to suffer brothell houses and common stews, and an infinite
number of wickednesses mo? I appeal here unto you ye Senators: if ye bear the
sword of the Lord only to revenge his cause, to the punishment of wickedness
and vice, take heed I advise you what ye do. Will ye give judgment and pro^
condemnation against your selves? Weigh and consider I pray you a little with
your selves, the wickedness that is laid to our charge, and first of all judge
whether it be more meet for us to obey you, rather than God. Are ye made so
drunk with the Cup of the great beast? Do ye after this sort bring the
people from falling into sin, whom ye bring from the true worship of God? If
you reverence and fear more the opinions of men, than ye do the judgment of
God, consider with your selves what the people of forroine nations and
kingdoms shall think of you, when the cruelty of your judgments shall be
spoken of in every place* yea, and that before so famous Princes.

How many wickednesses do ye commit, by the commandments of that ruddie
purpuled Phalaris, (can thou By the tyrant Phalaris he means the Cardinal
of Loraine.
O cruel tyrant, by the cruel death cease our sobbing sighs?) who at his own
pleasure, for his proper advantage and gain, advanced the authority of
certain rulers, to the destruction of the King and the whole kingdom. At his
commandment ye so rack and torment our bodies, that ye your selves are
constreyned to pity the same. How great is your cruelty? But me thinks I
see tears fall from your eyes. Why weep you? Can you hide the burden of your
consciences. Fear not, hardly, the judgment of God, although ye be
constreyned to tremble thereat. They which are condemned of you to die,
rejoice, accounting death to be unto them life: they are nothing abashed or
dismayed at your cruelty, they regard not the injuries offered unto the^, and
as for death, they count it a sleep, according to the Proverb: The conqueror
dies, and he that is conquered, lamenteth. What should it grieve me to be
hanged? I know Lord, that if ever any wickedness deserved punishment and
pain, the wickedness of those deserves it even to the full, which reject and
contemn the benefit of thy son Christ. I embrace (O Lord God) that saying
which thou have put into the mouths of certain of thy Martyrs, namely, that he
is worthy of double punishment which receives not the offered redemption of
our Savior. No man shall separate us from Christ, what snares of trappes
soever are laid for us, and with what pains soever our bodies shall be
tormented, I know that we were appointed long ago as sheep to the slaughter.
Let them therefore kill us, let them grind us to powder and ashes: yet
notwithstanding, they which dye to the Lord live still, and shall so rise
again at the resurrection of the just. Whatsoever come to pass, I am a
Christian, and a Christian will I be. Uerye earnestly will I cry, that I may
be heard, dying for my Lord and savior Jesus Christ. Since the matter
stands thus, why do I stay? take me hangman and carry me to ye gallows. And
repeating these words again, and that with such vehemency, that he made the
tears to come out of the eyes of his adversaries, he spoke these words to ye
Senators which were then present, namely, that he suffered death, because he
would not acknowledge, justification, grace, sanctification, merits,
intercession, satisfaction and salvation to be in any other, than in Christ:
and that therefore he died for the doctrine of the Gospel. And after many other
words concerning this matter, at y^ length he concluded with these words: Put
out, put out one day those your flaming fires, come unto the lord in newness
of life, that your sins may be done away, let the wicked man forsake his
ways, and the wicked cogitations of his heart, and then the Lord will have
mercy. In the mean time, meditate and consider these things in your minds.
Behold, I go now unto the death.

When he had thus uttered his mind, the hangman tied his hands, and bound
him to the Cart, in the which he was carried to the street commonly called
San-Iani Greuaei, above four hundred armed men garding him: beside this, the
whole City of Paris, as though it been at the coming of their enemies, was
furnished with armed men: the ways that led to the place of execution were
stopped up, and the freque^ted places kept. Yet for all this, this godly Martyr,
was nothing abashed, but abode courageous and constant. When he came to the
place of execution, he put off his clothes himself, and being stripte naked,
fetching great and deep sighs, he looked up steadfastly into heaven. And at
the length uttered these few words only to the people: I am not come hither,
either for theft nor murder, but to suffer only for the Gospels sake. For he
had the liberty of his tongue granted unto him (which liberty other of the
faithful had not when they came to suffer, having their tongues first cut out
of their heads) upon this condition, ye he should not speak to ye people. The
which he promised to observe, that he might the better pray unto God.
Therefore when he had made his prayers to God, and should now be sacrifised,
he oftentimes repeated these words with a loud voice: O my God, forsake me
not, least I forsake thee. And being strangled, he was cast into the fire,
sealing that with his blood, and death, which before he had subscribed with
his hand.

This was the end of that good and godly man being of great fame among the
learned, both for his wit, and also his learning, and being also of honorable
calling and great wealth: who had no doubt in short time attained to greater
honor and dignity in this life, had not God reserved him, by the pure
knowledge of his name, to this greatest preferment and dignity of professing
his truth, which the world counts reproach. For Burgeus came of an honest
family and stock, being borne in Rionssius, a town in Auergne, and brought
up in good letters, who had so given himself to the study of the law, that
he became famous in the profession thereof. Afterward, being chosen to be one
of the Senate of Paris, he left great fame of wit and learning behind him,
among the most noble men. Being therefore in the way to come to greater honor
and preferrement, behold, God indueth him with more pure knowledge of his
word, whereby he fearing no perils of times, joined himself to the reformed
Church, and would be present at the sermons which were then secretly made: and
thus dailye he was fervent more and more in godly zeal: Insomuch, that he had
not been partaker of the Lords supper passing once or twice, when he spoke his
mind so freely before king Henry in the Senate house in the defense of the
Gospel: by whose commandment he was cast in prison, and from thence (as ye
have heard) carried to execution. A singular example of the efficacy and force
of the knowledge of God, and also of godly constancy in so worthy a man, at
the which, the godly hereafter shall justly marvel. His blood truly was the
seed whereby the Church of Christ in France did greatly increase and grow, as
may plainly appear by those things which follow.

Touching the other Counselors, whom we said before were taken together with
Burgaeus, this was the end: after a while, they had diverse judgments given
of them, by which they were delivered. And the causes why these so escaped are
these: namely, either the new Judges, who to understand their causes, examined
them after another manner than the other was examined: either the diversity of
times, in which chanced many troubles: or else truly the very inconstancy of
the captiued Counselors themselves, relenting somewhat to their adversaries.

About this time, Nicolaus Durandus, (who altering his name, called himself
Villegagno, that is to say, a Conqueror of Cities, as though he had been a
new conquering Ulysses) obtained of the King a navy of ships with men and
vittaile accordingly, to sail to the South Indians, taking with him many men
which professed the reformed religion: to the end (as he said) that the
Gospel might to them be preached, and there planted. And when he was arrived
into America, he sent to Geneua, that Ministers might be sent unto him from
thence: the which his desire was granted, insomuch that he obtained two,
namely, Peter Richerius, and George Charterius. who came unto him with a great
number of those faithful Protestants that fled out of France in the hot
time of persecution. These men when they were come, began to preach the word
of God, and to appoint an order of discipline. There was also among the rest, a
certain man called Ianus Contachus, not long before, a Sorbonist or Papist,
who came thither after Villegagno. This man being ambitions, desired greatly to
be made a Bishop. Therefore he thought this a very good way to obtain his
purpose: namely upon the day appointed for the ministration of the Lords
supper, to move certain questions: as, whether Copes, and Surplesies, and
such Priest like garments were necessary to be used in that ministration: also,
whether unleavened bread and the mixing of water with win^, should not in the
same be used. The which he did in deed. Howbeit, for all this contention
moved by him, the Supper of the Lord was then purely celebrated. But the
controversies increasing daily more and more among them, it was told unto
Villegagno, that there was a fame and report in France, that many Lutheranes
were come into America, by his means and guidance. At the hearing whereof
Durandus Villegagno being made asearde, quite altered and changed his former
mind and purpose, concerning the bringing in and establishing of the Gospel
in those regions. And when as on a time Richerius ministered Baptism, and said
that all those things which were by the Papists joined to Baptism, after the
institution of the Apostles, were depraved and corrupted additions, Villegagno
made open proclamation, saying that Richerius lied, and straight way affirmed
that he had rather follow the ancient rites and customs of the Church made a
thousand years ago, than the new opinions of Calvin, and other newfangled
persons: adding also to this, that (...)would never more have to do with
them. At the last, after long controversy, it was concluded among them, that
the articles which were in question, should be sent to the Churches of France
and Germany, to judge of them, whose judgment and opinion they agreed to
follow. For this cause Charterius was sent into France. But when Villegagno
understood by rumors that great persecution continued still in France, he
plainly utters his mind, and declares that he would stand to none of all
their judgments and opinions, but would embrace the doctrine of the Romish
Church, and forbids Richeri^s to preach or ^o gather together the
congregation to pray any more. This was the cause why Richerius and Pontanus
returned into France, notwithstanding, the lets and impediments which
Villegagno objected unto them: who in deed went about to bring to pass, that
so soon as they came into France, they both might be delivered into the
hands of the magistrate. Many in like manner of the faithful which abode in
America, were very evil entreated for religion, some for this cause being
drowned, left a sign and remembrance to the utmost parts of the world, of
their sufferance for the Gospel. And this truly was the issue and end of the
rash and indiscreet zeal of Villegagno,

But now let us here bring in that, which we left behind unspoken, concerning
ye death of king Henry. After that he was buried, and his funerals celebrated
according to custom, and the new king Frances set in his room, the Guises
(having gotten authority and favor with the King, by the means of the Queen
of Scotts his wife) left nothing undone to advance them to dignity: seeking
all they could to remove others, to whom the government of things appertained,
but specially in this time of the Kings nonage, and at their pleasure placing
whom it pleased them, to the great detriment, loss, and reproach of those
Princes that were the Kings near kinsemen, being of the same family and line
that he himself was of. But this their authority and power happened unto the^
chiefly, to the destruction of the Church. Therefore that persecution which
seemed to end by ye wonderful chance Great affliction of the Church after the
death of king He^rie.
of king Henry. began now to be more vehement tha^ before. And ye chiefest
persecutors were the Guises, both for the old cankred spite they bare to
religion, and also for the unbridled and ambitious desire they had to bear
rule, and to get authority: the which they saw by no other means could
stand. For the Cardinal of Loraine who also joined with the Guises, was
greatly dismayed and made afearde by new rumors, which were daily brought
from foreign Nations, namelye, that a conspiracy was made against them, by
many men which could not bea^ their tirannie. And therefore the Guises
thought it best to proclaim open war against the Christians.

Then was there new Edicts devised and set forth more cruel than the other
that were before, with new punishments added to the same. In these, it was
forbidden so make any secret or privy assemblies upon pain of death: and also
promised to the bewrayets of such as should make the assemblies, the one half
of the confiscation or forfeyture of their goods, beside many other great
rewards. There was also commandment given to the overseers and searchers out
of such, to receive diligently the accusations brought unto them: to take those
that were accused: daily to search houses: and to certify the Senate of the
City what they had done in the premises.

Furthermore, there was authority given to the Praetor, to hang and draw, at
his pleasure: that he might giu^ sentence of death against such as were before
him accused for heresy, the benefit of appeal denied and taken away from
such as were condemned.

The U^cars and Curates also of every Parish were commanded not to be slack
in excommunicating those whom they knew to be Lutheranes. Besides this, there
was impunitie and pardon given to the accusers, if so be, it fell out that
their accusation were found false.

About this time Satan (who seeket^ all that he may the An example of two
false brethren.
destruction of Christ's Church) to the end nothing might be left undone that
might by any means hurt the same, takes new ways in hand: as ye shall hear
by this which follows. So it was, that two false brethren fled from the
Church of Paris. One of them was a Goldsmyth by his occupation, whom the Lord
had sometime used (as he does oftentimes other hypocrites) as a mean in
bringing many men to the knowledge of him: the other was a certain Painters
servant. The first of these two, which was the Goldsmith, being for his
wickedness and evil life excommunicate from the Church, came to Democharis
the Inquisitor, and told him that he knew many things concerning the
Lutheranes, and that he for sooke their company for this cause, that he might
so much as lay in him, work their destruction. And so whatsoever he knew
might be hurtful to the faithful, the same he declared to the Inquisitor:
giving unto him the names of such as were chief of ye church, and burdening
them with grievous crimes. To be short, he left nothing untold, that might
serve any manner of way to be hurtful unto them. To this fellow, the
Inquisitor gave diligent ear, and encouraged him with great commendations to
proceed in his well doing, promising unto him great things: and to the end he
might not seem to dally, he gave unto him a sum of money for an earnest
penny: and for the news he brought him, he called him Saint Paul the Convert.
To be short, this fellow perceiving some fruit and profit to come unto him
for his treachery and playing the Judas part, added yet to his former
wickedness another mischief. So many as he knew to be weak, and not fully
se^led in the Christian profession, he persuaded to go to the Inquisitor, and
to desire his friendship, that they might be absolved and discharged of the
punishment ensuing. Also he carried with him Catchpoles to so many of the houses
of the faithful, as he knew, that by them they might be apprehended. By this
his secret treason he made all the chief of the Church to flee. Now the
other, which was the Painters servant, envying his master for due correction
ministered unto his deserts, went and told the Judges that he had frequented
the Lutheranes company by the commandment and will of his master. Whom the
Judges seeing to be so ready to accuse, enticed him by many fair promises, to
bewraye such as he knew to be Lutheranes: The which request of theirs he
satisfied to the uttermost, saying that the common report was true, namely,
that they satisfied their filthy lusts one with another: and saying also that
he himself had to do with diverse young maidens, whom he named. For the which
cause he required that those Maidens with their mothers might be brought before
the Judge face to face, and the matter thoroughly examined. The which matter at
the length being manifestly proved false, this wicked accuser was constrained
to confess that he was procured by Democharis the Inquisitor, and one of the
chief of the Senate, to forge these things. Howbeit, this slanderous rumor
did much harm, for it was noysed abroad, that all manner of wickedness was
committed by the Lutheranes when they came together. The same whereof being
brought to the ears of the young King, made him more cruel against the
faithful. And so persecution waxed hot and vehement again, the Judges Flies
(for so were the Inquisitors called) flying abroad in every corner. Insomuch
that for the space of nine months the faithful were cast Grievous affliction.
in prison, banished, murdered, and their houses and goods confiscate.
Notwithstanding all these things, God preserved the remnant of his Church: and
suffered not, for all this, the preaching of his word to be taken away. Many
therefore were then burned for the Gospels sake, whose constancy wan many to
the same. And among the rest which suffered for the testimony of the Gospel,
there was one Margaret Rich.
woman, called Margaret Rich, a book sellers wife, of wonderful constancy.
This woman by the falshoode and deceit of her husband was betrayed into ye
hands of the Judges, who notwithstanding was the first that instructed her in
ye truth, and brought her to know and reject her former errors. Annas Burgaeus
affirmed that he was much encouraged by ye constancy of this woman, which was
kept in bonds when he lived.

Thus, the Kingdom of the young King Frances being governed as it pleased the
Guises, who having gotten the superiority, thought and devised now how to
bring two things to pass, which seemed to be so necessary for the^, that
without the obtaining of them, they could not get their purpose: the which two
things were these, the extinguishing and taking away of the liberty of
France, and the liberty of the Gospel. But while they went about to bring
these things to pass, many complaints of them, and libe^s that touched the
practice of these things were cast abroad: namely, that ye Guises did not
secretly go about to conspire against the kingdom: that they went about in the
days of King Henry by subtle and sinister means, to subvert and wast the
Duchy of Andegauensis and the County of Province: that they oftentimes
complained that the King had do^e them injury in this thing: that they went
about to prove by learned men who^ they had taken to search the Chronicles,
that they came by true lineall descent of Carolus Magnus: that Hugo Capetus (of
whom come the kings of Vales that now reign) usurped the kingdom: that they
said that they hoped for a time to come at the length, when they should have
more convenient time to reason and judge of this matter: And therefore that the
Guises having practiced these things in the days of Henry ye King, had now
greater hope in these days of the young king, to bring their purpose to pass:
that it was done against all the laws of the Realm, that they should
arrogate to themselves the government of the Kingdom, seeing the same
pertained to the Princes which were the Kings near kinsmen, whom
notwithstanding they had excluded from that lawful dignity appertaining to
them: yt the kingdom could not be committed unto them without great danger,
specially seeing they contended for the same: that it wanted not great
suspicion, that they banished the ancient kinsfolks of the king from the
Court, to the intent they might do al things as the^ listed: yt they did
change the governors of Provinces and Cities, to the end such might bear
office as would be ruled by them: that it appeared by many things that their
government was pernicious and hurtful for the kingdom: as both by the fresh
memory of the late wicked act done in the days of King Henry, concerning
that notable viage to Naples, by which the one was minded to make himself
Pope, and the other purposed to make himself King: and also by the sundry
exactions with the which the people were oppressed, when they should rather
have been eased, considering the great wars and charge that they had been at
before, being charged with war a fresh, carrying the soldiers that were
wearied in the former wars into Seotlande, and all under the pretense of
religion. And here for examples sake, the dealings of those were brought in,
who under the color of custody, protection, and wardship, had invaded the
kingdoms of Orphantes. These were the contents of those libels dispersed
abroad, co^cluding also that it was no offense at all, but well done, with the
sword to resist the tirannie of the Guises.

While these things were published abroad, and on both sides writings of
defense dispersed, many rumors were brought from far Countries to the
Guises, but among the rest, this in especial, namely, that many had made a
conspiracy to set upon them even in the Kings house. The Guises therefore
being moved with these writings and rumors, laid the cause of all these things
to the Lutheranes charge, and went about to persuade the King that the
Lutheranes disdaining to be so greatly afflicted, had made a conspiracy to
destroy him. And for the more safety of the The description of the tumult of
Ambaxia.
King, they carried him to Ambaxia, being a little town, and fortified with a
Castle: appointing watch and ward to be in every place through which the King
should pass to Ambaxia, commanding also to take so many as they found
armed, or by any manner of means suspected. This done, the Kings power and
authority was committed to Frances Duke of Guise, to supply the Kings room,
for confirmation whereof, he received the Kings letters patentes.
Notwithstanding all this, the Guises as yet were uncertain of the reported
conspiracy, as, from whence, after what manner, by what way they would come,
and who the conspirators were, until the Cardinal of Loraine was plainly
certified thereof by a certain lawyer of Paris: to whom were given for his
reward in revealing this matter, ten thousand French Crowns, out of the
Kings treasury.

But now, what manner of conspiracy or practice this was, ye shall hear:
There were very many which disdained and repined at the authority committed
unto the Guises, but specially the Noblemen, which took it in evil part, that
the liberty of France should be defaced by the tirannie of strangers.
Again, many of those which were of the reformed Churches, being wearied with
sharp and grievous afflictions, and laying the burden and blame of all these
cruelties upon the Guiles, as the chief and principal enemies of religion,
thought if they might be repressed and put down, they should find the King
more merciful and ready to hear their petitions: and they should defend
their cause before the Magistrates, if they were there unto lawfully called.
Yea, the matter came so far, that they thought they had just causes to put
down the Guises, the which should turn to the profit both of the King and
country. And this counsel and practice was enterprised at Nameta, which is a
town in the lower Britayne, by certain which came thither, under the color
of meeting together at a marriage. The chief perswaders and procurers of which
matter, were Godfridus, Barreus, Renaudius, and Garreus, being Noble men. Whose
determination and purpose was to compel the Guises to give an account bow
they had discharged their offices: and to remove them from that dignity, which
(they said) they had usurped, and to place the Princes which were the Kings
near kinsemen in the same. To bring the which thing to pass, they determined,
if need should require, to take the sword in hand. And thus they concluded
their purpose, the sum whereof was: That nothing should be done against the
King, against the Kings kinsemen, and against the state of the Realm: and that
their dignity, and the liberty of the country should be defended so much
as might be from the violence of strangers. And to bring this thing to pass,
Renaudius was chosen Captain, to whom they joined six other, whose counsel
he might use in any matter: and thirty men also very skillful in feats of
arms, to attend upon him in service of war. The time and place also of
meeting was appointed. And so every man diligently went about the thing
concluded: they provided money and artillery, and appointed soldiers.

Notwithstanding, the manifold rumors of their doings, and the exquisite
diligence of the Guises (or rather the providence of God which had a greater
work to finishe) bewrayed their counsels and devises. At that time the Earl
of Sansserrensis was lieutenant of Turon: who hearing that the Lord Castelnouan
and certain valiant captains with him, abode there certain days, came to
them, and seeing the Lord Castelnouan, whom he knew, very earnestly inquired of
the matter, but at the last they fell together by the ears. Howbeit, they
escaped, and fled to the castle called Nozeus, to the which, they had before
determined to come: and there, by the industry of Renaudius, were gathered
together the number of five hundred horsemen. But the Earl of Sansserreus went
without delay to Ambaxia, and told there all the whole matter. Whereupon captain
Nemorosius was sent to Nozeus with prepared soldiers, to take a view, and also
to know their intent and meaning. Whither, when he was come, he desired to
talk with the^. The which being granted, he demanded what cause they had so
to deal, asking also, if they by their disloyal disobedience would bring
infamy and reproach to all their countrymen, who were well known to be ever
faithful and true to their Kings. To this they answer by Baron Castelnouan,
that they meant nothing against ye Kings majesty, but were armed to defend the
King, and the state of the Realm, and intended to show his Majesty the fraud
and deceyte of the Guises, which they practice to destroy the King and the
kingdom: and that they were therefore gathered together with a great company
of Nobles, to resist the tyranny of the Guises, their manifest violence and
oppression both of laws and ancient institutions: Affirming also that they
would retain the name of faithful subjects in the midst of these
troubles, whatsoever they were thought off. To this Nemorosius replied, saying
that it became not Subjects to come unto their Prince with weapons and armor.
They on the contrary part said: that they did not bear armor against their
Prince, but against the Guises, his undoubted enemies, who will suffer none of
his subjects to have recourse unto the King. And therefore they said they were
armed, that they might have access unto the Kings majesty: to whom they
knew and would give due honor and reverence.

This communication passing between them, Nemorosius at the last fell to
entreating and beseching them, promising that if they would upon trust yield
themselves into his hands, and go unto the king without armor, they should
sustain no harm. Who at y^ length being persuaded, yielded themselves into his
hands, counting it a great good turn, if so be they might have free access
unto the King, without the use of weapons and armor. Notwithstanding, so soon
as they were come to Ambaxia, they were cast into prison, and handled, even as
they had been traitors to the kings Majesty. The day following, the band of
footmen, not knowing what had happened, went through the woods to Ambaxia and
being every one of them enclosed and taken by an host of horsemen, were the
same day put to death, some being hanged, and some drowned in the river. The
third day, the band of horsemen (among whom came Renaudius) having travailed
all the night, by the conducting and skill of Champdeus, a Noble man, came by
the break of the day, to the Castle gates of Ambaxia. But being betrayed,
they fled away, and were scattered here and there. And this was the end of
this enterprise, and thus it was stayed. They who^ Nemorosius had persuaded to
yield, which were taken, were diversely put to death, some had their heads
chopped off, some were hanged out of the Castle windows, and some cast into the
river. And among others that were taken, Castelnouanus was one, of whom we
spoke before, being a man of great fame, both for his birth, and also for his
bringing up. This man hearing himself to be pronounced guilty of treason
against the Kings majesty, cried out, that he was guilty in no respect of that
crime, neither that he could so be proved by any means.

This one thing he confessed to be true, that he went about to resist the
tyranny of the Guises, with a great number of the Nobility of France: if
this were to offend the Kings majesty (said he) they must be called Kings,
before I and they can justly be condemned of treason. And seeing they might not
have liberty to appeal to mortal Judges, he said that he appealed to the
celestial Judge for so unjust judgment given upon him, the which ere it be
long, will take vengeance on innocent blood so unjustly shed. The like also
many others affirming, and committing their innocence to God, caused many to
lament their state with tears. And among the rest, one whose name was
Villemongius, Villemongius
bathing his hands in the blood of his fellows which were newlye slain,
lifted up his hands imbrued with blood to heaven, crying: Lord this is the
blood of thy servants: thou shall take vengeance.

Now therefore these horrible slaughters, a man would think had been
sufficient to make Renaudius forsake his former purpose, but he notwithstanding
continued in the same. Wherefore he went about to gather together again his
men which were dispersed, as you have heard eue^ now: the which while he
assayed, he met with a horseman of his enemies side, who shot of at Renaudius
his dag, but missing him, was at the last by Renaudius slain. But Renaudius by
a soldier standing by, being the servant of the horseman that was slain,
was also wounded to death with the shot of a Dagge: whom notwithstanding,
before he died, Renaudius also manfully slew. But straight after by the
grieuousnesse of the wound he dyed. Whose dead carcas being brought to
Ambaxia, was hanged up with this title: RENAVDIVS captain of Rebels, and
Author of Sedition. After this, it was divided or quartered into four parts,
and set up in diverse places, and his head set upon a forke. A wonderful and
strange thing it was, that so many men should come together from all parts of
the Realm, and yet be seen of none. But this was not the end of this tumult.
The Guises, against whom this conspiracy was made, made great search and
inquiry for those that were suspected to be guilty of this conspiracy.
Moreover, the King of Navarre: and the Prince of Conde, in this contention
took part against the Guises, as hereafter shall be declared. The Constable,
at the commandment of the King, went to the Senate of Paris, and there opened
the whole matter concerning the tumulte of Ambaxia, commending the great
diligence of the Guises in pacifying of the same: But because he said, that
this conspiracy was made against those that were in chief authority about
the King, the Guises took the same in very evil part, who would have had all
men persuaded, that it was made for the destruction of the King and the whole
Realm, that all good order being taken away, every man might rule and govern
as him lysted.

At this time, Oliuarius the Kings high Chauncelour, who had condemned those
that were taken in the tumult of Ambaxia, was grievously taken with sickness:
and being very extreemely handled therewith, said that he had justly deserved
the same, for that those whom he had condemned, had great injury done unto
them. Moreover, he made exclamation against ye cardinal of Loraine, (who
hearing of his extreme sickness, came to see him) saying: Thou (O Cardinal)
art he that brings destruction to us all: And so fetching deep sighs and
grievous groans, be ended his life.

Now there came forth a new Edict very cruel against those which followed
the new Religion, as they termed it. Notwithstanding the late conspiracy
being found to come through the cruel punishments laid upon men, whereat
they boldly repined, brought to pass that the Guises being afraid, thought it
best to temper and mittigate those punishments. Therefore there were sent
abroad letters of pardon, in the which ye King declared that he would not in
the first year of his reign begin with the miserable he Kings ^rs of par^n.
slaughter of his subjects (although they had deserved ye same) but would rather
follow ye example of our heavenly father, to retain his servants by his lenity
and mercy, than by severity and punishments. Therefore he said he sorgaue all
offenses concerning religion, and gave general pardon: notwithstanding, upon
that condition that they which enjoyed the benefit thereof, should live
catholikely as others did. Moreover, the same that came by the conspiracy,
troubled also the Cardinal of Loraine, being a man by nature very fearful
and wavering, insomuch that now, after a sort he showed himself very gentle
toward the favorers of the Gospel: yea, and heard willingly many of the
Ministers of Gods word, which were not afearde to talk with him concerning
the chief points of the Religion now in controversy, affirming also that he
himself did agree with them in many points.

But the Queen, to the end she might understand the true causes of the
tumult of Ambaxian, and might see also what remedies might be had for those
troubles which were now ready to come upon the kingdom, sent for one called
Planchaeus, because he was said to be a man that had by long use, great
experience, who being come, and brought into her privy chamber, she declared
that she had sent for him to this end, that she might understand by him what
were the causes of the troubles now at hand, and also what remedies might be
provided for the same. Of which, she said, no man could better satisfy her
than he. Who, when he could by no excuse shift off or deny this request, at
the last affirmed that for his obedience sake, he would take this thing upon
him, and so far as he could satisfy her request. First, therefore he began
thus, saying: there are two sorts of them, who having their names altered,
were no more called Lutheranes, but Huguenotes. I say of Spiritual ^ guenotes
a Temporal Huguenote
these, there are two factions: the one of religious persons, the other of
Civil or politic persons. Of the which two factions, the first for their
afflicted Religion, the other, for that the government of the Realm was put
into the hands of the Guises (the Princes, the Kings near kinsemen being
defrauded of the same) were greatly displeased. These were the very causes of
these troubles: to remedy the which, there is no way, but to satisfy both
their wylles. The first, namely, the religious persons may easilye be
persuaded, if so be, godly and learned men were gathered together, and
disputation made of those articles now in controversy. But the others, which
were of the Temporaltie, can not be so easilye pacified, because they think
that they have just occasion to put themselves in armor, and to resist. This
therefore is the only remedy, if the Princes the Kings near kinsemen be kept
and set in their own proper degree and dignitye: and the Guises by some fair
and gentle means removed from governing the Kingdom. For the Nobility will
not suffer the Princes which are the Kings near kinsemen, to be in less
estimation than Strangers. And although the Princes through their humanity
and great modesty would suffer them selves to be so abased, yet
notwithstanding, the Nobles would not bear it, nor abide the government of
Strangers. And to confirm this which he had spoken, he brought in many
examples, that the Guises being Strangers, were neither in the number of
Princes, nor at any time so accounted: The names of Princes did not appertain
to the Guises, in the kingdom of France
and that therefore it was not lawful for the Guises, to arrogate unto
themselves the titles and authority of Princes, which only appertained to the
Kings blood, as the ancient custom of the kingdom would declare. This
(says he) to pacify those of the temporaltie, whose doings were the more to
be feared, for that the greater part of the Nobility was of that side, saving
such as were woonne and procured away by the Guiles for the Kings money.

Thus Planchaeus largely and freely uttered his mind. But all the while that
he had this talk with the Queen, the Cardinal of Loraine, was hid behind
the Tapistrie clothes that h^ng before the wall of the Closet. Who, when
Planchaeus had leave of the Queen to depart, came forth, and talking with the
Queen, appointed that Planchaeus should be called again, and commanded to
proceed in his former declaration, and to show who they were that were the
authors and Captains of she late conspiracy: the which, except he would
promise to do, that he might be carried to prison. Therefore Planchaeus being
called again, began to utter his mind as freely as he had done before,
showing the parentage and stock of the Guises, and also how they were
Strangers, and nothing appertaining to France: adding moreover, that it was
very evil done to commit the government of the Realm to Strangers, and
specially to such, as did contend ambitiouslye for the Kingdom, and thought
it should appertain to them. The Queen being offended with his boldness,
and specially, seeing he affirmed that he knew nothing of the conspiracy,
commanded that he should be carried to prison.

All which Planchaeus spoke, was even as it were the voices of the people
speaking by the mouth of one man.

After this Michael Hospital the Kings Chauncelour, after the death of
Oliuarius, of whom we spoke before, a man very well learned and wise, was sent
to the Senate of Paris, to consult with them about many matters that belonged
to the government of the Realm, and among the rest, concerning the providing
such remedies as might take away the tumults alredie begone. And thus
afflictions waxed Afflictions after a sort cease.
more easy than they wers before: and remedies were provided for so general a
mischief. But the fame and report of the increasing of the multitude of the
faithful daily, was in every place of the Realm: and because great troubles
seemed to be at hand, all men had regard unto them, more than to the report
of the increase of the faithful, the most part endeavoring themselves to stay
and pacify these troubles.

And at this time, this was the state of France: the Guises A description of
the Scotres war for Religion.
sent the same provision of war, with the which they withstoode the religion
in France, into Scotland, over the sea, to the intent they might there deface
and put down the religion newly begone. For the Nobles of Scotland with a great
multitude of the people beside, had cast off the Popes yoke from of their
necks, and had plucked down their Images, their altars, and abolished the
ceremonies of the Papisticall service: causing the Queen to get her into a
little town by hirselfe, for that she was sore offended at that which they had
done. Therefore lacking help, the Guises brought to pass to have an host of
men sent out of France, to the number of four thousand. Of this band of men,
Brossaeus was General, with whom was joined the Bishop of Ambianensis, to the
end, the one might fight with the sword, and the other with Papisticall power.
Therefore they took their journey with these commandments, namely, that they
should severely punish the Rebels, and the chief authors of sedition: and that
they should restore the wonted and usual obedience of the Pope.

Wherefore, so sone as they were come into Scotland, they made proclamation that
every one should go to Mass, and detest and forsake the new religion. The
Bishop wrote unto the King, that he would bring all the people within few
days to the catholic faith. Brossaeus wrote, that he would destroy all
within six months which would not come to the ancient Religion. But it came
otherwise to pass.

For after the death of Marie Queen of England, the Guises made claim and
title to the Crown of England, for their Niece the Queen of Scotts, as
though she had been the lawful heir. Whereat the most gracious Queen
Elizabeth having great disdain, sent word to the King of France, of this
great injury done to her Grace by the Guises, and bids battle.

Now the Scotts to the end they might abide the foreign power of the
Frenchmen, feeling also that they stood in need of help and aid from some
other place, went to the Queen of England, beseeching her that although they
were her old enemies, yet that she would vouchsafe to aid them in so just a
cause of Religion, saying that they had rather to abide any extremity, than
the tyranny of the Pope. To whom the Queens majesty willingly and gladly
promised and granted help. The Scotts therefore being encouraged by this
aid, did so withstand the French power, that they made great slaughter of the
French men, and drove them to such a strayte, that except the matter had been
taken up by peace, it should seem that they had been all utterly destroyed.

Peace therefore was concluded, and the reformed Religion there established. And
so that tumult was turned to the peace and quietness of the Church,
notwithstanding, the subtle practices and cruel threatenings of the
adversaries.

There were also at that time grievous afflictions laid upon the Church in
another place. For in the towns of Sixtus, and Guardia, in the country of
Calabria, there were Calabria, a country joining to Naples.
many, yea, to the number of a thousand, which by the Popes commandment
were put to death for Religions sake: and many horrible cruelties also
committed, by the means of one Marchion Buciane.

In the Kingdom of France also in diverse places, as at Paris, and Rhoane,
many of the faithful were murdered, upon the solemn feast day of the
Bishops deambulation. For the faithful began more and more to assemble
themselves together: and exhibited unto the King a little book containing the
confession of their faith, requiring to have liberty granted unto them, to
declare their cause. Wherefore, it shall not be disagreeing from our purpose, to
put down here the same their confession: to the end we may thereby see what a
notable consent and agreement there was in the doctrine of faith, among the
Churches of France, notwithstanding the ^oysterous tempests of the first
afflictions.

A Confession of the Faith made by the Churches of France.
WE belcue and confess one God, which is the only and simple spiritual
essence, eternal, invisible, immutable, infinite, incomprehensible,
unspeakable, omnipotent, only wise, good, just, and merciful.

2 This only God showed himself to be such a one unto men, first both in the
creation of his works, and also in the conservation and governing of them:
secondly, in his word, and that more evidently, the which word in the
beginniing he revealed unto the fathers by certain visions and oracles, and
afterward would have it to be written in those books, which we call the books
of holy Scripture.

3 All this holy Scripture is comprehended in the Canonical The Scripture.
books of the old and new Testament, the cataloge of the which books, is
this: First, the five books of Moses, namely, Genesis, Exodus, Leuiticus,
Numeri, Deuteronomium: then Iosue, Judges, Ruth, the two books of Samuel: the
two books of Kings, the two books of Chronicles called Paraly pomenon: the
book of Esdras, Nehemias, Esther, Job, Psalms, Proverbs of Solomon,
Ecclesiastes, otherwise called the Preacher, the book of Ca^ticles, otherwise
called the Ballets of Solomon: the Prophecy of Esaias, Ieremias with the
lamentations, Ezechiel, Daniel: the twelve lesser Prophets, namely, Oseas,
Joel, Amos, Abdias, Jonas, Micheas, Nahu^, Abacuc, Sophonias, Aggeus,
Zacharias, Malachias: the holy Gospel of Jesus Christ, after Matthew, after
Mark, after Luke, and after John. The Acts of the Apostles: Paul's Epistle to
the Romans, his two Epistles to the Corinthians. his Epistle to the
Galathians, Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians: his two Epistles to the
Thessalonians, both his Epistles to Timothy, his Epistle to Titus, to
Philemon, to the Hebrews: James Epistle: both the Epistles of Peter, ye three
Epistles of John, the Epistle of Jude* and the Apocalypse, or Revelation of John.

4 These books we confess to be Canonical, that is to say, the Rule and
stay of our faith, the which we have not only by the common consent of the
Church, but also much more by the testimony and inward persuasion of the holy
ghost: by the instinct and motion whereof we are taught to discern them from
other Ecclesiastical books, the which, although they be profitable, yet
notwithstanding, they are not such, that we should ground any article of our
faith upon them.

5 We believe that the word comprehended in these The word.
books, came from God alone, from whom only it has his authority, and not
from men. And seeing this is the sum of all truth, containing whatsoever is
requisite for the worship of God and our salvation, we say that it is not
meet, neither for men, nor yet for Angels to add or detract any thing from
the same word, or to alter any thing in the same. And hereupon it follows,
that neither antiquity, nor customs, nor multitude, nor humane wisdom, nor
Judgments, nor Edicts, nor decrees, nor Counsels, nor Uisions, nor Miracles,
ought to be compared or set against that word of God: but rather that all
things ought to be brought and examined according to the prescript rule
thereof. Wherefore also, those three Symbols or Creedes, as the Apostles Creed,
the Nicene Creed, and Athanasius Creed, The three Credes.
are allowed of us, because they are agreing to that word of God.

6 This holy Scripture teaches us, that in that singular and simple divine
essence, there are three persons, the Father, The Trinity.
the Son, and the holy Ghost. The Father is the first cause in order, and
the original of all things. The Son is his wisdom, and eternal word. The
holy Ghost, is the virtue, power, and efficacy of them both. The son was
begotten of the Father before all worlds. The holy Ghost proceeded from the
Father and the Son from everlasting. The which three persons are not
confounded, but distinct, and yet for all that, not separated, but coessentiall,
coeternal, and coequall together. To conclude, in this mystery we allow that
which those four ancient Councels did determine and do detest all those sects
and all others what soever condemned by those ancient holy Fathers, namely, by
Athanasius, Hilarious, Cyrill, Ambrose, and others, by the word of God.

7 We believe that God, (the three persons working together) by his power,
wisdom, and incomprehensible goodness, made all things, that is to say, not
only heaven and earth, and all things in them contained, but also invisible
spirits, of which some fell to perpetual destruction, and other some abode
still in their obedience. The first, as they are by their own wickedness
depraved, so are they perpetual enemies of all goodness, and therefore of the
whole Church. But the other being preserved by the mere grace of God, are
Ministers of his glory, and appointed for the salvation of the elect.

8 We believe that God did not only create all things, but also rules and
governs them, and disposes also and orders at his pleasure whatsoever is
in the world. Notwithstanding we deem him to be the author of evil or of
those things that are done amiss in any wise to deserve blame, seeing that his
will is the chief and most certain mark and rule of righteousness and
justice. For he has rather admirable than speakeable reasons, by which he so
uses all Devils and sinful men, as Instruments, that whatsoever they
wickedly do, the same as he did iustlye ordain, so also he tourneth it to
good. Therefore when we confess that nothing is done without his providence
and ordinance, we do humblye adore the secret mysteries that are hydden from
us, neither do we curiously inquire and seek after those things which are
above our capacity. But do rather apply that to our use and profit, which
the Scripture teaches for our quietness and tranquillity: Namely that God,
to whom all things are subject, does with fartherly carfulness watch for
us, in so much that not one hear of our head shall fall away without his
will. And as for Satan and all our enimyes, he has them in such hold and
bonds, that except they have power given unto them from him they can do nothing
at all unto us.

9 We believe that man being created pure and perfect and according to the
Image of God, fell through his own fault from the grace which he had
received, and therefore cast him self from God the welspring of all
rightcousnesse Man.
and goodness, in so much that his nature is altogether corrupted, and his
heart defiled, whereby he has lost all his former integrity without
exception. For although he has some discretion of good and evil:
notwithstanding we affirm that whatsoever light he has in him, the same is
turned into darkness, when he seeks after God, in so much that no manner
of way he can come unto him, by his own understanding and reason. Moreover,
although he has a will, by which he is named to do this or that,
notwithstanding, seeing that the same is captiued and made subject unto sin, it
has no liberty at all to will or desire that which is good, but only that
which it receives by the grace and gift of God.

10 We believe that all the progeny and offspring of Adam, is infected with this
contagion, the which we call original Original sin*
sin, the which comes by propagation and not of imitation, as the Pelagians
have thought, all whose errors we do detest and abhor. Neither do we think
it necessary to enquire how this sin may come from one to another by
propagation. For it is sufficient to know that whatsoever God has given to
Adam, was not given to him alone but to all his posterity: and therefore we in
his person are spoiled and bereft of all those benefits, and are fallen into
all this misery and malediction.

11 We believe that this deprauatio^ or corruption is very sin, and makes al
men, yea ye very infants as yet in ye wombes of their mothers, to be guilty of
everlasting death before God. We do also affirm that the same, after Baptism
is ministered, is very sin, in respect of fault, how beit they which are ye
children of God shall not be condemned therefore, because God of his free mercy
and goodness does not impute the same unto the^. Furthermore we say that this
evil does always show forth some fruits of wickedness and rebellion, in so
much that they which are the most holy, although they do resist the same, yet
nevertheless so long as they live in this world they are defiled with
infirmities and offenses.

12 We do believe also, that out of this corruption and universal Election.
da^natio^, into the which al me^ by nature are cast and drowned, God has
taken some, namely such, who^ he has elected and chosen by his eternal
purpose and everlasting counsel, of his own mercy and goodness in his son
Christ, without any respect of their merits. And othersome he has left in
that corruption and damnation, in iustlye condemning of whom, when time
comes he will show his justice, even as he declares the riches of his
mercy upon others. For some are not better than other some, until God make
the one to be known from the other, by that his everlasting purpose, which he
determined in Jesus Christ, before the foundation of the world: neither can any
man by his own strength attain unto that blessedness, since that by nature
we have no good motion, neither are we able to think a good thought, until
God by grace assist us and guides us unto that which is right and good.

13 We believe that whatsoever is requisite and necessary for our salvation,
it is offered and given to us in Jesus Christ Christ.
alone, who is given to us to save us, and is also made unto us or for us,
wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption, in so much that
whosoever forsakes him, forsakes the mercy of the Father, that is to say,
our only refuge.

14 We believe that Jesus Christ, the wisdom, and everlasting son of the
Father, took upon him our nature, in so much that in one person, he is both God
and man: a man, God and man.
passible both in body and soul, and in all things like unto us, sin only
excepted, whose flesh is very seed of Abraham and David, although by the
secret and incomprehensible power of the holy Ghost, he was in his time
conceived in the womb of the virgin Mary. And therefore we detest and forsake
all those heresies with the which the Churches in time past have been
troubled, as most contrary to the truth, and namely those devilish
Imaginations of Seruettus attributing to our Lord Jesus Christ, a
fantastical deity and such like.

15 We do believe that in one person, which is Jesus Christ, those two natures
are so truly and inseparably conjoined, Two natures in Christ.
that they are united together in one, and yet both of the^ retain still the
distinct property of their natures, in so much that as in this coniunctio^,
the divine nature of ye word retaining his properties, abode uncreate, infinite,
and replenishing all things: even so also the humane nature abode and shall
abide for ever comprehensible, having his natural form, measure, and
property, from whom the resurrection, and glorification, or assumption to the
right hand of the father shall not take away the verity of his humane nature.
Therefore we so consider of Christ in his Deity, that we spoil him not of his
humanity.

16 We believe that God has showed his unspeakable love The death of Christ.
and goodness toward us in this that he has sent his son to dye and to rise
again and to fulfill al righteousness, that he might purchase for us
everlasting life.

17 We believe that by that only sacrifice which Jesus christ The Sacrifice of
Christ.
offered upon the Cross, we are reconciled unto God, and are counted just in
his sight, because we cannot be acceptable unto him, neither obtain the fruit
of our adoption, except we have forgiveness of sins at his hands. Therefore
we affirm that Jesus Christ is our full and perfect redeemer, in whose death
we have full satisfaction, by which we are delivered from all our sins, and
from the which we can be absolved by no other means.

18* We believe that all our righteousness is placed in the Remission of
Sins.
remission of our sins, the which, as the Prophet David testifies, is our
only felicity. Therefore we reject openly all other ways and means by which
men think that they may be justified before God: and laying aside all trust
of our own merits and righteousness, we rest and stay our selves wholly upon
the obedience of Jesus Christ, the which is imputed unto us both that all our
sins may be thereby covered, and also that we may attain grace in the sight
of God. To be short, we believe that if we decline never so little from this
foundation, we can not find where to rest, but shall be rather always unquiet,
because we ca^ not have peace with God, until we are certainly persuaded of
this that we are loved in Jesus Christ, because in our selves we are worthy of
all hate.

19 We do believe that by this only means we have liberty to call upon God,
with certain trust that he will declare him self to be our Father. For we
have no access unto the Father, but by the means of the mediator.

20 We do believe yt we are made partakers of this righteousness Faith.
by faith only, as it is written that he suffered to save us, that whosoever
shall believe in him might not perish. And it is thus appointed to this end,
because the promises of life offered to us in him, are then applied to our use
and profit and are made effectual to us, when we embrace the^, nothing
doubting of the having of those things of the which we are certified by Gods
own mouth. Therefore the righteousness which we obtain by faith depends
upon the free promises, by which God testifies and declares that we are
beloved of him.

21 We believe that we are endued with the light of faith, The grace of the holy
ghost.
by the secret grace and working of the holy ghost, ye which faith is the free
gift of God, and proper to them alone to whom it pleases God to give the same:
that the faithful might have nothing in them selves to boast of, when as
rather they are two fold more bound to God than others, in that they are
preferred before others. Also we believe that faith is given to the elect, not
that they should once only walk in the right way, but rather to continue in
the same all the days of their life: because as the beginning is of God, so is
also the end.

22 We believe that we which are by nature the servants of Newness of life.
sin, by the same faith are regenerate into a new life. For by faith we
receive grace to live a holy and godly life, when we embrace that ^uangelicall
promise, that the Lord will give unto us the holy Ghost. Therefore faith is so
far from taking away the desire to lead a godly life, that it does rather
inflame the same in us, from whence good works necessarily do follow. But,
although God does regenerate us Good works.
to the end he might fully save us, notwithstanding we affirm that the good
works which we do by the assistance of Gods holy spirit, are not so regarded
of God, that we should be justified by them, or deserve to be counted the sons
of God, because we should always doubt and fear if so be that we had not
that satisfaction, by which Christ Jesus has delivered us from all harm.

23 We believe that all the figures of the law are taken away The figures of the
law.
by the coming of Christ, although we know that the truth and substance of
them remain in him in who^ they were fulfilled. Howbeit we must use and
exercise the Law and the Prophets, both for the framing of our life, and also
The doctrine of the law.
that we may be the more confirmed in the promises of the Gospel.

24 We believe that seeing Jesus Christ is given to us to be One only advocate.
our only advocate who also commands that we should boldly come to the
Father in his name, and seeing it is not lawful for us to pray in any other
order and form than in that which God him self has appointed in his word,
what soever men have devised concerning the intercession of dead Intercession
of saints.
Saints, it is nothing else but the deceit and craft of Satan, to draw men
from the right and true form of prayer. We do also reject all those means
whatsoever, that men have invented to deliver them selves from the wrath of
God, for so much as they do derogate so much from the death and sacrifyce of
Jesus Christ as men give and attribute unto them.

To conclude, we think that Purgatory is a fable, brought Purgatory
forth of y^ same shop, from whence also came Monastical vows, pilgrimages,
prohibitio^ of Matrimony, and the use of meats, the ceremonial observation
of certain days, Auricular confession, Iuduigences, and such like
abominations, by which, some think, that they merit grace and salvation. All
which things we do reiecte, not only for the false opinion conceived of
meriting adjoined unto them, but also because they be the inventions of men,
and a yoke laid upon consciences by the authority of men.

25 We believe, because we can not obtain Christ, but by the Gospel, that the
holy and inviolable discipline established Ecclesiastical discipline.
by his authority in the Church ought to be observed: and that therefore
Pastors ought to be in the Church, to whom appertains the office of
preaching the word, and the ministration of the Sacraments, whom men ought to
honor and reverently hear, if they being lawfully called discharge their
duty: not that God of necessity needs such inferior helps, but rather
because it thus seems good unto him to rule us, as it were with a bridle. And
therefore we do detest all those fanaticall persons, which so much as in them
lies seek to abolishe the holy ministerye, that is to say, the preaching of
the word, and the administration of Sacraments.

26 We believe therefore that it is lawful for no man to The unity of the
Church.
withdraw himself from the Congregation, and to trust in himself: but is
rather the duty of all men to defend and keep the Unity of the Church,
submitting them selves to the common Institution and yoke of Christ
wheresoever God has appointed the true and Ecclesiastical discipline,
although the Edictes of Magistrates be against the same: from the which order,
whosoever separate them selves, they resist the ordinance of God.

27 We believe that with great diligence and discretion the What the Church is.
true Church must be discerned, by the name whereof many are too much abused.
Therefore we affirm out of the word of God, that the Church is a company or
congregation of the faithful, which do agree in following the word of God, and
in embracing true Religion, in the which also they daily profit and go
forward, grounding and confirming one another in the fear of God, who although
they receive never so great profit, yet must they daily of necessity seek
for remission of sins. And yet for all this will not deny but that many
hipocrites and reprobates are mixed with the faithful, but yet their
wickedness can not take away the name the Church.

28 Therefore in believing of this thing, we also openly affirm that where the
word of God is not received, nor no profession of that obedience showed that
belongs thereunto, nor no use of the Sacraments, there (to speak properly) we
can Judge no Church to be. We therefore condemn the Papisticall Church because
the pure truth of God is banished out of the same, in the which the Sacraments
of faith are corrupted, falsified, or else quite abolished: in the which all
superstition and Idolatry is to be found. And therefore we think that all they
which do join themselves to such actions and do communicate with them, do
separate them selves from the body of Christ. Nothwithstanding because in the
Papacy remains some Imitacion of the true church, The Papacy.
and specially the substance of Baptism, the efficacy whereof depends not
upon him that ministers the same, we grant that they which are baptized in
the same Popish Church, have no need to be baptized again: howbeit, because
of the corruptions with the which Baptime is there mixed, no man can offer his
child to be of them baptized but he must pollute him self.

29 We do believe that the true Church ought to be governed with that
discipline, which our Lord Jesus Christ Discipline of the Church.
appointed, and to have in the same, Pastors, Ministers, and Deacons, that the
pure doctrine of the Gospel may be preached, vice bridled, and poor and
afflicted persons (so far as need shall require) comforted.

30 We do believe that all true Pastors, wheresoever they be placed, have power
and authority all a like, under that only head, and chief universal Bishop
Jesus Christ: And therefore that it is lawful for no Church to challenge unto it
self imperie or rule over another.

31 We do believe that it is unlawful for any man of his own authority to
presume to take upon him the government of the Church, but ought rather to be
chose^ to the same by lawful election, if so be the same may be had. We add
The lawful election of mi nisters.
this ( if) because sometime (as in our time also) when the Church has been
troubled and persecuted, many have been constrained without ordinary calling,
by the motion of Gods holy spirit, to take upon them to repair the
ruinousnesse of the decayed Church: notwithstanding howsoever the matter be, we
do believe that this rule ought to be followed, that all pastors and ministers
may have sufficient testimony of their calling.

32 We do believe it to be necessary that they which are chosen to be the
chief overseers of some one Church, do diligently way and consider among
them selves, by what way or means, the whole body of the same Church may be
best governed. Notwithstanding so that they swerue in no point from that which
our Lord Jesus Christ has appointed. And this lets not but that certain
places may have their peculiar and special institutions to them appertaining
as it shall seem best.

33 And we do exclude all humane inventions and laws which under the
pretense of the worship of God do bind the consciences of men, and we do
only admit and allow those which tend to the maintaining of concord, and the
keeping of every one in due obedience, in the which thing we think it meet,
to follow that which our Lord and savior Excommunication.
Christ appointed, concerning excommunication, the which with the circumstances
also we allow and think necessary.

34 We do believe that there are Sacraments joined to the word, for further
confirmations sake, as pledges and seals of the grace of God, by which our
infyrme and weak faith may be stayed and helped. For we confess these
external Sacraments.
signs to be such, that God by them works, with the power of his holy
spirit, that nothing there might be set before us in vain. Notwithstanding we
do think that al ye substance and verity of them rests in Christ Jesus,
from who^ if they be separated, they are nothing but vain shadows.

35 We do confess that there belong only two Sacraments to the whole
Church, of the which the first is Baptism, Baptism.
given unto us to testify our adoption, because thereby we are grafted into
the body of Christ, as being washed with his blood, and are also renewed to
holiness of life, by his spirit. This also we affirm, that although we are
but once baptized, yet notwithstanding the fruit of Baptism does appertain
to the race of our whole life, to the end that this promise might be sealed
in us by a sure and certain seal, namely, that Christ will be always our
sanctification, righteousness, and redemption. Furthermore, although Baptism
be a Sacrament of faith and repentance, yet notwithstanding seeing God does
reckon and accounte the children with the parents to be of his Church, we
affirm that infantes borne of holy and godly parents, ought, by the authority
of Christ to be baptized.

36 We affirm that the holy Supper of the Lord, which is the other Sacrament,
is a testimony unto us of our union The Lords Supper.
with our Lord Jesus Christ, because he did not think it sufficient for us,
only to dye, and to be raised again the third day, for our sins, but also
feeds us still* and nourishes us with his flesh and blood, that being made
one with him, we may be partakers of life with him. For although he be now in
heaven, and shall abide there until he come to judge the world, yet
notwithstanding we believe that he does by the secret and incomprehensible
power of his spirit nouryshe and quicken us with the substance of his flesh
and blood, apprehended by faith. And we say that this is done spiritually,
not that we go about to put fantasy and imagination in stead of efficacy and
verity, but because this mystery of our union, and knot made between Christ
and us, is sudden and far paste our reach, that by no means we are able to
comprehend it. To be short, seeing it is a thing so divine and heavenly, it
can not be by any means apprehended but by faith only.

37 We believe (as it is said before) that the Lord as well in the Supper as
in Baptism, does give unto us in very deed, that is to say, truly and
effectually, whatsoever is therein figured Sacramentally, and therefore we join
with signs the true possession and fruition of that thing, which is so offered
unto us. Therefore we affirm that they which bring a pure faith as a vessel,
with them, to the holy table of the Lord, do verily receive that which the
signs do there testify: for the body and blood of Jesus Christ is no less
meat and drink to the soul, than bread and wine is the sustenance of the
body.

38 In like manner we say that the element of water, although it be corruptible
does truly testify unto us the inward washing of our soul in the blood of
Jesus Christ by the efficacy of the holy Ghost. And therefore we reiecte all
those fanaticall persons, which reject these outward signs, when as our
Savior Christ him self spoke these words saying: This is my Body, and, This
Cup is my Blood.

39 We believe that it is Gods will that the world should be ruled and
governed, by laws and politic government, that there may be some means by
which the immoderate Magistrates.
desires of the world may be bridled and restrained: and that therefore he
has appointed kingdoms, commonweals, and other kinds of dignities, whither
they come by inheritance or otherwise? and not only that, but whatsoever
pertains to right and equity, the author whereof he himself would be
counted. Therefore also he has put the sword into the hands of Magistrates,
to punish offenses not only against the second table, but also against the
first. Wherefore we must for his sake which is the author of this order, not
only suffer that they may rule whom he has set over us, but also honor and
reverence them as his Ministers appointed by him to take that lawful and holy
office upon them.

Therefore we affirm that laws and statutes ought to be obeyed, tribute and
taxes paid, and all other burdens discharged, and voluntary subjection yielded
to magistrates, yea although they be infidels, so that God be not dishonored.
Therefore we detest all those that deny rule and government and refuse to
obey, desiring a confusion and to have all things common, and going about to
overthrow all law and good order. This therefore was the plain and simple
confession of the faithful Christians of the reformed Churches of France, and
a plain explication of that Doctrine for the which they were so greatly
persecuted by the Popish Bishops.

Thus ends this first Book.
The second Book of Commentaries of the state of Religion in the kingdom of
France.
IT was provided and appointed (as we have showed before) by the kings Edict,
that there should be a Parliament, by which, the great perturbations which at
that time all men saw to be imminent and ready to fall on the kingdom, might
be appeased and mittigated. Therefore at the day appointed, diverse of the
kings privy counsel and other noble men came together. The which assembly
being made, the King declared the cause of their coming together at that time,
and commanded that every man should freely declare his mind both for his own
profit, and for the benefit of the kingdom also. The rest (he said) they
should hear more at large of his Chauncelour, of the Duke of Guise, and of the
Cardinal of Loraine. Then the Chauncelour stood up and made a large discourse
concerning the state of the kingdom, showing that all men ought most chiefly
to endeavor them selves to find out the causes of so great peril and
mischief as the whole Realm now stood in, the causes whereof being known,
the remedies might be the more easily provided for. And, to this end and
purpose he said, this assembly was made, namely, to find out the causes of
this mischief, and to provide remedies for the same. Adding moreover that all
things were done for the safety of the people, for whom the King had most
deep and especial care. And after him the Duke of Guise briefly showed the
cause of his gathering together of an Army.

These things only were done that day: the next day those which before were
assembled, came together again into the same place. And then the Chauncelor
declared that it was the kings pleasure that every man should freelye utter
his mind, but first of all they of the privy counsel, that by their example
and beginning the rest might more boldly and cheerfully go forward. Then
Ianus Monlucius, Bishop of Valentia, the last cou^seller being commanded first
of all to utter his mind: Gasper Castillon the Admiral strait way stepte up,
came to the king, and when he had reverently saluted him, he deliuereed unto
him two supplications, written in their name, which called themselves, The
supplications of the faithful delivered by the Admiral to the King.
The faithful Christians dispersed through diverse places of France. Both the
which supplications at the Kings commandment were read, the sum and
effect whereof was: that they had good occasion offered them by this their
assemblye to offer their supplications and their humble requests to the King,
praying and beseeching him that he would have regard to the greatest part of
his subjects, who were evil entreated even until that present time, and that
for this cause only: for that they minded to frame their lives according to
the prescript rule of the pure word of God. Affyrming also that they sought
for nothing else than to have their doctrine examyned by the same rule of Gods
word, and that their cause might thoroughly be wayed and considered: that all
men might know for certain how greatly they did hate and abhor those
seditious and heretical opinions with the which hitherto they were falsely
burdened. Seeing they were thus evil entreated and oppressed, they flee unto
his majesty for succor, beseching him that he would not disdain but
vouchsafe to behold and way their cause, and in the mean time yt it would
please him to omit the punishments, by which their blood had been shed in every
part of the kingdom, by the wickedness and cruelty of many of the Judges:
who having no regard to the peace and welfare of the Subjects, but seeking
rather to satisfy their own fantasy, lust, and desire, had shed the blood of
poor men undeservedly and most unjustly, and had brought to pass to make a
stay, that their requests and supplicatio^s might at no time come to the kings
ears. Wherefore they humbly beseech his grace that he would maintain and
defend his poor subjects against the wicked cruelty of these men: for which
cause, they acknowledge him to be their King, and will render unto him,
according to Gods commandment, all due and seruisable obedience: and do
commit them selves wholly with all theirs, under his patrociny and safegarde,
and also do account him, their bulwark, refuge and stay. Protesting before
God and his Majesty, that they never intended any thing against him, or to
omit that loyal duty and obedience, which they owe unto him, for whose
prosperity, they daily make their prayers unto God. Adding moreover that they
sought for no evil liberty, or to have sin unpunished: but rather that they
might have liberty to live so near as they could, according to the Gospel
which they professed: and that in this thing they might not fear the
judgments of their chiefest adversaries. Again therefore they beseech and
pray his Majesty that it would please him to grant them leave to hear the
word of God, and to receive his Sacraments, until the matter were more fully
wayed and considered of the Counsel: and that to this end and use, they might
have Churches granted unto them, least their congregation or assembly being
private and secret, might come into false and evil suspicion.

This libell being red, the Admiral desired the King that he would take it in
good part, bringing in diverse testimonies of his faithfulness toward the
kings Majesty: As, when he was in Normandy to provide things necessary for
the Scottishe war, and was appointed by the Queens commandment diligently
to inquire out the dealings and behavior of those which were called Faithful*
and perceiving that they rendered certain reasons of their doings, he promised
unto them to offer their supplications unto the Kings majesty. To this the
King answered, that he had diverse good and notable testimonies of him, and of
his deserts, and also that he did take all things that he had done in very good
part. And then the King commanded again the Bishop of Valentia to speak his
judgment. Who in effect uttered this which follows.

DIOCLESIAN was wont to say, that the state and The sentence of the Bishop of
Valentia.
condition of those Princes was miserable, which were often deceived by those,
in whom only they reposed their trust: because they forsaking the government
of the common wealth, and being as it were, drowned in their pleasures, might
so be easily deceived. The which has not happened unto the King, forasmuch as
there was diligent provision made against those perilles by the prudent
wisdom of the Queen, and by the diligence and care of the Guises; by which
it was brought to pass, that the tumultes already raised were suppressed. The
which being appeased, the King did wisely foresee how to provide for the like
to come, and that for this cause he had caused this assembly to be made, in the
which there were so many good men that sought the Kings quietness and
profit, that it could not be but that his Majesty's desires should be
satisfied in every point. For so great is the confusion and trouble in every
place of the Realm, that it could not be more expressly described by the
Prophet Esaias, to be the dissipation of all things, of all orders and
government, than it is. The doctrine which has so drawn away the minds of
men, was not s^wne lately, as it were, two years ago, but for the space of
forty years since, or thereabouts; by many Ministers of the same doctrine,
being men very expert in the knowledge of holy Scripture: who, by their great
modesty, gravity and godliness, hating all vice, and specially
covetousness, and contemning their own life for the renseruation of their
doctrine, and having always in their mouth that most sweet name Christ
Jesus, finding also the people going astray without a shepehearde or guide,
were easily heard, and received, and brought great increase to their doctrine:
and no mar^ayle, seeing they left nothing undone, that might be done either by
preaching, by writing, or by any other means, to publish and spreads the same
abroad. But to come unto those usurped means and ways which were attempted to
^ynder and suppress^ Bishops of Rome.
that doctrine: if we shall begin first of all with the Bishops of Rome, we
shall find that they have very diligently gone about to sow discord, and to
make war between Kings and Princes. But our Kings, moved with godly zeal,
have appointed pains and punishments by Edictes, thinking by that means to
drive away those opinions, and to bring the people to one only kind of
Religion: but in vain. For the Judges, both greatly abused those Edictes, and
also oftentimes executed them after their own evil disposition and pleasure,
to gratify those which craved the confiscation and spoil of their goods
which were accused.

Of this matter we have a manifest example showed not long ago, of a man of no
mean calling, which desired to have the confiscation and spoil of one which
was accused of heresy, whose judgment he took upon him to order and appoint.
If any Magistrate, Counselor, or Lawyer, Lawyers.
had been an evil or wicked person, to the intent he might hide his former
faults and wickedness, his manner was, by and by to seek that these causes of
Religion might be brought before him, and that he might be put in office and
authority to deal in these causes: the which authoriti^ when he had rashly
abused, under the color of zeal, he should straight way have a name, and all
that he had done before, should be forgotten and forgiven: as though that
Religion ought to be defended by these supportations. So that it ought not to
seem strange unto us, that these executions have no better success, and also
if the people cannot abide and suffer such wicked and cruel practices. On the
other Bishop^.
side, the Bishops have been slothful and negligent, and have had no
consideration and care, to give an account of their flocks committed to their
charge: but have rather sought all that they could to maintain and increase
their yearly revenues, which they consumed upon filthy, vain, and
unprofitable things: insomuch that at one time forty Bishops together were at
Paris, banqueting, and satisfying their filthy pleasures, and living ydly,
while al disorder and wickedness increased in their Diocesses. Moreover, we
know that Bishoprics, or the office of a Bishop, has been bestowed upon
children, upon Infantes, yea, before they were borne, upon unlearned and simple
men also, which neither knew how, nor would discharge their office. And thus
the eyes of the Churches, that is to say, the Bishops, were blinded, and the
pyllers of the Church cast down to the ground. The Ministers therefore of
this and that sect, using the occasion of these perturbations and troubles,
have omitted nothing to win the people unto them. And as for Curates, they
are covetous, Curates.
unlearned, and conversant in all things saving in doing of their duty: and as
the most part of them have gotten their Priesthood by wicked means, so do
they most ungodly retain the same still: for Cardinals and Bishops let not
to make their servant, their Cooks, and horsekeepers, Priests, whereby
Ecclesiastical persons, are become a jest and laughing stock to every man.
But the only mean and way to provide for, and to remedy these mischiefs,
is to flee unto God, who in his just judgment is wroth with Ecclesiastical
persons, insomuch that he seems to intend their destruction, as he did once
the destruction of the Jews. Also, certain godly men must be sought for, and
called together from all parts of the Realm, to consider of these and the
like wickednesses, and to devise means and ways to extirpe and root^ them
out: and the King for his part must see with all diligence that the name of God
be not polluted and blasphemed, as it has been hitherto: and that the holy
Scriptures may be purely and plainly expounded to the people: and also that
they may have daily in their houses godly sermons, and exhortations: the which
shall be able to stop the mouths of slanderous persons, which shamefully
said, that God was not once named or spoken of in the presence of the King.

And you (says he) O Queens, grant me this one thing, He speaks to
Queens, namely to the Kings mother and the Kings wife.
I beseech you (if I may be bold to beseech you) that you would bring to
pass, that in stead of profane and unseemly songs, all your train and
retinue may sing godly and virtuous Psalms to the praise of God: Know ye
for a surety, that God does allow or like of no company or congregation, in
the which he is not praised and extolled. To this he added much more, by which
he proved* that it was against reason, that the singing of Psalms should be
The singing of Psalms.
forbidden, if the interpretation of them, which was noted about them, were not
allowed, he said, it was better that the errors were noted, than that the
whole work should be so rejected. And he showed also that the Psalms were
made, not only for the public use of Churches, but also to be daily and
privately used. And therefore in forbidding the singing of Psalms, there is
just occasion offered to seditious persons to calumniate and speak evil: For
now in this we strive not against men, but against God, whose The second
remedy to appease troubles.
praises are so hindered and let. The second remedy is a general Council,
the which the Fathers always used as a remedy to pacify and appease the
dissentions of the Church. I see not how the Popes conscience can be quiet,
nor to be in rest the space of one hour, seeing he sees so many souls to
perish through the diversity of opinions, and yet for all that seeks no
means how to remedy the same. But if it should come to pass, that the
General Council should be let or hindered, then the King shall do his duty
in calling a Council of his own Nation, after the ensample of his auncetors,
the Kings of this Realm, as of Carolus The example of the kings, Carolus
Magnus and Lodowicke.
Magnus, and Lodowicke his son. Now, they must be called to be of this
Counsel, which are counted to be the best learned men among them of that sect:
and learned men of the contrary part also, that they may dispute together of
the principal grounds of Religion now in controversy. Thus did Theodotius
the Emperor at Constantinople, against the Arrians and Macedonians, although
they were justly condemned by the Council of Nice and others: and afterward
the Emperor would have the acts of the Council handled before him, to be
openly publyshed abroad.

But concerning the pains and punishments which were The Gospel of diverse men
diversely received.
hitherto appointed, this (he said) was his opinion* and judgment: That
doctrine, for the which, all this trouble arises, is of diverse men; diversely
received. Some, so soon as they heard of the same perfect and approved
doctrine, and had in no point embraced and received the same, thought it
sufficient to know this one thing, namely, that no man ought to hear Mass:
and that it was lawful to eat flesh in Lent: that men were not bound to
Auricular confession: and that it was lawful to speak evil of Priests.
These men indiscreetly went about to defend that doctrine by force of arms:
but to be short, these men under the pretense of Religion, were mere seditious,
and are by no means to be excused. For if these kind of men were Christians,
or by any manner of means true receyuers of the Gospel, they ought to
remember, that the Apostle commanded to pray for Kings, and to render all
obedience unto them, yea, though they were cruel and wicked: also they ought
to call to mind, that never in the Church, specially in the time of the twelve
great persecutions, in the which an infinite number of Christians were put to
death, there was any one man found, which went about to defend his cause by
force of arms: but rather overcame the cruelty of their Emperors, with their
patience. Another sort of men there are also, which embrace this doctrine, and
retain the same, with such zeal, love, and obedience toward God and the
King, that they would in nothing offend them. By the life and death of these
men, it is manifest, that they have a desire to attain salvation, and to find
the way that leads to the same: and when they have found that way, they
neither fear loss of life and goods, nor any manner of punishment, but to ye
utmost of their power prosecute that way. Wherefore, they are not to be counted
among the number of those wicked professors before spoken off, nor to be
numbered in the company of seditious persons. As yet we see it plain enough
that those punishments which have been devised, have done no good: but on the
contrary part, their patience which they manifestly showed in the midst of
the fiery flames, has stirred up many to have a liking, and to favor their
cause. Hereupon it came to pass, that they which never heard of the same
doctrine for the which they suffer, were desirous to understand what doctrine
it was, and at the length having intelligence of the same, they did receive it
with no less affection and zeal, than others had done, being ready by the
ensample of others, to suffer death for it. Therefore set before your eyes and
consider With what weapons in time past the Bishops resisted heretics.
the examples of the three hundred and eightene Bishops, in the first
Council of Nice: of the. 150. in the Council of Constantinople: of the 200.
in the Council of Ephesus: and of the 630. in the Council of Chalcedon: who
never used any other armor than the word of God, against the Arrians,
Macedonians, Nestorians, and other heretics, convicted of blasphemy against
the holy Trinity.

Constantinus, Valentinian, Theodosius, Martian, being Christian and godly
Emperors, did use no greater punishment against the authors of sects, than
banishment. And, as touching assemblies and multitudes gathered together, they
were always forbidden, for the danger that seemed thereof to arise: ye king
also has sufficiently provided for this thing by his Edicts. And thus this
Bishop made an end of his oration, adding this one thing: (by the Kings leave)
that it was mete in punishing to have a prudent consideration of the place, of
the time, of the wills of men, and of the co^pani^ called together.

After this man, Carolus Marillacus. Bishop of Vienna in Dolpheny, uttered his
opinion in manner and form following.

Although that matter which is propounded unto us to deliberate The oration of
the Bishop of Vienna.
upon, is very hard and long: because it is left at large, and is general, and
therefore the more uneasy to be concluded, seeing we must come from that which
is general, to particularities: in discussing whereof, the diversity of Judges
will bring (as it is likely) great variety of opinions: yet notwithstanding,
we must hold this as a sure and certain rule in the discussing of all matters:
namely, that after long consultation and debating of things, some certainty at
the length must be concluded: and that there cannot be a more pestilent
mischief, and mortal plague in the government of commonweals, than to wander
among the diversity of opinions, and to appoint and retain no certain thing.
And if this rule, so greatly commended of wise men, and so prudently observed
of Kings, of commonweals, and of Princes, which ever at any time flourished,
ought to stir us up to follow the same way and rule: truly, the necessity
and the extremity in the which we are, has brought us into such a strayt, yt
we cannot do otherwise though we would* And as all men of sound judgment will
confess, y^ matter cannot abide in that state, in the which it is now, any
longer. But lest I be tedious unto you* I will come to the matter. The tumults
which of late have happened, the fear of new things, the complaints and
displeasure of many men, and the fear also and dread that is among men, ought
to stir us up to seek and provide for remedies in time, which may defend us
from these great troubles, which else will make a great alteration of y^ state.
And that I may briefly conclude this matter, I think that there are two
things, as it were two pillars, by which, the Two pillars of the kingdom
state of the kingdom may be fortified and borne up: namely, the integrity of
Religion, and the good will of the people. The which, if they were stable and
firm, we need not doubt the safety of things: but if they be once cast down
(as it is to be scared) there must needs follow great ruin and destruction
of that hie and notable building. These two things therefore must be stablished
and confirmed to prelient that ruin which is like to come: and to this end
(as both common profit and necessity requires) all our Councels, reasons,
devises and deliberations ought to tend: seeing hereupon both the due
obedience to the King, and the conservation of the people depends. The which
things are so joined together, that the one of them by any means cannot
stand without the other. As concerning necessity, we must measure and wey the
same by having a respect and consideration of the King, and of his principal
members or ministers, which under him govern the people, and of others also
who ought to obey. First of all therefore, it is the The office of a King
Kings duty to wey and consider whereunto he is called, and wherefore ye Lord
has given unto him ye rule of so great a people. In so doing, he shall find
that the Lord has chosen him to be a King to this end, that he might keep
the people under the knowledge, fear, and obedience of God, that he might
govern them by good and wholesome laws, and also to save and defend them
from the enemy: and in all things to show himself so studious and careful
for the common wealth, that he may be honored and be beloved as a father of
the people. For this is the only difference between a King and a Tyrant: The
King reigns and rules with the A Tyrant.
good will, love, and consent of the people: but the tyrant rules by violence
and force. In a King therefore a man may behold the ordinance of God, the
author and preserver of Common welthes and human society: In the tyrant the
force and violence of the Devil, who goes about to pervert that end to the
which God has ordained Kings and Potentates. Hereupon it comes, that as the
King is loved of all men, and hated of none, but of wicked men and Rebels: so
the tyrant is feared of all men without exception, and therefore hated of all,
according to the old Proverb, Quem metuunt, oderunt, him whom men fear,
they hate. Therefore if the King will be loved, and obey the commandment of
God, and retain the obedience and love of his subjects, he must of necessity
stablishe Religion, he must hear the complaints of the people, and must
provide for them remedies, as a father provides for his children: seeing that
he is set in the kingdom to that end, neither can he do otherwise, except he
will make himself unworthy of the grace of God, by which he confesses that he
does reign: as both examples of holy Scripture, and domestical examples also
do plentifully declare.

The first bond therefore which confirms, knitteth, and Religion.
retains the obedience of kings, is Religion: ye which is nothing else than
to know God, as it becomes us, that is to say, according to his prescript
will. And now seeing we ought to acknowledge him, to be ye creator, author, and
preserver of all things, it must needs follow, that al our actions ought to
tend to the setting forth of his glory. Whereupon it comes to pass, that
Religion, which is yt most assured bond of humane actions, and of the true
obedience of subjects toward their Kings, ought to be reformed, preserved, and
maintained. But because that bond is dissolved and broken in these our days,
both by the malice and wickedness of some, and also by the doting madness and
folly of other some, and by the corruption of our time: it is no doubt, an
evident demonstration and token of the wrath of God, which threateneth unto us
great destruction, not far hence, unless it be provided for out of hand.
For besides the variety of doctrines, who ever saw the ancient discipline of
the Church so miserably abused, contemned, and dejected: errors so dispersed
and rooted every where, offenses and stumbling blocks so common, the life of
Priests so corrupt, and so much to be reprehended, and also so many and great
tumultes among the people. The way to remedy this great evil and mischief,
is a general Council, the only ancient and usual mean: but as it plainly
appears, that is not to be hoped for, and that Why a general Council is not
to be looked for.
for two causes: The one is, It is not in our power to bring to pass, that the
Pope, the Emperor, the Kings, and the Germans, should by and by agree, of
the time, the place, and manner of holding of a Council: in which things there
are oftentimes great controversies. The other cause is this, Such is the
disease and mischief, and it so grieueth every part of the kingdom, that there
is small hope of any remedy: Like as if a man troubled with a continual
fever, or with some other grievous disease, which requires letting of blood,
or some other present remedy, cannot tarry to have the Physicians help which
dwells far of, because of ye great uncertainty of his coming. Therefore we
must bring to pass to call a counsel A Parliament.
of our Nation, as it was before concluded, the which also the King has already
openly promised: And this parliament must of necessity be called, both for the
necessity which so urges the miserable Church, being brought to so great
extremities, and also for the kings estimation and credit, who by his own
letters has openly given forth and declared y^ same: but specially because
there has nothing happened since that time which might let or hinder the same:
but on the contrary part, there grow new things and occasions daily, which do
urge and drive us to seek to call a Parliament, unless we could be contented
to lose all that we have. The Emperor Charles the v^lately deceased, when he
came to Bononia, and had conferred with Pope Clement concerning matters of the
Church, he willed his Chauncelor to talk with yt Pope The controversy between
Charles the v. and Pope Clement.
concerning the calling of a Counsel, both to reform the manners of Church men
and also to establish the doctrine which was in controversy. The Pope
vehemently withstode this thing, affirming that there was no need to call a
Council, neither for doctrine, seeing that al new opinions are refuted and
condemned of the ancient Councels, neither yet for Ecclesiastical discipline,
which was so well appointed, that it was sufficient only to observe and keep the
decrees written concerning the same. But the Emperor being not satisfied with
this answer, replied again, that it could not be, but that the great
assembly of the general Council, should bring great profit, and do much
good, both to cut off that evil which daily increased more and more: and also
to repair and confirm those things which were very well already received and
allowed, and to hinder and cut off that which might abolishe them by
discontinuance and want of use. And in this mind concerning the procuring of a
Council he continued, so long as he lived: In the which matter he found no
greater adversaries than those, who should have set him forward in so
commendable an enterprise.

Our auncetours were wont every five years to call general Councels, as it
is to be seen in the decrees. But as touching private Councels, or Councels
assembled out of our own Nation, we shall find in the histories of the Kings
of France, that they were called in every Kings time, beginning at the reign
of Clodouaeus, until the time of Charles the great, and so forth, until we
come to Charles the feue uth his days. The which Parliamentes, or assemblies,
were sometimes gathered together from every part of the whole kingdom,
sometimes from one half of the Realm, sometimes but out of certain Provinces
only. By which Parliaments it was sildome seen but that there ensued great
fruit and profit to the reformation both of doctrine and manners.

Let us not stay therefore any longer at the matter, but follow the examples
and ways of our elders: and let us not be afraid to be accused to be bringers
in of new customs, seeing that we have so many examples to follow: but let
us assure our selves, that there must needs follows thereof prosperous
success, seeing that God is always present with those which assemble
themselves together in his fear and name. Neither let us defer the time any
more, seeing that necessity does so urge us, and seeing speedy remedy
Forewarnings of delolation to come.
is so greatly required. We have many sorrowful and lamentable examples to set
before our eyes, which are forewarnings unto us of great desolation to come, as
the miserable state and condition of the Churches of the Jews, of the Greeks,
of the Egyptians and Africans, the which in time past flourished, but at this
day they scarsly retain a christian name. For these causes I conclude that we
must defer the time no longer to call a Parliament, to remedy these things,
without having any consideration or respect to those things which the Pope may
object as lettes against the same: seeing that both it is lawful for us so to
do, and also because our conservation and safety is now in hazard. For if
any one part of the kingdom were lost, it is not in the Popes power to restore
the same unto us again. Whatsoever my happen or befall, we must not perish to
fulfill the Popes mind: but must rather follow (at this time specially) that
rule which God has given unto us, and which our elders have so oftentimes
followed. But yet truly while this Parliament shall be a preparing, I think it
shall serve very well for the purpose, if we provide three or four* remedies,
which may greatly further this our enterprise. The first is, of the Churches
that Prelates may remain and abide in their Diocesses: and in this point let
no man be borne withal. And here I think it good to put you in mind of the
Italians, who enjoying and occupying the third part of the benefits and
spiritual promotions of this kingdom, draw unto (...) selves great profit,
and like horseleaches suck out our blood, having no care at al to dwell upon
their benefices. And laughing us to scrone, we are so blind that we cannot see
it: And if we chance to epsy it, we are pacified again by their flattering
words. If the King should hire a great multitude of soldiers, and give them
wages, and if they should abide still at home, and have no care of their
martial affairs in ye war, had not then (think you) the King just occasion to
depryue them of their wages, and to dismiss them? And thus truly do our
Prelates behave themselves, who in the troublesome time of the Church, when
heresies and such like wickednesses were in diverse places sown abroad (ye
which in deed is the greatest war of the Church, being so much greater than
the earthly war, as ye health of the soul surpasses and excels the health
of the body) sat notwithstanding in the midst of their pleasures, void of all
care of their flocks committed to their charge. The second remedy is, to show
and declare by some notable and manifest act, that we are fully persuaded, and
bent seriously to seek a reformation, least the adversaries should cauil and
say, that we call a Council, not to reform the Church, but to seek our own
advantage, and to stablishe and confirm our own prerogatives and priueledges.
In ye which matter nothing seems to me more meet and convenient for us, to
declare that we have an earnest care for the reformation of the Church, than if
we look diligently about that nothing be done in the Church for money and
bribes: to the end that Babilonicall beast Covetousness, which has
Covetousness the Babilonicall beast.
brought so many evils and corruptions into the Church, may at the length
utterly be overthrown. And so we shall find a more easy way to
controversies: and shall also stop the mouths of those that slander and
backbite us. If any man object and say, that so great a matter cannot be
brought to pass by so small a number of men as we are, without the
determination of the General Council, we make unto the^ this answer: namely,
that there is no new or vnwanted thing brought in by us, but we seek to bring
those things to pass which Christ has plainly commanded, Councels determined,
and Kings the executors of Councels confirmed, and which in our time also they
which have been the best learned in the Romish Church, by their judgments have
allowed. The authority of this voice abides for ever, Freely ye have
received, Math. 10.
Give freely. Spiritual things are given freely: therefore it is not lawful to
buy and sell them: and are in that order that they were given to be
distributed, that is to say freely. Hereupon they are called Simoniakes, which
take unto Symoniakes.
themselves that unlawful and forbidden game: of the which simonie or forbidden
gain, we have so many examples both in the scriptures, and also in the
history of ye ancient Church, that we shall not need at this time, to make
any longer discourse of the same. And to say somewhat of the Councils, how
oftentimes was this forbidden, namely, that not only corruptions, but also
suspicion of corruption, should be taken away? Inso much that they which
distributed and gave the alms, were forbidden to give it in the time of the
sacraments, least they should seem to give their alms for the receiving of
the sacraments, as ye may read in the Council of Ancyrane, and others. In like
manner king Lodoicus, seeing that confusion creeping by little and little into
the Church, commanded that the Clergy should abide and dwell in their
Diocesses, and that no money ever after should be carried to Rome: showing how
greatly this chopping and changing did displease him: and yet there was never
any man that was counted a greater Catholic than he. Also Pope Paulus the Pope
Paulus the third.
third, himself, in our time, seeing that many departed and forsook the
Church of Rome, and fearing that this mischief would grow more and more, was
constrained by the continual cries of the Protestants, to confess that there
were many errors got into the Church, and therefore commanded certain men that
were counted notable in learning, to note diligently what things were worthy
of reformation, and swore them to hide nothing thereof from him: threatening
them, that if they did not discharge their office thoroughly, they should
incur the penalty of excommunication. Among the rest to whom this charge
was committed, were these, Contarenus, Contarenus.
who was made Cardinal in Germany, for his dealing in y^ notable controversy:
cardinal Theatinus, who after the same Paul the third was made Pope: Cardinal
Sadoletus, and cardinal Sadoletus.
Poole the Englishman: and five others also, which for Cardinal Poole.
their great learning were chosen to this office. These men, when they had
diligently examined ye matter, gave forth their sentence and opinion in public
writing, the first article whereof was this: Nothing ought to be done for money,
in the use and administration of the keys, that is to say in the power of the
Church. Notwithstanding, that Pope Paul the third which was so hot in the
matter with his thundering threatenings, did nothing at all therein when it came
to the pinch. Neither would Pope Paul the fourth his successor, when he was
yet but Cardinal, establish that which he thought to be mete and necessary. I
omit that which Bernard and other learned fathers have said: only this I say,
except we aply our minds, and put our hands to the tearing up of this root of
al evil, Jesus Christ will descend from heaven with a whip in his hand to Math.
27. The third remedy.
expel us as buiers and sellers out of the temple. The third remedy shall be,
to confess our faults, the which in deed is the first step to health, and to
make the same manifest by public and general fastings: the which manner was
always observed in the old Church, whenever any great peril or danger was
like to come upon the Church, as plague, famine, or war: the which three
evils in these our days invade the realm together. For what greater plague
can there be, tha^ that which slays men's souls? What greater famine can
therebe, than the famine of Gods word? Or what war ca^ be more mortal or
cruel, than the corruption of pure doctrine? By which we being drawn from God,
are deprived of the eternal kingdom which Christ by his blood has purchased
for us. Let us therefore turn us unto those old accustomed remedies, as to
C^mmon prayer, to fasting, and to weeping: Old accustomed remedies.
and first of all, we must take into our hands the sword of God, that is to
say, his word: the scahard whereof we scarsly retain: neither must we think
that Myters, Croziers, Cappes, Garments, and other ornaments (the which in old
time were outwardly worn, to show that which was inward, that is to say,
that godly doctrine ought to be joined with a godly life) can deliver us from
the contempt of the people: seeing that which is eternal is wanting, and there
only remains an outward show and feined sight. Let us set before our eyes
this horrible sentence which John the Baptist pronounced against the Jews,
saying: Now is the axe put to the root of the trees, every tree therefore
that brings not forth good fruit, is ^ew ^e down and cast into the fire.

The fourth remedy shall be, while the Council is a preparing The fourth
remedy.
and gathering together to stay seditious persons, and so to restrain the^
that they break not by any means the common peace and tranquillity: and let
this be kept as a law ratified and inviolable, yt it is not lawful for any
subject, upon any occasion, or for any cause, to take arms, and to lift up ye
sword without the commandment or leave of the Prince, ye only moderator and
governor of wars. This I speak for ye sorrowful examples sake which happened,
and are like to happen, except we take heds. Of the one part we saw the tumult
of Ambaxia: on y^ other part, there were certain Preachers, which stirred up ye
people to tumult, and violently to set themselves to destroy and banish those
protestants, under a pretense of godly sedition: as though that Religion could
or ought to be established by sedition. And thus there was great offense
committed on both parts, insomuch that many were slain, which were thought to
be Protestants. Moreover, those protestants did greatly offend, enterprising
many things rashly, to put away these injuries offered unto the^, taking arms,
thereby violating the law of ye magistrate, which belongs to no private person
For the end of ye law is, to live according unto Gods will, to hurt no man, and
to obey the law of Arms. Therefore the king is the maintainer of Gods law, and
the moderator of wars, the which he may and ought to use to the authority of
the law, and to the punishing of rebels and traitors. To be short, he
counts him self a king, who, although he be not ordained of God, yet of his
own will and authority moves war. And truly hereupon it follows that he
ought to be counted of all men as an enemy, and to be punished as a breaker of
Gods ordinance and public power. For this cause I think it good that
commandment be given to inferior Magistrates, that they diligently attend
upon their charge and offices, least some new thing happen by their careless
negligence. Hereby therefore it evidently appears that the first bond to
preserve the kings estate is, so to establishe Religion, that no man may abuse
y^ same at his own pleasure, against the authority of the law, and the end
thereof, which is, that both God and the king may be obeyed.

But now to come to the second principal point, as concerning The second
principal point.
the ordering and keeping of the people in due obedience, we think this to be
the way, namely, to hear the complaints of the subjects, and to use
convenient remedies for the same. Notwithstanding there is great difference
between private and open complaints, for if the complaints be made of private
persons to private persons, the diligence of the Judges which are appointed to
ordinary government, is a speedy way to remedy and help them.

But when there are general complaints, or when either the confirmation or
alteration of things comes in question, we must straight way have recourse to
those ancient The state of the kingdom which consists of these three,
namely of the n^bilitie, clergy, and communa^tie.
constitutions and orders by which the safety of the kingdom stands: the
which are nothing else than those three orders which we call the states. That
is to say, that those things being made manifest and opened which may bring
any confusion, and the remedies which were provided to put away the same, being
diligently sought for, the king for the loves sake that he bears to his
people, may determine and appoint that which is justly required to the honor
of God and the common profit of all men. Of the which thing, the good will of
the people wholly depends, that having done that duty which he owes unto
God, he may in like manner satisfy the minds and wills of his subjects.

And so he shall not only keep the name of a king, and the gifts of nature
appertaining to a kingly name, but also may rule and govern by peace: seeing
that gentleness may allure them of their own good wills to do more, than force
or violence can extorte from them.

And to the end it may euidentlye appear that the complaints are such yt
they ought to be heard and examined of the assembly of ye States, I will show
unto you a general reason, namely this: The extraordinary taxes, tallages,
and Tributes.
tributes have so increased, that now the subjects not only are not able to
bear this great burden, but also not able to satisfy and discharge those old
duties which were before time accustomed to be paid. Is not this a complaint
to be considered and talked of in the assembly of States? Seeing the greatest
part of ye people complains of the same, and are by no manner of means any
thing disburthened: but specially seeing that to hear the afflicted and
oppressed, is the beginning of consolation, and to declare a readiness and
good will to ease the^, is the greatest and principal point to heal: the
which at the least may stay the^ least dispayring they should seek an
alteration and remedy. If on the contrary part, the king aledge for him self,
the calamity and trouble of the long continued wars, the diverse and
manifold charges and costs that grew thereof, the scarsitie and emptiness
of his Treasury, and also the great arrerages and debte in the which he
found the Crown when he came first to the same: Is not this a complaint to be
considered and talked of in the assembly of States?

If the people allege that the King ought to maintain himself and his
train by his yearly revenues, and that he ought to hold and maintain wars
with his subsidies, and to set forth armies with his customs and tributes, the
which things were for this cause granted in time paste.

If in like manner the king declare that he found almost al his demeines
distracted, divided, and conveyed away, the greatest part of the subsidies
taken up before hand, and yet he himself, greatly burdened and indebted, to
the end he might obtain by the consent of the people, that those burdens
being somewhat eased, might remain as yet for a time, until means and ways,
which are daily devised to recover again his demeines, may be brought to
effect.

But is there no other better way to be had to bring things to pass than by
ye assembly of the States? To speak briefly, if there be any manner of
complaint whatsoever, pretenced or otherwise, where can it be better put forth
tha^ in the general assembly of the States? and if it be a just The
comme^dation of the general asse^bly of the States.
complaint, where can he have a more present remedy than yt which shall be
devised by so many men? but if it be unjust where can the same be sooner found
out tha^ in ye assembly?

There is also another consideration of necessity, whereof there arise great
dangers, seeing in these straites and ext^emities, there is no ordinary remedy
used. First of all, the King is scarcely obeyed in his Edictes and statutes: ye
which is one of the greatest signs of sedition. For when the people are not
heard in those things whereof they do complain, it comes thereupon that they
cast away all hope to have redress, and so they fall into such desperation,
that they dare enterprise to ease and unburden them selves, without the having
of any consideration of the kings commandment or his officers: yea they arm
and prepare the^ selves against all perils, as though nothing were more sharp
and intolerable.

On ye other part, they which say yt they are grieved, captiously take this
complaint of ye people, and increase y^ same: and do all that they can, to
amplify and enlarge that with new lies which they have once falsely told and
reported for a truth. Hereupon comes the dishonest publishing and casting
Slanderous books.
abroad of slanderous books and public writings. And the people being
exulcerated and vexed with their own disease, willingly receives that which
appertains to their disease, and by the ignorance of the kings matters, do
flyde and fall into these sinister and wrong opinions. Of the which things to
have so great and manifold destructions arise, is great danger, many examples
whereof we see daily. To avoid which destructions, it seems most necessary
to call an assembly of the states. And although the causes hitherto spoken of
show no necessity, yet not withstanding the necessity of the assembly of
these men is such, that it ought to be wished for of all men. For what is more
to be desired, and meet for a young King to govern his kingdom, than to be
taught the things that concern his kingdom, that he may know the manners of
his people, and those things also which A lesson for Kings and Queens.
belong to the order and governing them. Therefore let him learn to spend as
he may and not to exceed: and let him play the part of a good shepherd, who in
shearing of his sheep does not flea and pull of skin and all, but leaves the
skin that he may receive the fleece at another time again, and let him
consider that whatsoever he spends more than his ordinary revenues,
tribute, custom and tallage, is as it were the substance and blood of the
people whom he is set to govern by Gods appointment.

Hereupon shall come honest and godly education: hereupon shall come, both good
beginnings and happy success of all things: and at the last the king shall get
unto him that Magnificent name with great glory, as, to be called, Pater
Patriae, The father of the country, as King Lodowic ye twelth Lodouicus. xii.
pater patriae.
was, which leaves a notable memory behind to all the posterity, and is
more to be desired than the Laureat crown for victory in war. Another
commodity also will ensue and that is this. The people of France, being
cheered up and comforted by this demonstration, they will seek all that ever
they be able to ease those burthe^s: for they once understanding their kings
business and need, will imploye all that ever they have to do their king
service. But we must take heed least that prompte willingness, being to often
styrred, do not turn at the last to impacient and brutishe madness.

And these commodities are joined with great honesty, for that the king, if it
please him, may in the beginning of his reign, examine old customs and
laws, the which is the only way to correct and amend matters that are out
of order. For although the king alone be the author of the law, and he only
can rule, yet notwithstanding those things which he has constituted and
ordained by this assembly of the states, are of greater force and efficacy:
and those will the people more willingly obey and keep, because they
understand that they were confirmed by many men's opinions and Judgments:
whereas otherwise, only a few being assembled together, they Judge that the
matter was done according to the mind and fantasy of a few, the reasons not
examined and wayed which might have been brought against the same. For by these
means the Frenchmen have preserved them selves and the kingdom unto this
day: neither is there any well ordered kingdom, in the which this order of
assemblies is not observed: the which ought to be of great weight and highly
esteemed.

For seeing so many kings do confess that they feel and perceive so many
commodities to spring and grow of this good order, and that they do count
the same the stay and strength of their scepter, we can not certainly well
and honestly depart from so ancient and commendable a custom. And as for the
contrary reasons which were wont to be brought to hinder these assemblies,
they can prevail nothing at all, seeing the peril of those things which
happened at another time are by no means to be feared, the Kings authority at
this day being so firmly established, and confirmed by the counsel of the
Queen, and by so many consents of Princes and Nobles, that if these reasons
might be received and take place, there is no doubt but that all their
practices would be void and frustrate which think it good and persuade
themselves that it is necessary to have a new alteration of the common weal,
and should be a most spedie remedy to mittigate and take away al
perturbations. The The end of this oration.
which one thing we must with all diligence possible provide for.

And thus he made an end of his oration: In the repeating whereof we have been
some what long, but yet for all that the matter is worthy of repetition, and
not disagreing from our purpose.

The day following the rest declared their Judgementes, and first began the
Admiral, and the Cardinal of Loraine, The sentence of the Admiral.
made an end. But this was the sentence of the Admiral Shatillion* namely:
that he would have had that those supplications which he had offered to the
king, should be subscribed of those in whose name they were put forth: who
answered, that they were ready either in a small or great number to subscribe
those supplications which they had exhibited: yea, they said that they would
assemble themselves together to the number of fifty thousand before ye kings
Majesty, if so it pleased him. But there can nothing be devised more
pestilent, tha^ the Prince to stand in fear of his subjects, and to be in
peril of them: and in like manner the subjects to have an evil opinion of
their Prince, and to be suspected of their king. Also he said that it was ill
provided to bring up a young prince in that fear, and also to give those
occasions to ye subjects of fearing. At the last he concluded that his sentence
was, that the errors of the Church should be taken away, that the guard
lately given to the king should be removed, and that there should be called
forthwith an assembly of the States.

Thus when the Admiral had made an end, the Duke of Guise taking occasion
upon that which he had spoken, began thus, saying, that it was not well said of
some that the The sentence of the Duke of Guise.
king ought not to be so and so brought up, when as he is so excellently
ordered, and specially by the Queen his mother by who^ he is endued, as it
were with a certain fullness of all virtues. And as touching that which was
spoken concerning the increasing of the Guard, he said that he himself did
mislike always of the same, until certain did move a sedition and put them
selves in arms, which seemed to be intended altogether against the kings
majesty. But whereas it is commonly reported that this sedition was not moved
against the king, but against many of his ministers and officers, that is a
vain cloak, and nothing answering the matter. For there is not any one of us
that ever hurt one of the^ by private offenses, or harms. But they bear all
that hatred against us for the executing of our offices, which we have by the
kings authority and leave: and therefore to speak more truly, they hate not
us but the king.

Wherefore he said, he saw no reason, why that number which was newly added to
the Guard should be removed and taken away.

And as touching Religion, he said, that he stood to the Judgment of more
learned men tha^ he him self was: how beit this one thing he would protest and
profess, that no councils at any time should so prevail with him, yt they
should bring him from the ancient Religion of his elders, and specially from
his belief of the holy sacrament of the Altar. Finally, he said concerning the
assembly of the States, yt he wholly referred the same to the kings majesty's
will and pleasure, and to like or dislike of the same with him.

The Cardinal of Loraine began his sentence upon those confessio^s which were
offered to the king by ye Admiral, saying, yt they were nothing less tha^
obedient and faithful, howsoever they boasted them selves. For so long as the
King will like The sentence of the Cardinal of Lorain.
of their opinions and sects, or at least wise suffer them, they will show
them selves obedient to the king.

But I appeal (says he) to the Judgments of all men in this matter, whether
it be more meet to follow the opinions of these Jolly fellows, tha^ the
authority of the king. To grant them Churches, were to allow their Idolatry,
which the king could not do without manifest peril of destruction. And as
concerning a general Council, or a Counsel assembled together out of our
own Nation, I ca^ not see (says he) by any means how it should be
necessary, seeing that it should be called only to reform the manners of
certain ecclesiastical persons, the which might be done with less business
a great deal, namely by particular admonitions. And as touching that which
else appertained to Religion, he said that the same had been so oftentimes
established and confyrmed, that he wished that only to be followed which had
been hitherto observed and appointed, for so much as all assemblies of
Councels whatsoever, can appoynte no more than the observation of those things
that have been kept already. And where as it was said that they which should
subscribe their names to those supplications which they had put forth, would
assemble them selves together to the number of fifty thousand, to that he
answered, yt the king might set against the^ ten thousand me^ of his Religion.
But it is manifest (says he) of what mind they are, by their railing libels
which they scatter abroad in all places against every man. Among which great
number of The Cardinal of Loraine hops to get honor and fame by keeping
libels that were scattered abroad.
libels, he said, that he had in his hands five and twenty, which he
diligently kept, as a testimony of great honor, because he was evil spoken
of by those villainous knaves, trusting that they should be Monuments of his
eternal and everlasting praise. Therefore he wished that those sedicious and
troublesome persons might be most severely punished, and specially they which
would put them selves in arms as many had begone. But, he said he thought it
good that they should sustain no punishment which frequented those sermons
without armor, and only for consciencs sake of Religion, which sang psalms,
and went not to Mass, and such like: Adding moreover that he was very sorry
for the sharpness and cruelty of those punishments which had been hitherto
used, protesting that he would most willingly spend his own life, if it might
do any good, to bring them into the right way. Affirming also that Bishops and
other learned men ought to endeavor them selves to bring this thing to pass,
according to the commandment of our savior Christ in the Gospel, saying
Reprove thy brother between The reformation wished for by the Cardinal of
Leraine.
thee and him. etc. Also he wished that the Governors and other Lieutenants of
the Provinces, would diligently attend upon their offices, to see that none
seditiously put the^ selves in armor: in like manner that the Bishops and
curates, and other Ecclesiastical persons, would have a care and diligent eye
to their charge, to note and mark the abuses and errors of the Church, and to
cert^e the King A National counsel, is as much to say as a counsel gathered
only cute of the French nation, which I gasle we may call a conuocatio^ of
the clergy, whereas a general counsel consists of diverse nations.
within the space of two months of those things which they know, that
thereby it may be known how necessary it is to have either a general counsel
or a National counsel. For it is very profitable to call and assemble all
the states together, that all men may perceive and see how well the Realm is
governed. And thus he made an end.

When they had thus uttered their sentences and minds, the King and Queen gave
thanks to the whole assembly, whose Counsel they said they were ready to
follow, granting unto them that, whereupon they had concluded, namely, That
all the states of the Realm, should be assembled together, and that if there
could not be a general council, there should be with all speed a National
Council. Therefore they determined and concluded that the states of the Realm
should be at Meldis, the tenth day of ye month of December next coming,
except it should please the kings majesty to appointe some other place. And
that the States belonging to every province should make in their province, an
assembly and consultation particular before that time, to the end that those
things which should be debated of in the general assemblies, might be
understood. Also that because it was in a manner agreed, of a general
Counsel, between the Pope, the Emperor, and the Christian princes, the
Bishops should come the tenth day of January next coming to the king, that
they might agree and conclude of the sending to the general Council, or else
of the having of a particular and National Council.

And that in the mean time the Bishops should get them to their Diocesses,
both to prepare them selves, and also diligently to note and mark those things
which lack reformation. In like manner that the Civil and substituted
Magistrates, should keep the people in peace and obedience, sparing and
omitting nevertheless, pains and punishments due to offenders, except it be
to such as put themselves in arms and move sedition: and yet notwithstanding
the King to reserve unto him self his power and authority to punish those
which are counted the authors of seditions and tumultes.

This was the conclusion of that consultation, the which shall appear
wonderful if we consider the state of the former times. For that liberty,
which as yet is but little, but before less, being restored from fiery flames,
and from death it self, so prevailed before the King, that it increased more
and more.

But for all that the adversaries ceased not their wicked Councels and
practices, what fair and painted words so ever they used, who by and by
again burst forth and showed them selves, by these occasions.

There was a certain servant belonging to the King of A tumulte against the
Prince of Conde.
Nauar, whose name was Sagua, who being come to a place called
Fontisbellaquaeum, and meeting with a certain soldier called Banna, talked
with him, and earnestly persuaded with him that he would not serve under the
Guises, for (says he) there are ways devised, to punish and handle them as
they have deserved: and at the last made rehearsal of certain things more
particularly.

Banna the soldier hearing this, went and told the whole circumstance to
Marshall Brissacus, who exhorted him to go to the Duke of Guise. To him
therefore he went, and told him all the whole matter in order. Then the Guise
desired him to feign friendship and familiarity toward this Sagua, and to
fawn upon him, and often times to repeat their former communication, also to
show him to one of his householde servants. The which this Banna did. And
Sagua was apprehended by the Guise. There were also taken in the Letters sent
to the Prince of Conde taken.
hands of Sagua, certain letters of Monsier Vidam of Carnutum, to the Prince
of Conde, in the which he declared: That if the Prince would take any thing in
hand, worthy of kinglike service, he was ready to serve him, and for his sake
to spend both goods and life. Upon the only occasion of these letters, the
king gave commandment that Monsier Vida^ Monsier Vida^ apprehended.
of Carnutu^ should be taken. The which was with all diligence brought to pass
by the Guises. In the mean time, there came from Lions from the Abbat
Sauignius, letters concerning the bewrayed and frustrated practices of
Malignius, who was said to go about to take Lions. Sauignius for his reward
received the Archbishopricke of Orleans.

By the means of these new tumultes the king came from Fontisbellaquaeum, to
the City Sangerman. But the cause and mischief of all these things was laid
upon the Prince of Conde, who was openly accused to seek the alteration of
the state of the common weal, and also to be the author of the tumulte of
Ambaxian. Then was Cursolensis sent The king of Nauar, and the prince of Co^de
are sent for to the king.
to the King of Navarre to command him to come unto the King, and to bring
his brother the Prince of Conde with him.

In the mean time Monsier Vidame although he was very sick, yet was he very
straightly imprisoned, in so much that his own wife might not come to visit
him. And being straightly syfted by those which were appointed to examine him
concerning the meaning of his letters, he still made this answer, namely: That
he did write expressly of those things which appertained to the obedience of the
king, and of whatsoever else that should be done by the kings commandment:
Also he said, that he was a near kinsman and friend of the Duke of Guises,
yet for all that, if there were any private controversy between him and tho
King of Nauar, and the Prince of Conde, he would rather take part with them
tha^ with him, in so much that for them two, namely for the King of Nauar, and
for the Prince of Conde, he would spend both life and goods.

On the other part, the familliar friends of the Prince of Conde, with whom he
was thought to have conference and consultation, were daily cast in prison:
and the suspicions of ye Huguenotes daily increased more and more, for by this
new and strange name were the faithful of the reformed Church then called.

Then was there a new Edict made That no Prince, or A new Edicte against the
reformed Religion.
any other man whatsoever should contribute money, armor, horses, and such
like to the setting forth of Soldiers: and that he which should be found to
do this, should be counted a Traitor to the King.

There was yet a second messenger sent to the King of Nauar, that he and his
brother should come with all speed. This Messenger was Cardinal Burbonius
their brother. Public supplicatio^s for the peace of the kingdom, were every
where forbidden.

And whereas the assembly of States was determined before to be holden at
Meldis, it was now translated and removed to Aurelias, Marshall Termensis,
being sent with two hundred armed men to keep the city.

At the feast of Saint Michaels order, Monsier Vidam, being one of the
foresaid order, put up a certain supplication by the Cardinal of Loraine, as
by the Chauncelor of that order, desiring that according to the ancient
custom he might be judged of all those that were of that honorable order of
Saint Michael, and that for those causes only for the which he deserved, to be
dismissed of the same.

This thing at the length was granted through the earnest suit of the
Constable: and the self same day that Monsier Vidam was dismissed of the order
of Saint Michael, there were xvij. into the same honorable order, by a new and
unaccustomed manner chosen by the travail and means of the Guyses* to the
intent they might bind many unto them by that benefit or promotion.

While the king of Nauar, and the Prince of Conde, were looked for,
commandment was given to the Governor of Poictiers, to go to Pictauium, and
not to suffer the King of Navarre, and the Prince of Conde, his brother to come
into the City. But for all this, at the length by the kings letters and
commandment, the King of Nauar was received of the Marshall Termensis into
Pictauium, with all his train: being nevertheless on every side beset with
armed men: the which suspicions the King of Navarre took in very evil part.

Then the King came from Sangermane to Paris with a great The king comes to
Aurelias.
army both of footmen and horsemen in battle array, the Duke of Guise and
the Cardinal of Loraine attending upon him. From thence he went to Aurelias,
with the same army, and in warlike order entered into the City: being reported
abroad that the King came thither for two causes, the one was to keep the
City from the treason of the king of Navarre, the other was, to call and
summon a Parliament.

Many therefore were made afearde, but specially they which were chose^ to be
of the assembly or Parliament, when they heard that so great an army of men
came with the king. Then commandment was given that every one should rehearse
and confess the confession of his faith according to the prescript and rule of
those articles which were set forth by ye Papists, in the year of our Lord
God, M. D. XLII. and it was reported for truth that ye Cardinal of Loraine had
drawn forth in writing those things which should be inacted and established in
that assemblye. There was also watch and ward throughout the whole City
appointed to be kept, even as if the enemy had come to assault the same.

Again commandment was sent to the King of Nauar, that he should come with all speed, and bring his brother the Prince of Conde with him, many also were
sent into diverse parts of the Realm, to take the names of all those that were
noted to be of the reformed Religion.

At the length the king of Nauar, and the Prince of Conde his The prince of
Conde taken at Aurelias.
brother came to Aurelias, there to salute ye King. But so soon as they had
saluted ye King, the chief and principal of ye kings Guard, as they were
commanded laid hands upon the Prince of Conde and carried him to ye next hold
prepared for y^ same purpose. The which holds were forthwith fortified and
made strong with Iro^ grates in every window, and a Castle was hard vy the
same erected and built to receive the footmen.

The^ were there certain me^ chose^ to watch and keep ye King of Nauar, whose
Chau^celor also was taken, and by and by with all speed was the Lady Roye,
mother in law to the Prince of Conde, taken and arrested and brought to the
city Sangerman, to whose charge it was laid that she was guilty of treason.

The Magistrates were ready to take and receive her and opened the prison doors
to bring her in. Straight after this also was Hieroine Grostotius the Governor
of Aurelias taken, in whose house the king lodged, being accused of negligence
and stouth in searching out the heretics: Howbeit he was quit and discharged
of this matter by the decree and Judgment of the Senate of Paris. But the
Andelote, when he had saluted the King and the Duke of Guise, and had excused
himself by the disobedience of the French host of footmen, departed in very
good time, otherwise as the most likly report went, he should have been taken
with the Prince.

In the mean time there were subtle devises and crafty means invented to
assault and trouble the Prince of Conde. And when Judges were chosen out of
the Senate of Paris, as Fagus, and Viollaeus, and the Lieutenant of Thou, the
kings Solicitour was commanded to open the case now in controversy, and to
proceed with the same. But the Prince alleging for himself his noble blood
and princely state, stands with them upon this point, yt he ought not to be
judged of them, but rather of the king him self and of no other, in the Senate
of Paris, the Peers and Nobles of the Realm being assembled together.
Therefore he said that he appealed to the King. Then the appeal was brought
unto the Priuye Counsel, the which appeal, they said was nothing, and of no
force: And this was done often times. But at the last they concluded, that
except the Prince would answer before those Judges, he should be condemned
of hie treason.

Then the Prince of Condes wife desired of the King that so much liberty might
be granted to her husband, as to co^sult with learned counsel. The which was
granted unto her, in so much ye he was permitted to take y^ counsel of two
lawyers, namely of Petrus Robertus, and Fra^ciscus Marillacus, cou^lellers in
ye court of Paris, but he was no otherwise permitted to have them, tha^ upon
this condition, that whenever he co^sulted with then the king to have vmpires
and indifferent me^, to be present at their talk. The Prince also required ye
it might be lawful for him, beside these two counselors, to consult and confer
with his two brethren, the king of Nauar, and the Cardinal of Burbo^, and also
with his wife, and to join with the^ what vmpires and witnesses soever it
should please ye King, affirming yt he was very loath to do any thing without
his brethren, specially in a matter of so great wait. The which request
notwithstanding was denied him: only he obtained leave to write unto them his
mind. At the length being come to the matter in controversy, he said to his
counselors that were present, that the affliction which he now suffered, was
not laid upon him by God, for that he had gone about to work any thing against
ye kings majesty, but rather that by this affliction he might try his
constancy. Also he said that he did not think him self to be Captive, seeing
that he inioyed the fredome of mind, and a pure and sound conscience: but
rather that he thought those to be captives which had their minds and
consciences bound and clogged with the burden of their sins and wickednesses
in a body set at liberty.

When he had thus spoken he gave certain notes of the defense of his cause
unto his Counselors. For king Frances by the subtle means and false
persuasions of the Guises, was fully persuaded that the Prince of Conde
conspired his death, and that therefore he was guilty of treason and worthy to
suffer condign punishment for the same.

Therefore while the bloody slaughter was a preparing, and whilst all men
looked to see great things come to pass, behold sudden and unlooked for
alterations happen. For the king had a ceataine pain and disease in his ears:
Of the which after he had been sick a while he dyed, the fifth The death of
king Frances the second.
day of December in the year of Lord God. M. D. LX. At the which sudden
alteration the Guyses were not a little dismayde.

When King Fraunces was dead, the Queen his mother sent unto the Constable,
(who had detracted the time to come to Aurelias) assuring him of her
friendship, and promising unto him that never hereafter none should intrude him
self into an other man's office, and praying him also that he would come unto
her with all speed. There the Constable came to her to Aurelias, without delay
with Martial Momorencius his son, and saluted the new King. Nevertheless
the Prince of Conde was kept in hold still, but not without great reverence
of his keepers showed toward him, and continusd in prison after the death of
the King by the space of ten days, denying to go out of prison, until he
knew his adversary in this matter laid to his charge. But all the matter was
laid upon the King deceased. Therefore by a wonderful and strange way or
mean, as by the death of the King, the subtle practices of the adversaries
were brought to naught: whose funeral was so slenderlye celebrated, that he
was deprived of that usual pomp which Kings commonly have at their burial,
all men wondering that the Guises would suffer the same: the which also was
very well noted by a public Epigram or libel sent abroad.

There were truly, within a short time, wonderful and manifest signs of Gods
just judgment against many Princes: the which al me^ at that time did plainly
see and acknowledge. Concerning the which, these verses following were made.

Charles a Tyrant King, of all kings that before him went, 1

Most craftily by counsel against Christ, his force he bent,
Till that his foolish madness, of children being espied,
In midst of all his mischief, most suddenly he died.
And thou O Henry eke, by men that wicked were and naught, 2

VVast too much led, and therefore greedily have sought
The blood of godly men, thereof to drink thy fill,
But he that sittes above, restrainde thee of thy will.
For in thy witless mode, thy rashness great thou did declare, 3

and therefore wou^d of death, by spear thou had ere thou wast ware:
And so thy bleding corpse e^brued the earth with blood,
Because to kill the Saints, to thee it seemde so good.
Frances that was his son (unhappy child) did so direct 4

His fete in his ill ways, that Christ's voice he did neglect:
He stopped his ears as deaf, when Christ to him did cry,
And therefore putrefacted ears did cause hi^ straight to die.
Be warnde therefore (O Kings) by these examples just,
VVisedomes doctrine to receive, or else to turn to dust.
Thus rumors were spread euerywhere abroad, that so wondrous a thing had
happened, the like whereof was never heard of before: namely, that they which
were brought to that pass, yt they should have been put to death, were now A
wonderful alteration after the death of King Frances the second.
advanced to great honor. And contrariwise that it was come to pass, that
they which thought their authority to be confirmed for a long time, saw the
same taken away, and were brought to their former state and degree.

They which were of the assembly of States, trembling and quaking before for
fear, took now unto themselves a bold courage, and with one consent make
petition that the king of Nauar may be the ruler and governor of the kingdom
during the time of the Kings nonage and minority: and also that the Princes
the kings nere kinsemen, with the Constable, the Admiral, ye Andelote, and with
ye rest of the Nobles, might be always of the kings Cou^sel^ and that Cardinals
and Bishops should be sent to their diocesses, to discharge their
Ecclesiastical offices, according to ye rule of the canons in that behalf.

The Kings mother took it not in good part that so great The privy
displeasure of the Queen, against the Prince of Navarre.
good will and favor should be showed to the king of Nauar, whom she demed not
long ago to be her enemy: and they increased these suspicions, which went
about to confirm their authority by their dissentio^s, working hatred and
spite against the king of Nauar, through ye sentence of the assembly of the
parliament, which wished him to have the rule of the kingdom. And thus the
minds of the Nobles being divided into two factions: one part held of the
Queen, and another part with the king of Nauar. Insomuch that a man might see,
the Constable, ye Admiral, and his two brethren alwais in the company of ye
king of Nauar: On the other part, ye Guises, Nemorosius, ye Marshal Santandrae,
and ye Marshal Brislac, and the cardinal of Turno^ always were about the
Queen, and stood wthir.

So that now, there was great danger of present sedition: The King of Nauar
yeldeth authority to the Queen to govern the Realm.
but the king of Nauar, by his courtesy and suffrance, put away all this
danger like to arise, yielding unto the Queen authority to govern the
kingdom. Then the Queen being somewhat appeased, plainly said, that she knew
now the causes of all the troubles past, namely, that all the Princes which
were of the Kings bloods, were displeased, that they were not accounted off,
according to their worthiness, which thing, she said, she would see reformed
ever afterward. By this occasion the stomacking and taking of parts between
them, seemed somewhat to be repressed.

There followed therefore a wonderful alteration and change: and all men began
to talk one to another, and to say, that the companies of armed me^ were
prepared and gathered together to some other use and purpose, than for ye
safety of the King: and that their counsels and meanings were otherwise, which
had arrogated unto themselves authority: also that their The peace of the
Church after long affliction.
practices should not so easily have success now. But the churches now,
which before were in great perplexity and fear, obtained peace: and all men
hoped now for a better state.

For amidst those sundry troubles and manifold afflictions which happened
under the reign of king Frances, the administration of the sacraments, and the
preaching of Gods word never ceased in the reformed Churches, although the
number that were assembled, were but small, and though also the same was not
done without great danger and wariness. For at that time there were cruel
conspiracies against the Church, which would have done great harm to the
same, had not the Lord by his providence turned them away. Then did the
reformed Churches command solemn prayers with fasting to be used: and they
which were the governors and chief of the congregation, exhorted their
brethren to be of good cheer, and comforted them, willing them patiently to
look for help from the Lord. So that after so great afflictions and fear,
there followed exceeding joy, and the sodennesse of the chance made the
matter to seem more wonderful.

Then was there news brought of the death of Monsieur Vidame of Carnutum, who
was kept at Paris in hold for The death of Monsieur Vidame.
those causes whereof we have spoken before. Whose death many of the Nobles
took very heinously.

Then were certain things appointed and determined, concerning the government
of the kingdom: and the imperie and rule was divided between the Queen and
the King of Navarre: and that in such order, that the chiefest authority to
govern the Realm, was given to the Queen, against all law and ancient
custom of France. Wherefore by reason of this sudden change, the assemblye of
States were interrupted and brake up for a certain space.

But they were assembled together again in the same A convocation of States,
or of a Parliament in king Charles the. ix. days
place, the. xiii. day of December, Charles the King, the Queen, and the
Princes, according to the manner accompanying them. Then the Chancelour at the
commandment of the King declared, that there was no less willingness in the
King, than there was in his brother before him, to The oration made by the
Chauncelour.
have an assembly of States: and that the rather because the King himself was
newlye come unto the Kingdom. And he proceeded speaking very seriously and
plentifully, of the cause, end, and use of calling an assembly of States: and
why the same being omitted for the space of eight and twenty years, should
now again be brought in use. And when he had showed the King and the
Subjects also their duties, he came to speak of those causes more
particularly, which brought to pass, that there should be an assembly of
States: that is to say, of the Seditions, which he wished might be taken quite
away, for that they were like to bring so great troubles to the whole Realm.
And to find out speedye and profitable Remedies for the same, he said, the
causes of so great evil must first of all be noted and known.

We must (says he) in every respect and condition, disalowe Sedition what it
is, and where of it comes
and utterly condemn sedition, the which is nothing else but a separation,
and a pulling away of the subjects from the Kingdom and Common wealth. And
it springs of diverse causes: First, of fear of some imminent evil which may
come by injury and oppression: and also of the expectation of great things, to
put away penury and scarceness. But the special cause is Religion. And this
is very strange, and most wonderful: because God the only true author and
preserver of Religion, as he is an enemy to dissension, so is he the defe^der
and preserver of peace. Christian Religion needs not the defense of Arms:
neither does the beginning, or conservation thereof stand upon force of arms.
Neither is their answer to be allowed, which say, That they take not arms
and force in hand, to offend any man, but to defend themselves. For by no
means is it lawful for the subject to rise against the Prince, yea, it is no
less unlawful for him so to do, than for the children to resist their
parents, whether they be good and courteous, or sharp and cruel. Thus did the
godly Christians in time past set forth and maintain Christian Religion,
namely, by long sufferance and patience, and also by devout prayer for wicked
Emperors, which overcame their cruelty. The very Ethnikes truly praised and
highly commended those, which had suffered injuries and reproaches for their
country. But we which are Christians, ought not to allow the opinions of the
Greeks and Romans, concerning the killyng of tyrants.

If men were such as they ought to be, there should never come any strife or
contention for Religion. But it is manifest, that there is no greater force
than the first conceived opinion of Religion, whether y^ same be good or evil.
There The force of Religion in the (...)of men.
is no peace to be hoped for between men of contrary Religion. There is
nothing that does more violently assail the hearts of men, and that does more
invade them: there is no affection that is of greater power, and more violent,
either to bring friendship, or to bring hatred, than Religion. The Jews hated
all other Nations as profane: And all other Nations hated the Jews. But
wherefore? for Religion. What and how great hatred was there in time past
between the fathers, and the Arrians? But I omit such ancient examples, and I
will come nearer, even to our selves England, and France, embracing al one
Religion, shall be more surely linked and knit in friendship and love one
toward another, tha^ they which disagreeing in Religion, are of one Country,
kindred, and name. Diversity of Religion dissolueth all the bonds of love: it
sets the father against the children, and the children against the father:
brother against brother, the man against the wife, and the wife against her
husband: according to this place of Scripture, I came not to send peace* but
a sword. Hereupon it comes to pass, that in all Realms there are
oftentimes grievous seditions. For if it come to pass, that there be varia^ce
and disagreement between those that are by nature so fast linked together, by
the means of Religion, what may we think of others? Not the diversity of
tongues but the diversity of Religion, makes division of Kingdoms, and of
Commonweals. Hereupon comes that old Proverb, Vna Fides, vna Lex, vnus
Rex, that is to say, One faith, one Law, and one King. Among these divisions
and discordes, how can it be that violence and force of arms should not be
used? For war follows always discord and dissension, according to these
verses.

Discordia, that Lady of strife and of woe, Bellona is the Goddess of war.

has with her, Bellona her handmaide also:
Who always does carry a most bloody scurdge,
the undoubted revenge of strife and of grudge.
Therefore the principal and chief cause of this disease and mischief, is
the discrepance and variety of Religion. To cure the which mischief, there is
not a more present remedy, than to have a Council, as it was lately concluded
at Fontubellaquaeum, and we have now great hope to obtain the same at the
hands of the Pope. In the mean time let us show our due obedience unto the
young King. Let us not, for Gods sake, receive new opinions according to our
own fantasy. Let us in time with wisdom consider of the matter, and let us
diligently seek to understand the same. It is no trifle that we have in
hand, but it is the salvation of our souls that is in question. If it may be
lawful for every man at his own discretion to receive what Religion him
lysteth, take heed that there be not so many Religions as there be men. Thou
say that thy Religion is better than mine, and I defend that which I
embrace, whether is it more meet that I follow thy opinion, or thou mine? Who
shall end our controversies, but the holy Council? In the mean time let us
not alter any thing rashlye, least by seditions we bring war into our
Kingdom, and so there follow a confusion. The King and the Queen will leave
nothing undone that may procure a Council, and if this remedy may not be
had, they will seek other remedies. And now our Prelates and Ecclesiastical
persons (if they well consider the weightinesse of the matter) will look
better unto their office and duty than they have done heretofore. Let us
know, that the dissolution of our Church, was the first beginning of heresies:
but it is to be thought, that a Reformation will take them away again. This
victory must not be sought for by violence, or by force of arms, but by
godly exhortations, and by godliness of life. With these weapons, the
Heretics in times past, were overcome. We must not hate the men, but the
vices and wickednesses that are in men: and we must go about, all that we
may, to bring them into the way that are in error. Let us therefore put
away all factious and seditious names, as the names of Lutheranes, Huguenotes,
Factious names.
Papystes, and such like, and let us retain and keep still the names of
Christians. But because there are many found, which will not be satisfied,
desiring tumult and confusion, enemies to peace and the common wealth (and as it
appears) contemners of God and Religion: the King which otherwise of himself
is gentle and long suffering, hitherto has vene constrained, and peradventure
shall be hereafter urged, to endeavor himself to punish the froward
obstinate. It may seem a very sharp remedy, but if we look well upon the
disease and mischief yet a growing, we shall find it very necessary for the
same. Notwithstanding, it is so come to pass as yet, by the goodness of God,
and the clemency of the Prince, that there has been no greater punishment
laid upon any man, nor no greater destruction followed, as the subversion of
Cities, the burning of houses, the disfraunchizing of Cities of The accusation
of foreign Princes.
their privileges, and the restraint of their liberties: the which, other
Princes that dwell about us, have oftentimes used, even within the compass of
our remembrance, for the punishing of seditious persons. And because it is to
be feared, least the armies of soldiers being dismissed, the seditious will
begin to practice and conspire a fresh, of two things the one is to be done,
namely, that either the armies be kept and maintained still (which cannot be
done without the great cost and charge of the Subjects) or else that the
Citizens of every City, endeavor themselves to punish such seditious and
seditious persons: and he that shall be first found to go about to alter the
state of the commonwealth, let him by his severe punishment be an example to
all the rest. The King to this end and purpose will give you a power of armed
men. Consider with your selves which of these ways is most for your profit,
either that you maintain garrisons of soldiers to keep the cities for the
king, or that you your selves in your own persons, do it at your own costs
and charges. As for all other things the King will provide and see unto them by
his officers.

In the mean time, let such as are Ecclesiastical persons, do their duty by
prayers, by Sermons, and by diligent instructing of the people. And so it will
come to pass that the King shall be obeyed, and you shall enjoy peace and
tranquillity. When the Chau^celor had proceeded thus far forth, and had spoken
somewhat concerning the Kings substance and great erpences, exhorting the
Court of Parliament to ease the same, he declared that it was the King and the
Queens pleasures that every man should freely put forth his complaints and
suits: for that their Majesty's intended with all clemency, as it was meet,
to provide for all things. And this only was done the first day.

In the next meeting the assemblye of States chose out three men to speak for
them, the which three stood before the King and made their several orations.
The sum whereof I will briefly repeat, so far forth as they shall seem
necessary for our purpose.

The speaker for the third order of States, that is to say, for the
Commonalty, was named Angel, a Counselor and The oration of the co^menaltie,
made by Angel.
a pleader of causes in ye Senate of Burdeux in Gascoyne. This man declared by
many reasons, that for the due putting away of perturbations and troubles it
seemed good and most necessary to the people, first of all to remove and to
take away the causes. Which causes (he said) were partlye the corruptions
among Ecclesiastical persons: among which corruptions (which were very many in
number) there were three notable and more pernicious than the rest: namely,
Covetousness, Ignorance, and Luxury. Ignorance (he said) The ignorance of
prelates.
was so manifest that no man need to doubt of the same: and so great also
that among that sort of men it was to be seen from the highest to the lowest.
Which ignorance is the mother and Nurse of all errors, as both experience, and
also the testimonies of learned fathers aboundantlye declare.

To remedy this, he said, Canons and decrees would be provided but in vain.
For so great is the contempt and negligence of preaching and instructing the
people, (which is notwithstanding the office of a good pastor) that Bishops at
this day count it a shame and reproach unto them to feed the flock of Christ.

And such as are Curates, and other mass priests, following the evil example
of Bishops, do also even abhor their office, and do commit the same to
unlearned vicars: who singing Masses for their reward, have only some one
slender bosom collation or other, which they always use without discretion,
as one plaster to all manner of soars. The second vice is Covetousness: the
which as it is no Covetousness.
less pestiferous than Ignorance, so is it no less to be seen as well in the
heads as in the inferiors.

And as for Luxury and the pomp and pride of Prelates, he fayde it was such,
that it was a great stumbling block and offense to all men. For they are
painted and set for the as though by an outward show in the world they should
represent the majesty of God: when as they should rather express the same by
godliness and integrity of life. How greatly have our Bishops of late days
degenerated from the mean estate, purity, and godliness of the true
Bishops of old time? All these corruptions (says he) must be taken away by
a godly, and lawful Counsel called, and also by the kings authority.

The speaker for the Nobility was one Iacobus Sillius. The oration for the
nobilitye.
This man began first to speak many things concerning the power, authority,
and office of Kings, and largely also concerning the order of Nobles, which he
said was very profitable and necessary to preserve and maintain the dignity
of the king.

In speaking of matters concerning Religion, he found this fault above all
others, namely, that hitherto there had been great oversight, in suffering
Ecclesiastical persons to have so great power and authority, and so large
living and revenues: who have incroched unto them selves ye houses of Noble
men, and do wickedly abuse all that ever they have. Wherefore (says he) it is
necessary that these sorts of men should he reformed. Also he wished that it
might be diligently foreseen that the office of an Ecclesiastical person might
not be committed to an unlearned, unapt, and ignorant person, affirming it to
be unlawful for them to dwell from their flocks in other places at their own
pleasure, and so giving them selves to worldly business, wholly to neglecte
their offices: but (says he) it is the Kings duty to call them to their
office again.

And in the end he made earnest peticion that there might be ways taken in
time to stop the seditions at hand: and also that it would please the king to
have regard and consideration to his nobles, as his auncetours had done before
him. When he had thus spoken he put up a Supplication, in the which peticion
was made in the name of the nobility that temples might be granted, for the
use and service of the reformed Religion.

After this man, one Quintinus Heduus, who was chosen The oration of the Clergy.
to be the speaker for the Clergy, when he had commended the king and Queen
to their face, saying that the kings of France, were specially chosen, eue^ as
if they had been borne and appointed, to be defenders of the Church of Rome,
and that therefore they had that most ancient name from all ages, as to be
called Most Christian Princes, he said that this assembly of States or court
of Parliament was very well called. The causes of the which assemblye (says
he) is that the complayntes of the people might be heard and helped, and that
means and remedies might be prepared for the scarsitie of the kings treasure
and substance. But this (says he) is the greatest cause of all, which I
speak with great sorrow and grief, and yet notwithstanding must needs
speak the same, namely, that the corruptions and notable faults of
Ecclesiastical persons might be reformed and amended. For (says he) the
matter is now come to this pass, that they the^ selves which should declare
this Ecclesiastical holiness by their life, are more afraid The faults of
persons Ecclesiastical.
of the kings Edictes than they are of Gods word, and of the Gospel of Christ.
Notwithstanding we must therefore think (says he) that the reformation of
the Church is sought for, which has not erred, neither can err: but a
correction only of those most grievous faults in those men which were the chief
gouerners of the Church, which correction must proceed from the king: but so
notwithstanding the king must use correctie^, that he follow the steps of
those kings that have gone before him, who always favored ye Church. Adding to
this also that those kings his auncetours would never have suffered the wicked
practices of these new fellows, which falsely and wickedly of late time take
unto them selves the profession of the Gospel, that they might thereby both
refuse all ecclesiastical order, and also abolishe, if they might, al Civil
power and authority. For (says he) the king ought to this end specially to
exercise his authority, and draw his sword to punish and utterly to root
out all heretics guilty of criminal punishments.

Therefore he desired that Churches might not be granted Churches.
to those horrible men (for so he termed them): and that they also might be
counted and punished as heretics, which durst offer the supplications of
Heretics to the king. This truly (says he) has been the old subtle
practice of Satan to bring this liberty to heretics, that they might the
more securely and without fear of punishment destroy the Gospel, the which
subtle practices he has now also in hand, and therefore the more diligent
heed (says he) ought to be taken. In like manner also he desired the king that
according to the doyngs of his Auucetours, and also according to the example of
Charles the great (whose name he bare) he would constrain all his subjects to
live according to the Canons and rules of the fathers. For detestable (says
he) is the boldness of these new heretics, which scoffing at the authority
of the fathers, and rejecting the doctrines and Canons of the Church, say
that they will have nothing but the true Gospel only: as though ye promise
of Christ were vain and to no effect, who promised that he would never forsake
his Church: and as though that they were wiser than so many Fathers, which
left so many godly Canons behind them in writing: also as though they alone
understood the word of God. Horrible boldness and reebllion is that (says
he) which casts of the yoke of the Church: and what else will they do at the
last but murmur and grudge also against the power and authority of the Civil
Magistrate?

Moreover he said, that the notes and badges of the Church were not obscure,
which these new men wanted: as the everlasting and continual succession from
the Apostles time, and the Canons and rules which the Fathers left behind
them: which badges the Church of Rome has.

Therefore (says he) that they may never hereafter abuse the name of the
Church, we must plainly pronounce and affirm. That the Church of Rome is the
Catholic, or universal Church. But if these new men take unto them the name
of the Church, we will not deny it them, but we say that they are not of the
True Catholic Church, but of the Malignant Church. Also he made petition that
they which had fled the Realm for Religions sake, might be banished men for
ever: that they might loose all manner of privilege, and that they might, be
handled even as if they were foreign enimyes.

Furthermore he said, that above all things, that drowning flood which had
flowed out of the diches of Geneua, was most pernicious: and therefore he
exhorted the king that he would to the utmost of his power root out all such
as came from that place, and not to hold the young child excused, if so be he
came from thence: seeing that God would call him to an accounte for the doing of
his duty: And persuaded Euse book 51. (...)the life o^ Constantin.
Queen Katherine also (the kings mother) by the example of that Katherine of
whom Eusebius makes mention, to overthrow and root out these new Heretics.
Therefore he said that this was the only cause of the great mischief at
hand, that there were so many heretics in every place to the destruction of
the Realm and all estates. Moreover he desired of the King that
Ecclesiastical persons might be defended and maintained, according to the
commandment of God, because they are The Lords Christ's, or anointed,
Shaue^ crowns the badges of Christ's an^.
as their badges, that is to say, their shaue^ crowns do declare. Also he
complained that the authority to chose Prelates was taken from the Clergy and
given to Kings, saying that it was done against Gods word, against the holy
Canons, and against the approved examples of the Elders: and that ever since
that time, (namely, from the year of our Lord God. M. D. XUII. when the same
was first usurped) all things have had evil success.

For (says he) in that very year, in the which that lawful right was
abrogated from Ecclesiastical persons, began that damnable heresy of Luther,
which afterward soke such rooting in every place: and hereupon followed an
infinite number of mischiefs. He entreated therefore that the same authority
might be restored again to Ecclesiastical persons: and that the king would
take away no more the revenues of Churchmen, for that they were consecrated
and hallowed, and could not be taken away without some manner of sacrilege,
seeing that men of the Church ought carefully to be fed and maintained. This
thing if the king would do after the ensample of Charles the great, he should
get a most glorious name, and at the length be called Charles the greatest.

And last of all he made petition that all the Clergy might neither pay tribute
nor tax: for that was the prorogatiue of the Church which ought not to be
taken from it. For says he it is the chiefest part of the Kings duty to
defend the Christian faith and doctrine, and to maintain Ecclesiastical
persons. The which if he did, (he said) that he promised unto him in the name
of the Clergy, all prosperity in this world, and in the world to come
everlasting life.

Thus much concerning his oration, which we have truly reported according to
the written coppie of the same. Many marvelled what he meant so indiscreetly to
inueye against the protestants of the reformed Church, seeing that he him self
sometime had approved the same, and for that cause was constrained to depart
from Pictauium.

Moreover because he wished them to be taken and punished as new Heretics
which should offer supplications to the King, (all men at those words loking
upon the Admiral as though he had openly noted him) the Admiral made complaint
hereof to the king and Queen.

Therefore Quintinus was called to come before the king, to give an accounte of
that which he had spoken. Who excusing him self by the instructions given to
him of the Clergy, promised that he would openly in the assembly or court
ask the Admiral forgiveness: the which also he performed. But after this,
ballets, and scoffing Libelles were set up against him in many places in so
much that he was openly derided. Whereupon at the length, partlye The death
of Quintinus orator for the Clergy.
by the impaciencie of these contumelyes and reproaches, and partlye by the
grief of his own mind for his evil deed, he fell into a sickness and
gave up his life.

After this there began to arise certain quarrels, complaints and
controversies against the Guyses. For the Burgeses of the Parliament that were
chosen for Burgundy and Dolphiny, of the which Provinces the two brethren the
Guyses were governors and chief, went about to bring to pass that the
Guyses might be counted as honorable, as any of the Princes the Kings near
kinsmen were: to the which notwythstandyng the greateste part of the Burgeses
of other Provinces would in no wise consent. At the which, the Guises being
offended, called those that hindered their estimation, sedicious persons. They
on the other side, misliking to be so called, complained thereof to the Queen,
who only gave them this answer, saying, that the Guises, did so call them,
adding this condition, that if the Burgeses did enterprise any thing against
the kings Majesty, and not otherwise: and thus by and by they were sent away.

Then were there certain days spent in bringing the assembly of the
Parliament together again, and in debating of diverse matters. At the length,
by earnest suit of many The parliament breaks up.
the Parliamente was proroged until another time, namely until the first day
of May next following. And so with thanks given to the king and Queen, the
Parliament brake up.

Then commandment was given to all the prelates of the French Church, That
they should prepare themselves for the Counsel. Also that all Magistrates
should set them at liberty both in body and also in goods, which were kept
in prison for Religions sake. And that no manner of punishment or injury
should be offered for Religion, or factious names.

Then, when the rumor and fame of Religion increased daily more and more, the
Constable attended with all diligence upon the king of Navarre, in so much that
he was seldom from him.

In the mean time, the Bishop of Rome, hearing of the kings pleasure
concerning the calling of a National council, and fearing least the same
would be hurtful unto him, urged by and by that there might be a general
Counsel holden at Trent, summoning the same incontinent and declaring Trent in
Italy.
it by public writing. Against ye which one Paulus Vergerius sometime a
Bishop and a notable papist, but at the length for taking the Popes doctrine,
became a member of Christ's Church. This Paulus (I say) wrote letters in the
Italian tongue to the Bishops of Italy. In the which he declared The letters of
Paulus virglus to the Bishops of Italy.
that the Pope had given forth a Bull, for the calling of a general Council,
the which Bull when he had seen, he had great sorrow and grief of mind and
that for weighty causes. Namely, for that the Pope went about to disperse and
scatter, and to overthrow and destroy the Churches of Christ, and to bring the
same again to the former state of desolation. Adding hereunto, that the Pope
was greatly offended with the light of reformation, which God had caused to
shine in earth the space of these forty years to men yt were blinded and
overwhelmed in thick darkness of errors.

As though (says he) you Bishops were judges, and should be vmpires in the
Counsel to determine and end matters. So soon as ye be come to Trent, ye
shall hear some profou^d disputation or other by Monks: but ye shall hear no
man that dare truly reply against them.

Then shall be song very solemn songs of ceremonies, ye shall be brought into
the Temple of S. Vigill, ye shall have fair and sumptuous clothes of Tapisery
hong before you, ye shall have Miters put on your heads: ye shall sit upon
marvelous fair chaires, which ye Cardinal of Trent brought from Millaine. And
being there thus placed ye shall hear solemnly read out of a Pulpit, the
decrees, which the Pope, an unlearned and foolish man, with the help of some
one monk or other has devised. But as for you, ye must do nothing but how
down your mytered heads to the Pope, and say to whatsoever you hear Placet,
very well: and so to approve the same, as though at the first sight you did
understand and consider of the matter very well.

Then will the Pope every where publishe abroad, That the Bishops of the
Catholic Church, have judged the Lutherans to be Heretics. Whereas you never
so determined or judged of the^, but he alone which sits in Peter's Chair.
And yet notwithstanding, ye shall be the cause of all these eu^ls. Also shall
that be called a general counsel, in the which neither we our selves, whose
cause is in hand, are heard, neither yet the Bishops that are present do any
thing of the^ selves, but stand only for sifers in agram? And the Pope will
send the Canons which were made at Rome, to Trent, that they may be counted
the decrees of the general Council. And to ye end that ye might not doubt of
this, what say ye to that which was don by Pope Paul. iij. and also by Pope
Iulio. iij. Of the which matter I my self can be a sufficient witness, and my
testimony the more worthy to be received, for that I my self for bewraying
this colored deceit, was constrained to depart from Trent.

Who knows not that here upon came this proverb: The holy Ghost is brought
from Rome in a Cheste. I my self was once a Bishop, as ye be, and that way
bent, that ye are, until I forsook the Pope, and got me to the Church of
Christ. The which I count the greatest benefit that ever I received. But
truly those toys and deceitful fleightes, are appointed now out of time in
these days, soing ye clear light of the Gospel so brightly shines throughout
the whole world, and seeing the deceites of the Pope are so openly^ known. Is
this your general Counsel, from the which, we that are the contrary part, and
for whose cause y^ same is assembled, are excluded? Is this I say the order of
your general Council, that ye Pope shall command Patriarchs, Archbishops,
Bishops, and Abbates to be at the Council, and shall exhort Kings and Princes
also to send their Clergy and prelates thither which are our adversaries, and
seclude us which ought to make answer before we be condemned. And whereas the
Pope would seem greatly to desire that Kings and Princes should either they
themselves be present, or else their Legates and Ambassadors, what a ieste and
ridiculous thing is that? seeing they have no definitive voice in the Council,
but are only lookers on. Therefore in your Councels, not wisdom, not
godliness, not gravity give Council, but your Miters. This and much more he
wrote, which for breuities sake we omit. Thus the Pope went about to bring to
pass to have a Council at Trident.

And now at this time the Electors and Princes of Germany which were
protestants, met together at Numburgh, that they might deliberate and consulte
of the Confession made at Augusta, and offered to Charles the fifth in the
year of Augusta, is ^ city in Germany called Ausburgh.
our Lord God. M. D. XXX. and that because they heard that they were many ways
misreported of before the Emperor Ferdinando. And writing letters to the
Emperor, they declared that they did hold fast and embrace with one consent
that confession made at Ausburgh, and that they were ready to give an account
of ye same confession out of the word of God.

While the Princes were thus occupied, there came two The Pope iuuiteth the
Princes of Germany to the general Council.
Legates from the Pope, to entreat the Princes of Germany to come to the
general Council. The which two declared their message as follows. The one
of them began thus, saying: That the most high bishop so soon as he was called
to the most holy and reuereud office of governing ye Church, to the end he
might do the duty of a true pastor, he had this care above al others, to
correct and amend whatsoever was amiss: that the Church might be quiet, and
that all nations might be of one consent and mind, and embrace one doctrine.
To bring the which thing to pass, seeing he saw no better way or remedy than
an assembly of a general Council, by due advise and deliberatio^, and by his
own authority also which he has from God, has ordained and appointed a
council, which shall be holde^ at the feast of Easter next coming. And that the
Princes might be ye more fully certified of this matter, and to the end they,
joining their endeavor with the Popes carfulness, might be willing and
diligent to procure ye tranquillity and peace of Germany, they said yt his
holiness, greatly desiring and seking the peace and quietness of ye country
of Germany, had sent his legates, to pray and exhort all me^ to come to y^
holy assembly: in ye which it should be lawful for all men to speak what they
would. Also they entreated those Princes by name, yt they would not by any
means hinder that godly zeal and peace of the Church, the most holy Father
being ready to give unto all men a most large Charter of the public faith,
and most solemnly to be bound to perform the same: his holiness exhorting al
Princes to send their Ambassadors to that holy counsel with their commissions:
to the end the controversies of the Church, (in the which there are so many
opinions as there are heads, and so many Gospels as there are teachers) may by
their industry and diligence be speedily ended: and that they also giving that
honor which is due to the Church, one Faith may be kept, and one God alone
adored and worshipped.

Thus when the first Legate had very copiously uttered his mind, the other also
began in manner and form following, saying yt he would not repeat those things
whereof his fellow before him had spoken, seeing yt they had all one charge and
commission from the holy Father.

There is no man (says he) that can be ignorant of the most grievous calamities
of the Church, and into what misery the same is cast one evil and mischief
following another, occasion being given to the enemies of Christ's name to
calumniate and speak evil of the same: Insomuch that of necessity, so great
confusion must be provided for, and a remedy sought. For the dangers do require
these things, the opportunity of the time persuadeth to the same, and the
clemency and godly zeal of the holy Father, allureth men thereunto: so that
there could never be a better consent, and a more fit occasion offered: the
Christian commonwealth being pacifyed, and Gods grace so plentifully being
given to y^ most holy father, who is not only very careful for Princes, but
also for souls health, and ye peace and tranquillity of ye church, The answer
of the Princes of Germany to the Popes Legates.


Thus they both made an end of their Oration, to whom this answer was given:
The most honorable Electors, Princes, Ambassadors, and Counselors, of the
most sacred Empire of Rome make this answer to the proposition of the
Legates: namely, that they doubt not, but that a great sort of learned, godly,
and wise men, of all ages and conditions, have wished a long time, that the
Church might be in better state: praying that at the length the pure doctrine
of the Gospel might be restored, and yt the wicked errors might be taken away.
Of the which matter Bishops of Rome ought to have a special care, for that
they have of long time attributed to themselves the tytles of Pastors of the
Church: but (say they) experience has hitherto declared, that they have been
rather occupied in establyshing of their Tyranny, and in bringing errors into
the Church, than in amplyfying and setting forth the glory of God, and in
curing the diseases of the Church. The which truly is most manifest, by too too
many sorrowful effects, as the best friends that the Pope has cannot but
confess, if there be any shame in them.

Also they said that they did not a little marvel what moved the Pope, and what
hope he had of them, that he sent his embassage unto them, and that he would
call them to this Council: as though he were ignorant what Religion the States
of the Empire followed: who of late, that they might reform their Churches
according to the true doctrine of the Gospel, were constrained to pluck their
neck out of the Popes yoke, that is to say, to separate themselves from their
fellowshippe, which went about to oppress and destroy the true doctrine of the
Gospel.

We would therefore (say they to the Legates) that ye should know for a
surety, that the most noble Princes of Germany, will by no means obey the
Pope, nor acknowledge that he has any power, either by Gods law, or by the
law of man, to call a Council: specially, being such a one as makes
dissension and strife in the Church, and most cruelly warreth against the
truth. Furthermore, they affirmed, that they were misreported of and
slaundered, as though they retained no certain faith, but that there were now
among them, So many heads, so many opinions, So many Gospels, so many teachers:
whereas they retained the plain and manifest confession made at Ausburgh, and
offered to the Emperor Charles the. v. in ye year of our Lord God. M. D. XXX.
in the which not only all the principal grounds of faith are distinctly
contained, but also y^ celestial truth many ways thereby set forth and
published. Also they said that the general complaints of all me^ did
sufficiently declare with what errors the Church of Rome was filled, and with
what filthy superstitions the Gospel was there suppressed: in so much that the
same is rather like to the traditions and vain inuencions of heathen men, than
Christian Religion. Wherefore (say they) because we have of late separated and
divided our selves from the Church of Rome, (not by any rashness or vain
curiosity, or being led by any leude affections, but by the only commandment
of God which wills all me^ to flee Idolatry) we protest that we will so abide
most consta^tly, and not be subject any manner of way to the Pope. For we
acknowledge no manner of jurisdiction, besides the jurisdiction of the most
renoumed Emperor Ferdinandus.

And as touching the two Legates, the Princes said, that were it not for the
Popes embassage, on which they came, they being worshipfully borne in Venice,
they would show unto them so great courtesy, favor and friendship as might
be: both for that they loved the country of Venice, and also because the
Legates themselves by the dignity of their birth, were worthy, as they
thought, to be well entertained. And thus the Popes Legates, with lost labor,
returned from Germany again.

Then began Religion and the great number of the faithful to increase more
throughout every province of the kingdom of France, but the devil envying
that notable increase, there were then many perturbations and troubles raised
up in many places.

In Province (which was sometimes called Narbon) there Persecutious in
Province.
was great a do and much trouble. And the Gospel being much preached in the
region of Langres, almost in every city with great assemblies of people to
hear y^ same, at the last ensued great affliction by the Earl Villarius.

Daulphenie also (which is called the Regio^ of Sauoy) embracing y^ same
doctrine, felt ye like persecutions. And by ye means of one Mottaegondrinus,
who was Lieutenant to the Duke of Guise, there was grievous persecution at
Valentia, in so much that a Minister of Gods word, and certain honest citizens
with him were beheaded. Moreover garrisons of soldiers were placed throughout
every city, to the great anoyance and detriment of the faithful, who
notwithstanding wonderfully increased both in number and in zeal daily.

The Prince of Conde being sent for of the King, came to him to the Court,
which was at Fontisbellaquaeums, with The Prince of Conde sent for to the Court.
a few only attending upon him. The day following, he was called before the
privy Council, and being come, he openly demanded of the Chauncelor if he
had any thing to say against him, who answered that he had nothing to object
against him: the like answer also made all the rest. And then he sat him
down in his accustomed place. Then the King declared before all the assemblye,
that the Prince of Conde had given unto him due proofs and testimonies of his
innocence: (for as we declared before, by the practices of the Guises he was
accused of treason) the which he said he did in no wise doubt of. And
therefore he gave commandment to the Senate of Paris to give leave to the
Prince of Conde to have larger testimonies of his innocence. And to the end
the Judgment of the privy Council might be known to all men, commandment
was given that the same should be registered in the Register of the Senate, and
sent also to the Ambassadors of other Nations. Therefore for because of these
things, the Prince of Conde went to Paris.

In the mean time there arose new cont^tions between The contention and ^lling
out be^weene the Queen and the king of Nauar^e.
the Queen and the King of Navarre, he complaining to the Queen that he was
not well dealt withal, for that he was ill requited for that great good will
and courtesy which he showed toward the Queen in yeel^ing unto her the
government of the Realm, the Duke of Guise being in office and authority
advanced before him, who had not only the keys of the Tower to keep, but
also by the Queens will did what him list: Saying also, that the matter was
very ingratefully handled, that he which had been always his enemy even in
the days of King Henrye and Frances, should as yet be advanced before him.
Also that if he were contented for the Queens sake to dissemble all things,
and not to bewray his grief, it was the more unmeet that he for his facility
and tractablenesse should be abused by her. In fine he said, that either he,
or else the Duke of Guise must needs forsake the Court: adding also that he
could by no means abide with the king, except the Guise departed. To this the
Queen made answer, that she did mean to gratify the king of Navarre, so
much as she might, and so much also as equity should require: but seeing as
then she saw no just cause, she said that she would in no wise expulse the
Duke of Guise from the King, because those offices that were committed unto
him, of necessity required his presence about the King. She said also that
she well perceived that these complaints of the king of N^uar were continual,
and that one thing being granted, she must daily grant more and more, and
that there should never be any measure or end of these complaints*
Notwithstanding for his sake, and to yield unto his complaints, she said that
she would give commandment that the keys of the tower might be delivered
unto him: although they pertayned to the Duke of Guise, because he was Lord
great Master: as may appear also by the example of the Constable, who
heretofore bare the same office. To this the King of Nauar that the Constable
did it not upon the same consideration and in that order, but in respect of
his office of the C^nstableship, the same thing proprely appertayning to his
office. But hereupon was kindeled a more fyerie contention, and sharp and
bitter words passed on both parts: and in such sort that the next day the
king of Navarre made himself ready to depart, and his ca^iage and sumpter
horses being sent before, he himself was now ready to mount on horseback,
and with him were ready to go all the Princes, the kings near kinsmen, the
Constable, the Chastillions, and the greatest part of the Nobles, the which if
it had come to pass, the Guises, and they of their part should have been left
only with the King. And the report was that they would go no further than
Paris, that there calling the assembly of states together, they might fully
determine concerning the government of the kingdom. The Queen being very
sorry for this sudden intention and purpose, by the advice of the Cardinal of
Turnon, called unto her the Constable, and to the end she might stay and
defer his going, she brought to pass that king Charles her son (two
Secretaries being called to make record) commanded and charged the Constable
in this necessity to abide with him as one of the chief officers that might
not be spared. This charge so stayed the Constable, that he never durst (as he
had promised) follow the king of Navarre, for all the persuasuasions that duke
Momorencius could use, who persuaded him to the same. Therefore the king of
Nauar was let of his purpose. But it was every where reported, that the Queen
for the hatred she bare unto the king of Nauar, made much of the Guyses. The
which rumor brought to pass, that they which should come to Paris to the
particular assemblies Deliberation^ of the particular assembly of states at
Paris.
of the States (as in other provinces of the realm they did also) came the
more speedily. In the which assembly many things were moved, concerning the
order and manner of governing the realm: as, concerning the removing and
placing some from and to the most honorable offices: concerning the Guyses
account to make of the money which was spent in the time of king Frances the
second: concerning their evil behavior in the time of king Henry: and
concerning their briberie and unlawful receiving of money: In the which crime
also the Marshall Santandrae, the Duchess of Valentien, and others were
guilty. All which were forbidden to be of the Kings privy Counsel, until
such time as they had made their account. Then they which were for this cause
assembled together at Paris (as it is declared before) were forbidden to do
any thing concerning the government of the kingdom: but they notwithstanding,
go forward with that which they had begone, affirming that the same did
specially appertain to the assembly of States to be talked of, and not to be
left to the determination and will of the Princes and kings kinsmen only. When
the Queen heard this, she was out of mea^ure troubled, and fynding no better
way or remedy, than to be reconciled to the king of Navarre, she desired the
Constable that he would endeavor himself all that he could, to bring the
same to pass. And at the length, the Constable Reconciliation between the
Queen, and the king of Nauar
being a mean, there was a new couenaunte and league made between them:
namely, That the King of Navarre should be taken for the Vicegerent, or
Regent throughoute the whole Realm: And that the Queen never after would do
any thing without his counsel and will.

This and the rest which tended to this effect, were confirmed and fully
agreed upon both by words and writings, and Registered by the Kings Secretaries
in public record.

These conditions being concluded and agreed upon, all the Princes the Kings
kynsmen, and the Prince of Conde, being for this cause sent for from Paris,
subscribed to the same. The Duke of Guyse in like manner subscribed with them,
promising from thence forward to show him self more obediente to the King of
Navarre. Then commandment was given to the Marshall Momorentius that he
should with all speed cause the states particularly assembled at Paris, to be
revoked and called back again, and that the same which was done at the first
concerning the order of governing the kingdom, should be quietly amended, and
corrected. The which thing was wisely brought to p^sse by him, to the great
pleasure of the Queen, and also without any offense to the king of Navarre.

Among the Ambassadoures of forreyne Princes and nations, which came into
France, to gratify the new king Charles, there was the Ambassadoure of
Denmark, called Georgius Gluchus. For this man the king of Navarre made a
feast, and desired him to tell his lord the king of Denmark, that be would
before a year came came about, bring to pass, that the Gospel should be
openly and freely preached thoroughoute the whole realm of France* For the
which thing, when thanks was given to God, and the good intent and purpose of
the king of Navarre commended, Georgius Gluchus the Ambassadoure prayed him
that he would take heed that the doctrine of Calvin, and of the Heluetians
might not be received in France, but rather the doctrine of Martine Luther.
Which doctrine the king of Denmark his Lord, and the king of Sueuia, and
many other kings and Princes (whose dominion and power is no less than theirs
which acknowledge the bishop of Rome and his Church) do follow.

To this the king of Navarre answered, that Martine Luther and John Calvin did
wholly disagree from the Pope in forty Articles, and of those forty Articles,
they agreed between themselves in nine and thirty: So that there is but one
between them in controversy. Wherefore (says he) both parts must endeavor
themselves mutnally to be^d their minds and force first of al against the Pope,
that he being once overcome, they may seriously together consider, confer, and
come to agreement, in that article in controversy: and so the Church at the
length may be brought to his former purity.

But the Constable when the Queen and king of Nauar were made frendeu,
obtained great favor on both sydis, persuading himself that he had not ben a
l^ttle beneficial to both of them: by this means he was very familiar with
them both. But when he saw that in Le^t flesh was commonly eaten, and openly
vought and sold: and that there were lermons openly preached in the prince of
Condes chamber: and heard also the Queen openly say, that it was the kings
pleasure and hirs also, that there should be godly Sermons every day in the
kings house, he began to suspecte that the king of Navarre and the Queen had
secretly agreed together concerning religion. And there preached before the
King one Ianu^ Monlucius, Bishop of Valentine, at whose preaching the Constable
and the duke of Guise were ^euer but once: and the Constable being very angry
with the bishop The Constable is drawn away from the p^nce of (...), and from
others o^ the reformed Church.
of Valentine, said that it was enough for him to come once and no more to
such a matter. To whom the Bishop said, that he prayed God that his word
might profit and take place every where. The day following, the Constable and
the Duke of Guise went together to a sermon of a certain Monk, and from that
time their mynd^ began to be altenated and drawn away. After which time the
Constable was angry with the Admiral his nephew openly, because he did freely
and publicly profess the Gospel. And the wife of the Constable greatly
pricked him forward to this evil, who was greatly offended that the family
and stock of the Chastillion should be advanced, her brother the Earl
Villarius being not in that estimation that she would have had him. Therefore
she moved and provoked him with these pricks, saying, that the Admiral went
about to deprive him of that benefit which the Queen had bestowed upon him:
that he did insta^tly persuade the Queen to promote and set forth ye true
religion, for the king of Nauars sake: yt the Constable ought not to suffer y
authority of the church of Rome to be diminished, he being not only the
chief officer o^ the king, but also such a one as had his original and
offspring of the first Christian of the kingdom of France, as the poelie of
his arms did very well testify, which was this: Protegat Deus primum
Christianum: that is, God defend the first christian. Also the Marshall
Santandrae, a subtle, crafty and malicious man, blew in his care that by the
subtle procurement of the Admiral, he was put up by the assembly of States to
be a bryber and an extorcioner.

By this means he thought to stay him: for he feared that the Constable
would not easily be brought to their wicked religion, except it were by these
persuasions. Therefore he proceeded, saying, that he which came of so noble a
stock and had done such worthy and notable service in the kingdom of
France, gouernyng the kingdom forty years, ought not to suffer new
religions to be brought in, to the hurt of the catholic church.

The like persuasions also used the Earl Villarius his wives brother, bearing
no less spite and malice against the Admiral than his sister did: and that
because he understood, that the Admiral did disprove before those of the
kings privy counsel that which he had done in Narbon against Religion.
Therefore they withdrewe the Constable all that they could. The which thing
Marshall Momorentiu^ fearing, and foreseeing a dangerous tempest like to arise
by the means of these dissentions, he showed to his father the Constable so
much as he could, what he thought needful to be done. And least he should
be drawn away from the greatest part of his strength, least he should
change away certain friendship for that which was uncertain: and least he
should join himself with new reconciled friends, he repeated unto him their
old enmities and fallings out. Adding moreover, that he should peruerte and
overthrow the greatest foundations of his stock and kindred, when he should
alienate and withdraw himself from the Prince of Conde, from the Chastillions,
from the Earl of Rupefocaldensis, and from the rest which profess the
reformed Religion: beside this, he should loose thereby the good will and favor
of the king of Navarre, and peradventure the Queens favor too. It is better
(says he) to suffer the Chastillions and the Guiles to contend together,
than for you to take part, and yet nevertheless you shall keep your faith.
Affirming also, that if the Guyses were overcome (as it is most lykely,
because they have procured the hatred of all the assemblies, against
themselves) then should his prudence, experience, and goodness bring to
pass, that he should be a moderatour and a judge of the reformation of the
Church: the errors of the which Church he ought not to defend, because he
was the chief officer under the King, and the successor also of the first
Christian that was in France. Also he said, that he ought not to count it an
injury that mention was made of him by those that were of the Assembly at
Paris, seeing that he had done nothing but by the authority of Kings, and of
the highest powers: and seeing also that he had received so little of king
Henrye, that there was no man but he would judge him worthy of greater
rewards, both in consideration of the office, which he had so long, and
also for the money which he bestowed in the Kings service. Moreover, he
said, that it appeared by the Books of account, that the gifts which the
king gave him, were not so much by the seventh part as those gifts were,
which were bestowed upon the Marshal Santandrae, so far they were from being
compared with the Guises gifts, and with the gifts of the Duchess of
Valentien.

To these persuasions only of Momorentius, the Constable made answer, saying,
That Religion could not be altered without the mutation of the state, and
civil regiment: that he was a faithful servant of the king, and of his
brethren also: that he feared not to be found guilty: that notwithstanding he
would not suffer the acts and deeds of the Kings deceassed to be reproved,
and disalowed: That he desired that his nephews the Chastillions might be so
good Christians in very deed, as they seemed to be in words: also that he
did willingly forgive those that had offended him whatsoever they had done.

After this very shortly, the Chastillions, Odetus the Cardinal, the Admiral,
the Andelot came oftentimes unto him, protesting that they bare no hatred in
their hearts against the Guises, but went only about to frustrate their
practizes and deuyses, which (as it evidently appeared) tended both to their
destruction, and of the realm also. Whom the Constable (say they) ought to
resist above all others. But they persuaded in vain: for his mind was drawn
away, and was linked in the freendship of the Guyses, by diverse that allured
him thereto.

Thus dissentio^s grew daily more and more by the means of Religion, and
openly burste forth: insomuche that both parts sought to injury and to
reproach one another, the favorers of the Popes doctrine, calling the
professors of the Gospel, Huguenotes: and the Protestants calling them
again Papists. Hereupon came a rumor abroad of Seditions, the Popes
chaplains in their Sermons moving and pricking the people forward to the same.
Wherefore the king sent his letters to the Magistrates of every Province: the
sum and effect whereof was:

That no man should call another contumeliously by the The kings Letters.
name of Huguenot or Papist: that no man should abuse that ho nest liberty
which every man ought to enjoy, either in his own house, or when he is in his
freds house: that no man should enter ei there with great or small number upon
other men's houses, under prote^ce of the former edicts which prohibited and
forbad unlawful assemblyes. That they which were kept in bonds for Religions
sake, should be by and by delivered and set at libe^e, before the first Edicte
made for their deliverance. That they which had fled the Realm for Religions
sake, should have leave to return home again, with full and safe liberty to
enjoy their goods and al things else that they had before, so that they would
be contented to live Catholikely and without offense. But if they would not,
that it should be lauful for them to sell their goods and to get them to
another place.

These letters, the Senate of Paris went about to let and stay, but in vain:
neither could their admonitions (as they term them) which they sent to ye king,
prevail so much, but that these letters were every where published abroad,
which also almost in every place were diligently observed. They were delivered
which were kept in prison for Religion. And many, which for the Gospel
wyllingly chose to live in exile in other lands, retourning now home again,
greatly increased the Church: The Church more and more flourished, the
Gospel was confirmed: All men, as though they had quite forgotten all other
things, talked only of the Gospel: Every one of what estate and degree soever
he was of, only reasoned of the Gospel: Sermons were made every where both in
the Cities and in the fields: All men diligently resorted to hear them: yea
the very rude and ignorant sort of people, because of the newness of the
thing, came also to hear them of which a great number by this means were
brought to the knowledge of God. But the adversaries, they stood amazed,
wondering and musing at so great a matter: The service of ancient ceremonies
began every where to wax cold, yea and in many places to be derided: yea
very many casting aside the Popes badges and marks, came into the Churches
of the faithful, and were made as one with them. So great alterations came to
pau^e in so little a time.

The Prince of Conde, (as we have declared before) came to Paris, that his
innoce^cie and guiltlesnesse might be farther tried by the Senate. He therefore,
the Cardinal of Burbon, and many other noble men attending upon him, pleaded
with the Senate of Paris, concerning this matter as follows: many men
maruelling that he was thus dealt withal. It is (says he) a special token of
Gods providence, by which I being delivered from the platformes and secret
traps of my enemies, shall get unto my self an everlasting testimony of my
innocence in those things laid to my charge. The lying in wait and
mischeuous practizes of wicked men, do nothing at all hurt those which have
their hope and trust in God. I have always wished that my cause might be
thoroughly wayghed and understood of the Senate, which is the most notable
place in France for the executing of Justice. I should (says he) be injurious
to my self, unless I should bring the equity and integrity of my cause
against the slanders of my adversaries, before so worthy an assembly, that
the matter being worthy of the laudable and honorable sentence of the Senate,
may by the gravity and upright judgment of the same be defined and ended.
Wherefore he prayed them to consider of his estimation, which to him was more
dear than his life. Then when he had required of the Senate that Petrus
Robertus his man of law might be peaceably and quietly heard in making his
declaration, he so departed.

Then Petrus Robertus by and by made his oration, saying, The oration of Petrus
Robertus, the man of law for the Prince.
That it had pleased God to try the Prince of Conde with that trial of
affliction, with which* he does oftentimes try his faithful servants, which
affliction he does oftentimes send to those that are his, but specially to
those that are set in high degree, and that for two special causes: First,
that Kings and Princes, and men of great calling might know that they have
their power and dignity from God alone, upon who^ depends either their
preservation or destruction. Secondly, that the innocence of his servants
may more evidently appear, by false accusation, and that by that means there
may be perfect trial of their integrity.

When he had thus spoken, he declared what things were wrought against the
Prince at Aurelia, how his appeals were not received, how he was condemned
his cause not heard: and therefore he said, that the sentence pronounced against
him was void and of none effect. At the length when many things were debated
and reasoned of between him and The conclusion of the Senate of Paris.
the Kings Sollicitour, it was concluded: That all matters that had been
brought in against the Prince, should be referred to the Senate: And if
nothing could be found that should deserve or require an extraordinary way
then by and by the Senate should pronounce the full and absolute sentence of
absolution and discharge: But if the Senate should find any matter of greater
weight, that then it should be lawful before those testimonies and proofs were
received and credited, to examine the witnesses again, and to consider the
matter more depely: and that the sentence pronounced by the former Judges
should be void, seeing that it appertained to the Senate alone, (which is the
court appertaining to the king and to the nobles of France) to examine and
judge the causes of the kings kinsmen, if any criminal cause were objected
against them.

The which point Petrus Robertus the prince of Conde his advocate, expounded
and opened at large: least the Prince should seem by the weakness of his
cause to forsake that former judgment of the judges which were chosen by
king Frances the second, of purpose to give sentence on him. He declared
therefore, that the Prince did refuse those judges, because they were far unmeet
to judge him: besides that so it should have been prejudicial to ye privilege and
right of the princes, ye kings kinsmen, for that they being accused of any
matter, may appeal to be judged of the king only their chief lord, and the
head of their stock, in the Senate of Paris.

To this the kings solicitor answered, That he did not only allow the sentence
of the kings privy council, concerning the innocence of the Prince of Conde,
but also earnestly desired that the same might be ratified and confirmed by
the judgment of a parliament: notwithstanding says he the same must be
established by an ordinary and lawful way.

Therefore the Prince of Conde was made playntiue, and the Kings Solicitour the
defendant* and it was concluded, That for somuche as the Prince of Conde was
put upon his further trial and purgation, the whole assembly of the Senate
house would receive any manner of accusation to be made against the Prince of
Conde, and duly consider of the same: to the end if nothing could be brought
against him whereby he might be found guilty, ^e might straightwaye by public
sentence, be declared and pronounced to be innocent and guiltless. Wherefore
all the Senators commanded, that if any man had any manner of accusation
against the Prince of Conde, he should come into the Senate house, and then he
should be heard. Yea every one of the prince Council were asked by name if
they had any thing to object against the Prince of Conde: Who affirmed in
general by a solemn oath that they had nothing to obiecte against him.

Then was ye final sentence of the Senate given in manner and The decree of the
senate con cerning the innocence of the Prince.
form following, that is to say, That the Prince of Conde had done nothing
against the kings Majesty but was pure, innocent, and guiltless of all those
crimes laid to his charge* that all actions commensed against him were void.
Also that he should have liberty to arrest and sue whom he thought good, that
he might be satisfied according to the dignity of his person. With prouiso
also that this decree should be proclaimed in the highest Courts of the king,
and registered in public Records.

This ordinance and decree was pronounced and openly read* by the chief judge
of the Senate, the gates of the Senate house being set wide open, and all the
Senators assembled together solemnly apparelled in their Scarlet Roabes,
according to order. And also at the Readyng hereof, there was a great multitude
of people, and the greatest part of the Nobility of France, as the king of
Navarre, the Cardinal Burbon, Monpensier, and others of the Princes the Kings
kinsmenne: and with these also were present the Dukes of Guise, Nemorosius, the
Constable, Momorentius, the Marshall of Santandrae, the Cardinal of Lorrayn,
and the Chastillion. Others also, which were accused for the same cause with
the prince of Conde, received the sentence of their purgation openly read.

And undoubtedly, the Prince of Conde always denied, that he was the author,
or of the counsel of that ^umult of Ambaxian, howsoever the Guises maliciously
interpreted that counsel and way which was devised to keep them under, to be
intended against the kings majesty, and the state of the realm.

By these and such like practizes, those two brethren the Guyses inflamed the
young king Frances against the men of Burbon, leaving nothing undone that might
seem to prove their accusations. Accusers were diligently sought for, and
matters of accusation inquired after: By gifts and by threatenings all things
were attempted. And in the judgment of the Prince of Conde, they leaned
specially to one witness, whose name was Sagua, a servant of the king of
Nauar, of whom we have made mention before. That Sagua being taken and
apprehended by the Guises, was diligently examined concerning the Prince of
Conde, if he knew whether he had conspired against the king or no. Sagua at
the first denied this, saying that he knew no such matter. But at the length
Frances the duke of Guyse brought it to pass, (having with him a hangman and
a halter) by thretning death unto him except he would plainly accuse the Prince
of Conde of conspiracy against the king. But at the length being escaped out
of the Guyses hands, he most constantly said both by word and writing, that the
accusation against the prince of Conde was extorted from him by force.

This public sentence therefore of the Senate took away from the Prince of
Conde, that spite and slander whereby he was said and thought to be guilty of
the tumult of Ambaxian. But if the sentence of the Senate had not cleared and
purged him, yet the effect and sequel of that which followed, may be
sufficient to approve that he never conspired against the king: As his only
study and most undoubted good will in defending the young king and the realm
also, being in great peril, from the mischief and lyings in wait of foreign
enemies. The which he would never have done, if he had intended to hurt the
king any manner of way.

The Cardinal of Lorrayn complained to the Queen that The complaint of the
Cardinal of Lorrayn.
the matter was every day worse and worse, and that the people presumed and
took too much liberty upon the kings Edictes, and also that the negligence and
carelessness of the Judges increased more and more: affirming that there was no
wiser way to be found, than in such troublesome matters, to take counsel of
the Senate of Paris. (It was reported that he went about this thing, being
assured and certified before of many of the minds of the Senators, that by
this prejudice he might help the National Council shortly at hand.)

Therefore the King and the Queen and all the privy Council came unto the
Senate to deliberate with them of those matters which appertayned to Religion,
and the government of the realm. The Chauncellor briefly declared, that they
were therefore called together by the kings commandment, that they might show
certain ready and exquisite ways to qualify those perturbations and
troubles, which would every day more and more increase by reason of the
diversity of Religion: to the end the Kings subjects might peaceably live
under his obedience. To the which matter (he said) it pertained nothing at al
to talk of religion, because the civil government was only now in hand: as for
religion (he said) it should be reserved to be handled in the National
Council, to whom it belonged to discuss the same. When the Chancellor had
ended his oration, every man spoke his judgment: Some wishing punishements 1.
for religions sake to ^e st^yde, until the C^uncel had determined of the same:
Other some wyshing to have punishment 2.
by death, which was contrar^e to the ancient c^nstitutions of the Bishops of
Rome. Other some deeming it 3.
best to have the whole matter left to the author^tie of Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction: In the mean time they thought good to forbid, that there should
be no conuenticles or assemblies either private or public* either with arms,
or without arms: allo that there shul^ be no sermons, or administrations of
Sacraments otherwise than according to the usual manner of the Church of Rome.
And thus the whole assembly were divided into three ^eueral opinions. Uerie
many were of the first opinion: how beit the last opinion and ad^iss pr^uayled,
having three voices more than the other had, for the which cause, there arose
contention, many men suspecting that the Notarie being corrupted, wroughte
deceytfully, re^koning the names of some which came vulooked for, while the
assembly were uttering their opinions: the which was against all order and
custom of the Senate. Nevertheless there was an Edicte made, which was
called, the Edicte of Iulye. The effect whereof, An Edict called of the Month
of July.
was this.

That all men should live peaceably: that there shouled be no injuries done
under the pretense of religion: That all disturbers and breakers of the peace
should suffer death: The sum of the Edict.
that there should be in no wise any manner of elections, or any other things,
which pertayned to factions or divisions: That preachers should use no words
of offenc^ that might breed sedition among the people, but should rather
modestly instruct them, and that also under pain of death: That there should be
no sermons made, or sacraments ministered either privately or publicly, either
with arms, or without arms, after any other manner than that which was used in
the catholic Church set forth by the king and his clergy of France, and that
under the pain of death and confiscation of all their goods, which offended
herein. Also, that the knowledge and examination of heresy should be left to
Ecclesiastical persons: and that whosoever was found guilty thereof, should be
committed to the secular power, and sustain no other punishment than exile.
All these things to continue until the determination of a general or
National counsel: Pardon and full forgiveness of all crimes for religions
sake being granted to those that had offended, upon condition that they
would ever afterward live peaceably and catholikely. Besides there was in
this Edicte severe punishments appointed for false accusers. And last of all
strayte commandment that no man should wear armor.

It was also agreed and concluded in this assembly, that the Prelacie or
Clergy should be forth with gathered together, and also the ministers of the
reformed Religion, being waranted from the king to come without harm in peace
to that assembly. The Cardinal of Lorrain bragged, that he would confute them
by the authority of the ancient fathers, and so made many men to hope to see
wonders. Therefore the Queen seeking to hasten this triumph, and fearing
least the States of the realm would once again make request to have Temples,
gave forth commandment, that the Clergy of the Church of France should
be at the town of Possiac, near to Sangerman, the tenth day of August
following.

France being in the midst of these troubles, there was warr^ also about
that time, occasioned by the means of Religion, between the Duke of Sabaudi^,
and the Inhabitauntes of the Ualleys of Pedemount, of the which to make
relation, being occasioned for one and the self same cause, and in the next
region, it shall not be greatly beside our purpose.

Pedamount near unto the mountain Vesulus, is called the valey of Lucern, of
a little town called Lucerna, near adjoining to the same: To this there is
also an other adjoining called Angronia, so called of the River Angrone, near
to the which the valeys of Perossa and Samnartine do lie. Those valleys have
dwelling in them fiftene thousand inhabitants. Of which number the greatest
part profess the Gospel: also, there were some in those places long ago,
which abhorring the Pope and his doctrine, had some knowledge and taste of true
religion. But after that the light of the truth in our time brast forth and
more clearly appeared, than it had done before, it began also more clearly to
shine in those valeys. Therefore when they were better instructed Wars between
the duke of Sabaudia and the inhabitants of the valeys.
in the doctrine of the Gospel, then did they more vehemently profess the
truth: and that specially in two little towns above the rest, where the same
was openly professed. These men of the valleys had many noble men appointed to
rule and govern them: but among the rest, they acknowledge the duke of
Sabaudia, their chief Prince and governor. Therefore these inhabitauntes being
hated for religions sake of the noble men that dwelt about them, were diverse
and sundry ways by them vexed. And their chief Prince the duke of Sabaudia
was sore agreeued, that Religion began to flourish among them: in so much that
he oftentimes commanded them to forsake the religion: and to warn their
ministers to receive the Mass and the ancient religion, otherwise he
threatened them cruelly to punish them as rebels. They being careful by reason
of these new commandments, send at length their Ambassador to the Prince
with a supplication and confession of their faith, protesting that they believe
all things contained in the old and new Testament, the articles of the
Christian faith, called Symbolum Apostolorum, the Nicene Creed, and the Creed
of Athanasius: also the four first Councelles, and the doctrine of the
ancient Fathers, so far forth as they with the word of God. Humbly beseching
him to give them leave to live according to the rule of Gods word, and not to
constrain them to do any thing against their conscience, affirming that they
were ready not only to give an account of their Religion, but also to
acknowledge and confess their error if they might be brought unto it by ye
word of God. Adding hereunto that this doctrine had continued a long time among
them, as they could well approve by great testimonies received from their
ancetors. Desiring him also to inquire how they behaved them selves toward
their gouerners, and in what order they lived: protesting that their only
desire was to render unto him all obedience as unto their chief Lord and
Prince, and that if they should The Edict aagainst the inhabitants of the
valleys.
be found otherwise, to be sharply and severely punished. This was the
effect of their embassage to the Duke, but it did nothing at all prevail. For
the Duke gave strait commandment that no man should come or resort to those
sermons which the Ministers of the inhabitants of ye valleys made: if any did
resort unto them, their first punishment was the loss or forfeiture of. 100.
Crowns, and the second punishment was to be a Gally slave. He commanded also
all the Nobles and Magistrates that had authority to punish, severely to
execute the same against the offenders. Therefore the Noble men began to wax
fierce against the inhabitants of the valleys: in so much that when they had
taken certain of them, they burnte them: among whom were two preachers of
Gods word. All men used violence against the me^ of the valleys, even as if
they had been mortal enimyes: great damage and hurt was done to them: and
those which dwelt about them, making an army made havoc of them and spoiled
them. The men of the valleys were contented with all this injury, and by the
exhortations of their Ministers and preachers bare these things patiently for a
time. But at the length being ouerladen and wearied with these troubles, they
purposed to defend themselves, in so much that they flew many of them which
came to pray and spoil them. Whereupon the Duke gave forth a commandment
that they should leave off to spoil them any more: and sent unto them
Ranconensis and Trini^aeus. Ranconensis and Trinitaeus.
two of his gentlemen, to entreat them friendly. Notwithstanding they
returned home again as they came, because they would have bound them to
send away their Ministers and Preaches. The Duke being angrye with this,
intended to make open war against them. Whereupon he sent against them
Trinitaeus with five thousands soulders (the greatest part whereof were
gunners, and some horsemen) commaundyng him that except the men of the valleys
would do as they were commanded, he should deal with them as with mortal
enimyes, to spoil their goods and to put them to fire and sword.

First of all therefore Trinitaeus assaulted Agronia, with a thousand and a
half of gunners: certain of the Townsmen to the number of thirty being
slenderly armed with flyngs and Crosbowes, straighte way went against them,
and withstandyng the first front of the Army, were strait way rescued with
two hundred out of the valleys adjoining unto them: and so by and by they put
their enimyes to flight, and slew three score of them, three of their own
side only being lacking.

When Trinitaeus saw that he had assaulted Agronia, in vain, he assaulted the
villages thereabout as Comba and Tagliaret: but at their hands he received the
repulse also with loss of thirty of his men. Seeing therefore how hardly he
should obtain his purpose, and that he little prevailed by open violence he
sought to practice by subtlety and craft. And sent to the inhabitants of
the valleys, promising them peace, if they would unarm them selves, send men
to the Duke to crave pardon for their rebellion, and give unto him sixtene
thousand Crowns. The people desyring peace and to be eased of all their
troubles, easilye yielded to these conditions. And sent chosen men for the
purpose to Trinitaeus. saying that they would fulfill his commandment: and
so they put off their armoure, which by and by was taken from them by the
soldiers. They sent in like manner in their own name to the Duke two men to
confirm the obedience of the people unto him by an oath, so that they might
have liberty to use their Religion. In the mean time there was a great sum
of money required, the one half being paid, and a day appointed for the
payment of the other half. Within few days after the Duke sent for the two
Legates of the valleys, and the Popes Legate sitting by him, and a great
multitude of people being present, commanded them, kneeling on their knees, in
the name, and on the behalf of the inhabitants of the valleys, to confess
their faults, and to crave pardon for the same: first of the Duke, and then
of the Pope in the person of his Legate there present: and to swear both of
them ever afterward to be loyal and obedient. This thing being extorted from
the Legates by fear, the Duke by the means of these promyses, commanded the
men of the valleys to put away their Ministers, and to receive such as he
sent unto them, and to come to the Mass. The inhabitants of the valleys,
blamed the inconstancy of their ambassadors, saying that the same should not
deceive them, neither that they would consent unto that which they had done,
being against their wills and commandment. They would (they said) obey
their Prince, but so notwithstanding that they would have the liberty of
their conscience.

Wherefore they desired that they might have leave to exercise that doctrine
which before time they had followed. So soon as the Duke heard of this, he
sent an army again, and that in the deep of Winter, inuading all the
country, burning houses, spoiling goods and Cattells, and showing so much
cruelty as might be.

The men of the valleys therefore being constrained, forsook their houses, and
fled to the tops of the Mountains with their wives and children, being
covered with snow. From thence they saw their houses on fire, their trees cut
down, their cattle taken away and sp^yled. And yet for all this eueryone of
them, yea eue^ their women shed no tears for the same, but gave praises unto
God who had made the^ worthy to suffer for his name, and had made their houses
ashes to throw in the eyes of Antichrist. Therefore when they saw whereabout
their enimyes went, they dispayred not in the midst of so great affliction,
but made their prayers unto God: and said with one mind and consent, that in
so just a cause they would spend their lives, thinking it better to dye than
to receive such horrible superstitions, being fully persuaded, that in so good
and just a cause God would not fail them. And thus they bended them selves to
seek their own defense: appointing scoutes and watches in certain convenient
places, making certain holds: stopping the ways against their enimyes: and
setting all things that was necessary for them in so good order as they
could. There was therefore daily skirmishes on both sides, and within a few
days there were a hundred men slain on the Dukes side, and on the other side
not forty. Among other valiant Captains there was one called Carolus
Truchetus, a very expert fellow in the war, and of great estimation and
authority with the Duke. This fellow sought how he might win the Castles and
holds of their enimyes, and therefore by the skill of the places and by the
knowledge that he had of their situation, he brought to pass by coming on the
back side of the mountain, that he brought a thousand soldiers and placed
them on the ridge of a hill: and having quietly possessed the same, he put his
soldiers in comfort to have the pray: and after he had fortified the same, he
made have to win another hold. Of the which, when many were ware that kept a
little hill hard by, they told the rest of their fellows: of the which, part
went to repel their enimyes: and part with all speed gave warning to all
those that dwelt there round about, with the sound of a Trumpet. And at the
last two hundred men being gathered together, they easilye put their enimyes
to flight. And making have to remove those soldiers which were placed on the
top of the hill, they saw certain troops of their enimyes making have to get
a forte near unto them of great force. Therefore when they had altered their
purpose, leaving their former assault which they had meant to give against those
on the ridge of the hill, they made have to encounter with the other part: and
setting upon them before they were ready, they slew many of their enimyes, and
had made a greater slaughter, had not a certain preacher of Gods word by his
admonitions stayed their force. But Truchetus being stricke^ with a stone on
the leg, was carried away by two soldiers. The The slaughter of Truchetus.
which when a certain Cowheard which fed oxen there saw, he threw a stone at
him with a sling, with so great violence, that he falling to the ground, and
being left of his soldiers, was slain with his own sword by the same
Cowhearde. And now for want of Gunnes, the men of the valleys had made them
crossebowes of wood, which would deliver stones with great force: and therefore
the men of Sabaudia being on the lower ground were very much anoyed with this
new kind of shooting. Wherefore the men of Sabaudia, to save the^ selves from
the force and violence of the stones that were thus shot at them, devised great
Targets, with which they might cover their whole bodies. Therefore they sending
before them forty men sheelding them and defending them from the force of the
stones with their Targets, marched on in have with all their armies.

The which when the men of the valleys perceived, they set upon them on the one
side, and slew many of them, and put all their armies to flight. And at the
length the enimyes unlooked for, took the town Taglaretus, and there some were
slain. But they which were ^n ye edges of the mountains, set upon the
enimyes, and slew many of them, and put the rest to flighte. And thus Tr^aeus
having no hope to prevail by wars against these me^, certified the Duke what a
hard matter he had taken in hand. Afterward the men of the valleys were called
to parley, with whom these couenantes were made, namely, That they should use
their accustomed exerci^es The agreement an^ ^uce between the Duke of Sabaudia
and the inhabitants of the valleys.
of Religion: that they should by no manner of means be accused or called to
account for this war: that they should have free liberty and intercourse to
bie and sell through all parts of the Dukes dominion: that they should render
unto the Duke all duty and obedience belonging unto him: that they also should
li^e without offense. There were diverse other particular matters, which because
they serve not for our purpose, we omit.

While these things were thus handled, Philip King of Persecution in Spain.
Spain, on the other side, left nothing undone to punish and vex with all
manner of torments, so many as embraced the Gospel in any part of his dominions
but specially in Spain, and Belgio, the murdering inquisitio^ in every place
most cruelly was executed: the houses in the which the faithful came together
were burned: they which were taken were spedilye put to death, some being
burned, some drowned, and some torments with new kinds of death: yea, there
was no respect of persons had, were he poor or rich, gentleman or noble man,
he was not free from these torments. The king being greatly inflamed and He
might rather be called Granvillan, or great villane.
pricked forward hereunto by ye Cardinal Granuellan, who a little before was
made Cardinal in Belgio, at the creation of new bishops. Nevertheless the
faithful of ye p^rsecuted churches offer their confession to the king of
Spain, and publish the same every where abroad: and by public writing open
their The confession of the Church of Flanders offered to the King.
cause to the magistrates, show how injurious a thing it is to condemn a man
before his cause be heard, beseech that they might have liberty to be heard,
that their confession might be read, which would manifestly declare yt they
were unjustly condemned: these troubles (say they) do arise of two sorts of
men, The first are such as are led by rash and indiscreet zeal (...).
to defend their errors, which have long time continued in the Romish Church:
The second are such as are afeard to have New^rs.
the Gospel prevail, because they know yt the doctrine thereof reproves their
wicked doings and affections. It is great arrogancy to condemn those that
lean to ye word of God, and to prefer the inventions of me^ before the same.
Wherefore they desire yt before they be condemned they might be co^uinced by ye
word of God, and that the disputation might not be with fire and sword, for
(say they) the word of God is the undoubted and certain rule of truth. But
this was the sum of their confession. We believe in one true God, which by his
glorious names and titles, may be discerned from false and counterfeite Gods:
which may also be known by that most mighty work of ye whole world, but
specially by his word: we also im^race and receive the only word of God by
faith, not so much because ye Church receives the same, but because it is
sealed in ye hearts of the faithful by the holy ghost. We believe that one God
in essence is distinguished into three persons, which are, the father, the
son, and the holy Ghost, reserving notwithstanding to every person his
special property. We believe that God which has created the world does
govern and preserve the same by his providence. We believe that he created man
after his own image and liknesse, yt is to say, holy, good, and perfect: and
that he fell by his own fault, and has wrapped his prosteritie in y^ same
giltinesse of sin, and corruption, that he him self was in. We believe yt
Jesus Christ, both God and man in one person, is a true mediator, and the only
mean and way to salvation.

We believe that he being promised long before unto the Fathers, and represented
and shadowed under the Ceremonies and fygures of the law, came in his time,
and fulfilled all things that pertayned to our salvation: and that without
great sacrilege and robbing him of his honor, no other mean can be taken:
also that the faithful are partakers of these benefits, which are the Church
of God, which is governed by the holy ghost, and not tied to places or perfons.

We believe that the pure and sincere preaching of Gods word, the pure
Ministration of the sacraments, and the discipline, by the which the Church is
governed according to the rule of Gods word, are notes and marks of the
visible Church.

We believe that the Sacraments were ordained to confirm our faith, and do
then profit when they are joined to the power of the holy Ghost.

We believe that there do belong only two sacraments to the Church: namely
Baptism, which is a seal of remission of sins, and of our regeneration, and
therefore a testimony of our entrance into the Church: And the Lords supper,
which signifies that we are truly made partakers of the body of Christ, and
of all his graces and benefits, that is to say, that our souls are
nourished to everlasting life by his flesh and blood, even as our bodies are
nourished with bread and wine: but we must bring faith to receive the truth
of that Sacrament, that is to say Christ: therefore we believe that the Lords
Supper does only profit the faithful, and brings to the unworthy, that is,
to the unbelieving, condemnation.

We believe that God to defend and preserve the society of men, has ordained
laws and pollitique government, which al men ought to obey: and that
tributes, custom, and other taxes ought to be paid to Magistrates, who ought
to be reverenced, and for whom we ought to pray unto God.

We believe also that Christ shall come again with all power, majesty and
glory, in the latter day to judge the quick and the dead. Thus much concerning
their persecution.

But now to return to our selves again.

When the Duke of Guise had been at no small variance with the Prince of Conde,
he purposed with himself, partlye by his own mind, in hope of profit and
partly by the Counsel of his friends, to come into his favor and friendship
again, The reconciliation of the Prince of Co^de and the Duke of Guise.
the Queen and the Constable, exhorting him there unto and helping him to have
his purpose. Therefore the King, when he had called the Prime Council together
and all the Princes being present, he called both of them before him: and when
the matter was opened he commanded the Duke of Guise to declare the whole
matter to the Prince of Conde.

The which the Duke of Guise did, protesting that he never caused nor
counseled the King (which was departed) to apprehend the Prince of Conde. To
which the Prince of Conde answered that he did count him a wicked and naughty
person, which went about to work him that mischief, what so ever he was.
The Duke of Guise said, that he thought him in like manner to be no less,
but he could not help it. At the length by the Kings commandment they
embraced one another, and promised to put away all grudge and malice, and to be
ever afterward true and faithful friends. This reconciliation gave the
Constable occasion more freely to join him self and to keep company with the
Guises, and to begin afreshe to suppress Religion, the which he had always
obstinately resisted.

We said before that the assembly of States, or Court of Parliament was
delayed and put off until the month of May.

Therefore they resorted again in the month of August to Pontosia a town in
Picardie: and by and by there arose dissension between the Princes and the
Cardinals about the order of sitting: the Princes denying to sit below the
Cardinals. Whereupon the Cardinals Turnon, Lorayne, and Guyse went away very
angry. But when the Earls and Nobles were gathered together, the Chauncelor
proposed the matter according to custom, showing the cause of their coming
together, and willing every man freely to utter that which he had to say.

Therefore the Legates or Speakers for the three estates made their several
orations: in the which they spoke much concerning the duty of the King, and
of the subjects, and of those matters which are commonly handeled in Civil
conuocations, the which we mean not to repeat, for because they appertain
not to our purpose. Notwithstanding this is not to be pretermitted, that the
Legate for the comminaltie complained very much of the corruptions of
Ecclesiastical persons: because they ought to teach the people and to exhort
them both by their doctrine and also by their example to a pure and honest
life: but foul and filthy ignorance was among them, and their corrupt and
unchaste ly^e was a great offense to all men. Moreover he said, that they were
hyrelings, and careful for nothing less than for ^oyng their duties, but
were whollye given to filthy pleasure: and this thing (says he) arises
hereof, for that they be more plentifully fed and fatted, than their offices
will bear: what has been the cause (says he) in times paste of all the
corruptions in the Church, but the too much ease and living of Ecclesiastical
persons. Also he made petition in the name of the third state, which we call
the comminaltie, that the King would refourme these great faults, and would
so temper and order the lyuings and revenues of Ecclesiastical persons that
they might not live too licenciously at their ease.

Moreover he declared that it was the office of a King to take upon him the
defense of Religion, and because so many troubles daily did arise for this
cause throughout the whole Realm, he said it was a present remedy to
pacify them, to call forthwith a National Counsel, and to give to all men
leave to come under safe conducte: and that it would please the King also with
the Princes his Kinsmen to be present at the same, and to call for learned and
godly men to come to that parley, and also to remove all those that might be
suspected.

Furthermore that they which think that they can not with a safe conscience
come to the Ceremonies of the Church of Rome, might have liberty freely and
quietly to come together into some temple or other public place, where they
may be taught the word of God in their vulgar tongue, and may have the
rytes of their Religion Ministered.

And because many things may be said to be done amiss in those assemblyes,
he wished that the King would command certain of his officers to be
present in those assemblyes to see what should be done.

Also he said, that they ought not to be counted for heretics which were
condemned, their cause not heard, but should be tried and judged by the word
of God.

Finallye, he made humble supplications that it would please the King to
grant such reasonable requests: the which also the Nobility with one
consent required, but the Ecclesiastical order or Clergy sought diligently
by all means possible to defend their cause.

But to the end it may more plainly appear what Certain Civil acts worthy
to be noted.
great alterations have happened within a short time, it shall not be amiss
to repeat certain things which were done in that assemblye concerning
matters Civil, and yet those things only which also seem to be more near to
Religion, the state whereof to show we mean.

Therefore these remedies were devised to discharge the King of that debte and
paymentes of money with the which we said before the King at that time was
greatly burdened: First, that they which had had the occupying of the Kings
Treasure, should come to accounte: In the mean time that so many as were of
the Kings Priuye Counsel should be forbidden to come into that assemblye,
until they had playnelye made their accountes: also that all should make an
accounte (the Queen only excepted) of all exceedyng gifts, rewards, and
doles. That so many as in their own persons, did not discharge their
Ecclesiastical offices, should loose all their revenues saving some part
which should be left them for the divine service, and for aims deeds. That
all the revenues of Benefices in controversy should be brought to the kings
Treasury. That so many Benefices as had their pastors resident, if they were
worth five hundred pound in money, should pay unto the King the fourth
part: if they were worth a thousand pound, the third part, if they were
worth three thousand pound, that then they should pay unto the King the one
half. Also that they which had in yearly revenues coming unto them twelve
thousand pounds, should have only remaining to them of the same, three
thousand, and the rest to be paid to the King.

That from the Cartusian Friars, the Minimi, the Mathurines, and the Moniakes
should be taken all their reuenews that surmounted and came to more than would
find them ordinary meat, drink and clothe: because by the order of their
rytes and vow, they ought to have no more.

Also, (they said) they had yet a better and more compendious way, and that
was this: if all the lands of Ecclesiastical persons belonging to their
benefices and spiritual promotions, saving only a house for the Bishop,
Canon, Master of the College, or person to dwell in were sold.

And of some part of the money for the same, the Kings debtes should be paid,
and the rest to be distributed to Ecclesiastical persons that had more need
of the same. Also to the end the king with the rest might perceive how
profitable a way this would be, they declared that the reuenews of those
ecclesiastical lands would be worth forty thousand pound, and their proper
living and remainder nevertheless twelve hundred thousand pounds. And they
said that these lands would the sooner be sold because they were free from
tribute, and were all most lords within themselves. Adding moreover yt
Ecclesiastical persons should sustain no harm hereby for they should
nevertheless have enough to live upon, and the king of the overplus of those
yearly revenues should both pay his debtes, and also have every year a great
sum besides, toward the maintayning of garrisons of soldiers, the
fortifying of Cities, and other such like uses to the great profit and
commodity of the people. They made Supplication in like manner that the Edict
of July, of the which we made mention before and in the which the faithful
were forbidden to assemble themselves together, might be taken away: that also
there might be used peaceable and quiet means in matters of Religion, and yet
notwithstanding that no Heretics, Libertines, Anabaptists, Atheistes, and
such like seditious persons might be borne withal: And that there might be
called out of hand a National Council to reform the errors of
Ecclesiastical persons. Furthermore they requested that the King with his
kinsmen the Princes would be at the counsel: that all men might have free
liberty under the kings warrant to come to that convocation: that they might
have Churches for the administration of their doctrine and Sacraments,
granted unto them, which affirm that they cannot with safe conscience come to
the Ceremonies of the Romish Church: that they might openly and plainly
profess and maintain their Religion, and put away all occasions of slander
and reproach.

Last of all they required, that all jurisdiction might be taken away from
Ecclesiastical persons, and restored to the King to whom the same truly
appertayned: that Ecclesiastical persons might have no place in the Civil
assemblyes of Parliamentes: and also that Civil or temporal persons might
not have benefices or spiritual promotions. These things were spoken by the
orators and speaker for the States, according to their commission.

Moreover at the length motion was made unto them ^o help to confirm the
covenant made between the Queen and the king of Navarre concerning the
government of the kingdom. To the which they answered that it seemed unto
them very unmeet and strange, that a woman should rule the Realm of France,
which was plain against the law thereof, called the law Salic.

After long contention, by the earnest persuasion of the king of Navarre, (who
sought to have the Queens favor) and said that he did willingly give place
unto her, the speakers answered, that if the king of Navarre would depart
from his right, and that the king and Queen could so agree they would not be
against it, nor hinder it.

But it was said that those speakers did not well in that they swarued from
their Commissions: and therefore that their assente to be void and of none
effect: neither was the facillitie and myldnesse of the King of Navarre well
lyked of.

Now the Pope feared (as we said before) that National Cardinal Ferrer, sent
from Rome to hinder the National Counsel in France.
Council which the king had promised, least it would be greatly hurtful unto
him: therefore so much as he could he made haste to have a general Council.
And for this cause he sent the Cardinal of Ferrer, to the king. This Romish
Cardinal called him self the Protector of the Churches of France, for the
which names sake many presents and gifts were given to him in France.

At the next coming together of the States, it was concluded that the Pope
should never afterward have authority to give any benefice or spiritual
promotion in France. Therefore the Cardinal, when he was come, would have
used his accustomed power and authority, but being let by the new decree of
the States, or Parliament, he rayled up great controversies. Then the
Chauncelor (...) affirmed, that it was a thing not to be suffered, that so new
a decree of Parliament should be infringed and broken. Notwithstanding the
matter came to that pas^e by the daily complayntes of the Cardinal, that the
king gave straighte commandment to the Chau^celor to seal his letters. The
Chauncelor said, that it was against law and equity so to do, howbeit he
sealed his letters with the kings seal, and subscribed these words with his
own hand, without my consent and will. Then these letters, according to
custom were sent to the Senate of Paris, that they also might confirm them.

But when the Senate had read these words of the Chauncelor, they made this
answer, They cannot, neither ought they to be received. Which words they
always use when they mean to note any unlawful or unjust matter. Therefore
Cardinal Ferrar was without hope of his letters, and was very sore agreeued to
see the Popes authority so sore diminished and shaken in France, beside this,
ballets and rymes were made ^f him, and having his Crosier going before him (as
the manner is) he was deryded of boys and children that followed him: also
pretty Libels were set forth against him, and the image of Pope Alexander his
grandfather finely painted with a lively description of his wickedness out of
the words of the Poet Pontanus, was held forth in every man's hand
against him. The Cardinal taking this in very evil part, departed out of
France, loking for better occasions to have his purpose the which in deed he
gat afterward.

But shortly after this, the Popes authority was cut off more and more in
France, and all the people almost every where said, that now the
authority of men must not be wayed, but the substantialnesse of reason and
truth: that the great errors which long ago were grown, were now spredde
abroad: that the Covetousness and Luxury of the Church men was insatiable:
that they were more outrageous and cruel against those which followed the
contrary opinion in Religion. All estates and degrees had these and the like
communications oftentunes in their mouths: yea, and they which as yet were on
the Popes side came not so often to their own Churches as they had wont, but
came often to the sermons of the reformed Church, kept company with the
faithful, and had often conference with them concerning Religion, and said
that for this cause there ought to arise no trouble, nor breach of friendship
or brotherly love. They which more obstinately leaned still to their old
opinions, kept themselves so cloose within their doors, that they scarce durst
to come in any company. Many were daily alured to the company of the
faithful, in so much that the alteration of Religion seemed now without all
doubt to be at hand. The greatest part of the Nobility also embraced the
doctrine of the Gospel: And the Queen seemed to prefer Religion very much,
and openly to favor those of the reformed Religion: whether to please the
king of Navarre, or to serve the time, I know not: and wrote very earnestly
to Pope Pius the fourth, desiring him that he would provide remedies to stay
those troubles. The effect of the Queens letters sent to Pope Pius the fourth.


And when the time of the parley appointed was rome, she wrote very large
letters to him the fourth of August, to this effect as follows.

If (says she) the state of the Kingdom of France may be expressly
described to the holy Father (for so she was wont to call him) in what and
how many straites and perils the same was, by reason of the diverse opinions
of Religion, he would provide with all speed for it, and would help to stay
these troubles both with his presence and authority, and also would bend
all his Counsel, wisdom, and power, to find out remedies for the same.

On the one part he might set before his eyes the infinite multitude of souls
which run headlong, as it were, into Multitude.
destruction, because they know not well the way of salvation.

On the other part he might see part of the kingdom to be distracted and
drawn away from the communion and fellowship of the Church, which consisted
of the greatest part of the Nobles, of learned men, of the best citizens, and
most civil sort of the common people, who want neither force, nor counsel,
or any other means to atchieue their Quality.
purpose: seeing there are among them men of great wealth and riches, which
will not let to spend their goods and substance in their cause. Furthermore
such is the concord, consent and unity, among them, that it is wonderful to
see how Concord.
carefully one of them do defend an other: in so much that they can neither be
drawn from that concord, neither can they be overcome by force of arms: And
without present peril this kingdom can not be cast into those straites which
threaten unto the same no doubt great ruin and extreme destruction. Seeing
therefore the matter stands thus, and seeing there is a manifest token of great
troubles as hand, The increase and force of the faithful.
the number of those men increasing and waxing strong every day more and more,
she also being persuaded, that the holy Father being myndefull of those
benefits which he had received of the French kings, would carefully endeavor
himself to provide remedies to ease these troubles: for this cause she was
bold^ to flee unto him as to a refuge, that he would apply all his counsel,
wisdom, and power, to procure the unity of the Church. It may please him
therefore to understand, that this thing might the more easyly be brought to
pass, because by the goodness of God there are not in the whole realm of
France, any Anabaptists, heretics or any that speak against the Christian
Articles of the faith, nor yet against the declaration of those Articles made
Doctrine.
by the sire general Councels. And (she said) this was the opinion and
judgment of certain learned men, with whom she had conferred, that the holy
Father might receive them which confessed that catholic profession of the
faith, plainly confirmed and expounded by those six general Councels, into
the Communion and fellowship of the Church, although they were of diverse
opinions: And that other opinions can not let the union of the Church, even as
in time past the diversity in celebrating the Passover, the diverse and
sundry Diversity of rites.
observations of fastings, and rites in sacraments, and other parts of divine
service, did nothing at all hinder the union of the Church: and that the same
way then used, should be very profitable now to stay the controversies of the
Latin and Greek Church.

Therefore they trust the controversies being at an end, yt God will be with
them, and that the dark and mistie clouds being driven away at the length,
he will show the true and perfect light of the truth. And (says she) if
this general way shall not be approved and allowed, although it ought to be
referred to a general Council, yet notwithstanding it is necessary that the
holy Father do provide a speedy remedy before that time, considering the
present necessity. For delay will bring such great inconveniences with it, as
can not easily by any means be recovered again.

But the remedy seems to consiste in two things: The remedy
First that they which have already separated themselves from the Co^mmunion
of the Church, might be called and brought to the same again: Secondly, that
they which as yet have not withdrawn themselves, might be kept in this
communion still. To win the first, it may seem very necessary, to use often
admonitions, and to have mutual and quiet conference on both parts. Bishops
and their ministers must diligently preach Gods word, and exhort the people
to mutual peace and concord: and names of reproach on both sides must quyte
be taken away. The which she hoped, was a speedy way to bring concord and
love. The which also (she said) she had given in commandment to those that
were separated from the Church, and was hitherto obeyed. But as touching those
which as yet had not separated them selves from the Communion of the
Church: there are many (says she) which as yet purpose not to depart from
the same, and yet notwithstanding they stand continually in doubt, and
specially in these three principal points.

The first is, that they understand, that the primitive The first point of
offense.
Church had no images. They know that God has expressly forbidden to
worship them, or to set them in those places where they may be worshipped:
They know also that Gregory has foribdden the same: and that diverse good men
in like manner, which since that time, received them into the Churches,
expressly declared that they were ordained for no other use, than to put the
ignorante people in mind of their Gods which were absente. Notwithstanding,
many errors, deceytes, and lies have prevailed and crepte into this kingdom
and realm of France, and many deceyuers, contrary to the doctrine of the
ancient Fathers Worshipping of images.
have most wickedly abused the worshipping of images to their own lucre and
gain, in so much that the cousciences of many men for this cause are greatly
offended, and therefore will not come into the Churches, least they should
bow their knee before the Images.

The matter therefore being well examined, if on the one part the
inconveniences which may arise hereof, and the fruits and commodities which
are like to come, be wy^ely wayed, it shall be found that it is better to
remove them, than to woorship them with offense of many: specially seeing the
same is neither the commandment of God, nor yet has been received of the
Church upon any necessity. Therefore to cut away all occasions of slanderous
report, and to keep those still, of whom we speak, in the fellowship of the
Church, let it be considered if it be profitable to remove these Images
from the Altars: and to place them about the Temple, either within or without:
the causes being declared, namely that certain ungodly men seeking their own
gain on the one part, and on the other part certain ignorant and unskillful
men, also will bring to pass, that the people shall abuse them against the
ordinance of the Church.

2 The second principal point is concerning the administration Sacraments.
of Sacraments, of Baptism, and of the Lords supper. In the administration of
Baptism, it seems strange Baptism.
to many good and godly men, that Exorcismes, and many forms of prayers should
be used: the which may somewhat profit those that understand them: but seeing
the greatest part of the people do not understand them, it seems better to
omit them. And where as it is believed and taught that these things are
necessary to be done before Baptism, they say that it is done against the pure
and sound judgment of the Church, which has decreed and appointed Water and
the Word to be only necessary in the Sacrament: but as for Exorcismes and
Prayers not to be necessary to the Sacrament. Furthermore they say, that in
Baptism Catechismes.
the words of the ancient Catechismes are retained still, the use whereof is
now gone, and therefore at this time is used in vain in Baptism. Also many do
very much misselike that a diseased or infected priest should spit his unclean
spittell into the mouth of the infant: whereby some great evil and peril
might arise. All these inconveniences (she said) might be remedied if it might
be left in the choice of al men, either to use Exorcismes and prayers in
baptizyng their infantes, or else purely and simply without any additions to
keep the substance of Baptism, that is to say, water and the word: and to
have the same ministered in the vulgar tongue that the people may understand it.
The which liberty were more tolerable, than either the offense, or
separation of many men: and so no infantes shall be baptized out of the
Congregation of the Romish church.

3 As concerning the holy Comunion, many good men do misselyke three things in
the same: Of the which, the first The holy communion
is, that it is given to communicate only under one kind: Whose consciences in
this matter can not be quieted and stayed, either by the authority of the
Council of Constance, or by the observation of custom, received not many
years ago: seeing that Jesus Christ plainly says, Take ye, eat ye, drink
ye, Paul the Apostle also says: Who soever The custom of the ancient
Church.
eats of this bread, and drinks of this cup. To the which express word of
God is joined also the ancient custom of the Church, constantly observed for
a thousand years and more. And although for reverence sake which they owe
unto the Church, they will not condemn the counsel of Constance, yet
notwithstanding, seeing thorough fear of erring, they lean only to plain
testimonies of Scripture, and to the ancient custom of the Church, it is to
be feared, that while there is controversy about this matter, others which
are weak will easily be brought to their opinion, and so withdrawn from the
fellowship of the Church of Rome. For the objection of the adversaries seems
to be of great force, seeing they bring both the express word of God, and
also evident reasons for that which they allege. May it please him therefore
to consider whether it be not best to give liberty that the communion may be
ministered under both kinds, although the council of Constance be against the
same.

2 The second thing they misselyke in the holy Communion The second point
that is misl^ked.
is this: Many are afeard to come to the holy communion, being ministered in
such order as it is in the Romish Churches, that is to say, to one or to a few
alone, using no prayers that may be understood of the common people, neither
yet expounding the use of the Sacrament: the adversaries on the contrary part
saying, and openly showing in very deed, that they have restored in this
point, the approved manner of the ancient Church. The which matter, when
diverse reasons and ways of communicating, are alleged on both sides, can not
be told how many of our countrymen it does pierce and move, in so much that
there is no doubt but that very many shall be constrained for this The sun^ie
r^ceiuing of the Sacrament.
cause to depart from the Church* For when ^n the one part they see some one
alone, or a cer^ain small number, without prayers, without a sermon, without
giving of thanks, to (...)any part of the sacrament, and that in an v^knowne
tongue: on the other part a congregation of a great number of men, together
plainly to make confession of their faith, publicly to confess their sins,
to give thanks unto God, to pray unto God, to sing Psalms in the vulgar tongue,
to come to the Sermon, by which they may be instructed to li^e a godly and a
chris^ian ly^e, and to prepare themselves al^o to receive the Sacrament: it is
hard to say, but that they which take our part only for a zeal and true
desire of Religion, will take these occasions to fall away from us.

To remedy this inconvenience, let the Pope himself consider, if it shall not
be well done to suffer the holy c^mmunion Times to re^eiue the communion.
to be ministered every month, according to the manner of the primitive Church:
that the Pastors and Elders of Churches, may call all those together, which
will communicate, the first Sunday of every month, or oftener, if they be
required, and that there, in the vulgar tongue, and Psalm may be soong, and a
general confession of faith, and of sins likewise to be made, public and
common prayers also for the preservation of Magistrates, for the pureness of
the air, for the fruits of the earth, and for such as are afflicted, devoutly
to be said. And to them, thus assembled together, some place, either of the
Evangelists, or of Paul's Epistles, which concerns the use of the Lords
supper, may be red: and so to be received to the communion under both kynds.
And although this seems to be new, and not customably heretofore to be used:
yet notwithstanding seeing the Apostles, and they which straight after succeeded
them, did so, it can not be said, that the holy father has done, or appointed
any thing against the commandment of God and the manner of the Church. And to
the end he may understand for what cause they urge and so earnestly desire
this thing, it may please him to know, that there is nothing that so much
troubles and burdeneth their consciences, as the fear of not rightly
receiving the Sacraments. And here the adversaries triumph, and cry that the
commandment of God is broken: and thus by little our ministry and all our
doctrine grows out of credit: insomuch that the shame and reproach hereof
will redound to the holy Father himself at the length, except it be foreseen.
For the which they think that there can not be a better and more present
remedy found, than if the Lords Supper be celebrated in that order, as is
before declared. The which thing she her self, so much the more urges and
earnestly craves, that he might help and remedy so great troubles in time.

3 The third special point of offense is this: There are The third point
that is misselyked.
many men of the more learned sort in all the realm, which are offended at that
rite or feast, which is commonly called Corpus Christi day: at which yearly
feast the body of the Lord is carried about the Cities: to the which
solemnity they say they can not with safe consciences come, and that for
these causes: First because it is against the express institution of the
Sacrament, Take ye, eat ye, drink ye, Also, Do this in remembrance of me.
That is to say, Do ye as I have done. And therefore they say, that there is
so great difference between the giuyng of bread to be seen, and the eating of
bread in deed, even as if a man should not receive that wholesome medicine
given unto him for his health, but should cause it very sumptuously to be
carried Spiritual worship.
up and down the chamber. They say also that Paul said not, Carry this bread
about the streets: but, Whosoever eats of this bread and drinks of this
wine. Furthermore, they say, that Christ is in heaven, and that therefore there
is only required a spiritual worship. Whereupon they say, that great ini^rie
is done to him by those corporal and external worships, seeing he exalted
(...)from earth to heaven, to the end he might be worshipped and adored with
true and spiritual honor. And last of all they say, that this rite of carrying
the Lords body up and down, was brought in, and by little and little
established, not by any authority of Scripture, but by the devotion of some
singular man. Also that neither Clement nor Gregory bishops of Rome, which
appointed the same to be a solemn feas^e, have not spoken one word of that
deambulation, and that therefore our sacrifi^ing Priests do err and offend
against their will and institution, seeing that no other day has such freedom
and liberty to commit all kind of wickedness as that has: the which truly
is not the way to knowledge and worship Christ, seeing that he requires of
his disciples pureness and newness of life, and in his holy word utterly
detesteth all sinful liberty: The which things seem hurtful, not only to
those which have separated themselves from our fellowship, but also to those
which will not leave the same. They do perceive that hereupon many things are
done amis^e, as the polluti^n of the Sacrament against the word of God, and the
approved customs of the Church. Also that by the occasion of this day, many
men are a^used and led to commit wicked and hor^ible things: and that the same
day is a ver^e pr^uocation of most (...)sedition, as we hitherto to our great
grief have felt. Therefore, except this thing be foreseen, and a reme^
proui^d for the same, at the length experience will show that it is better to
seek a more devout way to worship God withal, than to refeyne and keep this
ryte to the hurt and offense of many.

The Mass also is an other great cause of offense. All The Mass (...)of
great offense.
men cry out that the Mass is a great offense and slumbling block to the
Church, the same being sold of ignorant, dissolute and most ungodly Priests:
and yet no man seeks to reform and amend the same.

This thing truly, has of late diminished the devotion of the people very
much: yea, and many of our fellowship do proceed further also, and ^o doubt of
the Mass, both touching In the substance of the Mass.
the substance, and also touching the form. In the subs^a^ce they do note,
that the Churchemen af^irme, that the priests do offer Christ: and do more
esteem of their own sacrifice, than they d^e of the sacrifice of Christ. And
that certain of the Doctors do say, that the same sacrifiice which the
Priests offer, is only a monument and sign of the true sacrifice which
Christ offered for us once for all: but the ignorant people are taught by
ignorant priests, yt he ought to be counted for an heretik which thinks
otherwise. The which truly, seeing it seems to be most absurd, it gives
great occasion to ye adversary to speak evil. But in the form of the Mass
they note four principal things. In the form of the Mass.
First that all things are done in the same in a strange and an unknown tongue:
the which in deed is unprofitable and dangerous, seeing no fruit comes
thereof unto the people, but are only fed with certain outward shows. Whereas
on the contrary part (say they) it is necessary that the confession of the
faith should be plainly and evidently understood of all men: and seeing the
Latin tongue must needs be used, let the same yet be expounded into the
mother tongue that it may of all men be understood. And seeing the prayers A
strange language.
which are there made, appertain to the common profit of all the hearers, who
understanding not what is spoken, shall answer, Amen? Furthermore they say,
that the consciences of the Clergy do accuse them, and tell them that they do
amiss, seeing no part of the use of their Mass is declared: without the which
notwithstanding the administration of the Sacrament seems to be but vain.
Thirdly, seeing those things which are spoken in the Mass do belong to the
whole congregation, and not to the Pries^es alone, and specially those things
which concern the Communion, and yet nevertheless one Priest only
communica(...), the people s^anding by, and looking on: it seems ius^ly to be
ver^e far out o^ order, and not agreeing to the truth. Wherefore they think
it (...)that it should be reduced and brought to the ancient manner of the
church, agreeing to the first institution* Fourthly they mis^yke the order of
the divine service. In the which is to be co^idered what great profi^ the
singing of Psalms, and the ma^ing Singing of Psalms.
of Prayers in the vulgar tongue has brought in time paste. And truly our
adversaries of late days using these means have allured and drawn many unto
them. Wherefore let the holy Father consider, if it shall not be best to give
liberty to have the Psalms soong, and Pray^rs also made in the vulgar tongue,
that they may be (...)of all the people.

These are the principal points which they sa^e, are needful to be amended,
^en they which have separated themselves from our fellowship, which they (...)to
have taken in good part, seeing they go^ not about to violate the Apostoli^ie
authority of the holy father? and (...)per^ct in these two things: namely that
nothing be altered ^n doctrine: And also that if the Minis^ers of the Church
do^ offend in any thing, the Ministe^e therefore should not be taken away,
but the authority thereof always to remain preserved and safe.

These two things being firmly holden, they think it no absurdity if
diligente inqui^ition be made of other matters which have need of re^ormation.
Therefore she does humbly beseech the holy Father that he would provide for
these things, for that greater inconveniences no dout would follow if so be
that there were not remedy provided in time. As for other things, the Queen
promises that she her self, with the counsel of good men, and with her
diligence and i^deuour, will look unto so much as she may, both for the
peace and quietness of the Church, and also for the dignity of the Popes
holiness. These things have been by us faithfully gathered out of the Copy of
her own letters.

The third Book of Commentaries concerning the state of Religion, and or the
common wealth of France.
IN the mean season the Prela^es and Clergee came from all parts of the
realm to a town called (...), near to Sangeiman at the ^ay appointed in the
month of August: to reason and freely to dispute on both parts of the
principal points of Religion now in controversy. ^bertie was granted unto
all (...)of the reformed Church, freely to come to hear (...)sam^: and that
under safe conduct by the kings (...). Certain men were chosen to be of that
Council* (...)of the r^rmed: Churches* being (...)conducted at the king^
co^man^ment by his guard, from Paris to the town called Sangeiman* Among whom,
the principal were these, namely ( Peter! (...), ^rofessor of divinity in the
Tygur^ Church and The ^tore (...)^ho were chief in this disputation) (...)of
Gods word ^t Geneua, wh^ were procured to (...)thither by the king of Navarre,
and by the reformed Churches* There were also ^icolaus Gela^us, Augustinus
Marlora^us, Johannes (...)* Franci^cus Morellus, and Johannes* Malo: with whom^
also came (...), a lesr^ man, which a little before, abjuring and forsaking
the Popes religion, embraced the doctrine of the Gospel. The beginning of the
^putation at (...).


They therefore to begin ye matter, offer to ye king a supplication, in the
which they desire that this disputation might be begone forthwith by his
authority: and that these might be the conditions to be observed in the same:
First, that those prelates, which were of the contrary opinion, might not be
set as chief Judges in this disputation, but that the king with his
Counselors, should by his authority moderate and rule the whole matter:
Secondly, that all controversies should be referred and ended by the word of
God only. Thirdly, that what soever should be determined and concluded in that
disputation, should be registered in the kings public commentaries by his
notaries. To the which the king made answer, that he would consult of this
matter with his council, that if it might be, all the matter might by some
means, with the consent of the Prelates, quietly be ended. But the Prelates
complained and said, that this liberty of disputing ought not to be granted
unto them, which were long ago condemned. Whereupon they deferred the matter
for certain days, being busied in the mean time to ^ynde out the scruples and
doubts of these questions, namely, concerning the dignity of Cathedral
Churches: Concerning Regulars, and their exemptions: Concerning Cures and their
ordinary presentation: Concerning the exceeding number of inferior Priests:
Concerning the reformation of Monasteries. Concerning pluralities of Benefices,
and such like: seeking to help the disordered Church in due time with these
inquisitions. But this one thing they specially pretended, that they should
have great injury, if authority to judge were taken from them.

But now it shall not be disagreeing from our purpose to make mention of
certain communication had, between the Cardinal of Lorayne and Theodore Beza,
before the solemn di^putation began.

Certain communication between the Cardinal of Lorrain, and Theodore Beza
Minister of Geneua.
BEza came into the bedchamber of the king of Navarre, being so commanded by
him, to the intent he might salute the Queen. And at that time there was also
the Cardinal of Lorrain. Then the Queen began to talk with Beza concerning
his books. Upon which occasion the Cardinal then said to Beza as follows.

Card. Lorrain. I have seen a book, the author whereof you are said to be, in
the which are contained these words: Christ is to be sought in the Supper,
after the same manner that he was, before he took upon him our flesh. I have
heard also that you have written another most absurd saying, which is, that
Christ must be sought for in the Supper, as in the mire and dirte. At the
which saying the standers by, greatly maruelling, Beza answered.

Beza. If the books were here, I could the better tell whither they were mine
or no: but concerning the first saying, it may seem very absurd as you
repeat it: but the place being diligently wayed, it shall be found to be
most true. As for the second it is blasphemous and wicked, neither shall it
be found written in mine, or in any of our books.

Card. Lorrain. No doubt I marvel, that any man dare Concerning our
co^muniion with Christ, and of the fathers under the law.
affirm, that we have no more than the ancient Fathers had i^ the time of the
law: and how could they speak of the flesh of Christ, which as yet was not.

Beza. Do ye think that there was always a Church from the first creation of
the world? Do ye think that the Church which was from the beginning of the
world, was called a Church by him which was a Mediator between God ^ men?
And do ye think that Jesus Christ was that Mediat^ure.

Card Lor. It is my opinion.

Beza. Therefore the communion of the faithful with Christ, ought not to be
restrained to that time, when he joined his divinity in very deed to our
nature* for y^ which was not as yet by the order of nature, was notwithstanding
John. 8.
always by the force and efficacy of faith. Is it not said, that Abraham
saw the day of Christ, and rejoiced? And Paul says: That the fathers did
eat the same spiritual 1. Cor. 10.
meat, and did all drink of the same spiritual drink, whereof we have droonke,
namely Christ.

Card. Lor. It is very true: For he is the Lamb that was stain from the
beginning of the world.

After this when Beza had brought in many places concerning the difference
between the old and new Testament, there began a new disputation concerning
the presence of the body and blood of Christ in the Supper. Card. Lor. We do
disagree in the explication of these words, This is my body,

Beza. We disagree in very deed, for which we are very sorry.

Car Lo. I teach the children of my dioces, when they are demanded what the
bread in the Supper is, to answer, that it is the body of Christ: do ye
disalowe this?

Beza. No truly, for they are the very words of Chris^e. But I demand, how
the bread is called the body of Christ? For all that is, is not after one
fashion or manner.

But the Cardinal urged these words, The rock was Christ. which words
Beza had cited before, against the 1. Corin. 10.
which he set these words of S. John, The word became fl^she. To the which
Beza answered. John. 1.


Beza. There is great difference between that substantial communion and the
Sacramental communion: And this question (says he) does cons^st of four
principal (...). The first is of ^gnes: the second, of the thing signified:
the third of the conjunction of signs, and the thing signified: the fourth is
of the participation of signs, and of the thing by them signi^ied. Concerning
the first, we differ in this, that 1. Sacramental signs.
you apoint in the Supper only accid^nts for signs: but we for signs put the
substance of brea^ and wine as the nature of Sacraments does require, and the
Scripture universally teach. Here the Cardinal interrupting Beza in his
talk, said:

Card. Lor. I think truly, that I am able to prove and desend
Transubstantiation: but I think that the same was not greatly needful to be
found out by the divines, neither do I think that there ought to be in the
churches any divisions for this matter. Then Beza proceeding with his former
purpose, said.

Beza. Concerning the second, we do not say, that the 2. The thing sign^fied.
m^rites of the death and passion of Christ, are only signified by the outward
signs of bread and wine: but also that the very body of Christ which was
cru^ified for us, and his blood which was shed for us, is by them represented.
Also that Jesus Christ very God and perfect man is offered unto us by visible
signs, that our minds being lifted up by faith to heaven (where Christ now is
may spiritually behold him, and receive and enjoy all his graces to everlasting
life, and that so certainly and truly as we see and receive, and eat and
drink the corporal and visible signs.

To this the Cardinal of Loraine agreed, affirming that he was glad to hear
those words, for so much as he perceived that the doctrine of the Faithful
was otherwise than he thought it to be.

Beza. Concerning the third, there is great difference 3. The co^nction of
signs, and the ^ing signifi^d.
between common water, and that with the which we are washed in baptism:
between the bread and wine which we daily use, and that which is used in the
Supper. For the water of Baptism, the bread and wine of the Supper, are
Sacraments, that is to say, visible signs and Testimonies of the body and
blood of the Lord. But we deny (says he) that there is any such mutatio^ in
ye substance of the Elements: but we affirm that the change is in this, that
they are applied to an other use than that which is natural, because they
serving of themselves and by their own nature, for the nutriment of the body,
and being Sacraments, they signify that thing which does feed our seules.
Furthermore we do not assign the cause of this mutation to the words, or to
the mind and purpose of him that pronou^ceth them, but to the virtue and power
of God, whose will is revealed in his word. Therefore because the thing
signified is offered unto us, and so truly given unto us as the sign it self,
we must also acknowledge by the same reason, the conjunction of signs with
the thing signified. And by this means the body and blood of Jesus Christ,
in that they are truly given unto us, are in the administration of the Supper,
and not with, under, or in the bread, or in any other place than in heaven,
where, as he is ^an, he is contained, until he shall come to judge both the
quick and dead. The Cardinal also agreed to the same, and affirmed that he did
not allow Transubstantiation: but thought rather that Christ should be sought
in heaven. Notwithstanding as one in dout, he added other sayings of certain
Germans, to the end he might thereby seem not to have greatly traveled in
this matter, excusing himself to be let from the same by other business.

Then said Beza: I grant that we and certain Germans do disagree in this
third Article: but in this notwithstanding we agree that we altogyther,
jointly with one consent deny your Transubstantiation.

Card. Lor. Do ye confess that we are truly and substancially partakers of
the body and blood of Christ?

Beza. This is the fourth principal point, which before 4. The participation
of the signs, and of the the thing signified.
I noted, and rests to be declared. In su^me therefore we do affirm, that
the visible signs, which are naturally eaten and dronken, are touched with
the hands: that the matter of the Sacrament, that is to say, the body and
blood of Christ Jesus, is offered truly and without deceyte to all men, that
the same is received by faith, and not by natural reason, but yet, that the
same is so truly given unto us by faith, as if we were naturally joined with
Christ.

Then the Cardinal affirmed that Beza had satisfied him in this point, and
very friendly and lovingly desired B^za that he might have conference with him.
Notwithstanding it was reported, that the Cardinal had confuted B^za by these
first small tryalles and assayes. And so they fully persuaded themselves to
have the victory.

But when they which were the chosen me^ of the Churches The ministers desire
to have the disputation and obtain it.
to dispute, law that new delays were found out day by day, they urged that
their petitions, whereof we spoke before, might be granted unto them, and they
desired also to understand the Kings mind in writing. At the length they
received this answer of the Queen, that the Prelates should not be their
Judges, but that there should be granted unto them certain of the Kings
Secretaries: that the matter should be ruled wholly by the word of God: and that
the King with the Princes his kinsmen, would be at the disputation.

And herewith she admonished them to behave themselves modestly, and to seek
only the glory of GOD, which she thought (she said) they greatly desired.
But to grant them any thing in writing, she thought it not expedient, seeing
their words might serve well enough.

When the chosen men of the Churches had received this answer, and were
departed, there came straight way unto the Queen certain Papists, beseeching
her that she would not hear these men of the new religion: and if she were
minded to hear them, that she would at the least beware and see, that the young
king came not to their disputations: because it was dangerous, least he in
his young and tender years, should be taken and snared therewith. For (say
they) it is not meet that they should be heard, which not long ago were
convicted of heresy.

To whom the Queen only answered that she would do nothing without due
Counsel and advise, and that they should well understand that the matter
should not be handled after the will and pleasure of those men of the new
doctrine, as they termed them.

The next day after, which was the ninth day of September, The first session
o^ ^is disputation.
was the time appointed to begin the disputation. Therefore the King and the
Queen his mother, the Duke Aurelian the Kings brother, Margare^ his Sister,
the King and Queen of Navarre, the Prince of Conde, with the rest of the
Princes the Kings kinsme^, and the Privy Counsel, and a great number also of
Noble men and Gentlemen, were assembled together, in a very large hall, which
men commonly call, the H^ll of the holy Virgins of Posiac. Hither came also
the Popes chief Prelates the Cardinals, the Archebyshoppes, and Bishops, to
the number of fifty, beside a great many substitutes and deputies in the
places of those that were absent, a great many divines and men of learning
counted, standing about them. In the highest place sat the King, and hard
beside him, according to custom, the Princes his kinsmen: the Bishops sitting
all a long on both sides the hall upon greeces one above another. Then were
brought in the chosen men, for disputation, of the reformed Churches, which
were twelve Ministers, and twenty others, which were sent also of the same
Churches: whom the Kings Guard at the commandment of the king had brought from
Sangerman thither, least there should be some tumult raised against them.

When every man kept silence, the King spoke in manner and form following:
All men (says he) know well The proposition of king Charles the ix.
enoughe, what and how great perturbations and troubles are in the Realm: for
the which cause I have appointed you to come together at this time, that those
things which ye know have need of reformation, may quietly of you be
declared, without any manner of affection, having no consideration or care for
any thing, but for the glory of God, and the peace and quietness of
consciences: The which thing I greatly desire, in so much that I have
determined not to suffer you to depart hence, before you have made some end
of all controversies, that at the length all dissentions being taken away,
mutual peace and concord may be had among all men. This thing if ye bring to
pass ye shall give me occasion to maintain and defend you with no less care
than those kings my ancestors, that have been before me, have done.

Then he commanded his Chauncelor to declare his The proposition of the
Chauncelor.
mind more at large. The Chauncelor therefore began to show that the kings
will was according to the wills of his predecessors that had been before him,
in staying the controversies of Religion, the which, when those Kings of happy
memory went diligently about to bring to pass, they had in their labors very
small success, in so much that daily more and more new troubles arose:
wherefore he would that all men should the more diligently, wisely to apply the^
selves to pacify in time these troubles, for the which cause he had caused
them to come together, and minded in his royal person to accompany them, that
disordered matters in Religion which concerned both doctrine and manners might
be reformed: he understanding that this was the only cause of all troubles,
would diligently provide for them as his office required.

The remedy which now he intends to use, seems to be a present remedy,
as it was of late deliberated and considered of in the most noble assembly of
the Princes and Counsel, namely, that by this peculiar and particular
conference, the matters of Religion in controversy between both parties,
might be quietly reasoned and disputed of*

But to look or seek for remedy by a general Council, it is General Counsel
a vain remedy.
even as vain as if a man having good and sufficient remedy at home, should
notwithstanding travail to the Indyes, to seek the same. For (says he) we
our selves shall better provide remedies for our selves, than men of strange
and foreign countries can do, which know neither the state of our cause, nor
the condition of our people: of which kind of strangers notwithstanding the
general Council shall consiste. Greater fruits and profit have often times
come by National Councels, than have come by general Councels. As may appear
by that general Council of Ariminum, the Ariminum o therwise called Remino,
an old city in Flaminia in Italy.
which Council openly favoring and maintaining the sect of the Arrians, was
reproved and corrected by particular Synodes. Also, in this our realm of
France, Hilary Bishop of Pictauia, by his industrye and faithful dealing, in
Synodes, banished the heresy of the Arrians out of these parts. Therefore
(says he) there is no doubt but that there shall arise great profit and
commodity by this assembly: specially seeing it pleases the king to take such
pains himself, who no doubt will help both with his power and authority.
Wherefore he wished the disputers on both parts only to be careful to do
their duty, both of them jointly to seek concord, the greater part not to
despise the lesser: not to use curious disputations without profit: and to
judge and examine al matters by the word of God only, which being well
understood, few other authors shall serve: also that they which say they
follow the new doctrine, would not count the prelates of the contrary
part for their enimyes, seeing by Baptism they retain the name of Christians.

For the king (says he) has therefore given you leave to come together, that
men might see what reasons you have, and that the Prelates on ye Popes side,
might seek by strong arguments to confute the^: that the disputation at the
length being published abroad, all men may evidently see, that they are
condemned for just causes, and not by the vain authority of men. Therefore,
take heed in any case, that you do nothing ambitiously: know ye, that ye are
not judges: and endeavor yourselues to find out and manifest the truth. So
shall you both glorifye God, and also profit your country: and God himself
shall bliss your endeavors, and the most constant mind of the king, in this
matter.

The matter being thus propounded by ye Chauncelor, the The exception of
Frances Cardinal of Turnon.
Cardinal of Turnon, in the name of the Prelates, gave great thanks to the
king, to the Queen, and to the Princes: that it pleased them to come to this
holy assemblye, and for that the Ch^uncelor by the kings commandment had put
forth these matters: the which he desired to have given unto him in writing,
that they might deliberate and consider what was needful to be done in these
things. Then the Chauncelour said that he would not give the matter in
writing, seeing it was plainly enough declared. And thus they could get
nothing at the hands of the Chauncelor, although the Cardinal of Loraine
required the same.

Then the ministers, which sat oueragainst them, having leave to speak,
Theodore Beza, began thus. Seeing that all The oration of Beza in the name of
the protestants.
things (O king) both great and small, and specially those things which belong
to the worship of God, and which do far surmounte our capacity, do depend
upon the same God, we think it not troublesome to your majesty, if we begin
with prayer unto God. When he had spoken these words, he falling on his knees
with the rest of his fellows, began to pray unto God in that form of
confession of sins which is used in the reformed Churches, pronouncing the
same with a loud voice: and that done, straight way he added unto the same
these words. For so much as (O God) thou have been Beza his prayer*
so favorable this day to thy unworthy servants, as to grant them leave
to profess the knowledge of thy truth before their King, and this most
honorable assembly, we most humbly beseech thee (O father of lights) that it
may please thee, according to thy accustomed goodness, so to illuminate our
minds, to govern our affections, and to make them apt to be taught: so also
to direct our words, that whatsoever knowledge of thy truth thou shall give
unto us according to our capacity, we may both with heart and mouth utter
the same, to the glory of thy name, to the profit and prosperity of our King,
and of all his subjects, and specially to the peace and tranquillity of this
Christian common wealth and realm.

When Beza had thus ended his prayer, turning his speech to the king, he
uttered these words in manner and form following: They which do faithfully
serve and obey their Beza directs his speech to the king*
Princes, (most noble King) do think themselves most happy in this thing
above al other, if so be they may behold the faces of their Princes: ye which
representing as it were a certain visible majesty of God, can not chose but
stir up and delight the minds of faithful subjects. For such is our
nature, that those things which we see our selves with our eyes, do more
effectually move our affections, tha^ those things which we feel and perceive
by the bare and simple apprehension of the mind.

But and if it come to pass, that not only the subjects may see their Prince,
but also may be seen of their Prince, and that which is more, may be heard, and
at the length approved of him, then they think that they have all that they ca^
wish or desire. Of these four things (O king) it pleased God to deprive many
of your faithful subjects, for a time, to their great sorrow and grief,
until the same God in his infinite mercy and goodness at our sorrowful tears
and continual sighs forgiving somewhat, so spared us, that he has given unto
us this day a benefit more of us wished, than hoped for, namely liberty to
behold your majesty, that of the same we may both be seen and hard, in this
most noble assembly, almost of the whole world. If we had never received any
other benefit, neither should hereafter receive, all the rest How great a
benefit it is for subjects to be hard and seen of their Prince
of the race of our life should not be sufficient to celebrate and set forth
so great a benefit of God, and to give immortal and condign thanks to your
Majesty. But seeing we do join this also to those former benefits, that this
day does not only give unto us access, but does also inuit us, with one
mind and consent, to profess^the name of our God, and the obedience due to
your majesty: we must no doubt confess that our minds are far unapt to
conceive so great benefits as these be, and our tongues also l^sse able to
utter and express that which we feel in our minds. Therefore this benefit
surpassing all human eloquence, we had rather by modest silence, to confess
our imbecillitie, than with the bareness of words to diminishe the greatness
of the same.

But this one thing we wi^e, that our duetifull obedience may be acceptable
to your majesty this day. The which we hope will come to pass, if so be our
coming together may end not only the miseryes of our afflictions paste,
(the remembrance whereof this most happy day does quite banishe) but that
thing also which always seemed unto us more bitter than death: which was, the
great troubles raised in this Realm for Religion to the great destruction
Troubles fo* Religion.
of many. But now there are many occasions, which even at this day, will not
suffer us to enjoy so great a benefit, and have also taken clean away from
us al hope to enjoy the same, except by other means we be stayed and
comforted. First of all, there are many men, which (by what mischief I know
not) are thoroughly persuaded of us, that we are troublesome persons, ambitious,
whollye wedded to our opinions* and enemies to peace and tranquillity. There
are also other some, who although they do think us not to abhor peace and
concord, yet notwithstanding they do think that we do require ye same upon
such unlawful and straight conditions, yt we ought by no means to be received,
as though we would inuert ye whole world, and after our own fantasy make it
new again, and deprive many from their goods that we our selves might inioye
them. There are also other such like great impediments: but we had rather to
bury them in silence, than in speaking of them, to rub and renew old
punishments: specially at this time, when complaints are not to be made, but
rather the remedies of complaints to be sought and provided for.

But who does encourage us among so many lets and stays? We are destitute of
help (O King) seeing of all men we are the most base sort. But this makes us
bold, namely our good conscience, which is a help unto our cause, the which
we trust, God will defend, and revenge, by the means of your Majesty. In like
manner your clemency (O king) which most dilectably is to be seen in your
mouth, countenance, and talk: the equity and uprightness of your mind, most
excellent Queen: the goodness of your mind and of the minds of the Princes
the kings kinsmen, most noble King: the occasion also which you have given us
to think well of you most honorable Councillors (who agreeing in one, do your
selves no less desire to give unto us necessary and pure concord, than we
earnestly desire to receive the same) do give unto us great boldness and
hope. What should I use many words? There is also an other thing which
makes us to have some hope: and that is the rule of charity, which we trust
will so moderate you, with who^ we must enter into disputation, that you will
rather seek with us, (according to our slender capacity) to manyfeste the
truth, than to obscure the same: to teach, than to contend to expend and weye
reason, than wilfully to refuse reason: and also that you will rather restrain
evil, that it go no farther, than to loose the reins to the same, and to
make it incurable. This truly is our hope, and persuasion of you. And we pray
and beseech you, by the name of the mighty God, which has gathered us here
together, which shall be a witness of our cogitatious and words, that*
whatsoever has been written or spoken for the space of these 40. years) you
will with us put away all prejudicial means: which may possibly hinder the
fruit and profit of this laudable way, now taken in hand: and that it will
please you to hope and to assure your selves of that in us, which by the grace
of God you shall find, that is to say, a mind apt to be taught, and to
receive whatsoever shall be showed out of the pure word of God. Think you not
that we are come hither to defend and maintain any error, but to the end
that wherinsoeuer you or we have offended, we may acknowledge the same and
amend it. Think you ^ot, that we are so arrogant, that we would abolyshe the
Church of our God, which is sempiternall. Think you not, that we seek means
to bring you into this vile and miserable condition, in the which
notwtstanding, by the great grace of God, we are very well quieted and
contented. This is that, which we seek for, namely that the ruin of
Jerusalem may be repaired: that the spiritual temple may be builded: and that
the same house of God being builded up with lively stones, may recover his
former excellency: and also that ye scattered and dispersed sheep, may be
gathered and brought again into ye sheepfold of that only and most excellent
Shepherd Christ Jesus.

This is our purpose, this is our will, this is our desire: the which if you as
yet believe not, we trust you will then believe, when we confer with you,
with all patience and meekness. But I would to God that in stead of our
disputations and arguments, we might with one voice and consent, sing a Psalm
unto God, and shake hands as friends: as once it came to pass between the
Infidels, the field being pitched, and both armies ready to meet and
encounter together. At which thing truly we might be ashamed, if both of us
preaching the doctrine of concord and peace, should easily be divided, and
made enemies, and hardly reconciled again. But what need these words? These
things ought and may be wyshed for of men, but it only belongs unto God to
bring them to pass: the which he will do when it shall please him with his
goodness to cover our sins, and with his light to drive away our darkness.

And here (O King) to the end it may appear, that we simply and plainly
mean good soothe, we will (if it so seem good, and if leave may be granted)
briefly declare the chief and principal points of this Conference or
Disputation: notwithstanding in such order that no man shall have just
occasion to be offended. There are some which think and would also persuade
others, that we disagree in matters of small weight, and in those things which
are indifferent, and not appertayning to the substance of our faith. And there
are other some, which having no knowledge or understanding of those things
which we believe and defend, do think nothing less but that we agree with
the Jews and Turks. The purpose and thought of those first sort of me^, we
trust shall be approved by us, to be no less commendable than the other is to
be rejected. And yet certainly neither of their opinions are firm and true.
For if we should believe the opinion of this last sort, the one part could not
stand by any means without the destruction of the other. But if the first
opinion be received, many matters shall be left so raw, that occasions of
greater troubles will thereof by and by spring and arise. Therefore we grant
(the which we can scarsly do without tears) we confess (I say) that as we
do agree in certain articles of our faith, so in certain of them, we do
wholly vary and dissent.

We confess that there is one God, in one essence, infinite In what things
the Papists and Protestants do agree, and in what they do disagree.
and incomprehensible, distinguished and divided in three persons
consubstanciall and coequall in all things: namely into the Father begotten of
none: into the Son begotten of the Father before all worlds: and into the
holy Ghost proceeding from the Father and the Son. We confess that there is
one Jesus Christ, perfect God and perfect man without confusion of the two
natures, or separation of the Prophets. We confess that Christ, as he is man,
is not the son of Joseph, but conceived by the secret power of the holy
ghost in the womb of the virgin Mary: a virgin I say, both before the birth,
and after also.

We confess his Nativity, his life, his death, his buryal, his descending
into hell, his Resurrection, and his assention, even as they are contained in
the holy Gospel. We believe that Christ is now in heaven at the right hand of
God, from whence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. We believe in the
holy Ghost, which does illuminate, comfort, and defend us. We believe that there
is one holy Church, Catho lique, that is to say universal, which is the
company and fellowship of Saints, out of the which there is no salvation. We
are persuaded of the free remission of our sins in the blood of Jesus Christ:
by whose power, when our bodies being raised up from death shall be joined
again to our souls, we shall enjoy with our God, most happy and everlasting
life. What then? (will some say) are not they the articles of our faith? In
what therefore do we disagree? First of all we disagree in the interpretation of
some of these articles. Secondly, because it seems unto us (and if we err
therein, if it can be proved, we are ready to acknowledge our error, that many
things are added unto those articles as though they were not sufficient: and
so as though the edifice should never be builded, the new inventions of men have
daily ben brought in. Furthermore we say, that whatsoever has been builded and
set up more, was not (so far as we can perceive) builded upon those ancient and
first foundations: and therefore they do not only, not set forth and beautify
the building, but also wonderfully defile, deforme, and disgrace the same: and
yet notwithstanding greater credit and authority has been given unto those
feigned inventions of men, than to the pure word of God. This is the sum of
those things which we believe and teach.

But to the end our purpose may be the better understand, these things which
we have touched generally, we will (if it may seem good) declare particularly.
Therefore we do affirm, In the manner of obtaining Salvation.
and are persuaded that we may defend with all sobriety and modesty out of the
word of God, that the true God in whom we believe, is spoiled and robbed of
his perfect righteousness, if we set against his wrath and judgment for
sin, any other satisfaction or purgation, either in this world, or in any
other world, than the sound and perfect obedience, the which can be found in
no other, saving in Jesus Christ only. In like manner also, if we shall say
that God does forgive only part of our sins, that we may bring unto him
the other part, we spoil him wholly of his mercy. Heerevpon it follows,
that when we speak of the manner of salvation, we must stay our selves in the
passion and death of Christ Jesus our Savior and redeemer only: or else we
must appoint in the place of the true God, some strange and feigned God, which
is neither perfectly just, nor perfectly merciful. Heerevpon also depends
another special point, and of great force, concerning the office of Jesus
Christ. For except he above be wholly our salvation, that precious name Jesus,
that it to say, a Savior, being given to him of the Angel, does not
appertain unto him.

In like manner also, except he be our only Prophet, which has so fully
declared unto us the will of his father, as should be expedient for our
salvation: first by the mouth of his Prophets: then by himself with his
coming at the fullness of time, and after that by his Apostles: except also he
alone be the spiritual King of our consciences: and except he be our
everlasting Priest after the order of Melchisidech, and by that sacrifice of
himself only, once offered for all, and never to be offered again, has
reconcyled men unto God: and does also now alone in heaven make intercession
for us to God, even to the end of the world: And to be short, except we be
complete and perfect in him, that name of Messiah or Christ, that is to say
Anointed, and appointed of God the Father, for us to be a Savior, does
nothing at all beelong unto him. Therefore if the preaching of his word out of
the books of the Prophets and Apostles be made insufficient, he is spoiled of
his prophetical office: if new laws be made, and laid upon the consciences
of men, he should be deprived of his kingly majesty: And if he be offered
again for remission of sins, and other ways also be found out to pacify the
wrath of God, although it should not be sufficient to have one Advocate and
Mediator in heaven between God and me^, he should be defrauded of his
Priesthood. Thirdely we agree not, neither in the defiinition, neither in the
original, nor in the effects of faith, which by the authority of the Apostle
Paul we call Justifying: by which only, we affirm that Jesus Christ with all
his graces, is made ours.

As touching good works, if there be any that think we contemn them, they
are utterly deceived: For we separate no more, faith from love, than we
separate light and heat from fire. And with John we say, He which says he
knows God, and keeps not his commandments, is a liar. But in these
things we confess we disagree in three special points. First of all in the
original of good woorks, In the matter of faith and good works.
that is to say, from whence they come: Secondely, what those good works are:
And thirdely to what use they are good. As touching the first principal
point, we find no other freewill in man than that which is made free by the
grace of Christ, and we affirm that our nature, being in that state, into the
which it is fallen, has need not only to be helped and sustained, but rather
to be mortified, and as it were killed by the power of the holy Ghost: which
found our nature not only weakened in grace, but also destitute of all
strength, and enemy to all goodness, and dead, yea and putrified in sin
and corruption. And this honor we give wholly unto God, neither do we think
that in this matter we ought in any wise to be joined with God. For we assign
to his grace and mercy, the beginning, the middle, and the end of working in
us. Concerning the second point. We acknowledge no other rule of
righteousness and obedience which may stand before God, than his
commandments which are faithfully described and put down to us in his
word: to the which we think it not meet, that any creature should add any
thing that apertaineth to the building of men's consciences, or detract from the
same. Concerning the third point, namely to what use these good works are
profitable. We confess that so far forth as they come from the spirit of God
working in us, having their beginning from so good an original, they are good,
and ought to be called by that name: howbeit, if God would examine the^
according to the rigor of his justice, he should find many things in them
worthy of condemnation. We say also that they are profitable for an other use:
because by them our God is glorified, and men brought to the knowledge of him:
but we are persuaded that for so much as the holy Ghost is within us (for he is
certainly known by those effects) we are of the number of his elect, and of
those that are predestinate to salvation. But for so much as it comes in
question to know by what title the kingdom of God appertains Romans 5.
unto us: we say with S. Paul, Eternal life is the free gift of God, and not a
due reward of our merits. For by this means Christ Jesus does justify us with
his righteousness only, which is imputed unto us, sanctifies us with his
holiness only, given unto us, and redeemeth us with his only sacrifice imputed
unto us, by true and lively faith of the grace and liberality of our God. Al
these riches and treasures are given unto us by the power of the holy Ghost,
using the preching of Gods word, and the administration of the sacraments to
this end: not as though it has need of those means (for God is omnipotent)
but because so it pleases him to apply and co^form him self unto us, and by
these ordinary means to create and nourish in us y^ most precious gift of
faith, which is as it were at hand to apprehend and take hold of those gifts,
and as it were a ve^ell to receive Christ with al his riches, to salvation.
Moreover we receive only and embrace for ye word of God, the doctrine contained
in the books of the Prophets and Apostls, called by the The authority Gods
word, and of the Fathers.
name of ye old and new Testament. For who can assure and certify us of our
salvation, but they which without exception ar the gretest witnesses? And as
touching the authority of the doctors of ancient time, and general councils,
before they be received without any examination: first they should be compared
with ye scriptures, and then themselves, with themselves, for so much as the
holy ghost is by no means contrary to himself. He speaks to the Prelates.
The which (my Lords) I think ye will never take in hand, and if ye do, give us
this leave that we may see ye matter before if we believe that ye will not do it.
But what? Are we of the progeny of that wicked Cham, which uncovered the
priuities of his father Noe? Do we think our selves to be better learned than
so many greek and latin doctors? Are we so wise in our own conceits that we
think yt we are the first which have opened the truth? Are we so arrogant, as
to condemn the whole world of error? God forbid, yea that be far from us.
Notwtstanding my Lords, we trust you will grant, us this, that every ancient
council and every doctor ought not to be received rashely, for so much as there
have been long ago many false prophets in the church of God, as the Apostle in
many places techeth us. Secondly, as touching those doctors 1. Timo. 4. Act. 20.
which are to be received, seeing al truth which may be found in the^,
necessarily ought to be drawn from ye scripturs, what sounder way shall we
find to profit in their writings, than to examine all things by that
touchstone, namely by ye welwayed resons and considered testimonies of
scripture, by which we ought to interpret the^? No man truly can give unto them
more, tha^ they would give unto themselves: And these are the very words of
Hierom writing upon the Epist. of the Gala. The doctrine of the holy Ghost is
that which is contained in the Canonical books of scripture: against which to
decree any thing by councils, is not lauful. And S. Aug. writing to Fortunatus
says Aust. ad Fortunatus.
we must not so much esteem of the disputations of me^, although they be
catholic and of great authority, as we must esteem of the Canonical
Scripture: except it be lawful for us, saving the reverence due to those men,
to mislyke and reject somewhat in their writings, if it be found that they
have judged otherwise than the truth will bear, which we or any others by the
grace of God do know. This is mine opinion in other men's wrytings: and such do
I wish the readers of my works to be. The like words also he has in his. 112.
Epistle: Also in. 37. cha. of his second book against Crescon. In like manner
S. Cyprian says, We must not have regard what this or that man does before
us, but what Christ Jesus has done, who is before all. Like unto this is the
rule which S. Augustine gave to Hierome: And in an other place also when he
disputes against those which would use the Council of Ariminum: Neither
will I (says he) allege the Council of Nice against you: nor shall you
allege the Council of Ariminum against me. By the authority of Scripture
let us weye matter with matter: cause with cause: and reason with reason.
Chrysostom was of the same opynion, as may appear in his. 49. Homely upon
Matthew. For the Church is founded upon the foundation of the Prophets and
Apostles.

Therefore (to conclude this matter) we embrace the holy Scripture for the f^l
and perfect declaration of al things, which appertain to our salvation. But as
touching that which appertains to general councels, and to the books of the
fathers, we mean to use them, and we forbid not you to use them so far
forth as that which ye shall bring from them, be not disagreeing with the
word of God. But for Gods sake bring not in their bare authority, until al
things are examined by the Scriptures. For we say with S. Augustine in his
second book De doctrina Christiana: the. 6. chapter. If there be any
difficulty in the interpretation of Scriptures, the holy Ghost has so
tempered the Scriptures that what soever in one place is obscurely spoken, in
another place is more plainly and evidently revealed. And thus far concerning
that Article, the which I have prosecuted the more largely, to the end^ all
men may know that we are enemies neither to general Councels, nor yet to the
auncien^ Fathers.

There remain yet to speak of two articles, namely concerning the Sacraments,
and Ecclesiastical discipline. The first truly deserves a copious and long
tractation, by reason of the often and great controversies even at this day
concerning the same: but because it is not our purpose to dispute, but only to
declare the specia^l points of our confession, it seems enough to me to
e^plicate the sum of our faith. We agree as I think, in the description of
the The opinion of the reformed Churches concerning the Sacrament.
name of the Sacrament: namely that Sacramente^ are visible signs, by the
means and help whereof, the conjunction which we have with our Lord Jesus
Christ, is not only simply signified or figured, but is also truly offered
unto God, and is confirmed, sealed, and as it were graven by the power of the
holy Ghost in their mynds, which with a true faith apprehend that, which is so
signified and offered unto them. I use this word, Signified. not to weaken or
abolishe the Sacraments: but to the end I might distinguishe the sign from
the thing signified. Hereupon we confess, that it is always necessary in
Sacraments, that there be a heavenly and supernatural change: for we say not,
that the water in Baptism is simply water, but a true Sacrament of our
regeneration, and of the washing of our souls by the blood of Christ.
Neither do we say, that the bread in the holy Supper of our Lord Jesus
Christ, is simply bread: but a Sacrament of the precious body of Christ
Jesus, which was given for us, and that the wine is not simply wine, but a
Sacrament of his precious blood, which he has shed for us. Nevertheless we
deny that there is any change made in substance of the signs, but in the end
and use for the which they are instituted. We deny also that the same mutation
is made by the efficacy of certain words pronounced, neither by the
intention of him that pronounces them: but by his will only which has ordained
this heavenly and divine action: the institution also whereof, ought evidently
and plainly to be expounded in the vulgar tongue, that all men might understand
and receive the same. Thus much concerning external signs. Now to come to
that which is showed and exhibited by those signs. We say not that which many
do, who not well understanding our minds, have supposed that we have taught:
namely that in the Lords supper there is only a co^memoration of the death of
our Lord Jesus Christ. Neither do we say, that we are partakers of the fruits
of his death and passion only in that thing, but do join the ground it self
with the fruits which do come fro him to us: affirming with S. Paul* The bread
which we break according to the Lords insti^tion is (...), Coinonian.
that is to say, ye participatio^ of ye body of Christ, which was crucified
for us: The cup which we drink is the participation 1. Cor. 10.
of his very blood which was shed for us, yea ^ue^ in ye very same substance,
which he took in ye womb of the virgin: and which he carried up into heaven.
Behold I pray you, can ye find any thing in this Sacrament which we seek, and
find not? But me thinks I hear some body make answer. For many would have us to
confess ye the bread and the wine are changed, not into the sacraments of the
body and blood of our Savior Jesus Christ, but into the very body and blood of
our Lord. Other some peradventure will not so urge us, but will have us confess
that the body and blood is really and corporally in, with, or under ye bread
and wine. But here my Lords, I pray you hear me patiently a little, and for a
time suspend your judgments. If either of these opinions shall be proved unto
us out of the word of God to be true, we are ready to embrace it, and wholly to
retain it. But it seems unto us (according to the measure of our faith,)
that this Transubstantiation cannot be revoked or brought to the analogy
Transubstantiation.
and substance of faith, and to sound doctrine, because it is wholly repugnant
to the nature of Sacraments: in which it is necessary that there remain
substa^tial signs, yt they may be true signs of the body and blod of Jesus
Christ. Furthermore it does euert and confound the verity of the humane nature
in Christ, and of his ascentio^. And as my opinion is of Tra^substantiatio^
eue^ so is it also of Consubsta^tiatio^: Consubstantiation.
which has no ground in the words of Christ, neither is it necessary to this,
that we be partakers of the Sacraments. But if any man demand of us if we make
Christ to be absent from the supper: we answer that we do not separate him from
the supper. But if we have respect unto the distance of places (as we must of
necessity when we speak of his corporal presence and of his humanity
distinctly considered) we affirm that his body is so far absent from the
bread and wine as the heaven is absent from the earth, f^r so much as we and
the sacraments are in earth, but he is so glorified in heaven, that his glory
(as S. August. says) has not taken away the August. ad Dardanum.
verity of his body, but the infirmity of his body. If any man hereupon
gather that we separate Christ from the Supper, he gathers amiss. For we do
bring this honor unto God, yt although the body of Jesus Christ be in heaven and
no where else, and we in earth and no where else, yet notwithstanding we are no
less partakers of his body and blood, by a certain spiritual manner and
instrument of faith, than we truly see with our eyes ye sacraments, touch the^
with our hands, taste them with our mouths, and are nourished and sustained in
this corporal life with their substance. This truly, in few words, is our
faith in this point, yt which we think, is not repugnant to ye words of
Christ, nor to ye Apostle Paul, and destroys not ye humane nature of Christ,
neither ye article of the ascension, nor the sacramental institution, it
gives no occasion to bring in curious and obscure questions: it does by no
means derogate from the conjunction which we have with Christ, which is ye
special end of ordaining of sacraments, not to ye end yt it might be either
worshipped, laid up, carried about, or to be offered unto God for a sacrifice:
to be short, (except we be deceived) it gives more to the power and to the
words of the Son of God, than their opinion, which think that his body must
be really joined with signs, to the end we might be partakers of him.

But concerning the administration of Baptism we say nothing at all. For I
believe that there is none of you that accounts us in the number of
Anabaptists, because they have no greater enemies against them tha^ we. As
touching certain other particular questions in this argument of Sacraments,
we trust God willing, that the special articles being brought to some order,
by this modest and quiet conference, the rest shall of themselves easily
follow. As touching the other five Sacraments, as ye call them, thus we
think, that until we be better taught by the Scriptures, they cannot be
called by the name of Sacraments: but notwithstanding, we think that we have
brought in the true confirmation, which stands in this, that so many as are
baptized Confirmation
in their infancy, and all others, whatsoever, before they come to the Lords
Supper* may be instructed in the Cathechisme.

We teach also true repentance, which consists in the true acknowledging of
sins, and in satisfaction either publicly or privately, of the parties
offended, also in absolution which we have in the blood of Jesus Christ, and
in amendment of life.

We do allow Matrimony according to S. Paul, in all those which have not
the gift of continency: and we think it unlawful for any man to bind
himself with a perpetual vow to lead a continent life, and never to marry:
and we condemn all fornication and lightness in word, gesture, and deed. We
allow the degrees of ecclesiastical offices, even as God has ordained them
in his house. We allow visitation of sick persons, as the special parts of
the Ministry of the Gospel. We teach, with S. Paul, that no man ought to be
judged for choice in days, and meats, for the kingdom of God does not consiste
in those corruptible and external things. The last point to speak of, is of
external order and government of the ecclesiastical State, of the which we
think it lawful for us to say, by your leave, that all things are so corrupted,
that very hardely, the notes and printes of that ancient buylding very well
ordered and appointed by the Apostles can be seen. Of the which matter
Ecclesiastical discipline.
you your selves may be witnesses, which took some pains not long ago
herein. But we omit these matters, the which we think better not to
disclose than to utter. And to conclude this Oration, we proteste before God
and his Angels, before your Majesty, (most Christian king) and before this
honorable assembly, that our purpose and meaning is nothing else, but to bring
the state of the Church to that purity and perfection, in the which it so
greatly flourished in the Apostles time: and that so many of those additions, as
should be found either superstitious, or else manifestly against the word of
God, might quite be abolished and counted superfluous: also that all things
might be taken away which (experience teaching) bring men to superstition.
But if certain things be found profitable and necessary to edification,
first consider of them wisely by the ancient Canons and authorities of the
Fathers, then let them be observed and kept as it shall be thought expedient
and meet for the times, places, and persons: that so with one consent God
may be worshipped in spirit and truth, under your obedience (O King) and the
obedience of those whom God has appointed to your Majesty to govern the
Realm. For if there be any yet which think that the doctrine which we
profess, does withdraw men Obedience to Magistrates.
from their dutiful obedience to Kings and Magistrates: we have to answer
them. For this we teach that the first and principal obedience is due unto
God, which is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. But if our writings may not
suffice to clear us of that crime laid to our charge, we will bring forth many
examples of principalities, of rules, and of kingdoms, that have been reformed
by the prescript of our doctrine, which may be sufficient witnesses of our
innocence. To be short in this point we say with S. Paul, Let every soul
submit himself to the authority of the higher powers* Yea and Chrysostom
writing upon that place, faith, Yea, let him submit him self though he be an
Apostle or Evangelist, because that subjection does not derogate from the glory
of God. Wherefore if it shall come to pass hereafter that any man falsely
professing our doctrine, shall be found to rebel, but against the least of
your officers, we protest before God and your majesty (O King) that such kind
of men shall not be of us, neither shall they find more mortal enimyes against
them than we. Therefore (O king) our desire to advance ye glory of God, our
obedience and love which we owe to your Majesty, our love also toward our
country, and specially to the Church of God, have brought us into this place,
trusting yt the most mighty God according to his accustomed mercy and
goodness, will bless you no less tha^ he did ye yo^g king Josias: and that
by your most happy government (O Queen) and by your counsels (most honorable
Princes, and cou^sellers) the ancient memory of ye famous Queen Clotilda, shall
be renewed: whose diligence ye Lord used as a mean to make himself known
throughout this Realm. This is our hope (most mighty king) for the which we
are ready to spend our lives: yt obeying your majesty in this so godly a
matter, we may see ye golden world, where our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ
reigns with all honor and glory for ever and ever.

Thus far Beza proceeded in his oration: who with his fellows fell on their
knees, and standing up straight way again, offered unto the king the confession
of the Churches of France, and then he spoke thus unto him: We beseech your
Majesty not to regard our rude and barbarous speech, but our well wishing
minds wholly consecrated to obedience. But, because the principal points of
our doctrine, are more plainly and copiously contained in this confession of
our faith, we beseech your Majesty to receive the the same: and we trust (by
the leave of God) it will come to pass that when we have conferred together
with all sobriety and reverence we shall come to some agreement. But if our
iniquities be the cause that we may not obtain so great a blessing, we doubt
not but your Majesty will consider of all things, and provide for them
accordingly, without prejudice of any party.

And here we think it not good to let one thing pass, namely, that when Beza
entreated of the Lords supper, and spoke these words, As touching the distance
of places, the body of Christ is so far from the bread and wine, as the heaven
is higher than the earth: the Prelates were so moved, that by and by they began
to make disturbance, and to murmur, but this being somewhat quieted, Beza made
an end of his oration. After whom the Cardinal of Turnon, having great
indignation, and shaking and trembling for very anger began in the name of the
Popish Prelacie (of which he was chief) to declare unto the king, that the
Cardinal, Bishops, and the rest of their fellowship, by reason of the kings
commandment, gave their consent that the new Evangelists (for so he
termed the men of the reformed Churches) should be heard what they could
say, but notwithstanding, not without some offense of their consciences,
because they perceived that they might speak many things not meet for a
Christian Prince to hear: which might also, (and that not without cause,)
offend the minds of many good men* Therefore he said, that the Prelates
suspecting that it would so come to pass, had given him commandment to
entreat the King, that if any such matters fell out he would not in any
wise believe their words. And that therefore he would reject both the words
and sentence of that fellow, that had spoken in the name of those of the new
Religion: staying and suspending his judgment until the Prelates had
otherwise opened the matter: the which if it might please him, he trusted that
both the king, and the whole assembly should understand and see* what
diffenre^ce there was between the truth and a lie.

He required also, that he might have a day given him to answer. Adding that
had it not been for the regard they had unto the King, and to his
commandments, they would not, at the hearing of those horrible and
abheminable words which that other fellow uttered, have suffered him to have
proceeded any further. At the length he beseeched the King that he would follow
the faith and footesteps of his ancestors: the which he prayed all the
Saints in heaven, and the Uirgin Mary to grant.

To this the Queen answered that nothing was done in The Queen answers the
Cardinal of Turnon.
this matter without due advice and counsel, by the deliberation of the
Princes, and the privy Council, and by the judgment and consent of the
Senate of Paris. The which (she said) was not done to alter any thing in
Religion but to quiet the troubles that were risen through the diue^sitie of
opinions in Religion, and by these means to bring those that were gone astraye
into the way again. Which (says she) you and your fellows ought to seek,
specially at this time, by using good and strong arguments.

Thus the mynds of the Popish Prelates being galled, and very much grieved at
the first meeting, with the words of Theodore B^za, the day following, he writ
unto the Queen, saying, because he feared that she was not fully satisfied, by
reason of certain words whereat the Prelates were offended: therefore he earnestly
desired of her, that he might have liberty more plainly and largely to
discourse that matter, which then he could not copiously declare. The occasion
therefore (says he) of those words by me uttered, was the opinion of certain
men, which not well understanding our minds, thought that we went about to
exclude Christ from the Supper: the which to do were manifestly wicked, seeing
we have the contrary to be found in the word of God, namely, that, that
precious Sacrament was therefore ordained by the son of God, that he might
make us more and more partakers of the substance of his very body and blood,
whereby we might more straightly be united unto him and might grow to
everlasting life: And unless it should be so, it were not the Supper of Jesus
Christ. And therefore it is so far from us that we should say that Christ is
absent from the Supper, that none of all others, more resist that blasphemy
than we. But we say that there is great difference between these, to say that
Jesus Christ is in the Supper in that he gives truly unto us his body and
blood, and to say and affirm, that his body and blood is joined to the
bread.

That first I have affirmed, because it is the principal and chief, the
second I have denied, because I think it to be repugnant to the truth of
Christ his nature, and to the article of the ascension, as it is in Scripture,
and as the ancient fathers expound the same. This sentence and opinion gives
more dignity and authority to the word of God, tha^ that, which teaches
that Christ is really and corporally joined to signs. This therefore is the
declaration and meaning of that which we spoke, which I desire may satisfy
you: being ready to be taught if better be showed. To this also he added
certain testimonies of the Fathers. As of S. Augustine, writing upon the. 5.
Chapter of S. John, where he says: When our Savior Christ said ye shall not
have me always with you: he spoke of the presence of his body. For, according
to his Majesty, providence, and invisible grace, that which he promised in
another place, is fulfilled: I will be with you to the end of the world: But
according to his humane nature which he took, according to that, that he was
borne of the virgin Mary, that he was crucified, and buried, and rose again,
it is said: Me, ye shall not have always. Wherefore? Because according to his
body, he was conversant with his disciples forty days, and as they went^ with
him, ascended from them into heaven, neither is here any more. Also the same
Saint Augustine says, writing to Dardanus. As he is God, he is every where: As
he is man, he is in heaven. And Vigilius, which wrote against E^yches in the
year of our Lord God. 500. says, The son of God in respect of his
humanity is departed from us: but in respect of his divinity he says, I am
with you to the end of the world. He is with us, and he is not with us: for he
has not forsaken those, in respect of his divinity, whom he has forsaken,
and from whom he is departed in respect of his humanity. Moreover he says,
When his flesh was in earth, it was not truly in heaven: but now because
it is in heaven, it is not, no doubt, in earth. Again he says, The only
son of God, which was also man, is contained in one place, according to the
nature of his flesh: And is not contained in any place according to the nature
of his Divinity.

Now in the mean time, while these things were thus a working, the Prelates
came together, and certain of the P^pisticall doctors of the Canon law,
being made acquainted with the matter, did deliberate and consults together
what answer they were best to give to the reformed Churches. Here it is
reported that the Cardinal of Lorayne said, I would to God that either he
were dumb, or else we deaf and could not hear. The matter being diuersely
reasoned and considered of on both sides, at the last it was concluded, that
answer should be made, to t^o special points of the oration: the first
point concerning the Church: and the second point concerning the Lords
Supper.

They did also deliberate, whether it were not good to have a confession made,
which should be offered to the protestants, but if their chosen men, which
were appointed to dispute for them had denied to imbrate the same, that then
they should have the sentence of condemnation proncu^ced against them as
heretics: and so the disputation sh^ld end. But this their devise was not
fully concluded upon, for that many of them would not agree unto the same And
when ye ministers of the reformed Churches heard of this devise, they
complained to the king and Queen that the matter was not indifferently
handled, beseching them that the fruit and profit of the conference might not
be hindered by these plat forms and subtle devises.

Therefore the conference began again the sixtene day of The second session.
September the king and Queen, the king of Nauar, and the Princes the kings
kinsme^ being present. And here the Cardinal of Loraine first of all spoke
very largely in the behalf of the Prelates, concerning the obedience of his
fellows The oration of the Cardinal of Loraine.
toward the king, ye which they acknowledged to owe unto him by the
commandment of God, and confessed that they would gladly give the same unto
him. Notwithstanding that the king ought to have great care to defend the
Church, not as head, but as a member of the same: and, that in those Note here
the subjection of Papists.
things which appertain to doctrine, he ought to be subject to the Church,
and to the ministers thereof, as the express testimonies of scripture, and the
examples of the ancient fathers do declare. Therefore (says he) we do make
this the ground of all our reasons, that all obedience ought to be given to
the King. But coming more near to his matter, he declares yt the assembly
whose cause he had in hand did consist of Archbishops, of Bishops ordinarily
made, of Priests, of Canons, and of a great number of others. Whose leg^te
(says he) I am, and this is ye sum of my imbassage. Where as many to my great
grief were fallen from the Church not long a go professing the contrary
Religion, neither submitting themselves to their own constitutio^s, being
within these few days called thither by the kings commandment, had declared
some good will to profit: if they would come again into their country and
into the ancient house of the Fathers, they shall be received, and have nothing
yt is past cast in their teeth: if so be yt they will show themselves penitent,
and will become obedient children to the Church. Therefore I will frame my
self according to their infirmities: being glad that they profess with us the
articles of our faith: and I heartily wish that as in words so in judgment we
may agree together. Therefore I will answer them in the spirit of love and
modesty. But I will handle only two articles, because it will be to tedious
to entreat of every one of them particularly.

And the two articles whereof I will speak, are concerning the Church, and
concerning the Lords Supper.

Wherefore, concerning the first, it is not true I hat the Church does consist
only of the Elect, because in the Lords barn the chafe is mingled with the
wheat: and yet notwithstanding the Church cannot err.

But if some part of the Church should err, the whole body ought to be
preferred before one corrupt member: if any evil should creep in, then we
must have recourse to antiquity, and must have respect to the chief and
principal Churches, among which the Church of Rome has had always the
principal place. If any thing were found to be amiss in some particular
place of the Church, we must set against the Ignorance of a small number of
men, the decrees of the ancient and of the general Counsels. But if this
thing may not suffice, we must diligently seek for the judgments of the
approved fathers of the Catholic Church: notwithstanding we must specially
give place to the testimonies of Scripture, being expounded by the true voice
and interpretation of the Church, least heretics should brag and say that
they alone have the word of God. For the Catholic Church must give
authority to the word of God. The which order, because the Arrians kept not,
they fell into great mischiefs: into which destruction they also are like to
fall, which seeing not the beam in their own eyes, are very busy to pluck out
the moate in other men's eyes. As touching the second point, which concerns
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, I must needs confess that I and the whole
Clergy are greatly grieved to see that the blessed Sacrament of the
Euchariste, which the The opinion of the Cardinal of Loraine concerning the
Sacrament.
Lord left unto us to be a bond and pledge of peace and unity, should by
curiosity of searching out of deep matters, be after a sort, an occasion not
only of infinite controversies, but also of forsaking the truth, which may
scarcely be kept among these controversies. For in the Eucharste we ought to
consider four things. The first is the union and 1
concord, which ought to be among the faithful, according to, that which the
Apostle says, that We are one body, and partakers of one cup. The second is
the union with Christ 2
Jesus, as it is said, He which eats my flesh and drinks my blood abides
in me, and I in him. The third is remission 3
of sins, which is purchased by the effusion of Christ his blood. The
fourth is, the hope of everlasting life, according 4
to that which is written, He which eats this btead shall live for ever. But
the contrary does happen in this disputation, namely distractions and divisions
in the Church, the separation from God, the loss of remission of sins, and
of the hope of everlasting life. Diverse and sundry are the controversies of
our adversaries concerning this matter, of the which there are eight in
number. It is better to abide in the approved opinion and judgment of the
Catholic Church, which is, that the very body of God and of our Lord Jesus
Christ and his very blood also, is present and received in this Sacrament:
according as it is said, This is my body. The which words, except they be in
deed of as great force as they sound and seem to be, why are they so
diligently repeated in like words of all the Evangelists and of the Apostle
Paul also? Why did not the other three Evangelists, and the Apostle Paul,
which wrote after Matthew, writ after that manner yt our Sacramentaries would
write? specially seeing in a matter of less weight they do one of them
expound another: and that which one of them sets forth obscurely, another
plainly declares. This is the mind of the Testator, which by no manner of
means ought to be disalowed or violated: This is also the judgment and
doctrine of all the ancient writers, that not only the bread is given by the
Priest, but also the very body of Christ really. Therefore I embrace this
stable and hole some opinion, and I do abhor with all my heart the curious
opinions and sayings of these new men, which seem so to represent Christ, as
if they should bring him forth in a Tragedy or Comedy. As though it were
not better to retain and keep the simple words of our Lord and sa^iour than
the false imaginations of men, seeing that this is most firm and certain, that
we are not only joined to Christ by faith, but also by the force and
efficacy of the Euchariste, being rightlye, worthily and really received, yea,
and to speak more playnelye, Substantially, Naturally, and Corporally.

And here he alleged many things out of the ancient fathers: and plainly
reprehended Beza, because he used the words of Austen in his epistle to
Dardanus, in this matter of the Sacraments, seeing in that epistle he entreated
nothing at all of the Sacraments, and also because he had condemned the
opinion of certain Germans, concerning Consubstantiation, contrary to his
own opinion. And then he concluded his oration with these words: I come and
yield (says he) to your opinion of the Sacrament, except ye think that
Jesus Christ, as touching his flesh, is in this world from the time of his
ascension, and that, more now than he was before he took upon him our flesh:
except ye think that Christ has some other body than that which is
visible: except ye think that he is otherwise in the Sacrament than in the
preaching of the word: if ye think it to be all one to put on Christ in
Baptism, and to eat his body and blood: and to be short, if ye think^, that
he is so in heaven that he is not in earth also: and that he is no otherwise in
the Supper than he is in the Myer: we which are taught that the Supper is not
in heaven, but celebrated in earth, and which are not so curious that we would
by ingenius and wise speculations bring and separate Christ from the Supper*
to answer you fullye, affirm that we are so far from your opinion, as the
heaven is hyer from the lowest part of the earth. Let them therefore see and
consider which judge and examine our Religion not by Philosophy, but by
Divinity, which of us two do attribute more to the power of God, and to Jesus
Christ. And so praying to God to root out these dangerous and deadly
opinions, and not to suffer these controversies to be in his Church, he
exhorted the king and the Queen, that they would take upon them the
patrocinie and defense of this matter: and protested in the name of the
Prelates of the French Church that he would live and die in the defense of
this doctrine which he had set forth.

After this all the Prelates which were present rose up, The protestation of
the Prelates.
and came near unto the king, and in their name the Cardinal of Turnon
protested that this was the confession of their faith which they would seal
with their own blood, being the undoubted truth of ye holy mother the Church.
The which the king ought to embrace and follow, according to the manner and
example of his elders. But if they which had separated themselves from the
Church of Rome, would subscribe to that confession, then they should be
received and be heard more fully in other articles in the which they said they
would be satisfied, otherwise they ought not to be heard at all. And it is
the Kings part to banishe them out of his Realm: the which he must
earnestly desired him to do.

Then Beza vehementlye desired of the King by and by leave to make answer out
of hand to the oration of the Cardinal of Loraine. For the ministers feared
that they should have no more leave to come together again, fame reporting
every where, that the prelates had determined, from that day forward to deal
with them no more but by excommunications. Notwithstanding though the
Ministers that day could obtain no leave to answer, yet obtained they another
day, the which nevertheless by reason of diverse rumors, was deferred until
the day following. Because of these detractions of times, the ministers fearing
that the disputation should be ended, they determined to offer unto the King a
supplication, praying him, that, for so much as, at his commandment they were
come thither from so far countries, quietly to confer with the Prelates for the
rooting out of errors, which so many years had oppressed the Church, they
might have leave to confer together, and to declare their cause, and that he
him self would take upon him the defense of Religion: which they said, was
the mean and way to raygne and rule himself, and to preserve his kingdom in
peace and tranquillity. When they had offered this Supplication oftentimes to
the King, at the last they obtained leave to have the conference continued, not
in public but in private place.

Therefore at the length the assembly was renewed again The third Session in
another order.
which a long time was broken off, a small number of men, the King and Queen,
the king of Navarre, the Prelates and twelve chosen Ministers, and a few others
being only present. Then the Cardinal of Loraine began to show, that this
assembly was gathered together, that the Ministers might be heard what answer
they would make to those things which he had lately expounded. Beza therefore in
the name of his fellows began thus, saying. When we have called upon the name
of God, that he would aid and assist us in a matter of so great weight, and
would bring to pass that this assembly might be gathered together to the
glory of his name, to your dignity, and specially to ye peace and
tranquillity of the king and Queen, of the whole Christian common wealth, and
kingdom: we will briefelye answer to that which was lately propounded by the
Lord Cardinal of Loraine, concerning the two principal points of our
confe^ion: namely concerning the Church, and the Supper of the Lord. But if we
might have had leave to answer at the first out of hand, when those things
that were spoken were yet fresh in memory, we might have been able more aptly
and distinctly to have made answer. But notwithstanding we will speak as God
shall make us able, that it may be understand, in what things we agree, and in
what also we do disagree: of the which I would to God there might be made a
perfect unity and concord. Therefore concerning the first principal point,
which is of the Church, we will declare three things. First, what the Church
is: Secondly, what are ye marks of the Church: and thirdlye, what is the
authority of the same. There is no doubt, but that this name, Church, was
d^riued What is the Church.
of the Greek word, which signifies to call from one place to another. But
in the Scripture there are found two kinds of callings. The one conjoined with
the efficacy of the holy Ghost, of which there is mention made in the Epistle
of S. Paul to the Romans, in these words: Those Romans 8.
whom God has justified, he has called. The other although it be allone
with the first, as touching the external matter, yet notwithstanding it is of
no efficacy, as touching salvation, not that God is to be blamed therefore,
but thorough men's default, which will not hear the word of God. Of this thing
the Lord speaks when he says, Many are called, but few are chosen,
Hereupon it comes that the name of the Church, which is a congregation of
men gathered together by the voice of God, which calls them, is taken two
manner of ways. For if it be taken generally for all those which do externally
profess that they do answer to Gods calling, then there is no doubt, but so
many reprobates and ^ipocrites are comprehended And thus truly have we always
both written and taught with one consent, seeing that matter is very common in
the Scriptures. But if this word or name Church be taken more properlye and
strictlye, as oftentimes it is, then we say that it only comprehends those
that are predestinate and chosen of God. And to the end men may perceive that
we have not devised nor invented this phrase of speech, and much less this
doctrine, when it is said, That the Church is the body of the Lord, bones of
his bones, and flesh of his flesh, how can the reprobates be comprehended in
this 1. Cor. 12.
number, seeing they are the members of the Devil? For these two things cannot
agree together, To be a member of August. contra Cresco^ cap 21.
Christ and a member of the Devil also: the which S. Augustine well
understood.

This same distinction of the Church that Author also used writing upon the
sixty four Psalm, when he says, The Church fignified by Hieru^alem began
at Abel: and Babylon at Caine. And yet notwithstanding in this first book of
Baptism against the Donatistes, the sixtene chapter, taking the name of
Church more generally, he says, He which begat Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham,
and the Prophets: begat also Cayne, Ismael, Dathan, and such others. In fine,
therefore, let us take that which the same Saint Augustine Lib. 7. cap. 51.
has written in the forenamed book, where it is said, that there are two
sorts of men, as touching the Church: For (says he) some are the members of
Christ and of the true Church, and so of Gods house, that they are even the
house of God. But other some are in the house of God, but are not the house of
God. For they are as the chafe with the wheat. But hereof there seems to
arise a question, whether the Question.
Church be invisible: the which seems of necessity to be concluded, for so
much as God only knows his elect, and seeing also we confess that we
believe the holy Church: And Answer.
that which is believed is not seen. But hereby may come great inconvenience,
if we have not a more deep consideration of this matter. For if the matter be
so, into what assembly can we come? Where shall then be the way of our
salvation except the Church be known that we may cleave unto Christ Jesus,
seeing that he does declare his virtue and saving health in one Church?
Therefore we say, that although the Church in consideration of those
things, whereof we spoke even now, can not be seen of men, yet
notwithstanding we have certain notes to know, to what Church we ought to
join our selves, namely, the pure word of God, and the sincere
administration of True notes of the Church.
Sacraments. The which notes are so plain and many^est, that wheresoever they
shall be, we ought to be out of all doubt that there is the Church of God,
in so much that by the rule of Charity, we ought to account all those for
the faithful Children of God, which profess the pure Religion, except God
shall reuea^e their hypocrisy. And of this matter Saint Paul has given unto
us a plain example, when he calls the Corinthians and Galathians 1. Cor. 3.
Saints, attributing also unto them the name of the Church although there were
great errors among them, both in corruptions of doctrine and also of manners.
The which also he has showed in another place, when he says, If any 1. Cor.
3.
man build on this foundation Gold, Silver, Precious stones, Timber, Hay, or
Stubble. etc.

Thus therefore we speak of the Church not transformyng the same into
fantastical imaginations, neither yet (as it seems unto us) do we give
occasion to a^ye man, to count us in the number of such as are fantastical
as the Catharistes, the Donatistes, and those furious Anabaptists also that
were in our time, with whom diverse of our brethren oftentimes have contended,
Now therefore I come to those notes and badges of the Church, the which we
must diligently behold, seeing out of the same there is no salvation, neither
any manner of thing which Satan our ancient ennme has not gone about at all
times to counterfaite and falsify.

I said that there were two certain and undoubted marks, namely the
preaching of the word, and the sincere administration of Sacraments. There are
some also which add Ecclesiastical discipline, and the fruit of the
preaching of Gods word. But because our iniquities will not suffer these two
notes to appear, therefore let us contentour selves with those two first.

That the word of God is a true badge and mark of the Church, it may hereby
appear, that the word is compared unto seed. Therefore Paul says, that he
had begotten the Corinthians in the Lord, that is to say, by the preaching of
the word. And therefore in many places, it is called meat and food,
according to the saying of the Lord: My sheep hear my voice, but they know
not the voice of a stranger. Also the sacraments are a true note of ye Church,
because the Lord would instruct us not only by the ears, but also by the
eyes, and other corporal senses: in so much that he would have the Sacraments
to be manifest testimonies, and certain and visible notes of the union of the
faithful, first with him, and secondly between themselves. Therefore it was
said in the time of the old Testament: Let the man that is uncircumcised be
thruste out from among the people: and therefore the master of every house
was wont thrice every year to present themselves in Jerusalem, that they
might testify the unity of faith and Religion by those sacrifices.
Afterward, the veil being taken away, and the cloase shut gate being broken
open, the Jews and the Gentiles grew into one body, not only by the
preaching of the word, but also by Baptism, and by the Ephe. 2.
holy Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ. And according to this,
Christ said to his Apostles, Go and preach to every creature, baptizing in the
name of the Father, of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. Whereby both the word
and Sacraments are noted. For that is to be joined with baptism which Paul
speaks of the Supper, saying, that He gave that which he received of the
Lord. And this is also the very same which is said in another place, That
the Church is founded upon the Prophets and Apostles, that is to say, upon
Christ Jesus, which is the head corner stone, that is to say, the matter and
substance of the prophetical and Apostolical doctrine. And thus the other
place of ye same Apostle ought to be understood, that the Church is the
strength and pillar of truth, that is to say the word of God, and the same
truth of God (as S. Ihon says) does sustain and hold up the Church, as also
Chrysostom interprets it. These are the true and visible notes of the
Church, the which Church, because it brings forth the faithful, and
nourishes them with the heavenly and incorruptible meat, is called their
mother and Nource.

But and if the word be preached and the Sacraments ministered, it must needs
follow that there be pastors and teachers, to whom those offices may be
committed, as the scriptures in diverse places testifies, and the Apostle Paul
also.

Hereupon it comes to pass, that many add a third note, namely, ordinary
succession from the time of the Apostles. To the which we answer, that such
succession Succession in the Church.
ought to be greatly esteemed, so long as it is rightly considered and applied:
even as the Fathers often times used the same against heretics, as it is to be
seen in Tertullia^, Irenaeus, and in Augustine against the Maniches and
Donatistes. But because they set that buckser against us, as bringers in of
new things: it is necessary that we declare what we think of this thing.

We say that there is one succession of doctrine, and another of persons.

The succession of doctrine we acknowledge for the true and undoubted mark of
the Church, according to those things whereof we have spoken before. For
although the doctrine of the Gospel is never a whit the more worthy to be
believed for antiquity, and although it comes to pass by the judgment of
God, for our iniquities, that the same is counted sometimes so new unto men,
when it should be familiar and known: yet notwithstanding the ancient and
continual succession does greatly prevail with men, even to the farther
confirming of the authority of the same.

As touching the succession of persons, we acknowledge the same: but upon that
condition, that it be joined with the succession of the Prophets and Apostles,
specially in the substantial and principal points of faith, and not
otherwise. But way and consider that I speak of doctrine, and not of manners.
For although the integrity of doctrine and of life be here unto required, that
a man should be counted for a good and true pastor, yet notwithstanding we do
not reiecte a pastor for ignorance, or the diversity of opinions in small
matters of doctrine, and for manners, if so be that he keep the foundation. Thus
are we taught of Christ, who says, So far forth as the Scribes and Pharisees
sit upon Moises chair, do that which they teach, and not as they do.

The which place, S. Augustine writing upon Ihon, says ought to be understand
of hirelings, which nevertheless retain sound doctrine, and not of false
pastors, of who^ Christ speaks, saying, Beware of the leven of the Phariseis.
Because (says S. Augustine) they sit upon Moises chair, they teach the law
of God, and so God speaks by them: but if they will teach their own
doctrines, ye shall neither hear nor do that which they teach.

Therefore to come to the matter, because false prophets may succeed true
prophets, and wolves the true shepherds: this truly is a sound and manifest
reason, wherefore we think that personal succession ought not only, not to
be received, but also utterly to be condemned, because it gives place to that
which is false, and craftily colors the same, least the succession of
doctrine should be laid for the foundation. Furthermore, if personal
succession should simply be taken for a true note of the Church, we must
bring forth and show a certain sure promise of God, by which he has bound
his grace to certain definite places and Regions, the which we think can in
no wise be showed out of the new Testament: seeing this is rather manifestly
declared, that there is a certain catholic or universal Church, because the
particular members thereof are dispersed thoroughout the whole world, even as
it pleases God to show forth his judgments upon those who^ he has utterly
cast off, or who^ he chastises for a time, and to show his mercy and
blessings upon those, whom he preserves, or whom he newly brings to the
knowledge of him. For God showing his vengeance in certain places seems to
abolishe atl things, in so much that there is no manner of sign of the Church
left, as it is come to pass in all Africa, Greece, and in the whole East part
of the world. But sometime that personal succession does decay only for a
little while, as it happened at Antioch, in the time of Samosatene, and at
Alexandri, in the exile of Athanasius, and in many other Churches also, so long
as there were heresies among them. And to be short, personal succession
ceased in the time of Honorious, who was condemned in the year of our Lord
God. D. LXXXI. for the execrable doctrine of Eutiches, and in the time of John
the xxii. of that name, who was condemned of Heresy: except we should say
that manifest Heretics may be true pastors. I omit to speak of those
things which happened in the time of that woman Pope IOANE, and of the
manifold tumultes of the false usurping Popes, which the histories make
mention of.

These things therefore considered, I conclude, that if we will rightly know the
Church, we must not have regard to Successors of the Apostles.
personal succession, but to the purity of doctrine, and to the sincere
administration of the Sacraments: in so much that we must count them for the
true successors of the Apostles which being rightly called, do build upon their
foundation: and do first of all set forth the word of God in certain places,
whether the succession of persons be perpetual, or whether it decay or cease
for a time.

Whereas on the contrary part, they which either preach not the word of God at
all, or else preach their own doctrine in steed of the Apostles doctrine,
although they allege and bring in for them selves, a thousand continual
successors, are not to be heard as pastors, but to be shunned as wolves:
according to the express commandment of Christ Jesus and of his Apostles.

But some man will object and say: is it lawful then for Objection.
every man to preach the word and to minister the Sacraments? No truly, it
ought not so to be. For all things must be done in the Church of God (as the
Apostle says) 1. Cor. 14.
in order?

Who are then true Pastors? surely such as are lawfully called.

It rests therefore now to consider what is lawful calling, Vocation in the
Church, ordinary, and extraordinary.
that this special matter also may be understood. We say that there is one
form and manner of ordinary calling, and another of extraordinary calling.
That is ordinary calling, in the which, the order appointed of GOD in the
Church, is observed. In this order the first thing is, The examination 1
of doctrine and manners: the second, lawful 2
election: and the last, imposition of hands. These three 3
things may be gathered and approved, by diverse testimonies of Scriptures: as
by the election of Mathias, and of the seven Act. 1. Act. 6. 1. Timo. 3. Titus.
1.
Deacons in the Acts of ye Apostles: and also by those things which Paul
writes in his Epistles to Timothy, and to T^tus. This is the description of
ordinary calling. Whereby it may be gathered, that the same is an
extraordinary calling, in the which, although it be lawful by Gods authority,
either one of these two things, or both, or else all, are wanting. The which
kind of callings God has oftentimes used as in the Scriptures appears. For
who laid hands Exodus 28. Esaias. 6. 9. Dom. 1. 17. Amos. 7. 14.
on Moses to dedicate Aaron: Who anointed the Prophets, Esayas, Daniel,
Amos, and many others? Therefore when they which had authority, abused the
power of ordinary calling, then I say, it was necessary that the Lord
should use extraordinary means, not to bring in confusion, but to refourme
those which had perverted and depraved al things in the Church, under the
color and pretense of ordinary succession. And that the matter stands thus,
the writings of the Prophets which specially inueye against the Priests, do
manifestly declare.

If any man obiecte and say, that they had extraordinary Esaias. 28. Iere. 7.
Ezechiel. 22. Soph. 3.
testimonies of their calling confirmed with certain miracles, we answer,
That this is so far true in some, that in other some, it is stark false:
except we should speak of those things of the which there is no testimony. And
truly I cannot tell whether there be many Prophets to be found of the
progeny of Aaron, upon whom hands were laid after an ordinary manner. If in
like manner it be alleged that they contented themselves with the office of
reprehending and reproving, and exercised not the office of sacrificing: we
answer, first of all, that this is not found every where to be true. For
Samuel which was not of the family of Aaron, 1. Samuel. 7. 1. King. 18.
but of Chore sacrificed in Mispa. And Elias in Carmel. Secondly we answer,
that it ought not to seem strange that the prophets at that time extended
not that extraordinary office, to the doing and fulfilling of ceremonies,
seeing that the same office did appertain by inheritance to the kindred and
stock of Leui, which at this day is out of use. Thus far therefore concerning
these special points, what is the Church: what are the marks of the same:
what is the vocation of Pastors, we have spoken our judgment. The which
things if ye mean to call in question and to seek and try whether they be in
our Churches, or in our persons, we trust, by the help of God, to bring
such certain reasons, that no man can doubt that we have ye true Church, and
that our calling is lawful.

Now let us come to the third principal point, which concerns Authority of
the Church. Hebt 11.
the authority of the Church. It is manifest by those things whereof we have
spoken already that we do derogate nor take away none of those precious and
magnifice^t notes with 1. Cor. 14.
the which the Church is beautified. But we say, that it is ye body of the
Lord, yt as yet it is a pilgrim in this world, loking for ye fullness of the
head yt is, Christ. This is the house Ephe. 4.
of the Lord, which is daily builded and erected by little and little which is
governed by the holy Ghost, but as yet fighting against the flesh, it is
purified, but so, that by little and little it Galathians. 5.
may be brought to the perfection of that beauty and cleanness in the which
there is neither spot nor wrinkle: it knows Ephe. 5. 1. Cor. 13.
God, but in part. To be short, we confess, that out of the Church, there is
no salvation, seeing there is life no where else, tha^ in Christ Jesus, who
exercises his quickening life in no other than in his members, the vinion and
coagmentatio^ whereof is called the Church. But in this all the whole Whether
the Church may err.
controversy consists namely, whether the Church may err in this world:
whether it be subject unto the scripture, or ye scripture unto it. To the which
I answer that it is out of all controversy and doubt, yt the particular
members of the Church, may err, and do daily err, both in doctrine and in
manners, according to this place of the Apostle Paul, saying, We know in part,
And S. Ihon says, If we say, we have no 1. Cor. 13. 1. hon. 1.
sin, we deceive our selves. If any man would go about to exempt the ancient
fathers from that number, he shall not be offended, if we believe not his words.
For it were an easy matter (saving y^ reverence which we owe unto the^) to
note many blemishes and spots, eue^ in the greatest and most ancient fathers,
but we will not stand in repeating of them, both for the honor which they
worthily deserve, and also for that the Lord Cardinal (if I well remember his
words) thinks not that they ought rashly and indifferently to be received.

This is our opnion concerning the particular members of the church, whose
perfection notwithstanding is no such cause or let, but that the Church may
consist of them. For ye faithful profit by little and little both in the
knowledge of God, and also in the perfection of manners.

But and if the members of the Church be considered more generally, as they be
distributed into diocesses, and provinces, shall we say that they may err?
Moreover, if I be not deceived, my Lord Cardinal thought of late that
particular Churches, and provincial councels may err, and have oftentimes
erred: And truly this thing is confirmed by so long experience, that I think
not that any man in his right General counselles.
wits will deny the same. It remains therefore that we consider the whole
Church universally.

But how? For if we behold the same in the representation of a certain general
Council, first, it is not likely that all the force and virtue which the holy
Ghost has powered out upon the Church, is restrained to a certain number of
prelates, which are oftentimes never the more learned nor any whit ye better,
although they represent all those, of who^ they are sent. For how oftentimes
may it come to pass that some one man altogether unlearned, shall have more
wisdom tha^ all ye learned of ye whole company beside? Ane therefore is it
written in ye Gloss: Thou have declared concerning elections, that one private
faithful man, which brings better reasons, ought rather to be believed than
the whole counsel, and the Pope. But rather in ye great Nicene counsel, who
did let that law of chastity, which from that time brought so many
corruptions into the Church, that it might not be established? One only
Paphnutius, not greatly learned, as the story makes mention.

Furthermore, at what time was there ever so general a Council gathered
together, but that not only the greatest part of learned men, and of godly
men, but also of Prelates, was left behind? And who will deny, but that they
which are absent, have oftentimes had the more sound and better judgment tha^
those that were present? Beside these things, ye also my Lords do know, what
great confusion reigns in the Church, and specially in the greatest offices
of the Prelacie: in so much that we may say, The greatest corruption has been
in that part, which ought to have been more per^ect and sound. Of late we had
many examples, and the holy Bishops have fet such deep sighs for these
things, that the sound of them is heard as yet. And truly Bernar. in lib. de
consider. and in sermon. 33 in Cantica. and in sermo. de conuersione Pauli.
the saying of S. Bernard is no less known than true, when he says. Oh Lord,
they which love the highest romes and desire principallitie, are the first which
persecute thee, they have taken mount Sion, they have taken the arc of the
covenant, and by force have set fire on the whole City.

But let this be spoken, my Lords, not that I touch or mean any of you, but
only to declare, that seeing the principal vocations in the Church are so
fowly corrupted, it cannot be, that the general Councels after so long time
established by a multitude of such wicked men, should be so governed by the
holy Ghost that it cannot err. A certain Cayphas prophesied. ^hon. 18.
ancient Priest prophesied also, although he were ungodly and wicked: but it
was the holy Ghost that prophesied in him, being ignorant what he said, and
being driven to speak by the contrary spirit, that is to say, by the spirit
of the Devil, in appointing to kill an innocent, namely Christ Jesus the son
of God.

Furthermore if a general Council have this privilege, that it cannot err,
neither in the rule of doctrine, nor in the form of manners, we demand, when
and at what time it obtained this privilege. For there was never at any time,
but one faith, and one Church. And the Prophets do plainly declare, and the
histories do evidently confirm the same, that the ancient Church in the time
of the old Testament has erred. All the beholders thereof are blind, (says
the Esaias. 56.
Prophet) they know nothing, they are dumb dogs. And the Prophet Jeremy
says, From the Prophet to the Priest Jeremy. 6.
all have gone astray. And least this should be restrained to the life of
singular men, it is expressly said in the fourtene chapter of the same
Prophet: They prophecy lies, and Jeremy. 14.
set forth a false vision. Also the Prophet Esaias says: The wisdom of the
wise shall perish, and the intelligence of those that understand: God shall
put out the eyes of the prophets. Esaias. Ezechiel. 7.
Moreover in Ezechiel it is said, The law shall depart from the Priest. But
who slew the Prophets, who put the son of God to death, who condemned the
Apostles but only the Prelates and hie Priests of the Jews.

If any man object and say, that these things happened in the time of the old
Testamente, we reply that this is no answer, for because it shall be always a
strong conclusion, that the congregation of the Prelates or Papists of the
Church although it be universal at the last, is governed rather by the spirit
of error than by the holy Ghost. Secondly if we come to the new Testament,
has not the Apostle Acts. 20.
Paul plainly admonished the Church in the person of the Ephesians, that
wolves shall come forth from among 2. These. 4.
the shepeherdes? and also that the son of perdition shall sit in the Temple
of God? And certainly if the councels be compared one with another, many
contrarieties shall be found in them, in so much that we must needs confess
that they were not always led and ruled by the holy Ghost, but rather that
Satan has transfigured himself into the light of the general Councels, to
cover and hide his lie and error. There is also another place of S. Augustine,
Aust. lib. 2. de bap. co^tra Donat. cap. 31.
in the which he has these words: The Epistles of particular Bishops, are
corrected by provincial Councels, and the Epistles of provincial Councels, by
general Councelles, when as, by experience that which was before hidden, is
now manifest, and known.

This place I alleged before in my first oration, to the which my lord
Cardinal made answer, that it ought to be understood of external matters,
which might and ought to be altered as necessity should require. But y^ whole
matter being more diligently considered, it shall appear yt the word
(corrected) which Austine uses, does presuppose some error, which was
afterward amended. And S. Austine in that place does not entreat of external
discipline, but of one special point of doctrine, namely of the sentence of
Ciprian, and of the council of Africa, which concerned Rebaptizing.

If also this place be objected against us, as where our savior Christ says,
that He will be in the midst of two or three that are gathered together in
his name, hereby to prove that this promise does appertain rather to a general
council than to a few men: We answer, that we may thus think of this
promise, but there is great difference between our imagination, and a most
certain knowledge. For seeing the wickedness of men is grown to that pass yt
it abuses the name of God to a lie, there may be some which having the name of
God in their mouth, carry his adversary the Devil in their hearts, and we do
affirm that in so great infirmity of humane wit, and amidst so many
troublesome desires, he is in great danger to be deceived, which only leans
to men's judgments, and to the external show of a council.

What the^? shall we say yt the doctrine of the Church, seeing the Church may
err is uncertain? Nothing less. For we confess, yt although we see in part
(as S. Paul says) and so error may be joined with ye truth, yet
notwithstanding God will not suffer the knowledge of ye principal grou^des of
our salvation to be buried and forgotten, but there shall be always one or
other of his servant, which shall know that which ought to be known, and shall
follow that which ought to be followed: as we see it happened to Helias, in
time of the captivity of Babylon, and in Israel in the time of Christ his
coming, when as there was scarsly left one Zacharias, one Elizabeth one
Joseph, one Uirgin Mary, one Anna, the Prophetess, which among so many
corruptions of ye Scribes, Phariseis, and Saduceis, had the true understanding
of the Prophecies concerning the coming of Christ. These interruptio^s
therefore and lets which fall into the Church of God, are as it were a certain
tempest and cloud, which God drives away by the coming of his Son, that is
to say, of his word, according to the dispensing of the secrets of his
judgments and mercies. May we not condemn general councels? God forbid. For
ye know that if we shall go about to reform or amend any thing by them, ye
shall change and alter many more things tha^ we: in the which not long ago ye
traveled. Notwithstanding we require this thing at your hand, that the word
of God may be as a touchstone, that whatsoever is either spoken or done in the
Church may be tried by the same. If this thing seem strange unto you, I
pray you my Lords consider that noble place of Augustine, where he writes to
Maximinus Arrianus, being in the second book, Aust. lib. 2. ca. 4. ad
Arrianu^.
and fourth chapter, saying.

Is there a more approved Council, than the first Nicene Council? None I
believe. What was the council of Ariminu^? It was rejected, and condemned and
that justly. But whereof does S. Augustine entreat in that place? Surely, of
one of the principal articles of our faith, so oftentimes concluded and
confirmed, namely of Consubstantiatio^ of the Son of God. Nevertheless S.
Austine confesses that he will neither be tried by the cou^^el of Nice, nor by
the counsel of Ariminu^ but by the scriptures, which he calls indifferent
witnesses for both parts. But if here we will obiecte and say that the
scriptures are hard and obscure, we must confess with Saint Paul, that the
carnal man does not vnderstan^e ye things that are of God, and with the
Apostle Peter, that the scriptures 1. Cor. ^. 2. Peter. 1.
have not a private explication.

And if the obscurenesse of the Scriptures be such that they cannot manifest
themselves unto us, why does not Christ send us to some other thing rather
than to them, when he says, Search the Scriptures. Furthermore, what did they,
Ihon. 5.
which used only the writings of the Apostles before there were any
commentaries of the Doctors?

I remember, my Lord Cardinal, that ye said, that the firm and undoubted
interpretation, which was always in the Church, every where, and of all men
received, ought to be embraced. But who will certify us of those three
principal points? Furthermore if we come to these words, Always, and Of all
men, at what time shall we begin, but only at the Apostolical Church? And
who shall be counted the first, but the Apostles themselves, whose stories Luke
has so faithfully described, and are also to be seen by their writings.
Therefore because all truth depends upon God, which has made the Prophets,
and Apostles to be interpreters of our salvation, we always come to this
foundation of Scriptures.

And yet nevertheless we reject not the judgments of Councels and of the
Fathers, so that they agree with the Scriptures: the which, as S. Austine
says, are so tempered and placed by the holy Ghost, that the same which in
one place is spoken obscurely, in another place is more plainly uttered.

Notwithstanding here remain certain doubts to be opened, and expounded. For
there are many which think, that the will of God, as touching our salvation,
is not fully contained in the writings of the Apostles. But I pray you consider
with your selves, if this be granted, what a way is made to all errors? And
truly, by this way, Satan has greatly broken into the Lords vineyarde.
Nevertheless we do not deny, that God before Moses time, ordered and taught
his Church by visions and revelations, and that the Apostles builded the
Churches with their own voice, before they had written any thing.

But why would God, the number and wickedness of men increacing, have this
doctrine to be described, which was preached and known to all men? for this
cause truly that he might prevent their subtle crafts, which color all their
doings, with the names of tradition, of revelation, and of custom. But if this
doctrine be only written in part, what shall this remedy profit? Ihon truly
speaks not thus of the Scriptures, when he says, These things Ihon. 20.
are written that ye might believe, that Jesus is Christ, the Son of God,
and that in believing, ye might have life: the which no doubt should be false,
if there were any other doctrine necessary to salvation. In like manner the
Apostle Paul, expounding the use of doctrine, and in the person of Timothy,
instructing all the ministers of the Church, had not said, that The Scriptures
make the man of God, that is 2. Timo. 3.
to say, the minister, and every faithful man) perfect, and fully given to
all good works: if any thing ought to be joined to the same. Notwithstanding
we doubt not, but that there have been always from time to time unwritten
traditions, as touching the order and manner of doing. But because many of late
days do abuse this word (Traditions) we will show what Traditions ought to
be received. The which shall be easily done if these two things be considered:
namely, if the doctrines be conformable, and fyt to edification. For this is
always firm and certain, that the Apostles and true shepeherdes, never
appointed rites, either dirictly or inderectly contrary to wholesome doctrine:
or other things which might in any point or ^ot draw men from the spiritual
worship of God. Therefore when this rule shall be observed and kept, it will be
an easy matter to discern true doctrine from traditions, and true traditions
from those that are false. You also may remember how greatly Tertullian, in his
tractation of the Scriptures, condemns those which said that the Apostles
left somewhat obscure and not sufficiently expounded, which appertained to our
salvation. I will say more, namely that the same which the Apostles have done
here is not perpetual: not as though they were not by all exception the greater
witnesses but because they did bear somewhat with the infirmity of the Jews
by the rule of charity: as in willng them to abstain from things offered to
Idols, and from strangled: and in that also which Paul did in Timothe and in
himself, ye which Act. 15 16. 18
things at this day ought to have no place, but only by a general rule of
indifferent things, which of themselves are Things indifferent.
neither good nor evil, in which things we ought to apply our selves to the
infirmity of our brethren.

These things also may be gathered of the rytes which agreed with their times,
as the manner of kissing one another in going bareheaded in sign of authority,
which is contrary to the common custom of many people.

All these things therefore ought to be considered, before a custom be
established as apostolical: least the Apostolical authority and custom be
abused to the disturbing of the churches, as it came to pass after the
Apostles time, for the feast of Easter, and in the Apostles time for the
authority of the Church of Jerusalem, as appears by Luke. Acts. 15.
How then shall we think that the Apostles found out so many ceremonies, in
which afterward was placed remission of sins, when as plainly they have
testified the contrary. Augustine complained of these things long ago: and
there is no doubt, but that if he had been in these our days he should have
had greater occasion to complain. To be short therefore, we wish that the
Scripture which is very plain in these matters, may Judge between traditions
that are good and evil between holy and profane, between profitable and
hurtful, and between such as are necessary, and those that are super flucus.

The which being granted, this question may easily be resolved, namely,
Whether the Church be above the scripture: The which question seems so
absurd unto me as if a man should demand, whether the father were inferior to
the son, or whether the wife were above the husband, or man above God.

And truly the true Church never complains and murmureth against God in this
matter, but always modestly submits it self unto him. Neither makes it any
matter that the Church was before the Scriptures.

For that word which was afterward written, is more The word of God more
ancient than the Church.
ancient tha^ the Church, seeing of the same, the Church was conceived,
begotten, and brought forth, and has also of the same his denominatio^. And to
disprove this the saying of S. Austine is brought against us, when he says: I
would not believe the scripture, were it not that the authority of the church
did force me thereunto. But we must consider yt S. Austine speaks here in the
person of Manichaeus. For when two me^ do contend about the truth of some
instrument, to whom in the end shall they go but to the Scriuener or Notary, yt
has the first draught or cou^terpane of the same: Notwithstanding it does not
here upon follow yt the authority of ye instrument does depend upon the person
of the Notary, the which should be no less firm and strong, although the
Notarie being alive, would refuse to give testimony of the same. The same
answer must be made to those, which think Canonical Books.
the authority of the Canonical books of scripture to depend upon the
determination of the Church.

But I will content my self to add unto that, whereof I have spoken before,
one only argument, confirmed by the authority of certain approved Fathers.

The argument is this, Christ him self did so much esteem of the doctrine
of the Prophet, that he sought to confirm his doctrine by their testimonies.
After the same manner the Apostle Paul went about to confirm the Thessalonians
Acts. 17.
in his doctrine. Peter also the Apostle commends unto us and allows this
order of teaching. Therefore it is not meet that they which call them selves
Christ his vicars, and the successors of Paul and Peter should 2. Peter. 1.
Cap. 6. lib. 2. in Hiere.
refuse the same condition. Furthermore, thus says Saint Hiero^, The error
either of the fathers or of the elders, ought not to be followed, but the
authority of Scriptures. And Chrysostom says, He which will know which is
the ^ue Hom. 49 in Math. 24.
Church of Christ, How shall he know the same in so great confusion of
likeness but by the Scriptures? Also in ye same place he says, Let them
which are in Judea flee into the mountains: that is to say, They which are in
Christianisme let the^ busy themselves in the Scriptures. But why would he
have all Christians at that time be occupied in the scriptures? Because so
soon as heresy had entered into the Churches, there could not be had a
true probation of Christianisme: neither can they which would know the truth
of faith, find any other refuge than the holy scripture.

Whosoever therefore would know the true Church of Christ, how should he know
the same but by the Scriptures? In like manner the Lord knowing that there
should come so great confusion in the latter days, commands Christians
which will have the assurance of true faith, to have no other refuge than the
holy Scripture: otherwise if that they seek for other means, they shall be
offended, and perish, not understanding what is the true Church and so shall
fall headlong into the abomination of desolation, which is placed in the holy
place of the Church. Also Basil says, If Basil in noua summa Mora. cap. 22.
whatsoever be not of faith be sin, as says the Apostle: and faith comes
by hearing, and hearing by the word of God, then whatsoever is beside that
word given by divine inspiration is sin. Also in the sermon of the
confession of Faith, he says, If God be faithful in all his words, and if
all his commandments be firm and certain for ever, framed in truth and
righteousness, it is a forsaking of the faith, and a point of arrogancy to
retect any part of those things which are written, or to bring in any thing not
written.

Thus far (O Queen) we have answered copiouslye, according to our knowledge to
the first principal point of the Oration made by the Prelates, concerning the
authority of the Church, being ready patiently, and quietly to hear,
whatsoever shall be showed contrary to that which we have spoken. There
remains yet to be spoken of the Article of our Lords Supper, the which if it
seem good unto your Majesty, I will now pretermit: both for that I have
heide you and the whole company over long, and also because we desire to have
this conference hereafter framed in better order. Notwithstanding if it shall
seem good unto your Majesty that we proceed any farther, we are ready to
utter those things which the Lord shall put in our hearts: always
submitting our selves unto those things, which shall be objected unto us out
of the Scriptures, most humblye praying and beseeching your Majesty (O
Queen) to be fully persuaded in this one thing, that next unto the glory of
our God, we wish and desire nothing more vehemently, than the dignity of
your Majesty, and the peace and tranquillity of the Realm.

After that Beza had thus ended his oration, then the Cardinal, beckning to
Claudius Espensius, a Sorbonist, willed Espensius i^e Sorbonist.
him to make his oration. The^ Espensius beginning to show, that not long ago
he had wished to have this mutual conference: and that he always utterly
abhorred those cruel punishments, which were unjustly used against those
which embraced the Religion: he said that those things which were already
spoken of the Church, and of the marks, and succession of the same, were in
his judgment, very true, adding hereunto, that if this way had been taken in
hand at the first, all controversies had been by this time ended. But as
touching that principal point of the Succession of the Church, I have (says
he) oftentimes marvelled with my self, by whose authorite, and by whose
calling ye are entered into the Church, and have taken upon you the office of
teaching, seeing that ye are not come in by the ordinary way, nor by such as
have ordinary authority, nor have not received of the^ the impositio^ of
hands. Here upon he gathered that the ministers of the reformed churches, were
not true and lauful pastors, for so much as they could not say that they were
Succession ordiniarie and extraordinary.
come in by ordinary succession, much less by extraordinary, because
extraordinary vocation ought to be confirmed by miracles, eue^ as Moises being
raised up of God to deliver ye people, was established by extraordinary
miracles, or else truly these extraordinary callings, ought to be confirmed by
some express testimony of scripture, as the calling of Ihon by the testimony
of Malachy. Both the which seeing they lacked, he concluded that their calling
and ministry was not lawflul. As concerning traditions, and the interpretation
of scripture, if there shall happen to be any disputation about the^, the^ we
must run and have regard to ordinary successors, as to those to whom the holy
Ghost is promised, who were ordained to yt end and purpose, as it is manisest
by ye example of the Levites with whom in time past me^ ought to consult, and
from whose judgment it was not lawful to decline. Many things, yea eue^ those
that Traditions of the Fathers.
are most certain and farthest from all doubt, are retained by tradition: As
ye the father is not begotten: that ye son is of like substance with the
father, that infantes ought to be baptized, y^ the virgin Mary was a pure
virgin after the birth of Christ, and so remained, and such like, the which
being received from the fathers, although they be not plainly written in the
word of God, ye is to say, in the books of the prophets and Apostles, yet
notwithstanding they are not of less credit and authority. Moreover he said,
ye whatsoever was concluded and determined by general councils, were and ought
to be accounted most certain and true, seeing ye councels could not err in
those things that appertained to doctrine. For ye, which (says he) you have
alleged out of S. Austin, that one counsel was corre^ and (...)proved by
another counsel following, never came to pass in those things which
appertained to Religion. For there were only three councels in the time of S.
Augustine, namely the Three councels in S. August. time.
counsel of Nicene, against the Arria^s, the counsel of Constantinople
against the Macedonia^s, and the Ephesine council specially against Nestorius,
none of the which were afterward reproved and amended. That which you brought
in concerning Paphnutius, it is neither certainly true, nor yet does it
appertain to the purpose. Here upon he repeated that which was spoken
concerning the Supper, disputing a little about the corporal presence, and he
alleged many things out of the books of a certain author, which (as he said)
the ministers could not refuse, meaning Calvin one of whose books he brought
forth. It was said yt Espensius at the commandment of the Cardinal of Loraine,
of purpose began to reason concerning the Supper, to the intent he might find
convenient occasion to break off the conference.

While Beza was about to make answer to yt which Espe^sius had said, a certain
Sorbonist, a white monk, whose name was Xainctius, being fully bent to
dispute, rose up, making a long and tedious repetitio^ of those things which
were spoken Traditions cou^ ted of a Monk of greater force than the scriptures.
by Espensius before: and said that traditions had a more firm foundation than
the scripture it self, because ye scripture might be drawn every way by the
variety of interpretations: for the which cause he said, that Cyprian
contended with many Affricans, affyrming that Christ said not, I am custom,
but, I am the way, the truth, and the life. The which sentence from that time
forward, was many ways wrested and tra^sformed. To the same effect he cited
the testimony of Tertullia^, in his book of prescriptions of heretics, and
said that Beza had spoken very stately, sending him to the same place of
Tertullian, to read it more diligently: Who says (Quoth the Tertullian.
Monk) that, Heretics bring in the scriptures, and do lead the ignorant into
error, being moved by the authority there of. And thus he concluded that the
Scriptures ought not to be used, and that from them simply we ought not to take
weapons to convince heretics, for because of things so uncertain, the
certain victory of truth cannot be gotten. At the last he obscurely said,
that God beside his Council, had given unto us his doctrine in writing, and
said that Chrysostom was the author of this saying.

Here Beza made answer that those long and tedious words of the Monk were
very impertinent to their conference, and nothing helping to that peace and
concord which they wished: and directing his oration to the Queen, he did
beseech her to provide that they might never afterward swerve and fall into
perturbations and troubles not serving to the purpose. Therefore (says he)
that I may answer to the first doubt of Espensius, from whence the Ministers
of our Churches, had their calling, seeing they were not called by ordinary
Imposition of hands.
means, neither had received the imposition of hands: know ye, that
Imposition or laying on of hands, is not the special note of lawful calling:
for the principal and substantial notes are, the Inquisition of manners and
doctrine, Signs of laufull calling.
and Election: from the which two, if imposition of hands shall be wanting,
yet we must not think the calling to be any whyt the less lawful. We are
elected Ministers, and approved of our Churches, which with one consent have
allowed our Ministry. But whereas we have not had imposition of hands, nor
appointed by those whom ye call Ordinaries, that ought not to seem strange,
seeing that in so great confusion of all things in the Church of Rome, we
would not receive imposition of hands of those, whose vices superstition, and
false doctrine we disalowe: for that they were open enimyes to the truth. It is
out of all doubt, that the Prophets in old time had no greater adversaries
than the Priests, which rejected sound doctrine, and neglected their office
and duty. Did the Prophets therefore at any time, which were raised up of
God to be enemies unto them The co^firm^tion of the ministry.
desire the confirmation, or approbation of their offices unto the which they
were called, and appointed of God? And yet notwithstanding who will say that
they did intrude themselves into those offices, which they executed and
discharged faithfully with great peril and danger of their life? The which
also we ought to do at this time. And it ought not to be said that Miracles are
necessarily to be required to extraordinary callings: for that which is
written concerning the calling of Moses, is not common to all.

For by what Miracles were the callings of Esayas, Daniel, Miracles.
and Zacharias confirmed? Did the Apostle Paul look for imposition of hands
of the Phariseys, that he might execute that office which God had committed
unto him? And when he would confirm his Apostleship, he speaks not only of
the Miracles which he had done, but also of the fruits of his preaching: The
which also we may say, of so many kingdoms and provinces, which have received
the Gospel by our preaching, notwithstanding so many lettes and impedimentes
to hinder the same: and we think that there cannot be required of us a more
firm confirmation of our Ministry, seeing the virtue and power of God is
manifest in us, the which neither bonds, neither imprisonment, neither fire,
neither banishments, nor death could let.

Albeit, says Espensius, bring ye me one only example done a thousand five
hundred year agone like unto yours. Al things, says Beza that have happened,
are not put down in histories: but howsoever the matter be, it does not follow
that this our example is not manifest enough, and set forth of God in his due
time: who went not about to give a new Gospel, but meant to renew that old
Gospel, which was The Gospel.
exquisitly written by the Apostles, and sufficiently confirmed by Miracles.
And so by a certain unwonted and singular mean or way, he caused that bright
light to shine. But concerning Traditions, what foolish madness is it to make
them either equal with the Scripture, or else more certain than the same,
because of the diversity of interpretations? For what shall be the stay and
foundation of our faith if we stand in uncertain opinions? But what so ever
men do, this notwithstanding is most certainly to be embraced, Truth will be
truth still.
That truth shall be most firm and constant, although for a time it seem never
so obscure: and although heretics do abuse it, yet nevertheless ought we
always to lean to the same. Also, touching the place of Tertullian, which
Xainctius wills me so diligently to consider, I have so certainly
considered the same, as I am sure he has falsely cited Chrysostom, in whom
that shall never be found, which he has falsely feigned.

We will not deny but that Tertullian was deceived in certain places: and yet
notwithstanding the place cited, The place taken out of Tertullian explaned.
being rightly understood, and the end thereof considered, it shall be very
easy to be expounded. For it was his purpose to declare, that we must not
dispute in vain against heretics: but as the Apostle Paul says, they being
once or twice reprehended must be rejected. But show unto us, with what
Heretics he had to do: surely even with those Titus. 3.
which being convicted by the word of God, obstinately thrust in certain
testimonies of scripture, transformed to maintain their errors.

Against these men Tertullian brings in the traditions of the Church, the
which he shows ought to be of greater weight than the new devises of many
men. First of al therefore it is meet that we should be convinced by the word
of God, that we may be brought from error. For if we should simply lean unto
traditions, which are neither Apostolical, nor agreeing to their doctrine, we
should set open a way to a thousand deceites, and at length pervert and
overthrow the certainty of the Scripture. And why does Tertullian cast the
heretics in the ^eeth, saying that They, contrary to Scripture, do believe
without Scripture, but only to teach them that they must lean and cleave to
the certain truth of the Scriptures, and by them convince errors? But if the
traditions and ceremonies, which are at this day objected unto us of our
adversaries, were Apostolical and always used of the Church, we might
otherwise think and determine: but seeing we can show their beginnings, it
follows that they are not come from the Apostles. And truly Tertullian does
greatly reprehende them which thought that all things, which appertained to
salvation, were not put down to us by the Apostles. Therefore, when truth comes
in question we must have recourse to the Apostles, whom Christ has sent to
teach the Church. But how shall we agree of the Apostles doctrine, but by
their writings? For therefore were they called of God to that office, that they
might plainly teach and instruct us in all things that appertained to our
salvation.

After the same manner also the place of Chrysostom may be explaned in the
which we have these words, Christ left nothing to the Apostle in writing: did
he therefore forbid The place of Chrysostom expounded.
them to leave any thing in writing? No truly. But he did rather illuminate
them by his holy spirit, to the end his doctrine being put in writing, might
abide for ever. Howbeit, the Apostles taught certain things, which they have
not written. We deny it not. But we say that those things which they have not
written, do not appertain to our salvation. For those things which might
appertain to certain rytes profitable for that time, and to the order and
government of the Church, they have showed and declared by word of mouth.
But because those things are of such condition that they may be diuersely
altered according to the circumstaunces of the place, time, and persons,
therefore they neither ought nor can bind the consciences of men.

And as concerning these words: Not begotten, Consubstantiall, Trinity, and
such like, although they be not to be found so expressly in the Scripture:
yet notwythstanding their sense, effect and meaning is plentifully to be found
therein. Whereupon afterward to avoid the subtle ^lightes of heretics, these
and such like words were found out and received of the ancient fathers. Thus
Beza answered to those objections: that white Monk (...) in the mean time
crying out against him, interrupting him, and still inculcating this thing,
that neither the virginity of the virgin Marie, nor the baptizing of infantes,
could be proved by testimonies of Scripture. And thus crying and exclaming
still, after the manner of schools, he was very troublesome to the whole
assembly. At the last, after this confused disputation to and fro, the
Cardinal of Loraine perceiving the inciu^litie of his fellows (as it may
seem) least they should be reprehended of the Queen, he himself ended this
controversy, as though the question had been sufficiently handled. Upon which
silence the Sorbonistes afterward persuaded them selves to have gotten the
victory.

Then the Cardinal began to speak concerning the Cardinal of Lorain
moderator of the controversy.
Lords Supper, protesting in the name of all the Prelates, that they would
proceed no further, until that question were fully determined and answered:
both for that it was the principal point of all controversies, and also
because the Ministers had so plainly declared their opinion and judgment
concerning the same in that their first Oration, that the rumoure thereof is
gone thoroughout the whole Realm. Therefore he demanded of the Ministers
whether they would receive and embrace the Augustane Confession: Augustane
confession.
And the Ministers on the contrary part demanded if they also would receive
the same.

The Cardinal faring as though he would answer to this demand, began to
bring for the the judgment of certain Ministers of Germany, concerning the
Lords Supper: the which (he said) was sent by them, to him out of Germany.
But herein he played the crafty Fox, to the end that if they had openly
denied this thing, he might have set them and the Ministers of Germany
together by the ears: but if they had embraced the same, that then he might
tryumphe over them as if they had gotten the victory.

Beza to avoid this Dilemma, and subtle train, answered, That he and his
fellows came thither to defend the confession of their own Churches, which
they were, only by them, enjoined to do. So that he desired that the order
of the disputation might be framed upon the form of their confession: to the
end that they might gather thereby both the greater fruit, and also come into
a more perfect concord. For the order of nature does require that first of all
those things which are more easy should be handled: and we must first of all
dispute of doctrine, because the Sacraments do depend of Doctrine.
Notwithstanding the Cardinal did with no less vehemency still urge the
matter. Therefore the chosen men of the Churches, fearing least by this means
occasion might be taken to break off the conference, and that the blame
thereof should be laid upon them, they desired to have leave to vewe and
consider that writing, whereto the Prelates went about to make them to
subscribe, and so they would deliberate together what they were best to do.

Then was brought for the a form of the article concerning the Lords Supper,
written (as the Cardinal said) out of the Augustane confession, thus. We do
Confess that the very body and blood of Christ Jesus, is truly really, and
Sacramentally in the Supper of the Lord, and is so given and received of those
that do communicate. There were also brought forth many opinions of the
Saxone Ministers concerning this matter, written in the year of our Lord.
1559. And thus was the assembly dismissed until another day.

In the mean time news was brought, that the writing The subtle sleighes of
one Balduine.
exhibited by the Cardinal of Loraine, was by the industry of one Frances
Balduine, sent with letters, which signified that he would come very
shortly and bring certain ministers with him out of Germany, which should
dispute and contend with Beza, and with the rest of the challengers of the
reformed Churches. Balduine therefore came to Poossiac in the time of the
conference, leaving notwithstanding behind him those ministers of Germany,
making the more haste, to the intent he might offer up a certain Latin
book, entitled, The office of a godly man, among the controversies of
Religion: persuading himself by this means, that he should please all men,
specially the Bishops.

And this Book he highlye commended and bragged of, as a certain singular
mean and way to work peace and unity: the author of the which book, the
miserable ambitious man partlye affyrming, and partlye denying himself to be,
by vain dissimulation, the name of Cassander, being suppressed and quite taken
away, which had patched the same together, would that all men should have
counted him to be the author thereof: persuading himself hereby to win
great fame. But his expectation for all this was deceived, for he was called
of neither part into the conference, for that all men feared his inconstancy
and light rashenesse, which he had all his life time showed by manifest
proof and show of his subtle and false mind.

But his hatred for this matter was wholly kindled against the Ministers of the
reformed Churches, whom he thought to be the cause that he was not called to
the conference.

Afterward he inueyed against Calvin and Beza, who by their answer again
declared by evident arguments, that he was guilty of a lie, of falsehoode, and
of impiety. That is to say, Balduine not long ago ^ayned to love the
Gospel, and declared the same also by setting forth of Balduines inconstancy.
books, and was conuersaunt in the reformed Churches, whereby among good men
he had gotten a good report: notwithstanding changing oftentimes his
Religion, one while he seemed to embrace the doctrine of the Gospel, going to
those places in the which the same was publicly preached: another while he
went to the Papists, seeming to like of their service, whereby at the last
all men justly Judged him to be of a wicked and unconstant mind. Therefore
after he had experience and proof of diverse Religions, shyfting oftentimes
from one to another, the subtle fellow thought that he had at the last found
out a certain undoubted form of Religion, and reported abroad that he
knew a sure mean or way to appease all controversies for Religion.

And being brought unto the King of Navarre, by the practice of the Cardinal
of Lorayne, he made him to have a wonderful opinion of him.

And whilst the King of Navarre was greatly disturbed with the fair promyses
of the Pope, (of the which we will speak anon) this fellow daily called
upon him, who also bringing forth arguments, out of certain ancient notes
and abbreuiations, which he said, he had found by chance, he put the
King of Navarre in such hope to get the Kingdom of Navarre, that his love and
zeal toward the Gospel waxing cold by little and little, at the last he
utterly renounced and forsook the Gospel, to the great detrimente and hurt
of the reformed Churches, and of the whole Realm of France, in King of Nauar
an Apostata.
furtheryng whereof before time, he had notwithstanding been very diligent.

Balduine for brynging these things to pass, received for his reward, a great
sum of money, and had also committed unto him the charge to bring up the king
of Nauarres, bastard, for which he received a stipend.

But now again they come to the Conference, so that, when they were all
assembled together, and leave given to the Ministers to speak, Beza pronounced
this Oration before the Queen.

We declared of late before your Majesty, (noble Queen) according to our
skill, our opinion concerning the Article propounded unto us of the Church, and
of the marks and authority of the same: in opening of the which things we
have so followed the word of God, that we trust no man has had just occasion
to complain of us. But for so much as those things which have been opened by
us, ought either to be approved, or else to be reprehended by the word of God,
it was even now demanded of us by what authority we would preach the word
of God, and minister the holy Sacraments: in the which demand, to make our
cause to be hated there was left nothing undone. We know not to what end
these things have been propounded. For first of all, we came not hither, either
to preach the word, or to minister the Sacraments. So that it seems
superfluous to demand of us by what authority we would do this thing. If
answer be made unto us, that this was therefore demanded that we might give
account of those things which we have done before time, it was to be
considered that this assembly does consist of two sorts of men. For some are
Ministers of other Countries, in such places, in which their calling is
approved. Of these men ye have nothing to do to take an account of their
offices. Other some there are here which preach the word of God in this
Realm: but ye have not called these men before you, to constrain them to make
an account of their calling, but to confer with them concerning doctrine:
otherwise they might seem after this manner to be brought to judgment: the
which we think (O Queen) not to be your will or meaning. But if ye did it for
disputatio^s sake, by your leave, I must say, that it was not meet to move any
such talk openly: to answer the which we had no good occasion offered us,
except we would offend the minds of the Prelates: the which to do we would
be very loath, least we might seem to be the cause that the conference should
be broken off.

And least we may seem to speak without reason, consider that so often, as
two parts come together to confer or to dispute: If the one part demand,
why do you this? and the other part also demand the same thing, saying, why
do you this? it cannot be but in these questions reiterated there shall
discention arise.

But omitting the Prelates of this Realm, whom we will not offend, let us
imagine with our selves, that there were here a certain Bishop which should
demand of us, saying, by what authority do ye preach, and minister the
Sacraments? And we in like manner should demand, by what authority he did the
like: that is to say, whether he were elected by the Seniors of his Church,
in the which he is Bishop: whether the people desired to have him: and whether
his life, manners, and doctrine were first examined.

He would answer that he was in that order called: but the contrary is
manifestly known, and we call the conscience of those to witness that hear
us, and know how y^ matter stands. If he should say unto us, ye are no
ministers, because ye have not the impositio^ of hands, we in like manner would
answer, neither are ye Bishops, because in your institution, the principal
and most substantial matters commanded by the word of God are lacking. If the
disputation proceed farther, we may use these words: ye have but one only
thing, which is required in the right institution, namely, laying on of hands.
If the lack of this one thing, make (as you think) that we are not ministers,
(...)must needs the lack of the other two, (namely the election by Seniors,
and the trial of life and doctrine) prove you to be no Bishops.

The Council of Chalcedone, even one of the first universal Counsels,
appointed that the ordering and appoynting of a Priest should be void which
was not done by the Ministry of some one Church. A great deal more might
we say to the Bishop disputing with us, seeing that two principal and
substantial things are wanting 1. Timo. 3. Titus. 1.
to him, centrarie to the commandment of the Apostle.

There is also an other thing which we speak against our will, and yet
notwithstanding we must speak it, that all the whole assembly may evidently
see, that this question concerning Uocation, is full of peril and (...). If ye
should demand of that Bishop of whom, he had received imposition of
hands, and for how much he has bought the same, what would he say? Surely
he would make answer that he had received imposition of hands of
Bishops, and that he had not bought the same, but that he gave for it so
many thousand Crowns: which is as much as if he should say, I have not
bought the bread, but I have bought the wheat. If this disputation verily
should be judged by the Counsels and Canons of the Church, it would make many
Bishops and Cura^es ashamed. Into the which Disputation we would not
willingly enter, least we should offend any man. But take not this to be
spoken, to the end we might enter into that disputation, or to the intent we
might render quid pro quo, or check for taunt: but to the end you might
understand (O Queen) that we did therefore very unwillingly touch the matter,
least the peace and concord a working might be hindered.

As touching the Article of the Lords Supper, we would of late speak no
further of the same, because we had regard to many men of this assembly,
which never hearing of any such matter before, might easily have been there
at of^ended, as at some new thing. We had rather that they should hear the
words of the aunciente Fathers of the Church than ours, for somuche as the
Cardinal of Loraine, by open promise bound himself, to persuade and
satis^fie (...)in this principal point of doctrine, by the proper words of the
fathers, the which thing we greatly desired. To satisfy this our desire, and
the expectation also of a great many men, the article of the Lords Supper was
put forth, decided out of many and very necessary articles of the faith, and
it was said unto us, Either subscribe unto this, or else we will proceed no
farther. If ye were our Judges, and had authority to sit upon our lives, ye
would not say, Subscribe unto this but, We condemn you. Your office leads
you to another manner of speech, and wills you to show unto us our errors if
there be any in us, and to instruct them in the doctrine of truth, which are
ready to give an account of their faith by the word of God.

We are here before you (O Queen) and that for two special causes. The first
is, that we may give an account of our faith to God, to you, and to the whole
world. The second is, that we may obey God the king, and you, so much as in us
lies, to the pacifying of those troubles which are raised up for Religions
sake. If ye had to do with us only which are here, ye might the more easily
have your wills and purpose, but hehold we represent a great number of men,
which are not only in this kingdom, but also in the chiefest parts of
Heluetia, Polonia, Germany, England, Scotland, and Flanders, and which long to
see to what end this conference will come. But they shall understand, that in
stead of the determination of a free and general Conference, the tenth part
of an Article was exhibited: and that it was said, Either subscribe unto this;
or else we will proceed no farther. And admit we should subscribe hereunto,
what were ye the better? They which have sent us hither, will know, whether
by constrainte against our wills, or else by force of good and wholesome
Arguments, we have subscribed.

Therefore (O Queen) we most earnestly beseech you, that so good and godly a
work be not broken off, and that ye will vouchsafe to grant such men unto ^s,
which will not disdain peaceably and soberly to confer and dispute with us:
otherwise you may consider with your self what great inconveniences will
hereof arise.

Notwithstanding least we might seem to want an answer: we affirm that we
do receive all those things, which Espensius has alleged and brought out of
the book of Calvin. But the article exhibited by the Cardinal is only a
portion of the Augustane confession. In the which matter many things are to be
considered: First ye whole confession should be propounded unto us: for it is
not meet to set before us one verse* and to omit the rest. Then we must see,
whether the Cardinal does this thing of him self, or in the name of all the
Prelates. For hereupon we should give thanks unto God, that they them selves
do confess themselves to be overcome in the Article of Transubstantiation, the
which truly is condemned by the consent of all the reformed Churches of
Germany and of others.

And if it be meet for us to subscribe, then is it meet for them to subscribe
also, that our Churches may understand what we have done.

But and if they will thus come to the whole confession of the Germans, we
trust we shall come into a very good way to have concord and vn^tie. In the
mean time (O Queen) we do affirm that Jesus Christ is present in the use of
the Supper, in the which he offers, gives* and truly exhibiteth unto us,
his body and blood, by the operation of the holy Ghost: but we eat, and
drink the same body that died for us, and the same blood that was shed for us,
spiritually, and by faith: that we may be bone of his bones, and flesh of his
flesh: that by him we may be quickened, and may perceiu^ whatsoever pertains
to our salvation. And if this be not sufficient, (as it is a dangerous and
hard matter to speak of so great a mystery in so few words) if it seem good
unto the Cardinal that we search and confer together the Scripture and the
writings of the aunciente Fathers, (as he has also promised) and if it may
please you (O Queen) to make a convenient form of collation, and to call
Notaries which may receive our disputations, we trust you understand that we
came hither not to bring disorder and trouble, but peace and quietness. For this
one thing we wish, that both to this doctrine, and also to the Sacrament the
very natural and proper integrity and perfection it self may be restored. In
the which matter we dedicate and wholly give our selves to God, to your
Majesty's, to ye whole Christian common wealth, and specially to the peace and
tranquillity of this Realm.

Thus far proceeded the oration of Beza. But the Prelates took it very
haynously, that Beza had thus spoken of their vocation. Therefore the Cardinal
swelling with anger The braule of the Cardinal with Beza.
said, that the Queens Majesty was dishonored with these words, into whose
hands the right and liberty of election was given, and by whom they
themselves were elected. Adding that the ministers spoke of that, whereof they
were ignorant, not knowing that the Prela^es, the people being called at the
sound of a bell, are elected.

Beza answered yt he was altogether giltlesse of this fault, saying, that Kings
had taken unto themselves that liberty and authority, because Churchemen had
so filthily abused the same. As touching Election, no man is ignorant that they
make as it were a play or interlude of it: I speak not this of purpose (says
he) but am constrained thereunto, to the defense of our Ministry, and to the
intent also I might declare what manner of calling it is: the which
notwithstanding without cause is contemned.

To this the Cardinal answered, That Beza first began to offer injury and not
he, without the having of any regard of the reverence due to the kings:
willing him and his fellows to look unto that which appertained to themselves,
for that they were not both of them in one condition.

This talk being ended, he presently demanded of them, why they refused to
subscribe to the Augustane Confession, The ministers answered yt they knew net
whether they were required to subscribe by a general consent, or whether he
did it in his own name. My brethren that are here (says the Cardinal) c^n
witness with ^e that I do it with common consent: Notwithstanding, there was
not one among them which declared whether he consented or no, notwithstanding
that the Cardinal looked upon them, to the end they might confirm that which
he had spoken Then says Beza, for so much as ye require not this thing, it is
not meet that we should do it.

This comunication being done, the Cardinal of Loraine called in question the
article of the Lords Supper, and every prelate objected against the Ministers
all the doctors and C^nons they had. Then said Espensius, we cann^ recey^
Christ, except we receive him with the bread* And therefore it is that Calvin
says, We receive the substance of the body of Christ. The Ministers to this
answered, that they do willingly agree with Calvin. Saying that by this word
(Substance) was not meant a corporal and gross eating, but that the spiritual
and true eating was discerned from that which was by imagination and fancy.

To the which effect Peter Martyr spoke very much in the Italian ^oung, because
he could not speak French. And as he pro^eeded all men giving good heed to
that which he spoke, and having him in great admiration, the Cardinal Peter
Martyr interrupted by the Cardinal.
of Lorayne interrupted him, adding this reason, that he would not dispute with
men that spoke in a strange tongue: not that he him self understood not the
Italian tongue, or that many could not understand Peter Martyr.

Then Espensius stood up and gave him this commeudation before them al, That
no Divine in their time, had so plainly and distinctly spoken of the Sacrament
as he had done.

Then starte up a certain Spanishe Monk a Jesuit, which having obtained
leave to speak, did nothing but pour out contumelious and reproachful
sentences against the Ministers, calling them, inconstant, crafty,
deceitefull, Wolves, and Apes, which he said, ought to be shunned and
avoided. And beginning to speak of the Lords The unapt compa^son of a
Spanisha Monk.
Supper, he would show and manifest the Corporal presence of the Lord by
this stmilitude. Even as (says he) the King, having gotten the victory over
his enimyes, to celebrate the remembrance thereof, ordains certain plays,
of the which he makes him self chief ouerseer, even so Christ intending to
make the remembrance of his death everlasting by the institution of the Supper,
is also himself present at the same.

At the last, exhorting the Queens majesty to be an enemy to the ministers,
by his foolish madness, and mad folly, he moved the most part of them that
were present both to laughter and also to indignation, even together.

Then Beza answered the Monk, saying that he dealte with them, as though they
were already condemned of heresy, which was not done, but, (says he) I will
reserve your contumelious injuries, and railing sentences for you and your
companio^s. And as for ye Queen, she will do al things with good will, and by
due and wholesome counsel, for the benefit of the whole Realm, and stands
not in need of a Monks advise. Concerning the Lords Supper* you have so
v^reuerently spoken of the same, that you make a play of it, in the which
Christ should be the special person, the which is to childishe, ridiculous,
and profane.

And so Beza tournyng him self to Espensius, said, Ye urge the consent of
the Evangelists, in the form of words, in that they have all said, This
is my body: but remember that the Euangelystes have also said: This is my
blood of the new Testamente And also, This Cup is the new Testamente in my
blood, the which cannot be understood without a figure, as I have already
showed that it is a sacramental kind of speech, as Saint Austine expounds
it in his Epistle to Bonifacius. If Sacrament* Aust. ad Bonifacius*
(says he) should have no agreement with those things whereof they are
Sacraments, then were they no Sacraments: for this similitude, they
oftentimes receive the name of those things, which only they represent. As
therefore the Sacrament of the body of Christ, in some respect, is the body of
Christ, and the Sacrament of the blood of Christ, is the blood of Christ:
even so the Sacrament of faith, is says* neither can there be a Sacrament
without the figure.

Then said Espensius, if the case be so, that our Sacraments are not
without the figure, they differ not much from the Sacraments of the old
Testament, which were How the Sacrame^t^ under the law were Figures.
f^guratiue. For they were figures and shadows of the truth, which is now made
manifest and fulfilled in Christ, Otherwise we must say that they are figures,
of figures.

The Ministers denied this consequence, affirming that the Legal Ceremonies
which were appointed by God, had respect to the truth, whereof also, the
ancient Fathers were partakers before the coming of Christ, and we after his
coming, in which time, we are not under ceremonies, but yet notwithstanding we
need visible signs and sacraments, so long as we shall be in this world: and
yet for all that it does not follow that we have the less understanding of the
truth, although we have external Sacraments.

After this a certain Sorbonist demanded of the ministers, what the (...)
(This) in these words, This is my body, signified.

The Ministers answered, That it showed the bread, and signified the body of
Christ: that it might be understand, that the bread was a sign of the body,
which they confirmed by the testimonies of the fathers.

On the contrary part the Popish Doctors replied, that the Grammar rules
would not suffer this word (This) to be referred to the bread.

But the ministers said, that this was repugnant to the nature of Sacraments,
in the which it ^ught not to be denied, but that the sign is joined with the
thing signified. Thus these Rabbines, and Sorbonistes, making exclamations in
all things and a confused noise, spent the day.

And one among the rest, shaking his finger at Beza, said, if we had thee in
our schole. At the last the assembly was Beza is here threatened.
dismissed, and the conference, after this, was no more kept in the same order
and form, the Cardinal fearing, (as it was reported) least by their
disputation in the vulgar and known tongue, the matter might the more plainly
appear to the Princes and nobles that were there.

Therefore from that day forward the manner of the conference was altered: five
out of either part, that is to say, five of the Prelates and five of the
Ministers being chosen and appointed for this conference: by whom all matters
might be reasoned and disputed of peaceably and quietly. The five that were
chosen from among the Prelates, were these: Ianus Monlucius* Bishop of
Valentia, Vallius Bishop of Se^n, Bottillerius an abbot, Espensius a Sorbonist.

The five that were appointed out of the reformed Churches, were these: Peter
Martyr, Theodore Beza, Nicolaus Gallasius, Augustine Marlorate, and Espensius.
Then they agreed concerning the order of the disputation, the place, the time,
and concerning the Notaries which should note and receive the disputation.
And although it seemed meet and convenient to all men, that the confession of
the reformed Churches, should by order be handled first, yet notwithstanding
they began the disputation concerning the supper, because they had before
propounded the same, in that article which concerns the Lords presence in
the Supper: and the matter being diuersely canuassed and handled between them,
at the length both parts agreed upon this article following.

Forsomuche, as Faith makes things that are promised to The article agreed
upon between the Papists and the protestants concerning the presence.
be present, and does truly receive the body and blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ, by the power of the holy Ghost: we confess the presence of his body
and blood in the Supper, in the which he offers, gives, and truly
exhibiteth unto us, the Substance of his body and blood by the operation of
the holy Ghost: in whom we receive and eat spiritually and by Faith, the
same body which was offered for us, that we may be bone of his bones, and
flesh of his flesh, and may be quickened by him, and may also perceive,
and understand what so ever does appartayne to our salvation.

The five disputers for the Prelates, showed this article unto their fellows,
which they wholly mislyked. Therefore the day following, another Article was
exhibited unto the Ministers in their name, in ye which there was somewhat
altered: for that which the first article attributed unto faith, the second
attributed to the word. This article for the ambiguitie thereof, the ministers
would not receive, least it should be the cause of greater errors. But least
the contention might seem to stand in words, they al agreed with one consent on
both sides to put down ye article in this form.

We confess, that Jesus Christ in the Supper, offers, gives, and truly
exhibiteth unto us, the substance of bis body and blood, by the operation of
the holy Ghost, and that we do receive and eat, spiritually and by faith, the
same body which dyed for us, that we might be bone of his bone, and flesh of
his flesh, to the end also we might be quickened by him, and may understand
al things that appertain to our salvation: And because Faith being grounded
upon the word of God makes things that are promised, and of us understood, to
be present by this faith, we truly and effectually receive, the true and
natural body of Christ Jesus, by the power of the holy Ghost. In this respect
we confess the presence of his body and blood in the Supper.

These things thus determined, the chosen men on both sides, went to show the
matter unto their fellows, that both parts might freely show their opinion
and judgment. At the first sight therefore many of the Prelates received this
article. But when the matter was communicated and declared to the Sorbonistes,
they did afterward with one consent reject the same. And laid unto the
charge of their chosen men that disputed for them, and which continued in the
same opinion, in the which, they concluded with the Ministers of the reformed
Churches, that they had made a compacte and agreemente with the Ministers, and
therefore they were not suffered to confer or dispute any more after that.
Therefore the ministers having occasion offered, sent this explication of that
article unto the chosen men that disputed for the Prelates.

We affirm that no distance of places can let the communicating which we
have with the body and blood of Christ, because the Supper of the Lord is a
heavenly thing. And although we receive in earth, with our mouth the bread
and wine, being true signs of his body and blood, yet notwithstanding by
faith, and by the operation of the holy Ghost, our minds (of which this is
our special meat) being lyfted up to heaven, do receine there his body and
blood. And in this respect we say, that the body does truly join it
self to the bread, and the blood, to the wine: and yet notwithstanding no
otherwise than after a Sacramental manner: that is to say, neither locally,
nor naturally: but because they effectually signify and declare, that God does
give them faithfully and without all doubt to the communicants, who do truly
and certainly receive them by faith.

This therefore is the plain opinion and judgment of the reformed Churches,
concerning the presence of the body and blood of Christ Jesus in the sacrament
of the Supper.

But there were now come certain ministers out of Germany, by the means of
Ba^duinus (as we said before.) But they, bewraying the council and purpose of
the Cardinal of Loraine, by whose practice these things were spedely brought
to pass, returned home again with loss of their The deceit of the Cardinal
labor, and their expectation being deceived. The purpose and practice of the
Cardinal was to bring these ministers and the other into one disputation and
contention, and so contending and striving together, he might cause the
conference to cease, and make them to be a laughing stock to all men. The
Prelates doubting of the faith and trust of their men, which they had chosen to
dispute for them (as we said before) would have no conference after this with
the ministers, whereupon the conference brake up the* xxv. day of The end of
the conference of Pos^cene.
November. And this was the end of the Conference of Possiac, many being
gathered together for the same, the space of three months: after the which
there ensued not only no profit, but also great trouble and motions of wars.

Thus the conference being ended without fruit, there was no way found for
peace and concord, but rather the minds of both parts being exasperated,
there insued great quarrels and discentiens. So that great discord rose daily
between the Papists and the Protestants more and more some complaining and
finding fault with the Prelates for their disordered departing from the
conference, (the which in deed sufficiently declared the weakness of their
cause) and other some misliking of the authority of the General Council,
shortly alter to come, and of the Church of Rome. Neither were these
dissenti^ns only among the common people, but also among the Peers and Nobles
of the realm, men's minds being distracted and drawn into manifest factions,
which foreshewed not only bare contentions of words but also great and
mortal wars at hand. For the compactes, and manifest practices of the
Guises, of the Constable, and of the Marshall of Santandra, were well enough
seen. Yet notwithstanding their purpose and endeavor, was very much let and
hindered at that time by the authority of the King of Navarre, whom they
thought good to assay by all means possible, to the intent they might draw
him from taking part with the Protestants. In the which matter the Cardinal of
Ferrer (of whom we spoke before) being the Popes Legate in France, take very
much King Philip by the suff^rance of the Pope, had certain years inioyed the
king dome of Nauar which lies at that part of Spain, that bordereth on the
mountains Pyrenaei.
pains, promising unto the king of Navarre, in the Popes name the full
possession of the kingdom of Navarre, affyrming that the Pope should easily
obtain this thing of king Phillip, for that he already promised to do the
same for the Catholic Churches sake. Moreover the Cardinal of Towers, the
Bishop of Ansseren, and Escarsius, also certain of his houshoulde, confirmed
him in this matter: and used daily persuasions, being wicked men and set on for
money by the Cardinal of Loraine.

Among whom also was that Frances Balduine, of whom mention was made before,
as diligent and busy as the best to bring the matter about, whereby he thought
he should reap no small gain.

This man forging a new Gospel, caused the king of Navarre to hate both the
doctrine, and also the men of the reformed Churches. So that now he began to
hang between diverse opinions, to forsake the love of Religion openly, to show
himself an enemy to the reformed Churches, to be more co^uersant and
familiar with the Guises, to give him self to lightness and filthy pleasure,
and also to go to the Mass and to the Popish Churches. When the Duke of Guise
had deliberated and consulted of the matter with the Constable, and the
Marshall of Santandre, and willing them to gathered unto them forthwith so
great power as they could he departed from them leaving them in France, and
came to Imuilla in the month of November: and after he had tarried there
certain days, he went to the City Tabernas, which bordere^h upon
Germany, to provide for his business, and to consult with many of the Princes
of Germany about this matter.

Notwithstanding the number of the faithful daily more and more increased, and
was wonderfully confyrmed: a great part of the Nobles coming to the reformed
Churches. Therefore there were assemblies and congregations in great number:
almost in all the noble Cities of the Realm, in the which the word of God
was openly preached, and the Sacraments ministered, notwithstanding the Edict
of July of which we spoke before. Whereupon notwithstanding there arose
oftentimes great disc^ntions, and of those seditions ensued great perils. For
they which were grieved and offended at these assemblies of the faithful,
made exclamation that Edictes were broken, and did so prepare themselves to
trouble the faithful, that there seemed to be present occasions of great
mischief, which brake forth in many places, but specially at Paris, For the
faithful being gathered together the. 26. day of December, to hear ye word of
God in Paris, in the suburbs of The sedition of Sanmedard.
Sanmarcellus, a place specially appointed unto them by the King, for the same
purpose: the Priests of the Temple of Sanmedardus hard by, in the time of the
Sermon, caused such a noise to be made with ringing of bells, that the voice of
the Preacher could by no means be understood. Whereupon two of the
Congregation, men unarmed, and without weapon, came to these Popish Priests,
and beseeched them that they would not make such a dynne with ringing their
Belles, that so great a company of men should be let from hearing the
word of God.

The Priests having with them diverse other men, began to abuse them and
shamefully to missecal them, saying that they would not leave of their ringing:
and straytwaye they ran upon them, and made haste to shut the Church doors:
but one of them escaped by flight, the other they took, whom they wounded so
sore that he presently dyed. Then they ran up into the Church steeple, and
top of the church, they rang the Belles, and tumultuously cried Tocsanctum,
which word the people use, when they cry Alarm.

At the which cry the people ran with all speed possible from every part of
the Suburbs: So that, what with the cry of the people, and what with the
hurling of stones into the place where the sermon was then made, there was a
great and terrible noise. The which noise being heard, but specially
Toc-sanctum, or Alarm above the rest, they which were chief of the
Congregation, least the whole assembly should be quite discomfited, thought it
needful to provide help out of hand. Therefore when they had willed every one
to be quiet and not to stir, they chose out of the whole Congregation (which
was in number about 13. thousand men) a certain small number of expert
soldiers: willing the Minister to proceed: and sent the Lieutenant his
servant (for he was then there, by the Kings authority) to will and command
the Priests in the Kings name to cease the tumulte which they had begone:
Notwithstanding the Arrows and stoanes came so ^aste about his ears, that
he was constrained strayte way to return back again. The faithful fearing
the Sedition like to ensue, whereby they being naked and unarmed were like to
be oppressed, thought it good before the matter went any further, to set
upon the Popish Priests, and to stay their rage. Therefore even at once,
they ran upon them with all their might, even through the thick Hayle of
stoanes and arrows, and brake open the Church doors, behind the which they
found the dead carkas of their slain brother, and the Priests with their
coherentes armed: who, at the first outragiously like mad men behaved them
selves, but afterward, being easily repressed and tamed by the faithful,
part of them, being constrained, yielded themselves into their hands, and part
fled into a high tower, shutting the dore^ fast to them, from whence, they
cas^ down stones, timber, arrows, and many other things, yea whatsoever in
their madness, came next to hand: in so much that breaking the Images of
their Saints (as they call them) in pieces, which they had carried out of the
Temple, least they should be violated and defiled, most furiously they threw
them down, still crying Toc-sanctum, Allarum. But the faithful seeing their
outrage, threatened them to fire them out of their hold or Tower, whereupon the
Popish Priests and their coherentes, ceased at the last from their Popish
madness, forty of them being sore wounded, and fiftene of the authors of the
Sedition being taken, and delivered into the hands of the Magistrate. And thus
was that sedition pacified.

But the congregation of the faithful, was guarded and safeconducted by the
same Lieuetenaunt and Centurion of the City, least the people should begin
again some new sedition. It was reported that this sedition was appointed and
devised certain days before, by the knowledge and consent of many of the
governors and Senators of the City, who promised to the Curate of Sanmedarde
that he should be blameless and escape unpunished whatsoever happened. It was
also found, that they had carried before into other houses, (fearing what
would come to pass) their Albes, Crewets, Censers, their Chalice, their Copes
and precious vestments, and the res^e of their implementes which they said
Mass withal. The day following the outrageous multitude, having certain
Popish Priests their guides, came into the houses of the faithful, broke
chaires, stools, settles, and spoiled all things even to the bare walls, and
set fire under: thus they set fire on the houses on every side until they were
chased away by certain horsemen and the magistrate of the city.

Then were those that were before taken prisoners examined. Howbeit the Senate
joining with them such men, who^ they thought meet for their purpose, brought
to pass, that they were delivered, and many of the faithful cast into prison,
as guilty of that matter whereof the other were accused: and writing letters to
the Queen, they laid all the cause of that sedition upon the faithful.

The which notwithstanding was manifestly found false by the open voice of the
people deriding the faithful, and boasting of the favor of the Senate. But by
suffering so great a fault to escape unpunished, the people of Paris, which
before were prompt and ready enough of themselves to sedition, began now to be
more encouraged to work mischief against the faithful.

Therefore new rumors were spread abroad of the wickedness of the people in
that copious city, and many of the Bishops and nobles of the Realm made
exclamation that the Kings Majesty was greatly offended, because the
authority of the Edict of July was contemned, the Huguenote* having their
Sermons every where, for so were the faithful called.

And every day complayntes were brought of both parts, from every coast of
the Realm. But the reformed Churches daily increased, and had their Sermons
every where, whether the king gave leave or no: And thus the kings will and
pleasure not known, great troubles were like very shortly to ensue.

The matter standing thus, the Queen fearing what would come to pass,
perceived that it was needful to provide a spedie remedy.

But the king of Nauar being also doubtful what to do, and being made afearde
with daily Rumors and reports The cause of the Edict of January.
saw that it was ^ie time to provide, saying that those matters could not be
ended without the benefit of a more large Edicte.

Therefore by the authority and commandment of the king, the Queen, and of
the king of Navarre, and by the consent of the Princes and the kings privy
Counsel, the kings purseuauntes were sent to summon a Parliamente to be holden
concerning this matter the. xvij. of January at Sangermane. Men also of
singular discretion and knowledge were sent for out of all parts of the Realm.

The whole assembly being called together (in the which also were the Princes,
and the kings kinsmen) the king declared how needful and necessary a thing
it was to provide means and remedies to pacify so great troubles, when as
every day grievous rumors of Seditions did arise. Wherefore he prayed them to
show with pure and upright minds such means and ways to pacify them as
might be to their own profit and for the benefit of the Realm: promising
that he would follow their Judgments so far as should be needful.

Therefore when the Chauncelour, according to custom had propounded the cause
of their assembly, and had showed the necessitye of things, every man spoke his
Judgment: And when they had all concluded, a new Edicte was set forth by
the Kings commandment, which was called the Edicte of January: the sum
was this following.

FOr so much as the King had found in the beginning The Edict of January.
of his reign, diverse and sundry troubles, he went about by due advise
and Counsel of the Queen his mother, of the Princes, his near kinsmen, and
of his Lords and Nobles to provide remedies for them, setting forth to this
end and purpose diverse Edictes, and among the rest, one, the last of July: In
the which all doctrines were plainly forbidden, saving the ancient and
accustomed rytes and ceremonies of the Church of Rome: the force
notvvithstanding and effect of the which Edicte, was not only let and
stayed, but thereof also followed diverse perturbations and troubles, through
the obstinacy and headiness of the people, complaining and finding fault
with the severity and rigor of the same Edict. Therefore he having regard to
the peace and tranquillity of his Subjects, by the Counsel, advise, and
consent of the Queen, the King of Navarre, and by the consent of the Princes
and Nobles of this Realm, and by the advice of other wise and grave me^ of
the Parliament, has and does, appoint, charge and command: That the men of
the reformed Religion, so called, do forthwith restore unto all
Ecclesiastical persons, their Churches, houses, or fields, and their
reuenevves or Tenthes, which they have occupied, and that they do suffer
them, peaceably and quietly to enjoy them: that neither directly nor
indirectly, openly nor privily, they hinder, vex, or moleste them. Yet
notvvithstanding, it shall not be lavvfull for those persons of the reformed.
Religion, either within, or without the Cities, to build them Temples or
other convenient places for the gathering of assemblies together, and for
preaching of Sermons. Also he wills and commands, that no Crosses,
Crucifixes, and Images be overthrown, oranye other offense in these things
hereafter committed: upon pain of death without any hope of pardon.

Furthermore, it shall not be lavvfull for them to have any Sermons or the
administration of Sacraments within the Cities, by any manner of means,
openly, or secretly, in the day time, or in the night. Notvvithsta^ding for
the peace and tranquillities sake of his subjects (which he specially
seeks) he has willed and commanded, and by these presents does Sermons
without the cities permitted.
will and command that, until the determination of a general Council, no
manner of punishment, under the pretense of the former Edictes, be executed upon
those which shall preach or minister according to the reformed Religion, or
which shall come to, or frequent those Sermons or administrations of the said
reformed Religion, so that they be without the cities: Earnestly charging and
forbidding all Magistrates and Protection of the protesta^tes.
others his Majesty's officers, to do any hurt or harm to the men of that
Religion for these causes, as for going to Sermons, or such other like
exercises: yea he wills and commands the said Magistrates, and all
others that bear any manner of public office, to protecte and defend them,
and to save them from all injury and harm: if they need armor in their
defense to put on armor: but in any wise notvvithstanding to take and
punish according to the Edicts most severely such as are seditious, what
Religion so ever, they say they follow Also hevvilleth and commands all
men of both sorts of Religion, of what Inhibition of armor.
state or condition soever they be of, that they do not assemble themselves
together in armor: And that no man b^stirred or provoked for his Religion, or
be miscalled with contumelious, or factious names: but that all men live
peaceably and quietly together. Moreover he wills and commands the
Ministers of the reformed Religion, so called, that they receive no man into
their fellowship or congregation, before their life and manners beevvell
examined: to the intent that if any man be found guilty of any crime, he
may be delivered into the hands of the Magistrate.

But if any of his officers will go to their assemblyes to hear and consider
of the doctrine which is there preached: his Majesty will that they be
honorably received, with due consideration had of the dignities and offices
they bear.

Also he wills and straightly charge, that they make no nevve civil
Magistrates among them: and Synodes and Consistories.
that they have no Synodes, Courts, or Consistories, except some one of the
officers be present thereat. But if any thing should be needful to be
appointed by them concerning the use of their Religion, then he wills them
to bring their matter before his officers, that by his authority all things
may be confyrmed. Also he wills that there be no choice of men, or entering
into league of either part, for the putting away of mutual injuries. That
there be no contributions Contribution of money.
of money, but if contribution be made for alms sake, let the cause first be
shevved to the Magistrate, and then let it be done. Furthermore he wills and
commands that those men of the reformed Religion, Poll ^ike laws to be
observed
do observe the politic laws, and specially those things which concern
festival days, that no trouble for this cause do arise: in like manner that
they observe in the bonds of Matrimony those things which concern
consanguinitie: Also that the Ministers of that Religion come unto the
Magistrates, to swear before them to observe and keep this Edict, and also
to preach and teach the people only the word of God with all pureness
and sincerity, doing The oath of the Ministers.
nothing against the Nicene Council, and against the books of the old and
nevve Testament. Moreover he wills, that they use no reproaches, nor seek to
constrain any man by force to hear or to believe their doctrine: this he
gives in charge to the Ministers. Also he wills and commands that no man
of what Religion or condition soever he be of, do bolster, hide, or conceal
any that is a seditious person, upon pain of forfayting (for such as
beryche) to the poor a thousand Crowns: and upon the pain, (for such as
be poor and not able to pay) of whipping, and then banishment. Finally he
wills, charge and straightly commands, that no man Books of infamy.
make, sell, or cause to be sold, any Books or vvritings that tend to the
defaming or sclander of any person, upon pain of Cudgeling for the first
time, and for the second time death: And that Magistrates do their duty
within their precinct, otherwise to be removed from their offices. Also if
any seditions happen, that then they enquire out the authors of the same, and
punish them, being found, most severely, and the matter being manifestly
proved to pronounce The duty of Magistrates.
against them the sentence of death, upon pain of the Kings displeasure.

This Edict, he commanded to be proclaimed, and obediently observed and kept
throughout his whole Realm, without exception or exempting of any person
whatsoever. Yet notwithstanding, the Senate of Paris, after the first, second,
and third commandment of the king, scarcely published the same: where as in
all other Courts and parts of the Realm it had been very solemnly proclaimed,
according to the kings commandment in that behalf. But the obstinate
contempt of the Senators, which were set on by many of the nobles was not
altogether hidden, but evidently ynonghe appeared to all men that would see
the same.

FINIS.
The translator to the Reader.
THus gentle Reader ends the first part of these Commentaries, faithfully
collected and gathered by that singular learned man Petrus Ramus of France,
who himself, (because he was a zealous professor of the Gospel, and an enemy
to Antichrist) was slain in this last horrible butcherly murder, in the year
of our Lord God. 1572. The special cause that moved the said Petrus Ramus to
spend his travail in penning these Commentaries in the Latin tongue was (as
you may perceive by his preface in the beginning of this Book) that all
Christian Realms might be certifyed of the true original and cause of all the
wars, troubles and sheding of Innocente blood, that have been from the
year of our Lord God. 1557. until this present day. To the end therefore,
that his desire might be the better satisfied, when I had considered the
worthiness of his travail, and what great fruit would spring of the same to
all that will vouchsafe to spend sometime in reading of this work: for that
all men understand not the Latin tongue: I thought good to translate the same
into English, that none of our Countrymen might be stayed from the taste of
such fruit as will grow thereof. And as I have spente sometime in translating
this first part, so I mean (God willing) to go forward with the other two
parts: the second being now in hand, and shall be printed (if God
permit) against the next Term. In the mean time I beseech thee (right
Christian Reader) content thy self with this, accept my labor, and requite my
good will with diligent reading of the same. Before the which I shall desire
thee to correct with thy pen, such faults as I have here caused to be noted.
In so doing, no one sentence (I trust shall seem obscure unto thee.

Faults escaped in Printing.
Line. 2. Page. 9 For (it) read, he. Li. 19. pa* 12. for (might defend)
read, might seem to defend. Line. 18. page 17. read acknowledging of the
truth. Line. 16. page 40 for (other wile) read, otherwise. Line. 22. page 43.
read, as though it had been. Line. 5. page 73. read, we will not deny. Line.
8. page 73. read, name of the Church. Line. 4. page 76. for (is sudden)
read, is so high. Line. 31. page 112. for (there) read: Then. Line. 3. page
124. read, must not therefore. Line. 25. page 125. in these words and if that)
leave out, if. Line. 23. page 164. bring in these words: might be sold from
them. Line. 32. page 194. for (Prophets) read, properties. Line. 5. page 167.
for (although) read, as though. Line. 1. page 239. for (only thee) read, only
three. Line. 18. page 235. for (they shall) read, shall they. Line. 20. page
235. for (does) read, does not.
NOte here (good Reader) that these faults escaped in Printing, are not so
escaped in all the Books of this impression, but in some. Least therefore they
to whom those should happen, might be troubled in the reading with obscure
sense, I thought good to make a general note of all.

THE INDEX.
A.
Affliction of the Church after the death of King Henry. 47. Affliction
rising of false reports. 50 Affliction somewhat cease. 61. Agronia
assaulted. 161. Ambaxian Tumult. 2. Andelot put in prison. 23. Andelot
answers. 23. Andelot escapes prison. 110. Andelot in favor again. 24.
Annas Burgeus defends the gospel in the Parliament house. 26. Annas Burgeus
carried to prison by Mongomerie. 27. Annas Burgeus examined. 32. Annas Burgeus
condemned. 33. and 39. Annas Burgeus disgraded. 35. Annas Burgeus confession.
36. Annas Burgeus takes his judgment thankfully. 39. Annas Burgeus Oration.
4. Annas Burgeus burned, 43. Annas Burgeus bringing up. 44. Angel, speaker for
the Comminaltie. 121 Apology for the faithful Captives. 9. Arrogant
threatenings of the Constable. 11. Augusta a city in Germany. 131. Authority
of God^ word. 199. Authority of the Church. 227.
B.
Baptism. 75. Beza his prayer. 189. Bishop of Nauntes author of the Tumult.
17. Bishops of Rome sowers of discord. 82. Books of sclaunder. 100.
Brosaeus, General of the Army that went into Scotland, 61.
C.
Cardinal of Loraine an enemy to Burgeus. 39. Cardinal Poole. 95. Cardinal
of Loraine seeks to get fame, by keeping Lybelles of reproach. 104. Cardinal
Ferrer sent from Rome, to hinder the National Council. 166. Calabria
persecuted. 63. Christ our righteousness. 68. Christ God and Man. 68. Christ
has two natures. 69. Christ dyed for sin. 69. Christ our Advocate. 71.
Church what it is. 72. 217. Churches denied to them of the reformed Religion.
124. Commendation of the protestants. 25 Communion with Christ and the Fathers
under the law. 18^. Comparison between the doctrine of the Gospel and
papistrie. 37. Confession of the french church. 63 Confession of Annas
Burgaeus. 36. Confession of the church of Flanders offered to king Philip. 166.
Confirmation. 204. Constable proudly threatens. 11. Constable drawn away from
the Prince of Conde. 140. Constable misseliketh of the profession often he
Admiral. ibidem. Controversy between Charles the fifth, and Pope Clement. 91.
Contention between the Queen and the king of Navarre 136. Consubstantiation.
203 Covetousness the beast of Babylon. 93. Covetousness of Priests. 122.
D.
Democharis the inquisitour sits upon Burgaeus. 32. Democharis a slanderous
inquisitour. 50. Denises to abolishe the Gospel. 1. Discipline of the Church.
73. Disputation at Posiat. 179. Doctrine of the law. 71. Duke Arscotus a
Brabantine. 8. Duke of Guise an enemy to the Andelot. 23.
E.
Earl Villarius an enemy to the Admiral. 141. Ecclesiastical Disciplne. 72
Edict of Castellobrian. 24. and. 12. Edict of July. 150. Election divine. 67.
Election of Ministers. 74. Example of two false brethren very notable* 48.
Excommunication. 74.
F.
Factious names. 118. Faith and good works. 167 Faith comes by the holy
Ghost. 70. Faith attaineth righteousness. 70. Faithful sclaundered. 7.
Figures of the Law. 71. Forewarnings of desolation. 92. Fruits of Popish
Sermons. 22.
G.
Geneua a Sanctuary for the Godly. 4. General Council not looked for. 90.
General Council, a vain remedy. 187. Georgius Gluchus Ambassador out of
Denmark. 139. God omnipotent. 65. Gospel has diverse professors. 85. Good
works. 71. Guises rule the Realm. 50. Guises persecutors of the Gospel. 51.
Guises no Princes. 60. Guises make claim to the crown of England. 62.
H.
Huguenotes, a name given to the faithful. 59.
I.
Iacobes slaughter at Paris. 1. Iacobus Sillius, speaker for the Nobility.
122. Ianus Contachus, moves controversies. 45. Ignorance of Priests. 122.
Injuries done to the faithful. 17. Innocence of the Prince of Conde. 147.
Inquisitors of France called Flies. 50. Intercession of Saints. 71.
K.
King Hentie the second, set against the Protestants. 26. King Henry
threatens Burgaeus. 27. King Henry slain. 34. Kings duty. 100. King of
Navarre, and the Prince of Conde sent for to the King. 107. King Fraunces
dies. 112. King of Nauar yeldeth his authority to the Queen. 114. King of
Nauar forsakes the court in displeasure. 137. King of Nauar promises to
promote the Gospel. 139.
L.
Letters from the Princes of Germany to King Henry 28. Letters of Pardon. 58.
Letters sent to the Prince of Conde taken. 107. Letters of the King. 143.
Letters of Paulus Verglus, to the Bishops of Italy. 192. Lodowick the. 12.
called the Father of his Country. Lodowick Faurus carried to prison. 27.
Lutherans, a name given to the Protestants. 22. Luxury in Priests. 122.
M.
Man at the first perfect. 66. Magistrates. 76. Margaret Rich Martyr. 50.
Matrimony. 204. Monsier Vidam apprehended. 107 Monsier Vidam dies. 116.
Mongomery slew king Henry. 34 Mongomery of a persecutor, became a faithful
Christian. 34. 35. Murder done nere to Saint Innocents. 21. Murder at a
Popish Sermon. 22. Myraculous delyuerance of the faithful. 19.
N.
Names of reproach. 118. Nemerosius sent to dissuade Renaudius from his
enterprise. 54. Newness of life. 70. Neuters. 167. Nicolaus Durandus called
Villegagno. 45. Notes too know the Church of Christ by. 219.
O.
Obedience to Magistrates. 205. Office of a King. 88. Oration of the Bishop
of Vienna. 87. Oration made by Beza. 189. Oration made by the Bishop of
Valentia. 81. Obedience to Magistrates. 205.
P.
Parliament at Paris. 24. Parliament. 116. Parliament breaks up. 128. Peace
after long persecution. 115. Persecution in Spain. 166. Persecution in
Prouance. 135 Persecution in Paris and Roane. 63 Peace between Spain and
France. 24. Persecution stayed for a time. 17. Persecutour receive Gods
vengeance. 16. Persecution in the Church of Paris. 5. Planchaeus Counsel. 59.
Planchaeus imprisoned. 60. Pope Paulus the third. 94. Pope summoneth a
Council. 128. Pope inuiteth the Princes of Germany to the Council. 131. Pope
renounced by the Princes of Germany. 134. Prince of Conde sent for too the
Court. 135. Prince of Conde appealeth to his Peers 111. Prince of Conde taken.
110. Protestants called Lutherians. 21. 4. Purgatory. 71.
Q.
Queen of England aydeth the Scotts. 62. Queen falls out with the King of
Nauar. 114. Queen sends Letters too the Pope. 168. Quintius Hedius speaker
for the Clergy. 123. Quintius receives his Oration. 127 Quintins dies for
sorrow. 127.
R.
Real presence. 210. Rebaptizing. 73. Reconciliation of the Prince of Conde,
and the Duke of Guise. 161. Reconciliation between Queen and the King of
Nauar. 138. Reformation wished by the Cardinal of Loraine. 209. Religion. 89.
Religions force in men's minds. 117. Remission of sins. 69. Renaudius
Captain against the Guises. 54. Renaudus slain. 57. Richerius minister of
the congregation under Villegagno. 46.
S.
Sacraments. 201. 75. Sacramental signs. 183. Sagua, servant to the Prince of
Co^ de apprehended. 107. Scotts war for Religion. 61. Scriptures. 64.
Seditious Preachers. 20. Sedition defyned. 116. Shaven crounes, the badges of
popery. 126. Singing of Psalms. 20. Singing of Psalms required of noble
women. 84. Sclaunders raised up against the faithful. 7. Soul of Picardie.
22. Supper of the Lord. 75. Supplication of the faithful delivered to the
king. 79. Succession of the Church. 221. Successors of the Apostles. 224.
Synod at Paris, 27. Symoniakes. 94.
T.
Transubstantiation. 202. Trent in Italy. 128. Trinity. 65. Tributes. 98.
Truchetus slain by a Cowhierde. 157. Truce between the Duke of Sabaudia and
the me^ of the valleis. 166. Tumult of Ambaxia. 52. Two Pillars of the
Kingdom. 88. Tyrants reign by force. 88.
V.
Vidam answers to his letters. 108. Vidam dismiste of Saint Michaels order.
109. Vidam dies. 116. Villers an enemy to the Admyrall. 141. Villegagno goes
to the weste Indies to plant the Gospel there. 45. Villegagno a fearful
Apostata. 46. Villemongius a constant martyr. 56 Unity of the Church. 72.
Vocation ordinary and extraordinary. 224.
VV.
VVarres between the Duke of Sabaudia and the men of the Valleys. 125. Word
of God. 64. Word of God a weapon against Heretics. 86. Works, and faith.
167. Worshipping of Images. 171.
FINIS.
The second part of Commen taries, Containing the whole discourse of the
civil wars of France, under the reign of CHARLES the nynth.

Translated out of Latin into English, by Thomas Tymme, Minister.

Seen and allowed.

Imprinted at London, by Frances Coldock.

And are to be sold at his shop in Pawles churchyard at the sign of the green
Dragon.

1574.

To the right woorshipfull Sir Richard Baker, Knight, Thomas Tymme, wishes
health and prosperity, with full perfection of all Christian knowledge, and
godliness.
PArtly Experience of the former friendly acceptance of my good will (right
woorshipfull) and partly presumption upon the same again, two bold guides,
have moved me to attempt the Dedication of these two other parts of
Commentaries (to the which also is joined an Addition of the horrible, and
cruel slaughter of the Admiral Chastillon and other Nobles) unto you: hoping
that as you have already worshipfully received the first part, and taken the
same to your protection, so likewise you will not refuse these other parts,
set forth with such diligence as conveniently might be used. The gift (which
is my small labor in the Translation) is scarce worthy the presenting to your
worship, but the Argument which concerns the affairs of so noble a kingdom
as France is, I boldly presume in the learned Authors name too present unto
you: especially seeing the reading and knowledge thereof shall not only redound
to the profyt of our Country, but also greatly illustrate and set forth the
glory of God. For when we shall compare our happy estate, with the miserable
condition of the afflicted people in France: when (I say) we shall call to
mind the happy days of peace and concord, and the prosperouse success in our
civil government, which by the unspeakable mercy and goodness of God, we
have enjoyed since the reign of our gratiouse Sovereign: and contrarywyse,
the bloody wars, the sore dissentio^ and strife, with the horrible desolation
that has ensued in the realm of France, we cannot choose, but we must needs
be forced too magnify and extol the great mercies of our God, which has
delivered us from the like destruction, no less deserved by our sins. Shall
we say that the Frenchmen our neighbors are greater sinners than any other
Nation under heaven, because of the great desolation fallen upon them? No
verily, but except we Luke. 13.
repent, we shall in like manner perish. Therefore (right woorshipfull) by
the benefit of this discourse of the civil wars, we shall not only be
drawn to the knowledge of our selves, but also be provoked to give God most
hearty thanks, for our quiet and peaceableestate, which by our Soueraign Prince
we enjoy. These are the fruits which shall ensue to the Christian Reader, by
these Commentaries: the which if they may reap, as no doubt they shall: I may
account my labor well bestowed.

Thus having boldly craved your worships courtesy in receiving this base and
simple present of mine, I cease with thanks for your liberality showed
toward me: committing you and my good Lady your wife, into the hands of
Almighty God, who send you prosperouse success in all your affairs, desired
health, and the blessed felicity of Gods Elect in the kingdom of Heaven.

Your worships humble Orator Thomas Tymme.

HIC tibi depingit, sparsi monumenta cruoris,
Sed tamen innocui (lector amice) liber.
Aspice Saeua mades tu Gallia cade tuorum,
Guisius ecce tuus, perforat ense tuos.
Te regit obductus tenebrosis nubibus error,
Martius erroris, Duxque Comesque furor.
Proh scelus, erumpunt districtis agmina telis,
Armat sanguineos ad scelus omne Satan.
Concutiuntque suo sanctorum turbine coetus,
Et duce vesano cuncta furore patrant.
Horrida pestiferi machinantur bella papistae,
Perpetrat infandas improba turma neces.
Coeduntur, pereunt, lapidantur membra piorum,
Qui coluere tuum numen honor Deus.
Torrescunt rapidis trepidantia corpora flammis,
Et vexant miseris agmina sacra modis.
Mactatur trepidus, trepida cum coniuge coniux,
Charaque cum chara filia matre perit.
Quis furor anguigenae proles Cocytia diri
Papicolae misere pectora vestra premit?
Carnifices, cur vos insontes ensibus agnos
Mactatis? facinus respice quaeso Deus.
Contundes rabidos dulciscime Christ papist as,
Qui iusto spoliant nomen honor tuum.
Mortua non laus est, quamuis tu mortuus ipse
(Rame) tuus viuit, te moriente, liber.
Est quoque Timme tibi tua laus tribuenda, quod Anglis
Foeda papistarum bellica facta canas.
Quisque per hoc noscet, quam sit tua prona voluntas,
Et prodesse tuis, and meruisse decus.
E. G.

To the Christian Reader, desirouse to know and to understand the truth.
IT were to long, and peradventure to loathsome a thing unto thee (Christian
Reader) for us to make rehearsal of those things which not unaptly came to my
mind at the writing out of these Tables of Commentaries: And although they
should not be utterly besides the purpose of this present Argument, yet if in
so small a work, I should wander into any long circuit of preface, I see it
might be objected unto me, that I pretend one thing and do another, which is
a thing worthy reprehention: as Horas in his verse notes:

Currente rota cur vrceus exit* that is,
The porter purposed to make a wine measure,
But in tourning of the wheel, is proved a water pitcher:
Therefore, I will let them pass, if you be at leisure, and may vouchsafe to
read these few things. For now I have here for thee (Gentle Reader) brief
Commentaries of the whole Civil wars of France, wherein I have followed the
order and course of the matters rehearsed by us in the former three books of
Com mentaries. And if I shall begin to excuse my self, first for that I being
a man even without name, have enterprised to begin the History of so weighty
matters, which had been a fit Argument for other learned writers: I see that
straight way, that may be objected to me, which was objected to Albinus the
Roman, excusinge himself and asking pardon for writing a history in the Greek
tongue, wherein he was not very skillful, (to wit) that he had rather ask pardon
for his fault, than to be without fault. But beit that I am in a fault,
whether it be rash nesse or temeritie (for I know that this my enterprise shall
incur the judgments of diverse men) yet I trust, I shall not be accused of
rashness before they have red me, except it be of such, as by giving their
verdict of an uncertain and unknown matter, may be accused of temerity
themselves. And as for the judgment of those learned and moderate men, which
shall read these our Commentaries, I do not greatly fear it, neither will I
think my labor wast, but rather count it for an excellent gain unlooked for,
if I shall provoke them to set them forth better for the utility of other me^.
But least I should stay longer tha^ I promised, in the defense of this
exte^porall writing, not like to live above a day, lacking his Genius, I w^l
only sai thus much: that if I have offended for thy sake (gentle reader) I have
offended, that thou might not be destitute altogether of the discourse and
rehearsal of so great matters committed in France, for religions sake: And
surely if ever any thing heretofore, or in our time were worthy to be put in
writing, these are worthy of the same: neither do I doubt but that thou shall
receive fruit by reading them.

Here then thou may behold how many ways God does govern and preserve his
church, among the manifold chaunges of worldly business: and how maruelously
he provides entertainment for them in the seats of Monarchs. The Gospel
being spread abroad and planted in Germany, Switserland, England, and in other
places, France remained utterly without so great a benefit, established by
public authority of the Magistrates. But it is a most delightsome thing to
call to mind by what means God did bring the gospel into France, and by what
manner of men, and how mightily God did work by weak vessels. For first the
foundation being laid by the help of poor men, which suffered sclaunder,
proscriptio^, stripes, torments, burning, and every kind of slaughter, at the
length also when it pleased him, he joined unto this Church, men of greater
account and fame, even noble men, Peers, and Princes: and those great
difficulties, which could not but hinder the course of the Gospel, he took
away, and laid open a broad entrance, to the propagation and enlarging of the
same, that he might make it known, how far his power reaches and extends it
self to the preservation of his Church, and that the same is contained within
no limits. The case was so greatly changed, that whereas before the
maliciouse enemies of the church, had the chief rule, and the authority of the
Magistrates was armed against the same: now contraywyse, those maliciouse
enemies were so restrained and holden under, that they seemed to be brought on
their kneese, the fame also of those matters were brought unto them which
favored the gospel, and seemed to have a special care to spread and plant
the same. But the matter fell out far otherwise: for he which seemed to have
most ability to promote and further the cause of the gospeil, rejected the
gospel and became an utter enemy to the same: so that he seemed most of al men
to have opened a wide window to the ruin thereof. But how trimly did the Lord
disapoint Satan and Antichrist of their purpose: yet did he always so mo
derate the matter, that neither the church when it was expedient, might seem
to want man's help, neither might seem wholly to be stayed thereupon. Greeuouse
wars arose: God gave unto his servants strong defenses of man's help, yet
least they should depend thereupon, he weakened the same also, and that so
greatly, yt great dangers in diverse places ensued to the church,
notwithstanding the end fell out for their safety.

In the midst therefore of these confusions and tumultes, God himself the
Prince of Princes, showed his singular providence and care which he has
effectually toward mankind: but especially and peculiarly, toward his
church, to preserve and stablish the same mightily in the iniddest of al
worldly troubles: neither by one means only, bnt by sundry means, as it has
seemed good to him in the diverse forms of rule and government, to assign unto
his church an abiding place: as of old time in the governing of the primitive
Church immediately after the Apostels, and in our time in Germany, Switserland,
England, Scotland, and in other places, it has appeared: and more of late in
these our country of France, is evidently seen: not that in this variety we
should ascribe any thing to the rule of fortune, but that the manifold and
maruailouse efficacy of the wisdom of God, might be considered, which does
singularly wateh over the safety of the Church. And if it may please thee to
consider the second and middell causes and reasons of the Instruments, which
God used in the beginning of this work; you shall see how contrary they be,
and how variable: On the one side the wicked and unbridled iustes of men prove
to work mischief, do appear: a color of religion is pretended to work the
overthrow of Religion: the kings name is usurped when they go about to
suppress the King himself: and in the mean time, the gospeil is accused as a
common enemy, and the subversion of the same is conspyred. On y^ other side,
God styrreth up many men to preserve and defend his church in those troubles,
because the destruction of the same was chiefly desired. There appears in
those me^ as the history plainly shows, a desire of the safety of the church,
of the Kings dignity and authority, and of the public peace: and yet in the
ex^ution of that their laudable desire, it appears that they were not utterly
faultlesse. yet is the Church preserved in the midst of all these misorders:
that as it is manifest, that men cannot be said to be the very authors and
keepers thereof, so must we needs confess that God is the very author,
preserver, and keeper of the same. Therefore, the church does not triumph as
having gotten the victory by man's aid, neither does it lie utterly prostrat by
the violence of worldly tumultes: which being fashoned like unto her head,
reigning in the midst of hi^ enemies, does so strive in continual conflictes
in this world, because she certainly knows that the heavenly Judge, has
provided ^ time when they shall fully triumph. The church has heretofore ben
exercised in many battails, and how many are behind, God knows, because the
time which is appointed for the last victory is unknown: yet the promise of the
heavenly reward is most true, which yt most valiant Cha^pion has pronounced
with his own mouth saying, That through many tribulations we must enter into
the kingdom of heaven. If the promise of God as touching y^ victory of his
church were included within the limits of this world, surely it should
triumph in this world, by the virtue and power of the omnipotent and
everlasting God: but that her triumph is appointed elswher, the often and
greuouse spoils and calamities of the same declare.

In the mean time let us consider these things, and contemplate where and in
what parts of the world the tokens of that Catholic and true church do
appear, and let us advance the providence, wisdom, bountifulnes, and power of
God in preserving and governing the same, least if the blind ignorance of men
be reprehended, and that worthily, because they see not God, who has not left
himself (as says the Apost^e) without witness in this world: we also be much
more worthy of blame, who see not the light before our ^yes* nor the Sun
beams glistering throughout the whole world, neither do reverence Jesus Christ
diuersely triumphing by the mighty working of the Gospel.

Truly, gentle reader, this is my counsel and purpose in writing these
Commentaries, to give thee occasion by preserving the memory of these things,
to contemplate and reverence the providence of God in the government of his
church, whereof we be members: and that we thereby, while the whole body is
assaulted, enduring manfully our own particular conflicts might with all our
mind, long for the reward of the heavenly victory. Moreover, what soever in
this little work (wherein I have traueled faithfully) belongs unto me, I
dedicate the same wholly, liberaly, and frankly to thee Christian Reader,
neither shall it grieve me too bear the censure of diverse judgments, so that
thou by reading these s^iender Common taries, may be encouraged, and
prepared to read a just history.

FARE WELL.
The Table.
A
Acts done by M des Adretz in Dolphini in the county of V^ ayas. 143 Answer
made by the Prince of Conde to the supplication which was put up too the King
and Queen by the Guises. 91 Answer made by the Prince of Conde and his
friends to the decree of the Senate of Paris. 148 Assault given too Cesteron
(by the Papists) a city in Prouance. 181 Auinion a City in Prouance yields
to the faithful 80 Aid comes from the Princes of Germany the Protestants,
to the Prince of Conde to Orleans. 214
B
Blesa and Towers taken by the Papists. 137 Breach of the Edict of January cau
sed the Civil wars. 2 Burges besieged by the Papists. 199
C
Cane in Normandy won by the Admiral. 259 Civil war caused by the breach
of the Edict of January. 2 Civil wars begone. 124 Complaint made by the
faithful of the slaughter at Vassie. 14 Comparison made between the Princes
request and the request of the Guises. 110 Conde forsakes Paris 19 Conde
comes to Orleans. 21 Conde inclined to peace. 24 Conde persuaded to take the
protection of the young King. 26 Conde complains too the old Queen of the
murder done a^ Sens 34 Conde sorry for the slaugher of Mot recondrine. 085
Conde returns to Orleans with his army. 173 Conditions of peace offered by
the King to the faithful. 124 Conditions offered by the Prince of Conde at the
first parley. 219 Conspiracies made against the Gos pell by the Guises, the
Marshall of Saint Andrew, and the Constable. 4 Crafty policies wrought by the
co^ spiratours to seduce the King of Nauar to take their parts. 5 Conspiracy
against Languedocke. 184 Cruelty used at the taking of Orange. 140 Counsel
holden at Orleans by the^ of the reformed Religion. 72
D
Declaration set forth by the Prince of Conde the second time. 56 Decrees made
by the Senate of Paris against the men of Orlea^s. 145
E
Edicts set forth in the kings name, promising peace to them which had and
would forsake the Admiral. 245.
F
Four special constitutions in the kings minority. 168.
G
Great cruelty used by the papists to the inhabitants of Orange. 140. Great
slaughter of the papists. 194. Guyses under color of pence seek to dec^e the
prince of Co^de. 130. Guyses seem to go home to their houses. 134. Guyses
remove their army from Bogencia and take Blesa and towers. 137. Guyses aided
by the Germans and Switsers. 145. Guyses authors of most horrible murder done
at Vassy. 10. Guyses come to Paris against the Queens commandment. 16.
Guyses having gotten Paris seek to get the king also. 19. Gnyses seek to stay
the Prince of Conde from joining with the Englishmen. 237. Guyse being at the
siege of Orleans was slain by treason. 258.
H
Horrible murder done to them of Towers by the Guyses after they had won the
town. 137. Horrible murder committed at Mo^b^yse by Baron des Adretze. 183.
Help desired by the Prince of Con de, of the Queen of England and the princes
of Germany. 146.
I
Idols broken down and defaced at the Cities of Towers and Blayse. 50. Idols
broken down at Orlea^s. 50.
K
King of Nauarie being shot into the shoulder with a small pell^t dies. 202.
L
League made between the Nobles and the Prince of Conde. 25. Letters sent by
the old Queen to the Prince. 31. Letters sent from the Prince of Con de to
the reformed churches. 47. Letters sent by the old Queen to the Prince. 50.
Letters sent from the prince of Co^de to the Emperor. 70. Letters sent from
the Senate at Paris to the Prince of Conde. 51. Letters sent from the Prince of
Co^de to the Prince of Palatine. 71. Letters sent to every congregation from
the Counsel holden at Orleans. 73. Letters sent to the county Palatine from
the Synod at Orleans. 76. Letters from the Prince of Conde to the Queen. 115.
Letters from the Prince to the king of Nauar. 118. Letters sent by the Prince
of Conde to the Queen of England and the German princes for aid. 146 Letters
found in the Papists tent^ after they were put to flight, bewraying their hole
purpose. 195. Letters sent to the Germans which were in the host of the
Guyses by the Priaces of Germany to dis^ade them to take his part. 210. Letters
parents given out to them which had started away from the Prince of Conde. 212
Letters written to the Germans which were in the princes of Co^de his army to
dehort them from his service. 2540
M
Marshall of S. Andrew being taken and wounded in the head dies in the field.
243. Momorantius the Constable joined in amity with the Guises. 3. Montauban
taken by the Faithful. 74. Monsieur Montbron put to flighte with his army.
181. Monsieur ^oyse besieged Montpelier. 185. Monsieur Bularges got a
wonderful victory over the enemy. 193. Monsieur de Adretze his acts done in
Dolphiny and in the county of Venayas. 143. Mottecondrine slain. 81.
N
Names of the Captains over the faithful. 139 Narbone is left by the
faithful too the tuition of the Papists. 79 Nemeaux, otherwise called Nemis
is taken by the faithful. 80 Nemours wins Vienna. 248 Nemours deceived by
an Inhabitant of Lions. 249 Noble men of the Prince of Co^des side went too
parley with the Queen. 133 Nonay cruelly spoiled. 252
O
Orange assaulted and taken by the Papists. 140 Orleans vexed with a grievous
pestilence. 146 Orleans besieged by the Papists. 255
P
Paris being gotten by the Guises they seek to get the King also. 19 Parleyes
had between the old Queen, the Admiral and the Prince of Conde. 2^4 Peace
offered by the king too the faithful but upon conditions. 124 Peace taken on
both parts. 260 Poictiers won by the Ma^shall of Saint Andrew. 145 Policies
wrought by the Guises to expel the Conde out of Paris. 17 Prince of Conde
becomes pledge. 131 Practices to take the Prince of Conde. 131 Prince of
Conde returns to his ar mie back again. 136 Prince of Conde forsakes
Paris. 17 Prince of Conde specially inclined to peace. 24 Prince of Conde
co^plaineth of the murder done at Sens. 34. Prince of Conde receives letters
from the Senate at Paris 51 Prince of Conde returns from Pa ris to join with
the Englismen 237 Prince of Co^de taken prisoner. 242 Purpose of the Guises
concerning war. 22 Pultrot sent from Lions to Orleans with letters. 256
Pultrot s^apeth the Guise and by the mere providence of God is taken again.
258 Pultrot is drawn in pieces with horse for killing the Guises. 265
Q
Queen of Scotts promised to be given in marriage to the king of Nauar. 7
Queen mother denies thevse of the reformed Religion too the Prince of Conde.
134 Queen mother would have the Prince of Conde and his friends banished. 135
Queen of Nauar shows her self to be a virtuous Lady. 202
R.
Requests made by the faithful. 124 Roan in Normandye besieged, but in vain.
138 Roan besieged the second time. 201 Ruzeus a professor of the Gospel,
commanded to ward. 23
S.
Saltanus Lieuetenant of Lions, anenemie to the gospel. 82 Slaughter at
Tholoze 79 Slaughter of the faithful at Vassy, committed by the Duke of Guise.
page 10 Supplication offered to the King and Queen in the name of the
Triumuiri. 87 Supplication offered the second time to the King and Queen by
the Guises and his confederates. page 90 Suze his army in Dolphiny, greatly
anoyed the faithful 146
T
Talk betwixt the King of Nauar, the Old Queen, and the Prince of Conde. 115
Talk between the old Queen and the Nobles on the Prince of Co^de his side. 133
The second declaration of the prince page 59. The true cause of the first
wars. page 168 The beginning of the civil wars. page 124 The reasons that
stayed the Prince of Conde from going into exile. page 222 The form of the
government of the realm in the Kings minority. 222 The order of the meeting
of booth the battles on the plane of Dreux. 238 The first battle wherein
the Constable was taken and many Swit sers taken and slain. 240 The Admiral
goes into Normandy. 257
V
Valentia taken by the faithful. 81 Vienna won by the Papists. 248
IV
War purposed by the Guises. 22 Wickedness almost incredible com mitted by
the Papists against the faithful in Prouance. 185 VVritings published by the
Queen of England concerning the help she sent to the Prince of Conde. page.
203 Writings published by the Prince of Conde wherein he declares himself
not to be the beginner of these wars. 215
FINIS.
Faults escaped in Printing both in the second part, and also in the last part.
Page. 57. line. 7 leave out, of the which. Page. 88. line. 10. for and, read
an. Page. 97. line, last, for, They then said, read, Thus much they said at
that time. Page. 105. line last, for they, read the. Page. 133. line 13. for
orget, read forget. Page 147. line 13 for oh, read, of. Page. 169. line 27. for
Bishops, read, Kings. Page. 175. line. 6. for a, read, as. Page. 174. line.
28. for, the, read, then. Page 176. line ^6, for, rnd, read, and. Page. 187.
line. 8. for breathe, read, breadth. Page. 188. line. 22. for ayy, read any.
Page 204. line 30. for my see, read, may see. Page. 224. for, it it, read, it
is. Page 51. line, 20. for do, read, to.
The fourth Book of Commentaries concerning the state of the common wealth,
and Religion of France, in the reign of King Charles. IX.
THe Edict of Ia nuary, Anno Domini. 1561.
(whereof mention is made in the end of the third Book goinge before) being at
the last, after the delays of the Senate of Paris, published and proclaimed at
Paris, and in the whole Kingdom, made a joyful and prosperous end of all
troubles: the Gospel had peaceable passage throughout all the dominions, all
most, of France: and the faithful, according to the tenure, and prescript of
the Edict, gladly leaving the Churches and places, which were within the
cities, flocked together in great assemblies without the Cities, insomuch that
all men greatly delighted to look upon them. But Satan envying that peace
and tranquillity, caused after a while not only private perturbations, and
troubles between man and man, but also, open and Civil wars, by the devises
and practices of the adversaries, to the great hurt of the Realm. The which
things, as briefly, even so truly will we declare in this history: In
penning whereof, we know into what sundry hap and hazard of judgments we are
in, what a large scope we have, to set forth diverse matters, and also, what
hatred and peril we bring unto our selves. But the truth shall defend it self,
and shall also take away all sclaunder and reproach.

Many grieved and repined at the increase and good success of the reformed
Churches, greatly misliking of the Edict of January, for that it tended much
for their The very cause of the Civil wars was the breaking of the Edict of
January
peace and quietness which favored the Religion. Of these repyning enemies there
were two sorts: The first sort were such as had their living by the Benefices,
revenues, and spiritual promotions of Priests: and of these many were
gentlemen, and men of high calling, who perceiving that the greatest part of
their substance came unto them by the said Benefices, thought that they should
sustain great hinderance and loss, if so be they of the reformed Religion
should obtain and enjoy the benefit of the Edict. The second sort, were such
noble men as being enriched, not only with those great and huge sommes of
money which came to them by the yearly revenues of those Benefices, (the fat
whereof, they reserved to them, and theirs,) but also with the innumerable
gifts of King Henry the second, and Fraunces the second: feared, least they
being called to give up their accounts, (according to the custom of the
Realm) should be found guilty of extorcion. Among these latter sort, the
chief were the Guises, the fatal destruction of the kingdom of France: who
also as yet were to make their account for great sommes of money taken out of
the Kings Treasury, for common affairs, and other weighty matters in the time
of King Fraunces the second: and also of their evil demeynor, whereof they were
plainly accused, under the reign of King Henry the second. Also the great
loss of that high auctho ritie, which almost they alone had during the
minority of King Fraunces the second: and with the same loss, the fear
foreseeing the great euilles to come, pinched them even to the heart, and
grieved them to the very gall. To these also was joined the Martial of S.
Andrew, a man full of all subtlety, guile, and mischief, who being out of
measure rich with the great gifts which he received of King Henry, for his
evil and cruel service, was pricked in conscience for spoiling, by sinister
means, diverse noble men of his familiar acquaynta^ce. By the practice and
endeavor of this Martial, the Constable Momorentius (as we said in our other
Book) a Momorentius the Constable made a friend to the Guises.
little before a mortal enemy to the Guises, having diverse times experience
of their hatred, was brought to the familiarity and friendship of the Guises.
And to the intent they might win the Constable wholely unto them, by a new
benefit, they granted franckly unto him, the dominion of Dammartine, for the
which, before time there had been great contencion between them.

Therefore the daily adhortations of the Martial of S. Andrew, and the Duches
of Valence, (beside the domestical and daily persuasions of his wife, and of
the Earl of Uillars) greatly urged and pressed the Constable: as, that the
ancient and catholic doctrine was abolyshed: that the common wealth was
disturbed: that they of the reformed Religion did plainly threaten to bring
such as had been officers of the kings before time, to give up their accou^ts:
that those me^ sought only by lit tle and little to place them selves in
authority, and to abase those that served and had borne office under the kings
in time past, and to have the spoil of their goods: that the Queen Mother, was
led away with their persuasions: and that she being an effeminate and weak
woman, would incline to that part which was most strong: also that it was
manifest that she did favor those of the reformed Religion for the king of
Nauar his sake, who seeks all that he can to have the Religion altered, being
thereunto provoked by the Prince of Conde, to spite those which are suspected
to be the authors, that he was cast into prison: And therefore that they, if
they might bring al things to pass after their own desire, as to have their
enemies subdued, and the state of the kingdom and of Religion altered, would
bring the Constable him self to their own bent and will, and would in like
manner call him to account. These persuasions being oftentimes inculcated and
beaten into the Constables ears, being rather an enemy to Religion, drew him
quite away at the last to the contrary part: and so by little and little for
saking the king of Nauar, and the Prince of Conde, he openly showed his
displeasure and choler against ye Chastilions. Therefore now began to be
manifest familiarity and friendship between the Constable and the Guises, in so
much that they ba^ketted one another, and had oftentimes secreate conference
between them selves.

Wherefore at y^ last they conspired together, namely that the Duke of Guise, as
a Prince of aliance to the The conspi racie of the Guises, the Constable and
the Martial of S. Andrew against the Gospel.
king, and Lord great master of France: the Constable as chief officer under
the king: and the Martial of S. Andrew, as head Martial, should bend their
whole endeavors in this, that no part of the ancient and Catholic Religion
might be altered. And because, notwithstanding the constitutions and Edictes of
the former kings, a new Religion was brought in, they would endeavor them selves
with all their force and might, that those heretical doctrines might be quite
abolished and destroyed: And also that they would not suffer new Decrees to be
made concerning the state of ye realm, and the wills of the former Kings to
be disproued: that they would openly declare them selves to be enemies to all
those, which would go about this thing: And finally, that in this cause they
would do what they could, even to the spending of their goods and lives: To
perform the which, they swore solemnly one to another.

The matter being thus agreed upon between them, they did deliberate and
advise them selves, what they were best to do, namely that they would gather
together all the power they were able to make, and that they would seek for all
the help and aid at their retainers and friends hands that might be had:
they being assured of aid, out of Spain and Jtalie: and that the Guises
should prove what help they could get out of the parts of Germany. But first
of all they thought it necessary, to intise and win the king of Nauar, and to
bring him if they could to defend their part, to get Paris: and finally, to
have the King and Queen at their beck. These things once obtained, they
persuaded them selves easily to obtain their purpose. Concerning the winning
of the king of Nauar, they had good hope, being voluptuous, given to ease, and
unconstant: and having his household servant hired by the Cardinal of
Loraine, to use their diligent endeavor to bring y^ same to pass. Who, being
once won to take their part, they perceived a plain way to have their
purpose. Therefore, to the intent they might win him, they use very subtle and
crafty means. First, they assay what they can do by his household servant,
the bishop of Aussere* Monsire Escars, and Frances Balduinae, being sent in to
confer and talk with him.

These declared to the king of Nauar, that they of the Religion, sought now, to
bring in new and more severe Laws than were wont to be, to reform Princes:
as though it were not lawful for Princes to live as they list, and to do what
seems good in their own eyes. If credit be given unto these men, than must
men frame a new life: and if these me^ be made Judges to reform what they
think good to be reformed, (the which no doubt they go about) there will
ensewe no small danger. But he being one that had chief authority in the
Realm of France, ought rather wisely to follow that which was agreeable to the
present state: and to consider into what troubles he should bring the Realm,
if he would abolish the ancient Religion, which so many Kings before time had
received. There are (say they) opinions of diverse Religions, which as they come
with time, so with time they fade away again. If therefore he should be of the
reformed Religion, the King of Spain would be his open enemy: And beside
this, the Pope would set whole Jtalie and al Christian Realms, against the
kingdom of France, which might easily be vanquished and overthrown, in the
midst of so many dis sentions. But look how much hurt and damage he should
bring to himself and to the whole Kingdom, if he should defend that new
Religion, and the professors thereof: so much profit, glory, and fame, should
come to him and to all his stock, if he did not to much entangle himself in
these controversies of Religion, but did rather frame himself wisely according
to occasion and time: that is to say, when occasion is offered, to maintain
and defend the ancient and Catholic Religion, whereby he might look to
find great profit. Thus if he would show himself, he should win the
Popes favor, and bind his holiness to requite him with some great benefit,
by whose means he might recover again the kingdom of Nauar, which belonged
to his Ancetours, without wars* for that the King of Spain greatly esteemed
the Popes Authority. Consider therefore (say they) with your self what you
were best to do, least suddenly by the force of sinister persuasions, you bring
your self to great extremity. Consider with your self, that as the times are
perilous, so is the event and success of all things uncertain: wisely wey
therefore with your self what is most profitable for you. Admit the cause of
Religion should be dissided by disputacion: should men so lean to the opinions
of a few, that they should not embrace other men's Judgments? For among those
men which embrace the doctrine of that new Gospel, what contrariety is there,
and difference of opinions? But you which were borne, not to Judge of
Scholasticall Disputacions, but to the exployting of greater matters and of
more weight, may occupy: and trouble your brain with these matters, at your
leisure. Therefore we wish you, according to your wisdom, to weye and consider
what is most needful to be done.

The King of Nauar, being to much given to voluptuousness and ease, harkened
all to soon to these persuasions: and being overcome, forgetting his
authority, he wholly gave himself to his Adversaries: by whom he being
spoiled of that his authority, and of his wits also, was the occasion of
many and great mischeeues. The way therefore being thus made wholely to
overthrow and subvert the King of Nauar, there came then unto him the Cardinal
of Ferrar, and the Cardinal of Towers, with many faier promises from the Pope,
that he, if he would thus embrace the Catholic Doctrine, should prosper and
benefit him self very much. For (said they) the Pope will bring to pass
that the Kings of Spain should very shortly give unto him again the kingdom
of Nauar. And also, that he would give unto him a bill of diuorcement, that he
being divorced from his wife, which was to much inclined to that new Religion,
Queen of Scotts promised to be given in marriage to the king of Nauar.
might marry with the Queen of Scotts, a woman of excellent beauty, rich,
and the widow of a renowned King. And thus he should have two Kingdoms, namely
the Kingdom of Nauar, and by this new marriage also, the Kingdom of Scotland.
Whereby, was offered unto him opportunity, to exployte and bring to pass great
matters, when as he having the kingdom of Scotland, might claim also unto
him the kingdom of England, which bordered upon the same, which the Scottish
Kings before time challenged unto themselves as their right. And so, he being of
so great power both by his own kingdoms, and also by the help and aid which
he might have out of France, out of Spain, and from the Pope, should easily
conquer and enjoy England, and so become a great Monarch.

Wherefore they exhorted him to consider how many occasions Fortune luckely
offered unto him to bring to pass whatsoever he would. The which if he should
forslowe and neglect, and on the contrary part like of and mayntaine the new
Doctrine, they wished him to consider, according to his wisdom, what grievous
perils and troubles he should fall into, the which yet might easily be
repressed and anoyded, if so be he would hearken to good and wholesome
counsel. Adding moreover, that the Prince of Conde, would do as he did, and
that the Chatillions would not be behind: and as for the rest of the nobles and
common people, it should not force, if so be that he would use the authority
of the Kings Edictes and his own power, and join himself with the faithful
and trusty servants of the King.

After these persuasions, the king of Nauar, daily more and more showed
himself, not only to dislike of the reformed Religion, and of the professors
thereof, but also was angry and sore offended with them. Insomuch that he
commanded the Ministers of Gods word which were with him in house to depart
from him: and went him self oftentimes to the Popish Churches, heard Mass:
and earnestly commanded his wife, which was a very honest and virtuous Lady,
(who also refused) to do the like: gave him self to filthy pleasures of women:
and was also very familiarly conversant with the Guises, the Constable, the
Martial of S. Andrew, and with the Cardinals. Notwithstanding all this, the
reformed Religion so prevailed, that new reports and rumors were daily brought
into the Court concerning the same. The Prince of Conde, the Admiral, and many
of the Nobles, diligently seeking to have the same preferred: The Queen mother
also was ruled by good counsel: And as for the king of Nauar, he was uncertain
what to do in the midst of these troubles, and was like unto an unskillful
mariner destitute of counsel, having diverse cogitations in his mind,
uncertain whether to go, and yet nevertheless, standing still as one amassed. In
ye mean time the Edict of January (whereof mention is made before) took place,
and was put in execution. But then were the minds of the Guises, of the
Constable, and of the Marshall of S. Andrewe so vexed and grieved, that they
thought good not to delay the time any longer: they being encouraged to
proceed with their purpose, for that they might rule the king of Nauar as them
list. Therefore every man being appointed what to do: the Duke of Guise departed
from the court: The Constable, went home to his house: and sent for his
retainers and friends to see if they would s^icke unto him: and such as he
doubted of, he sought to win. The Marshal of S. Andrew did even the like.

The Guises (as is said before) had taken upon them to win the Princes of
Germany to take their part: and therefore they wrote letters oftentimes to
diverse of them. And to further their busynes they used the help of the
Rokendolfe, and the Rheingraue: the Cardinal trimly countenancesing, and
dissembling that he embraced ye Ausburgue Confession. And that he minded, not
long ago, to establishe the same in France: but he said, that the men of the
new Religion did greatly gainsay and let the same: whom he blamed in all
things, as ungodly men, and the vpholders of all monsterous opinions. Moreover
he said that the Prince of Conde by the means and counsel of the Admiral, went
about to aspire to the kingdom: and that under the pretense of Religion, he
lived a licentious and voluptuous life. After these practices, the Duke of
Guise him self, came to Sauerne, a town bordering upon Germany: and there
he talked with the Duke of Wirtemberge: fained that he embraced the Confession
of Ausburge: sla^dered and falsely accused the prince of Conde, and the reformed
churches, and craved his aid against them: and under the pretense of that
communication, the Duke of Guise vaunted and bragged much of the freendship of
the Duke of Wirtemberge, saying, that he was sure that he would without all
doubt take his part, and also alleging that he had taken these enterprises in
hand, by the Dukes advise and counsel: For the which the Duke of Wirtemberge
afterward blamed him, and proved that he persuaded him self to have more
friendship at his hands, than ever he meant unto him, and did falsely disse^ble,
wherefore he earnestly exhorted the Guises to cease from persecuting the
reformed churches.

After this, the Duke of Guise, having gotten to take his part, certain
valea^t captains, by the means of the Rokendolfe, and the Reingraue came to
Jnuille, and there and in the towns thereabouts, he chose out armed horse men:
when he had so done, upon occasion of letters sent from the king of Nauar, he
intended straighte way in all have to come to the Court with an army of me^:
and after deliberation had, he began his voyage with a lamentable slaughter, as
you shall hear. There is a certain Town bordering upon Champaigne, nere to
Jnuille, The slaugh ter at Vassi, made by the Duke of Guise.
the Lordship of the house of Guises, called Vassi, within the dominion of
France but no part thereof. In this town there was a certain number of ye
faithful: but because the Guises bordered so near unto them, they durst not
profess the reformed religion so frankely as they would have done.
Notwithstanding they being at ye last provoked and encouraged hereunto, by the
me^ of Troy^ their neighbors, were fully bent to use the benefit of ye kings
Edictes, and procured of the congregation of Troy^ a minister of Gods word to
attend upon them, and so after the disputation in the Conu^cation at Possi,
they had a church established among them, whereby the number of the faithful
wonderfully increased more and ^ore. The Guises hearing of this, greatly
gr^dged against it, and were much displeased therewith, and sent the^ word yt
they should evil fauoredly enjoy their liberty, Therefore the Duke of Guise
returning from Sauern, and making have into France to the King, fully
determined to set upon the enhabitantes of Uassi (which earnestly followed the
reformed Religion) with force of arms as he went. So that he charged all his
retainers, (which dwelt in the villages about Uassi) to be in a readiness
against his coming to Uassi, by the which he meant to take his journey withal
speed into France. The which commandment of his was fulfilled. Therefore the
Duke of Guise, upon the first day of the month of March, being the Saboth
day, on the which he knew the faithful would cheefely assemble them selves
together, came by the break of the day to a village called Dammartine from
whence, after he had heard Mass he went to Uassi. And when he was entered the
city, be heard that the Huguenotes were assembled together to hear a sermon:
to the which place he went in (...). Now, the people which were assembled
together, were in number a thousand and five hundred persons, and the Preacher
had begone his Sermon. Therefore the Duke of Guise, having his Brother the
Cardinal waiting upon him, sent for many of the towns men, and for the
chief parish priest, (as they call him) and the governor of the city, to
come unto him. With these men he entered into a popish church, which was not
far from the congregation of the faithful: And after that he had disclosed
unto them his purpose, he went out again, and commanded his men to make haste
to go to the Huguenotes sermon. The soldiers being come to the place, where the
sermon was made, began to cast their darts among them. At the first the
faithful marvelled what the matter was: but incontinently many of them were
slain: and the soldiers of the Guise in great number rushed and fell upon the
congregation: and thus they being hemmed in on every side, and having no way
to escape, the Duke of Guise himself stood at the door with his sword drawn
in his hand, ready to receive such upon the same as should seek to escape by
flight, crying out most outrageously against the^, and encouraging his
soldiers to the slaughter. Who making a violent assault, fell upon the
fearful and trembling multitude, and such as sought to escape by flight, or
by climing up to the top of the house, they slew without pity or mercy: yea
whomsoever they met withal, were they men or women, old or young, they put
them to the sword most cruelly against all humanity, making havoc of them all
together. In the mean time the clamors, howlings, and pitiful cries of these
innocent sheep appointed to ye slaughter, were not ceased, but were made with
the sound of the trumpet which blew all the time of the flanghter, to be more
doleful and terrible, to all those that heard the same. Where upon the Duches
of Guise the Dukes wife, walking by chance by the walls of the city, and
hearing this fearful noise, was abashed thereat: In so much that she sending
straight way a messenger to her husband, earnestly desired and beseeched him,
to cease and mak^ an end of that miserable slaughter, least women great with
child in the city hearing that fearful noise should be delivered before their
time. Therefore the Duke of Guise being troubled and somewhat terrefied with
his own horrible and wicked enterprise, commanded a retreit to be blown. And
then was brought to him the Preacher, whom he miscalled and reviled at his
pleasure, and then committed him to the charge and custody of a soldier. But
yet for all this the soldiers ceased not to slay and kill committing murder in
diverse places of the city, and defiling the streates with blood, yea with the
blood of innocents: to describe the which as it was don in deed by these
bloody butchers, it would abhor any christian heart to hear. At the last when
they had made an end of killing and slaying, they searched throughoute every
corner of the place where the people had assembled them selves together, they
ouer^hrew the seats and benches that were therein, and brake them to pieces,
they did cut the holy Bible in pieces: yea and the rascal soldiers spoke thus
of the same. What shall I do with this word of God, I pass not for it, I can
make no money of this, give me therefore the gold, the silver, and apparel.
It cannot be uttered with what and how many blasphemies the gospel was
blasphemed. The Cardinal Guise also had in his hand a certain Bible which
was found in the pulpet: Of him the Duke of Guise demanded, what book it was?
The Cardinal answered that it was ye holy scripture: What holy scripture is it
(says he) and loking upon the first leaf of the book, he said, that that
book was not made above two years since: showing by his warlike rudenes and
ignorance, what little knowledge and understanding he had of the word of God.

At the last, even as if the city had been over run and vanquished by the
foreign enemy, the lackeis and serving men, fayning the voice of a Crier sold
gowns, coats, cappes, and w^mens apparel to the popish sort of the town,
which greatly scorned and derided the faithful. The houses also of the
outdwellers and borderers upon the city were despoyled: and many by the way
as they went were evil entreated and slain. Then the Duke of Guise commanded
the keeper of the Castle to come before him: whom he sharply reprehended,
because he knew of those sermons that were made in the City, and threatened to
punish him, commanding him to follow him. Many also of the townsmen were led
away with them bound. The Minister or Preacher (of whom we spoke before) being
sore mangled and wounded, and lying groueling upon a Ladder, was so carried by
the commandment of the Guise to a town called Sandiser, being derided,
miscalled, and evil entreated as he went.

Now the fame of this horrible act and butcherly slaughter was brought by and
by to the Churches bordering therabouts, and thereof also diverse rum^rs and
reports arysing, it was diversely reported in the Kings Court, and suddenly
astonished and amazed all those that heard of the same, until within few days
after certain messengers came from Vassi, and from certain of the Churches
thereabouts, certifying the truth of the matter, and complaining of the
horrible fact e^ the Gui ses, and making humble supplication that remedy might
be provided for so great a mischiefe^: adding hereunto that the true subjects
of the King, could not bear any longer the great cruelty and injuries of the
Guises, being strangers. The matter being thus reported, seemed Complaint of
the faith full of the flaughter.
to all men very presumptuous and rash: Insomuch yt ye Prince of Conde the
Chastilons ye Chauncelour, and others cried out against the same, saying that
it was a wicked and horrible act, and against the Edicts and laws of the
Realm: and that therefore it was needful to provide a present remedy.
Notwithstanding the daily rumors of the coming of the Guises to Paris, caused
al me^ to fear, foreseeing diverse great troubles and calamities like to ensue.
At this time the King was at Monceaulx, a house belonging to the Queen his
mother who was there also, accompanied with the Prince of Conde. But the King
of Nauar, the Martial of S. Andrew, and the Brissac were at Paris: to whom
straight way also came the Constable. Now the Duke of Guise was come to
Nantuille, a place of his dominion: and it was reported that he would come the
next day to Paris. The Prince of Conde much marueiled at this sudden and
hasty coming of the Guises to Paris, after the comitting of so wicked and
presumptuous a deed against the kings Edict. He went therefore to the King and
Queen: and declared that the matter was such, that except a remedy were
provided in time, great destruction would fall upon the whole Realm: Wherefore
he wished that so great a mischiese might might proceed no farther: For (says
he) if the Duke of Guise come to the City, there will follow present peril
of most grievous calamities. The Queen the Kings mother, liked well of this
advise of the Prince and agreed to the same. Therefore she wrote to the king of
Nauar, exhorting him, according ^o his office, to see that the kings Majesty
and the Realm also, fell into no peril: and charge the Guise also by her
letters not to come to the city: but to come him self to ye King with a few
only waiting upon him. To the which the Guise answered, that he was busy in
entertayning his friends and could not come: Whereu^pon the Queen wrote her
letters again: but in vai^e.

Therefore after deliberation had, the Duke of Guise came to Paris the twenty
day of March, with his brother the Duke of Aumal, the Martial of Saint Andrew,
which came to him to Nantueile, and with a great many noble men more, and with
a great Army of horsemen The Guise comes to Paris against the Queens
commandment.
also. And entering into the city, there went to meet and entertayne him the
chief master of the marchaunts, a man of great authority and estimation among
the Parisians, three counsels of the City, sumptuously apparelled, and a great
concours^ of the Citizens, crying, God preserve the Duke of Guise. The which
acclamation is proper only to Kings. Now when they were come, there were many
doubtful and uncertain reports in the City: and the conspiracy between the
Guise, the Constable, and the Martial of S. Andrew, evidently appeared to all
men: Who joining with them certain of the Senators of Paris sat in counsel
every day.

The Prince of Conde also came to Paris, accompanied with certain noble men,
and exhorted the faithful not to forsake him in so great peril and danger.
The Guises were very sorry for this coming of the Prince of Conde, which they
judged would be very hurtful for them. For although the common sort of people
of the City of Paris were foolish, hawtie, and stout, at the first, by the
coming of the Guises, yet notwithstanding their courage and pride, was
brideled and abated even with the name of the Prince of Conde: insomuch that
they stayed from open outrage. Therefore the City, by the coming of the Prince
of Conde, was quieted, and as it were, newly altered.

But this thing did very much hinder the purpose of the Guises, which greatly
desired to obtain Paris, being the chief City of the kingdom, and a very
fit place to bring their matters to pass. Therefore, first of all they saw that
they must bring to pass that the Prince of Conde might depart from the city.
Wheruppon they practiced by the King of Nauar, that, Marshall Memorencie the
Lefetenant of the city, might be called back The practi ses of the Guises to
expel the Prince of Conde out of Paris.
again: and that the Cardinal of Borbon, which would be at their
commandment, might be sent in his stead: the necessity of the time, (say
they) greatly requiring this thing.

The Constable brought to pass that his son Momorencie, should not greatly
refuse this thing: who, if he had constantly withstoode them and denied their
request, they had very hardly brought their purpose to effect, he being a man
of excellent wisdom, and experience, but yet withal a time seruer.

By this time, the King of Nauar was come to the King and the Queen, which lay
at Moncaulx: thither came also, out of hand, the chief master of the Marcha^ts,
an Author of Seditions, hired and sent by the Guises. This fellow declared to
the King and Queen, that the Prince of Conde wrought sedition at Paris, the
which, would shortly turn to great mischief, except he departed from thence:
the which if it should come to pass, he to whom authority was given to
provide remedies for the same, should bear all the blame. So that, with his
often complaynts to the Queen, he brought about, that according to his
request, the king of Nauar should go out of hand to Paris. Then the Guises,
joining with the^ certain of the Senate of Paris, that were fittest for their
purpose, and seeking to have the greater authority through the presence of ye
king of Nauar, which was chief Uicegerent, they determined to have a common
counsel: to the which they never called the Prince of Conde. And this they
called The Kings Counsel. The king of Nauar, by the decree of this counsel,
wrote out of ha^^ to ye Queen, that it was necessary yt the Prince of Co^de
should depart from Paris, and get him home to his house: except she would have
present peril of sedition, by reason of his presence, to burst forth into
open and manifest perturbation and garboyle.

Notwithstanding it was to be doubted what would come to pass: For a man might
behold thoroughout the city, the diversity of men's minds by diverse
shows: Somewhile they trembled, somewhile they triumphed: both parts in one
hour changed: Di^ers rumors were dispersed abroad: In so much that there
appeared evident and most certain tokens of imminent sedition.

Great was the power of the Guises, through the authority of the king of
Nauar: The Senate had the handling of the cause. The greatest part of the people
consented, the common multitude being easily led. On the other part, the
authority of the Prince of Conde was not small, his name having such a
majesty, that the people trembled at the same: great also was the number of
the faithful, and no less was their power: In so much that there was no great
inequality between both parts: yet (...)the twain the Popes number was the
greater, yea by many.

Also the Prince of Conde perceived well enough all the practices of the
Guises: and how they went about to bring the king and Queen to Paris. But he
was not as yet fully determined, what to do, for he feared least he forsaking
Paris, the Guises should possess the same: and if he should abide at Paris,
that then by the Counsels of the Guises the King and the Queen should be
won from him. Notwithstanding he wayed and considered with himself the
gra^itie and wisdom of the Queen, of whom he was fully persuaded, that she
would withstand the practices of the Guises. And he could not be altogyther
certi^ied, That his brother the king of Nauar would be so blind, as to prefer
strangers before his own blood. Being therefore doutefull what way to take,
he was the more cold in his bus^nesse.

In the mean time, the Queen, being stirred and provoked with the daily
complayntes of the Merchant master, wrote unto the Prince of Conde, wisshing
him to forsake Paris, and to come to the King: And the Prince of Conde was
daily disturbed and persuaded hereunto by the Cardinal of B^urbon his brother,
who was sent (as we said before) to keep the City.

Therefore he went from Paris, to his house called The Prince of Conde
forsakes Paris.
Fertea in his own Dominion, purposing to go from thence to the King, as the
Queen had given commandment.

Things being thus appointed, and the Guises being free from their g^t fear,
by the departure of the Prince of Conde, they appointed a very great and strong
garrison of soldiers, (ordained before by the Merchant master) to keep
Paris. Thus when they had gotten the city according to their own desire, they
seek^ to atchieue and bring about another principal point of their counsels
and devises.

Therefore they made have with an army of men to the king, who at that time
was at Fontainbleau. The Queen being amassed and afraid at his sodein
preparation, looked for the Prince of Conde: who even now also had taken his
journey to come. Of the which, when the Duke of Guise had intelligence, fearing
least the Prince of Conde would enter into Paris, he gave The Guise having go^
ten Paris seek to ge^ the King also.
charge and commandment to the Marchantmaister, to look diligently
thereunto. Upon this commandment the Marchantmaister, warned the Captains
to have their Soldiers armed and in a readiness: appointed watch and ward to
be in every place of the city: and planted pieces of Ordinance, in such
places as he thought needful. Therefore when the Prince of Conde came near
the city, notwithstanding mynding not to enter therein, the whole city roonge
and sounded with the noise of the great Gonnes.

In the mean time the Guises, otherwise peradventure scarce able to match with
the Prince of Conde, thought it not best to tarry his coming at Fontaynbleau,
least they should put their purpose in hazard. Therefore they purposed to carry
away the King from Fontaynbleau, which was a place, not of strength, but of
pleasure, to a more strong hold. Whereupon they caused the king of Nauar,
whose authority they abused in all things to serve their turn, to persuade
with the Queen, that it was very necessary, for diverse present necessities, to
depart from Fontaynbleau: The Prince of Conde coming to take the king. To
this the Queen answered, that there was nothing more unlikely, than that his
bro there the Prince of Conde, being the Kings kinsma^, should purpose any such
thing against the king, his liege Lord and master: and beside this (says she)
the king will not depart to any other place.

The Queen constantly persisting in this mind, was again provoked by the king
of Nauar, who said, that they must of necessity depart from thence:
otherwise the king would be destroyed: and except she would grant hereunto,
he said he would him self of his own authority and office, being the Kings
keeper and Protecto^r, transporte the King to another place. Then the Queen
began to beseech the King of Nauar, to know his intent, and why he should
have these suspicions of the Prince of Conde. The King him self also said
that he would go to no other place, and in his childish vehemence, he
declared his grief with tears. But the King of Nauar still affirmed, that
there was no remedy, but that they must needs depart from thence. Therefore
he and the Guises carried away the King, and the Queen his mother, his
brethren, and his Sister, from Fountaynbeleau, to a Town called Mellune: The
King so soon as he came thither, was appointed to lodge in the Castle that
was therein, without any manner of Kinglyke provision for the same: the which
Castle before time had been used as a prison to keep offenders in, and such as
had deserved death, by their evil demeanor.

By reason of this expedition and haste of the Guises, the Prince of Conde had
no way or mean to do any thing as he would: In so much that now there was a
plain gate set wide, to open wars. For the Prince of Conde, being the Kings
near kinsman, and seeing that his elder Brother did not his duty, thought
that he ought not to suffer the safegarde of the King, and of the whole realm
to come in peril.

Therefore, he took counsel out of hand: he came The Prince of Conde
comes to Orleans.
to Orleans strayt after that he had sent the Andelot with certain horsemen,
and kept the same, beeinge a well fenced city, and fit for his purpose: gave
commandment by publiqne Edictes, That no man should cause any tumult, under
the pretense of Religion: and that all men, of what Religion so ever they were
of, should observe and keep the kings Laws and Edictes. He commanded also
the kings Officers and the Magistrates of the Town to come unto him: Who being
come, he straytly charged them to do their duty, upon their allegiance and
obedience to the king: gyuing them to understand, that he was not come thither
under his own name, but in the name of his soueraygne Lord the king.

The faithful according to the prescript of the kings Edict, had their Sermons
without the City. The Papists on the other part freely used their rightes and
ceremonies: frequented their churches, and the morrow Mass Priests walked
through the city in their priestly apparel: All things were done freely on
both parts: the Prince gyuing new commandments and charge from day to day,
that no man should be so hardy as to break the kings peace. This was done in
the month of March.

After this, that the Guises were certified that the Prince of Conde was come
to Orleans, yea, and that The purpose of the Guises con cerning War.
great rumors were brought daily unto them, they were fully determined to take
no small enterprise in hand. Therefore the society in the which they were
lynked before with the Constable, and the Martial of S. Andrew, being
confirmed now again between them selves, they said that it was now a more
convenient time to proclayme open war, than would be afterward, by further
delay.

The king of Nauar was won on their side: Paris they enjoyed: And the king was
in their hands, But they feared and stood in doubt of the Queens mind, which
at that time plainly seemed to inclyne to the Prince of Conde.

Least therefore the Queen joining with the Prince of Conde should go about
some new practice, first of all they determined to carry the king and the
Queen, to the most convenient place for their purpose, that all occasion of
fear might be quite taken away. And to serve their turn, they used diverse
pretenses and colors. By the king of Nauar they declared unto the Queen,
that it was most necessary, in consideracion of those perillouse times, that
the king should be carried to Paris. Beside him, the Merchant master daily
persuaded that it was necessary for the King to come to Paris, to stay the
hurleyburleys, and to quiet the people by his presence. They declared therefore
to the Queen that it is fully decreed that the king should be carried from
Melune to Paris: notwithstanding that the Queen earnestly requested the
contrary.

First, came the Constable, with three hundred horsemen attending upon him,
from Melune to Paris: and then began open war against the faythefull. The
Constable understanding that Ruzeus, a noble Counceller in the common place
Court of Paris. professed the reformed Ruzeus a professor of the Gos pell,
commanded toward.
Religion, sent for him and commanded him to prison. And Ruzeus demanding of
him by what authority he did so, he answered: It is authority sufficient,
that the Constable himself has done it.

After this, he, having a great multitude of people sollowing him, came to
those places which were limited to the faithful by the kings Edicte, for the
preaching of the word, and the administration of Sacraments: and there,
casting all the pewes, selles, seats and benches on a heap, he set them on
fire: The common multitude highly commending him for the same: who being
encouraged by the familiar example of the Constable, by and by set the howses
belonging to the same on a light fire, and burnt them down to the ground.

Then had every man free leave and liberty to put him self in armor:
Insomuch that a man might then see in every streate and corner of the city
armed men, well appointed to fight: and the rash multitude of laboring men
having weapons in their hands to lay lustely about them, committing murder and
rapine throughout the city: falling with violence upon every on that was said
to be a Huguenote: Yea a man might see inordinate sedition in every place. If
any man made complaynt to the Constable of any violence or wrong done to him,
he should for his recompense be threatened to the gallows.

The houses, at the last, the streates, and the river were filled with dead
carcasses: There was nothing so cruel, which the furious multitude did not
attempt.

To this tumultuous and sedicious city, did the Guises bring the king: first
of all to the Castle which appertayned to the King: then the King entered the
city without any manner of kinglike pomp, to the Castle called Lower.

All things falling thus out, according to the desire of the Guises, they now
seriously study and beat their brains concerning the order of their wars:
and they communicated their business with the Kings counsel (which they had
almost renewed, choosing such as they knew were for their purpose, and putting
out others, commanding also Michael Hospital the kings Chau^celour to get him
home to his house) requiring them to provide for the mayntenaunce of the
wars, even as if they should have dealt with the forreyne enemy. They sent
also Ambassadors, into Spain, into Italy, and into Zwitserland to have help
and aid from thence: Every where, but specially at Paris, there was pressing
out of soldiers, the Merchants and the shaueling Priests, setting forth many
soldiers, armor, goonnes, and all manner of furniture, being provided for the
wars.

On the other part the Prince of Conde, seemed to be very careful, and
disquieted with these commotions, musing what success his enemies should have,
and of the event of the imminent war, being very loathe (as it should seem) to
war with them. Whereupon, he cau The Prince of Conde specially in clined to
peace.
sed the Edictes concerning the maintenance of peace to be proclaimed, least
any man for religions sake or for any other cause should make a tumult: and
declared to the magistrates of the town, and to his Centurious, that he
desired nothing more than to have all men live according to ye prescript of the
Kings Edicts. He wrote also daily letters to the King, to the Queen, and to
the King of Nauar his brother, beseeching them to take heed and see that all
things were done peaceably, and by common consent, if it might be: admonishing
also such as had the government of the Common wealth to be ware, least by the
ambition of the Guises, and of his adherents, the King and the Realm were
brought into great pearill and danger, for the avoiding whereof, so many
means of late were used: protesting heerewyth that he desired rather to see
the very extreme end, than war: and that he wished specially that ye king in
that his tender age, and his realm also, might be accordingly provided for.

Notwithstanding, the wills and purposes of his adversaries, so manifestly
appeared, that he was admo nished by diverse prudent and wise men, which
attended upon him, that it was his part to seek all that he could to let and
hinder them, least they did turn to the ruin and subuertion of the whole
realm, and of the reformed church. For there came unto the Prince of Conde, of
all estates some, from all parts of the Realm: and very many also of the
Noble men, as the Admiral, the Andelot his brother, and the Cardinal Odette,
ye Earl of Rochefoulcaut the Prince Porcian, Piennes, Crusol, Soubiz, Mouy,
Sanli Estern, and many others, which came to the Prince in great number to
Orleans.

These men perceived well enough the horrible and wicked enterprises of the
Guises, and their adherents: the manifest violating of the Kings Edicte: the
injury offered to the young King, and to the Queen his mother: and the
conspiracies of strangers against the Kings kinsmen: and therefore they
thought it their duty to provide for these mischeenes. Whereupon, after
deliberation had with ye Prince of Conde, they earnestly persuaded with him to
take upon him ye patrociny and defense of the realm, for that the right of
governing ye realm during the time of the Kings minority, pertained unto him,
the King of Nauar his brother, neglecting his duty in that behalf. They prayed
and most earnestly beseeched him, being of the Kings blood, that he would not
forsake the captiued King in such time of peril, that he would not suffer the
Kings Edictes, to be violated and contemned of strangers, of whose violence he
him self not long ago, had experience: and principally that he would not
permit that true Religion, (whereof he him self was so zealous a professor) to
be suppressed so furiously by war. This thing, they being the kings faithful
subjects, most humblely beseeched him that he would vauchsafe gladly to take in
hand: they promising to show them selves ready at all times to show all manner
of lawful obedience, and to spend their goods, and their lives to, in so just
a cause.

The Prince of Conde, being moved in conscience, with this plain declaration
of his duty, and having so oftentimes called upon the mother Queen by his
letters, he at the last took upon him the defense of this cause, and the charge
so earnestly offered unto him. Whereupon the Prince of Conde and the Noble men
made a league between them selves, for the defense of that cause: and then
caused the same to be put down in writing the eleventh day of April in manner
and form following. The league between the Prince of Conde, and the Nobles of
France.


WE Lodowic Borbon, Prince of Conde, and the greatest Part of the Nobility of
France, whose names are subscribed to this League, esteeming nothing more
precious, next to the honor and glory of God, than the obedience of our King,
and the conservation of the Crown aed Dignity, during the time of this his
Minority, established by the Authority of the Queen, and by the high Court of
Parliament: and seeing the presumption and boldness of certain of the Kings
subjects to be such, that not only they dare bear armoure, contrary to the
Kings Edictes, to destroy his subjects, because by the benefit of the
Edictes, they come together to hear the word of God, and to call upon his holy
name: but also have taken into their custody, the King, the Queen, and her
sons, against all Law, both of God and the Realm: seking hereby (so far
as we can perceive) under the pretense of the Kings authority, to deface true
religion, and to destroy the greatest part of the Kings Subjects, which in
deed were the way to get the Kingdom into their own hands.

We therefore (I say) for these causes, to restore, (so much as we may) first
of all the Kings majesty, to his dignity, and the Queen to her authority: and
may also maintain and keep the Kings faithful subjects, in the liberty of
that Religion and conscience, which is licensed and given to them by the Kings
Edicte, made by the judgments, and consents of the Princes the Kings kinsmen,
and of the Kings counsel, and also of the whole assembly of Parliament: which
ought to abide firm and immutable in this tender age of the King: are
constrained according to our duty and office, as the Kings loyal and
faithful subjects, to take the sweard in hand: the which is the only remedy
given of God at this time, to remedy and resist so much as we may these
outrages and unlawful actions. For the more sure accomplishment whereof, after
we had made our faithful prayers unto God, and had duly and rightly wayed and
considered all things, with one heart, mind and free will, have entered into
league, by solemn oath of the name of the living God, the which we have sworn,
and before God and his Angels have promised to perform and keep, by the
assistance of his grace and mercy inviolable, upon these conditions.

First of al, we protest, that in this League, we have no manner of
consideration or regard either of our private persons, or of our goods: but do
only set before our eyes, the honor of God, and the deliverance of the King and
Queens Majesty's, the observation of the Edicts which they have commanded,
and a perfect good will to punish Rebels, and such, as contemn the King and
Queens Majesty's. And for these causes only we swear, and promise, that we
and every one of us, will spend and bestow all that ever we have, even to the
last drop of our blood. And this League shall abide inviolable, until the
Kings Maiority, that is to say, until the King come to his lawful age, and
do take upon him self the government of the kingdom: that then we may obey
him in all things with voluntary obedience. At which time, we trust, we shall
give so good an accounte of this our League, (the which also we will do to the
Queen, she being at her own liberty, whenever she will) that it shall be
manifest that this was no conspiracy, but our duty of true obedience, to
preserve their Majesty's in these perilous times.

Secondly, to the end all men may understand and know that we have entered
into this league, with a pure conscience, and in the fear of God, upon whom
we call, as upon the vpholder and protector of our society: We declare, and
promise by our oath, That we will not suffer any man among us to commit any
thing against the honor of God, and against the Kings Edicts: as Idolatry,
Supersticion, Blasphemy, Whoredom, Theft, Sacrilege, and all such
otherlike, forbidden by the law of God, and by the last Edict of January: the
which if any do commit, we will severely punish. And to the end all things may
be done according to the prescript rule of Gods word, we will have in all our
assemblies, faithful ministers of Gods word, which may teach us the will of
God, and whom as it is meet, we may hear, that we may obey the will of God.

Thirdly, we elect and nominate the Prince of Conde to be our Captain
general, being the Kings near kinsman, and therefore one of his Counsel, and
the lawful protector and mayntayner of the Crown of France: Whom we promise
to help, aid, and assist, with all our might, and to give to him all obedience,
in all those things, which appertain to this League: and if we neglect to do
our duty in any thing, we submit our selves to such punishment as it shall
please him to lay upon us.

And if it shall so happen that the Prince of Conde, shall not be able to go
forward with this enterprise, being let with sickness or with any other
reasonable cause, we promise to serve and obey him, whom he shall nominate to
be his Vicar or Deputy.

And the Prince of Conde, for the glory of Gods sake, and for the obedience
sake, which he owes to the King, byndeth him self to these conditions:
promising to all that are of this confederacy, by his oath, that he will with
all diligence and courage, by the help of God, according to covenant,
constantly do the duty of a true Captain.

Fourthly, we comprehend in this League all the Kings Counselors, except those
which contrary to their office, bear armor, to make the King and Queen
fulfill their minds: The which armoure, except they put of again, and do give
an account of their doings with all subjection and obedience to the Queen,
and King, whensoe^er it shall please her to call them: We give them to
understand, that for these just and reasonable causes, we will account them
guilty of treason, and troublers of the common wealth.

And to come to the end of this our league (the which we protest again we
have made, only for the glory of God, for the dignity and liberty of the
King, and for the peace and tranquillity of this Realm, which is to be
mayntayned under the authority of the Queen mother) we affirm and promise
every one of us, and do confirm the same by solemn oath before God and his
Angels, that we will prepare and provide out of hand, all that we are able,
as money, armoure, horses, and all other things necessary for the war, that
we may be in a readiness so soon as we shall be called by the Prince of Conde,
and that we may follow him whither soever it shall please him to command us,
and also that we may obey him in all things that appertain to this league,
even to the utmost peril of our lives.

And if it shall happen that any of our companions and fellows in this seague,
shall sustain, any hurt or detrement, for this leagues sake, we promise that
we will help, aid and assist him all that we can, at the commandment of
the Prince of Conde. But if it shall happen (as God forbid it should) that any
one among us forgetting his duty and oath, should conspire with our enemies,
and should violate this league by horrible treason, and should not stand to
these conditions and couenaunts: We swear and protest with all constantnes of
faith, that we will bring such an offender to the Prince of Conde, and will
account him for an enemy and handle him as a traitor. And thus be it ratefied
and established between us, with free consent, and irreuocable.

This league being made, and the causes thereof being declared in manner and
form, as ye see, and then every where published abroad: the Prince of Conde
sent letters diverse times to the Queen Mother, and to the King of Nauar his
brother, tending still to this effect: That they should consider and have
regard to the state, and that they should set before their eyes the manifold
perilles and troubles at hand, except they according to their office and duty,
did better provide for the same: that they should look to the observation of
the Edictes made by the act of Parliament, specially now in ye time of the
Kings minority: Protesting herewith for himself and the rest, that they would
be subject and obedient to all things reasonable and lawsull: but if the
matter should come to trial by sword, he said that then they feared no manner
of perilles, but would for the mayntayning of the glory of God, the Kings
authority and the liberty of their consciences, spend and bestow all that
they had.

The Queen Mother, took the matter very grievously, and signified to the
Prince of Conde by her letters that as her person was a Captive, so also she
was res^rayned of her will, and could not do what she would, whom she persuaded
in her letters to take the mateer into his own hand, and to defend the same:
and declared also at that time by her letters, that she did utterly dislike and
abhor the Guises. Certain of the which letters, according to the very tenor of
them, which remay ned in the Prince of Conde his hands, I thought good here to
bring in: The coppie whereof, is this.

I Have received, well-beloved Cosen, the letters which you sent unto me by the
Lord Guardius and I signify Letters of the Queen to the Prince of Cond^*
unto you, good Cosen, that I am as fully persuaded of those things contained
in your letters, as I may be of any thing, and am no less assured of them
than I am of my self: neither wiil I be unmindful at any time of those
things which you do for the King my sons sake. And because the same messenger
retourneth back again for those causes which he shall declare unto you, I will
wright no more at this time. Only ^his I will request at your hands, that you
believe me in those things which he shall speak unto you in my name, who,
wishes so well unto you, as if she were your own mother, namely

your dear Cosen CATHARINE.

The Coppie of another of her Letters.
I Have talked with M. de Iuoy, even as if you your self were present, of
whose fidelity and trustines, I doubt not. And whatsoever I send backagain, I
assure my self, that he will disclose to none saving to you: and that you in
like manner for my sake, will keep all secret. Only be mindful to preserve and
defend the Children, the Mother, and the kingdom, as he to whom this thing
does specially appertain, and he, (namely the king) will never I warrant you
be unmindful of so great a benefit. Burn this letter when you have red it.

Your dear and loving Cosen KATHARINE.

These things, I say, at that time were written by the Queen. In the mean
time the King of Nauar, following the wills of the Guises and his adherents,
both thought, and spoke very much evil of his brother the Prince of Conde.
All things daily, on both parts, waxed worse and worse.

News was brought to Orlians concerning the slaughter of the men of Sens,
which greatly inflamed the minds of men. Sens is a noble City bordering upon
Burgondy. In the which the faithful according to the Edicte of Ianuarye,
congregated them selves together to hear the word of God. And although there
were new rumors daily concerning the perturbations and troubles at hand, yet
notwithstanding they continued in their godly exercises. Therefore diverse Bands
of soldiers well appointed at the commandment of the Cardinal of Guise, who
was Bishop of the same Town, suddenly and unlooked for, set upon the
Congregation and flew many of them: and at the last, such was their rage, that
they killed both old and young, yea without all pitye or mercy, man, woman, and
child. The which slaughter continued the space of three days, and had
continued longer if so be any store of the professors of the Gospel had been
left alive to kill. Yea and it was reported that diverse women great with
child, were put to the swerd, and the children, most horriblely torn out of
their wombes. Such was the spoiling of the houses of the faithful, and the
shedding of blood in this City, that the horrible murder committed by the
Guises at Vassi was counted nothing in respect of this.

When news hereof was brought to the Court, it made all that heard the same
abashed. Yea they them selves that had commanded this to be done, when they
heard of the event were also abashed. Notwythstanding after these presumptuous
enterprises and beginnings after the slaughter of Vassi, all men were fully
bent to Civil war.

The Prince of Conde complained of this thing to the Queen by his letters,
which he wrote the ninth of April, to this effect: First he says that he
thought that the fault and blame of the wickednesses before time com mitted,
would have stayed their boldness which envied the peace and tranquilitye of
the common wealth, and have taught them at the length to embrace, follow, and
obey the Kings Edicts. But (says he) so has their malice increased, that they
can no more restrain and bridle their wickedness, but do violate and break
al law: which may move us to look for nothing but the severity of Gods
judgment to fall upon us.

Of this brutishe boldness (says he) after so many old examples, there is
now a new come in place to be seen in the pitiful slaughter at Sens, upon
those that professed the liberty of the Gospel by the benefit of the Kings
Edict: the description of the which Tragedy, he says, he sends unto her.
Not doubting, but that she according to her natural and great goodness, will
tremble The prince of Conde complayneth of the murder.
at the hearing of so horrible a butcherly murder: whereby she has to
consider what is to be looked for at their hands, which blind and beguile men
with their fair and flattering words. He cannot (he says) but he must
needs complain unto her of so great wickednesses committed: and is
constrained also, to his great grief, to say, That if these presumptuous and
horrible murders escape unpunished, the cry of the innocent blood that is
shed, will so pearce the heavens and enter into the ears of the highest, that
the ruin and utter subversion of this whole realm by the just judgment of
God is to be feared. Therefore (he says) he beseeches her, setting before her
eyes the examples of so great and horrible wickednesses, and considering also
his patience in forbearing so long time, even until that present day, for the
King and her Majesty's sake, that she would diligently use her authority, to
repel and reform them: and not to suffer such manifest contempt of the Kings
majesty to escape unpunished: least violence and rebellion, were planted in
stead of equity and justice. In so doing she should preserve the Kings
majesty, and the tranquillity of the Realm. Otherwise lamentabl^ afflictions
were like to ensue.

Notwithstanding this reasonable and godly request of the Prince, both the
people of Parris, at the hearing of the Rumors waxed more outrageous daily, and
also the Guises with their Adherentes, wholely bent them selves to war. We
have spoken before concerning the league between the Prince of Conde and his
Adherents. All things therefore daily growing from ill to worse, nothing now
was looked for but war. But before the wars began, the Prince of Conde, and
they of his part, set forth another Proclamation, in the which they show the
causes and reasons of their purpose, and why they were constrained to lift up
the swearde. And after certain letters sent to the King and Queen, and to
the king of Nauar, they sent unto them that Proclamation also: which was, to
this effect following.

Although they which of their own authority do first of all put them selves
in Armoure, ought to give account and reason of their so doing: yet
notwithstanding the Prince of Conde, seeing that this motion, for diverse
circumstances, is subject to diverse men's Judgments, and because the
knowledge hereof appertains to all men, would, to put away all occasions of
slanders, show to all men manifest reasons, which have constrained him to
join with a great number of his friends and retainers, to serve the King and
Queen, and to procure the peace and tranquillity of the whole Realm.

All men know that after the diverse perturbations and troubles for Religions
sake, when as greater also were like to ensue, to stay and appease them, at the
last in the month of January last past, there was made an Edicte by the Kings
commandment, to quiet and pacify both parts, with the advice and consent
also of the most Noble of the high Court of Parliament.

The Proclamation of this Edicte, (which at the first was much hindered) caused
suspicions to arise that these things were done not without a confederacy,
which te^ded to a farther matter. The which suspicions were increased ye more by
ye meetings of ye constable, and ye Magistrates of Paris, by the co^moning of
ye senators, and also by the often assemblies of the chief Marchantes.
Notwtstanding all the which, the Prince of Conde, or any of the reformed
Churches, never did or spoke any thing, which might interrupt or break ye
public peace any manner of means. Yea even in the midst of those vexations
and troubles, they looked quietly and modestly for the Proclamation of the same
Edicte in the Senate of Paris. This proclamation being at the length made at
Paris, and being extorted by the Supplications of the King and Queen rather
than by commandments, the Prince of Conde after his grievous sickness, when he
had saluted the King and Queen, got him home to his house to recreate him
self.

Amidst these troubles, there came news concerning the cruel and horrible
slaughter at Vassi, done in the presence of the Duke of Guise, and by him: many
of the Kings Subjects both men and women being slain, which according to their
manner, by the benefit of the Kings Edict came together to hear the word of
God.

This horrible Act being reported at Paris, greatly moved the minds of all
men of both parts: insomuch that much mischief was like to follow. And
among other Rumors it was reported that the Duke of Guise was coming with a
great army of men, to the intent he might utterly destroy the churches of the
reformed Religion. Whereupon the me^ of those Churches came out of diverse places
to the Court, and required of the King and Queen punishment of so great and
notable wickedness committed. This was the cause why the Prince of Conde going
homeward stayed at Paris, and went from thence to Monceaulx at the
commandment of the King and Queen: to whom he said he feared the commotions
and troubles like to ensue: to stay ye which (he said) he thought this ye only
remedy, namely that the Duke of Guise, which was said to be coming to Paris
with a great army of men, might not be suffered to enter therein: the which
advise seemed to please the Queen and the king of Na^rre very well. And
according to this advise, the Queen wrote her letters to the Duke of Guise,
entreating him, that he would come to the king and to her to Monceaulx. The
which thing being twice required by the Queen, was also twice denied of the
Guise: the first time, he made excuse that he was busied in entertayning his
friends, which were come to see him: and the second time by silence, making no
answer at all* But he came to Paris with a great number of armed men, having
also with him the Constable, the Martial of S. Andrew, and diverse others of
his counsel. And he was received into the city by the citizens with great
pomp, the Marchantmaister being their Captain: and the people crying as he
entered into S. Anthonies gate, even as if he had been king, God preserve the
Duke of Guise: he seeming in no point to dislike of the same.

The Prince of Conde returning from Monceaulx, that he might go to his house
according to his former purpose: and being certefied of the coming of the Duke
of Guise and of his company to Paris, he altered his purpose: and determined
to abide at Paris, according to his duty, to defend the kings subjects:
being persuaded that his presence would stay the minds of the citizens of
Paris, which began to wax somewhat haughty by the coming of the Guises. And
truly all men know that so long as the Prince remained at Paris, there burst
forth no great Sedition.

Notwithstanding there were many and great reasons why the Prince and many of
the Nobles which were with him, should be disdayned. For the Guises so soon as
they were come to Paris, calling unto them such out of ye Senate, as they thought
meet, had a counsel, which they called the Kings counsel: as though a council
consisting of the chief officers of the king were very lawful. The which truly
seemed very strange to the Prince of Conde, and to those noble men that were
with him.

Is it lawful to have any other kings counsel, than that which is near to
the king and Queen? and the Prince of Conde the kings near kinsman, to whom
a care of the king and Queen appertayned, and being also in the same town in
the which the counsel was held, not to know thereof? This evidently declared a
manifest conspiracy, which would bring no small hurt to the king and Queen.
For if in that counsel of the Guises, those things were handled which
appertayned to the preservation of the kings authority and the common wealth,
what cause was there why they should shoon the presence of the king and Queen,
and of the kings co^sell? Moreover, it is well enough known what displea sure
the Guise took with the Queen, when he departed from the court: complaining
and misliking that he was thought to be made acquainted with Nemours his dealing,
who was accused to go about to carry away the king. The Constable also of late
very contemptuously used the Queen in words: and meeting with the kings
retinew, and being told that the king was present, he passed by so
irreverently, as if he had met with some strangers: his proud and lofty
words which he also oftentimes uttered at Paris, did plainly declare that
there were some new things a working. Also the Martial of S. Andrew* did not
only refuse to go to attend upon his charge committed unto him by the kings
commaundment: but also before all the kings counsel, he so contented with the
Queen in brawling words, that it might evidently appear that he leaned to
some other greater trust. In consideration therefore of these men, which
seperating themselves from the Kings counsel, called a counsel of their own
authority, and put men in armor, the Prince of Conde could not but look for
some lamen table end.

Beside all this, when the Queen had openly declared that her will was that
both of them should depart from Paris: the Prince of Conde understanding of
the Queens commandment, by the Cardinal of Burbon his brother, went strayt
way from Paris. But the Duke of Guises mind was so far from departing thence,
that gathering more soldiers unto him, he did more strongly fortefie the same
than he did before, and came unto the King and Queen, contrary to their
express commandment with an army of men: and carried the^ whether they would
or no, from Fontaynbleau to another place. The which manifest force and
misliked captivity of the King and Queen, may manifestly appear, both by the
open complayntes of the Queen, and also by the Kings tears. And because the
Duke of Guise, the Constable, and the Martial of S. Andrew, so boast of their
dignity and offices, as though it were lawful for them to make an army when
it shall seem good unto them for the behoof of the King and the Realm: and
also because they do deryde, and manifestly abuse the authority of the King
of Nauar, the kings high Legate, all men may see how they do abuse themselves
and the offices committed to their charge.

These things should first of all have been done by the advice and consent of
the Queen, who always openly resisted their doings. Let them therefore if
they have any greater authority than she in this kingdom, show the same. So
seriouse and weighty a matter also, should have been handeled in the Kings
lawful counsel: or else let them say that they are in authority above the
kings themselves, which always consult with their counsel concerning wars,
before they take them in hand. But if they replye and say, that the Queen now
is contented with their doings: admit it be so, yet let them remember that
this is not the first time that they have begone wars: their purpose and
intent does plainly appear by that horrible slaughter don by them at Vassy,
which displeased both the King and Queen, and all those that heard of the
same, except themselves, as an act committed against the manifest laws of the
king, and contrary to all humanity. Let them not therefore color over their
doings with the Queens will, whom they have captiued, and rule as them list.
And to take away al bolstering and coulering of the matter, who know eth not,
that before the Duke of Guise came to Paris, and had troubled the minds of men
with that horrible murder at Vassi, there was great peace and tranquillity
throughout the whole Realm.

But if any thing have happened otherwise tha^ it should have done, it is come
to pass by their Counsels and assemblies, specially through the default of the
Senate of Paris, which observed not the authority of the kings Edict, as they
should have done, and by their example made the minds of men the more out of
quiet. As for example, the commotion of Prouance which was raised by the
preuarication and collusion of many of that Assembly, and was at the kings
commandment pacif^ed again by M. Curlsol. with the help and aid of the
reformed Churches, which have always showed what obedience they will show
forth toward the king and his laws.

To be short, all men may behold and see what will be the end of all their
Counselles which they take in hand, even the great shame and reproach of the
king, and the destruction of the Realm.

They keep the king captive, and abuse his name at their own pleasure, and to
the end they may at the length quite overthrow the king, they stoutly threaten
men with the Kings name, if they refuse to do any thing as they would have
them. Moreover they seek all that they can to make the Prince of Conde to be
envied, and not esteeming the auethoritie of the kings Edictes, they do even
what they list. And to the end they may set up their stock and kindred with the
ruin of the kingdom, they convert the authority, and the whole substance
thereof to their own use: and troubling and molesting the kings lawful and
faithful defenders, do reign and rule alone, and do moderate the laws,
statutes, and decrees of the Realm as they list themselves. What is he then
that sees not what their mind and purpose is, in causing these garboyles and
troubles? And as touching Religion no man can choose but see, that they bend
themselves to work both the decay there of, and also of public and common
liberty. They do very indiscreetly allege for themselves that the Prince of
Conde has certain other particular causes of complaynts. For the Prince of
Conde does protest that he is driven to take these things in hand, for the
only desire he has to defend the King and the kingdom, and to maintain the
Kings laws, according to his office: and does greatly mislike that the
benefit of exercising the reformed Religion should be taken from the kings
subjects, against the plain commandments of his will, and that from the
kings subjects should be taken, not only the liberty of their consciences, but
also the peace and tranquillity of their bodies. Let the Duke of Guise call to
mind the horrible slaughter at Uassi, which as yet is fresh in memory: Let him
remember the great cruelty showed of late to the men of Sens. And let the
Constable remember what has happened at Paris, and what is like daily to
happen by his behavior. Whose wicked deeds done against the wills of the
king and Queen, he hops to see one day severely punished. If men neglect the
doing of their duty, God no doubt in his just judgment will punish the same.

These therefore are the occasions offered to the Prince, to go forward with
those enterprises that he has taken in hand. These men think to rule and
govern the kingdom as they themselves list: And therefore it comes to pass
that they cannot abide the government of the Queen, and the liberty and
integrity of the kings counsel. They think that the time serves for them
very well, not only to cover all their wicked acts, of the which they are never
able to give a rea son and an account, but amiddest this troublesome stir, to
inriche themselves. By which their boldness and presumption, there cannot choose
but be most grievous mischiefs following, the troublesome alteration of al
things, the hurt of all estates, specially of the Nobillitie, divisions also
and sempiternall hatred. They coullor all their doings with Religion, as
though they would not suffer the ancient and Catholic Religion (as they term
it) to come into contempt, and for this cause they cause us to have many
enemies. But why do they take away the bene^te of the kings Edict, which
does permit us to use and exercise that Religion, which we believe to be good
and true. They them selves live according to their conscience, by the bene^te
of the kings laws: And what reason is it then that they should not suffer us
to do the like by the benefit of the kings Edict!

There is not one of us that mole^eth or troubles them in their Religion, or
that does hinder their Clergy by any manner of means. And if there were any of
us that would so do, or that would behave our selves otherwise than we ought,
there are laws and punishments to punish us. But, truly, under the coullor
and pretense of Religion they seek another thing. We deny not but that they
hate the truth of the Gospel, as they have of late declared by fire and sword:
but this is the special thing they seek for, to trap and snare those that
before time miraculously, have escaped their hands: to be revenged of others,
whom they have always hated: and to enrich themselves by the spole of others.
The which to bring to pass, they care for no Religion. And such as go about to
resist their practices, by which they seek, both the p^rill of our king, and
the destruction of his subiecte^ by Civil war, they call open enemies to the
king.

THese and many other things, which time will reveal, being way^d and
considered, the Prince of Conde testified before the king and Queen these
things also following, and wished all kings, Princes, Nobles, and all others of
the Realm of France, and all Christi an Nations* truly to understand these
things.

First of all therefore he testifies, that he is not moved by desire of his
own profit: but only with love of the glory of God, and of the profit of the
whole common wealth, to seek the which he thought him self specially bound
under the Queens auethoritie. So that, for conscience sake to do his duty,
and for the love he bears to his Country, he says he is constrained and
compelled to seek all lawful means, to set the Queen and the kings Sons
at liberty: and to mayntaine and defend the kings Edictes, and the Edict of
January, which was made for the ordering of Religion.

And he prays and beseeches all the kings true and lawful subjects, waying
and considering the matter, as is before said, that they would aid and assist
him in so good and godly a cause.

And because the king in the beginning of his reign found him self oppressed
with a great burden of debt, and having but little any manner of way to
discharge the same, many of his faithful subjects gave unto him a great sum
of money, both to discharge the same, and also to recover his patrimony: but
there is no doubt, but that they which are the auethors of this Civil war,
will now lay hold and catch unto them that sum of money, which was given to
the king for those causes, and will spend and bestow the same to other uses:
Whereby, both the people shall receive great hurt and loss, and also the hope
which the Queen and the king of Nauar had for the payment and discharge of all
the kings debtes, that the people might be brought into the same state, in the
which they were in the time of king Lodowi^ the xij. that hope I say, by the
wasting and consuming of that money, should be (...)and quight taken away. For
these causes the Prince of Conde affirms, that they which shall get un to
them that money, shall be bound to restore the same again, and at the length
shall give an account for the bestowing thereof.

But he testifies that he and all those that fight under his banner, shall
maintain and furnish themselves with their own proper costs and charges.

And God, says he, will hear from heaven, the ^rie of his poor oppressed
people, against those which begin wars, and refuse all reasonable order,
which seek trouble, and constrayne us to defend our selves with force of Arms.

And because all men do understand and know, that the king and Queen, being
beset on every side with soldiers and captiued, and ruled, and that the
greater part of the Counsel, are so quayled with fear that they dare not
resist the au^thors of this war: The Prince of Conde would have all men
certefied, that he myndeth and will show toward the king and Queen all
obedience, in the which he will give place to none: and that he will not suffer
him self to be so deceived and mocked, under the pretense of rescriptes, of
commandments, and of Letters, under the kings name and seal: but will war
against them until the King and Queen do recover their former liberty and
authority, and may declare their wills by their own mere government.

Concerning the king of Nauar his brother, the Prince of Conde, beside the
natural bond of brotherly love, and ye particular cause of obedience, which he
ought and will give unto him, he testifies that he does consider of him
according to his worthiness, and will give unto him next unto the King and
Queen al ob^dience. And h^ trusts that he will give an account of his
dealing, whenever it shall be required at his hands.

To be short the Prince of Conde, and a great multitude of Earls, Lords and
Nobles, and other estates, to declare that they speak simply, and in good
earnest, and that they seek for nothing more than the glory of God, and the
excellency and dignity of their king: Do earnestly pray and beseech the Queen
Mother with all reverence, that setting the fear of men aside, which guard her
after a strange fashion, with force of Arms, as if she were a captive, that
she would, according to her judgment and mind freely declare, whether part
were to be blanted: and that she would go unto that City whererevnto she had
most mind: that from thence she might command both parts by the meanest
servant she has to put of their Armor, and so they would show that dew
obedience, which should become loyal subjects, to show unto their sovereign
Lord: and would also mo destly answer to their doings according to the law.

The Prince promises that he will obey her law^ull commandments, upon the
condition that others, would show themselves ready to do their duties. But if
they refuse, he testifies that he with fifty thousand men more, which are of
the same mind will spend their lives. And if it please not the Queen to go to
another place to do these things, then let her first of all seek, that they
by whom she is guarded and captiued may go to another place, pu^tting of their
Armor, namely the Duke of Guise and his brethren, the Constable, and the
Marshiall of S. Andrew. And although he being a Prince and the kings near
kinsmen, were their superior, yet notwithstanding to the intent it might apeere
that he is in no point the cause of trouble and vnquietn^s, he promises that
he and his whole army will depart every man home to his own house, upon
those conditions before spoken of.

Also he says that he has a special care for this, that the Kings
Counselors may have their accustomed liberty, and that the kings laws and
the Edict of January, may be observed and kept: until the king coming unto
his Maioritie, may judge of the matter him self, and may punish those
according to their deserts which have abused his au^thoritie.

But and if these conditions were not performed, and that the Guises and their
fellows went on still to show violence against the King, the Queen, and the
kings Counsel, to deceive and beguile men, under the kings name, and to be
injurious to the kings subjects, the Prince of Conde testifies that he will
not bear it, and will bring to pass that he shall not be found guilty of
all those calamities, mischiefs, and miseries, which will happen for these
commotions and troubles, but rather they themselves which are the authors, and
only cause thereof.

This his Protestation, being published abroad, all men's minds seemed to be
troubled, and diversely occupied: the faithful being more bold and courageous
to defend themselves, who at the first stir of the Guises, were not a little
terrefied.

The Prince of Conde sent letters to all the reformed Letters of the Prince of
Conde, sent to the reformed churches.
Churches the twenty day of April, sending diverse messengers with the Copy of
those letters throughout all provinces of the Realm: to this effect: For So Much
as the necessity of the time is such, that we must openly resist the violence
and tyranny of the Guises, adversaries of the Christian Religion, who having
captiued the King and Queen* do so abuse their name, that they tread underfoot
true Religion with the liberty of the Realm, and do what they list them
selves: see that ye prepare your selves against these troubles, and beware that
you leave nothing undone that may further you in your business. And because we
must now of necessitye begin wars, be diligent to provide Armor, Money, and
all kind of Artillery so sone as may be: and whatsoever you do, certefy me of
the same by these messengers that I have sent unto you. But above all things
see that ye behave your selves so peaceably as ye may: and forget not
diligently to call upon God the vpholder and defender of his truth, and of all
just causes.

That former declaration, whereof we have spoken before, was sca^sely come to
Paris, when as two Edicts were solemnly proclaimed there in the Kings name: to
this effect^:

The King seeing what great troubles and garboyles were in the Realm, is very
sorry and much agreeued, who h^th left no remedies vnsoughte for, for the
maintenance of peace and tranquillity, by the advice of the Queen, the King of
Nauar, and the Princes, as may appear of late by the Edict made in the month
of January, by which, to order all matters peaceably, he showed him self very
favorable, contrary to the manner and c^ome of his A^cetors the Kings, toward
Religion, that by this means in bearing with the frowardnes of men, be ^ght
maintain public peace and concord: yet notwith^anding for all this they can
not be content and quiet, as appears by diverse tumultes by them all ready
raised, many of them (which has not been heard of before) being so bold that
they dare make open war, and take diverse of the Kings Cities: The which,
although it be very grievous unto him, that men should so lewdly and impudently
behave them selves, abasing him in this his tender age, to the great hurt of
the Realm: yet notwithstanding he will continue still toward them his
accustomed clemency and goodness. And therefore to confirm that his will and
meaning, he wills and commands by this public Edict, that al men use the
rites and administration of their religion freely, according to the prescript
of the Edicte of January. But because at Paris, the Metropolitan City of the
Realm, there have been oftentimes great perils of most grievous seditions, he
wills in consideration of the present time, that there be no exercise of the
reformed Religion, so called, in that City, nor in the Suburbs, borders, and
limmites near adjoining to the same, until it shall seem good otherwise to
the King.

There was also publicly set forth about the same time very solemly, the
Kings Rescript, which they call Letters patents in manner and form following.

All men see the great perturbations and troubles of the Realm, and also how
the minds of all estates and degree, are so vexed and disquieted, that there
cannot choose but ensue great hurt, except God of his mercy and goodness turn
away the same. Notwithstanding it is wonderful that men which are the authors
of these troubles and dissensions, should so color over the causes of their
wickedness, that they ca^ deceive thereby the simple sort of people. But whereas
they complain of ye violating and breaking of y^ Edict which was made for
Religion, ye is most false, as may apeare by ye manifest declaration of ye
Kings will, which he plainly of late showed by his Edict. And this also is a
most impudent sla^der, whereas they say that the King and the Queen his mother,
his brethren, and sister, are captives in the hands of certain of his chief
officers and servants, and do boast that they lift up the sword, to the intent
they may set them at their lawful liberty. But the King and the Queen do
openly testify, and would have it generally known for a suertie, that he,
his mother, his brethren, and his sister, never came, thanks be to God, into
that state of captivity: but co^trarywyse, do retain and keep, liberty,
authority, and kingly dignity and power, and shall no doubt by the goodness of
God, enjoy the same, with the help and diligence of good and faithful
subjects. And because those seditiouse persons do greatly abuse the facility
and gentle nature of the Prince of Conde their kinsman, whom they have chosen
to be the Captain of their conspiracy, he testifies that he will do all
that he can to restoare him to his former liberty, and to pacefie the troubled
state so much as he may.

There was also at this time mustering of men in Pa ris, specially of Noble
men, which are commonly appointed to be horsemen: and commandment was sent
thorough every province to all men to be in a readiness against the month of
May next coming. Paris also was in every corner replenished with armor, with
sol diours, and Enseignes.

The Prince of Conde being entered into Orleans, very many of the faithful,
which bordered thereaboutes, took cities for the Prince of Conde, professing
notwithstanding that they mayntayned the Kings authority: as they of Towers,
of Blais, of Angew, and many others as hereafter shall be declared.
Notwithstanding the Edict of January was rightly observed, by the severe
commandments of the Prince of Conde, which were oftentimes repeated by his
servant.

But all things growing daily nearer war then peace, the greatest part of the
inhabitants of Towers and Blayz, suddenly rose and went into the popish
churches, and brake down and quite defaced the Images and pictures which they
there found: notwithstanding there was no murder committed.

When news hereof was brought to Orleans, the Prince of Conde greatly misliked
of their doing, and gave Certain Idols broken down.
commandment that inquiry should be made of the doers hereof, and that they
should be punished according to the prescript of the kings Edicts. At Orleans,
they of both Religions, lived peaceably, and according to the Edict of January,
the priests openly in their churches, used their superstitiouse rytes and
ceremonies: and the faithful on the contrary part, went out of the City to
hear sermons. The which notwithstanding continewed but a short time, as shall be
declared anon when occasion is offered to speak of the same.

The Prince of Conde had sent the causes in writing that moved him to war (of
the which we have spoken before) to the King and Queen and to the king of
Nauar his brother: praying and beseeching them, that upon the conditions which
he propounded unto them, ye whole matter might be peaceably ended: and
concerning the same matter also, he wrote to the Senate of Paris, that his
writings and letters, might be kept in the public Commentaries and Register
of the Senate, for a remembrance, whatsoever might chance afterward. After the
which letters, the Queen answered the Prince of Conde the second of May, by her
letters again. In the which letters sent from the Queen to the Prince of
Conde.
she said, she was glad that the Prince of Conde showed himself to be
desirouse of peace and concord, whereas otherwise there was cause why she
should greatly sorrow and lament: for that she being a woman, to whom by the
common consent of the States, the government of the king and realm was
committed, was now in the midst of so great troubles: to be ryd out of
which, she trusting to the Prince, doubted not, but that he would do all that
he could for the good will and obedience sake which he did owe unto the King,
and for the profit and quietness of the whole Realm, and would not refuse
any reasonable condition, for the establishing of peace and concord. Therefore
she said that he should do very well, if so be he would come unto the King
and to her out of hand, putting of his armor, and trusting to the promises of
her faith, which should be as sure un to him, as any obligation, if so be he
would remember the friendship and love which she alwais bare toward him, who
loves him as tenderly, as the mother loves her child. Therefore she says
that he shall do very well, if so be he come boldly to the Court, that he
may end all matters at once before the King and her.

The Senate of Paris also sent letters of answer to the Prince of Conde, the
fiueth day of May, to this effect following.

We have received your letters, with the form of Letters from the Senate of
Paris to the Prince* of Conde.
your declaration, the which we could not read without our great sorrow and
grief: Seeing that we know you to be a Prince and the Kings near kinsma^, of
one of the most noble stocks of the kings kynred: neither do we doubt, but
that your nature and disposition is agreeable to your offspringe (as it is
commonly seen in the best Princes) if it be not alienated and drawn away with
evil counsels. And although it be our office only to deal in the principal
points of the law, yet nevertheless, seeing you have made special complaints
unto us, we thought it not good to let you want all that we are able to do in
that point, but freely and truly to set before you our opinion and judgment:
whereby you may know how reuere^tly, according to our duty, we esteem of you

We have considered and do perceive that your complaints do consist in two
principal points: The first and principal is, that it has been told you that
the king and Queen, were captiued in the custody of certain of the Nobles
which attended upon them: and that many of his Connsellers were with
threatninges made afeard. We beseech you, that you would not any more believe
these reports: seeing it is so manifest and evidently known to all men that
it cannot be doubted of, how that the King of Nauar your Brother, a man of
great wisdom, and such a one as is very careful for the preservation of the
king and his dignity, is with the King and Queen, who will not, without all
doubt, suffer any manner of violence or injury to be offered to the King, being
both of kyn to the King as well as you, and also charged with the king by his
office. Beside this the Cardinal of Borbon is with them, who has no less
care for the safety of the king and the Realm than you have. Moreover there
are with him other Princes his kinsmen, men of wisdom, which are bound both
by their office and also by the bond of love to defend the king, with a great
sort of his Counsel also, which if the king were so shamefully misused, would
lay their heads together to remedy the same: because if in this point they
should fail to do their duty, they might be sure to be evil spoken of among
all men. In that therefore they do so diligently seek with one consent the pre
seruation of the state, and would have you to be joined with them, you may
thereby certainly perceive how false those reports have been: the which
reports would greatly have offended and grieved the minds of your brethren if
that they had not here tofore declared their faith, and great good will: for if
they should so behave themselves toward the king, it would greatly redownd to
their reproach and shame.

If you will wey and consider these things, you shall find that those
reporters, do unto you and to them also great injury, seeing that ye are
brethren.

This also we would have you to understand, that we have none otherwise
confirmed letters concerning the liberty of the King and Queen then the very
truth thereof has caused us, least you should think that we had done any
thing rashly or through fear.

We fear no man in the executing of our office: in doing whereof, we have only
a consideration of the king, specially in those things which do belong to the
obedience of the king, and to the profit of the Realm: being ready for these
causes to spend our life and goods.

Know you also for suertie that all dew reverence and obedience is showed here
to the King and Queen. And because we understand by your declaration, that you
find fault with certain of us, as though we forsaking the Kings lawful
Counsel were present at certain secret Counselles: Know you also this for a
certain, that none of us were present at that counsel, which was kept here
extraordinarily, by the authority of the king of Nauar your brother, but only
by the slat commandment of the Cardinal of Borbo^ your brother also, and the
keeper of the City: neither did we hear, see, or perceive that anything was
done there, which did not appertain to the obedience of the King.

The other principal point of your complaints, concerns Religion. The which
truly is no less straung and wonderful unto us. Of the which, we perceiving
that you have been otherwise infourmed, than it is, have thought good to
certify you of the truth. You know that the Edicts which have been made in
these our kings days, pertain to no other end, than to keep the kings
subjects in their obedience, and to avoid seditions, until such time as the
king were come to his full age: for all those Edictes are temporal, and serve
but for a time, to the intent they may be changed* if so be necessity and
experience of things shall so declare it to be best. The Edict of July was not
so soon made as abrogated, at the making whereof you your self were present:
and yet notwithstanding the same ought not therefore to be defended by violence*
After this, there was made another Edict, in the month of January. And least
it should rather bring trouble than tranquillity, at the first we doubted to
confirm the same: but when we had good hope of peace and tranquillity, we
confirmed the same, otherwise we would not have done it. And upon the same
hope of peace, three days ago, we confirmed and published another Edict like
to the Edict of January in every point, saving that Paris the Metropolitan
City is excepted. The which exception was not made without great cause: For
when the sedition which was there of late days wared more grievous than in
other places, it could not be otherwise appeased. The end of those Edicts was
not, to bring in news Religions, but, as it is said already, to keep the
people in peace and tranquillity. If the offense be as great in the first as
in the second: the King has power of himself to continue or to alter laws,
and not the subjects by private authority and by force of Arms. The whiib
thing truly we cannot couller or hide, seeing we read in your declaration,
how that you say that you, and fifty thousand more, which are of ye same mind,
will spend your lives in this cause. We wish that you may receive this our
admonition to your profit: and to consider that it is a great deal more meet
for you, being the kings near kinsman, to defend his dignity, than to join
your self to others which are not in the same condition. If by your following
of other counselles the dignity of the king be deminished, ye greater blame and
reproach shall be youres.

You know that we have maintained your Innoce^cie: and do persuade with you to
use wholesome Counsel: least you hurt your self.

We cannot offer unto you a better testimonye of our good will ready to serve
you, which we will constantly retain so long as you show all due obedience to
the King and Queen.

Concerning other matters which are written in the same your declaration,
because they do not appertain unto us, you shall understand the Kings will,
to whom they do appertain.

This one thing we add, That the examination of the slaughter committed at
Uassi, is appointed to us to be examined, the which shall be handeled of our
part, according to our office and manner, with justice and equity.

WE have spoken before concerning the letters which the Queen sent to the
Prince of Conde: In the which she persuaded him to come unto the King
vnweapened and without Armor, that the matter might be ended quietly among
them, and that he might by his presence put away those slanders which were
reported of him. For there went diverse evil reports abroad of him, and the
more by reason of the Declaration which he caused to be published, the Kings
Letters being set forth against the same: insomuch that the causes of all the
troubles were openly laid upon him. Whereupon the Prince of Conde, published
another writing the. ix. This name Triumuiri signifies three chose^ officers
of equal authority.
of May, in the which he declared that the Guises, which were called the
Triumuiri, and not he, were the causes of all the troubles: declaring reasons,
by which it might appear, that he had sought peace, did, and would still
seek the same: And although (says he) I have always hitherto declared by
undoubted Arguments, not only a singular love, and an obedient mind toward the
King and Queen, but also a notable desire and care for the profit and
concord of the Realm: the which also of late I declared, when as I deferred
the putting my self in Armor, even until the very pinche and extreme
necessitye, at what time I was constrained to do it, that I The second
declaration of the Prince of Conde.
might resist their violence, which threatened to kill and slay, and made great
bragges, and which of late, when they had gotten an Army of men, contrary to
the King and Queens commandment, armed them selves, and entered into Paris,
where I was at that time, being not ignorant what they meant to do: yet
notwithstanding I made no stir or do, least I should put the City in pearill.
Yea, I having no consideration of my estate and condition, although I was not
the first that put my self in Armor, yet notwithstanding at the first
commandment of the Queen, least I might seem to omit any thing lawful that
might bring peace, I with mine went from Paris, minding to get me home to my
own house, and to dismiss al my train, thinking that my adversaries would have
done the same: who notwithstanding co^trarywise, keeping Paris still, and doing
many things there against their office, and also having usurped the Kings
authority, kept the King and Queen captives not only in body but also in
mind. I, on the contrary part, ceased not from yt time forward, to propounde
al reasonable conditions that might be, to ye end all things might be ended
peaceably, as testify my wrytings, and those men them selves, whom I used as
means to bring matters to quiet end: although (I say) all these things were
done thus by me, that it might plainly appear that I desired nothing more than
the Kings dignity, and the peace and tranquil^ity of the Realm: yet
notwithstanding, fearing least my answers to the Rescripts from the Queen,
after I had offered the conditions of peace, be not so truly and wholely
brought to her hands as they passed from me: I thought good to have the whole
matter put in writing, both to the end they may be considered of the King and
Queen, and also that they being published throughout all Christian Realms,
may be known to all Princes, to our Friends in France, and specially to all
Courts and Parliame^ts of this Realm: of the which, but specially of the Court
of Paris, to the which before this time I have sent my Declaration, I require
and crave, that these explications of my reasons, may be put in the public
Regester: to the end I may give accounte of all my actions to my Prince and
sovereign Lord the King, at what time be shall come to that age that he may
Judge of the merits of his subjects, and of their evil deserts also, which
have don any thing during the time of the kings Minority.

First of all, this I think for a suertie, that it neither can, nor ought to
be said that I have been the cause either of stirring up or of maintaining these
commotions and troubles: when as my ennemies them selves will confess that I
was not the first that took ye sweard in hand: and when I did take it after
them, which put them selves in Armor against the King and Queens wills, I
had good occasion so to do. For by the Law of Nature, being a Prince and one
of the Kings kinsmen I ought, and am bound of duty, to defend and maintain the
dignity of the King, and the peace and tranquillitye of the Realm. So soon as
I put on Armoure I protested that I would put of the same again upon such
reasonable conditions, as should appertain to the liberty of the King and
Queen, and to the peace and concord of the Realm.

Whereupon it must needs follow, that they are the causes and authors of
troubles, which have refused those conditions, and which, when they could not
abide the peaceable government of the Queen, and that she should be the head
over the Kings subjects, and disdayning at her, for that she looked so
straytly unto the^, least they should defraude the kings creditors of any of
their debt, put themselves in armor, came with a band of soldiers to the
King, and beset him about with armed men, that having the king and Queen in
their own power, they might govern the Realm as they list themselves: they
committed horrible murders upon the kings subjects living peaceably
according to the kings laws, and thus have brought upon the whole Realm of
France these stormy tempests of trouble, beginning even a little before to
enjoy peace and tranquillity, both parts being contented to live peaceably,
so that they might enjoy their Religion.

But and if (leaving the present state of things) we will call to mind and
consider every man's acts in time past, in good sooth, we shall find these
same men, which at this day stir up these troubles, have been also aforetyme,
the causes of great inconveniences to the Crown and dignity: seeking by the
perturbation of this realm to enrich themselves, whereas by peace and
tranquillity they decay. And to omit that which king Fraunces, a man of
excellent wisdom and Judgment, said of them, and to omit also many of their
bold and presumptuouse enterprises, who knows not that they hating public
peace and concord, were the only causes and authors of the truce and league
breaking between king Henry and king Philip of Spayn^, to the great damage and
hurt of France: In so much that they brought the same, by wars, in great
perilles, and all to have their will and pleasure by one means or other.
Beside this, after S. Laurence slaughter, when they had gotten unto them the
Treasurers office, which they had before greedily gayed for, what detriment or
hurt did they not bring unto the kingdom? What did they also to King Hen^y,
who dis^king and being weary of their violent and cruel disposition, minded to
have sent them away from the Court to their house, had he not ben prevented by
death? But afterward in the days of king Fraunces the second, being but young,
these Strangers, and violent Carters, agaynst^ law and equity, and against
the ancient constitutious of the realm of France, usurped the mere impery
and government of the kingdom: during which time, was the realm void of
troubles? Did they not in the sight of all men go about to set that young king,
being by nature very gentle, and full of clemency, against his subjects: and to
have made him infamouse with the note of cruelty for ever? Did they not cause
him to be a mortal enemy against his subjects, even in the midst of his
reign, in so much that except GOD in his mercy ha^ turned away so great
calamities and miseries like too have ensewed, we all should have rued the
same, to remember ^he which, it would cause any Christian heart to tremble?

And to make an end of so lamentable a Tragedy, A Tragedy begins merrily.
but ends sorowfully
When king Fraunces was dead, these boysterouse storms were blown over, and
the sky was more clear, the government of the Realm being committed to the
Queen, and to the king of Nauar: until such time as their ambition hating
peace and tranquillity, styred them up and their fellows, to set heaven and
earth together, and to cause the state to be troublesome, as (to my great
grief) is to be seen. Therefore I leave the Judgment of these, to all
indifferent men, to discern who are the authors of troubles: whether they,
which have sought peace and concord by all means possible: or they, which have
so mayntayned dissensions always, that they dare at this time, to the great
hurt of the whole Realm proclayme open wars. Besides this, there is so
little cause for any man to marvel why I should be so busy to deal and so
ware and circumspecte in the matter, that I should be in great falte if I did
otherwise. For their acts in time paste against me, have taught me
sufficiently to beware how I put my self into their hands. And it is plain
enough to be seen, that their purpose is to destroy the greatest part of the
Nobility, and of all estates of men which embrace the truth of the gospel,
specially those that attend upon me. The which their meaning may easily be
gathered by the talk which the Duke of Guise, and the Constable had together of
late in the Senate of Paris, before a great assembly. But what obedience they
show toward the Queen, it may appear hereby, that contrary to the Queens
will which she oftentimes declared, they did frustrate the kings Edict of
January, adding this new exception: Let not the Religion be used at Paris. Who
sees not that they intend nothing else, but even to banish the Gospel out of
all parts of the Realm? when as also of late proclamation was made at Paris,
to banish all the new Christians. To what purpose should I say that by no other
means, the Inhabitants of Paris, can be kept in quiet? For we have seen that
the Prince of Rochesuryon, and Martial Momorentius, having about them only
twelve soldiers, have kept the people of Paris in quiet without any manner of
tumult, the space of three months together. The which continewed even until
that day, on the which the Duke of Guise entered into Paris. But this is worthy
the remembrance, that when the same Martial Memorency had somewhat increased
the number of soldiers to keep the ordinary watch, whereby the confederacies of
certain factious persons, might be preue^ ted, the Merchant master and
certain of the Citizens said, that the people might be kept in peace and quiet
with less ado a great deal. Notwithstanding after the coming of the Guises
into the City, the minds of the people were so altered, that to keep them in
quiet they were feign to have a band of men which they appointed without the
knowledge and will of the Queen. But I know it came to pass by the singular
providence of God, that the Duke of Guise and the Constable should disclose the
secrets of their hearts, before so great a multitude, that their tongue no doubt
might run before their wit. The which thing truly does sufficiently declare
that those things are true which certain of their familiar friends, and
household servant have reported, and which does also appear by diverse of their
letters that have been taken, namely, that their purpose is to deprive me of
that company of men which are here with me, and to punish them with such
punishments as they had already devised.

The which in deed the slaughters, and spoiling rapine committed by the
soldiers of the Constable, and those things also which were done in diverse
places against the me^ of the reformed Religion, do opeuly declare: but
specially that horrible murder don by the Guises at Sens. Of the which
calamities they are to give an account, and to answer. But as touching the
commandment of the Queen, by which she has willed me, laying my armor
aside, to come unto the king upon her faith and trust, and too make me such
assurance in writing as I shall require: I protest truly, that I have a
singular desire and good will to obey her commandments: but I understand yt
these are the subtle practices of my enemies, which bring all things to pass
as they lust themselves: And again, I see not how the Queen can save me
harmless, so long as she is in that state that she is now in. For how shall
she resist them, who putting themselves in armor against her will, have beset
her round about? And as like it is that my brother the king of Nauar cannot
exercise his power and authority as he should, whose facility and sufferance
they have greatly abused, and do what they list themselves both against his
will and the Queens: eut^ as also they have done oftentimes heretofore, when
they were put in authority to govern. The which injuries done to them, if
they would remember, they must needs think themselves much bound to the
providence of god, which has safely preserved them from the counsels and
practices of the Guises. To be short, I see no other way for the safegarde of
the king and Queen, than for the Guises to depart from the Court home to their
house, and for the Queen her self to recover her former liberty. For, truly,
I will not think and believe that they are to be trusted, so long as they
keep themselves in arms, and do retain those bands of men which they have
gathered unto the^: yea I my self am plainly taught to take heedby their
promises heretofore. For what mischief is it not, that they seek to work
against me, and those also that are with me? They openly revile us as rebels
and open enemies to the King and the realm: and do thruste us out of our
offices: and also threaten death unto us. For who knows not what false
rumors, and shameless re ports, they have openly bruted abroad against me? Who
sees not the preparation of wars which they make against me, both within the
kings dominions and also without? They conspire with foreyne Ambassadors to
make war, partly without the Queens knoweledge and consent, and partly by
her consent, which they extorte from her through fear, abusing her facility,
making her believe that which they intend not. They set the King and encourage
him against his faithful subjects. They spend and waste the kings Treasure
in warlyke affairs, which should be better bestowed to the paying of his
debtes: So that the same which the people gave to help their King withal, is
now turned to their destruction.

And to accomplish their wickedness at the full they mind utterly to destroy
the greatest part of the Nobility, which mislike of their wicked acts. The
which certainly is nothing else but to bring the king and the Realm into
present destruction. And in the midst of these their devilish Counselles, am
I in safety?

For whereas it is said, that I do seek my own private commodity more than
the common wealth, that certainly cannot be rightly said of me, but more
truly a great deal of them which add daily to their old wickedness new
mischiefs: being so obstinate and wilful, that they had rather bring the king
and the Realm in to this peril of war, than for common quietness sake,
somewhat to relent. They say that they will not go home from the King. What
faithful Subject would deny to obey his sovereign in this? To the avoiding
the causes of such present and imminent euilles. For whereas they obstinately
say, that it is not meet for them to depart from the King in this his
minority, they have no reason for it. For the Queen is sufficient enough to
discharge that matter, specially when as great and urgent cause requires the
same. Let them remember that they were advanced to their dignities, not to do
all things after their own mind, and contrary to the wills of the king and
Queen to bring the Realm into these dangers: but to the end they might keep
the same in peace and concord, that is, to leave it in that state, in the which
it was before they enterprised to take armoure. In putting on of the which,
dare they say that they have done according to their office? It is lawful for
no man truly in this Realm to put on Armor, except it be by the express
commandment of the king. It has not been lawful at any time by the laws of
France in the days of those kings that have been of lawful age, for the
kings natural brethren, though they returned from war, to enter armed*
into the Court. And have they authority so to do in this time of the Kings
minority? But if they were the Kings faithful subjects, seeing that by
their coming in Armor into the Court, the whole Realm is in a roar, they
would for the peace and tranquillity of the Realm, depart.

And seeing this is the only way to bring peace and concord, they, if they were
good and faithful subjects, would show themselves to have more regard to the
common profit of all men, than to themselves. Although truly I my self am not
only as they are an officer to the king, but also the Kings near kinsman, and
therefore have more right and authority to be with the king: yet notwithstanding
I, which was not the first that put my self in Armor, for the common wealths
sake, do protest and promise that I with all that are with me, will depart
every man to his house: upon condition that they will do the like. To the
which condition except they grant, all men may see, that it is not I, but they
which prefer their own gain before the common wealth.

But and if they cannot be satisfied with these reasons, let them also search
for examples: let them call to mind what has been always wont to be done
hitherto in these matters: and they shall find that the Kings aforetime of
France have used this mean, that when controversies have fallen out between
their Princes, and that both parts had put themselves in Arms by their
private authority, to give commandment unto them to unarm themselves, and
to go home to their houses: and afterward to make them answer to the same.

But admit that they had aucthority to abide still with the King, against right,
and all approved customs, being but his servants only and to beset him round
about with such soldiers as they have gathered together by their private
authority: yet notwithstanding it cannot be denied but that I have great
injury, I (I say) which should have this prerogative before them, being the
Kings near kinsman, and which have not put on Armor, but by them
constrained, only for this cause, to defend the King, the Queen, and my self
from violence: these things (I say) considered, I have great injury except I
have leave in like mauer for me, and mine to be about the king: which are
sworn as well as others unto him: and which I say and affirm are the Kings
faithful subjects and servants, as they have both showed already, and also
will show hereafter: at what time they shall be commanded by the king of
Nauar, the kings Deputy, to defend the kings liberty, and the aucthority of
the Queen, and of the king of Nauar, being ready for the same to spend both
their life and goods.

But and if they will not suffer the Queen to use that equallitie that she
ought, let her not lean to the one part more than to the other (howbeit if she
be more inclined to any part, she should rather be inclined to me being a
Prince and the kings near kinsman) and let her use her authority to remedy
the mischtefe at hand otherwise than she has done before: for no man will
think that any thing has been done by her consent, seeing that she is of such
wisdom, and so careful for the preservation of the king her Sons dignity,
that she would not be negligent to do her duty in a matter of so great
weight. But there is no doubt, but that which she did, was for fear of them,
which having her in hold, pulled her from doing of her duty. When as also it
is manifest that the King is brought to that state that he is constrained to
grant many things against his will. To prove this thing, their choosing of
new Counselors shall serve: whom they therefore chose, that under the pretense
of a Counsel, the Queen might be constrained to do what they would by a more
clenly way. For it is known in what order it was done, and in what estimation
they now have the Queen: who deliverate and take counsel together by them
selves a part, and do conclude whatsoever they them selves do like of. They do
many things by their own private authority, and when they have don, then they
come to ask her mind and opinion. And what soever they them selves lust to
have done, they cause the high Court of Parliament to confirm the same. And
in very deed they preuatle more with those of the Parliament than the Queen
her self can. Finallye, who will deny, that it is necessary at this time, to
deliver the Queen from fear of this violence, that she may recover her
former authority: and so they to lay aside their Armor, and to go home to
their houses, that all suspicion of violence being taken away, there may be
more quietness hereafter, and the perrils of great calamities avoided? For I
and all that are with me he fully persuaded and bent, that except the matter be
uprightly and indifferently handled, rather to abide the extremity, and to see
the end, than that they which have usurped to them selves power, against all
law and right, to the great hurt and detrement of the Kings subjects hitherto,
and also as yet going about to work their utter destruction, by so many
horrible murders cruelly committed against the kings Edicts, should still
hereafter impudently proceed in their Insolency.

And to take away all occasion of slander which they may have against me
hereafter: whereas they say that the kings letters were taken away from the
kings Posts by my commandment: I answer that I have given contrary
commandment to those that attend upon me, neither were there letters at any
time taken by them, which were sent either to the king, to the Queen, or to
the king of Nauar. This I confess to be true, that there have been many
letters taken which have been sent to diverse private persons: by which are to
be seen an infinite number of sclaunders, false rumors, counselles, and
practices against me: many things being quite contrary to those promises which
they have made unto me concerning peace and concord.

But concerning the casting down of the Images at Towers, and at Blais: I
protest that I was very sorry for the same: in so much that I signified to the
kings Officers which are in those places, that I would aid and assist them,
to punish those according to the kings laws which should be found gilty in the
fact. This is and may be an Argument of my will and meaning, the which also I
have done, and do as yet, at Orleans. Every one of what state and condition so
ever he be of, prayseth and commends the moderation and behavior of al those
which are with me, which live peaceably and quietly with the Towns men,
without any manner of offense, or breach in any point of the Edicte of January.

And as touching those which keep in hold certain Cities: I affirm that they
do it for no other cause, than to keep those Cities for the use of the King,
and not to suffer them to come into their hands, which abusing both the Kings
name, and his Artillery, do seek to get power for their own private profit.
For so sone as the Queen shall be restored to her former liberty, and into that
state wherein she was within these three Months, she shall well perceive and
understand that those Cities will show all obedience to the King and to her as
they had ever done before: and will always continue in the same so faithful,
that in that point they will give place to no City within the Kings dominion:
no not to Paris, which of late has gone about to cause this civil war,
spending great store of money to that end and all under pretense of Religion.

And now, I and mine are so far from forgetting these things and buryinge
them in silence (as we are wished to do) that we would rather have the^ to be
chronicled for ever, to be written in Tables, and to be portrayed in letters of
Gold, and to be shrilly proclaimed throughout all Christian realms, that they
may see our dutiful obedience and faithful trust, showed toward our King
greatly injured in this his young and tender years: and also that so notable
an example of my courage and concord with the rest of the Nobility of France,
which have joined our selves together with one heart and consent, to preserve
the dignity of the king and Queen, may be a memorial for ever in writing to
ye posterity.

I for my part, truly, do think, that I could not have better occasion
offered, to express my love and duty toward the king, and to get unto my
self true honor and praise than by this means: and fully I am perswa ded,
that my King and Prince will consider my dutiful service which I now show unto
him, when he comes to that age that he is able to judge hereof: and to weigh
the says and truth of my good will, showed in such time of need.

For these causes duly considered and weyed, I which have sought al means and
ways to pace^y these troubles, which are like to bring destruction to the
realm: and which have offered and do offer still al reasonable conditions to
be taken for the laying aside of armor on both parts, only upon consideration
of the king and Queen, and of the common wealth, do protest again before the
king and queen, and before all the states of the realm, yt the whole fault and
blame of all those calamities and mischeeues, which are like to ensue by the
means of these wars, is to be attributed to those alone, whom I have
declared to be the causes of these perturbations and troubles: who refuse in
the present peril of the destruction of the Realm, to depart from the
Court and the kings Counsel: which their armor laid apart, would bring peace
and concord. I do earnestly pray and beseech all the kings Courts and
Parliaments, and all estates and degrees, to weigh and consider all things in
due time: and to be diligent in doing of their duties, for the preservation of
the kings dignity, and the authority and government of the Queen: that one
day they may give an account of their doings (as I trust to do of mine) to the
king, when he comes to his lawful age, that they may rather have praise and
reward for their doings, than reproach and ignominy And not to forslow
themselves, either for to satisfy their own desires, or for fear or favor of
those which seek to color their faults. And to conclude, I heartily pray and
beseeth all the Kings faithful subjects to help, aid, and assiste, me in
this so good and just a cause: calling God to witness, that I, only for the
advancement of Gods glory, for the setting of the King and Queen at their
former liberty, whom I see beseeged and enclosed about with their subjects,
for the mainteyninge of the Queen in her authority, for the defendinge of the
common wealth, and for the putting away of those injuries offered to the Kings
subjects, for these causes I say, I have been provoked to put my self in
armor, and to resist their violence: The which even at this day I judge and
see to be so profitable, to bridle the outrageous madness, that I trust
hereafter God will bless my labors, and will bring the work which he has
put into my hands to so good effect, and to so prosperous an end, that his
name shall be glorified, our Kings dignity and Royal seat defended, and peace
and tranquillity main tayned.

This was the whole sum of this Protestation, which the Prince of Conde sent
to the King and Queen, by certain Messengers, to whom he gave commandment
to declare how earnestly he deu^red peace: for the which he would refuse no
indifferente conditions. He wrote also to diverse Princes that were his friends
in the kingedome of France, and specially to the Princes of Germany: whom he
prayed to be means to make peace among them. He wrote also letters to the
Emperor the four and twenty day of May, to this effect.

In consideration of the singular clemency, humanity, Letters of the prince of
Conde to the Emperor.
and wonderful wisdom, which for diverse causes, I have thought to be in you,
I thought it my duty (although to my great grief) to make you acquaynted with
the state of France. Know you therefore that the matter is come to this, that
the Guises conspiring with the Constable, and the Martial of S. Andrew, have
gotten the king into their hands, insomuch that they have taken away from him
and from the Queen their liberty: and setting at naught the kings Edictes,
they do even what they list themselves. And they have already so begoon their
Practices and Counsels, that if they may bring them to effect, there is no
doubt but that the kings dignity, and the liberty of the kingdom of France
will quight be over thrown. But to the end you may understand the whole
matter, I send here unto you the true and plain explication of al things,
which both the Guises and I my self have done in this business. By which it
may evidently appear, that the Guises, are the conspiratours, and the breakers
of the kings laws and dignity. But I to stay these troubles, and for the
defense of my king, to whom I am bound, both by duty, and also by the bond of
nature, and also for the Realm, my native country, will spend all that I am
able, and my life it self: And I alone will not do this, but a great many
more of the same mind. Wherefore I humbly beseech you to weigh and consider the
reasons of all my doings: the which if they seem just and good, be an aid I
pray you in these perilous times to the king and Queen, and to all the family
of Valesia: and set to your helping hand for peace and concord. In so doing
your majesty shall do a most godly act.

He sent letters also to the County Palatine called Letters sent to the prince
of Palatine.
Frederike, all most to the same effect, with both his writings also in the
which he declared the manner of his doings: and because he had always wished
al his actions to be known to all men, and to be judged of those, that will
uprightly consider of the same: he said he greatly desired that the truth of
all things, might be faithfully and truly known to all men: to the end all
those slanders might be taken away, which his adversaries, the authors of all the trouble, to his infamy, every where colourably spread abroad.

Although therefore the truth needs no defense, and although he had both the
testimony of a good conscience, and also a sure testimony of many men, for all
his doings, to maintain his cause, yet notwithstanding, he said, he thought
good to signifi unto him, with how great care and labor he had sought (as it
became a faithful subject to do) to make peace and quietness. Where by he
trusted that he should see, both his faithfulness toward the king, in the
which he would always abide: and also should marualle at the perverse
obstinacy of his enemies: which intend rather to co^fou^d and pervert al things
than to forsake their ambitiouse desire to rule. Therefore he said that he
would write unto him those things which he had great cause to lament, beseeching
him, that for the love and friendship which he bare to the King and the realm,
he would help to further his purpose, which only tended to the working of
peace and tranquillity.

To the same effect also, he wrote two letters to the Duke of Sabaudia.

About the same time, there was a Synod of the reformed churches of France,
at Orleans: to the which there A Synod at Orleans.
came diverse Ministers of Gods word, and certain chosen men also of other
churches. There was chosen, accor ding to custom, by the common consent of the
whole assembly: to moderate this Synod, Antonius Champd^us, minister of Gods
word in the congregation of Paris, a man of singular godlynes, learning,
eloquence and modesty. This man was borne of a noble house, and being but a
very young man, be embraced and professed the doctrine of the Gospel, in so
much, that he was chosen by the church to the ministry of Gods word, the same
church being but tender and young, and beside that, much anoyed with affliction:
and as he was chosen to this office, so was he no less diligent in the same:
whereby he became a most profitable member to the chuche but specially to the
congregation of Paris, of ye which he was Superinte^dent.

In this Synod there arose a great controversy concerning ecclesiastiall
discipline: which certain light heads at that time began to discuss, seeking
to maintain the licentiousness of the common people. This controuecsy being
at this time stayed, burst forth afterward more vehemently, and troubled many
churches. And because the civil wars increased more and more, the Ministers
by a common decree, proclaimed public prayers to be made in every
congregation, to turn away the wrath of God from the Realm, who was not
without great cause displeased with the same. And they sent to every
congregation, letters, to this effect.

Al me^ evidently see what great troubles are at hand, Letters sent from the
Synod.
like to fall upon the Realm and the whole church, for the which specially
this mischief is provided, Satan and his soldiers, envying the propagation and
prosperity of the Gospel, and the peace which the same has enjoyed by the
great goodness of God.

And do perceive that the causes of those troubles are the just judgments of
God, punishing the sins of men, which reject so notable a benefit, as the
glad tidings of the gospel, the power of God to salvation, or else esteem not
so reverently of the same as they ought.

Our sins therefore are the very causes of these calami ties, so that we must
seriously seek all that we may too appease the just wrath of God: but
specially they, who under the name of the reformed Religion, lived very
wickedly. But to such as do truly and from the bottom of their hearts repent
them, and study to live in newness of life, the promises of God are effectual
and do appertain. Seeing therefore the matter is come to this point that all
men may plainly see, that they which raise up these troubles of wars, do
seek the ruin of the Gospel and of the church, and therefore do war and
fight against God himself: they must pluck up their spirits, be of good
courage, and certainly persuaded that God will not fail his servant, whom he
vouchsafes so to advance, that whereas they have deserved to be severely
punished for their sins, they might be afflicted for the truths sake, and
for the glory of his name What have the enemies left undone, by which they
might extinguish the doctrine of the gospel? Yet notwithstanding it has
escaped, Satan and the Romish Antichrist ^etting and fuming in vayn. Therefore
we must make this our cry, The Gospel is assaulted, the destruction of the
church is sought, and open war proclaimed against God. Therefore god will
fight for him self and for his. There are also other causes ^ for beside yt
their de^estable counseil to abolish the Church, all men know that they go
about to bring most greenouse troubles upon the realm, to the end they
themselves alone may govern. They have arrogantly broken the Edict of January:
they have added cruelty to their impudent boldness: they have put the Kings
subjects to death in diverse places, using quietly the benefit of the Kings
Edicts: and they have handled them more cruelly, than ever were any forreyn
enemies. What mischief has not their unbridled crueltye brought to pass? They
came to the king being but yo^g, to the Queen a woman, and not able to
resist, armed with a band of men, and took them and carried them, will they nil
they, whether they would. And having captiued both their bodies and their
wills, at their own pleasure, they most impudently abused them, breakinge the
Kings Edictes, and violating his dignity. Therefore (say they) there are great
causes why we should hope that God the author of humane society, but specially
ye preserver of his church, will not suffer the unbridled force of those
violent and cruel counsels to proceed more outragiously than they do: but
will make his Church in the midst of all the trouble, the conqueror. And we
have a new and manifest argument, beside those which have appeared heretofore,
of this his good will toward his servants: in that he has in these days of
his afflicted church, raised up the Prince of Conde to be a Patron and
defender of this cause, by miracle of his divine providence. For this cause, we
must give hearty thanks unto God, the first and principal author of this
benefit, and we must look for happy success of his cause.

And because he will use this mean to preserve his church we for our parts,
must be diligent, faithful, cou ragiouse, and constant: least we omit good
occasion to bring things to pass, being offered. We seek the co^ser uation
of the Gospel and of the church, and for the befendinge of the liberty and
dignity of the King, of the Realm, and the whole common wealth.

Who will deny that these are just and lawful causes, to put on Armor, and
specially for them to whom that authority appertains? It is meet and
necessary there fore (say they) that you and we to the utmost of our pow er, and
to the spending of our lives, do aid and assist the Prince of Conde, and the
rest of the kings officers, which have made a sollemne vow for the defense of
the King, the Realm, and the Church: and to be very careful to give unto the
Prince of Conde, for this cause, money, fourniture, and all manner of warlike
provision whenever he shall require the same. In so doing (they said) this
thing should be so profitable for them all, that nothing can be more necessary,
the time being considered: And as they thought it to be their duty, to
admonish them of these things, seeing that now, the glory of God, the safety
of the Church, and the preservation of humane society, was to be sought for:
even so (say they) you must not delay the matter, being of so great weight by
any manner of means. But for so much as all man's help is wholely unprofitable
and vain, except we have first of all the help and aid of God, the aucthor
and revenger of this cause: We must take heed that we be diligent in calling
upon God, and that we profess the true Religion with holiness of life, least in
the midst of these troubles of wars, the care of true godliness be quight
extinguished. The best weapons that may be had to fight against our enemies, is
holiness of life, and godly prayers. If these be wanting, our words shall run
through our own sides. And because (say they) we see before our eyes such
horrible calamities: we, following the approved custom of the Church, have
appointed by a common decree of all men, that in all congregations, their
should be fasting and sollemne prayers for certain days, which we admonish
you to use modestly, devoutly, and godly: and also that God should be prayed
unto publicly and privately, to send a happy success of all these troubles,
to the glory of his name, and to the peace and tranquillity of his Church.

They wrote letters also in the name of the whole Letters to the County
Pallentine, from the Synod.
Synod, to Frederike, County Pallentine at Rheine, whom the reformed Churches
of France had found always in time of cruel persecution a friend, and ready
to help at need. This was the coppie of their letters.

We are not ignorant, that the baseness of our condition is such, that we should
not trouble you with our letters: but notwithstanding both the experience which
we have had of your singular clemency and humanity, and also the weight and
sharpenes of our miseries and calamities, do constrayne us in these our
extremities to flee unto you for aid: seeing that of long time you have
professed the truth, and have had a singular care to pro mote the glory of
God, and to mayntaine and defend those which profess the truth of the
Gospeel in what place soever they are. First of all therefore we pray unto God
omnipotent, and to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which will have Kings
and Princes to be Nourses of his Church, that he will vouchsafe to confirm
and strengthen your highness, in true fortitude and constancy, by his holy
spirit, which fortitude you have hitherto abundantly showed, with great
commendation, in setting forth and promooting the word of God in your
Churches. And we give you most hearty thanks for those benefits which we
received of you within these few years oftentimes, entreating our kings on
the behalf of our brethren which were afflicted for the doctrine of Christ.

And now we being gathered together of late out of all parts of the Realm,
for a common Counsel or Synod, gladly call to mind the benefits which you
have showed upon us: and so much the more willingly also, because at this time
the truce being broken, by which we began to enjoy the benefit of the Kings
Edict, we stand in great need of your clemency. We foresee the great tempest,
and calamities of our Churches like to ensue, the state of your Churches of
Germany in that Civil war, coming into our mind: the which troubles and
calamities, being ended by God so happily, who has promised without all doubt
to help his servants, there is no cause why we should fear. Notwith standing
we cannot choose but be very careful for our flocks committed to our charge.

But to make the matter more plain, because we know that ye understand already
our care by certain Noble men, we will not be tedious unto you. Thus much we
ad concerning our Churches, namely, That there is such a conspiracy made
against our Churches, that except God in his mercy do provide for the same,
there is like to ensue no less calamity and confusion, than there has
happened long ago, to the Oriental, Greek, and Affrican Churches. For, to
conclude the matter in few words, when the Duke of Guise, and they which have
conspired with him, perceived that by the Edict of January, men had leave
freely and openly to preach the Gospel, and that they were restrained of
cruelty, which till that time they had declared by all manner of punishments:
many of the Kings officers and Noble men embracing the doctrine of the
Gospel: they made a conspiracy with the enemies of the true Religion, to kill
in every City the professors of the Gospel. Of which their conspiracy we have
had manifest arguments: First, by the horrible slaughter committed at Uassi it
may appear, and then by the cruel and bloody murder of the men of Sens, the
Bishoppricke whereof pertayned to ye Cardinal of Guise, so great slaughter of
them being made, that for the space of four days, there was such killing and
steying, of men, women, and children, without any respect of person, that the
only remembrance thereof, cannot but cause tears to be shed: Yea, the dead
bodies of such as were slain, came swimming down the River of Seine, to Paris
requiring (as it were) their burial, and complaining of this tiranie, or
rather calling for vengeanee of God, and man. And now, although we know it
rather to be our duty to pray for our enemies, and for those which do
persecute us, than to accuse them: yet notwithstanding, we trust that you will
interpret to the best these complaints of our just grief, and of our manifold
calamities. And for so much as, those our adversaries, to leave no thing undone
that might be to our destruction, have required your Realm of Germany to aid
and assist them, we earnestly pray and beseech you, for the love which you
bear to the Church of Christ, that you will bend all your might, to withstand
and put away this evil, least Germany embracing the same truth of the Gospel
which we do, be evil spoken of, for seeking to hurt and anoye us. And we
entreat your honor by the tender mercy of God, that you will vouchsafe to be a
mean for us to the King and Queen, that there may be some consideration had
of our Churches: and that you would help to maintain and defend, so just a
cause, the time requiring the same.

Concerning the Letters which the Prince of Conde sent to the reformed
Churches of France, we have spoken before: in the which he willed them, when
they saw wars to begin, to prepare themselves to the war with a good
courage. Whereupon in many places they obeyed his commandments, some
prospering very well in their affairs, othersome, not having so good success.
They fortefyed with men and munitio^, so much as they could the Cities. And
after the inhabitants of Towers, of Blais and of Angewe, had so done also, the
men of Poicters, did the like, and then the Normans, which fortefied diners
Cities, and took their chief City called Roane. But at Burdeux, and almost
through Vasconia is Gascoyne.
but Gascoyne, except in certain mean towns, the faith full were molested,
by Monsiere Monluce, the Lieutenant, who dealt very cruelly with the faithful
every where, but specially at Bourdeux. By the means of this Monsire Monluce,
there was a great slaughter the slaugh there of Tolosa.
committed upon the faithful at Tholoz, and the rest of the multitude, which
were many in number, and had escaped this grievous murder, brake out of the
City, being a necessary place of refuge, both for them, and also for all the
faithful of the Countries therabout. The city Montaubane in Langnedoc being
taken by the Mont aubon.
faithful townsmen therein, and fortefied with their garrison, who, being
oftentimes assaulted by the inhabitants of Tholoz and M. Mo^luce, and
encountered with all also in playue battle, with great courage and constancy
defended themselves, and had good success.

Therefore in the province of Languedoc diverse things attempted, had diverse
success. In the Towns called Chatronouar, and Limos, many of the faithful
were slain. The faithful fled out of Narbon, being not able to withstand the
power of Monsier de Iuoys the The acts of Narbon in general.
Liuetenant: they fled also out of diverse towns about Towers, the inhabitants
whereof are called Rheni. Castra Albiens a Noble City was taken by the
faithful, and many other cities near adjoining to the same. Pezenac chum, a
City, so called, yielded also to the faithful, but within a while after they
were troubled again. Also the City called Blitter, was taken and fortefied by
the faithful. Aijgnes also a Noble haven lying upon the Mediteran sea, was
yielded into the hands of the faith full. Monpellier, also a City very famous
for Physic, and healing diseases, and very rich also for that it bordered
upon the sea, was fortefied by the faithful. Also the faithful took a very
strong hold called S. Peter's Castle, and thrust out a Bishop that kept the
same, after which they got the whole City, the I Will, and the castle of
Maguelon. The took also a town called in old time Fosse Marian, but now Aquae
Mortuae, a noble haven of the Mediteran Sea: but the Captain thereof being
slain, through treason, the Papists got the same again. Nemaux otherwise
called Nimes
Moreover the faithful took Nemaux a City very rich, and noble by the
ancient monuments of the Romans, and they took not only this, but the whole
ter ritory thereabout. The whole territory also almost of Uiuar, and Seuenas
yielded to the Faithful: with the Meadows on both sides the river called
Roane, from Lions almost to Auinion, after the which, they took a very strong
hold called Rochmor Castle, which afterward Auinion in Province.
greatly anoyed the men of Auinion. Therefore, a great part of Narbon, which is
called Languedoc, being very rich and replenished with stout and valiant
soldiers, yielded to the faithful.

On the other part, the Inhabitants of Dolphiny, being a great number which
professed the reformed religion, made almost the whole province on their side,
putting al such as were Papists to silence. And herein they used the help of
Baron des Adretz, who having with good success done many valiant acts in
those regions, with the very terror of his fame and name, even at the first
quayled the minds of the Papists thereabouts. The City of Ualentia also was
taken by the faithful, but not Valentia taken.
without great peril In the which City there was one M. Mottecondrin, Deputy
to the Duke of Guise, (who was governor of that province) a man of war, and
by the means of the Guises, a mortal enemy to the reformed Religion. This
man to withstand the faithful, gathered together all the power he was able to
make: Mottecondrinus slain.
and brought into the City new garrisons of soldiers, and appointed new watch
and ward at every gate of the City, to the great terror of the faithful
Citizens, who perceiving the present danger, fled to the Churches that were
reformed thereabouts, craving their help and aid. Whereupon many came from
Roman and Montill* noble cities, and from the hither part of Viuaretz. And now
when assault was made, the faithful of the city of Valencia got the gate, and
whilst the soldiers of Mottecondrin made have to withstand them, the
faithful rescued them on every side: in so much that the Papists were
constrained to give back: And Montecondrin himself, after he was come to his
house from the tumult, was besieged, and at the length by fire, which was set
to his house, constrained to yield himself into his enemies hands. Then the
Captains entered into communication with Mottecondrin. And while they were
thus in talk together a good while, the people stood waiting at the doors, and
long looking when Mottecondrin shoule be slain: and at the last they
threatened certain of their captains which went about to save his life, that
except they delivered into their hands Mottecondrin, they would slay them.
Upon this, one Mongoni, a noble man came to Mottecondrin, and said unto him:
That which thou wentest about to bring upon other, thou shall now taste of thy
self, and shall suffer punishment for so many good men that have been slain.
And then vnarming him, he thrust his dagger into his side, and so slew
Mottecondrin: and hoong the dead carcass out of the window for the people to
behold. And thus the faith full enjoyed Valentia, and almost all the chief
Cities in Dolpheny, as Grenoble, Uienna, Romans, Montil, Crest, and others. It
was reported that letters of the Duke of Guise were found among the writings of
Mottecondrin, in which he gave commandment to kill the faithful in every
City: and it was reported, that the fourth of May, was the day appointed for
that murder the which rumor greatly stirred up the minds of the faithful,
they plainly understanding whereabout their adversaries the papists went.

While these things were thus a working at Valencia, and throughout all
Dolpheny, at Lions also (as commonly it comes to pass in so great garboyles)
diverse men's minds were diversely occupied. The papists seemed to exceed the
faithful both in strength, and also in number. Who notwithstanding, what with
their own might, and what with the help of their neighbors, were not weak, and
as touching their minds and courage, they did no doubt far excel their
enemies.

The Lieuetenant at that time of Lions, was one Saltain, a Noble man being of
quiet and modest disposition, Saltanus Liefetena^t of Lions.
and was not altogether an enemy to the reformed Religion: and yet he was
very careful to maintain peace, according to the prescript of the Kings
Edictes. Therefore he endeavored himself all that he might, to keep both
parts and sorts of men in peace and concord.

Nevertheless there came news to the Elders of the reformed churches, that
the destruction of the church was even now a working: certain noble men
papists, that were of the Guises faction, intending to be at Lions, by a
certain day, as Mottecondrin, Aches, Calmentius, Mongeronius: who were
reported to have gathered great armies of soldiers from every place. Soldiers
also were mustered at Lions, Saltain not knowing thereof. Their conspiracy and
purpose was, to remove Saltain from the custody of the City, and then to
destroy all the faithefull. Then came Mongeron to Lions, and showed to Saltain
the kings commandment, that Saltain Liuetena^t of Lion.
he should be joined with him in the custody and government of Lions. By
whose coming the Papists were not a little comforted. Whereupon the faithful
thought, that in this extremity, it was not good any longer to delay the time.
According to their manner, they had Sermons in the suburbs: notwithstanding
being careful to defend themselves, even now of late, they had brought
soldiers, and armor into the City. In the mean time news was brought to
Lions of the tumult of Valentia, almost about that hour, in which the stir
was there made. Then went Mongeron from Lions: and by and by Fame reported,
that Mottecondrin was slain at Valentia.

Therefore the faithful thinking it best to behave the^ selves ma^ly, they in
ye night time, secretly placed diverse armed soldiers in so^dry places of the
common streates: and and at the length when they had gotten the Townhouse, and
had fortified every place of the City, and had taken the Churches they came
into Parley with the Brother hood of saint Jhons, which were fat and rich
priests, who had leave given them to depart out of the City unarmed. And so
the faithful had the City to themselves, placed certain pieces of ordinance
in diverse convenient places, and fortified, the City. After those things, they
came to Saltain the Liuetenaunt, and declared unto him, that they had not done
these things, either for contempt of the king or his magistrates: but to
defend the City from injuries of open enemies, and to keep it for the King:
obeyinge (as their duty required) the commaundeme^ts of the Prince of Conde,
to whom the conservation of the king and Queen appertayned: and therefore they
willed him, according to his accustomed manner, to proceed in the government of
the city. But M. Saltain within a while after forsaking his office, got him
home to his own house. And M. des Adretze, in the name of the Prince of Conde,
took upon him the government of the City. And when consultacion was made by
the Citizens what were best to be done, they agreed at the last upon this: That
there should be chosen out two thousand men of the reformed Religion to keep
the City: and yt they should be paid their wages, both out of the common
treasury, and also out of Ecclesiastical livings. That no man should be
indammaged or hurt for his religion: but that it should be lawful for every one
to live with his conscience to him self. Notwithstanding, that there should no
Masses or other rytes and ceremonies be used, either within or without the
city. That there should be twelve of the chiefest of the reformed Religion,
joined with the Consuls or Aldermen of the City. And that it should not be
lawefull for the Aldermen of the city to do any thing without their consent.
And thus Lions came wholly into the hands and power of the faithful. After
this the people spoiled the popish churches, brake the Images and pictures of
saints and other ornaments belonging to the Mass. And it is reported that
there were only three slain in the winning of this Lions won by the
Protestants.
so great a city. Lions being after this manner brought into the hands of the
faithful, they took also the greatest part of Burgundy: Monsieur Tauuanes the
Liefetenant seeking in vain to hinder and let them.

The news of these things, thus prospering on the Protestants side, being
spread throughout France, troubled the mynds of the Guises a new, and
encouraged the Prince of Conde, and those of his side to proceed in their
purpose. Notwithstanding the Prince of Conde was very sorry that the men of
Valentia had slain M. Mottecondrin, The Prince of Conde sorry for that Mo^:
condrin was slain
and much discommended them for the same. Neither did the Prince of Conde
allow the breakinge down of Images, and the spoiling of other such
superstitions, the which notwithstanding he him self could not stay when he
was at Orleans: the people crying euerywhere, that the Idolles which were the
causes of all these troubles, ought not to be spared: and that seeing the
defenders of them were so cruel, that they would not let to kill living men,
is it not necessary then to overthrow those false worshippes of Idols, that the
Idolatrers themselves may see their punishments for their abominable
wickedness? And the people were not a little displeased with the Prince of
Conde, for that he severely forbad these things to be done. Therefore upon a
certain small rumor of the throwing down of Idolles which were set up in a
certain place in the suburbs, the fame thereof was by and by spread throughout
the whole city, in so much that all men ran to the churches, some into one
church, and some into an other, and made such a spoil of Images and other
monuments of Idolatry, as though it had been so appointed by the kings
commandment or by an Edict: this I say, they did, notwithstanding that the
servants of the Prince of Conde did all that they could to stay them. And
least yt the church called Holy Rood Church, which was more beautyful, should
be thus served and spoiled, the Prince of Conde commanded certain soldiers
to guard the same: but they also shutting unto the^ the church doors, began to
pull down the Images and to deface the pictures. In the mean time the
papists being sorrowefull, ran up and down the City and cried, that the
kings Edictes were broken. At the last the faythefull of the Church of Orleans
(where this broyle was) with much a do, obtained leave ^f (...)^rince of Conde
to have sermons in the city: yea and with importunate suit they went about to
obtain at the last leave to have their Sermons in those Churches, in the
which the Idols were defaced.

But the Prince of Conde said, that his purpose was not to deface Idols: but
to see that nothing should be done contrary to the Edict of January, for the
breaking whereof his adversaries, he said, being guilty, were to be punished.
But the common voice notwithstanding of the people was this to him again:
Seeing, say they the adversaries of the truth have first begoone to extingnish
the reformed Religion, and to persecute the professors thereof, why should we
not destroy all false worship? And why should they deal coldly, which had
taken upon them the defense of the truth, and of the liberty of the Realm,
seeing that their adversaries had proclaimed open wars against the truth, the
King and the Realm.

The affairs of the faithful going forward as ye see, diverse rumors of them
in the mean time, being brought to the Court, the Duke of Guise, the
Constable, Momorencius, and the Marshiall of Saint Andrew, to the end they
might make it seem a matter of envy that they were charged to put themselves
in Armor to keep the King and Queen captives, (as might appear by the
Letters of the Prince of Conde which were spread abroad to that effect) they
would have all men, they said, to know that all things were done by the
authority and will of the King and Queen, and that therefore they were falsely
sclaundered. They offered therefore to the King and Queen a Supplication to
this effect following.

TO THE intent it may appear unto you to the whole world, that we have
always borne toward you and toward the kings your auncetors of happy
memory our sovereign Lords, a faithful and loving A Supplica tion offered in
the name of the T^iumuiti.
mind, and have sought to the utmost of our power the advancement of your
dignities (for the mayntenance whereof next to the glory of God, we will spend
our lives and all that we have:) we pray and most humbly beseech you that ye
will understand our very purpose and meaninges, which we wholely and truly
declare unto you in this Supplication: to the end also we might declare the
causes why we came unto you, and why also we are with you as yet, and why we do
think in our conscience that we ought not (in consideration of the offices
committed unto us) to depart from you, except we would incur the danger of
perpetual oprobry and shame both to us and our posterity, as careless and
untrusty servants to you, and as despisers of the glory of God, the safety of
the King, and of the common peace and tranquillity of the country: the which
we see in most grievous peril at this time of inevitable destruction, unless
it be helped in time by the only remedies of these Edictes, which we hope you
will prefer, and which ought to be confirmed by all Parliaments, but
specially by the Parliament or Court of Paris. The which remedies we propound
here before your Majesty with all obedience, and reverence, in manner and
form following.

First we think it necessary, not only for our conscience sake, but specially
for the conservation of the Kings dignity, and for the defense of that oath,
which the King took at the time of his coronation, by which he bound him self
to mayntaine the peace, tranquillity, and safety of the whole Realm: least
the Law both of GOD and also of man should be confounded, (whereby the
perturbation and utter destruction of all Realms, Kingdoms, and Monarchies,
must needs follow.) For these causes it is necessary, that the King declare by
and everlasting Edict, that he will not suffer hereafter diversity of
Religion, and of Churches, diverse doctrines, and sundry fashions of
administrations of Sacraments, and of Ecclesiastical rites, nor the Ministers
of such, in his Realm, But that he would will and command one Catholic,
Apostolic, and Romish church, which he and the Kings his Auncetors before him
had received, to be retained and kept throughout his whole Realm: forbidding
all other assemblies or congregations to set forth and teach any thing to the
contrary.

That all such as bear any office in this Ralme, as Justices, Treasurers, or
any other such like officer under the King, be commanded to embrace and follow
this only Religion, and openly to profess the same: and such as should deny
or refuse so to do, by any manner of way, to be deprived of their offices.
Provided notwith standing that for the same they be indammaged neither in body
nor in goods: so that they be found not to be the au^thors of troubles, of
Seditions, and of forbidden assemblies.

That all Prelates of what state or condition soever they be of, make the same
confession of faith and of Religion: and such as shall disobey this, to lose
their spiritual promotions, and the profits thereof to go to the kings
treasury: or else to place fit men, ordinarily called, in their rooms. That all
temples and churches throughout the Realm, which were violated, spoiled,
broken down, and defaced, to the dishonor of God, the contempt of the church,
and of the king, and the manifest breaking of the wholesome laws made both of
late and also aforetime, should be reedefied, repaired and restored to ye
former comlines and dece^t beauty that it ever at any time had: and that ye
breakers of the Kings Edicts should be punished according to the prescript of
the kings Edicts. That all manner of men, what state or condition so ever they
were of throughout the Realm, or what color or pretense soever they had,
should put of their armoure, except they had put on the same by the expres
commandment of the king of Nauar, the kings visegerente of the whole Realm:
and if any refuse so to do, that then they be proclaimed and accounted of all
men for Traitors, Rebels, and enemies to the king and the whole Realm. That
it may be lawful for the king of Nauar the kings deputy, or for whom soever
he shall appoint, to have bands of armed Soldiers for the orderinge of these
things and such other like, which shall seem mete for the conservation of the
king and queen. That those Armies which were gathered together at the Kings
commandment for the causes before said, may be maintained for certain
months: in the which space there is great hope that there will spring some
fruit of these remedies, and that we shall see public peace. Other matters and
necessary Cautions for the workinge of this peace, shall be supplied and put in
by the counsel and judge meant of the high court of parliment in Paris. These
things (without the which we must needs look for the destruction of the
Realm) being thus ordered and appointed, we are every one of us ready, not
only to go home to our houses, if it so seem good unto you, but also to be
banished for ever into the uttermost part of the world: we being fully
persuaded that we have given unto God, to the king, to our country, and to
our selves that honor, obedience, love, and natural affection which we owe
unto them, in so great peril and danger, as is now: to avoid the which we
are ready to spend our lives, and whatsoever else we have in this world. The
which, we signify to you and to the king of Nauar, both to the end ye may be
Judges and witnesses to us of these things, and also that ye may apply these
convenient re medies to those inconveniences. And we testify and protest
before God and you, that we only seek the safetye and peace of your dignities,
and of the whole Realm. And we trust that all they which seek the same, will
gladly yield unto the things contained in this Supplication, which we wish to
take effect, for the duties sake which we owe unto God and you. This was the
sum of their Supplication.

To which the King and Queen made answer, that it was not their wills, that
they should depart thence to any other place. Therefore, the same day they
offered another supplication to the Queen to this effect:

Beside those things which we have already offered to your Majesty's in
writing, that ye might plainly understand that we will submit our wills and
opinions Another supplication offered to the King by the Guise and his.
to your Judgments: after we heard that it was your pleasures, that we should
not depart to any other place: we thought good to make this offer, namely, That
if they which were at Orleans, laying aside their armor, and yielding up to
the King, the Cities and Towns which they had taken, would be sworn to show
all obedience toward the King, as to their sovereign Lord, and would also
obey the Kings Edictes which were al ready made, and shall be made hereafter by
our consent, and confirmed by the Senate of Paris, we would depart of our own
accord. To the which, except they will grant, we cannot in consideration of
our office depart from the King, except we would show our selves to be
careless in defending the King and the Realm, in so great necessity. But if
they will yield unto these conditions, we are ready to get us to our own
houses, and to obey the commandment of the King of Nauar. But we mean not
hereby to seclude the Prince of Conde from the Kings company, nay we wish
rather that he were near the King, and that he were sent for, to come from
them with who^ he is now linked, and to be daily with the King: trusting that
so worthy a Prince will do nothing but that which shall become him to do.

After that these supplications of the Guise and his fellows, The Answer of
the Prince of Conde to the Supplications*
came to the ears of the Prince of Co^de, he made answer unto them, sending
letters to the Queen with his answer, beseeching her that she would also
diligently wey and consider his reasons, and that she would cause both his
writing and his adversaries also to be kept for a memorial for ever, yt both
their actions might one day be showed to the King. The answer which he made
was to this effect: Although (says he) I have heretofore oftentimes declared,
both by writing, and also by other means, why I have put myself in armor, and
upon what conditions, I am ready to unarm my self again, and to go to my
house: yet notwithstanding I could never obtain any thing at their hands,
which have the King and Queen in hold, but threatenings and contumelious
words. So soon as I came hither, before they understood any thing of me, they
sent letters, and such severe and sharp commaundmente, as though they had had
to do with thieves, and the most wicked men alive. But now, when they perceive
that I regard not their impudent boasting and proud threats, and that they
cannot stay me from my purpose, and also that I co^sta^tly persevere in my
lawful request, having no consideration of my self, but of the liberty of
the King and Queen, and of the peace and tranquillity of the realm, they
seek to prevail by other subtle ways. And this forsooth is their devise,
they have offered a certain supplication to the king, in the which they
pretend al obedience, submission and reverence. But if a man read and mark the
same well, he shall find it rather a Decree than a Supplication. For it is a
flat sentence and decree made and concluded upon by these three, namely by the
Duke of Guise, the Constable Momorencie, and by the Martial of S. Andrew: and
with these also was the Popes Legate, and the servants of strangers. But they
which for six months ago, marked and noted al their doings, can testify upon
what foundacions these conclu sions do stand, not upon zeal of Religion and
faith: but rather upon the fraud, deceypt, and ambition of those three: who
seeing themselves to be out of the court, were offended, not that they had any
injury offered them, but because they could never yet abide that the Prince,
being of the kings blood, should be about the king: perceiving also that the
Queen rather sought the Kings profit, and the peace and tranquillity of the
Realm, than to satisfy their wills: they began to join ano associate
themselves together, to recover their former liberty again, to rule and
govern all things as they list themselves. And when they saw that they could
not have help of the Nobles, nor of the common sort of people to bring their
matters to pass (for ye they were justly hated of them): they colored their
purpose with the pretense of Religion, hoping thereby that the popish priests
and those yt hoong upon them, would aid and assist them. And thus winning so
many to take their part as they could, and seeking to have aid by strangers
of for reyne Nations, they minded to come to the king and Queen in such
battle array, that no man should once resist them. And to the end they might
have better hope to rule, they took and kept the names of all those, whom they
thought or suspected would be hurtful unto them, minding to kill some, to
banish other some, and to spoil and deprive many of their offices: And among
the principal number, was Michael Hospital, the Kings Chau^celour, and diverse
of the kings counsel, and many other good men, set in authority and office
under the King. There were also already some placed in their rooms, which
were either slain or banished. And truly, they very well declared their
judgment of late, in chosinge those six, whom they appointed to be of the
Kings counsel: the matter being so ridiculouse that the people made a game or
ieste of that choice. The Queen was sent away to C^enoncellum, to busy her
self in gardening. The Prince Rochsurion, the kings near kinsman, being a
very wise and godly person, was called away from the King: and in his place
were set new Tutours, that he might never hear any mention made of God, or of
any godliness, nor any thing else which appertained to good education, he
being of himself of a good disposition, and well inclined: And that he might
not be taught to understand his estate, which the Queen his mother went
about to instruct him in, teaching him to hear every man's cause peaceably: to
make much of his noble men: to esteem the use of armor for necessities sake:
to look to judgment, to maintain his people, and to be a guard to the
afflicted, and to deliver the oppressed: and above al things to beware least he
retained any such persons about him, which under color of friendship and
humility, would take upon him the kings office, and use tyranny against the
kings subjects. These things (I say) were taught him of the Queen his mother:
which these three Suppliants much mislike of, who would have the King frame
himself to their bent and disposition, as to dance cunningly, to sit or ride a
great horse well, hansomly to carry a spear, to be a wa^to^ lover, to love
another man's wife more than his own, and (to be short) to be ignorant of all
honesty and virtue. For they say, ye it is not meet for a King to be occupied
and troubled with such hard matters. But rather (say they) it is meet for a
king, to show him self very severe toward his subjects that come unto him:
to enriche his household servant, and to commit the government of the Realm
wholly unto them: not to trouble himself in hearing men's causes, in reading
letters, in setting too his hand and seal: (least their deceites which they
use under the coullour of his seal should be espied:) to fancy and favor a
few (which contend one with another who shall be the greatest thief:) to be
liberal only to a few, and to other some sparing and hard: and to dispoyle the
people of their goods: to sell the offices of Judges for money to simple and
unlearned men: and last of all to fill the Court full of al vanities, and
wickedness. I speak not these things unadvisedly: the Queen knows these
things to be true as well as I. These Suppliants therefore have made a more
pernicious and hurtful conspiracy to this Realm, than ever was that which
Sylla, which Caesar, and which the Triumuiri made. And it had by this time
caused much mischief to be done, if I my self had not with all my might
withstode the same unto this day. I marueyle that they so impudently contend
before the Queen in words: and I do wonder that the Queen will hearken and
agree to their words, as though she had never heard any thing of their wicked
counselles: the which truly plainly declares that she is more than a captive.
And truly if she were not afeard to be stifeled or strangeled in her bed,
(which they have threatened to her, as I appeal to her self if she may speak
her conscience) she would not have given her consent to their Supplication: but
would have told them to their teeth, that their covetousness and Ambition is
the cause of all these troubles. Seeing therefore at this time the Queen, in so
great peril, cannot speak of the matter, as she would, nor restst those which
abuse her with fear, to bring their purpose to pass: I my self am constrained
to defend her authority and the Kings also, to answer to their suppliant
petitions, in the King and Queens name, of whose liberty I confess my self
to be a defender. And why should I not trust that God will prosper my
indenours, and that good will which he has given to me, and the Kings
faithful subjects also, doing their duty in so honest and godly a cause?

1 First of all they begin with their titles of dignity, seeking thereby to get
the more authority: and magnificently paynt forth the memory of their actions
in time past: and would have men to judge of their minds and meanings, by these
their actions.

Truly it is necessary that so glorious a beginning, should have as evil and
base an end set against it. And why so? They have very well behaved themselves
toward their Kings (they say) in times past: is that sufficient not only to
cover their faults at this time, but also so to countenance them, that wicked
acts shall be taken for meritorious deeds?

If they have done any thing profitable or worthy of commendation for their
Kings (as they have done nothing so far as I know) if they have not in all
this time received their deserved recompense, it does not follow that they
should so importunatly crave to be recompensed at this time, to the ruin and
destruction of the King, and the Realm. But they three seek so great ly for
their profit, and are such careful followers of gain, that they would not
tarry so long before they would crave and receive a reward for their deserts, if
they ever deserved any thing. For probation whereof, what say you to this? That
their profits and yearly re uenewes do amount above the sum of two hundred
and fifty thousand french Crowns, more than their patrimony, beside other
helps. On the contrary part, let them remember (if any of them will say that
they have not ben fully satisfied in all things) How many good and singular
men, by their means, were cast in prison: how many Noble families have been, by
them destroyed, in the reign of Henry the second, and France the second: In
so much that it may evidently appear that they abused the favor of those
Kings, not only to the enriching of them selves, but also to the revenging of
their malicious minds, to the ruin and destruction of many. Wherefore if they
will have their minds and counsayles (as they say) to be examined, tried, and
judged by their actions in time past, go to then, and let them have that trial
and judgment: and let them deny, if they can, whether their doings have not
ben such, that they ought to be reproved and resisted, by all the Kings true
and faithful subjects:

Further more they say that the King and the Realm are in great peril: and
least they should fall into that meuitable destruction, they offer unto him
certain sure remedies? but (say they) with all reverence and obedience. If it
should be demanded of them what were the very cause of this destruction, and
if they answered truly as their conscience bears them witness, they must
needs impute the cause, and the whole blame hereof, unto themselves. For after
the proclamation of the Edict of January, there was peace throughout all parts
of the Realm.

Now if they will deny that they were not the disturbers and breakers of this
peace, then they shall deny a thing so manifest that all men can give
testimony against them. For in what state was the kingdom when the Duke of
Guise, began war and committed horrible murder at Uassi? To what end were
the conspiracies of the Constable and the Marshiall of Saint Andrews? What
meant the beastly barbarous rudenes, and rude barbarousnesse showed at Paris?
For where as they profess their reverence and obedience to the King, how
incredible seems that in the ears of all men?

Those three often times contemned the Queens commandments: as when the
Queen commanded the^ to go to their Manors, and Lordships: when by her
commandment also in time of peril, they were sent for to Monceaulx: is this
to shewreuerence and obedience to the king and queen? They came also contrary
to the Queens commandment to Paris, with an army of men: and would not
depart from thence, for any thing that the queen could do either by entreaty
or otherwise. Whereas I my self to obey the queens commandments went from
Paris: they abiding in Paris at their pleasure, when they had made there al
things sure, came to the king and queen with an army of men, and brought them
whether they would or no violentlye, from Fontainbleau, to Paris. I appeal to
the conscience of the Queen for testimony of these things, if she may freely
speak. They were fully determined to rule all things at their own pleasure.
But this is their obedience toward the king which they show by the open
breaking of the kings Edictes: This is their love toward their country, to
destroy the which they think it not sufficient to arm thmselues and theirs,
except also they cause the aunciente enemies of the Realm to arm themselves
against the same.

3 They seek to have a perpetual edict made for religion: but to what end? When
we desired to have the Edict of January kept, until the king came to
sufficient age him self, they said it was a very unlawful, request: adding
that the king might order change, amplify, and restrain the Edictes, when, and
how it pleased him: and that we, in desiring that the same which was decreed by
the king and his Counsel might be kept until he came to his full and ripe
age, went about to make the king a bond man, and to shut him up as it were
into prison, which would limitte his power and authority with these
exceptions. They then said. And now they go about to make that an everlasting
and irreuocable law, which they three themselves have devised and decreed.
Truly, we may with better reason and truth conclude, that they go about to make
the king a captive and bon^man unto them, not only in this his minoriti, but in
his maiority also. Who sees not their sundry and contrary devises? Who sees
not that they go about, not only to have the king in their hands, and to rule
him at their pleasure, but the whole Realm also? when as in a mat ter of so
great weight and perillouse, they dare take upon them to determine and decre
what they themselves list.

Did ever those Triumuiri of Rome namely Augustus, Antonius, and Lepidus, which
by their conspiracy perverted the laws and the common wealth of Rome, any
thing more bold and presumptiouse? If they had been moved by the love of peace
(as they say) and not by the outragiouse heat of sedition: if they had been
moved by zeal of Religion, and not by the force of ambition: they would not
have begone those their counsels with force and murder: they would have come
reverently and modestly: they would have declared the causes whi they could
not allow of the Edict of January: And they would have entreated the king and
queen to consulte with their Cou^sail for the remedeing of those troubles, to
the glory of God, the dignity of the king, and the conservation of the Realm.
And so they should have declared that they were moved by zeal of their
consciences. But while they go about these things, they sufficiently declare
that they take Religion but for a colloure, to the end that they may draw away
the Kings subjects to take their part: yt by their help, and by ye help of
strangers, they may bring al things to their rule. Can the Princes the kings
kinsmen suffer this, that strangers shall make laws, and Edictes, to rule the
king and the whole Realm?

4 They require to have ye church of Rome, which they call Catholic and
Apostolical, to be alone through out the whole Realm: and that the use and
administration of the reformed religion should be forbidden. Let this be the
Edict of the Duke of Guise, a stranger, of the Constable Momorentius, and of
the Marshall of saint Andrew, the kings servants. Let their wills, minds,
and decrese, be set against the authority of ye kings Edict, which the king,
the queen, the king of Nauar, the Princes, the kings kinsmen, the kings
Counsel, and forty chosen men out of every court of the realm, have made. Let
them oppose, and set this their Edicte both against the decrees of the
nobility, and the cominaltye, by their supplication, which they offered to ye
king first at Orleans, then at saint German, concerning the orderinge of
Religion after this manner, and the^ they must needs acknowledge and confess
that their Edict, will be the cause of civil wars, and in time, the
destruction of ye realm. But blind Ambition carries them out of the way, to
bind the king and the Realm to them, (as they say) by these merits. For this
I affirm that the Duke of Guise and his brethren, can not deny, but that while
they go about to molest, and trouble those that are of the reformed Religion,
what zeal soever they pretend, they bring the Realm into great peril. Let
them remember what happened of late almost in the same counsel to the^ in
Scotland. There, both sorts of men, yt is to say, both papists and
Protestants, lived peaceably, and obediently under the government of the
Queen: until it was commanded by the aucthority of the Guises, that no other
religion should be there received, then that which is of Rome. Then a certain
small number of men for this cause being raised, and appointed to battle, by
the wisdom of the queen, and by the help of the Nobility, were easily put down
again. The which thing ought to have made the Guises, sease from their former
purpose, for fear of greater trroubles, which would ensue by the means of
those Edictes. But they on the contrary part more obstinately went forward
with their purpose to hinder the reformed religion, writing sharp letters unto
the Queen, because she showed hirself so favorable: and persuaded with her,
that it was necessary that the principal authors, and many of the Noble men,
should be put to death. Therefore to bring that to pass in deed which they
uttered in words, they sent an army of me^ into Scotland with M. Brosseus,
and the Bishop of Atniens. At whose coming most severe Edictes were made
concerning the observation of popish rytes, and coming to Mass. The Bishop
said that he would soon call those that were gone astray (as he said) to the
obedience of the Church of Rome: and monsieur Brosseus said, that he would
quickly within few days by force of arms put all the rebels to flight. And as
cruelty has always covetousness joined with it, they beheld and considered
the lands and possessions of the noble men, and wrote to the Guises, that they
could both make the people tributary, to pay unto the French king two hundred
thousand Crowns, and also assign to a thousand Noble men of France which
should continually maintain war in Scotland, houses and land. The Guises
hearing of the which, were glad: but the Queen and Osellus (a noble man of
Scotland) said unto M. Brosseus, that the Scotts could not be so easily
conquered: who if they were constrained, would crave help of straungees, which
imbracinge the same Religion, would not desire to have better occasion to
banish the Popes Religion out of Scotland, whereby the Kings Royal estate
should come in peril. But they refusing these admonitions of the Queen and
Osellus, said that the Queen with her facility and sufferance would mar
all: and they called Osellus, fool and dastard. There fore these wise men so
wrought, that the greatest part of the nobility gathered unto them an army of
men, and within few days either slew or put to flight the Papists and
sacrifising priests: which if this had not ben, might have lived peaceably. And
thus they which before would bind Bears, and which triumphed before the
victory* did not only dishonor the Duke of Guise, but also lost the
authority of the Church of Rome.

By this example the Guises ought to acknowledge their fault and to leave of
their enterprise, and also to have no more in their mouths these words: One
of those two Religions must be banished the realm: and some must needs give
place to other some. These proud words become not subjects and servant: but
a king, of full and perfect age. And whereas they would have no religion but ye
Romish religion established within the realm, which they go about to defend
by force of arms, they bring the realm into great peril and danger: And
truly, it were a great deal better, to keep both parts in peace and concord,
and to use in steed of blows, words and writings, omitting all force,
wars, and sheding of blood. The which peradventure will so provoke God, and
his vengeance to fall, that the papists and priests themselves, which might
quietly enjoy their offices and livings, shall be the first that shall feel the
furour and madness of the people. To be short, the protection of the
Suppliantes, cannot choose but bring great trouble and garboyle unto them. But,
when they may be assured of this, that they need not without they will
themselves, be enda^maged, neither in body, office, nor goods, have they just
cause to complain? except peradventure they will say that they were careful
and sorry for the loss of our souls. But what has made them so suddenly so
careful, when as neither any one Bishop, Curate, or popish priest, has
labored or taken any manner of pains to that end? Seeing therefore we never
intended to hurt any of the^, what need was there to bring them into this
contention, and to pretend the name of the Church? Is not this too set one
against another? and to cause the people which before could not abide those
priests, to hate the^ the more? Was there ever a more sorrowful sight seen in
this Realm? Can there be any profit, benefit or good turn so great, that it
may make a sufficient men's for so great destruction? Can the Popes pardones
and Indulgences restore the blood that* is shed for this cause? These
Suppliantes may one day say unto the King, that they to defend that which no
man gainsayed, and to preserve the Romish religion, which no man went about to
hinder. have lost, or went about to loose the one half of his nobility, and
chiefest of his subjects. Then, and that truly it shall be objected unto them,
that as by their feigned and dissembled opinions concerning Religion, they had
brought the Realm of Scotland into great peril of destruction, and caused
much blood too be shed: even so by the same opinions, counsayles and
Instruments, great discord has been sown in this realm: and* both sorts of
men set together (as it were) by the ears, in such sort, that they may justly
hereafter among all posterities be said, to be the authors and causes of all
mischeeues and calamities which shall happen to the men, both of the reformed,
and also of the Romish Religion.

And, to cause more trouble, they would have all the Kings officers, and all
Ecclesiastical persons, to profess the confession of their faith: and that
such as should deny or refuse so to do, should be deprived, if they were
temporal men of their offices, if they were priests, then to loose their
benefices. For this is the other Edicte of those three Suppliants against the
received and approved laws of ye king. For there is no man that can remember,
neither has it ben heard of, that any king, that has been heretofore, has
constrained his true Subjects to receive any other confession of faith, than
that which is in the Apostels Creed. Let that Lawmaker, by whose crafty and
subtle wit these their supplications were made, bring forth but one only
example. The which, truly, he cannot do, except he will bring into this
Realm the Inquisition of Spain: the which by the judgment of all other
Nations is counted so wicked, that they all reject the same. These are the very
same trappes and snares, which they laid at Aurelias, (otherwise called,
Orleans,) a little before the death of King Fraunces the second, and which
cannot choose but bring the extreme ruin and destruction of the kings
subjects. For those Suppliants know that there are ten thousand Noble men, and
a hundred thousand soldiers, which neither by authority nor by force, will
forsake that Religion which they have received: and will not suffer the
preaching of the word, and the administration of the Sacraments according to
the form of Religion which they profess, to be taken from them, and will
defend themselves with the sword, against them which abuse the authority of
the Kings name.

That great number cannot be overcome and destroyed (which God forbid) without
the anoyance and ruin of those that shall set upon them.

And to conclude the matter briefly, I say and affirm in the name of the
Noble men, Gentlemen, and of many others which are here with me, that this
Decree is made by three private men, which by their authority pervert the
kings Edictes and make no account of them, and to put their decree in
execution, before they made the King and Queen acquaynted with their doings,
they put themselves in armor, and took them both captive. I say and affirm
that the same Decree is against the laws of this Realm, against all Christian
order, against the State, against the Edict of January, which was only made for
this cause and against the dignity and safety of many of the kings subjects:
whose enemies they openly show themselves to be, and whose goods and life they
seek to take away, and all under the pretense of Religion and conscience. This
decree also, takes away the liberty of going to a Counsel, the which should
have been considered by that subtle counsayler. For if it be decreed, that the
same confession, which they call the confession of the Faith, shall be received
of all the inhabitants of this Realm, that is to say, if all men be
constrained to receive the Popes doctrine and ceremonies: this must needs be a
plain sentence of condemnation against the reformed church: neither is it then
lawful for our Ministers, or for the Ministers of foreign Nations, embracing
the same doctrine, to go unto a Counsel: when as they, being not heard are
condem ned. But before the Duke of Guise, and the Cardinal of Loraine his
brother, bring forth the decree, concerning ye confession of the Romish faith,
let them renounce and deny many special points of the confession made at
Ausburge, which, when they were at Sauern, they said they embraced, and
promised to one of the Princes of Germany, that they would cause them to be
observed in France. It is needful also that the Cardinal of Loraine, should
declare by open writing whether he do persist in that opinion, which sometime
he said to the Queen before a great many witnesses, concerning
Transubstantiation, concerning the carrying about of the Sacrament, concer ning
Justification, Invocation of Saints, Purgatory, Images, and concerning many
other special points also, of which he spoke plainly against the judgment of
the Catholic and Apostolic church of Room.

6* Furthermore in that supplication, straight after this, they call to mind
the throwing down of Images, and require, that the same Images be repaired,
and the breakers of them be punished. But thereunto I make this answer: The
punishments, wherewith I punish them, which brake down Images, first in diverse
places, and at the last in Orleans, shall witness before God, and men, that
this misdemeanor of the rash multitude, al ways displease me: both for that it
was contrary to ye Edict of January, and also against the form of y^ League
and oath taken of us not long since. But if that deiection of Images deserves
any punishment, because any such fact is contrary to the kings Edict, what
punishments then deserve they, which so greatly abuse the kings name, that
under the coullour thereof, they commit great wickedness, as may appear by the
committed murders at Uassi, at Sens, at Paris, at Tholoz, and in many other
places He that preferred this Supplication, should first of all have considered
and remembered himself, that it is read in no place, that a dead Image
requires vengeance: but it is read, that the blood of a slain man, which is
the lively Image of God, cries and calls for the vengeance of God, and does
at the last cause the same to fall upon the bloudshedders.

7 Moreover those Suppliants, or rather commanders, require that they may
unarm themselves, which without the commandment of the king of Nauar put on
the same: and that they should be counted for Rebels and enemies to the King
and the Realm. I would glad ly demand of them, which think them selves so
wise, and say, that they seek for the peace of the common wealth, if that be
not the way to cut of all hope of concord, when they require that I, and they
that are with me should be counted Rebels and enemies to the king and the
Realm? For they say not, Let them which will not put of their Armoure, but,
which have put on Armor, be accounted the Kings enemies. They which point
requires another manner of answer than by writing. But I trustwtin these few
days to see them, and to disput^ wtithe^ by ye dynt of sword, whether it be
meet for strangers, and two such me^ as they are, to judge a Prince the kings
near kinsman, and ye chiefest part of ye Nobility of France to be rebels and
enemies to ye king and the Realm. And let not them pretend ye name of ye king
of Nauar, to whom they in the former kings days were sworn enemies. They
abased him all that they could, and caused him to be little regarded of the
king, his right and dignity being suppressed in matters of great waighte. They
cannot deny, but that of late days, when they went about to vsurp the
government of the Realm, by their means it was brought to pass, that
whatsoever the king of Nauar required, was denied: al occasion to rule and
govern, either in time of war, or peace, being taken from him: and to
discharge their spiteful stomachs, in the days of king France lately
disceased, they made him to be less esteemed then a man of mean state and
condition: being sent for to Orleans with thretnings: and commandment given
to Noble men that they should not entertain him at his cumminge: also Marshall
Tremen beeinge sent with two armies one of horsemen another of foot men, was
commanded, to take and* spoil all his Dominion, and to call the stranger to
the pray. And when they saw that their devise and purpose was let by the soden
death of king Fraunces yet notwithstanding they sought by all means possible
to be delivered of him, and would have kept him from having any authority to
rule or govern. The Duke of Guise openly said, that he would not depart from
the Court, neither at the entreaty, nor yet at the commaun dement of the king
of Nauar: The Marshall of S. Andrew, even in midst of the kings Counsel
said that be knew no other king or Queen. And now, they abuse the name of the
king of Nauar, who^ they have so much abused heretofore, under the pretense
whereof they seek the ruin and destruction of his own natural brother. And
they go about to bring to pass, that whereas the king of Nauar, is now
beloved of all the Nobilitye of France, he may here after be hated of al: that
they at the length may spy^te out their venemouse hatred at the full upon him.
These are their practices, and hereunto tend all their devises and Counsels.

8 Whereas they require, that the king of Nauar will bend all his force to bring
these things to pass, they plainly euough, declare, either great impudency,
or else an earnest desire to hinder peace and concord. For saying they are fully
determined to subdew all those of the reformed Religion to their wills by
force of arms, they should have kept it close in secret to themselves, until
we ^ad bin unarmed. But seeing they do so plainly declare unto us their
meaning, we will take heed that we be not circumuented, and beguiled: that is
to say, we will not unarm our selves, but upon very sure con ditions, and
cautions.

9 Furthermore they require that by the sentence and wisdom of the Senate of
Paris, al other things might be added and supplied to the making of the Edict.
Whereby they euideutly show in what estimation* they have the Queen, the king
of Nauar, and the kings Counsel. But I marvel wherefore they have no regard
of those wise and grave men, to use their Counsel* whom they chose of late to
be of the Kings Counsel* I doubt not but that there are in the senate of
Paris, good men, which are nothing inferior to those of the Senate heretofore
in virtue, in wisdom, and in religion. But those three Suppliantes, have so
handled the matter by bying and selling of offices, and by other unlawful
means, ye the greater number of the Senate are subject to the Guises, so that
the voice of the smaller number* quayleth. For probation, whereof we have this:
The Senate of Paris, refused to confirm that Edic^ which was made at yt
petition of the three estates of the Realm, and sollemnely confirmed by all
the Parliaments and Courts of the Realm, notwithstanding that the king him
self sent his letters and Messengers twice unto them: but of late by the
simple commandment of the kings Letters, another Edict, which is contrary to
that former Edict in many things, was by them preferred without any manner of
stay. This is the hope that we have of their good and wholesome counsel.

10 To be short, they add this request, that the Cities might be yielded up
again to the king, and the Inhabitants thereof sworn a new unto him. They
would bring to pass and earnestly seek (as they did in the days of king
Fraunces ye second lately disceased) to persuade men that they are the kings
enemies, which cannot abide their tirany. The Duke of Guise and his brethren
should hold themselves content with this, that they have once already used
these subtle means to the offense of many good men: when as they pretented
and abused the kings name to defend themselves against their enemies.

If any man were of them suspected to be their enemy, ^ither for that he had
at any time spoken irreverently of them, or for any other cause, he was cast by
and by into prison, was reported to be an enemy to the king and to the Realm.
And because those their subtle flightes have once had good success and have
been by them abused to the destruction of many, if God had not provided for the
same, they would now put them in prac tise again: and although there is not one
of those which takes our part, which would not willingly spend and bestow all
that he has, and his life to, in the service of the king, yet notwithstanding
they call ^e Rebels and the kings enemies. There is I say, not one of us,
which would not most gladly, for the preservation of our king, whom we alone
and singularly love, serve and reverence as the only gift of God, spend and
bestow his life. There is none of us which has put him self in armor to
requier any thing of the Queen or of the king of Nauar. We require no other
king whom we may acknowledge and reverence as our liege Lord and Sovereign.
Neither do we require to have him and his authority in our hands. We desire
not to have tributes, customs, taxes, and other payments due to him to be
made, to be eased and diminished: nay on the contrary part, we not only have
not refused to bear any burden that has been laid up pon us, but do also now
of our own accord promise unto the king to give unto him whatsoever he will
require so far forth as our goods will extend. The Cities which are blamed as
Rebels, have not forsaken or changed their Sovereign: they gladly
acknowledge al obedience to the king. They have not put themselves in armoure
against the King: such wickedness be far from them: neither have they sought
by force to make the King and his authority subject unto them. But they and we
have put our selves in armor against the Guises, the Constable, and the
Marshiall of S. Andrew, and that with such discre tion and modesty, that we
seek neither their blood, goods, nor offices. Therefore they which shall say
that we have put our selves in Armor against the king, shall impudently lie:
or else those Suppliants attribute to them selves the kings name and dignity.
But they which shall counsel and persuade the king to give unto them his
authority, soldiers, and money, although war were enter prised against him,
shall truly one day make an account of those their cou^selles: and shall declare
who has caused the king and the Realm to contend: and who also has spent the
kings money contrary to the laws of the Realm.

And I trust it will so fall out that the goods which they have taken out of
the Kings treasury to mayntain wars, will be one day repayed again out of
their substance, both to the profit of the King, and also to the easing and
disburthening of the people.

11 Last of all they protest that they are ready to go home to their own
private houses, yea to the utmost parts of the world, if need should require:
and to the end we should not be ignorant, they assign the time of their
departure, saying: When these things are fulfilled and brought to pass, that
is to say: When the Edict of January by their private authority is openly
broken: when the reformed Religion is wholly abrogated, with the preaching of
the word of God and the administration of Sacraments: when our consciences
shall be subject to ye vexatio^ of strange doctrine: when al they yt have im
braced the reformed Religion shall be put to silence and made subject to the
furor and outragions madness of their enemies: and being in danger of their
lives if they live otherwise than they would have them: and (to use their own
words) if they shall live without offense, that is to say, if they will come
to Mass, and to other popish ceremonies, this they call to live without
offense. These are the conditions which we may look for at their hands. This
is their discreet counsel.

But let us now proceed a little farther, and let my petition be joined and
compared with theirs, which I now make, as follows.

I require the observation of the Edict of January: they on the contrary part,
would have the same abolished. They desire the subversion and ruin of many
Noble families, and of others also: I desire that al ye kings subjects of what
estte or condition soever they be of, should be in safty, and still inioye their
goods and liuinges, and to be delivered from all injury violence, and
oppression. They go about to kill and destroy all those of the reformed
Religion: I seek to preserve them, until the King shall come to ryper age to
judge and determine of the whole matter as shall seem best unto him: and in
the mean time I desire that both parts may live quietly: that the papists may
enjoy their livings and revenues with safety. They seek to deal by open
violence, not caryng to begin civil war, seeking by forrayne aid to destroy
us, spending the kings treasure to the destruction both of the king, and also
of the realm, whereby we are constrained to defend our selves. I neither desire
wars, neither do I spend the kings treasure, neither do I seek the help of
strangers: nay I re fused them alwais hitherto, when they have offered me
their service, and so will I do still, except I be thereunto greatly
constrained by these authors of wars. I desire to have armor put of on both
parts, and do promise, that all those which are of my part shall be obedient,
and that love and the reverence which we owe to the king, shall more preuail
with us tha^ force of arms, for whose preservation we are ready to spend all
that we have. They desire that we may be counted rebels and open enemies, our
cause not heard: yea they seek our blood, our offices, our goods, and our
consciences. We neither seek their blood, their offices, their goods, nor
their consciences. This only we seek for at their hands, to who^ we will be
bound, that they and we will go home every man to his own house, according to
the tenor of those conditions which we have more copiously declared in ye
Instrument which we sent to the King and Queen con cerning this matter.
Neither can they complain and say that they are hereby dishonored, seeing that
we submit our selves to the same conditions. Our peticion is alike without any
manner of inequality, we desire nothing but that which is indifferent for both
parts: seeing that they themselves came otherwise then they ought to have come
to the king: and were the causes of these troubles, by their untimely usurping
of armor. And they have violently assaulted so many good men, that although
our petitions are not alike and so indifferent, yet notwithstanding it should
be expedient for the peace and tranquillity of the realm, to have rather
regard and consideration of many men than of a few, least the whole kingdom
for these causes be brought into peril of civil wars.

But, although there be no comparison between these two peticions, seeing the
one is just and equal, but the other unjust and violent, the one seeking wars
and horrible murder, the other peace, and the general profi^e of all men: yet
notwithstanding the Queen may judge and determine of the whole matter. But and
if she cannot at this time freely declare her judgment, either being stayed
by violence, or else because she will not for other causes offend them: yet
notwithstanding this thing we crave and request at her hands, seeing these
times great ly requires the same, namely: That their supplication and mine may
be registered in the public Commentaries of the Senate: That the Edict of
January may be observed: and that both parts laying aside their weapons, may
depart to their own houses, until the King coming to ryper years, shall be
able to judge and order the whole matter as it shall please him: or else till
the Queen with the advice of her counsel shall determine of the same.

The remedy appertains to both parts, neither ca^ any man complain that
he receives any prejudice: and it is so easy to be done, ye whosoever shall
refuse y^ same, cannot deny himself to be an enemy to the king and the realm.
Neither can it be but that they shall be judged of all men to be in the blame,
which refuse the remedy so easy to be had, for so great misery and calamity
like too ensue. It shall be judged also who is a traitor and an open enemy to
the king and the realm either he which willingly offers to unarm himself:
or he which had rather destroy all, than restore the King again to his former
liberty.

But because civil wars have always evil success, the soldiers minds and
hands being not easy to be restrained: I protest before God and men, that I
put my self in armor, and prepare my soldiers to battaill with great grief of
mind: and do heartily desire that so great calamities and miseries as are like
to come by these civil wars might be auerted and appeased by my blood only,
if it might so please God. But because my reasonable request is rejected, and
seeing my adversaries will be Judges in this cause, I protest again that my only
purpose and intent is, to restore the king and Queen into their former
liberty, and to bring the government of y^ kingdom to the Queen, and to the
king of Nauar: and to deliver the greatest part of the people from the tyra^nie
and oppression of such as have usurped the government of the realm. I have no
regard to my own private commodity or gain in this cause. I am not led by
ambition, by a desire to revenge, or by covetousness, as knows the Lord,
whose glory and truth I seek to defend, with the dignity of the King, and
peace and tranquillity of the Realm.

While the matter was thus canuassed too and fro by writing, and the Guises
with their compartners bearing only an outward show to the Queen of reverence,
and seeking notwithstanding daily more and more to rule and govern the realm
themselves, the Queen by her effeminat and timerouse nature, was very doubtful,
being careful for her liberty and authority which she had lost: and fearing
also the ambition of the Guises and his adherents. And being afeard of their
great power, she stood in doubt whether she should incline to them, or lean to
the Prince of Conde. Notwithstanding she wrote often letters unto him by
faithful messengers, and sometime she sent her mind by word of mouth, not
daring to send by letters. Of some of ye which letters we have here put down
the Coppies.

I See such sights daily to my great grief (my well-beloved Cousin) that except I
looked for help from God, and did comfort my self with ye trust which I have
in you, whereby I am persuaded that you will presently seek to preserve me, the
realm, and the king my Son, I should be much more grieved than I am. But I
hope that all things shall be very well ordered by us, with the help of your
good Counsel, to the frustrating of all their actions, and practices which
seek to destroy al things. But because I have at large declared ye whole
matter unto this messenger, I will be here the more brief. Only I beseech you to
credit that which he shall tell you, concerning al those things which I have
given him in charge to declare un to you two.

Your Cousin CATHARINE.

Also this which follows is the copy of another of her letters.
I give you hearty thanks (my dear Cosine) for that you so oftentimes certify
me of your affairs: and because I trust to see you ere it be long face to
face, and to talk with you my self, I will not now write much unto you. Only
this I request of you, that you fully persuade your self, that I will never
forget those things, which you have done for my sake. And if it fortune that I
did before I shall be able to acknowledge and recompense so great a benefit, I
will give my children charge to supply such lack in me, and to requite the
same. I have commanded this messenger to tell you many things. Thus much only
I certify you of, that I do as I do, and behau^ my self as you know, to
work, if it might be, peace and concord, the which I know that you (my
well-beloved Cousin) desire no less than I. Salute I pray you in my name your
wife, your wives Mother, and your Uncle.

Your dear and loving Cousin CATHARINE.

Whereas the Queen complains in these letters, that she is in great sorrow
and grief, and notes also many authors of troubles, she speaks of the
Guises, and his fellows: whom notwithstanding she durst not openly resist,
neither yet take part with the Prince of Conde. And whereas she says that
she trusts it will shortly come to pass that she shall see him face to
face, the occasion was this: when nothing went forward neither by letters, nor
yet by messengers sent from one to another, the Queen made peticion to the
Prince of Conde that he would come and talk with the King of Nauar, to the
intent they might have mutual conference of the Communication be twene the
Queen the King of Nauar, and the Prince of Conde.
whole matter, and might devise some way for peace and concord. The Prince of
Conde yielded to the request: the place and time, for their meting was
appointed: namely the first of June. At which time the Queen, the King of
Nauar, and the Prince of Conde met together, in the Region of Beausse, in the
mid way between Paris, and Orleans. At this their meeting they commoned of
many things, of the which we will speak hereafter, as they were publicly
put down in writing by the Prince of Conde. The Queen durst not grant any
thing to the Prince of Conde, neither did the king of Nauar, his brother, show
himself any whit tractable or friendly. Where upon they brake of and departed
without any profit by their meeting and conference: their minds being thereby
not a little exasperated, and grudge raised against one another. The Queen and
the King of Nauar, plainly denied to the Prince of Conde the removing of the
Guises and his adherents from the Court, and the observation of the Edicte of
January, throughout the whole Realm: the which two things were the principal
points of the petition of the Prince of Conde.

Therefore the Prince of Conde, when he was returned Letters of the Prince of
Conde to the Queen.
again to Orleans, and had told the whole matter to his confederats, sent
letters to the Queen the xi. day of June, certifying her, that according to
her commandment he had declared the whole matter to all those that were his
adherents, and had conferred with them concerning the finding out, and devising
ways for peace and concord. Who, when they had wisely wayed and considered all
things, gave their sentence thus: That there could be no firm or certain
ways for peace and concord devised, so long as the contrary part their
enemies, beset the King and her with soldiers; and ruled them both by
violence: insomuch that not only all hope to pacify things is taken away
thereby, but also good occasion is offered unto us to fear, least all things
wa^e much worse than they now be: seeing that they, upon whom the King and
Queen do wholely depend, do under the pretense of the Kings name and
authority, seek to work their wills, and do accuse men of those things
whereof they themselves are most of all guilty. Therefore (says he) they
earnestly desire of you, that you would not take it in evil part, if they abide
in that their former p^rpose seeing they have now put them selves in Armor to
defend them selves from the force of those enemies, least in very deed they,
which have declared them selves to be enemies, should be also Judges of the
cause in controversy. For it was never seen in any assembly that when any
matter is objected against many men, they should by absence not be^ suffered to
have their cause to be judged and examined. Is it meet that they should be
absent, specially at that time when matters of so great weight come in
question, as when they are burdened to be enemies to the glory of God, to the
Kings liberty and authority, and also to the common peace? Whereas they are
maintainers thereof, and their accusers of such enemies. Wherefore, they say,
except they may be permitted to come in presence to clear them selves of these
crimes, there is no other way to be looked for than by force of Arms.

Also whereas you said, being first taught of those enemies, that it could not
be that ye Edict of January should be observed, the people being armed to break
the same, it seems to them to be no less unreasonable than the other. For
what can be more unreasonable than this, that the common sort of people should
not only defend these opinions, without law to maintain the same, but also
being of all the Kings subjects the very rascal sort, should put on Armor
both to break the Kings Edictes, and also to rule and govern the King at
their pleasure? Notwithstanding, this they know, that seeing that Edict was
made and established by a notable and singular assembly of Noble, wise, and
learned men, after that matters on both parts were wisely considered of, the
Nobillitie of France will not suffer themselves to have such ignominy, neither
yet strangers to break the Kings Edicts, and to make new Edicts at their own
pleasure. These things being of her wisely considered, she may judge whether it
be meet that the consciences of the kings faithful subjects should be tied to
the wills of factious men, and of the outrageous multitude: or what concord is
to be hoped for of them, which took away all power of government from the
Queen her self: and whether it be to be suffered that they should have the
Kings power at their commandment any longer, which seek to appresse those
that defend and mayntaine the Kings authority and his laws. Finally she may
judge whether it be more meet that they go home to their own houses, or
whether by their presence, they bring the kings State into peril: the which
all men see they will sooner do, than they will loose on jot of their wills.
The which notwithstanding he says he trusts to let with the help of God the
mayntainer and defender of all right. And to conclude, seeing there was no
other way to breed peace and concord, than for the Guises and his adherents to
depart from the Court, he prayed the Queen, that she would bring the same to
pass, the necessity of ye time, greatly requiring the same.

He wrote Letters also to his Brother the King of Nauar, to this effect.
ALTHOUGH, (says he) I might long ago see some part of those calamities, which
I now see to be imminent: yet notwithstanding I may truly affirm this, that I
now see far greater miseries, than ever I feared would come to pass. For both
the conscience and testimony of the integrity of the reformed Churches, and al
so, of the natural and loving inclination that I have seen to be in you,
beside the testimony of all my actions, had persuaded me that you, (they which are the authors of those troubles being compared with me, whom God has so
advanced to honor that I am your own natural brother) would rather follow
the love of brotherly conjunction, than the subtle persuasions of those which
never sought for any thing but their own advancement, and your destruction.
And truly I am not altogether without hope of the same, what occasion so ever
at this time I have to think to the contrary. And for this cause alone I have
now written unto you my letters, not so much with pen and ink as with tears
distilling from mine eyes.

For what can happen unto me more lamentable and sorrowful, than to understand
that you should be a sworn enemy unto him, which would be the first that would
adventure his body to defend you from harm: that you should go about to take
away his life, which came of the same parents that you came of, and which will
never refuse most gladly to spend his life for your preservation? Consider I
pray you, and diligently wey with your self, whether there ca^ be any thing,
which ought to move you to so great hatred against nature. If the matter be
for religion, there is no man that can better judge tha^ you, whether it be
meet and convenient, to violat and break the bond of nature and humanity
for religion, which the very Barbarians will never do. Although ye cannot
embrace and receive all the points of our Religion, yet notwithstanding I am
fully persuaded of this, that your nature and disposition is such, that you do
abhor so great and horri ble cruelties committed against us, so far you are
from being the author and cause thereof. If the matter concern the Kings
dignity and authority, who is there, next after you and your children, to
whom the government more appertains, than unto me? Judge (I heartily pray
you) who is most careful for the state, whether he that offers all lawful
conditions, to have the matter quieted, or they which had rather bring al
things into present peril and danger, than to forsake their armor which most
vniust^y they have put on, and to follow peace which they have ungodly
forsaken. Judge I beseech you, if the matter came thereunto, that they had
destroyed them whom they perceive to resist their ambition, in what state
should the kingdom then stand, the keeper and protector whereof you are, and
of what power you should be of, to defend and preserve the same. If the matter'
concern your dignity, you may call to mind what manner of persons they are,
which scarce two years since, were not contented not only to take away your
dignity, but sought your life also. And whether they have since that time
changed their minds, I cannot tell, time truly will reveal: but thus much I
protest for my self, that the obedience which I owe unto you, I will perform
and show while life does last: upon condition that he may be made equal with
those, which are neither so near unto you by blood, nor yet so borne to obey
you, as he is. Nevertheless you shall grant me leave to be ignorant how they
can be your friends, who are not content again to seek to put your brother to
death, except thye make you the minister and instrument of their hatred. But
wey and consider that I have spoken these things, not for mine own cause, but
for the glory of Gods sake, for the love of my country, and in respect of you:
before you proceed any further to set upon him, which by the bond of nature is
no less careful and loving unto you, than you are to your self: for as by the
leave of God he will never cease to do his duty unto you, even so he had
rather suffer death, than to wish those calamities which will follow this
contention, which way soever the victory shall incline. But and if the authors
of these troubles, which ought to submit them selves to reason and equity, do
prosecute their counsels, being not restrained by you to whom God has given
authority: we trust (by the help of God, the defense of whose glory we will
seek to the shedding of the last drop of our blood) that you shall behold that
event, which shall evidently declare unto you the ends of all their counsails:
and shall also certify you how faithful a heart not only I, but this whole
assembly also have borne to you next unto, God and the King and Queen.

The Prince of Conde sent with his letters also the sum of his petitions
briefly contained in writing, in manner and form following.

I think (says he) that these are convenient and necessary means and ways to
avoid the perturbations and troubles which hang over the realm: the which I
propound by the leave of the King and Queen, For so much as, before they began
their counsel, which were the first that put themselves in armor, and which
as yet keep the King in their custody by force of arms, all this whole
realm began to enjoy peace and tranquillity, concerning religion: men of both
sorts of religion thinking themselves in very good case by the benefit of the
Edicte made in the month of January last past, with ye advise and consent of
the Princes the kings kinsmen, of the Kings Counsel, and by the consent of
all the most notable men of all the kingdom: and experience will show that
without the observation of that Edict, there cannot be peace and concord kept
among the kings subjects. First of all I require this, that the same Edicte of
January, according to the form thereof, be observed and kept without
alteration of the same, until the determination of another Parliament: or
until such time as the King himself by lawful age shall be able to take upon him
the government of the Realm, and to order the matter according to his own
discretion: to whom I and my Co^federates do yield ourselves in such wise to
obey, that if it should please the King to take from us the benefit of the
reformed Religion, we would also alter our purpose and obey.

Secondly, that al violent acts on both parts committed since the time that
they put themselves in armor, may be punished: and that whatsoever has been
done and constituted since that time, may be quite abolished and taken away:
because the minds of the King and Queen were and are captiued by the Guises.

And because the coming of the Guises, of the Constable, and of the Marshal of
S. Andrewe, into the Court, and many of their deeds which they did, are the
only causes of these tumults: I can see no other way to bring peace and concord
then to have the^ to depart from the Court. The which I desire, not for that, I
for my own part bear unto the^ any evil will: but to the end the King, and
Queen may have their liberty: that the Queen may have her authority in
governing the kingdom: that the Edictes may be observed: and that there may be
some con sideration and regard had of me, and of those which attend upon me,
and of all the reformed Churches, which otherwise stand in great fear. I
desire therefore yt the Guises, the Constable, and the Marshall of S. Andrew may
lay aside their armor: and that they may go home to their own Lordships,
until the king come to more perfect age. And I promise that I and they which
are with me shall do the like. And to the end the matter may be seen to be
spoken in good faith, I will give my Eldest Son in hostage, and all the rest of
my children, to be most precious pledges of my faithful meaning. These are the
most equal and indifferent pledges, that I could devise. And I protest that I
will put away all causes of debate and enmity that appertayned to me and the
Guises, for the king and Queens sake. The which Conditions, if they be
rejected, I sai and affirm (the which also I have oftentimes protested) that
not I but they are the authors of al those calamities and miseries, which by
reason of all these Civil wars have happened unto me, who have rejected
these conditions to the present peril of the kingdom.

The fyfth Book of Commentaries concerning the state of the common wealth, and
Religion in France under the reign of King Charles the ninth.
THESE peticions and admonitio^s of the Prince of Conde, to co^corde took no
place, but were lightly regarded: whereby the matter daily waxed worse and
worse. The queen could neither retain her authority, neither did she care at
the length to have the same. And whereas at the first she was drawn away from
the Prince of Conde, through fear, she became now through effeminate rashness,
and inconstancy, a bitter enemy to him and his cause. The King of Nauar,
being utterly blinded and bere^t of judgment, was so inflamed with wrath, and
great indignation against his brother, and his adherents, and also against the
reformed Churches, as though he had never heard any thing concerning the truth,
neither yet had had experience of the minds of the Guises.

Therefore he was wholely led and carried by the Guises, whethersoeuer they would
have him: who, to make him more sure, on their side, ins^ared him with harlots,
and with other intiseing vain pleasures, in the which they perceived the King
of Nauar, to have most delight. The beginning of civil wars.
He therefore fulfilling the minds of the Guises in every point, stoutly
thondred out the Kings authority against the Prince of Conde, and his fellows.
These were the first beginninges of this Civil war: the kingedome and the
Church of God being cast into great extremities* So greatly may the subtle
devises of ungodly men disturb the society of the godly: unless the
providence of God do govern the event, and pronide a prosperouse end, amiddest
so great outrage.

There were certain letters brought in the kings name to the Prince of Conde
and to his fellows, the which promised peace unto them after a sort upon these
co^dicions, The conditions of peace offered by the king to the faithful.
namely: If the Prince of Conde and his fellows, according to their former
commandment from the king, would out of hand unarm themselves: and would
yield up into the Kings power their cities. The which if they would do, the
Guises, the Constable, and the Martial of S. Andrewe, promised (as they had
also done before) that they would go home to their houses. Also, that the King
of Nauar should have at his commandment all manner of Artillery, and should
take and choose out of the army of the Prince of Conde, for the use of the King
and the realm, whatsoever seemed good unto him. To these things if they would
yield and grant, the King would forgive and pardon their offense in putting
themselves in armor: and would leave to every man the free use of Religion, so
that every man should live peaceably at home, without receiving of any hurt for
Religion. This was don the twelueth day of June, the Martial Vielle and the
aarle Villarius, being sent with ye letters for this matter.

To these letters the Comparteners of the Prince of Conde made this answer.
First, We render all humble The petitions of the faithful.
thanks to your Majesty, for that you seem to have so great a care and
consideration for our peace and safety: But whereas it is thought that the
putting of our armor, would be a great cause of the same, it seems too us
otherwise, for yt you stand in need of our aid against those which seek the
destruction of you, of your realm, and of your faithful subietces. For by
these means we may seek to restore your Majesty and your mother too that
liberty and authority which ye had, before the Duke of Guise came into the
Court. It seems unto us at this time, yt neither you nor your mother are at
liberty, as may be perceived by the effects. This we request, that the Edict
of January may be generally observed and kept throughout the Realm: that in
certain places in the which there is most danger of sedition, the faithful
may have leave to have their Temples within the Cities, that the Guises, the
Constable, and the Marshiall of S. Andrew, may depart from the Court: and that
they come not into the same again, nor have any manner of govern meant of the
kingdom during the Kings minority. Also, that whatsoever has been done by the
kings counsel, from that time since the which the Guises have kept the King
and Queen in their custody by force of arms, may be boyd and of none effect.
Furthermore, we request, that the Cardinal of Ferrar, a pr^uoker and mouer of
wars, may forthwith depart the Realm, and speed him to Rome: and that he
certefie the Pope, that if he will appoint a common counsel, either at Lions,
Auinion, or Bezance, they were ready by the Kings leave to come to that
Counsel.

But whereas it is said that we shall have pardon for putting on armor, there
seems to us no cause why we should need any pardone. Since we have not horn
armor against the king but for the King: yea we are sofarre from deserving
blame herefore, that we rather deserve all commendation, praise, and reward:
Which shall well appear to the King when he comes to that rypenesse of
years that he may judge of our merits and well deserving, until which time
we desire that the writings of the Prince of Conde, and of the Triumuiri, might
be registered in all the Courts of Paris. Moreover, it seems not necessary
unto us that Triumuiri are these three, Guise, the Constable, and the Marshi
all of Saint Andrew.
any manner of artillery should be taken away: only it is necessary to bring
to pass that the Triumuiri, which are the authors and causes of the war and
these troubles, do lay aside their armor: for we desire nothing more than
peace. As for the Cities which we have fortified, we do and will ever
acknowledge them to be the Kings. And we utterly mislike that the Triumuiri
sold bring into the Realm any foreign power.

Wherefore we desire not that the armies of foreign Princes be brought into the
realm: but that they would only be suerties for the performance of the
Conditions. Therefore we desire the Emperor, the Princes Electors, the Queens
of England and Scotland, the King of Spain, the common wealth of Vennize, and
the Switzers, to give their warrantise and suertiship for the performance of
these condi^ions.

These things notwithstanding were attempted in vain, men's minds on both
sides being inflamed to wars. The Prince of Conde and those of his side,
trusted to the goodness of their cause, howbeit they sought all that they
could for peace and concord, although both in number and also in courage,
they far exceeded their adversaries, persuading themselves to have the
victory. The Guises and his fellows, greatly leaned to the Kings authority,
and had in their custodye the Kings treasure: So that what with their own
subtle practices, and what with the help of the King of Nauar, they brought
many things to pass. For ye kings name and authority carries with it such a
majesty and reverence throughout the whole Realm of France, as ever the name
of a king has done or may, in any Kingdom: the subjects having in them, a
certain natural love, as it were ingraffed. By which name how greatly the
Guises, have prevailed, experience has taught. The Guises also were helped by
the Spaniards, by the Italians, and by the Swizers, whose help the Guises
required, even when they took their counsel first to begin wars. The
Guises had also on their part the City of Paris, the Senate, the people, and
many other great and mighty Cities: So that they were very strong on both
parts, insomuch that all things considered, it was not easy to be di^erned
which was the stronger part. At this first beginning the Prince of Conde and
his part, were both in number and courage far surpassing the Guises: but the
Guises and his adherents exceeded the other part in policy and subtle
sleightes. Notwithstanding God did so moderate and order the whole matter,
least the victory one the on^ part being to great, both the Kingdom should be
brought to great calamity, and also the Church to extreme ruin and
destruction. Herein therefore most miraculously appeared the great providence
of God, in afflicting his servants, and yet notwithstanding saving them from
destruction: and in punishing the great outrage of the whole Kingdom, and yet
not utterly overthrowing the same.

The Guises therefore perceived that they must needs stop and repress the
proceedings of the Prince of Conde and his ad^erents, with whom they had not
ben equal if they had joined battle: and also intended to shift of the
courageous forwardnes of the Prince of Condes Arm^e by subtle means, until
they had the help of these Strangers whom they looked for: To bring y^ which
their purpose to pass, the vehement inclination of the Prince of Conde to
peace, did greatly help them.

While the fa^hfull were in good hope one while to have peace, another while to
have victory, by daily rumors, and the Cities being more negligently kept than
they were wont to be, certain of them were lost: as Angeu and Caloniu^, and
others, the which were at the first counted but small losses: but afterward
great losses, as the faithful found.

Now seeing there ensued no fruit of the communication had between the Prince
of Conde, the Queen, and the King of Nauar, (as we have before declered) both
Armies prepare themselves to take their journey. The Army of the Guises was
neither very great in number, nor yet furnished with many expertsouldiers. There
were certain bands of soldiers footmen, gathered out from among the rascal
sort of people of Paris, which were so raw that they were feign to be taught
even the first principles of Martial feats: and among th^se were many popish
Priests, which had obtained leave from the Pope and of the Bishops to go to
the war. And as for horsemen, they had scarce one whole army: many of the
Noble Captains being with the Prince of Conde.

The chiefest part of the Garrisons of soldiers, which were appointed to defend
the strong holds in diverse parts of the Realm, were called home to help the
Guises: of the which a great number stale away secretly to the Prince of Conde.

The Army of the Prince of Conde was the greater in number, the most
courageous, and the best appointed. The greatest and most principal part of
the Nobillitie being very well appointed and furnished both with courage and
armor, and a great multitude of soldiers coming unto him from all parts of
the Realm almost: ye which was divided into three parts. The first part
consisted of Uascones, of the which Monure Grammuntiu^ was general. The second
of Oscitanes, and of the Inhabitants of Dolpheny, of whom Monsure Rohainus was
Captain. The third consisted of those Inhabitants of France, that are called
Franci, in Latin, of which the Andelot was Captain: who notwithstan ding was
made the Captain general of all the footmen. Concerning field pieces or
great Goonnes, the enemy had great abundance, whereof the Prince of Conde had
small stoore: which either he had taken at Orleans, or else were cast of purpose
for him.

The common Counsel and consent of all men was to go to Paris with all their
power, being the chief Me tropolitane City, and the head of their enemies,
and to assault the same.

Notwithstanding, the Guises removed their Army from Paris: commandment
being first of all given by the King of Nauar, that all those which profess
the reformed Religion, should depart out of the City with in three days. And
then they came to Stapulas, toward Orleans.

The Prince of Conde also removed from Orleans, with all his Army, the twenty
of June, to meet the enemy. Then sent the Queen Letters to the Prince of
Conde, entreating and persuading him to peace and concord, upon indifferent
and reasonable conditions. The Prince of Conde always desiring peace, sent
Letters back again, and was contented to come to Parley. Whereupon truce was
taken for six days. Then the King of Nauar wrote to his brother ye Prince of
Conde more lovingly than he was wont to do, and desired of him to have for
himself and his family only a City lying near to the river Loyer, called,
Bogencia, which City was kept with Garrisons of the Prince of Conde: the which
he desired but upon this condition, that if they did not conclude upon peace,
he would yield it into his hands again. The Queen also came into the army
of the Guises, and wrote to the Prince of Conde very louinge and friendly The
Guises under the color of peace seek to deceive the Prince of Conde.
letters, desiringe him earnestly, to come and talk with her. By reason hereof
it was commonly reported through out the whole army of the prince of Conde,
that there should be peace: the Guises intending nothing less, but a farther
mischi^fe, as the event afterward declared. The Prince of Conde, in the time of
the truce, talked oftentimes with the Queen, and with his Brother the King of
Nauar.

Then the Prince of Conde, when he had told his fellows that the Queen had
promised him that the Guises and his adherentes should forthwith depart to
their own houses, and unarm themselves, upon condition that he himself
should come unto her as a pleadge, for the confirming of the peace that should
be concluded, when I say he had reported these things to his fellows, he
crediting the same, persuaded his fellows to give him leave to bring this
thing to pass, that he might seem, to leave nothing undone that might breed
peace and concord. To the which they granted, making this request in manner and
form followinge.

Before the matter proceed, let the Guises, the Constable Momorentius, and the
Marshall of saint Andrewe, depart home to their own houses: immediately after
the which departing, we desire that the Prince of Conde may remain and abide
in the hands of the Queen, and of his Brother the king of Nauar, as a hostage
and pleadge of our faith: promising with one consent, that we will gladly, and
readily obey al things that shall be commanded us to do, which concern our
obedience, and duty to the king, the profit and commodity of the Realm,
and the conservation of our lives and goods: but specially for the glory of
God, and the liberty of our consciences.

Then was this request, which the adherentes of the Prince, of Conde had made,
brought to the Queen with letters: and o^t of hand, the same night, al to
soon, it was subscribed by ye Prince of Conde and the rest of his friends, and
solemnly also subscribed by the King of Nauar, and sealed with the Kings seal:
and then it was sent back again with letters, by which the Queen and the King
of Nauar declared yt they liked very well of the condicio^s. This return was
made the four and twentye day of June, being the last day of the truce taken:
at which time notable occasion was offered to the Prince of Conde, to anoie,
and gaul his enemies. The Guise go home to their houses, and the Prince of
Conde became pledge.


Notwithstanding he attempted no manner of force, because of the letters that
came in the mean time. The six and twenty day following, the Guises, the
Constable, and the Marshall of Saint Andrew, departed from their Camps. And by
and by word was brought to the Prince of Conde, that those three, according to
the form of the peticion, were departed from their army home to their houses.
When the Prince of Conde understood this, he came to the King of Nauar, to
Baugence, with a few only attending upon him.

Whereupon he was brought through the midst of the host, in all the have to a
village called Talsiac, where the Queen aboade: and between Baugence, and that
Uillage Talsiac, were placed certain Garrisons of soldiers. When he came to the
Queen, he was of her very louingelye entertained, and had many fair promises
made him: and by request easily obtained leave of her, that certain of his
fellows might come unto that place: both to the end they might salute her, and
also that they might confer and talk together concerning concord The
practice of the Guises to take the Prince of Conde.
and peace. In the mean time word was brought to the friends, and fellows of
the Prince of Conde, that the Guises, the Constale, and the Marshall of Saint
Andrew, abode still at Chastellodune, which was not far distant from Talsia
where the Queen and the Prince of Conde abode: and certain letters also of
the Dukeeof Guise to the Cardinal of Loraine his Brother, were taken by the
way, and brought to them: Of which letters this is the sum word for word as
they were written.

I send unto you this messenger in all have possible, to certefie you that all
things were yesterday finished. And They mean the Queen, and the King of
Nauar.
know you this also for certain, that many are blinded and deceived very much.
Our Mother, and her brother, swear that they will not forsake us: and that
they will follow no other Counsel than the Counsel of such whom you know.
To be short, the reformed Religion, if we behave our selves wisely (as we mean
to do) will have a fall: Ye and our Admiral shall have evil success. All our
power remains still whole, but theires is broken and dispersed: our Cities
are rendered up again, without any manner of mention of preaching or of the
administration of Sacraments. This messenger which I send un to you is trusty.

There came also to the hands of the Prince of Conde by ye means of one of the
king of Nauars household servant, a note in writing of the Duke of Guises,
left with the King of Nauar for a remembrance: to this effect.

Let there be no obligation made for Religion: See that the pledge be kept in
any wise: Concerning the rendering up of the Cities, let there be no delay:
Order the matter wisely: Suffer them in no wise to come any nearer to Orleans:
Let us be diligently certefied and admonished of all things.

These forewarnings greatly troubled the Prince of Conde and his adherents:
they saw that he was fallen into the hands of his enemies: so that there was
great danger on every side. Notwithstanding his friends thinking it not good
to delay the matter, and to suffer ye Prince to be in peril, when they had
given the Captains charge to be vigilant, and to have their soldiers in a
redines, came to the Queen. The principal whereof The nobles of the Prince of
Co^des side went to the Queen.
were these, the Admiral, the Andelot, Monsuer Porcia, Monsuer Rochfocald,
Monsuer Rohan, Monsuer Genluis, Monsuer Grammontius, Monsuer Soubizius, and
Monsuer Piennius.

These saluted the Queen, and were very lovingly entertained of her: She gave
unto them thanks, for their great diligence and pains for her and the kings
prifite at that time: insomuch that she said they had pre served her life and
the kings: ye which their merits deserving honor, and price, the said, she
would never or get.

Then they declared to the Queen, with what fidelity they had served the King
with their body and goods, under the Prince of Conde: they showed unto her the
equity of their cause, which at that time was in controversy: and their
earnest care also which they had for The communicatio^ between the queen and
the Nobles.
the preservation of the kings dignity, and the peace and profit of the
whole Realm. Whereupon they most heartily prayed and beseeched the Queen,
that they might not prefer the immaginations of a few men, before those
things which appertayned to the glory of God, and the safety of the Realm:
For God (say they) will defend every good cause, and severely punish all kind
of wickedness, which are committed against the Kings Edicts, abusing the Kings
name thereunto. For himself also the Prince of Conde protested, that it seemed
very strange unto him, yt some should be had in such estimation, and no regard
at all to be had of him, which was not only near of kin to the king, whereas
the other were strangers, and but servants to the king, but also had offered
all manner of indifferent conditions and submission. Wherefore he said it was
now high time to provide some remidies to resist and repel those calamities at
hand.

The Queen being before instructed concerning every thing what answer she
should make, began, not to answer to those things which were spoken by the
Prince of Conde, but to declare: That the number, power, The queen denies the
use of the reformed Religion.
and authority of those was very great which followed and embraced the Church
of Room: and they have the sword in their hands (says she) and are fully
determined to defend that Religion, which all former kings have received and
embraced: so that they mean this shall be the principal condition among the
rest, for concord and peace: That there be no other Religion observed and
followed throughout the whole Realm, than the Catholic Religion of Room.

But the Prince of Conde in ye name of ye rest, replied, that they did not
plead their own private cause: but whatsoever had been done by them until that
day, was done first for the defense of the kings liberty and authority, and
secondly for a common wealth: and herevppon they put themselves in armor at
the first by the Queens commandment: for the which cause, they did not care
if they spent their goods and lives, so that the kings Edict might be observed
and kept, whereby every man might have leave to use the reformed Religion, and
the liberty of their conscience: without the benefit whereof, they thought
them selves to be but dead.

Insomuch, that if they in whom so great a number of faithful did repose their
trust for the handling of these matters, should so much ouershoote themselves,
and forget their duty, that they should agree to those things which were so
repugnant to the glory of God, and the common profit of all men, it could not
be avoided but that they should be counted of all men forsakers and contemners
of the glory of God, of the kings dignity and safety, and of the common peace
and tranquillity of ye realm. The which, rather then it should come to pass,
should cause them to forsake ye realm, before they would agree to those so
unjust and severe conditions. And if their departure out of the realm, might
remedy the matter, he beseeched the Queen, that there might be no regard or
consideration had of them but of public peace and quietness.

The Prince of Conde had oftentimes used these words: Let there be no
consideration had of me, I would gladly bring to pass that by my exile the
kingdom might be in peace, and the use of the reformed Religion restored. And
the Queen even of purpose had entised and provoked the Prince of Conde, she
having the Triumuiri, her School masters, to use these words. Therefore, the
Queen having feet occasion offered her, answered, That she had always the
Prince of Conde and the rest in as great estimation, The queen would have the
Prince of Conde and his friends banished,
as became her. But for so much as the matter was come to this point, that such
remedies must be used as she wished not, to her great grief, yet
notwithstanding, because of the present necessity, she said, she received that
condition, namely, that they should forthwith depart the Realm, by whose
absence the minds of the Bishopps would be the better pacified, and so the
Realm should be at peace and quietness. And she would (she said) make
generally and particularly to every man such assurance for their peace and
safety, as they could desire.

The Prince of Conde and his fellows wonderinge greatly at these words of the
Queen, which they looked not for, said at the length, that they had respect
unto others as well as to themselves, whose advise they would have. But the
Queen prosecuted her former talk saying, that so the common wealth should be
greatly profited: and there are some says she, that threaten to prolong the
kings minority, until he come to the age of one and twenty, if so be need
should require to resist their violence, she was persuaded (she said) that the
Prince of Conde and the rest of his friends, would come and help the King,
although he were never so far of.

Thus they made an end for this day. And the Queen came to Talsiac. The day
following there came a Messenger betymes in the morning to the Prince of Conde,
from the Queen, with short letters, which made mention of the communication
had the day before, and of the concluding of the same: for the which cause she
said she would have him come unto her. Then the Prince of Co^de and his
fellows, came to the Queen: and when he had talked with her a while, seeing
that the time of his abode with her was not limited: and seeing also that he
could bring nothing to pass as he would, he prayed the Queen that he and his
fellows might have leave to return back again to their army: for so much
as also he perceived that those perleyings wanted not the accustomed treasons
of his adversaries. And thus ye Prince The Prince of Conde returned to his army
of Conde the same day returned again to his army: who very joyfully
received him, notwithstanding the soldiers was almost displeased, that the
Prince of Conde came into so great peril, with the common consent of all the
Nobles: saying that those parleyes should be needful no more: and that the
policy of the adversaries, was not perceived and seen, who go about to
detract and delay the the time, to the end they may increase their power with
forreyne help, to set upon us, whom they now fear. We for slow (say they)
the advantage when it is offered: Where we had rather suffer any extremity,
than to have these delays. Let us set upon the enemy, and contend no more
with words, but with the dynte of sword.

And in very deed, if the Prince of Conde had brought his army at the first
to Paris, being so well appointed, and of so great courage, there had been great
hope of victory. But these delays, through parleying, did both abate the
number and also the courage of the soldiers: where as the enemy thereby
greatly increased his power.

The Guises hearing of this, returned with all speed The Guises remove their
army from Bogencia, and take Blesa, and Towers.
to their hoaste, and were not a little grieved that the Prince of Conde was so
escaped their hands. And because they thought it necessary, they removed their
host secretly in the night from Baugence, leaving there only certain garrisons
of Soldiers to defend the same. The day following they assaulted Blais,
being a Noble City, which wanted sufficient power to defend the same, because
the enemy came unlooked for: This they took, and put a great number of men to
the sword. From thence they went to Towers, and sought to have the same
rendered unto them: the which when they had taken by surrender, they spoiled:
and horrible slaughter was committed by the Papists in the same town against
the faithful. Men and women without any respect of age were drowned in the
River by shipfulls. And diverse also were beheaded.

These sudden, and unlooked for rumors, stayed the Prince of Conde: also the
great and huge stoare of rain which fell in that Region, being of it self
very deep and foul, made the Prince of Conde to alter his purpose and to
leave following the enemy: For there was no joining of battle by reason of
the foulness and dyrtinesse of the Country, the time rather serving to assalt
and besiege Cities. Wherefore, he determined to reserve his power, until
better occasions were offered: The Prince of Conde returns to Orleans with
his* army.
and so returned to Orleans again with his whole Army.

About this time well near, the Aumal, brother to the Duke of Guise, assalted
Roan in Normandy, and battered a very strong and well fenced Castle, commonly
called the Castle of Saint Catherin, with great store of ordinance: but he
prevailed not, but had evil success, the City being stoutly defended by the
soldiers in the town, Moruilleirs a noble man, being their Captain. Therefore
the sixteen day of the seege, the Duke Aumale with out his purpose, removed
his host from Rhoane, and Roan besie ged in vain by the Aumale.
departed, with loss of a great number of his Soldiers at this seege.

At Lions, and about the utmost regions, as Dolpheny, Burgundy, and the
province of Langres, the faithful were diversely vered and troubled. In
Burgundy, the loss of Chalon (which in old time was called Cabilo) was the
occasion that many other Towns also were lost: Tauuanies the vicegerent of
that province, having always, at every occasion an army ready and appointed
to fight. Matisco was kept and defended by the garrison of soldiers of Lions,
whose Captain was Mombrun. This Mombrun. giving to the Soldiers in the night a
watch word or sign to depart, stale away by ship and left the City, and came
to Lions. Then Tauan, easily took the City of Matisco, being quite void of
defense. Herevppon all Burgundy, yielded to the Pope.

In Province, which is a Region nere unto the Meditaran Sea, the faithful were
very evil entreated and murdered. Before the first motions of this Civil war,
there was stirred up a greuouse sedition, the chief author and Captain
whereof was one Flacean, a desperate person, who had gotten unto him a band of
wicked and lewd men: the which sedition, notwithstanding, was easily
repressed by Monsuer Cursol, who^ the King sent for the same purpose, and by
the help of the reformed churches, notwithstanding that Monsuer Sommeriue, the
gouerners Son of Province, and many Noble men, and diverse other in authority,
for because of the Guises, assisted those lewd persons. Nevertheless, the
Gouerner of Province, Count de Tend of Sauoy, openly maintained the faithful
and being oftentimes assaulted by his Son, came in great peril of his life.
Therefore Monsuer Sommeriue, so soon as he heard that wars should begin,
fortyfied the Cities of greatest trust, as Marseile, Aiigues, and others,
gathered together so great an army as he could, and every where evil
entreated the faithful. Thus the matter daily waxing worse and worse, and
both parts being bent to battle, the faithful also gathered an Army, with
no small number of soldiers and captained* but they had small store of great
goonnes, and of cities, out of which they were excluded by the subtle practices
of the papists. Their Captains were these, Monsuer Cardet, Monsuer Bari,
Monsuer Panard, and Monsuer Mouans, a very good and expert captain. These
marching forth with their armies came to Pertus, and beseeged the same, and for
want of great goonnes, they intended to vndermind the city. Notwith standing
when they heard of the coming of their enemies, which in deed were mani mo in
number, they raised their seege, and came to Cesteron, which at that time they
themselves possessed. But while Monsuer Sommeriue, intended to follow and
pursue them, behold he got a new occasion to commit great wickedness. There
was at Auinion (which was a town belonging to the Popes jurisdiction or
territory, and of great wealth) a certain man called Fabricius Cerbello of
Bononia, being Governor of the same town, expert in the wars, and the
Bishop of Romes Nephew, and a mortal enimye to the reformed religion. This man
entreated Monsuer Sommeriue by his letters, that, for so much as he had already
an army prepared, he would come out of hand to Orange (which is a Noble city,
and the Lordship or seignorie of the house of Nassau) to the which there came
daily a great multitude of Huguenotes, who unless they were oppressed even at
the very first, not only Auinion, which bordered upon the same, should be
endammaged, but also all Prouence, should thereby receive great detriment.
Therefore by this man's advise and counsel* Mon sieur Sommeriue marched with his
army toward Orange, and had this occasion offered unto him, easily to assault
the same.

Monsieur Parpalia of Auinion, Lord chief Justice of the Parliament of Orange,
returning from Lions, was taken at Bourg, which is a town in Languedoc, near
un Orange assaulted and taken by the papists.
to the river called the Rosne, the inhabitants of the same town being sworn
enemies to the reformed religion. Therefore, to deliver and redeem this
Parpalia, the inhabitants of Orange, and the borderers thereabouts, leaving a
small garrison to keep the City, came in battle array to Bourg. Whereupon
the army of Monsieur Someriue, being aided with many of Dolpheny and Auinio^,
whose Captain was Monsieur Suze, a notable enemy to the reformed Religion,
besieged the City of Orange, being void of men to defend the same: battered
the walls thereof with ordinance, the which being shaken down, they easily
obtained the City. After the taking whereof the furiouse and outragiouse
soldier, exercised al manner of cruelty upon the poor inhabitants. For beside
the accustomed cruelty used in wars, and at the raising and overthrowing of
cities, as rapines, forcing of women, and the deflowring of virgins, they used
a new kind of torture* as by casting down the prisoners from Turrets and other
high places, the soldiers in the mean time watching the fall, that they might
receive them upon the tops of their spears, and points of their swoords.
They used also to hang up men with their heels upward, boaring holes through
their feet for the thouges and tie ropes to hold by. And after this they burnt
and destroyed the chiefest and principal buildings in the city.

The victory being in this wise gotten, the army by and by marched to
Cesteron, which we said before the faithful possessed: and determined to give
the assault upon the City. Notwithstanding after certain days, they hearing
of the coming of the army of Monsieur Sorez and Mone^s, with other necessary
aids and helps, they raised their sieg and departed without their purpose.

The loss and destruction of the city of Orange brought great terror and
fear upon all that Region, and upon the Inhabitants there abouts: but
especially to all Dolpheny: Monsieur de Suze (of whom mention is made before)
abiding still also about that Region after the departure of Monsieur Sommeriue,
with a prepared army, playing the mortal enemy, and was of great might and
The army of Suze in Dolpheny greatly anoyed the faithful.
power, both by the help of the inhabitants of the same country, of whom he
had gathered together a great army by his own authority and also by the aid
of Monsieur Fabricius, governor of Auinion. Where upon he took the Cities
bordering thereabouts, some yielding up themselves without assault, and some
being co^ssrayned thereunto by siege, as Pierlot, Mornac, and diverse other
little towns. (All the villages in that Region are walled round about, because
of their often and accustomed wars) and in the territory of Auinion, (which
men call the Countye of Venais) being a very fruitful soil, he wan many
little Towns. For in that Countye the faithful held many of them.

And if he had marched with his army toward Dolpheny, he had won with little
ado, diverse Cities, being slenderly fortefied: all men quaking for fear, and
the cities almost being quite void of men to defend themselves. For at that
time the faythefull were gone to win the city of Puj, in the Region of
Vellay. Notwithstanding at Lions was M. Adretze, at yt instant gouerner of the
city.

This man by his singular diligence and endeavor, having gathered together from
diverse places an Army of men, came from Lions to Montiil, a noble City of
Dolpheny: at whose commandment suldiers came to him from diverse places. For
at that time his name was of such authority throughout all those Regions, that
he might rule and govern as he listed himself, al those places in the which
the faithful abode, as the Provinces of Lions, Dolpheny, and Languedos.
Monsuer de Suze having gotten a great Army, went to besiege the City of
Vauriac in the County of Venais, but being the more bold by reason of the
success that he had at Orange, he was careless and rechlesse in his business.
Therefore he encamped him self near unto the City, and willed the Citizens
to yield up the same unto him. In the mean time, the soldier being careless
talked of the spoil, and of the pray, assuring himself of the same: and the
Captains even as if they already had gotten the victory, began to divide the
spoil among them selves. Also Monsuer de Suze him self, sat wholely unarmed
in his tent playing at the Dyce after he had dyned, and boasted and triumphed
greatly of the pray before the victory. And when the Scouts of the Army cried
out that the enemies were come, Monsuer de Suze made a jest and scorn of the
matter, saying that they went about in vain to deliver the city out of their
hand: notwithstanding he gave commandment to certain under captains which
were with him, to make better enquiry what the matter was, and to command the
soldiers to arm them selves. But he in the mean time followed his play,
till every man began to cry, that the enemy which had ambushed themselves on
the other side of the hill, which lay between them, was come. Therefore at the
length he arose, and commanded the soldiers to set them selves in battle
array: he him self took unto him his Armor: and had scarsely put on his
brestplate, when every man began to cry that the enemy had given the onset
upon the first froont of the battle, which was now constrained to retire and
flee. He therefore in all have, without his helm mounted on horseback, set the
soldiers in their array, ran up and down, and cried out like a mad man so
that all were now on a roar, and at their wits end. Yet nevertheless many
of them stood stoutly unto the battle, so that the sight began to wax fierce
on both parts. Notwithstanding the faithful being under the conduct and charge
of Monsuer de Adretze prevailed, and flew a great number of their enemies. Then
the soldiers of Monsuer de Suze turned their backs and fled before the
faithful. And Monsuer de Suze him self being beset with a certain troop of
horsemen, escaped by flight, but very hardly. Thus when the faithful had
gotten the victory, with loss of a few of their soldiers, where as on the
enemies side two thousand were slain, they took and carried away their tents
and artillary. They took also some of their enemies prisoners, and had it not
ben that they wanted horsemen, few of them had escaped, the soldiers were so
sore moved to wrath by the remembrance of the destruction of Orange.

After this, when Monsure de Adretze, had fortefied U^uriac (which he had now
valiantly defended to the overthrow of the enemy) he went forward, and took
diverse towns, which had yielded them selves to Monsuer de Suze: and then he
came to Auinion, the soldiers The acts of Monsuer de Adretze in Dolpheny, and
in the County of Venais.
of Monsuer de Suze, fleeing from the same with all speed.

There is a certain town in the County of Venais of no great fame, called
Mornac, yet notwithstanding by reason of the cituation of the same, and also
of a Castle belonging thereunto, it is very hard to be woone. This town also
Monsuer de Adretze obtained: but the Castle, the Garrison of soldiers
appointed to keep the same by Monsuer de Suze, held, with two hundred
townsmen also. Yet notwithstanding at the length, partly by force, and partly
by surrender, he enjoyed the Castle, upon condition that the soldiers should
escape with life. But so soon as he was come into the Castle, the men of
Orange which were in the Army, cried out saying that all those soldiers, which
were dismissed with life, were at the winning of Orange, and many of them were
noted to be great shewers of cruelty at that time. The Inhabitants of Mornac
also showed what iniu^ie they had done unto them, and how they had broken their
faith and promise after they had yielded up unto them the city. Then said
Monsuer de Adretze: As they have handeled others so let them be handeled
themselves. Then were they carried into the Castle again, from the top whereof,
to requite the cruelty which they had showed toward the men of Orange, they
were cast down headlong: The like execution was done at Pierlat, when the
soldiers of Monsuer de Adretze had taken a very strong hold that appertayned
to the same. And from hence forth this kind of punishment was used eve ry where
among the enemies. But while these men of whom we spoke before, were cast down
bedlong from the Castle of Mornac, there happened a thing worthy to be
remembered. One being cast down from the Castle, fell by the way by a wild
fig tree which grew to the bank of the Castle, and caught hold of the
same: the which when the lokers on saw, they greatly wondered. But some to
cause him to fall shot at him: Notwithstanding by the earnest entreaty of
certain capitaynes, Monsuer de Adretze granted unto him his life. This
happened in the Month of July. And thus the name of Monsuer de Adretze was a
terror to all those that dwelt there aboutes.

Now the Prince of Conde (as we said before) being returned back again with
his Army to Orleans, the Guises and his adherents having gotten Bla^ and
Towers, and all that Region besides, showed all the cruelty that they could
against the faithful.

The Marshall of S. Andrewe, went with some part The Marshiall of S. Andrew
wins Poictiers.
of the Army to Poictiers: and the same being but slenderly fortefied, he wan.

After the surrender whereof the soldiers showed great extremity, murdering,
spoiling, rauishing, and carrying away men's wives.

There came also, into the host of the Guises great aid The Germans and
Swisers aid the Guises.
from the Swisers, and shortly after that there came an Army of footmen and
horsemen of Germaynes under the conduct and charge of the Rheingraue, and the
Rokendolphe. And they looked for aid out of Spain, and Gascoygne.

In the mean time, the Guises used other means and ways to help and defend
themselves. For by the The decree of the Senate of Paris, against the men of
Orleans.
decree and ordinance of the Senate of Paris, they which had put them selves in
Armoure at Orleans, were proclaimed to have put on the same against the King
and the Realm, and that therefore they were Rebels, and guilty of Treason,
and ought to die, and to have open war pronounced against them. Also that
they ought to be deprived of such dignities as they enjoyed by the King.

Furthermore that they should be made an open shame and a perpetual ignominy
that neither they themselves, nor any of their posterity ever after might bear
any public office under the King. And last of all that their goods should be
confiscate to ye King. But they excepted the Prince of Conde, as though he had
bin constrained to do that which he had done against his will. In like manner
the Guises, sendinge letters to all places but especially into Germany, openly
accused the Prince of Conde and his adherents, to be the authors and de^e^ders
of new and monstrouse opinions: that by this means they might make the
Germans, whose help both they and the Prince of Conde wanted, to take their
part.

The Prince of Conde was hindered many ways. For beside the greuouse
sickness of the pestilence at A grievous pestilence at O^leans.
Orleans, which daily wasted his army, his power was greatly also diminished
by the loss of Cities, and by the increase of his enemies. Also by reason of
the delays of doubtful things in chance, and by the threatenings of the
enemy, which so triumphed of their good luck at the first, and finally
through the danger of the pestilence, a great number of his Soldiers went a
side, and many quight forsook him. Then were fastinges and prayers solemnly
proclaimed to be in the Church, to the which the Prince of Conde came
oftentimes in his own person. He exhorted also his soldiers to be of good
courage: and was very careful for the preservation of Orleans. and he sent
Monsuer de Subize, a noble and wise man, to Lions, to be Lifetenant of the
same, because Monsuer de Adretze seemed to be to rash hardy, and aduenterouse
in his doing^s.

And he sent letters oftentimes, willinge that there should be diligent heed
and care had of Lions, Dolpheny and Languedoc. Also because the enemies power
daily The Prince of Conde craves help of the queen of England and of the
Germane Princes.
increased, by the means, of foreign aids, and because they were the more
stout and bold upon hope of new aid, the Prince of Conde, sent Monsuer de
Stuard a Scot with letters to the Queen of England, requiringe at her hands
aid, in his own name and in the name of his fellows. And he wrote also
diverse letters to the princes of Germainy, that were protestants, in the which
he craved help at their hands the Andelot himself be ing sent for the same
purpose the more spedily to bring the matter to pass. The helpers in this
matter, were said to be the Lantgraue Hessus, the County Pallatine, and the
Duke of Bipont.

About this time the Prince of Conde published a writing, by which he meant to
put away those rumores which were spread abroad of him and of his friends, by
the Guises, as though they had bin the authors and defenders of new and
monsterouse opinions. The libell published was to this effect following.
Because (says he) we hear daily that our adversaries according to their
accostomed manner oh lying, and maliciouse dealinge against us, do in every
place slander, and speak evil of al our doings, one while laying to our
charge that we are Atheistes, and Anabaptists: that by this means they might
withdraw from us their good wills and care, which seek with us to defend and
mainetaine the true and pure worship of God, by the doctrine of the prophets
and Apostles: we thought good over and above the former declarations of our
cause to propounde a brief sum of our faith. By which faith we woorshippe
and call upon the living God, in the name of his only Son our Lord and savior
Jesus Christ: abiding in his fear and service, by the ministering of his word
and holy Sacraments, that is to say by the institucion of Baptism, and of his
holy supper. To be short, we condescend to all the articles of the primitive
Church, as to the only rules of our salvation, being grounded upon the books
of ye Prophets and Apostles: as it is set forth more at large in the confession
of our faith, confirmed with the whole consent of all the reformed churches
within this realm: the copy whereof we send out into al foreign Nations, to
take away those detestable and wicked sclaunders and lies, by which the enemies
both of God, and of this our realm, being void of al shame, have sought in
their libelles and sealed letters, to sclaunder, backbyte and defame us.
Wherefore we humbly pray and beseech all those that love the pure and sincere
doctrine of the Gospel, and which are the faithful servant of God, yea and
we require them in the name of the living God, that they first of all set
before their eyes the flowing streams of innocent blood that has been shed
throughout this realm, crying both from heaven and from earth for vengeance.
And we require all such that they help and aid us, and that they join with
us in this cause, which is not our cause alone, but also the cause of all the
faithful, to repress and assuage their cruel tyranny, which go about to
take from us the perfect and free liberty of our consciences, the benefit
whereof was granted unto us, by our soueraign and liege Lord the Kings
Majesty, and by the consent of all the states of ye realm: we being persuaded
that we linked together in one religion, and in one mind, the most mighty and
eternal God, will stretch forth his gloriouse hand to save his Church, and
will also bless our labor and endeavor, to the glory of his, and to the
enlarging of the kingdom of his son Jesus Christ: to whom with the father and
the holy Ghost be all honor and glory world without end.

The Prince of Conde also made answer to the Ordinance The answer of the
Prince of Conde and his friends to the Decree of the Senate of Paris.
and decree of the Senate of Paris, by the which his Adherentes were condemned
of treason: First of al refusing all those of the College, as the Judges and
Senators, to be men unmeet for this cause: and writing the causes of their
appeal, he sent the same unto them. Their answer was in manner and form
following.

Although I and my friends and fellows have sufficiently declared the equity
of our cause, which has constrained us to put our selves in armor, namely the
liberty and authority of the King, and the observation of the Kings Edictes
for the maintenance of the liberty of our consciences, and the peace of the
reformed churches: Yet notwithstanding, seeing the open and sworn enemies of
the glory of God, and of the common wealth, do daily publish and send abroad
new sclaunders and infamies, to the obscuring of my innocence and the innocency
also of my fellows: we think it most necessary and meet, that if wicked and
ungodly men will not cease too withstand the truth and all equity, no more
should we be weary to defend and maintain the same truth. For so much as
therefore the XXUI. day of July, there was an ordinance and decree of
Condemnation, established in the Senate of Paris, by which they make those to be
gilty of Rebellion, which have borne armor to maintain the authority of the
King and his estates, and against the tyranny of the Guises and his adherents:
we think it necessary that the Justice of the said decree, should be
declared and set forth, not only to the inhabitants of this Realm, but also
to other forreyne Nations, and for an everlasting remembrance to be committed,
to all posterities. For, it will be an example worthy to be remembered, in the
which men may behold and see into what Laberinthes of blind and perverse
judgments the enemies of God and his Church do fall: and are so mad and blind,
that for truth they mayntaine falsehode, judging them to be sedicious, who, to
the vttermoste of their power, seek the peace and tranquillity of the common
wealth: and pronouncing them to be Rebels, who, laying aside all care and
consideration of them selves, do both hazard their goods and their lives to
mayntaine the obedience belonging to the King, and the due and lawful
authority of the kings Edictes. And to the end the same proclamation of
Rebellion, may evidently appear to be unlawful and vni^st, and r^ther a
sclaunder of the enemy than the sentence of the Judge: behold (says he) I and
my fellows, over and above the former declarations of our innocence do
publish these things in manner and form following,

First of all, whereas I am excluded out of that number, that are counted
rebels, the singular love and care that I have for the Kings majesty and
dignity, will not suffer me, not to accounte my self a partaker and sustainer
of that wound and hurie, which is done unto those men, whom I know, never to
have had any other respect and consideration, then the preservation of the
Kings majesty, and of the whole Realm. And I affirm that I think my self
so little gratefied hereby, that I think they have done unto me great injury,
in that they have gone about to except and separate me, from so honest and godly
a company of the kings louinge and faith full subjects. Therefore I being
persuaded before God and men, that their Innocence is such, yt no one jot of
disobedience or rebellion can be justly imputed to them or me, intend to join
my self, and to be in the same condition with them, whose cause and mind is
all one, who are also of the same religion, of the same life that I am of, and
are also no less careful than I to mainetain and advance the true woorship of
God, in this realm. And as I can not nor ought to be disliked of the^, at
whose co^mau^dements I have justly put my self in armor: eue^ so I ought not,
neither will I separate my self from them, who at my entreatie have armed
themselves with me, and are of the same will, and mind that I am of.
Furthermore I have sufficient experience of those wonted subtilties in my
adversaries, in so much that I may easily understand what they go about by
making exception of me. As also may evidently appear by those letters and
rescripts sent to the Liuetenaunt of the provinces, in the which letters I my
self among others am comprehended.

But to the end it may appear, that they rather ought to be counted Rebels,
which obiecte rebellion unto us, that is to say, that they are Rebels in
d^de, which were the first that put them selves in Armoure to break the
authority of the Kings Edictes: and not we, which to hinder their mischeuous
attempts armed our selves: we will briefly repeat those things which are more at
large setforth in our former declaratio^s. Al me^ know ye Edit of January
brought such peace and tra^quilli ty to the whole realm, that the state of the
kingdom (being before tossed and tormoyled with tempestious waves of diverse
troubles) seemed to have attained at the length to the most quiet haven of
peace and tranquillity, when as the Duke of Guise commiting a most horrible
slaughter at Vassi openly declared, that he intended nothing but open war
against ye Kings dignity, and against the peace and tranquillity of the whole
Realm. The which thing (as meet it was) I could not take in good part, for
that I know my self to be bound by ye bond of consanguinitie to maintain the
Kings Crown and dignity, which the Guises of late went about to deface.

For this seemed unto me to be very lewd, that a sub iect durst be so bold, so
openlyto contemn the law of his Prince, and that such a law as was made and
confirmed by all the states of the Realm in sollempne Court of Parliament. And
although I of my own authority had the^ just occasion offered me to
withstand so bold an enterprise against the king and his laws: yet
notwithstanding I did moderate and stay my self until such time as I had
express commandment to take the matter in hand.

And here I beseech the Queen to call to her remembrance, how that when she
was at Saint Germans she was certified of the whole purpose, counsel, and
intent of the Guises: as, that she should be put beside her authority, and
that her most faithful and trusty servants that were about her should be put
from her, to the end that when they had gotten the government of the Realm,
they might rule and order all things at their own pleasure.

Of the which matter when she understood, and of the League also which the
Spanish* Ambassadors intruded, she was wonderfully troubled and grieved:
insomuch that for this cause she entreated me that I would with all speed
gather together so great a power as I could to hinder the same. The which
request I faithfully accomplished, having both a consideration to the Queens
commandment, and also of my duty toward the King and the Realm. This was
the beginning of all those things which I have prosecuted ever since that time,
setting my self against those whom the Queen judged to be our enemies. And
here also let her call to mind those, whom at that time she could name one
by one.

But when the Guises by their conspiracies both at Paris and else where, had
openly bewrayed to all men, that thing, which before was setretly in their
minds: the Queen again both by her letters and also by messengers confirmed
that her former charge and commandment given unto me, which was, that I
should withstand the violence of the Guises and his adherents.

And here I pray and most humbly beseech her, that so far forth as the faith
and word of a Queen ought to stand firm, she would set before her eyes, even
those things which she wrote unto me with her own hand, ye which I am now
constrained to publish abroad for all men to behold, that in her letters also
my innocence may be seen. For I must needs assure my self of this, that
she cannot choose but be mindful of those things: which she wrote unto me
from Fontainbleau* in the Month of March, commending the King and her self
also unto me in these words: I commend unto you* the Mother and her
children: and of that also which she wrote unto me with her own hand by
Monsuer Bocauan at what time the power of the Guises was at Paris, that I would
not unarm my self before my adversaries had done the like, affirming also
that every man might see to what end their conspiracy tended.

Let her also remember, how oftentimes she has seemed, and has signified also
the same by letters, to accept and like very well of my doings: which she said
she would put the King in mind of, that when he came to lawful age, he might
reward me according to my well deserving. To this purpose it serves which she
spoke to the Admiral a few days before he should depart from the Court,
namely, that she knew him to be so faithful and obedient to the King and to
her, that he would endeavor himself all that he could, to deliver them from
the oppression of the Guises. Insomuch that of late she wrote unto him by
Monsuer Rembouill, that she thought him to be so faithful a servant to the
King, and so careful for the Kings crown and dignity, that she would use
his advise and counsel, to pacefie the present troubles. To be short, her
behavior toward me and my fellows, when we and she were together at
Baugence, do so plainly prove her consent and agreement in this matter, that
it shall be needelesse to repeat many other arguments to prove this thing. For
there before seven Noble men, she speaking of our dutiful obedience,
protested unto us that she did acknowledge that we by our deeds had preserved
her life and the Kings. These things considered, have our adversaries any
reason, nay, have they any conjecture of Rebellion against us? By whose
authority, shall we be said to be Rebels? Shall we be said to be Rebels
by the King and Queens authority, who have given us express commandments
to arm our selves, who flee unto us for succor in these perilles, who by
their will, letters and messages like of our doings, give us thanks, and
approve the same, as profitable for the preseruasion of this Realm?
Furthermore all men know, that those our enemies have abused the King and
Queens names, whose wills also they have captiued unto them* The which is the
only cause why I and my fellows have hitherto testified, and as yet also do
unfeignedly protest: That we will not receive any Edicts, Rescripts, or Decrees
coming forth in the Kings name, so long as he enjoys not his liberty. For
probation whereof this example may serve, namely: That the Queen complained
unto us oftentimes in her letters, that she could not therefore grant unto us
our requests, because the contrary part was mightier, and the people armed.
And although the Kings name, since the Month of April last past has been so
abused: yet notwithstanding the matter thereby has the more plainly appeared:
but most plainly by those letters which the Queen sent by Monsure de Villars,
and Mo^sure Vieilleuill the xxiiy. day of May: In the which she wrote, that
she delivered the King into other men's hands: understanding by these words
other men's hands, our adversaries. Whereupon it follows that this sentence
of Rebellion, and all other things done in the Kings name, ought to be judged
to be done by our enemies: seeing the King is in their hands, as appears by
the testimony of the Queen. Let men judge therefore what sentence that is
against the condemned, being pronounced by those which are both adversaries and
Judges. But let us see what great fault of Rebellion that is which is laid to
our charge, and why it is ob iected to us: Because (say they) they will not
unarm them selves. If this be the fault, I demand what they are to be called,
which coming to the Court armed, although they had no enemies in Arms, yet
notwithstanding would not unarm them selves at the commandment of the King
and Queen: and which continue in the same boldness and presumption still? But
who is he, which at the commandment of the enemy will lay aside the sword
which he has drawn to fight? What does the enemy else in commanding me to
unarm my self, than to will me to commit my goods to the spoil, and my life
to cruelty, and also to receive the law at the hands of an outlawe? Is not
that to break the fence with the which God has enclosed his Church: that
being destitute of fence and inunition, men may fall in to the hands of their
cruel and fierce enemies? Furthermore all men know very well that I always
offered to lay aside my Armor, so soon as my enemies vnarming them selves,
had restored the King to his former liberty.

Was it not meet that they which were the first that put them selves in
Armor, and that without commandment and authority, and against the
express Edicts and commandments of the King and Queen, should be the first
in like manner that should unarm them selves, rather than they which by their
example put on Armoure, that is to say, by the commandment of the King and
Queen to preserve them, and also to defend the Edictes from the oppression and
violence of others. To be short, let all my acts done until this day be
examined: and it shall be found that my aunsweres, my declarations, conditions,
and all my actions are testimonies of my innocence.

What condition of peace agreeable to reason and equity have I a^any time
refused, nay rather, I and my fellows have desired the same? How often times
have I refused strangers least they should enter into this Realm? Have I not
signified the equity of my cause to forreyne Princes that have been in league
with this Realm, and desired them that they would be means to take up and
pacefie these controversies? With what modesty have I behaved my self in those
Cities, which were in my hands? Was there ever any sign showed of violence,
or unjust dealing? Whereas the enemies assaulting the Kings Cities, and taking
away the benefit of the Kings Edictes concerning Religion, did all things with
barbarouse cruelty, in so much that they filled the streates of the Cities
with dead bodies, and caused the earth to flow with innocent blood. Let men
therefore judge by the effects, who they be that are worthy to be counted
gilty of Rebellion: Am I and my fellows, which have armed our selves to
defend and maintain the Kings Laws made by solemn act of Parliament so to
be counted: or our enemies? who putting themselves in armoure without the Kings
authority, have broken the Edictes; spoiled Cities, and brought the Kings
subjects to the slaughter: and taking away the Kings Edictes, and specially
that notable and worthy Edict of January, have made new Edictes themselves?

Therefore, if all the parts of this cause be uprightly wayed, it shall be
found, that I and my fellows are falsely accused of Rebellion, of those which
are themselves rebels in deed: and of sedition by those which have been
themselves since the days of King Henry, the causes of all those troubles
which have afflicted the Realm: also of treason by those, which go about to
oppress the king, deprave the Kings Edictes, and abuse his name and
authority, to enriche them selves, to his ruin and decay. They, even they,
are gilty of divine treason against the majesty of the living God, whose
actions have alwais declared that Ambition is their GOD, Covetousness their
Religion, and worldly Pleasures their felicity: who have proclaimed open war
against the son of God, and against the professors of his word: who play the
Anabaptists, rebaptizing infantes again: who have their houses full of
rapines, and their hands defiled with innocent blood. And they are gilty of
humane trea son, which contemn the Kings laws, keep the King as a captive
beset with armed men on every side, and which seek the destruction of the King
and the Realm. And to conclude, they are gilty of Treason, which have
encouraged and brought the whole Realm to wickedness, and to oppress the
liberty of the Gospel, and which do bind the Kings subjects unto them in
service by an oath.

Those outragiouse kinds of wickedness, and horrible acts do cry that the
Guises and his fellows are rebels, seditiouse, and gilty both of Divine and
humane treason. Contrarywyse, it is evident, that they are the true and
faithful subjects of the King, which stoutely withstand their rebellions,
seditions, and wicked practices, to overthrow the Kings authority, and the
state of the Realm. Of the which matter, beside the Arguments which I have
alleged, this also may be a testimony, That they have overthrown the Law and
Government of this Realm, and that in the Senate of Paris, whose help they
have abused in this false and perniciouse sentence of Rebellion. And truly
they could not have found more wicked and corrupt me^, and more seruiseable to
their minds: who either had their offices by favor of the Guises, or else
hoped to come to some preferment by them: and many of the chief of them have
conspired with the Guises, the lamentable success whereof we feel at this
day. And truly we must needs confess, that among all the calamities with the
which God has afflicted this realm, this one is the greatest, that this Senate
which ought to be the place of Justice, the refuge and Sanctuary of the
oppressed, and the brydel and punishment of vice is so declined from his right
and natu rall use, that it loses the raynes and opens the gate to all
Injustice, violence, and to all unbridled wickedness. And for probation
hereof, I do not only bring in ye manifold injuries, which they have done to
diverse, the complaints, the cries, and the blood of so many oppres sed,
condemned, and slain innocents by them: but specially I bring forth this false
and perverse judgment, which they have denounced against us: which is an
injury done to a great number of men, whose life and actions have always
testified the reverent obedience which we wish might be given to the King.
But, to the end those unjust Judges might leave nothing undone, they pronounced
this sentence, the cause not heard, no matters discussed and the reasons of
justification not understood: also they being refused, and the causes of the
refusal or appeal being declared, yet nevertheless they persisted in their
purpose: that all men might know how, that in the Senate of Paris there are no
other Judges, but preposterous opinions, corruptions, and hatreds: that there
are no other laws, than the contempt and open violating of the Kings Laws and
Edictes, and of his approved customs. And here I appeal unto you which bear
the name of Judges: What is it to deal unjustly and corruptly, if this be not
so to deal* For where is there any form of Justice observed? where are the
reasons, with the which they that are gilty are convinced? where is y^ ancient
and approved custom, that one Judge, in one and the selfsame cause, ought not
to be Judge, and also plaintiue? Wherefore have you made your selves Judges of
those men, which have refused you to be their Judges? having so many reasons
moving the^ thereunto, as there are arguments of injustice in you. And to speak
truly, are ye not justly and upon good and sufficient cause refused, which have
thrust out of your society all those which ye thought would not condescend and
agree to your conspiracies? that is to say, ye which by that your Edict, put
the Of this Edict there is mention made in the 4. book going before.
sword into the hand of the furiouse and mad people, against the law of God,
ye law of man, your own laws, and against the whole peace and tranquillity of
ye realm? Who have proclaimed the Ministers of the reformed Churches, to be
open enemies, and traitors to ye King: whom notwithstanding the King had
received into his favor, and which also upon this condition, were sworn to the
King.

You truly, which are grown to such boldness, that by your Deputies Monsieur
de Fay and Monsieur Chambo, that ye durst say unto the king, that these words
concerning the entrance into peace and concord, seemed won derfull unto you
and perniciouse: and that ye would never allow these reasons concerning the
making of peace between me and my adversaries: to take away all doubt, that
ye were to me and to my fellows mortal and sworn enemies. But what needs
many words? Let men consider the Metropolitan City of the kingdom in the
which ye dwell: let men consider the horrible cruelties, which the people daily
commit before your eyes, with your consent, will, and provocation. Let men
consider the greatest part of you, of the which many (to the end ye may the
better show your selves to have cast away Justice, and rather to use violence
and force, than ye law) are become of Judges and Councellers or Senators,
soldiers: and have changed your pens into swords, and your scarlet gowns
into armor: ye show your selves to be warlike Captains, and are openly seen
in armor, setting forward this kind of wickedness very far unmeet for your
calling.

Let all these things be considered. But and if rebels cannot judge of
rebellion, and open enemies of peace and tranquillity of sedition, also if the
breakers of the kings laws, cannot judge of traitors, if (I say) they which
are condemned themselves, ought not to condemn others: ye cannot deny but that
those whom ye have condemned, have just and undoubted reasons, not only to
refuse you, but also to have you punished, according to your wickednesses
committed. Therefore al these things being justly wayed in equal balance,
shall evidently appear to all those, which shall bring to the discerning of
this cause an upright judgment without prejudice: and although nothing be
brought to defend my innocency and ye innocency of my fellows against this
unjust judgment, yet notwithstanding the matter is so apparent and plain, that
it speaks for it self, and plainlye conuinceth the false and impudent
sclaunders of the Judges our aduer saries. And this thing I leave to all men to
consider of, what just cause I have to be grieved, seeing yt I have always
faythefully obeyed the commandments of the King and Queen for their defense,
and have done so much, as a man of my estate, degree, and calling, might do,
for the peace and profit of the whole Realm: and now to be recompensed with
these rewards, as to have my seruise done to y^ king called in question, and
my obedience counted Sedition. This thing is not only greuouse unto me, but
altogether intolerable. And although they cannot touch me with that note of
infamy which they lay unto my charge: yet notwithstanding I profess and
acknowledge, that I have a great desire to defend my estimation and credit, and
the estimation of my fellows: and will seek by all means possible, that our
innocence may appear not only to our country men, but also to people of
foreign nations, and that it may be remembered among all p^sterities. And
because I perceive, that by so unjust a sentence pronounced against me and my
fellows, and by the breaking of the laws and ancient customs of France,
the way to attain justice is stopped against me, that I can have no hope to
look for the observation of the kings Edictes, and therefore not to declare
and show forth my innocence as I would: for these causes I am compelled to
take the sword in hand, as the only and last refuge. The which seeinge I have
taken into my hands, both at the commandment of the King and Queen, and
also for my office and callinges sake, which I am of in this Realm: I protest
that I am in the same mind, that I will never lay away the same, until such
time as my sovereign Lord the King be of all men peaceably obeyed, his Edictes
observed, and my innocence and the innocency also of the rest of my fellows,
be made evident and plain to all men. The glory of God, and my duty persuade me
hereunto, and I cannot choose, but publish the same.

Therefore I and my fellows, proteste before God him self, before the kings
majesty, and before al people and nations, to whom the knowledge of these
things may come, that we are most obedient, loyal, and faithful subjects and
servants of the kings majesty, our sovereign and leege Lord: and that we do
bear our armoure, not against him, but against his adversaries and enemies.
Whom we call Rebels, seditiouse, and Traitoures, because they have peruer^ed
the laws, and institutions of the Realm, broken the Kings Edictes,
impudently violated the authority of the estates of the Realm, and besides
this they have thrust themselves into the Kings counsel, being forbidden
before by the decree of the states, after which time they troubled and vexed
many faithful and good men, of the Kings privy Counsel: And also because
they having taken the King into their hands, do deprive him of his liberty, do
abuse his name and authority, to satisfy their insatiable, couetouse and
cruel desiers, and do daily make conspiracies and consultations, both for the
kepinge of that which they have usurped, and also to destroy the greatest part
of the Kings true and faithful subjects, and specially for this cause, yt
they may banish the pure and sincere preaching of ye Gospel out of France,
and may quight destroy the lovers and professors of the truth. Therefore, only
against those men, and for those causes especially I and my fellows, proteste
that we have taken the sword in hand, and that constrained by extreme
necessity: seeing that we have no other way to defend and maintain the King,
the authortie of the Kings Edictes, the firmity of the Kings dignity, the
state of the whole Realm, the goods and lives of many of the Kings
subjects, and the pure woorshiping of God and the King, established by Edictes
throughout the whole Realm. The weight of which things do so touch our
minds, that when we considered the horrible calamity and destruction, which
through murders, bloodshed, rapines, and such kind of mischieues, is like to
come upon the whole realm if they go forward as they have begone for the space
of these five months, we have determined for the avoiding of such euilles to
shun no peril, and for the safety of the Kings subjects, and the
tranquillity of the Realm, to adventure our lives, and loose our goods. And as
for that wicked and false judgment of Rebellion we fear it not at all, but do
account the same a false slander, impudently devised and published by our
adversaries. And truly seeing we do oppose and set our selves against the same,
we protest that we do not in any point withstand the Kings will, nor the
ordinance and decree of the Parliment lawfully made: but the robbery,
oppression, and open violence, which our adversaries show against our lives and
goods. Wherefore, I pray and beseech not only all the inhabitants of this
Realm, which are willing to yield all obedience unto the King, but also all
foreign Princes, which love equyty and right, to join with me against those
that use violence, injury, and oppression against the King, be ing yet a
Child. Whose virtues appearing in this his tender age, do put us in good hope,
that when he shall come to his ripe and perfect age he will give hearty thanks,
to the ayders and assisters of him, in his great necessityes. And specially, I
pray and beseech all foreign Germans He dehorteth the Germans which came
under the charge of the Rokendolfe, and the Rhengraue from bearing armor
against the King.
and Swysers, which are come already, and are daily looked for to come to help
my adversaries, that they will call to their remembrance that good name,
renown, and equity, which their Elders had always in estimation and
reverence, least they do that which shall afterward turn to their reproach and
shame, because they shall fight in the defense of an evil and unjust cause,
against a good and just cause: for the Kings enemies, against the Kings
faithful subjects: for foreign Prnces, against a Prince that is the Kings
near kinsman: for Papists and main tainers of the Church of Rome, against
those which profess the sincere truth of the Gospel. And here I call the
consciences of all those strangers, before the judgment seat of God, which
profess purity of the Gospel, that they take heed that they be not helpers of
our adversaries to expel and banish the Gospel out of the Realm, and all the
godly and Christian professors of the same. I also pray them, to note and mark
the pur pose of my adversaries, who, although they pretend the name of
rebellion, and go about to lay the same to me and to my fellows charge, yet
notwithstanding seek to suppress the Gospel being contrary to their ambition
and cruelty: and that therefore I am molested by them because I seek to defend
and mainetaine the liberty of the Gospel granted by the Kings Edicte.
Therefore those forreiners which embrace with us the pure and sincere doctrine
of the Gospel, ought not to give to my adversaries occasion to laugh them to
scorn: as though they could bring to pass by their money (which they already
boast of) that they which had defended the Gospel in their own country,
should come to war against the Gospel in France. I admonish them also to
have farther regard to the matter, and to fear, that if those enemies of the
truth destroy the professoures of the truth of the gospel in France, they will
also war against the inhabitants of Rheyne: to the end they by the league made
with the Pope and other forreyne Princes, may set upon them also being in
their houses, professinge the same doctrine that we do. And although for my
part I have refrayned until this day to seek the help and aid of strangers:
yet notwithstanding seeing my adversaries have begone to call strangers to
assiste the^ in their evil cause, I protest that I will not let hereafter to
use their help, to defend my cause, because the co^seruation of the king
stands thereupon. And because this war, which daily increases more and
more, cannot choose but bring great calamities with it. I and my fellows
protest before God and men, that we are not the causes of those calamities: but
they which have stirred up and caused these garboiles, that is to say my
enemies, that they may bear the blame of all the evils like to ensue.
Finally, I will and desire that the league which I have made with the Princes,
Peers, Nobles, and with all those that follow me, and shall follow me, may be
established and confirmed by this my writing. To the which my fellows I
promise and vow, that seeing it has plea sed God to advance me to so great
honor, as to make me the Captain and principal of that league, and to be a
deliverer of the reformed churches, living under the Kings Edictes, from the
injuries and violence of the enemies, I will be the first that will spend my life
and goods, to maintain the pure worship of God, to defend the true
professors and followers thereof, and to restore the King to his former
liberty and authority, and his Edictes and the laws of the Realm to their
proper dignity. In like manner I pray and beseech all my Confederates, that
they abide in the same mind, courage, and constancy that I am of, in this so
godly and commendable a purpose, having always respect unto the uprightness
of our cause, and reposing all their trust in the power of God: being fully
persuaded of this, that fighting for the glory of God, for the preservation of
his Church and for the conservation of the King and the Realm, God the mighty
Lord of hoastes will stretch forth his mighty hand to help. Whom I most humbly
beseech to take upon him the patrociny and defense of our cause, and to enter
into the Throne of his judgment: before whom I show and reveal the horrible
blasphemies which our adversaries have breathed out against his Majesty: the
cruelties which they showed upon his poor afflicted members: the innocent
blood of so many of his servants that has been shed: and the bloody and
mischeuouse coun sails, against his glory and the life and safety of his
Saints: so that he taking his people under his protection, would show his
power, Justice and wisdom, both in destroying his adversaries, and also in
blessing those, which seek to defend his people: whereby all the world may
know that he is a refuge for the afflicted in time of trouble, a deliverer of
his Church, and an enemy an^ Judge of his enemies.

About this time also, the Prince of Condes fellows sent letters to the
Emperor Ferdinande, to whom they declared their cause, and rendered a reason
of all their doings, and frustrated the rumors of their adversaries: praying
him that he would be careful to defend this cause: and also that he would
call back the Germans, that were gone to help the Guises. And although (say
they) the reports of the troubles which were in France were every where spread
abroad, and were come also to the Emperors ears by letters sent from both
parts: yet notwithstanding the Prince of Conde sent to the Emperor, (whom
he understood should come to an honorable assembly) the causes of all his
actions, that ye Emperor himself might certefie the whole assembly of the
same: seeing so great and weighty matters were objected against him by his
adversaries: the Prince of Conde thinking that it became him, in a matter of so
great weight, to show the causes of all his doings to all men and to the
Emperor himself, being of so high calling, that he might leave to the whole
world evident testimony of his innocence. To bring the which matter to pass he
may be glad that he has gotten so good occasion, to crave help to be aided in
this just cause, for the preservation of the young King of France, being of
such age that the same of itself requires, and ought to obtain help.

It is no new thing neither wants it examples, that Kings in their minority
and infanc^e have received the Kingdom of France: as appears by the late
times of Charles the sixth, and the eight, and of others. In whose time of
minority we do not read that there was any contention about the government of
the Realm: because the Princes which were the Kings kinsmen, left always the
government of the Realm to thein, By the states ye must understand the
Nobility, the Clergy, and the Tempo (...).
which were elected and created by the States of the Realm of France, to whom
the government of the Realm was committed so long as the King continuing in
his minority, which was until he came to the age of fourteen years.

The which order of government in the Kings Ne^age, has been always so
approved, that Kings have warely provided in their Testaments, that if they
should disceace before their Sons were come to their perfect age to govern
the Realm, then the States should provide for the same government. The which
does sufficiently declare that this kind of government, does in no point
deminish the Kings authority or power (whom whosoever resists, resists
the ordinance of God,) but is rather necessary to preserve and defend them, so
long as they are unmeet to take upon them any such government, through the
defect and imbecillitie of Nature.

But when the King shall come to the age of fourteen years, that vicary or
substituted government does cease, and all things do so return to the King,
that whatsoever he shall will or decree, shall be ratified.

In the days of Charles the sixth, after he had reigned many years, and that it
pleased GOD for the sins of the people, to deprive him of his wit and
senses: and when the time came that the Realm must of necessity be governed,
there arose a certain contention among the Princes that were the Kings
kinsmen, about the same government. but this was never heard of that a
forreyne Prince, would ever intrude him self into the government of the
Realm, and that, against the will, ordinance, and decree of the States: as
does now the Duke of Guise at the first, with force of arms, and afterward
under the coullour and name of the King of Nauar: corrupting and breaking all
Laws, constitutions, and customs, that by all means possible he might
satisfy his ambicious mind, and get the government of the Realm into his
hands.

And (say they) most renowned Emperor, you must not think that he is moved to
do these things for the love he bears to any Religion: but does only make
Religion a cleake, to fulfill his ambicious desire: but under this pretense, he
has drawn a great part of the people unto him, whom he has so stirred to
outrage and cruelty, promising that they shall escape unpunished whatsoever
they do, that now the mad and frantic people throughout the whole Realm of
France, do nothing else but kill, spoil, and show al manner of violence. After
the death of Henry the second, and Fraunces the second, Kings of France, it
was expedient according to the ancient use of the laws, that the States of
France should be called together, and that in the greater number because
Charles our King was of tender years. The true cause of the first wars.


Then the States, as it was meet, made certain laws and statutes, the which
should only stand in force and strength duringe this time of the Kings
minority, according to the institution and manner of our elders. The which is
the only foundation of those things which have happened since that time, to the
which all those things ought to be referred and brought as to the Power
spec^all consti tutions in the Kings minority.
toutchstone, that they may be discerned whether they be good or evil. Those
laws and constitutions were divided into four principal heads,

1 The first concerned the custody and protection of the King, and the
Governor of the Realm. 2 The second concerned those which should be of the
Kings Counsel for that time. 3 The third concerned provision for war, and
all manner of Artillary. 4 The fourth concerned Religion, and the staying of
such troubles as might ensue by occasion thereof.
As touching the first, upon great causes and reasons The first.
wise, waighed and considered, the States or whole body of the Realm have
decreed that the Queen the Kings mother, shall have not only the charge and
custody of the Kings majesty her son, but the government also of the
Realm, in her own person, and the same not to be put over to any other
without her consent, will, and pleasure. And this decree of the States was
confirmed and approved, by Princes the Kings kinsmen.

Also the States decreed that the Queen Mother should be by them so directed,
that she by her wise ordering and disposing of things, should discharge the
great debt which remained to be paid after the death of king Henry and
Fraunces: and so the people to be disburthened from such great exactions and
payments, as they had aforetime paid: And that she for her part should
endeavor her self to bring all things to their former state and condition,
and that the people might live every where in peace and tranquillity.

The second principal point, was concerning the The second.
Kings Counsel: The which the States desired to have furnished with men that
were virtuous, wise, and careful for the King and the Realm. Therefore they
thought good that the Kings Counsel should consist, of such men, as were not
sworn to any forreyne Prince or power: as Cardinals, Bishops, Abbats, and
all such which they call Ecclesiastical persons: both for that they ought to
follow their ordinary and proper office and calling: and also for the oath
which they have sworn and vowed to the Bishops of Rome concerning temporal
obedience, which have been oftentimes enemies to the Bishops of France.

Therefore they prohibit and disalow any of them to be of the Kings Counsel:
or that there should come unto that Counsel two brethren or more together,
according to the example of other Parliaments. Notwithstanding here they except
those which are Princes and the Kings kinsmen; to whom it appertains without
limitation of number, by right to be of the Kings Counsel, except the States
have any thing to object against them to the contrary. Also they forbid such to
be of the Kings Counsel as have had the oversight, use, and disposing of the
Kings treasure, until such time as they have made their accounts.

And last of all, because the Kings Counsailers are bound, to make account to
the King of their just and lawful counsel, and also to preserve and
maintain the Kings treasure: and when the Kings treasury has small store of
money in it, not to receive of ye King, or to suffer to be given to any, great
and large gifts: the states do appoint and determine, that all such gifts
shall be revoked: and that so many as have received such gifts be constrained to
restore them back again: and in the mean time not to be of the Kings
counsel.

Upon this second point depends the occasion of the ^uill war and sedition,
which at this day shakes and violently assalteth the whole Realm of France:
the Guises, the Constable, the Marshall of Santandre, perceiving that they by
this means should not only be exclu ded out of the Kings counsel, but also
be constrained to restore those gifts again which they have received of the
Kings, and thereby greatly in riched themselves. And so they have joined
themselves, and co^spired together, specially to hinder and frustrate that
decree. It is no new thing, that gifts which Kings have bestowed, contrary to
the laws appointed, should be nothing regarded, not only of the States, which
are chief in authority in the time of the Kings nonage, but also of the
ordinary Judges of the exchecker, by whose indgeme^ts, the Kings before time
have been put to great expenses in gifts, contrary to the laws of the realm.
Of these things we have many examples: as of the Constable Clisson in the
days of Charles the vi. who was depryued of his office, because he had gained
by the service of the King to the value of sixtene thousand pound. But there is
greater and more vehement cause at this time, why they which are bound by the
decree of the states, should be called to give an account of that which they
have received: and seeing that now there is found in the kings Treasury the
su^me of 330000, pounds (which was never seen before) and yet the people at
this present are more burdened with exactions and tributes, than ever they
were before. And it is manifest that King Frauncis the first of that name,
which had diverse wars for the space of three and thirty years, and paid for
his discharge a great sum of money, and took not so great and so many
tributes of the people, left notwithstanding in his treasury a great mass of
money. Therefore the states demand the cause of so great expense. And because
it is likely that they were spenders and wasters, whose duty it was to husband
and increase the same: the States upon very good consideration do desire to
have an account, that restitution and allowance may be made of such
unmeasurable expenses. The which truly is the very cause why those three have
brought the Realm of France into these troubles, to overthrow those decrees
of the states: that the same may appear most true which we said before,
namely, that they conspire, not for religions sake, but for because they are
couetously and ambitiously minded, which Religion notwithstanding they take for
a cloak, to cover and hyde their wickedness withal

The third principal point of their costitutions is The third
this: The States would have it in their power and authority during the time
of the Kings minority, to order and appoint wars: and at their pleasure to
command the subjects to arm themselves. Because before they take wars in
hand, they should understand the causes thereof, and by what means they might
be appeased. Therefore also they would have this authority, that they which
have provoked the people to Ciuyll war, might be made known to be the
authoures of all the calamities and detrements which come by these wars.

The fourth principal point is that which concerns The fourth
Religion: by which the states have decreed that there must be a difference
made between the cause of Religion, and the cause of sedition: in so much that
for Religions sake no man ought to be condemned as a seditiouse person and a
Rebel. Therefore they think it lawful for the kings subjects to have liberty
to take which religion the ilist, that is to say, either the common Romish
Religion, or else the Religion reformed according to the Gospel, and to cleave
to none other: and that all violence, either pryuate or public, against
either part, ought to be prohibited: and that the Civil magistrates should
provide Temples for the ministers of the reformed Religion to have their divine
service in: and that no man should receive any manner of violence or harm, for
using the benefit hereof. But because those constitutions manifestly touched
the Guises, the Constable, and the Marshall of Saint Andre: the Guises, for
that there were two Cardinals of them which were chosen to be of the Kings
Counsel, also the Duke of Guise, and the Duke de Aumal: also because the Duke
of Guise, and the Cardinal of Lorraine his Brother, were the Kings
treasurers: And they touched the Constable and the Marshall of Saint Andrew,
because they by the same means, were come to great abundance and wealth. For
these causes they have sought by all means possible, to adnihillate and
disanull these Laws.

In the mean time, the Queen the Kings Mother, as she has been always in all
her doings wise and circumspecte (the which she declared when she had full
liberty, and was not Ruled by other men's power and violence) endeavored her
self to make an unity and concord between the Churches by friendly and quiet
conference.

To the which Conference and Disputacion came all the chief Prelates of
France, and many Doctors out of the university of Paris, many Moonkes also
which were sent from Rome, and the Cardinal of Ferrer the Popes Legate: and
beside all these, twelve Ministers of the Gospel: both parts hoping it would
come to pass by this friendly conference, that they should come to some
concord and agreement. The which was greatly hindered and let by the Cardinal
of Lorraine, by whom, after certain principal points of the Confession of
Ausburge were disse^blingly embraced, ye Assembly was dissolved. Then the
Guises took other practices in hand, and persuaded the Queen and the King of
Nauar, to send for the Judges and Counselors of all the Parliamentes of the
Realm; that they with the Princes and the Kings Counsel might give their
advice for the present necessity: And to this Counsel they sent such as
they had bound unto them before time by one benefit or other: that by this
means they might abolishe that which the States had decreed. The which
notwithstanding by the providence of God, fell out otherwise than they looked
for. And to the end they might the more craftily bring their purpose to pass,
they departed from the Court.* But before they should go, to the end they
might leave nothing undone that might serve to work their wills, they subtly
practiced to carry with them the Duke of Orleans our Kings brother, that if
their devises had not had good success, they might have had one with them of
the Kings lineage whose name they might abuse* This thing was plainly proved by
diverse arguments, and confessed also by the Duke of Orleans himself, who
stayed the matter.

Here it may please you to consider at what time, and by what means the Guises
began to be iniuriouse, and to show violence to the Queen, out of whose lap
she being a widow, and in great trouble, they went about to take her son.
Afterward the Guises departed not only from the Court, but also to the utmost
parts and limits of the Realm, and came to Sauern. And there they feigned to
like of the Confession made at Ausburge before one of the Princes of the
Empire, that by these means they might insinuate themselves into the number ber
of the Princes of the Empire, the which as known to your highness, we touch by
the way. But their departure out of France, caused all men to hope for peace
and concord, which was every where received by the rumor of their absence.
For in all places, every man of what religion soever he wereof, lived
peaceably, without any offense committed for the diversity of Religion: all
men receiving that religion which liked him best. And ye word of God was
preached in diuer^ places, many joyfully embracing the same, and if a few had
made any stour or business for Religion, they by and by were easily suppressed.

About this time there was an assembly of Judges and Counselors, which sat in
the Court that belongs to These things are touched before.
the Princes and to the Kings privy Counsel: among whom was the Constable,
and the Mashall of S. Andrew, who waited for new troubles. The Bourgeses or
chosen men for the states, declared that there was nothing in those things
which the States had decreed to be altered, but must stand wholly upon their
determination and liking: and they said that before they began with any other
matter, they must seek to purge and to reform the Kings Counsel. On the
contrary part, they which were to be thrust out of the Kings counsel by the
same decree of the States, bare themselves so bold upon that assembly, that
they persuaded themselves to escape unpunished, notwithstanding all that the*
States could do: Who nevertheless when they understood the power and
authority which belo^ged to the States, would not give their consent to do
any thing contrary to their decrees. And although many of them openly declared,
that they favored the Guises and his fellows, yet notwithstanding there was
an Edicte made, called the Edicte of January, because it was made the 18. day
of January: by the which Edict liberty and leave was granted for the word of
God to be openly preached* as it was decreed by the States. Notwithstanding
with this exception, So that it were done without the walls of the City: and
that the Churches dedicated to the uses of the Church of Rome were not usurped.
The Magistrate being commanded to take an oath of the Ministers of the gospel,
that they should preach the word of God purely, sincerity, and quietly without
any sedition: as is more at large declared in that Edict, which was confirmed
by the decrees of the States.

And although that same Edicte was suspected of the men of the reformed
Churches, least when they were out of the Cities, and vnar^ed, and far from
their houses to help themselves, they should easily be made a pray for their
enemies: (as it came afterward to pass in deed) yet notwithstanding because
they would not be importunate and troublesome to the Queen, to ye King of
Nauar, to the Princes, and to the whole assembly, they agreed thereunto, upon
this condition, That they should deal uprightly and in good faith: the which
also the whole assembly promised unto them. And then every man swear to observe
and keep the Edict, faithfully and truly: and the men of more noble calling
swear again before the Queen, that they would not crave pardon for those
which had violated or broken that Edict.

The Ministers of the Gospel after their oath, had authority given them by the
Magistrate, to preach in all Provinces: they had also places for the preaching
of the word; and for the administration of Sacraments granted unto them in the
(...)of the Cities, and al things else peaceably, and without any ^umult. Our
adversaries envying that all things went forward so well, sought daily new
occasions to move troubles. At the length their Captains, the Constable, and
the Marshall of S. Andrew, thinking it good to delay the time no leager, wrote
letters to the Duke of Guise, to come with aid and a power of man to the
Court^ and having gotten the King of Na^ar, on their side, there was great hope
that they should have all things at their pleasure.

Then the Duke of Guise coming with a great Army of footmen, and a troop of
horsemen, made have toward the Court: and by the way as he came, he ^uelly
handeled the reformed Churches, which peaceablely used the benefit of the
Edict at Vassi, setting suddenly upon a great number of the faithful, which were
gathered together to hear the word of God, he slew man, woman and child,
without all pity or mercy. Thus beginning his business, he went forward on his
journey without fear, and came to N^antuil the house of his territory or
Lordship: whether the Constable and the Marshiall of Santandre came. And when
they had deliberated of the matter, and had opened the causes of their
complaynts, some of them bewayling the decay of their authority and rule
which they had in the days of King Fraunces the second: other some repining
that they must make their account according to the decree of the States: at the
length they determined to arm them selves. And thus of their own private
authority they put them selves in Arms, to mayntaine their ambition and
covetousness, which notwithstanding they cover with the cloak of Religion:
they came to the King and Queen with an Army of men, and made them subject to
their power, and took upon them the government: subtillie foreseeing that
there was no better way to make the people to take their part, than under the
pretense of Religion and the name of the King: and so to abolish the Laws and
constitutions of the States, and the Edict it self.

Therefore from that time forward, having gotten Paris into their hand, and
brought the King captive thither, they left no kind of mortal cruelty
vnshewed, no one corner of the Realm was free from the Civil wars which
they had stirred up: insomuch that the lamentable remembrance of things past,
and of the great destruction like to come, would make a man to tremble.
Nothwithstanding the Queen being certified of these things, was very careful
to let and stay their purpose, and to frustrate their devises: sent for the
Prince of Conde to come to Monceaulx: and prayed him to resist the violent
force and cruelty of these men by force of Arms: and for this cause she
appointed him to be Captain general, and named certain men unto him, whose
help and furtherance he might use.

But the Prince of Conde delaying the matter for fear of tumults and vproares,
was prevented with the expedition and have of his enemies: who had so gotten
the King and Queen into their hands, that they abused their wills at their
own pleasure: deludinge and abusing also the facillitie and sufferance of the
king of Nauar, they seek thereby coullers to hide their tirranie.

The which sufferaunce notwithstanding of the king of Nauar, although his full
consent were joined therewith, as it ought not by any means to restrain or
deceive the king of his liberty, even so it can be of no force to excuse the
unbridled ambition and presumption of the Guises. For in giving authority the
simple and bare ratefying is not sufficient, but the civil laws do show that
it is needful to have express commandment.

Furthermore the King of Nanar has not this authority to rule and govern the
Realm, without the Queen: and neither of them have any such authority that
they can set over the same to any other without the consent of the States.

Moreover as touching the tractation of war and artillery, the Queen her
self during the time of the Kings nonage, can do nothing, as of her own
authority: seeing this thing pertayneth to the States: who notwithstanding
have not decreed and appointed this war, but the Guises, which have caused
the same to be in every corner of the Realm. Is there any man in the whole
Realm that can or ought to take unto him such power and authority, as to
gather Armies of men and to move war to the detrement and hurt of the King
and the Realm, as the Duke of Guise now does? And this is the service that the
Triumuiri, namely the Duke of Guise, the Marshiall of Saint Andrew, and the
Constable do to the King their sovereign Lord, in this his tender age, in the
which he is subject to many injuries: that is to say, their wicked acts, by
which they go about to overthrow the King with the kingdom. Which are the
causes (O Emperor) that we put our selves in Armor, and have chosen the
Prince of Conde to be our Captain: who showed him self willinger to take so
notable a matter in hand, being moved the runto by no less good will toward
the King and the realm than we were.

The Queen also her self both persuaded and commanded him to take this war
in hand, to deliver her from that injury which both she and the king sustained:
as appears by her express words in letters to be seen, the Coppies whereof
we have sent unto thee (O Emperor.) Notwithstanding all this, the Prince of
Conde, which was the last which put himself in arms, and that at the
commandment of the Queen, never ceased to seek peace and concord, offering
all indifferent and reasonable conditions that might be, as, That he would put
of his Armor, depart from the Court, and would go also, if need were, out of
the Realm, so that his adversaries would do the like, and that the Edict of
January might be observed.

Also he prayed and does pray and beseeth by his letters, al Christian Princes
that are in League and amity with France, to be means for the making of
peace and concord: and with them all Noble Princes of the Empire, whose godly
and commendable endeavors for peace and concord were notwithstanding hindered
by the Guises: who in the mean time sought by all means possible to be aided
by strangers.

And it is manifest that the Prince of Conde, has sought so many ways to
establish peace and concord, as they have sought by all means possible to
hinder the same: as may appear by the last Parley between the Queen and the
prince of Conde, at Baugence, they seeking by Treason to circumuent the Prince
of Conde.

Wherefore, by the demonstration and knowledge of al these things, both the
truth and equity of our cause, and of the Prince of Conde, and also the
falsehood, treachery, and unjust dealing of our adversaries may appear: as is
more at large set forth in those writings published concerning this matter. Of
the which matters, because thou art certified already (most noble Emperor) we
will at this time be no longer tediouse unto thee.

This one thing the Prince of Conde requesteth at your highness hand, that you
will take into your custody the crown of our young King from those three
private persons which have brought him into so great danger, and to restrain
them of their wills: seeing it is manifest that these three private persons,
the one of them a stranger, the other two not comparable to the Prince of
Conde in no condition, have caused Civil wars, to the destruction of the
Realm. And above all things this he requesteth, yt you would deliver the
King, the Queen, and the Realm from their presumption, tyranny, and
falsehoode, and that you would help the states of the Realm to their
authority, and the Kings Subjects to peace, and to the benefit of the Kings
Edictes. Also because under the couller of defendinge the King, the Rokendolfe,
and the Rhengraue have brought troops of horsemen out of Germany into
France: notwithstanding meaning to help our adversaries, whereby there cannot
choose but ensue great hurt to the King and to the realm: the Prince of Conde
humbly beseeches you, that by your commandment and by the commandments of
your noble Princes, they may with all speed be called back again, and may be
severely and straightly charged not to bear armoure against us: and also that
hereafter it be lawful for none within the limmits of the empire to musture
either horsemen or footmen, to serve the Guises, which use not, but abuse the
Kings name and authority.

The which deed (most noble Emperor) shall become you very well, since God has
made you a refuge for the afflicted in time of trouble: and a help for Kings,
especially when they are in danger of men, by reason of their tender years.
Defend therefore our King, our Queen his mother, the Kingdom, and the laws
and states of the Realm from the tyrrannie of the Triumuiri.

Concerning the vain assault that was given to Cesteron a Town in Prouance,
by Monsuer Sommeriue, The assault given to Cesteron.
a Captain on the Papists side, we have spoken before. Yet notwithstanding
they came to the same place again the xxvi day of August with a greater army,
and with all manner of artillery better appointed, carrying with them from
Marsiles certain great field pieces. Therefore the City began to be battered
with greater force of ordinance than it was before. The^ word was brought that
Monsuer Monbrun, came with an Army of men to raise the siege, (his Army
contained a thousand footmen, and two hundred horsemen) Monsuer de Suze,
hearing of this, went out to meet him with a company of well appointed
Soldiers, and giving the on set upon Monsuer Monbrun, he slew an hundred and
fifty of his Soldiers, and put the rest to flight. Monsuer Monbrun also
himself fled, leaving behind him two field pieces, The Army of Monsuer
Monbrun put to flight.
which afterward came into the hands of Monsuer de Suze. At the commandment
of Baron des Adretz, Monsuer Monbrun came to Cesteron, minding with the aid and
rescue of mo^suer de Adretz, which on ye other part had invaded the County of
Vena^, both to remove the siege from Cesteron, and also with the greater force
to assault Prouance. Against the men of Auinion which went about to resist him,
Baron des Adretz prevailed, and had the victory, giving unto the^ the overthrow
at a village called Orgo. Notwithstanding when Baron des Adretz heard, that
Monsuer Monbrun was put to flight, he returned into Dolpheny. New, Monsuer
Someriue and his Soldiers at the return, and good success of Monsuer de Suze
and his men, were not a little encouraged, in so much yt with greater force and
vehemence they began to assault the city, and when by battery they had made a
great breach in the walls, ye soldiers began with great viol^ce to enter thereat:
who notwithstanding were constrained to retire again, many of the^ being s^ain
by the faithful.

But when their vitualles were well nigh spent, and that they were daily
oppressed more and more with penury and scarsitie, Monsuer Senaz the
lifetenaunt of the Town, Monsuer Mouens, whose help he greatly used, began to
consider concerning the yielding up of the City: and placing certain
Soldiers in the breach of the wall to keep the City, according to the
custom of wars, they in the night without noise, carried out a great
multitude of the Townsmen, with Women and Children, and aged persons, at a
certain place, to the which the enemy could scarcely come, being let with a
river and a hill which lay between them. The enemies scoutes, were wary of the
noise, and gave intelligence thereof unto the Army: but rather thinkinge that
some came to help them, than that the faithful went out of the City,
suspected nothing, and therefore held themselves still in their tents. Thus
Monsuer Mouens and a great multitude of people escaped the peril. But Mon suer
Someriue, being certyfied of the whole matter by the Papists of the Town
entered into the City: and there slew all that he found in the City both
Papists and Protestants without respect of persons. Monsuer Mouens carried
the people which he brought out of Cester^, most miraculously through diverse
places, which were possessed by the enemy, and yet notwithstanding escaped
their hands, and came at the last, to Gratianople a City in Dolpheny. And so
all Prouans, when the faithful were overcome, yielded to the Papists: by whom
all kind of cruelty, beside the custom of war, was committed in Cities and
Towns, as at Marsiles, and at Aijques, and in that whole Region. Many Women
also in those Cities, were so outrageous, and best like cruel* contrary to
their kind, that it is almost incredible to be told. These, when they had
gathered themselves to gyther to a sufficient number, would in the night, as if
they had bin drunk or out of their wits go up and down the City, searching,
and ransackinge the houses of the faithful: and when they had found a woman,
they led Great wickedness committed in Prouance against the faithful.
her and scourged her through the City until she came to the common place of
slaughter which they had prepared for the purpose: and then hanged her up by
the feet, the which being done they drove up a wedge or wodden pin into the
body through the shame and secret part of the woman, and so slew her: an act
most horrible and shameful to be either spoken or heard. Every where robbery,
rapine and spoil was committed: the Senate in the mean time not only
suffering these things to escape unpunished, but also approving the same.

Upon the Territory of Lions, there bordereth a Region called Forestes, the
chief City whereof is Monbriso. Therefore the inhabitants of Forrestes having
Monsuer Monselas their Captain, anoyed the men of Lions all yt they could:
Whereupon the men of Lions having the Baron des Adretz the General, came
with an army to suppress them: and being entered in that Region, they The
horrible slaughter at Mo^briso by Adretz.
besieged the head City Monbriso: and the Townsmen refusing to yield up the
City, being encouraged to fight by their Captain Monselas, at the length
their city was battered down and taken by force: then the souldioure that got
the victory showed such cruelty, that ye streats of the city were covered
with dead carcasses: Baron des Adretz himself vehemently encouraging the
soldier to murder. There remained a fortress in the city, into the which
Monsieure Monselas with certain of the chief citizens sled. The same
notwithstanding being shortly after taken, partly by force, and partly by
surrender, Mon sieur des Adretz, after he had vewed all places of the castle,
sent in certain soldiers, to murder and spoil: who presently took Monsieur
Monselas, and his soldiers that were with him, and cast them down hedlong
from the top of the houlde. The which cruel kind of death made many to
mislike of Baron des Adretz, and the rather because he had given his faith (as
it is reported) to Monselas, and to others with him to save their lives. Thus
the city Monbriso was sacked and rased, and the whole Region therabout
spoiled. And Baron des Adretz returned again to Lions, in the month of August.

About this time in the Region of Languedoc, there was much business. The
inhabitants of Tolouze at the provocation and setting on of Monsieur Monlace,
oftentimes assaulted the city of Montauban, into the which we said before
many of the faithful fled from diverse places: but by the singular Industry,
virtue, and constancy of the men of Montauban, the inhabitants of Tolouze
prevailed nothing at all. Notwithstanding the faithful were thrust out of
Pezenac, and out of certain other Towns by Monsieur Ioyse, Liefetenant of
Languedoc. But Monsieur Sommeriue had very good success in his affairs in
Prouance, as we declared before, the which gave courage to the papists to set
upon ye faithful that were in Languedoc. Therefore Monsieur Ioyse, Co^spiracy
against La^guedoc.
Liefetenant of Languedoc, Monsieur Sommeriue, Fabricius of Auinion, and
Monsieur de Suze with others, consulted among themselves, and determined to
make so great a power, as they were able, and to join together in one with as
much speed as they could, to overcome ye faithful in Languedoc. All Prouance
belonged to the charge of Monsieur Sommeriue, to whom, because of his victory
and late good success of war, many came from diverse places, Monsieur
Fabricius had a great army which came unto him, some being Italians, and some
coming out of the Towns and territory of Uenais. And a great number attended
and followed Monsieur de Suze out of Dolpheny. But Monsieur Ioyse was of
greater power tha^ the rest, who had out of the mighty cities Tolouze and
Narbon both a great number of Soldiers, and also all manner of artillery and
other necessaries for the war. These also were aided by the men of Auuernoys,
and they had hope to receive help of the Spanish borderers, from whom came
diverse bands, whose Captain was Petru^ Lapia, a notable thief, who came from
the Mountains of Pyrren.

But the faithful had many well fenced and fortefied Cities* land and ground
enough, with sufficient store of cattle. Notwithstanding in men and other
necessaries for war, their enemies were mightier. In so much that the
Papists persuading themselves to have the victory thought it best to join
battle out of hand. Monsieur Ioyse setting upon the faithful on the one
side, and the men of Prou^nce and of Auernoys on the other side. Therefore
while great armies were a prouidinge every where, Monsieur Ioyse Liefetenant of
Languedov, first of all removed with his army, with Monsieur Forquenoz
Lieftena^t of Narbon. Their armies contained seven thousand footmen, and a
thousand horsemen: they had sir great Canons, and many other small pieces. They
pitched their Tents the fourth day of September Monsieur Ioyse besie ged
Montpellier.
at a Uillage called Lates, being a mile from Montpellier. In this place he
aboade lookinge for his fellows, thinking himself so sure to win
Montpellier, that they divided the spoils among them* as if they had already
won the City.

Thither came the Bishop of Montpellier. whose name was Pelisser. This man
being sometime well accounted of among learned men, and one that knew the
truth, but now having forsaken the same, became a notable enemy, bought and
sold Montpellier, to certain Marchaunts which only waited upon him for the
pray.

At Montpellier beside the ordinary and accustomed Garrison of the Town,
there were certain rescuing armies belonging to the churches, containing the
number ber of eight hundred horsemen, whose Captain was Iacobus Bellodine, borne
of a noble house, who afterward was called Acierus according to the name of
the territory of his Lordship, and did very notable service in the civil
wars following: and also twelve Enseignes of footmen.

After they understood that the enemy had encamped himself, they intended to
break out upon them the same day, to the end they might take a better vewe
of them: and so they came nearer the enemy with two hundred horsemen, and
five hundred Gonners, under the charge and conducte of Monsieur Ays of Nismes.

The enemy being ware of their coming, rushed out of their tents to meet
them with all speed: and thus the battle began to wax hot on both parts,
the men of Montpellier fighting with such a courage, that they constrained the
proud enemy to retire and flee back even to their tents: from whence they
discharging certain great pieces, but in vain, the faithful returned safe
into the City again, with loss of two of their men only, whereas on the
other part there were slain 100.

For this good beginning, and happy success, the faithful caused public
and sollemne thanks to be given unto God: the which being done they provided
diligently for the safety and fortefying of the City: and at the
commandment of Monsuer Bellodine, the Suburbs, in the which there were
certain great Churches, and great stoore of houses, were with the diligent
labor of the people thrown down. And after this there were certain
Skirmishes daily between both parts, the Protestants most commonly having
the victory: Insomuch that Monsuer Ioyse was discouraged from befieging the
City, before he had more help and aid from his fellows: Notwithstanding
because he would not in the mean while spend the time in vain, he intended
to assault a Castle which is in the I Will of Maguelon.

For in that part, bordering upon the Sea coast, there is a certain Fen or
Marshe, which the Sea at certain times ouerfloweth, being of a great compass
both in length and breath, in the which also there is a certain Ileland lying
out in length almost three miles: and upon this Ileland there stands a
Castle both of great antiquity, and also of sufficient force, the which at
that time the faithful held. Therefore Monsuer Ioyse took shipping and in his
ships great store of Ordinance, with the which he so battered the Castle,
that the keepers thereof for want of help yielded, and delivered the same into
his hands.

The men of Montpellier in the mean time not know ing of the yielding up of
Maguelon intended to go with all the power they were able to make out of ye
City, and to set upon their enemies camp being busied in ye besieging of ye
Castle. Therefore they went out of the City to the number of eight hundred
horsemen, and twelve Ensigns of footmen, leaving behind them a Garrison to
keep the City, carrying with them also certain field pieces. And they had
not gone far, but they met with ye Camp of Monsure Ioyse, whether he was
returned with all his men from the siege of Maguelon, and all that day was spent
between them only with discharginge shot one at another, Monsuer Ioyse
woondering at the boldness and courage of the men of Montpellier.

And while he was in a certain Manner Place, or ferme, sitting at supper with
certain of his Captains, and talking of the help and aid which he looked
for, at which time they assured them selves of the victory, it came to pass
that a certain pellet which came out of the shot of the Protestants, fell
upon the top of the house in the which he sat, and shaking the house, it
berayed the whole table at the which he supt with dust, and made their ears to
ring with the crack and rashing rent of the house. Then all of them began to
fear and tremble, doubting least the house would fall upon their heads. Then
Petrus Lapas that spanish these, of whom we spoke before, being merrily
disposed, cried to Monsuer Joyse in the Spanish tongue, saying: Behold Mon sure
Ioyse the keys, which Montpellier offers unto thee: deriding hereby his
security. The same day being the xiii. day of September, Baron des Adretz came
out of Dolpheny with eight hundred well appointed horsemen, to the Protestants
Camp of Montpellier: by the rumor of whose coming, Monsure Ioyse and the rest
of his soldiers, were not only greatly afeard, but also much offended with
the delay of their fellows. Then Monsure des Adretz, when he had found out the
situation of their Camp, minded to besiege them.

First therefore he got between them and the Marsh or fenne, and the^ did so
beset or enclose them on every side round about with men and ordinance, that
they could by no means escape, nor yet by any way attain to ayy vittailes.
And the minds of the Papists, which had conceived that the Protestants were
many mo in number ber than they were, (as they were in deed) were so discouraged
and amazed, that they durst by no means set upon their enemies, nor yet
adventure any way to escape.

But now when the soldiers of Montpellier, were thoroughly encouraged by the
aid of Adretz to the battle, and that their enemies on the other part were
quight discouraged, behold Baron de Adretz told the Captains that he must
needs depart from thence that night, for so word was brought unto him from
Lions. And entering into the City of Montpellier by the break of the day, he
commanded the Aldermen of the town to give unto him 15000. Frankes. Who for
fear of force A Frank is a piece of French coin in value ij. s. ij. d. q.
and sedition gave unto him so much money: after the receipt whereof he departed
out of the City: minding no doubt to play the false Judas and Apostata, which
afterward came to pass.

Thus the siege being broken up, word was brought to Montpellier that Monsure
Sommeriue, and Monsure de Suze, were come with a great Army, and that they
went about to make a Bridge to come over the River called the Rosne, and that
on the other part the power of ye men of Auuergnoys came to ye teritory of
Seuenas, under the charge and conduct of the Graun Prier. Word hereof also came
to the Camp of Monsure Joyse, who when This great Prier was brother to the
Cardinal of Loraine.
they understood that they were delivered from the peril, of the siege and
that there had happened so soden a change they were exceedingly comforted and
revived, as commonly it happens to men that have escaped great danger.

This rumor therefore daily increasing more and more, the men of Montpellier
saw that it was necessa ry for them to learn and know, both what power the
enemy of France had, because he was nere and perilous, and also how far
and which way he minded to go, and whether there were any way to stop him.
Therefore by the common advise of the Captains, Monsure Grill, Monsure Bari,
Monsure Bulargues, men very expert in the war, went to Nisines the twenty
day of September with five hundred horsemen, and three hundred foot men,
leaving the rest of their army behind the^ to keep the City: Who in the mean
time suffered not the enemy, which lay near the city to be in quiet, coming
out oftentimes even to their Camp, and skirmishings with them.

Now Monsieur Bulargues being a man expert and paynfull in warlike affairs,
was put in trust to vewe the Town of Sangiles, whether the enemy minded to
come, and to see whether the Town were sufficiently fortefied to defend it
self, and what garrison it had: who coming thither, saw that the City was
indifferently fortefied: and was certefied by the inhabitants of Sangiles, that
they had been summoned by the enemy to yield up the city: and while monsieur
Bulargues was there, the enemy summoned them again with the same
commandments, saying that monsieur Sommeriue and monsieur de Suze, required
them to yield up unto them forthwith the city, unless they would suffer and
abide all manner of extremity and cruelty, if the same were won by force of
battery. So monsieur Burlargues leaving twenty of his men at Sangiles, they
scarce having in their own gar rison in the town so many more good and able
soldiers and encouraging the townsmen with promise that out of hand they
should have more aid, he returned to Nismes: and conferring with his fellows,
he had charge committed unto him to conduct to the Town of Sangilles two
hundred Gonners. And monsieur Grill and Bars promised that they would follow
with the rest of the footmen and horsemen.

In the mean time word was brought to Sangiles, that the enemy was come with
a great army, containing six thousand footmen, and eight hundred horsemen,
having with them also three great Canons, and that they intended to make a
bridge over the river called ye rosne, and so besiege the town of Sangiles.
The proud and boasting Soldier approached to the walls of the city, who
notwithstanding were driven back again by those ye kept the walls with
gonnes. Then the enemies began to batter the walls with their great Canons,
and to set ladders to the walls to scale them. They of the town seeing this,
called upon their Captains to make al speed to defend them: for they were
grieved at the proud words of the papists which bragged as if they had
already won the town. And oftentimes the soldiers of monsieur Sommeriue
would cry out to the towns me^ saying: Say unto thy God, Judge me O God: for
that psalm was made a common ryme. Therefore monsieur Bulargues removed in the
night to go from Nismes with his two hundred gonners, and troop of horsemen,
which we said were appointed to aid those of Sangilles: his fellows followed
after, notwithstanding with not so much speed: and thereupon he sent unto
them to make more haste from Estegell, where they tarried their coming.

In the way to Nismes from Sangiles, there aryseth even at the first a little
hill, which lying out in length, makes an even plain, and then assendeth again
with an other hill between both which hills there are certain small
valleys: and then again that plain or level (at the entry whereof the
town of Sangiles is situate) is bounded with the River of Rosne for the space
of four and twenty furlonges, and so extends it self to the Castle called
ye Fourques, which lies over against ye city of Arles, the river of Rosne,
running between them: on the other part there lies a very large Island, and
exceeding fruitful, which, in the vulgar tongue is called Camargua; corruptly,
as it is thought, of Campus Marius, because Marius aboade there while he warred
against the people of Denmark: or else of the Greek word with Chaimaiergon
the proper name of Camargua
the which the people of Phocis, that built the city Massilia in Prouance,
called the same, which Greek word is, (...), signifying the goodness and
fertility of the ground.

By this means following, there was a bridge made by monsieur Sommeriue and
his men. First they took certain Ships, and tied them side to side with
ropes cross the River, upon which then they laid bourdes and plankes, and so
the whole army of monsieur Sommeriue went over to the other shore of
Languedoc. For the river called the Rosne, diuidteh Prouance and Languedoc
asunder. Monsieur Bulargues therefore looking for his soldiers at Estegel,
there came ryding out of the army of monsieur Sommeriue ten horsemen, not ware
of monsieur Bulargues, at whose commandment eight of the^ were presentlye
hemde in: the other two, with great fear fled back again to the army, and
made report that a great number of their enemies lay hid in the valleys beside
Estegell. Therefore monsieur Sommeriue commanded the horsemen to set
themselves in array, and every one to march from thence, and the footmen to
arm themselves with speed. Then monsieur Bulargues having placed certain
scoutes upon the top of the hill which lay between them and their enemies (for
from thence they might easily behold the whole army upon the level) was by
them told that the horsemen of monsieur Sommeriue, were coming toward them
in battle array. Here monsieur Bulargues, being like to be ouercom easily by
the greater number of his enemies, devised a way out of hand, and brought all
his soldiers out of the valleys and set them upon the top of the hill to make
ye greater show to terrify his enemies. Whose pollitique devise had good
success: for so soon as the enemy saw them upon the top of the hill, they
suspected that it was a train made to beguile them: imagining also, that so
small a number durst not come so nighe, except they were sure of more aid, and
that therefore they showed them selves, because they would allure them forward
until they had gotten the advantage of ye place, and then with a great number
to join battle with them. The^ they stayed even right over against them, and
so keeping a while their battle array, they returned back again to their
camp.

In the mean time some were sent again to accelerate and hasten the coming
of Monsure Grill, and Bari, who at the last came with the rest of the Army:
which being joined with those that were before with Monsure Bulargues, made the
whole Army to be in number one thousand, five hundred of them horsemen, and the
other five hundred being footmen: and for the space of certain hours they
abode there still in battle array in the sight of the Army of Monsure
Sommeriue: which Army when Monsure Bulargues perceived to be quiet, they came
to the town of Sangiles, that as it was appointed, they might both aid the
City and also return out of hand to Nismes.

Therefore Monsure Bulargues leaving his fellows hard by the town, sent into
the town two hundred goonners, and shortly exhorted them and the soldiers
that were in the town to play the men, promising unto them that he would not
be long from them. And then going out of the City he perceived that the enemy
had raised their siege, and therefore he ran in have to see which way they were
gone. And he saw the Army going toward the Rosne, as though they fled away.
Then he ran and told this thing joyfully to his fellows, that they might see
the discomfited enemy fleeing away: and therefore he said that they must not
neglecte this occasion which God had offered them: for God fights for his: be
therefore says he of good courage, and let us pursue the enemy. And thus
talking a while with his soldiers, many of them because they were a few in
number refused so to do, (for he had with him only a hundred and A wonderful
victory gotten by Monsieur Bulargues.
twenty horsemen.) Then he said, Let him that loves me follow me: And so
setting spoures to his horse, he and so many as were with him pursued after the
enemy, until he came within three hundred paces of them: at the sight whereof
the horsemen of Monsure Sommeriue fled by and by before the footmen, which
were appointed to keep the ordinance.

Monsure Bulargues making no stay put forth his horse and began to skirmish:
and after the discharging of two small pieces, the horsemen of Monsure
Sommeriue, leaning their great ordinance, turned their backs, and brake
through the raye of the footmen, and so the whole Army began to flee. Then
Monsure Bulargues with the rest of his fellows began to cry, The victory, and
killed whom soever they met, though they made no resista^ce, and so they made a
great slaughter. And by reason of the coming of more aid to Monsure
Bulargues, there was the greater slaughter made, every where some sleing and
some pursuing and ouercomming.

Notwithstanding they which came last delaying the time, because they believed
not the same to be true which Monsure Bulargues told them, many horsemen of
Monsure Sommeriue, which were on the other part of y^ Army, and had the better
horses, escaped by flight over the Bridge and among these were monsure
Sommeriue, and monsure de Suze, who breaking the Bridge for fear least their
enemies should follow after them, caused a great number the more of their men
to be slain: There fore the scattered soldiers, ran up and down, to and fro,
seeking how to escape, but found no way. Wheruppon many cast themselves into ye
River called ye Rosne, that they might swim over to the other side:
notwithstanding many perished in the water.

It is said that monsieur Sommeriue lost of his men beside Great slaughter of
the Papists.
those that were drownde four thousand at the least: and of the faithful but
one only, and the same was slain by one of his fellows unawares. And in this
skirmish, the most wicked murderers and spoylers of the people of GOD were
slain, of which the greatest part of that Army did consist. The faithful then
carried away their tents, and all other moueables, of which there was great
stoore: three great field pieces and a great number of Calleuers: they found
also certain Letters found.
letters in the cariadge of monsieur Sommeriue, and monsieur de Suze, by which
it appeared that they were fully persuaded to have the victory, and determined
also to make hauoc and spoil of the Churches in Languedoc. But monsieur
Sommeriue and the rest that were escaped, to excuse this their effeminate
consterantion and fear, afterward pretended: That they thought that Baron
des Adretze had ben^come with an Army from Lions and Dolpheny: and that beside
the credible suspicion, the great boldness of monsieur Bulargues, and certain
red Ensigns like to the Ensigns of Baron des Adretz made them to believe more
firmly their conceived opinion. So that of so great a number, there were not
many that returned back again into Prouance, and to A^, and that without the
spoils of Languedoc.

While these things thus came to pass at Sangiles, monsieur Beaudisne and the
townsmen also were great ly careful and occupied in fortefying Montpellier,
and in providing all things necessary for the same. Notwithstandig the
soldiers of monsieur Joyse boldly went about to invade them: and after
consultation, they went about to overthrow a Mill which the townsmen great ly
occupied, being about half a mile distant from Montpellier: notwithstanding in
vain, being driven away by those that kept the Town, and some of them
flayne, among whom was Petrus Lapia the Spanish thief.

Then news was brought concerning the slaughter of the Papists at Sangiles:
the which as it dismayed Monsieur Joyse, and his men, so it greatly confirmed
and encouraged the inhabitants of Montpellier. Whervppon they caused a sollemne
assembly to be made to give thanks unto God, the which being done, monsuer
Beaudisne gave commandment that fires should be made upon the tops of
every house (for at Montpellier every house has a tower built higher than it
self of stone, and open in the top) both to put the enemies in mind of the
vi^tory, and also to discourage them quight. And there were so many fires made
throughout the City, that it seemed to be on a light fire.

Monsuer Grill taking his hands of men returned toward Montpellier, and was
come to a little Town called Lunell, being in the midway between Montpellier
and Nismes. This was well enough known to the enemy, but not understood of
monsuer Beaudisne, monsuer Grill not thinking it necessary, to give
intelligence here of to the inhabitants of Montpellier, and because of the fame
of the late victory he conducted his Soldiers out of order, and carelessly.
When monsuer Joyse understood of the coming of monsuer Grill, he chose out
the most seruisable men in his whole Army, and went out of his camp by the
break of y^ day, making a show as though he would go toward the sea, but
casting about again* he took his journey toward Lunell.

The which when the watchmen that were in the Towers saw, they admonished
monsuer Beaudisne, there of: who suspectinge where about monsuer Joyse went, he
armed and appointed soldiers so fast as he could went out of the City and
marched forward in have: and when he was come to his iournyes end, he found his
fellows dispersed, out of their array, and fleeing, monsuer Joyse following full
fast. Then there began a whot skirmish between them. But at the first meeting
the Souldyers of Montpellier being the stronger part, monsuer Joyse began to
retire till he came to an Olive grove behind him, and there he and his men
planted themselves, and skirmished whotly with their gu^nes, by which they had
now the vantage: for their gonners were foot men, and the place into the which
they had gotten, was both very san die, and also full of trees: at the last
monsuer Joyse entered into a vineyard, and so returned back again to his camp*
The dead bodies of both parts that were found in the fields were a hundred
and fifty, of which the greater part were Protestants. This was done the
third day after the victory of Sangiles.

Notwithstanding monsuer Joyse having no hope to be aided from Prouans and
Auuergnoys* thought it not best to attempt any farther, for that he was more
like to be in peril of his enemies than to anoy them. Therefore packing and
trussing up his bag and baggage, he marched his army to Lates, the third of
October, having thus spent in vain all the month with loss of C C C. of his
men at the foresaid skirmyshes. And the soldiers disdaining, and almost ready
seditiou^y to fall upon monsieur Joyse, because they wanted their wages under
the couller of the spoils of Montpellier, (for that was promised them for
their service) they sacked and spoiled by the sufferance of monsieur Joyse a
little Town called Florence, in the territory of monsieur Cursoll.

Where upon this jest was made of them, They favored Montpellier a town of
Surgery and phisike.
of purpose Montpellier, because they Wanted Surgeans, that they might spoil
and sack Florence, but not Florence in Italy.

From thence they went to Villeneufue, and there tariing certain days, they
minded to go to Agde* which bor dereth upon the Sea to assault the same. This
Agde was kept by the Garrison of montpellier, monsieur Senglar having charge of
the same. There were sent also from ye borders of Blitter a hundred
hargabuzeres to aid those of Agde* To assult this Agde monsieur Joyse planted
his ordinance and began to ba^er the walls, and at the length ma^e a breach in
the same forty pa^es broad, at the which monsieur Joyse and his men seking to
enter, the Towns men valyantly desended themselves, and gave them the repulse*
and slew at this ski^mish. CCCC. of them at the ^east, among which were the
Captains and chief men of the Army. When ^nsieur Joyse saw that he could not
p^uayle* and was certif^ed by his scouts, that the men of M^tpellier prepared
themselves to raise the siege, he removed his camp from thence: and had
scarsly* passed over the river, when as the men of mont pellier, came to Agde,
and being certified that the enemy was ^n, they went (...)the river* and began
to pursu after: and monsieur (...) in pursuing, (...)with CCC. footeme^ which
had for saken the army, and went to the hill country to rob and spoil, these
he with a certain troop of horsemen s^ew: and then he reto^rned to montpellier
again with two ensigns, and a very great sp^il* The rest of the Army ca^e to
Narbon with monsieur (...)^oyse and (...). These were the euentes and exploytes
of both parts, in Languedoc.

But for all this* the Guise* and his compartners, ceased not to proc^de in
their former wicked purpose. For Poictiers being won (as we said before by
the marshall of Santand^, the army was conducted with all the power that might
be made, to assault and win Burges in Berry, being a city of great force and
ner^ to Orleans. Mo^sieur de Iuoy, a man of noble birth, was governor of this
city under the Prince of Conde, and had under his charge a well appointed
garriso^ containing to the number of ten engsignes of footmen* and CC.
horsemen. Now all the cities of Berr^ being rendered up, and the whole Region
almost being spoiled, Burges was also besieged the ^. day of August, with a
very strong Army. In the which Army there were three thousand horsemen, and
fiueteene hundred footmen: and they had with them The besieging of Burges in
Ber^i.
very many great gunnes. The King and the Queeue, and the King of Nauar, almost
followed the Camp. The city being shaken and ^hattered very sore with their
great gunnes, they made at the length great breaches in the walls* the
soldiers of the Guise lustely geuinge the assault. Notwithstanding they of
the Town like taule Soldiers* manly defended themselves* and gave their
enemies the repulse: also daily they brake forth of the city, to the great
anoyance and hurt of the enemy. But whilst there were sending from Paris more
men both horsemen and foot men to aid the Guise* and greater gunnes also*
with store of shot and poulder* the Admiral removed from Orleans with a band
of well appointed soldiers, and set upon them at Chasteaudun as they were
going with the forsaid provision. And he slew many of them, took their great
gunnes, and carried away all their artillery* But for want of horses and carriage
to carry away the great gunnes, the Admiral gave commandment to over charge
the great gunnes with poulder, and so to shake them in peers, and to fire the
(...)poulder that remained.

Notwithstanding, the same day, monsieur de Iuoy, either for want of aid and
vittayles; as he afterward excused himself, or else by treason, as the
soldiers for the most part commonly reported, took truce with the Guises
about the yielding up of the ci^ie upon these conditions: namely, that monsieur
de Iuoy, his Captains, his soldiers, and all in the town, should escape
with their lives and goods, and be left to the liberty of their consciences:
and to be in no peril of harm for bearing armor, or for their religion*
Furthermore* that all his army should join with the Kings power, and so be
under the kings protection, and under the protection of the King of Nauar* and
of all his Prince^* also that mo^sieur de Iuoy his Captay^es, and noble men,
should have lea^t to salute the King. And, because monsieur de Iuoy said, that
he had made an oath to the Prince of Conde, preten ding ye obedi^ce of the
King, it was agreed that he should have leave (his soldiers remaining in the
mean time with the Kings power) to go to the Prince of Conde: and coming
back again from him, should signify unto the King his whole mind and
conscience: as whether he and his fellows could find in their hearts to be
sworn to the King without any exception or condition: if not, he should have
leau^ to go home to his house without peril of any manner of harm^, either to
him, or too any of his Captains or soldiers, upon this condition, that they
should never after bear armor against the king or enter into any city which
was kept against his Majesty. And finally, it was ^greed, that whatsoever
monsieur de Iuoy at the commandment of the Prince of Conde, had taken out of
the Kings treasury, or from the Church, to (...)this war, should never be
lay^d to his charge, or to the charge of any of his deputies, or substituts:
and that the Decrees of the Senate of Paris, or of any other Court, against
these things should be ^ayde.

Upon these conditions the City was rendered up, possessed by the Guises
soldiers, and the Garrison of monsieur de Iuoy brought out of the Town to
the Guise* army. Then monsieur de Iuoy went toward Orleans sending a messenger
before him to signif^e the whole matter to the Prince of Conde, and to declare
the cause of his coming: Who, when he understood that (...)de Iuoy mad^
request to be discharged of his oath, he sent him word that he should not
approach near the Ci^ie: willing him to consider what it is to make an oath to
God and to Religion: certyfying him herewith that he would not be an instrument
and partaker of his treason and falshehood. And so monsieur de Iuoy returned
to the Guise^ army again, the which he followed afterward, almost during
all that war, and certain other Captains and soldiers with him.
Notwithstanding the greatest part, by the sufferance of the Guise, were
dismis^: and returned to Orle^ns under the conduct of Damplerre. Therefore all that region, even to (...), yielded to the Guise: the faithful being
euerywhere cruelly handled, to whom notwithstanding a certain town called
Montargis was a present refuge, by the benefit of the Duchess of Ferrer
called R^nee, the daughter of Lodowic the xii. King of France: the Duke of
Guise being greatly offended thereat, and threatening the Duchess whom
notwithstanding he favored as his moother in Law, and the Kings daughter.

The Duke of Guise having gotten the victory, removed from V^aron the eleventh
day of September, and came to (...): the chief City in Normandy, which we
said before, Duke de Aumall besieged in vain. But now it The besieging of
Roan in Normandy.
was more strongly besieged, both with a mightyer army, and also with more
valiant and expert Captains: and was so assaulted that notwithanding the
manhood, and strong defense of County Momtgomery and his soldiers in the
town, the Guise obtained both the Castle of Sancatharine, and also the City.
Notwithstanding, County Momgomery and a great number of soldiers with him
took ship, and escaped. Great murder was committed in the City, and the
same thoroughly sacked. And among others that were put to death in the City,
Augustine Marlorat was one, being a Minister of gods word in the reformed
Church of Roan, whom they hanged openly upon a pair of Gallows: yea the
professors of the Gospel in every corner of the City went to the pot.

In the time that the City was besieged, the King of Na^ar, as he was leaning
upon his Ten^e, or making water against the same, with his back toward the
The death of the king of Nauar.
town, was shot in the shoulder with a small pellot: and being sore wounded,
was carried from thence by the river of S^in to Paris: and there within few
days after, being weary of his life through extreme pain, desperately dyed:
The Queen, the King of Nauars wife, being very careful for his health: who
showed hirselfe always the Queen of Nauar a virtuous Lady.
very modest and constant, both in doing her duty with all obedience,
notwithstanding his evil disposition toward harlots, and also in firm
abiding in y^ truth: being also very careful for the virtuous education of
her children, but specially for the trayninge up of her son in the reformed
Religion, whom the Guises went about to nussell in all kind of wickedness.

Therefore the Prince of Conde wrote letters of comfort vnt^ her: certefying
her, that a great many at Orleans were sore agreeued for the death of hi^
husband. This therefore was the end of the King of Nauarr^, who after that
he had forsaken the defense of the truth, was the cause of many troubles*
being so much more hurtful to the church, as he might have been profitable,
if it had not ben the purpose of God to declare that he himself is the only
author, builder, pre^eruer and defender of his church, and not man, how noble
so ever h^ be: for herein stands the glory of God.

The Prince of Conde had oftentimes entreated the Queen of England^, while
there was some hope that peace might be had by entreaty* that her hignnes would
be a help to him therein: but at the length, the matter being brought to be
tried by force of arms, as we showed before, he required of her highness,
money and ^ouldiours to maintain war.

Therefore about this time, when there was a rumor spread abroad of the coming
of the German^s, and of the ^ide out of England, to help the Prince of Conde,
there A writing published by the Queen of England concerning the help she
sent to the Prince of Conde.
was a writing published in the name of the Queen of England, (who also had
sent Ambassadors to the king about the same pacification: but they little
profited, yea, and returned almost without any answer) In the which she both
laid to the Guises charges that they were the authors and causes of all the
war, and also affirmed that she would take upon her, as it became her, the
defense of the Kings cause: And also that all Christian Realms and Princes,
ought both to be moved to compassion and pity, at the afflicted and troubled
state of France at this time, and to move thom to have a deep consideration
and care to provide remedies, by which not only the King a child, the Queen
his mother, and all the Kings sons her children, and so all the people of
France, may be delivered and free from present trouble: but also to evil and
rent up by the roots, so great a mischief, least the same should spread it
self to other nations: Notwithstanding (says she) there is no man to whom this
common care does more specially appertain than unto me: which being both of my
self inclined to care, and also confirmed and provoked thereunto by the
judgments of my Counsaylers, have hitherto gone about by all means, to do the
best I could, to stop and prevent the first beginnings of the great mischief
like to ensue. And why I ought thus to do, both the commiseration and pity of
the king, my well-beloved brother, a child, and my neighbor: of the Queen his
Mother, of all the Kings children, and of so great a people: and also the
present peril of conueying the same war over the Sea unto as (all men of
sound judgment, either hare, or ^ls where, both beholding and talking of these
things, and also praising this care, of it self very commendable) may
sufficiently declare, and show my mind in this matter worthy of commendation:
Notwithstanding it seems reasonable to setforth in open writing how and after
what manner I have behaue^ my self herein: that all men my see how I have dealt
with my neighbors, and how I mean to deal hereafter.

First, all men might see how greatly even since the beginning of my reign, I
have desired, that every She means* Callice.
Christian might enjoy prate and concord: when as because of the same I have
willingly departed from my right, and have let go some part of my ancient
Dominion for a time: when as otherwise they for whose sake I have received this
loss, recovered and received by and by all that was taken from them. And yet
notwithstanding* all men remember and know in how short time after, and for
what just and manifest causes I am constrained, seeing that I am offered great
injury and violence, She means the Scottish Queen.
to proclayme also my self, open war: both to deliver me and my kingdom
from peril, and also to free my neighbors which fled unto me for succor,
from open tirrany. In the which matter notwithstanding how uprightly I have
dealt, all men may see: first by exhortations to abstain from war: then by
open declaration that I minded to deliver my self and mine from violence and
wrong: after that, by all manner of good government and disposing of matters:
and last of all by the very (...)and end of the thing it self.

After the pacification of those troubles, to the end I might leave nothing
undone to make true and assured peace and concord* I made a firm and
everlasting League with the Queen of Scots my well-beloved Sister, and my near
neighbor. In the which matter; how sincerely and truly I have behaved my
self, God knows, and sundry benefits and gifts whith I bestowed upon the
Guises, Uncles to the Queen of Scotts, and upon their servants, may
sufficiently declare my great good will herein: beside the mutual and freendly
communication also which I had with the same Queen of Scots. But among these
deliberations, and communications concerning peace, beside the lack which I
had of the fruit of peace. I am also constrained to have a study and care for
those new troubles in the kingdom of France, raised up by those, which have
always showed themselves to be enemies toward me: and what they have done to
make new suspicions between me and the Queen of Scotts, for the same Queen
of Scotts sake, I have always hitherto kept silence.

At the beginning, when I knew well enough, if these troubles should prenaile,
it would not only come to pass amidest the Civil dissentions, that the
kingdom of France should come into great peril of destruction as now it is:
but also that other Christian Realms, and especially my own Realm should
fall into the same peril, both for the neerenes of the places, and also
because the authors of those troubles are my enemies: I used all means that I
could, both by Letters and also by Ambassages, that there might some ways be
taken for peace and concord between both parts. Notwithstanding one part
refused the same; and bursted forth into open violence and mortal war, yet I
ceased not from my purpose and good intent.

But when I saw, that the desire of cruelty daily more and more enereased,
and that every where bloodshed, and butcherly murder was committed: and (which
was most perillons) that the young King and his Mother were suddenly besieged,
and came into their hands without aid and succor, and that he was so forced
by them, that he would suffer his authority to be abused, to the murdering of
his poor and innocent people, to the besieging and spoiling of his Noble
Cities, to the breaking of good and wholesome Edictes, to the injury of the
Kings kinsmen and Nobles, and to the ruin and destruction of the Kings
faithful servants, beside an infinite number of wickednesses mo: and all, to
satisfy their wills and minds, which determined to break the Kings
Edictes, without punnishment: which Edictes were made by the^ States of the
Realm, for the preservation of peace and tranquillity, and for the safety of
the Kings Majesty: When also I perceived that they went about and had already
put in practice to overthrow and destroy the Religion, and the professors and
followers of the same: I thought it good and most necessary for these causes,
to provide out of hand a more effectual and forceable remedy, that the authors
of these troubles, might at the last he constrained, to come to peace and
concord, upon reasonable conditions: least the whole Kingdom of France,
through the unbridled and outrageous wills of a few, should be brought into
so great peril.

And for these causes I sent some of my Counsel Ambassadors into France,
wise, grave, and experiensed men, and addicted to neither part: that in the
extremity of these matters, there might be a remedy found out, whereby their
King and sovereign Lord might be obeyed, and the peace and tranquillity of
the Realm mayntayned. Notwithstanding this my labor and good endeavor, was not
thankfully taken, neither could I have any answer from the young King, nor from
his Mother the Queen, being made a feared by that part which was the cause of
all these troubles.

Whilst therefore I was carefully busied about these things, and had no other
care than for the profit of the King, my well-beloved brother, without
condemning of either part: I was other wise dealt withal than I looked for.
Whereby appeared that their will and mind was, which so often times denied the
bearing of those things, which were propounded by me and mine at my
commandment, for peace and concordes sake. For all my Marchaunts of London and
of other parts of my Realm, which came into certain places of Britain,
only about their Merchandise, and were preparing to return home again, were
taken, and robbed and dispoyled of all their goods: and they which sought to
defend them selves, were cxuelly slain, their ships and Merchandise taken,
by the Magistratrs of those places whereunto they arrived: and that for no
other cause, but for that they were reported to be Huguenotes By the which
word, although it seemed strange to those poor Marchaunts and Mariners, who
knew not what it meant, it sufficiently appeared from whom they received
commandment to do these things, and what they would do more, if time and
occasion would suffer. This was no small rapine or light spoil, but of great
weight: it was not done suddenly or marage, but by ye common Magistrate, upon
the commandment of the Governor of those parts, and that by great
contencion with my subjects. The matter being complained of to those that
should have reformed the same, nothing was done: but to make a mendes, one of
my messengers coming homwards with letters of my Ambassador was robbed: the
which also escaped unpunished without any farther examination. Whereby I
perceive, that the King, or Queen his Mother, or rather the King of Nauar, do
rather want authority than good will. And certainly it is manifest both by
this and by an infinite sort of other arguments, in what state and condition ye
young King stands: when as he may not preserve his people and household,
establish his laws and Edicts, nor give no just answer to other Princes and
Nations. By which, and by other wicked devises, practiced against me and my
Realm, it appears to all men of sound judgment, how greatly that violence,
(which is now used in France by the Guises and his fellows) does toutch not
only France, but also me, and my whole Realm, more than any other Prince.

Therefore, for so much as the dignity and authority of the King and the Queen
his Mother, and of his Counselors lovers of peace, cannot at this time so much
prevail, as to have abillitie and leave to rule and govern, or to do any thing
else appertaining either to their own people, or to other Nations, or to their
own proper persons: seeing also the Kings tender age, and the Queen his
Mother are so circumuented and snared, that they must condescend and agree to
whatsoever the Guises will have them: as may testify those great destructions
and manifold calamities, which the authors of these troubles have brought, in
besieging, assaulting, and sacking the Kings Cities and Towns, and in
shedding the innocent blood of his subjects: also, seeing they have caused
civil war that they might abolish and extinguish in every place the reformed
Religion, and do seek to make mortal war in every part of the whole world:
furthermore seeing they are the authors and fautors of these pitiful and
lamentable troubles and are noted so to be of all men, who, if they might have
time and opportunity, would seek by all means possible, to violate and
diminish the state and dignity of my Realm: and to conclude, seeing of late
also they have openly gone about to contend with me by force of arms, (but by
the grace and goodness of God were disapoynted of their purpose) and do yet
diligently seek the same, and also to advance them selves to my inco^moditie:
shall I suffer and bear with those sworn and mortal enemies to peace and
concord? Shall I suffer the blood of my neighbors to be cruelly shed, if by
any manner of means I might let the same? Shall I suffer the young King my
well-beloved brother, to be besieged and in great peril, and not to be counted
unthankful and merciless? Shall I as unwise and negligent have no
consideration or regard to my mortal enemies, and to their practice. Therefore
for these just, evident and necessary causes of the Kings subjects, requiring
my help and aid in these tempests and calamities: I commanded many of my
subjects, to be armed both by Sea and land, to deliver the subjects of my
well-beloved brother the King of France, from tirrany, Rapine, murder, and
destruction: and to keep certain Cities, bordering upon the sea coast and
more near unto us, in saftie from those enemies, least the peace made between
me and my brother the King being broken, they might the more easily war
against my Realm.

To provide for the which things time calls upon me. For I have the
testimony of a good conscience, and do protest that I in these things do use
such sinceritye and integrity, that I seek and iusue christian peace, as I
ought: and I doubt not, but that the protection and defense of innocent blood
is acceptable unto God: and will be taken in very good part, of my well beloved
Brother, when he shall come unto that age, that he shall be able with equity to
Judge of these matters. It will serve also for the lawful protection and
preservation of me and of my people.

And to be short, by the great goodness of God, it shall be an occasion of more
firm and sure peace, between me and my well beloved Brother the King of
France: that either of us may peaceably use our libertys. And this one thing
also I most earnestly say and affirm, to my beloved Brother the King of
France, to the Queen his mother, to the King of Nauar, and to all his
faithful Counsaylers and servants. That I, whatsoever any mallicious person
hereafter shall report, will deal in this matter with such sincerity and
integritye, as both the thing it self and the time shall require: and will
usurp nothing to my self, nor offer injury and violence to any one of his
subjects. And this I protest before God, his Angels, and before all men in
the universal world, that my full mind, and intent is, in these extreme and
perillouse times, to deliver the subjects of my brother the King of France,
from the destruction like to come by these Civil wars: seeing that I embrace
the peace and concord made between me and my Brother the King, I will omit
no occasion to set him in his former lyberty, and to restore peace and
tranquilitye to his people. The which shall come to pass, when it shall please
God to give a better mind to the authors of these troubles, and to make them
content with that which is their own, that they may both keep them within the
limits of their duty, and also as good subjects to be lovers of peace. The
which at this time ought specially to be sought for, namely, rather peace and
concord, by the con sent and agreement of the Christian Princes and states, than
to stir up lamentable war among Christians, by fire and swerd.

About this time there was a certain writing of Letters of the Princes of
Germany, to the Germaynes which were in the army of the Guises*
all the Princes of Germany that were protestants, sent to those armies of
horsemen and footmen, which seruid the Guise under the conduct and charge of
the Rokendolph to this effect following: All the Princes Electores,
protestants, of the sacred Empire, will and command this thing to be notified
and declared to all the Germans, which serve the Duke of Guise under the
conducte of the Rokendolph* being by him dereyued: which Guise abusing the age
and authority of the king of France, would abuse your hands and power to be
instruments, to ertyrpe and destroy all those which profess the Gospel. And
although the horrible murders and cruelties of the Duke of Guise, of his
Brother the Cardinal, and of the rest of his fellows, have been openly showed
upon al Christians lovers of the truth, yet notwithstanding, you (which we
heard of to our great grief) are ready to help and aid the Duke of Guise.
And besides this it is evidently known to all men, that ye Rokendolph your
Captain is banished discredited, and openly proclaimed a traitor, by the
public judgment, and solemn decree of the Emperor, and of al ye states of
the Empire, for his false betraying of the Germans into the hands of the
Turk: notwithstanding ye being deceived by their wonted guiles, and subtle
words, have agreed to go with him into France, and at this time also are ready
to obey him, and to do whatsoever he will have you: whereby it is plain that
ye will forsake al christian faith and charity, and love of virtue and praise,
for the Duke of Guise, and for the Rokendolph your captains sake: such an
example given hereby as has not bin heard of heretofore among the Germans.
For these causes, we will and command you, being admonished by this writing,
and do exhort and earnestly require all and every of you, which have any
regard to your good name and fame, and have hitherto bin deceived by the fraud
and subtilty of the Rokendolph, that ye take heed and have regard to the great
infamy and reproach which you shall sustain hereafter: that you forsake out of
hand your Captain the Rokendolph, and the Army of the Duke of Guise: whose
principal purpose and intent is, to root out and destroy Christians, whom we
mind to defend with all our might and power. And therefore whatsoever he be
that shall refuse to obey this our commandment, let him be well assured that
he shall have the same punishment of ignominy and shame that the Rokendolph
has: Let all men know this for a suertie.

These letters greatly troubled the minds of the Germans, of which the
greatest part of the Guises army consisted: but the under Captains and
Centurions being corrupted for the most part with money, they little or nothing
prevailed. Notwithstanding a few under the charge and conduct of County
Waldech forsakinge the Guises army, came to Orleans to the Prince of Conde.

The Duke of Guise having good success in his business according to his mind,
and contrariwise the Prince of Conde, coming daily more and more into
farther Quillebedouius.
extremity, many forsook the prince of Conde, among which were many noble men:
who, by the Guises commandment, were peaceably received, notwithstanding with
the reprochful name of Quillebedouius, which signifies a Traiterous coward.
These startawaies had the Kings letters of warrant given to every one of them,
in manner and form as follows.

Thomas. R. or J. B. or else such a one, has declared unto The Kings letters
patents granted to those that started away from the Prince of Conde and the
fruits there of.
us that he was persuaded to put himself in armor, thinking it to be done upon
his allegance and obedience toward us, because he was told that we and the
Queen my Mother were captiued: and to this end he has followed those which
have taken many of our Cities. And for these causes he is condemned by the
sentence of our Judges to dye, and his goods already brought into our treasury
and his house straightly watched and warded, to the which he dare not come but
by our gracious benefit and help, the which he most humbly requires. We
therefore upon consideration of his mind and pur pose, which he says, and of
the which we are certyfied also, shall be to live ever hereafter in our
obedience: and also to the end we may gratefie the requests of certain of our
faithful servants: For these causes, and for diverse other great and weighty
causes also mouinge us hereunto, we have permitted and granted, and by these
presents do permi^ and grant to the said T. R. although he has borne
armor, and has contributed money to aid those which as enemies have armed
themselves in this our Realm against us, and for the establishing of the new
Religion, or has otherwise helped and furthered seditious persons with their
advise and counsel, and has gone to besiege Cities without and contrary to
my will and pleasure: that it may notwithstanding be lawful for him to go home
to his house, and peaceably to enjoy his goods: and for none of all those
faults to be in no perell hereafter by any manner of means, either for wearing
armor, or for Religion: commaundinge that all sentences pronounced against
him for these causes to be void and of none effect: and that his goods and
substance which has bin brought into our treasury, be given and restored to
him again: and commanding also the watch and ward about his house to cease,
whatsoever has bin ordained and decreed in our Parlements for this matter,
notwithstanding. Also that it shall not be needful for the said T. R. our
suppliant, to have any other argument or proof to declare our will and
pleasure herin, but these our letters only. Notwith standing provided that he
be no author of seditions, of rapines, or of spoiling of Churches, nor that he
secretly convey to our enemis either money or armor: and also upon this
condition that he live ever hereafter, Catholicly, and come not to the service
or rytes of the new Religion: and that he never hereafter bear armor against
us, nor do aid and assiste those that are our enemies, any manner of way.

But as by these means snares were laid to trap and entangle the simple and
heedelesse sort (as shortly after appeared in many when they were come home) so
there was no stay of excommunications thoondered out at Paris. at Tbolouze,
and at Bordeaulx, and in other places where the papists ruled, against such as
were counted Huguenotes: strayt charge being given to al me^ to detect such
persons: the pain appointed, threatened to such as should conceal any such
so suspected, and a reward promised to him that would detect any such person:
the Kings Attorney being commanded to inquire and and out such causes, and to
bring them with all speed before the Senate. Then after the publishing of
those letters of warrant from the King, whereof we spoke before, the Senate or
Parliament of Paris decreed, that all those men which came from Burges,
Poytiers, Meaulx, Roane, Lions, and from other Cities which were kept by the
Prince of Conde, to Paris, should be taken: and that they should be punished
according to the prescript of ye Kings Edicte, which commands al men of the
new Religion to go out of Paris, notwithstanding that they had gotten the
Kings letters of warrant, and had made a Catholic confession (as they term
it) of their faith.

Roane being won, as we declared before, the army of the Guise came to Paris
about the beginning of November, The Guise tetourneth to Paris.
the rumor increasing more and more concerning the aid of the Germans and of
the English men, which should come to the Priuce of Conde very shortly.

Therefore Roan being fortified again, and the breaches of the walls being
builded up, and a Garrison left in ye town, the Duke of Guise returned back
again with The Guise comes to Paris.
his army to Paris. In ye mean time came the armies out of Germany to
Orleans, sent by ye protestant Princes under the conduct and charge of the
Marshall of Hessen. They were thirteen enseignes of horsemen, containing Aid
comes from the Princes of Germany to the Prince of Conde.
in just number 2600, and eleven enseignes of footmen, containing three
thousand soldiers. Then the Prince of Conde, when he had gathered together
an army, minded to remove from Orleans and to go to Paris. But before his
departure from thence, he published a writing, in the which he clears
himself from being the author of the first motions, and of the civil war,
deryuing and laying the same upon the Guises and his fellows: and protests
that duty moves him too enter into war, to deliver the King and the whole
Realm from those injuries and violence. This which follows is the sum of
his letter.

I have hitherto sufficiently (says he) by many writings Another writing of
the Prince of Conde.
published and sent abroad, evidently declared, that the Guises, the Constable,
and the Marshiall of S. Andrew, are the authors, and the first and true causes
of those troubles, which we see at this time to be so hot and outra giouse in
the Realm: because they took disdain, that they should be removed from the
government which they usurped in the days of King Fraunces the second, and
were offended at the decree of the States of the Realm, in which they are
commanded to make an account of the exceeding number of gifts which they had
received in the former Kings days, and of the ordering and bestowing of the
Kings money: greatly refusinge, not only to be delivered from this account,
but also using their former subtilties, to enriche and set up them selves by
the ruin and decay of others. After that I showed the diverse Counselles and
secret deliberations had, they covering their conspiracies with the cloak of
Religion, and how they began to arm them selves by their own prinate
authority, contrary to the express commandments of the Queen, and the
Decree of the States, breaking the common peace: how they contemning the
Queens authority, and the decree of the States, by which they were commanded
to go home to their own houses, came with an army ofmen and took the King
and Queen into their hands perforce, with so much grief to the King, that he
declared the same with tears openly. I have also declared, and will ever
evidently declare that I have for just and necessary causes, and by the
express commandments of the Queen her self, (as may appear by letters
sealed with her own hand) armed my self: and have been nominated and elected
by her to take upon me the defense of this cause: as can testify Monsure
Jarnac, Monsure Soubize, and mo^sieur Pordillan, to who^ she expressly
declared, that it was her will that the Kings faithful subjects should obey
me, and that they should at my commandment withstand the counselles and
practices of the Kings adversaries, to restrain their licenciouse wills. And
as for me, if I should not take the sword in hand, the King and Queens
Majesty's, and the Realm cannot choose but be ruled by the wills of the
adversaries, whom experience has showed of late to be the tyraunts of France.
And now, although I have the testimony of a good conscience toward God and
the Queen, who has power and authority to govern the Realm: and although I
have already declared all my actions and the truth of my cause, by diverse
writings: yet nevertheless, because my adversaries, according to their wonted
wicked custom, do send abroad into forreyne nations many false reports and
sclaunders in writing, impudently burthening me with false lies, making me
the author and cause of all these troubles. I which desire to have a good name
and report among all Christian Princes and Nobles, and among the Kings
faithful subjects, and which desire to keep my honor and dignity: thought
good, after many other to publishe this writing also.

To the end all men may understand, how carefully even until this present
day, I have labored and sought by all means possible to mitigat and pacefie
those troubles raised by their wickedness: not only because I know what great
destruction will come thereby, but also because I have a singular care and
desire, both to stablish the Kings authority and dignity, the safety and
preservation of the Kings faithful subjects, the liberty of their
consciences, and also the peace and tranquillity of this Realm, in the which
I was borne. And I am fully persuaded, that the only demonstration of ye which
I have done and will do, shall prove those my adversaries, liars and
sclaunderers, and shall bring to pass, that never hereafter any indifferent
man shall give credit to the like. First of all, every man may behold and see,
how I alone in the beginning of this our Kings reign, procured peace and
tranquillity, and sought to put away al occasions of seditions and troubles:
for the which cause, I had much ill will and displeasure in the days of King
Of this me^ cion was made in the second book of co^me^taries
Fraunces. II. but I have forgiven that injury. Since that time hitherto, those
enemies of God, the King, and public peace, were offended with the decrees of
ye States, and with the form of Government, which they then perceived to be
contrary to their ambition: when as they had determined to peruerte all things,
and to enlarge their power and tyranny: to the which end and purpose they
conspired with strangers: the which conspiracye is more perniciouse and
detestable, than was the co^spiracie of the Triumuiri of Rome, as now appears
by the lamentable effects thereof: but I, on the contrary part, to quench that
burning fyrebrand of troubles, have left nothing undone that I could do.
Neither did I regard the goodness of my cause, nor the wickedness of my
adversaries cause (when as they armed them selves of their own private
authority, to overthrow the Edicte made by the consent and advise of the
States) neither did I so esteem of my place and dignity, that I would put my
self in armor, without the express commandment of the Queen: yet in the
beginning I of my own accord offered to unarm my self again, so that my
enemies would do the same, and that the Edicte so solemly made by the Decree
of the States, might be thoroughly kept: as may appear by my writing
concerning this matter. The which conditions seemed to all men very indifferent
and reasonable, sauinge to them selves. Furthermore, to the end we might the
better and more safely enter into peace and concord, I sought diligently that
many Christian Princes might be admo nished of this matter, and I entreated
them by letters and by Ambassadors that they would be means to pacefie the
same, and to take away all occasions of greater dissentions.

But my adversaries even at the same time, when al things might have been
brought to some quietness, went about to take away all hope of concord, and
sought for the nonce to exasperat and provoke our minds to displeasure by new
cruelties showed upon our brethren: making more careful provision to war
against me and mine, than does the forreyn enemy, when he inuadeth the
bounds and limits of the Realm. Beside this they suffered not the
Ambassadors of the Princes of Germany, which were now coming forward in
their journey, to do their office about the pacification: but sought to
procure the Italian, the Spaniard, and the Switzer to aid them in their war:
and because a certain Noble man of France called Gonor, did disallowe the
coming of forreyne power into the Realm, they abused him with iniuriouse
words openly among the Kings counsel. Whereby it may appear to all
indifferent men of sound judgment, what I and my adversaries have sought for:
and whether I could in this time of the Kings minority, devise more profitable
means and ways, to avoid these greeuouse troubles: and also whether they can
do more than they have done, to increase the same. For they have gone about to
bring in new, hard, and violent laws, plain contrary to the Kings Edicte,
made by the consent of the whole Realm, and agreeing with the Spanish
Inquisition, which is the ruin and overthrow of peace and tranquillity: that
thereby they might not only bring in an infinite heap of troubles, but also
the confusion of all things. The which also I my self by publishing a writing
contrary to the same, showed how much it was disagreeing from al reason and
indifferency. But what soever I could show unto the Queen, they had her in
such bondage and captivity, by force and subtlety, that they made her an
instrument and mean to do what soever they would themselves. Notwithstanding
she perceyuinge what great inconvenience would come by war thought, she
might do much good if she could bring the matter to parley. Therefore, the
Queen, my brother the King of Nauar, and I met together in the midway between
Paris and Orleans. Then I made declaration unto them of two things, which I
said were the causes of troubles, the which causes being taken away, the
effects, that is to say, great troubles shall with them be removed also.

To take away the causes, I said, the first was: That the Guise, the Constable,
and the Marshal of Santandre, who had broken the peace by arming of them selves
by their own private authority, and had forceably dealt with the King and
Queen, and also had broken the kings Edict of January, might go home to their
own houses and might be forbidden to be of the Kings Counsel, The conditions
offered by the Prince of Conde, at the first par ley.
during this time of his minority: And I my self, though I were of the Kings
blood, and of much higher degree than they, promised to do the like.

The second was, I said, that the Edict of January might be fully observed, and
that according to the tenor thereof, the use of Religion might be free for all
men throughout the whole Realm. To these two* neither the Queen nor my
brother would agree. Affirminge that it was not lawful for those being the
Kings servants, to depart from the young King being in such extremity as he
was: the request, they said, was neither indifferent nor profitable for the
Realm.

Moreover they said there could not be two Religions together in one Realm,
and therefore the Edict of January could not be suffered, because they of the
Church of Rome were so many in number and so sharp set to mayntaine their
Religion* that if they should not have their wills, greated troubles would
daily arise* To this I replied again saying, that it was neither indifferent
nor profitable for the Realm, for them to abide with the King, which had both
abused the Kings age and dignity, and also had brought him and the whole
Realm into great peril, and unhonestly broken the Kings Edict. And concerning
the Edict of January, I said, what could be more unseemly than for a few
private men, so little to regard the Kings dignity, that they durst break
the Kings Edict, to observe and keep the which, they themselves were sworn:
by the benefit of which Edict, not only Paris, but also the whole kingdom
enjoyed peace. Also I said it was a very evil example, for the people to be
armed to break the kings Edictes, and was the ready way to make them ever
after more disobedient: also that the Religious were not so contrary, that the
Christian name should not every where be retained: As for that Religion which I
and my fellows embrace, it is the true and reformed Religion, which is also
received and embraced of great Nations, and pourged from Romish Idolatries and
superstitions. And to make the matter more plain, what say you to the late
example of the Emperor Charles the fifth, who after he had assayed to
establish in Germany that Religion which he him self approved, and could not
bring it to pass, thought it to be the best way, although he had gotten the
victory by force of Arms, to let every man use what Religion he would, for
quietness sake. What should I need to repeat many other examples, when as
experience teaches us, that this is a necessary remedy to keep the people of
this Realm, in peace: To let them have the use of what Religion they like
best. But for all that I could say or do in that Parley, the Queen durst not
go from that which was prescribed unto her to speak. So that the Armies were
prepared on both parts again: Then we entered into parley again: by which
they went about very subtly to betray me: First, I yielded unto my brother
the King of Nauar the Town of Baugence, the which he meant to use for him and
his family during the time of entreaty for pear, which I had good hope to
obtain by the means of the Queens letters. Then I did put my self into my
enemies hands; minding thereby to win peace. The Guises and his fellows
feigned a departure away, but they were not far of, but had encamped themselves
within the compass of three miles minding to oppress me, as appeared
afterward by their Letters which came to my hands.

At y^ length I and certain of my fellows came in parley and conference with
the Queen At the first we were denied to have the liberty of our consciences.
We straight way affirmed that the liberty of our conscience was to us the most
precious thing of all and the chiefest thing that we desired: and added this
also, that if the departure of a few, would be an occasion of peace, and of the
liberty of Religion, we our selves would willingly go into crile, even to the
utmost parts of the world. The Queen took our offer, and liked of the
condition: and when she had made a long protestation of her good will toward
us, she persuaded us to prepare our selves to take our journey, and she would
send unto me whether soever I would appoint ten thousand Crowns, promising there
withal that my exile should not be long. But when I was certified of the
platform and snare which the Guises had made for me, at ye entreaty of my
fellows I made have back again to my Army. Then the^ Queen before my
departure required of us an answer, the which we referred to the common
counsel and advise of my fellows: affirming notwithstanding for our selves,
that we were ready, not only to go into exile. but also to suffer any manner of
extremity willingly for a common wealth.

But afterward I had taken deliberation and consulted The reasons that stayed
the Prince of Con de from going into exile.
with my fellows, they answered: That except I would forsake God, the King,
and my Country, I could not nor ought to go to any other place: declaring unto
me that the ancient and approved Laws and constitutions of the Realm were,
that when the king by reason of his young and tender years cannot take upon
him the Government of the Realm, the Princes that were the Kings near
kinsmen, with the counsel and advise of the States should provide a form of
The form of the government of the Realm in Kings minority.
Government. The which during the time of the kings ninoritie, ought to abide
firm and immutable,

At the first beginning of this kings reign, the States, (whose authority has
brideled always their ambition, which would abuse the tender age and facility of
kings) decreed with the consent of the Princes the Kings kinsmen, That the
government of the King and the realm should be committed to the Queen: and
that she should discharge and pay that debt which the Kings au^cetours had left
the Crown in, and should also maintain the peace and tranquillity of the
Realm of France, Diverse other things and they decreed more particularly,
concerning such as had taken any other to serve forreyn power, whethe^ they
should be of the Kings Counsel or no: and whether two brethren at once,
except the Princes the Kings kinsmen, should be of the same coun sell:
concerning also an account to be made by such as had the trust of treasure
committed unto them in the former Kings days: and diverse other things they
decreed as is to be seen in my former declarations in writing published. But
amongst all other it was decreed by the Queen, that matters concerning
Religion, should be established, for peace and unities sake. First of all
therefore the matter was handeled by Disputation at Possit but in vain. Then
the Queen caused an assembly to be made of the Princes the Kings kinsmen, of
the Kings Counselors, and of certain, choosen out of all Parliamentes of the
Realm, that they might make an Edict concerning this matter. Then there was an
Edict made in the Kings Counsel: to the which they were all sworn (and they
also which at this day have broken the same) and which was published and
confirmed, according to custom, throughout all Courts in ye realm: by the
benefit whereof the Realm in every place seemed to be at peace.
Notwithstanding this, three private men offended with the Kings Counsel, and
inflamed with their own desires, because they knew that they were bound to
obey their Decrees, and to give up their accountes: conspired together how they
might remove the Queen from her authority: gathered an army of men together,
without the commandment of yt Queen, contrary to the authority and decrees
of the States: denied to go home to their own Provinces, at the commandment
of the Queen, and to unarm themselves: came armed to the King, and so took
him: stirred up war, and put the king to great expenses: not only entered
into the kings Counsel, from which they were secluded by the Decrees of the
States, but also did put in and put out such as it pleased the^: and finally
they brake the kings Edict solemly made and confirmed by the advice and
determination of the States, and from the time that they armed them selves,
they have not suffered the same to be kept, without the which notwithstanding,
it it not possible that the public peace should stand. By which their wicked
acts and presumption, they have broken the authority of Magistrates and
Laws, and have plainly declared themselves to be enemies to God, to the king,
to the Realm, and to common peace. For these causes my friends said unto me
(considering my state and calling in the Realm) that it was not meet that I
should give place unto them, which by violence had gone about already to
confound all things: Neither that I should forsake the cause which was not
particular, but generally belonging to all men: and that I should resist open
force and tyranny, and restore liberty of conscience to the men of the
reformed Churches, by the benefit of the kings Edicte, after so great and so
long affliction, whereby they said I should preserve the authority and
dignity of the king and the Estates. For these causes the greatest part of
Noble men and Gentlemen, upon conscience of their duty, knowing that they
were bound hereunto both by divine and also by man's law, have followed me: and
with these the greatest part of ye kings subjects, and his most noble Cities,
have voluntarily joined themselves with me: and rather by divine than humane
reason, have elected and created me with one voice and consent, for this cause
to be their Captain. The which office, I being of the kings blood, and
naturally bound to the Crown of France, have taken upon me, and have sworn
to maintain the glory of God, and the dignity and conservation of the king and
the Realm: having also entered into league with them, in respect whereof I
have bound my self unto them, and cannot be discharged of my oath again,
without the solemn consent of my fellows, to whom I have given my faith. And
whereas I offered to the Queen to become a banished man, upon this condition:
If by the departing of us few, the common peace, and liberty of Religion
might be obtained: it is manifest, that my departure shall open a gap to more
miserable destruction, and therefore there is no cause why I should be bound by
that my promise. If I should depart the realm, I should leave the King in
this his nonage in peril of the ambition and violence of strangers: and the
Crown of the which I am by nature a defender and protector, in hasard of lying
in ye dust. Again, it cannot be, that the Kings subjects should be in the
more security through my departure, when this one thing is manifest, that ye
Shepeheard being away* the Woulfe may the more easily destroy the flock.
Can I think that so great a multitude, can be sent out of the realm, without
their great hurt, and without the great destruction of the whole realm?
Therefore, for my duties sake, to do the which I am bound both by nature, and
also by my oath, I cannot, neither ought I, to depart out of the Realm,
specially in these perillouse times: unless I would incur the fault of a
fugitive and startaway. For as touching the reasons which my adversaries bring,
to cover their wickedness, and to diswade me from the defense of so just a
cause, they are so weak and of so small weight, that no man will esteem them,
but those which are affectionate unto them.

For, whereas they say, that from that time hitherto, the Queen has altered
her purpose, disalowed the Edicte, and allowed their bearing of armor, and had
given her authority to the King of Navarre, to rule and order the whole
matter: it is nothing.

First, because it is more probable and agreeable to reason, that whatsoever the
King, the Queen, and the viceroy, determined and decreed, when they had full
liberty, and when the kingdom was in peace, is more firm and sure, than that
which they approve and confirm in these troublesome times, when they are after
a sort constrained by force of Arms.

Secondly the Queen cannot allow the gathering together of domestical and
foreign Armies of men, and the beginning of war, contrary to the ancient
custom of the laws of France, and the late decree of the states, and that
for so evil an end and purpose, as to break the Kings Edicte, and the decree
aforesaid, made solemly by the Queen's commandment: but she must also overthrow
the foundation, upon which her authority stands, which by that means
should be of no force. Neither can she of her self, put over to another her
authority, and power to govern, because it comes not unto her by natural
right, but is given unto her by the benefit and consent of another. Moreover
touching the king of Navarre, whether he be Viceroy or Legate, he has no such
authority, that he may command the Guises, or any other to gather together
armies of men, and that without the commandment of the Queen, or ye kings
lawful Counsel chosen by the states. The which was not observed when the
Queen gave them commandment to put of their armor. Neither is it of greater
weight or force, that the Queen, since that time, has approved the bearing of
armor and the musteringe of soldiers: because in those matters it cannot be
sufficient to have only a bare allowing or approving, in the which a sure and
express commandment is required. To conclude, admit the Kings Counsel
were such as it ought to be, by the decree of the States, and that there were
joined therewith the authority of the Queen and of the King of Nauar: God
forbid that any man, how great soever his authority be, in the time of the
Kings nonage, might gather an army, proclayme war, and put the power of the
King and the Realm into ye hands of a subject be he never so faithful,
without the will and consent of the States first had: and specially when the
purpose is so evil, and that the Kings* Edict should be broken. These things
of me considered, I have determined, not to forsake my king in his young age,
and my Country and Religion, all which require my help. Therefore I have
brought my army more near my enemies, my soldiers being very willing and
courageous to set upon the enemy, and to join battle. But our enemies which
have so often triumphed over us and scorned us, have found no better way, than
to pack and steal away secretly in the night. Therefore forsaking to ioyn
battle with us, they came to Blais a town without any Garrison, unlooked for,
and besieged the same: and when they had won it they showed al manner of
cruelty: and since that time they have spoiled, and as yet do spoil cruelly
many of the Cities of this Realm. And as for the Queen, though she know the
goodness of our cause, and that I have done nothing but by her commandment:
yet nevertheless, because she is more a fraide of the power and subtle
practices of our adversaries, than she trusts to the good success of our
part, minds to give her self wholly unto them, anddoth more openly and
vehemently favor them: as may plainly appear by these effects. Therefore she
gave her self wholly to the Cardinal of Lorrayn, who at that time was with her,
to be governed by him: although she knew well enough the covetousness,
ambition, and cruel mind which is in him and in the rest of that stock, which
have bin the causes of most grievous troubles in the Realm of France* since
that time that they have borne any rule. Therefore the Cardinal left nothing
undone that might hinder peace, as may appear by his letters which by chance
came to our hands.

Moreover because the Germans (which came to aid them under the conducte and
charge of the R^kendolph and the Rheingraue) understanding some what of our
cause, refused to war against us, they devised a new practice, and brought
the King and Queen into their Army, to couller hereby all that they had done.
Neither do they omit any subtlety or craft to allure strangers to aid them:
and yet notwithstanding they deryde and scorn the Germans and their Religion,
as though they for the gredines of money came into France to subvert and
overthrow the Gospel which before in their own country they had defended with
peril of their lives, And they impudently lied and fained unto them to bring
the confession of Ausburge into France: which they said they had done long a
go, if so be I had not bin a let unto them.

Besides these things they object against me and mine most shameful slanders,
saying that, we are Rebels, destroyers of the worship of GOD, usurpers of
the Kings Crown, possessores of the Kings Cities, and treasure, Heretics,
Anabaptists, and Atheictes, without any Religion or faith. With these and
diverse other like crimes they do so fasty sclaunder us, that we appeal to the
consciences of our adversaries, if they have any conscience at all. But by the
grace of God we have a firm and sure testimony of our Religion, that is to
say, the confession of the reformed Churches, so evidently declared and
offered to the King, to the Queen, to the King of Nauar, to the Princes the
Kings kinsmen, and to all the kings Counsel, as they can testify which now
go about to suppress the same, and sealed with my hand and with the hands of
a great number besides, which also we doubt not to seal with our own blood.
The which, as it ought ^o stop the adversaries mouth, so also it ought to
s^oppe their ears to whom our adversaries are not afeard to sclaunder and
backebyte us.

But and if the life and manners of both parts, if the effects of our Religion
be compared with our adversaries, although I will not altogether excuse our
selves from many sins, yet notwithstanding this I say: that our life, by ^he
grace of god, is not defiled with blasphemies, with whordome, with impieties, and
with horrible lusts against nature, as the life of many of our adversaries is,
which notwithstanding call them selves Catholics, and glory in those filthy
crimes. As for Heresy, and Anabaptisme, we are so far from them, as it is
manifest that our adversaries are guilty in them, and have been by us proved so
to be. Can they clear them selves of Anabaptisme, which have rebaptized those
infants that were baptized in the reformed Church, which is an herisie in all
times reprobaled, and condemned also by the Decrees, and constitutions of
Counselles? And as for the worship of God we have not abolished the same, for
the defense whereof we are ready to spend our lives, desiring uothing more than
to have the same purged in the Realm of France, by the purity and truth of
the Gospel from so many superstitions: and also that it would please God to
illuminate our King with the pure know ledge of his word, to bless the Scepter
of his youth, and also to deliver him from all corrupt Tutors and masters.

But how shameful a thing is this, for the Cardinal of Loraine to make as
though he loved the confession of Ausburge, the which he utterly refused to
allow in the disputation of Possi. And it may appear what love he and the
rest of them bear toward that confession, by y^ horrible murder committed at
V^ssi. As for the Cities which they say we possess, they have not hitherto
disobeyed the king, neither will they hereafter, so long as they obey my
commandments. And whereas they obey not our adversaries, the cause is, least
they being at their commandment should be utterly destroyed. The Kings money
also is kept from their hands, least they having the same, should spend it
upon war against the Kings subjects. But whereas they say that I go about
to usurp the Crown of (...): (...)actions of my life past, free from ambition
and (...), and my hands pure from innocent blood, do so plainly prove this to
be a false lie, that I am fully persuaded, that no man of sound judgment will
approve the same. When as ou the contrary part al men know, by what and how
many means my adversaries have gone about to trouble and molest all the whole
Realm, by ambition and covetousness: and have so enriched themselves, that they
have made a plain and ready way to ^et the Crown. To put away the suspicion
whereof they can never bring sufficient reasons, the effects of their desires
being so manifest, the events also so lamentable, that they shall never be able
by any manner of means to hide them. All men see, since the time that they have
had the government in their hands, they have brought the Realm into so great
troubles, that it was never in so miserable an estate, being brought all most
to ruin and extreme destruction: the King brought into great debt, and his
subiect^ oppressed with tributs and customs. There is yet another exquisit lie
devised by the same Cardinal: For he is not afeard to give out to diverse
strangers by his letters, that the King and Queen having established and
confirmed the assurance of the common faith, do give pardon to all th^se that
will put of their Armor, go home to their own houses, and live there without
offense. But none of al these things are contained and set down in the form
of any Edict or Rescript: for they are but deceitful baits and snares to
entangle men with all, and so are they to be counted. Daily many men are both
cast into prison and also put to death, and that for no other fault, but only
because they professed the reformed Religion, which they make The cause of
Sedition, of Conspiracy, of unlawful assemblies, and of the breaking both of
Gods law and man's law. And being not contented with so great blood shed,
knowing that many have escaped the cruelty of their Decrees: they have caused
the Bishops and their Popish officers, to publish and thunder out
Excommunications, giving charge that they which knew any of the Kings
officers, which came either to the public or private sermons of the reformed
Churches, to the administration of the Lords Supper, to their prayers, or to
any other rite or ceremony, contrary to the church of Room: or if they knew
any that did either eat or drink with those preachers, that they should
within three days after disclose their names. And of late also they have
published a Decree, In the which they commanded and do command* That so many
as are come from Orleans, Lions, Burges, Roane, Poictiers, and from other
Cities which are kept at my commandment, to Paris, and that all men or women
of the reformed Religion, should be taken and punished according to the form
of the Edict, what Privilege soever to the contrary they were able to bring.
Whereupon many were taken by the force of those decrees and put to death,
which came home to their houses upon trust of the Kings Letters of warrant.
Whereby it may evidently appear, how falsely they have made report to Princes
of other Nations of the security that men should have, if so be upon trust
they would put them selves in their hands.

And because certain Princes knowing the goodness of our cause, and the unjust
dealing of our adversaries, have sent unto me aid to avoid those miserable
calamities at hand, they make exclamation, to discredit me and my cause, that I
bring forreyne aid and power into the Realm. But what I did before I took
this remedy in hand, many Princes know, whom I entreated to be means to make
a pacification, and who ca^ testify that their Legates were hindered herein.
Also, seeing they have replenished the whole Realm with strangers, as with
Spaniardes, Switzers, Germans, and with Italians, to the end they might
execute their tyra^nie: how shameless be they to reproach and discredit me in
saying that I bring forreyn power into ye realm? And I protest, that as I was
constrained to take this remedy in hand, so I have determined ever hereafter,
to seek by all lawful means and ways, to deliver the Church of God, the
King, the Country, and my self from this oppression.

But whereas they have every where published abroad the Decree of rebellion
against me and mine, which they have caused to be made, sure cause not known
nor heard, by certain seditiouse persons, which displacing certain good men
out of their rooms, take upon them the name, and countenance of Senators of
Paris: I have appealed from them, and showed in wri ting the causes of my
appeal. And to the end their fraud and deceit may appear the more impudent,
they have exempted me from the number of those whom falsely they call rebels.
Howbeit, if this good and just cause may be called rebellion, I my self above
all the rest, ought to be burdened with the same: seeing that I account my
self to be their Captain, and have taken upon me the defense of that cause,
and have called those that attend upon me, to show their obedience to the
King, at the commandment of the Queen, and do as yet retain them with me
to this end. And I affirm, that there can be greater injury done unto me,
than to be separated from so honest and faithful a company, in who^ I do note
so great fidelity and obedience toward ye king in this so present a
necessity, that I think that the same their dutiful obedience will be commended
among all posterities for ever. This therefore is the sum of those things,
which I have don unto this day, the which I have with great simplicity, and
without all cooller declared. And I pray all those that love the truth, most
earnestly, which shall read this writing, that they will uprightly and without
all prejudice weigh the matter: and to Judge not by the words, but by the
actions. God for his mercies sake, order and direct the whole matter to the
glory of his name, to the peace of the Church* to ye tranquillity of the
Realm, and to the confusion of those his enemies, which are the authors of
these troubles.

This writing being published abroad, and all manner of warlike provision being
prepared, the Prince of Conde (as we said before) removed with his army from
Orleans, and conducted the same by the Country of Beausse toward Paris. And as
he went, he besieged a town called Plu^iers, which was kept with seven
Enseignes of footmen, and at the length, when he had sore battered the same
with his ordinance, he had it delivered up unto him. Then he took two of
their principal Captains, and caused them to be put to death, as for the
rest of the common soldiers he spared them. After this many Towns yielded
unto him, as Escampes, la Ferte, Dordan, and others, which he received into
his service upon trust. Also he minded to besiege the City of Corbeil, which
the Guises kept and mayntayned with a great garrison of soldiers. This City
is of great forte, b^rdering upon the river of Sein, by which river great
provision and store of vittailes, were carried to Paris. And while he was making
al things ready for the siege, word was brought unto him of the death of his
brother the King of Nauar. Whose office of Uiceroy, he perceiving that he ought
to have by order during this time of the Kings minority, and then hoping to
moderate and end al things by peace, he left of his purpose of besieging
Corbei^ and coming nearer Paris he pitched his camp at Arcel* the first day
of Dece^ber. Therefore the Queen sending letters unto him, desired to confer
and talk with him: not purposing nevertheless (as the event declared) to
conclude concord and peace, but only to delay and differ the time, and to
diminishe the force of ye Prince of Conde his army, until the armies came out
of Spain and Gascoyne, which were daily looked for: this was done by the
subtle practices of the Guises. But because the Prince of Conde was not at
that time very well at ease, the Admiral went first to talk with the Queen,
passing over the river of Seyn by the port Angloyse. In the mean time the
Constable came to the Prince of Conde for a pledge. But this journey was in
vain, the Queen saying, that she would never agree, that the reformed
Religion should be used in any part of the Realm. Then was the parley
appointed again in a more convenient place, ^eere unto the suburbs of S.
M^rceau, in a certain Mill. At which meeting, the Prince of Conde propounded
these conditions of peace: First, that the use of the reformed religion might
be free in those Cities, in the which it was before the war began: and that
the faithful might live peaceably in other places, and that they might go unto
such Towns, as they knew the reformed Religion to be used in: also, that
there might be diligent heed taken, that they sustained no manner of peril for
enjoying the benefit of religion. Secondly, that it might be lawful for all
men of the reformed Religion, to enjoy their goods, offices, and dignities, but
specially their religion in what part of the Realm soever they dwelt: and that
all sentences and judgments of any Court pronounced against them for religion
be void and of none effect: that they which for religions sake were fled the
realm, or having before fled were now come home again, might enjoy y^ same
benefit, and might have leave at their return to enjoy all that they had:
that every Noble man might have liberty to use the reformed Religion in his
house: and also that it might be lawful for every one of the Kings Counsel to
have the same religion in or about ye Court, so long as he shall there give his
attendance. Thirdly, that the King himself might ratefie and allow y^ war
which they had mayntayned, and what soever they had spent of the Kings money to
maintain the same: that there might be a common and general Counsel
appointed in some convenient place within this six months, in the which
neither the Pope, nor any other for him might bear any rule: Or, if it might
not be general: yt then it might only consist of our country men, leave
being granted to every one to come thither, that both armies whether they were
domestical or forreyne, might depart home, every man to his own house: and
that it would please the King to account the Prince of Conde his army, as his
own, the which he protested he gathered together to serve and obey him: And
finally, that for the establishing of this concord, it would please the King
and Queen to give their faith, and that every one of the Kings Counsel, and
Governor of any Province within the Realm, might in like manner swear to
observe and keep this peace.

These were the special conditions which the Prince of Conde required, which
were for certain days sent abroad into diverse places, the Guises for the
nonce practicing with the Queen subtillie, so to do, that they might have the
better hope of the aid which was coming, and also that the Prince of Conde
beginning now in the winter, might fall into greater straytes. For the Duke of
Guise went about at no time to seek peace and concord, fully persuading and
assuring himself to have the victory of the Prince of Conde and his. And
hereupon it is reported that the Duke of Guise said to the Queen when she went
about to make peace, If I thought that you would make any certain and firm
pacification with the Prince of Conde, I would never agree to the same. To the
which the Queen made answer again, that she never meant it.

This therefore was the answer that was made in the kings name, to the
peticions of the Prince of Conde. First, the liberty of religion was granted,
but with so many exceptions, that it was no liberty at all. For the king
denied any of his Counsel to use the reformed religion in his Court: he
deprived the Cities of war which were in the utmost parts of the Realm, of
the benefit of the Edict: among which also he put in Lions, being no city of
war: He also exempted Paris, and the whole Territory of the same, from the
use of the reformed Religion: commanding the army of the Prince of Conde to
break up, and to depart home, but the Army of the Duke of Guise, which was
called the Kings power, to remain at the kings pleasure as it was he denied
also leave, for those that had forsaken the Realm to come home again, having
not already enjoyed that benefit: He would not have the Decrees and sentences
pronounced, to be quite frustrated, but for a time suspended: He denied any
Protestants too enjoy his office, saving the Prince of Conde: And finally, he
refused to allow that expense of his money upon the war.

Upon this answer, the Prince of Conde was out of all hope to have peace. The
Guise would not go out of the City of Paris, mynding by delay to weaken the
pow er of the Prince of Conde. While these things had this success on both
parts, the Guises, because they would loose no time, went about to make
Monsieur Genly, a Noble man, whose Brother was Monsieur de Iuoy (which had
forsaken the Prince of Conde, after the yielding up of Burges) to take their
part also. Monsieur Genly therefore, being earnestly travailed withal, fell
from the Prince of Conde to the contrary part, and was received into Paris:
Whose departure made the Prince of Conde to alter his former purpose, because
he knew that he being one that had known al his secret and privy Counsel,
would now bewray the same to the Guises. The Prince of Conde removed from Paris
to Join to him the Englismen
So that when he should have approached nearer Paris, and have besieged the
City, he altered his purpose, and removing his Camp, went from Paris with his
whole power, going through Normandy, myndinge to join him self to the English
men, who were now come to the Haven le Grace, being a City which bordered
upon the sea coast: that then he might be the better able to join battle
with the Guises.

IN the mean time there came Armies of Souldi ers out of Gascoyne and Spain
to aid the Guises: the com ming of these men grealy encouraged the Guises, for
they were in number xxxii. Ensigns of tall and well experienced The Duke of
Guise se keth to stay the Prince of Conde from ioyninge himself with the
Englismen
soldiers. Therefore now he fully determined to pursue the Prince of Conde,
before he joined unto his Army the English men, which were sent, with great
stoore of money also to aid him, by the Queen of England, least by the
coming of that money he should be greatly helped to mayntaine war: for he
hoped that the Germans at length, wanting their pay (because the Prince was
bare of money) would come unto him. There fore to keep the Prince of Conde and
the English men asunder, the Duke of Guise removed with his whole Army and
power from Paris, and making great have he come to a town in Normandy, which
is called the Teritory or plain of Dreux, where also the Prince of Conde
stayed, and both Armies pitched their Camps with in two French Leagues, one of
another. The Guise had chosen a very convenient place to incampe him selue on,
both for the neerenes of the town of Dreux, which was kept with their
Garrisons, and also because there were villages and woddes hard by them, to
flee unto if need were. Between both the Armies there ran a pleasant long
plain, having but a little valley only, which lay on the side of them.

THE PRINCE OF CONDE, when he saw that his enemies were approached so near,
after consultation with his fellows, determined to join battle with them,
leaving the event to the providence of God. Notwithstanding the Duke of Guise
had a great number of footmen more on his part than the Prince of Conde had:
For he had XXVI. thousand footmen, where as the other had scarcely XI.
thousand footmen. But of horsemen the Prince of Conde had IIII. thousand,
where as the Duke of Guise had but III. thousand.

THE Prince of Conde intending to join battle with his enemies, early in
the morning by the break Anno 1572 December. 19.
of the day, set his soldiers in their arraye: the horsemen in the first
front, which was divided into diverse ranks: In the first rank or vauntgard he
placed Monsieur Cure with a four square troop of shot on horse, containing
six Cornets, upon each side of the which vauntgard, were two wings of
Lances, one wing of Frenchmen under the charge of Monsieur Move, and Monsieur
Auerill, and the other wing of Germans. After the French winge, which was
upon the left hand of the battle, came the Prince of Conde and Rochfocaut,
with a Troop of Lances, to the number of 230. If that (ge^ tle Reader) thou
look in the printed battles, and descriptions of the skirmishes of the Civil
wars of France, this shall be much more plain unto thee: for in them thou
shall have a lively view.
After the second wing came the Prince of Porcian, and the Admiral, having the
charge of two Giddons of Lances, to the number of 120. Then followed them a
very strong square battle of footmen Germans, containing twelve Ensigns:
having a little before them 500. shot on horse. Then was there a very great
Squadron of Frenchmen, containing 23. Ensigns, placed to keep the great
Ordinance, which were also guarded with a wing of horsemen Germans, on either
side. And thus the Prince of Conde marched forward with his whole Army, to
encounter with his enemy: who also had his men in a readiness. First the
Guise with a very huge Troop of Lances guarded the corner or point of the
Squadron of the first Army, which was on his right hand, containing fourtene
Ensigns of footmen Spaniardes, and the point of the second Squadron, which
was on his left hand; containing 22. Ensigns of tall Frenchmen, having planted
before them against the enemy 14. feeld pieces of Ordinance. Then the Marshal
of Santandre having six Giddons of Lances, came with the point of the third
Squadron, which contained a seven Ensigns of footmen Germans: At the other
point of the which Germans there were also five Giddons of horsemen, under ye
charge of Monsieur Dan uille. Between which five Giddons and the 12. Giddo^s
of the Constable, were placed two great Squadrons, the one containing 22.
Ensigns of footmen Switzers, having planted before them eight pieces of
Ordinance, and the other containing 17. Ensigns of Brittons and French men.
So that in all on the Guises part there were five Squadrons of foot men. Every
Squadron is a battle in proporcion four square: so that between every
Squadron from point to point, saving between the two last, there were Giddons
of horsemen at Arms, to guard them. This battle had his proporcion in length:
but the Battle of the Prince of Conde not so much in length, but more in
breadth. Whereupon against the Constable, the Admiral was opposite at one
end, against Danuille, the Prince of Conde: but against the other end, which
was the first Army, where the Guise, and the Marshall of Santandre were, there
was none opposite.

The Armies on both parts being placed as you hear, the Prince of Co^de, first
of all commanded his whole Army to make their prayers unto God, the which
being done, he road round about the Army, exhorted his soldiers to be of good
courage, and then commanded to sound the Trompet to battle.

Then Monsieur Curee, Captain of the vaunfgard, not The first battle in the
which the Consta ble was taken, and the Swisers dispersed and slain.
staying till the great pieces, which were bent against him were discharged,
with the rest of his troop discharged his shot at the Swisers* after whom
followed the Prince of Conde, and at the first encounter so charged the
horsemen of the Swisers (whereof Monsieur Danuille had the conduct) that he
both put them to the chase, and also brake into the squadron of the Swisers:
Rochfoucant in the mean time standing still, and keeping his ray. At the first
the Swisers, that were the footmen, both by the force of the great gunnes, and
also by their own artillery, withstoode the first charge given by the Prince:
notwithstanding by the often shot discharged by ye horsemen they were
constrained to break their arraye and to retire before the Lances, who also
brake upon the^, and caused them to forsake their great ordinance: the Princes
soldiers sleying and killing so much as possibly they could. The Admiral also
prevailed almost no less against the Constable: and having with him the
troops of the Germans; they skirmished with the horse men of Monsieur
Danuill, which came again to rescue the Constable, and greatly anoyed them
with the hayle of their shot. The Prince of Conde having destroyed and put to
flight the Swisers, encountered then with the next Army of french men, and
breakinge their ray, over ran them and put them to flight. In the mean time
there was a sore battle between the Admiral and the Constable, both parts
quighting themselves, very valeantly. Notwithstanding the Constables side being
not able to make their part good, the Constable himself also being sore wounded
in the head with an arming swerd, and in other parts of the body with diverse
shot, and taken in plain fight, they fled away, the Prince and the Admiral,
pursuing the chase.

The Prince having so good success, had good hope to have the victori, for the
greatest part of the enemies army, was either slain or put to flight, the
great gunnes belongyng to the second Army taken, and the Constable also as is a
foresaid.

The horsemen of the Prince of Condes part, being The second battle.
occupied, almost every one, in pursuinge the enemy, the Armies of the
Germane and French footmen of the Princes side lay open and naked before the
Guise and Monsieur Danuille. The which when Monsieur Danuille perceived, he
vaunced all the power he was able to make thither ward, of whose coming, so
sone as the Germans were ware, they disordred themselves and fled to a village
hard by called Bleinuill, without any manner of resistance.

Then the Princes army of French footmen being left alone, a very great
troop of horsemen charged the^ The third battle.
sore: and being discouraged and made a feared even at the first onset, they
turned all their backs and fled. Where fore a great number of them were slain
in chase: with loss of a few of the Guis^ horsemen only.

Thus the Princes footmen being disperf^ and slain, the Guises by the mutable
chance of war, had good hope to foil the Prince of Conde. For almost all the
horsemen of the Prince of Condes side were wholly occupied in chasing and
killing the remnante of the Switsers and Frenchmen: Whereby also it must needs
be yt they were greatly disordered and out of ray. Wherefore Monsieur The
Prince of Conde taken prisoner.
Danuille the Constables Son, advanced his power of horsemen, to encounter
with the Prince of Conde and the rest. Who being unable so match with their
enemies began to flee, and the other followed the chase. And ye Prince
himself seeking to escape through a wood hard by, had his horse slain under
him with a shot: and for lack of a fresh horse to shift him, he fell into the
hands of Monsieur Danuille, and was taken prisoner.

The Admiral seeinge in every place his men fleeinge away, (ye Germane
horsemen also fleeing by h^apes hard by, according to their manner, to charge
their gunnes, and then The fourth battle.
to return again with one force to anoy the enemy: the which manner of fight,
because many understood not, and suspecting that the Germans fled, were
afraid:) and perceiving also that they were quight discouraged because the
Prince of Conde was taken, was much troubled and grieved in mind. He saw also to
his great grief, three great troops of horsemen, which the Guises, very
pollitiquely and prudently had reseruid even till the very pinch came, (in ye
which was the Marshall of Santandre, Duke Daumale, Monsieur Niue^ne and other
noble men which he spedily dispatched to the chase, he himself tarying still
behind to see the end: the Admiral, I say, seeinge these things made have
out of hand to recover the Germane and French horsemen, and when the French men
saw that the Germans returned out of the wood again in their array with
their Harguebutes charged, they received such courage and boldness, that
valeantly together they bid battle to their enemies again: both parts
fighting with like courage: Notwithstanding the Guises part reculed by little
and little: and ye battle had bin more whot, (the minds of the Princes
soldiers being fierce,) if so be the night had not caused the weried soldiers
to stay and cease.

Therefore the retract was blown on both parts* and both armies retired to
their camps. The Admiral for want of horses, left behind him four field
pieces. In this last battle, the Marshal Santandre was taken, and being
wounded in the head with a shot dyed in the field, and was dispoyled: this man
was of very wicked disposition, and the cause of the troubles of France. In
this battle also were slain Monsieur Mo^brun the Constables Son, Monsieur
Piennes, Moncharne, and one of the Guises called the Graund prior: there were
sore wounded the two Brosses, Monsieur Giury, Annebauld, and diverse others
which notwithstanding lived: But D'aumall, and the Duke of Neuers, being sore
wounded dyed, and many others which were wounded and slain: Many also noble
men that were Papists were taken prisoners, as the Lord Rotchford, Beauuais,
and diverse other Gentlemen to the number of 100. Of the Protestants side,
Monsieur de Mouy, and diverse other Noblemen, and Captains were either taken or
slain. God did so moderate this great battle, that neither part could be
said either to conquer, or to be conquered: thus ordered and appointed by
God, lest so great a Kingdom denided in it self, should come to utter ruin
and destruction.

The Prince of Conde also the fa^tor and defender of the cause of the faithful,
was taken. And of the papists, the Constable was taken and the Marshall of
Santandre slain. And as of the Papists side many Swisers and Frenchmen were
slain, so many Protestants were slain also by the Papists. The greater
number of horsemen were slain by the Guises part, and of 22. Ensigns, there
were but a few left. But for all this, the Prince of Conde found more lack of
his men though they were the smaller number than did the Guise.

THE Admiral, who now in the absence of the Prince of Conde had the whole
government of the Protestants, was very careful for the preservation of his
Army. Therefore when he had gathered together so much as he could, the
remaynder of his horsemen and footmen, and had increased and furnished his
army again, which was not a little weakened by the loss of the footmen, he
came to Orleans, differring his purpose to join with the Englishmen because it
was now winter until a more convenient time. And the Constable was also
brought with the rest of the Captives to Orleans.

The syxt Book of Commentaries, concerning the state of Religion and of the
common wealth of France under the Reign of Charles the ninth.
THE Duke of Guise mynding to repayer his decayed army, came with the same to
Paris, and then appointed new troops of horsemen, new Captains also in the
steed of such as were wanting, with a great number of common soldiers. And to
the end he might make the King and the people think the loss of his men to be
the less, he said that he had gotten the victory: and hoping to draw many in
these troublesome times from the Prince of Condes part, he brought to pass
that there was an Edict made and published in the Kings name, promising unto
the^ peace and security which had and would forsake the Admiral and come unto
him. The Edict was to this effect. The King being moved, both with the due
advise The Kings Edict.
and counsel of his Counsaylers and also by his inclinable and natural
goodness has sought even until this day, all means and ways possible to
appease these troubles in his Realm, and to bring his subjects to their
accustomed peace and tranquillity: and to bring to pass that they which
without his commandment have rashly put them selves in Arms, might unarm
them selves again. The which his Majesty's good will he has declared by many
tokens, writing Letters to to all places of his Realm, and seeking a
reconciliatio^ again by parleys and conference at sundry times with the
chiefest of their Captains: the which, touching diverse both with remorse of
their offenses, and with the love and desire of obedience which they owe unto
their natural Prince, has done some good, insomuch that many have returned
from their wicked purpose, and thewed themselves since, good and faithful
subjects. Yet notwithstanding that remedy could not so much prevail as he
hoped for: albeit he left nothing undone that might preserve them, and that
might bring peace and concord, the Queen his mother also, with certain of the
Princes that were of Royal blood, and endued with no less good will riding to
and fro at sundry times, to confer and talk with them, and to declare unto
them her true intent and meaning, to bring them into her favor again by
pardoning their offenses. But they continuing still in their former evil
enterprise, God would have the matter come to the very extreme and last
remedy, that is to say, by bidding battle against those which have so
obstinatly gone forward: the triumphant victory whereof, it has pleased the
same most holy and righteous god to give unto him, by which he hoped to receive
that fruit, which so greatly a long time he had wished for, namely, their
return and acknowledging of their faults, which had erred and gone astraye:
at which time they shall understand, that although their offenses are great,
yet he is ready to embrace them with the arms of mercy, and to receive the^
into his favor again: for the which cause he thought good to signify the
same to all men. And because he desires nothing more than the reconciliation
of his subjects, and would use this victory to the Glory of God, and to the
peace and tranquillity of the Realm, and to show his natural clemency and
goodness in the beginning of his reign: he wills and commands all his
subjects what condition, state, or degree soever they be of, which without his
will and commandment, have put them selves in Armor, taken Cities, encamped
them selves against him, have been at any battle or skirmish, or had done any
other thing against him, to unarm them selves again, to leave those places
and assemblies, to show their obedience, and to renounce their company and
fellowship, In so doing they shall sustain neither loss nor peril, in body
or goods, for bearing Armor, nor for their conscience, what soever has been
heretofore decreed notwithstanding: but shall be received with all their
families into his favor and protection. So that, ever hereafter they shall
live obediently and quietly, Catholiquely, and without offense. And upon this
condition also, that they shall within sixtene days after the publication of
these Letters, put of their armoure, and depart from those places and
assemblies prohibited and forbidden. Whatsoever he be that shall do otherwise,
and shall favor, support, and maintain his obstinate subjects, he straytely
charge and commands his Magistrates and officers, severally to execute
upon him such punishments as by the Laws are appointed.

The Duke of Guise used these letters, which were published under the Kings
name, to the intent he might entangle and snare his enemies by all manner of
means possible.

After the besieging of Burges, the Duke of Nemours with certain troops of
horsemen, came at the commandment of the Duke of Guise, into Burgundy, that
joining the inhabitants of Dolpheny and of Auernois with Monsieur Tauuanes,
Liefetenant of Burgundy, he might assay to win Lions, and Dolpheny. And at
the very first assay, he wan Vienna, a noble City near unto the Rosne,
Nemours wins Vienna.
and bordering also upon Lions, by the means of the pa^ pistes which were in
the town. The soldiers were co^ducted by Monsieur Mogeron, who, after the
surrender of the Town, committed great murder and rapine. The loss of Vienna
was very hurtful to Lions, ye passage being shut up into Dolpheny and
Languedoc. Then Nemours picking out so many soldiers out of his own men, and
out of the Burgundians, and Indwellers of Auuergnois, and of Forest as would
make an army, removed with the same near Lions, to besiege the City. The
Liefetenant of Lions (as we said before) was Monsieur Soubize Liefetena^t of
Lions.
Soubize, a very wise man, who with great diligence, prosperously provided for
the fortyfying of the City. Notwithstanding Nemours did not incampe him self
hard by the City after the manner of besieging: but taking the suburbs and
places bordering thereaboutes, sought to keep them from vittailes and other
necessary provision: Notwithstanding the Towns men diverse times brake forth
upon the enemy, and lightly skirmished with them.

But for all this, the enemy at the length was in hope to win the City: yet
their hope was frustrated to their own damage and hurt. There came into the
hands of Nemours a certain inhabitant of Lions, of a reasonable good wit, and
at that time, of some estimation and countenance. This man declared unto
Nemours certain means and ways to obtain Lions: promising unto him, that if
he might be sent thither, he would prepare and make an easy entrance for him
into the City: For (says he) I when I am in Lions, am appointed to watch
and keep the city, joining diverse other of the Garrison with me, can open the
Gate unto you, and can let in such a sufficient multitude of soldiers, as
coming unlooked for, may easily take the City: Only set me at liberty and
give me leave to go into the city, and give me my reward when I have brought
it to pass. Nemours took his offer, and after fair promises made he set him
free, and bad him go to Lions. He, when he was come into the City, declared
the whole matter to Nemours deceived of his purpose
Monsieur Soubize, governor of the city: who commanded the man to keep the
matter secret, and also to flatter Nemours in hope thereof still. Therefore he
appointed Nemours the time and place, where and when he should come to the
City: watch words were given: and the matter was so appointed, that Nemours
had great hope to have his purpose. Whereupon he commanded a great number of
harquebusiers and certain troops of horsemen, when the time was come, to go
before, and he himself followed after with his whole army.

In the mean time Monsier Soubize had very well fortified the City in every
place and corner: the which being done, he commanded him to go toe the Gate of
the city, whom Nemours had put in trust for the treason, and the watchmen
about the gate to be very hush and silent without any manner of noise, as if
they were a sleep: and then to give the watchword. The soldiers of Nemours
hearing the watchword, came with all speed, and were let into the City: And
when three hundred of them or there abouts were entered, the warders of the
gate, perceiving that the whole army of the enemies followed after a pace, they
discharged with all speed a great piece of Ordinance against those that were
without. Whereby Nemours perceiving that he was betrayed, fled back again
with the rest of his army so fast as he conld: then the Townsmen fell upon
those that were entered the City, and slew them, very few escaping their
hands. After this, Nemours went his way, and would never more come so near
Lions to besiege the same. Notwithstanding they had after this certain small
skirmishes between them.

Against the coming of Nemours, Mo^sier des Adretz had gathered together out
of all Dolpheny, so many soldiers as he could, to help the men of Lions, and
he conducted 1500. footmen, with a very small troop of horsemen. The report
hereof caused Nemours to take a new devise in hand: and because he
understood that the army of footmen of Monsieur des Adretz, wanted horsemen
to guard and defend them, he determined to set upon him with his horsemen.
Wherefore, not far from Beaupere he met with Monsieur des Adretz and his men:
and skirmishing with them, troubled them sore, and had slain a great number of
them, if so be both the opportunity of the place, and also the ma^lines of M. de
Adretz, in conducting his me^, had not helped the^. So yt notwithstanding the
greatest part escaped and few were lacking.

Notwithstanding for this cause the inhabitants from Vienna all a long the
river Rosne, were greatly afeard: and greatly also the news hereof dismayed
Turnon, although it was strongly fortified with Garrisons of Soldiers. And
about this time the inhabitants of Nonay sought to win the City of
Sanstephen, being a very Noble and famous City in the Territory of Viuaretz:
and this was the occasion: there is in the country of Forest a City called
Sanstephen, nere unto Nonay, where diverse kinds of weapons and artillery (the
place being very convenient for the same) are made by Copper Smithes. of which
there are there great store. The winning of Sanstephen and Nonays.
The men of Nonay, being desierouse both to have weapones, and also the spoil
of the City, which was of reasonable wealth, by the advice and counsel of
their governor, they intended to win the same: Imageninge that by reason of
the nearenes of Nemours, and of Monsieur Caumont, a man of great power in that
Region, and of diverse other noblemen which dwelt about them, they were secure
and careless, and might therefore more easily be oppressed. And in deed it came to
pass according to their imagination. For the greatest part of soldiers, and
almost all the young men and boys in the Town, having the governor of the
Town their Captain, went out of Nonay: and travailing all the night with
great speed, through woods and secret places, were very early at the City of
Sainstephen.

And so soon as the Porters and Warders of the gates had carelessly, suspecting
nothing less tha^ the coming of the enemy, opened the gates of the City,
they violently rushed in, and oppressed and slew a great number of the
Townsmen, as they were making of them ready to arm and defend them selves.
Their purpose was to return back again to Nonay with as much speed as
possibly they could, when they had gotten them armor and weapons and taken the
spoil of the City. But when by the example of their Governor, the soldiers
gave themselves to spoiling of houses, and spent the time in vain upon
dalliance with women, they gave great occasion ^o Monsure Caumout, which was
not far from them to work their destruction. For he being certified of their
delay and security, gathered together by and by so great a multitude as he
could from the places: thereaboutes, alarm being sounded in every streat and
corner. Therefore the men of Nonay being busied in their pray, in so much that
they neither reme^bered to depart, nor yet suspected the coming of their
enemies in so great number, were suddenly hemde in with a great number of
soldiers which came under the charge of Monsieur Caumout: and falling into
their hands, were slain for the most part of them with their Governor, and
the rest fled.

And when Monsieur Caumont understood the matter, he marched with his army,
taking with him certain field pieces, toward Nonay, and finding the same void
of any garrison, and greatly amassed with much fear and Nonay cruelly spoiled
grief: after he had battered the walls, at the length, took the City. And
then showed extreme cruelty, killing rashly both Papist and Protestant
together, with women also and children: which murder most cruelly continued
for the space of two days. But when it was reported that Monsieur des Adretz
was coming by Turnon, with a very great hoaste, Monsieur Caumont removed in
the night: and causing great silence to be kept throughout all his army, he
stale away secretly. And what soever the soldier at his departure could not
carry away, that he spoiled, as corn and wine, and such like, casting the
corn abroad in the streates, knockinge out the heads of Toonnes of wine, and
setting fire on diverse places of the City. I my self (which have written
these things) am also an eye witness of this horrible cruelty, being present
at the same, and carrying yet, and shall do while I live, certain marks by
wounds in my body, to remember the same.

Nonay being desolated with this horrible murder, Monsieur Sainmartin a
Captain, Liefetenant of the Region of Viuaretz, came within few days after
with a garrison of soldiers, and repaired the broken walls, and fortified the
same so well as he could.

Monsieur des Adretz having gathered an army, entered into consultacio^ about
the besieging of Vienna, whether Nemours was come with the greatest part of his
army: and removed his army which he had taken out of Dolpheny and Languedoc,
to Uienna, myndinge to besiege a city in ye utmost parts of Viuaretz called
Saint Columbe, but he bare at that time a false and trayterouse mind, as
experience afterward declared.

Therefore after certain small skirmishes, they entered into parley with
Nemours: and Monsieur des Adretz was let into Uienna: and coming out from
thence again, showed manifest tokens that his mind was altered. And he agreed
with Nemours to yield unto him forthwith Roman and Ualentia cities of Dolpheny.
Therefore he removed his army from Vienna, and appointed Nemours to be at Roman
that day, where he himself had given his faith at the self same time to be:
and he himself went to view and win other cities. When his other fellow
captayn^ understood of this, as Cardet, Lieftenant of Ualentia, Blacon, Bari,
Mouens, and others, they admonished Monsieur Cursol of the same: and they with
ye help of Mouents took Monsieur des Adretz while he was at Valencia, they
having sit occasion offered them thereunto. And then the subtle lying in wayt
of Nemours being detected and bewrayed, who came with his soldiers at ye day
appointed to Roman, he returned again to Vienna disappointed of his purpose.
And so the treason of Baron des Adretz being discovered, he was brought to the
city of Nemaus, in the province of Languedoc: but because of the benefit of
peace which was concluded by an Edict, he escaped present and deserved death.

In the mean time the Duke of Guise, having augme^ted his army, and provided
all things necessary for war, removed from Paris, and went to besiege Orleans,
in the The Admi rall goes into Normandy.
month of January. The Admiral was gone from Orleans, with the greatest part
of his army, and with all the troops of Germane horsemen to join with the
English men, leaving to keep and defend Orleans, his brother the The siege of
Orlean*
Andelot with the other part of the army. For the Admiral stood in great need
of money: Of the which when the Guise understood, he sought all yt he could, to
draw away the Germans from t^king part with ye Prince of Conde: and because
they were discouraged from the Guises, because he warred against religion; and
because the faithful contended for no other cause, than to deliver ye King
from captivity, and to defend the Edicte which concerned the reformed
religion: the Guise affirmed and protested that he neither mayntayned war
against Religion, nor kept the King nor any of his Captyues. And for this
cause he procured the Kings letters, in the which the King and Queen declared
to the Marshall of Hessen, and to the Germans which aided the Prince of Co^de
under his conduct, that neither of them were captives. This is the sum of
their letters.

In consideration of the great friendship and unity, which has bin heretofore
between the Germane, Princes, The Kings letters to win from the Prince the
Germans.
and the Kings of France our auncetoures, and in respect of the mutual love,
which the one has always showed toward the other, to the profit and
commodity of both parties: it could not but seem wonderful and strange unto
us, that certain of those Princes of Germany, our friends should aid and
help our subjects, which have lifted up the swerd against us, and have
seditiously brought our Realm into great troubles. But we think that it
comes hereof, that those seditious persons have deceived the Princes with a
false couller and pretense, making them believe that we are captiued: and that
they for the duty and obedience which they owe unto us, have gone about, to
deliver us from the same. In the which opinion, even at this day also they go
about to persuade and retain both the Captains and also the Souldies of those
Germans, whom for the cause and pretense aforesaid, they have brought into
this Realm: of whose goodness and estimation we are so persuaded that we
doubt not but that they will for very grefe and sorrow, be offended that they
have been so deceived. For these causes we signifye and declare to the Marshall
Hess, the Captain general of those Germans, and to the under Captains and
soldiers, that we were never kept by any manner of violence, nor Captiued any
manner of way. But have always enjoyed both the fredome of our bodies and
minds: and have ever found those our subjects which are accused in this
behalf, to be most loving, faithful and obedient. Furthermor we have not
commanded or given leave to those our seditious Subjects to put themselves in
armoure, and to join with for reyne Nations: as we think now the Marshall Hess
himself well perceived, so soon as he came into the Realm, both by the late
success of the battle, and also by the infinite number, of murders, rapines,
and spoils, which that seditiouse sort do daily commit against our poor
subjects: whereby there cannot be a more firm and certain argument to declare
what the purpose and mind of those seditious persons, is: In so much that we
must needs persuade our selves, that those Soldiers of Germany, by the
admonition of these our letters, will be certified of the truth, and beware of
that error with the which those seditious persons go about to blind them.
In so doing they shall both win ^ame to themselves, and also deserve well at our
hands, but especially main taine and defend the glory of God.

To these letters subscribed Alexandre the Kings brother Duke of Orleans,
Henry Borbon Prince of Nauar, Charles Cardinal Borbon, Lodowicke Borbon Duke
of Monpenseir, Fraunces Burbon county de Alphine, and Charles Borbon Prince
Rochsurion, ye xxiiii. day of January.

After this the Duke of Guise beseeged Orleans with a great host of men, and
with abundance of great guns: which he planted against that (...)of the City,
by which the River of Loire ran, (...)the midst of the same: by reason
whereof the Guise persuaded himself the more easily to win the same: For on
the other side of the City, the ground lay level and plain, which was very
unmeet to incampe upon: and besides this the City had very strong fortes
and Towers on that part to defend it self. At the first therefore he to^e the
Suburbs called Porterell, and the German footmen that were set to keep the
same fled away: at the receiving of whom into the City there were a great
number of Gascoynes and inhabitants of Languedoc slain which made the
Citizens sore afraid. After this the Guise bent his ordinance for the battery
against the city, and gave a very whot assault to the same. In the mean time
the Andelot, though he was sore troubled with a quartern ague, took great
pains in forte^ing and defending the City. At the length, by treas^n the
Guise got the tower which stands upon the bridge foot, by which the
townsmen might have bin greatly anoyed if so be they had not beat down a
great part of the bridge from the same, at the commandment of the Andelot:
the Island being very well fortified and defended.

While these things were thus in hand at Orleans, the Admiral was in
Normandy, and had joined himself to the English men* whereby his army was not
only much increased, but also he received a great sum of money: whereby the
Germans were not a little encouraged.

The Duke of Guise daily, more and more urged the men of Orleans, and sought
new ways to work their Pultrotse^t from Lions to the: Admiral.
destruction. But behold as the Guise mused and de^ised with himself to work
mischief, there came a certain Soldier from Lions, called Pultrot Merae,
carrying letters of Monsieur Soubize to the Admiral, being of body great,
taull, and strong, but in courage and stomach, a very coward.

This Pultrot, when he had delivered his letters to the Admiral, declared vuto
him that he knew an easy way to discomfite the Guises army, yea if need were
to kill the Guise himself: shewinge himself very ready and willing to bring
the same to pass. The Admiral wondered at the boldness of the man, being to
him a mere stranger: and also had no great trust in him at the first:
Notwithstanding because he was commended unto him by Monsieur Soubize, he
granted unto him according to his own request leave to be a spy, and secret
beholder of the Guises doings, and commanded him also to certify him thereof
so soon as he could: deriding and little regarding that his immagination
concer ning the killing of the Guise. First of all therefore the Admiral gave
unto Merae for to play the spy, twenty french Crowns: after the receyte
whereof, he went to the Guise in his camp at Orleans: and made protestacion
unto him that he was very sorry that he had borne armor against the king,
craving pardon for his offense of the Guise, and promising ^uer after to show
himself a true and faithful subject toward the King. The Guise hearing
this, very lovingly received and entertained Pultrot Merae. Then from the Guise
he went to the Admiral again, showing unto him how well he had sped, and
received of him again a hundred crowns to by him a Horse. Therefore he
returned again to the Guises camp with a better horse, and tarying there
cerdayes, he earnestly studied in himself how he might bring to pass to slay
the Duke of Guise: and he made the more speed to finish his purpose, because
he saw the City of Orleans like to come in peril. Wherefore when he had fully
determined with himself what he would do, he began to devise with himself,
whether he were best to kill him when he had many men or few about him. When
he had fully resolved himself how and after what manner he would accomplish
this enterprise, he came to the Guise, as he was vewing the strength of the
Town and the manner of his siege, and waited upon him according as he had done
before. At the length the Guise being weary mounted on his horse intending to
go home to his house, with two men only waighting Pultrot kills the Guise.
upon him, and Merae followed him also. And when the Guise and the rest were
come over a certain Ferry, not far from his house, Merae suffered the Guise to
ride about six or seven paces before him, and then discharged at the shoulder
of the Guise a pistolet, which he had charged bebefore with three pellettes.
With the which he being sore wounded, within a few days after he dyed: But
Merae, so soon as he had done the deed set ^rres to his horse, and fled with
speed. And riding all the night from place to place, the night being very foul
and tempestious, (as it is commonly in the winter) he came again to the same
place from whence he had ^ed the day before which was at a Uillage called
Oliuet nere unto the Pultrot taken,
River Ler^, the which village was the appointed place for the Army of the
Switsers. And runninge upon the Switsers unawares, was by their outcry
bewrayed: Not withstanding he fled again, but was taken within few miles of the
Guise camp.

Now the death of the Guise for certain days was kept from the knowledge of
the men of Orleans, the captains slacking never a whit less the siege yt the
Guise had begone. Notwithstanding the army being herewith much discouraged* and
the Queen, and the Prince of Conde giving commandment that truce might be
taken on both parts, they raised their sieege and departed.

Then a peace was entreated, the Constable faithfully, Peace taken.
as it might seem, promising the same to the men of Orleans. Therefore there
was oftentimes mutual conference between both parts, and free communication
had also even among the common Soldiers.

In the mean time the Admiral prospered very well and had good success in
Normandy: and having won Cane in Normandi won.
Cane a noble City in Normandy, and having great store and abundance of
money, had no doubt brought greater things to pass within a short time, if the
peace had not bin a stay unto him.

Therefore the peace was now in question between the Queen and the Prince of
Conde, the Constable earnestly soliciting the same by his letters. The Queen
although she saw her part to be in worst case, two of her principal
Captains being destroyed, and the third taken: and on the contrary part,
although the Prince of Conde were taken, yet that the rest of the Captains
flourished and prevailed, although I say she saw these things: yet
notwithstanding she dissembling with a double heart, made the Prince of Conde
believe and hope for great matters, and made him bend unto her will so much as
she could. Therefore certain conditions of peace were propounded to the Prince
of Conde, but not indifferent: in the which conditions many things were
discided concerning the Edict of January: by which Edicte the Prince of Conde
would have had the peace formed and framed.

Then the Queen, the Prince of Conde, the Constable, and the Andelot came
together to Parley in a certain Ileland called Boum, near to Orleans, the
Admiral which at that time was in Normandy being advertised of the same. And
after much communication to and fro, the peace was at the last concluded, the
xiii. day of March in manner and form following.

ALL men see and know with what troubles, seditions, and tumultes this our
kingdom, for certain years, by the just judgment of God, has been tormoyled
and tossed, our subjects being the occasion and cause thereof, through the
diversity of opinions concerning religion. To provide a remedy for the which,
there have been hitherto had many conuocations of the most singular and wise men
of the whole realm, by whose advise and coun sail, many Edictes and decrees
have been made, as the necessity of the time required: meaning thereby to
prevent a mischief, and stop greater inconveniences like to ensue.
Nevertheless the iniquity of time by little and little has so prevailed, and
the Lord by his secret and just judgment, provoked by our sins and
wickedness, has not restrained but suffered those outragiouse trou bles to have
their course: and that so far forth, that an infinite sort of murders,
bloodshed, rapine, spoil and destruction of Cities have come thereof: beside
the violating of temples, the joining of battayles, and an infinite number of
mischeeues mo in diverse places. In so much that if this mischief proceed any
further, seeing there are so many strangers in our Realm, and more daily like
to come, we may plainly see and behold the inevitable ruin and destruction of
the whole Realm: beside the great loss of so many Princes and noble men, and
valeaunt Captains, already made by the authors of these troubles, which Noble
men, under the mighty hand of God, are the only strength and true defense and
protection of this our Crown. The which things we have diligently considered,
and devised always and remedies to help in time: yet notwithstanding seeing
we see that all the inconveniences which come of this war, do redownde to
the diminution and detriment of this our realm, and have felt by experience, to
our great hurt and loss, that this remedy is not sufficient for this purpose,
we have thought that there can be no better way, tha^ first of all for us to
flee unto the infinite grace and goodness of our Lord God, and by his help to
seek for peaceable and quiet remedies, to cure the soarenesse of this great
and mischeuous disease, in the eyes of man almost incurable: to bring the
wills of our subjects to unity and concord, and to the acknowledging of that
obedience and duty which belongs unto us, being speedy remedies to keep our
subjects in peace: trusting that the fruit of a general or national Counsel
will bring such assured peace and certain tranquillity, to the honor and
glory of God, that we shall have all great cause to joy in the same.

In the which matter we will have the good and wholesome Counsel of the
Queen, our most loving and reverend mother, of our most loving Cosynes the
Cardinal of Borbon, of the Prince of Conde, of the Duke of Monpensier, and of
the Prince Rochsuryon, of the Princes that are of the Kings blood, of our
beloved Cosines also the Cardinal Guise, Duke de Aumall, Momorencius the
Constable, of the Duke Estamp, of the Marishalls Brissac, and Burdillon, of the
Lords the Andelots, and of other peers of the Realm, and men of the Kings
counsel: All the which, with one consent and mind have thought meet and
necessary that these things following should be ordained and decreed, for the
common wealth and profit of our realm: the which we will and command to
abide firm and immutable, that is to say. THAT all noble men hereafter, having
the rule and go uernement of Provinces, may peaceably and with the liberty of
their consciences live in those houses in the which they shall dwell, with
their families and servant, and enjoy the use of the reformed religion, so
called, with out any impediment or trouble. And it shall be lawefull for all
noble men and their families, what jurisdiction soever they have, to use the
same religion at home and in their houses, so that they dwell not in those
villages and towns that are subject to the greater Jurisdiction. In which
places they cannot have the use of the Religion, without the leave and license
of the higher powers. We appoint to every Office, Senate, or Court, whose
first appeal belongs unto the higher courts, a city, at the peti cio^ of
the me^ of reformed religion, to the which city the men of those offices and
Courts may come and have the use of the reformed religion, and no otherwise
nor any where else. Notwithstanding all men may live every where peaceably at
home, without any peril or harm for the use of religion and their conscience.
Furthermore, all men in those cities, in the which that religion was exercised
the vii. day of this month of March, beside those cities which shall be
specially appointed to every Court, shall have leave to use the administration
of that religion still, in one or two Cities, which shall be appointed unto them.
Notwithstanding it shall not be lawful for the men of the reformed religion,
to occupy the churches of the Catholics and priests: whom we will and
command to be restoared from this time forward to the full enioyinge of all
their Goods, Houses, Lands, Possessions, and Profytes, whatsoever: that they
may enjoy the same as they did before these troubles were begone: that they
may use their divine service in those places where they were wont, without
interruption or trouble of any man. We will also and command, that the city
and Court of Paris be free from the whole use of that Religion.
Notwithstanding whatsoever he be of the reformed Religion that has any house,
or reuenewe in the city of Paris, or within any part of the same, may freely
come and go thereunto, and shall be in no peril of harm for any thing past or
to come concerning Religion. All Cities shall be brought again to their former
and wonted intercourse of bying and selling: and al Strangers shall forthwith
be sent out of the Realm.

And to the end we may the better quiet and stay the minds of our subjects,
we will and command, that all men be under our protection, patrociny, and
defense, and that they be restored to their offices and revenues, what state,
degree or condition soever they be of: notwithstanding the statutes,
ordinances, and decrees, made since the discease of our dear Father Henry of
happy memory, for Religion, or for the Armor which our well-beloved Cosen the
Prince of Conde has borne, or any other at his commandment. The which
statutes and decrees we command to be void and of none effect least through
them, they, their children, executors, heirs, or assigns, should be stayed
hereafter from the use and possession of their goods and dignities. Be it
therefore sufficiently provided by these our letters, and let all men be out of
doubt, that we set and restore them to the possessions of all their goods and
lands, which they now have or had heretofore.

AND least any man should stand in doubt of the faith and true meaning of our
cosen the Prince of Conde, we say and affirm that we do take and account him
for our well-beloved cosen, and for a loving subject, and faithful servant in
all our affairs: In the which number of faithful subjects we esteem and
account all the Peers, Lords and Nobles, and all the inhabitants of the
Cities, Towns, and Villages within this Realms, which have taken part with
our said cosen, and have served in these tumultes of Civil war, in any manner
of place within this Realm: Thinking that those things which our subjects have
done, have proceeded from good intent meaning, and for their duty and
obedience sake. Furthermore, we will and command, that the Prince of Conde
our well-beloved cosen, be fully discharged of all accounts for such sommes of
money as he has himself (or any other at his commandment) taken out of the
Treasury: and to be free also from making an account of such money as he has
taken out of Cities, or corporat Towns, or from Ecclesiastical persons: or
for the coining of money, the casting of great Goonnes, the making of
Goonpoulder, the fortefying of Cities, or for the pulling down of Edifices or
buildings at the Prince of Condes commandment to build up any fort or hold:
Of all which things we discharge and fully acquit both him and all others at
that time under his service, by these our Letters and Edict, by us subscribed
and sealed. And so many as were taken either in war, or for Religions sake,
or which are kept in durance for any other cause, we dismiss and set at
liberty by these presents. Such notwithstanding excepted, as are thieves and
murderers, to whom the benefit of this Edict shall not appertain.

AND because we specially and above all things wish, that all these causes of
these troubles may be cut of, and all men's minds truly reconciled and
pacified, that by this consent and agreement, the obedience due unto us may be
confirmed, we will and command also these things following.

First, that all injuries and offenses which have grown by iniquity of the
time and by the occasions coming thereof, and that all oaths things sprung up
by these tumultes, may be extinguished, forgotten, and buried under foot, even
as if they had never been.

We deny and forbid also upon pain of death, all our subjects, what state,
condition or degree so ever they be of, to provoke one another with
contumelious words, and to stir up anger by envy of things past: but do
exhort them, rather to behave them selves loving ly one toward another as
brethren and fellow Citizens: him that shall otherwise do, we will and
command too be executed forthwith without any further examination or
judgment, according to the severity of our Edict.

For the which cause, to the end all scruple may be quite taken away, those
our subjects, shall shake of and reject the making of any manner of Leagues or
partakinges, either within this Realm, or without: neither shall they make
hereafter any conuocatio^s, moysterings of men, nor collections of money,
otherwise than they are permitted to do, by this our Edict, and that without
Armor. The which we straitely forbid them to do, unless they will incur the
punishment, for breaking this Edict. And we will and command, that this our
Edict, be sollemnely proclaimed throughout the whole realm, and that it be
also put down in the Court Roolles, and diligently observed and kept of all
men. THIS we command by our authority to abide firm and irreuocable for
ever.

THE XIII. day of the same Month, Poltrot Merae, the same whom we said before
had killed the Duke of Guise, was examined, and after examination confessed him
self to be guilty of the death of the Guise: and for the same was by the
judgment of the Senate of Paris, con demned, to be drawn in pieces with four
horses. This is a most cruel kind of death, which has been ever of old time
used upon Traitors. The manner of the death was this. They tied to the wrest of
each arm a strong rope, and likewise to the small of both his legs: and then
the other ends of the same roopes being fastened to four great horses, the
horses wers made to draw two of them against the other two til they had rent
his lims one from another. This kind of death Poltrot suffered. After this his
death there was a Libell set out concerning his examination, and published
and reported also among the Germans in the Admiralles Camp, that Merae,
appealed the Admiral to be the author of his wicked deed, and Theodore Beza
and a cer taine other Minister, which he named not, to be prouokers of him
thereunto, and the County Rochefoucaut, as accessory to the same. To this
accusation the Admiral answered, and affirmed the same to be false, saying,
that either Maerae had made no such accusation at all, or else if he had made
it, that then he did it falsely, being provoked thereunto either for fear, or
for hope. For probation whereof he alleged the rash and sudden punishment of
Merae, which was so speedy that he had not leave to come before the Judges,
according to order of Law, and to have ye accused present before the accuser.

Now concerning the peace, it was reported of every where, every one rejoiced
because of the same, yea the naming of peace was pleasant in the ears of all
men, every one hoping that so great troubles and calamities were now at an end.
Notwithstanding the Protestants greatly m^ruelled what the Prince of Conde meant
to agree unto those slended conditions, seeinge the principal heads of their
enemies were destroyed, some taken, and the ^ost (...)discouraged: whereas on
the contrary part the Prince of Conde had now the lawful government of the
Realm, and many couragions captains to take his part: whereby they were like
to have ^etter success than ever they had.

Moreover the Admiral in No^ndy, and Monsie^ Cu^sol in Languedoc prospered
very well: notwithstanding by letters sent to him from the King, and from the
Prince of Conde, concerning the Edicte: and to Monsieur Cursol also, which was
then besieging of the Castle of Pyle, they unarmed themselves, and embraced
the peace. And the Edicte was there by and by (...)^ed, and in all Towns also
where the Protestants inhabited. The Catholics also were suffered freely to
go unto their Cities, and enjoyed all things to them appertayning according to
the benefit of the Kings Edict. Notwithstanding at Bourdeux and Tholoze the
Papists made much a do about the receiving of the Kings Edicte, in so much
that the Protestants durst not go home to their houses, but were feign to make
often complaints here of to the King.

The English men by the sufferance of the Prince of Conde kept the Portele
Grace which is a City bordering upon the Sea in the edge of Normandy: who
refusing for certain causes of covenant between them to go out of the City,
the Kings army removed to besiege the same, the Prince of Conde also himself
being present with a great part of his army: at the which the English men
greatly marueiled, thinking that he requited them not as they had deserved.
Notwithstanding at their Queens commandment they departed from thence,
upon certain conditions: a League being made between the King of France and
the Queen of England. Both Armies also of the Germans went home and almost in
every place men wholly unarmed themselves: notwithstanding certain of the Guises
army and of the Prince of Condes also were reserved still in their armor for
another purpose as shall be hereafter declared.

The end of the second part.
The third part of Commen taries, Containing the whole discourse of the
civil wars of France, under the reign of CHARLES the nynth.

Translated out of Latin into English, by Thomas Tymme, Minister.

Seen and allowed.

Imprinted at London, by Frances Coldock.

And are to be sold at his shop in Pawles churchyard at the sign of the green
Dragon.

1574.

The Table for the third part.
A
ABbay of Saint Florent burnt. page. 201 Acts in the time of the Kings
progress. 46 Admiral, accused by the Cardinal of Loraine. 11 Admiralls
purgation. 13 Admiral cleared of the Guises death by the Kings sentence. 47
Affairs of the low Conntrey. 77 Agreement between the king and the Duke of
Orleans. 40 Amanzi slain. 131 Answer of the faithful to the oath which they
should take. 124 Andelot comes to the Prince of Conde with a great army. 174
Andelot passes over the River of Loyer. 176 Andelot joins with the Admiral.
176
B
Battle woone by the Protestants at Auuergnoys. 107 Battle in the which the
Prince of Conde was slain. 208 Brotherhoodes of the Papists. 43 Brissiac
slain 215 Boysuerd slain. 175
C
Cardinal accuses the Admiral. 11 Cardinal takes foolish and ^ain
journeyes. 70 Cardinal of Loraine practices too take the principal
protesta^s. 118 Cardinal of Loraine practices too take the Prince of conde.
121 Cardinal S^astillion flees into England. 162 Church of Lions diversely
vexed. 50 Chartres besieged. 108 Charity, besieged and taken. 221 Cities and
Towns which took part with the Protestants. 107 Cities yielded to the Prince
of Con de. 174 Cipiere cruelly slain. 119 Conference between the Nobles, and
the Duches of Parme. 86 Conspiracy of the Papists to destroy the Gospel. 92
Constable slain. 102 County Panpadon slain. 215 Counsel of Trent traueileth
to hi^ der the Gospel. 23 Congregatiou of the Protestants at Pamiz 37 Crafty
disposition of the Queen Mother. 11
D
Death of the Prince of Condes wife. 41 Death of Ch^els Son to King Philip.
162 Death of the Lord of Morueile. 227 Death of the Duke of Deuxpons. page.
223. Declaration of Rossilion gave a great overthrow to the Edict. 50
Description of the Dukes camp. 223. Description of the princes army. 224
Discipline appointed by the Prince of Conde. 164. and. 165. Duches of Parme
causes an assembly of states. 83. Duke of Alba comes into Flanders with the
Spaniards. 94. Duke of Aniou marches toward Loraine. 106. Duke of Aniou put to
the worse in fight. 193. Duke of Deuxpons promises aid to the Prince. 197.
E
Edict wrested by the Anuil. 5. Edict falsely interpreted. 27. Edict
enterpreted. 45. Edict against the Gospel. 106. and. 177 Edict collerably made
by the Catholics. 112. Edict not observed. 115. Edict of peace. 300. England
a fuccor to France. 109. Endreau reuolteth. 212.
F
Fortress built at Lions 49.
G
Germans take both parts. 196. Government of D'anuil over the Churches of
Languedoc. 3. Gospel begins to florishe in ^launders. 77. Guyses seek to
disturb the peace. 20
I.
Impunitie for the murder done at Towers. 69 Images in Flanders go to wrack. 85
Injuries done to the Protestants page 60. and. 113. Interdiction of Sermons.
48.
K
Kings progress with the causes thereof. 38. King comes to Lions. 48. King
comes to Languedoc. 74. King Philip certified of the increse of the
Protestants in the Low country. 79. King and Queen remove to Paris. 97.
L
Letters of the king to the Prince of Conde. 67. Letters of the Prince to the
King page. 98. and. 132. Letters of the papists intercepted page. 130. Letters
of the Queen of Nauar ^o the King. 168. to the Queen mother. 169. and to the
Cardinal of Borbon. 173 Lettes of the Queen of Nauar ^o the Queen of England.
187. Letters pattens from the Pope. 184. Lord Boccard dies. 216. Luzig
surrendered. 241.
M
Messenger sent by the Prince of Co^ de taken. 162. Merindol appointed for the
exercise of the reformed religion. 73 Monsuer Cure slain. 44. Monsuer Saltane
displaced out of his office, and Monsuer Lossay succedeth him. 50. Mons.
Cochay taken and many of his men slain. 197. Mons Mouens, and his soldiers
slain. 186. Motton commanded to be hanged by the Anuil. 6. Murders most
horrible. 119. Musters of Souldier^ 130.
N
Niort besieged. 237. Noyers won. 198.
O
Oath of the prince of Nauar. 212. Oath collerably made. 130. Order of gods
f^ruice in Nemaux. ^
P
Papists brag of abolishing the Edict. 10. Petition made by the Prince of
Conde^ 98. Peace concluded. 110. Peace requested by the protestants. 232.
Poictiers besieged. 242. Pey battered 244. Prince of Conde intised from the
defense of the Gospel. 33. Prince of Conde escapes the Papists snares. 40.
Prince of Conde complayneth of injuries. 54. Prince of Orange comes to
Anwerpe. 87. Prince of Conde marches to Loraine. 105. Prince of Conde flies
to Noyere page 121. and. 164 Prince of Conde in great peril. 131. Prince of
Conde seeks to encounter with Mompensier. 190 Prince of Orange seeks to
join with the Prince of Conde. 195. Preaching forbidden, 48. Practice ^o
stcale away the prince of Nauar 167 Proclamations for the observation of the
Edict 68 Pultrot deareth the Admiral. 14 Protestants commanded too return
to Monachisme. 52
Q
Queen of France encourages the fouldiours. 224
R
Reconciliation between the Guises and the Chastillion 47 Restraint of Synode^.
51 Rochell (...)to be besieged 130
S
Sanser besieged 202 Sermons (...)preached. 217 Slaughter of the Parisians at
Saint Dionyse. 102 Slaughter of the faithful at Tow ers 53 Slaughter of the
^thful. 41 Slaughter of 10. thou^sande protestants in the space of 3. months,
in the time of peace (...) Spy sent to vewe Noyers, taken. page 122 State of
the common wealth, after peace was taken 1 State of the Church of Orleans. 1
State of the Church of Lions. 2 State of the Church in Dolpheny. 3 State of the
Church in, Burgondy and Prouance 3 State of the Church of Venais. 7 State of
the Church of Orange. 8 State of the Church of Paris. 8 State of the church of
P^eardy. 8 State of the Church of Brittayne and Normandy. 8 State of the
Churches of Gascoyne and Guian. 9 State of the protestants in the second war
100 State of the Churches in the low Country, after the coming of the Duke
of Alba. 102 Supplication of the Nobles of the low Conntrey 82 Succor of the
Pope. 224 Strosius men slain. 224 Suburbs of Rochereul thrice assalted 253
Subtle practices of the papists against the Gospel. 25
T
Troubles at Lions 116 Troubles at Paris 117 Tyranny of the Duke of Alba. 196
V
Valencia beseeged 89 Valencia surrenuered. 91 Violence done to the
Protestants. page 60
W
VVatch and ward at Havens and Bridges 114
FINIS.
The vii. Book of Commentaries, concerning the state of Religion and of the
common wealth of France under the Reign of Charles the ninth.
ALTHOUGH that France was now (as The state of the com mo^ wealth and of the
church after peace was taken*
it were, very desirous to be at rest; after so great broils of that grievous, and
lamentable war: yet heavy occasions of new troubles, seemed to be offered
every day, and the hearts of the Papists were espied by manifest tokens and
talk, to wax more spightfull. New haven a town lying on the sea cost of
Normandy, being received again of the English men, part of the Kings army was
quight, discharged, and part of it was chosen to lie in garrison, in those
Cities, which were holden of the Protestants in the time of war: and for
this purpose also, were taken some of the Prince of Condies The state of the
chur ch at Orlcaunce.
bands, especially those who in the time of service had forsaken the Prince,
and gone to the Duke of Guise. The state of all the Churches being scatered
throughout all the provinces of the Kingedome was such as here follows.

Monsieur Sipier a noble man, had again, by the kings commandment, the
gouernmente of the Church, at Orleans: and the City it self was fortified
with a very grievous and troublesome garrison. Notwithstanding the Church
flourished there, both in great number of the faithful and also good plenty of
learned men: there was a school ordained for the use of the reformed Church,
and beawtyfied with most excellent Doctoures and Teachers: but amongst the
wrongs and verations that they of the Garrisons did daily work, the
Protestants of Orleans were greatly encouraged, by reason they of Chastillo^
dwelt so near them, the Cardinal Odet Chaste illo Odet Cardi nall of Cha
stillon.
also very frankly and liberally helping with money, the needs and wantes both
of their Church and schole.

The Marshall de Vielleuille came to Lions, and the Protestants at his
commandment forthwith laying the state of the church at Lions.
a side their armor, whilst (as he said) he went about to put the Edict in
execution, he fenseth the City with a strong Garrison, and by force of the
Kings letters, staieth the building of the Church, which the faithful had
begun, being thrust out of the Papists churches which before in the time of
war they had used. And yet, they of Lions were not in worst case, for the
Protestants there did both quietly live amongst themselves: and also enjoyed,
freely and without restrainte the use of the reformed religion, certain places
being by the Kings majesty's grant, for that purpose appointed. All which
time Petrus Uiretu^ a Godly and eloquent man, together Petrus Vire ^us.
with his most excellent fellowlabourers, did very profitablye travail in that
congregation, which was greatly frequented and furnished with men of all sorts
and degrees so that to the Godly it yielded a joyful and pleasant spectacle but
to the Papists, a heavy and lamentable sight.

The government of the Country of Dolpheny fell into the hands of Monsieur
Mo^gron, and Gordes and garrisons of soldiers were placed in the chief towns
thereof, as in Ualence, Grenoble, Roman, Uienne, Montillon, the state of the
church in Dolpheny.
notwithstanding they did not long bear the wrongful dealing of the
Soldiers, especially in that part of the Country which was ruled by Monsuer
Gordes, for they procured unto themselves his favor by gifts, and so by that
means were delivered from the Garrisons. But the congregations in Burgundy
were euel entreated, by Monsieur Tauennes and the Counsel of Diion. the state
of the church in Burgun die and Pro uance.
But chiefly toward the Country of Prouance, they were very cruelly
handled, for there the Papists were so impudently imboldned, and as it were
fleshed through the impunitie and liberty of the spoils they had committed in
the time of war, that the Protestants being utterly discouraged, with the
often tydinges of the injuries and murders that were there committed, durst
not once to repair home to their own houses, although they did not openly
practice their Religion. But yet at the length by the Kings commandment,
they were suffered to return home, and diverse punishments executed upon
such, as had been woorkers of mischief there, as in place convenient, we will
more at large declare.

The Constable had procured the government of the the govern meant of M. Anuil
over the Churches in Lan guedoc.
Province of Languedoc, (over which he was chief ruler) to be committed over
to his Son Monsieur Anuille, with exceeding straight and sharp commission: For
the men of that Countey, had manfully and couragiouslye behaved themselves all
the time of the former war. Monsuer Anuille therefore imparting the matter to
the counsel of Tholouze, and having their advise how to behave himself in the
exploit of all his affairs, went to the other parts of this Province with more
stomach and courage: and to those Cities which in the time of war were
holden by the Protestants, he came with ranged and warlike armies, as though
he had meant to have encountered with some enemy. By his commandment also
there was watch and ward appointed at every gate, and flagges set out upon the
battlementes of the walls, like as the manner is in Cities that be vanquished
by force. Moreover he very straightly commanded the Protestants, that they
should bring all their armor to the common halles of every City, and charged
his own men, that they should ransacke all the houses of the faithful. At
Nemaux, he caused one to be beaten with cudgelles, because he had brought in
his armor, somewhat to late: and under color and cloak of that example, did
very haynously sclaunder before the King, the whole company of the faithful in
Languedoc, as obstinate and stubborn. And deuidinge Garrisons of Soldiers
into every City, where any congregation Albanoys
was, surueyed and vewed them himself, and with certain troops of Horsemen,
whom he had reclaymed to his own lure, and made fit for his own pitch, did
spoil and waste all things wheresoever he came. The Soldiers that were in
Garrison, and also they which waited upon the Anuille began very cruelly to
rage against the whole families of the faithful, even as though they had bin
taken captive in war: neither did they abstain from robberies, and rauishing
of Uirgines but did scotfree and without check commit horrible murders, the
Anuille being in the mean time wholly given over to the filthy love of whores,
and beastly excess of that good and gentle wine of Languedoc: and for these
two causes, he went diverse times to Auinion, and there did compel (a sight
truly almost of incredible impudency) his own wife, a noble woman of the worcester
thy and honorable house of the Duke of Bullion to salute, and entertain, at her
own table an whore of that town, a wydowe, whom, he being taken with her
bewty had caused to run headlong after filthy gain. And whereas fhere was an
order appointed by the Profestant^s in The order of calling upon god his name
in Nemaux
the Court of Nemaux, that before they took any thing in hand thereshould be
prayers made unto God, whose aid and help in administering justice, ought to
be craved and sought for: the Anuille commands that that custom should be
fortwith laid aside, and when the chief Justice had said unto him, who then
shall teach us true Justice, if the righteous and just God, be not called
upon? He made answer, that if he, or any of his, had any care or regard of
that invocation or calling upon Gods name, yet not withstanding it was not the
Kings pleasure, to lay any such burden upon them, who did little set by any
such customs and rytes, as that was: and so at the commandment of the
Anuille the invocation of Gods name was utterly banished out of the Court of
Nemaux.

Through the unreasonable outrage of this furious raging president, there were
diverse injuries and damages wrought against the Protestants, either under
color of the Edict, or else by plain and open force. Of the which these
things that follow being taken out of, almost an infinite number of other may
be sufficient examples. The Kings Edicte of peace did give free liberty to
exercise the reformed Religion in all those Cities The Edict violently
corrected by the Anuille.
in which it had bin practiced the vii. day of March (as it was provided by
flat and expres words of the v. branch of the Edicte) besides other Cities,
that were severally to be appointed, throughout all and every one of the
Provinces. Against this did the Auuille set this interpre ^acion, So that it be
thought Lawful by the chief Lords of those places. And so by these means,
he hindered the use of the reformed religion in many places: and every where
scatered and dispersed abroad the congregations. And although by the express
tenure and form of the Edicte, liberty of Religion and conscience was granted
to all and in all places of the Kingdom: yet he did so curtall and weaken the
lihertie of the Edicte, that he did not only compel those which were newly
come out of the Cloisters and Abbeys, or else had forsaken some other Popish
Rites, in the time of war: but also those who long a go, had left that kind
of life and were entered into some better trade of lyuinge, to take again their
former life of monkish supersticion and to put away their wives if they had
married any: or else to depart out of the bounds and limits of his Province.
And by these means he plucked away many of the ministers of Gods word from
their congregations, and drove them out of all the Country, where he ruled. A
notable example of this extremity was show ed in Moton the minister of the
congregation. Who having long before forsaken all kind of Monkery, had married
a wife in honest and lawful matrimony: and labored ver^ frutefully there in
that Church. To him straight commandment was given, either quight to forsake
his wife and leave the ministry, and then to take upon him h is former kind of
life, or else to depart out of the coast of Languedoc within three days: who
when he had made answer, that he was content to depart, for that he was so
commanded, and having provided al things necessary for his family, and
being set forward on his journey, as he passed by Monfrin (a little town of
Languedoc by the way that leads to Auinion) he went to visit the congregation
there, and was requested by the elders of that Church, that according to the
custom he would preach a sermon to the people. Moton was content, and Monsieur
Anuille co^ maundeth Moton to be hanged.
preached. The matter was signified unto Mo^scur Anuil who by and by commanded
the chief executioner, forthwith to hang up Moton, as guilty of breaking the
kings Edicte, for that he had preached contrary to his forbidding. Wherefore
Moton was violently apprehended (the ^earefull Protestante^ of the Church of
Monfrin standing round about him) and being haled and drawn out of his wiue^
arms, that pitifully cried out, was bound unto an almon tree. Where after that
he had comforted his wife, and protested, that he did willingly seal there
with his blood ye truth of his doctrine, for which vnwor thely he was so
troubled, he was strangled to death by the common hangman. All which time while
this was in doing, Mo^suer An^ll lay carelessly at Auinio^ wallowing in the
filthye pleasures of whoores and wine. The churches of Languedoc did complain
of these ini^ryes to the Kings majesty and the Queen his mother. The like did
the Prince of Conde being desired there unto by them of Languedoc but all was
in vain. For the Constable was a careful maintainer of his lonnes mischiefs,
and so wrought, that all the complaints that were put up against his son
were void and to no purpose, in so much that they which complained were in
peril and danger* Whereby it came to pass that ^he congregations in
Languedoc, which had any thing at all borne out the bruntes of the former
war, were very hardly dealt withal, and felt that peace was more grievous
then wars: and many of them thorough the cruel government of that president,
were scatered abroad.

In the County of Vena^s, being part of the Popes Dominion, a very frutful
soil and a commodious country: the state of the church of Venais.
the Protestants by the Popes commandment were erceding cruelly entreated,
and the goods of all them forfaited that did profess the reformed Religion:
neither could the kings Edict case the^ by any means, notwithstanding both
the King and the Queen were ^iuers times sued to by suppl^ations. Wherefore
the greatest part of the Protestants of Uenais, being spoiled of their goods,
went to Dolphiney and Orange: where the use of the reformed Religion was
freelye allowed, both by warrant of the Kings Edict, and also through The
state of the chur ches of Orange.
sufferance, and favor of the Prince of Or^nge.

The use of the reformed religion, was banished, out of Paris, by especial
commandment, of the Edict. Not withstandinge the Protestants of Paris, that
were returned The state of the churches of Paris.
home, began to devise and consult among them selves* for the renewing and
gathering together again, of the congregation. Wherefore straglinge abroad in
sendry companies, they enjoyed the preaching of Gods word: but always, there
resorted but a small number together in one company, least they should be
accused, and condemned as breakers and violaters of the kings decrees. And yet
although the Parliment of Paris, was very sore offended, and moved against the
faithful, and the Guises spies and promouters, also were very busy, and left
nothing, that might be done, untried: not withstanding through the policy,
and wisdom of the Marshall Momorency, who was President there, a certain kind
of peace and quietness, was kept, which was (as it were) sauced and
entermingles, now and than, with bitter and grievous vexations.

In Picardie, the Prince of Condies Province, the pro The state of the chur
ches of Picardie.
testantes through the faithful and diligent travail of the President: lived,
almost in every point, according to the order prescribed in the Edict
Heuerthelesse very few congregations were in that country: both because the
people of themselves were much given to popish ceremonies, and also they were
stirred up against the protestants that were there, by diverse of the Noble
men.

Moreover in Britannie, chiefly by the means of the The churches of Brit tanny
and Normandy
Andelot who held a great part of that country, by his wife which was Heir of
the countye of Lauall: and in Normaudy there were some Churches that lived
quietly, and yet many times were in great fear,

Amongst the Gascoignes (for at Burdeux the thief City The Churches of Gas
coigne and of al Guian
was a famous church,) the Santones, the men of Poictures and other countries
of the province of Guian (where were very many congregations, the protestants
were diversely molested and wronged by the Liuetenantes, Monsieur Monluc,)
Mousieur de Beri, Monsieur de Lude, and Monsieur de la Taride. And yet the
Queen of Nauar having the chief rule, almost over al those countries, being a
very godly and christian woman, did what possible she could do, that al things
there might be don in peaceable quietness, and according to the order appointed
in the Edict. She had also in the Dominion of Bearne (it is a Country on this
side the Mountains Pyranaeis, The Churches in the dominion of Bearne.
and part of the kingdom of Nauar, where she rained in soueraign and princely
aucthority) granted free liberty of the reformed Religion: but as then she
governed her subjects, according to the prescripte order of the French Edict.
There was to be seen, the churches live in perfect peace under a good and
Godly Princess.

In the Country of Mets which had bin long before The Churches in the Country
of Metz.
kept by the Kings Garrison, the Church did enjoy the benefit of the Edict:
and many of the Captains of the Garrison, and the Soldiers themselves did
frequent the Sermons. They had also at that time their Leuftenant Monsienr
Auancie, enclyninge to and fauouringe their procedinges very much.

The Churches that were in those Cities of Predmont The Churches of Pie mont.
which were holden by the French king, and those in the Marquesdome of Salus,
defended themselves by the warrant of the Edict.

Thus all the Churches dispersed through the whole kingdom of Franec, were in
diverse states and conditions, and the greatest part of them enjoyed the
benefit of the peace taken, but evil fauoredly, and all through default of
the common Courts and of those that were appointed comissioners for the
execution of the Edicte, and others the Lieftenantes of the provinces. The
papists had raised and bruted a rumor abrod, that the king The Papists brag of
abolishing the Edict.
being in his nonage and enforced by necessity of the time, had made that
Edict, but for a certain space: but when he attained unto more ripe and
discreet years, he would utterly root out and pluck up the seeds of that new
Religion, and bring home again his Subjects to an uniformity of one
Religion. And this forsooth was the will and pleasure of the King, his Mother
the Queen, and almost of al other the Peers and Nobles of the Realm: and that
they of the new religion should either consent unto this order* or else be
utterly destroyed by the King: or at least be spoiled of their Gods, and
banished out of all parts of the Kingdom. So that by the voice of the
papists, the faithful had granted unto the^ but (as it were) the loan of
the Edict for a very short space and at their pleasure, and that to, with many
great troubles and injuries. In so much that a man might perceive, very much to
be taken from the former Edict made in January, and the peace granted by the
an. D. 1563.
benefit thereof, greatly diminished. Notwithstanding the rage and troubles of
that most cruel and unnatural war being pacified, the churches were
miraculusly preserved in the time of truce, and by dispersing of some
congregations, others wore wonderfully augmented.

It was easily perceived how the Guises were enflamed against the protestants,
and highly effended, that The fetches of the Guises to disturb the peace.
ye use of their religion, was after a certain fort granted unto them in
France and that by warrant of the kings Edict: but yet there were many things,
which stayed them, that they burst not out into open war: for the present and
urgent state of things that had moved the Queen to make peace would not
suffer any new broiles or troubles to be raised again. They perceived also,
that they could not frame her mind to their pitch, although she were of her
self froward enough against the protestants, and very favorable to them and
their The crafty wi^ of the Queen the Kings mother.
parts. For the Queen greatly feared new tumultes, and did therefore feign to
be very careful, both to maintain the Edict, and also to see it put in
execution for the protestants sake: whom she flattered very subtly, and
against her stomach, especially the Prince of Conde: whom of all other, she
chiefly, by all means and ways possible, desired to win and draw unto her.

To these lettes also was added the extreme difficulty and almost
impossibility, of taking any new matter or exploite in hand, so hastily (as
it were) in the neck of so great wars but newly ended, Frances the Duke of Guise
being murdered, the chief and most expert Captains dead: finally the
Constable himself, a man of a most spightful and cankered stomach against the
Protestants, was afraid and trembled at the remembrance of the bloody
slaughters that were before committed: and was very loath to fight again a
fresh any new battles. Wherefore they take another way, and devised new
fetches and sleightes to compass that, which by open force they could not
atchieue. Of which devises the Cardinal of Lorraine an old enemy of the
reformed Churches, had coined great store and put them forth to be practiced.

The Counsel at Trent that had bin often before renewed by great diligence:
was now again summoned. Thither went the Cardinal^ of Lorraine, in the name of
The Cardinals sharp accusation against the Admiral.
all the Popish Prelates of France, having before he took his journey, by
the help and counsel of some of the counsailours of Paris, devised, and
protested a grenous and sharp accusation against the Admiral: as though he
had commanded Merae to kill the Duke of Guise, and given him money for that
purpose. Mere was now already dispached out of the way with extreme
punnishment, (as we have before declared) and a writing published abroad in the
time of war of his examination: wherein the Admiral was called the aucthor,
and procurer of that murder. The Admiral (as also is expressed in the former
book) had made answer to that writing: in which his answer he first
requested that Merae might be kept a live, to the intent the accuser might
appear face to face with the accused, according to order of Law, and
justice. But after that execution was done upon Merae, he complained that the
same was done in such post haste, to the end (all means to purge himself by
the accuser, being taken from him:) preiudicat and hurtful opinions of false
accusations, might be conceived against him. But the Cardinal labored by all
means possible, under pretense of that accusation, to procure hatred against
the Admiral: and had replenyshed many men's minds with displeasure and
malice against him: always laying abroad, and showing the horror and
vnwoorthines of that murder, so shamefully committed by treason upon so
worthy and noble a man.

And besides a great number that were welwillers and followers of the dead
Duke, he stirred up the hearts of foreign Princes against him: and wrote to the
Emperor Ferdinando of the same matter: and to diverse other Princes of Germany.
And this was the cause and beginning of many and great troubles* The King of
Spain also, being moved thereunto by the often letters of the Cardinal, did
write unto the King, that there was no peace to be observed and kept with such
betrayinge Traitores, that had defiled themselves with the blood of a man so
notable and famous. The Admiral wrote to the King and to the Queen his
mother, and as much as he can purges himself, and shifteth of his
accusations, complaininge that they were but injuries offered unto him by the
Cardinal of Lorreine: and publishes abroad for his own defense, a certain
writing, as hereafter follows.

Those things (says he) which I answered to the The Admiral publishes a
wri ting, where in he clears himself.
accusation of Merae, in my former writing given up to the Queen, the Kings
mother, and published abroad throughout the whole kingdom, ought to be
sufficient to discharge and free me of all kind of blame, with all men of
wisdom and discreation, and not before them only which have had trial and
knowledge how I have led my life heretofore: but with them also which know
and understand, how natural and unfeigned, the hew and color of truth is:
and how simplye and plainly she uses to tell her tale. Especially seeinge I
did so earnestly request, that my accuser Merae might be reserved, to appear
against me. Which certainly I would never have done, had I not bin thereto
moved by an assured and clear conscience of my just cause and innocence. This
my request was not in vain, nor to cloak the matter: for I did not ask it by
violence forcibly: nor yet for a fashion, slightly, but only for this one end
and purpose: that the truth might be known and made manifest to all the
world. But this request beeinge denied me, I did verily think with my self,
and esteem all the judgments that the parliamente of Paris had given
against me, as void and of none effect: whose intent was (as by the hasty and
spedy execution of my adversary it did appear) to pres me with false and
prejudicial surmises, al means of reproving and conuincing mine accuser being
quight cut of. I have therefore done that which my duty required: and requested
that the matter might be handled and known according to order of law. And
whereas besides the letters, I sent to the Queen of this matter I have
newpublished this writing abroad, I have not done it with out great and weighty
cause, and the advice and counsel of wise and pollitique men. For by that my
request, I was in good hope to have stayed the spedy expedition of the
execution: which, the Judges being very sore bent against me, did hasten and
help forward all that they could. Also by this means I thought (the end of
the broiles and troubles that were then being uncertain) to have satisfied the
desires of many men, which desired to know the matter: especially of forreiners
and strangers, amongst whom I was evil spoken of, by infamous Libelles and
false malicious sclaunders: until such time as I having my adversary before
me, might have better occasion more clearly to purge my self. Moreover I did
know for a certainty, not only that Merae had utterly denied and renounced his
former accusation against me, whereby it was manifest that he did that which
he did by plain force and threatninges: but also that his privy and secret
confessions were in my ememies hands, by which ^e did declare me to be
innocent and guiltles of the matter. All other accusations therefore, wherewith
Merae did charge me (and yet if he had flatly and without all doubt pronounced
me as guilty, my answer all men know might be ready* that, forasmuch as I
could not be suffered to talk with him, all these things which are objected
against me, were violently extorted and wringed out of him, either in hope to
escape death, or else to moderate and lessen the torment and fury of his
punnishment) I hold and take as forged and feigned: seeing that it may appear
by the testimony of many good and very worthy men, that Merae had often times
said, that he had declared before the Judges, that I was clear and free from
all manner blame in that matter: and that when The words of Merae.
he was drawn and had to execution, he expressly and openly said, that those
accusations against me, were written and penned down by my enemies, before
them only, who had left no way in this cause untried, that might seem to
further my accusation, and for their sakes, in winning of whose favor, (al men
might see) they had set their consciences to sale. which thing certain
letters may easily prove (which when occasion shall serve I can bring forth)
that were written from the appointed commissioners to the parliament the vi. and
xv. day of March for the hastening of the execution of Merae: in which these
words were written. That the Keepers of Merae were corrupted: and that
therefore his death was not longer to be deferred: for that he would call back
again that which he had said. But I understand, that some do take occasion to
coygne and forge a sclaunder against me, because I confessed in my former
writing, that I had given a certain sum of money to Merae. which thing,
although I did then and there sufficiently answer, and thereby showed that I
dealt plainly and truly: when as I declared the whole matter simply without any
manner dissembling: yet notwithstauding, I will plainly and sincerely lay forth
the cause of the giuinge of that money, and thereby evidently prove, that it is
but a mere and malicious surinise, whatsoever in this matter is objected
against me* and chiefly that I may satisfy them that are trained in Marshall
affairs and do exercise that kind of life. For I am not ignorant that this
matter, which came to pass through the occasion of war, and in the Camps of
troublesome warriors: can not easily be known and understood in the
peaceable Courts of quiet laweyers. And yet I could this way easily make*
manifest my integrity and innocence, but the testimony of my own conscience,
shall suffice me before God and men, the double and contrary aunsweres of Merae
in his examinations, his mind stricken and amazed with the terror and fear of
death, the hope of life which he conceived of the Judges promise, if he would
accuse me (which hope he held still even unto the last hour of death: and
of mine own part, the request which I made to have mine accuser to appear
face to face, and my pro testation of my innocencye if that were not granted:
the perplexed and headlong affection of the Judges long before by me refused as
incompetente. To be short, the astonished unquietness and waueringe inconstancy of
my accuser, do manifestly and sufficiently declare my vnguiltines and
innocence: neither truly would I have differred so long to have showed my
purpose and intent, wherefore I gave this money, unless (that having written
to the Queen, and testified unto her my innocence) I had thought my enemies
would not have made such post and headlong have with the execution, as they
did: which although it was done for evil will, and contrary to all reason
and equity: yet could they not have gotten a more manifest testimony of my
guiltles uprightness then that, which they themselves thereby did give me:
especially, because it was necessary that he should have bin kept a live, not
only for that I was accused of the killing of the Duke of Guise: but also for a
greater and far more waightye accusation as though I should have gone about
to have murdered the King. VVherby it ap peareth how shameless those surmises
were of the crimes laid to my charge. But let that pass, and let us come to
show the end, wherefore I gave that money to Merae: least that amongst
Strangers, giving credit to rumors and tales, the good cause of an harmeles
and innocent man be oppressed, the matter being neither known nor made manifest.

And first of all, where Merae says that he offered me his help in this
matt^r: it is even so. For when he had (being commended unto me by Monsieur
Subize his letters as I have more at large declared in my former writing)
lustely and frankly proffered me his service, I demanded of him, in what thing
he could stand me in best stead: He answered, that he had great acquaintance
with the Aumale, for that he had served in times past under him in Picardy, of
whom, if he could find him in the Dukes Camp, he would easily know all the
Dukes ententes and purposes, and that he would forthwith certifye me of them,
but if the Aumale were not there, yet he was so well known of a great number
of Captains and soldiers that served under the Duke, that he did not doubt,
but that he should have both easy and also safe passage into their Camp. The
which certainly did make me suspect him, when I saw him offer himself in such
a bravery (and I said as much to Monsieur Granmont who was then present there
with me, declaringe Monsieur Granmon^
unto him that I had known him not passing iii. or iiii. days, and that only
by the letters of Monsieur Subize.) Notwithstanding I gave him at that time,
xx. crounes, that I might have a trial of him. For such as are skillful in
feats of war, know what spies and scoutes may do, Scoutes.
and that money in such a case is not to be spared: and they who know me, can
testify thet I set but little by money when such occasion is offered. And this
was the first and chief cause why I gave him that money: the which truly I
counted as cast away. For there was nothing I less looked for, then for Merae,
when as sodeinly there came unto Monsieur Tranuie.
me, ^ying at Neuuille, Monsieur Tranuie a noble man, who said he was come unto
me at the commandment of the Andelot my Brother, to bring a certain fellow
unto me, that was newly come from the Guises ca^pe. And although I looked not
for him (for I was very often troubled with such matters) yet I talked with
him, and asked him of diverse small and light matters: in the which he seemed to
answer me very readily and cunningly: wherefore I enquired further of him
whether the Duke knew of my departure from Orleance, and whether I vould go. He
answered, that the Duke knew not the certain day when I would set forward: but
he knew certainly, six days ago, that I meant to go to Normandy, and had so
provided for the matter already, that I was sure to find many lettes and stays
in my journey. And for this cause there was commandment given to the Marshal
of Vieleuill and the Cou^ty of Ringraue, that they should cause all the Towns
both great and small to be fortified: that they should so work, that there
might be enemies for me in every place that I could not lay siege to any
Town, for that I lack both footmen and ordinance: that the Duke himself
would see that all the Horses that could be gotten should be brought to
Paris, and that he would provide all such Horses as should be needful for
the carriage of the gunnes, that he would bring the matter about, that he would
bring three orfoure thousand shot on horse besides his light horsemen, and
men at arms, that he would follow me so hard, and trace me so nearly, that
I should have no opportunity to ioygne with the aid of Normandy, no, not so
much leisure to rest me, finally, that besides, that the Germain horsemen waxed
faint and weary, he would drive me into such straights and distres, that either
he would make them to come unto him, or else (which was more) would cause them
bend their force against me.

And because I feared that most of all other, I told Merae that it was
convenient he went again to the Guises camp, and to certify me what the Duke
meant to do. To which he answered, that he was ready and willing to do it: but
he wanted a horse for that purpose: and truly (quoth I) I would to God I had
one to give thee, But to say the truth, I have not one left: to which he
replied, that he could quickly buie one if so be he had money: Marie (quoth
I) I will give thee money with a good will, so that thou bring me certain and
true tidinges what the Duke means to do: thou shall want for no money, only
make dilligent inquiry whether the Duke mean, to pursue me or no, and if he
attempt any thing against Orleans see thou carriest word of it to my brother
the Andelot. After this talk, I gave him 100* crowns: and he forthwith, not
once salutinge my brother the Andelot (although he passed through the Suburbs
of Orleans,) came to a Town called Nun. And this was the cause why I gave him
the 100. crowns. Moreover I protest, that when he began to talk with me of
killinge the Duke: I made him no answer, as though I had either allowed or
disallowed the fact: for I little cared whether he either would, or could do
it And when I gave him the hundred crowns, I protest, I did it, for no other
end and purpose, but only that he might spedely certify me, whether the Duke
meant to pursue me or no. And why I should fear this thing, there were both
weighty and manifest causes which I will not stick to set forth here
perticularly. I could not be ignorant that the Duke knew of my journey, for I
was constrained, to provide and take order for it, in a great assembly of
horsemen eight days before I departed, neither could I set forward any sooner,
because the German Horsemen, were feign to leave their carriages and other
necessaries behind them, and surely I had very much a do to bring that matter
to an end, being a thing neither heard of, nor practiced amongst the Germans.
And that the Duke of Guise knew of this, it is past all peradventure: for
there were diverse that remained amongst our horsemens bands, to entice and
move the Germans to defection and slyding away from us to the Guises: in so
much that some of them were in such case and so minded, that the Marshall of
Hesse and others their chief Captains began to mistrust them. Moreover,
besides that I was admonished by Mere, I did also know for a certainty, that
there was commandment given throughout all Normandy, that all manner stops,
The Marshal Hesse.
lettes, and hindrances that might any way trouble our army should be
practiced against us. And for the more assurance of this matter, there came
certain letters into my hands, wherein was contained very straight charge for
the accomplishement thereof, and for the furnishing of the Cities with
victuals (as afterward we understood to have bin done in many places) and
that the Milles should be so spoiled of their furniture, that they should not
grynd, and that in every place, they should set upon me with all their force
and power. Wherefore, all the Cities being taken before hand, and the ways
where I should pass stopped: it was impossible for me to get to the sea side,
to receive money out of England, for which I longed very sore to pay the
German horsemen their wages. The which thing as soon as they once knew,
there was great danger that sedition should have been stirred up amongst the
soldiers, in so much that they feared not to talk and mutter of it in their
common and open communications. Wherefore, if the Duke had attempted to have
skirmished but with the straglers and tayll of our army, it was likely that we
should have bin greatly endamaged by him and shamefully foiled: but sure it was
past all peradventure, that he might so have hyndered and troubled us that we
should never have gotten to the sea coast: wherein did consist (as far as
man's reason could reach) the whole and only hope of all present aid, namely
of money, without the which I could not have paid the German horsemen their
wages, whereupon without doubt would have followed a most miserable calamity
and overthrow of all my affairs, especially being thereby not of ability to
encounter or join battle any more with my enemies. For after we had bin past
the plain of Neufburge, the way was so uneven and disco^modius, that 500.
harguebuzeres did compel ten thousand horsemen most shamefully to fly and the
best remedy that I could wish, to rid us out of ^o great distress, was that
I might have both opportunity and occasion to ioygne battle, which neither I
could have done, without very exceeding great and gr^uous loss and danger,
being beset on every side and as it were hedged in with fensed and fortified
cities, to which our enemies had free recourse and passage. There was also an
other let of great weight and importance, and that was that the Villages and
Towns were so desert, wast, and so forsaken of all men, and the families in
that country so scatered and dispersed abroad, that very hardly there could be
gathered together the number of fifty horsemen. All which difficulties and
lettes the Duke and his Captains knew full well, which made me to judge that
he would rather set forward toward Normandy to pur sue me, then to attempt
the siege of Orleans. For if so be my army had bin once destroyed: it was very
likely that Orleance should soon have come to ruin and wrack, but if my army
had bin safe and preserved, there was good hope, yea although Orleans had bin
won, to have maintained and gone forward with the war. These things I have here
more particularly declared and set forth, to the intent I might show to them
that have any experience in these matters, whether it had bin expediente and
fit for me to have spared my money in such an extremity, wherein it was
necessary to know what way the Duke meant to work, and for this purpose I had
hired very many, who received of me good round sums of money and yet do not
make their bragges and vauntes thereof. And whereas I amongst all these
distresses and dangers that I knew to be certain, did adventure upon that
journey, I was truly against my will compelled thereunto, by the extreme
peril and hazard I should have bin in, if I had bin forsaken of the Germane
horsemen through want of money. To these foresaid causes that I have showed why
I gave this money, I may ad also this, that M^rae was wont (as it is to be
proved by the testemonie of diverse and sundry men) long before, to talk of
the murdering of the Gu^se, and yet it appears by his own saying, that I
never spoke unto him or had any knowledge of him, before the time that he
brought Monsieur Subize his letters unto me. Where upon I may truly conclude,
that it is neither true nor like to be true, that I should be the author of
that thing which he long before had conceived and purposed in his mind.
Moreover where as Merae was very nere of kin to M. Rainold (whom the Duke had
caused to be slain) it was likely that he was enflamed and stirred up against
the Guise, by some private quarrel and special hatred. And as I have declared
before: even so of a truth the case stands. whereby me think it is evident
and plain that they who persuade themselves that I was the author and procurer
of this murder, (besides that they use very fond and childishe reasons to
prove the same) do not know my nature, for if so be I had charged him to do
any more then that I have before declared, I would not fear to confess it
with like franknes and boldness. And truly, I would gladly ask this question of
them: whether they im^gin, that there was any other cause why I should cause my
other answer to be published, then that I desired the matter might be
understood of all men. And it there were any thing else, why should I
dissemble? why should I cloak it? why should I not confess it: who ever was a
more deadly and open enemy unto me, than the Duke of Guise? for what other
cause did he besiege Orleans, but that he might utterly destroy and cast away
me, my wife and children, and whatsoever else I held as dear and precious
unto me? yea there are men of great credit, that can and will testify, that
he used often to brag and make his vaunts, that whenever the City were
taken, he would spare none, neither man, woman, young nor old. Neither needs
any man to doubt, that amongst all them that were in the battle at Dreux, it
was he I sought for, and chiefly he with whom I wished to meet. And certain
it is, that if I myself could have discharged any shot at him, I would full
glad ly have done it: yea truly, if I had been Captain over ten thousand
gunners, I would have charged them that they should every one have leueled and
shot at him alone. To be short, I would have left no devise that might stand
with the law of arms, untried: so that I might by any means deliver my self
from an enemy so spightfull and deadly against me and mine, and all good men.
And last of all, I protest before God and his Aungelles, that I commanded
nothing else, but that which I have declared in these my writings. If there be
any man that desiteth to know more, let him repair too me, and I will make
him answer.

Whilst these things happened in France, the Popish Prelates sat still at
Trent, laboring very diligently to provide and establish the estate of
Popery, with a long rabble of Decrees: the exact rehearsal whereof (being The
travel of the Cou^ cell of Trent to hinder and stop religion in France.
at large already set out in a book for that purpose) shall not be needful to
be brought in here in these our Commentaries, especially for that our only
purpose and intent is, briefly to show the estate and condition of the
faithful in France, and how they were troubled and vexed in the time of
Truce, and how afterward they were enforced to break out into open war. The
Council of Trent therefore did very carefully travel in maintayning and
defending the Popes authority and dignity in the kingdom of France: and
this matter, as a thing of greatest weight and importance, was thoroughly and
most earnestly labored of all sides. And the great and large reuenew that came
out of France (which thing did chiefly inflame ye zeal of those reverend
Fathers) and the great danger and present hazard they were in, to loose them,
if the reformed Religion had prevailed, did make them busily to besturre them,
and to take the matter in hand.

There was present at the Council the Cardinal of Lorraine, having great
knowledge and experience in the affairs of France, and a subtle and sleighty
old coygner of new fetches, and besides that, the matter for his own cause
stood him upon: he was also incensed with an outrageous hatred and malice
against the men of the reformed religion, and chiefly against the truth it
self, which he both knew and renounced. At his request and setting on, they
began to consult how they might utterly deface and root up the reformed
Religion out of France: the readiest and fittest way for that matter that
they could devise was, that there should be a league made betwixt the King of
Spain and the King of France: and that the King of Spain, (because it was a
thing of great difficulty and could not without much a do be brought to
pass) should help the French King at all times with such aid as should be
needful: and that all ways and means should be sought to abolish and
disannull the Edict wherein was granted the liberty and use of the reformed
Religion. This league which was made for the rooting out of true religion, the
holy fathers of the Council of Trent did call the Sacred and holy League. The
Cardinal of Lorayne does promise all possible diligence and trauaill in this
matter: and that he will persuade the King to finish the league, and as for
the Queen, being of herself prone and enclining to their part, and the
consents of the Nobles, he accounted him self sure of them.

As the Cardinal (a most bitter enemy to the reformed Religion) did what
possible he could for the accomplishement of these matters in the Council at
Trent: the enemies of the Gospel were not idell at home in France, in
defacing and putting down the Edicte: and the Queen was not only every day
more wayward and disliking of the reformed religion, but was also very
furiously incensed against it: and did by all means she could denise, go
about to engraffe and so we hatred and malice in the tender mind of the young
King against religion: that then he might proclayme perpetual and everlasting
war against all the reformed Churches in France.

The Constable Momorencie was also very forward in this matter, and was very
maliciously bent against the truth, because he purchased so great infamy and
dishonor in the former wars. So that the Edict had in France enemies both
many in number, and great in The King being of the age of 14. years i^
declared to be of full and lawful ag^
power and authority. About this time the King being of the age of xiiii.
years was declared to be of full and lawful age by the decrees and judgment
(as the manner was) of all the high Courts of parliament, and within few days
after, was according to the custom solemly crowned, and all such estates as
had to do with the administration of the Realm as vicegerents and protectours
and such other, were displaced very profitablie and fitly, both to make their
co^federacy, and also to raise and stir up new broiles and troubles, which
otherwise they could not have done, without the authority and assent of those
estates.

All the noble men being thus encensed against the The su^til and crafty
devises of the aduersari^s against Religion.
reformed religion, yet nothing was attempted against it by open force and
warlike manner: neither could they have done it without great danger,
conside^inge the Estate of things at that present time. Wherefore this was the
wily and crafty fetch of the Cardinal of Lorreine, that nothing should be
done openly against the Edict: but that they should by little and little assay
it, and as it were undermine it privily till the time were come, wherein they
might set forth and declare that sacred league, and that they might by the
Kings authority utterly overthrow and destroy the Edict. In the mean time the
people should be borne in hand and made believe, that the Edict as concerning
Religion was not perpetual, but at pleasure and for a space, till such time as
the King might conuenientlye bring the whole Realm to one only uniformity
of Religion. And that the King especially and his Brother might be enflamed
against the reformed Religion. And last of all that no occasion that might seem
to make for the accomplishing of these matters, should be let pass, but that
al ways and means that might in any wise* further them should be practiced
warely and with great discretion and policy.

The devises that were used were these. It was talked openly abroad, and that
very much among the courtiers, that it was the Kings and the Queen his
Mothers will and pleasure, that the Edicte should be dyligently observed and
executed, and in the mean time by the Cardinals devise and the Queens
commandment, there were privy and secret commandments sent out to certain
picked and chosen men for this purpose, that they should not fear to violate
and break the Edicte in any thing, whereof they had occasion offered them. And
if so be that any of the Protestants that were wronged contrary to the
prescripte order of the Edicte, did complain thereof, (as very many did) at
length with great suit having leave to show their griefs and wrongs, they
always received this answer: that it was the Kings will and commandment
that his Edict for and concerning Religion, should be every where observed and
kept, and that whosoever were found guilty of the breach and violating
thereof should be grievously punnished: and as this was his pleasure, so they
were bidden to take heed least that they themselves who did so much complain
of wrongs and iniu ries done unto them, had first transgressed against the
Edicte, and then malicioufly and falsely accused others for it. So by this
means a great number of such as complained were feared and shaken of with
threateninges and angry words, and many of them also were thrown into prisons
and clapped fast into yr^ns, as authoures of false accusations and workers of
sedition and trouble. And if so be I should go about to repeat here particular
examples of such matters, it were but in vain, being the office rather of a
just and full history then appertaining to our purpose, which in writing these
short and bri^fe Commentaries, we have taken in hand. But notwithstanding all
this, those that were appointed by ye protestants, sued still that their
matters might be had in question and examined, and at length obtained it, and
Commissioners, choice fellows appointed for the purpose: in so much that the
matter was so handeled, that new devises and fetches were brought in to
oppress and entangle ye truth: so that, what soever was brought in by ye
protestants against their enemies, was either judged manifestly false, or else
not so evident true, that the offender thereby should be punished: and if so be
a Papist had been convinced and found gilty, by and by there was one special
cause or other devised, whereby it was proved that, that which was done, was
done according to law and equity: yea and the capital and chief faults were
turned upon ye protestants heads against who^ they had been committed: whereby
there was quarrels piked and occasion taken to enterprete and expound the Edict
at the pleasure and liking of the Papists, so that hereby the faithful were
every day more and more afflicted through the factions and inclinations of the
people, waxing every day more cruel and hautie, by reason of so great
impunitie and winking at mischief.

When the Cardinal of Loraine was returned home violent and false
interp^tations of the Edict set ^orth by the Kings commandment.
into France from the Council of Trent, the Papists were marueloufly thereby
encouraged and emboldend to attempt and enterprise new matters: but they had
their lesson given very subtilie by the crafty Cardinal, to cloak and
dissemble their intent and purpose of abolishing the Edict. And yet they were
not content that they which were offenders went scotfree without punishment:
but they also stayed for the Kings letters and warrants, whereby their
impunitie should not endammage or be hurtful unto them, and that they might
have license to offend hereafter worse then they had done before, and that by
warrant of the Kings will and commandment. There were therefore new
interpretations of the Edict solemnly published, which should be of the same
force and virtue that the Edict for Religion was, as hereafter shall be declared.

The Prince of Conde being often moved and requested by the protestants, had
diverse times co^playned both to the King and the Queen his mother, declaring
that the Edict was many ways violated and broken, and thereby the faithful
grievously wronged and spoiled. But always against all the Princes
complaints, was holde^ out as a buckler of defense, the Kings pleasure and
mind for the expounding and interpretation of the Edict: and that this his
pleasure might be more manifest and better known, all the Kings Counsel was
commanded to repair to Paris, and certain of the chief of the parliament of
Paris with them. To this assembly also the Prince of Conde was commanded to
come, accompanied with diverse of the Noble men that were professors of the
reformed religion. Which done, every man spoke his mind, and the Papists
voices being more in number and preuaylinge, there was a Decree enacted,
wherein was comprised (under the name and authority of the King) the
interpretation of the Edicte in this form:

Whereas we have endeavored to provide remedies for those broils and troubles
which have many ways shaken and afflicted our kingdom, and have for that
purpose given out and granted our Edict of peace, wherein was granted to those
our subjects that profess the new Religion, free liberty and license too
exercise the same: we do now eftsoon will and command that it be holden and
accounted as firm, and ratified of all our leege people and subjects. For
our purpose and intent was thereby to give unto those our subjects the
benefit and commodity of peace and quietness: the which our Edict we do
promise in the faith and honor of a King, shall be kept and observed as far
forth and as long, as it shall seem good and expedient. For we know what
authority and power we have received from above of God, which we do mean to
use with all moderation and integrity, to the profit and commodity of our
subjects: of which (as we have next to the glory of God) chiefest care and
regard: so do we wish that it may be advanced and furthered by that our
Edict. And there fore whereas we understand that there are certain things
comprised therein very generally, which being either wrong understood, or not
rightly executed, have given occasions of great troubles, and are like
hereafter to breed greater inconveniences and broils, if they be not spedely
provided for: which we are fully purposed to do.

Wherefore, for these considerations our pleasure is (to the intent we may
answer and satisfy the just complayntes of all our subjects) to give a full
and plain declaration of our mind, as concerning certain clauses of the
Edict, which be now in controversy and diversely taken. And because that all
things may be done in better order for the profit and common utility of our
subjects, (for which we are most careful) we have consulted with the wisest
and greatest of our Counsel: by whose advise we have here set forth a more
full and expres^e declara tion of our pleasure concerning the Edicte, the which
we will and command to be established and ratified: not that we mean to take
any thing from the Edict, but too enterpret it according to our will and
meaning to whom it appertains so to do, least that such clauses as be
doubtful, breed contention and strife.

To the first Article which is. That al noble men that were of chief authority
might live quietly without trouble or molestation in their mantions and
dwelling places, and to enjoy together with their families and subjects free
bertie of conscience, and the peaceable use of the religion which they term
reformed, this exception is to be added in the way of interpretaion. It shall
not be lawful to be done or practiced in any places that were either bought or
taken from the Ecclesiastical livings, or in any which were holde^ of the
church, to which we forbid the use of the re formed Religion, both publicly
and privately. For there were diverse of ye church livings yt were sold at ye
Kings commandment, and were by yt means holden and possessed of the
Protestants, who used the benefit of the Edicte for the administration of
Religion in those places, to the great grief of the Papists. There were also
diverse that had great and fat benifices, brought to the knowledge and
profession of the reformed religion, but chiefly one of great reputation the
Cardinal Chastillon a man endewed with many goodly church livings and was
Archbishop of Aeges: and many other of the noblest houses in France. Who if
they once had gotten by the Edicte liberty of Religion, it was very likely,
that it should have been spread and sown abroad far and wide in diverse places.
For many places where those benefises lay, had preuiledges of great authority,
and very large and ample dominion and rule: so the Papists by this
interpretation were well eased, to the great hinderance and discomodity of the
faithful. To the first article of the Edict wherein was. Be it fre and lawful
for all cities, in which that religion was used the vii. day of march (besides
other Cities that are perticularly to be set out and appointed in every
Province) still to have and enjoy the use thereof. There was added a new
interpretation. That those Cities were understood and meant, which were kept
and holden in warlike manner, and in which the reformed religion had bin
publicly and openly practiced, at the day before assigned. So by that means
there were certain Cytyes barred and shut out from the use of their
religion. To the sixth article wherein was me^cioned, That the city and the
whole province of Paris should be free and clear from the use of that
religion. There was added a more straight restraint and prohibition, That it
was not lawful for any that dwelte within the City or precinct of the
Province of Paris, to go to any Cities licensed by the king of the provinces
near adjoining, to exercise that Religion, unless they did dwell in them:
neither shall it be lawful for any such persons to have any ma^sion place or
dwelling within the limits of the City or province of Paris. This restraint
was manifestly known to be annexed for no other purpose, but only in despite
and hatred of certain Senators and Aldermen of Paris, worthy Patrones of the
truth, and other worthy and famous men, that thereby they might be constrained
to leave Paris, and remove to other places.

And where as in the fourth article mention is made, That all men might live
quietly in every place, without any trouble or danger for the freedom and use
of their Religion and conscience: it was restrained with a very straight
exception: That none, neither man nor woman were accounted in that number which
either in, or after the time of war had forsaken either Abbayes, Nunries or
other religiouse houses: and these were straightly commanded, either to
return again to the places of Religion they came from, and if they were
married to forsake their wives, or else forthwith to depart the Realm. So that
by this means many families (but with greater discommoditie and wrong of a
more number) were eased and helped: to the which both young men and maids that
were in times paste thrust and shut up into Abbayes, were now returned, being
endewed with a more pure and sincere knoweledge of the truth, and sued by the
law for their patrimony and parts left by their parents. But by this
exception, all liberty and license to sue and plead for their own was taken
from them, and they either com pelled to reenter the Cloisters they had
forsaken, or else enforced to depart out of the Realm. And by this means
there were many occasions given of diverse great and grievous injuries, as for
example: That horrible and accursed murder committed by M. d' Anuille, (as we
have before declared) upon A. Motton, a minister of the word of God: which
detestable fact was cloaked and defended under pretense of this Inter
pretation.

Furthermore the use of the religion which was termed by a common name, The
administration of religion, was maruetlously abated and diminished by a new
devised interpretation. That it should not be lawful for any man to be a
minister of that religion, but for such as were borne there (that is) bred
within any of the Provinces of the kingdom of France. So that by this fetch
diverse of the Churches were bereft and spoiled of their good Pastors and
Doctors, as namely the Congregation at Lions, of that learned and eloquent man
Petrus Viretus, who did very effectually and faithfully travel, in aduauncing
and spreading abroad the Gospel in that most famous and populous City and mart
Town of all France, to the great grief and heart sore of the Papists, for
whose cause especially they had procured this exposition of the Edict.
Wherefore he departing thence went first to the Country of Orange, and
afterward at the Queen of Nauarres commaundment, he came to Bearn, to
confirm and set in order the Churches and Congregations that were there.

The Papists now began to mock and laughe in their sleeves, to see this
Declaration given out by the King, and published abroad in open writing,
whereby it was made manifest, what an overthrow was given to the Edict: and
being in a bravery and al upon the hoigh set day, and appointed the time, and
that with threatenings, when as it should be utterly abolished and quite done
away: and warrantinge them selves upon this beginning, they every day more
and more without check violated the Edict.

There be also new devises put in practice, whereby they might entyce and
allure the Prince of Conde from New sleights put in practice to entice the
Prince of Conde from the reformed Religion.
the reformed Religion. This fetch was practiced before by the Cardinal of
Loreine against the king of Navarre, and had prevailed, and therefore he
thought good to prove and try once again against the Prince, thinking with
himself that he might as easily and with the same devises wherewith he had
overcome the king of Nauar, win also unto him the Prince of Conde: the Queen
of her self was ready and desirous to take this matter in hand, and many
other means there were that seemed (as it were) to profer their help for the
accomplishme^t thereof. The Prince of himself was of a myld and soft
disposition, desirous of peace, and even glutted with the lothsomenesse of the
former wars, and being altogether bent to keep and maintain peace, did from
his heart abhor and detest strife and contentious troubles. Wherefore he was
much and often at the Court, and very familiar both with the King and the
Queen his mother. The Guises also of set purpose seemed not too come so often
to the Court, nor to be in such favor with the Queen as they were wont to
be, and all for the Princes sake: to win whom, there was no fetch, no devise,
no subtlety left untried. The Queen her self used very often and lovingly,
to show the dear good will she bare to the Prince: and told him that of her
self and for her part she did favor and love him: that it was and should be
both the Kings and her will and mind to esteem and love (as right and reason
required) the Princes their near kinsmen in their degree and place: that there
was good cause, why there should be more near and dea^e friendship betwixt
her and him above all others: that he should not think that any thing had or
might hereafter happen that should stay or s^ack the true and perfect good will
she bare him: so that he would do his duty, and let no occasion slip, that
might advance and enlarge the glory and honor of hers and his. And many other
trayns were intermingled with this talk, whereof that subtle and alluring
woman thorough her courtly tricks and baytes had great store. Beside this,
there were more particular promises made: and that old forged devise was
renewed of the yielding and gyuing up of the I Will of Sardina: which had been
diverse times before that offered to the King of Navarre and was now again
promi^ed to the Prince by the Queen, and that in the name of the King of
Spain. And that it should not be thought that the matter were but triffled
withal in words, there were many great gifts bestowed upon the Prince and his
Children. Marriage also was attempted that there might be a more sure band and
conjunction of amity amongst them. The Marishall of Saint Andrew, a man of
exceeding great wealth, being slain in the battle of Dreux, had left behind
him one only daughter, who was heir of all those goodly and ample
possessions. To her (being almost mariageable) the Queen went about to couple
the Prince of Condies eldest son, who was then called the Duke of Augnien,
the mother of the gentle woman, doing all she could to bring that marriage to
pass: And although the honor and nobility of the two howfes were nothing
like equal: yet the Marshialles daughter had great abundance of ritchesse on
her side, which surely is the thing that strikes the strok and bears
greatest sway in marriage matters now in these our days wherein men are
altogyther given to get wealth and riches. The Prince himself was not very
unwilling, and therefore kept company very fami liarly with the widow the
Marshialles wife, and great curteousie was exercised betwixt them. The
Marshalles wife gave unto the Prince of Conde a very fruitful and beautiful
place called the Territory of Ualeri: and the Marishiall him self had bestowed
there for the trimming and beawtifying of it, much rickes which King Henry had
given him in gifts and rewards: this place did she give unto the Prince,
withal the right, Title, and possessions thereto belonging, the Queen
ratifying and allowing the matter very well: wherefore every man looked every
day when that marriage should be solemnized. And who in the Court then but the
Prince of Conde: who (as the nature of man is to slide and fall through ill
company from exercise and virtuous trauaill to pleasure and idleness) began
(contrary to the institution of the reformed religion and good conversation) to
give himself to the wanton desire and lust of women, and tasting very
licentiously of the baytes and snaring traynes that were laid for him, seemed
every day more and more careless of that good and virtuous Matrone his wife,
who was of the house and family of Roye, and waxed cold and faint in the
profession and defense of the reformed religion, to the great grief and fear
of all good men, but to the great joy of the papists, who made their vaunts
and crackes saying, that the Prince would dance the same dance that his
brother the king of Navarre had lead defore him. And surely there was great
likelihood of most lamentable and sorrowful decay and ruin, had not the
merciful providence of god, speedely prevented it, as hereafter in his place
shall be declared.

In the uttermost part of the province of Languedoc in the way as they go to
the mountains Pyren^es, there is a City called Paniez, a very rich and
populous town: This town was kept and holden by the Protestants in the time
of war, but after that Truce was taken and peace concluded, and that Monsieur
de Anuill (as we have before declared) was come into Languedoc, and had even
wearied all the cities thereof with his outrageous and unruly garrisons: the
Inahbitants of Paniez foreseeing their own danger by other men's harms,
wrote unto Monsieur de Anuille, desiring him that he would not press and
charge them with needless garrisons, whereof there should be no need nor use,
seeing that they were and would be ready pressed to obey all his commau^ dements:
and did purpose truly and faythefully to maintain and keep the peace.
Monsieur de Anuill was thereby more earnest and h^te, and did straightly charge
the Consuls of the City (for so they in that Country do call their chief
Officers) that they should leave of their suit and enterprise, otherwise they
should be sure to smart for the common peoples faults, wherewith they being
terrified, made answer that they were ready to obey him in whatsoever it
pleased him to lay upon them, and calling the commons together to an assembly,
did bitterly and very sharply rebuke them for their stubburnes. But the commons
on the other side protested, that it was against all law and right, and that it
was done con trary to the tenor and form of the peace concluded, that they
would rather complain to the King of the tyranny of the President. Finally,
that they would not for any cause commit themselves, their goods, their wives
and children into the hands of the Lieuetenant, being (as he was) so sore
incensed and angrye against them. But whilst words went too and fro amongst
them, there began a whot contention betwixt the Magistrates and the commons.
The people being set on a fury, chased away the Magistrates, and forthwith
fortified and ^ensed the city, and no entrance would be granted to M. de
Anuilles garrison. Who co^plaining to ye King of the matter received commission
from him to punnishe the offenders very severely, with commandment also that
the Townsmen should receive in the Garrison. The King also sent thither
Monsieur (...) a noble man with charge, that they should either receive such
Garrison as the Lieuftenant the Anuill should appoint: or else to be grievously
punnished who coming thither to the City was forthwith received in by the
Citizens, who declared unto him that they had not committed that fact in way of
rebellion, but were ready to obey the King their chief sovereign Lord and
governor: that it happened through the rash and hasty dealing of the
Magistrates, that the commons being moved and stirred up with fear of further
harm to ensue, had behaved themselves otherwise against them, then became
them: finally that they did willingly and gladly submit them selves, their
children and goods, to the Kings will and pleasure. So upon this M. Ram^
being entered the City, certified M. de Anuill of the Townsmennes minds, who
straight ways coming thither accompanied and guarded with certain bands of
horsemen and footmen was very reverently and humbly received of the Citizens.
But he was no sooner entered the Town but he immediately began to use and
handle them as enemies. The City was spoiled of all her privileges, the
walls razed, the Noble The spoil and wasting of the congregation at Paniez by
d'Anuille.
men diversely fined and punnisht, many of them beheaded, their Minister hanged,
their goods given over to ye Soldiers for a pray and a spoil, the furiouse
Soldiers were let loose upon the honest matrones and Uirgines of the City,
to the number of 800. Citisens were banished: to be short that worthy City was
utterly wasted, spoiled and made desolate of the greatest part of her
inhabitants, by the cruel and detestable villainy of the Anuill.

About this time, there came news abroad of the Kings prograce, throughout
the whole Realm and forsooth there was a cause of this prograce devised: and
The Kings progress and causes thereof.
that was, that it stood the King upon, to take a survey and a view of his
whole kingedome, that he in his own person might hear and receive the
complaints of his subjects, and with present remedy help and ease their
gree^ed minds, and that with his presence he might confirm and encourage
every on to do his duty. And though this cause was pretended, yet the Queens
had another fetch and purpose in her head. (Whereof the Cardinal of Lorraine
both knew, and was also author and first inuenter of it, although for other
causes he was not in this prograce,) the mark she shot at (as it is reported
of diverse that were more thoroughly acquainted with the matter) was (the King
himself as it being ignorant of it) that ye sacred league with ye King of
Spain which was begone in the Counsel of Trent, might be ratified and
confirmed: and that in the mean season the tender mind of the youug king,
might be, by all means possible provoked and stirred up against the reformed
Religion and al things were of set purpose so ordered in every City where the
King should come, that the Protestants might complaime as long as they would
but al should be in vain and to no purpose: yea and they themselves rather
accounted and taken for the causers and authors of troubles, then obtain any
thing where by to redress their wrongs and injuries.

Whilst preparation was made for this journey, there came a commandment from
the King to all those Cities that were holden of the Protestants in the time
of war.

Where as now after pacification of all former troubles, ther^ is nothing that
we more wish and desire than that peace and quietness may be restored in all
parts and quarters of our kingdom: we do now will and command (to the
intent all occasion of new broiles may be removed and quight taken away: that
all such munitions, fortifications, and bulwarks, as were made and built in
the time of war for the defense of your Cities, be quight defaced and taken
away: that all our subjects hereafter may quietly and without fear of further
danger, keep and maintain our peace: especially for that our faith and promise
sufficiently declared in our Edicte ought to be to all true and faithful
subjects, in s^eede of a sure wall and shield of defense etc.

So by this means all kind of munition and fortifications was defaced in
diverse Cities, as in Orleans, Mountaubane, valence, and diverse other of the
most famous Cities in France to the great discommoditie and Montauba^
destruction of the whole Realm. And that chiefly in (...), a most
necessary and profitable City to the whole country yea and that in the most
dangerous times of the Kings and kingdom, especially in the time of Charles
the vii. (...)the Englishmen were conquerers far and near, and when all
Normandy and Paris the Metropollitane City of the Realm were w^nne and
vanquished, together with the Countries to them adjoining and all the Kingdom
in an uproar with enemies, then was Orleans a chief and special place of
succor and refuge both for the King and all his. Notwithstanding these Cities
were defaced and marked with the tokens and blemishes of Rebellion, for that in
time of trouble they had preserved a number of good and true subjects,
especially Orleans was shamefully spoiled, and made almost a poor simple
Oraunge or Uillage: and a Castle builte (at the gate it leads to Paris) to
govern and keep under the Citizens, and a very cruel Carrison of Soldiers
placed there. And yet for all this the administration of Religion was not left
of there. Like cruelty was exercised upon Montaubane, Montauba^
because they had manfully and courageously defended themselves against the
assaults and invasions of them of Tholouze.

About this time by the ad^ise and consent of the agrements made between the
King and his brother the Duke of Orleans
Queen and the counsel, order was taken in certain grave and weighty
matters, betwixt the King and his Brother. The Dukedom of Orleans was by old
use and custom of inheritance, always given to the Kings eldest Brother. But
because many contentions, and controversies did commonly arise between the
Kings of France, and their second Brothers Dukes of Orleans: for diverse
considerations of the commodities of that City and country, it was thought
good and profitable, both for the King and the Kingdom, that that Dukedom
should be taken from the Kings Brother. Wherefore the two Brethren agreeing
themselves, Alexander* the Duke of Orleans yielded and gave up his Dukedom to
the King, and had of him for it the Dukedom of Aniou, and the Title of Viceroy
general over all the provinces of France was given him, and had also a yearly
stipend of an hundredth thousand Crowns, which afterward was largely augmented.
Thus was Orleans taken from the Kings brother and he very liberally
recompensed for it.

We spoke before of the Prince of Conde, and how the Papists labored by all
means possible to entice him from the reformed Religion. And surely they had
made The Prince of Conde eseapeth the papists snares and baytes.
a great breach and wide entry to their purpose, thorough the to much
licentiousnes of the Court that the Princ^ used, and the great hope of large
gain that was offered him on all sides. But as they were in the midst of their
iolitie and triumphing, as though they had quight vanquished and reclaimed him
to their lure, he manfully and luckely escaped all their traynes: and by this
occasion, as the Prince did thus give himself to all pleasure and looseness
of living, his wife (a most godly and chaste matrone) took sorrow and inward
thought at her husha^ds imtemperate and disordered conversation, and thereby
(with other causes) fell grievously sick, and stryuing and wrestling long with
her disease in great sorrow and la^guishing of mind, at length departed out of
this troublesome world: but before her death, she had very wisely and wittely
admonished her husband, to look well The death of the prin ces wife.
about him, and to remember what duty, the knowledge he had of Christian
religion, and the dignity and place that God had called him to, did require of
him. The death and this counsel of his wife (of whose singular, dear, and
chaste love in his greatest extremities and distress he had always had
sufficient proof and trial) did so move and stir him, that waying and
pondering his estate and calling more nearly and wisely, ever after he took
unto him a myraculous and most valiant courage, and diligently and willingly
obeyed and hearkened to the counsel of such as were good and godly, and wexed
every day more and more earnest and zealous in the study of true godliness and
piety. And yet at the first, his wifes death seemed to give great occasion to
further and advance the papists wish and desire: for it was common then in
every man's mouth, that the Prince of Conde should marry with the Queen of
Scotland, a veryfaire and beautiful woman: and that then the Prince and the
Guises should be all one. But he using and obeying better advise, did manfully
and valiauntly contemn and despife all those vain baytes and enticing
allurements, and afterward married the Dukes sister of Lon gueuille, a famous
and worthy man.

In the mean time news came out of all quarters of The slaugh ters of the
faithful.
the cruel slaughters that the papists committed upon the protestants, which
if I should go about to tehearse, it would be a thing of an infinite and
endless labor, and nothing appertaining to our purpose: for there was account
made (as is evident and to be seen in the common registers) of an hundredth and
thirty great slaughters committed in diverse places upon the faithful since
the publishing of the Edict. But there was no mention (I warrant you) nor talk
of punishment: wherefore the Papists were by this loose and negligente
impunitie more and more encouraged to al unnatural and outrageous cruelty.

The men of Main, under the conduct and leading of their Bishop (who had waged
Soldiers for that purpose) made horrible havoc and spoil in many pla ces
upon the Protestants both man, woman, and child, without all respect of
years young or old. Many complaints and supplication were put up to the
king, and the faithful company of that Country set out a writing openly,
wherein they declared the horror and abomination of those mischievous factes,
with example of such* fury and cruelty as was not erst hard of amongst the
Frenchmen. Such savage and cruel madness had. (by reason of impunitie) enflamed
the Bishops mind with hatred against Religion. Wherefore through all the
C^untrey of Maynes in every Town and City, great cruelty was exercised at the
Bishops commandment, as God willing shall one day be more plainly seen in a
full and large discourse of these matters.

At Creuan (a Town of Burgundy a place appointed by the Kings commandment,
to prea^h the word of God in) when as there was gathered together from diverse
places of that Province a great number of men, women, old men and children,
altogyther naked and un armed, to hear a Sermon* the Papists that dwelt in
the Town assembling together, ran violently and rushed with force upon the
Protestants. And as they began to kill and murder them, there was by and by a
great uproar and tumult raised: on the contrary part, the papists were
suddenly amassed, and fearing least the aid of the Protestants near adioyninge
and of other noble men professoures of the reformed Religion had bin there,
craftily left of their enterprise: and so by that means the faithful
escaped. Notwithstanding many of them as they strove to get home to their
houses, were slain at the first brunt: so the Papists in Burgundy, what by
the sufferance of their Lieftenaunt, by the setting on of the Counsel, and
through the help and aid of Mo^sieur Begat* a seditious and factious
Counsailour waxed more and more bold and insolent against the Protestants.
Moreover there assembled (under color of gathering together the states of
every Province) certain companies which they termed the Confraternities, or
Brotherhoodes of the holy Ghost: to Brother hodes of the papiste.
the intent to proclaim and denounce everlasting and perpetual war against
the Hugunotes, and under pre tence of these assemblies, many things were
haynously and seditiously committed. Wherefore the Prince of Conde complained of
these misorders to the King. Where upon these conuenticles by the Kings
Interdicte were forbidden and prohibited: but all in vain for the letters
wanted that p^iuie signet: whereby (by the Cardinals subtlety and other
Papists of great estimation) such letters were known as it were of any
wayghty matter or importance. Monsieur* Begat* the counsailour had always very
ryfe in his communication the great renown of the Spanish King: whereat many
men marueiled to see such a fellow borne with all, and to be in favor with the
people, who in open assembles would so frankely set out and b^ag of the fame
and glory of a foreign Prince, and such a one as might the easier an^oy them
by reason he was so near adjoining unto them: yea certain Orations that he
had made of that matter, were at the Cardinal Granuillans commanded printed
at Andwerpe and published abroad. Wherefore the people encouraged by the
example of Monsieur Begat, began to talk of the Spanish Kings name, and to
boast and vaunt themselves of his favor: and the Papists in every place
mingled and enterlarded the Catholic authority and power of Spain with the
affairs of France, as though the King of Spain had had the ordering of
Religion there, and the government and moderation of the Kings Edict.

Monsieur Curee (who as we have before declared, Monsieur Cure that famous and
valiant cap taine is slain.
had valiantly behaved himself in the vauntgard of the battle of Dreux under
the Prince of Conde) was by the Kings commandment ruler and governor over
the Province of Vendosme: a man much given to the stu die and embracing of the
reformed religion, and therefore greatly hated of all the papists, in so much,
that the filthy bloudsuckers encouraged by the impunitie of the hau^cke made
upon the faithful of Macine, and having their hands red and dyed, with the
blood of the miserable subjects, began now to conspire the death of their
head and ruler: and laying snares and ambushementes for him, set upon him
suspecting no such thing, and cruelly flue him. Monsieur Curee his wife and his
brother And yet escaped unpunished.
complained of the matter to the King, declaringe what an horrible villainy was
committed upon the person of the Kings Lieuftenant: and after they had tarried
and waited at the Court sir whole weeks, at the last with great suit and much
a do they obtained, that the murder should be brought in question and
examination. Whereupon the doers of the deed were accused, and apprehended, and
when the case was proved by so many certain and evident arguments, that
every man thought it should have proceeded on and be put in further execution,
and that no man could withstand it: behold suddenly those heinous and traiterous
murderers were delivered and dispatched out of hand by the Kings commaundment:
and he that apprehended them and sent them to ward, was commanded to apeare
and that under pain of sharp punnishment, to give account of his doings (for
he was charged to have done more then his commission would bear him in,) his
house was made flat with the ground, and he him self appeared, and was thrown
into prison, and very hardly at length got out again. The murderers (as though
they had done well) were not only pardoned and forgiven, but had also great
rewards for their well doings and offices also bestowed upon them. A notable
surely and an evil example, of contemning and overthrowing of Justice.

There came out also about this time the Kings letters containing certain new
exceptions against the Mo^ interpretations of the Edict.
Edict: That it should not be lawful for any Ministers of the reformed (they
term it new) Religion, to dwell or inhabit in any other place, then in such
as were in every province appointed for the hearing of sermons, for this
purpose, that they might not visit and comfort the sick, nor take any heed or
care of the housholdes and families of the faithful: And that it should not be
lawful for any of that profession to be schoolemaisters or keep any open
school for to bring up or teach young children. And this was the old fetch of
the Cardinal of Lorraine, that taking away all discipline, the purity of
doctrine should utterly decay: and that all knowledge of good learning and
liberal Sciences being banished, the study and desire of truth might be
darkened with the duskie and loathsome clouds of barbarous and savage ignorance.
A practice used in times paste by Julian the Apostate, and now put in ure
again by the Cardinal, a good and cunning scholar in such matters, and
worthy of such a master, whereby he might declare him self an open and
manifest enemy to al humanity and pure doctrine. Notwithstanding there were
causes and matter pretended that in show were very godly as: That it was so
enacted, to the end all things might be done in good order, and least that the
greater part of his subjects being thereby stirred up, might give occasions
of new trou bles: not that it was the Kings pleasure to change or alter any
thing in the Edict, but that this was the very plain exposition of his
Majesty's pleasure, which he commands and wills to be received and kept
of all his subjects.

The King (as we said before) under coulor to suruay The Kings progress.
and vewe his Realm, came to Paris, and from thence he first went to Troy, a
noble and famous city of Campaigne, thence he removed to Lions, and so along
through Dolpheny, Prouance and Languedoc toward Ba^onne, a City of Guian,
situat upon the Sea coaste, and next adjoining to Spain, that there the Sacred
league might be made and established, as hereafter we will show in place
convenient.

It were a long and tedious matter to rehearse here what was done in every
City, what complayntes and The su^me of all that was don in the time of the
Kings Progress.
supplicacions were put up to the King, what injuries done to the protestants,
and what sleightes and devises were forged and practiced to inflame and encense
the young King against Religion: that must be done hereafter by some more large
and perfect history. But we, because we mean but to draw out brief and
short notes of the wars, will briefly (setting apart all long discourses of
so large and copiouse matter) set forth the sum of that was done in this
progress. The papists spared no sleightes, no forgerie, no lies, no saucie
malapart^es, no imp^dencie nor any kind of malicious and spyghtfull wickedness,
whereby they might by any way procure hatred and envy against the protest and
(...)and their cause. I se^aunder no man, for (...)I am bond by reason and
order of this my enterprise, to say ye truth, I will not spare to speak it:
From every quarter came great flocks of the faithefull complayninge of their
wrongs: supplications were offered up, but when any satisfaction was to be
made to their complaints, they were so posted over from this man to that man,
from this place to that place: that whilst the execution of law and equity
was prolonged and differred, Justice was quight gone and fled from amongst them.

We have spoken before of the accusation commenced The Admiral adjudged free
of the Dukes murder by the kings own judgment
against the Admiral, as though he had been author of the Duke of Guises
death, and of his answer there too. But because the matter seemed likely to
breed further trouble, and that it was such as might hinder and disquiet his
progress, both parts being so earnestly bent to wrath and reuengement: the
King thought it best to decide and take up the matter before he proceeded any
further on his journey. Wherefore at Molins, the chief City of the Dukedom of
Bourbone, the Admiral was The Guises and the Chastillon are charged to be
reconciled.
declared by the Kings decree, free and clear from that accusation, and that
he ought not in any point to be charged therewith, and commandment was given
that the matter should on both sides be buried in the dark grave of
everlasting forgetfulness and obli^i on, and be trodden under foot, as though
it had never been done. The Guises also and they of Chastillon were charged to
lay aside all hatred and grudge and to be reconciled, and euerafter become
friends and lovers. This commandment was obeyed and received of both sides,
whereby the wound was stopped and covered for a while, but not thoroughly healed.

Notwithstanding the Cardinal of Lorayne was here by, sinely beguiled and
defeated of his purpose, thinking by this to have had just occasion (as the
Spanish King br agged in his letters) both to have displaced the Admiral, and
also under a fair show of this cause to have violated and broken the peace.

The Prince of Conde, the Admiral, the Andelot and other of the chief Nobles
that were professors of the reformed Religion went not with the King on this
journey. The Cardinal also of Lorrayne tarried behind in France, as we shall
hereafter declare.

After this, the King came to Lions with a very great The Kings coming to
Lions and what he did there.
train, and was Royally and sumptuously received of the Townsmen of both
Religions. Here they had determined to frame and put in practice many
conceyptes and devises: for that, if they could overthrow and suppress ye
congregatign that was here, being of all other the chief and most famous, they
should the easier deface and destroy others that were less. For the state of
that most flourishing and populous church did grieve the Archepapistes at the
very hearts. Wherefore they thought it behouable and very expedient, by all
ways possible, to oppress and disquiet it. Yet contrary to their purpose and
meaning, they tarried but a small time there, by reason the plage raged so
cruelly, that through the stubborn wilfulnes of the Queen that meant to have
stayed the Court longer there, the plague came even into her own chamber, and
dispatched one of the Noble women of her own train out of the way. Wherefore,
thorough fear of the pestilence, the Court removed from Lions to Rossilon, a
territory belonging to the house of Tarnon, their howses being very stately
garnished be fore with the Kings own provision and furniture: and yet the
papists were not idell at Lions, although their aboade there was both short
and dangerous. For the An enterdiction for Sermones.
chief men of the reformed Religion were charged to abstain and not to resort
any more to Sermons or other assemblies. And that this might the better be
done in all places where the Court should pass, there came out a commandment
from the King, forbidding That the reformed religion should be exercised in
any place where the king should pass, or in any place where he lay, as long as
he made his aboade there, and that it should not be pra ctised at any time
hereafter in any of the kings howses and palaces, (the cause also was added)
least the Catholics, being grieved and offended with it, new troubles should
arise. There was also a p^face adioined, That, the same was omitted in the
Edict, whereunto the king would all men should understand, he meant not by this
interpretation to add any thing. So thus they used the name of the Edict,
where in deed they endeavored to overthrow and abolishe it.

A fortress also by the Kings commandment was A fortress built at Lions.
begone to be built at Lions, to keep in subjection and ouerlooke the
Townsmen, upon the hill of S. Sebastian, in the highest part of the City, and
the garrison augmented with a new supply of fresh soldiers, whereby the
protestants were manifestly marked with the note of rebellion.

We declared before how the City of Lions in the be ginning of the former
war, was kept and fortified with a garrison of the protestants: and how
Monsieur Saltan, a noble man, had as then the government and rule over the
City, who being very earnestly requested of the faithful, that he would in
the Kings name go forward in the administration of their common wealth:
notwithstanding refused to do it, and leaving Lions, got him quietly home to
his own house. By his defaulte and negligence the Duke of Guise when he lived,
would say, that Lions was taken of the protestants, and many complaints and
accusations as touching that matter, were put up against him, by the chief of
the popish Nobility, and certain Italians were suborned to accuse him before
the King for betraying Lions into the protestants hands. To these complaints
Monsieur Saltan makes answer and albeit he had sufficiently proved them to
be but mere surmises and false sclaunders, and was also quited and discharged
by the Kings own Judgment, of that accusation: yet notwithstanding no
punishment (although he complained diverse times to the King thereof) was
executed upon these wrongful sclau^derers. Moreover, entreaty was made with
him by Interpreters in the Kings name, that he would give over his Monfieur
Saltane removed from the govern meant of Ly ons and mon suer Lossay succeeded him.
Presidentship: wherefore being nothing desirous of glory and authority,
willingly gave place and resigned his office, in whose room was placed
Monsieur Lossay, a man of very crafty and deceiptful disposition, and
exceeding hautie and proud. For it is almost impossible to be told with what
intolerable pomp and excessive pride he vaunted and boasted himself, and how
great impunitie and carelessness in offending against ye protestants was
granted to the papists by him. The particular discourse whereof (as I have
often said before) does not appertayn unto our purpose: for so should we take
upon The sundry troubles of the church at Lions.
us an other man's charge, and our Commentaries which we purposed to make but
short and brief, would grow unto a great and large volume.

About the fourth day of August a new interpretation of the Edict was enacted,
and called the declaration of Religion, wherein first was placed a preface at
the first view very goodly.

That it was the Kings will and pleasure, that his Edict The declaclaration of
Rossillon a great overthrow to the Edict.
of and for religion should be straightly kept and observed every where, that
they that should be guilty of the contrary should be punished: that law and
justice should be ministered unto all men indifferentlye and without
partiality, and that his majesty did survey and visit his Realm and
Provinces, to thentent he might meet with, and provide for all such confusions
and disorders as were in the common wealth. But whereas he is given to under
stand that the liberty that he had granted out for the use of religion, did
daily minister occasions of strife and contention, he was ready to provide
remedy for that mischief. And to the intent, that here after no doubtful or
double understanding of the Edict which was made and set forth by his
authority, be left still uncertain: and for that the declaration of his own
and very true meaning, does only appertain unto him self: for these causes
he has thought good to set it forth in open writing. And whereas (says he)
we do license our noble men to exercise their new religion freely, we will
that it be so understood that this benefit do reach to themselves only and
their families: and that this was our intent and purpose: the very form and
tenure of the words therein, do sufficiently prove. Wherefore we forbid and
prohibit all and every of our noble men, to give any license to any other
whosoever do use the benefit of the Edict, vnlesle he be of the number of his
or their subjects: and that who so shall do to the contrary, him or them we
take and denounce as Traitors to our majesty and do appoint for them such
punnishment as is due and fit for traitors and rebels. We also will and
command, that none of the new religion shall (as they were accustomed) gather
together or sommon any assemblies or conuenticles in way Restrain of Sinodes.
of Sinodes any more hereafter, and that who so fails herein, be punished
according to the greatness and estimation of his fault. And where as very many
treading under foot the holy ordinances of Religious houses, have forsaken
their former lives of priesthood and monachisme, either in the time of the
former wars and trou bles, or else after the pacification of them, and
contemning the vow of religious chastity, have thrown themselves headlong
into the state of most detestable and accursed marriage, we will and command,
that all such men be by imprisonment enforced and compelled to forsake and
renounce Protestants commanded to return to Monachisme.
their wives, and the women likewise their husbands, and so to return to
their former kind of life. or else to be punished with perpetual exile and
banishment, and within the space of ii. months to depart the bounds and
limits of our Realms and Dominions The neglec toures thereof by this our
sentence we adiudge (if he be a man) to the gallie there to remain for ever a
gallie slave, (if a woman) to perpetual imprisonment: and this our declaration
we will and command to be established and in as full force and authority as
the Edicte it self.

The protestants were greatly endamaged by these exceptions, for they who were
scatered abroad through the Provinces and could not conveniently repair to
those Cities that were appointed for preachinge, were by the first article
forbidden to resort to any other places to hear sermons: for they that sought
or resorted to any such place were both in great danger as they went, and were
also charged to be violaters of the Edict. Yea the noble men themselves were in
great peril and trouble. And where the assembling of Sinodes and collections
of money were forbidden, there were all means and ways of bringing any thing
to pass taken away, and the authority of discipline quight defaced* which
being maintained by Counsel, was the chief and greatest instrumente whereby
the Church was preserved. The ministerye also was almost destroyed, all things
that made for the relief and sustenance of the ministers, being by these
exceptions taken away. For the use amongst the Protestants was to contribute
and give their money together, wherewt their ministers lived and were
maintained. And as for the co^maundment whereby they were enforced to return to
Monkerie, and the disannulling and destruction of such mariadges as they had
co^tracted, every man may see how dangerous and hurt full they were and of all
men to be detested and abhorred: so full farst and stuffed are the papists
budgettes with sleightes and subtilties to overthrow religion.

Whiles these exceptions and breaches of the Edicte were by the papists (under
pretense of the Kings name) forged and invented, others of their side,
committed diverse The great slaughter of the faith full at Tours.
acts of extreme outrage and boldness in violating it. In Towers. a famous
town of France, there was a Congregation, beautified and furnished with a
great number of faithful Christians. But because they had not liberty by the
Edict to practice ye reformed religion within the City it self, there was a
place appoin ted for them by the Kings commandment, at the castle next to the
city, called Loray: whether when the congregation had one day resorted to
hear a Sermon, and great number of all ages and sorts of men and women were
there, suddenly they (suspectinge no such thing) heard a great shout and
outcrye of the papists, who rushing, burst in upon them with weapon and
armor: and besetting all the passages round about, flew violently upon the
naked and unarmed Assembly, and murdered and slew all they met with. And many
of them as they sled straggling here and there were slain: many also were sore
wounded both men and women, and their Minister thrust thorough, even in the
very pulpit. Like cruelty also and fury was exercised within the City with
all manner rapines, pillage, slaughters and hauockes that might be. The brute
and rumor of this so great villainy and mischief, amazed and feared all the
Congregations round about them, and coming to the Prince of Condes ears, it
maruelously moved and stirred up his mind, with the often remembrance of so
many mischieues committed against them by the papists without check or
controlement: the shameful and cruel violating and wresting of the Edict, did
grievously vex him. Wherefore he complains of the matter to the King, and the
Queen in diverse letters, whereof some were set out in print, which we mean here
to repeat, because they contained in them the whole matter of all the rest.

Whereas I have diligently and thoroughly wayed and The Prince of Conde
complains of these injuries.
considered of the last answer I received from the Queen concerning my
letters I sent to her, wherein I admonished her of such things as seemed to be
prepared for the disquieting and disturbing of the whole Realm and public
profit thereof, whose evil beginnings being full fraught with horrible murders
and slaughters past, and augmented with shameful hauock and robberies which are
but newly committed, and that without all manner punishment, do foretell and
warn us of very grievous troubles hanging over our heads and like to ensue:
and when I had with good heed and advise pondered each point and article of all
her aunsweres, and especially that which co^teigned the causes of the
Interpretation of Rosillon: And do now perceive that this mischief does not
only steal upon us by little and little, but violently does invade and
ouerflowe us, and all through the disobedience and contentious factions of the
Kings officers, and the great indignation and disdain, that a great number of
his subjects have conceived against him: which surely does arise and spring of
this, because that whereas they see the Edicte violated, and are daily
oppressed and afflicted with all manner rapines, slaughters, and all other kind
of outrage and violence: and yet can get no redress nor remedy of their
griefs by the law, but are driven to such a pinche and desperation of mind,
that I ca^ not but greatly fear the danger of tumultes and insurrections: and
that they will endeavor themselves through indignation of the injuries don unto
them heretofore) by force to put away violence, and by armor and weapon to
defend themselves (unless very speedy remedy be had). For, and upon these
considerations I have thought it my duty, to certify the King and Queen
thereof: as becomes a good subject and trusty servant to do, which
desires by all means and ways possible too avoid and turn away so great
and present danger and peril.

Neither (says he) is there any cause why I should fear that I shall be
accounted and taken of their Majesty's, as one that is to importune and
unreasonable, not regarding either time or person: albeit I have diverse times
troubled them already with these matters, especially seeing it stands me
vpoon my honor and honesty: and the present and urgent necessity of things,
does so earnestly require me to do it, that unless I will become both guilty
and worthi punishment for so great and common calamities, I can not pass so
weighty a business in silence. Wherefore I most humbly beseech your Majesty's
that you will not take it in evil part, that I am come by letters to entreat
for them, that are without all law and Justice most shamefully spoiled and
slain, contrary to your highness pleasures declared in your Edict. And for
that they could not by any other means obtain remedy and redress of their
wrongs, they are come unto me for succor, thinking that in respect of my near
kynred to your Majesty, and the place whereunto I am called in this realm, I
might obtayn for them that ease and relief of their griefs, which otherwise
they could not get. Neither could I my self for these causes and for the
obedience I owe to your Grace, refuse to declare and show unto your Majesty
with all humble modesty and reverence, these so great miseries and calamities.
For all your highness Subjects have felt what great profit and vtility has
come to the whole Realm, through your Majesty's Edict of peace: the which
notwithstanding is so defaced and altered from his first form, that no man
has any care once to acknowledge, much less to observe and execute it. And
although your Grace have diverse times plainly declared and expressed, that it was
your will and pleasure that it should be observed and kept inuiolably of al
men: yet notwithstanding, certain disordered persons, that seek to abolish
and deface the reformed religion, have so prevailed, that certain
interpretations of ye Edict are set forth in your Majesty's name, whose
prefaces are very notable and good: but if a man but of mean judgment do
mark the end of them, he shall perceive that they be nothing else, but
devises and means invented only to weaken and take away the liberty of the
Edicte, and now of late at Rossillon, when as no man was with your Majesty
that would maintain the cause and right of the protestants, there was a
Declaration set out, by which the Edict is so rent and defaced, that it is not
credible that it should long continue, for thus it has.

The Edict says, Be it lawful for all noble men having chief authority,
their families, and those of their jurisdiction that will, of their own accord
to use and exercise the reformed religion freely and without molestation. But
the interpretation says, That al such places are exempted from this
liberty, as were either sold or taken by the kings commandment from the
church living: neither should such that had any Church revenues, enjoy that
benefit.

Further, the Edict says, That liberty of religion was not only granted to
the noble men and their families, but also to as many of their subjects as
would willingly resort unto it. But the Declaration of Rossillon says
further, Neither shall the Noble men suffer or permit any which is not their
subject to come or resort to any sermons or assemblies. And that who so does to
the contrary, shall for the first time be fined at 500. Crowns, and for the
second time loose and forfeite all their howses and Castles, wherein any such
sermons or assemblies shall be had or kept.

Which rigor and severity (as it is manifest) can never be observed and kept,
seeing that many of ye Noble men do not know all their subjects, and few of
the subjects one another, whereby it may chance, that one may come to a Noble
man's house, and yet be neither one of his subjects, nor known of him, who
thinks and takes him for his own subject: and yet notwithstanding should by
these means be enforced to pay a great fine, and lose also his house wherein
the assembly was gathered together. The like dannger also should he incur if
one of his neighbors did but come to see how he did. Which thing would not
only hinder and trouble, but also bring to miserable thraldom and slavery
the mutual and friendly society of men, the chief and surest bond of true
friendship, and the stay and rock of all common wealths and Monarchies.

The Edict says, That there shall be a City choosen out and appointed for the
administration of the reformed Religion in every Province or presidentship, and
other places of Judgment, from which it was lawful to appeal to the high
Courts of Parliament, but this last point was never yet put in execution,
neither could it be granted to the protestants: although they both earnestly
sued for it: and the promise it self was confirmed, by the express
commandment of the Kings letters, and certain Cities named to be chosen as
fittest and most profitable for that purpose. Also where according to the order
of the Edict, there ought to have been a place appointed for the use of the
reformed Religion within the suburbs of those Cities that were named, it was
appointed in other inconvenient places. xx. or. xxv. leagues of. Whereupon
followed diverse slaughters and seditions in many places. Notwithstanding this
Article of the Edict was altogether broken and violated, whereof I do not
think your Majesty causer, neither any of them, who without prejudice to
either part do wish that the Edict might be truly and incorruptly observed,
but rather I judge your presidentes and other officers to be procurers of it,
who of a preposterus and disordered zeal and love they bear to the popish
Religion, could not bridle their own outrageous lust, but suffered themselves
to be carried headlong by their affections, to the breach of the Edict and
spoil of them that profess the reformed Religion.

The Edict says, That liberite and free use of the reformed Religion is
granted and permitted to all Cities wherein it was exercised the* vii. of
March, 1562. besides those Cities that were to be chosen and appointed in every
Province: and this should be done in one or two several places of those
Cities, according as the King thought good to appoint. But the interpretation
does permit none to enjoy this, but those Cities only, which were holden by
force in the time of war, and so, many are defrauded of that liberty, in
which the use of the reformed Religion was kept at the time appointed, namely
the. vii, day of March, 1562, both before and in the time of the late troubles.
Diverse other places also were spoiled of this free use of their Religion, who
notwithstanding had it the. vii. of March at the earnest entreatie not only of
certain Nobles who were mere Lords of those places: but also of such as
were only governors substituted and put in trust by your highness grace and
favor, which is nothing else but a ^lat breach of the Edict.

The Edict without any distinction or difference gives free liberty of
Religion to All men in every place, but by the interpretation of Rossillon al
they (he or she) who came from any abbeyes or Nunryes, are debarred from his
freedom, and compelled to return to their Cloisters, and there to live
according to the Canons of popish traditions: and yet the preface of that
interpretation says, it was not made to derogate any thing from the Edict: the
words of the exception be these. That all Priests and all other men or women
that have received the orders of Monachisme, and forsaking that estate have
married wyfes, either in the time of the former broils or after the
pacification thereof, be compelled to forsake and renounce those Mariges, and to
return to their former kind of living, and therein to live according to the
rules and orders appointed ^or them. Which thing, besides that it does
manifestly violate the Edict, which permits every man to live according to
his own conscience, does flatly repugne and stand against the commandment of
almighty God, who is author and fautor of Matrimony. It would also breed
great strife and dissension in the Monasteries and religious houses.

In the declaration of Rosillo^ is also adjoined an interdict and prohibition
of Synodes, not only contrary to the Edict, but also flat against diverse
others of your Majesty's letters and commandments. For although the Edict
do not expresely make mention of them, nether does fla^ly forbid them, and yet
does grant the use of such religion as is reformed, it must needs follow
that it does permit them, especially for that they do appertain to that
religion, and are not only as accidents and things belonging to it, but are
also the very maintayners, and (as it were) the synewes wherewith that religion
is governed. This kind of Synodes the ancient fathers in old time did vs^
very often, before general Councels were known. And surely the use of them is
so necessary both for the rooting up of Heresies and corruptions of living,
which do day^y creep into the Church and also to ^epe away and debar al
wicked and vngraci^us persons from the community of the Sacramen^es and other
godly ceremonies, that without them it is impossible ever to (...)unto any
true and sincere purity, either of life or doctrine, and yet we do not mean
that any unlawful or to high authority should be practiced in them. Neither
is there any thing that we more earnestly desire then that your Majesty
would appoynte certain men at your graces discretion, to be present with us
at those our Synodes: and so should all suspicion of false and cauilling
opinions be quite taken away.

Besides these violent wrestings and breaches of the The gre^ous ini^ries
committed against the Protestants.
Edict which are the only cause of all sedition: those that did make and frame
them, have persuaded your highness that it was necessary for the better
observation of them, to appoint and set down penalties for all such as did
violate them, and yet made pro^estation in their pre faces that those
interpretatio^s were not made to der^gate any thing from the Edict, where as it
is most manifest that no more effectual and forcible way could be invented
quight to abolish and overthrow it. Confiscation and loss of goods, house,
and land, is appointed for them as though they were rebels and traitoures to
your grace. Whereby it is evident, that these fellows which do abuse your
majesty's name and authority, are most wickedly bent to destroy your highness
subjects, and utterly to deface and raze the noblest and most honorable
families of your kingdom, to the great decay and ruin of your faithful and
loyal subjects, which when they have done, it will be to late to repent. And
as for my self and all other of the reformed religion, w^e are so fully
persuaded of your majesty's goodness and clemency toward us, that we do not
think it to be your will and pleasure that such sharp and severe
punnishmentes should be executed upon us. But such is the wilful and
outrageous lust of many your graces Lieuf tenantes and officers, that they
bestow wholly al their tra^aile and diligence both of body and mind to se these
clauses and interpretations observed, and only endeavoring themselves to destroy
us, will, and do think this occasion good enough, by examination of our
doings to trouble and endaunger us. If so be they can but epsy ye
protestants resorting to make their prayers to God, or else to hear his holy
word in any other places then those that be appointed for them: or if they go
to any other Noble man's house then his, whose subjects and servants they
be. Which certainly does make nothing either with or against the duty they owe
to your majesty, or the common and public vtility of the Realm. But when as
they see before their faces, slaughters, seditions and most dangerous and
^amentable occasions of new tumults and breach of peace, then they turn their
backs and wink at them, and in such manner deal with us that they had rather
grant commission of inquiry out against them that were spoiled and are plain
tife, then once to make proffer that they are willing to administer Justice
equally to all men, for the restraint of the cruel rage of so bloody
murderers, who (as it is manifest by the impunitie of all outrages co^mittd
upon us*) are defended, maintained, and set on by them, as though we were
abhorred and detested of your highness, and not in the number of your
faithful subjects. And how true this is, daily examples do make to evident.
News comes every day of slaughters and seditions out of all quarters of your
kingdom, but no word of any punishment executed for them. And besides infinite
murders and havoc made in other Provinces upon the faithful, your majesty
may behold those which were committed at Creuan, in Maynes, in Prouance, in
Aquitaigne, in Puy: and that lately done at Tours. For which we never to this
day could procure any kind of redress may so impossible it is to ge^ remedy,
that in diverse places commandment was given, that such mat ters should not
come in question and trial, yea which is more, the commissioners did sit
against those that were spoiled, which thing did not only grievously trouble
the^ that had sustained damage and injury: but did also encourage and enbolden
the hearts of the seditious. And diverse other that might have bin repressed
with little labor, were by this example animated, and hartened to persevere in
all kind of violence and rapine. Wherefore ii. great dangers are herein to be
looked for and feared, the one is, that if your majesty do not speedily meet
with these outrages, but suffer them to range and spread abroad further, it is
very lykely that when you would redress them, then you shall not be able: the
other is, your afflicted and persecuted subjects shall be driven in to such
distres and desperation of mind, that when they shall perceive all right and
justice to be taken from them, by treachery of your officers, flat against your
majesty's pleasure, they will of themselves, defend themselves from wrong, and
also revenge the injuries.

And yet I speak not this as though I knew not, that your majesty had
commanded comissions should be granted out, both for examination and
correction of such spoils, which on thing does sufficiently prove that it is
your graces will and pleasure that the Edict should be kept and observed. But I
beseech your majesty to consider, was there ever any remedy of any
complaint whatsoever onward out by them to whom you have committed the
correction and punishment of malefactors? Your highness Presidents and
Lieuftenants, whose charge and office is to redres and restrain such disorders,
and are for that purpose guarded with Garrisons of Soldiers, at the cost and
charge of those over whom they govern, do abuse that aid given them to
maintain Justice, always to the favor of one part of your subjects, and
utter destruction of the other. And if so be it chance now and then that they
go to any place to sit upon any such matters, there is nothing done according
to Justice, but the catholics defaultes and offenses cloked and covered: and
as for the examination to be had there, it is either quight omitted, or else
done in hugger mugger and corners that no man can know of it. But if any
complaints be brought to your majesty of those whom disdainfully and
spightfully they call Huguenots, forth with in post have, before commission be
given out for the trial of the matter, there is judgment awarde^d against them,
not once waying the accusation whether it be true or false, and they condemned
either to lose their lives, or else their goods, and their houses to be beaten
down flat to the ground, as does appear by this example. For when as Monsieur
de la Taride only moved by a vain and uncertain rumor, had written not unto
your Majesty, but to a private friend, as concerning a certain commotion
which he thought was at Montauban, ye report hereof was scant crept abroad,
when straightway commaundment was given to raze and beat down the walls of
that City. And like sen tences to this were executed in diverse places,
especially where the number of protestants was thought to be great, as of late
in Ualence and Sisteron: but no such thing don in those towns where the
Catholics bear rule, althought it be plain and manifestly known, that many
seditions have been raised by and through them. And very slender was the
travail and labor that was bestowed in the examination of Monsieur Cures
death, although he was your Majesty's Lieuetenant, and represented your own
person. For when his brethren and executors did sue for punishment of the
murderers, they very hardly in six long weeks obtained a Commission to have
their matter examined: which thing does plainly bewray in what estate and
estimation we stand. And again on the other side, we know what commission
the Duke Monpensier had to be executed upon Monsieur C^agier, who had done
nothing in the e^aminatio^ of Monsieur Cures death, but that which the
commisioners appointed for that purpose had commanded him: and yet
notwithstanding was charged either to appear presently upon sight of the
Attachement sent for him, or else that his house should be made equal and even
with the ground. Which thing imports nothing else but the utter subversion of
Justice, and manifestation of their greedy desire they have to vio^ate and
break the Edict, by all ways and means possible, but s^ecially by three: By
parciall administration of Justice: By unjust and unequal tolleration and
suffera^ce of mischief: and lastly, By deadly and cankred hatered against all
th^se that profess the reformed Religion. And this last is that wherewith both
the chief doers in this matter (who ought chiefly to seek the observation of
the Edict) are carried headlong: and also the common people, who (through
impunitie of mischief and sufferance of the noble men) ar waxen shameless in all ^ind of tyranny and cruelty. For when they perceive the Justices and
Judges of Law and equity, so haynously offended against us, that when we have
any matter be fore them that does concern both our safegarde and re^esse of
wrongs done unto us, we find them a sleep and loath to ease our grie^es, but
to be both ready and careful in all things that are to proceed against us: yea
and too condemn us, not once hearing our cause: they do hereby take occasion
proudly to triumph over us, and conspire against us. Of these injuries (after
long and weary sufferance) the afflicted company of the faithful, have
complained to your Graces Presidents and other your Officers, and to certain
who are near about your Highness, but can receive no other answer but that
your Majesty's whole care and study is, to content and satisfy both parts,
and that the Catholics do no less complain of the protestants, then they
of them: which in very deed is nothing else but to suffer every man to be hurt
and wronged without Law and Justice, and to give the Catholics large reins
and full swing to do all things that their cankered hatred against the
faithful do drive them to, and freely to kill and murder them without either
fear of punishment or danger, least that they should at any time (perceiving
that they were suffered too be injured of every man with out all law and
equity) take armor, and so by force defend them from that violence which by
law they could not avoid.

We see this also happen diverse times and oftener than needs, that your
Graces Justices in steed of administering Law and right to those that have
proved their causes, do use to cou^teruayle their injuries done vntothe^, with
some other offenses that they have committed: or else cause some rumor to be
spread abroad, of some evil fact or other, done by the protestants, wherewith
they use to stop the plaintifes mouths, and so send them home in as evil case
as they came, without any redress of their wrongs. And yet it is well known,
that the Protestants crimes be not so haynouse but that they may be easily
redressed: as to go to another place to hear Gods word then your Majesty
has appointed, or not to have restored and set up again popish religion in
certain places. But far unlike to these be the offenses of the papists cruel
and savage bloudsuckers, who have filled ai places with rapines and horrible
murders: so that we do not doubt but God will one day have mercy upon his
poor afflicted people, and hear the gronings, sighs and lamentable cries of
his, that do fly to him only for succor and refuge, and can obtain redress
no where else, all right and Justice being taken away from them, by such as
have most barba rously (contrary to their Kings commandment) spoiled and
wasted all things with unknown and almost incredible rage and cruelty: upon
whose accurfed and detestable factes have followed to the number of 140.
lamentable murders since the publication of the Edict, and yet not two of
them, either punished or like to be punished.

And now I trust your majesty does perceive, that these be some causes why
both I and other of the reformed religion do say, that the Edict is violated,
and we our sel^es evil handled, besides many things that are done against us
by the greatest part of your graces presidentes, and all because we are of a
contrary religion to them, and infinite other devises which they daily (as it
is manifest) do practice against us: all which I leave unto your majesty, to
consider how disagreeing and hurteful they be to public peace and
tranquillity. And these things I have thought good to signify to your highness
least I should seem to have omitted any one jot of that Loiall obedience I owe
to the same* most humbly beseeching your majesty to take in good part, and
patiently to ponder and consider of these things, which I do with all dutiful
modesty and humble reverence declare unto your grace, O noble King, and say
that it is impossible that true and steadfast peace be kept in this Realm, tho
rough the often declaration of your highness pleasure therein, unless the
Edict be truly and incorruptly observed and executed in all points, and all
interpretations thereto adjoined quight disanulled and taken away: yea and all
disorders, seditions, and slaughters committed by either part after the
publishinge of the Edict sharply and equally punnished: and lastly that the
loose sufferance, and corrupt collusion of Magistrates and Justices, be
ouerlooked and corrected. And unless this be don, I can not see how an
universal and firm during peace can be maintained in your majesty's Realms.
But contrary wise I perceive and foresee that they who have suffered so great
injuries with out all remedy, are so wearied, and as it were tired with long
sufferance, and being now in desperation and past hope of redress, will
endeavor to defend themselves from wrong and injury by force, which must needs
be occasion of great troubles.

When these letters of the Princes were brought to the King, and the
indignation that he and other professoures of the reformed religion had
conceived was known, the very necessity of the time enforced them to make some
show of redress and correction of these misorders. For the king being now far
in his progress from Paris, the chief and Metropolitan City, the Queen
greatly feared least the Prince of Conde should attempt The Kings letters to
the Prince of Conde.
some new troubles. Wherefore the King writes to the Prince very lovingly,
declaringe that de does like and allow of his care for the observation of
peace, and says that he wishes nothing more heartily, then that law and
Justice should be equal without partiality ministered to all his subjects, and
that this was his chief and only desire. And whereas he had set forth diverse
interpretations of the Edicte, he says he was forced thereto by diverse and
sundry urgent and most weighty causes, and that they do greatly make for the
use and public profit and comoditie of his subjects* and yet he believes so
well of the Prince, that he judges he never once so much as meant or thought
to govern and rule him and his doings at his own pleasure: and if so be any
of his Justices and officers had offended in any thing, he would so punnish
them, that all men should know that it was his will and pleasure, that the
Edicte should be executed justly and sincerely in all places, and that all his
subjects should have Justice and equity show ed them without respect of
religion. Also he trusted that he (who ought to have special regard for the
good and safe estate of the Kingdom) would so travail and labor, that no new
broiles should be raised by the^ of the reformed religion that complained of
their wrongs, seeing it is fit that they should not revenge themselves of such
injuries as they say are dove unto them, but rather commit the charge and
orderinge of those matters to him, being chief Lord and governor over both
them and their causes, and that unless they did so, they should purchase unto
themselves most grievous and severe pu nishment: only he willed him to take
heed that none were falsely accused, and that that which they objected a against
others might not rightly and worthily be laid to their own charge. Lastely he
let him to understand, that it was his only, chief, and most desired with to
have peace kept and maintained, according to the order taken in the Edict,
which as he had oftentimes declared in word, so like wise he would fulfill and
express it in deeds.

About this time there came out new Proclamations New proclamatio^s for the
obserua tion of the Edict.
from the King, wherein all men were very straictly charged to observe and keep
all orders prescribed in the Edict, and grievous and great punishment appointed
both for such as did violate and neglecte the same: and also for all such
Magistrates as did wink at them that should offend therein. He declares
also that it is his will and pleasure that all his subjects should live
quietly together, and therefore does appoint the Edict and the declarations
that he had made thereof, to be a rule and square to order their doings by,
which he straightly charged and commanded all men to do: least they should to
late repent them for so abusing his clemency, and at length prove his force
and power to their own destruction.

Shortly after this the Mashall of Vielleville was The punnishment appointed
for the mur there done at Tours made frustrate.
sent to Tours to see execution done upon those seditious persons that had
committed that slaughter lately done there, but the matter was so handled that
all was in vain for when the Marshal (saying he would do according to his
commission) had begone to rippe up the matter, Monsieur Chauigny a wicked and
desperate man was suborned, who by open force resisting the Marshals doing,
did so work that nothing could be done, faringe as though if the matter
should have been stirred any more, it would have bred a further and greater
trouble, s^ing the greatest and best part of the Townsmen was thereby so
hainously moved and enflamed. Wherefore the Mashall returned to the Court
leauyng the matter as he found it, and when he had given account of all his
proceedings there, Chauigny was very liberally rewarded of the Queen, as one
that had done a thing both fit and profitable for that present time: yea
grea^e offices were bestowed upon him, as to be Ambassador to foraine Princes
and kingdoms.

The Cardinal of Loraine (as we said before) went not with the King, in this
progress to Baion: which he did as the end of the thing proved, for two
considerations: first that this league which he him self had devised might
more safely be kept close: secondly least the Protestants and the Prince of
Conde (for that he was by them adjudged to be a man very prone thereto) should
attempt to stir up any new broils in this the Kings absence. Wherefore being
guarded with a great number of his servants and retainers, he tarried sometime
at The fond and foolish iorne^s of the Cardynall.
Mendon, and sometime at Nanteuill houses of his, being near Paris, to the
intent he might more straightly and circumspectly ouerlooke the protestants
doings. And upon a time he was determined to go to Paris, either to devise
some new fetch, or else according to his old custom to confirm and
strengthen the papists, and with a greater train of men then he was wont to
have, to amaze and discorage the protestants. Mounsier Memorencie the chief
Marshall had the charge and government of the city, who hearing of this, did
forthwith advertise the Cardinal, that it was very dangerous for him to come
thither in such diuersitye of minds, the King also being so far absent from
them: it shall be therefore good (says he) that you do not come ac companied
with such a train, but if you shall attempt the contrary I will according to
my office, do that which I think shall be expedient.

The Cardinal taking this answer in very evil part, and being besides that
incensed against him with an old ^ngraffed grudge he bare the house of
Memorencie approaches the City with a greater company then before he purposed
to bring with him: the Mar shall meets him by the way, and demands of the
Cardinals men, at whole commandment they bare armor, and whether they knew
not that it was contra ry to the Kings commandment for any man so to do: and
they excusing their doings with the Cardinals com maundement, were commanded
forthwith to disarme themselves, and to be carried to prison, there to be
punished according to the order taken by the King for that matter: at which
they were so amassed, that every one shifted for himself, and straglinge, were
scattered all abroad. The Cardinal seeing his men thus discouraged and
dispersed, took his heels and crept into a Marchaunts house thereby, whom he
knew well, and thinking himself not half safe there, caused the wall of the
next house adjoining to be broken down, that he might fly further from them.
And thus was his goodly journey disgraced with great laughters of others, and
much shame to himself: yea it was commonly talked of, and Iesters and Rymers
made songs and ballades of it s^offingly, saying, that the Cardinal of
Lorraine ran away from his men into corners, and berayed him self for fear.
And this forsooth was the prudent and polytique care that he had to observe
and maintain the peace. Wherefore he returned back into Lorrayne, in a great
chafe: and least he should seem idell, he began a fresh again his suit to
the states of the Kingdom, desiring to be accounted and acknowledged as one of
ye Peers of the Realm. And after that, gathered together a great number of
Soldiers, and pursued Monsieur Salsede a Spaniard, an old Servant of his,
for that he had not in certain points obeyed his commandment. But he ^eing
Capteyne (by the kings co^maundment) of a garrison that kept the Town where
he remained, was safe enough from all that the Cardinal and his army could
do unto him: such was the fond and shameful end of this angry souldierlike
Cardinal.

The Mar^shall of Burdillo went before (the King the bloody suruay that the
Marshial of Burdillo made thorough out all Guian.
coming aft^* to view and suruaye the Province of Guian, and in eu^ry place
where he came made declaration of the Kings pleasure as concerning the
observation of the Edict, and all was done in the Kings name: for they greatly
feared troubles and co^motions there, because the Protestants of that Province
had been very sharply perfecuted, and were both many in number, and also very
ready to defend themselves. Notwithstan ding all this great a do for the keeping
of peace, Monsieur Riuier, a man known to be a protestant, was murdered in
his own house, by a company of bluddie ruffians that came under color of
friendship to visit him. But the Marshell of Burdillo was openly reported to be
the auctour of this murder, both because he bare deadly ha tred long before to
Monsieur Riuier, and also for that he took him to be a fit man, and as it
were, a ring leader amongst the rest of the faithful, to attempt any kind of
vpro^re.

The Kings Majesty having gone thorough all that part of Dolphine, which
adioyneth to the riner of Rosne, came to Valence and Montille, and being
Royally and nobly received there, went thence to Orange, where he har^ very
many grievous complayntes of the desolate and oppressed Citisens, and did view
the great ruins and lamentable hauockes that were made there. And th^nce he
removed to Auinion, and had there all kinds of pleasures that could be devised
to delight his mind, both by the Citizens, and other Lordly Italians that were
abiding there at their masters the Popes commandment: and every man did
herein what possible he could, and all for the favor of the Queen, who
endeavored al her study and diligence to entangle and snare the Kings tender
young mind, with such pleasant a^nd delightful baytes, neither did they omit to
use the filthy love of Maids and Uirgins to entrappe him. The young Prince of
Bearn, the Queen of Nauarres son, accompanied the King in all this long
progress, but his good mother the Queen did look carefully to him and kept
him from those poisoned hooks and netts.

After this the king came to Prouance, and having seen Arelat and Aijques two
famous Cities, he removed to Marselles and was there very triumphantly received
and greatly delighted with pagentes and shows that were upon the water. At
which time the congregations of the faithful that dwelt there had peace, and
lived quietly through the good and politic gouernmente of Monsier Morsau
their ruler, both a prudent and godly Counselor and a valiant and stout
captain, who was sent thither from the Parliament of Paris at the Kings
commandment with certain other counselors, to redress the disorders and
enormities wherewith that province did then swarm. Wherefore as soon as he
came thither, he deposed the Senate of Aijques for that they wincked at and
favored the outrages there committed which done he began to search out the
offenders themselves, wherefore many of them fled away, and some escaped
punishment by favor of the noble men, other some and that a good number were
sharply punished, the Papists fretting and chafing at it all in vain, for it
was manifest and openly known that that City stood in need of severe and
strait reformation, yea and the seditious townsmen would openly threaten to set
open their gates to the Spanishe King their neighbor, if so be that the
reformed religion did take place there. Wherefore the Queen burst not openly
disalowe those executions done upon the Papists, but would rather when the
Protestants came to complain to her, praise them and make as though she
liked very well of them, and all to show what desire she had that law and
Justice should be administered to every man equally without partiality. At the
earnest and importunate suit of the Protestants, one place was Merindol a
place appointed for the reformed religion.
chosen out of all that Province, for the assemblyes, to have the use and
administration of the reformed Religion* but it was inconvenient by reason of
the vneuenesse and crookedness of the way to Merindoll: Notwithstanding by the
great providence of God, it came to pass that the same place which a little
before had received the truth of the Gospel in the dark and dusky days of
papistrye, and had suffered much calamity for that cause, should by the Kings
Edict be made a receptacle and mansion place for the Gospel and the faithful,
and thereby made very famous and noble. Therefore the faithful came out of
all places of Prouance to Merin dol, having free liberty to hear the word of
God.

After this, the King came to A^inion, that from thence The king comes to
Langue do^.
he might go into Languedock. And as he traueiled, he was very princely
received of every City wherethorough he passed, and had very large and stately
gifts given unto him: of the which to make relation, pertayneth not to our
purpose.

When the King was come to Nemaux, there came thither a great multitude of
protestants, making great moan and lamentation, in so much that the crying and
pitiefull voice of the people came to the house where the King lodged: who might
hear them crying and calling for Justice of their sovereign Lord, and
requiring of the Christian King the liberty of the reformed Religion. This
noise of weeping and crying was so great and so shrill in the Kings ears, that
the mind of the young King at the hearing of the same, was somewhat abashed, and
straightway demanded what the matter was: the standers by dissembled and
excused the matter: but he with angry mood answered and said, I see that my
people are evil entreated: and turning to the Que^ne said, How chance this
people are not satisfied? I will Lady (says he) that this my people have
Justice Notwithstanding they by and by put in his head, that they were
seditiouse people, which were wont after that fashion to do all things with
tumult: And then this multitude being driven away with violence by the Kings
Guard, the Elders and governors of their Church were called for: and being
come, they were sharply reproved that they had suffered the unruly multitude to
come thither in such tumultuouse order: and were commanded to deliver their
grief in writing to the Master of Requests, and to come to Montpellier to
receive an answer according to the same. The like complayntes also were made
by the men of Montpellier, when the king came thither: but they with the men of
Nismes were sent to Blitters: and after this the churches of Blitters, and
those thereaboutes, making the like complayntes, destring reformation, had the
like success, they being pu^ of from day to day, and from one place to
another: The Constable being sore offended that so many co^plaintes should be
made against his son d' Anuile. And beside the infinite verations of d'
Anuille which he brought upon them, the Senate of Tholoze left nothing undone to
make the cause of the reformed churches odiouse before the King. These were
the mendes made for so great injuries, and this was the profit that ensued the
Kings journey.

THE new year brought with it a certain rumor an. do. 1566
of the Kings progress into Baione, which was kept secret until this present
time. Therefore consultation being had of the matter with the chiefest of the
Senate of Tholoze, the king passing through Guian, and coming to every city,
came at the last to Baione, in the month of July.

Thither to her brother the king came Elizabeth wife to King Phillip of Spain,
and was very pompously received of the whole Court. But the cause why Phillip
her husband came not thither with her, notwithstanding that the same place
bordered upon his kingdom, was (as it is reported) that the league concerning
the destroying of the reformed religion, might the more secretly be confirmed.
Others attribute the cause of his absence to ambition* for that he would not
seem in any thing to seek to the King of France. Notwithstanding by the
coming of Elizabeth, that holy league (as they termed it) was ratif^ed and
established, by which was meant, as is aforesaid, to banish and abandon the
reformed religion. And to the end the Realm of France might be an utter
enemy to the professors of that religion, the king of Spayn promised unto the
king of France, so great power and aid as he could: the like promise also made
the king of France to the king of Spain: both of the^ promisinge one to the
other to embrace and observe the doctrine of Rome, with the rites and
ceremonies thereof, and to do all that they could to remove and take away all
lettes and impediments to the same: and so to take the next occasions offered
to bring this matter to pass. After the confirmation of this league to the
ruin of the Church, there followed lamentable effects. But notwithstanding the
secret conclusion of this matter, the prince of Conde and all the Noble men of
the reforme^ Religion understood the same, whose deaths hereby were sought.

Thus when the king had viewed all the Region of Guian he returned back again
into that part of France, called by the Frenchmen Franc^ys, toward the lat^er
end of this year.

IN this year and in the next following, there was (...). do. 1566
truce taken between the Churches, and the faithful had some rest and
breathing time, notwithstanding not without sustayning diverse injuries. Yea,
there were snaring baytes laid, and privy platformes practiced against the
Admiral and the Andelot which were espied, manifestly revealed, and brought
before the king: but in vain. The kings long looked for occasions to put
their league in execution.

It shall not be from our purpose, if we note certain The affairs of the low
Country*
things concerning the affairs of the low Country called Belgio* about
this time, for matters concerning religion: both for that the cause is all one,
and also because the same Country bordereth upon France: notwithstanding
observing the order of time we will inserte those things which specially
appertain to our history.

Therefore ye shall understand that this noble and plentifnll country was
exercised and much troubled about this time with diverse and sondrye
contentious conflictes, for religions sake: Whereby we have diverse examples set
forth unto us of the wonderful prouid^ce of God, in ordering and framing of
his Church, quite contrary to human reason, that is to say, whereby we may
plainly perceive that the Church is not the workmanship of man. But seeing we
are in hand with the affairs and acts of the low Country, let us first
compare the state thereof, with the condition of the Church of France. As both
Churches are in migh^ye Monarchies, so ^ad they for their adversaries mighty
Monarchies, being vexed with the furies of Cardinals: both of them in the
beginning very small, but in the end, great and mighty both troubled, with
great conflictes.

Amidest the cruel torments, and bloody murders The beginning and en^ of the
church of Flaunders.
of the Inquisition of the new Bishops: the number of such as acknowledged
and professed the truth of the Gospel wonderfully increased: Insomuche that
at the length, by the example of the Frenchmen, who by the Kings favor, had
gotten some liberty to use the reform^d religion, the matter began to be
handeled more freely and openly, a certain form of confession of their faith
and religion being published.

But the Cardinal Granuel on the contrary part: against the minds of those
Noble men which were appointed by King Philip, went about earnestly to afflict
Andwerpe with the Inquisition of the new Bishops, which notwithstanding was
exempted from the burden of the same, by special privilege. After this he
being complained of by those Noble men, was put quit out of his authority, and
sent for by the Kings letters to come out of Flaunders. But he he had so
provided before his departure, and the King was so affected at the instante
suit of the Span^she Inquisitors, that their Inquisition was the more seuerelye
executed in Flaunders: yea all things were done in the absence of Granuel, as
he would have them. And among all other Cities, at Andwerpe great cruelty was
showed against the faithful, one of the Ministers of the reformed religion
called Christopher Smith, being cruelly slain, the people so much disdayning
thereat, that they were like to cause a daungerouse tumult. This was in the
year of our Lord M. D. lxiiii. at what time the kingdom of France was
greatly vexed, and deprived of the benefit of the Kings Edict.

Notwithstanding the Churches of the low country daily more and more
increased: many of the noble me^ embracing and professing the truth, which
even until that time had been enemies to the same: Insomuch that certain
Noble men, set on fire with the love of ye truth notwithstanding ye they saw
themselves to be in great peril of the Inquisitors therefore, determined to
make a league among themselves, That they would endeavor themselves all that
they could by all lawful means, to help one another for the avoiding of
peril, and to certify one another of the attemptes of ye adversaries. Thus
when they had made this agreement, they went about to join and wyn unto them
others that were inflamed and bent against the reformed religion: Insomuch that
a man might see openly a great many noble men with the greatest part of the
people, both to detest Popish superstitious, and also receive and embrace the
reformed religion. But in the mean time the thunder clappes of the new Bishops
made such a stoure, that the faithful being no more so subject to injuries
as they were before, it was to be doubted, least while they went about to
resist the violent force and cruelty of the Inquisitors, great vexations and
troubles would arise.

At this time the Duches of Parme, under the King King Philip certified of the
increase of the protestants in the low country.
had she government of the whole region. Therefore she at the Admonition of the
rulers of those parts, foreseeing the peril to come, by their advise and
authority, sent Egmond to Philip King of Spain, to declare unto him the
great peril and danger which hoong over the whole low country of Flaunders:
and to certify him that so great troubles could not be prevented, unless
both the severity of the Edictes, and also the bouldnes of ^ertaine men
outragiously abusing and violating the^ were restrained: yea, and that all
sorts of men were so sore offended thereat, that unless there were some
speedy remedy out of hand provided, there was great peril of great troubles
and garboyles. To this Egmond the King gave a gentle answer, saying that he
had a care for the affairs of the low Country: and that he would endeavor
himself, that all things might be done there peaceably and orderly.

Then he commanded the Duches ^f Parme, to take order as necessity required,
with the advice and Counsel of good and wise men, by which she might provide
for so great inconveniences, and yet retain safe the catholi^e Religion. The
Duches of Perme when she had received the Kings commandment by Egmond, she
by the advice of the rulers, caused a solemn assembly, in the which there were
three Bishops, three learned Divines, three Canons Lawers, and three skilful
Ciuillians, to who^ she committed the ordering of the whole matter. They then
devised and put down an order: and took such pains for the Inquisition, that
the same could not be more conveniently established. For though ye form of
words were changed, yet the matter it self was more severely ratifyed and
confirmed: the terrible word of Inquisition, being mittigated by calling the
same, a visitation: In steed of burning they used hanging, as we will
hereafter declare more at large.

Notwithstanding it did not satisfy Granuell, and the Spanish inquisitoures,
as though this kind of most cru ell death had not bin sufficient: they being
such kind of men as were accustomed to show open cruelty, without shame. They
brought the matter therefore before the King: they said that there was a way
made to the v^ ^er subversion of Religion* askinge whether the ^inge should be
afraid to make open profession of his Religion. Moreover by their means the
Popes legates persuaded with the King by threatninges, shewinge that not only
the name of the Catholics should decay, but also that he himself should be
utterly overthrown, except he sought with all speed to deface and utterly to
destroy, even the least remnantes and relics of the new Religion in the low
Country: the which could not be done without the benefit of the inquisition.
Therefore King Philip rejecting that order of government which the Duches had
taken by the advice of those grave and learned men, of whom we spoke before,
sent at the length letters unto the said Duches of Parme, That the Inquisition
should be stablished throughout all the low Country of Flaunders, that the
inquisitours should have certain counselors out of the chief senate joined to
them to every province, by whose help they might be furthered in doing of
their office: that the ancient Edictes might every where be observed and
kept: that Bishops should be consecrated in all places: that the decreese of
the counsel of Trident should be every where proclaimed: and that by all
manner of means, the Doctrine of the Gospel and the professoures thereof
should in all places be persecuted and afflicted. This came forth in the year
of our Lord M. D. L. X. U. and in the month of December.

These letters of the King being made openly known by the commandment of
the Duches of Parme, made the Catholics not a little joyful, but greatly
discomfited the minds of the protestants: but specially the nobles, and those
of the richer sort, which saw that their goods were sought for. For what
could be free from the outragiouse cruelty of the inquisitours, seeing they had
to help them the Kings Edictes, the Queens artillery, the Kings prisones,
and their own executioners? When as the noble men could not escape their
tirannye. Therefore the Nobles and all the inhabitauntes of the low Country
were brought into great peril.

Amidst this so great fear and maze of all that dwelt in that region, certain
of the noble men, seeing that the ruin of the Gospel which they had
professed, besides the calamity of the whole country, and their peculiar
destruction was at hand, devised a way in so great extremity to rid themselves
out of peril, namely to defend themselves against the rigor and tyranny of
the inquisitours, so far as the Kings dignitye and authority would give them
leave. Thus when they had entered in to league, and solemly confirmed the same
with an oath, they sought such ways and means as seemed best unto them to
withstand that calamity like to ensue. To this league three hundredth Noble men
had given their consent: who determined and agreed that it was the best way to
go to the Duches of Parme, and to show unto her the present danger, that she
might according to her duty provide a remedy for the same. But because they con
sidered that if they should make any mention of religion, it would give
occasion to the inquisitours to execute their tyranny first of all upon them,
they thought it best and most necessary to avoid the force and rygor of the
Edictes and the Inquisition, if they pretended only the liberty and ancient
privileges of their country. This way pleased the most part: but some feared
the severity of the Inquisition, from the which the King himself was not free:
howbeit the most part of them thought it unreasonable, that the laws and
liberty of the country should be violated and broken, and such tyranny
executed upon their bodies* goods, and consciences, wherb^ would follow the
utter ruin and subversion of the whole Country.

Therefore three hundred Noble men almost agreed together in this confederacy
at Brussels the third day of a^. do. 156^
April in the year of our Lord M. D. LXUI. and by a Noble man whose name was
Brederod, they offered a Supplication to the Duches of Parme: In the which,
after they had protested their reverence, obedience, and The supplication of
the nobles of the confederacy.
singular love which they ought unto the King, and to the Duches of Parme, the
Kings vicegerent, by diverse and sundry reasons they made their petition. That
the Inquisition might be taken away: that the Kings Edictes concerning Religion
might be suspended, until such time as the King and the states of the
Realm, had deliberated and determined concerning the same, and the^ they
protested that they would in every point do the duty and office of
faithful Subjects, saying, that if there were not a remedy provided for these
things in time, the ruin of y^ country would follow. To this the Duches of
Parme made answer, That she would do any thing that she was able, that was
either good or profitable for the common wealth: that she would endeavor her
self to bring to pass, that the Inquisitours and officers under the King,
should wisely behave them selves, and not deal with any according to the
severity of the Edictes: and that she would within six months understand
the Kings pleasure concerning these things.

Then she wrote letters to the Governors of the Provinces, willing them not
to execute ye Kings laws with severity, until such time as they were
farther certified of the Kings will and pleasure: She sent also to the King the
Lord Montign^, and the Marquis of Berge Noble men. In the mean time the
Church of the faithful increased, and were joyful that they were for some
while delivered from tyranny, and the cruel slaughter, hoping at the length to
enjoy peace and quietness. On the contrary part the catholics were evil
apayd, ^earing that hereby they should have evil success. There fore they came
often times to the Duches of Parme, and declared unto her that she went about
to bring her self and the whole Country into extreme peril, if so be these
men of the new Religion so greatly prevailed with her* many other pernicious
persuasions also they used to this effect.

The Duches of Parme being led by them, called all The Duches of Par me
causes* an assembly of States.
the States together, choosing out such men, as seemed unto them fit for
their turn, and not such as should have been of that assembly by order and
course of every city. And before every man had uttered his judgment as the
order of such assemblyes requires, they made a law, which they called the
Moderation of the Edicts, and then were commanded to subscribe to the same,
and ^o confirm it with an oath. The sum of this Moderation was this. That
all such as followed the new religion* or did by any manner of means favor or
allow the same should be severely pu^nished: yt hanging should be the death for
such offenders, and not burning: that also the punishments of proscriptions
and banishment should be executed upon those that professed the new religion,
according to the Kings former Edictes. Therefore, now the matter seemed to be
in worse case than before, because these things were given forth in the
Kings name, and commanded by the solemn authority of the States. And thus
the petition of the Nobles seemed to be satisfied. It is said, that these
things were done without the Kings consent and knowledge.

The Rumor of this Edicte being in all places, the green wound which before
was scarcely salued, began to ware sore again, and the people began to
complain a fresh, perceiving that great calamities were like to f^ll upon
them. Notwithstanding great was the number of such as professed the reformed
religion, and ^t daily increased: howbeit they were fay^e to have the use of
their religion privily and in private houses. But at the length the people
waxing zealous in this cause, that which before was done in secret began to be
publicly and openly exercised, in so much that Sermones were made in public
places that all men might resort therv^to that would: nothing fearing the late
made Moderation, which notwithstanding in some places was severely executed,
many by this occasion feelyng ye smart of the Inquisition.

In the very utmost parts and borders of Flaunders, first the protestants
began to come together openly in (...)Ser^ones.
^lockes, and in congregations, to hear the word of god: then straytway at
Antwerpe: after that diverse other cities and towns following their example,
did the like. This was toward the latter end of the month of June At the
first, the people assembled them selves together without the Cities,
notwithstanding in such number, that a man might see continual passage of
people between the fields and every City. In the beginning, they came
together unarmed: but when they understood that their meeting waxed
daungerouse, and that the In quisitours began to play their part, they carried
with them at the first swords, but afterward, more strong and better
weapons, to defend themselves as they passed from their houses into the
fields. At Antwerpe the Magistrates of the city gave leave to the
protestants, to arm themselves so long as they were out of the city in the
fields, but in no wise to bear the same within the city: to the which the
protestants willingly grau^ ted. This was the beginning of public sermons in
the Churches of the low country, to the which there came many thousands of
men, the Inquisitours in ye mean time seeking the pray, and making great
complayntes to the Duches of Parme.

And after that the Gospel had been quietly preached for the space of certain
weeks, behold there ensued a great tempest and wrack among the Images and
Idolles Images in Flaunders went to wrack
of the Papists. And first of all they were thrown down and beaten to pieces,
in the vtmoste parts of Flandres: after that, in diverse places of Flaundres,
the people making such a spoil among them, as if the Magistrates had
commanded the same. The Magistrates were so amazed and abashed hereat, that
although they followed the Catholic religion, yet notwithstanding they set to
their hands and furthered the pulling down, defacing and breaking the Images.

At Gend^, a fair Town, by the sufferance of the fearful Praetor, all the
Images and other ornaments used in popish service, were defaced and spoiled in
every Church. The like was done at Lire in Brabant. At Antwerpe the Magistrate
kept himself out of sight, while the people ran up and down from church to
church, and spoiled the Images that were therein.

If any man condemn this rash zeal of the people, void of reason, let him
there withal weigh the singular Judgment of God against those Idols, with the
which the world being blinded, had so many ways dishonored his Majesty.

The Duchess of Parme being careful, and not knowing what to do in these
extremities, fearing least there would ensue greater troubles, thought good to
pacify and content the people with fair promises: and to make those Noble men
that professed the reformed religion, means to repress those troubles.
Therefore when she had sent for them to Brussels, she desired them to endeavor
themselves to stay the tumul^e of the people: to reiecte all false conceived
opinions, to be persuaded that the King would use all means and ways for
their peace and tranquillity: promising unto them leave to have their Sermons
in such places as they had them be The conference between the nobles, and the
Duches of Parme.
fore: and that she would give commandment to the Magistrates and Governors
of every city, to appoint places for the Protestants, to the which they might
quietly resort to the hearing and administration of their Religion* that the
profession of religion should be hurtful to no man, so that he brake not the
common peace, as in spoiling of Temples, and such like.

To this the Noble men did condescend and agree: whereupon the Conditions were
solemply confirmed between both parts with an oath, and engrossed, and sealed
with the Kings seal. Commandment was given to all Governors and
Magistrates, solemly to proclayme this agreement, and to do all things
according to the tenure thereof. There was made also an Edict, by which all men
were forbidden to do any injury, either by word or deed for Religion, upon
pain of severe punishment. Upon this commandment the governors of every
circuit or shyer, appointed out places for the exercising of the reformed
religion suffered churches to be builded for the same purpose: and willed both
parts to stay themselves under their protection. This was about the Month of
August.

The Religion and the professors thereof seemed now to be in good case, report
euerywhere being made, that the King was fully purposed to give license to the
inhabitants of the low Country to use the reformed Religion. But the minds of
the Catholics were not yet quieted: whereupon they sought daily new occasions
of tumulte, being full of envy for the breakinge down of their Images.
Wherefore there arose now again new troubles.

And at Andwerpe specially there were great contentions: and as though the
enemy had bin at hand the gates were shut up, and continual watch and ward
thereat. Thither therefore at the commandment of the Duchess of Parme, came
William Nassau Prince of Orange to govern the City in the Kings name, being
The Prince of Orange comes to Antwerpe.
at such great contention. And calling unto him by two and two the Churches of
the Protestants which consisted of Wallonnes and Fleminges, he did deliberate
with them concerning the best remedies to bring peace and tranquillity to both
parts, as well to the catholics as to the Protestants* After which
deliberation, they concluded upon certain articles, and confirmed them: which
afterward were published and proclaimed in manner and form following.

It shall not be lawful for those of the reformed Religion, to disturb by any
manner of means the administration of the Catholic Religion of Room, or to
take away such places as are appointed for the use thereof, but shall content
themselves with those places which are allotted to them: to the which places
they shall resort upon the days appointed, as upon the Sunday and other
holy days or, if there be no holy days, upon the Wednesday. I sh^l not be
lawful for them to have any other Ministers, than such as be borne within the
Dominion and circuit of the low Country, and shall be sworn to obey both the
civil and temporal government so long as they shall there remain. It shall
not be lawful for those of the forenamed Religion, when they go to their
Sermones, to carry any other weapons or armor than swoords: but to obey laws,
and to walk as it shall become good and faithful subjects. It shalnot be
lawful for Preachers of either part, in their Sermons to use any seditiouse or
iniuriouse words, which shall appertain to the refuting of erroures, or the
corruption of manners. These things we will and command to be observed until
such time as we understand the kings pleasure farther. And if so be it shall
please the King to appoint otherwise, than it shall be lawful for those of the
reformed Religion to forsake the Realm with their lives and goods. After the
proclamation hereof, it seemed to bring peace to diverse other Cities, and to
abolish quight the remembrance of other troubles: but yet for all this, the
men of the reformed religion were not free and at such perfect peace as they
judged themselves to be. For the papists which inclined to the Cardinal
Granuellan and the inquisitours side, took occasion by the foresaid casting
down of Images to work their mischeuouse intent Therefore taking a courage
amidest that great and sodame fear and maze, the greatest part of the kings
officers, went about to bring in question the throwing down of the Images, as
done against all order and the public authority of Magistrates. They refused
also the letters of the Duches of Parme, as to help any thing at all the
offenders herein.

Therefore gatheringe together a great number of Soldiers to serve their
turn, they took many in all places of the protestants, and cast them into
prison: and after examination, put them to death.

After this also Norcam Manques of Berge, a notable enemy to the reformed
Religion, came with four bands of horsemen, and v. Ensigns of footmen, and
minding Valleucia besieged.
to besieege Ualencia, took as he came a Town called Sainctaman, and committed
their most cruel tyranny, as rapine, murder, and the defiling of Uirgins,
beside most horrible kinds of torment then practiced. This was done in the
month of November.

By these cruel acts of the papists, which threatened extreme destruction,
the protestants saw that it was now high time to provide for themselves.
Therefore diverse practiced sundry ways and means for their defense: but God
altering and orderinge all things by his providence, would not suffer the^ to
come to good effect. Great was the multitude of people, and great was their
courage: but they wanted Counsel and Captains to guide them. There were
sufficient men enough, which could have governed them and conducted them both
with wisdom and policy: again the number of Noblemen was not small that
favored that side, who, if they had taken part with them, there had been good
hope of victory, and to have had more quiet govern meant. But such as were of
highest calling, standing still as lookers on, and seeking neither to defend
nor to resist the one nor the other, all good occasion to bring any thing
happily to pass, was lost: The which brought great ruin to the protestants
of the low Country, and great calamity to those noble men themselves: So hard
and perillouse a thing it is for a man to seek to serve two masters so
contrary the one to the other. The grea test part of the Nobility professed
the reformed religion: and yet there was scarce one of them, which came at any
time to the sermons of that Religion. Wherefore we must needs confess that
our sins have caused the Lord not to finish that good work which he had
begone. Hereupon came the pitiefull calamity of the churches of the low
country.

The Protestants therefore were both destitute of counsel, and also of a
goide, but the Catholics wa^ted neither of them both. Wherefore their cities
were daily fortified with garrisons, and they besieged as is said before,
Valencia, which was quight void and destitute of any Captain. There came
diverse bands of Soldiers also, as scattered sheep, to aid the Protestants
at Vale^cia, and that with good courage: and while they vainly looked for a
Captain, the greatest part conveyed themselves away. Therefore all this mouth
was spent with diverse troubles, and diverse cities of the pro testantes were
won, and the inhabitants thereof put to flight.

Antwerpe being under the authority and government of the prince of Orange
was not pertaker of those troubles that other places felt. But the foolish men
being weary of peace and ease, and as though there were not at Antwerpe
troublesome heads enough, they sent for Matth^us Illyricus, and for Flaccus
Spangenberge and other to contend with the men of the reformed religion, about
the Supper of the Lord, and the presence in the Sacrament.

All things growing daily from evil to worse, the Protestants offered up at
diverse times Supplications to the Magistrates, to whom most humbly and
reverently they committed themselves and their cause: promising unto them a
great sum of money, upon condition that they might be in safety. Also, when
diverse of the Princes of Germany had sought to entreat the matter, and could
not obtain that which they wisshed, Brederode and certain noble men confederat
with him, offered up a Supplication the eight day of February, which consisted
of these special points, That the agreement made between him and the Duches
of Parme, in the month of August, might be observed and kept: that the
liberty of Religion might be granted: and that the soldiers gathered
together (contrary to the form of the oath) might be dismissed. To this, within
a while after, the Du chesse of Parma made answer, That she never meant to
grant the public administration of the Religion, nor the use of Sermons,
Sacraments, and Consistories: and as fos the interpretation of the agreement,
that (says she) depends upon me. Concerning the Request, to have the
soldiers dismissed, all men may see whereunto that tends. Wherefore (says
she) I pray and com maund every man upon pain of the Kings displeasure, to
go home to his own house.

This answer made Brederode and his fellows to doubt, and to fear the
calamity like to ensue. And when they had tarried in vain thirteen days at
Antwenpe, they got them home to Uian, a town in the borders of Holland: and
thither strayghtway a great many fled.

The rest of the month of February, was spente with diverse troubles, the
faithful Protestants being daily anoyed and vexed more and more, with
proscriptions banishments, and such like. All this while was continued the
siege of Valence, which at the last by the letters of the Duches of Parma,
wherein she promised Valence surrendered
all clemeney and favor, was surrendered to Noircarm the xxiii. day of March.
After the which it cannot be expressed what great cruelty was showe^ upon the
townsmen: the chief both of the City, and also of the Church, were taken
prisoners: and among these two ministers, the one called Guido Bresse, and the
other Peregrine Grage, and certain other honest Citizens were put to death:
for that they had Sermones in the City without the Kings will and pleasure,
and had also used the administration of Sacraments. In the midst of these
garboyles, it was reported that Fraunces de Tolede Duke of Alba was coming
with a great army, to overcome and subdue all the low Country, otherwise
called Belgio.

IN this year also* the Churches of France were not a an. do. 1567
little troubled, occasion being taken of the cruel murder The last co^
spiracy of the Catholiqnes concerning the ruin of the Church of France.
committed in the low Country, the which the Cardinal of Loraine thought
fit for his purpose to afflict and destroy the Churches of France, with the
help of the Duke of Alba, of whose coming he was truly certifyed by the
letters of Granuellan. The same Cardinal also procured the Popes letters, and
the letters of King Philip, to the Queen, putting her in mind thereby of her
promise, of the holy league. Therefore this year they minded to work the utter
ruin and destruction of the Churches of France. So that they having their
consultations at Marches, and at Monseaux, (at which places the King and
Queen most commonly aboade) determined to provide out of hand bands of
soldiers, and to require the help and aid of the Switzers: all the which
they determined to do under the collonr, that the Duke of Alba with the
Spaniardes meant to give some attempt against the Realm of Frannce, or that
they minded to defend Callice against the Queen of England. They sought also
other means and ways to quarrel and contend with the Protestants, mynding
to deal with them as guilty of the Edictes broken, and to examine those which
had done any thing contrary to the Edicte, specially against that which was
made at Rossillon: that is to say, which had gone to any other places to
bear Sermons than to those which were appointed them by the Kings
commandment: or if the Noble men had entertained any other to the hearing of
the said Sermons, beside those that were within the compass of their
Jurisdiction: and such like offenses. As these transgressions had anexed unto
them the pain and punishment of exile, so their purpose was to seek a
reformation of these things, by severe putting the same punishments in
execution, according to the tenor of the Edict.

But least they might seem to have no regard to the Counsel of the Duke of
Alba, which was: It is better to have one Salmons head, than the heads of a
thousand Frogs: they went about to snare and catch those Noble men, which
embraced the reformed religion, as the Prince of Conde, the Admiral, the
Andelot, the Rochfoucault, and other Noble men. And this seemed a present way
to bring the same to pass, if so be the King sent for them, as standing in
need to have their advise in those things that concerned the government of
the Realm. Now if they should have refused to come unto the King, than had he
good and just cause to complain of them, as none of his friends. And if so be
they should have need to use any force, they had at hand two and twenty
Giddons of horsemen, and certain Switsers also, of which they had already
gotten six thousand.

In the mean time the Prince of Conde, the Admiral and diverse other Noble men
of the reformed religion, were very careful. For beside these flying rumors,
both the daily news of the coming of the Duke of Alba, and of the aid of
the Switzers, and also the manifest preparation of horsemen, with the evident
state of all things else, caused them to have a great care. For concerning that
Holy League, made between the king of France and Spain, to destroy the
religion. The prince of Conde was fully certifyed by the Prince Rochsuryon, the
Prince of Condes near kinsman, and of the Kings blood, of the house of
Borbou: who a little before his death exhorted the Prince of Conde to provide
remedy in time for so great troubles. The Noble men aforesaid, being very
careful and withal uncertain what to do, fearing least if they should obey
the kings commandment (whose name they perceived their adversaries to abuse)
they should suddenly be oppressed: or least they should be accused of
rebellion, if so be they sought means to restite the force of their
adversaries: they determined (I say) to seek all ways and means to appease
and quallify these troubles, and to certify the King plainly of their will
and mind herein. In the mean time because they perceived their enemies to be
in a readynesse, they sent diverse mesiangers to the reformed Churches within
the Realm to prepare themselves, and to have a diligent consideration of all
their actions. They certified diverse of the princes of Germany concerning their
affairs, requiring aid of them if need should require: This was in the
months of July and August, of this year.

The Spanishe armies aryued at Nice, a City of the Duke of Sauoy, mynding to
pass through Pedemont, Sauoy, The coming of the spanish army with the Duke of
Alba.
and the County of Burgundy: where the Prince of Orange had occasion offered
him to finishe notable exploytes, if he would have taken his time, but as he
did in the low Country so did he now, least he might seem to attempt any
thing against the king: but within a while after he was very homely requighted
by the Duke of Alba.

Philbert Duke of Sanoy, required of the inhabitants of Bernoy, a great part
of the territory which they had sometime taken from his Dominion, by war: and
the matter between them was oftentimes solemnly debated in an assembly of the
Switzers, the men of Bernoys affirming that the same Region was given unto them
by the Law of Arms, and that they had lawfully received the same.

Notwithstanding at the same time when the Spanishe armies were looked for which
came with ye Duke of Alba, the men of Bernoys communed with the Duke of Sauoy,
and agreed with him upon certain conditions, and granted unto him the three
Dominions or Lordships that were next to Geneua* By reason of this agreement,
the administration and use of the reformed religion was used in those
Dominions, even as the men of Bernoys themselves would desire.

Concerning the purpose and connfaile of the Prince of Conde, of the Admiral,
and of others of the reformed religion, we have spoken before. The Prince of
Conde therefore, by diverse messengers prayed and entreated the King
concerning the seeking of a reformation for those troubles, which were like
shortly to ensue. Declaring unto him that the coming of the Swirsors into the
Realm again was so perillouse, that it would cause the people seditiously to
rise. The Admiral went often times to the Constable his uncle, and talked with
the Queen, whom he knew to be at Chantilly, the Constables house, and freely
declared unto her, that if the faithful were so handled, whereby they had just
cause to suspect that war was a preparing for him, they could not any longer be
kept in peace. Notwithstanding the Queen and the Costable pretended a notable
cause why it was needful to have the aid of forreiners: for, say they, the
Spaniardes bear an old grudge and hatred against the realm of France: so
that we have good cause to fear, least they having occasion set upon us: but
the King will reform all things so, for the faithfulles sake, that all men
shall see, that he will deal uprightly and justly toward all men. After this
also the Queen made these promises in her letters to the prince of Conde.

Notwithstanding there came six thousand Switsers, in the beginning of
September:: and a great number of horsemen were armed and prepared. And the
Prince of Conde was fully certified, that the Duke of Alba which was already
come to Belgio, had moved the King of France in the name of King Phillip, to
go forward with the holy league, and withal had persuaded him to take present
occasion to bring his purpose to pass. At this time the Cardinal of Lorraine
was with the King, and a great number of his adherentes also. Notwithstanding
all things waxing daily worse and worse, the Prince of Conde, and the rest
of the peers and Nobles which professed the reformed religion, saw that there
was no longer stay to be made, but that they must of necessity, when they could
do no good by their letters, come before the king themselves, and declare unto
him the present danger. Wherefore they appointed the day to go unto the King:
and because they might the more effectually declare the matter before the King,
and also escape the peril and lyinge in way^e of the Cardinal, they
determined to go with the greater number, and that armed to defend themselves.
Therefore a hundred and twenty noble men, having the Prince of Conde their
Captain, came to M^nceaux, to talk with the King, and to offer up unto him a
supplication in the name of all the faithful: the su^ine whereof was this:
That for so much as the King had made an Edict, to keep his subjects in peace
and concord, which was necessary both for them and his Realm, they most
humbly beseeched him that the same might be better obseruid and kept than it
had bin aforetyme. And forso much as until that same day they had made the
same complaints before in vain, and that often times, they now at that time
trusted, seeing there were so manifest peril of such great troubles at hand,
that he would effectually declare, that he made account of the faithful as of
the rest of his subjects: who being abused and iniuried, have no other refuge
to flee unto in their extreme calamities, than to his grace, their sovereign
Lord and King.

The Cardinal of Lorraine understood of the coming of the prince of Conde
with the rest of the nobles, declared unto the King and Queen, what great
peril and danger it was unto their persons, for the Prince of Conde to come
unto them with so great a power of men, intending he said, nothing else than
to take the king, his mother, and his whole family, yt then he might do what
him list.

The King and Queen being made afearde with The King and Queen remove to Paris.
these rumors, removed to Paris, being guarded with the bands of the Switzers.

The Prince of Conde being sorry for this fear of the King and Queen, stayed
at Rozoi, a village therabout: to the which place the Marshall Momorencius was
sent declaring unto him the causes of his coming, saying yt he was very sorry,
that he was fallen into so great suspicion. To whom the Prince delivered a
Supplication, and prayed him to deliver the same to the King, and to certify
him of his whole intent and meaning. Then he came to Clay, whether the King
sent unto him the Chancellor Hospital, the Marshall Vielleuil, and
Moruilliers: to whom when he had more at large declared the cause of his
coming, he sent letters again to the King, in the which he protested his
faith and reverent mind which he bare toward the King: refuted the sclaunders
of his Adversaries, by which they went about to make him hated of the King,
declared also that he was ready to render all obedience to the King, for whose
sake he said he would spend his life and goods, Letters of the Prince to the
king
notwithstanding, he said, he saw wicked and ungodly men abusing both the
Kings name, and also his age and will: whom alone he thought to be the
causers of all these troubles, and therefore would give place to none of them
unless he meant to show himself a traitor to his King and Country. The
Prince of Conde also declared his reasons more particularlye, and put down
this in writing as the sum of all his petitions: First, That according to the
first form of the Edicte, all other interpretations and exceptions taken
away, the faithful may enjoy their Religion: and that all the Kings
Subjects what Religion soever they be of may, according to their degree and
calling bea^ office under the King: and because both the people and the Nobles
have been oppressed with tributes, we desire (says he) that it may please
the King to ease us of the same.

After this he removed from Clay, to the Town of Sandionyse, because the same
being near unto Paris, he might the more conveniently have conference with the
King. But all was in vain: the Cardinal of Lorayne inflaming the minds of
the King and Queen against the Prince of Conde, and against the cause of the
faithful. But because the Prince of Conde would, if it The last pe tition of
the Prince of Conde.
might possible be, bring somewhat to pass, he made this last request of the
King, That it would please him to have some consideration of peace, and men's
consciences: and that all things hereafter might be ordered, not at the
pleasure of their adversaries, but by the Kings will, but by a firm and
infalliable Edict.

But the Papists thinking the Protestants to be quite done, and out of heart,
with unadvised rashness, rushed to war again, the Constable very immodestly
and contrary to his gray hears behauing himself at Paris, even as though
already they had gotten the victory.

Therefore beside the Soldiers which they had already gotten and prepared,
there was choosyng and mustering of men at Paris, and many were priest to the
war: in so much that a man might think that the Prince of Conde would
easily now be oppressed and overcome, having so few men with him:
notwithstanding within few days a great number came to him out of all parts
of the Realm: and the faithful in all quarters armed and prepared themselves.

The. viii. Book of Commentaries, concerning the state of Religion and of the
common wealth of France under the Reign of Charles the ninth.
WAR being thus a fresh begone, all men waited and looked for new things to
come The state of the faith full in the beginning of this second war.
to pass. Notwithstanding these affairs of war, in diverse places had diverse
success. The Catholics had many mo Cities and Armies of soldiers, than the
Protestants had: howbeit they again far exceeded the other in courage, and
boldness, being as men, after long oppression by injuries, brought into p^rill
of their lives and goods. The Protestants had but a few cities in their
possession. Lions, a town of notable force, ^ell from them, which, by the
diligence of the Governor of the Town, was out of hand very strongly
fortified with new garrisons of men. Then went the faithful to wrack, being
robbed, spoiled, and murdered: the soldier and the townesman furiously
running up and down the City, and ransacking the houses of the faithful:
their Temples were set on fire, which were very costly builded in two convenient
places, yea the honest Citizens went to wrack in every corner of the city.
Howbeit, many escaped by the means of the castle of Sansebastian, the which
notwithstanding was appointed for the destruction of the faithful, but the
keeper was their friend. Geneua was their Sanctuary and refuge in this
extreme time of trouble.

Notwithstanding diverse Cities took part with the The Cities and towns that
took part with the protestants.
Nobles of the reformed Religion: as in Dolpheny, Ualencia, Vienna, Roman, and
Montill. In Languedoc, Nemaux, Montpellier, (notwithstanding the papists held
the Castle of S. Peter, but afterward were driven out of the same by Monsieur
Mouents) Castra-Albien, and certain Cities also of Rhodes, of Seuenas, and of
the territory of Vi^aretz: also by the industry of Uicount Burinquet, they
had Montaulban and all that bordered upon the same. Moreover, Orleans and the
Cities and towns thereunto adjoining, was possessed by the Protestants, and so
was Rochell. In all parts of the realm those was some number or other of
Protestants: but they were banished out of the Cities, which made the army of
the Prince of Conde to be the greater.

The misdemeanour and cruelty of the inhabitants of Lions, made the
protestants in other places that were more mighty in power to arise. Therefore
diverse murders were committed in diverse places: and because the Catholics
had burned the churches of the protestants, they in like manner burned their
Churches to requite their cruelty. In so much that in all those cities which
the protestants possessed, there was not almost a church to be found which
they had not burned, spoiled, and beaten down to the ground: the people crying,
that all the remnaunts of superstition must be so taken away, that afterward
there may be no remembrance or sign thereof to be found.

While this business and garboyle was abroad in diverse places, at Paris, the
papists were very extreme and cruel against such as they could but suspecte
to be favorers of the reformed religion. All men therefore were set upon
war and tumult. In the mean time the prince of Conde waited for his
soldiers at Sandionyse and waxed daily more strong with new aid.

The Constable being verily persuaded that he should oppress and overcome the
prince of Conde, marched with all the power he was able to make from Paris,
taking with him great gonnes, bragging and boastinge that the prince of Conde
had none such to put him in peril withal: but his bragges and boastes had
evil success. For the slaugh rer of the Parisians at Sandio^yse.
after that the Parisians had discharged their great shot, and that the
battle began to wax whote, they being not able to abide the charge of the
Prince of Conde and his soldiers, though they were the smaller number began
at the first to retire, and afterward, when their array was broken, to quayle
and to flee, seeking to recover the gates of the City so fast as they could.
In this battle the Constable was sore wounded with a shot, and his horse
also, and falling to the ground, was wounded again: and then was speedely
carried away by certain horsemen to Paris: after the which within certain days
The Co^sta ble wounded to the death.
after he dyed. This man had lived five kings reigns, being of great
authority in France many years, ye^ he was the second person in the realm:
he was also a faithful and trusty servant to the King, being wise and
circumspect to avoid the danger of his enemies, until such time as he joined
himself unto them, for the hatred of Religion.

Concerning the calamity of the churches of Belgio, we spoke before. After
therefore that the people were The state of the chur ches of the low country
after the coming of Duke de Alba.
in good hope by reason of the authority and promises of the Noble men that
were of the Confederacy, they received notwithstanding at length the answer
of the Noble men which seemed to be of greatest power in these matters, That
it seemed good unto them to commit the whole matter to Maximilian the Emperor,
and the Princes of the Empire, whereby they should be sure to enjoy the
liberty of the confession of Ausburg. But Valence being left destitute of
aid, and therefore cruelly spoiled, and the whole country being desolat,
that, their purpose was frustrate. For the protestants fledd out from all
places of the borders of Belgio, by heaps: also the Ministers and chief
Gouerners of the church of Antwerp, yea and the Prince of Orange himself,
leaving his son at Louayne, fled out of the country, and that in good time,
as the pitiefull deaths of Count Egmond and Horn afterward declared: of the
which we will speak anon. A great part of the Protestants of the low
Country fled into England, and part into Germany, and into Cleueland, the
Queen of Enland, the princes of Germany, but specially the Countye Palatyne,
granting unto them Cities to dwell in. God thus provided for his people, who
is always a continual preserver and vphoulder of his Church, the which, when
horrible destruction comes, he builds up with out the help of man.

The Duke of Alba therefore came into Belgio, otherwise called the Low
Country, where he placed in diverse Cities, garrisons of Spayniardes: and then
proclaimed the Kings Edicte concerning the establishing of the Inquisition, by
which he willed and commanded the reformed religion to be altered and
ordered.

Then also he ordained a new senate, consisting of twelve men, commonly called
the Bloody Counsel, which should sit upon all matters concerning life and
death. He displaced also diverse Magistrates, and set others in their room.
After this he took a great number and cast them into prison, having no regard
or consideration of them what Religion soever they professed: to such as were
fled the country, he appointed a day for their return, and before the day was
fully expired, he adjudged their goods to be confiscate. Howbeit in the
beginning he dissembled this cruelty, and made the people believe that
whatsoever had bin done before time for religion should be pardoned by the
Kings Edict. And thus were County Egmond, and Horn, Noble men brought and
caught in the snare. And when sharp laws were made concerning the inquisition,
the inquisitoures were not idle, but played their part, and cast a great number
into prison: Infantes which had bin baptized before in the reformed Churches,
were constrained to be rebaptised: Women whose husbands were fled for
religion, were constrained to be married again to new husbands: and at the
commandment of the Duke de Alba, many of them were forced to mary with his
soulders. Now, the Spanish soldier began to pray and spoil in every City.
Also, when the dissembled clemency of Duke de Alba, showed at the first, had
drawn a great many home to their houses again, the Bloody Senate, was set a
work: some were beheaded, some hanged, and some had their tungues first of all
cut out of their heads, and then a bodkin thrust through their lips: these
lamentable sightes were daily to be seen, but specially at Brusselles and at
Antwerp. Diverse Noblemen also were partakers of these punishments, as the
Battemburges which were Brethren of a noble house, and were cruelly put to
death: but these had more company, for heaps were brought at once to the place
of execution. And at the same time, County Egmond, and County Horn, noble men,
and such as before time had borne great offices, and done to their King and
Country good service, were also with this bitter reward of cruel tyranny
requited: and after they were beheaded, their heads were set up on forkes.
County Horn, all the time of his imprisonment, and even in death, showed a
singular zeal of religion. It was reported that the Duke of Alba bare toward
both of these an old grudge, but specially toward the County Egmond for that
which he had done in the affairs of France, and not for religions sake, which
neither of them at any time had professed.

These things were done in the year of our Lord, 1568: the which we have
here inserted, though as yet we are not come to that year, to the end the
reader might the better understand the order of all the acts and affairs of
the low Country.

After the foresaid slaughter of the Parrisians, there courage was somewhat
quailed, that they durst no more so boldly set upon the Prince of Conde. But
the Prince of Conde, when he had sought and entreated peace by messengers sent
unto the King, and could not obtain the same, and being as yet unable to give
any greater enterprise, sent into Germany for aid to the princes. For there
were prepared great Armies both of horsemen and footmen Germans, their
general Captain being C^simire Duke of Bauire and son of Frederike county
Palatine. And because the prince of Conde wanted great ordinance, the princes
of their own proper charge provided reasonable store of great gunnes for him.
At the The Prince of Conde marches to Lorain.
length the prince went himself with his army, to meet the Germans, that,
joining with them in time, he might have occasion to bring notable things to
pass. Goinge therefore from Sandionise, he marched toward Lorraine, being
the ready way into Germany. The prince being absent, the Catholics armies,
which men commonly called the Kings army, had the more liberty to increase
their power: to whom, beside their domestical aid, came certain bands of
horsemen and foote^ men out of Italy. The Catholics chefetaine General, was
Alexander Duke of Anion a young man, and the kings brother: but he had under him
to guide him diverse expert Captains, as Mons. Martigues, (...), Lessay, and
others. They wanted greatly the Marshall Brissac, who dyed before the troubles
of this second war, and to whom, the charge of the war was principally
committed.

The Kings brother having gathered his whole Army together determined to
march also toward Loraine, The Duke of Aniou marches toward Loraine.
that he might either stay the Prince of Conde, from joining with the
Germans, or else by means or other might anoy him: and to the end also he
might join with those Germans which came to aid him, under the charge and
conduct of Captain Saxon and Baden. Thus for space of certain days, whilst
one of them lay in wait for another, there was nothing done but certain
small skirmishes made, the kings brother always refusing to join battle.

While these things thus proceeded on both parts by martial affairs, the
Catholics sought also to prevail The Kings Edict against the faithful.
by Edicts, and with thundering threats. Therefore the use of the reformed
religion was forbidden in all places of the Realm: all Ministers were
commanded to depart the Realm within fiuetene days, upon pain of death:
notwithstanding leave was granted to such to abide still at home, as could be
contented to forsake the exercise of the reformed religion: again, it did not
appoint any manner of punishment for any diversity of opinion concerning
Religion, so that ye holders of them did keep their conscience secret to
themselves, and did not publishe the said opinions abroad, nor join with the
favorers of the Prince of Conde: also all such as bare any office, and
favored not the Catholic religion were commanded to forsake their offices*
and to live as other private Subjects.

And strait after this, the Senate of Paris sent out decrees by which they
condemned the most part of the nobles, as guilty of treason, but specially
the Admiral. Whose office was taken from him and given to Mons. Martigues, a
very wicked and ungodly man, but yet a valiant Captain.

The Armies pursued one another at Lorain, while they waited for the coming of
the German horsemen. And the Kings brothers Army was daily increased with
new aid: to whom within a while after the Cermanes came and joined
themselves: they were in number a thousand and CC. horsemen. But all this
while, which continued the space of two months, there was no notable
attempt given: the more was behind against winter.

By the sufferance and favor of the Queen of Nauar, there were armies pressed
out of the Region of Foix (which is within the dominion of the Queen of Nauar,
and adjoining to the mountains Pirenei) and they came to Montanbane: where
other Armies also by the industry of Vicount Burniguet, and other noble men,
were gathered together out of the Territory thereaboutes. After this, by the
diligent travail of Monsiuer Monents, Monbrune, Ponsenac, and of other Noble
captains, there were diverse other bands of soldiers, footmen gathered out
from among such as were banished out of Prouance, Forests, Bourgondy,
Dolpheny, and out of Languedoc: the which were minded to go together and to
join with the Prince of Conde. And when they were in Auuergne, the Noble men
of that region, A battle in Auuergne, the pro testants ha uing the victory.
at the Kings commandment, and by the furtherance of the Liuetenant, went
about with all the power they were able to make too stay the Armies of the
protestants. Whereupon, they meeting together joined battle at Cognac, a
village, near unto the town of Gainat. The faithful understanding of the
lying in wait of their Adversaries, at the first drew back: Then being
encouraged by their Captains, but specially by Mons. Mouents, they did not
only encounter with the enemy, but also caused them to flee, and slew a
great number of them: at which time the foresaid Gannat, was a convenient
place of refuge for them.

Because the protestants wanted great gunnes, and were loathe to linger their
journey taken in hand, they left Gannat, and as they went, to wrecke their
anger, they set fire on the house of Haulltefull, a noble man, and one of the
chief of the Catholics, who was also slain among the rest of the common
soldiers, Mons. Pezenac, of the protestants side, was very sore wounded in
that battle, in so much that he shortly after-died. This happened the. viii.
of Ianuarye. After this, the protestants Army passed peaceably on their
Journey, and came into the midest of France. And while they waited for the
coming of the Prince of Conde with the whole army, they through the
encouraging of Mouent^ wan a Noble City called Blays.

The protestants in Dolpheny were often times skirmished withal, by Baron des
Adrctz that traitor and Apostata, but to small purpose.

THe Duke of Aniou, lingering and delaying to join an. do. 1568
battle, the Prince of Conde joined himself with the aid that Casimire
brought out of Germany, and then sought all occasions to encounter with the
enemy. And for this cause he determined to besiege Chartres a noble and fair
City in the region of Belloge, being rl. Miles from Paris. He began to besiege
this City about the end of February: at what time he battered the walls
Chartres besieged.
of the city with the great gonnes that came out of Ger many: the city was
neither well fortified nor yet well governed by any skillful Captayn: for the
chief governor of the city was the County Daulphin, of the Kings lineage, and
of the house of Borbon, being a very young man, and the son of Monpensier.
Therefore the King and Queen were sore afraid least this noble city should be
won: and Monpensier being very careful for his Son as well as for the
city, made great moan to the Queen. Then the Queen sent messengers to ye
prince of Conde to entreat peace, promising unto him, that if he himself
would, the same should be confirmed out of hand. The Prince of Conde, although
now he was in the way to prevail greatly against his enemies, this noble
city being almost won, yet notwithstanding, rejoicing more at this news of
peace, very modestly answered the Queen, That there was nothing more dear
unto him than peace, for the which cause also he was constrained to take this
war in hand. And to the end he might appear to speak in good faith, he
brake up the siege. The Queen being glad at this beginning, sent word again
to the Prince of Conde, to appoint what conditions of peace he would, that the
King might consider what was needful to be don both for his dignity, and
also for the safety of the Realm. She desired also truce for certain days.
This was a notable fetch of the Queen, both to deliver the city from peril,
and also disarme the Prince of Conde, as the end afterward proved. Then the
prince of Conde propounded the conditions of peace: namely, that According to
the tenor of the Edict made in Anno 1562. the use of the reformed religion
should be received and embraced: that all added interpretations should be taken
away: that men might enjoy the peace of conscience: and that such as should
hereafter offer any injury to the protestants might not escape unpunished.

This being done, there was some contention about certain particular points
of the prince of Condes petitions: notwithstanding at the last Peace was
concluded Peace concluded and the sum of the kings Edict
according to the form of those conditions which he had put down: and the
same was confirmed by this Edict of the King.

The King to provide for his kingdom, which has been hitherto overwhelmed
with troubles, and as yet is not free from the same, with the advice and
consent of his mother, brethren, and of his privy Counsel, after wise and
diligent deliberation had of all things, has thus decreed and appointed: and
therewithal straytly charged and commanded the same to be faithfully observed
of every one. And first of all, he wills and commands that the former
Edicte of pacyfication made in anno M. D. LXVIII. abide firm in his full
strength and virtue: and that the men of the reformed religion, so called, use
and enjoy the benefit thereof: and that all interpretations added to the same,
be void and frustrat: also that the same exception which so straytly byndeth
the noble men in their liberty of using the reformed religion, be quight taken
away. Furthermore, his majesty's pleasure is that the noble men which inhabit
Prouance enjoy the same benefit, and that Merindoll only be reserved to the
whole lieuetenantship. That it be lawefull for all men of that reformed
religion to return home to their houses, and to enjoy their goods, lands,
and tenements. That the bearing of armoure, nor any thing else that has been
done at the commandment of the Prince of Conde, or in his name be called
hereafter in question Also, that all Edictes, arestes, sentences, and decrees
made against those which have done any of the said things, be abrogated and
quit taken away: that neither the Sentences themselves, nor yet their
executions be iniuriouse to them or to their children.

Moreover, his majesty professes that he does esteem and make account of the
prince of Conde, as of his nere kinsman and faithful servant and subjects:
and also all those for his good and faithful subjects universally and
particularly, which aided him in this war. Also that he does forgive him all
that money which he has either taken out of the kings treasure, or else out of
the Church goods: and in such wise that no man never hereafter shall demand
any thing of him or of them which have spente the same. In like mauner he
pardons the coining of money, the making of artillery, of gonpowder, and of
other munition for the war. Also it is the kings pleasure that those things
which have been taken out of the revenues of farms or of Cities, from the
beginning of this war, until the day of proclamation of this Edict, which he
wills to be proclaimed in the Senate of Paris the third day after the making
of the same, and in all other Parliaments within eight days. And he commands
al Lieuefenants of every Province, to see that this Edict be proclaimed with
all speed in every place, least any man should pretend ignorance. He also
commands every Parliament too proclayme this Edict out of hand, and too
Register the same without delay. Notwithstanding his pleasure is, that Paris
and the liberties of the same, shall be free from the exercise of the reformed
Religion so called, according to the tenor of the former Edict. Furthermore,
he straytly charge and commands all those of the reformed religion by and
by after the proclamation of this Edict to unarm them selves, to render up and
restore those Cities which they hold, and all such artillery as they have:
and that al captives taken in war, or for religion, be speedely delivered
after the proclamation if this Edicte.

And to the end the occasions of all troubles may be taken away, he wills
and commands that the remembrance of all those things done for the wars,
or for Religions sake be for ever forgotten: and that no man be so hardy as to
provoke his neighbor by word or deed for these things, vpppon pain of
death, or to contend and dispute together about the same: but too live together
lovingly and quietly as it becomes friends, and neighbors. Also he
commands the men of the said Religion presently to break and fossake all
manner of Leagues and covenants, which they have made either within or without
the Realm: never to make the like hereafter, nor to gather any collections and
sums of money. It shall not be lawful for them, to gather together any other
assemblies, than such as are permitted by the former Edict, and that without
armor: It shall not be lawful for them by any manner of means, either in
word or deed to trouble Churchmen, but to suffer the^ to have the use of
their goods and lands, peaceable. To conclude he wills and commands all
his subjects faithfully to observe and keep these things, upon pain of his
highness displeasure: and also that this Edict be sollemly proclaimed according
to custom.

This Edict came forth the xxiij. day of the Month of March in the year of oue
Lord. M. D. LXUIII.

This was the end of this second war, which continued for the space of half
a year, namely, from the Month of October to March. In the which there was
nothing done worthy to be remembered, saving only that Edict of peace, of the
which we have made mention before. The which was a notable platform devised by
The deceit of the Catholics by this Edict.
the Cardinal of Loraine, to disarme the Prince of Conde and the Protestants,
and to send away the aid which came out of Germany, which he knew could not
afterward easily be gotten into France again, because the Prince had spent
his money already, about the affairs past. And yet notwithstanding let all
posterities know that the Catholics had confirmed this Edict by an oath:
which they observed not, but boldly cast aside all reverence of Gods holy name,
the Kings faith, and all the bonds of humane society: as shall appear both
by that which we will more at large declare, and also by the lamentable
effects, which have brought great destruction to this noble Realm.

The Edict therefore being brought to the prince of Condes Camp, and there
solemly proclaimed, every man rejoiced, desiring to see their wives, their
children and their household: and specially they rejoiced, because some liberty
of Religion was granted by the Edict. The prince of Co^de by and by dismissed
his Army: Casmire after thanks received of the prince for so great a benefit,
going homeward with his army: whom the prince very honorably brought* on his
way. Then he having a few attending on him went into Picardy. And sending
diverse letters unto the faithful commanded them, ac cording to the tenor of
the Edict to deliver up out of hand the Cities which they held, and the most
part of them did so. The King also dismissed the Germans, and certain bands
or^ French men: the rest of the armies he commanded to abide in armor, and
appointed the horsemen a day of payment.

But contrary to that which was looked for, these things were done, the
faithful being very heavy to see such lamentable beginnings: nothing less
than peace seeming to be meant. For there was great silence every where of the
Edict which was in very few places proclaimed. They which went home to their
houses, were either not suffered to enter into the Cities by the commandment
of the governors in diverse places: or else such as had leave to enter into the
Cities, were Great iniures done to the Protestants.
commanded to lay down their armor at the gates of of the City: and being
entered into their houses were so straightly dealt withal, that they might not
come out of their houses nor salute one another without leave: So that it was
better dwelling without the Cities than within.

These things troubled the faithful and increased suspicions, they fearing
some new garboyle* both for that there were great garrisons maintained in every
City, and also because the Kings armies almost remained whole. Many therefore
standing in fear durst not enter into the Cities, but aboade in villages and
Country towns* of the which notwithstanding a great ma ny were there taken
and put to death, by the townsmen. Therefore they began to straye abroad by
heaps through the fields and villages: not daring to come within the kenning
of any City, being feared by other men's harms: howbeit commandments came
forth willing them to have leave to enter into the Cities according to the
benifite of the Edict.

The Protestants which held any Cities, at the first sight of the princes
letters surrendered them up. Notwithstanding diverse understanding of this
strange dealinge, were more slow in delivering up their City. But by the
example of the men of Orleans, and by the second letters of the prince of
Conde, the Inhabitants of Dolpheny gave up their Cities: and after them diverse
other Cities did the like also. In the which Cities garrisons of the
Catholics were presently placed. Nowbeit there were certain Cities which
resisted, as Castelalbiat, Miliac, Aubenac, Priuac, and diverse others which
were very well reserved: as shall be hereafter de clared. Rochel also refused to
receive any such garrison, pleading for the same their anncient privilege,
granted to them by the Kings of old time. The like also did the men of
Sanserre.

At the Kings commandment, both Cities and VVatch and ward at havens and
bridges.
havens, and all other passages by water were stopte and fortefyed. And
commandment was given to the warders to look dilligently to their business, and
to look carefully to the protestants: which being known brought great
suspicion.

There was also a Rescript sent abroad the xix. day of May in the Kings
name, to this effect, Where as I understand that many which profess the new
Religion, having no regard to the leave given unto the^ to repair to their
Cities, do wander abroad in ye fields by heaps, to the great hurt and
disco^modity of many, pretendinge that they should disobeye my commandment
if they should unarm them selves at the gates of the City: I protest that it
is my will that it be lawful Violation* of the Edict.
for them to go into the Cities without breakinge my ordinance of laying down
their weapons at the gate, and also to dwell safely in those Cities according
to the prescript of the edicte. Wherefore I command that those vagrant
persons which walk up and down through the fields, be admonished quietly to
go unto their Cities, and to repayr to their own houses. If they shall
refuse so to do, I will that the Magistrates gatheringe together such aid as
they shall think convenient, set upon them as open breakers of the peace, and
to put them to the sword. The Issue of this declared that it was a pray and
bayte to snare the Protestants with all.

And contrary to the express words of the Edicte, not one man that had borne
office under the King, Violations of the Edict
being of the reformed Religion, was restored to the same again, and such as
complained hereof were cast into prison. The prince of Conde also had no
passage into Picardy, of the which notwithstanding he was Liefe tenant, and
Senarpont his deputy was removed from his office. Also the houses of Noble men
of the reformed Religion nere adjoining to any City, were committed to the
charge and ouersighte of others, as to bocald, to Martingue, to Guian, to
Esternay, and to Foissi. Who by the Industry and means of the Cardinal of
Lorayne was chosen into the order of Nobility who littell before was accused of
theft and homi^ide, all me^ wonderinge at this so sodeine a change.

The Senate of Tholoz had earnestly withstoode the proclamation of the Edicte:
and Rapine the prince of Co^des servant, which was sent with the Kings letters
of trust to Tholoz, to signify to the Senate the Kings co^ maundement
concerning the proclayminge of the ^dicte, they of the Senate condemned, as a
Seditious person and put his neck to the axe. The prince of Conde making
earnest complaint hereof to the King, at the last by the Kings commaundinge
letters sent the fourth time, they proclaimed the same addinge this exception,
Serteine Clauses reserved which are contained in the secret exposition of the
Senate.

The like was done, almost about the same time, in the latter end of the
Month of May, at Lions: two c^ trary predictes being proclaimed in one day:
which was a notable ieste. for with the Edicte of pacification there was
another proclaimed, by which commandments were given to the Lefetenant to
persecute the faithful with the sword, which were not entered into the cities.

More over, when the Inhabitants of the Church of Lions made request unto the
King that they might have liberty to exercise the reformed Religion: answer
was given them, that the King would not have the administrati^ of that
Religion in the city, but would shortly app^int the^ a place without the
city. But, not Troubles ^t Lions.
only the liberty of the Religion was taken from them, but also leave to go
home to their own houses. Yea bloody murder and Rapines were committed
throughout the city of Lio^s, ye people she winge their outragiouse madness
even upon the very houses of the faithful.

At Paris, by the coming of the Kings letters, the Garrisons of warders and
wacheme^ were increased: Troubles at Paris.
and in diverse places throughout the city upon the bridges watchme^ were set to
ward: the people also had leave to arm them selves: whereby it manifestly
appeared that the death of protestants with in the city was conspired.

In the mean time the popish Prelates in their (...)Sermones.
Sermones, on the other part encouraged their me^ to war, but specially the
Jesuits, of which there were great no^bers in every principal city of the
Realm: these were pestiferouse Locustes procedinge out of the bottomless pyt,
and sent abroad to be troublesome unto men in his last age: These I say in
their Sermones tohght that there ought to be no faith kept with here^iques,
nor any agreement made: that it was a godly and meritoriouse deed, to lay
violent hands upon such ungodly men: and that al Christian people ought to
arm them selves against them. Beside this, they brought also examples of such
as were killed by the Levites, at the commandment of Moses: of those which
had woorshipped the golden Cal^e, and of Iehu, which by dissimulation shut up
the Preistes of Baale and show them. Thus the people being styrred up and
pricked forward, boath with the ungodly persuasions of such preachers, and
also with the words of mighty men, were daily more and more inflamed to ^uror
and madness.

Moreover it was given for the that it was the Kings will and pleasure, that
the Huguenotes should be utterly destroyed: and that it would please him very
well if the Catholics would do what they could too hinder the execution of
the Edicte: and also that all his subjects might be brought to one uniformity
of Religion. Whereby the people were provoked a fresh, and sought nothing
more than to arm the^ selves again^ the faithful, who were now as naked me^,
by ye means of the Edicte.

Thus the people were brought to tumult, and not only by the means aforesaid*
but also by societies and co^fraternities made in diverse places, which they
called the Confraternities of the holy Ghost* By these Fraternities, which
confirmed and moderated by consistories, did they provide money and soldiers
for the war. Therefore when a great number of men were gathered together at
Diuinion for this confraternitie, the common sort of people, began to cast
forth sedicious words, threatening the faithful that they should have only
three months use of their goods to live by, after that harvest and grape
gathering was done: affirming that the King himself if he would should not
alter there purpose: and, if he once sought to hinder it, they would make a
Moonke their King. Therefore the raynes of impudent boldness being losed, all
things began to war out of order throughout the whole Realm. The faithful
wanted both armor and Cities: all passage both by hill and dale, by water and
by land were restrained: the Catholics were very strong in each condition,
with all things in a readiness for the war: so that the faithful being thus
h^mmed in on every side, might continually look for nothing but sudden death
and destruction.

And in deed al means and ways were sought to bring this thing to pass: and
as the Cardinal sought diligent Practice of the Cardinal to take the
principal profes sors of the Religion.
ly to bring this to effect, so wanted he no necessary servants and wayters to
fulfill his commandments, throughout all parts of the Realm. Also, to the
end his purpose might have the better success, he thought good to follow the
counsel of the Duke of Alba, (with whom he consulted oftentimes by
messengers) which was: That the principal heads of those that professed the
said Religion should be taken, and then the rest would be tamed well enough.
Wherefore he sought diligently by all ways possible to take the prince of
Conde, the Admiral, the Andelot, and Cardinal Odet his brother, Rochfoucalt,
and diverse other noble men of the reformed Religion. In the mean time
notwithstanding very loving and freendly letters were sent to the prince of
Conde in the King and Queens names.

But so great liberty, whereof we spoke before, being given to the furious and
outrageous people, was not Idell. It would abhor any Christian mind to hear
the declaration of so many horrible murders, which happened Horrible murders.
in so short a time: I mean not, to repeat al if I would, I cannot. Strait
after the proclamation of the Edict. the people of Ambian: a fair city in
Picardie* assembled themselves together and conspiring the death of the
faithful slew of them, to the number of a hundred and forty* At Altisiodor,
(otherwise called Auxer) a city of Borgondy which was rendered up by the
faithful, there were fifty slain, and their dead bodies cast openly into
cannells of the streates* At Rhane, at Orleans, at Bery, at Sanleonard, and at
diverse other cities horrible murders were committed, upon the faithful as
they went to their churches to divine service. Cipiere cruelly slain.


Also Monsure Cipiere the son of County de Tande, Lieuetenant of Prouance, a
young man, about the age of twenty years, was also cruelly slain at
Foru^-Iuly a city of Prouance. It was reported that commandment came from
the court that this Monsure Cipiere should be slain. The manner of this
slaughter was this.

Monsure Cipiere, was returned from Nice, whether he went to see how the Duke
of Sauoy his kinsman did, of whom he was very honorably entertained: but when
he came nere to the town of Forum-Iuly, he perceived that some lay in a bushe
in the wood hard by for him: wheruppon he fled with all speed into the city
with his whole train, which were in number thirty and five. Then they which
lay in wait being three hundred armed men, having Baron de Arsi their
captain, en tered also into the city: and crying Toxcin, or Alleyum, a great
number of people were gathered together by and by, to the number of a thousand
and two hundred. who beset the house in the which Cipiere was, round about. But
the Consulls and Magistrates of the city being careful for Monsure Cipiere,
made entreaty to the peo ple, and at the length brought to pass that Baron de
Ar si promised that he would depart with the whole multitude, if so be Cipiere
would yield unto them his men and armor. The which being granted, he
departed: but the people were scarce gone out of sight when Baron de Arci
returned with all his soldiers again, beset the house, and then slew all
Cipieres men. But when they could not find Cipiere among the slain carcasses,
'Baron de Arsi, sent for the consulles, demanded of them where Cipiere was
(for the consulles had carried him away to another place) and promised that if
they would tell him where he was, he would save his life, for he him self (he
said) was careful for him. But so soon as Cipiere was delivered unto him, he
stabbed him in with his Dagger: And thus the young man with many wounds was
slain, and the dead carcass much deformed with diverse hacks and cuttes. In
the same Month also one of Monsure Cipieres servants was slain in the day
time before the Castle of Lower at Paris.

I am ashamed truly to repeat all that I could, concerning the butcherly
murders committed. The whole Realm was replenished with sobbing sighs, and
pitiful tears of widows, and fatherless children: No place was free from
bloodshed: yea, widows, before the blood of their slain husbands was
through cold, were pertakers also of the same Cup. Honest young, women, before
their husbands faces were defiled and Ten thousand protestants slain with in
the com pass of three Months.
forced: and afterward carried away from their husbands, by the rude and
ruffianly Soldiers. Within the space of less than three Months, there were
more than ten thousand Protestants slain, as has bin well approved by just
accountes: where as in the former war there were scarce five hundred slain
in six months space. This was the goodly end of the peace made and confirmed
by the Catholics. The rememberance whereof deserves to be cronacled for ever,
that all posterities may see and know, with what deceites, with what falsehood,
treachery, treason, furor, and brutish madness, all humanity set aside,
Antichrist, abusing the outrageous furyes of Kings, and Nations, goes about
to establishe his kingdom. These things were done in the Months of April,
May and June.

These great calamities caused the Prince of Conde to complain oftentimes by
his letters unto the king, The prince of Conde remoueth to Noyers.
but he received nothing again but bare words without effect: and he was
daily admonished, both by messengers, and also by the nearenesse of the kings
Garrisons to look to himself. Whereupon, after notice given to the King by
his letters, he came to Noyers with his wife and children, which is a little
town in Burgun die. And the Admiral being beset with garrisons round about,
where he was, removed to Tanlay which was within the liberty of his brother
the Andelot, and near to the Castle of Noyers. The Andelot was in Britain.

The Cardinal of Lorraine was sore offended and grieved that he failed of his
purpose in taking of the prince of Conde, and the Admiral, which might have been The Card* of Lorrain practices to take the Prince of Conde.
done so easily and conveniently. But he meant to assaye again by other means,
thinking it best to see what he could do, by plain force: notwithstanding so
craftily and covertly, that his lying in wait might not be perceived.
Therefore he sent some to Noyers, to measure the altitute or height of the
castle, minding this way too take the prince of Conde and the Admiral, who came
oftentimes thither to confer with the prince. And the Spy which was sent to
Noyers, was wonderfully taken The Spy taken.
by the servant of the Prince of Conde, as hereafter shall be declared.

Moreover, to weary the prince of Conde, there came letters unto him in the
Kings name, straytly chargyng him to make payment of a great su^me of money,
which the king had paid to the Germane horsemen that were soldiers under the
prince of Conde. The sum amounted 90000. Frankes, is in our coin four score
and eightteen thousand and nine hundred, and seven and thirtye pounds ten
shillings.
to 900000. Franks, which was exacted of the faithful beside the great
expenses of the wars: for payment of the which the prince of Conde and diverse
other Noble men stood bound to the king. Notwithstanding the King signified
unto him, that he understood not the said money was required of all those of
the reformed religion: but only of those which had borne armor under his
conducts. And this was urged again with new letters.

To the which letters of the king, the prince of Conde made answer, that in
this matter he was greatly urged, and to much burdened, complaining of the
subtle dealing of his adversaries: in that they went about too offer unto him
and to all the rest of the reformed Religion, open and manifest injuries. The
Edictes (says he) are by them broken: the faithful are worse entreated than
if they were strangers, and the most wicked creatures in the whole earth: they
are neither in sauetie in their own houses, nor in the fields. My house is
guarded with garrisons of soldiers, which was never seen before, that any of
the princes (the Kings kinsemen) should be so handeled. Moreover of late, a
certain Spy was taken, which came to take the measure of the height of the
Castle of Noyers* where I lie, that I might suddenly, and ere I was ware, be
taken. And vaunte is made abroad by the Catholics, that after Harvest and
Grape gathering, there shall not be left one Huguenote in France, without
excepting of women and children: yea, they presume so far, that they dare
say, that if so be your bighnesse will have peace, they will make them a new
King of a Monk. Furthermore, by the suffera^ce of the Lieuetenants of the
provinces, there are many conuenticles and brotherhoodes, which they call
Confra ternities of the Holy Ghost: by which many things are wrought contrary
to the peace.

Wherefore, among so many injuries, I beseech your Majesty and all other
Christians, to way and consider, I have and do behave my self, and not only.
I, but also all that are of my profession. Therefore, if your Majesty suffer
the Edicte (so violently in the sight of all men) to be broken, and the
offenders to escape unpunished, it cannot be, but there will ensue most
greeuouse troubles.

This letter was sent by Theligny, a noble man, whom he commanded to declare
diverse other particular mat ters which I mean not hear to repeat.

About this time the King sent to the Lieuetenantes of every province a certain
form of an Oath, according to the which the professors of the reformed
Religion, (but specially the Noble me^) should be caused to swear. To this the
Noble men made excuse and said, That by this peculiar oath they should have
great injury done unto them, as though they were not to be counted in the
number of the rest of the Kings subjects: which also was done contrary to the
express words of the Edict, in the which as the prince of Conde is
acknowledged too be the Kings faithful kinsman, and servant, so are they
expressly called the Kings faithful servant. Therefore they beseeched the
king, ye they might not be constrained hereunto more than other men: if al
other men of the contrary religion, were urged so to swear, they would not
refuse, they said, to do the like, seeinge they could not do to much in
shewinge their obedience to the King.

And because this Oath was published in writing, it shall not be amiss to set
down the same according to the very tenor thereof, that all men may see how
the adversaries of the truth go about to abuse the name of God to bring their
own wills to pass. Ye may read Victor Vticensis lib. 3 pers. Afric.
of the like in the African History in Hunrich Wandallet time, practiced by him
against the Christians.

The protestants said, that because in the form of that oath exhibited unto
them, the Catholics (so called) the answer of the faith full.
were not comprehended, they plainly perecyued, that their fidelity and
obedience past, and to come, was now called in question: and that the security
of the kings protection was to them uncertain. Also they said, seeing they
were fully persuaded, that the Kings Majesty had spoken nothing unto them
hitherto, but ye which was true and unfeigned without all dissimulation, they
could not nor would think that the same form of the oath offered unto them,
was known to the King, but rather devised by some notable enemy both to him,
and also to the public peace of all me^. But nevertheless, because we desire
this one thing (say they) above all the rest, namely, to show our true and
sincere obedience, which we owe to our King, and natural Prince Charles the
ninth, we modestly and humbly desire to make our answer to that oath: praying
and beseeching the Kings Majesty, that before he proceed any further in
establishing the form of the same oath, it may please him to consider these
our petitions, which with all reverence and submission of mind we propose in
manner and form following.

The Form of the Oathe.
We proteste before God, and swear by his name, That we acknowledge King
Charles the nynth, too be our sovereign Lord, and natural King.

The Answer.
We will never doubt or stay, to swear, in so good and just a cause: but we
most humbly beseech our king so to judge of us as he has himself spoken of us
in his Edict. For our conscience bears us witness, that we never had any
thing in our minds contrary to ye form and meaning of this Oathe.

Oathe.
And are ready, to give unto him, all honor, obedience, and Submission.

Answer*
To this, we will most gladly, and willingly swear, seeing that this exception
can not be denied us, That according to the tenor of his Edictes, we have
granted to us, the liberty of our consciences and the use of the reformed
religion.

Oathe.
And that we will never bear armor, but at his express commandments, as
shall appear unto us by his own letters: And that we will neither consent
unto them, nor help them with Counsel, with Money, with vittailes, or with
any other necessary thing which may arm them against us.

Answer.
To this also we willingly swear, for seeing we have two Edictes of
pacification, for certain and plain demonstrations unto us of his will and
meaning, we will account all other commandments contrary to those two Edictes,
for false and counterfaite. And we will, never bear armor, neither have we so
don at any time unless we have been plainly constrained to defend our selves
from the injuries and oppression of those me^, which breaking the
commandments of his majesty's Edictes, have gone about to oppress us
contrary to his will.

Oathe.
Neither will we make any collections of Money, under the color of any
occasion, without his express commandment.

Answer.
We trust that in this branch, the Money which necessarily we gather for ye
releuing of our Ministers, the poor, and for the repairing of our Churches,
and for other necessary uses, is not comprehended. The which being gathered we
swear, being ordinarilye called, that we will not use them deceyt^ully to any
other end,

Oathe.
We will not have any secret Counsels, nor privy leagues, neither will we
consent unto them, but contrariwise we promise and swear that we will certify
him or his officers faithfully of all those things, which shall be practiced
against his Majesty, against the tranquillity of the Realm, or against any
that are near unto his Majesty.

Answer.
By the order of this Article (whosoever was the author of the same) we seem
to be accused: as though we had hitherto behaved our selves otherwise than we
ought to have done: the which certainly we will never confess: For the Kings
Edictes of pacification will not suffer us so to do, seeing it has pleased his
Majesty by them, to acknowledge us for such manner of men as in deed we are,
namely for his lawful and faithful Subjects. This being added, we will
swear, that we will with the help of God, constantly retain unto the death,
this Article of the Oathe.

Oathe.
We pray and beseech with all reverence and submission of mind his Majesty,
that it may please him to extend toward us his accustomed clemency and
goodness*: and to accounte us for his faithful and obedient servant and to
keep us under his protection, to whom next under God we flee unto.

Answer^*
As we never doubted of the clemency and goodness of our King, whom we have
acknowledged and do acknowledge for our natural Prince and supreme Lord next
unto God: so are we ready most humbly to pray and beseech him* to continue
the same his good will unto us* his most obedient and faithful subjects.
Notwithstanding if it may be spoken with his highness favor and leave, we have
no need to cra^e his favor and pardon for the time paste: seeing, by the
goodness of God our consciences do bear us witness, that we have neither
done nor thought any thing against his Majesty: and therefore we trust^ that
this is not so meant or spoken.

Oathe.
To whom we will pray incessantly, for the conservation of his life and
dignity, and for the happy estate of the Queen his mother, and of his
brethren.

Answer.
We have, and always will, God willing, make our prayers from the bottom of
our heart unto the Lord. And we give thanks unto the King, that it pleases
him to think better of us than our adversaries do: who both by their words and
writings, report us to be wicked, and call our prayers, blasphemies.

Oathe.
And we do submit our selves willingly to all rygor of pains and punishments,
if there shall happen any troubles or tumultes through our default, in this
City, (Expessing the name of the City) for the defense whereof, under the
Kings authority, and at the commandment of his Ministers, we will willingly
spend and bestow our lives and goods.

Answ^^
To this Article we answer with all reverence: This being so generally put
down, experience has taught us, that it will be a ready way and fit
occasion for them, of whose minds we have had of late to large testimonies, to
kill us at their pleasure, either by prete^ding judgment, or else by some
seditious tumult: of which things, they are skillful workmen. Therefore as
every one of us would willingly swear unto these things, so we most heartily
pray and beseech the Kings Majesty, to see diligently that we may have
Justice more truly ministered unto us than hitherto it has been: and that
according to the prescript of the Edicts. Again if any of us be found to
offend against any of the Edictes, let him be punished according to order of
law by some upright and uncorrupted judge: and let not the offense of one man
condemn the whole multitude.

Oathe.
And if it please his Majesty that we shall dwell peacebally and quietly under
his protection in our cities, al di^sentions taken away, we protest that we
will never depart out of the same, what extremity or loss soever we abide:
but do promise that we will with heart mind, hand, and with all that ever we
have, join with our citizens, to the obeyinge of them, and to the defense of
our cities, toward the which we will all ways bear a true love and faithful
heart.

Answer.
We cannot with a good conscience embrace this Article as it is put down.
because it brings that in doubt which is evidently granted unto us, by the
Edictes: that is to say, that by them the Kings Majesty does account us for
his faithful and true servants, as by the grace of God we have been hitherto,
and will be ever hereafter. Insomuch that we cannot doubt but that we are
under his protection, being in those Cities of his dominion in the which we
were borne, or do dwell, saying that we are ready to persiste and abide in his
obedience.

Therefore we are so far from doubtinge of his will and meaning, that we
rather give him immortal thanks, and do beseech him to continue the same
towar des us still: and specially to be favorable unto us in the liberty of our
consciences, and in the administration of our Religion. Without the use of the
which, we are not only ready to forsake our Cities, but also our lives: where as
contrarywyse, granting the same unto us, which is more dear, by right, unto us
than our life, namely the observation of his Edictes, we will most gladly
swear and promise to keep these things.

Oathe.
And also a true and sincere good will toward the Catholics, until it shall
please God to end al troubles: to bring the which thing to pass, we trust,
that this reco^cilliation will make a happy and pro^perouse way.

Answer.
As concerning that love which by nature we owe unto all men, the Religion
which we profess teaches us never to forget the same: and the rather we ought
to show it toward them because they are our Country men: to whom we ought
to do good for evil: the which we promise to do so much as we are able. But
where as wear required to enter into a sound and perfect reconcilliation
with them, we beseech his Majesty to enjoin the Catholics to the same oathe:
and specially to provide yt their seditiouse preachers, which are ye principal
causes of these troubles, may cease to go forward, as of late they have begoon.
And that they may be punished except they obey according to the tenore of the
Edictes. To conclude, if it please his Majesty that his Edictes may be
observed, with all sincerity and vprightnes (as we trust it is his pleasure, and
that the execution thereof rests in his officers hands, which hither too
they have been very neglegent in) we are ready to swear, without any
exception, what soever a good prince can require of his subjects.

This was the oathe, and this was also the answer of The coulered deceit in
this oath.
the faithful. They were woorkemanly devises made by their crafts masters,
with which many might have been snared, s^inge there was n^ mention made of
Religion: that by this means the noble men being won with hope of peace, and
bound with an oathe, the way might be the more easy to bring their matters
to pass.

Whereas the men of Rochell (as we said before) pretending Rochel co^ maunded
to be besie ged.
their privilege, had excused themselves, to be free from receiving any
Garrisonnes of Soldiers, the King having often times threatened them by his
letters, armies of footmen and horsemen were prepared out of hand to beseege
the city. Monsieur de Anuil, and Monluce (...), received the like co^maunment
to beseege Montauban. Notwithstanding Danuil was very much busied in diverse
places of his Liefetenantship.

There were also in every Prouines pressinges and Musters of Soldiers.
moysterings of soldiers but only of the catholics side: and they were such
as were counted able men. These were commanded to provide them Armoure, and to
be ready at the first call. Also diverse and sundry reports were brought daily
to the prince of Conde: as, That the faithful congregation at Blais going^ to
hear a Sermon at the place which the King had appointed them, was almost
(...), to the number of* 200.

Beside this there were letters found out in diverse Letters of the Catholics
sound out.
places, which greatly bewrayed the secret Counsels and devises of the
catholics: and their practicing of the holy League with diverse other
co^spiracies.

Therefore al things grew daily to farther mischefe: and rumors were every
where of new murders, also the proud threateninges of ye catholics, as in
saying that the faithefull should enjoy their goods but one Month, were
manifest signs of wars. But among all other murders the death of Amanzi a
noble and modest man, grieved very much the prince of Conde and Amanzi, a noble
man slain.
the rest of the faithful. This Amanzi, was slain at his own doors as he
stood there, houlding a young daughter of his in his hand. He was a man of comely
personage, tall and great, and no less beautified with gifts of the mind,
of singular modesty and humanity, and so well-beloved of all men, that a man
would have thought it impossible that, so amiable a man should have found
any enemy.

There came news also to the Prince of Conde, that The Prince of Conde in
great peril.
the Armies which were sent to beseege Rochell, were called back again, and
were sent to take him at Noi^rst and that fowertene Cornets of horsemen, with
fowertene Ensigns of footeme^ were coming to that part of Borgondy. The
coming also of Theligni from the Court with the Kings Answer (which was
notwithstanding seasoned with maruellouse fayer and sweet words) fore showed
sorrowful news.

Therefore the Prince of Conde hanging doubtful and not kowing what to do, and
being also certified by daily messengers in how great peril he stood,
requested the Countes of (...); that she would go unto the King on his
behalf, and declaring unto him these things, would also beseech him, That his
promises, so sollemly confirmed by his oath, by his Edict, and by his letters
might not be broken: being so much the more injurious, because all these
counsels are practiced un der the color of his name, although he doubts
not of his true and sincere meaning.

But the Countess of Roteline was scars^y departed, when the Prince of Conde
was admonished by messengers again, That except with all speed he did look
un to him self, he would afterward repent his delay: for that the armies of
the enemies approached so fast: and that he could not without great peril
escape the hands of the garrisons which were so nie. Again they told him, that
it was certainly reported that the purpose of his adversaries was, to take
him, and the Admiral.

Therefore when the Prince of Conde had consulted with the Admiral, they
perceiving that they had no longer time to tarry, they commended the success of
al things to the providence of God, and took with them their wives and their
children, and fled the xxij. day of August: the same day the Prince of Condes
letters being delivered to the King: in the which he declared unto him the
cause of his departure, and complained also of the injuries offered unto him.

I AM SORRY (says he) most Christian King, that in all my letters which I have
sent unto you since the Letters of the Prince of Conde sent to the King.
proclimation of the Edict, you have found nothing but complaints and
lamentations of your subjects, and yet I am constrained too write of the same
unto you still. For if ever any subject had just cause to complain and lament
to his Prince and sovereign Lord: then I and the rest of my brethren have
cause so to do: who, a long time, have been abused and oppressed miserably with
all kind of injuries and violence* The which they have borne ye more pacie^tly,
because they have thought, that time at the last would ease them of all their
evils: and because they would let pass al occasions that might renew the wounds
of former wars: although* by the goodness of God, they might have repelled
those injuries many ways. The causes whereof, we know, O King, are not to be
imputed unto you, who of your self are so well inclined and disposed, that you
are an utter enemy to such ways. The which you have often times declared unto
me by your letters, and also by the communication which you had of late with
your Mother the Queen, by which you declared how odious the renewing of
troubles was unto you: when as you requested her to seek to pacefie all
things, and to bring to pass that the civil wars might be no more begone,
which could not choose but bring in time, extreme destruction. But we impute
the cause of these troubles to the Cardinal of Loraine, and to his fellows,
your adversaries, and enemies to your Crown and dignity: by whose wicked
counsel and familiarity which they have with the King of Spaeine;
dissentions and hartburnings have been continued these six years among your
subjects, and are miserably fostered and increased by murders, which are
daily committed every where at their beck, upon those which refuse to join
with them. Wherein they do openly abuse your Majesty, that they may make your
self the instrument of the detestable destruction of your Realm: and they do
also obscure your Majesty's fame, while they go about to constrain you to
violate the warrant of your faith openly given and confirmed by your oath: that
this one thing might be to all your subjects, and to all foreign Nations an
example, never to credit your faith hereafter whatsoever by words you shall
profess: the which how perilous and pernicious a thing it is for the conser
uation of your state, do ye not see? For what shall they say which have heard
of our prompt and ready obedience which we have showed toward you, in
disarming our selves, and in dismissing our armies with all speed, go ing home
to our houses void of armor, and discovering our naked breasts to the sharp
swords of our adversaries, and all under trust and warrant of your faith?
Shall your faith be said to be a net and share to entangle and slay your better
sort of subjects, and shall their faithful obedience be thus tried? How long
shall an army at your cost and charge be waged to guard and defend your
enemies, but to work the destruction of your good and faithful subjects?
What shall they say which understand of the peace made? Surely, they will say
that we could not sleep safe in our own houses: and that to save our lives we
are constrained with our wife and children to flee from house to house. I was
no sooner come to this place in Burgandy, but there were diverse spies sent to
view the walls thereof and the altitude of the Castle. And now, because our
adversaries would not fail to bring their mischeuous purpose to pass, they
have sent hither the chiefest part of their power, to hem us in, and to set
upon us: Insomuch that we are constrained to depart from hence, and too
wander up and down until God shall appoint a place of refuge: and all to
avoid the brutish madness, the furies, and cruelties of the Cardinal and his
compartners, enemies to the Crown of France. Can there be found in any
monument of histories, and Cronicles an example of so great falshode, and such
detestable treachery, executed under the pretenced name of the King? Will you
suffer your faith, your promise, and name to be so abused by them: and your
subjects which serve you faithfully and truly, to be so violently oppressed?
Shall an unchaste priest, a Tiger, and a cruel Tirant* with a ra ble of such as
he him self is, rule you and the rest of your Princes, and the Peers and
Nobles of the realm? How long shall your patience suffer such Iauelles too
abuse your authority and name, and make you the author of your own
destruction? How long shall they be counted for faithful subjects and
servants which seek for your Crown to divide the same with strangers? And
how long shall they be counted for Rebels, and Traitors, which willingly
submit themselves to that obedience which they owe unto you, and desire only to
live peaceably under your protection?

I might be more tediouse unto you, (most Christian King) if I would speak all
that I might to this effect: the which, seeing they are more particularly
declared in the Supplication which I have sent to your highness by this
bearer, I refer my self to the same: and I shall most humbly pray and beseech
your Majesty, to accept, to consider, and to way the same, as proceeding from
him, who seeks so much the preservation of your dignity and Royal estate,
as the Cardinal and his fellows are mortal enemies to the same: yea, as
proceeding from him who only wishes to live and dye in that natural
subjection and loyal obedience which he owes unto you.

Therefore the Prince of Conde sent with these letters a Supplication, which
although it be long and tediouse, yet notwithstanding because it declares the
causes and reasons of great and greeuouse complaints, and shows also the
necessity of the war which he took in hand the third time, we will not let
to put down the same in order.

And thus the Prince of Conde began.

Although I never doubted (most Christian King) of your Majesty's singular good
will, to have your Edicts of pacification observed: because it is the only and
most present remedy to establish the peace and tranquillity of your Realm:
seeing also your Majesty has oftentimes signified unto me how greatly the
same was grieved for that you could not provide remedies for all things as you
would: yet nevertheless when I had read over and diligently perused those
aunswers that were brought unto me in your name to the letters which I gave to
Theligny, to deliver to your grace, and also when I had heard those things
which your Grace willed him to declare unto me by word of mouth: I could not,
neither can I choose, but give most hearty thanks unto god that your Majesty
perseuereth in that good mind, and no less thanks to your highness also for
the same. And thus I replye again to certain principal points of your
aunsweres with all reverence, modesty, and submission.

And first of all, I replye to the answer of the first and second principal
point of my letters: which are these: There are many of the reformed religion,
which have not taken my part, nor allowed of my Counsayles: but contrarywyse,
there are some of them, because they knew that the sword was not taken in hand
for religions sake, which have obeyed you and your Officers in all places.

I pray and beseech your Majesty, to remember and call to mind, that when you
had intelligence of my true meaning, and of the very purpose and intent of
such as followed me, your majesty by due advice and deliberation, declared by
an Edict made in the year M. D. lxii. That whatsoever I and they which
followed me, had done, we had done the same to show our obedience, and to
maintayn your dignity, acknowledging me for your dear and faithful kinsman,
subject. and servant, and all mine for your faithful and lawefull subjects
and servant. In this therefore there is manifest repugnancie and
contrariety: because, if I and mine have borne armor for any other cause than
for the obedience sake which we owe unto your Majesty and for the preservation
of the same, then no doubt we should worthly be found gilty, both of rebellion
and treason. But as we can by no means be persuaded that your majesty would
be so manifestly contrary to your self, so also I affirm that it may easily
appear that these aunswers were forged and devised by the Cardinal of Lorayne
and his fellows, to discharge that poison which a long time has lain in their
stomakes, and also to make your majesty's faithful and loving subjects to be
suspected of treason and rebellion. Of the which crimes, seeing we are in no
point to be convinced by the goodness of God, we are ready rather to dye, than
to suffer the same falsely to be imputed to us by the Cardinal and his
fellows: but we will prove that the matter is far otherwise than they have
falsely and sclaunderously reported the same unto you. In the mean time I
beseech your Majesty to consider with what show of truth can these things
be spoken, when as I, and others of my brethren were of late admonished of the
counsel had at Baione with the King of Spain, to the utter destroying and
banishing of all those, which profess the reformed religion within the Realm:
if the ways and means, by which I and the Admiral, under the couller of
coming to talk with you at ye Castle of Vincen, should have fallen into the
hands of our adversaries: of the new musterings of men at Paris: of the
letters of Duke de Alba to you, in which you were put in mind of the holy
league: Truly it is not likely that we would have tarried the coming of the
SwitZers armies, or the Spaniardes, if we had meant any harm. Can it be denied,
but that we have sought all means and ways possible, that might be for peace?
Can it be objected unto us, that at any time from the first beginning of these
troubles, we have required any other thing of your Majesty, than the liberty
of our consciences, and the conservation of our lives goods, and dignities?
Saving that among other things, when I was at Saindionyse, I required of your
Majesty that you would have some consideration to ease, not only the
Nobility, but also the communaltie of those intolerable burdens laid upon
them* And your answer being known to this our petition, we have not since
that time spoken one word of the same. When we had about us great power, that
if we would have abused the same, we had not been able to be resisted, did we
then enlarge our petitions? When you offered unto us your faith, did not we
embrace the same, making no further request? Was there any other mat ter
propounded in the tractatio^ of peace, than the liberty of our consciences?
Did we not put our lives, our goods, and dignities into your hands upon
trust of your promise? Were not we content with the observation of the Edict
only? Does the Edicte of pacification comprehend any other thing, then that
which appertains to the conscience? If therefore you have not tried our
minds in receyuinge the conditions of the peace propounded, and in showing our
selves so tractable: if the sclaunders concerning the violating of your
dignity, be not sufficiently refuted (as in deed they be in the judgment of
all indifferent men) yet notwithstanding you have certain and evident arguments
of our pro^ptnesse and obedience, when as so redily we unarmed our selves at
your commaundments, and carefully dismissed our Armies. Notwithstanding the which
sure and undoubted sign of obedience, we could receive no other benefit then
that which was contrary to your promises: in so much that your Edictes may
seem to be snares and trappes only to entangle us withal, that is to say,
that by the false color and pretense of peace, we might receive that injury,
which by open war we could never sustain.

Concerning the fourth principal point, which is:

That your Majesty has willed and commanded nothing more, than the
observation of the Edicte, after the troubles of wars were appeased, without
any manner of impediment: and have always commanded your officers to
defend your subjects all alike without respect of any Religion, and quietly
to govern the^ without offeringe of them any injury.

I marvel (truly) that the Cardinal of Loraine and his fellows which have
framed these answers, remember not that many letters were taken in the time of
these troubles, by which you commanded your Lieutenants, your parliame^ts, and
other of your officers, that they should do clean contrary to those things
which were contained in the Edicte: Let them remember what was answered to the
writing sealed in your name by your Secretaries, to the States of Languedoc:
let them remember what answer was made to the parliament of Tholoz, against
the four bloody decreese, by the same commanded to be put in execution, for
you said in your letters, that this thing pleased you well, and would alwais
be acceptable unto you, that you greatly desired that they would deal ever
after in that manner, having altogether regard and respect to the rescriptes
and commandments, by you already, or hereafter to be granted for Religions
sake: and in such wise, that all the men of our Religion, and they which by
any manner of means aid and assist us should be counted as Rebels. And,
to make the matter more plain by reasons, Is there any City which enjoyed the
reformed Religion after the proclamation of the Edicte? Nay, is there any City
in the which there were any number of the faithful that has not had the
streates thereof defiled with their blood? Have they not in the chief cities,
as at Paris and Lions, soulde the goods of the faithful by port sale? Was not
Lomen, one of your privy counsel, much abused, first his house spoiled, then,
he himself greatly oppressed with diverse injuries, and afterward cast
into prison, notwithstanding that he earnestly entreated you to have some
consideration of him. Is there any place found with in your whole Realm, in
the which the faithful at any time till this day might dwell or sleep in
safety? And if any by some miracle escaped the cruel and bloody hands of our
Adversaries the former troubles, yet they were cast into prisone, where many
starued for lack of food, and many as yet remain in prisone, and are cruelly
entreated, as at Lions, at Pny, at Tholez, and in diverse other places. And
since the time of the Edicte, have there not some been cast into prison, at
Cannat, Altisiodore (or Auxer) at Tholoz, and at Belu? And when your letters
are delivered unto them the Judges make answer that they have commandment to
deliver none out of prisone that are in for Religion. What City is it since the
peace concluded, that has given leave to the faythefull peace ably to enjoy
their houses therein, and in the which they have not been abused, spoiled, and
in diverse places slain? Moreover, is there any one of the reformed Re ligion
which has not been in the stelde with me, that is restoared again to his
office from the which before he was deprived? And yet notwithstanding it was
contained in the Edicte proclaimed in your name, that so many of the reformed
Religion as had been deprived from their offices, should be restoared to the^
again. Are not all they banished from your Court which are suspected for
Religion? And to come from the lowest to the highest. What authority have I in
my Lefetena^tship? what authority has the Admiral in ye admiralty? what
authority has ye Andelot in his general captainshippe of the foolmen? Why was
Bochaue^ put by his Lieftenantship? But if the Cardinal go about to make a
distinction or difference, between those which hare Armore with me in the
feelde, and those which aboade still at home, why was Mornilliere, and
Senarpont, who, as all men know, tarried still at home, and came not in the
field, banished and deprived of their Lefetenant ships? Can there be any
thing more contrary to your Edicte tha^ these things? We are sorry for these
things not because of Ambition, but because we are counted disobedient and
breakers of your Edictes: and also because we are out of hope, to be accounted
and handeled as your faithful servants and as we deserve, for so much as the law
is in their hands, whom we know to be earnest stekers of troubles.

And because in the said principal point, it is said, It cannot be found
in any place of the Realm, if any thing have been done contrary to the
Edicte, but that the same has been by and by provided for and remedied. I
cannot choose but marvel with that face the Cardinal and his fellows can
defend this thing. Can it be denied but that after the proclamation of the
Edicte of peace, there were an infinite sort of injuries and murders
committed, of which so many complaints have been made to your majesty? Can it
be truly said that there has been any remedy had, (and much less, that
there has been any punishment) for these things? And to prove this thing,
lest I should be tediouse to your Majesty in expressinge all things, I will
repeat among so many the cheifest, which are not tolerable among the
heathen and barbarians. And amoungest all other the cruel murder of Amboyse,
in the which there were a hundred and sortye slain, of all ages, estates, and
sorts of men and women.

If you be remembered, when you could bear with so, cruel a fact, you sent
thither Marshall Cosse, who, when he had found out the authors of so great
murders and had apprehended them, sent word thereof unto you. Then the
Cardinal of Loraine, like a patron of thieves and murderers, maintained their
cause, and said to al your Counsel, that there ought to be a consideration
had of those men, which were moved of a zeal to do as they had done: that is
to say with such a zeal as his brother Frances Duke of Guise had declared
aforetyme in the horrible slaughter at Vasse. And in deed the matter was so
handled, by the labor and travail of ye said Cardinal, that the prison
doors were set open, and those abominable murderers delivered. And to the
end it might appear what small dislyke they had of that deed, they brought to
pass, that whatsoever the men of Amboys required, was granted. But specially
they obtained. That no manner of use of the reformed Religion should be had at
Amboys, nor within three leagues of the same. The like happened at Auxer, where
after the peace made were slain, a hundred and fifty: where also an infinite
sort of mischeues mo were committed: as the taking away of the money which we
had provided to pay the Germans their wages: and the imprisoning and killing of
many of those, which were put in trust to carry the same. Thither Monpenser and
diverse others were sent to examine the matter: but what was done to reform this
great disorder.

Was not the cruel murder of Cipierre with six and thirty men mo showed unto
you, Baron Arci also named to be the author of the murder? and what other
reformation followed them that which was wont to be? And yet notwithstanding
the Cardinal says that all things have been provided for. But we affirm,
which also is most true, that there is no reformation provided any where for
any disordered wickedness, and wicked disorder. But if there has been any
reformation at all among so many cruelties, Murders, Robberies, forcings of
women, Rauishings of virgins, and among so many wickednesses of all sorts,
committed at Troy, at Orleans, Lions, Valence, Amiens, Theloz, and in Maine, we
must then needs confess that we have co^playned without cause. But if it be
true, shall the Cardinal of Loraine constrain us to confess, that Justice is
there, where injustice and impunitie does bear the sway? Shall he make us
believe that the Sun shyneth at midnight, and the Moon at noontyde? It may
therefore be said, O King, that your Cities are places of refuge for thieves and
murderers, despoyled of their true and native Citizens, full of errors and
disolute persons void of all order, and deprived of Justice, and all show of
equity.

To the nynth point, where you proteste, That you have appointed watch and ward
in the ports, bridges, and passages to no other end, than to keep your
subjects within the bounds of peace and concord, to defend the good from
the practices of the evil, and to restrain the force of the wicked. In deed
I acknowledge your sincere and perfect good will: but to the end you may know
how im pudently they abuse your name, I beseech you to command them to
exhibit unto you a form and pattern of the commandments, which are given
to those Warders, that they may order the whole matter after their own wills,
preferibyng the same to be done in steed of your commandment. And by those
commandments you shall plainly perceive, that those warders and soldiers
were appointed to no other end, than to vex and oppress by all means the
professors of the reformed Religion: and therefore, as they abuse your name* so
also they abuse your will most impudently: as the effects like and agreeing
with these commandments do sufficiently declare: in the writing of the which
commandments I do note the style of the Cardinal of Loraine.

But as touching that which you say in the. xi. branch, That your Majesty,
ought to have no confideration of appointed garrisons, when the advancement of
your dignity is in question: and that the Queens houses, and the houses and
lands of other noble men also, have garrisons also set to ouersee them: I pray
and beseech you most Christian King, to persuade your self that there is no
man to whom I give place in showing my readiness and good will to obey your
Majesty. If therefore it were profitable unto your Majesty, to appoint
Garrisons to ouersee and watch my house, I would esteem it for great honor
to spend, not only my house and lands, but also my life, to obey you. And
where as garrisons are appointed over the Queens houses, and over the houses
of other Noble men, it is done for another consideration. Moreover I had great
injury done to me, when I was denied to have passage into my own
Lieutenantship and circute: the which cannot justly be done except I were
guilty of Treason, or of some such detestable crime. For whereas I am moved in
yt thyrtene branche, Not to credit the rumors of neither part, that truly is
very dangerous: for those things which are reported of us, can be proved by no
manner of effect or deed: as for those things which are reported of the
catholics, they are evidently proved by deeds. For whereas you protest that
you never allowed those Confraternities of the holy Ghost, but counted them
manifest violations of your Edicte: I will not hyde from you what happened of
late in this matter: About the eightene day of July last paste, there was an
open conuenticle of three thousand men at Diuion, in the which Ian Begat a
Counselor of the Parliament of Diuion, with Fio^, Raimond, and Malleroy his
fellows, and with the two sons of Tauuans (because he himself being let
with sickness could not be there) made a long oration to the whole assembly,
showing how necessary it was for every man to be vigilant, least they were
oppressed by false Princes which went about to rule the King. Therefore he
exhorted every one to provide Armor Money, great horse, Gunnes, and all
manner of Artillery: for the which cause, a Treasury should be made, that
therein money might be gathered together for the defense of the Fraternity. And
for collecting of this money, was appointed the Abbot Bussier: and when he had
exhorted and persuaded that assembly with many words to be contributors to the
Treasurye, he commanded all that were present to hold up their hands, upon
that condition, that if war were moved, every man should to ye uttermost of
his power seek to bring those things to pass which were deliberated and
devised by the Consistory appointed to this end, without having any regard or
consideration of Father, Mother, Brethren, Sisters, Wife, Children or
Kinsfolks. And when one of those which were present by and by demanded of him
whether your Majesty would allow the doing of these things: Begat, made
answer that you had already confirmed these things with your letters: and
that Tauuans had given letters unto his Secretary, for the better credit
whereof, he himself being sick, had sent thither both his sons to justify
the same, until he could be present himself: which he trusted would be
shortly. Also he added further, that if your Majesty should not allow of the
same, it were no great matter, because there were others to whom they might
safely trust and lean: saying moreover, that they ought to have regard to
those letters, which your Majesty should write to Tauuans or to the
Parliament concerning the observation of the Edicte, because there was between
your Grace and them, a special and secret manner of talk, which was not of
all men understood. Tauuans also sent letters to the men of Creuan, which were
delivered unto them the seven and twenty day of July: by which his letters he
exhorted them to use the like society or brotherhood: promising unto them that
he would bring to pass that your highness should confirm and allow the same.

The like confraternitie was begone at Maine, many noble men entering into
that society, being Catholics, as Baron Uasse, Tuarsi, Surchi, and many
others which were either present themselves, or else confirmed that society
by their substitutes, whom they sent thither with letters. The like are also to
be found in diverse other places of your Realm. And to the end all men might
be the more encouraged hereunto, they which were present at these assemblyes,
were told, that your highness had allowed them by your letters: and to other
some which were more subtle, it was said, That the Cardinal of Loraine wonlde
bring to pass that you should allow all those their doings. These things, O
king are contrary to your Edict. If they will excuse themselves and say, that
they had special and necessary occasions offered them thus to do, as by your
special commandment, of the which also you wrote unto me, that there should
be musters of men in every province, especially of such as were able men: I
say that these societies go beyond that Commission, and are nothing agreeable
with your commandment. I say also that the same devise to have a description
and view taken of your people, has given occasions to those pernicious
assemblies to assault your dignity: beside that it is done contrary to the
laws of your auncetors, which were ever ware and circumspect to keep secret
to themselves the number of their power. But as touching the sixtene branch,
where you say, That I know that your Majesty has written to the Senate of
Tholoz, concerning the rapine there committed. In deed I will not deny but yt I
knew of the sending of your letters, to the men of Tholoz, in the which you
said, that you had seen many decrees given forth by them expressly against
Rapine, in the time of troubles: and that you thought, that they had done all
things upon just grounds and considerations. Whereupon they conclude that the
same sentence or decree is so confyrmed by you: the which is false: seeing the
same decree against Rapine, was given forth the thirteen day of April, and
therefore after the Edict made and proclaimed.

As touching the eyghtene branch, where you say, That you are very sorye,
that justice is not truly and purely ministered as you desire and would have
it: the which you could not hitherto remedy, because the men of the reformed
Religion, had not so fully observed the Edict as they ought, all the Cities
which they held, being not rendered up, when as your Majesty your self had
first of all given them an example of the observation of the Edict.

I would gladly demand of the Cardinal of Loraine and his fellows, whether I
forsook and rendered up Orleans, by and by, yea or no, and whether at my
commandment the like was done at Auxer, at Suessi, and in diverse other places
in these parts: and as touching those cities which were farther of, I demand
whether I sent not certain with my letters to command them to sollowe my
example in yielding up themselves? But to be short, if I have pretermitted no
thing which was my duty to do, and which I was able to do, can it be truly
said that I have kept my authority still over those Cities which are not
surrendered? To whom therefore may you justly impute the cause, but to the
Cardinal of Loraine, who is the the very cause of all violence committed, at
Orleans, at Suessi, at Ualence, at Cisteron, at Auxer, and at Saint Spirit the
which cities being cruelly vexed, have notwithstanding showed the principal
part of obedience. Was this way to cause other cities to surrender, and to lay
aside their armor? Was the staying of the proclamacion of the Edict, the way,
too make the same too be observed? Should not the Edict have been proclaimed,
before the men of the reformed Religion had been punished for not observation of
the same? But they are so far from desiring the observation of the Edict
according to the prescript of your will, that we have found some of their
letters, clean contrary too the same, an example and coppie whereof we have
sent unto you: the letters them selves are in the hands of the Queen of Nauar,
being written by the two Capitolles of Tholoz (the Magistrate of a town is so
called) to their fellows, saying that your Majesty was sorry that the Edict
was not proclaimed at Tholoz, because thereby the surrender of the Rebellious
Cities would be delayed: and therefore it was necessary for the commen profit of
all men, that the proclamation should be made in the Parliament out of hand:
notwithstanding without any manner of solemnity in the proclaiming thereof, and
with those exceptions which the Court shall think meet. But some will reply
and say, that we must not have regard to a few sedicious persons: truly, we
would with all our hearts make no account of them, if so be their sedicious
counsels were not effectually commanded and yours rejected. For it is most
true, that you were feign so send commandment four several times before
your Edict would be proclaimed: and then it was not so ^oolorably and
fraudulently, as maliciously and spitefully done: adjoining to the words of
the Edict, contrary to the express form thereof, this sentence, (...)is
contained in the secret and privy Commentaries of the Senate, by the which
words it is plain that they have inserted exceptions clean contrary to the
Edict. Whereby it may evidently appear, that they are more careful to defend
and enlarge their own dignity, than the preservation of your Majesty and
authority: As though their honor did depend upon any other than upon you:
and although they had any other authority to defend than that which
appertains unto you. The which they shall not do, so long as I can find any
way to hinder, them. And yet notwithstanding their Rebelli on and boldness is
so far from reproof, that you have written your letters, at the suit of
some, to approve and maintain the exceptions and delays in proclaiming your
Edict. Moreover, where as you say in the former brau^ch, That your Majesty
has in nothing broken your promise, I pray you heartily give me leave to say,
that neither I nor any one of the reformed Religion, have felt as yet any fruit
or profit by this peace, and have enjoyed none of those things which you have
promised unto us: but have felt the oppression and violence showed to us ward
since the peace made, to be a great deal more than the hurt and detrement
which we received by open war: Insomuch that in respect of our selves, we
may truly say: The time of war, was to us the time of peace: and the time now
of pretended peace, is to us the time of most cruel war.

Concerning the last branch, where you say, That it is very unreasonable and
far from the duty of a good subject, to go about to abrogate the authority
of your Majesty, but that you might when peril is like to ensue and for the
avoiding of the destruction of one of your chief Cities, to alter and change
the places appointed for preaching of Sermons: and that you are fully persuaded
that the reasons and considerations were such, why that liberty was taken from
Lions, that I also would have approved them, if I had been of your counsel. I
most heartily beseech your Majesty to think, that I would never so much forget
my self and my duty, that I would but once have a thought to deminish your
dignity: but contrariwise I protest that I would most gladly spend my life to
seek all means and ways that might enlarge the same. Let your Majesty call
to mind also, that this liberty of Lions is a matter of great weight, which
also was so greatly debated among us, when the peace was in question. And it is
well known that the same matter has been handeled heretofore in your counsel
at Sangerman, when the making of the Edict of January was in hand: at which
time were present the most principal of your privy counsel, and the
chiefest men out of all your Courts within this Realm of both sorts of
Religion: by whom, after long disputation it was concluded, that in the
bordring Cities, as in Mets, Bolone, Callece, Ardes, and in such other like
places, there should be a preaching place, with in those cities, to avoid all
occasions of lying in wait and of treason. Notwithstanding the Cardinal of
Loraine and his fellows, will persuade, if they can, that they which seek and
require the precise observation of ancient constitutions, and of the Edicts,
would abrogate your Majesty's authority: and that they and their fellows,
seek to maintain and enlarge the same, when as in deed they would have it
quight abolished.

Furthermore it is contained in the former branch, That your Majesty was sorry
that your subjects would not persuade themselves of that security and peace,
which they should receive from you, and that they would not obey you as it
became them: Truly I protest that there is nothing more grievous unto me than
that I cannot be with you, and obey and serve you alone, as I have always
wished, and do also at this present most earnestly desire: But I pray and
beseech you consider, that if spies be daily sent unto me to view my doings,
and my house, to see if they can hurt me by any manner of means, what peace and
security should I have if I were with you, when my enemy has in his own hand
the ordering of your power and authority. Therefore if it be certain, (as I
neither ought, nor can doubt) that it is your will, that your Edicts should be
observed, and that the public peace which you have granted and confirmed
with an oath, should also be of all men embraced: but contrary to your highness
pleasure, your subjects are cruelly slain, and murdered, throughout your
whole kingdom, and that freely without redress: Again if flat against your
Majesty's commandment, Leagues be concluded, Societies and Fraternities
assembled, soldiers mustered, armor and harness made ready, money levied,
and all other things that belong to open and manifest war be prepared: if for
law and Justice, Rapine and injustice reign, and your Majesty (with contempt
of all estates) disobeyed, and that which is more compelled to violate and
break your public promise made to all your subjects: upon whom I say shall
al these tormoyles be fathered, but upon the Cardinal of Loraine author and
mainteiner of al dissentions and disorders which do so furiously rage through
all this Realm? And although your Majesty and all those that are not wedded
to the Cardinal do know this matter to be so as I have said: yet because it
tends to the defacing and overthrow of your graces honor (in maintenance
whereof I am more earnest because I perceive the Cardinal has long ago
purposed to overthrow it) he does accuse both me and all other of the reformed
religion, and would with his wiles charge us with treason and rebellion,
whereof he him self is guilty.

Wherefore, seeing we cannot suffer so great injury any longer, we are
determined to dissemble no further in so great and so weighty matters: for our
long and almost incredible patience and sufferance of wrongs, does but puff
up the Cardinal, and make him to croe over us. And therefore to be short, I
beseech yeur highness to consider what mark he shot at, when he and his
family made claim and title to the Dukedom of Aniou, and the County of
Prouance, what he meant so curiously to search out his petigree, whereby he
purposed to prove that he was of the blood Royal of the lawefull Kings of
France, and that our Auncetours had wrongefully taken the Crown from his
house, and usurped it* likewise, I humbly des^re your Grace to mark for what
end and purpose they used such outrage and tyra^me in the time of King Fraunces
the second, to destroy and raze out the houses of Burbon, Momorencie, and
Chastillon, whose destruction they had sworn and vowed long before, with all
other the Princes and Noble me^, which they thought would set themselves to
withstand their wicked attemptes: and that this was their intent, their
dooinges of late sufficiently proved. For as soon as it was talked abroad that
the Queen (your highness mother) was not like to live here any longer,
forthwith they took counsel and devised how to murder the Cardinal of
Burbon, the Chauncelour, the Marshalles, and diverse other Noble men of your
Counsel: and sent moreover letters thoroughout the whole kingdom too their
friends to raise up and gather together soldiers to destroy all such as did
in any respect disallow of their d^inges. But because this en^prise could not
be done under pretense of Religion (for with that cloak they use to hide all
their mischiefs) because they whose blood they sought, professed the same
religion that they did: they devised a new snare to entray them in, and charge
them as earnest favorers of the protestants, and therefore to be expedient,
yea and necessary to dispatch them out of the way, for so might they with
less labor destroy the protestants them selves. Wherefore, they term them
Neuters, and say that they are worse and more hurtful then the Huguenotes. And
if so be the Cardinal could (which God forbid) bring his purpose to effect
both against the princes and Noble men of the reformed religion and also
against them which profess the Romish religion, and yet favor not their
proceedings, (whom they call Neuters, because they love peace and hate trouble
and dissension) is there any that either would or could defend your majesty
from their cruel hands? Is there any that could stay them from rending your
Crown of your Graces head, which they say your progenitors have usurped
unlawfully against their auncetours? Can your Majesty require a more lively
representation or sufficient proof of the Cardinals saucie ambitious
boldness, then that he showed, when he took you^r grace and your highness
mother the Queen weeping and lamenting, as captives and prisoners with open
force of arms from Fountainblean to Melune, and from thence in tumultuouse
have to Paris: and caused your Majesty's entrance into that famous City to
be as dishonorable to your highness as it was wont to be honorable and
glorious to your noble progenitors.

Which his doings have been the only and true causes of the former wars and
other dissentions that have ever since raged thoroughout your Majesty's Realm.
And may it not be easily proved, how grievous your graces authority has been
always to the Cardinal, and how continually he has repyned at it, and done
what possible he could to draw your faithful and loyal subjects from their
duefifull obedience toward your majesty, as may appear in that his suit
wherein he sought too have Fraunces, Duke of Guyse, made one of the Princes of
the Empire, and got for that purpose a warrant from the Emperor, which he
would have proclaimed thorough all your Kingdom, had not Monsieur Ausant and
Monsieur Halsede stayed him, who, although they were of one religion with him,
yet could they no longer dissemble or see so great in^urie done to your
highness: as though your majesty could not protecte and defendea Cardinal as
well as other your subjects, unless he^ fled to the Emperor for succor, by
whom or of whom he has, I am sure nothing, unless it be a cankred Imperial,
and not a true French heart toward your majesty: whereof he gave sufficient
proof in the Council of Trent, where in steed that according to his duty,
he ought to have kept and maintained those prerogatives that time out of mind
have been given and granted to the Kings of France your auncetours: He I say,
in steed of this his loyal duty, called them in doubt and question, seeking
by all means to challenge and claym^ them for the Spanish King. Wherein he
has both done great injury to your majesty and the wole kingdom: and also
sought thereby to bring your Grace in fear, and to stand in awe of him by
reason he is in such favor and estimation with the king of Spain, to whom he
co^municateth all the affairs of this realm. There was never any devise
invented or practiced, neither in the first or second wars, whereof King
Phillip has not ben both an author and fautour, whose chief desire is, to see
the greatest part of your Nobility destroyed, that he might the easier conquer
your kingdom. For surely, there is no more effectual means to bring that his
purpose to pass, then to set us together by the ears by sowing of strife and
dissension. And to what other end^ ^an those Confraternities and brother hoodes
(as they call them) of the Holy Ghost be referred then to this. For some of
the Noble men which are admitted into that fellowship, are so wedded unto it,
that they utterly forget their duty, and do conspire with them the death of
such noble men as profess the reformed religion: whose desire is to live
quietly with them in the band of brotherly love as becomes good subjects
under one prince, and friends alied together either in kindred or affinity. And
who I beseech your majesty, has been the author of these holy brotherhoods,
but the Cardinal? who has promised to procure your warrant for them,
notwithstanding your highness has declared them to be hurtefull and
prejudicial to your honor, and therefore to be disallowed? And what shall we
think of his sendinge abroad through all the whole kingdom, wherein he willed
that no man should either give credit to or obey your Majesty's commandments,
unless the letters which were sent were signed with special signet? and
surely, through this his doing, no commission that ever came out from your
grace for the observation of the Edicte was in any poinct obeyed and executed:
so that we may both justly and truly say, that he and none but he has been
auctour of these broils and tumultes. Furthermore, who did hinder the
publishing of the Edict? and who does st^y the execution of it? who emboldened
the Parliament of Tolouze, to rage so tyrannically as they did? And who but he
and his confederates has driven your Majesty into such straight distress,
that you are compelled to violate your public promise made and solemnly
confirmed by oath, and thereby to have your credit and honor cracked amongst all
forreyne nations? yea we are able to prove how he himself wrote letters to
your Majesty's mother and had the A^males hand subscribed unto them, letting
hi^ to understand, that he could not stay the conclusion of the peace (whereto
necessity drane them) notwithstanding he would so work that it should never be
kept. By whose means is justice and equity banished out of this realm, and
most fi^thy and dissolute liberty of factions and seditions brought in with
all kind of traiterous murdering of those that will not yield to their
tyranny. Who is it that sends ruffians and desperate persons every day, yea
eue^ home to my own house to murder both me and the Admiral? and this have
two (whom I have taken) confessed. Who entised certain Knights of S. Michaels
order, and other Captains to murder the Admiral, who (God be thanked) had
warninge given by them that should have done the deed? Who procured Monsieur
Sipierre to ^e slain and to the number of five and thirty Noble men with him,
but he? For his Brother the Duke of Guise would commonly boaste of it a month
and more before it was done: and being done, he himself had the first tidings
of it. Yea who but he or his men flue Monsieur Amanze, sitting at his own
door with his young daughter in his arms, who had offended neither part, but
lived quietly with all men of both Religions? Nevertheless, when his Nephew
the Duke of Lorayn had advertised him, that it were expedient for him, that he
absented himself from your Grace, because many did bear him deadly hatred:
and because he, ruling al things at his own pleasure, should be charged as
author and causer of all the troubles and miseries that had, or should endammage
the common weal of the kingdom: He made him answer, That he ruled not at
all, and that he made not his abode with your Majesty, but because he did not
know any other place wherein he could be more safe and fr^e from danger.
Whereby it is euid^nt, that for his ^uegard only, your highness Army is
maintayn^ t^ your exceeding great charges, which must needs bring with it a
very dangerous and mischeeuous end. For if so be the sauetie and strength of a
king does consist upon the good will and love of his ^ub ^ectes, what cause
can be invented whereby he should enforce your Majesty to take armor
against those whose only desire is to show the liege and loyal obedience
they owe to your majesty? But he thinks the pretense and show of your name
and authority sufficient to hide and cloak his mischeuous doings, in so
much he spared not of late to say, that your highness gave him this answer:
That shortly men would have gathered in their hay and corn, and have made an
end of their vinetage: that the Rivers would be so high with showers of rain,
that men could not pass over the said Rivers: that your treasury should
shortly be enriched with tributes: and that then war should be proclaimed
against those of the reformed religion: but in the mean time the chief
maintainers thereof were to be dispatched out of the way. Yea such is the
impude^cie of the man that he is not ashamed to brag that the Queen has
complaining wise found fault with him, That their purpose of our destruction
was not brought to effect, notwithstanding the feast of San Ian was past, in
which time he had promised to rid the greatest part of us out of the way. And
as yet, none were dispatched but only Monsieur Sipierre: whereunto he made
answer, That he had done the best he could, to keep promise: but all would
not serve, because the Noble men were always speedely informed of al his
devises: notwithstanding he was in good hope to compass the matter and in the
mean season it was expedient that your majesty (O Christian king) should feed
us with vain hope and gentle letters till they might spy out fit occasion and
opportunity to accomplish their desires. And what other can your grace
conceive of that su^me of money which they procured Ian Baptist to send to
you? was not the usury beyond all reason to give a hundredth for an hundredth?
do they not by this their money show what good will and love they bear your
highness? wherefore can any man say that we of the reformed Religion do
without urgent and great cause assault the Cardinal of Loraine? how long
shall he with subtle trecheries abuse your Majesty, and make you believe that
we seek not him but you? seeing we protest before God that we desire to have no
man but him only and his confederates: and why we ^o so we have declared both
just and necessary causes. How long shall credit be given to his old Iuglings
and lies? I most heartily beseech the Queens Majesty to remember his former
talk at Chantelliere, where she told the Constable and the Admiral, that the
Cardinal was borne to sow strife and discention wheresoever he was, and that
he, was the chief and only cause of all the broils and factions that were
fostred through out all the Realm. Let her call to her mind the purpose of
that wise and prudent king Henry, who perceiving the ambitions and wicked
dispositions of the Cardinal and al his brethren, was fully bente a little
before he dyed to have banished them all from his Court to Loraine. But here
note the judgment that the Emperor Maximilianus that now is, gave of him
when he wrote to your Majesty. That all the wars and dissentions that
trouble the state of Christians, were both begone and maintained by a couple of
Cardinals, the Cardinal Granuella^ and him of Loraine: notwithstanding all this
he abides with your Majesty, a great army is maintained to guard and defend
him, that subtle Serpente at your charges is maintained to suck your own
blood, who tarieth for nothing but only to spy out fit occasion and
opportunity to spit out his venomous poyso^ against your grace. What blyndnesse
has bewitched us that strangers and forreyners can see the destruction that
hangs over our heads and yet we cannot perceive it, having it amongst us as it
were in our lappes? Is there any man so ignorant that does not see him
practice his old and I^neterate treacheries to the intent he might thrust out
and depose the lawful and true hie^e from the crown, and then give it to a
stranger? what does he make of Religion but a cloak and a veyle to cover his
villainy? Can any man think that he sets by or bears any zeal to that
Religion, which he willingly of his own accord would have forsaken, and in
stead of it have embraced the confession of Ausburge, only upon this condition
that Francis the Duke of Guise might be chosen one of the Princes electors of
the Empire. If any man say unto him that it is very perilous and likely that
the Spanishe King triumphing at our destruction, will to our great grief set
upon and invade the Kingdom, such is his shamlesse impudency, that he will
not stick to say openly that the Queen does not much care for that, because
she loves her daughters as well as her sons. And although God would grant
your Majesty both might and power to pacify all controversies amongst us for
Religion, yet surely there is no hope ever to extinguishe the engraffed grudges
and hatred that the Cardinal and his companions do daily sow amongst your
subjects. For what salve, what remedy can be devised for that wou^d, which
through murders and spoils is made every day more and more incurable? Is
there any hope to reconcile your subiec^s and set them at one again, whose
st^macke are with these furious and bloody cruelties, set on fire with inquen^h
able flame of hatred? Nay sure it is past all doubt that these old
displeasures and hateful harthurnings will last from one generation to
another, and pass from one to another eu^ by succession and heritage as lands
and ^ubstance do, yea it is to be feared that the same misery and destruction
will over whelm^ us that has fallen upon the Queen of Scots, through the
wicked and diuelishe counsel of the Cardinal. If we see the Commons to ri^e
up and ^ebell for custom and tribut^ of salt and for unreasonable taxes that
there Princes lay upon them (which causes be unlawful and feditious) what then
shall they do that have just and necessary causes to allege forthemselues,
who are not only spoiled and bere^ed of there goods but also of there
consciences, dignity, honor and life: that by this mean he might more easle
compass his long desired wish to depose your Majesty and has for this
purpose full craftily raised civil broils as more fit for his purpose then
foreme wars. Is there any injury that can drive a man sooner into
desperation then when he sees his conscience, his honor, honesty, and life
affaulted? wherefore if I (whom it has pleased God to place in near degree of
bl^d to your Grace and am besides that natural conjunction bound by other great
occasions to be careful for the preservation of your honor and dignity:)
together with the Admiral, one of your chief and most^ no^le officers and
many other Noble men who are your highnes^ natural liege and loyal subjects
do see the enemy even before your gates, shall not we hazard and spend both
life and goods to chase him away? shall we be such traitors both to our selves
and our Cou^ey, that when we see the ^atter mani^ we shall hold our tounges and
suffer our enemies furiou^y without r^sistance to i^ade v^? shall we your
Princes and subjects so behave our selves that it may worthily and justly
another day be cast in our teeth and said, That we without regard of our
allegiance which by (...)he w^ (...)promised to your Grace, ^ue suff^ed our
lawfu^l Prince and appoyn^ed by God (...)of his throne: shall we suffer our
selves to b^ (...)noted with such rep^oche of perjury and treachery as to have
seen the scepter and Crown of ^ur country rent from the right and true heir
and given to an usurping stranger? but admit the Cardinals doings tend not
to the utter destruction of your Majesty, yet no man can deny but that
council which he gives un to your grace is not only disordered and unjust but
also very pernicious and intolerable.

There is nothing more acceptable before God, or that draws nearer too his
divine purity, then for a King to govern his subjects and people with Justice
and equity: again there is nothing more beseeming the office and duty of a
King, then to love, promote, and further peace and tranquillity, and to defend
his subjects committed to his charge from all calamities and anoy. What has
been the cause that so many common welthes have been preserved in flourishing
estate so long, but only the peaceable and quiet government of the commons
without any violence or injuries? But amongst all those counselles which that
wicked Cardinal has and does give to your Majesty, can one word be found
that did or does tend too the maintenance of peace and quietness? Nay rather at
your graces great cost and charge, he maintains an army, that there by he
may engender and norish suspicions in your Majesty's breast, against those who
covet nothing so much as to show the dutiful obedience they owe to your high
nes. Is it not thorough him that you suffer those to be slain, murdered, and
spoiled of all they have, whom your majesty is bound by your duty too defend
and shield from all harm and distress? To be short is there any thing so
contrary to Justice and equity, as to wink at these infinite murders, and
intolerable injuries, which by the Cardinals procurement and allowance do so
grievously aflict this whole kingdom, and are by them and his fellows falsely
fathered to be your Majesty's proceedings.

Wherefore, seeing this is evident and plain (as in deed it can not be denied)
that it greeueth your Majesty (as you have often written to the Admiral and
me) to be bereaved of lawful and due obedience, and to have Justice defiled
and corrupted, and have theruppon desired your mother that all things might be
done quietly without any kind of tumult, and that the Edict might be observed,
and all occasions eschewed that might pro cure civil wars, again being the
extreme destructi on of your kingdom: if I say your Majesty have done all
these things, and notwithstanding your faithful and true subjects do perceive
that the Cardinal (who has conspired our death) has as it were violently and
frau duntly possessed your authority, and abusing the same, does charge your
host and soldiers (contrari^ to the public warrant granted to us) to take
both me and the Admiral by treason, and ambushe: and does also en force your
Majesty to do al things contrary to the duty of a good and gracious King, to
the intent he might weaken and slaken the good will and love of your subjects:
Wese him also rule and govern the whole common wealth according to his own
filthy lust, and to bring all things to such narrow streites, that every man's
heart is ready to flame out with everlasting fire of dead ly hatred, by reason
of so many horible murders yt escaped al unpunished and scotfree: seeing
therefore that these things are so manifest what else can your subjects do in
this extreme desperation, but to suppress that wicked Cardinal, author and
beginner of all mischief. And surely the cause that urges them to seek this
remedy is both just and lawful, seeing they can not suffer any man to reign
over them but your Majesty: and see moreover your dignity and Crown their
religion, honor goods, and lives, to be in the hands of their deadly
enemies, nor have, nor can have any protection wherewith to shield them selves
from such injuries as openly are both threatened and offered them. How can they
either hope or suffer any longer, foreseeing in their minds that terrible and
blustering tempest of troubles that is like to ensue? Whereof they have full
many a time advertised your Majesty, and setting before your graces eyes the
fearful and lamentable state of things have very often most humbly craved
remedy at your hands.

These are the causes (O King) that have enforced me and the Admiral, and
diverse others of your subjects (who had rather to hazard their lives and die
valiantly, and honorably, then to suffer so great injury and villainy to be
wrought against your Majesty and the whole Realm) after long and earnest suit
for other lawful means, to take this thing upon us. Wherefore we all
desiring, and craving, the help and aid of all Princes and Noble men,
confederate to succor your Majesty in these extreme dangers, do protest
before God, and all the world, that this is our only intent and desire to have,
The Cardinal of Loraine and his fellows, and that it is they only whom we
seek, as the very roots, causes, and maintayners of all trouble and
mischief: Which threaten destruction and desolation to this kingdom, and to
pursue them as perjured robbers, violaters of peace and chief and deadly
enemies of all good orders and quietness. Wherefore let no man hereafter
marvel, if I and my fellows refuse to obey any thing that shall be ordained in
your Majesty's counsel where in the Cardinal is present, not that we will
disobethem as come from your highness, but as coygned and framed by the
Cardinal and his companions, whom we utterly refuse and renounce both in
public affairs that concern the common wealth, and also in private matters
that only touch us, to the intent we be not charged with the troubles that
may arise hereof, but he rather who is the author and father of them, the
Cardinal I mean and his adherents.

These letters and this supplication therefore being The Prince of Conde goes
to Noyers.
delivered to the King, the prince of Conde went to Noiers with his wife great
with child, and with his children also, of which, some were in their tender
infancy. The Admiral also carried with him his whole family, and his brother
the Andelots wife, with her Son, which was then of the age of two years:
with this weak Army the Prince of Conde went to Noyers, but not without great
peril of the garrisons of souldioures which were at hand. Notwithstanding the
Prince of Conde, what with his own men, and what with the household servant,
of the Admiral, and certain other Noble me^, which came to aid them, had an
hundred and fifty horsemen to guard his train. But being in great peril and
necessity, found out a remedy, though full of danger and adventure.
Therefore, because the Havens, Ports, Bridges, and passages were warded with
garrisons of soldiers, so that they could not pass, they determined to go
over the River of Loyer. This River is in all places for the most part so
deep, that a ship may pass by the same: Notwithstanding, because the force
of the stream fretteth and works up great heaps of sands oftentimes, there
is in certain places the less plenty of water. By reason hereof, they found by
and by a shallow foorde: over the which when an horse had safely passed, the
whole multitude followed in like manner. The which passage was wonderful,
seeing the very same place within two days after was so deep, that no man
might in the same manner pass over again. The self same day certain armies
of footmen which we said were sent for to leave the siege of Rochell, and to
come to take the Prince of Conde, came to Sangodon, a village almost three
miles distant from that part of the River, over the which the Prince of Conde
had passed. Therefore when the Prince of Conde had a clear passage, he made
the more speed in his journey toward, the house of the Rouchfaucalt in the
territory of Santonge, shoonning all Towns and places, where he knew
Garrisons of Souldioures to be set: and he wrote letters to Marshall
Vielleuil, which was then at Poyctiers, and to Monsieur Monluce, Lieuetenant of
Guian, signifying unto them, that his purpose was to go to the house of
Rochefocault, only to leave his family in safety, and there to abide himself,
until such time as he had received an answer of his letters (of which we
spoke before) from the king.

About this time also, the adversaries lay in wait The Cardi nall Chastillo^
fleeeth into England.
to take the Cardinal Odet Chastillon, abydinge in the territory of Bellouac:
of which he being certified, fled, and in fleeing, was chased by soldiers,
till he came to the Sea: In so much that he was constrained to leave the
greatest part of his carriage behind him, and to take Ship to pass over into
England.

It was also commonly reported about this time, The death of Charles son to
King Philip.
that Charles, Son to King Philip of Spain, was dead. The causes were by
diverse men diversely reported: but that which was most credible, is, That the
Inquisitors (suspecting him of certain things concerning religion) provoked and
stirred up ye displeasure of the Father against the Son, that he might
deprive himself of his only Son, and of the lawful heir of Spayn. Shortly
after this also, news was brought concerning the death of Elizabeth, wife to
Philip King of Spain, and Sister to Charles King of France.

Furthermore, the Duke of Alba, daily more and more played the tyrant in
Flaunders, straining no courtesy at the shedding of innocent blood: whereupon
the prince of Orange being moved partly to discharge his duty, being one of
the Princes of the Empire, and partly for the love which he bare to his
Country, caused a great Army to be in a readiness, that he might withstand
the cruel tyranny of the said Duke of Alba.

He had to aid him, great numbers of horsemen and footmen, which came out of
Germany, out of France, and also out of the low Country. County L^dowike also
his brother, a valea^t captain, came with a great number of good soldiers to
join with him.

COME LORD IESV, COME QVICKLY.
The. ix. Book of Commentaries, concerning the state of Religion and of the
common wealth of France under the Reign of Charles the ninth.
THus began the third civil war in France being more notable than the
others going before, both for the great atte^pts Anno Domini. 1568. in the
month of Au gust.
and enterprises, and also for the continuance of the same, for it troubled the
Noble Realm of France for the space of two years. Therefore when news was
brought to the Court of the departure of the Prince of Conde, there was open
The state and condition of both parts.
provision made on both parts for the war: but both their conditions were
not alike. For the Papists had Cities, Artillery money, and all manner of
provision belonging to war, they had also the Kings name, authority, and
power, by which they prevailed more than by any other mean. But as for the
Prince of Conde and the Protestants they had almost nothing, but the goodnes^e
of their cause, and courageous minds to defend them^elues, who, though to the
peril of ye loss of their lives and goods, were almost desperate to defend
the same: Moreover they which should have been helpers and furtherers of their
cause, were hemde in and shut ^p throughout the whole Realm: in so much that
it was marvel that the Prince of Conde was able to hold war, and to
withstand his enemies, in so great extreamitie. There were great and urgent
ca^ses of new contention, *as the di^pleasure taken for the breaking of the
oath solemnlye made, the breaking of the Kings promise and common peace, and
the me^itable necessity of defending their consciences and lives. But the
Papists being forward enough of themselves t^ destroy the godly, were pricked
forward by the bloody ^uriousnesse of the Cardinal of Loraine.

Therefore, by the Kings commaund^ment (for under this name the Papists did
what they would) the Armies that were dismi^t, were now called back again,
new choice and muste^s of men were had, and they were all commanded to be at
Staples the. x. day^ of September. The whol^ ordering and charge of the war
was committed t^ Alexander Duke of Angewe, ye Kings brother, being but a young
man: notwithstanding he had joined with him certain valiant captains as we
said before. Then were baytes and ^nares subti^ly laid, and in the Kings
name the governors of the Provinces published a decree, as thus: The King
commands that all the men of the reformed Religion The Kings* Decree.
be under his protection, no less than any other of his subjects: that they
may have leave to complain of injuries done to them: that they may have
remedies provided out of hand, as it is meet and convenient, for their
defense: and that all Magistrates should be vigilant to defend them.

In the mean time he that carried the Prince of Condes letters to the King,
after the delivery of them, The messe^^er sent from the Prince of Conde (...)*
was taken, and committed prisoner to a certain noble man, and no answer made
to the letters.

The Prince of Conde, when he had stayed in the house of Rochfoucant certain
days, went with his whole retinew to Rochel, of whose inhabitants he was
very lovingly received. And thither came unto him the inhabitants of Xantonge,
of Poictou, of Perigueux, of Engolmoys, and a great number of noble men of the
Regions thereaboutes, which embraced the reformed religion: and as for the
common sort of people, they came unto him out of all those quarters, by beapes.
The C^ties also called Saints, Tifauge, and Montagu, offered themselves unto
him. But for all this, he sent letters to diverse parts of the Realm,
requiring ay^ of his fellows, and for so much as the Protestants were expulsed
almost every City, it seemed good unto him that they should come with all
speed to hi^ to Rochel, and then having greater power, to ioy^ battle with
the enemy. Notwithstanding in many places by the wonderful providence of God,
there were diverse places of refuge reserved throughout the whole Realm, as to
the men of Francoys, Sanferre, and Uezelay: to the men of Languedoe, Montalban,
Castrealby, and Milliaulde, to the men of Dolpheny, which at that time were in
great peril, the Cities of Uiuaretze were reserved, as Albenac, Priuac, and
many others.

But before the Prince of Conde began any war, he published a certain
solemn declaration of the causes of the same: In manner and form, as
follows. I protest before God and his Angels, and before this holy assembly,
that ^as (I also declared in my last letters which I sent unto the King my
Lord) intend to do nothing against his Majesty, which may either hurt his
person or dignity: but taking him for my King and supreme Lord, next under
God, by him so appointed, I protest that whatsoever I do, is for no other
cause, but to keep and defend the liberties of our consciences, the free use
of the reformed Religion, our lives, honors and goods, from the tyranny and
oppression of the Cardinal of Loraine and his fellows* the which tyranny
they have always hitherto showed, and mind still to use toward the men of
the reformed Religion, contrary to our kings will, which he has openly
declared by public Edicts and decrees, thereby breaking the common peace and
tranqui^itie. And for this cause, to the end I may defend their lives, honors,
goods, and the liberty of their cons^ences, which profess the reformed
religion, I affir^e that I will spend both my life and whatso ever e^se God
has given unto me:

And because there came soldiers day by day unto him, and that all things
might be done orderly* he appointed a certain form of discipline to be used
among Discipline appointed by the Prince of Conde.
his soldiers, the which we thought good here to inserte as worthy
remembrance. For the performance whereof this was the form of the oath that
was ministered unto them.

Ye swear and promise by the name of the living God, that ye, for the causes
declared by the Prince of Conde, will give your lives, bodies, and goods to be
at the commandment of the same Prince of Conde, whom ye acknowledge to be the
captain of this Army: Ye swear and promise, willingly to obey all those
things, which either he or his deputies shall command, and faithfully to
observe and keep the order of discipline which he has appointed to the
governing of his army. And that till such time, as they which are enemies to
the common peace, be openly punished by order of law, for their murders
rober^es, spoils, and oppressions, which they have committed against the
Kings will and against the peace, toward the professors of the reformed
Religion within the Realm: that we at the length may eni^ya the freedom of
our consciences, the security of ourdyues and goods, peac^ably under the
Kings obedience.

But this was the description and form of the Discipline prescribed. BECAUSE
Order, as it is profitable to all men, sort is necessary for the lovers of the
reformed A descrip^ on of the discipline of war.
Religion: I which am lawfully called to this war, have thought good with the advice and confent of the Nobles, Captains, and of other expert and wise men,
to orday^e and to give all (...)to understand, That if there be any man which
will not obey these things, there is no place for him in our army. I will
therefore that every man faithfully observe and keep them. First, whosoever
shall come to this Army, shall declare and give his name within six days, and
shall ^weare acco^ding to the form of the oath appointed: the which except
they do, their horse and armor shall be taken from them and given to their
accuser. And when he has given his name, he shall give attendance and ^de to
his charge, whether it be to watch and ward day or night, or whatsoever else:
if not, then he shall for^ayte his armor. No man shall forsake his Enseigne and
go to another Enseigne, without the sufferance and leave of his Captain: he
that shall do otherwise, shall be punished according to his offense. And because
no man shall plead ignorance, let them which are lately come to our army, be
certified of this decree. It shall be lawful for the soldier to ask leave of
his Captain: if it be denied* I will that he come to me, and I will order the
matter at my discretion. I will also that the oath be ministered every Month.
And to the end the names of such as be lacking may be known, I will that the
hills and Scroules of the names be brought unto me ^ and that th^re be none in
the Army which keep back his name, or which is not allowed by the testimony of
some other. He which shall be found gilty herein the third day after the
publishing of this writing, shall suffer death. Furthermore, I will and
appointe that there be in ei uery Giddon of horsemen one hundredth, and of
every Enseigne of footmen CC. and every Captain to have under him his
vndercaptaynes, and other officers. That no man presume to attempt any thing
against the enemy, wiihout the commandment of his Superiors: if the
Captain shall be found culpable herein, then he shall be banished his office: if
the Soldier, his armor shall be taken from him and then he expelled the
hoaste. That no man forsake his Enseigne: and that such as are found robbing
and spoiling, be severely punished as thieves, and their armor and horse given
to their accusers. And because this war differs from the other wars that
have been heretofore, I will that the spoils be carried all to one place, for
the common profit and wealth of the whole Army. If any shall pilpher or
purloyn from his fellow, he shall be punished as a thief: and he that shall
apprehend and detecte such a one, shall be well rewarded. The spoils which
shall be taken at the yielding up of any City, shall (...)to the general use of
the whole army. And nothing shall be counted for spoil but that which may be
proved so to be, by sure arguments and testimenies, otherwise it shall be
accounted for rapine and theft. I will also that there be no vagrant and
unprofitable members in the Army. Three footmen shall have only one Page
attendinge upon them, who also shall follow his Masters Enseigne: if he be
found otherwise, he shall be hanged. It shall not be lawful for any footeman to
have horses, asses, or other cattle, but only for Captains and such like
officers: provided notwithstanding that they abuse not this liberty. If any
man shall take away the cattie that belong to husband men for tillage, he
shall suffer death. Moreover, I will that there be no braule nor contencion
mo^ed, specially that one man fight not with an other: if any shall so do, he
shall dye. If there happen to be any offense, ^et the Captains be (...)(...),
(...)there may be some order taken and peace (...). I (...)that all privy
grudge and ma^ice be laid aside, and if any man refuse to be reconciled, I
command (...)that Captains be admonished thereof, yt all sawfull ways may be
sought for reconciliation. That no man take any other lodging tha^ yt which
shall be appointed to him. If he be a Captain that shal^e fasty herein, he
shall loose his office, but if he be but a common soldier, he shall loose his
armoure or horse, beside other punishments at my discretion. And I will that
all officers diligently come together to the appointed place of meeting for the
Army, that they may foresee and provide whatsoever shall be necessary for every
occasion. That no man steal away the vittayle and provision belonging to the
Army, upon pain of death* And least any man may plead lawfully ignorance, I
will that these Martial decrees be proclaimed every week throughout the whole
Army, in some convenient place or other. Let these things be diligently
observed and kept generally.

They which abused the Kings name feared least the Queen of Navarre should go
to the Prince of Conde A practis^ to draw away the Prince of Nauar from the
Prince of Conde.
with the young Prince her son. Therefore Monsieur Loss was fent to steal
away the Prince, but in vain. For the good and Christian Queen of Nauar, when
she had made all things ready, and had gathered certain bands of men out of
her dominion, came with her son to the Prince of Conde. Then they practiced by
other means to stay her, least she should join her self with the Prince of
Conde, writing unto her sugared letters, to win her from the reformed
Religion. With these letters was sent Monsieur Motte to persuade her, and to
assure her of the King and Queens good will. But the Queen of Nauar
persisting in her former purpose, sent letters to the King, to the Queen, to
the Duks of Aniou, and to the Cardinal of Borbon: In the which because she
does plainly she we the reasons of her purpose, it shall not be amiss to
repeat the sum of them.

When (says she) I received your letters, I was rea die to take my journey,
hearing the rumor of so great alte Letters of the Queen of Nauar to the King.
ration, the which notwithstanding was not unlike to come, our adversaries
beeinge so outrageous that their madness could not but take away from us all
hope of peace, which was offered unto us (most Christian king) by your Edict of
patification: the which notwithstanding was not only evil observed and kept,
but plainly broken also by the subtle means of the Cardinal of Lorain: who
notwithstanding your promises which you have made to your miserable subjects,
has not ceased, both by letters to the parliaments, and also to all those
whose help he thought he might have, to frustrate and adnihillate the force
and effect of the Edict: and abusing our patience after he had made a way to an
infinite sort of murders, he presumed to proceed farther, and sought to
prevail against the Princes your near kinsmen: of the which we have a
manifest example in my brother the Prince of Conde, who was so furiously
assaulted, that he was constrained, to crave aid of his kinsmen. And because
my Son and I are so near of blood unto him, we could not choose but offer
unto him that kindness, which the Law of nature requires. We know
sufficiently your mind, which you have declared both by word and writing,
which is to have at our hands obedience, the which we are ready to yield unto
you, even to ^heading of the last drop of our blood. And furthermore we know
most Christian king, that your natural goodness is wholly encl^ned to preserve
us and not to destroy us. Seeing therefore we see such practices against us, is
there any man which, knowing you to be a faithful and just king, and seeing
notwithstanding such contrary actions so manifest against your promises, will
not Judge that these things are done withour your commandment, and that by
the cankered malice and spite of the Cardinal of Loraine: Therefore I pray
and beseech you (most Christian King) to take it in good part ye I was gone
from home, to serve our God and you also, which are our King and supreme Lord,
and of our own blood: We setting our selves, as utter enemies, against their
practices, so much as we may, which presumptuously go about to oppress us.
And I pray you to certify your self, that we have not put our selves in
armor but only for these three causes least they should utterly destroy us,
as they have gone about As touching mine owe part, I say ye the Cardinal has
done great injury unto you, in that he has gone about to change his power
and authority into violence, seeking to take away my Son from me perforce,
that he might be brought unto you: as though your only commandment could not
sufficiently prevail both with him and me. But we say and affirms (O king)
and beseech you so to think, that we are your most loving and obedient
servant: in so much that whenever it shall please you to try us, and to
compare our faith with the falsehood of the Cardinal and his fellows, I
believe you shall find more truth and trust in my deeds, than you shall
find faythfulnes in his words. The which also we will always perform with
all willingness of mind

But to the Queen the Kings mother, she wrote after Letters of the Queen of
Nauar to the Queen Mother.
this manner: I protest (says she) O Queen, before God and men, that
nothing has been, is, nor shall be hereafter more dear to me, than the love of
God, the King, my Country, and my own blood. The which have been so
effectual in me, that Monsieur la Mott, who^ you sent unto me with letters,
found me gone from home, with full purpose and intent to spend and bestow my
life, goods, and all that I have, for their sakes. But I p^ay you O Queen, if
these my letters be over tediouse unto you, that you would impute it to the
necessity of the time, which has brought me into such extremities, that I
cannot choose but be long in repeating of them: meaning thereby to declare unto
you my purpose, and to set before your eyes my whole mind: in the which you
may have a lively view of those things, the which I know, are after a contrary
manner laid to my charge. But I pray you, give me leave to repeat the whole
matter from that time, in the which ye Guises showed themselves to be enemies
to the peace and tran quillitie of the whole realm: at what time they
flattered the King my husband disceased with fair words, making him believe
that he should recover his kingdom. You know with what kind of men he was then
beset on every side, to my great griese, and to your grie^e, I dare say also:
for I knew it then of your own m^th. I pray you remember how faithful you have
always found me, when as for the common wealth of the realm* I almost forsook
my husband and my children. I pray you also remember what talk you have had
with me, and what a trust you seemed to have in me, when I departed from you
from Fontainbleau. From that time, I protest that I have been the same woman
still. And I pray you remember how faithfully I obeyed your letters which you
sent unto me when I was at Vendosme. Remember what I did after that in Guia^,
to obey your commandments. Then I lost the King my husband, that I might be
partaker of the common chance and calamity of widows. I will not repeat every
particular injury that has been don to me, seeing that I mean to speak of them
all generally. And I protest again, that the desire I have to obey god, and
the love which I owe to my kin^olkes and country, have so possessed my mind,
yt I have almost no respect or consideration of my self. Let me come therefore
to ye time of ye extreme troubles, the^ renewed again, when the Cardinal of
Lorain brought us into such straites, as you and al men know. In ye mean time
I, by their malice and subtle practices, abode vnprof^ table in my own
dominion, who sought all that they could to entangle me. And what I the^ did,
you are so well certified of y^ same, that I shall not need to make any farther
rehearsal thereof. Therefore to come to this my present state, at what time I
see the Edicts of my King, not only broken, but also quight contemned and set
at naught, his au thoritie despised, his kingly promises not regarded: all
which come to pass by the wicked practices of the Cardinal of Loraine: whom I
can not so well point out O Queen, as he is known unto you. And beside the
barbarouse cruelty which he and the rest of his fellows have showed, the
boldness of those homicides increases insomuch that they dare give atte^pts
against ye princes of the Kings blood, which are no less ornaments unto him,
than are the branches to the tree, of ye which notwithstanding they seek to
dispoyle the King. It is not zeal of Religion that moves them. God prosper
you, O Queen, you know well enough that when you were sick of late, the
Cardinal of Borbo^ my brother escaped not altogether the snares which they laid
for him: and yetnotwithsta^ding he is a Catholic. It is therefore the blood and
house of Borbon, that does so grieve them: as they have evidently declared by
persecuting my brother the Prince of Conde and his children: whose defense my
Son and I will never neglect. Neither do I forget the practice of Monsieur
Lossae against my Son: the which was done by the tirannicall counsel of the
Cardinal of Lorain and his fellows. I know, O Queen, it will come to pass that
many which shall hear my letters, will say that they are written by the form
and copy of those, which are daily brought unto you from diverse places, and
that they come not from me. But I pray you to consider, that we which profess
the reformed religion, use not only one argument, but also almost one form of
words: and also that it cannot be but that true and sincere fidelity must
come from so noble a house, as the house of Borbon is. There are three reasons
which have brought me hither. The first is, the obedience which I owe unto
god, seeing that I see, the Cardinal of Loraine going about with the rest of
his fellows, to destroy those which serve the Lord, and embrace the true
religion. The second is the obedience of my king, that I may best owe my life
and goods, for the observation of the Edict of pacifiation, made by the kings
will and consent: and least this France our Country, the mother and Nource of
so many good men should be utterly destroyed with her children. The third is,
consanguinitie: the which, as I have said* calls us to help our brother the
Prince of Conde all that we can: whom we see manifestly to be afflicted and
assaulted, by the^ which are in y^ authority with you and the King, which they
little deserve: who blind your eyes, least you should see their evil
dealing, and stop your ears, least ye should hear our complaints. But I
would to God, O Queen, that your eyes and ears, being at the last opened, ye
may both see and hear, what good will and love every one of us bears to
your Majesty's. But now as concerning those letters which you sent unto me,
I perceive by them very well, how greatly you are incensed against me.
Wherefore by this Messenger I have sent unto you my mind more at large, whom I
have co^ maunded to signify unto you in my name, how necessary it is for
you, if you mean to keep your authority, to separate them from you which
seek to diminish the same, and to destroy those also which love you. Judge of
us rightly, and put a d^fference between the good and the evil, and persuade
your self this one thing of me, that I have a singular care and desire to
preserve peace, the which is so firm in me, that the Cardinal of Lorayne and
his fellows can never take the same from me. For the establishing of the which
peace if I might any thing prevail, I would think my self most happy.

Her letters to the Cardinal of Borbon were more vehement, to whom, after
discourse made of her letters sent to the King and Queen, and of the occasion
of her Journey, she wrote in manner and form following.

How long (says she) will you be suffragane to the Cardinal of Lorrayne?
shall he make you ashamed of your brother, sisters, and kinsfolks, and harden
your heart against them? Truly if you will not be moved for their sakes which
are so near of your blood, but will be an ennemie to the reformed Religion:
yet remember what destruction he went about to bring upon you, the Queen being
sick. After ye which, for a while you were ware and took heed, least you
should fall into the like peril, but quickly you forgot the same ageyn, you
were so blinded with the persuasions of the Cardinal: because you are
separated from us by religion, shall therefore the bond of consanguinitie and
nature be broken? Take heed, take heed what you do. They seek for the death
of your natural brother: whose defense if you seek not, I and my Son will
do it our selves. But if you cannot defend him by force of arms, show your
good will otherwise. For these have allured us, God, the King, and
Consanguinitie.

The Queen of Nauar came to Cogn^ with her Armies, whether the Prince of Conde
went from Rochell to meet her, with a great number of Noble men. A great
number of men came daily out of the hither part of Guian, to the Prince of
Conde. But it was marvel that the Papists did not stop their passage, seeing
that they had great Armies of men in a readiness, and had already stopped up
all passage by water.

In the mean time the Duke of Aniou was at Orleans, gathering his dispersed
Army together: but there arising a contention between the chief captains,
he was much hindered: and the Prince of Conde thereby had the better occasion to
proceed in his affairs.

At the rumor of the coming of the Queen of Nauars Armies the City of San
Iand Angely, a well fenced Cities yielded to the Prince of Conde.
and copio^s City in the territory of Xantonge, the strong Castle of Blay,
and diverse other Cities yielded themselves to the Prince of Conde, as F^ntenay,
and Sainmexant, in the territory of Poictou.

When the Prince of Conde went from Noyers, the Andelot was in Britain. And
being certified of his departure, he gathered together a great number of
soldiers, out of Brittanie, Normandy, Touraine, and out of the countries
thereaboutes: the Noble men of the reformed The Ande lot comes to the Prince
of Conde with a great Army.
religion taking great pains therein. So that within a few days they
gathered together to the number of one thousand and a half of horsemen, and
more than two thousand and a half of footmen.

And to come to join himself with the Prince of Conde, he minded to pass
over the river of Loyre. Now the purpose of the Andelot was to take a certain
town called Saulmur, near unto the river of Loyre, that he and the
Protestants the, and ever after might have the more easy passage over ye
river. This thing Duke Mopensier (one of the Princes the kings near kinsman
and one of the house of Borbon) feared, and therefore having the chief
government in those parts, he gave commandment to Martiques Lieuftenaunt of
Brittanie, a man very expert in the wars, to win Saulmur.

The Andelot, little mistrusting that the enemy was so nigh, divided his army
into three parts, that they might be the better vittailed by the villages and
towns. One part was conducted by Monsieur Boisuerd, a very good Captain. The
Andelot tarried at a village called Saintmalin, there to take his dinner. In the
mean time, a Monsieur Boysuerd chief Captain of that army, was conducting
his soldiers to the river of Loyre, there met him a young man wonderfully
dismayed and abashed, and when he perceived that Monsieur Boysuerd and the rest
of his soldiers were protestants, he told Boisuerd that Monsieur Martyques
was come with a great army of men, the greatness whereof, he said, had made
him sore afraid. Monsieur Boysuerd regarded not this news, until he saw
certain troops of horsemen, and then he sought with all speed to defend
himself, and sought to make out of hand bulwarks and trenches between him
and the enemy beside the river: this was a good remedy, but he could not have
his purpose, the enemy marched so fast ^ne* Then Monsieur Boysuerd with all
speed sent word to the Andelot, of the coming of Martiques: but before
Boisuerd could set his men in their array, Martiques rushed upon him with a
great troop of horsemen, dispersed his soldiers, and made great slaughter of
them in the chase. For that they had not sufficient Boysuerd slain.
store of horsemen, Monsieur Boisuerd also himself was slain: many of the
chief Captains also were taken, and many slain. Notwithstanding Monsieur
Martiques marched forward with his army toward Saulmur, with five hundred
horsemen, and ten ensigns of footmen. The Andelot for all this supposed to
have the victory, because his enemies were fewer in number, as he thought: but
when he understood that Boisuerd was slain and a great sort of his soldiers
also, and that Monsieur Martiques had a strong army divided into diverse parts,
when also he perceived that his army had gotten the vantage of ground of him,
he shonned them, and chose^ more convenient ground: suffering Martigues to pas
by him toward Saulmur, many of the souldyours of the Andelot, not knowing what
the meaning hereof should be yielding unto him, Then the Andelot gathering togi
there his men pursued with all speed Monsieur Martigues: the which when he
perceived he rode the faster and took Saulmur, which was then kept by the
Garrisons of the papists: leaving behind them the spoil which they had taken
from the Soldiers of the Andelot.

Now the bridges being stopte up and cut away the The Andelot passes over the
forde of Loyre.
Andelot was driven to seek other ways to pass over the river of L^ire: he
sought therefore to go over at some shallow forde or other: but he could not by
reason of the winter floudes, which had caused the river to be deep in those
places where otherwise there is little or no wa ter at all. Notwithstanding at
the last he found a place so shallow and fleet, that his horsemen, footmen,
Ordinance, wagons, and his whole army passed over the river without peril
being most wonderful and the like seldom heard of before.

After this their safe passage they gave thanks unto The Andelot joins with
the Admiral.
God, and sang altogether the 73. Psalm. beginning thus: IN IVKY IS GOD KNOWN,
HIS NAME IS GREAT IN ISRAEL. And thus as they went foreward on their journey,
they saw certain troops of horsemen on that side of the river: against whom,
when the Andelot had sent certain troops of horsemen, he put them to flight,
and slew some of them.

After this, they passing quietly on their journey came at ye last into the
country of Poictou, and took a certain Town called Tuars by surrender. and
then joined them selves with the Admiral which came to meet them. After this
conjunction of both armies, they took a noble City called Partenay, the
Citizens willingly yeeldinge (...)* saving certain popis^ priests, who
seeking to re^st, were slain.

Then they jointly, and together, besteged a noble City called Engolesme: but
when they had assaulted the same certain days, and were out of hope to win
it, they took at the last a certain young man which was sent at the ea^est
intr^aty of the townsmen to Monpensier, to cr^ue aid at his hands, by which
young man they learned in what great necessity the town was in. Thereupon the
Admiral gave a new assault to the other side of the Town, and by battery made
such breaches in the same, that the Townsmen being void of al hope to defend
themselves, came straightway to compositio^ with the Admiral for the surrender
of the Town. So that this City came into the power of the Prince of Conde.
And strayt^ after this, that Noble City Niort came into his hands. In so
much that it may seem wonderful that so many Noble Cities in so short while
having so near unto them great aid of the Catholics to defend them, should
be taken. These things happened in the month of September.

Toward the end of this Month, a great Army being gathered together at
Orleans, ye Kings Edictes were theenderedout, in one of the which Edictes, the
use and administration of the reformed religion was quight taken away and
forbidden. It contained this sum.

Know all men, that the Kings our Aun^etours of happy memory, to the end they
might show themselves An Edict prohibiting the use of the reformed religion*
to be Christians, and true defenders of the church, have used all lawful ways
and means to preserve the same Church, and to take away the divisions of
Religion, sprung up by secret sermons, and by seattering abroad of r^probate
books. And after the unfortunate disceasse of ou^ Father King Henry, there
were certain Noble men, stirre^ up by the Ministers of this new opinion,
which withdrew themselves and moved controuer^, and that upon no zeal of
religion, but moved by ambition to have the government of this Realm, under
King Frances our brother, albeit that he himself was of sufficient years by
the laws of this Realm, and was able enough to govern, both for that he had
authority and wisdom enough, and also was ruled and counsayled by the
virtuous and wise counsel of ye Queen his mother* and of other singular
Noble men which were still about him after the death of his Father king Henry.
who directed him in the steps of our Father: as plainly appeared all the
time of his reign. Who had no doubt brought the kingdom into that former
State and condition, in the which he found it, if the Lord had lent him longer
life: notwithstanding the state of the Kingdom was then troubled by certain
noble men, who when they durst not openly bewray their minds concerning the
getting of the kingdom unto them* by the industery of their Ministers of this
^ewe learning, they caused the tumult of Amb^yse, under the color of offering
up a supplication, with a confession of faith to our brother the King: who,
although he knew them to be the authors of that mischief, yet notwithstanding
with great clemency, following the example of our heavenly Father, he
pardoned all his subjects by an Edicte, which had straied from faith and
truth, and would come into the right way again, thinking hereby to prevail
more, than by the Rigor of punishments. And by another Edict he left those
under the power of Ecclesiastical laws which would not come into the right
way: which Ecclesiastical power, is no bloody power, so that men break not
the common peace. Notwithstanding for all this the Kings expectation was
frystrated by the secret conspiracies* of those Noble men, which went about to
move war under the color of Religion, and to trouble the Realm. And when
he understood the whole matter thoroughly, he was constrained to come to
Orleans with an Army of men, to prenent and provide for things in time, for
the which cause he called all the States of the Realm together. In the which
place he dyed, and I being of younger years, The King was xii ye^ old when
his broth^ Frances dyed.
and therefore less able to take upon me the government of so great a
kingdom, was by the providence of God appointed to succeed him. And the
convenient and ne^essarie help which God left unto v^, namely the counsel of
the Queen my mother in the gouernmente of our Realm was greatly let and
hynde^d, through the contempt of this our young and tender years, by those
Noble men, which next to our own brenthren, are most near of blood unto us:
and yet notwithstanding thus they have disagreed and contended with our
mother. And to make themselves the more strong, they ha^ taken upon them the
defense of that new opinion, by whose favor and travail, the same is
wonderfully spread abroad and increased. To prouids a remedy for ye which
matter so soon as we were anointed, we commanded our Princes, our privy
Counsel; and all the Counselors of the Senate of Paris, to come to
Sangermane: and by their counsel and advise we made an Edicte, in the which
we clean forbad the use and administration of the reformed religion, or any
other contrary to that which was received in the Catholic church by our
Elders, after the receiving of the Christian faith. But because the fautors and
maintainers of that new opinion, saw that their ambitious counsels and
purpose were greatly let and hyndered by this Edict, they would not suffer the
same to be observed and kept: but in all places styrred up such as embraced
that new opinion, by whom the making of that our Edict might be frustrated.
And under the color of those troubles, which by their means were raised
daily throughoute the whole Realm, they pretended that the Edict could be
observed by no manner of means: and they were the authors that an assemblye of
exquisite and learned men was made out of all Parliaments, which might declare
their Judgments concerning the ordering of religion, and that by them an
Edict might be made: an^ by this means, they being most mighty and of
greatest authority, and having made whom they lysted to be of our counsel,
they obtained their purpose, namely, That there should be liberty granted for
the exercising of two religions, the which was confirmed by the Edict of
January: the which Edict the Queen our Mother suffered against ^ir will (which
was ever godly) to take place, as did also our Cosyn the Cardinal of Borban,
the Cardinal of Turn^n, the Duke Mo^orencie the Constanble, the Marshall of
Santandrae, and also the chiefest of our officers, which our Father and
brother left unto v^: w^o at that time toulde the Queen, that it would be the
less (...)to suffer the same religion, seeing the use there of should not be
within the cities: and because there was good hope it would come to pass that
when we should come to our full and perfect age, we should amend and reform
the same by our auth^ritie and power royal. Therefore the Queen our mother
went forward with singular faith and constancy to retain and keep us, our
brethren, and Sister, in the catholic, and Apostolic doctrine of Rome, which
our auncetours embraced and received for a thousand years ago and more, and
in those days flourished and brought notable things to pass: in consideration
whereof we, and all our subjects are greatly bound to our mother the Queen.
And although those men of the new religion should be sufficiently satisfied
and contented with that Edict of Ianuarye, if they had not another purpose and
meaning than the liberty of their consciences: yet notwithstanding they being
not content with that our sufferance, shortly after the Proclamation of that
Edict openly declared their perverse minds, of their own private authority
bearing armor against us, taking our cities and holds, bringing foreign
strangers into this our Realm, and like mortal and sworn enemies, joining
battle with us at Dreux, in the which it pleased God to give unto us the
victory, having compassion on his people our subjects. To the end also we
might win our rebellious subjects with clemency, and might (...)them to our
obedience, hoping that it would come to pass that God at the length, when we
should come to more full and ripe age, would restore obedience and concord
to his Church, we granted unto them another Edict, in the which we granted
them some liberty to use their religion. And although from that time forward
we had many ^ecrees according to their own fantasy concerning public
peace, to the end we might put them out of all fear and suspicion: yet
notwithstanding they did very lycensiously break them: howbeit we made our
Edicte for their peace and tranquilities sake, the which although we might
have revoked as being only made but for a certain time, yet notwithstanding
we saithfully have observed and kept the same, and have given them no occasion
to bear Armor against us.

The which notwithstanding they have done of late, and have come unto us with
force of arms, pretending afterward that they came in that manner, to offer
unto us a supplication for the preservation of their religion. Notwithstanding
they have openly bid us batta^l, in so much that they have besieged our
principal City Paris, and have done all that they can to win the same. Yet for all this, we seeking to spare the blood of our nobility, and the lives also of
the rest of our miserable subjects, and indeuouring to win them by clemency,
have graun ted unto them, (they craving at our hands peace) the same Edicte,
they certainly promisinge, that they will faithfully observe and keep the same,
and will never hereafter trouble our Realm. Who nevertheless brake that same
their promise, and refused to surrender unto us Rochell, Montalbon, and diverse
other Cities in Languedoc, kept still bands of Soldiers in sundry parts of
the Realm, brought in strangers, and killed many of our catholic and
faithful subjects: and all because (as they said) certain of their side were
slain: for the examination and punishment whereof we gave commandment.

But seeing we see them so oftemtymes to abuse our clemency and goodness, and
can doubt no more of their wicked counsel and purpose, which is to appoint an
other soueraign, and to destroy him whom God has appointed: and by this means
to draw^ from us our subjects: for these and diverse other great and wayghty^
causes, with the advice, judgment, and consent of our mother. Brethren, of our
Princes, and of our priyue counsel. we have and do inhibite and forbid by an
Edict irreuocable and everlasting, al men of what state, condition, or degree so
ever they be of throghout our whole realm, to use any o there religion tha^ the
catholic relig o^ of Rome, which our au^cetours have embraced, and which we
following their ex ample do as yet hold and keep. Also we straightli co^mau^d
and charge that all the ministers of that religion do depart and avoid out of
this our Realm, with in fiuetene days after the proclaiming of this Edict.
These things we command, upon pain of death, and confiscation of the
offenders goods. Notwithstanding we will not that the men of the reformed
religion so called, be vexed and sifted in their consciences for their
religion, so that they frequent and use no other religion than that which is
Catholic and of Rome. Hopinge that it will come to pass at the last, both by
the instinct of Gods holy spiril, and also by the diligence of the prelates
of ye church, that all our subjects shall embrace and receive one religion.
And we do freely pardon and forgive every one which with in twentye days after
the publication of these our letters shall put of his armor, and live peaceably
as it becomes faithful subjects, whatsoever he or they have committed
heretofore against us, and our familye: all the which, if they will obey, we
take under our protection: and do forbid our officers to do unto them any
harm. Also we will that all dissentions, between whomsoever they be, whether
they be common, or pryuate, beburied in silence: and that no injury be done to
a ny, either in word or deed. Whatsoever he be that does contrary here unto,
he shall be punished as a rebel. But when twenty days are expired, we will show
against the obstinate all manner of severity and rigor by law: and will show
unto them no manner of favor. We will and command that this Edict be
published and pro claimed every where, and the^ straightly observed, and that
we be certified from day to day of all things concerning the same. Whereunto,
ye that be our officers, look diligently.

There was also another Edict made forbidding all those that professed the
reformed religion, to have any manner of office committed unto them: whether
they had lived peaceably at home all the time of the Civil wars, or whether
they had born armor to take part with the Prince of Conde.

These Edictes were first of all by the Senate of Paris, then by all other
Courts of the realm very joyfully received, and no less carefully published
and proclaimed the same day, al solemn rites being diligently ob served, as
though the kingdom after so long and so many vexations and troubles of war,
had now (...)peace.

There came also from the Pope letters patentes, by Letters pat^es from the
Pope.
which the King had liberty granted unto him to take out and to sell of the
Ecclesiastical lyuinges and goods, so much as should be worth unto him yearly
five hundred thousand Crowns, to maintain war against the heretics, that
they might either be utterly destroyed, or else be brought to the obedience of
the church of Rome. But first in the beginning of his letters, he spoke
largely concerning the great boldness of heretics, and of their wicked
coun^ayles, which they had and have with the Germans and Englishmen.

The Prince of Conde about this time put Monsieur Aciere in trust to gather an
army of men together: too whom there came a great number of Protestants which
were by the papists molested and thrust out of their houses, or which could
not be in sufficient safety in their houses, out of Lang^edoc and Dolpheny: and
a man might see great heaps of men, women, children, and old folks, leaving
their houses, and fleeinge to those Cities that were in the territory of
Ui^aretze and Seuenas, which are also in Languedoc, and were kept by the
Protestants. Notwithstanding Monsieur Aciere gathered out from among these no
small number of warlyke souldi^urs, which he minded to conducte to the Prince
of Conde to Rochel. He had also of the men of Dolpheny seven hundred and five
Enseignes of footmen, and two Giddons of horsemen. The Captains over these*
were Monsieur Monbrune, Monsieur Ancon, Monsieur (...), Monsieur Viri^y,
Monsieur Blacon, Monsieur Mirabell, Monsieur C^elard, and Monsieur Orose: all
which were (...)come of noble stock. Out of Languedoc he had five h^ndred and
three Enseignes of footmen, and (...)Giddeons of horsemen. And among those
were nu^bered the men of Uiuaretz, which were also of Languedoc, of which there
were xiii. Enseignes of footmen, under the charge of Monsieur Pierregord: and
one Giddon of horsemen under the conduct of Monsieur Toras. The Captains over
the rest, were Monsieur Beaudisne brother to Monsieur Aciere, Monsieur Ambri,
Mo^sieur L^mosson, Monsieur Burlargues, and Monsieur Espondillan. And Acieres
band contained two hundred well appointed horsemen. Monsieur Mouents had
gathe red out of the Prouancialles ten Enseignes of footmen: and Monsieur
Uallouore, a Giddon containing a hundred horsemen. The place appointed for all
these ba^des to meet was at Ales, a town of Languedoc in the territory of
Seuenats: and the time of their coming together was the xxv. day of September,
But the men of Dolpheny could not come into Languedocke, but they must needs
pass over the river called the Rosne, the which was very hard to do, both
for that the same was very swift and deep, and also because the ennemie had
stopped the passages by the bridges. But for all this, Monsieur Meuents, by his
singular industry and trauaill, within ^ower and twenty hours builded and
raised up a strong Bulwark over against Uiuarets: and so the Armies were
carried over by shipp out of Dolpheny, to the other side of the River. After
this, all the Armies met together at Ales, and with great speed, when they had
passed the territory of Seuenats, and Rhodez, Monsieur Aciere the xxiiii. day
of October, passed over the river Dordo^ne at Solliac with his whole Army, and
so came into Guia^: Monsieur Monluc the Lieuetenant, daring not adventure upon
him to resist.

The rumor being spread abroad of the coming of Monsieur Acier, Duke
Monpensier, which a little before was in the territory of Poictou, minded to
stop his passage, with four thousand horsemen, and with forty Enseignes of
well appointed Souldioures, footmen. Therefore taking long journeys, he came
with speed to a City called Perigueux, near unto the which Monsieur Acier
had brought his army, to a little Town called Sainctastier: where Monpensier
set upon the head and tail of Monsieur Acieres army, with two several
bands: but by and by Acier gave him the repulse: who fearing least the enemy
would go to invade the other bands which were distributed among the villages,
he by and by gave warning to Monsieur Mouentes and to Monsieur Pierregorde to
keep their Soldiers with in their Camps, and said that he would come by and
by with the rest of the army. This advise pleased the captains very well,
^auing only Monsieur Mouents, who vaunsing his Enseignes willed them to
follow him. Monsieur Pierregorde and the rest of the Captains fearing least
by this destruction of the bands, there should be a way made to the enemy to
anoy them, and protesting that the whole blame hereof should rest on him, they
also with their bands marched forward. But they were not scarsly gone out of
the village, when they saw Duke Monpensier coming with a great army of
horsemen. Then with speed he prepared himself, and choose out five hundred
harquebuziers to be in the first front, who straytway discharged a great peale
of shot against the lances on horse: but they presently charging their
lances, ran with such violence upon them, that they brake the ray of Mouents
soldiers, and so ensued a sore skirmishe: and when they had resisted a while,
the whole army of Mouents turned their backs and fled: the two Captains also
themselves being slain, namely Mouents and his soldiers slain.
Pierregorde, and Mouents, and the rest which fled, were for the most part
slain by the Inhabitants of those quarters: notwithstanding many escaped and
ame to Monsieur Acier in safety. In this skirm ishe there were slain and
wanting of Monsieur Aciers soldiers si^e hundred: and of Monpensiers side,
certain horsemen of great name.

After this, Monpensier gave no other attempt, but returned to the City
Perigeux: and Monsieur Acier, when he had gathered together all his soldiers,
and the remnant of the soldiers of Mouenes, came the next day to a village
called Aulbeterre.

The Prince of Conde hearing of the coming of Monsieur Acier, after he had
won Engolesme, prepared himself to take his journey, and to meet him.

The Queen of Navarre in the mean time dealt very substantially at Rochel,
and had appointed certain Ships to keep the havens mouth belonginge to the
same: and also to the end she might have the more easy passage into England,
which was a great friend and fur therer of the Protestants cause.

Therefore the Queen of Navarre sent letters to Lettees of the Queen o^ Nauar
to the Queen of England
the Queen of England, by Mousieur Shastiller, a Noble man, whom she had
made General of that Navy: and when she had declared the causes of the war
begone, she commended her self and her cause unto her, as follows.

Beside the great good will and desire (most Noble Queen) which I always had
to abide in your favor, there is also at this day occasion offered, the which
truly would greatly accuse me, if I should not by letters declare unto you,
what causes have led me and my children (whom God has lent unto me) hither.
And my fault should be so much the greater, by how much he, according to his
infinite goodness, has bestowed so many and so great benefits upon you, and has
given unto you such a zeal for the advancement of his glory, namely to you O
Queen, whom he has choosen to be a ^ngular Nource of his Church. By good
right therefore are those things referred and brought before you, which do
appertain to this defense of the truth and of the church of God. And truly,
as I know that you understand the general state of our affairs, most noble
Queen, so I pray and beseech you, persuade your self, that there are three
causes (of the which the least ought to be sufficient) which have constrained
me to forsake my own Dominion, and to come hither. The first cause therefore,
is RELIGION, the which would have been oppressed in this our Realm of France,
by the old and barbarouse tyranny of the Cardinal of Lorrayne, and of those
which take his part, that I should (no doubt) have been ashamed of my self and
mine, and to have had my name reckoned among the faithful, if so be, to
withstand this error and horror, and to defend the truth, I had not sought all
means possible, both by my goods, and also with peril of my life: and except
also my Son and I had joined our selves with this so honorable a company of
Princes and Nobles: All the which are with me determined and fully purposed, by
the help of the lord God of hoastes, not to spare in this cause by any manner
of means, neither life nor goods, nor any thing else which God had lent unto
us.

The second cause, which also depends upon the first, is, our obedience to
the King: because the ruin of religion, is also the ruin of the King: for the
preservation whereof we are straightly bound. And because my son and I have
obtained at the hands of God this honor and dignity, that we are so near of
blood to the King, this also, most Noble Queen, has constrained us to make
haste, and to set our selves against those, which abusing our Kings name and
facillitie, do make him the author of his own detrement and harm, and
(although of himself he is most faithful and sure of his promises) the
breaker of his faith and promises: and that by those subtle means and ways,
which they have devised to break the Edicte of pacification. The which Edict,
as it caused and maintained peace between the king, and his good and faithful
subjects, so long as it was observed and kept, so the same being broken,
calls and provoke the fidelity of the subjects to lamentable and pitiful
war, and so coacted and constrained, that there is never a one of us, which
is not violently and against his will drawn thereunto. The third cause,
most Noble Queen, is peculiar to my Son and me, namely, for that we see the
old and sworn enemies to God and to our s^ocke and kynred, with deadly and
impudent hatred, to go about and seek to raze and utterly to destroy us and
our family: when as also, my brother the Prince of Conde, to avoid the
practices and conspiracies against him and his, was constrained with his wife
and children, to seek a place of refuge and security, the mother great with
child, and the children being in so pitiful a case, that I cannot repeat the
same without tears: beside this also that I was certifyed and knew the same
for a suertie, that some were appointed to steal and violently to carry away
my son from me. With these reasons and causes we being moved, could not choose
but come together, to the end that we being joined in one, might live and dye
together: as also the bond of consanguinitie with the which we are mutually
knit together, does bind us hereunto, that it does command us to do no
less. These are the three causes (O Queen) which have urged me to take the
sword in hand. We do not (as the good catholics lay to our charge) war
against God and our King: we thank God for it, there is no such treason to
be laid to our charge but are faithful servants and subjects both to God
and our King. Of the which I most humbly pray and beseech you to be
certifyed and persuaded, and to assist us with your aid and favor. In the
mean time the mother and her children commend themselves to your Majesty, to
whom they wish most happy preservation.

This letter was written the xv. of October.

Certainly England did greatly favor the cause of the England a succor to
France.
faithful, as may appear by the second demonstration of their good will in
time of extreme peril, binding the Frenchemen unto them for ever by the great
benefits and good turns bestowed upon them. For they gave liberally to such
as were exiles and banished me^ places to dwell in, and very much comforted and
succored the poor, needy, and oppressed, in these tumultes and garboyles of
civil wars. But to return to our former purpose.

The Prince of Conde joined himself with the Army The Prince of Conde seeks
to encounter with Monpensier.
of Monsieur Acier, the first day of November at Aulbeterre: and then out of
hand they consulted concerning the pursuing of Monpensier: of which when they
had agreed, they took certain troops of horsemen of the first Army, and the
greatest part of harquebuziers which came out of Languedoc, and then the
Admiral went toward a certain village called Bertrizi, where it was reported
the enemy aboade: but when they had diligently enquired out the matter, it was
found that he was departed from thence with great speed: and so with loss of
that journey the Admiral returned back again to (...) to the Prince of Conde.
To whom, when he was come again, they determined and decreed together to seek
all occasions of battle: and s^ straightway they pursue^ Monpensier: who with
great expedition traueiled toward the Duke of Aniou. For the Duke of Aniou,
with the rest of the army, was at Chastelleraud in the territory of Poictou,
who had also with him great store of great Gunnes. Therefore the Admiral with
the first Army pursued Monpensier, who was not far from the Duke of Aniou: in
so much that the Duke of Aniou being moved with so great celeritie, removed
his Camp nearer the City, and more strongly encamped himself and his
soldiers: the Admiral not bidding him battle, but extending his army and
displayng his Ensigns in great quantity of ground. Notwithstanding this day
there was nothing don. The day following he marched his army more near, but
first of all he gave knowledge thereof to the Prince of Conde, who sending
before him his footmen, came unto him with the troops of horsemen of the
second Army: but as he was coming, on from the Admiral met him, and told
him that he could not cause the Duke of Aniou to join battle with him,
because he had inca^ped his soldiers within certain valleys environed with
hills, and also by reason of a thick myste, which was so foggie that one of
them could scarsly discern and know another. Therefore this day also was
spent with charge and discharge of thundering shot one against another.

The Prince of Conde had taken a very strong castle, called Ca^uigny, by
surrender, which was situate near to the river of Vienna: This castle he
battered down to the hard ground, because it should not afterward stand the
enemy in any steed.

Then the Prince of Conde, to the end he might entice the lingering Duke of
Aniou to battle, after deliberation had of the matter, retired back again
with the Admiral and went aside, passing over the river again. In the mean
time Monsieur Bocard was coming to the Prince of Conde with the rest of the
army, and with good stoa^e of great Ordinance, when he had taken Pont, a strong
and well fenced city. The Duke of Aniou understanding of this, determined to
set upon Monsieur Bocard, he being yet a good way of from the Prince of Conde:
and passing over the river of Uienua, he came to a certain Town called
Pamprui, where Monpensier tarried for him with the first army. The Prince of
Conde also was minded to join himself with Monsieur Bocard, that if it were
possible, by this occasion he might procure and allure the Duke of Anion to
battle.

Therefore the Prince of Conde came to that place the xvii. of November, and was
no farther then half a league from Monpensiers camp. And by and by there was a
small skirmish between them, which was but short by reason yt night approached.
The Duke of Aniou was from thence about a league. Monpensier as though he had
encamped himself, made certain fires to deceive the enemy, and in the dead
time of the night came toward the Duke of Aniou at Iazenail.

By the break of the day the Admiral sent Monsieur Briguemauld with certain
Troops of Horsemen as scoutes to view the cost: and he himself aboade there
still, the Prince of Conde being not far from him. Then Monsieur Briguemauld,
when he came to the place from whence the enemy was fled, found certain tents
empty, and horses tied, with carriage which they had left behind them, and
riding a little farther, he might discern the enemy going forward: then he sent
Monsieur la Lo with twenty Horsemen to take a better and more certain view
of them: who, when he had ridden more near gave knowledge to Briguemauld, that
they were their enemies, who straighte way with the rest of the horsemen rode
against them: at the sight where of the Soldiers of Monpensier were so
terrefied that they forso^ke their carriage, and fled toward Mongontour, he
leauinge his purpose to join with the Duke of Aniou. And it seemed now that
they had occasion offered them to give notable attemptes, if so be the Admiral
had not altered his purpose, fearinge least the Prince of Conde on the other
part should be troubled with the Duke of Aniou, because he hard oftentimes the
sound of the gonnes. For the Prince of Conde fought with ye Duke of Aniou,
with whom he skirmished diverse times, even at his camp. Notwithstanding this
was not done The Duke of Ang^we put to the worse.
without sheadinge of blood: six hundred of the Duke of Anious Soldiers being
wanting, and of them fiueteen captains. And if they had not been prevented by
night, it was to be feared, least the battle had bin more blou die by the
rescue of the Admiral.

The next day again the Prince of Conde came with his whole power to the same
place, but in vain.

The Duke of Aniou marched with his army to Poictiers, and the Prince of Conde
with his army to a town called Mirebell, within four miles of Poictiers,
which straight way was yielded to the Prince of Conde: where he tarried eight
days.

Then the Admiral, when he hard that certain bands of Soldiers tarried at the
city Pontauzane, took all his horsemen both with lawnce and shot, and
travailed in the night, and set upon the whole Legion, of the which the
Brissac was Captain, and slew three hundred of them. There was also the
greatest part of the enemies horsemen, whom he durst not set upon, both for
that he knew not where the Prince of Conde was, and also because there were
great showers of rain which much anoyed them. Therefore returning back
again they met with the Prince of Conde who on the other part went to pursue
the enemy. And thus for the space of certain months the time was spent with
skirmishes of horsemen.

For this was the policy of the chief Captains of the Duke of Aniou, to
defer joining of battle, thereby The Duke of Aniou by Policy delayeth to
loyne battle. Du^e Dau man in Loraine.
to alaye the force of the Prince of Condes Army, that his power being
deminished by delay, which the Prince of Conde could not easily repair again,
they might so at the last oppress him.

While these things were thus wroughte in Guian, the Duke de Aumall was with
another Army in Loraine: mynding there to reseyne the Germans which were
looked for to come and aid the Papists: and also to stop the passage of such
as should come to aid the Protestants, as we will declare when we come to the
same.

While the Prince of Conde was at Mirebell, there came a Messenger from the
Queen to the Prince of Conde, who in the Queens name exhorted and persuaded
him to peace. To this the Prince of Conde made answer before a great
multitude, yt he was constrained to take the sword in hand to resist those
injuries offered unto him, and not to enterprise any thing against the Kings
Majesty: I and my friends (says he) seek only to invade the Cardinal of
Loraine and his fellows, from whose tyranny we will deliver our consciences,
our lives, and our goods: for they are open and sworn enemies to the King and
the Realm.

All men know how greatly I have wished and sought for peace, as of late may
appear by my tractable facillitie. But, says he because the king is compassed
about and beset with his enemies I mean godwilling, to make my petitions
before the King himself. And so with this answer the Messenger was dismissed:
whom fame reported to be sent only as a Spy, to vewe what power he had, and
also to feed him with the vain hope of peace, that thereby they might make
him the more secure.

Concerning the prince of Orange we spoke somewhat before. Therefore, when he
had gathered together Prince of Orange in the low country.
great bands of Souldies, some out of Germauie, some out of the low Country,
and some out of France, and when Mons. Genly a Noble man had brought unto him
for aid a great Army of Frenchmen out of Picardy: ^e passed over the river of
Mense, and came into Belgio, otherwise called the low Country: where he
tarried certain months, and made only certain small skirmishes with the Duke
of Albas soldiers, and took (...)o^ the Papists a few small Towns. And
having no occasions offered him to give any notable attemp^e, the Prince of
Orange seeks to ioyn with the Prince of Conde.
Duke of Alba having the chief Towns in possession, toward the end of the
Month of November, he came by Liege to Picardy: and so came to Saint Remi, and
R^bemont with his whole Army, mynding (as it was reported) to join with the
Prince of Conde. By reason of the coming of the Prince of Orange all the
Cities theraboutes were afraid, and Paris it self also trembled: neither had
they any hope of aid and strength, the Duke of Aniou, being in the Region of
Poictou, and the Aumall in Loraine, sufficiently occupied. For this matter the
Cardinal of Loraine so provided, that what they could not do by might, that
they brought to pass by fraud and deceyte: and sought to draw away the
minds of the Germans, by whom the chief strength of the Army consisted. And
they had the better occasion offered them to bring their purpose to pass,
because the minds of the Germans were offended by nonpayment of their wages.
One Schomberg, which had access to the Prince of Oranges Camp, by the means
of the chief Captain, (whom they call the Marshall of the Army) to whom he
was of kin, sought to bring this thing to pass. Therefore when the Prince
of Orange was minded to March further into France, the Armies of the Germans
refused, and required with angry mood to be paid for y^ time past their
wages. The captains made excuse that they made no promise to the Prince of
Orange to come to war in France, and that they could not so do, because
they were the Kings friends. And thus the minds of the Captains being
distracted, the whole army was dispersed also: the Germans saying, that they
would after so much lost labor, return into their own country. The French
men also by reason of this distraction went daily away by heaps. And because
there was no passage into France by that part, the Prince of Orange with
certain French Captains, minded to return into Germany again, with the
remnant of the army, that he might ^oyne himself with the Duke of Deuxpons,
which made provision to aid the Protestants.

The Duke of Alba being encouraged with this Tyranny of the Duke of Alba.
success, pursued and persecuted the remnant of ye faithful throughout all
the low Country: and laying new ta^es and tributes upon the people, he
provided also new kinds of torment, bringing those forth to execution, whom
before he had put in pryso^. Every where horrible and cruel murdering sightes
were to be seen: but specially at Tornay and Ualencia, where fifty Citizens, to
the terrible fear of all the rest, were executed by ye common hangman.

Concerning the Duke D'aumall we have spoken before, The Germane^ take both
parts.
and have showed for what causes he was in Lorayne: for the papists to
destroy the truth of the Gospel went about to win Germany to take part with
them, pro mising to the Germans great rewards of money, which is a ^oble
pe^swader, and can bring mighty things to pass Besi^e this also they used
false persuasions, saying that they d^d not war against religion, which the
King maintained by his Edicte, but rather against Rebels, which without the
Kings commandment have put themselves in armor to trouble the state, the
people for the most part being drawn to mischeuous sedition, under the
prefence of religion.

On the contrary part the Queen of Nauar and the Prince of Conde, urged and
declared to ye Princes, that the Gospel was specially assaulted, and that with
their accustomed guiles they went about to cover their wickedness, and the
breaking of the Edict: for that all men Duke of Deuxpous promises to help the
Prince of Cond
might see both by the breaking of the Edict, and also by the manifest
denouncinge of war against the truth by those last Edictes, published in
the month of September, that they are mere sclaunders of the papists.
Therefore Wolphang Duke of Deuxpous knowing and wisely waying the cause of the
faithful, promised help liberally to the Prince of Conde, and did so in deed,
as we will here after declare.

In the mean time, while Duke Daumall waited for the coming of certain
Germans to serve the king, he heard say that there were certain bands of the
faith full in the territory of Strausburg. Their Captain was Monsieur Cochay
of Dolpheny, a good warrier: he had charge of eight Ensigns of footmen, and
of certain troops of horsemen, which he had gathered out of the remnants of
the men of Dolpheny, of Lions, and from among the remnante of the Borgondians:
and he trauayled this way, because there was no other passage to the Prince of
Conde, all other ways being s^opt up. The Duke D'aumall went with his power
thither, and being prepared to fight, met with the bands of footmen and
horsemen, travailing without order or raye. Then Mon sieur Cochao taken and
many of his men slain.
Mon. Cochay, being thereunto constrained, sought to defend himself against
the Aumall, as time and place would suffer him, and that manfully.
Notwithstanding the Aumall, though to the loss and spoil of many of his
men, gat at the last the victory: and took Monsieur Cochay and certain of his
Captains, and slew of his men. 120. The rest of the army which were gone
before Mons. Cochay, and met not with the enemy, escaped in safety, without
any sight of the enemy. Then Mons. Cochay was brought to Ments: and being
within a while after brought for the of the City, as though he should have
been exchaunged, was slain without the City.

Noyers a Town of Burgundy, from whence we said Noyers won.
before the Prince of Conde was gone, was notwithstan dinge kept in the Prince
of Condes name with a small Garrison. About this time this town was besieged
and won by Monsieur Barbezieux: the soldiers with in the town having very
valeantly defended themselves so long as possibly they could. The Castle also
was yielded up on these conditions, that the Soldiers should pass in safety
with their lives, and carrye away with them bag and baggage, and that Monsieur
Barbezieux should give his ^aith for the performance hereof. But these
conditions were kept in no point. For so soon as the gates were set open,
they cruelly slew the Townsmen so fast as they met them, only a few after
they were ransacked and spoiled, escaped: all manner of household stuff was
given to the soldier for a pray, but the rest was carried to Troy.

The Germans which were under the Kings pay, were by this time come over the
river of Rhein, well ny to Mogunce, about the latter end of December. There were
of them five thousand and six hundred horsemen: whose principal captains were
these Philbert, Marquis of Bade, Diere Hess, Leuineng, County Rhingraue, and
Bassompere. Duke D'aumall was so proud of this news that openly he threatened
the Duke of Deuxpons and his Region. Notwithstanding the Duke provided so well
for the matter, that this threateninges turned to bare words, and nothing else.

But let us come now to the affairs and exploites of Poictou: After those
skirmishes by horsemen against the Duke of Aniou, we said that the Prince of
Conde took the town of Mirebell, and there aboade: and the Duke of Aniou at
Poictiers. Within certain days after the Prince of Conde brought forth his
armies, and won the castle of Champiniac in the territory of Mo^penser: and
after this he took the Castle of Sauuigniae, and beat down the same to the
ground.

In the mean time the Duke of Anious army being increased and fortified with
fresh bands of Soldiers, both horsemen and footmen, which were brought unto
him by Monsieur Ioyse, Lieuetenant of Languedoc, he determined to besiege
Mirebell, because it would stand him in good steed being so near Poictiers,
the Prince of Conde being gone with his army to the same. And when by battery
he had made the town sautable, the soldiers being not able to defend the
same any longer, for want of vittaile and other provision, they surrendered the
same: howbeit the Souldious that were in the Castle, stood still in the
defense thereof. But the Duke of Aniou, leaving there the Lieuetenant of
Poictou called Mo^ sieur Lude to besiege the same, went with the rest of his
army to a town called Lodun, which was kept by Mo^sieur Acier. Who being
summoned by a Heralt to surrender the same at the commandment of the Duke of
Aniou, answered that the city was committed unto him by the Prince of Nauar,
the kings general President of Guian: to whom again he said he would restore
the same, and to none other, and if any man would go about to take the same by
force, he would by force again make resistance, and if he could, give him the
repulse. And then he certified the Prince of Conde of every thing as it fell
out. In the mean time the Castle of Mirebell was taken, certain soldiers
being let into the same under the color of parley.

The Duke of Aniou hearing the answer of Monsieur Acier, brought his army
nearer the city. The prince of Conde also came thither, in so much that both
armies being in their battle array, and their Ensigns displayed might see
one another very plain. Then they discharged shot one at another with their
great gonns, spending all that day with shot and certain small skirmishes: and
when the night came, both parts encamped themselves. This was done the
sixteen day of December. The xvii. and xviii. days following, were spente as
the other day before.

The xix. day the Duke of Aniou, toward the evening gave place, and went to
Chinon, the Princes soldiers pursuing the army: at which time there were on
the Princes side two hundred Switzers slain, and on the Dukes side three
Ensigns of footmen.

About this time the cold of the winter wared very eager: in so much that it
was wonderful that the Armies would lie in the fields under the cold air*
but such was the burning heat of hatred, that many of both Armies, by reason of
the extreme cold, fell into grievous diseases of the which many dyed.

Therefore both Armies for this time of winter retired. The Duke of Aniou
brought his Army to Poictiers, to Salmure, to Chinon, and other places
thereabouts: and the Prince of Conde brought his army to Tuars, and to
Montriuibellay: And he made Monsieur de Iuoy, which in the time of the first
civil war, was Lieuetenant of Burges, Lieuetenant of Lodune. And these were
the exploites of this year.

Notwithstanding the troublesomnesse of the time and an D. 1569.
the coldness of the winter, these garboyles of war were not quite ceased:
So that this year also was spent and ouerpassed with lamentable troubles.

There was sent into Gascoyne Monsieur de Pills, and man very expert in the
wars, which should make new collections and Moisters of soldiers, and carry
them with him.

For there, what with the aid of the town of Mo^taulbane, and what with the
help of the armies, of the which ye Uicountes had the charge, the faithful were
of no small power: yea, they had also many towns in their possession: although
the inhabitants of Toloze and Monsieur Monluce went about still to anoye them.
So soon as Monsieur Pills was come thither, he took the towns of Beegerac
and Saintfoy by surrender: and when he had gathered together ban^es of horsemen
and footmen, he returned to the Prince of Conde. And by the way as he
returned by that place in the which (as we said before) Monsieur de Mouents
and his men were overthrown, he wounded and flew many of the inhabitants of
that place, because they had destroyed such as at that time fled through their
villages for succor.

The Prince of Condes bands wan and spoiled Saint florent, a very rich Abbay
near unto Salmure, which was the Abbay of Saintflo rent won and spoiled.
guarded with two hundred Soldiers: but when they had slain the soldiers
because they stood stoutly in ye defense thereof, they set fire on the Abbay.

County Brissac, one of the Duke of Anious Captains, and a very expert young
man in the wars, goinge out of Salmure, came suddenly upon a troop of
horsemen, being in number 100. under the conduct of Monsieur Borsauld, part
whereof he flew, and part he put to flight. The same also came suddenly and
unlooked for upon County Momgomery in the village of la Motte: in so much
that Momgomery was constrained to flee into a Castle hard by: but his brother
Corminuille with certain others were taken.

For want of vittailes, the Prince of Condes Army went from Tuarz and from
Montrebell: and one Army came to Partenay, and the other to Niort. Thither came
also the Queen of Navarre, to consult with the Prince of Conde and with other
Noble men there, concerning diverse things. And among all other this was
decreed, That for so much as the papists to maintain this war, did pluck away
and sell the land of Churchmen, according to the prescript of the Popes letters
patents, whether they were Catholics or protestants, the Queen of Nauar and
the Prince of Conde also should do the like in those places which they held
and kept. To bring this thing to pass, letters were given forth in ye names of
the prince of Navarre, of the Prince of Conde, of the Admiral, of the Andelot,
and of the Rochfoucault: By which letters certain me^ were commanded to sell
the land of Ecclesiastical persons, and to assure and warrant the buyers in
their names, quietly to enjoy the same. By this means, within a short time,
they had gotten a great mass of money.

And on the contrary part the Kings Edictes, of the which we spoke before,
were executed with great rigor against Religion. All the moveable goods of the
faithful at the first which were taken in spoil and reserved by the
Magistrate were openly sold: their lands were made to pay great fynes and
subsidies, to mainteyne Garrisons and soldiers: Garrisons were set to keep
Noble men's housholdes: and the lands of the faithful by the commandment of
the Kings letters, were appointed to be sold.

The Prince of Conde gave an attempt against Lasignan, being a very strong
Castle, being come thither with the greatest part of his armies: but failing of
his purpose he departed again from thence.

Sanser a City in Burgundy was besieeged by the catholics, Sancer besieged.
whose captain was Martinenge an Italian. To this siege came Monsieur Nemours,
bringing with him three thousand footmen, at the least, and certain troops
of horsemen: all which he brought out of Prouance to aid Martinenge in the
seige. The General over these was County Tend Lieftenant of Prouance. With
these also there came certain Armies out of Dolpheny, under the charge and
conducte of Baron des Adretz: whom we said before forsook the faithful in
the first war. The Townsmen valiantly for certain Months defended
themselves, and by diverse eruptions upon the enemies and skirmishes with them,
they had slain many of them, and broken many of their great gunnes.

Therefore Martinenge when he had wearyed in vain his soldiers with the
extreme could of winter he took up his caryage, raised the seige, and departed
away secretly in the night. Then the warders and watchmen of the City,
suspecting that the enemies fled, gave knowledge thereof to the chief
Captains in the City, who going forth by the break of the day with certain
soldiers slew many straglers that lingered behind the army without order or
raye. After this, county de Tend went to the Duke of Aniou: and Baron de
Adretz taking Nemours with him, went to the Duke D'aumall: This was about the
beginning of February. The King was now at Mets: and before he came thither
he had forbidden the Protestants to use the reformed religion upon pain of
death.

The power of Duke D'aumall being greatly increased with new and fresh aid,
he determined to encounter with the bands of French soldiers, which waited
for the Armies of the Duke of Deuxpons: and came to Sauerne a town belonging
to the Bishop of Strasburge, which favored him, and there he stopped all the
passage over the river against the enemy. But he could not there abide, being
repulsed I put to flighte by the Frenchmen his enemies. These French bands that
put him to ^light, were such as had fled out of the hither part of France
thither, and partly which were left of the Army of the prince of Orange.
About this time MonsGenly dyed at Bergasiber in the Dominion of Deuxpous, and
because he was general of those Armies, Mons. de Moy a Noble man and a good
Captain was chosen in his steed.

While Duke D'aumall behaved himself thus about the borders of Loraine, there
came to the Duke of Aniou, two thousand and two hundred Germane horsemen,
conducted by the Rheingrane, and Bassompierre. He himself when he had paid
the rest of the army their wages, went with all his power toward the
Territorye of Engolmoys: mynding to win Engolesme a very fair and copious
City. But because the passage to the river of Charente, would be a necessary
help for him, be minded to keep the bridge. And therefore he commanded Mons.
Riuiere to go and take the City and the Castle of I^rnac, which bordereth
upon the river of Charente. This was the occasion of a great and lamentable
battle.

The Prince of Conde being certified of the purpose of the Duke of Aniou, came
to Niort with his main battle the first day of March: and from thence he
came by the Town of Sanlan Angely, the City of Saints. The Admiral went
with the Uauntgarde to Cognac: and the next day after being the fourth day of
March, he with his brother the Andelot brought all the horsemen of the
Uauntgarde both with lawnce and shot to larnac, and with them two Canons and
two dimi Canons. Then straight way the Admiral beseiged the castle of Iarnac,
because Mons. Riuiere by and by at the discovery of them left the city and
went into the castle. But the roaring Canon shot did so shake the castle
gates and the walls thereof, that Mons. Riuiere desired parley: and the next
day after upon condition that he and his s^uldiers should escape with their
lives, he surrendered the Castle. Leaving therefore to defend that place the
Uicount de Montanmoy with his Legio^, the Admiral and the Andelot d^parted to
view and epsy the force of the enemies, because they were said not to be far
of.

The sixte day of this month the Prince of Conde with the Admiral and the
Andelot, taking with them all the horsemen of the vauntgarde and maine battle
saving certain troops which tarried behind at Iarnac with Briguemauld, came
to Beauuoire, beside the river of Mate; where the Duke of Aniou was with his
army. So soon as the prince of Conde saw him he set his army in array, and
commanded certain drums to stricke up behind a little hill hard by them
in covert, as if an Army of footmen had been there. Notwithstanding all that
day was spent with certayn^ small skirmishes.

The Duke of Aniou being driven from th^nce, which is a place of passage over
ye river, sought another way: and certain miles beyond Engolesme, he passed
over the river Charente with his whole army: and in his journey he suddenly
gave assault upon the city of Mele, and on the castle of Ruffec, slew the
garrisons and tok^ the same: and after this also he took ^y surrender the city
of Chasteau neufe, and there passed over the river. *

Report hereof being brought to the Prince of Conde, he perceived well that
there was no lingering of time, he went therefore with his maine battle from
Saints to Cognac: and the Admiral came with ye vaunt guard ^o Iarnac. The
eleventh day of this month the Duke of Aniou having commanded a strong bridge
to be made at Chaste^uneuf, came near in the mean time unto Cognac with the
greatest part of his armies, making a counten^unce as though he would
presently besiege the City: The princes of Nauar and of Could were then at
Cognac, their Armies being distributed and lodged among the Uillages there
aboutes. Then by and by they sent word to the Admiral commaundinge him to
come unto them with all speed. The Admiral, because it was needful for them to
be at Iarnac, sent his brother the Andelot to the princes, to the end they
might both understand the necessity of his abiding still, and also to
deliberate with them what was needeful to be done. The Andelot was not so s^ne
gone, but the Duke of Aniou with his whole army which was at Cognac, rushed
with great violence, mindinge to recover and get the bridge of Iarnac. But
being forced to retire by the Admiral, they turned their backs: and many of
them, and of the other part also, at this con^ict were slain.

In the mean time the prince of Conde deliberating of the matter, minded on
the day followinge to remove his army: and he on ye xii. day came to Iarnac,
and the Admiral removed to Bassac. And the same day the Admiral came with the
Uauntgard before Chasteauneuf, to view the place. He knew that the enemy had
made another Bridge of wood near unto the stone Bridge of Ghasteaun^f that he
might pass and repasse over them with his whol^ army, the more speedely. And
then he ^eturned to Bassac again: leaving there certain bands for defense
till he came back again.

But because of the inco^modiousnes of the place, which caused the army to be
dispersed abroad, the prince of Conde sent to the Admiral willing him to be
with him (...)day early in the morning, and to bring with hi^ all his bands,
and his ordinance: and to see that the horsemen were with him even at the
break of the day. So soon as ye Admiral had received the message, he sent
word that night to every captain hereof. But many of them were so slack that
they had the next day in the morning scarsly taken their journey by nine of the
clock. The Admiral tarried their coming at the River to keep the same with
certain bands of Harguabuziers.

In the mean time the Catholics Camp passed over the river of Charente all
the night with as great speed as might be: and were come before Bassac in the
sight of the prince of Conde. But because the said prince lacked the Lord
Pluueaus horsemen and his regimen of footmen, leaft (as you have heard)
behind and were now coming, he had no intent as yet to fight. The morrow
after being the xiii. of March, the prince with his horsemen that were already
arrived, presented himself in the morning in order of battle before the
enemy above the Uillage of Bassac. When all was arrived, the said prince
returned with the battle, and drue to Matt^ near Saint Iean de Angelie,
which the Admiral did also, leaving behind to direct the retracte, the Lord
de la Noue, who retiring a reasonable pase and yet not far of, was charged with
a great host of horsemen, which forced him to take the charge, and chased him
to Bassac, where the Admiral was ready to resist, and repulsed the catholics
unto the other side of the Uillage.

In the mean while certain troops of shot of the Catholics entered the
said village, and sought to skirmishe with the Admiral, who likewise drove
them out of the village: Notwithstanding they were relieved by the rest of the
Camp that followed at hand, and returned to the village.

The Lord Admiral seeing that the Catholics were so nigh, sent a Gentleman
with speed to the Prince, to advertise him that the whole camp of the
contrary side was there and almost at his heels: so that, seeinge no mean to
retire without fightinge, desired him to advance such powers as he had of the
battle. Immediately the prince reculed till he was very near the Admiral,
ringing himselfs in battle at the foot of a hill The batail in which the
Prince of Conde Was slain.
on the left hand. The Admiral was in battle raye on the right hand along a
little Coppies lookings toward Bassac. He had about him the Lord Pluueaus
regimen of five Enseignes of footeme^, who made a long skirmish: and seeing
that the Catholics in ye mean while were ready to charge him, coming
between the Prince and him, turned his face right upon them, and with certain
Cornets which were with him, pressed upon them so whotly, that he brought to
the ground a great number, and so passed further.

At the same instant the Prince (when he had mads his prayers unto God) went
to battle with great courage: upon who^ rushed a great Squadron of Reisters or
Germans, and set upon him on the side: at which charge his horse was killed
and fell upon him, and his horsemen put to the chase, whom the Catholics
pursued. Albeit as they passed further, a French Gentleman, named the Lord of
S. Iean, knew the Prince of Conde, and also the Lord de Argence: both which
promised him to save his life, or else to leave theirs in adventure. Where
upon, as an Archer being descended on foot to help to shifte the prince of
Conde from under his horse, and had set him on his feet, one named Montesquion
(who was thought to be the captain of the guard to the Kings brother) knowing
the Prince, shot him thorough the head with a pistolet: the shot entering
behind, and came forth under his eye: of which he presently dyed. They which
were present were very sore offended for this deed: but specially they which
had given unto him their faith to save his life.

This was the end of the Prince of Conde, a Noble Prince* who has left behind
him a gloriouse name among the French me^: yea and among those that were his
enemies for ever. There was in this prince a singular love toward the gospel,
a desire most fervent to aduau^ce the glory of God, to further the dignity of
his prince, and to maintain the liberty and peace of his country. For the
which his enemies brought him into great peril: and sought by all means
possible, to quench that burning zeal in him toward the Gospel. But he
declared himself wise and valiant* in over passiug those troubles, and also
constant in the truth of the Gospel: who, for the same has forsaken great
dignities and princely honor, and has consecrated himself wholly unto God: and
who, as he has for the gospel of God, for the dignity of the king, and for
the liberty of his country spent his life: even so, seeing he has for these
causes spent it, he has in the foil got the victory of his enemies, and
being dead, triumphs over death and is yet alive. A miracle which all godly
and christian men throughout all posterities, will ever embrace.

In this battle there were two hundred of the faith full slain, and forty
noble men taken prisoners: among whom was the bastard son of the King of
Nauar, the Lord de la Noue, whose horse was slain at the first charge, the
lord of Teligni, de la Balbe, de Soubize, and de Love: also the Lord Stuard a
Scot* and Chastelher porta^t, who after they were taken, were stabbed with
daggers and murdered. On the Catholics side were slain, the County de la
Miraude, the lord de Monsaletz, the Ba rons of Ingrande and Prunay, with many
other.

After this battle, one part of the horsemen drew to S. Iean de Angely, with
the Admiral, the L. Andelot, the County de la Rochefocault, and Monsieur de
Acier: the other part took their way to Coignac.

In this Encounter the prince had no other footeme^, than the Lord Pluneaux
regiment heretofore me^cioned: all the rest of his footmen was retired by his
commau^deme^t to Iarnac, as being not of mind to fight that day. There was made
at Iarnac a bridge of boats to pass the River Charente in time of need: over
which the footmen seeing the overthrow, passed over to the other side of the
river, and so then brake it in pieces for fear of pursutes, and soretired to
Coignac, where were the princes of Navarre and Anguyen. The artillery brought
from Coygnac, was brought thither again, having made not great way.

The said princes of Nauar and Anguyen (now prince of Co^de) departed from
Coygnac the next morning, with such horsemen as were retired unto the^. And the
same day they arrived at Saints in Sainctonge, leaving their footmen at
Coygnac, to maintain war against the Catholics: Who the morrow after
being the fiueteene of March, presented themselves in battayll before Coygnac
with horsemen and footmen, making countenance to besiege it.

There was a great skirmish upon them on the parks side thereto adjoining, by
mean of a silly made by the Lord Baudine: In which encounter were left dead in
the same place two hundred bodies, and great numbers hurt* which made the
Catholics to retire the same day, retourning to Iarnac.

In the mean while the Admiral understanding that the princes were retired to
Saints, went thither too them: and with the horsemen of their trayn, he
brought them to S. Iean de Angely, and from thence to ThonieCharante.

Now, the army of the faithful were in great sorrow, when the Queen of
Navarre came to them, because of the death of the Prince of Conde: who used
these persua sions and exhortations to quiet their minds.

Whereas (faith she) the prince of Cynde has spent his life valiantly for the
defense of so good a cause* which also in his life time he ro^stantly defended
the has left behind him to his fellow soldiers, an example of Constancy, for
them to defend Gods truth, the Kings dignity, and the liberty of their
Country: against which wicked men rebel: Our good and just cause is not dead
with the Prince of Conde: neither ought the minds and courage of so good men,
to quayle and faint by any manner of means: God has so provided for his cause,
that he had raised up Defenders thereof in the* Prince of Condes place, to
succeed him. Those* and many other comfortable persuasions the Queen of
Navarre used to encourage the moorning Army: and then returned to Rochell.

The prince of Conde thus taken away, and his death no small loss to them of
the religion, the Kings*brother knowing the princes of Navarre and d'Anguyen*
were passed the river of Botoune, determined to follow them, and in that
purpose departed from Iarnac and came to Dampierre where he passed the river:
he lodged his army within half a league of S. Iean d'Angely; of purpose to
execute a certain enterprise within the said town, by mean of the captain
of the Castle. In the mean while the Princes Army passed Charante, as well
at Thonye Charante, as at Tallibourgh, keeping the boats always on their side.

The Kings brother understanding the said army was passed over Charante, and
also that his enterprise upon the town of S. Iean d'Angely, was so discovered,
as he could not commit it to safe execution, returned from whence he came,
that is, to Iarnac, Chastoau-neuf, and places about Angoulesme, attending his
opportunity to effect an attempt which he had conspired upon that town, and
that by mean of the captain of the Park, which was also discovered, as
hereafter shall follow.

The Princes being now on the other side of the river Charente, began to survey
their forces, viewing first their horsemen, and then their foot^ in order as
hereafter shall be showed. All the horsemen were sent for in one day into two
places: The prince of Nauar and the L. Admiral mustred the battle, and ye d'
Andelot with the County Rochefoucaut, the vauntgarde. There were viewed and
enhabled about. iiii. thousand horsemen, well mounted and armed, with
valiante disposition to follow the cause to a good end. It was openly read
there to all the horsemen, that the prince of Navarre* declared himself chief
of the army, with promise not to leave The oathe of the Prince of Nauar.
the camp till a good and happy peace, and much less to spare his life and
goods in that behalf. This being published, the horsemen likewise protested
by oath not to depart the army without his leave, nor forbear life
(...)living in the assistance of the quarrel.

l'Endureau captain of a hundred light horsemen, after l'Endureau reuoltes
she last conflicte, revolted, and took part with the County du Lude,
governor of Poytou. He was grievous, (after his reuolte) to the Protestants in
a number of heavy evils, as in pilling and robbing them without respect, and
also under shadow of his white Cassakins, wherewith he yet disgnised his people:
He took the castle of Montaagu in base Poytou, yielding to the garrison no
other mercy than by the edge of the sword. He made many incursions into
Poytou, and anoyed them with such general peril, that the princes (to
overcome him this troops) dispatched thither the Lord de la Roche^ard with
vii. cornettes of horsemen, and the regiments of footmen of the L. la Mousson,
Saint Magrin, and Montamma, whose strength and travel was to small purpose,
because the enemy had a special sauetie in his singular swiftness, as
knowing well the straites and compass of that country.

The princes being at Saints, got intelligence of the enterprise which the
Kings brother mente to execute within Angoulesme, and thereupon (knowing also
that he was upon his way thither, dispatched to intercepte that purpose) the
Cou^tie Montgomery with ten cornets of horsemen, over and besides the regimen
of footmen of the Lord Montbrun and Mirabel sent thither all ready. The
Montgomery, the better to execute his charge, in the beginning of April,
sommoned the said ten cornets of horsemen to be before him at Pons, the monday
being the fourth of April in the evening. At his coming, he found only. vi.
cornets with whom he departed after some expectation for the other which were
not yet come: he travailed all that night, and the next morning was received
within the town of Angoulesme without any let or impediment by the way: the
other four cornets coming somewhat late to Pons, hasted on the way after their
copanie, albeit as they were near Chasteauneuf, neither fearing nor for seeing
any peril, they were charged by a great troup of horsemen laid of purpose in
amb^h to intercept the^* and so pursued as the chase came to Coygnac, from
whence they returned and found safety in the swiftness of their horses. At
this encounter the L. de Chaumont, captain of one of the said cornets with
certain other common soldiers were taken prisoners, and about. xxx. or. xl.
slain.

The County Montgomery was no sooner within Angoulesme, than he began to
devise and provide for the safety of the town: wherein for his first
policy, he surueyed the wards and warders of the town: And because that
those which before made the view and search of the town, passed not by the
Park (which is a new building joined to the town) which cut of all
aduertisment of any thing done there: the place it self also not unapt to
receive companyes, foysted in by night without knowledge to them of the town:
The said Montgomery made pierce the walls, and open the gates of that side
toward the park, so that always after the searchers of the town passed and
visited the gardes of the same. He removed also the Captain of the said Park
to avoid treason, with order that every night the warders of that place should
be changed. The Duke de Roauois being led prisoner (as you have heard) to
Rochell, and there continuing til the month of January, was delivered upon
this promis to pay within three mo nethes after twenty thousand frankes to
ransom, or in default of either the time or sum, to return prisoner to
Rochell. He failed and therefore was sommoned to make good his word, which he
refused, clearing himself by the death of the prince of Conde, to whom, as he
had given his faith, so his death acquitted his promise* The Kings brother
kept still about Angoulesme, al be it understanding of the precise direction
of the Montgomery, gave over his further attempt, and depar ted from thence the
xii. of April, taking his way to Perigueux, and passing by Aubeterre, he took
the castle by composition* for whose guard the L. of the place did entertain
about a hundred men, who enduring only cer tayne shot of the cannon, yielded
themselves (their lives saved:) wherein notwithstanding they were abused, for
that diverse were killed, and the L. of the place arested as prisoner: from
Aubeterre he drue to Mucedan a town of Perigueux, before the which, as the Lord
de Montlue attended him with his forces: so the army being arrived, they began to
batter with such fury, as a breach was speedely enforced. There were within
the town seven or eight score popular Soldiers, who dispairing either to
fill up the breach, or to keep it longer, in respect chiefly of their small
nombers, abandoned the Town and closed themselves within the castle being
sufficient ly strong: the catholics being within the town, bent their
batterye against the castle, where they had no sooner battered a breach, than
they cried to the assault. They within sustained the first assault, and
likewise ii. others in the neck of it, repulsing at last the catholics, whereof
a great number left their dead bodies in paune: then the Kings borther (under
their word of assurance) came to Parle with them, wherein he so prevailed, as
they yielded, reserving only their lives, which notwith standinge were
violently taken away from them all without exception* contrary to his faith
and word of honor: he lost at these assaults a great company of
soldiers, with sundry Lords and captains of choice: Brissac slain.
amongst which was the county Brissac stricken with a harquebush shot in the
left cheek: he was a gallant gentleman and of great hope amongst the people,
of xxv. years of age when he died, and of great calling and function in
France. For first he was Knight of the order, cap taine of fifty men at arms
of the Kings allowance, Colonel general over the french footmen in the
Kings camp, and governed also in this journey a regimen of xl. ensigns of
footeman: his brother succeeded him in most of his charges, sauinge the estate
of Colonel general which was given to the Lord of Strossie: there dyed at
Conte P^ padon slain.
that slege the contie Pompaden: with many other to the number of v. or vi.
hundred.

Mucedan being taken in this month of April* the Kings brother took way
again to Angoulmois, and the Lord of Montluc returned to his gouernemente,
and charge.

The Princes horsemen being thus viewed and mustered, they would also survey
their footmen, in which business the d' Andelot was chiefly used, and
therefore immediately dispatched, to the end he might puruse the garrisons in
every town of their obedience: he began his first travail in this charge
upon the end of April, following the garrisons and mustring them in his own
presence. In the beginning of May, he returned to Saints, feeling himself
somewhat sick, the same growing so upon him as he dyed the Sarterday the
seventh of the same 1569. to the lamentable grief and displeasure of the whole
army, as being noted a most wise and valiant Gentleman, called commonly the
knight with out fear: his office of general Colonel of the French footmen
was given to the Lord d' Acyer* his company of men of arms since his death
has bin governed by the Lord of Beauuais, his Lieuftenant. It was thought he
was poisoned, and the physicians that viewed his bo die were of the same opinion.

Immediately after, in the same month and at the same place dyed the Lord of
Boccarde, having line long The Lord Boccarde dead.
sick, he was of no less council in matters of consultation, than of courage
in the execution, his estate of the great Master of the artillery was given
to the Lord Ianlis his son in law, with his cornet of horsemen.

And now, to ouerslip nothing that was executed in this last April, there eis
in the mountayns of Daulphyne a Castle nere to Bryanson, wherein the King
keeps an ordinary dead pay of certain numbers of soldiers: A Captein called
Colombyn borne in Grenoble, vndersta^ ding by certain of the borough of Oysans,
that most part of the said dead pay men were issued out of their charge, took
the said Castle, and finding no resistaunce other than the very captain of
the place, who yielded being hurt with a shot, he made him self Lord of it,
where neglecting one first and most necessary policy in a victor, he rather
labored to deface the images, tha^ to furnish place y^ with convenient
provision, which being not unmarked of certain evil neighbors, purlewing upon
the Castle, they forthwith environed him with a siege* and so cut off his
vittaill, whereof they knew the castle had but slender store. Their siege
continuing about xv. days, enforced him at last to render the place upon
composition and only reservation of life, which notwithstanding was not kept,
for that all his soldiers were cut in pieces, and he only led on live to
Grenoble.

After the general view and muster of the Princes footmen, the Lord de Pills
(returned now from Gascoygne) was sent to sease upon the I Will of Medoc, a rich
I Will lying between Rochell and Bordeaux, containing in length about xvi. or
xvii. leagues, and 4. or 5. leagues in breadth: he provided necessary boats to
pass the river of Gironde, and embarking himself with two thousand footmen,
descended into the said I Will, and took haven without any let: he made himself
master of the isle upon the sudden and unlooked for, finding great foyson of
riches, wherewith he and his soldiers loaded themselves plentifully.

By mean of this isle he besieged Bourg a town in Berdelois, but being
speedely called back by the princes, he raised his siege and came again to the
Camp: At this siege died of a shot in his shoulder, the Lord Ualphe uiere,
Lieuetenant to the late Lord d' Andelot, of his regiment of footmen, whose
regiment was translated to the Lord of Rouray, a gentleman of France. This was
upon the end of May.

The Kings Brother being now returned into the country of Angoulmois, and
after he had somewhat relieved his army on that side to Villebois, sent to
sommo^the town of Angoulesme, by a trompet, wherein he was refused, and so
took way toward Berry to join his force witht the Duke de Aumall being in
the said country: the Count Montgomery charged upon the tail of his camp,
and discomfited certain of them.

The Lady Marquise of Rottelin, understanding of the death of the prince of
Conde her son in law, put her upon the way to come to Rochell, where was the
widow princess her daughter: she passed to S. Iean de Angely, and so to Thony
upon Boutonne, where the said princess met her, and so returned into France
without her daughter, whom she purposed to have with her. But the princes
excused her upon her children, which were then at Rochel, whether she also
returned: it was thought the Lady Marquise came to entreat a peace, which was
not so, because her occasion was only as is aforesaid* this was in the end of
May* 1569.

In the first kindling of these wars, the Princes having true intelligence
of diverse numbers of strangers entered the Realm for the strength of the
Catholics, determined also to fortify their army by ye like mean. And
therefore, knowing that the prince Wolfgange, the Duke de deux Pons, had
erected great numbers of men of arms, as well on foot as on horseback, the
better to defend his own countries, sent to him with request to yield them
succors in their so urgent and extreme necessity, both with his army
presently in point, and also such other powers as he might possibly leuye,
whereunto the said Duke condescended with promise to relieve them with all his
forces, which albeit at that time were not fully assembled, yet he forgot not
within short time after, to put an army in readiness to come into France:
whereof the Duke de Aumale (lying in Lorayne) being informed by special
Intelligencers, dispatched forthwith a Gentleman of his, by whom he advertised
the Duke of the common brute that passed of the diligence he used in the leuyes
of men of war in Almayne, and all to assist the conspiracies of such as arm
themselves against the Crown of France, with displayed war against the
King, which for his part as he neither had nor would believe, so looking
nearer into his magnificence and parts of a Prince, he judged him of no
inclination to favor rebels against their sovereign majesty, considering
withal, the ancient respect of amity so long continued between the house of
the electors of the county Palatines of Rhine, and the scepter of France:
Albeit, his majesty desiring to understand an absolute truth, gave him
special charge to dispatch this special Messanger, he also having authority
of his Majesty to withstand the entry of any strangers to relieve the
enterprise of the said rebels, which he hoped to accomplish, or else to leave
his life in the charge.

The Duke forbear to answer spedily, until his army were fully in point,
albeit after that he had received his Riestres, he began to march toward the
county of Burgogne, and as he lay upon the frontiers of France, tarrying for
his Launceknyghtes, he answered the d'Aumales letter, which he sent forthwith
to the King: In the beginning he laid before him how in the years before, many
Reistermaisters passing through his Duchy without leave, grieved so his
Country, that the continual complaints of his people forced him to draw into
companies of armed men, as well on horseback as on foot, to withstand further
offense to his people. And that now in respect his cousins and dearly
beloved Princes of Nauar and Conde, have lamentably imparted with him the
unjust quarrel, urged upon them, as well to enforce their lives and goods, as
to deprive the exercise of their Religion, contrary to the Kings faith and
plain proetstation of his Edictes: and that not only they, but all the
Nobility and others, professinge the same religion, have, and do endure
miserable oppressions, as estraunged from their own houses, thruste out of
their charges and offices, their possessions and wealths, confliked into the
Kings hands: lastly, that there be raised huge companies of men of war aided
with sundry sorts of strangers to cut them in pieces, as in other times of
open hostility: in these respects together with their earnest motion and
request for succors, and lastly upon an upright view and consideration of
their present calamity, he could, nor ought do no less than aid them. And
for their parts, the better to auouche their integrities in refusing all
attempts, aspiring preiudicially to the crown of France, (as ye d' Aumalles
letters did smisterly suggest) the said princes have protested by letters,
which he keeps sealed with their own hands, that if (at his being in France)
he see or know any inclination in them to conspire in any sort against the
crown, that he would not only draw away his succors, but convert them to the
enemy and contrary side, the rather to revenge their disloyalty: which makes
him judge of the princes side, and believe that they are not only far from the
slanderous impositions of their enemies, but also of unfeigned desire, rather
to reast quietly in their houses, than follow so hard and doubtful a war,
whereunto they have been drawn of force as to defend the violent oppression of
their malicious ennemies: he alleged besides, that when his Cousin the Duke
Casimir erected his army in Almaign in ye like cause, he was also untruly
informed (as of purpose to draw him from succouring the Prince of Conde) that
it was against the Majesty royal that the said Prince did conspire, which
notwithstanding was found otherwise, as appears by his majesty's Edictes of
peace, both first and last, approving always the actions of the said Prince,
as done for the service of his Majesty. And to take away all suspicion, he
declared, that besides that, his meaning and purpose was to succoure the said
Princes of Navarre and Conde, his enterprise in coming intoo France,
stretched also to relieve the little ones of the Religion, dispersed into their
several miseries, to who^ of very duty (being a Christian Prince) he could do
no less than offer and lend his hand to lead them to Jesus Christ.

And to the end his majesty may unfeignedly resolve in ye integrety of his
purpose, and that he undertakes not this journey to spoil his subjects or make
pray of their wealths, or for any other particular profit, he protested that
if his majesty would grant them a safe use of their religion with a free
exercise of the same without limitation and distinction of persons and places,
together with assurance of their goods, honors, charges, and estates, he would
not only return and dismiss his army, but also defray the whole charges of
the same and the said Reistremaisters in their passage, amounting in all to
above a hundred thousand crowns, protesting for end, that if (in refusing his
just and reasonable offers) the quarrel do aggrauate by his coming into
France, to wype his hands in innocence of al imputations hereafter, and the
fault to be laid upon the authors and chief Councellers of the war, being
about his majesty.

The Duke having now received his Launceknightes, entered into France, and
passing by Bourgongue, came to Charity, being coasted sundry times both
behind and before by the armies of the Dukes d' Aumall Charity besieged and
taken.
and Nemors, without attempting any thing upon him: he arrived without let
before Charity, the. xvi. of May, which he battred so vehemently that he
enforced forthwith a breach, in the mean while the Lord of Mouy, passing
over Loere a little above the said town, with three hundred harquebuziers, won
ye suburbs toward the bridge, the same so occupying and amazing the^ that
were besieged, that the Duke entered the breach, and put the whole garrison to
the sword: this town was taken in good time, because that if it had lingered
never so little, the Duke. d' Aumall being very near with succors, had
endaungered the enterprise. The town was no sooner taken, then he was
discovered not far of with. xviii. hundred horsemen, who coming to short to
withstand the Dukes entry, returned in hope to hinder the Duke to join with
the Princes Army, by means that he met and assembled with the Kings
brothers power, who knit together for this purpose in the country of Berry.

In the end of May, the Princes informed of the approach of the Duke de deux
Pons, and the taking of Charity, began to march to join with his army, and
leaving the Lord de la Noue, to govern in the countries of Poycton and
Sainctonge, took their way by Angoulmois, directly to Perigueux, and as they
passed through that country, the Lord of Chaumontes light horsemen, with
certain companyes of footmen, took the town of Noutron belonging to the
Queen of Nauar, wherein were killed about four score men that defended it:
this was the seventh of June. 1569.

The morrow after the said Princes dispatched the County Montgomery into
Gasoyne, to command over the army of the Uicounts, who otherwise would not
agree, as not acknowleging one above another: he took his way by Solliac, where
he passed the river of Dordone, and so beneath Cadenat, he passed also over Lot
and came to Montauban without any let.

They of the town of Perigueux, fearing the coming of the Princes army,
desired the Lord Montluc to send them succors, to whom he dispatched
immediately the knight Montluc his son with. xii. Ensigns of footmen, with
the which he entered the town the fourth of June.

In this mean while the Princes army kept the way drawyng to Lymosyn, and
the Duke de deux Pons hasted by great journeys to join with them, passing the
river of Viene two leagues above Limoges. The catholics had sent thither two.
C. shot to defend the passage, who were all cut in pieces by the Lord de Mouy,
the ix. of this month, on which day the princes army arrived at Chalus a town
in Lymosyn, departing the next day to join with the army of the Duke de deux
Pons in a village within two leagues of Chalus belonging to the Lord de Escars,
Governor of the said country.

The Lord Admiral accompanied with two hundred horsemen, went where the duke
was to salute him: the The Duke de Deux Pons dead.
Duke enduring certain fittes of an ague not many days before, and not cured
as yet, dyed the xi. of this month. 1569. in a village three leagues from
Lymoges: a fore his death, he called before him the chief and principals of
his army, with who^ he communicated in many points, but chiefly in persuasion
and request to pursue the purpose of their coming into France, leaving for
their general leader in his place, the County Wolrard de Mansfeld, before his
Lieuetenant General: his body was carried to the Town of Angoulesme, to be
there huryed.

In the army of the said late Duke, were xxviii. cornets Description of the
Dukes Camp.
of horsemen, containing viii. thousand and v. hundredth Reistres, whereof were
Colonels, Hans Bucq. Reignold Grac, Henry d'Estam, and Hans de There Is: six
thousand Launceknightes will armed on foot, and for the most part pikemen,
divided into xxvii. Ensigns, where of were Colonels, the Lord de Grauillar, and
the Lord Guteryn Gansgorffe baron of Grelezee, besides ii. M. horsemen and ten
Ensigns of foot men of French men, whereof was Colonel (touching the
footmen) one of the sons of the Lord de Bricquemau. There were also in the
said army diverse personages of high estate, as the prince of Orange, his
Son, the Countes Lodouike and Henry de Nassau, his Brethren, the Lord d'
Moruilliers. the Marquis of Renell, the Lords of Mouy and Esterney, besides
many others: there were also xix. pieces of artillery, and they either main
pieces, or field pieces, with others somewhat less, whereof he left two of the
grea description of the princes army.
test at Charity. There were in the princes army about thirtene thousand
harguebuzers, besides pikes, whereof were great nombers, about iiii. thousand
horsemen, six cannons and two mean pieces.

The Kings brother now having received from the Snccours from the Pope*
Pope two thousand horsemen, and four thousand foot men Italians under the
conduit of the county de Saint Fiour, came to Lymoges with his army, fronting
alwais as near as he could the Almaignes, but not medlinge with them.

About this time the Queen Mother accompanied the Queen mother en courageth
the Soldiers.
with the Cardinals of Bourbon and Loraine, came to Lymoges, and there
desirous to see in battle the army of the Duke her son, she visited the*
battayls and squadrons of his horsemen one after an other, perswadinge them to
omit no duty, to continue their service to his majesty, and so departed the
camp, and went to Limoges, where she remained certain days, and then retired
to the court.

The same day the Lord la Love marshall of the prin ces camp with his regiment
of horsemen, was sent to Aesse upon Vienne, to guard the passage, whereof the
Kings brother having intelligence, came the next day beeinge the eleventh of
June, and encamped with in a league of the said Aesse, making out the same day
certain nombers of shot to undertake the skirmishe, who being repulsed, tarried
not long there, but returned to the camp: the twelfth day arrived at the said
Aesse, the footmen of the vauntegarde of the Princes, and thither came also
other supplies of shot from the Catholics camp, and that in great nombers:
they at the first coming repulsed certain shot which were with in the
Subburbes on the other side Vienne, albeit they were forthwith reskued, and the
other driven to retire, ye skirmish endured long and whot, devouring of the
catholic side about CC. men, and of the Princes part only xx. or thirty.

Within two days after the Princes army marched toward S. Tirier la perch, in
ye said country of Limosin, of purpose to refresh there the Launceknights,
weried with so long travail: the Kings brother followed the^, albeit so far
of, as it was the xxii. of June before he came near the Princes, and then
lodged three leagues from the said S. Tirier, where the said princes were, who
sent for their army as well footmen as horsemen to come and camp there. The
twenty three of the same month he aduau^ced more near them, lodging within a
league and an half of S. Tirier in a village called la Roche, the same arguing
to the Princes, that he would give them battle the next morrow, whereof they
attended to see if he would come any nearer, which he did not, albeit the
princes sent for their army to be ready at the first show of the day, who
accordingly marched in good order to the said place de la Roche, where
forthwith they bestowed themselves in squares: the forlorn hope were appointed
to march both on the right and left hand, they of the right hand were led by
the lord de Pills, whose regiment made the first winge, the others of the
left hand were guided by the Lord de Rouray: the Lord de Mouy, with his
regiment of horsemen kept the left hand, and the lord de Bricqueman* and de la
Love with their regimentes of horsemen, the right hand making the winge of the
vauntegarde: the Launceknightes were ringed in two battles, the one a
vauntgarde and the other a battle: the vauntgarde carried. viii. field pieces
which were planted before their battle.

The skirmishe began of ye Lord of Pills side against the Lord de Strossi, who
with two thousand shot was behind a close pale, and sent thither for the
defense of the passage, he had a great advantage upon the Lord de Pills,
because his harquebushears shot in covert from behind the said close pale, and
the said Lord de Pills was open and in a high place. Besides, the Lord of
Strossi had to back him in time of need four Cornettes of Italians, who
seeing that the forlorn hope of the Lord de Pills, could not discharge
their pieces by reason of the rain, charged so hotly upon him, as they forced
him to retire a hundredth pase within y^ wood* killing at that charge about ten
of his soldiers, albeit being rescued by two Cornets of light horsemen of the
Captains la Motte and Brilliam, Gascones, repulsed with equal violence the
Italians, and put them to flighte, in which mean while, the said forlorn hope
renewed more hotly ye skirmishe, and yet did neither hurt nor amaze greatly the
said Lord Strossi, which caused the Admiral to draw thitherward, who as soon as
he had surueted the place, caused to come to him the shot led by the Lord de
Rouray.

They began to skirmishe on the let hand against the Lord de Strossi,
beating him on the side: with constraint at last to habandon his shade and
recule: whereupon the Captains la Motte and Brilliam, with many other
companies of horsemen, gave upon his troops, and put them to the chase,
wherein the lord Strossi was taken and led to the Admiral, who caused the
victory to be pursued to a little river running fast by, and The Lord Strossi
taken
many soldiers followed the fortune of this chase even within the tents of
the Catholics camp, and hard to their ensigns.

On the left hand the lord de Mouy offered to charge certain Cornets of
Italian horsemen, who refused to abide him, and so he returned back.

It rayned so vehemently that there could be no use of any har^uebushe* so
that without any other thing done, the army retired: the Strossi lost and
left dead on Strossies men flame*
the place about five or six hundred: Amongst others of account was slain his
Lieuetenant, called the Lord de Saint Loup, with thirty as well Captains in
chief, as Lieuetenantes and ensign bearers, whose Targets remained also upon
the place: Ofthem of the Religion were slain and hurt of all sorts only
fifty, whereof were two Captains of footmen called Peyrol and la Merry
Dauphynois, this was the. xxv. of June. 1569.

The morrow after, four hundredth Italian horsemen, with certain Pikemen of the
men of Arms of the Duke de Nemors, came to see if the Princes army were
discamped as the Kings brother was advertised, as they approached near the
camp, they were discovered by the watch, and so hotly set upon, as they were
enforced to retire out of order, some slain and some taken prisoners.

The. xxvii. of this month, the said Princes army were driven to discamp for
want of vittailes, drawing toward Perigueux, to relieve themselves.

The lord de Moruillier, comen out of Almayne as The death of ^e lord of
Moruill.
you have heard with the late Duke of Deux Pons, was sick in this time at
Angoulesme, of a hot Ague, the same pressyng him so sore, that within few
days he dyed in the said town.

The County du Lude governor of Poyctou, having assembled certain troops
as well of Touraine, and Aniou, as of Poyctou, departed from the Town of
Poyctiers, The siege of Niort.
and the twelfth of this month of June, planted his seige before Nyort,
wherein was governor the lord de la Brosse.

The first day of the siege the lord de Pluuean, with The Lord pluneau
succors it.
his Regiment of footmen, and his company of light horsemen, entered the Town
in despite of the Lord de Lude, who notwythstanding those succoures, began his
battery the next morning on the side of the Toure de la Pigalle, and followed
it forthwyth with an assault: which was so valiantlye repulsed, that, he
seeing the breach filled up with such speed, removed his battery, and
forced a breach in an other place, albeit he durst not make it good with an
assault, but understanding of supplies of succor at hand raised, his seige
the xxii. of the month of June.

He had four Canons and two mean pieces: Coming again to Poyctiers, he
left within S. Meseut, the lord de Anuony, master of the Camp of the
Regiment of the late County Brissac, with such companies as he had with the
said Regiment, with two Canons, two field pieces and certain other munitions,
leadyng the rest to Poyctiers.

At this siege, the lord de Pluueau was lightly hurt with a shot, and soon
healed again: Of the du Ludes side were slain the Captains Flogeat, Gorbon a
Gentleman of Sainctonge, Fresouet la March, the Captain Colonel of the said
Regiment, the master of the mines, and Morlou guider of the artillery
carriage, with a great number of footmen.

The Lord of Teligni was sent for to go to the reskue of Nyort, with four
cornets of Reisters, with certain other cornets of Frenchmen, and the regiment
of footme^ of the Lord Bricquimi^ the younger. Notwithstanding, before he came
there, the siege was raised, whereupon they went to the said S. Mesent, to
intercept the artillery: which in the end they abandoned, as hereafter shall be
noted.

The Princes army being in ye country of Perigueux was still pursued, but
far off, by the catholics, keeping on the left hand: The Princes entered by
composition within the town of Branthome, they took also two Castles in the
said Country, the one belonging to the Bishop of Perigueux, and therefore
commonly called the Bishops castle: the other called la Chapelle, in which were
killed about two hundred and three score men, with like number of the popular
sort withdrawn thither, and thereabout.

Upon the beginning of July, the Princes army departed from the country of
Perigueux, drawing to Confluence or Confolance, a little town upon Uienne.
Near unto the which is a Castle called Chabaucy, then in question between the
Uidame of Chartres and the Lord de Montluc: within the castle was a company of
footmen, whose Captain refused to open the gates to the vittailers of the
Princes army, and therefore the vauntgard came and besieged them, and the same
day battered and took the Castle by assault, putting the soldiers to the
sword: The Captain only was taken, who promised for his raunsom twenty
thousand Frankes, and withal to cause to be sent home* M. Pierre Viret,
minister of the gospel, taken prisoner in the territories of ye Queen of
Navarre. The castle after it was taken the sixth day of July, was burnt to the
ground. Within two days after the Lord de Mouy entered by composition the
town of S. Genays in Poictou. One chief covenant in the composition was,
that the Town promised to pay ten thousand Franks, so that their goods were
not put to the pillage or spoil, wherein they were duly dealt withal, as
they also paid truly their money.

You have heard how the Kings brother pursued the princes Camp into Perigeux,
who now seeing (as it seemed) into their several purposes, turned away, and
passing by Lymosin and Berry, came into Touraine. Being at Loches, he licenced
a great number of his horsemen to recreate themselves abroad until the first of
October, by which occasion his camp so diminished, as he had not about him of
the French nation above a thousand e or xii. C. horsemen, and very few
footmen: almost all the Captains went to relieve and increase there companies.

The princes being advertised, that the town of Chastelleraut contained not
above three score souldioures in guard, dispatched thither the Lord de la Love
with his re giment of horsemen, and a company of Harquebuziers on horseback:
At his first coming he sommoned the town, which withont much resistance, was
rendered unto him, reserving only that their goods should not be sacked, nor
any the inhabitants hurt, upon which agree meant the gates were opened, and the
Lord de la Love entered at one gate, and the lord Uilliers Knight of the
order, and Governor of the Town* issued out of another. Upon the end of this
month, the Lord de Sansac, with iiii. or v. M. footmen and certain horsemen
of the Catholics, besieged the town of Charity, he battered it so
vehemently, that within small time he made a breach, and sodeinly marched to
the assault, from whence he was repulsed with the loss of v. C. men, the rest
retiring from the assault to the artillery, whereof one of small experience
let fall his match within a cask of ca^non powder, which in a moment flusht up
such a general flame and fire, that it burned a great number of the said
soldiers, and blew one on the other side the river of Loere upon the grauel,
and so burned him to death in every man's sight. They that defended the town,
made great resistance, and grieved many of the Catholics by their sallies
which they made out of the Town: whereupon the Lord de Sansac (not able to
force them) was constrained to raise his seege, hearing withal, that the
Princes had provided to succor them with three or four thousand horsemen,
which notwithstanding was rather incertayn, than a true report.

After the taking of the Castle of Chabaney the princes army took way to
Luzignan, a strong castle, and (as it is said) builded louge since by
Mellusigne: the guard of this castle were two hundredth soldiers under ye Lord
de guron, captain and keeper of the same, who, being sommoned to render it,
refused, by reason whereof it was besieeged the fourteenth day of the said
month, when the battery began very furiously with six Cannons on that side to
the park, they within being sore shaken with the cannons, and almost iiii.
score of their soldiers slain, a breach being beaten open and flat, and the
regiment of footeme in order of battle ready to offer the assault, began to
faint in heart, demaundinge Parley, and immediately rendered the place under this
composition, yt the said Lord Guron with the Lord de Cluseaux, should depart
with bag and baggage, and ye Soldiers with their lives and only sword and
dagger: within the castle were found four canons, two fieelde pieces, with
great store of munition: and as some say, huge sums of money. They
established there* as governor the lord de Mirambeau, a gentleman of the
country of Sainctong, with vi. hundredth harquebusheares to guard it.

The Baron of Adretz, who had bin at the D'aumals camp, and seen his ensigns
but evil followed in respect of his slender nombers of men in his regiment,
took way to Dauphine, very slenderly accompanied, without displaying any
banner. Against his return the lord de Gordes governor there, had put in
readynesse two Ensigns of footmen to send into Languedoc, whereof he
presented the conduction to the said Baron of Adretz, who refusinge such
charge, the expedition was used by Captain Mestrall, who led them thither
upon the beginning of July.

About this time the Queen of Nauar, the Prince her Son, the Prince of
Conde, the lords, Knights, Gentlemen with others that accompanied them,
presented a request to the king, entreating an assured peace of the present
troubles, which for the importance of the matter is hear contained in every
singular word and point as follows.

Sir, it is a thing no less strange, than almost incredible, The protes tants
request to the king for peace.
that amongst so many people put under your obedience by the resolute will and
provision of God, as a blessed pawn and witness of his bountiful regard
toward you, and the same contending in ordinary vau^t to be so dearly
inclyned to the upright proceedinge of your affairs, and preservation of your
crown, there is not one no not on amongst so many nombers, that once offers
to put himself in endeavor to quench or qualify this unnatural fire, so
burninge daily with in your Realm, as there lackes little of the utter
confusion of the same: It is also no less true than the other marvelous, that
of the contrary, infinite nombers do travail infinitely, not only to kindle
that which is already burst into flame, but also by so^dry sorts of artificial
sle^ghts, do study to entertain, aggrauate and increase it.

And albeit it ought first rather to move from such, To whom the troubles ought
to be imputed.
who of a galantnesse of stomach, and to satisfy some particular respect in
themselves, have incensed these troubles against the will of your majesty,
making both peace and war at their pleasure: then from those, who besides,
they are justly assailed and pursued in their consciences, honors lives and
liuelyhoodes, have no other purpose and meaning, than to defend their lives
against such heavy and violente tyrannies, lothing always troubles and
emotions, and loving with a singular zeal both peace it self, and such as
labor to entertain it: yet the Queen of Navarre, the Prince her son, the
Prince of Conde, with the Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen that accompanye them,
moved (before the rest) with a natural bond and affection to your Majesty,
and preservation of your Crown and Realm, neither can nor will suspende or
defer any longer, to search and apply for their parts (as always they have
done) such most proper and convenient remedies, as they thought most apt to
warant and defend this your realm from a lamentable subuersio^, where with it
both has been, and is presently threatened: And as in respect to establishe a
peace and public tranquillity, they have hitherto more forwardly inclined then
the rest, happening by that means into such strange perils and adventures, as
if God had not kept an eye upon them, there had now remained but a
lamentable remembrance of their general confusion: so these things well
considered with their several circumstances, they have small reason of hope,
and less cause of expectation to effect that which so earnestly they desire,
if God (the incliner of all hearts) change not the minds of their enimyes that
govern you, and give them a disposition to desire and embrace peace. The said
Princes, Lords, Knights with others parties to this humble request, persuading
rather y^ in place to allow this their frank and liberal will, with their
duetifull endeavor to advance a perfect unity and peace amongst your
subjects, they shall be charged with slanders and sinister interpretation of
their godly purpose, as heretofore they have been used by those who neither
hate nor fear any thing more than to see this reconcilment.

And as the said Princes with the other parties to this motion, have neither
had nor holden any thing in more dear regard, than the publication to your
majesty from time to time of their actions and proceedings, the same as
impressions and witnesses of their singular desire to live and die in the
natural ^bedience and awe of your majesty, and withal to make kn^wne before
the whole face of the world, both how far their hearts and wills be from
the slaundrous impositions of the Cardinal of Loraine and his adherentes
(pensionarie ministers and natural enemies to your Crown) and also that by
their forces (whereunto they have been drawn with their great evil will and
grief) they intend no other than to maintain their religion, lives, honors,
and such portions of goods as God has appointed to their shares in this world:
Even so they persuade that such considerations, neither can nor ought to hinder
their uttermost end^uoure to pursue and purchase the effect of so blessed and
necessary a peace to this realm and yielding withal vn^ayned testimony of
the humble and reuerente respect they owe to your majesty, which they had
long ere this put in practice and proof, were not that their enemies would
think and persuade others to believe, that the only necessity of their case
have induced them to it, seeing first their untrue persuasion to your majesty,
that there were no leuies of men of war in Almaigne for the succors of the
Princes: Secondly, that if any such were, yet the Realm was of sufficient
mean and force to withstand their entry: Thirdly, if they did enter, it was
impossible to join with the princes in respect of so many deep rivers and
passages of danger between the one and other camp: Fourthlye, albeit their
armies did knitte and join, yet, (the princes poverty considered) the charges
could not be long defrayed, nor the plentifully long contented: seemyng by
these reasons to attend and temporise, till they had both joined and paid
their said forces, and assembled others which were dispersed, and (as the
world knows) of such numbers and faculty, as besides their ability to
resist easily their enemies, they wanted neither way nor mean to execute any
wicked attempt if they had had any will, as is suggested and imposed upon them:
If then in the former troubles, the late prince of Conde, with the Lords,
knights, and gentlemen of his part, received the conditions of peace concerning
only the matter of religion and liberty of their consciences, and that
immediately after the death of the Duke of Guyse and Marshall Saint Andre, and
the late Constable of France taken prisoner, being three principal leaders of
the army: if also in the last rising, as soon as was offered to the said
prince and other Lords and gentlemen of his company the reestablishment of the
exercise of religion, notwithstanding their great troops and strength of
strangers joined with them, and upon the very point to assault the town of
Chartres in the view and face of the enemies camp, which was for the most
disordered, if at the only sound and pronouncing of peace made by a Trumpet
sent under the name of your majesty, the said prince did not only forbear
y^ assault, but also raised forthwith his siege and retired his army, reping
notwithstanding of so ready obedience, but a bloody peace and promise full of
infidelity: if also during the same stir, the morrow after the battle at
Saint Denis: where both the prince had the better, and the Constable
principal leader of the army was slain. The said Prince dispatched to your
majesty the Lord de Theliguy, as well to warn you of the ruin and desolation
threatening from the instaunt your Realm if the strangers were suffered to
enter houering there upon the frontiers, as also to mediate and solicit in
means and remedies to knit an absolute peace only in the cause of religion if
(in short) your Edicts have been always published, and the peace accorded, at
such times as they of the religion, (if they would have abused the opinion of
your purpose) might in respect of their forces, persuade and believe, that
as well in all your parleyes and treaties of peace, there was no other mention
than of the matter of religion, as also that their enemies have not been
brought to it but by necessity, being unable by open force to mayntaine any
longer against them: in what conscience or with what face, or countenance, may
it be said yt these troubles move and continue for the matter and cause of
religion.

And yet nevertheless the more to choke and convince the Cardinal of Lorraine
and other his adherentes, of their lies and slanderous impositions which they
publish daily: the said Princes, Lords, Knights, gentlemen and others of
their companies forgetting the infidelity and all disloyal attemptes
heretofore conspired against them, declare and protest this day both before
God and your Majesty, that what so ever has been don or offered to them in
evil from the beginning to this hour, they neither have nor will once impute
it to your Majesty, as knowing your nature to be nothing touched with such
iniust seuerities, whereof you have given so many public experiences, that
there is now no cause of doubt: neither have or do they think to change or
diminish in any respect their duetye and natural regard which they have
always bent to the true advancement of your greatness and Royal estate:
wherein, and also in so many effects aforesaid, if it be both known and
seen, that they entertayne no other purpose nor meaning, than (under the
obedience and authority of your Edictes) to serve God according too his will,
and as they are instructed by his holy word, with desire to be maintained
with equal care as your other subjects, in their honors, lives, and goods,
they are now ready to give such further manifest proof and witness, as their
most enemies shall have least cause henceforth to doubt them: And that neither
to enter into any justification of their actions passed, as their inn^cencie
and justice of their cause being sufficientlye known to your majesty, and all
other Kings, princes, and potentates what strangers so ever they be, if they
be not of the faction and party of Spain: and much less to seek to
capitulate with your majesty, knowing (god be praised) what is the duty of
good and faithful subjects to their sovereign Prince and natural Lord. But
(Sir) in respect of the large penny worthes and common merchandise which
heretofore has been made of the faith and word of your majesty, which, above
all, ought to be holy, sacred, and inviolable, and withal, with what unseeming
boldness your authority and name has been abused, to the extreme peri^ of
all your people of the reformed profession: it need not seem strange if the
said Princes with their consociates do humbly beseech you to declare by an
Edict solemn, perpetual, and irreuocable, your resolute will in a liberty and
exercise of their Religion, to the end, that by the same, such as heretofore
at two several times both rashly and with all impunitie have infringed and
violated your former constitution in that cause, may by this third, be more
brideled and restrained, wherein because such as were not able to endure the
unity and universal rest, maintained amongst your people, by the good
observation of your Edictes, have taken occasion to alter and corrupt them by
new constructions and modifications, contrary to the true substance of the same
and sincere meaning of your majesty. And that also the said Princes with the
rest of their faction, confess to have borne a most just judgment of God in
more sorts of afflictions in time of peace, than when it was open* war, as
in con senting too easily to the treatises of peace which have been made, the
same providing a general contentment on all sides, that God should be served
only in certain places of the Realm, and by certain persons as though (in a
sound conscience) there belonged no other thing to the service of God.

They most humbly beseech your majesty, to accord and grant generally to all
your subjects of what quality and condition so ever, free use of the said
Religion in all Cities, villages, and boroughes, and all other places and
corners of your Realm and countries within your obedience and protection,
without any exception, reseruacion, modification, or restraint of persons,
times, or places: and that with suerties, necessary in so high a cause: and
besides to ordeyne and enjoin to make manifest profession of the one or other
religion, to the end to cut of hereafter all means and occasions to many, who
abusing such benefit and grace, are flipt into Atheism and carnal liberty,
and who, standing upon no exercise and profession of religion, desire nothing
more, than to see an universal confusion in this Realm, and all order,
policy, and Ecclesiastical discipline reuersed and abolished, a thing so
dangerous, as not to be tolerated in any Christian state. And because (Sir)
we doubt not at al, that those who hetherunto have pitched the foundation of
their devises upon slanderous reproaches, impudently published to make us
hateful, eue^ to such as (God be prays^d) be free from the servitude and
tyranny of Antichrist, will not stick to impose upon us an inciui^e
obstinacy, rather to defend (without reason) that we have once resolved to
believe touching the Articles of Christian religion, than to correct or retract
our erroures.

We declare and protest (as hereunto we have done) that if in any point of the
confession of faith heretofore presented to your majesty by the reformed
Churches of your Realm, it may be found by the word of God comprehended in
the Canonical books of the holy scripture, that we swerve from the doctrine of
the prophets and apostles, we will forthwith lend our hands, and give place to
such as will instruct us better in the word of GOD (if we err in any article)
than we have been from the beginning: for which cause, and the better to effect
so happy a purpose, we desire nothing more, than a convocation of a counsel
free and general, and lawful ly called, wherein as every one may have hearing
and scope to reduce his reasons at large, so the same to be either confirmed,
or convinced by ye only word of God, the true mean used in all times of
antiquity upon like oc^asion By which mean (Sir) also it is not to be doub
ted, that God (by his special grace) will not unseal the eyes of your
majesty, and so give you speedye and true sight into the hearts and wills of
your subjects, reconciled and knit with an indissoluble bond, and your Realm
returned into his first estate, beawty and dignity, to the shame and confusion
of yours and our common enemies, who by their subtle and privy intelligences
with the house of Spain, have with sinister pollicyes translated the late
storm and tempeste of the low Countries to your Realm, and almost thundered
it upon the type of your crown: humbly desiringe your majesty to enter precise
consideration and judgment, whether it be better to expecte, of two armies
already assembled within your realm, a fiery and bloody victory, yeeldinge
equal fruit to the conqueror, and he that is overcome, or else to employe
them together in the service of your maiestyes affairs, in so many goodly
occasions presently offered, importing no less the rest and advancement of
your crown and realm, than any that ever happened in your time, returning
also by that mean, the storm to the place from whence it came: wherein the
said princes, Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, with all the rest of their
companyes, be unfeignedly resolved, (as in all other things, tendinge to the
greatness of your Noble estate) to employ their lives, goods, with al other
means wherewith God had endued them, even to the last drop of their blood,
acknowledging in this world no other so ueraintie or principality than yours,
in whose obedyence and subjection they ^o desire to live and dye. The same
being also such and all that a sovereign and natural Prince is to exspect or
desire of his faithful loving subjects and servants.

This request thus devised and written, the Princes sent a trumpet to the
catholics camp to obtain passeport for a Gentleman to go to his majesty,
which being refused, the Admiral found means to send a coppie of it to the
Marshall Montmorancy, to present to the King, who about the xix. of Iulye
following returned a messenger to the Admiral, to let him know that he had
presented the request to his majesty, who would not look on it, saying, he
would neither hear nor see any thing coming from him, before he had put
himself in obedience and favor of his majesty, who then assured him to
receive and embrace him, when, and as often, as he would put himself in
endeavor.

To this message by letter, the Admiral answered the. xxvi. of the same
month, that seeinge his majesty would not receive the said request, he could
not otherwise choose, than leave the matter to the judgment of al christian
Princes not touched with passion or partial affection, whither they used not
endeavor to come under the dutiful obedience of his majesty or not,
labouringe for their part by all their possible means to quench the manifold
calamities houering to ouerwhelme ye whole realm, and so set themselves
within the favor and grace of the King. But now, seeinge that there be some
will not spare the universal destruction of the realm, only to rauishe their
lives and erercyse of their religion, they would look more near than before
for the remedy.

The Kings brother being at Lohes, had advertisement of the sieege of
Luzignan, dispatching with all diligence Luzig. rendered.
the Duke of Guyse, to get within Poictiers, as well to hinder the taking of
the town, as to turn the sieege from Luzignan, notwithstanding he was there no
sooner than the castle was rendered.

The Duke of Guise arrived at Poytiers with the Mar quise du Meine his brother,
on Friday xxii. of July, entering by the Bridge Anioubert with his companies,
which were about fifteen hundredth horsemen, amongst whom were four hundredth
Italians, governed by the lord Paul Sforce, brother to the Count de Saint
Fiour, and one Cornet of Reisters.

These succoures assured greatly them within the Town, who otherwise might
happily have tre^bled at the coming of the Princes camp.

There were within Poyctiers (before the Guyses coming) Lords and Captains
within po^ tyers.
the Count du Lude, his three brethren, de Chastel liers, de Sautere, and de
Briancon, the Lords de Ruffec, de la Riuiere, Boisequin, de Ferraques, d'
Argence, de Rouet, and other lords and Knights of the Order, and Captains of
horsemen with part of their companies. There were also of footmen, the
companies of the Captains Passac, la-Prade, la Vacherie, d' Arsac, le Lis,
Bois-vert, Boneau, Boulande Iarrie, with certain other, besides vi. companies
of footmen raised by the inhabitants of the town. The general number of
Catholic Soldiers of all sorts, as well footmen as horsemen strangers, as
townsmen during this sieege (whereof shall be spoken hereafter) were v. or vi.
thousand me^: they had vi. pieces of Artillery, as two or three means, and
certain less^ pieces in the Castle.

The Princes, after the rendering of Luzignan, and before they besieged
Poyctiers, took Monstruel, Bonyn, Bouche, Sansay, Viuone, with other little
Castelles about Poyctiers, thereby to hold the Catholics more strayt. In
which mean while the princes horssemen made ordinary roades, even to the
gates of Poyctiers, burninge many Abbayes, Priories, and Temples.

The 24. day the said horsemen, as well French as Allemans, presented themselves
in battayl before the town, on that side which is above the Abbay of S.
Cyprie^, until very near S. Benoit, being divided into two great hosts:
Certain horsemen of the town issued out at the gate toward the bridge
Anioubert, with certain numbers of shot on foot, who without any thing
dooinge, retired into the town, and the horsemen of the Religion into their
several quarters.

The 25. day of the same month, the Princes foot me^ and horsemen presented
again before the town about noone. The footmen gave a hot charge upon the
su^burbes de la Cueille, where the Capteyne Bois-vert with hsi company, lodged
behind a little trench, (making negligent watch) were suddenly set upon, and
the most part killed: the rest being forced to retire more low to the suburbs
S. Ladre, were valiantly followed by them of the religion, even to the posts
and houses joining to the gate of the suburbs: There began a hot skirmish
which lasted almost five hours, until the night divided them: they of the
religion being come but to make a first view of the state of the town,
retiring with loss of very few of their people.

The 26. day being tuesday, the Princes beset ye town Poicti^ (...)^esieged.
on al sides, pitching their tents in the meadow beneath Hostel-dieu near to a
milne, where they made forthwith a bridge upon the River of Clyn, to pass on
both sides the town as need required: the same day, certain principals of the
army viewed the Town on all sides, beginning the next day to batter the
defen^es of the castle with certain culuerines and other meaner pieces. There
was no other thing worthy of report done this month, but making and filling of
baskettes, deuidinge of quarters, disposing the camp, casting trenches,
ditches, and digging of earth to cover and shroude the shot.

The battery began the Monday being the first of August Battry against
Poyt^ers.
on the right side of the Tower of the Bridge Anioubert, and the wall fast by,
planting viii. or ix. pieces ^f battery upon the rock or hill right against the
said bridge, above and between the suburbs of Pympaneau and S. Sornyn, which
continued three days: the reason was, that otherwise the said tower might
grieve the army and other batteries: they forbear not also to provoke
skirmishe, wherein they that kept the Suburbs beyond the bridge, as Captains
Arsach, and Bonneau, with their company were forced to leave the said suburbs.

As Soon as the said suburbs were abandoned, there was brought down two Canons
to beat the foot of the wall, piercing of purpose to make it a house to serve
for baskets of earth, the same being perceived by them in the town, forthwith
discharged certain volues of the cannon against it, to make it fall, and so
enforced the said two cannons to be haled away: in the mean while the
protestants labored to win the suburbs of Rochreul, guarded by the Captain
la Uacherie, skirmishing continually within a vine, lying directly between the
said suburbs and the castle, where was hot war without intermission. The
v. of August the said captain la Vacherie, as he maintained the skirmish, was
shot thorough the head with a harquebush, whereof he dyed in the field.

I have noted before, that the L. de Aunoux, master of the camp of the
regiment of the late Count Brissac was left within S. Mesen by the count du
Lude, since his return from Nyort, who now by commaundment from the Duke of
Guyse, coolled out iiii. or v. hundred of the best soldiers in his companies
to come to the succors of Poictiers, sendinge the residue with his carriage to
Pertnay, where was the captain Allard, and so he arrived at Poyctiers, about
two hours after midnight the sixth of August.

The battery having ceased at the bridge Anioubert, from the iiii. of this
month, began again the vii. of the same, albeit not on that side, but against
a tower of the Battery against Poie
bridge S. Cyprian next to the suburbs, by mean whereof they within were
enforced to descend and leave the said tower, and entrenche themselves upon
the bridge with vessels and hogsheads, and other such like things, the
Protestants from that time afterward, being unable to grieve them within the
Abbay of S. Cyprian, as they did before: The company of Captain Reynaut was
ordained for the guard of this Tower and quarter.

After the defenses of this tower were raised, the Princes removed their pieces
to the right side of the wall of the Abbots meade, thinking that place most
weak of all the town, and to that effect they planted their canons the nynth
of this month to make a breach bestowing others in other places to batter the
flank and side, having the day before set up in this quarter upon the river of
Clyn a bridge of pypes and boordes tied together with great cables.

The battery was so vehement and fierce, that in small time they had enforced
two great breaches, the one near the other, skowring such defenses as anoyed
them by reason of a tower and mylue which were there by: they within labored
to fill up their breaches, albeit with great difficulty and distress, as not
able to show themselves within the Abbottes meade without great peril,
because the hills governed all the said meadow.

The breaches thus battered, the Protestants were of mind to assault them,
bestowing (for this purpose) their people in squares and wings, and showed
the^ selves upon the hills in very good order.

They first sent certain Captains and Soldiers to view the breaches, who
brought report, that they could not be entered without great peril the rather
because the bridge which they had erected upon Clyn (over the which they must
pass to go to the breach) was neither convenient for the matter, nor
sufficient to bear the soldiers that should pass over it, neither could
the horsemen (what distress or need so ever chanced) go to the succors of
the footmen within the said Abbots meade if it happened that they were
charged by the horsemen of the Catholics. Besides, they within had planted a
counter battery of three or four Cannons fast by Carmes, which discharging
right upon the breaches, might much endaunger them that offered the assault:
these were the causes that nothing was done that day. Captain Caluerat being
in a tower near the breach, and going to see it, was killed the same day, in
the night the Catholics descended to the river, and cut the cords of the
bridge before mentioned and brake it, using this policy to cover and disguise
their enterprise* they brought down great volues and noise of Harquebushot,
bestowing them against the body of the watch being near the artillery, to the
end they should be neither heard nor seen whilst they break the bridge.
These things hanging thus in train before Poyctyers, the King, and Queen
mother accompanied with the Cardinals of Bourbon and Lorarne, came to Amboise,
and from thence to Towars whether the kings brother came to them: there they
deliberated upon means to succor Poyctiers, and to that end was dispatched
speedely the knight Montluc with v. C. harquebusiers on horseback, to get (if
he could) within Poyctiers, albeit he was so discovered in the way that his
enterprise quailed and he returned to the camp: The king sent for yeLorde de
Sancsac lying before the siege of La Charity to come to him with all his
forces: he procured also a speedy leuy within Paris of twenty enseignes of
footmen and certain horsemen, dispatching special letters to all the
Nobility of France, to repair speedely to him to the Camp, which he was
determined to follow in person, and that upon pain of confiscation of bodies
and goods, or to be declared within the danger of contempt, he raised also
his arrear banks in many provinces, who forthwith came to him in the said
country of Tourain, in effect he assembled with wonderful diligence, as much
succors as he could for the rescue of Poyctiers. There were certain Cornets
which ordinarily used to beat the streets and ways within half a league of
Chastelleraut, amongst whom were specially, the lord of Boniuets companyes,
son to the Lord of Creuec^ur, and of the baron of Numburg a Normande: which
being known to the garrison of the said Chastelleraut, together with the
certain place where the said lord Boniuet was wont to come, the tenth of
August two or three hundredth horsemen with certain shot of the Captain
Norman, made a sally upon them, and took the said L. Boniuet with his company
in a village near to Liguers* where they entered without let, as keeping
negligente guard, and were found laid and lodged after ye french manner, the
Lord Boniuet was prisoner, and almost all the rest of his company either
killed or taken. About the same time the Marquis of Rancon an Italian, was
taken near to Myrebeau as he bayted, and was led prisoner to Nyort. The lord
of Tarrides governor for the King in Quercy, maintained war all this while in
Bern, a country belonging to the Queen of Nauar, having almost brought all the
country under his authority: wherefore the county Montgomery, sent (as is
said) into Gaseoyne, assembled the forces of the ii. vicountes to apply
speedely to the succors and rescue of the City of Navarre in Bearn, besieged
by the said Lord of Tarrides: he divided his journey into such diligence and
speed, as about the 7. of August he was very near Nauarreis, at whose so
sudden coming, the Lord Tarrides raised his siege, and retired into a town
there joining, where the Montgomery besieged and took him with his brother and
the lord de S. Colombe and of Negre-pelisse, with many other great lords and
knights of the order, and captains to the number of. xxx. The Lord of
Tarrides lost his artillery with a great number of his horsemen and footmen:
The county Montgomery, (by mean of this discomfeit) restored the whole
country of Bearn to the obedience of the Queen of Navarre.

Touching the sieege of Poictiers, they within were in great amaze with the
breaches made in the Abbottes meade, the rather because they could not defend
them, whereupon entering into counsel, they found it most best and necessary to
stem the river of Clyn, to the end to make it run over his cannell, and so
drown the said meade: this counsel was put in speedy execution, and
plantinge stakes and pales proper for the purpose beneath the arches of the
bridge of Rochereul, they da^med the river, so that in a moment the mead was
all overflowed with water about three cubits high, the same so troubling the
protestants, as it drive them from their determinations, notwithstanding after
they had considred well of the subtilty, they began as in a couuter polli cye,
to beat the pales, and give vent to the water, and therefore the next morning
discharged so many shottes of artillery against the said waterworke, as the
water retired and left the meade dry, which the catholics the night
following restored and countergarded in this order: they cast behind the said
damme under the arches a very thick wall, fastening certain fleeces or
balls: woll to the pales to receive and dampe the cannon shot, which made the
water swell and ouerflow more high than before: Notwithstanding the catholics
were closed very nere and straight, yet made they many sallies upon the
Protestants, who skowred them back again even to the very posternes of their
City, not without great loss to the one and other side: Amongst these sallies
they made one of such a sudden the xii. of this month that they took a
cornet of Reistres, and carried them without let into the town.

In this month the town of Orillac in Auuergne* was taken by night by the L.
de la Roche, and Bessonniere, professoures of the religion in that country,
accompanied only with seven or eight score men. This was their mean and
policy: there is in the said Orillac, a gate of quarrie in the wall toward
the river, which the in habitauntes of the place caused to ram and wall up,
leauinge only a posterne so straighte, that one person could scarcely enter.

This posterne was cloased with two ports or gates of wood, the one within and
the other without the town: the said Lord of la Roche and Bessonniere came to
ye gate without the postern and with a great iron instrument made a hoale or
creuish, by the which they cast in about a hundredth pounds of cannon powder
between the said two gates, and then closing up the^ said hoale or creuish, and
making under the said first gate a train to the same powder, they put fire to
it, which forthwith flushed with in the said two gates, and blewe them both
up, the one carried forty pace of, and thrown upon a house within the town,
and the other enforced with the violence and strength of the powder, rushed
against a wall without the town, and brake a breach containing his own
compass, by which they entered the town, wherein was no other guard than of
the inhabitants, whereof they killed a hundredth or six score resisting them
in armoure. The Lord of S. Heraut governor of the country, appeared certain
days after before the town thinkinge to recover it, but finding such warm
resistance he returned forthwith to S. Flower.

The long continuance of this steege before Poyctiers, brought the Catholics
in a great necessity and want of vittailes, as well for men as horses, and
above al, forage was so scant with them, that they were driven for to turn
abroad part of their horses to the vynes, meadows, lands, and other void
places of the town, whereof the Princes having understanding by certain
straggling soldiers issuing out of the town, determined to break the mylne
in the bottom of the medowe near to the port de Tyson.

And for this purpose planted over ii. Canons in that quarter, which they
discharged against the said mylne, and after retired them as being discovered
and anoyed by the Catholics: who pinched now with an extreme want of
vittailes, determined to thrust out of the town a great number of unprofitable
persons, which as they began to execute the. xvi. of this month, so the
Protestants (to pine and sterue the town more) drive the^ back with force,
to enter the town again.

For want of powder and bollets, the battery ceased for a time, whereof, the
Princes having received a new provision from Rochell, renewed also the battery
the. xx. of August on that side toward the Abbottes meade, where the breach
being forced, they sent in the evening to surueye it by certain numbers of
Soldiers, whereof. xvi. or. xvii. entered by y^ breach into the said meadow, from
whence (being discovered by the watch in S. Peter's steple who ronge the alarm
bell) they were constrained to retire with speed.

The night following the protestants builded a bridge upon Clyn toward the
suburbs of S. Sornyns, to pass to the Bishops meade, stretching toward the
temples of S. Rudegonde and S. Sulpiee: the bridge was made of quarreis of
wood, hurdles, pypes, earth and plankes of oak very large, also well fastened
and joined with nails, cables, and cords, that the cannon might well pass
over it, and of such breadth that. viii. or. ix. men might walk a front.
They made another of the same matter and fashion, and set it likewise upon the
river about. xl. pase distant from the other. These bridges thus made and
erected, they bestowed many baskets with earth, as well near the first bridge,
as on the other side that which was within the Bishops meade, drawing to the
suburbs of S. Sornyn near the said bridges, part of their artillery beating
the defenses of y^ wall, which are before and right against the said temples:
Those defenses thus beaten and skowred, the battery began the morrow after
being the. xxiii. of August, in that place and the bishops mead. The catholics
labored to their best to repair their breaches, and had no assault that day:
The Lord of Briancon, brother to the county Du lude, going the same day to
view a platform near to Carmes, to supply some special want with his advise,
had his head stricken from his shoulders with a bollet: Likewise the Lord a'
Aunoux, stryuing the same day to drive the protestants from a Tower which
they occupied near the breach of the Abbottes meade, was stricken in the head
with a harquebush, whereof he dyed shortly after.

The Lord of Prunaye also being amongst his soldiers at the breach, had his
left leg taken away with a Cannon and so dyed. Of the Protestants side
were killed the Lord of Chanay called Frauncis du Fay and one of the Marshals
of the camp of the vauntgard hurt with a musket in the arm, broken in two
parts.

The four and twenty of this month in the morning, the Princes renewed
eftsoon the battery with twelve or. xiiii. pieces against the wall before the
said Temples, the same being of such vehement fury, that their was discharged
that day more than seven hundredth shottes of Cannon, which beat a large breach
before three of the clock in the afternoon, and the Protestants ringed in
battle upon the top of the hills toward the suburbs, ready to give the
assault, which they intended forthwith to do by the Abbots meade, as having
disposed most part of their army on that side: The Catholics were busy to
relieve their breaches with beds, faggots, and other matters apt to fill up.

The Duke of Guyse being at the one breach and the county Du-lude at the
other, seeing the enemy prepared strongly and spedely to the assault, rong the
alarm bell of the town, to the end that every one might retire into his
quarter. There was a captain of the protestants, who being followed with ten
or twelve and covered only with his target, ran over one of the bridges
within the Bishops meade, and came even to to the little corner or arm of the
river that touches ye wall, and so viewed the breach, which he reported to
the Admiral not to be sufficiently assaultable, as well because the ruin and
breakings of the wall were fallen within the town and had not filled up the
river which runs at the foot of the wall, as also that they within had
raised great trenches and rampires, whereupon the army retired in the evening
without any assault: This day Captain Gascourt Knighte of Malta, was slain
with a cannon, being sent by the Guyse, to view the breach, and consider what
was necessary to defend it.

The morrow being the xxv. of Angust, the Princes army was eftsoon ringed in
order as though they would go to the assault, the breaches were once again
viewed, as well that within the Abbots meade as the other at S. Radegonde, by
certain Captains and soldiers, who in their return reported the perilous
estate of the same,

The same day the Protestants bestowed certain shot of artillery as well
against the Bridge Anioubert, as Rochereul, wherein were beaten certain holes
or creuisses to avoid the water out of ye Abbots mead: the same being filled
and stopped again the same evening by the Catholics.

The rest of this August passed without any great effects, saving certain
light batteries to purge the waters and raze the milne of Tyson, together with
certain sallies made sometime by the bridge Achard. It was thought that the
sickness of the Admiral and the Lord de Acier was the cause why there were no
more attempts advanced.

The first of September the princes determined to win the suburbs of
Rochereul, to the end by that mean the sooner to rid the waters. And
because they would cut off from such as kept the said suburbs al suc course and
relief from the town, they bent first certain Canons against the tower of
the bridge of Rochereul, discharging upon it above an hundredth voleis, which
battered a great part of it, winning in the end the vine whereof is spoken
before, which houered and valted on high over the streat of the suburbs. This
was almost the chiefest place of skirmishe, since, and during the siege.

The morrow, they battered the defenses of the Castle and Rochereul bridge,
pitching also new batteries under the Nut trees near the river, between the
way that goes to Hostel-dieu, at the parting of the suburbs drawing to the
meadow toward Chastelleraut.

The Saturday the iii. of September, the battery began in the morning against
the wall and gate of the sub urbes, which by two of the clock in the after
noone had thrown open a wide breach, whereupon the protestants did speedely
ring themselves in battaill, as well on high de la Cueil (where lay a piece
that governed the Offices of the Castle) as beneath the said Hostel-dieu, and
in three squares near the Nut trees of the place, where ye battery was made.
The Catholics restored the breaches as much as they could, with vessels,
wood, earth, and rampires: and there were the Captains Passac, Nozieres, the
Lord of Montaill, and Carbonieres, with others, prepared to sustain the
assault. They had bestowed about four hundredth harquebuziers in the Towers,
galleries, and offices of the Castle, which flanked all along as they should
come to the assault. All which notwithstanding, the Protestants about three of
the clock in the afternoon came to the assault, the Lord de Pills with his
regiment was the foremost, being followed with Three assaults given to the
suburbs of Roell.
diverse other regimentes of the French footmen, who valiauntly came upon the
breach, and stood till they had bestowed diverse blows with their Curtillaxes:
albeit, they were constrained to turn face in respect of the flankers, which
grieved them greatly. Immediately followed the second assault given by certain
numbers of horsemen descended on foot with diverse footmen, and they like wise
repulsed.

These first assaults being performed by the French men, the Lansknechts would
needs follow with a third, which albeit was performed with such courage, as
they fought valiauntly upon the breach, yet seeing the present defense, and
general danger to mayntain it long, they reculed and retired every one into
his quarter.

In these assaults the Protestants lost an hundredth or six score souldieurs,
with certain numbers hurt. The Lord de Pills was hurt in the thigh with a
small shot, whereof he was speedely cured. The Lord Briquemaux Son, Colonel
of the footmen, was also hurt with a harquebush, whereof after certain days,
dyed. The Lord de S. Marie Dolphinoys, with others of mark were also killed. On
the Catholics part were killed, Captain Passac, and the Lord de Montall,
with a good number of footmen.

Before these assaults, the Catholics sent two me^ to the King and his
brother for succors, with charge to reveal the estate of the town and
penury of vittails. The Kings brother having assembled as much force as he
could, came to la Hay, and to Port de Pills, determining to beset
Chastelleraut, to the end to draw the siege from Poytiers: and therefore made
to march his vauntgarde right to Chastelleraut, lodging the monday, being the
v. of September, a quarter of a league from the town The morrow after, his
horsemen and part of his footmen presented in order of battaill before the
town to view it, all that day being spent in skirmishinge on the other side
the river of Vienne.

The town was governed by the Lord de la Love, Marshall of the Camp of the
vauntgarde to the princes: He had first for the defense of it, his own
company of light horsemen, and then the Lords of Ualauoire, Bressay la Motte,
and de Royesses, with vii. companies of footmen, and captayn Normantes
company of harquebusiers on horseback.

The suburbs defaced by fire, was no place for the catholics to lodge in, so
that they were constrained to encampe further off, which they began to do the
same day they viewed the Town. The artillery brought by the Swizers, arrived
at midnight, and immediately appro ches were made, and the Cannons ringed in
batterye in two several places, beating notwithstanding al one breach. It
began the wednesday the vii. of the said month, very early near ye gate S.
Catherine, between a tower of the said gate, and an other tower more near
drawing to the temple S. Iean. Such was the fury of the battery as by two of
the clock in the after noone, a breach was forced of three or four score
foot wide: the chance fell upon the Italians, to give the assault, which
they did being backed and followed with certain Frenchmen. They mounted upon
the breach: where, albeit they Assault of Italians.
presented xvii. Ensigns, yet found they such sharp and speedy repulse, as
they were enforced in a moment to turn their faces, receiving great loss by
the vaulte of the said gate, wherein were bestowed vi. score harquebuzears well
appointed. The Italians lost at this assault v. of their Ensigns, which the
Protestants took from them by force.

After this the assault (and the catholics retired from the breach) Captain
Bernier d' Auphinoys, came to succor the town with four hundredth
harquebuzears, be ing backed with the horsemen of the Princes uauntgard led by
the L. de la Love and Teligny. The Italians were so crushed at this assault as
they had no will to make it good again, neither was any other thing worthy of
memory done that day.

The same day, the sieege of Poitiers raised to come to xeskue Chapter stellerant,
marching no further that day than three leagues, by reason one of the cannons
miscarried and was lest on the place. The morrow after the army approached
within half a league of Chastellerant, which made the catholics raise their
sieege, and retire to Port de Pille, having lost in this sieege five hundredth
men, and almost all Italians, whereof the Colonel Fabiano de Rome was one.
The next morninge the Princes vauntgard pursued the catholics, cuttinge of
from the tail of their camp about two hundredth footmen, and killed them all.

The same day, the Lord de Sanzay entered Poytiers with. x. or xii. companyes
of footmen, almost all Italians, and two hundredth horsemen. Immediately after
whose coming the Duke of Guise and the Marquis du Meine his brother,
accompanied with xv. hundredth horsemen, departed the Town to relieve
themselves with fresh air. The morrow after, being the x. of September, began
a skirmish on the hither side the said Port de Pille, against two thousand
harquebuzears which ye catholics had left there within the trenches. They were
at last enforced to pass speedily over Creuse, leaving about iiii. or v.
hundredth of their company dead on the place. The Princes army drew to la
Hay, to pass the said River the next morning, being the xi. day of the said
month. There was no worthy matter performed other than certain light
skirmishes.

The monday followinge, the Princes army ready ringed in battle very early,
presented before the catholics to giu^ them battle: Albeit, because there was
between the two Armies a little River with maryse shoares, which neither the
Princes could pass themselves, nor yet co^uey over their artillery, after the
two armies had long remained one within view of another, they retired into
their several quarters.

The princes army, for want of vittailes, and seeing with all the Catholics
had small disposition to fight, passed again over Creuse, and also Vienne,
the twelth of September, retiring so to Faye la Vineuse in Poyctou, of purpose
chiefly to refresh them. The catholics drew to Chynon, expecting not only
forses to be brought from many places in France, but also such companyes of men
of armies as had leave till the first of October as has bin said.

The Prince of Orange departed from Faye to return into Almaigne with a very
small company, he passed by Charity and Uezelay, and from thence by many
countries without any let till he came into Almaigne. The brute went that he
undertook his journey to have certain succors of Reistres.

As the Admiral lay at Fay vineuse, there was one Dominike Dalbe a Gascoine,
executed by sentence the xxi. of this month. These were the causes proved
against him: First, that he being of the Admirals chamber, and sent by him to
the Duke de deux Pons with letters, as well from the said Admiral his master
as other Princes, was taken at Brissac, a Country in the Marches upon the end
of May last, by the Lord la Riuiere, Captain of the Guard to the Catholics,
and being by him earnestly solicited, he revealed to the Queen mother, Duke
d'Aniow her son, and Cardinal of Loraine his journey with the purpose, with
further promise, that under color to go and deliver to the said Duke his
letters of charge, to epsy his camp, and sound his secret determinations,
and so being presented from that time with an hundred crowns, and an estate or
office roomth in the chamber of the said Duke d'Aniow, he put him on the way to
effect his promise touching the view and report of the Dukes camp, from whom
having speedy dispatche, he returned to the said la Riuiere, and imparted his
full expedition, not forgetting to describe at large what he had learned of the
state of the Dukes camp. Secondlye, he was instantly persuaded and pursued as
well by one Laurence de Ruze, Secretary to the Duke d'Aniow, as by the said la
Riuiere, to kill by poison or other ways the said Lord Admiral: which he
might be bold to do (say they) without fear of the Admirals children, who
also should be rooted up to the uttermost of their race, neither need he
stand upon any dreadful respect of any his friends or kinsmen, seeing they
assured him that no one of them should ever be well received or welcomed to
the court, as first ye Marshall Montmorancy his Cosine should be committed to
prison, where he should never come out with honor, and that of the rest of the
said Mashals brethren, there should not remain one. Finally, the (rather to
allure him to such an horrible act) they sealed their last offer with a
dampnable promise of xxx. thousand crowns in recompense, and. xxx. thousand
Frankes of perpetuity out of the town of Paris, besides the favorable good
will (all days of his life) as well of the Queen mother, Duke d'Aniow, as
Cardinal of Loraine, and the whole court. Dalbe yielded so far to their
murderous enticementes, as he gave his word and promise to kill the Admiral:
Whereupon was delivered him by the said la Riuiere certain white powder,
which was known afterward to be either Reagar, or Arsenicke, with a large
pasporte from the said Kings Brother, wherewith he departed and came to the
Lord Admsrall his master at the siege of Poyctiers, his long aboade in the
Catholics camp, together with other suspicious circumstaunces appearing at
his arrival, persuaded a ielous judgment of his dealing, and thereupon was
committed to prison, his process pursued and ended, and sentence lastly
pronounced in these terms.

Judgment pronounced the. xx. of September 1569. in the council established by
the Prince of Navarre and Conde present, and assisted with the Printe of
Orange, the County Wolrard de Mansfelde, Lieuetenant general of the
Almaignes, under the said Princes, the Counties Lodouike and Henry de Nassau
brethren, Menard de Chomber Marshall of the Almaignes camp, Hans Boucq, Renard
Gracco, Henry Destam, Hans de There Is, Colonels of the Reistres, Guieryn Gangolf
Baron of Grelesee, Colonel of a regiment of Launceknightes, Theodore Wegger
professor of the law, and Ambassador from the Duke de Deux ponts, with many
other lords, knights, Colonels and Keistremaisters of Almaigne, the Lord of
Corras Counselor to the King in the Parliamente of Toulouse, and Chaunceller
to the Queen of Navarre and the army, the Lord of Francourt, Bricquemau, de
Mouy, de la Noue, de Renty, de Soubize, de Mirambeau, de la Caze, de
Puch-perdillan, de Biron, de Lestrange, with many other Lords, Gentlemen and
Captains of France.

Seeing the process made by the commissaries deputed by the said Princes of
Navarre and Conde, against Dominique Dalbe, groom of the chamber to the L.
Gaspard Count de Coligny, lord of Chastillon, and Admiral of France, the iii.
examinations of the said Dalbe before the Provost general of the camp, and two
other before the Commissioners assigned for that purpose: lassly, the
confessions of the said Dalbe relterated viii* several times, wherein he
acknowledges to have hen instantly solicited, urged and pressed by la
Riuiere, Captain of the guard, and one Laurence de Ruze, Secretary to the
Kings brother, to practice and procure the death of the said L. Admiral,
either by sword or poison, which he promised to the said la Riuiere, to effect
with poison only, receiving (to that end of the said la Riuiere) certain
money, and poison in form of white powder, which he has showed since to the
said Provost and Commissioners, seeing also the verification and proof of the
said poison tried by Phisicions and Apotecaries assembled at la Hay in
Touraine, the xiii. of this month together with a very large pasport granted
to the said Dalbe the 30. of the last month by the Kings brother, lying the^
at Plessis les Tours: and now (for due punishment and revenge to such a
traitorous and detestable attempt, so often acknowledged, as well in his
private confessions, as public assembly, the said council has and does con
dempne the said Dalbe to be delivered into the hands of the executioner of high
Justice, who tying him upon a hurdell, with a halter about his neck, shall
draw him through the streets and corners accustomed of this town de Fay la
Vineuse, with this inscription in parchement about his body: This is Dominike
Dalbe, traitor to the cause of God, his Country, and Master: trayling him
first to the lodging gate of the said Lord Admiral, and there with no other
garments than his shirte, the halter remaining still about his neck, holding
in his hand a torche of burning wax, shall demand pardon of God, the King,
the law, and the Lord Admiral, confessinge there that wickedly, disloyally,
and traitorously he had professed promised, and practiced to kill (by poison)
the said L. Admiral his master, and at the same instant and in his presence
the said poison which he confessed to be given unto him by the said la
Riuiere, to be cast into the fire and burned. All which being done, he shall be
led (keeping still the inscription about his body) to the place of public
execution and there to be hanged and strangled on a gallows set up for that
purpose. And that also humble suit be made to the King to do justice upon the
said la Riuiere and Laurence, with their accomplices, and withal (if his
majesty be of mind) to verify more ample their said conspiracy with the said
Dalbe (the same notwithstanding resembling a sufficient truth against them by
his voluntary confession) to proceed against them with punishment due to so
horrible a fact, and the same both to terrify hereafter others of like
villanious humor, and also to remain to all nations as a President of the
noble nature and disposition of France, in abhorring such traytrous attemptes,
declaring the said la Riuiere and Laurence, with all other sects and sorts of
traitors (keeping schole and open shop to poison persons of name and virtue)
to be traitors, villayns, and men unworthy of honor, either in them selves or
their posterity to the 4. generation. Lastly, it is judged, that before the
execution of judgment, the said Dalbe shall be put on the rack, to the end to
confess further practices with his said confederates, with other things
contained in interrogatories given to the Provost. This sentence thus
pronounced, the morrow after being the xxi. of September, the rack was used
accordingly, where he confirmed his former confession, and so the same day the
sentence was put in execution.

Whilst the Kings brother kept at Chynon in the Country of Touraine, whether
he was retired (as is said) great numbers of men of war flocked to him from
many parts of the Realm, together with the horsemen to whom he gave liberty
for recreation, and the xx. enseignes of footmen Parisiens, whereof we spoke
before: these forces assembled, he made march his vau^tgard out of Chynon the
six and twenty of this month, under the conduct of the Lord Montpensier,
himself following with the battle, lodging near Lodune, the princes camp
drue toward Partney, the xxix. of this month, whom the Catholics followed
near to provoke them to battayll, as in respect of the advantage and favor of
certain towns which they held thereabout: either the camp was within the view
of other, and both of equal desire to gain Mont-gontour, using like diligence
the rather to obtain it: For which cause the Admiral made his footmen
advance all night, his horsemen being in point of battle the last day of
September, in the very first discovery of the morning, upon a plain within a
league of the town of Mont-gontour. There the Admiral sent the Lord de
La-loue and de La-noue with seven cornets of horsemen, and Captain Normauts
herquebuzears on horseback to Montgontour to know if the Kings brother were
there, who finding no body returned with speedy report to ye Admiral
accordingly, who made march forthwith the footmen of the battle, then the
artillery and so the footmen of the vauntgard, as well French as Almaines,
following them himself with the horsemen of both the one and the other Nation:
He left in the tail the Lord de Money with charge to govern the retract with
five cornets of French horsemen, two cornets of Reistres, and a company of
harquebushears on horseback of Captain Montarnaunt a provincial: The
catholics coasted them very near, expecting their artillery, which was not yet
come. The Admiral passed over a little River half a league from Mongontour,
very uneasy to march over, by reason of a marrish a long the brink of it, the
same making it impossible on all parts, saving in a little straight or gutter
beneath certain houses a long the high way, there lacked no more but the
Lord of Mouy and his troup: whom the catholics with xl. cornets of horsemen
charged, together with a voley of canons discharged also upon them. It was
thought this charge was given by the Lord de Tauannes governor for the King in
Burgon: it was withstanded a little by the Lord de Mouy, who unable to sustain
it thoroughly, in respect of the multitude, retired: the Admiral seeing his
peril, gave back with the horsemen, and returned (with no less fury) the
charge upon them that had laid it upon the Lord de Mouy, who in the mean time
retired with ye rest of his troop with the loss of some few, amongst the
which was the Lord de Entrichaut, ensign bearer to the Lord S. Auban
Dauphynois: the artillery was by this at Mont-gontour, and the footmen of the
battle very near, who seeing that charge, turned back to the fight, as also
the Lord de la Noue, and la Love with their cornets, all that day passed in
skirmishing without offer of other charge.

The Catholics shot vehemently, which albeit an noyed much the Admiral: yet
he left not the fieeld till night, and then retired with those of the Religion
to Mont-gontour, and the catholics encamped upon the place.

The next morrow being saturday, and first day of the month of October, the
said army issued out of Mont gontour, and lodged in the Uillages thereabout:
leaving the Lord de Mouy with his regiment of horsemen, and two regimentes of
footmen, within the town to guard the passage. There were certain lighy
skirmishes, al^eit neither of long fight, nor much loss: they moved by
certain disordered shot of the catholics who thought to win the Suburbs on
their side, but being repulsed, their purpose was also intercepted, and they
forced to return without any other thing doing.

The Kings Brother seeinge that side closed from him* and that he could not
easily wade the river of Viue, (the fame being his only impediment to follow
the Princes Camp) determined to pass above the head of the river in a Uillage
beneath Mirebean. In the mean while the Princes, having bin at Niort, to see
ye Queen of Nauar, returned to the camp the second of October, where they
drew into counsel, with resolution to take the way to Partney and Niorte,
and give battle to the Catholics if they assailed them in the way, sommoning
(for this purpose) the whole army to be ready by the dawning of the day: and
every Colonel and Captain to labor accordingly in his charge.

The Catholics were also of opinion to go to Nyort, and besiege it, and by
that means to provoke the princes to battle. The Princes camp (according to
the order resolute aforesaid) was in a perfect readiness, ringed in battles
and squares, pitching the next morning ye third of October, upon a little hill
near to Mont-gontour, well disposed (as is aforesaid) to give battle if the
enemy advanced, who also began to appear and discover on the left hand upon
another round hill, from the bottom whereof they might easily discern the
disposition of the Princes army, which when he had well viewed, he retired his
march as though he meant to draw directly to Nyort, using notwithstanding such
order as his rings and companyes near together. The Admiral bearing an eye to
their doings, espied their policy and purpose of proceeding, wherein as he
suspected that they shot at his advantage, as laboring to win way upon him,
made descend forthwith the Princes army from the hill where it was settled, of
purpose to gain and occupy the plain before them, whereupon the Catholics, in
place to march forward, commanded a sudden stay, holding their pikes vprighte,
and ringing them in square and mean battles, turned face to their vauntgard,
winning by that means, the hill from whence the princes army were but now
descended. And being masters in this forte of the hill, above the opinion and
expectation of the Admiral, began to dispose themselves to the shock. And at
the first descending from the hill, they ordered and ringed their footmen in
the valley or side of the foot of the said hill, not without great discretion
and judgment, keeping by that means their footmen in covert, and defended
from the storm of the artillery, which discharged vehemently as well on the
one as other side. In the mean while the Kings brother dressed and disposed
two batteries, not sparing his body to travel from one battle and square to
another, with persuasion to the soldiers, to have good heart: the like also
did the Princes, visiting in person every rank as well of horsemen as footmen,
whose pleasant aspect, and specially in the prince of Navarre gave cause of
singular courage to the soldiers, whose stomakes, besides they were firmly
settled in the goodness of the cause, yet they seemed to redouble in desire,
the rather at the gracious view and persuasions of the young Prince. Immediately
after two of the clock in the afternoon, the vauntgarde of the Catholyques
went to the charge with a square and wing of 18. cornets of Reisters and great
numbers of horsemen, as well French as Italian, who charged altogyther so
violently upon the Lord de Mouy, and de la Love, that they were enforced to
endure and take the charge, retiring through the battle of the Lanceknights
which grieved them sore, notwithstanding the Admiral supplied the charge, and
gave with such fury upon the Catholke Reisters, that he cut great numbers of
them in pieces, and immediately with the remainder of his horsemen of the
Uauntgard, repulsed with force the vauntgarde of the enemy: whereupon was
raised a cry on the Admi rals side, Uictory, victory, the same sounding with
such noise of comfort in the ears of the maine battle, that diverse ran
thither to follow the victory: when lo ye Catholic main battle advanced,
bending directly upon the Princes battle, where they were in person. To the
Catholiquas battle joined a wing of horsemen which came from the vauntgarde.
At the beginning, the battle of the Princes sustained the charge, albeit,
finding and feeling their own weakness, as being not able to fight together
(as the Catholics did) were enforced to disorder and fell out of array, the
horsemen of the vauntgarde dispersed here and there without order, and not
drawn as yet into any safe policy or guard of war, followed also the others,
whereby both the French and Almaine footmen were left naked, whereof the
French men were first forced to break array, and then the Papists horsemen on
the one side, and the Suyzers on the other side, began to buckle with the
Launceknightes, who seeing themselves environed on all sides, neither present
help, nor cause of further hope, the rather for that the artillery was planted
even at their feet, let fall their pykes and prostrat themselves upon their
knees, amongst whom rushed with no small fury the horsemen and certain Swizers*
using butchers mercy, and cut them all in pieces. The Count Mansfeld and
Lodowike retired always in order of battle: a thing worthy to be noted in so
general disorder, having about them xiii. cornets of Reisters, which had not
followed the others, with whom they gathered together certain cornets of
Frenchmen, and so retired and never were charged. After the overthrow and
spoil of the Launceknights, the Kings brother pursued the victory half a
league and no further, and so encamped in the plain of Cron where the battle
was given: he was far stronger in horssemen and footmen than the Princes, who
had not above vi. thousand horsemen of all sorts, as well strangers as
others: viii. thousand footmen French, and most har quebuziers: and lastly,
three thousand launceknights. In this battle the Princes lost their
launceknightes, a thousand or xii. hundred French footmen, and about an
hundred horses, vi. Canons, two Coluerines, and three little field pieces. The
lord de Autricour Captain of a hundred light horsemen, a very foreward and
galland Gentleman was there killed: the lord de Acier and la Noue taken
prisoners, and the lord Admiral lightly hurt in the cheek: In the
Catholics army were viii. or ix. thousand horsemen, and xvi. or xviii.
thousand footmen with great store of artillery. They lost few footmen because
they fought not, so that their greatest loss consisted in horsemen, which,
what with the chance of that day, and the encounter before touched, grew to
great numbers, with diverse of no small estate, as the Count Mansfield, and the
Ringraue, the Marquis of Baden, the young Count Cieremont Daulphinoys, with
many other Lords and Knights of the Order: the Duke of Guyse, and the
Ringraues brother hurt.

The retraite of the Princes and their army was to Partenay, about vii. leagues
from the place of the battle, where, as they arrived the night following at
midnight, so the next morning the iiii. of this month, they departed from
thence with the Admiral, Count Mansfelde, the Count Lodowike and Henry de
Nassau brethren, with other great numbers of Lords, Gentlemen, and Capteynes:
coming the same day to Nyort, where they found the Queen of Navarre,
remaining there ever since they departed: In the mean time they laid the
ways and quarters by the Marshals of the camp, to the end the dispersed
sort might eftsoons resort to their Enseignes, which was performed the same
day by the most part of the horssemen.

Notwithstanding this last success and loss at Montgontour, did both grieve
and amaze the princes, yet they were not unmindful to reassemble their forces,
whereof the most part of the horsemen was forthwith under their sta^derds, which
the footme^ could not do with such speed in respect of their long retrait, and
therefore the vauntgarde of the battle were disposed severally into sundry
quarters and villages near to Nyort, by the which mean the French footmen,
who (in respect of their good order) were not much distressed in this
conflict, resorted readily to their Ensigns and companies. In the mean while
the Prince^ deliberated in the said town upon the sequel of their affairs, to
whom albeit the loss seemed great, yet considering that in a general
calamity every one has his fortune, they covered their present greet (and as
the necessity of their state required) with joyful countenance they assured
^tsoones the remaynder, of their dispersed companyes: In the evening the Queen
of Navarre departing from Nyort, went to Rochereul, and the Princes the next
morning took their way to Saintonge, leaving within Nyort both to make head
against the catholics, and let them to pass further, the Lord of Mouy with
his regimen of horsemen and. ii. regimens of footmen, beside the ordinary
garrison, being perhaps. iii. hundred shot.

Such was the brute and heavy noise of this battle, that many companies of the
Princes army, as well footmen as horsemen bestowed in several charges in
sundry castles and towns, as well in Poyctou as Touraine, determined to leave
their garrisons, as not able to endure a speedy siege, in respect they were
weak within themselves, and also had small hope to be succored in sufficient
time.

As they which were within Chauigny upon Vien at Roch^ose, Captain Belon
within the Castle de Angle with Chesnebru^le his ensign bearer, which was at
Pru ly, together with captain Teil, captain of the Castle of Cleruaut, with
his cornet of shot on horseback, departed and abandoned their several charges,
taking their way to Charity: captain Lornay governor of Chastelleraut, as soon
as the s^ege was raised, left the town the vii. of October at xi. of the
clock before noone with his own company of footmen, and two others, whereof
one was under captain Mor^s, being in all about three hundred footmen, and
two hundred horsemen, and took their way toward Charity, passing by la blanc
in Berry, and from thence came to Bourgdien, a town belonging to the Bishop of
Bourges, and heretofore taken by skaling by the Lord de Bournay: there they
joined with the rest aforesaid, and also the Lord Bricquemau the Elder, who
tarried there with his companyes in respec^ of his sickness.

In the mean while, the kings brother following his victory, came to Partnay,
which he found desolate, directing his way from thence to Nyort to besiege it:
certain forerunners of his camp were come already to the gates to terrify
those that were within the town. At this alarm the Lord de Mouy with certain
horsemen issued speedely out of town, who were no sooner without the gates,
than the other were retired almos^e out of sight, whereupon he returned, and
being one of the las^ to govern the retraite, as he was at point to enter the
town, one Montreuell (yielded to him not long before under color of religion)
discharged a Pistolet upon him, and hurt him sore in the head, flying
immediately well mounted upon the self same horse which the Lord de Mouy had
given him: who notwithstanding his hurt, determined not to depar^ the town,
albeit being specicially advised by his friends to be carried where his hurt
may be cured, he left Nyort the seventh day of October, and came to Saints,
and from thence he was carried to R^chell, where within few days after he
died, to the grief of the army: for he was of stayed council in any cause of
estate, of great speed and justice in execution and of long experience in
ma^ters of war, as witness his acts as well in the battle of Dreux, as
other places of worthy memory: the rest appointed under him within Nyort, left
also the town together with the Lord de l^ Brosse, gouerner there, retiring
with. iii. hundred shot to Rochell. This was the same Lord de la Brosse, who
with the aid of the Lord de Pluu^au made head against the County de Lude at
the siege aforesaid.

The Kings brother finding the town forsaken, entered without let: whether also
came very shortly after, the King* the Queen mother, and Cardinal of Lorain,
being then near Chynon: they began there to devise and deliberate upon their
present bu^nesse, accompting it of special purpose, to recover the Castle of
Lusignan, wherein was governor the Lord de Mirambeau, and that before the
Protestants had either renewed their strength or well assured their present
companyes: In this mind they dispatched forthwith certain to summon the
castle, who so prevailed with persuasions to the governor, that easily inoughe
he gau^ up the Castle only with lives and goods saved: certain days before
the battle, there were bestowed in this hold five Cannons which descended to
the catholics by covenant: this was. iiii. or ^ue days after the battle of
M^nt-gontour. Ny^rt being thus abondone^, the Princes went to S. Iean de
Angely, the, ix. of this month, and so to Saints, and because they gathered,
that the catholics would besiege it, they determined to man it with great
numbers of men of war, causyng to enter forthwith the horsemen of the Lord de
la Motte, with c^rtein footmen: likewise captain la Mures company being of
the regimen of the Lord de Uirie^: At that time was governor the L. de Oryoll,
a gentleman of Sainctonge, who after was content to give order to the policy
and state of the town, leaving the consideration of matters of war to the
Lord de Pills, whom the Prince established there for that purpose, and who as
yet was not fully cured of the hurt in his thigh, received at the siege of
Poyctiers. He with the Souldiour^, and the rest of the inhabitants, resolved
to defend the Town, and endure the siege. The morrow after, the Princes came
to Saints, and there made their army pass over Charante.

The ^. of the said month, the lord of Montbrun and Myrabell departed from the
Camp to go into Languedoc, a journey pretended long time before, so that they
might lead thither their regiments, and for this cause at the siege of
Poictiers, as is aforesaid, the Lord de Pontais Marshall of the Princes Camp,
as well in their own name as for other Colonelles, Captains and Gentlemen of
Daulphine, were suitors for leave to go for a certain time into Daulphine, and
the more to enforce their motion* they showed how long they had followed the
camp, and that their Souldioures wearied with so continual war* stood in
need to be relieved with the fresh air and fellowshippe of their Country,
and lastly as their general fear to be so evil wintered as the year before,
drive diverse numbers to retire without order to the towns holden by the
Religion in Uiuares, where they had sure aboade, so if they be not some what
relieved of their long and loathsome travail always in a camp, it is also to
be feared that by little and little they do not abandon their Ensigns, and
leave their Colonelles in the fieeldes without Soldiers: The same being
already revealed unto them by certain numbers of their soldioures, they could
do no less than commend their suit with humble request in themselves for leave
and liberty to depart, now that the sieege of Poyctiers is raised: The Princes
answered that they could not order their request and satisfy the time
together, because they were as yet uncertain what would be the end and issue
of the sieege, and therefore they thought it convenient that they tarried till
the end of the month of September, hoping (after they had seen the resolute
proceedinges of the catholics) to bestow their army in garrisons to rest
all winter: This answer qualified their requests with expectation of the end
of September. When the army being returned from the countre^ of Touraine, and
soiourning near to Fay la Vineuse, their suit was eftsoons put upon new
^earmes: for which cause the Gentlemen, Captains, and Colonelles of those
country men, assembled to deliberate upon the motion: some were of opinion to
pursue in general a leave and liberty of the Princes, seeing their time of
Septem ber is expired: But others Judged the present season most inconvenient
to entreat for leave, consideringe the state and disposition of the war,
every day encly^ing to battle, where they were bound in duty to be, ^nlesse
they would deface the honor of their actions passed. Which last opinion, so
settled into the most of them, that they resolved universally both to mortify
their desire to go home, and also to give over to attempt further leave,
attendinge either by battle, or by some happy peace, to make themselves free
of the war, and so returue and remain quietly in their houses.

And thus the Lord de Montbrun and Mirabell remained in the Camp until the
time wherein they thought to execute their enterprise: wherein after they had
communicated with the Lord de Verbele^ brother to the Bishop of Puy in
Auuergne, and many other as we^ of Dauphine, as the countries thereabout (as of
purpose to have their company in the voyage) they went to An goulesme, to the
end to tarry there for their furniture and strength.

This being known in the camp, many came to Angoulesme to assiste the voyage,
so that they were in all, abo^te four hundred horsemen in very good point to
fight, with certain nombers of shot on horseback with the which the said
Lord de Montbrun, Mirabell, and Uerlibet, departed the fourteenth day of the
month of October, and taking their way by Perigueux, came to Solliac the
Sunday the sixteenth of October, about two of the clock at after noone. They
thought there to pass Dordon, but it was so swelled by the great raines fallen
certain days before, that it was not possible to wade over. By which
difficulty they were constrained ^o stay there, sending for such boats as
they could ^inde, by which they began to ferry the same day and all the next
night, not with such speed (in respect of their few beats) but certain
numbers were not yet passed in the morning. Which being espied of the Catholic
garrisons thereby, and specially they of Sarba, sent out three skore horsemen
with certain footmen and Paisants, to view the number of such as were yet to
pass, and what watch and guard they kept. Who with others to the number of two
hundredth, seeing neither order used, nor any shot his match kindled, fell upon
them, and discomfited them without resistance: many were slain and the rest
stripte into their shertes, and so sent over the passage to follow their
company: Some using a speed above the rest in passing the day before, the
better to refreshe them at their ease, were set upon in the night within their
lodgings, and led away prisoners by the Catholics: Amongst whom were the
Lord d^ Quintell, a 'Dauphyno^s, Mormoiron de Uenesin, guide to the whole
company, a Physician called M. M^rle with three others: the Lord de Sarraz a
Gentleman of Uiuares, was taken by the same a little before, but forthwith set
at liberty.

The noise which the Catholics made in charging them on the water side, gave
the Alarm to those that had already passed the river, being in a Town not far
off, who falling forthwith into array and order of defense, after they had
tarried sometime to receive them that escaped to their succors, began to march
toward Acyer. wherein they entered the next morning, and from thence without
other let, they went to O^yllac in Auuergne, from whence they departed, as
shall be hereafter declared.

After Nyort was taken, the Kings brother determined i^ beseege the town of S.
Iean de Angely in Sainc^onge, and for that same effect drue his army and power
on that side. The Lord of Byron, Marshall of his camp, about the. x. of
October, accompanied with certain cornets of horsemen, came to sommon the
Town for the King: to whom the garrison made an answer by the Lord de la
Ramiere, that they meant not to surrender the Town by other composition than a
general peace including the public quiet and profit of the realm of France,
whereupon he returned. And captain la Motte accompanied with. xv. or xx.
horsemen, went forthwith to skome and skoure the ways within half a league
about the town, and specially of that side to Nyort, finding within a village
certain footmen of the Catholics, whereof some were slain, some put ^o
flight and v. or vi. taken and led prisoners into the town.

In the mean while they of the town prepared for the siege, using great
devise and diligence in fortifying diverse parts of it, some did beat down
part of the suburbs of Aulnis and Tailleburg, to cut from the Catholics all
conueniente means to encampe there. Some filled up the ditches in necessary
places, in effect they left nothing imperfect which necessarily belonged to the
fortification of the town, the better to endure the siege. The Lord de Pills
governor there for the matters of war (as is said) made a view of the
footeme^, which were a thousand or xi. hundred of all sorts, as well
strangers as others* mmediatly after this muster, the Lord de Person
arrived there with xxx. or. xl. horsemen, and then (because they would omit
nothing tending to the defense of the Town) they began to make fire works,
with other artificial Engines to* annoye the enimyes.

About the. xiiii. day of this month, the Kings brother planted his siege
before Saint Iean de Angely, about three of the clock in the after noone. The
Lord of Gouas regimen with certain other, was lodged in the Suburbs of
Aulnys: dealing not that day with the suburbs of Taillebourg, as fearing they
could not enter but with great peril. They within the town had forsaken his
Suburb, because they would not put their men to the hazard in keeping it:
Albe^t, the Catholics forbear not to sease upon it the next day, and lodge
within it. The Protestants fortifyed the Fort or place of defense without the
gate d' Aulnis, and filling it with earth, rammed up the gate, omitting nothing
necessary either to force or policy, wherein, to en^orce a gener^ll diligence
in their fortification, Proclamations were pronounced through the town, that
all people, as well men women as children, able or apt to travel, should
labor and work at the rampires, and that every one should have always
before his door, three or four sackes full of dong, to be employed in
necessary places. According to these commandments, there was a common
assistence at the rampires, as well of strangers, as people of the town, by
whom was performed a wonderful endeavor.

As soon as the Catholics had made them selves Lords of the Suburbs
aforesaid, the Protestants made a sallie with forty horsemen, by the gate de
Matta, and set upon the Suburbs of Aulnis, where they killed four or five
men, and then fell on skouring the ways toward Nyort* till the place of
execution, where they found an Italian on horseback, and brought him into
the town.

About the eythteenth day of this month, the Protestants made another sally
by the gate d' Aulnis, and issuing out above the forte, they descended within
the ditche by a ladder: there were of this faction (and conduc ted by captain
la Motte, (Cl. Soldiers with white shirtes above their garments, who
charging so happily upon the Suburbs d'Aulnis, found the catholics playing
at cards, and so without any watch to discover them, they killed about three
score or four score Souldioures, and then retired upon the false trenche of
the ditche by the help of their haquehusheares, which were upon the fort of
the gate. They wanne in this exploite two footmen Ensigns. xl. or l.
harquebusheares, certain Morrions, corcelets, and pollares of steel, which
they carried into the town, loosing not above two or three of their company.

The Catholics in the mean while drue near their artillery which they
planted so aptly in a vine toward Nyort, as it mighr beat as well the gate of
Nyort, as the bulwark of the port d'Aulnis, and also the tower between the
two gates. Their battery which they bestowed there, was four Canons and a
Coluerine. Before they discharged any battery, they demanded to parley, and
for that cause would that the lord of Pills should have come forth of the
town upon their faith, which the protestants thought not convenient for their
safety: albeit, in his place, they sent out of the Town la Riuiere, who was
not sooner without, than the Canon began to beat, which caused him to cut off
his further proceeding with speedy return.

Thus the battery began the xxii. day of October, beating the Tower of the
Town near to the port de Aulnis, and continued all the day, and toward
night it enforced a breach of forty or fifty pase wide, whereupon the
catholics sent one of their company to view it, who being come to the brink
of the ditch, and discovering him self to survey the breach, was killed with a
shot: so that that day passed without assault or any other special attempt or
act. In the night the Protestants with great diligence repair their breach,
and let down to the ditch certain laborers and Soldiers, to ryd away the
ruin and broken stuff of the Wall fallen into it. These laborers and
soldiers before they came out of the ditche, they set up a pretty wall of a
man's height, to make the place less accessible. Besides, the protestants
keeping still a careful mind of their town and estate, considered diligently
where, and how they might be annoyed by the battery planted in the vine,
which had there remained about eight days, without discharge of Canon:
whereupon they cast a trench well flanked behind the breach, upon the which they
bestowed certain Uessells and hoghesheades to pauise their shot. In the
effect, the breach was so supplied, as the place was stronger than before.

From this battery, the morrow after came certain thunders of Canon against
the fort of the Port d'Aulnis: and likewise three or four discharges against
the port of Nyort, not forbearing notwithstanding their first battery. But
seeing this battery brought forth small effect (not many days after) they
bestowed in place of the canons, five coluerines.

Removing the said Canons to the entrey of the suburbs d'Aulnis, both directly
before and also so near the said Fort, that only the ditch was between the^.
From thence began a vehement battery against the said fort, as well by these
Canons as the Coluerins planted in their place, which bestowed certain
bollettes flanks wise, within the said breach even to the Castle The battery
continued all the day, all that night* and all the next morrow of one violent
furye without ceassing, so that both the Fort and the Portall (by which is the
ordinary entry into the Town) were almost beaten to powder.

In the mean while, the protestants made a covert way between the Fort and
the gate, to the end, that the ruin falling from the gate, should not annoye
nor hinder the entry of the Fort.

After this long and vehement battery, the Lord de Guitiniers demanded to
speak with the Protestants, and under the honor and virtue of their word,
entered the Town the four and twenty day of this month, about two of the
Clock in the afternoon. He labored to induce them to render the town, but
the L. de Pills remained constant in his first answer, that there could no
other price buy the Town, than an assured peace, to the profit and quiet of
the Realm. Whereupon the Lord de Guitinieres returned again and came to the
camp without other effect of his purpose.

He was no sooner out of the said Town, then the catholics rushed fiercely
to the assault so unlooked for, that the protestants doubted of their sauetie,
the rather because the assault was maynteyned as well at the breach of the
Fort as on the right and left side of it within the ditche, the better to come
to the gate of the Town which they had battered (as you have heard). And for
their more easy coming to the breach of the Fort, they had provided great
numbers of pyonners to bear sackes full of earth and cast them upon the breach:
who besides turning up the earth, threw stones against the protestants, by
which they greatly grieved diverse of them. They presented upon the breach vi*
target men followed with a good number of shot, who albeit ventu red far to
enforce the protestants, yet (being repulsed) they retired without any great
effects. This assault lasted from three of the clock in ye afternoon til
night, during the which was great wast of shot and powder by the protestants
in sustayning so hot assault: in the night they fortified and repaired their
breaches as well as they could, as they also forbear not to do even in the time
of the battery, filling them up as fast as they were made with sackes of dung.
In this night also they entrenched them selves within the Forte, whereby the
breaches, the morrow after, were put in defense.

Albeit, the Lord de Sansac (after the siege of Charity) was sent for to go
into Tourayne to join with the Catholics camp, as is said, yet (whether it
were by cou^termaundement or other special occasion) he sturred not from
where he was: And yet in the same month of October, he besieged the Town of
Noyers in Bourgogne, the which without great resistance he took by
composition, the same notwithstanding not observed, because forty of the
soldiers that defended it, being led to Troy in Champaigne, and before they
entered into prison, were cut in pieces by the people.

After he had taken Noyers, he determined to besiege Vizeley in Borgoigne,
governed at that time by the lord de Sarazin. There was for the guard of it
only two com panies of footmen under Captain Rybaupierre, and the young Lord
de Sarazin with two cornets of horssemen of the Lord de Blosset, and of
Belanseau, with certain numbers of Gentlemen retired thither to aid the siege.
The lord de Sansac had to furnishe this siege about. xxii. enseignes of
footme^, whereof ye L. de Foyssy was Colonel often cornets of horsemen, four
canons and ii. Culuerins.

He arrived with his horsemen to survey the town the sixth of October,
retyring at night to lodge at Aquiens and S. Pere, villages situate at the
hill foot, upon the top whereof stands the City.

The eleventh of the same month he made approach with three of his companies
of footmen, at the gate du Barle, otherwise called S. Stephen: certain of ye
Town* but specially the nobility that were there, issued out, and repulsed
presently the said three Ensigns, whereof two were put to disorder and flight
before they could get to Aquiens, where they meant to make their retrait. In the
chase were killed about six and forty, and as many hurt, all the Captains,
Lieuftenauntes, Ensign bearers, and Sergeauntes of these two companyes, were
there killed, saving three which were led prisoners within the town: the third
company hid themselves within a tuft of vines, from whence (being not
discovered) they retired in the night to Aquiens. Notwithstanding this charge
and chase, the Lord de Sansac marched with his camp the Saturday, the eight of
this month, and toward the evening environed the Town, the same evening he
approached his artillery, which the tenth day following in the morning began to
batter a Tower of the side of the gate du Barle, right against the watring^
place, the same continuing so vehemently two full (...), that at the ^econd
days end, a corner of the Tower fell to the earth: The Wednesday the twelfth
day he removed four of his pieces of the side of S Pere, thunderinge a new
battery against the gate called the wicket, above the which eight Ensigns of
footmen came and pitched the thirteenth of this month, remaininge there till
the whole army discampped. The foureteenth day he removed also two of his
pieces, and planted them against a Tower called the Columbes, to the end (with
more ease) to batter the said wicket, against the which the batterye endured
till the next day. When having now beaten two breaches, he gave the assault
to them both at one instaunt, offering to scale on that side of the Cordeliers:
His assaults were resisted, and his people so repulsed, that they were out of
heart eftsoons to return: and therefore the night following, about midnight,
he raised his s^eege, and retired to Auallon, having lost at the assaults and
in the time of their sieege three or four hundredth men as well footmen as
horsemen: Of the Protestants side, there were slain and hurt, only ten men,
whereof the Lord Sarazin was killed with the canon, being in the first Tower
that they battered, whom the Lord de Blossar succeeded in place and charge,
chosen by the common voice and opinion of the multitude, in respect of his
virtue and wisdom in defense of the Town. The Lord of Sansac raised not his
sieege for other purpose tha^ to provide other Canones, all his others being
either cracked or burst in these batteries.

The Princes being at Saints, as soon as they were informed of the sieege of
S. Iean d' Angely determined to go into Gascoygne with two or three thousand
harquebushears on foot, and all their horsemen, leaving the remeinder of their
footmen to aid the Towns wherein were Garrisons: they had two principal
reasons to induce them to this journey, as to draw the siege from S. Iean de
Angely esteeming the camp would follow them, and also to join with the
Uicountes forces, over whom (as is said) the Montgomery commanded. They
departed from Sanctonge about the beginning of the siege, and with their
horsemen as well French as Almayns, (who after this voyage had sent their
carriage to Roch^ll, and sho ton foot, whereof some were led by the Lord de
Rouray) took their way toward Montauban: And because the River of Dordonne,
(by which they must pass) was not at that time passeable without vessels, the
Lord de la Bessonniere (by whose means as is before said the Town of Oryllac
was taken) departed with a hundred horses, and gathering together as many
boats as he could find a long Dordonne, caused them to be brought to
Argentall, to the end the Princes army stayed not at the passage there, albeit
coming thither about the. xxv. of this month, they were constrained to stay
there almost eight days before their whole army could pass. In which mean
while certain of their army summoned the Town of Sourd in Auergne to be
rendered to the Princes, to the obedience and use of the King. Whereunto as they
refused at the first: so, considering the condition of their own state, with
the present force of the enemy, yielded upon covenant to set open the gates
and pay six thousand Frankes, not to be committed to pillage: the Lord of
Montbrun and Mirabell being come to Oryllac (as is said) their compayes lodged
within a league of the town in a village called Arpaion, to rest their horses
which were weary with long trauail, where there Lord de Montbrun fell sick of
a continual ague, the same partly causing the aboade and stay of the army,
albeit feeling by the course of his sickness, that he was not able to make
present departure from thence, imparted the same with the Lord Mirabell, to
the end the voyage lingered no longer, whereupon the Lord Mirabell with four
hundred horsemen put himself on the way the. 24. of the same month to
perform his journey into Languedoc: he had (amongst others) in his company the
Lord Foulques, who not many days before came to the said Oryllac with lx.
horsemen, of purpose to accompany the Lord Mirabell: their departure was
neither so secret, nor their journey so surely conveyed, but the Papists
which were in certain towns and Castles about Oryllac, were speedely
advertised, who commanded the towns men of every village to sound the Alarm
bell, to the end to warn and discover the place they passed by, and so set
upon and discomfyt them. According to this charge the Tocsain was sounded at
the same instante that the Lord Mirabell and his troop descended from the
hill two leagues from Oryllac, whereupon the garrison of Roilliac (having seen
the troup pass by them in negligent order, and leaving withal their own
charge, made no small speed by a cross way a thwart the hill, and set upon
them suddenly in the village where the Tocsain was sounded, and the same in
such subtle season and sort, as before they were discryed they killed six or
seven of the Mirabels company and so retired, leading with them certain
prisoners: the troup notwithstanding mounted above the village, where being
ringed and drawn into battle order, they discovered in the tops of the hills
concours of people from all parts to intercept them in a strait by which they
should pass, their guides (besides) bringing them further increase of fear
and danger by general flocking of the popular sort to set upon them in that
strait, whereupon they were constrained to turn back, and retire to their
quarter of Orpaion, and there to consult of a safe mean to pass.

The Lord Uerbelet, in the mean while remained at Oryllac, as governor in
Auergne under the Princes, according to the authority given him at his
departure from the Camp. Within few days after his coming to the town, and
being acknowledged of the garrison as their governor, ordained that three
hundredth Harquebusears on foot, and three hundredth pykemen should be
entertained for the guard of the town: for whose pay he levied of the
inhabitats a loan of Lord de S. Heran said he was come thither to bestow^
garrison in the Castle: the gentlewoman answered, that this errand was
without need, because that as the place was already furnished, so her husband
(as she thought) would not admit any new numbers, wherewith as she offered to
have shut the gate, and return into the Castle, the Lord S. Heran thrust so
rudely at the gate, that the Gentlewoman being thrown to ye ground, he entered
the gate by force upon her, by whose skrike or cry, one of the household
servant descended speedely, and seeing his mistress upon the ground,
discharged his pistoiet, and hurt the Lord S. Heran in the arm, who also
fearinge further peril, flong out of the posterne, which immediately was shut
upon him: albeit, he caused all, or most of his troop to remain still before
the said Castle, to withstand that no man should enter till he sent new
forces from S. Flour, whether as he speedely repaired, so he dispatched from
thence certain numbers of footmen to join with the troop he had left before
the Castle, with charge not to depart till it were taken: M. de Sallians, to
whom both the place and charge belonged, lay very sick, who in respect of his
small strength, having not above six soldiers, and withal doubting speedy
surcours, made no great resistance, but yielded the Castle by composition to
have only their lives saved, which albeit was faithfully promised, yet
traitorously performed, because both her husband was killed, and she led
prisoner to S. Flower, charged to be the only cause of the lord of S. Hierans
hurt.

The taking of the town of Oryllac, (whereof is spoken before) amazed greatly
them of Auergne wherefore having gathered people from many parts, determined
to besiege it, before they within could have mean to fortify themselves. And
for this purpose, the Lord Rocne^onne Governor of Puy and the graund Pri^r of
Auergne, with their regiment^ of footmen, came to Mar zillas in Roargnes,
att^ding there (as it was said) certain ca^nons which should be sent from Rhodes
to batter Oryllac. In the mean while also the Lord de Saint Hera^ with no
less diligence aduaunsed at S. Flour, the other forces and also the Nobility
of Auergne, whom he summoned speedely to repair thither. Albeit hearing in the
heat of his diligence, of the princes coming to Argentall; he let fall his
enterprise.

The men of Auergne fearing the princes would sease upon the low country
called la Lymagne, and there to winter, in respect of the general fertility
of that place, drew in troops of paysants and co^munalties into the straites
of the mountains, by which they imagined the army should pass, and there
hewing down great numbers of trees, bestowed them athwart the high ways to
trouble the passage of the horsemen.

The rest of the country were bestowed by the lord de Saint Heran, in towns
and Castles, to the end they should not be suddenly taken: the princes beguyled
their opinion as not passing that way, but directed their io^ ney over Dordone
and so into Quercy, and beneath Cadenat, passed the river of Lot, and so from
thence arrived at Montauban, in November. 1569.

The Lord de Mirabell and Foulques* (having remained about Oryllac, ^nee the
charge they had near to Rolliat) took way about this time with their troops
to end their voyage: who passing the River of Lot beneath Cadenat, and after
they had trauersed the mountains of Rouarges and Sauennes, arrived without let
a^ Priuas and Aulbenas, towns in Viuarez, holden by those of the Religion.

The siege continued all this while before S. Iean de Angely, where the King,
the Queen mother, and Cardinal of Lorraine were in person. The morrow after
that the breach of the Fort was assaulted, the King procured the protestants
to be commoned withal, to the end to render the Town by composition: Wherein
they used this persuasion, the rather to entice them, that his Majesty had
determined to erect a puissant army to make war in Allemaigne, wherein as they
might stead that service in special turn, so his Majesty was careful not to
spill men of such experience and value, and otherwise, if they would not
embrace his Majesty's offer and composition, he would thunder upon them all his
forces till he had won the Town. They answered as before, that they would not
render the town till there were a peace assured to the profit and quiet of ye
whole Rea^e: whereupon the King required to speak with the Lord de Person,
as well in the causes concerning the Town, as to send him to the princes in
the mean and matter of peace: Whereunto the protestants condescended, and sent
out of the Town the Lord de Person, receiving in his pleadge and hostage
the Lord de Guiteniers. After the King had conferred with the Lord de Person,
they grew to capitulations as followed:

First, that if the Lord de Pills were not succored within ten days, to
render the Town to the King their lives and goods saved. 2 That for the
assurance of this, there should be delivered in hostage two Knights of the
order, and they to be sent either to Rochell or Angoulesme, at the protestants
choice. 3 That during this space of the x. days, truce should be between
them, with charge that neither they should fortify in the town, nor they
without upon their trenches, nor yet approach the walls of the town. 4
Lastely, that in the mean while the Lord de Person should go to the Princes
with a Gentleman of his Majesty, to treat of peace. According to the which
the said L. de Person with the Kings Gentleman went to the Princes, in the
Gentleman's place the Lord de Guitiniers was sent out of the town to the
camp.
They which the princes left (as you have heard) at Saints, to defend the
town, maintained their charge till now. And hearing that Saint Iean d' Angely
was in parley, and at point to yield, fearing with all, that it was their lotte
and turn to be besieeged next: They forsook the town and retired to the
other Garrisons which were thereaboute: wherein the King forgot not to embrace
the opportunity, sending forthwith certain companies to sease upon it, to the
end, that by that mean the way might be cloased from them of the Religion,
being at Angoulesme and Coygnac, to go or come to Rochell: Likewise they of
Rochell should be bard to send succoures to them.

The Lord of Bricquemau, lay all this while in the town of Bo^rg dieu in
Berry, (as has bin said) by reason of his sickness: During whose aboade
there, his troops made ordinarye war upon the Garrison of Chasteau-roux,
upon Indre, wherein the Lord of the place retained three companies of footmen
for the catholics. There were often incursions and enterviewes between them:
the same continuing almost six weeks, in which time were killed of the one
and other side, almost two hundredth men. After the said Lord Bricquemau was
restored to health, he retired in this month of November with his troops to
Charity.

During the sieege of S. Iean d' Angely, the Town of Nimes in Languedoc was
taken by the Religion the fiueteenth of this month, and by this mean: there
is a mylne in the town near to the walls, and to make it grynde, there comes
a spring or fountain not far of, through a sluse or creuishe in ye wall
dressed with grates or bars of iron: They of the Religion in that Country
practiced intelligence with the miller, by whose aid they plucked up by night
the said iron grate, and so conveyed into the town by that creuish and
channel, about a hundredth souldioures, who hid themselves within the myll,
attending the hour to execute their enterprise, in the mean while they sent
from Priuas and Au benas two hundredth horsemen, and every one a harquebushear
behind him, who being in good point before the gates of the Town at the hour
appointed, they within ye mil issued out, and got to the gate, which with
certain engines and instruments apt to countermyne ye lock, they set open, and
so the companies without, entered and made themselves Lords of the town: the
Lord of S. An dre governor there, considering of his present peril, thought
to save himself in the castle, albeit as he lept out of a window he brake his
leg and so was taken, dying within two days after* there were slain in the
town at this entry about a hundredth or six score men and within few days
certain ministers of Justice: Incontinently arrived at Nimes, the L. de S.
Roman brother to the Lord de S. Chaumont, sent thither by the Princes to
govern in their absence the Country of Languedocke he had with him in
company a great number ber of horfemen, besides many that came to him, as the
Lord de Foulques, with the troops which he brought from the Camp. In the
mean while they of the Castle denied to render, making marvelous defense,
notwithstanding they were but few in number: there were sundry attempts in
vain to win them, with certain mines sorting to no effect, and yet after
certain months, the Castle was put into the hands of them of the Town.

And now, touching the siege of S. Iean de Angely, it has been said that the
lord de Pills promised to render the town, if he were not reskewed within ten
days: which being passed, and he void of succors, the Lord of Byron summoned
him to his promise, to whom the lord de Pills answered, that albeit he
believed that either they had stayed the lord de Person there, or else where,
or at least had not sent him to the Princes, yet if they would enlarge his
term, he would render the town, whereupon they gave him two days more,
within the which he dispatched forth of the town by the port Matta a Gentleman
to go to Angoulesme and provide succors. In the mean while, the thursday the
xvii. day of November the Lord de Guitiniers entered the Town with certain
Captains and Marshalls or harbengers for lodging, with intent to take
possession of the town, whereof Guytiniers gave this manifest inkling in
saying to the Lord de Pills, that as that night he gave the watch their
charge, so it should fall to his lot to do it the next day.

The gentleman sent to Angoulesme for succors, used such diligence as the L.
de S. Seuerin accompanied with l. or lx. gentlemen or horseback, entered
without let S. Iean d' Angely by the port Matta, the friday being the xviii.
of this month, which as it chanced contrary to the general opinion of the
Catholics, so it amazed most of all the lord de Guitiniers, thinking nothing
less than to go out of the town again: albeit seeing in the friday morning
certain numbers of strange gentlemen mustering in companies about the town,
he changed his opinion and was forthwith put out of the town with such as
entered with him notwithstanding the coming of these succors: the Lord de
Biron commoned with the lord de Pills at the gate of Nyort, whom as he
summoned to perform his promise to the King in yielding the town: the day of
conuention being expyred, so lord de Pills told him that he had received
succoures, and therefore discharged of his promise to render the town, wherein
the lord Byro^ caueled with him in that his reskue came not from the princes,
with persuasion also, that he should not stand so much on the help of four
or five horses come to him, and thereupon caused too be read alowde the
capitulations agreed upon between them. The lord de Pills was constant in
his opinion, alleging that of what value or numbers so ever his succors
were, they were such as both suffised his need and contented him, charging them
upon the instant to draw back from the walls. Immediately the battery began
of fresh, as well upon the old breach which was upon the fort or tower of the
wall, as against the fort of the gate d' Aulnis, and also against the Castle,
against which were bent three cannons: this battery brought down to the earth
the Castle gate, from which, they went upon a bastion or platform of earth
before the Castle: this being well noted of the protestants, they made
another passage within the ditch, beneth the first, and near to that bastyon
of earth, they made an opening or window in the wall of the town, without the
which and within the ditch, they set up a close pale or covert to flank the
Castle. In the mean while the catholics growing cold in their battery, and
yet continuing it eight days, beat down a part of a tower of the Castle of
that side to the suburbs of Tailebourg, called the hangmans Tower, together
with a great ruin of the walls from the Castle to the old breath.

During this battery, the protestants made a sally with fifty or forty
horsemen, and three or four hundredth footmen by the gate Nyort, upon the which
they erected a bridge of wood to discende to the ditch.

The horsemen of this sally were led by Captain la Motte, who charged upon
two cornets of horssemen which were in guard of that side to Nyort, whereof
certain were killed, and some lost their standerds, and one of their enseigne
bearers led hurt into the town, where of he dyed forthwith: the footmen were
governed by diverse Captains, who, charging the papists in their trenches,
made them forsake them, and loose their Culuerynes, which were forthwith choked
and fire put in five or six barrels of powder. They took also in this disaray
an enseigne of the footmen* with many other arms and armours of the
Catholics, carrying all into the Town, whether they retired as soon as they
had effected their enterprise: they killed in this sally about thirty or forty
catholics, and loosing but one of their own which was hurt in the retrayte,
besides him that set the powder on fire, who was a little singed.

Not many days after this sally, the catholics removed their canons planted
in the entry of the suburbs d' Aulnis, and pitched them upon the brinke of the
ditch on the right side of the castle, very near the battered fort of the
gate. There were in this battery six canons, beating as well within the entry
of the said forte, as against the wall from it to the castle which was also
beaten with the other three canons aforesaid. The coluerinnes ceased not also
to thunder as well flankerwyse as to the old breach.

This battery was of such violent force, that in three days and an half
(which was the space it endured) there were discharged above xv. or xvi.
hundredth shot of canons, and many killed that labored to relieve the breach.
In which vehement extremity, the Lord de Pills, sent out by the Port Matta,
the same Gentleman, whom he used before in the supplye of succoures, by whose
second diligence, the Lord de S. Auban, a Gentleman of Daulphine accompanied
with xl. horsemen enterprised to come to the relief and succor of the said
town: who (notwithstanding) was so encountered in the way, as he was forced
to retire with the loss of three of his people, and also the Gentleman his
guide.

The xxix. day of November, Sebastian Luxenburge, count de Martiques, knight
of the order, Captain of fifty men at arms, and Lieuftenaunte general to the
King in his Duchy and country of Britain, being at the battery, was stricken
in the head with a harquebushot, whereof he dyed, to the general grief of the
Papists.

In the beginning of December, about ix. of the clock in the morninge, the
Catholics demanded to parley with the Lord de Pills, whereunto he listened
with less difficulty, in respect he was not furnished with munition of war
for one assault more if it had bin offered; ney there had he hope to be so
speedily succored as his peril required: which was the cause that the ii. of
this month, after he had established extreme acts and provisions for the
Guard of the said town, he was enforced to render it upon the couenantes
following.

1 That the Protestants should depart the town their goods saved, with their
horses and armor and banner displayed. 2 That they should not bear arms for
the general cause of Religion in four months after. 3 That their whole
companies, as well Strangers as inhabitaunts, might retire whither they would
in all surety. 4 That they should be safe conducted to their place of suerty
where so ever it were, by the Lord de Byron: according to which composition,
the morrow after, the iii. of this month, S Iean de Angely was yielded into
the hands of the Lord de Guitiniers. The lord de Pills departing the same day
about noone, by the Port de Matta with eight hundredth footmen of all sorts,
and about C. horsemen* taking his way toward Angoulesme. Not withstanding, the
conduct and presence of the said lord de Byron, the most part of the footmen
were spoiled and diverse slain, and the baggage of the horsemen taken against
their promysse of faith. During this sieege, died in the town about a hundredth
Soldiers and certain numbers of laborers: of the catholics side, without
the town, dyed as well of the hand of the enemy as by diseases, about two
thousand, amongst which were many great lords, Gentlemen and Captains slain,
as the great master of ye artillery, whose office was given to the said lord
de Biron: the government of the town was given to the lord de Guitiniers, and
for the guard of it, the King bestowed eight companies of footmen. The same
day the King, ye Queen mother, the Cardynall of Loraine with diverse great
lords of the Court, entered the town, and visited as well the forte of the
gate Aulnis, and the castle, as the first breach of the tower on the wall, and
so returned to their places, where they were lodged before.
Certain of the Catholics (immediately after the town was given over) went
toward the yles of Marans and Marennes, holden of long by them of the
religion, from whence they were now withdrawn by special commandment from
Rochell, whereby the Catholics entered and seized upon them without resistance.

In this time were executed in France certain judgments diffinitiue,
pronounced before against those of the reformed Religion, whose processes were
begone and pursued by the Kings procurers from the beginning of the wars,
as well against such as were out of the Realm, as those that maintained part
with the Princes. The first sort forsook the Realm immediately after the
second peace, as being denied to enter their houses and goods contrary to the
couenaunts of the same* and less able to live (without mortal peril to
their persons) in the towns of their proper habitation, being filled with
garrisons of the contrary faction, as has been touched in the beginning of
these discourses: the other sort, (forsed estsoones to fall into arms) were
knit and tied to the army of the Princes, to resist the voluntary infringers of
the peace, and coniured enemies to the whole Realm: both the one and other
were proceeded against by personal adiornements in three short days, and for
defaulte of appearance their goods were seized to the Kings use, and governed by
special Commissioners of sequestration: many idle officers busied themselves
to effect the execution of their goods: in many provinces the said judgments
did suspend and hang until after the battle of Montgontour, when they awarded
general and speedy process against all men by defaultes, proceeding to
execution in Effigy and adiudication of their goods to the King, wherein
(such was the liberal zeal of the judges) that they executed by Effigy such
as were dead long time before.

It has been said before that the Lord de Sansac left the siege of Uezeley by
reason his Cannons miscaryed: and now having got new provision of Artillery to
the number of twelve or thirteen pieces, and being wythall advertised by
certain of the Town of Vezeley that the Lord de Traues, with a great part of
the Nobility present at the first siege, were departed and left the Town,
came to besiege it of fresh: He battered still the tower of the Port du Barle,
right against the watering place: soon after he removed his battery to that
fide of the gray Friars, following with so vehement an assault, that they came
to hand strokes upon the breaches, albeit he was repulsed. During this siege,
Albert de la Chasse a Bourgeys of the town, wrote letters to the Catholics,
revealing the particular state of the Town: He threw his letters over the wall
into a field where the Catholics came and found them: and as he was going to
the Wall with a letter, ready to conueye to the enemy, he was taken with the
fact, and charging a scholemaister, as party to his treason, were both hanged
forthwith.

The battery was such, as thee were spent above three thousand and five
hundredth shottes of canon, and al not able to force the Protestants, which
made the Lord Sansac raise his siege the. xvii. of December. 1569. loosing in
this siege about. xv. hundredth men, amongst whom the Lord de Foyssy, Colonel
of his footmen was hurt to death with a shot upon the trenches. Within the
Town, amongst others, M. Jacques Perrin, a Minister, was killed with a Canon.

The war did still aggrauate in diverse places of the Realm, contrary to the
opinion of such as thought it should have been qualified and utterly quenched by
ye battle at Montgontour. They of Charity (whereof has been spoken before)
stre^gthened themselves with great numbers of men of war come with the Lord
de Bricquemau and Borry, with their retinue: they maintained ordinary war
against the garrisons of the catholics thereaboutes, making many enterprises,
and one winning of another.

The Lord de Lespau a gentleman of Berry, and one called la Rose, Sergeant
mayor to Sanserre, attempted an enterprise upon the Town of Bourges in Berry,
by mean of intelligence with a Soldier of the town, called Vrsin Pallus, to
whom was promised a great sum of money, with a bill for the assurance,
payable within two months after he had satisfied his promise: This enterprise
had been of long practiced, and for the execution of it, the parties to the
practice, imparted it with the Lord de Bricquemau, de Guercy (Liuetenant to the
Lord Admiral, over his men of Arms, and governor at the present of Charity
for the King, under the princes) to the Lord de Borry. Baron of Reury, des
Essarz, with others Lords and Captains in those quarters: Who understanding
the enterprise at large with the means to execute it, judged with it as a
thing very convenient to be pursued.

This Vrsin Pallus in the mean while revealed it to the Lord de la Charstre
governor of the town of Bourges and country of Berry, and also to Captain
Martyn keeper of the tower of Bourges, who advised him to entertayne the
enterprise and assure to them of Charity. day, place and mean to effect it,
who likewise applied himself to their instructions.

In the mean while the said Governor of Charstres omitting no preparatiue
fit to welcome them, devised gynnes of fire and trains of powder within ye
ditches of the place assigned: he bestowed also two grates, the one at the
entry of the little Forte, and the other at the door or false port by which
they enter into the great tower: bringing lastly into the town diverse
horsemen and footmen Italians, for their better suerty and defense.

The day and hour special for this purpose, was assigned by the said Pallus,
on S. Thomas night, the on and twenteth of December at two of the clock at
after midnighte, which they of Charity failed not to observe in point. And
because they were dispersed in diverse places, the place of general meeting
was at Baugy, a castle taken before by tht Barron of Reury, about six leagues
from Bourges. There met about a thousand or twelve hundredth harquebushears on
foot of the troops of the Lord Borry and Loruaye, with three cornets of
horsemen guyded by the Lord Bricquemau, all which in very good point observed
both the hour and place asseigned called la Grange Francois half a league from
Bourges, where where likewise met the^ the said Vrsin Pallus* assuring the^
still of the facility of the enterprise, and that he could bring the^ to ye
great tower without danger, whereunto (to cover all cause of doubt) he offered
to be their first leader.

They of the Religion under the says of his word, made march first and
foremost, with him the Lord de Lespau, accompanied with twelve, as well
Captains as soldiers, and entered by a wicket toward the fort of ye false
port, where they pitched ladders to enter within the false port, which was
sieve foot above ground. After him entered the Baron Reury with five and twenty
men, and then the Lord de Sarts with fifty soldiers to sustain the first? but
as his troop entered, the cords of the grate were cut, when they also within
applied their several engines to use and put fire to the trains and at the
instant the artillery bestowed in flanks thu^dred upon them that were to
enter, as also Captain Martyn, with his number of armed me^, charged such as
were unhappily entered, who seeing themselves and their enterprise betrayed,
devised and labored for their safety as well as they could: some lept from the
wall down some gat out of the grate, the same being somewhat hyer because
Buysiere, steward to the late Lord de Autricour was enclosed under it, being
notwithstanding taken from thence by his company, who not able other wise to
effect their enterprise, were constrained to retire.

They killed of them of the Religion twelve or fourtene as well Captains as
Soldiers, and almost as many kept prisoners within the town, besides such
as were hurt, the Lord de Lespau, the Baron of Reurye, de Lessartes, des
Milles, with certain other were taken within the gross tower.

After this, they of Bourges fearing the courses that they of the religion made
even to their gates, advertised the king of their necessity, who succored
the^ spedely with fix cornets of horsemen, which had been before at the siege
of S. Ian d' Angely, they arrived at Bourges upon the end of December.

The Princes being come to Montauban, (as is said) executed the cause of their
coming adjoining to their army the forces of the two Uicountes and
Montgomerie.

In this time the King sent back to Poyctyers, the Duke de Aumall, with three
Canons, and one coluerine guyded by the Lord de Gouas and his regiment of
footmen: And so bestowing his garrisons to winter (lycensing before the Italian
to go home) his Majesty came to the Town of Angiers.

After these long vexations and troubles, all men began to desire, peace, the
which, as it was greatly desired of the faithful, so there were manifest
reasons, why the Catholics should desire the same. For although the loss and
ruin of the faithful was more hard to be recovered: Notwithstanding they that
were stain of the Papists side were not the lesser number. And their spoils
made known too many in diverse places, caused them to fear the desolation and
calamities to come the more, if war should be taken in hand again: which
seemed to such as wisely beheld al things not hard to be renewed of the Princes
part: seeing among great difficulties they had both renewed wars with
encredible speed, and also made them with greater force then before: the
stirred minds of the subjects being dangerous weapons. But all being weary of
the continual troubles wished for peace and quietness: and would the kingdom
take weapon against it self to her own destruction? It was said that the King
was inclined to peace, and yet angry for his former losses, and moved with the
letters of the Emperor and the Princes of Germany concerning a mariadge to be
made between him and Maximilian the Emperors daughter: unto whom the Emperor
would not consent but upon condition of peace. And so the matter being
handled of both parts for certain months, at the length in the month of
August with the great expectation and prayers of all men, peace was concluded:
and by the Edict all men of both Religions were commanded to live quietly
through the whole Realm. Which Edict after our long and lamentable unquietness,
it shall be good to set forth, in manner and form following.

VVheras (says the King) we perceive that the troubles The Edict of peace.
of war, which were spread abroad before this time and also now, did threaten
present ruin and destruction to our realm and subjects: to prevent so great a
mischief, and to bring our kingdom to her former tranquillity and quietness,
by the advice and consent of our sister, our brethren and such as were
specially chosen to be of our counsel, I thought good to decree and establish
these things that follow, with a perpetual and irreuocable Edict: which we
will command all our subjects faithfully to observe and keep for ever.

1 First of all, that after these troubles and tumults of wars, all things
that hitherto have been done of both parts be quite forgotten, and also
whatsoever was brought to pass by reason thereof: and that it shall not be
lawful for any to move any strife or controversy, or any ways to be
troublesome for the same either publicly or privately in any public place or
else where.

2 We straightly forbid and charge, that no man rip Concord.
up a fresh, those things done and past: or do offend one another with word
or deed: or that they do dispute or contend, about any thing done and past:
but rather that they live together peaceably and quietly as it becomes
Citizens and friends. Then ye which shall do otherwise we will account as
breakers of the common peace.

3 We will that the Catholic and Romish Religion, (...)(...).
be presently restored to those places of our realm, out of the which it has
been banished: and that all things belonging to the Ministers thereof, which
have been taken away, be restored again, and that they may quietly enjoy with
their Religion, their goods and lands.

4 And least there be any occasion of controversy and The (...)(...).
dissension left hereafter, we will, that men live peaceably and quietly in all
places of our Realm, and that they sustain no peril or hurt for Religions
sake, or that they be molested and troubled any where, so that they live ac
cording too the prescript of our Edicts.

5 It shall be lawful for all Noble men, whether they Noble men that are (...)of
(...).
dwell within the Realm or without, to use the reformed Religion, in one place
only of the jurisdiction: and the same also to appertain to their servants,
and to all others of their jurisdiction that will come to the same: so long as
they or any of their servants are present. I will that they signify unto our
Lieftenants, what place they will choose before they use the same, according to
the benefit of the said Edict.

6 We also permit such Noblemen as are of inferior Noble men of (...)calling.
calling, to use for them selves and their families only, the reformed
Religion. And if so be there resort any of their friends to their houses to
the number of ten to celebrate Baptism, or for any other business, our will is
not that they should be in any peril for the same, so that the^ exceed not the
number of ten.

7 And this we grant to the Queen of Navarre, our The Queen of (...).
Aunt, that beside the benefit generally granted to all those that are in
chief authority, it shall be lawful for her within her Duchy of Albrel,
Armiguac, Foix, and of Bigorre, (so that it be but within one special place of
every of those Lordships) to have the free use of the said Religion: that
whosoever will, shall go unto that place without al peril or harm, the said
Queen being absent, to hear and see the administration of the foresaid Reli
gion.

8 We do also appoint these Cities to every Lieftetenantship, All (...).
by name, (The which cataloge for breuities sake we do omit as not necessary.)

9 And furthermore we do permit and suffer by these Places (...)(...).
presents, that the use of the reformed Religion shall con tinue in all those
places, in the which it shall be found to have been used the first day of this
month of August.

10 But we severely forbid the administration and use of that Religion, either
in ministering the Sacraments, in preaching the word, in discipline, or in open
chatechising and instructing of children, ^o be in any other places, than in
those in which we have permitted the same to be.

11 We will also that this Religion be in no wise exercised The Kings Cour^*
within our Court, nor within two miles of the same.

12 Neither is it our pleasure that the same Religion Paris
should be exercised at Paris nor within the liberties of the same: nor in any
place within ten miles of the City. (...)of the (...).


13 At the Burial of the dead, I command my Lieutenants of my Cities, and all
other my officers, to suffer the men of the said religion, to have leave to
use those places, which they have already or shall hereafter provide for the
same: notwithstanding so, that when any of them shall die, the Lieutenant may
have warning, who shall give his servant commandment to attend and follow
the coorse, which shall be brought forth in the night, and that with ten persons
of his friends and kinsfolks only following the dead corpse to the
funeral: least there should be any t^mult by these occasions.

14 It shall not be lawful for the men of the said religion (...)*
to Marry within the degrees of Consanguinitie by my laws forbidden.

15 I will that all poor people, and sick persons without Hospitals and
Colleges.
respect, be received into hospitals, and colleges.

16 And least any man should doubt of my good intent The good will of the king
toward ^he prince of Conde and the rest.
and meaning toward the Queen of Nauar my Aunte, the Prince of Conde, and
toward the Prince of Nauar: I plainly affirm that I acknowledge and take
them for my faithful kinsfolks, subjects and servants.

17 As also I protest that I account and take all those Noble men for my true
and loving subjects, and all others whatsoever, which have followed my said
kinsfolks, or by any manner of means have aided them.

18 I do also account the Duke of Deuxpons and his The Duke of Sweburge and
other Princes.
children, the Prince of Orange, the cou^ty Lodouic and his brethren, the
county VVolrade Mansfeld, and al other strangers, which have aided my
kinsfolks, for my good neighbors and friends.

19 I will and command that my said Aunte and my The Queen of (...).
Cosyns, and all others which have done any thing at their commandment, be
free from making of any account, of all that money which by the^, or by any
other at their commandment, has been taken out of our treasury, out of our
cities, and out of the sale of our Churchlands: so that she or they give unto
me a bill of their accounts made. I do also pardon and forgive whatsoever has
been about the affairs in the war, as the mustering of soldiers, the
coining of money, the casting of great gu^nes, and such like provision: the
besieging of Cities, the battering down of the walls: the entering into league
with strangers, the bringing of them into my Realm: and to be short, I pardon
and forgive all those things which have been done and committed, both in this
last war and in the wars before time, and that so certainly, as if I did
perticularly name them by name.

20 Notwithstanding I will that the men of the said Religion do forthwith after
the proclayming of this Edict, break and let fall those leagues, into the
which they have entered either within or without the Realm: neither shall they
make collections of money, musterings of men, or any other assemblyes, than
such, as shall be allowed of us: except they mean to suffer the punishment of
rebels and traitors.

21 I will also that all Provinces Cities, and towns, and Privileges of
Cities.
all other places, do enjoy those offices and privileges, which they have
enjoyed, before these tumultes of wars.

22 And to the end all occasions of complaints and Offices.
quarrels may be quite taken away, we will that all favorers of that Religion,
without respect, may be in authority, and be pertakers of all manner of
offices, as well as other men, also that they may lawfully be present at all
assemblyes, Counsels, and consultations, depending upon those offices: and in
no wise to be put from the said offices after the proclamation of this Edict.

23 We will and command that the men of the said Payments to be indifferent.
Religion, be not oppressed more than the catholics, but to bear all a like
one burden according to the consideration had of their goods. And because of
the great burdens which the men of the said religion have borne, we will that
they be not subject to the payment of the tributes of Cities, which shall be
hereafter upon consideration of those things which have been done heretofore.
Notwithstanding they shall be tributary unto us at our commandment, as well
as the Catholics.

24 We will and command that all they, which Delivery of prisoners.
because of these wars are kept in prison, be set at liberty, and that
without any manner of ransom.

25 If any controversies happen to be for those raunsomes, Raunsomes.
and that the prisoners goods be taken away for the same: we will that the
parties so disagreing and contending do repair to our brother the Duke of
Aniou, who shall order and end the matter.

26 We will and command that all men of the reformed All under the Kings
protecon.
religion be under our protection, and may peaceably enjoy their offices and
dignities: notwythstanding we will not that their Lieutena^ts and the deputies
belonging unto the^, be restored unto those offices, because we have otherwise
provided: notwithstanding they shall have our pay for the same.

27 The booties and spoils not taken in wars, which Mouables restored.
as yet shall remain, shall be restored to their owners again, the buyers having
their money given to them again, in such quantity as was put down in the
regester of the Court. Thus would we have all moueables restored again.

28 Also we will and command that all owners may Revenues.
receive the revenues of their lands peaceably this year and we abrogate all
sentences to the contrary.

29 We will and command that the houses, Castles, Of houses, castles and
cities
Cities, and other places of the men of the reformed Religion, be free from
Garrisons of soldiers, and that they be in the same state and condition in the
which they were before the beginning of these tumultes.

30 We will and command that the Prince of Orange, Princes of Nassau.
and the county Lodouic his brother, be really restored to all their dominions
which are within the borders of our Realm: and that the dominion of Orange be
in the same state and case, in the which it was before the troubles of wars,
according to the prescript of the grant, made King Henry our Father, and other
Kings our Auncetors: commanding also that al instruments, Deeds, and writings,
belonging to the same be forthwith restored.

31 We will also, that all writings and evidences of Writings of Lands.
any lands be presently restored too all men which are owners of the same of
what Religion soever they be.

32 And to the end the remembrance *of all troubles Judgments.
past, may so much as may be, quite and clean forgotten: We will and command
judgments against the men of the said religion, pronounced since the death of
King Henry our father, for because of wars or Religion, whi there the said
sentences or judgments concern death, or loss of goods, to be void and of
none effect, and to be rased out of the Regesters of all Courts: and that all
goods, with the ground of houses overthrown, and the appertenances, be
restored to their owners.

33 In like manner we abrogate all sentences in controversy, during the time of
this war, gotten and obtained Abrogation of Sentences*
against the men of the said Religion, in what cause soever it be: and we will
that the controversies be in the same state, in the which they were before the
beginning of these tumultes*

34 We will and command the men of the said religion, Obseruaaion of
dollitique Laws.
to observe and keep all pollitique laws of our Realm, as that which
concerns holy days and fasting days, on the one, to do no work, and on the
other to eat no flesh.

35 And to the end all men may have the law without Instice equal ly ministered.
suspicion of hatred or favor, we will that such controversies as have been
already moved, or shall be moved hereafter between the men of contrary Religion,
be first of all brought before the ordinary Judges: and if any appeal be made
in the higher Parliaments: in respect of the Parliament of Paris which
consists of seven Courts, then the men of the reformed Religion may if they
will, refuse four of the Judges or Senators, and yet show no cause of their
refusal: howbeit the law is against it, which will not suffer any man to
challenge or refuse a Senator without he show some lawful cause. And it shall
also be lawful for them to refuse any other Senator, show ing, according to
custom lawful causes.

36 As touching the controversies, of which the appeal Appeals from
Parliaments*
is to be made to the Parliament of Tholoz, except the parties shall choose
another Parliament to decide the controversy, it shall be lawful for them to
appeal to our Masters of Requests in the Palace of Paris, who shall define
and decide all controversies in high Court.

38 In the Parliament of Rhoane, of Aijgues, of Britain, Refusal of Judges.
and of Granople, it shall be lawful for them too refuse six Judges or
Senators: that is to say three in each Court. And in Bordeaux, four in every
court.

38 It shall also be lawful for the catholics, to require that all they which
have been at any time deprived of their offices, may not know or understand
their controversies, without expressing of any farther cause: and withal they
shall have leave to make exception against any other counselors, according to
the custom.

39 And because so many have been offended in the Four Cities granted for
Securities sake.
time of these wars, that they cannot easily forget the injuries done unto
them, which we would gladly have the^ to do: to the end therefore all
occasions of troubles may be taken clean away, we give unto the men of the
reformed religion, the Cities of Rochel, Montaubane, Cognac, and Charity to
keep: In the which they may dwell which would not return home so quickly
for fear of troubles. And for the safety of the said Cities, the Prince of
Nauar, and the Prince of Conde our well-beloved kinsmen, and twenty Noble men
more of that side, will stand bound unto us, and will be sworn unto us to save
them from all peril, and to keep them to our use, and also at two years end
to restore them again without any delay. In the mean time the use of the
catholic Religion shall abide in those Cities, and all Churchmen and
catholics shall peaceably enjoy their goods and lands.

40 Furthermore we will and command that so Concerning this Edict.
soon as this Edict is proclaimed in the two camps, that all men by and by lay
aside their armor and weapons and never after to arm themselves again without
our consent, and the consent of our dear brother the Duke of Aniou.

41 We will that there be free traffyke in all places of Trafike.
our Realm after the proclamation of this our Edict.

42 And to the end this our Edict may not be broken, Punishments for breaking
this Edict.
we command those which shall have charge to see the execution of this our
Edict, that they cause the Magistrates of every city, of both religions, to
swear, that they will diligently look to the observation of this Edict. And
if any offense be committed against the same we protest that we will punish
the Magistrates themselves, except they bring such offenders before us.

43 Moreover to the end all our officers may plainly Disanulling of all former
Edictes.
understand our will and meaning, and to the end there may hereafter no
ambiguitie or scruple by the pretense of the former Edictes we protest that we
do abrogate and disanull all other Edictes, rescriptes, decrees,
interpretations, sentences of parliamentes, and privy commentaries contrary to
this our Edict concerning religion: and do command them all to be void
frustrate and of none effect. And we plainly declare that we would have all
men faithfully to observe and keep this our Edict.

44 And for the more sure confirmation of this our The oath of Magistrates.
will and meaning, we command that all our officers and Magistrates of Cities,
be made to swear faithfully and truly to observe and keep this our Edict.

45 Finally, we will and command that all Courts Solemn proclamation of this
Edict.
of Parliament take the same oath, and that without delay they proclaim this
Edict solemly so soon as it shall come to their hands. And also that so soon
as it shall be proclaimed in both Camps, the foreign soldiers on both parts
be dismissed. Also we command the Lief tenants of every Province to see that
this Edict be forth with proclaimed throughout all their Circuits. The Edict
being once proclaimed, if any man put himself in armor seditiously, let him be
well assured that he shall loose his life, without all hope of pardon or
favor, Know all men for a surety that this our Edict shall abide firm and
irrcuocable among all our subjects: for the observation whereof I charge them to
look diligently.

This Edict thus made, was by and by proclaimed at Paris and in both Camps:
both parts unarmed them selves, the stranger was dismissed: and the Protestants
came from diverse places after long and pitiful tariance to their own desolate
houses: but yet not quight and clean healed of the wounds of the injuries and
hatred conceived.

But thou O God, most mighty, the Governor and preserver of thy Church,
restore and build up the decayed Kingdom, after so long calamities of Civil
dissentions, and desolations of wars: that at the last (O Lord) Thy Church
may attain to rest and peace. Yea come Lord Jesus, come quickly.
FINIS.
Imprinted at London, by Henry Middelton: for Frauncis Coldocke, and are to be
sold at his shop in Powles Churchyard, at the sign of the Green Dragon.
Anno 1574.

The tenth Book treating of the furious outrages of France, with the
slaughter of the Admiral, and diverse other Noble and excellent men, committed
the. 24. August. ANNO. 1572.
IT were to be wished that the memory of the fresh slaughters, and of that
butcherly murdering that has lately bin committed in a manner in all the
towns of France, were utterly put out of the minds of men: for so great
dishonor and so great infamy has thereby stained the whole French nation,
that the most part of them are now ashamed of their own country, defiled
with two most filthy spots, falsehod and cruelty, of the which, whether has
bin the greater, it is hard to say. But forasmuch as there flee every where
abroad Pamphlets written by flatterers of the Court, and men corruptly hired
for reward, which do most shamefully set out things fained and falsely
imagined, in stead of truth, I thought my self bound to do this service to
posterity, to put ye matter in writing as it was truly done in deed, being
well enabled to have knowledge thereof, both by mine own calamity, and by
those that with their own eyes beheld a great part of the same slaughters.

In the year of our Lord. 1561. when there seemed to be some peril of
troubles to arise by reason of the multitude of such as embraced the Religion
(which they call reformed) for before that time the usual manner of punishing
such as durst profess that Religion, was besides loss and forfeiture of all
their goods to the Kings use, to burn their bodies) at the request of the
great Lords and Nobility, there was holden an assembly of the estates in the
Kings house at Saint Germans in Lay, near to the town of Paris, at which
assembly, in presence, and with the royal assente of King Charles the ninthe,
which now reigns, it was decreed, that from thencefoorth it should not be
prejudicial to any man to profess the said Religion, and that it should be
leefull for them to have public metings and preachings for the exercise
thereof, but in the suburbs of towns only.

At this assembly, Francis Duke of Guise, being descended of the house of
Loraine, and at that time Grandmaister of the kings household, was not present.
But when he was informed of this decree, he boiled with incredible sorrow and
anger, and within few days after, at a little town in Champaigne called
Vassey, while the professors of the said Religion were there at a Sermon, he
accompanied with a band of soldiers, set upon them, and siewe men and women,
to the number of two hundredth.

There was among these of the Religion (for so hereafter according to the
usual phrase of the french tongue we intend to call them) Jews of Burbon of
the blood royal, commonly called Prince of Conde, after the name of a certain
town, a man of great power, by reason of his kindred to the king. Therefore when
the Duke of Guise most vehemently striued against that law, and as much as in
him lay, did utterly overthrow it, and troubled the common quiet thereby
stablished, Gaspar de Coligni Admiral of France, and Francis d' Andelot his
brother, Captain of the Fantarie, and other Princes, Noble men and Gentlemen
of the same Religion, come daily by heaps to the Prince of Conde, to complain
of the outrageous boldness and intemperate violence of the Duke of Guise. At
that time Catherine de Medices Pope Clements brothers daughter, and mother of
king Charles borne in Florence, a city of Italy, had the governance of the
Realm in the kings minority. For though by the law of France, neither the
inheritance nor the administration of the Realm is granted to women, yet
through the cowardly negligence of Anthony king of Navarre, the said
Gatherine de Medices the kings mother, against the custom of the Realm, was
joined with him in that office of protectorship. She fearing the presumption
and fierce pride of the Guisians, wrote to the Prince of Conde with her own
hand: which letters are yet remaining, and at the assembly of the Princes of
Germany at Franckeford, holden under Ferdinande the Emperor, were produced
and openly read about ten years past: wherein she earnestly besought him, in
so great hardness and distress not to forsake her, but to account both the
mother and the children, that is, both her self and the king, and the kings
brethren, committed to his faith and natural kindness, and that he should with all speed, provide for their common safety: assuring him, that she would so
imprint in the kings mind his travel taken in that behalf, that he should
never be loser by it. Within few days after, ye Duke of Guise well knowing
how great authority the name of the king would carry in France, and to the
intent that he would not seem to attempt any thing rather of his own head than
by the priuitie of the king, and having atteined fit partners to join with
him in these enterprises, he got the king into his power. Which thing being
known abroad, and many hard incombrances there upon suddenly rising, and a
great part of the nobility of France maruelously troubled with it, the Prince
of Conde by advise of his friends, thought it best for him to take certain
towns and furnish them with garrisons: which was ye beginning of ye first civil
war. For the Prince of Conde alleged the cause of his taking armor, to be
the defense of the kings Edict, wherein co^sisted the safety of the common
weal, and that it could not be repealed without most assured undoing of the
nation of France, and destruction of the nobility, by reason of the exceeding
great multitude of those that daily joined themselves to that Religion. Of
which number such as being of noble birthe, were in power, dignity, wealth,
and credit above the rest, thought it not meet for them to suffer the
punishments and cruelty accustomed to be extended upon the professors
thereof: beside that, they held them discontented that the Duke of Guise a
new come, a stranger translated from the forestes of Loraine into France,
did take upon him in France so great courage and so high dominion and power.
Thereto was added the Queens mothers singular care (as was reported) for
co^seruation of peace, and repressing the rage of the Guisians. Upon which
opinion it is certain that above twenty thousand men having regard only to
the Queens inclination, joined themselves to the side of those of the
Religion, and to the defense of their profession, which at that time had
beu^eged the force of the kings power* After certain battles and many
losses on both paris, and the Duke of Guise slain, within a year peace was
made with this condition, that they of the Religion should have free liberty
thereof, and should have assemblies and preachings for the exercise of the same
in certain places.

This peace continued in force, but not in all places, during five years: for
in the most towns and jurisdictions, the officers that were affectionate to
the Romish side, whom they commonly call Catholics, did all the displeasures
they could to those of the Religion. Therefore, when Ferdinando Aluares de
Toledo, commonly called Duke of Alua, was leading an army not far from the
frontiers of France, against those of the low country which embraced the
reformed Religion, against the will of the king of Spain, the Queen mother,
caused to be levied and brought into France six thousand Switzers for a
defense, as she caused it to be bruted, but as the success has proved, for
this intent, that the Prince of Conde, the Admiral and other Noble men of the
Religion, if they escaped the treasons prepared for them, and listed to defend
themselves by force, and try it by battle, might be sodeinlye oppressed ere
they were provided. For the courtiers which then had the managing of these
matters, did not at that time well trust the soldiers of France. Many things
pertaining to the course of that time, and the renewing of the war, must here
for have to our present purpose be necessarily omitted.

When the war had endured about six months, peace was made with the same
conditions that we have above rehearsed, that all men should have free
liberty to follow and profess the Religion reformed* For this was ever one
and the last condition upon all the wars. But within few days or months
after, it was plainly understood, that the same peace was full of guile and
treason, and finally, that it was no peace, but most cruel war cloaked under
the name of peace. For forthwith al those towns which they of the Religion had
yielded up, were possessed and strengthened with garrisons of soldiers of the
contrary side, saving only one town on the sea ceast of Xantoigne commonly
called Rochell. For the men of that town about two hundredth years past, had
yielded themselves to the kings power and allegiance, with this condition, that
they should never be constrained against their will to receive any garrison
soldiers. Also the Prince of Conde and the Admiral, were advertised, that
there was treason again prepared to entrappe them by Tauaignes, a man given to
murder and mischief, which had lately bin made Marshall of France, and that
if they did not spedely avoid the same, it should shortly come to pass, that
they should be deceived and taken by him, and delivered up to the cruelty of
their adversaries. Upon the receipt of these aduertisementes, they immediately
make haste to Rochell, carrying with them their wives and young children, which
was the beginning of the third civil war, the most sharp and miserable of
all the rest. There was at that time in the court, Charles Cardinal of
Loraine, brother to the Duke of Guise, which (as is above said) was slain in
the first war, one accounted most subtle and crafty of all the rest, but of
a terrible, cruel and troublesome disposition, so as he was thought
intolerable even at Rome it self. This man, they of the reformed Religion
reported to be the most sharp and hateful enemy of their profession, and him
they abhorred above all other for the cruelty of his nature, and named him the
firebrand of all civil flames. He at the beginning of the third civil war,
persuaded the king to publishe an Edict, that no man profess any Religion but
the Romish or Popish, and that whosoever would embrace any other, should be
co^pted as traitors. In that same Edict printed at Paris, this sentence was
expressly contained, and for the strangeness of the matter, and for that it
stained the kings name with the most dishonorable spot of perjury and breach
of faith, it was in other impressions afterward omitted. And it was further
then declared, that albeit the king had in many Edictes before that time
permitted the freedom of Religion, yet his meaning ever was to retain and
cause to be retained of all men, the only Romish or Popish Religion within
his Realm.

After many overthrows on both parts given and received, whereas the end of
this third war was thought likely to be the harder, by reason of the breach
of faith in the years before, and on the other side the state of the Realm by
reason of the wast that the Cities were brought unto, and the extreme poverty
of the mean people and his husbandmi, did require some treaty of composition,
the king sent messengers to the Admiral, to signify unto him in the kings
name, that the king himself had at length found out a most sure way of
peace and concord, namely, that the armies of both parties joined together,
should go into the low country against the Duke of Alua, which had bin the
author of the late calamities in France. He signified further, that he had
great causes of querels against the king of Spain, and this principally, that
he had invaded and held by force, suddenly slaying all the soldiers there, an
Islande of the new found world, called Florida, which had bin taken by the
French and kept under his dominion: and likewise the Marquesdome of Final, the
inhabitants whereof had but a little time before yielded themselves to the
kings subjection and allegiance. He said that the most steadfast band of
concord should be that foreign war, and that there could no other better mean
be devised to drown the memory of the former dissentions in eternal
forgetfulness.

To the performance hereof, he said it was a matter of most apt opportunity,
that Lodouic Count of Nassaw, brother to the Prince of Aurange, had bin now
two years in the Admiralles camp, to whom the Admiral gave principal credit
in all things, and that by him and his fellows of the low country and other,
whom he understood to favor his part, it might easily be brought to pass
that certain Cities might be surprised, and thereby great advantage be
attained to the atchieuing of the war.

The Admiral hearing these things was maruellously troubled. For albeit he
doubted not of the kings fidelity, yet therwithall many things fell into his
mind to be considered: as the power of the Cardinal and the rest of the
Guisians, who were well known to have bin at all times most affectionate to
the king of Spain For the Duke of Guise had left a son, a very young man
called Henry, to whom the Queen had given all the offices and places of honor
that his father had borne before, being unfit thereto by age, and against the
ancient laws and customs, and also through the traitorous infidelity of
certain of the kings counsaylers, whom she knew for their affection to
Popish Religion to be most addicted to the Spanish king, and that diverse of
them had great yearly pensions of him, and did disclose unto him the affairs
of the Realm. He remembered how hereby it came to pass, that the same kings
Ambassador (which among strange nations seemed utterly incredible) was
admitted into the privy Counsel of France, and that one Biragio a Lumbard,
and (as it is reported) a traitor to his own country, otherwise altogether
unlearned, and specially ignorant of the civil law, was yet for the subtlety
of his wit advanced to so g^reat honor, that he executed the Chauncellers
office, Michaell Hospital being displaced, a man known to be such a one, as
there was not in all degrees of me^ any either more wise, or more learned, or
more zelously loving his country. Herewithall he considered the slanderous
cauillations of his adversaries, to whom hereby might seem an occasion given,
as if the Admiral were of a troublesome nature, and could not abide any
quietness, nor could long rest at home without some tumultuous stir.
Hereunto the messengers replied as they were able, and therewithal alleged
this cause of so sudden hatred against the Spanishe king, that one Albenie
late returned out of Spain, had infourmed the king and the Queen mother for
certainty, that king Philip a few months before, had poisoned his wife the
French kings sister, and had spread rumors of her throughout all Spain, such as
for the honor of many persons are meet not to be disclosed. But nothing
moved the Admiral so much as the cherefull earnestness of Lodouic of Nassaw,
who as soon as he was advertised of that purpose of the king, omitted nothing
that he thought might serve to encourage the Admiral thereunto.

The Admiral persuaded hereby, nothing fearyng the infidelity of those of the
Court, gave his mind to hearken to composition. And so was the third civil
war ended, and the peace concluded with the same conditions that were before,
that every man should have free liberty to use and profess the Religion.

Within few months after this, diverse princes of Germany, that favored the
Religion reformed, and among those the three Electors, the Palsgraue, the Duke
of Saxony, and the Marquis of Brandeburge, sent their Ambassadors into France
to the king, to gratulate unto him for the new reconciliation of his
subjects. And because they accounted it greatly to behoue themselves that the
same concord should remain steadfast and of long continuance, they promised,
that if any would for that cause procure trouble, or make war upon him,
either within his own dominions, or without, they and their followers should be
ready to defend him. To this embassage the king first by words, and afterward
by a book subscribed with his own hand, answered and gave his faith, that he
would for ever most sacredly and faithfully observe his Edict of pacification.
Hereby so much the more willingly the Admiral suffered him self to be drawn
to the said purposes for the low country, although oftentimes calling to
mind the nature of the Queen mother, he used to say to diverse, and specially
to Theligny, to whom he afterward married his daughter, that he greatly
suspected the rolling wit of that woman. For (says he) so soon as she has
brought us into that preparation against the low country, she will leave us
in the midst.

Nevertheless, the Count of Nassaw, writes to his brother, and they
conferring their aduises together, sent messengers to the king, that if it
please him to deal with the matter of the low country, they will shortly so
do, that he shall by their many and great services, well perceive their
affection and devotion toward him. The king writes again to them in most
loving terms, saying that their message most highly pleased him, and he gave
to them both his hearty thanks.

About the same time Maximilian the Emperor, pitying the estate of ye prince
of Aurange (as he said) treated by his Ambassadors with the king of Spain,
and had in manner obtained, that the Prince should have all his goods restored
unto him, but with this condition, that he should have no house within the
territory of the low country, but settling his refidence and dwelling
elsewhere, he should freely enjoy all his revenues. Which matter being
reported to the French^ king, he immediately sent messengers to the prince of
Aurange, willing him to look for nothing by that dealing of the Emperor,
saying that it was but a fraud and guilefull devise intended for this purpose,
only to break up his leuying of soldiers that he had begone in Germany: and
assuring him, that if he would credit and follow him, he would give him aid
sufficient to recover his estate.

The Prince of Aurenge persuaded by these promises of king Charles continued
his musters, and determined a while to bear the charges though they were
heavy to him, while such things as were necessary for the war, were in
preparing. In the meanetime Lodouic in disguised apparel went to Paris to the
king. Forasmuch as the season of the year by this time seemed not commodious
to levy an army, for the winter was at hand, by assent they deferred the
matter till the next Summer.

These things thus hanging, the Prince of Aurenge his captains by Sea, did
oftentimes set v^n the Spaniards and Portingals and such ships as they took
t^y brought into the haven of Rochel, which then was in the power of the Prince
of Condees part: and there they openly uttered and sold their prizes to the
men of the town and other merchantes of France, whereupon the Ambassador of
Spain made often complaints to the kings privy Counsel.

And forasmuch as they thought it very available to this enterprise, that
Elizabeth Queen of England, might be brought into league with them, the king
committed the dealing in that matter to the Admiral. For a few months
before, the king had with most sweet alluring letters, gotten him to the
Court, where he was most honorably enterteined: and to take from him all
occasion of distrust upon his adversaries, or of otherwise suspecting of the
kings or Queen mothers affection toward him, first, all the Guisians of a
set purpose departed the Court. Then the king gave the Admiral free liberty
to take with him what company and with what furniture he would: and because it
was thought that he had more confidence in the Marshall Cosse, than in the
rest, therefore the king commanded the said Marshall to be ever at hand with
the Admiral, and to assiste him in the kings name if any need were.

The matter of the league with England, the Admiral so diligently and
industriously handled, that within short space after by Ambassadors sent, and
by faith given and received, and oaths solemnly taken on both parts, it was
confirmed. Concerning the procurement of other leagues and amities, such as
might seem to further the enterprise of the low country, the Admiral also
traveled in the Kings name, and by his commandment, and had in a manner
brought al these things to an end. And of all those leagues, the first and
principal condition was, that the liberty of Religion should continue, and
that the king should most diligently and sincerely observe this Edict of
pacification.

Though these things seemed to be handled secretly, yet by the letters both of
Biragio the vicechancellor, of whom we made mention before, and of Moruilliers
whom for his hypocritical leanesse children commonly called the Chimera or
bugge of ye Court, and by advertisement of Cardinal de Pelue, a man most fit
either to invent or execute any treason, they were carried to ye B. of Rome, who
by advise of his Cardinals, sent by and by one of their number, called
Alexandrine, in the midst of most sharp winter into France, with these
instructions, to persuade ye king to enter into the society of the league of
Trent, whereof the first and principal article was, that the confederats
should ioyn their powers and make war against ye Turks and Heretics, meaning
by the name of heretics, al those Princes that did permit the use of the
reformed Religion within their dominions.

The Cardinal Alexandrine was honorably received in the Court, but yet
dismissed without atchieuing his purpose. For so was it bruted among the
people, and commonly believed throughout France: albeit he himself secretly
seemed to return very merry and cheereful to the Pope: and as it is reported,
did sometime say that he received such answer of the king as was needeful not
to be published, and that the King and Queen mother had largely satisfied him.

Forasmuch as it was thought a matter greatly auayling to the enterprise of the
low country, to send certain ships into the English Seas, that if any
aid should be sent into the low Country to the Duke of Alua out of Spain,
it might so be stopped, Strozzi and the Baron de la Guard were appointed for
that purpose, to whom the King gave in commandment to rigge forth certain
Ships of Bordeaux and Rochell, well armed and well appointed, and to provide
with all speed all things needful for those Ships. The Ambassador of
Spain somewhat moved with this preparation, made diverse complaints to the
Kings Council on the behalf of the King his master, and yet never received
any other answer but that the King thought it not likely, and that he would
send Commissioners to Bordeaux and to Rochell, with letters and commandment
that there should be no preparation made to the Sea, and if any had been made,
it should be enquired of. What instructions were secretly and closely under
hand given to these two Captains of that navy, we do not certainly know.
But this no man can doubt of, but that they had commission to distress all
such Ships wherein any Spanishe Soldiers should be transported into the low
country, and that all this preparation to the sea was ordained against the
Spanishe King and the Duke of of Alua.

And moreover that the Admiral at the same time received commandment from
the King, to send Espials unto Per^ an Islande of the new found world, most
plentiful of gold above all the other, now being in the Spaniardes dominion,
to learn if there were any good enterprise to be attempted or achieved for
the getting of it. Which matter was committed to a certain Gentleman, one of
the Admiralles train, who went thither accompanied with a certain Portingall,
a man most skillful of those Nauigations, whom the Admiral had joined with him
by the Kings commandment, and is not yet returned.

Now it cannot be expressed how many and how great tokens of most loving
mind the King at that time showed to the Admiral, and to the Count
Rochfoucault, and to Theligny, and to the rest of the chief noblemen of the
Religion. First all such things as in the former wars had been taken away in
the Towns, Fermes, and Castles of the Admiral and d'Andelot, the King caused
to be sought out and restored. If there were any other whom the King
understood to be beloved and esteemed of the Admiral, or to have attained any
special honor in the said late wars, those he liberally benefited and
rewarded. To the Admiral himself he commanded one day to be given a hundred
thousand pounds of his own treasure in recompense of his former losses. When
his brother the Cardinal Chastillio^, endowed with many great and welthy
benefices, was departed his life, the king gave him the fruits of one whole
year. Also the king wrote to Philibert Duke of Sauoy, that he should do him a
most acceptable pleasure, if he did not only deal more gently with those
that in the former wars had aided those of the Religion, but also would use
clemency and mildness toward all other that professed the same Religion
within his dominions.

And for that there was old enmity between the Guisians and the Admiral,
whereby it was to be doubted that perilous co^tentions would arise in the
Realm of France, the king willed it to be signified to them both in his name,
that they should for his sake and the commonweals, give over those
displeasures, and he prescribed them a certain form of reconciliation and
agreement, the same whereof the foundations had bin laid almost six years
before in the town of Molins, where the king calling to him ye greatest estates
of his realm, after consultation and deliberation had upon the matter,
pronounced the admiral not guilty of the death of the Duke of Guise,
wherewith he was charged by the young Duke of Guise and his kinsmen: and so the
king by the advice of his Counsel had ended that controversy.

Furthermore, the Cardinal of Loraine (who as we have said was the very forger
of all the former wars) to take away al jealousy of new practices, was
departed to Rome and took with him his familiar friend the late created
Cardinal Peluey, one reputed a most subtle and crafty person, under
pretense of going to the election of a new Pope in place of the old Pope then
lately deceassed.

But there was none greater and more assured token of public peace and
quietness than this, that the king purposed to give his sister Margaret, in
marriage to the Prince Henry, the son of the Queen of Navarre, which Prince
had in the last war defended the cause of the Religion, and bin sovereign of
their army. Which marriage the king declared, that it should be the most
straight bond of civil concord, and the most assured testimony of his good
will to those of the Religion.

Yea, and also because it was alleged that the said Prince Henry was
restrained in conscience, so as he might not marry the Lady Margaret being of
a contrary Religion, a Catholic and given to the rites of the Romish Church,
the king for answer said that he would discharge her of the Popes laws, and
notwithstanding the crying out of all his courtiers to the contrary, he
permitted him, that without all ceremonies, in the porch of the great church of
Paris the marriage should be celebrate in such a form as the ministers of the
reformed Church mislyked not.

Which thing being by report and letters spread through the world, it ^n not
be expressed how much it made the hearts of those of the religion assured and
out of care, and how it cast out all fear and ielosies out of their minds,
what a confidence it brought them of the Kings good will toward them. Finally,
how much it rejoiced foreine Princes and states that favored the same
Religion. But the Admirals mind was much more stablished by a letter which
about the same time Theligny brought him with the Kings own hand and sealed,
wherein was contained, that whatsoever the Admiral should do for the matter of
the intended war of the low country, the King would allow and ratify the
same, as done by his own commau^deme^t. About that time Lodouic of Nassaw with
ye Queen of Navarre a Lady most zelously affected to the Religion, came to the
French Court. The league was made between King Charles and the Prince of
Aurenge, and the articles thereof put in writing. The marriage was appointed to
be holden in the town of Paris. For which cause the Queen of Navarre during
those few days repaired thither to provide things for the solemnity of the
wedding. For the same cause the King sent to the Admiral one Cauaignes, a man
of an excellent sharp wit whom for the Admirals sake the King had advanced
to great honor, requiring the Admiral to go before to Paris, as well for the
said preparation, as also for the matter of the war of the low country,
promising that he himself would within few days follow after him: assuring
him that there was now no cause for him to fear the threatenings and mad
outrages of the Parisians. For in as much as the same town is above all other
given to superstitions, and is with seditious preachings of Monks and Friars
daily enflamed to cruelty, it is hard to express how bitterly they hated
the Admiral and the professors of that Religion. Whereto was added a grief of
their mind conceived certain days before, by reason of a certain stone
cross gilted and builte after the manner of a spire steeple, commonly called
Gastignes cross, which the Admiral with great earnest fute obtained of the
King to be overthrown: for he alleged, that being erected in the midst of the
rage of the civil war, as it were in trumphe to the reproach of one of the
Religion, it was a monument of civil dissension, and so a matter offensive to
peace and concord.

The King well knowing the deadly hate of the Parisians to the Admiral, wrote
his letters to Marcell the provost of the Marchaunts (which is the highest
dignity in Paris with sharp thretnings if there should be raised any stir or
trouble by reason of the Admirals coming. To the same effect also the Duke of
Aniow the Kings brother, and the Queen mother wrote to the same Marcell and
the rest of the Magistrates of Paris, so that now there seemed utterly no
occasion left for the Admiral to fear or distrust. And within few days
after, the King sent Briquemault a man of great virtue and estimation, to the
Admiral, with the same instructions, saying that the matter of the low country
could not well be dealt in without his presence.

The Admiral persuaded by thus many means, and filled with good hope and
courage, determined to go to Paris, where so soon as he was arrived, and had been honorably and lovingly entertained of the King and his brethren, and the
Queen mother, and consultation entered among them about the preparation for the
low country, he declared to the King at large, how the Duke of Alua was in
leuying of great power, and preparing an army, and that if the King should
dissemble his purpose, it would come to pass that many thereby would show
themselves slower and slacker to the enterprises, and that now were offered
great means to do good, which if he let slip, he should not easily recover
the like again hereafter. And therefore it was best to take the advantage of
this opportunity.

A few days before, Lodouic of Nassaw went secretly into the frontiers of
the low country, and took with him as partners of his journey and privy to
his council, three Frenchmen of great credit with the Admiral, namely
Saucourt, la Noue, and Genlis, to whom the King had given in charge to see
if they could by any means attempt and possess any towns bordering upon his
Realm. They gathering diverse other Gentlemen into their company, went
speedily into the low country, the Admiral not knowing of it. Who as soon
as he understood of their going thither, wrote unto them that he much
marvelled what they meant, saying that he well knew there could be no power
gotten ready before forty days end, and that they should be well advised to
do nothing rashly, nor to overthrow with have their devises that seemed not
ripe to be executed.

The County of Nassaw inflamed with the sight and desire of his country, and
fearing the mutablenesse of the King, did first at the sudden set upon
Valentiennes, but being repulsed by the Spanishe Soldiers that were in
garrison in the Castle, he hastily departed to Montz and took the town, being
a place very strong by nature and well furnished with all things necessary for
the war. Which thing being by report and Messangers spread abroad into the
low country, and carried into France and Germany, both encouraged all them
of the Religion with great hope, and also seemed to have now plainly and openly
deciphered and disclosed the mind of the French King. Moreover Genlis returning
to Paris, when he had made report to the King of all the matter as it had
proceeded, easily obtained of him, that by his assente he might levy certain
bands of footmen and horssemen of France, and carry them to succoure Montz.
But by the way when he was entered into ye bounds of the low country, having
with him to the number of 4000. footmen, and about 400. horssemen, they were
beset by the Duke of Alua, and the most part of them distressed: which thing
was well known to have been wrought by the means of the Guisians, which by
daily messages and letters, advertised the Duke of Alua of their purpose and
preparation. Which falsehood of theirs, many most affectionate to the Romish
Religion were highly offended with, because a great number were addicted to ye
same Romish Religion in that company.

With this loss, and with the rescue of the town of Valentiennes, ye King
seemed to be much troubled, for he feared least his counsels being disclosed to
the Spanish King, would at length breed some cause of querell and war.
Howbeit, when he began to remember, that a great part of his secrets was
already revealed to the Duke of Alua, he oftentimes resolved to utter his
mind plainly, and to make open war. But he was withdrawn from that purpose
by certain men which the Admiral had long before conceived, that they would
so do. Howbeit, he gave the Admiral liberty to send what soever he thought
meet to further the Prince of Aurenge his enterprise, and as great supply
either of footmen or of horssemen as he could to the army which the Prince of
Aurenge had levied in Germany. When the Admiral for that cause had made
request that he might levy thirty troops of horssemen, and as many ensigns
of footmen, he easily obtained it.

For the entertainment of these footmen it behooved to have money, wherefore at
the request of the Admiral, the King called for his Tresurer and commanded
him to deliver to the Admiral so much money as the Admiral should think
meet, and charged him, that he should not in any wise after the usual manner
of the accounts of finances, write the causes of the receipt, but only set it
down in this form: This sum of money was paid to the Admiral such a day
by the Kings commandment, for certain causes which the King has commanded
not to be written: and to this warrant the King subscribed with his own hand.

Also the King wrote to Monducet his Embassadoure in the low country, to
travel as earnestly as he could, for their deliverance, that were taken at the
overthrow of Genlis, which commandment it is said that Monducet did most
faithfully and diligently execute.

Not long before this, Ioane Queen of Navarre above mentioned, died in the
Court at Paris, of a sudden sickness, being about the age of forty and
three years, where as the suspicion was great that she dyed of poison, and her
body being for that cause opened by the Physicians, there were no tokens of
poison espied. But shortly after, by the detection of one A. P. it has been
found that she was poisoned with a venomed smell of a pair of perfumed
gloves, dressed by one Renat the Kings Apothicarie, an Italian, that has a
shop at Paris upon S. Michaels bridge, near unto the Palace: which could not
be espied by the Physicians which did not open the head nor looked into the
brain. It is well known that the same man about certain years past, for the
same intent gave to Jews Prince of Conde a poisoned Pomander, which the Prince
left with one le Gross his Surgion: le Gross delighted with the same, was by
little and little poisoned therewith, and so swelled, that he hardly escaped
with his life.

By her death, the Kingdom came to the Prince Henry her son, to whom as is
abouesaide, the Kings sister was promised and contracted.

Things being as it seemed throughout al France in most peacible estate, and
the concord of all degrees well stablished, the day was appointed for the
marriage of the King of Nauar, which day all they that fancied the Religion
esteemed so much the more joyful to them, because they saw the King
wonderfully bent thereunto, and all good men judged the same a most assured
ple^ge and establishment of civil concord, whereas on the contrary part, the
Guisians and other enemies of common quietness greatly abhorred the same
marriage,

When the day came, the marriage was with royal pomp solemnized before the
great Church of Paris, and a certain form of words so framed, as disagreed
with the Religion of neither side, was by the Kings commandment pronounced by
the Cardinal of Bu^bon the King of Nauars uncle: and so the matrimony
celebrate with great joy of the King and all good men, the bryde was with
great train and pomp led into the Church to hear Mass, and in the mean
time the brydgrome who mislyked these ceremonies, together with Henry Prince
of Conde, son of Jews, and the Admiral, and other noble me^ of the same
Religion, walked without the Church door, waiting for the Brides return.

While these things were in doing at Paris, Strozzi, who as we have said, had
the charge of the Kings power at the Sea, houering upon the coast of Rochel,
did now and then send of his Captains and Soldiers into the town, under
color of buying things necessary: and sometime he came thither also himself.
The like was done at y^ same time in an other part of France, by the horsemen of
Gonzague Duke of Niuers near to the town of la Charity, which has a bridge
over the River of Loyre, and remained till that time in the power of those of
the Religion, by reason of the great number of them there inhabiting. This
troop was of those horssemen which the King has accustomed to keep in
ordinary wages in every country, whereof the most part were Italians,
countrymen to their Captain Jews Gonzague, to whom the Queen mother had
given the daughter and heir of the Duke of Niuers in marriage. They requested
of the townsmen, that they might make their musters within the town, saying
that they had received warrant from the King so to do, and showed the Kings
letters therefore. At Lions the governor of the town, commanded a view to be
taken of all those that professed the Religion, and their names to be written
in a book and brought unto him: which book shortly after, according to the
success, was called the bloody book.

After the marriage ended at Paris, which was the time that the Admiral had
appointed to return to his own house, he moved the King concerning his
departure. But so great was the preparation of plays, so great was the
magnificence of banquets and shows, and the King so earnestly bent to those
matters, that he had no leisure, not only for weighty affairs but also not so
much as to take his natural sleep. For in the French Court, Dauncings,
Maskings, stageplayes (wherein the King exceedingly delights) are commonly
used in the night time: and so the time that is fittest for counsel and
matters of governance, is by reason of nightly riottous sitting up, of
necessity consumed in sleep. So great also is the familiarity men and the
women of the Queen mothers train, and so great liberty of sporting,
entertainment and talking together, as to foreine nations may seem
incredible, and be thought of al honest persons a matter not very convenient
for preservation of noble young Ladies chastity. Moreover, if there come any
Pandor or bawd out of Italy, or any Scholmaster of shameful and filthy lust,
he wins in short time marvelous favor and credit. And such a multitude
is there begone to be of Italians, commonly throughout all France, specially in
the Court, since the Administration of the Realm was committed to the Queen
mother, that many do commonly call it Fraunce-Italian, and some term it a
Colonie and some a common sink of Italy.

These madnesses of the Court, were the cause that the Admiral could not have
access to the Kings speech, nor entrance to deal in weighty matters. But
when they that were sent from the reformed Churches to complain of injuries
commonly done to those of the Religion, understood of the Admirals purpose to
depart, they did with all speed deliver to him their books and petitions, and
besought him, not to depart from the Court till he had dealt in the cause of
the Churches, and delivered their petitions to the King and his Counsel. For
this cause the Admiral resolved to defer his going for a while, till he
might treat with the Kings Counsel concerning those requests: for the King had
promised him that he would shortly entend those matters, and be present with
the Counsel himself.

Besides this delay, there was an other matter that stayed him. There was owing
to the Rutters of Germany, which had served on the part of the Religion in the
last war, great sums of money for their wages, in which matter the
Admiral traveled with incredible earnestness and care.

Concerning all these affairs, the Admiral (as he determined before) having
access and opportunity for that purpose, moved the Kings pri^ie Counsel the
22. of August, which was the fifte day after the King of Nauarres marriage, and
spente much time in that treaty. About noone, when he was in returning home
from the Counsel, with a great company of noblemen and Gentlemen, behold, a
Harquebuzier out of a window of a house near adjoining, shot ye Admiral with
two bullets of lead through both the arms. When the Admiral felt himself
wounded, nothing at all amazed, but with the same countenance that he was
accustomed, he said, through yonder window it was done: go see who are in
the house: What manner of treachery is this? Then he sent a certain gentleman
of his company to the King to declare it unto him. The King at that time was
playing at tennise with the duke of Guise. As Soon as he heard of the Admirals
hurt, he was maruellously moved as it seemed, and threw away his racket that he
played with on the ground, and taking with him his brother in law the King of
Navarre he retired into his Castle.

The Gentlemen that were with the Admiral, brake into the house from whence he
received his hurt, there they found only one woman, the keeper of the house,
and shortly after also a boy, his lackey that had done the deed, and
therewithal they found the harquebuze lying upon the table in that Chamber
from whence the noise was heard: him that shot they found not, for he in great
have was run away out at the back gate, and getting on horssebacke, which he
had waiting for him ready sadled at the door, he rode a great pace to S.
Anthonies gate, where he had a fresh horse tarying for him, if need were, and
an other at Marcels gate. Then by the Kings commandment a great number rode
out in post into all parts to pursue him: but for that he was slipped into
bywayes, and received into a certain Castle, they could not overtake him.

At the suit of the King of Nauar, and the Prince of Conde and other, the King
by and by gave commission for inquiry to be made of the matter, and committed
the examining thereof to three chosen persons of the Parliament of Paris, Thuan
and Morsant and Viol a Counselor.

First, it was found that the same house belonged to a Priest a Canon of S.
German, whose name is Villemure, which had been the Duke of Guises
scholemaster in his youth, and still continued a retayner toward him. Then the
woman which we said was found in the house, being taken and brought before
them, confessed that a few days before, there came to her one Challey sometime
a master d'hostel of the Duke of Guises house, and now of the Kings Court,
and commanded her to make much of the man that had done this deed, and to
lodge him in the same bed and Chamber where Villemure was wont to lie, for
that he was his friend and very familiar acquaintance, and that Villemure
would be very glad of it. The name of him that shot was very diligently kept
secret. Some say it was Manreuet, which in the third civil war tratorously
slew his Captain monsieur de Mouy, a most valiante and noble Gentleman, and
straightway fled into the enemies camp. Some say it was Bondot, one of the
archers of ye Kings guard. When the woman's confession was brought to the King,
he immediately called Monsieur de Nance, Captain of his guarde, and commanded
him to apprehend Challey and bring him to him. Challey as soon as he heard the
stroke of the piece, fled into the Kings Castle called the Louure, and hid him
in the duke of Guises chamber, from whence he conveyed himself away as soon
as he had heard of the kings commandment. When de Nance was informed of his
departure, he answered that Challey was a Gentleman of good worship, and there
was no doubt but when need were he would appear before the King and the
Magistrates.

While these things were doing, and the Admirals wound in dressing, Theligny
went by his commandment to the king, and most humbly besought him in the
name of his father in law, that his Majesty would voutsafe to come unto him,
for that his life seemed to be in peril, and that he had certain things to
say, greatly importing to the Kings safety, which he well knew that none in
his Realm durst declare to his majesty. The King courteously answered that he
would willingly go to him, and within a little while after he set forward.
The Queen mother went with him, and the Duke of Aniow, the Duke of Monpensier,
a most affectionate subject to the church of Rome, the Count de Rhetz, the
Queen mothers great familiar, Chauigny and Entragny, which afterward were
chief ringleaders in the butcherie of Paris.

When the King had lovingly saluted the Admiral as he was wont to do, and had
gently asked him some questions concerning his hurt and the state of his
health, and the Admiral had answered with such a mild and quiet countenance,
that all they that were present wondered at his temperance and patience, the
King being much moved (as it seemed) said, The hurt my Admiral is done to
thee, but the dishonor to me: but by the death of God (says he) I swear I will
so severely revenge both the hurt and the dishonor, that it shall never be
forgotten. He asked him also how he liked of the Judges that he had chosen, to
whom he had given commission for examining the matter. The Admiral answered
that he could not but very well like of those that his majesty had allowed
of, yet he besought him if he thought it good, that Cauagnes might be called
to counsel with them, albeit that it was no hard matter to find out, for it
was no doubt (said he) that this good turn was done him by the Duke of Guise,
the revenge whereof he referred to God. This only he most heartily and humbly
besought of his royal majesty, that the fact might be duly enquired upon.
The King answered that he would take earnest care of it, and revenge that
injury with no less severity than if it had bin done to himself. Then the
Kings brethren and their mother withdrawing themselves a while, the Admiral as
it was afterward known by his own report, began to advise the King to have
in memory those things that he had often told him of the dangerous intentions
of certain persons: and he told him, that though he himself had received a
great wound, yet there was no less hanging over the Kings head: and that
long ago there was treason in practizing against his life, which if he would
do wisely he should avoid betimes. Further he said, that though so soon as
God should take him to himself out of this life, he doubted not but that his
fame should be brought into sundry slanders by envious persons, and such as
ought him evil will by reason of the late wars, nevertheless he had
oftentimes disclosed unto the King the authors of the dissentions, and opened
the causes thereof, and that ^od was his witness of his most faithful heart
to the King a^ the common weal, and that he had never holden any th^g dearer
than his country and the public safety.

The King after such answer ^ade here unto, as he thought best, spoke aloude,
and heartily entreated the Admiral to suffer himself to be removed into his
Castle of Louure, for that he thought some peril, least there should arise
some sedition among the commons already in disorder, or any stir in that
mad and troublesome City. Whereto this speech of the king tended could not
then be understood. For though the communaltie of Paris, has ever been
accounted the most foolish and mad of all other, yet is it ever most easily
appeased, not only with the coming and presence of the King, but also with the
very sound of his name. The Admiral most humbly and largely thanked the King,
and made his excuse upon the c^u^sell of the Physicians, which feared that
shaking would increase his pain, and therefore had taken order that he should
not be stirred out of his place. Then the Count de Rhetz turning to certain
Gentlemen of the Admirals friends, said, I would the Admiral would follow
the Kings counsel, for it is to he feared that some such stirmay arise in the
town, as ye king shall not easily be able to appease. Which speech being
uttered, although no man did yet suspecte whereto that advise tended, yet the
Admiral and his friends thought it good to request of the King to assign
unto him certain of the soldiers of the guarde for his safety. The King
answered that he very well liked of that devise, and that he was fully
determined to provide as well for the Admirals safety as for his own, and that
he would preserve the Admiral as the ball of his eye, and that he had in
admiration the constancy and fortitude of the man, and that he never before
that time believed that there could be so great valia^tnesse of courage in any
mortal person.

Therewith the Duke of Aniow the Kings brother commanded Cossin Captain of the
Kings guarde, to place a certain band of soldiers to ward the Admiralles
gate. There could hardly a man be found more hateful against the Admiralles
part, nor more affected to the Guisians, than this Cossin, which the success
plainly proved, as hereafter shall appear. The Duke of Aniow further added,
that he thought it should be good for the Admiral, if more of his friends and
familiars that lodged in the Fauxburges did draw* nearer about him: and
forthewith he commanded the Kings herbingers to warn those to whom they
had before assigned lodgings in that streat, to remove from thence, and to
place the Admirals f^iendes in their rooms. Which counsel was such, as none
could possibly be devised more fit for those things that followed. For those
which might have by flight escaped out of the suburbs were now holden fast
enough, being enclosed not only within the walls of the town, but also within
the compass of one narrow streat. The next day after, the Undermasters of
the streates commonly called Quartermen, surueyed all the vittailing houses and
Innes from house to house, and all the names of those of the Religion, together
with the place of every of their lodgings they put in books, and with speed
delivered over the same books to those of whom they had received that
commandment.

After noone the Queen mother led out the King, the Duke of Aniow, Gonzague,
Tauaignes, the Count de Rhetz called Gondi^, into her gardens called Tegliers.
This place because it was somewhat far from resort, she thought most fit for
this their last consultation. There she showed them, how those whom they
had long been in wait for, were now sure in hold, and the Admiral lay in
his bed maimed of both his arms and could not stir, the King of Nauar and
Prince of Conde were fast lodged in the Castle, the gates were kept shut all
night, and watches placed, so as they were so snared that they could no way
escape, and the captains thus taken, it was not to be feared that any of the
Religion would from thenceforth stir any more. Now was a notable opportunity
(said she) offered to dispatch the matter. For all the chief Captains were
fast closed up in Paris, and the rest in other towns were all unarmed and
unprepared, and that there were scarcely to be found ten enemies to a
thousand Catholics: that the Parisians were in armor, and were able to make
threescore thousand chosen fighting men, and that within the space of one
hour all the enimi^s may be slain, and the whole name and race of those wicked
me^ be utterly rooted out. On the other side (says she) if the King do not
take the advantage of the fitness of this time, it is no doubt but that if the
Admiral recover his health, al France will shortly be on fire with the fourth
civil war.

The Queens opinion was allowed. Howbeit it was thought best, partly for his
age, and partly for the affinities sake, that the King of Nauars life should be
saved. As for the Prince of Conde, it was doubted whether it were best to spare
him for his age, or to put him to death for hatred of his fathers name. But
herein the opinion of Gonzague took place, that he should with fear of death
and torment, be drawn from the Religion. So that counsel brake up, with
appointment that the matter should be put in execution the next night early
before day, and that the ordering and doing of all should be committed to the
Duke of Guise.

The Admiral being informed of stir and noise of Armor, and threatenings
heard every where throughout the town, and preparation of many things
perteyning to tumult, sent word thereof to the King: who answered, that there
was no cause for the Admiral to fear, for all was done by his commandment,
and not every where, but in certain places, and that there were certain
appointed by him to be in armor, least the people should rise and make any
stir in the town.

When the Duke of Guise thought all things ready enough, he called to him the
abouesayde Marcell, and charged him that he should a little after midnight
assemble together the masters of the streates, whom they call Diziners, into
the townhouse, for he had certain strange and special matters in charge from
the King, which his pleasure was to have declared unto them. They all assembled
bytime. Carron the new Provost of merchauntes, guarded with certain Guisians,
and among the rest Entragne and Pnygallard, made the declaration: He said that
the Kings meaning was to destroy all the Rebels which had in these late years
borne arms against his Majesty, and to root out the race of those wicked
men, it was now very fitly happened that the chieftaines and ringleaders of them
were fast enclosed within the walls of the town, as in a prison, and that the
same night they should first begin with them, and afterward for the rest
as soon as possibly might be, throughout all parts of the Realm the King
would take order: and the token to set upon them, should be given, not with a
trumpet, but with tocksein or ringing of the great bell of the Palace, which
they knew to be accustomed only in great cases: and the mark for them to be
known from other, should be a white linen cloth hanged about their left
arm, and a white c^osse pinned upon their cappes. In the mean time the Duke
of Guise made privy thereunto the captains of the Kings guard, both
Gascoignes, Frenchmen, and Switzers, and bad them be ready to go to it with
good courage. Shortly after, the Duke of Guise and the bastard son of King
Henry commonly called the Cheua^ier, with a great band of armed men following
the^, went to the Admirals house, which Cossin kept besieged with Harquebuziers
placed in orde^ on both sides of the streat.

The Admiral advertised of the stir and the noise of the armor, although he
had scarcely ten persons in his house able to bear harness, and in his
Chamber only two Surgions, one Preacher and one or two seruitors, yet could
not be made afraid, trusting (as he often rehearsed) upon the ^ings good will
toward him, approved by so many and so great means of assurance, having also
confidence that the c^mmonaltie of Paris if they once understood the King to
mi^ke of their mad fury, how much soever they were in ou^rage, yet so sone as
they saw Cossin warding the gate, they would be appeased. He repeated also the
oath for keeping of the peace, so often openly sworn by the King and his
brethren and their mother, and entered in public records, the league lately
made with the Queen of England for the same cause, the articles of treaty
couenanted with the Prince of Aurenge, the King^ faith given to the Princes of
Germany, some towns attempted and some taken in the low count^ey by the
Kings commandment, the marriage of the Kings sis^er sol^nized but six days
before, which it was not like that he would suffer to be defiled with blood,
siually the judgment of foraine nations and of pasteritie, shame and the honor
and constancy of a Prince, public faith, and the sacred respect of the law
of nations, all which it seemed monstrous and iucredible that the ^ing could
ass^nt to be stained with so outrageous a crue^l deed.

Cossin when he saw the noblemen draw near* knocked at the gate, which as is
abouesaide, he was commanded by the Duke of Ani^w to keep. Whereupon many
applied the old proverb, A goodly guarde to make the Woolfe keeper of the
sheep. When he was entered without in manner any difficulty, he carried in with
him a great company of armed men, and after those followed the great Lords.
Such as Cossin found at the entry of and within the porch of the house, he
slew with a partisan that he had in his hand* Which when the Admiral
understood, he caused those that were about him to lift him out of his b^d,
and casting on a nightgown upon him, he rose upright on his feet, he bad his
friends and servants to flee and make shift for themselves, and to take no
more care for him, for he said that he was ready with most willing heart to
render into the hands of God, now calling for it again, the spirit that he
had lent him to use for a time: and said that this violent cruelty was
prepared not so much for his destruction, as for the dishonoring of Christ and
the tormenting of so many Churches, the defense of which Churches he had at the
petition of all godly men with his many dangers and calamities sustained.

In the mean time there came up the stairs into the hier part of the house,
on Benuese a German, brought up in the house of the Duke of Guise, and to
whom it is said, that the Cardinal of Loraine had given one of his bastard
daughters in marriage: and with him came Cossin the Gascoine, Attin a Picarde a
retainer and familiar of the Duke d'Aumal, one that a few years before sought
to murder d'Andelot by treason, and also one Hamfort an Auernois, all weaponed
with swords and targets, and armed with shirts of maile.

When they were broken into the Admiralles chamber, Benuese came to him, and
bending his drawn sword upon him, said, Art not thou the Admiral? he with a
quiet and constant countenance, (as we have since understood by themselves)
answered, I am so called. And then seeing the sword drawn upon him, he said,
young man, consider my age and the weak case that I am now in. But the fellow
after blaspheming God, first thrust his sword into the Admiralles breast, and
then also stroke him upon the head, and Attin shot him through ye breast with a
pistol. When the Admiral was with this wound not yet thoroughly dead, Benuese
gave him the third wound upon the thygh, and so he fell down for dead. When
the duke of Guise, which stayed in the court with the other noblemen, heard
this, he cried out alowde, have thou done Benuese? he answered, I have done.
Then said the Duke of Guise, our Cheuelier (meaning King Henry's bastard
abouesaide) unless he see it with his eyes will not believe it: throw him down
at the window. Then Benuese with the help of his fellows took up the Admirals
body and threw it down through the window. When by reason of the wound in
his head, and his face covered with blood they could not well discern him, the
Duke of Guise kneeled down on the ground and wiped him with a napkin and said,
now I know him, it is he. And therewithal going out at the gate with the rest
of the Lords, he cried out to the multitude in armor, saying: my companions
we have had a good lucky beginning: now let us go forward to the rest, for it
is the Kings commandment: which words he did often repeat aloud, saying: Thus
the King commands: This is the Kings will, this is his pleasure. And then he
commanded ye toke^ to be given by ringing tocksein with ye great bell of the
palace, and alarm to be raised, and he caused it to be published, that the
conspiratours wers in armor and about to kill the King. Then a certain
Italian of Gonzagues band, cut off the Admirals head, and sent it preserved
with spices to Rome to the Pope and the Cardinal of Loreine. Other cut off his
hands, and other his secret parts. Then the common laborers and rascalles
three days together dragged the dead body thus mangled and berayed with
blood and filth, through the streates, and afterward drew it out of the town
to the common gallows, and hanged it up with a rope by the feet.

In the mean time, those of the noblemens bands brake into all the Chambers of
the Admiralles house, and such as they found either in their beds, or hidden,
they mangled them with many wounds, and so slaughtered them. Of that number
were two young children, Pages, of honorable birth. There was also the Count
Rochfoucault, which for the excellent pleasantness of his wit, and for his
valiantness was hiely beloved of King Henry, and so seemed for the same cause
also to be beloved of the King. Him was de Nance abouesaide commanded to kill,
but he refusing it for their old acquaintance and familiarity: one Laberge an
Auernois offered himself to the King to do it, but with this condition, that
the King should give him the Captainship of horssemen which Count Rochfoucault
had. There was also slain Theligny the Admirals son in law, a young man of
singular towardness both of wit and courage, to who^ the King these many years
had both in words and countenance made show of so great good will, as that no man
was thought to be more highly in his favor. He crying out, that it was now
grievous to him to live, for that he had ever commended to his father in law
the faithfulness of the King, refused not the death offered him. And many
other most flourishing young noblemen and Gentlemen were every where butcherly
murdered in that streat. Then the noblemens bands, and Cossins soulders went
ransacking from house to house: and the Admiralles house and all the other
houses were all sacked and spoiled, eue^ in like manner as is used to be done
by soldiers greedy of pray in a town taken by assault: and many by this
robbery, were of beggars sodeinly become rich men. For the Duke of Guise, the
duke of Monpensier, the Cheualier king Henry's bastard, Gonzague, Tauaignes,
and the other great Lords, did with the reward of ye spoil and booty
encourage the multitude to ye slaughter, and cried out aloude that this was the
Kings will. So all the rest of the day from morning to evening, the rascal
multitude, encouraged by spoil and robbery, ran with their bloody swords
raging throughout all the town: they spared not the aged, nor women, nor the
very babes: In joy and triumph they threw the slain bodies out at the
windows, so as there was not in manner any one streate or lane, that seemed
not strawed with murdered carcases.

While these things were thus a doing in the town, the King of Navarre and the
Prince of Conde, whom the King had lodged in his own Castle of the Louure,
were by the Kings commandment sent for and conveyed unto him. But their
company, their seruitours of their Chambers, their friends retaining to them,
their scholemasters, and those that had the bringing up of them, crying out
aloude to the Kings fidelity for succor, were thrust out of the Chambers, and
by the Kings guarde of Switzers hewed in pieces and slaughtered in the Kings
own sight. But of that number of persons slain, no man's case was so much
lamented of many, as Monsieur de Pills, in whom it is hard to express
whether there were more godly zeal in Religion, or prowess in war. Whereby
having in the late years, specially in the defense of the town of S. John
d'Angeli, which the King then besieged, gotten great honor of Cheualrie, he
was thought very well beloved and highly esteemed of the King. Him and Leranne
the son of Odou, by the French Kings commandment (which was not then
understood whereto it tended) the King of Navarre had stayed in a Wardrobe
adjoining to his own chamber, and caused* them to lodge there all night. A
little asore day, hearing of the running of men, and noise of armor, and
cries and killings, they rose in have, and immediately de Nance who^ we have
before spoken of, came to them, and commanded them in the Kings name to come
down into the court, and to leave their weapons behind them, and lastly to
depart out of the Castle. When de Pills saw himself thrust out among the
multitude of the murdering soldiers, and beheld the bodies of them that were
slain, he cried out with a very loud voice that the King might well hear him,
protesting upon the kings fidelity, and deteu^ing his traiterous infidelity,
and therewith he took off a rich cloak which he wore, and gave it to one of
his acquaintance, saying: take here this token of Pills* and hereafter
remember Pills most unworthily and shamefully slain. Oh my good Monsieur de
Pills, said the other, I am none of them: I thank you for your cloak, but I
will not receive it with that condition, and so refused to take the cloak: and
immediately de Pills was thrust through by one of the guarde with a partisan
and dyed And this end had this most valiant and noble Gentleman. And then his
body was thrown into the quarrey with the rest, which when they that passed by
did behold, the soldiers cried out, there they be that made assault upon us,
and would have killed the King. Leranne being thrust through with a sword,
escaped and ran into the Queen of Nauarres Chamber, and was by her kept and
preserved from the violence of those that pursued him. Shortly after, she
obtained his pardon of her brother, and committing him to her own Physicians,
who restored him both to life and health.

While these things were in doing at Paris, Strozzi. which (as we have
aforesaid) was come with all his power to Rochel, sent a great number of his
Soldiers into the town, under color of a banquet to be made to his friends
in the Castle called la Cheine: but by reason of the iealosie and watches of
the towns men, by whom he saw his treason was espied, he went away without
his purpose. But they of la Charity, which as we have before showed, were
trapped by the Italian horssemen, taking less heed to the salfe keeping of
their town, were a little before night, surprised, and within few days after
put to the sword.

The next day following, where any that had hidden themselves in corners at
Paris could be found out, the slaughter was renewed: also common laborers and
porters, and other of the most rascals of the people and desperate villains,
to have the spoil of their clothes, stripped the dead bodies stark naked and
threw them into the River of Seane The profit of all the robberies and spoils
came all for the most part to the hands of these laborers and the Soldiers,
and to the Kings treasury came very little or nothing. The only gain that
came to him, was that which might be made of the vacations (as they term
them) of offices, and of places of Magistates, Captains and other romes of
charge, whereof yet he gave a great part freely away to diverse of the Court.
For the Admiralles office he gave to the Marquis de Villers, the Chancellorship
of Navarre, after the murder of Francourt, he by and by gave Henry Memne de
Malassise, which had been the truchman and messanger in the treaty of the
last peace: the office of the master of the Finances after the slaugheer of
Prunes he gave to Villequier: the office of President des aides when Plateau
was slain he gave to de Nully: the other offices he sold as his manner is, to
such as gave ready maney for them. For it has bin ye custom now lately of
certain kings of France (such as among foreign nations has not bin heard of) to
put to sale all the profits, rights, and benefits of the crown, and to keep an
open market for money, of all judicial offices, and of all the rooms
belonging to his tresure and finances, according to a rate of price set upon
every one of them: and there is not in manner one in all France, that does not
openly justify that he bought his office for ready money, and that no man
ought to marvel if he desire to fill up the empty hole of his stock again.
And therefore Justice is through all France usually bought for money, and
though there be never so many murders committed, yet is there no process
awarded to enquire thereof, till present coin be paid to the rakehels and
scribes.

This butcherly slaughter of Paris thus performed, and four hundred houses (as
is abouesayde) sacked, immediately messengers were sent in post into all the
parts of the Realm, with often shifting their horses for have, to command
all other Cities in the Kings name to follow the example of Paris, and to
cause to be killed as many as they had among them of the reformed Religion.

These commandments it is wonderful to tell how readily and cherefully the
greatest part of the Cities of France did obey and execute. But the King,
fearing (as it was likely) the dishonor of false treachery and perjury, sent
letters to the governors of his Provinces, and also speedy messangers into
England, Germany, and Switzerland, to declare in his name, that there was a
great commotion and seditious stir happened at Paris, which he was very sorry
for: that the Duke of Guise had raised the people, and with armed men made
assault upon the band that was assigned to the Admiral for his guard, and had
broken into the house and slain the Admiral and al his company and household
servants, and that the King had hardly kept safe from those dangers his own
Castle of the Louure, where he kept himself close with his mother and his
brethren: the true copy of which letters is hereafter inserted. But the same
most mighty, and by the consent of all nations commonly called the most
Christian King, within two days after came into the Parliament, accompanied
with a great train of his brethren and other Princes. The Counsel being
assembled, he sitting in his throne, began to speak unto them, he declared
that he was certified, that the Admiral with certain of his accomplices had
conspired his death, and had intended the like purpose against his brethren,
the Queen his mother, and the King of Navarre, and that for this cause he had
commanded his friends to slay the said Admiral and all his co^federates,
and so to prevent the treason of his enemies.

This his testification and declaration, the King commanded to be written and
entered in the records of Parliament, and that it should be proclaimed by the
heraldes, and published by Printers. And he willed a book to be set forth to
this effect, that the slaughter of the Admiral and his adherentes was done by
the Kings commandment, for so was his majesty's express pleasure, because
they had conspired to kill him and his brethren, and the Queen his mother and
the King of Navarre. And farther, that the King did forbid that from
thenceforthe there should be no more assemblies holden, nor preachings used of
the Religion.

After the Kings oration ended, Christopher Thuane President of that
Parliament, a man very notable for his light brain and his cruel heart, did
with very large words congratulate unto the King, that he had now with guile
and subtlety ouercom these his enemies, whom he could never vanquishe by
arms and battle, saying that therein the King had most fully veryfied the
old saying of Jews the eleventh his progenitor King of France, which was
wont to say that he knew never a latin sentence but this one, Qui nescit
dissimulare nescit regnare, He that can not skill to dissemble, can not skill to
be a King. But Pibrace, the advocate of the Fina^ces, made a short oration, the
sum whereof was to this effect, that although the King had just and great
cause to be displeased, yet he thought it more agreeable with his majesty's
clemency and goodness, to make an end of the slaughters and common spoil,
and not to suffer such outrages to be any longer committed without judicial
proceeding in the cause: and besought his majesty that from thenceforth it
would please him to use the law, which is well known to be the only
stablishment of kingdoms and Empires: and that there had been already given to
the commonaltie too perilous an example to follow. An arrest of Parliament
with the Kings royal assent being made to that effect, there were immediately
Haroldes and trumpeters sent round about all the town, and an Edict proclaimed
in the Kings name, that from thenceforth the slaughters and common butcherly
murtherings should cease, and that all persons should abstainc from pillage
and robbery.

This being known, there were diverse speeches used of this matter throughout
the town, and specially of learned me^. The most part said, that they had read
many histories, but in all memory of all ages they never heard of any such
thing as this. They compared this case with the horrible doings of King
Mithridates, which with one messenger and with the advertisement of one letter,
caused a hundredth and fifty thousand Romans to be slain. Some compared it
with the doing of Peter of Arragone, which slew eight thousand Frenchmen in
Sicile, which Isle they had surprised in his absence. But yet this difference
appeared between those cases and this: that those Kings had exercised their
cruelty upon foreins and strangers: but this King had done his outrage upon
his own subjects, being yielded not so much to his power, as to his faith and
credit. Those Kings were bound by no promise, but such as was given to the
strangers themselves: this King was with new made league bound to the kings
and Princes his neighbors to keep the peace that he had sworn. Those kings
used no guilefull means unworthy for the majesty of a King, to deceive: this
king for a bait and allurement abused the marriage of his own sister, and in a
manner besprinkled her wedding robe with blood. Which dishonor and indignity
no posterity of all ages can forget. Some again discoursed, that though this
cruel advise seemed to many Courtiers to have been profitable, yet not only
the honor of a King, but also the estimation and good fame of the whole nation
was against that show of profit. They alleged how Aristides did openly in the
audience of all the people, reject the counsel of Themistocles concerning the
burning of the Lacedaemonians navy, although it must needs have followed, that
the power of the Lacedaemonians their enemies should thereby have been utterly
weakened* Fu^ Camillus received not the children of the chief Lords of the
Phalice, betrayed to him by their schoolemaister, but stripped him naked and
delivered him to be whipped home with rods by the same children. Pausanias has
left it reported, that the posterity of Philip of Macedon fell into most great
calamities, for this cause, that he was wont to set light by the reverend
conscience of an oath and his faith given in leagues. Some cited the law of the
twelve tables: Si patronus clienti fraudem facit, sacer esto. If the patron or
sovereign defraude his client or vassal, be he out of protection. They
disputed also, that like faith as the vassal owes to his Lord, the Lord owes
also to his vassal: and for what causes and for what fellonies the vassal
loses his tenancie, for the same causes and fellonies the Lord loses his
seigniorie. Some said that the right hand in ancient time was called the
pledge of the faith of a King, and that this if a King shall despise, there is
no communion of right with him, and he is no more to be accounted a king,
neither of his own subjects nor of strangers. Kingly virtues in times past
have been reported to be these, justice, gentleness and clemency: but
cruelty and outrage have ever been dispraised both in all persons and
specially in princes. Scipio has in all ages been praised, who was wont to
say, that he had rather save one citizen than kill a thousand enemies: which
sentence Antoninus the Emperor, surnamed Pius, the kind or virtuous, did often
repeat. It was a most shameful byworde of young Tyberius to be called clay
tempered with blood. They said also, that kings have power of life and death
over their subjects, but not without hearing the cause, and judicial proccding:
that there cannot be alleged a greater authority, than the Dictators had at
Rome, in whom was the sovereign power of peace and war, of life and death,
and without appeal, yet was it not lawful for them to execute a citizen his
cause unheard. Only thieves and murderers take away men's lives without order of
law and hearing their cause. Who can doubt (said they) but that this so great
outrage, so great sheading of Christian blood is the fruit of the curssed life
of the courtiers? For (said they) now throughout al France whoredom and loose
lewdness of life are so free and usual, ye now the most part of the women of
France seem to be in manner common: and* the wicked blasphemies and
continual execrations and dishonorings of Gods most holy name and majesty,
are such as God can not longer bear: And true it is, though incredible among
foreign Nations, that the Catholics of France have prescribed themselves this
for a special mark to be known from other men, that at every third word they
blasphemously swear by the head, death, blood, and belly of God: and
wonderful it is, that the King himself is so much delighted in this custom
of swearing and blaspheming: and this as it were a pestilent infection is spread
abroad and common among the very plowme^ and peysants, so as none among them
now speaks three words without most filthy blaspheming and horrible
execration of God. Who can longer bear the vile vnchastities, the bawdes and
Ruffians of the Court? Finally, very nature it self does now as it were
expostulate with God for his so long sufferance and for bearing, and the very
earth can no longer bear these monsters.

Now as touching the Admirals supposed conspiracy, who can think it likely
that he should enterprise any such thing within the walls of Paris? For in
the Court there is continually watching and warding a garrison of the Kings:
and at the entry of his Castle the guards of Gascoines, Scotts and Switzers,
are continually attending: and the King himself both always before, and
specially at that time, by reason of his sisters marriage, had a great trayn of
Princes, great Lords noblemen and Gentlemen about him. Moreover it was well
known, that in Paris within three hours space might be assembled and put in
armor threescore thousand chosen armed men, specially against the Admiral,
whom no man is ignorant that the Parisians most deadly hated: beside that, the
noble young men that came thither with the King of N^uar and the Prince of Conde
by reason of the marriage, and brought with them their wives, their sisters and
their kinswomen, thought at that time upon nothing but upon triumph and
exercises of pastime, and gay furniture of apparel and ornaments. Finally, at
whither of these two times can it be likely that the Admiral attempted this
conspiracy? was it before he was hurt? why? at that time he found the King
his most loving, or at least his most liberal and bountiful good Lord:
neither could he hope ever to have a more favorable sovereign in France. Was
it then after he was hurt? as though forsooth he lying sore of two so great
wounds, aged, maimed of both his arms, the one whereof the Phisitio^s
co^sulted whether it were to be cut off, accompanied with three hundredth young
men, would set upon threescore thousand armed men, or in so small a time
could lay the plot for so great, and so long and so heinous a fact: for he
lived scarce forty hours after his hurt, in which time he was enjoined by the
Physicians to forbear talk. Again, if he had been detected of any such
crime, was he not committed to Cossin and to his keeping, and so environed, all
the ways beset about him, and so in the Kings power, that if it had pleased ye
King he might at all times in a moment be carried to prison? why was not orderly
inquiry an^ judicial proceeding used according to the custom and laws and
general right of nations, and witnesses produced according to the form of
law? but be it that the Admiral and a few other of his confederates and
followers had conspired, why yet proceeded the outrageous cruelty upon the
rest that were innocent, why upon ancient matrones, why upon noble Ladies and
young Gentlewomen and virgins that came thither for the honor of the wedding?
why were so many women great with child, against the laws of all nations
and of nature, before their delivery thrown into the River? why were so many
aged persons, many that lay sick in their beds, many gownemen, many
Counselors, Advocates, Proctors, Physicians, many singularly learned
professors and teachers of good arts, and among the rest Petrus Ramus that
reno^ed man throughout the world, many young students, executed without
hearing, without pleading their cause, without sentence of condemnation?
moreover, if the Admiral had ^aine the three brethren, who doubts but that
all cou^eys, al Cities, all Parliaments, finally, all sorts and degrees of men
would have speedily taken armor and easily have destroyed all of the Religion,
having them enclosed within their towns, and having just cause to render to all
foreine nations f^r their common slaughters and killing of them? As to that
which touches the King of (...), what ca^ be imagined more absurd and
unlikely? had not the Admiral him four years in his power* Did not he
profess the same Religion that the Admiral did, which of those (...)the
Religion, which of them I say (as Cassius was wont to reason) should have
gained or received profit by the killing of the King of Navarre? did not the
Catholics hate him? and the Admiral could not hope to have any man more
friendly to him, nor by any other ma^s means to have revenge of his injury.
Lastly, in their houses that were slain, what armor, what weapons were found,
by which co^iectures judges use to be lead to trace out a fact? These matters
wise men throughout the town of Paris commonly muttered.

But now to return to our purpose. At such time as the Kings pr^hibition
abouesayd was proclaimed at Paris, not only in other towns, as at Orleance,
Angiers, Viaron, Troys and Auxerre, the like butcheries and slaughters were
used, but also in the town of Paris it self, in the very gaoles that are
ordained for the keeping of prisoners, if any had escaped the cruelty of the
day before, they were now tumultuously slain by the raging and outraging
multitude, in which number were three Gentlemen of great reputation, captain
Monins a man very famous in marciall prowess, Lomen the Kings secretary, a
man of great estimation for his long service in the Court, and Chappes a
lawyer near fourscore year old, a man of great renown in the Court of
Paris. And because we have made mention of Angiers, we think it good not to
omit the case of Masson de Rivers. This man was a pastor of the church, and
esteemed a singular man both in vertuousnesse of life, and in excellence of wit
and learning, and was the first that had laid the foundation of the Church at
Paris. As soon as the slaughter was begone at Paris, Monsorel a most cruel
enemy of the Religion, was tente to Angiers in post to preuente al other that
might carry tidings of the murdering. As soon as he came into ye town, he
caused himself to be brought to Massons house. There he met Massons wife in the
entry, and ge^tly saluted her, and after the manner of France, specially of
the Court, he kissed her, and asked hi^ where her husband was, she answered,
that he was walking in the garden, and by and by she brought Monsorell to her
husband, who gently embraced Masson and said unto him: Can thou tell why I
am come hither? it is to kill thee by the Kings commandment at this very
instant time, for so has the King commanded, as thou may perceive by these
letters, and therewith he showed him his dagge ready charged. Masson answered
that he was not guilty of any crime, howbeit this one thing only he besought
him, to give him space to call to the mercy of God, and to commend his spirit
into Gods hand. Which prayer as soon as he had ended in few words, he
meekely received the death offered by the other, and was shot through with a
pellet, and dyed.

Now to return to Paris* the Admirals body being hanged up by the heels upon
the common gallows of Paris, as is aforesaid, the Parisians went thither by
heaps to see it. And the Queen mother to feed her eyes with that spectacle,
had a mind also to go thither, and she carried with her the King and both her
other sons. But the next night following, the body was conveyed away, and (as
it is thought) buried. About that time, where as many of the Court secretly
muttered that the King should by this fact incur dishonor, not only among
foreine nations, but also with all posterity in time to come for ever,
Moruillier, of whom we have made mention before, one that is accounted the
principal lewd practiser and wicked sycophant of all France, and the first
author and chief mean of bringing the Jesuits into France, came to the
Queen mother and told her that it was best that some of those that were
lately taken s^eyng and hyding themselves, should for manner sake be brought to
open judgment, and after the accustomed manner should be enquired upon, that
they might be condemned by the sentence of certain Judges picked out for that
purpose, and so openly executed in sight of the people. There were called to
counsel here upon Birage, Li^ege. Thuan and Bel^eure. They not only allowed
Moruilliers opinion, but also gave advise, that a man of hey made in figure for
the Admiral (for his body, as we have said, could not be found) should be
dragged by the Boureau thorough the streates, his arms and ensigns of honor
broken, his memory condemned, his castles and ^ermes rased, his children
pronounced in famous, vn^oble, and intestable, and all the trees in his woods
to be hewe^ down to the height of six foot. There was among those that were
apprehended, one Cauaignes, master of Requests to the King, and Briquemault,
of whom we have before spoken. This Briquema^lt had spente his time in service
in the old wars in the time of King Frauncis and King Henry, and was for the
war accounted a man of great experience among the best now living, and was
near about threescore and ten years old. As soon as they were carried into
prison, there were presented unto them all, the tormenter and the hangman, and
they were threatened with torture and tearing their bodies in pieces, unless
they would presentlye subscribe with their own hand, that they were of
counsel with the Admiral to kill the King and his brethren, and the Queen
mother, and the King of Navarre. They all cried out that they were ready to
suffer death most willingly forasmuch as the Kings pleasure was it should be
so: but so great torture they could not bear, and therefore humbly besought
his royal goodness and clemency too pardon them that torment, and yet
trusting upon the mercy of God, they hoped that they should suffer exceeding
great pains, rather than stain themselves with so great shame, or confess
an untrue crime against themselves. They that were first assigned their judges,
hearing their cries and defenses, and fearing the judgment of the world, said
plainly, that they would not draw upon themselves most assured infamy for
condemning them. Therefore there were new judges appointed in their places, to
them was adjoined such a tormenter and notarie, as were thought fittest for
the purpose. And so Briquemault and Cauaignes were quickly condemned by a
shadowed form of law, and led to the gibbet* standing in the principal
street of the town, and in sight of many thousands of men gazing at them. To
this spectacle the Queen mother led the King and her other sons, and her
son in law the King of Navarre.

It was thought commodious for playing of this last act, that Briquemault
should in hearing of all the people ask pardon pardon of the King, and for
that purpose there were some suborned to put him in mind, that if he would, he
might easily purchase his life, for the King was of nature full of clemency and
mercy, and if he would ask pardon of his majesty with confessing his
offense, he should easily obtain it. He answered with a valiant and bold
courage, that it was not his part but the Kings to ask pardon of God for his
fault, and that he would never crave forgiue^esse of that offense whereof he
well knew himself and had God so witness that he was clear and innocent.
Nevertheless, he ^esought God to forgive the King this fault. So were these
two excellent and famous men with halters fastened a^out their necks thrown
by the hangman from the ladder and hanged, and therewithal also the man of
straw made for figure of the Admiral, was tied fast and hanged with them,
after a preposterous order of law, whereby the Admiral was first slain and
then condemned.

But whereas in a manner in all towns there were great slaughters committed,
yet was there none more horrible nor more outrageous than the butcherly murder
at Lions. So sone as the letters from the court were brought to Mandelot
governor of the town: first, by a crier and (...)he caused to be proclaimed,
that all the professors of the Religion should appear presently before him at
his house. They without all delay repaired to him. As soon as they were come,
he commanded them al to suffer themselves to be led to prison by such
officers as should be assigned them. They obeyed his word and followed the
officers that led them. By reason of the great multitude, they sorted them into
sundry prysons. Then Mandelot willed the common executioner to be commanded in
his name to take some to help him, and to kill those that were in prison. The
executioner answered, that he used not to execute the law upon any but such
as were condemned, and in public and open places, and therefore willed him to
seek an other slaughterman if he would. Mandelot thus refuse^ by the
executioner, commanded the garrison Soldiers of the Castle to do it. The
Soldiers answered that it was against their honor, to use weapon upon men
bound and lying supplyant before them. If they had raised any rebellion, or
had offended or provoked them, they said they would most readily have fought
with them. Being thus refused by them also, at the la^t he committed the matter
to the watermen and butchers. Those fellows being let into the prysons, went
to it with chopping knives and butchers axes. Such as they faunde prostrate at
their feet, piteously holding up their hands to heaven, crying upon the
mercy of God and men, they did for sport cut off their fingers and the tops
of their hands, and throughout the whole town was heard such a c^ye and
lamentable howling of women and children, that innumerable people, even such
as were zelously given even to the Popish Religion, did detest that cruelty,
and judged that not men, but outrageous savage beas^es in shape of men were
entered into the prysons. It is well known, that a great number of honest women
in the town great with child, were so flighted with the horror of it, that
they were delivered before their time. And out of the Court of the goal
called the Archbyshops prison, the blood was seen in the broad day light, to
the great a^orring and fear of many that beheld it, run warm* and smoking
into the next streats of the town, and so down into the River of Seen. There
was in that same Archbyshops prison an aged man called Francis Collut, a
Merchant of cappes, and two young men his sons, whom he had ever caused
diligently to ^e taught and instructed in Religion. When he saw ye butchers
come toward him with their Axes, he began to exhort his children not to refuse
the death offered by G^d. For (said he) it is the perpetual destenie of
religion, and that often such sacr^ices do betide in Christian Churches, and
Christians in all ages have ever ^in and for ever to the worlds end so shall be as
sheep among wolves, doves among Hawks, and sacrifices among priests. The^ the
old father embraced h^ two young sons, and lying flat on the ground with the^,
crying aloud upon the mercy of God, was with many wounds ^oth he and his sons
slaughtered by those butchers: and long time afterward their three bodies hard
knit together, yielded a piteous spectacle to many that beheld them. In the
mean time Mandelot in jest and scorn (as it seemed) caused to be proclaimed
by the crier, that no man should commit any ^laughter in the town, and that
if any would detecte the doers of any such slaughter, he would give him a
hundredth crowns in reward for his information. And from that time they ceased
not to kill, to rob and to spoil. The next day after, which was the first of
September, the greatest part of the dead bodies were thrown into the river of
Seen and the rest of the^ Mandelot, to feed and glut his eyes and heart with
blood, caused to be carried by boat to the other side of the water, and there to
be thrown down upon the grene grass near unto the Abbey called Esne. There the
people of Lions, specially the Italians, of whom by reason of the Mart there
is great store in the town, satisfied their eyes a while, and did such spites
as they could to those heaps of carcases, and so exercised their cruelty not
upon the living only, but also upon the dead. And there happened one thing
which for the abominable cruelty is not to be omitted. There came to that
spectacle certain Apothecaries, and among those bodies they perceived some
very fat ones, by and by they went to the butchers, and told them yt they did
use to make certain special medicines of ma^s grease, that they might make and
profit thereof. Which as soon as the butchers understood, they ran to the
heaps and chose out the fattest, and launced them with their knives, and
pulled out the fat, and sold it for money to the Apothecaries.

While these things were doing at Lions, the King being informed that diverse
of the religion had left their wives and children, and were fled out of the
other towns, and lurked some in the woods, and some among their friends such
as took pity on them, he practiced with ^aire words to allure and call them
home again. He sent to every part messa^gers and letters, affirming that he
was highly displesed with those slaughters and horrible butcheries, and that he
would that such cruelty should be severely punished: and if the Admiral with a
few of his confederates had entered into any secret practice, it was no reason,
that so many innocents should bear the punishment due to a few. Many swetely
beguiled with these words of the King and with the letters of the governors,
retired home again to their dwellings and houses, specially they of Rhoan.
Diepe, and Toulouse. There were scant two days passed when they were again
commanded to prison, where they were all shut up. Then were murderers a new
appointed of the most base and rascal of the people, to torment them with all
kind of torture, and then to slay them. And throughout the whole realm of
France for thirty days together there was no end of killing, slaying and
robbing, so that at this day there are about a hundredth thousand little babes,
widows and children, that were well borne, that now fatherless and
motherlesse live wandering and in beggerie. About this time the King caused to
be proclaimed, that such as had any office or place of charge, unless they
would spedily return to the Catholic, apostolic and Romish Church, should
give over those their temporal rooms. There was no town nor any so small a
village or hamlet wherein all the professors of the Religion were compelled
either to go to Mass, or presently to take the sword into their bosoms: and
in many places it happened that such as being amazed with the sodainenesse of
the matter had abiured their Religion, yet notwithstanding were afterward
slain.

And while these things were still in doing, yet the King in the mean while
sent abroad his letters and messages into all parts, and caused to be
proclaimed with trumpet, that his pleasure was that the Edictes of pacification
should be observed: and although they could not have freedom to use and
exercise their Religion in open places, yet they should have liberty permitted
them to retain and profess it within their own houses, and that no man
should (...)with or disturb the goods and possessions of those of the
Religion.

And the same King which but few days before, had by letters directed to
all the governors of his Provinces signified that his cousin the Admiral was
slain by the Duke of Guise to his great sorrow, and that himself was in great
danger, the same King I say, now caused it with sound of trumpet to be
proclaimed, that the traitorous and wicked Admiral was slain by his will and
commandment. He that in few days before had by new authority confirmed the
liberty of Religion permitted by his Edicts of pacification, the same King did
now not only take from the professors thereof their offices and honors, but
also prescribed them in precise form of words, a form of abiuring and
detesting their Religion. Which things least any man should doubt of, we shall
hereafter set down the very true copies of the said Letters, Edicts and
Abiurations.

THE KINGS LETTERS, to the Governors of Burgundy, whereby he charge those
of the house of Guise, for the murder committed upon the Admiralles person,
and for the sedition which happened at Paris, and commands that the Edicte of
Pacification should be kept and retained.
COVSIN, YOU HAVE Perceived what I wrote unto you yesterdaye, concerning my
Cousin the Admiralles wounding, and how ready I was to do my endeavor to
search out the truth of the deed, and to punish it, wherein nothing was left
undone or forgotten. But it happened since, that they of the house of Guise,
and other Lords and Gentlemen their adherentes (whereof there be no small
number in this City) when they certainly knew that the Admiralles friends
would proceed to the revenge of his hurt, and because they were suspected to
be the authors thereof, were so stirred up this last night, that a great and
lamentable sedition arose thereof, in so much that the Guarde by me appointed
for his defense about his house, was set upon, and he himself with certain
of his Gentlemen slain, and hauock of other made in diverse places of the
City: which was handled with such a rage, that I could not use the remedy
that I would, but had much a do to employ my Guardes and other defense for
the safety of my self and my brethren within the Castle of Louure, to give
order hereafter for the appeasing of this sedition, which is at this hour
well appeased thanks be to God, and came to pass by a particular and private
quarrel of long time fostered betwixt those two houses. Whereof when I
foresawe that there would succeed some mischievous purpose, I did what I
could possibly to appease it, as all men know. And yet hereby the Edicte of
Pacification is not broken, which I will to be kept as straightly as ever it
was, as I have given to understand in all places throughout my Realm. And
because it is greatly to be feared, that such an execution might stir up my
subjects, one against an other, and cause great murders through the Cities
of my Realm, whereby I should be greatly grieved, I pray you cause to be
published and understood in all places of your government, that every person
abide and continue in the safeguard of his own house, and to take no weapons in
band, nor one to hurt an other upon pain of death: commanding them to keep
and diligently to observe our Edict of Pacification. And to make the offenders
and resisters, and such as would disobey and break our will, to be punished,
you shall assemble out of hand as great force as you can, as well of your
friends as of them that be appointed by me and others, aduertising the
Captains of Castles and Cities in your government, to take heed to the
safegarde and preservation of the said places, so that no fault ensue on
their behalf, aduertising me also so soon as you can, what order you have
given herein, and how all things have passed within the circuit of your
government. Hereupon I pray God to keep you, Cousin, in his holy safeguard.

At Paris the. xxiiij. of August. Signed Charles,
and underneath, Brulard.

ANOTHER LETTER FROM THE KING to the Lord of Prye, his Lieutenant general in
Touraine, upon the same matter that the former Letter was.
MOnsieur de Pry, you have understood how my cousin the Admiral was hurt
the last day, and in what readiness I was to do as much as in me lay, for the
trial of the fact, and to cause so great and spedie justice to be done as
should be an example throughout all my Realm, wherein nothing was omitted.
Since it is so happened, that my cousins of the house of Guise, and other Lords
and Gentlemen their adherents, which are no small party in this town, as all
men know, having gotten certain intelligence that the friends of my said
cousin the Admiral intended to pursue and execute upon them the revenge of
this hurt, for that they had them in suspicion to be the cause and occasion
thereof, have made such a stir this night passed, that among them on both
parts has been raised a great and lamentable tumulte: the Guard that was set
about the Lord Admirals house, was distressed, himself slain in his house
with diverse other Gentlemen, as also great slaughter has been made of other in
sundry places and quarters of this town: which has been done with such
fury, that it was impossible for me to give such remedy as was to be wished,
I having enough to do to employe my Guard and other forces to keep my self in
safety in the Castle of Louure, to the end to give order for the appeasing of
the whole vproare, which at this hour (thanks be to God) is well quenched,
for that the same happened by the particular quarrel that has of long time
been between those two houses, whereof always having some doubt that some
unhappy effect would ensue, I have (as is well known to all men) before
this time done all that I could for to appease it, nothing in this last fact
tending too the breach of my Edict of Pacification, which contrariwise I will
in all things to be mainteyned, as at any time heretofore, as I do give it to
understand thorowout my Realm. And forasmuch as it is greatly to be seared
that this may stir up and cause my subjects to rise one against another, and
to commit great slaughters in the towns of my Realm, whereof I would be
maruelously sorry, I pray you that immediately upon the receyte hereof, ye cause
to be published and done to understand in all places of your charge, that
every man as well in town as in country, remain in rest and surety in his
house, and do not take arms one against another, on pain of death: And that
more diligently than at any time hertofore, ye cause the last Edict of
Pacificatio^ to be kept and carefully mainteyned and observed. To the intent
abouesayd, and to punish such as shall do to the contrary, and to distress all
such as shall rise and dysobey our pleasure, ye shall immediately assemble all the
strength that ye are able, as well of your friends being of our allowance as
others, aduertising the governors, and captains of towns and Castles within
your charge, that they take good heed to the surety and safe keeping of their
pieces, in such sort as there ensue no default, informing me with speed of
such order as you shall take therein, and how all things shall proceed within
the compass of your authority. I have here with me my brother the King of
Navarre, and my cousin the Prince of Conde, to take such hap as my self. I
pray the creator, Monsieur de Pry, to hold you in his holy safegarde. From
Paris this. xxiiij. of August. Thus signed Charles, and underneath Pinart. These
letters are all of one argument as the former be, and written all in one form,
and al one day to Monsieur de Prye the Lieutenant of Touraine.

THE KINGS LETTERS TO THE OFFI cers of Burges, upon the same matter that the
former were.
Our loving and faithful, we doubt not but by this time you know of the
sedition which to our great grief happened in Paris afewe days since,
wherein my cousin the Admiral, and certain others of his side were slain, and
a great murder committed upon diverse in many places of this City. And least
the news thereof should change the quiet estate, wherein Burges has hitherto
been maintained since the Edict of Pacification, if remedy were not foreseen,
it is the cause that we writ this letter presently unto you, whereby we
command and expressly ordeyne that every one of you according to his charge
do see that no commotion or insurrection be against the inhabitants of the
said City, nor that no murder be committed, as it is to be feared, by those
which pretend too break the Edict of Pacification, and thereby would execute a
revenge of their long and private grudge, too our incredible vexation and
anguishe of mind. For this cause it is your part to give to understand and
publishe throughout that City of ours and other places pertaining to it, that
every one should quietly and peacibly keep their houses, without taking weapons
in hand, and offending one the other, upon pain of death, and well and
diligently to keep our Edict of Pacification. And if any go about to contrary
this our intent and mind, to cause them to be punished and rigorously
chastised by penalties imposed on such offenders in our ordinances, having a
watchful and diligent eye to the safegarde of that our City, in such sort
that no inconvenience arise in your service toward us, as you would have us to
know, that you are our loyal and obedient subjects.

Given at Paris the. xxvij. of August 1572. Thus signed, Charles,
and below, De Neuf-ville.

A LETTER OF THE TREASORER OF the leagues of the Switzers, written by the Kings
commandment unto the said Leagues, of the same argument that the former
letters were.
NOble Seigniours, Monsieur de la Fontaine, Ambassador for the King, your
assured and perfect friend and confederate, and I his Treasorer in this
country, having commandment of his majesty too communicate with you, as
with them whom be accompteth his chief and sure friends, of a chance which
lately happened in the City of Paris, his own person and court then being
there, whereof he received so much more grief and displeasure, because it
befell on such a time as he least feared, or looked for such a thing. The matter
is this. On the xxij. day of August last, the Admiral as he went from Louure,
was with an harquebuze shot hurt in the hand and arm, whereof when his
majesty was advertised, he commanded incontinent that search and punishment
were had of the offendour, and the authors of such a mischief: whervntoo when
he had readily laid his hand by his officiers, and committed the
inhabitants of the house, where the harquebuze was shot, to prison, they which
were the cause first of the mischief (as it may easily be presupposed)
because they would preuente the inquisition thereof, heaping one transgression
upon another, on the. xxiij. and xxiiij. of the said month assembled a great
troop of people in the night, and moved the people of Paris to a very great
sedition, who in a rage set upon the Admirals lodging, and enforcing the Guard
which his Majesty had set for the Admirals surety and keeping, slew him with
certain other gentlemen in his company, as the like also was committed upon
others in the City, the matter growing in the very same instant to such an
o^age and commotion, that whereas his Majesty had thought to provide remedy
for appeasing thereof, he had much a do with all his Gardes to keep his house
at Louure, where he lodged with the two Queens, his mother and the Spouse, the
Lords his brethren, the King of Navarre and other Princes. Think therefore ye
noble Seigniours, in what a perplexity this young and courageous King now
stands, who, as a man may say, has held in his hand thorns in stead of
a Scepter ever since his coming to the Crown, for the great troubles which
have almost ever since been in his Realm, and therefore by the good and wise
counsel and assistance of the Queen his mother and the Lords his brethren,
thought to enjoy and establishe a more sure repose in his Realm, and a more
happy government for himself and his subjects, after he had taken away (as
he thought) al occasions of dissentions amongst his subjects by the means of
his Edicts of Pacifications, and of the marriage of the King of Navarre to the
Lady his sister, and the Prince of Conde to Madame de Neuers. Besides all
this, to the intent nothing should be left undone that might serve for the
quieting of al things, and especially for the Admirals safeguard, his Majesty
as every man knows, has done his ind^uour to the uttermost, to appease and
reconcile his principal and most dangerous enemies unto him. And so God the
true judge of the Kings Majesty's good and pure intent, brought to pass, that
the peoples rage being quieted within a few hours, every one went home too his
house, and the king had special regard to nothing more than to see nothing
attempted or innouated contrary to his Edicts of Pacification, and the repose
of his subjects as well of the one Religion, as of the other. And for that
purpose has sent to diverse of his Governors and Officers in his provinces,
to look diligently to the obser^ing of his Edictes, with express commandment
to ^olde their hands there, that every one might perceive that the chance at
Paris happened for some private quarrel, and not for any purpose to alter his
Edicts, which his Majesty will in no wise suffer. Which is the principal
thing, noble Seigniours, that his Majesty has commanded us on his part to
assure you, and to let you understand the dangers that depend over him and
his neighbors, not so much for this sedition, for he trusts in God that
shall grow no further, and his Majesty will keep his Realm in as good repose
as it has been since his last Edict of Pacification, but for the great
mustering and assembling men of war in many places, specially in the low
countries, where it is yet uncertain on which side God will give the
victory, nor whither the conqueror will employ his force, after his conquest.
Wherefore his Majesty prays you, continuing the good love and intelligence
which has always been betwixt the Crown of France and his allied and
confederate friends the Seigniours of the Leagues, too have good regard to
him, and his Realm, in case that need shall require, as he will have to you
and your prosperous estate, if it be requisite, employing in the mean while
your great and singular wisdom to the perseruation of the union of the Nation
in League, which is the only cause to make you, not only able to send succor
to your friends, but also maintain your selves in estimation, that you may be
a terror to your neighbors, how great so ever they be, his majesty promising
you in all occurrentes as much friendship, favor and assistance, as you can
desire, and to be as entier and perfect a friend, as ever your nation had any.

A DECLARATION OF THE KING CON cerning the occasion of the Admirals death and
his adherents and accomplices, happened in the City of Paris the. 24 of August.
1572.
Imprinted at Paris by John Dallier Stacioner, dwelling upon S. Michaels
bridge, at the sign of the white Rose: by the Kings license.
BY THE KING.
HIs Majesty desiring to have all Seigniours, Gentlemen, and other his
subjects, understand the cause of the murder of the Admiral and his adherentes
and accomplices, which lately happened in this City of Paris the xxiiij. day of
this present month of August, least the said deed should be otherwise
disguised and reported than it was in deed: his Majesty therefore declares
that which was done, was by his express commandment, and for no cause of
Religion, nor breaking his edictes of pacification, which he always intended,
and still minds and intends to observe and keep: yea it was rather done too
withstand and prevent a most detestable and curssed conspiracy begone by the
said Admiral the chief captain thereof, and his said adherents and
accomplices, against the kings person, his estate, the Queen his mother and the
Princes his brethren, the King of Navarre, and other Lords about him. Whereof
his Majesty by this declaration and ordinance gives to understand to all
Gentlemen and others of the Religion which they pretend reformed, that he
minds and purposes that they shall live under his protection, with their
wives and children in their houses in as much safegarde as they did before,
following the benefit of the former Edictes of Pacification, most expressly
commanding and ordaining, that all Governors and Lieutenants general in
every of his countries and Provinces, and other Justices and Officers to whom
it appertains, do not attempt nor suffer too be attempted any thing in what
sort so ever, upon the persons and goods of them of the Religion, their wives,
children, and families, on pain of death against the faulty and culpable in
this behalf. And nevertheless too withstand the troubles, slanders,
suspicions, and desiances that may come by sermons and assemblies, as well in
the houses of the said Gentlemen, as in other places, as it is suffered by the
said Edictes of Pacification: it is expressly forbidden, and inhibited by his
Majesty to all Gentlemen and others of the said Religion, to have no
assemblies for any cause at all, until his Majesty has provided and
appointed otherwise for the tranquillity of his Realm, upon pain of
disobedience and confiscation of body and goods. It is also expressly
forbidden under the pain aforesaid, that for the foresaid occasions, none
shall take or retain any prisoners, or take ransom of them, and that
incontinently they certify the governors of every pr^uince, and the
Lieutenante general, of the name and quality of every such prisoner, whom
his Majesty has appointed shall be released and set at liberty, except they
be of the chief of the late conspiracy, or such as have made some practice
or devise for them, or had intelligence thereof: and they shall advertise his
Majesty of such, to know his further pleasure. It is also ordained, that from
hencefo^th none shall take or arrest any p^isoner for that cause, without his
Majesty's commandment or his Officers, nor that none be suffered to roame
abroad in the fields, to take up dogs, Catell, Beefes, Kine, or other
beasts, goods, fruits, grain, nor any thing else, nor too hurt the laborers
by word or deed, but too let them alone about their work and calling, in
peace and safety.

At Paris the. xxviij. of August. 1572. Signed, Charles,
and underneath, Fizes.

THE KINGS LETTERS TO THE OFFICERS of Burges, of the same argument that the
former declaration was.
Our trusty and well-beloved, we considering that under the color of the death
of the Admiral, and his adherents and accomplices, certain Gentlemen, and others
our subjects, professing the Religion called Reformed, might rise and
assemble together to the prejudice and hinderance of the tranquillity which we
have always desired should be in our Realm the doing of the said murder being
counterfeited and given out otherwise than it was. We have therefore made a
declaration and ordinance, which we send you, willing you to publishe the same
incontinently by sound of Trumpet, and setting the same up in such places of
your Jurisdiction, where cries and Proclamations are usually made, to the end
that every one might know it. And although we have always been diligent
obseruers of our Edicts of Pacification, yet seeing the troubles and seditions
which might arise amongst our subjects by the occasion of the said murder, as
well of the Admiral as of his companions, we command you, and ordeyne, that
you particularly forbid the principals of the Religion, pretended reformed,
within your Jurisdiction, that they have no sermons nor assemblies either in
their houses, or in any other places, to take away all doubt and suspicion
which might be conceived against them. And likewise that you advertise such as
dwell in the Cities of your Jurisdiction, what you judge meet to be done, too
the intent they might in this point follow our mind, and keep them quiet in
their houses, as they may do by the benefit of our Edict of Pacification, and
there they shall be under our protection and safegarde: but if they will not
so retire themselves after you have given them warning, then shall you set on
them with all strength and force, as well by the prouostes of the Marishals and
their Archers, as others which you can-gather toogether by Bell ringing or
otherwise, so that you hew them all too pe^ces as enemies ^o our Crown.
Besides, what commandments so ever we have sent by word of mouth either to
you, or others in our Realm, when we were in fear, upon just occasion,
knowing the conspiracy that the Admiral had begone of some mischaunce that
might fall unto us, we have and do revoke, willing you and others that no such
thing be executed, for such is our pleasure.

Given at Paris the. xxx. of August 1572. Thus signed, Charles,
and underneath, De Neuf-ville.
Published in judgment.



REMEMBRAVNCES AND INSTRVCTIONS sent by the King to the Count of Charny his
general Lieutenant in Burgundy, of the same argument.
THe King considering the commotion lately happened in Paris, wherein the L.
Admiral Chastilion with other Gentlemen of his side were slain, because they
had mischeuously conspired to set upon the Kings majesty's person, the Queen
his mother, the Princes his brethren, the King of Navarre, and other Princes
and Lords near about them, and upon his estate: and least they of the
Religion called reformed, not knowing the true causes of the said rebellion,
should arise and put them selves in arms as they have done in the troubles that
be passed, and devise new practices and fetches against the weal of his
Majesty and tranquillity of his Realm, if he should not cause the truth of
the matter to be known to all Gentlemen and others his subjects of the same
religion how it passed, and what his pleasure and mind is in their behalfes.
And thinking that for remedy hereof it is very needful for the Governors
of the Provinces in his Realm to go round about their gouernementes: for this
occasion he wills that the Count of Charnie great Esquire of France, and
his Majesty's Lieutenant general for the government of Burgundy, shall go
diligently through all Cities and places of the said gouernements, and as he
arriueth in every place, he shall devise tho best ways that he can to make
peace, union and quietness amongst the Kings subjects as well of the one
Religion as of the other. And to bring it the better about, he shall gently
call before him in open or private place as he shall see best cause for his
Majesty's service herein, the Gentlemen of the places, and the Burgeses of the
Cities of his government, that be of the Religion, and shall declare unto them,
and cause them to understand the truth of the said commotion, least any have
misreported it too them, otherwise than it was in deed. And shall tell them,
that under the color of the L. Admirals hurt, wherefore his Majesty would
have caused justice to be done according to the good order that he had
appointed, the said Admiral and Gentlemen of his Religion which were in the
City with him, without looking for the execution of the said Justice, had made
a mischeuous, unhappy, and detestable conspiracy against the Kings Majesty's
person, the Queen his mother, the Lords his brethren, the King of Navarre,
and other Princes and Lords with them, and against the whole estate, even as
certain of the chief and adherents of the said conspiracy (acknowledging
their fault) have confessed. Wherefore his Majesty was constrained (to his
great grief) to resist and prevent so mischievous, pernicious and
abominable a purpose. And that which he suffered to be done on Sunday the.
xxiiij. of August upon the Admiral and his accomplices, was not for any Religion,
nor to go against the Edict of Pacification, he entending nevertheless that
they of the Religion should still live and abide in all liberty and safety,
with their wives, children and families in their houses, as he has and will
mainteyne them, if they be content to live quietly under his obedience as he
desires* For the which cause he wills, that the Count Charnye shall offer
and give to them his letters of safegarde in good and authentyke form, which
shall be of as good force and virtue, as if they should come or be taken from
his own Majesty: and by the authority of them, they shall be preserved from
all wrongs, violences, and oppressions: enioyning and forbidding most
expressly all his catholic subjects whatsoever they are, to attempt nothing,
upon the persons, goods, or families of any of the Religion which keep
themselves quietly in their houses, on pain of death. And if any be so rash,
or evil advised, to do against this Iniunction, or too violate the safeguard
promised, his Majesty wills that ready and rigorous punishment be done,
too the intent that their example may serve too hold in others not too do the
like: which is the true and only means of assurance that his Majesty can
give to them of the Religion, with his word and promise which he gives them
too be their good and benign Prince, protector and preserver of them and of
all that touches them, so long as they live and continue under his obedience
without doing or enterprising any thing against his will and service. And
because his Majesty has often known that the enterprises and consultations
taken in hand by them of the Religion against his service, have been concluded
amongs them at assemblies at sermons which Gentlemen had liberty to cause to
be made in their houses and Lordships, therefore my L. of Charnye shall
particularly give too understand to Gentlemen which were wont too have such
sermons, that his Majesty in consideration that nothing has more moved and
set on the Catholics against those of the Religion than such preachings and
assemblies, and if they continue it is certain that it will be a cause too
increase and maintain the said commotions, desires that they should cause
them to cease off until he has otherwise provided and appointed, and that they
apply themselves hereunto as a thing greatly serving the effect of his
intention, which is, gently to bring his said subjects to a true and perfect
amity, union and concord one with another, committing all divisions and
partialities to obliuio^. And because this may seem hard at the beginning, my
L* of Charnye shall cause it to be fair and gently spoken to them, least they
enter intoo some strange conjecture or suspicion. For so his said Majesty
would proceed in all true sincerity toward them which conform themselves
to his will and obedience, wherein he exhorts them to live, with all the best
persuasions that he can, and shall assure them in so doing to be surely
maintained and preserved as his other subjects the Catholics, as his Majesty
would that he should do. And too the intent his said subjects the Catholics
should know how to use and behave them selves herein, my L. of Charnie shall
tell the^, that his majesty's pleasure neither is nor has been that any wrong
or oppression should be done to them of the said religion, which like good and
loyal subjects will gently keep themselves under his obedience. Declaring unto
the said Catholics, that if they forget themselves and burt those of the
religion which in such sort behave themselves toward his majesty, and those
also which for that end have received of his majesty or of my L. of Charnie
letters of safeconduite, he will cause them to be punished and chastised in the
field, as trangressours of his commandments, without any hope of grace,
pardon, or remission. Which the said L. of Charnie shall express and declare
unto the^, with as plain words as is possible, and cause it also to be as
straightly executed. And after that following his Majesty's intent, he has
pacified them by this means, which is the way that his majesty best likes
of, and searched the direction to assure a tranquillity betwixt the subjects
and to set some assurance betwixt the one and the other, such as shall
conform themselves herein to his said majesty's will, he will comfort, and
make them the best and most gentle intertainement that he possibly can. But if
any of the Religion become self willed and stubborn to his Majesty, without
having regard to his said warnings, and shall assemble in arms together,
making practices and devises against the weal of his service, then the L. of
Charnye shall run upon the^, and hew the^ in pieces before they have power to
fortify the^ selves and join together. And therefore he shall assemble as much
force as he can, as well of the ordinary, as of other men of war, Soldiers,
Footmen of the garrisons, and inhabitants of the Catholics within the Cities
of his government, and shall besiege them which hold and make themselves
strong in Cities about of his government, so that the victory and authority
may remain in his majesty.

At Paris the. xxx. of August. 1572. Signed, Charles,
and underneath, Brulard.

THE KINGS LETTERS TO THE LORD of Gwich, whereby it may plainly be perceived,
how they would search out all them of the Religion which had any charge in
hand during the troubles.
MY L. of Gwiche, I understand that the. iij. brethren Daggonels, and one
Porcher the host at the sign of the Adventure, Mossoner, Crispine, and
Captain Grise, which were the principal of the faction in Burgundy, and were
the cause of the taking and recovering of the City of Mascon in the late
troubles, and of all the decay which happened in that country, be kept
prisoners in Mascon. And because I understand they hope to escape out by
ransom (which I would in no wise should be done) I ordeyne and commau^d that
you keep them safe, for as much as I hope by their means to discover a great
many things which greatly touch the weal of my service. And if there be any
other prisoners of the new religion in Mascon, which have been factious, you
shall likewise keep the^, so that they escape not by paying ransom, for I would
not for any thing in the world that there should be taking of rasome among my
subjects. And thus my L. of Gwich I pray God keep you in his holy tuitio^.

VVritte^ at Paris the. xiiij. of September. 1572. Signed, Charles,
and vnde^neath, Brulard.

THE KINGS LETTERS TO MONSIEUR DE Gordes his Lieutenant general in Daulphine,
wherein ^e sends him word, that the best proof of his doings is the
accusations and complaints of them of the Religion against him, whereunto be
should have care to answer.
MOnsieur de Gordes, by your letters of the first of this month I perceived
the order which you appointed in your Government since the advertisement which
you had of the execution of the Admiral and his adherentes: and since I am
sure you forgot nothing which you thought might serve for your assurance of
those places whereof you had occasion to doubt. And to the intent you should
have the more means to make your self known, I have prepared that the
soldiers of Corsica which I had appointed to go into Province, should return
to you, and thereupon have written too my Cousin the Count of Tend, who will
not fail to send them unto you, ^or as much as there is no need of them now
in that country. He should also send you word of the time of their departing,
to the end that you might have leisure to provide to receive them, and appoint
their places where they should be in garrison. I have seen that which you writ
too me concerning the continual payment in Daulphine, what is due for the
last year, whereupon I will advise of the state of my fines the means that
may be, and according thereunto there shall be no fault, but they shall be
provided for. For the reparation of the Bridge of Grenoble, they of the same
place must devise the means whereby they should best help them ^elues therein,
and when they have advertised me, I will appoint them necessary provision.
Touching the soldiers appointed ^or the Baron of Adresse, because the occasion
why I appointed them to be levied now ^easeth, I have written to him to send
them back and dismiss them again: wherefore there is no need to make
provision for their main^enance, nor likewise to tell you any thing else
concerning the answers which you have made too the remembrances which they of
the Religion have presented against you. For your doings are well known and
plain unto me, and thereupon I will take no better proof than their
accusation. Wherefore you shall put your self to no more pain on that side.
Moreover I have herewith sent you a copy of the declaration which I made of
the Admirals death and his adherents, and made to be understood that it should
be observed and followed, and that all murders, sackings, and violences should
cease. Nevertheless I have heard complaints of diverse places that such
extraordinary ways continue, which is a thing, that does much displease me.
By the means whereof I advise you, in doing this charge once again put unto
you, that you give order throughout your government to cause all hostility,
force, and violence to cease, and that the said declaration be straightly
observed and kept, with punishing those that withstand, so rigorously, that the
demonstration thereof may serve for an example, seeing my intent is that they
should be punished as behooves, and to mark them which wincke or dissemble
thereat. This present letter shall serve also for an advise of the receipt of
those letters which you wrote the. 5. of this present, whereby you send me word
that you received no message by word of mouth from me, but only letters of the.
xxij. xxiiij. and. xxviij. of the month passed, whereof put your self to no
further pai^e, for that charge was only for such as the^ were near about me,
which is all that I have at this time to say unto you. Praying hereupon the
Creator to keep you in his holy and worthy tuicion.

Written at Paris the. xiiij. day of September. Signed, Charles,
and beneath, Fizes.
And above.To M. de Gordes knight.
THE KINGS LETTERS TO THE DVKE of Guise, his Lieutenant general in Champaigne
and in Pry.
COusin, although in all my former letters I have given you too understand well
enough how much I desire that al my subjects, as well of the nobility as others
which profess the new Religion, and quietly use them selves in your
government, should by you be maintained and preserved in all surety under my
protection and safeguard, without giving them any hinderance by trouble in their
persons, goods, and families: yet nevertheless I have been aduerti^ed that in
certain places of my Realm there have been many sackings and pillings done by
such as dwell in the hou^es of them of the said new Religion, as well in the
fields as in the Cities, under colou^ of the commotion which happened in my
City of Paris the xxiiij. day of August last, a thing beyond all measure
displeasant and disagreable unto me, and for the which I would have provision
and remedy. Wherefore I pray you, Cousin, that above all things as you desire
that I should know the good affection you bear to the good weal of my
service, you take that matter next your heart too perserue and maintain within
your government according too that which I have so plainly told and written
too you heretofore, that all such of the new Religion which behave them
selves quietly, take no wrong or violence, whether it be for the preservation
of their goods or persons, no more than too my Catholic subjects. And where
any wrong or outrage shall be offered them against my will, as I have before
declared, so do I now by these presents declare, I will and intend that you
shall make some evident and notorious punishment of such as are herein culpable,
so that their correction may serve for an example to al other, that I may see
my self thoroughly obeyed herein as I would be, and my commandments received
amongst all my subjects in another sort than they have been heretofore.
Assuring you cousin, that the best news that I shall receive from you, shall
be to hear say that you chastise those well, of whom I am disobeyed. And thus
cousin, I pray God too keep you in his holy tuition.

Written from Paris the. xxviij. of September. 1572. Signed, Charles,
and underneath, Brulard.

REMEMBRANCES SENT BY THE KING too all governors, and Lieutenantes of his
Provinces, too put out and remove all those of the Religion from their estates
and charges, although they would abjure the same, saving such as have but small
estates and offices, to whom his Majesty permits continuance, on condition
that they abjure the said religion according to the form of abiuration sent
for that purpose.
THe King considering how much his officers and Magistrates of Justice, and
such as have the administration and dealing of his Fynes and payments, which be
of the new Religion, are suspect and hated, and put his catholic subjects in
great mistrust if they should presently exe^cise their offices after these
fresh commotions, for cause that the said offices be in their hands that now
keep them: therefore least the people should thereby be brought to a new
occasion of stir, and they of the new religion be in danger or hazard of
their own persons, although they would abjure their said new religion, and
profess the holy faith and catholic Religion of Rome: his majesty desiring
to avoid the new mischiefs and troubles which may come, has advised to
discharge the said officers from the exercise of the said offices, until he
shall otherwise appoint. And yet nevertheless, in the mean while, if the said
officers be obediente unto his will, and live quietly in their houses without
attempting, practicing or ^aking any thing in hand against his service, they
shall receive their wages, and they that will resign their said offices too
Catholic persons, and come too his majesty, shall be very honorably
provided for. And as touching other small offices without wages, which can not
be troublesome, as Notaries, sergeants, and such where the officers have none
authority, which cannot be so odious nor mistrustfull to the people as the
other, his Majesty is advised, that such small officers which will abjure the
said new Religion, and profess the faith Catholic, Apostolic, and Romish,
and therein live continually hereafter, shall continue in the exercise and
enjoying of their estates: but they that will continue in their new opinion,
shall depart from their offices, until his Majesty has otherwise provided.
And this is for the great mischief and inconvenience that may betyde them, if
they should exercise their said estates, because of the great mistrust and
suspicion which the Catholics have conceived of them of the new Religion.
Nevertheless his Majesty well considering that the most part of the said
officers have none other way too live, but the exercise of their said offices,
wills that they shall be in choice too resign to Catholic and capable
persons, and then too come too him for that effect, and he will grant them the
greatest favor and moderation of his treasorie that is possible. The which
resolution and pleasure of his Majesty, he wills to be declared to the said
officers of the new pretended opinion, as well by governors and Lieutenants
general of his Provinces, as by the^ of his Courts of Parliament, of the
chamber of his accomptes, of the Court of his aids, them of his great Counsel,
of the Treasorie of France, the Generals of his Fynes, his Baylifes,
Seneshals, Pro^osts, Judges or their Lieutenants, and ^uery one of them as
shall* appertain. And to this intent his majesty wills and intends that
every one of the^ in their calling shall send particularly and ^part for every
of the said officers of the new Religion, which be of their incorporatio^,
charge and lurisdictio^, and shall admonish the^ in this behalf to conform them
selves to his majesty's mind: and if any of the^ in authority, because of
their said estates will return to the bosom of the Catholic and Romish
church, it shall be said to the^ that his majesty likes very well of it, and
that he takes a great and singular affection therein, and that it shall give
him the greater assurance and credit of their good will, and that his Majesty
will not bar them from his service hereafter, but will provide for them as
their behavior shall deserve. And notwithstanding, for the reasons abouesayd,
he wills that they shall cease from the exercise of their estates and offices,
until he otherwise appoints. And because that in many places of the Realm
they have proceeded by way of seasing the goods of them of the new Religion
which be dead or absente, and hide themselves: and sometimes of those which
be in their own houses, although hi^ Majesty gave to understand by his
declaration of the xxviij. of August last, that he would and intended that they
of the new Religion should enjoy their goods, nevertheless, to the intent
there should be no doubt of his purpose, and that no mistrust might arise
thereupon, he declares, wills, and i^tendeth again, that according to his
declaration of the. xxviij. of August, they of the new Religion which be
living, whether they be present or absent, and be not culpable or charged with
the last conspiration, or to have attempted against his Majesty or his estate,
since his Edict of Pacification, shall be restored to their houses, and put in
possession of all and singular their goods moveable or vnmoue^ble. And that
the wydowes and heirs of them that be dead, may and shall succeed them, and
apprehend all and singular their goods, and that they shall be maynteyned in
them, and kept under the protection and safeguard of his Majesty, so that no
hurt shall be done or said unto them in any manner of wise or sort. VVilling
for this purpose that all necessary surety shall be given them: and that all
officers, Magistrates, Majors and others which have public charge, shall
maintain them in all safety, forbidding al persons, of what estate, quality
or condition so ever they be, not to hurt them in person or goods upon pain
of death. And nevertheless his Majesty wills, that they of the new opinion
shall submit themselves, and promise upon pain to be declared rebels and
traitors too his Majesty, that they shall hereafter live under his obedience,
without attempting any thing too the contrary, or taking their parts that do
attempt against his Majesty and estate, or things against his ordinances: and
too acknowledge none but his Majesty or such as he shall appoint under him to
have authority to command them. And if they kno^ ^ any that shall enterprise
against his Majesty and service, to reveal the^ incontinent to him and his
officers, as good and faithful subjects. And to take away all doubt and
suspicion as well from the nobility as others, because that in the declaration
of the. xxiiij. of the last month, these words are contained ( Except they
be those of the chief, which had commandment for those of the new opini^n,
or those which made practices and devises for them, or those which might have
had intelligence of the said conspiracy.) His Majesty declares that he
means not of things done and past during the troubles which were before the
Edict of Pacification in August. 1570. and that there shall be no inquisition
thereof, and none shall be troubled in goods or person therefore (but for that
respect they shall enjoy the benefit of the Edict of Pacification) but that the
said words extend only to those which be found to be guilty or accessarie to
the last conspiracy done against his Majesty and estate, and that other which
are imprisoned, shall be set at liberty. And as touching them which will make
profession of their faith, and return to the Catholic Religion, his Majesty
desires that his governors and officers shall excyte and conforte them as
much as they can, too that effect, and execution of that good will: and that
their friends and kinsfolks should also be exhorted too do the like for
their part. And if any should hurt them in goods or body, his Majesty wills
ready and speedy execution too be done on them. And too the intent that they
may follow the form which has been kept, in professing the faith which
they do make that return to the Apostolic and Romish Church, there is sent
herewith a memory thereof.

From Paris the. xxij. day of September. 1572. Signed, Charles,
And beneath, Pinart.

THE FOVRME OF ABIVRATION OF HE resie, and confession of faith, which they
which have swarued from the faith, and pretend to be received into the church,
ought to make.
THIS IS THE ABIVRATION WHICH they caused al of the Religion to make in
France, to save their lives. Printed at Paris by Nicolas Roffet, dwelling in
the new streat of our Lady, at the sign of the Mower: with the Kings
Privilege.
FIrst, they which have swarued from the faith, and desire too return intoo
the compass of our holy mother Church, ought too present themselves to their
Curates or vicars to be instructed of that which they ought to do: that done,
they shall be sent unto the reverend Bishop of the dioces or his Chancellor
or official, too make the said Abiuration and confession in manner and former
following:

IN. borne at. etc. in the dioces of. etc. and dwelling. etc. acknowledging by
the grace of God the true faith Catholic and Apostolic from the which I have
through my fault gone astray and separated my self since etc. and desirous to
return to the flock of Christ's true shepefold, which is the Catholic,
Apostolic, and Romish Church, confess to have abiured and cursed all the
errors and heresy of the Lutherians, Caluinistes, and Hugonotes, and all
other heresy whatsoever wherewith I have heretofore been diffamed or touched:
and I agree to the faith of our holy mother the Church, and desire you in the
name of God, of his son Jesus Christ, and of the glorious Virgin his mother
Marie, and of all the Saints of Paradise, that it would please you to receive
me into the flock and shepefold of Gods people, which live under the obedience
of the Pope ordained our Savior Jesus Christ's vicar in the said Church,
submitting my self patiently to abide and willingly to do the penance which it
shall please you to enjoin me for the absolution of my faults committed,
whilst I was in the foresaid sects, whereof I ask and require pardon of God,
and of his said Church, and of you (that be appointed my pastor by God the
Creator) absolution, with such penance as you shall judge to be wholesome for the
satisfaction of my sins and offenses. And to the intent you should know that
I have and do make this abiuration from my heart, I confess moreover before
God and you, that I believe that which is contained in the Simbole or Creed of
the Apostles, and Athanasius, and other confessions of says made and approved
by the whole councels of the Catholic, Apostolic, and Romish church: that is:
I believe in one only God, the father almighty, Creator of Heaven and Earth,
and of all things visible and invisible, and in one L. our Lord Jesus Christ,
the only son ongendred by God the father before the constitucion of the
world, God of God, Light of Light, true God of true God, engendered not created,
Consubstantiall with the Father by whom all things were made, who for us me^,
and for our salvation, descended from heaven etc. as in the belief of morning
prayer. I believe likewise, acknowledge and confess all that which is contained
in the books as well in the old as of the new testament, approved by the
said holy and Apostolic church of Rome, according to the sense and
interpretation of the holy Doctors received by the same, rejecting al other
interpretation as false and erroneous. I acknowledge the seven Sacraments of
the said Catholic, Apostolic and Romish church, that they were instituted by
our L. Jesus Christ, and that they be necessary for the salvation of mankind,
although that al of them are not of necessity to be conserred too all, that is
to say: I confess that the said seven Sacraments are these, Baptism,
Confirmation, Eucharist* which is the Sacrament of the altar, Pen^nce, extreme
unction, Order, and Marriage, and that the said Sacraments confer grace, and
that of them, Baptism, Confirmation, and Order, can not be reiterated without
sacrilege. That the said Sacraments have the effect which the said church
teaches, and that the form and usage wherewith they be ministered too
christians, is holy and necessary. I acknowledge also that the holy Mass is
a sacrifice and oblation of the very body and blood of our savior Jesus
Christ under the form of bread and wine mingled with water, which substances
of bread and wine under the said forms (are in the Mass by the words which
serve for consecration, said and pronounced by the Priest) transubstanciated
and transformed intoo the substance of the said body and blood of Jesus
Christ. Notwithstanding that the qualities and accidents remain in the said
forms after the said consecration, and that the Mass is wholesome and
profitable as well for the quick as the dead. I acknowledge and confess the
concomita^ce, that is to say, that in receiving the body of Jesus Christ under
the form of bread alone, I likewise receive the blood of Jesus Christ. I
confess that Prayer and interc^ssion of Saints for the quick and the dead
is holy, good and he^thfull for Christians, and is not contrary (for any
respect) to the glory of God. That prayers made in the Church for the
faithful which are dead, do profit them for the remission of their sins, and
lessening of their pains incurred for the same. That there is a Purgatory
where the souls abiding are succored by the prayers of the faithful. I
confess that we must honor and call upon the saints which reign with Jesus
Christ, and that they make intercession for us to God, and that their Relics
^re to be worshipped. That the commaundeme^ts and traditions of the Catholic,
Apostolic, and Romish Church as well they which pertain to the form and
ceremonies of divine ^ruice, and to assist the same, which I think be too
draw Christian people to pi^ie and turning to their God, as fasting,
absteyning from meats, observation of holy days, and ecclesiastical
policy, according to the tradition of the Apostles and holy Fathers
continued since the primitive Church till this time, and afterward brought
into the Church by the ordinances of councels received in the same of long and
ancient time, or of late, be good and holy, to the which I will and ought too
obey as prescribed and appointed by the holy ghost, the author and directer of
that which serves for the keeping of christian religion, and of the catholic,
Apostolic, and Roman church. I believe also and accept all the articles of
original sin, and of Justification. I affirm assuredly that we ought too
have and keep the images of Jesus Christ, of his holy mother, and all other
saints, and do honor and reverence unto the^. I confess the power of
indulgence and pardons to be left in the church by Jesus Christ, and the use of
the^ to be very heathful, as also I confess the church of Rome to be the
mother and chief of al churches, and co^ducted by the holy Ghost: and that
other pretended particular inspirations against the same, come of the
suggestion of the Devil, the Prince of di^ention, which would separate the
union of the mystical body of the savior of the world. Finally, I promise
straightly too keep all that was ordained at the last general council of Tre^t,
and promise to God and you, never more to depart from the Catholic,
Apostolic, and Roman Church: and if I do (which God forbid) I submit my
self to the penalties of the canons of the said Church, made, ordained, and
appointed against them which fall back intoo Apostasy. The which Abiuration
and Confession I have subscribed.

THE KINGS LETTERS TO M. DE GVISE and other Lieutenantes and Governors of his
Provinces, by the which he wholly abolisheth and subuerteth all the Edictes of
Pacification, and wills that only the Romish Religion should take place in
his Realm.
THe King knowing that the declaration which he made upon the occasions which
lately cha^ced in the City of Paris, the remembrances and instructions of his
will which he sent round about to all Governors of his Provinces and
Lieutenants general therein, and particular letters to the Seneshals, and his
Courts of Parliament, and other officers and Ministers of Justice ca^ not
hitherto stay the course of murders and robberies done in the most part of the
cities of this Realm, to his Majesty's great displeasure: has advised for a
more singular remedy, to send all the said Governors into every of their
charges and gouernements, assoring him self, that according to the quality
and power which they have of his Majesty, they can well follow and observe
his intent, the which more fully to declare, his Majesty has caused his
letters patentes to be dispatched, which shall be delivered them. Besides the
contents whereof M. de Guise the governor, and Lieutena^t general for his
Majesty in Champaigne and Brye, shall call before him the gentlemen of the
new Religion abiding within his government, and shall tell them that the Kings
will and intent is to preserve them, their wives, children and families, and to
maintain them in possession of their goods, so that on their part they live
quietly, and render to his majesty obedience and fidelity as they ought: in
which doing the King also will defend them, that they shall not be molested or
troubled by way of Justice or otherwise in their persons and goods, by reason
of things done during the troubles, and before the Edict of Pacificatio^ of
August. 1570. And afterward he shall lovingly admonish the^ to continue no
longer in the error of the new opinions, and to return to the Catholic
Religion, reconciling themselves to the Catholic Romish Church, under the
doctrine and obedience whereof, Kings his predecessors and their subjects have
always holily lived, and this Realm has been carefully conducted and
mainteyned: Showing too them the mischiefs and calamities which have happened
in this Realm, since th^se new opinions have entered intoo men's spirits. How
many murders have been caused by such which have fallen from the right way
holden by their Ancestors? First they made them separate themselves from the
church, then from their nex^e of kindred, and also to be estranged from the
service of their king, as a man may see since his reign. And although the
authors and heads of that side, would have covered their doings under the
title of Religion and conscience: yet their deeds and works have shown well
enough that the name of religion was but a visarde to cover their driftes and
disobedience, and under that pretense too assemble and subborne people, and too
make and compel them to swear in the cause under the title of disobedience,
and by such ways to turn them from the natural affection which they owe to
the King, and consequently from his obedience, being notorious that what
commandment so ever the King could make to them of the new Religion, they
have not since his reign obeyed him otherwise than pleased their heads. And
contrariwise, when their said heads commanded them to arise and take to their
weapons, too set upon Cities, to burn churches, too sack and pill, to trouble
the Realm and fill it with blood and fire, they which went so astray to
follow them, forget all trust and duty of good subjects, to execute and obey
their commandments. Which things if the gentlemen will well consider, they
shall easily judge how unhappy and miserable their condition shall be, if
they continue longer therein. For they may well think of them selves, that the
King being taught by experience of so great a danger, from the which it has
pleased God too preserve him and his estate, and having proved the mischiefs
and calamities which this Realm has suffered by the enterprises of the heads
of this cause, their adherentes and accomplices, that he will never willingly be
served with any gentlemen of his subjects that be of any other religion than
the Catholic, in the which also the King, following his predecessors, will live
and die. He wills also to take away al mistrust amongst his subjects, and to
quench the rising of discordes and seditions, that all they of whom he is
served in honorable places, and specially the gentlemen which desire to be
accounted his good and lawful subjects, and would obtain his favor, and be
employed in charges of his service, according to their degrees and qualities,
to make profession hereafter too live in the same Religion that he does: having
tried that discords and civil wars will not cease in a state where there be
many Religions, and that it is not possible for a King too maintain in his
Realm diversities in religion, but that he shall leese the good will and
benevolence of his subjects, yea and they which are of a contra^ie Religion to
his, desire nothing in their heart more than the change of the King and of his
estate. For the reason abouesayde, the Duke of Guise, to bring the matter to
this pass, shall take pains to persuade the nobility and others infected
with the said new opinion, to return of themselves, and of their own
frewil, to the Catholic Religion, and to abjure and renounce the new without
any more express commandment from the King. For how so ever it be, his
majesty is resolved to make his subjects live in his Religion, and never to
suffer what so ever may betyde, that there shall be any other form or
exercise of religion in his Realm than the catholic. The said Duke of Guise
shall communicate with the principal officers and magistrates, having the
principal charge and administration of justice in cities of his government,
his Majesty's declaration, to the intent they should know his mind, and the
good end whereunto he tends for the uniting and quietness of his subjects,
to the intent the said M. de Guise and the said officers and Magistrates,
should with one concord, intelligence and correspondence proceed too the
effect about said, so that fruit and quietness may thereof ensue, such as his
Majesty desires, not only for himself, but for the whole Realm. The Baylifes
and stuardes which are not in religion accordingly qualified, shall within one
month resign their offices to gentlemen capable, and of the quality required
by the Edict, which may keep and exercise the same. And too the intent this
should be done, his Majesty does now presently declare them deprived after
the said month, if they do not then resign, that they shall have no occasion
or color of excuse to delay their resignations, and yet permits them in the
mean while to resign without any fine paying. Al Baylifes and stuardes shall
be resident at their offices upon pain of loss of the same, and if they can
not so be, then they shall be bound to resign. Al Archbyshops and Bishops shall
likewise be resident in their dioces, and such as for age and other
disposition of person can not preach the word of God, nor edify the people,
and do other functio^s appe^taining too their charge and dignity, shall be
bound to take a conductor to comfort them, and to employ them selves to the
duty of their charge. To the which conductour they shall appoint an honest and
reasonable pension according to the fruits and r^uenue of their living. Also
persons and vicars shall be resident at their benefices, or else shall be
admonished to resign them to such as will be resident, and do their duty.
Archbyshops and Bishops shall take information of the^ which hold abbeyes,
prioryes, and other benefices in their dioces, of what quality so ever they
are, and how they do their duty in the administration of them, whereupon they
shall make process by word unto the Governors, which shall send them to the
King to provide therein as reason shall move him. They shall c^pell the curates
actually to abide at the places of their benefices, or else shall appoint other
in their steades according to the disposition of the Canons.

At Paris the iij. day of November. 1572. Signed, Charles.

LETTERS OF M. DE GORDS THE KINGS Lieutenant in Daulphine, too certain of the
Religion in his government, whereby he exhorts them too come back again too
the Religion of Rome, and how the King is determined too suffer none other.
SIr I am sufficiently advertised of your behauior, but you should remember what
aduertisements I have before sent you too return too the Catholic Religion of
your self, which is the best hold and stay that you can chose for your
preservation and health, putting from you all those which persuade you to the
contrary, who would abide to see any commotion or disorder rather than abate
any point of their opinion. And by this means you shall make evident too the
King, the will which you say you have to obey his Majesty, counsailing you for
as much as I desire your well doing, that this is the best for you to do,
without loking for any more open commandment: otherwise assure your self,
there can but evil come of it, and that his Majesty would be obeyed. And thus
I pray God to advise you and give you his holy grace.

From Grenoble the sixth of December. 1572. Your entire good friend, Gordes.

THE ANSWER OF THE GENTLEMEN, Capitaines, Burgeses, and other being in the
town of Rochell, too the commandments that have been given them in the name
of the King, to receive garrisons.
WE the Gentlemen, Capitaines, Burgeses and other now being in this town of
Rochell, do give answer too you Mounsier N* and to such commandments as
you give us in the name of his Majesty, that we can not acknowledge that that
which is signified unto us, and the Proclamation which you require that we
should cause to be published, do proceed from his Majesty. And thereof we call
to witness his Majesty himself, his letters of the. xxij. and. xxiiij. of
August, his own signet, and the publishing of the same letters, by the which
his said Majesty lays all the fault of all the trouble lately happened, and
of the cruel slaughter done at Paris, upon those of the house of Guise,
protesting that he had enough to do too keep himself safe within his Castle
of Louure with those of his Guard. And we shall never suffer our selves to be
persuaded that so foul an enterprise and so barbarous a slaughter has at any
time entered into the mind of his Majesty, much less that the same has been
done by his express commandment, as the paper imports which you have
exhibited unto us, nor that his majesty has been so ill advised, as himself
to cut of his own arms, or too d^sile the sacred wedding of. Madame his own
sister with the sheding of so much noble and innocent blood, and with the shame
of so cruel a fact to disteine the nation of France and the blood royal
which has heretofore ever among all nations borne the name of frank and
courteous: nor that he has had mind to deliver matter to writers to set forth
a tragical history, such as antiquity has never heard speak of the like,
and such as posterity can not report without horror. But that it was first
laid at Rome, and afterward hatched at Paris, by the authors of all the
troubles of France. And howsoever it be, we are ready too maintain that out
of the mouth of his Majesty does not proceed hot and cold, white and black,
and that he does not now say one thing and by and by an other, as he should
do if the paper that you present unto us had passed from him, protesting that
he will inuiolably keep his Edict, and immediately breaking the same in
declaring that he commanded those murders too be committed, having also made
protestation before, that it is too his great grief, and done by the outrage
and violence of those of Guise against whom he was not able to make speedy
resistance in time as his Majesty desired. And in this quarrel, we the
Gentlemen, Capitaines, and other that make you this answer, are ready to try
it by combat man to man, or otherwise, to maintain the honor of our King
against all those that so p^ophane holy things, and as much as in them lies
do by such words and titles vilainously defile the excellence of his Majesty
and of the noble Princes of his blood. Which we may right well conjecture
and estimate, by the slaughters that are yet in doing, as well in the town of
Paris as else where, upon so many noblemen, gentlemen and other, men, women
and children, and upon a great number of young scholars (the maintenance under
God, of Realms and commonweals in time to come) and by many other barbarous,
unnatural and unmanly acts generally committed. We think therefore and judge
that herein treason is enterprised against the person of his Mai^stie and of my
Lords his brethren, and that the Guisians mean to invade the Crown of the
Realm as they have of long time practiced: and how so ever it be, we say that
his Majesty is forced by the power that they have taken upon them and usurped
by mean of the rebellious stir of the commons of Paris. As for that which
they say that the Admiral and those of the Religion had conspired against the
Kings Majesty and his brethren, these be allegations of as great truth and of
as good likelyhoode, as their manner of proceeding in Justice has been orderly,
beginning at execution before examination of the fact. But it is now no need
to tarry for time too discover it, for the matter is plain to be seen with
eye and groped with hand, and all those of the Romish Religion that have
remaining any drop of nature of man, do confess it and hold down their
heads for shame, cursing both with heart and mouth the cruel executers of this
abominable enterprise, and the wicked disturbers of common quiet, which can
yet no more suffer, than they hitherto have done, that this poor Realm
should long enjoy the benefit of that peace, which the King alone next under
God had wisely caused to be made and to be accordingly observed, whereof this
Realm began to feel the good taste, to the great contentement of all
persons, except the enemies of peace and of this Realm, namely the Guisians.
Finally, when his Majesty being out of their hands and power shall declare
what is his pleasure, we will endeavor us to obey him in all things, wherein
our consciences, which are dedicate to God alone, shall not be wounded, in
which case we will rather forsake the earth than heaven, and our frail and
transitory houses rather than the heavenly mansions. But hitherto, the law of
nature, and the duty that we owe to our natural Prince, to the preservation
of his Crown, and to the safety of our lives, our wives and children, does
command us to stand upon our guard, and not to put us in the mercy of those
that have received the same bloody commission from the Guisians under the
pretended name of the King, to use us in the same manner as they have wickedly,
tr^itorously and unnaturally done to those about his Majesty, and as it were
under his wings and under the skirtes of his robe, which the traitors strangers
have stained with the true French blood, without that his Majesty has been
able to remedy it, nor too stay their cursed at^emptes: so much less is he
able now so far off to defend us as he would, which his Majesty's good will
being known unto us, does arm us for our defense, and for the safegarde of
our lives, and of the privileges which he has given us, until such time as he
shall be able by himself to defend us against his enemies and ours.

FINIS.

