A CATECHISM briefly opening the mystery of our redemption by Christ, having
the ^ro^es of every point so annexed, and joined under every answer, that the
ruder sort of people, may be much furthered thereby, if they would use a
little diligence and endeavor to commit it to memory, or be much conversant in
reading thereof, or if they cannot read in hearing it read by others, unto
knowledge, and godliness.

Philipp. 1.9.10. And this I pray, that your Love may yet more and more abound
in knowledge and all Judgment, that ye may know things which differ, that
ye may be sincere, and go forvvard in a blameless course until the day of
Christ. Proverb. 3.13.14.15. Blessed is the man that finds vvisdome, and the
man that gets understanding. For the merchandise thereof is better then the
merchandise of silver, and the gain thereof is better then gold, it is more
precious then pearls, and all that thou can desire are not to be compared
unto her. Seen and allowed by authority.

Printed by W. How, for Henry Car, and are to be sold at the Blasing star in
Paul's Churchyard.

To the Right worshipful master Henry Warner Esquier, and the virtuous
Gentlewoman his wife, T.S. wishes grace, and mercy from God, thorough Christ
Jesus, and daily supply of all godliness, and virtue, the right directors to,
and augmentors of all true worship.
THe Lord (Right worshipful) the most wise disposer of all actions, having
given unto me his least able minister, an entrance into the Town of
Mildenhall, to publish there in the cares of that great people, according to
his grace b^stowed upon me, his glorious Gospel: I was streightway, after I
had some knowledge of their state, moved with compassion toward them, and
framed my self so near as I could, to use such a familiar, and plain kind of
teaching, as I thought to serve most for their understanding and capacity. And
although I had not granted unto me, (which was never yet granted to any
faithful minister) to please, and approve my doings to all: yet a few
skorners set apart, which seem as the Prophet speaks, E^^ ^^^
To have made a covenant with death, and to be at an agreement with hell,
being more devout to serve Bacchus, then the true God: and therefore can like of
no Prophet, except such, as says an other Scripture, Can walk in a liing
spirit, Mich. 2.11.
and prophecy unto them of wine, and strong drink: And a few other which
being altogether worldly minded, be frosen in their dregs; which seem to
have made their large Fen their God; it pleased God to make the rest, likers
and allowers of the holy doctrine, wishing to have the same continued amongst
them, and willing to impart something of their substance unto the disposer,
toward his maintenance and living. In the behalf of these, (Sir) I do
unfeignedly thank and bless God the Father, Lord of heaven and earth, by his
Son Christ, conceiving no small hope, through his blessing, of their more
increasing and growing in faith and godliness, which God grant unto them for his
Christ his sake Amen In the behalf of those, I do earnestly pray, enforcing my
self in all my doctrine, Jude. 23.
as the Apostle Jude says, to save them with fear, and to pull them out of
the fire, wishing that at any time God would give them repentance, that they
may come to amendment, out of the snare of the Devil. But if they will not
hear this, My soul shall weep in secret for their pride, Ierem. 13.17
(as the Prophet speaks) and mine eye shall weep and drop down tears to
see Gods judgments upon them. And now if I might speak of your worship
without suspicion of flattery, and coorying of favor, by your diligent
attending upon the hearing, accompaned always with your virtuous wife, most
godlily likewise disposed to hear the holy word of God, and so much as might
be your whole family And by your good countenance most cheerfully showed unto
me, a poor minister of God, that I may not speak of other your beneficence
toward me, you most evidently declared, not only what love your self had
unto the truth of God, that is his word, and his pure and holy worship, but
also your care by your godly example to draw others to like and allow of the
same, that so Christ Jesus might be enterteined and his kingdom erected at
Mildenhall. And I cannot forget how (which did declare your desire and care to
have the word of Gods grace, that is the Gospel continued at Mildenhall, for
the salvation of the people) you spoke to the Right honorable the Lord North,
coming over to his house at Mildenhall, not only to show me his favorable
countenance, for my continuance at Mildenhal, but also to procure me a more
ample, and large salery and stipend: which thing his Honor, of his godly
disposition unto Religion, was willing to do. In consideration of these
things, as they concern Gods glory, first I give God hearty thanks: Secondly
as they concern the help of me his Minister, not otherwise knowing how to
requite any way your Worships good will, as a testimony of a grateful mind,
I bestow upon your Worship, and the virtuous Gentlewoman your wife, a little
Catechism, which I have lately made, in my small judgment, not altogether
unfit (for indeed I labored to make it fit) for the state of the inhabitants
of Mildenhall, not for any great use of your selves (for I verily persuade my
self, that you have not now need to learn the first principles of the word
of God, but are able to disiest much stronger meat,) but for the use of your
babes, your two sons, and daughter, and others which afterward it may please
God to give, and bless you withal, whom I do not doubt, to be instructed in
the principles of Religion, so soon as they have laid away their stammering
tongues, according to Gods commandment given to all parents, Deuteronomy. 6.7.
without exception of degree, Psalm. 78. s^ 5, 6, 7. Ephesians. 6.4.
and condition in the world it will be unto you both, no little care and
study: which that it may be so, I shall daily pray. Accept (good Sir) of this
mine enterprise, as I trust you will; And thus I take my leave, beseeching God
that ye do none evil, that his good graces may be multiplied upon you, and
that your whole spirit, soul, and body, may be kept blameless unto the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Your worships in all godly dutifulnes most ready Thomas Settle.

To the Christian Reader, and especially to the inhabitants of Mildenhall in
the County of Suffolk, for whose cause chiefly this little Catechism was
written, grace, mercy, and peace.
AFter so many Catechismes of so many good and godly men had been already
published in our Church, if thou demaundest why now I do adventure the
publishing of this of mine, as though I would seem to accuse them of some
negligence, or want in that behalf, or to ad unto them: I answer, that my
mind was free from any such purpose. But as they, in study and care I do not
doubt, to further religion and godliness, did take liberty unto themselves,
in form as they be extant, to frame and set forth theirs, so have I done.
They have written some largely, some briefly, and some have kept a mean
between long and short, and I have labored, if not to be the briefest, yet
to come as near it as I might. They some have quoted for confirmation in their
margent, some have omitted quotations, and some have proves set forth at large
by directions alphabeticall; as every one of them thought best, so have they
proceeded. I have made proof of every answer immediately upon the answer,
and almost made the words of the text the answer, hoping thereby the more to
allure the reader and hearer. God make me partaker of my hope, and my godly
brethren of theirs. And thou (good Reader) remember, in the bowels of Christ I
beseech thee, that the more pains I and my brethren bestow for thine
instruction by preaching and writing, the more and grievous shall be thy
condemnation if thou profit not by it, which thing would be our grief.
Consider what I say, and the Lord give thee understanding.

Thine in Christ, Th. Settle.

A CATECHISM, briefly unfolding the mystery of our redemption by Christ,
with other necessary points of Divinity thereunto annexed.
Question.

WHO made you, and to what end were you made?

Answer.

God, and for his glory (as says the Prophet Esaias) chapter 43. I created him
for my glory, Esaias. 43. se 7.21.
formed him and made him.

Quest. What is God?

Ans. Even as (proclaiming his own name in Exodus 34.) be describes himself,
Exodus 34. s. 5.6.
saying: The Lord, the Lord, strong merciful, and gracious, slow to anger,
and abundant in goodness and truth, reserving mercy for thousands, forgiving
iniquity, transgression, and sin and not making the wicked innocent. In the
fourth of the gospel after John* he is said to be a spirit. John. 4.24. Exodus
6.3. Iehoua what it does signify.
In Exodus the sixth, he calls his own name Jehovah, which is as much to say,
as one that has his being of himself: which name imports his
euerlastingnes.

Qu. What can you say further concerning God?

An. Verily that he is three distinct persons, that is, Father, Son, and
holy ghost, and yet in substance one God only. As John the Apostle evidently
teaches in the fifth chap. of his first Epistle, saying: 1. John. 5. v. 7.
For there are three which bear record in heaven, the Father, the word, and
the holy Ghost: and these three are one.

Qu. How do you prove that the holy Ghost is God?

An. In 28. of Matthew, Math. 8.19.
Christ commands to baptize in the name of the holy Ghost. Now this is
certain, ye baptism is to be ministered in no name, 1. Cor. 1. verse. 14.15.
but in the name of God. But it being commanded to be ministered in the name
of the holy ghost, does manifestly prove that ye holy Ghost is God. In the 5.
of the Acts, Peter says unto Ananias: Act. 5. verse. 3.4.5.
Why has Satan filled thine heart that thou should lie to the Holy Ghost?
etc. How is it thou have conceived this thing in thine heart? Thou have not lied
unto men, but unto God. This place also proves in plain words that the Holy
ghost is God.

Qu. You said even now that God made you, and you showed to what end: show now
in what state he made you?

An. According to his own image, that is to say, in righteousness and true
holiness, as Paul expounds it in the 4. to the Ephesians, Ephesians. 4.24.
calling it being repaired in Gods elect by the spirit, in other words the
new man.

Qu. Do you continue in that state of righteousness and true holiness wherein
you were at the first by God created?

An. No verily: For Paul witnesses in the 3. to the Romans, Romans 3.25.
that all have sinned and are deprived of the glory of God. And in the second
to the Ephesians ye same Apostle says, Ephesians. 2, 3.
yt they as well as others were by nature ye children of wrath. And as David in
the 51. psalm confesses, so may all others, ^sal. 51, 5.
that they were conceived and borne in sin.

Qu. You said even now that you were made after the Image of God righteous and
holy, and now ye confess that ye were borne a sinner: how can this be?

Ans. Adam the first man was created after the Image of God righteous and
holy, and so I, and al other in him our first parent, were created righteous
and holy: But when he by his sin, in eating the forbidden fruit, made
himself unrighteous and unholy, then I, and all the world being then in his
loins, (for who says Job in the 14. chapter of his book, can bring a clean
thing out of filthiness) were made unrighteous and unholy. Job. 14.4.
And to prove that man was made righteous at the beginning, the Preacher says
in the 7. of his book: Only lo, this have I found, Eccles. 7.27.
that God has made man righteous; But they have sought many inventions:

Qu. Do you then affirm that the sin which Adam committed is also your sin?

An. Yea verily: for so affirms holy Scripture in the 5. to the Romans: By
one man's disobedience many (that is all) became sinners. Romans 5.19.
And again in the same chapter. By the offense of one the fault came on all
men. Romans 5.18.
Yea, and a little before in the same chapter the apostle says; that Death
reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them also that sinned not, Romans 5.14.
after the like manner of the transgression of Adam: he means even the very
babes and young sucking children, to be by Adams sin subject unto death and
damnation.

Qu. Do you think, that if your sin in Adam in eating the forbidden fruit,
were not laid unto your charge, that you should be righteous and holy, and
free from sin?

An. No verily: for the scripture cries out every where to the contrary. Our
nature was so poisoned through Adams sin, that we can do nothing but sin. As
it is written in Genesis the sixth: The Lord saw that the wickedness of man
was great in the earth, Genes. 6.5.
and all the imaginations of the thoughts of his heart were only evil
continually. And Paul confesses saying in the 7. to the Romans: Romans 7.12.
I know that in me (that is in my flesh) dwells no good thing; for to will
is present with me, but I find no means to perform that is good. And again
in the 8. to the Romans, it is said, Romans 8.3.
that The Law is weak through the flesh, that is to say, that the flesh by
reason of the corruption thereof, No free will in man since Adams fall, or
ability to do good.
and weakness, is not of ability to perform the Law, which Law was engraven
in Adams heart. Finally, we may all that are descended of Adams race, cry out as
it is in the 130. psalm: Psalm. 130.3.
If thou (O Lord) straitlye markest iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand?

Qu. What then is the state and condition of you, and all other, through your
sin in Adam, and your own daily sins, by reason of your corruption of nature
drawn from Adam?

An. Most woofull truly and miserable is mine, and the state of all men else in
themselves because of sin: for it is written in the 5. to the Romans: Romans
5.18.
By the offense of one the fault came on all men to condemnation. And again in
the 2. to the Romans: Tribulation and anguish shall be upon the soul of every
man that does evil. Romans 2.9.


Qu. Set forth yet more fully the punishment of sin, and the state of
condemnation.

Qu. In the 30. chapter of Esai it is said, Tophet (which by a borrowed speech
is Hell) is prepared of old, Esai. 30.33.
it is even prepared for the king, he has made it deep and large, the burning
thereof is fire and much wood, the breath of the Lord like a river of brimstone
does kindle it. In the 66. of the same Prophet, Esai. 66.24.
it is also said: And they (that is the godly) shall go forth, and look upon
the carcasses of the men that have transgressed against me, for their worm
shall not die, neither shall their fire be quenched, and they shall be an
abhorring to all flesh. In the 8. of Matthew it is said, Math, 8, 12.
The children of the kingdom (that is the Jews) shall be cast out into utter
darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. In the 21. of the
Revelation it is written, that The fearful, unbelieving, Revel, 21, 8.
and abominable shall have their portion in the lake which burns with fire
and brimstone, which is the second death. In consideration of which extreme
punishment, the wicked at ye coming of Christ shall say, as it is in the 6. of
the Revelation, to the mountains and to the rocks, Fall upon us, Revel, 6, se
16, 17.
and hide us from the presence of him that sits on the throne, and from the
wrath of the Lamb, for the great day of his wrath is come, and who can stand?

Qu. O most woeful depth of misery, and cruel calamity because of sin, but
is there no mean to avoid this woe?

Ans. One only means to escape is provided by God. Acts, 4, 12.


Qu. Show what it is?

Ans. God straightway after Adams fall, raised him and all other his elect up
again unto hope by the promise of a savior to vanquish the power of Satan,
and to set the enthralled free: as appears in Genesis 3. where it is
denou^ced against Satan, Gen, 3, 15.
that The seed of the woman should bruise his head.

Qu. Did any deserte of Adam move God hereunto?

An. None at all. It was only Gods love, pity, and compassion that procured
this salvation: As it is written in the 3 of John's gospel; John 3, 16.
God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son, that every one
that believes in him might not perish but have eternal life. And again in
Romans 5. Rom, 5. ver, 8
But God sets out his love toward us, seeing that while we were yet sinners
(yea and a little after Enemies) Christ dyed for us.

Qu. What natures were in Christ?

An. Two. The nature of man, and the nature of God in one person: As it is
proved by these words in Romans 9. Romans 9, 4. 1, John, 5, 20.
Of whom (that is of the Isralites) concerning the flesh Christ came, who is
God over all, blessed for ever.

Qu. Why was it needful that our Redeemer should be man?

An. That God might satisfy his Justice in punishing man (as he threatened if
his commandment should be broken when he gave it first to Adam) for that which
man had offended. Which thing the Apostle seems to say in Hebrews 2. where he
says: Heb, 2, verse 14, 15, 16, 17
Forasmuch as the children were partakers of flesh and blood, he also him self
took part with them, that he might destroy through death him that had the
power of death (that is the devil) and that he might deliver all them which
for fear of death were all their l^fe time subject unto bondage. And Peter
says in the third chapter of his first Epistle: 1. Pet. 3, 18.
Christ has once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust to bring us to
good,

Qu. Why was it necessary that our redeemer should be God?

An. To the intent that the infirmity of his manhood might be sustained by his
Godhead, that so he might overcome death, and the sorrows of death. And
therefore it is said in Romans ^. that He was declared mightily to be the
son of God, Rom, 1, 4.
touching the spirit of sanctification, by his resurrection from the dead. And
again the same Apostle says in 2. 1, Cor, 13, 4.
Corinthians chapter 13. For although he was crucified according to his
infirmity (that is his Manhood) yet does he live by the power of God. If he
had been but only man, he could not have overcome death, and therefore Peter
in the third chapter of his first epistle, ascribes the quickening of Christ
(that is the raising of his body from death) to the spirit, 1. Pet. 3.18.
that is to the divine power.

Q. Was Christ himself who was borne of a sinful woman, free from the
contagion and infection of sin? You alleged out of Job the 14. chapter,
That none could bring that is pure out of filthynesse.

An. If Christ had not been free from the infection of sin, be had been
unmeet to have ransomed and delivered other there from; And therefore it is
said in the 7. to the Hebrews, that Such an high Priest it becomes us to
have, Heb. 7.26.
as is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher then
the heavens. And in the fifth of the 2. to the Corinthians Paul says; He was
made sin for us which knew no sin. 2. Cor, 5, 21.
And therefore to the intent he might be free from sin, he was conceived in
the womb of the virgin, Luke, 1, 35.
as appears in the first of Luke, by the holy ghost.

Q. Do you think that the bodilye death which Christ did suffer, was
sufficient to deliver all mankind from the punishment due both to their bodies
and souls?

A. Notwithstanding that the Scripture oftentimes ascribes for giuenes of
sins, and our redemption to the shedding of his blood, as in the first to the
Ephesians; By whom we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of
sins. Ephesians. 1.7.
And in the first chap. of the first epistle of Peter: Knowing that you were
not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, 1. Pet. 1. se 18, 19.
from your vain conversation, received by the traditions of the Fathers: but
with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb undefiled, and without spot,
and many such like places. Yet we are always to understand, that a special
part of our redemption consists in the sufferings of his soul. For therein he
bickered, and had combat with all the powers of hell and damnation, which was
due for our sins, the stings, horrors and sorrows (as Peter Acts 2. calls
them) whereof, caused him to sweat drops like water and blood, trickling down
from his body: so great was his agony, Luke 22, ^^
as Luke in the 22. chapter records, when the angels came to comfort him.
Again, upon the cross the wrath of God did so press his soul for our
sins, that for extreme anguish this pitiful exclamation was wrested from his
mouth; Mat, 27, 49.
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Who can think that these strong
cryings and tears, as in Hebrews 5. they are termed, Heb, 5, 7.
were ever in the Son of God, for and because of a bodily death, which we do
see many weak men (yea, which suffer for no good cause amongst us) most
constantly to endure. In these his sufferinges he has spoiled death and hell,
as it is written in threatening wise; O Death, I will be thy death, O grave,
Hosea 13, 14
I will be thy destruction. And again in Collossians 2. Collos. 2, 15.
And he has spoiled the principalities and powers, and has made a show of
them openly, and tryumphed over them in the same cross.

Qu. But now since none can enjoy the ioies of heaven and eternal life, but
those that fulfill the will of God, and perfect obedience unto his Law. How
shall we poor sinners do in this behalf?

An. The goodness of our God has in this behalf also provided for us, raising
up for us a mighty salvation. The Apostle says in the 4. to the Galathians,
that Christ was made under the law, that he might redeem them which were under
the law, Gal, 4, v. 4* 5.
that they might receive the adoption of sons. And again he says in the
second to the Collossians, And you which were dead in sins, Collos. 2. ver.
13, 14, 15.
and in the uncircumcision of your flesh has he quickened together with him,
(that is Christ) forgiving all your trespasses, and putting out the hand
writing of ordinances that was against us, which was contrary to us, he even
took it out of the way, and fastened it unto his cross. Again, 1 Rom, 10, 4
in Romans the 10. Christ is the end of the law for righteousness unto every
one that believes. 1, Cor, 1, 30.
Lastly in 1. Corinthians 1. it is said, that Christ is made of God our
wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption (that is to say) that
whatsoever we have need of to the obteining of eternal life and salvation, we
have it in him as in a full fraught and plentiful storehouse.

Qu. Does this salvation pertain to all, and shall all be partakers of the
same?

An. The salvation is offered to all, but none shall have it but those yt
believe. As it is written in the 16. of the gospel after Mark: Mark. 16* 15
Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature; He that
shall believe and be baptized shall be saved, and he that will not believe
shall be damned.

Qu. What is it to believe?

An. To believe, is to be fully persuaded that God the father, which has made
me the promise of salvation in his Son, will faithfully perform his promise
unto me. For as Abraham having Gods promise made unto him, as the Apostle
affirms in the 4. to the Romans did not doubt of the promise through
unbelief, Romans 4. se ^0.21.
but was strengthened in ye faith, and gave glory to God, being fully assured,
that he which had promised was also able to do it: even so also we having Gods
promise: (for says the apostle in ye same place, it is not written for him
only, Romans 4.23.
but also for us) must not doubt of the promise through unbelief, but be
fully assured to obtain it, God being both able and faithful.

Q. How is faith wrought in men?

An. Three things especially for the woorking of faith are to be noted from
the Scripture. First the preaching of Gods word: For says the Apostle Romans
the 10. How shall they hear without a preacher, Romans 10, 15.
and how shall they preach except they be sent, etc. Then faith is by hearing
and hearing by the word of God. 1. Cor. 1.21.
And again in the 1. Corinthians. 1. It pleased God by the foolishness of
preaching to save them that believe. John. 11.20.
Also John the 11. I pray not (says Christ) for these (my disciples) alone,
but for them also which shall believe in me through their word, that is their
preaching.

Qu. What is the second thing that you note from the scriptures to be necessary
to the begetting of faith?

An. The second is, that he which preaches be sent and authorized of God.
For how (says the Apostle in the 10. to the Romans) shall they preach except
they be sent? Romans 10.15.
Again the Prophet Jeremy in his 23. chapter says: Iere. 23, 32.
I sent them not nor commanded them, therefore they being no profit to this
people. Our savior Christ says in the 10. of John: John. 10. s. 1, 2.
That he that enters not in by the door into the sheepefold, but climeth up
some otherway he is a thief and a robber. And in the 10. verse he says, That
a thief comes not but for to steal, to kill and to destroy, so far is it
of that they shall beget men to the faith. Job calls such a messenger a man
of a thousand in his 33. chapter. Job. 33, 23.


Qu What is the third thing?

An. The working of the Holy ghost in the ministration of the word with power
in the hearers hearts, as by these places of Scripture is, and by many other may
be proved. Paul in the fourth chapter of his former Epistle to the Corinthians
threatening to come to Corinth, to make trial of the doctrine of the false
Apostles, which were so highly extolled, and of the effectualnesse thereof
affirms, 1. Cor. 4. s. 19, 20.
that the kingdom of God (that is the ministry of the Gospel) stands not in
word but in the power of the Spirit. In the second chapter of the same Epistle
he says: ^. Cor. 2, 4.
Neither stood my word and my preaching in the intising speech of man's
wisdom, but in plain evidence of the spirit and power, that your faith
might not be in the wisdom of men but in the power of God. Again in the
former Epistle to the Thessalonians the first chapter: 1 Thessalonians. 1, 5.
For our gospel was not unto you in word only, but also in power and in the
Holy ghost. In all these three places Paul sets forth the power of the
Holy ghost in begetting of faith by the outward ministry of his preaching. In
the fifth chapter to the Galathians Paul says: Galat. 5.22.
The fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentletlenesse,
goodness, faith, meekness, temperancie.

Qu. What men are meet for the planting of faith?

An. Those only that have a feeling of their own misery and woe, due from
Gods instice for their sins. For those only does Christ call in the
eleventh of Matthew, saying: Math. 11, 28
Come unto me all ye that are weary and laden and I will ease you. In the
second of the Acts we read that those that were pricked in their hearts, and
said unto Peter and the other Apostles, Acts. 2. se 37, 38, 39.
Men and brethren what shall we do, immediately after believed.

Qu. To what head or point of religion do you refer this sorrow and trembling
conceived of the sight of Gods displeasure for sin.

An. To the point of Repentance, Acts. 2 ^7.
as a foregoer thereof in the elect.

Qu. What is Repentance?

An. Repentance is a turning from sin unto God, What Repentance is.
that is to say, a framing of our whole life to obey him. And ye word that the
Scripture uses most commonly to express it by, does signify a change or
alteration of the mind. That new birth which our savior Christ speaks of in
the 3. of John unto Nicodemus is nothing but Repentance. John. 3, 3.
It is called Regeneration. Regeneration or Repentance has two parts
represented in baptism, that is, Dying unto sin, called mortification,
termed in the Scripture circumcision of the heart: And newness at life. Both
these parts of repentance are in sundry places of the Scriptures expressed.
As in the 2. chapter unto Titus in these words: Titus. 2. se 11, 12.
For that grace of God that brings salvation unto all men has appeared, and
teaches us, to deny ungodliness, and worldly lusts, (this is Mortification) and
to live sobe^ly, righteously, and godly in this present world (this is Newness
of life.) In the 2. to the Collossians these two parts are also expressed,
where the Apostle says: Coloss. 2. s. 11, 12.
In whom also ye are circumcised with circumcision made without hands, by
putting off the sinful body of the flesh through the circumcision of Christ,
in that ye are buried with him thorough baptism, Ephesians. 4. se 22, 23.24.
in whom ye are also raised up together through the faith of the operation of
God. In the 6. of the epistle to the Romans, Romans 6.4.
and in the 4. of the first epistle of Peter, both these parts are manifestly
expressed: 1. Pet. 4. se 1, 2.
the one proceeds of the force of Christ's death, the other of his n="*" Phil.
3, 10.
resurrection.

Qu. How is repentance wrought in man's heart?

An. By the holy ghost in preaching of the laws and the gospel. John 3, 5.
Except a man (says Christ) be borne of water and the Holy ghost, he cannot
enter into the kingdom of God. Again Paul says in the 6. of his first
epistle to the Corinthians: 1. Cor. 6.11.
And such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye
are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God. And
again in the 3. chapter of the second epistle to the Corinthians: 2. Cor. 1,
12.
But we all behold as in a mirror the glory of the Lord with open face, and
are changed into the same image from glory to glory as by the spirit of the
Lord.

Qu. You have proved that Repentance is the work of the Holy ghost. Now prove
that it is in the ministry of the law and the gospel.

An. In the 1. chapter of Titus it is commanded Titus that he should sharply
rebuke the Cretians, Titus. 1. se 12, 13.
because one of their own prophets witnesses that they were always liers,
evil beasts, slow bellies, that they may be sound in the says. Romans 3.20.
The whole Scripture (both the law and the gospel) says the same Apostle in
the 3. of his 2. Epistle to Timothy, 2. Timoth. 3. se 16, 17.
is given by inspiration from God, and is profitable to convince, to correct,
and to instruct, etc. thus much for the ministry of the law. For the gospel:
Our Savior Christ says in the fiftenth of John: Now are ye clean through
the word that I have spoken unto you. John. 15, 3.
Also Peter says in the 1. chapter of his first epistle: Being borne again,
not of mortal seed but of immortal, 1. Pet. 1.23.
by the word of God. Lastly in the twenty and six of the Acts, it is witnessed,
that Paul was sent by Jesus Christ by preaching the gospel unto the Gentiles,
To open their eyes, Acts. 26, 18.
that they might turn from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to
God, that they might receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them
that were Sanctified by faith in him. Thus it is plain that Repentance is the
work of the Holy ghost, by the ministry of the law and the gospel.

Qu. Whether is faith before Repentance, or Repentance before faith?

An. The question is busy: there is no doubt but faith and repentance are very
nigh adioined, as touching their beginning, as is the cause and the effect. Let
it suffice us to know, that when a sinner through the preaching of the law is
thrown down to the sight of his deserved damnation, by the auenging justice
of God, that the^ (if he be Gods elect) faith in Gods promise of salvation in
Christ is wrought in him by the preaching of the gospel: whereupon follows an
hatred of sin and care to avoid it, a love of righteousness and care to do
it, which are especial effects of repentance in token of thankfulness for
salvation by Christ. The Scripture in sundry places does ascribe sanctification
and purging of the heart unto faith. As in the twenty and six of the Acts:
Acts. 26, 18*
That they may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them which
are sanctified by faith in me. Again in the 15. He put no difference between
us and them after that by faith he had purified their hearts Now Sanctification,
regeneration, and repentance being all one, it follows that they are effects
of faith. Further because without faith (as the Apostle says in the 11. to the
Hebrews) it is impossible to please God: Hebr. 11, 6.
and in another place, Romans 14.23
What soever is not of faith is sin. We have most warrant to think that faith
is before repentance. Notwithstanding some writers are of mind that some part
of repentance goes before faith, and some part follows as an effect thereof.

Qu. When cease repentance in men?

An. When men cease altogether to sin: But sin does not cease to be in the most
holy man so long as he lives, therefore men must continue repentance so long as
they live. It is written in Genesis the 8. For the imagination of man's heart is
evil even from his youth. Genesis 8, 21.
And in James the 3. James. 3, 2.
In many things we sin all. And in the 5. to the Galathians: The flesh
lusts against the spirit, Galat. 5, 17.
and the spirit against the flesh; and these are contrary one to the other, so
that ye cannot do the same things ye would. We are commanded to pray
continually by Christ: Matthew. 6.
Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass etc.

Qu. Do you hold it for a certain truth that men are justified only by
Christ, and that the works of sanctification and newness of life begun in us,
do merit nothing concerning the work of our salvation?

An. I hold it for an undoubted truth, that the whole work of our salvation is
wrought in the person of Christ without us, and without all respect of our
works, either before or after repentance, whatsoever the Papists prate. But yet
there are many places of Scripture which do seem to give something to works
to the obteining of salvation: As the 15. Psalm; Psalm. 15. se 1, 2, 3.
Lord who shall rest upon thy holy mountain: He that walks uprightly, and
works righteousness and speaks the truth in his heart. Again the 24.
Psalm: Who shall ascend into the mountain of the Lord, and who shall stand in
his holy place, Psalm. 24. se 3, 4.
Even he that has innocent hands and a pure heart etc. Again Esaias the 33.
Who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire, Esaias. 33. se 14, 15.
who among us shall dwell with the everlasting burnings, he that walks in
justice, and speaks righteous things, refusing gain of oppression, etc.
Psalm. 50, 23
Again Psalm 50. And to him that disposes his way aright will I show the
salvation of God. Math. 7. se 21, 22.
Again Math. 7. Not every one that says unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into
the kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will of my father which is in
heaven. Again John 5. John 5. se 28, 29.
For the hour shall come in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his
voice and they shall come forth, they that have done good unto the resurrection
of life, but they that have done evil unto the resurrection of condemnation.
Mat. 25. se 34, 35.
Again Math. 25. Come ye blessed of my father inherit ye the kingdom
prepared for you from the beginning of the world, for I was an hungered and ye
gave me meat, I thirsted and ye gave me drink, I was a stranger and ye lodged
me, I was naked and ye clothed me, I was sick and ye visited me, I was in
prison and ye came unto me. And there be many such like. I answer unto these
places, and al such like in the scripture (which answer if it be marked of ye
simple, may be a keie unto them to open much of the Scripture, and may enable
them to stop the Papists mouths,) that these places do not set down and
express the causes of salvation, and of eternal life: but describe and point
out who they be that shall be saved, by the effects that follow faith, and
repentance. The Apostle terms good works the fruits, not the causes of
righteousness in the 1. to the Philippia^s, Philip. 1, 11.
where be prays that they may be filled with ye fruits of righteousness, The
end of good works the glory of God.
which are by Jesus Christ to the glory of God. But when the Scripture sets
down the causes of salvation, and why men are saved, and obtain eternal
life, it gives all to Christ Jesus. As by these places following, and many
such like, and none to the contrary appears. Acts 4. Acts. 4. se 11, 12.
This is the stone cast aside of you builders which is the head of the corner,
neither is the salvation in any other, for among men there is given none other
name under heaven whereby we must be saved. Hebr. the 7. Hebr. 7, 25.
But this man (meaning Christ) because he endures ever, has an everlasting
priesthood. Wherefore he is able perfectly to save them that come unto God by
him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for us. Hebrews the 10. Hebr.
10, 14.
For with one offering has he consecrated for ever the^ that are sanctified.
Hebrews the 9. Hebr. 9.28.
So Christ was once offered to take away the sins of many, and unto them that
look for him shall he appear the second time without sin unto salvation.
Romans 3: Romans 3.
To him that works the wages is not imputed of favor, but of debt, but to
him that works not, but believes in him that justifies the ungodly, his
faith is counted for righteousness. Ephesians. 2. se 8, 9.
Ephesians the 2. For by grace are ye saved through faith and that not of your
selves, it is the gift of God, not of works that me^ may boast. Philippia^s 3.
Paul says, Philipp. 3.
Touching the righteousness that is in the laws I was unrebukable: But the
things that were vantage unto me, the same I counted loss for Christ's sake:
yea doubtless, I think all things but loss, for the excellent knowledge sake of
Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have counted all things loss, and do judge
them to be but dunge, that I might win Christ and might be found in him, that
is, not having mine own righteousness which is by the law, but that which is
through the faith of Christ eue^ the righteousness which is of God through
faith, etc. And the Scriptures are almost infinite that make to this purpose.

Qu. What means this phrase of speech so much used in Scripture we are
justified by faith?

An. It means nothing else, but that God accompteth and acknowledges us for
righteous and holy in Christ (in whom, as the Apostle says in the first of
the second Epistle to the Corinthians, all the promises of God are yea, and
Amen,) whom we lay hold on by faith, and apply unto our souls against all
terrors of sin, death, and damnation, Roman. 5.
and so have peace with God, se 1, 2.
who has said from heaven that in him he is well pleased. Matthew. 3.17.


Qu. Now seeing there is such abundance of salvation in Christ, why do not all
lay hold of it?

An. No man (says Christ) comes unto me except my father draw him. John. 6,
44.
John. 6, 37.
And again he says in the tenth of John: But ye believe not: John. 10, 26:
for ye are not of my sheep.

Qu. Now seeing none can be saved but those that have repentance toward God,
and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, tell me how a man may know certainly
that he has faith and Repentance?

An. If he can say in true feeling, The good that I would do that I do not,
Romans 7, 19.
and the evil that I would not do, that I do, with Paul in the 7. to the
Romans, Math. 5.
and mourn under the burden of his sin.

If he delight in the law of God in the inner man. Romans 8, 16.


If he be led by the spirit of God. Romans 8, 14.


If he have crucified the flesh with the affections of the flesh. Galat. 5, 24.


If he walk according to ye rule of a new creature, Galat. 6, 15.
and be a new creature, peace shall be upon him, and mercy, as says ye Apostle.

If he can say with the Apostle, 2. Cor. 1, 12.
This is my rejoicing the testimony of my conscience, that in simplicity, and
godly pureness, and not in fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, I have had
my conversation in the world.

If he have true love toward the brethren, even to be grieved in their
griefs, and joyful in their good: and careful to help them in christian
compassion, by easing their greeues, and furthering their good; it is a true
mark of the child of God. And thereby (says John) we know that we are of the
truth, 1. John. 3.19
and shall before him (that is God) assure our hearts. And in 1. John. 4. he
says: Herby we know that he dwells in us, and we in him, because he has
given us of his spirit, that is the fruits of his spirit. Roman. 8.
And if any have not the fruits of the spirit the same is none of his. The
fruits of the spirit are, as appears in Galathians 5. love, joy peace, Galat.
5, 22.
long suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith meeknes, etc. If a man by these
notes examine himself he may judge of his repentance. If any man have not
repented he is diligently to attend upon the holy ministry of the law and the
gospel that he may be called in Gods good time.

Qu. How may Gods people know a faithful man?

An. By 3. marks specially. First by his professing and frequenting of the
public worship of God, when it may be had. As in Romans 10. Romans 10, 9.
For if thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe with thy
heart that God raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved. And in 1. Peter.
3. 1. Pet. 3.15.
Be ready always to give an answer to every man that asks you a reason of
that hope that is in you. Our savior Christ says in John. 8. He that is of
God hears Gods word. John. 8, 47.
Secondly by his honest and godly conversation among men: for Paul says, 2.
Tim. 2.
The Lord knows who are his, and let every one that names the name of Chrst
depart from iniquity. Show me (says James in the second of his Epistle) thy
faith by thy works, James. 2, 18.
and I will show thee my faith by my works. Where he plainly shows, that
if good works be away, Matthew. 7.
there is no faith. Ye shall know them (says Christ) by their fruit, verse,
16, 20.
for a good tree brings forth good fruit, etc. Thirdly by true Christian
love: John. 13, 35.
Hereby (says Christ in the 13. of John) shall all men know that ye are my
disciples if ye have love one to an other. These are three sure marks to know
a faithful man by so far as man may judge. Hypocrites God will either
display in this world in time, by bringing their sins abroad to the view of
all men, as he did Simon Magus his sins, Judas, Saules, and many others, or
else when the secrets of all men's hearts shall be disclosed, he will throw those
tares into unquenchable fire with others prepared to condemnation.

Qu How may a man know an unfaithful man and an infidel?

An. By his life unreformed, and continuance in his wickedness after he is
rebuked, and hears how he ought to walk. Luke. 6. verse 43, 44.
It is not a good tree (says Christ in the sixth of Luke) which brings forth
evil fruit, neither an evil tree that brings forth good fruit. Again, John
says in his first epistle and third chapter: 1, John, 3, 10.
In this are the children of God known, and the children of the devil,
whosoever does not righteousness is not of God. And again, He that commits
sin is of the devil. Proverbs 29. He that hardens his neck when he is
rebuked, Prou. 29, 1.
shall suddenly be destroyed, and cannot be cured. Psalm 68. Surely God will
wound the head of his enemies, Psalm. 68, 21.
and the hairy pate of him that walks in his sin.

Qu. Now show what joys are prepafor true Christians?

An. Such as (says the Apostle in the second chapter of the former Epistle to
the Corinthians) The eye has not seen, 1, Cor, 2, 9.
neither the ear heard, neither the heart of man conceived, prepared by God
for them that love him. Peter in the fifth of his first Epistle, terms those
joys the incorruptible crown of glory. In the 21. of the Revelation, 1, Peter
5, 4.
Revel, 21,, 10, 11, 12, 13 14, 15, 16, 17 18, 19, 20, 21 22, 23, 24, 25.
this joy is described in the description of new Jerusalem, builded of gold
precious stones, and pearls, etc. where, by most excellent earthly things is
set forth the excellency of those things, which pass and exceed man's
capacity. Wherefore let none of us be a profane person as was Esau, Hebr. 12,
16.
to sell our birthright for a mess of pottage, and for the pleasures of the
doonghill of this world, which endure but for a season, to loose the joys and
dainties of heaven, which are eternal. Which thing God grant unto us for his
Christ his sake, to whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, three persons and
one only God, King of kings, and Lord of lords, who only has
immortality, and dwells in the light that no man can attain unto, whom
never man saw, neither can see, be honor and power everlastingly, Amen.

The end of the Catechism.
To the Christian Reader.
BEcause this Catechism is very short, I thought it needful to add and
adioyne unto the end thereof (good Reader) certain duties required by God at
the hands of his people, to be performed under pain of damnation, and the
testimonies of Scripture which prove the same. For surely this naughtye age in
performance of duty is very remiss and untoward, persuaded, as it seems,
that a mere profession of Religion with the lip is Christianity enough. And
what is the speeches of the most part of men in these days when they are
blamed for their ungodly life, but these and such like? Why, God is merciful,
men cannot be saints and angels, you are over precise and pure. Luke 1, se 74,
75.
As if it were not written that we are therefore delivered by Christ from our
enemies, Hell, Death, and Damnation, that we should serve God without fear
all the days of our life in holiness and righteousness before him, and in
another place that we should live soberly, Tim. 2, se 12.
righteously, and godly in this present world. And in another place: That if
any be in Christ, he must be a new creature. 2, Cor, 5.
And again: Follow peace with all men, Heb, 12.
and holiness, without the which no man shall see the Lord. And to the same
effect there are infinite testimonies of holy Scripture. But I would such
mocke-gods were once mindful of their woeful state, which may rather be
termed incarnate Devils then Christian me^, or members of the holy body of
Christ, so long as they continue so desperately naught. I would (good reader)
either thine or mine admonition might do some of them good. Farewell in
Christ, and let us pray in the spirit, for the peace and prosperity of Zion,
and our gracious Sovereign.

Thine in Christ, Th. Settle.

A fardle of Christian duties, needful to be taken up and borne of all such as
travail toward eternal life according as every of their callings require.
1. That all Christian men and women are bound to go to Church, or the place
appointed for Gods worship, namely where Gods word is preached, prayers and
Sacraments ministered: and to join themselves in fellowship in those holy
exercises of religion, that so they may grow up in true Christianity.
But ye shall seek the place which the Lord your God shall choose out of all
your tribes, Deuteronomy, 12, verse 5.
to put his name there and there to dwell, and thither thou shall come. This
place was under the law Jerusalem, or where God's Ark and tabernacle was
pitched. And now since Christ's birth, is all places of the world where Gods
word and sacraments are truly preached and ministered.

It shall be in the last days, Esaias 2, ver, 2.
that the mountains of the house of the Lord shall be prepared in the top of the
mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills, and all nations shall flow
unto it. And And many people shall go and say: Micha, 4, 1.
Come, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord to the house of the
God of Jacob, and he will teach us his ways, and we will walk in his paths.

And they that dwell in one City shall go unto an other, Zachar. 8,. 21, 22.
saying: Up, let us go and pray before the Lord, One must provoke, another to
go to the assembli^s.
and seek the Lord of hosts: I will go also. Yea, great people and mighty
nations shall come to seek the Lord of hosts in Jerusalem, and to pray before
the Lord.

Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee, Psalm, 84, se 5, 6, 7.
and whose heart are in thy ways. They going through the vale of Baca make
wells therein, etc. They go from strength to strength, till every one appear
before God in Zion. Then a shower of rain ought not to be an excuse for any
to absent himself from the holy assemblies, as many a one of our dainty
Christians do in these days make it.

2. Examples of the meetings of Christians for the hearing of the word, prayer,
and administration of Sacraments.
ANd they continued in the Apostles doctrine, and fellowship, Acts, 2, 42.
and fellowship, and breaking of bread, and prayers.

And they continued daily with one accord in the temple, Acts 2, 46.
and breaking of bread at home.

And daily in the temple, Acts 5, 46.
and from house to house they ceased not to teach and preach Jesus Christ.

And the next Saboth day came almost the whole City together to hear the
word of God. Acts 13, 44.


And the first day of the week the Disciples being come together to break
bread, Acts 20, 7.
Paul preached unto them ready to depart on the morrow, and continued the
preaching until midnight.

When ye come together therefore into one place, 1, Cor, 11, 20
this is not to eat the Lords Supper.

3. Examples of the servants of God, reioicing to go to the assemblies of God,
and to see others go. And of the servants of God complaining and sorrowing for
the want of the holy assemblies, when as by persecution they were hindered,
and of their desires to be there.
I Reioised when they said to me, Psalm, 122, se 1, 2.
we will go into the house of the Lord. Our feet shall stand in thy gates, O
Jerusalem.

O Lord of hosts how amiable are thy tabernacles. Psalm, 84, verse 1, 2, 3.
My soul longs, yea and faints for the courts of the Lord, for my heart
and my flesh rejoice in the living God. Yea, the sparrow has found her an
house, and the swallow a nest for her where she may lay her young, even by thy
altars O Lord of hosts, my king and my God. Blessed are they that may dwell in
thine house, they will ever praise thee.

As the Heart brayeth for the rivers of water, Psalm, 42, verse 1, 2, 3, 4.
so pants my soul after thee, O God. My soul lusts for God, even for the
living God, when shall I come and appear before the presence of God. My tears
have been my meat day and night, while they daily say unto me, where is thy
God. When I remembered these things, I poured out my very heart, because I had
gone with the multitude, and led them into the house of God, etc.

And he said (that is David unto Saul) Wherefore does my Lord thus persecute
his servant, 1, Sam, 26, 18, 19.
for what have I done, or what evil is in my hand. Now therefore I beseech
thee, let my Lord hear the words of his servant. If the Lord have stirred
thee up against me, let him smell the savor of a Sacrifice: But if the
children of men have done it, cursed be they before the Lord. For they have
cast me out this day from abiding in the inheritance of the Lord God, saying:
go serve other Gods.

Hezekia hearing the message of death from the Lord, Esaias 38. se 1, 2, 3, 18,
19.
prayed and wept not for fear of death, but as the whole chapter does
evidently declare, because he should no longer live to praise God in his
sanctuary, and to grow up among the people of God in more graces to promote
Gods glory. For says he (after he had promise of life) The grave cannot
confess thee, death cannot praise thee, they that go down into the pit
cannot hope for thy truth. But the living, the living he shall confess thee,
as I do this day: the father to the children shall declare thy truth.

One thing have I desired of the Lord that I will require, Psalm, 27, 4.
even that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all ye days of my life, to
behold the beauty of ye Lord and to visit his temple. David by the beauty of
the Lord in this place, means neth nothing else but ye hearing of Gods holy
word, prayers, praises, thanksgiving and the use of other Gods ceremonies for
that ministration appointed.

For a day in thy courts is better then a thousand other where: Psalm. 84, 10.
I had rather be a door keeper in the house of my God, then to dwell in the
tabernacle of wickedness.

4 That al must hear and receive Gods word.
Receive with meekenes the word that is grafted in you, James 1, 21.
which is able to save your souls.

As new borne babes desire the sincere milk of the word, 1, Pet 1, 2.
that you may grow thereby.

He that is of God hears Gods word: John 8, 47.
ye therefore hear them not, because ye are not of God.

He that turns away his ear from hearing the law, Prou. 28, 9.
even his prayer shall be abominable.

Despise not prophesiyng. 1, These. 5, 20 Prou. 13, 13.
He that despises the word shall be destroyed.

5 That Gods word is effectual, and full of power to convert men, and to
alter their minds, and cleanse their hearts.
THe law of the Lord is perfect, Psalm. 19, 7.
converting the soul.

Now are ye clean through the word which I have spoken unto you. John 15, 3.


Sanctify them with thy truth. John 17, 17.
Thy word is truth.

For I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ, Romans 1, 16.
for it is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believes.

For the word of God is lively, Heb. 4, 12.
and mighty in operation, and sharper then any two edged sword, and enters
through, even unto ye dividing a sunder of the soul and the spirit, and of
the ioints and the marrowe, and is a discerner of the thoughts and the intents
of the heart.

Nevertheless though we walk in the flesh, 2, Cor. 10.. 5, 6, 7.
yet we war not after the flesh. For the weapons of our warfare are not
carnal, but mighty through God to cast down holds, casting down the
imaginations, and every high thing that is exalted above the glory of God,
and bringing into captivity every thought, to the obedience of Christ. And
having ready ye vengeance against al disobedience, when your obedience is
fulfilled.

Is not my word even like a fire, says the Lord, Ierem, 23, 29
and like an hammer that breaks the stone?

Surely as the rain comes down, and the snow from the heaven, Esaias 55. 10,
11.
and returns not thither, but waters the earth, and makes it to bring
forth and bud, that it may give seed to the sower, and bread unto him that
eats. So shall my word be that goes out of my mouth, it shall not return
unto me void, but it shall accomplish that which I will, and it shall prosper
in the thing whereto I sent it. 1, Cor. 14. verse. 24, 25.


But if all prophecy, and there come in one that believes not or one
unlearned, he is rebuked of all, and is judged of all: and so are the secrets
of his heart made manifest, and so he will fall down on his face, and worship
God, and say plainly that God is in you indeed.

These places then considered, it will appear that they which neglect and
despise the hearing of the word preached, cannot be saved, though they trust
never so much to secret revelations, they shall shall as soon come to heaven,
as he to France that will pass the sea without a ship.

6 That for every thing that a Christian man does, he ought to ask council
at the word of God, and make that the rule of al his doings.
TAke heed therefore that ye do as the Lord your God has commanded you:
Deuteronomy, 5, 32.
turn not aside to the right hand, nor to the left.

Whatsoever is not of faith (that is of knowledge from the word) is sin. Romans
14, verse 23.


And when they shall say unto you, enquire at them that have a spirit of
divination, Esaias 8. verse 19, 20.
and at the southsayers which whisper and murmur. Should not a people enquire
at their God? From the living to the dead, to the law and to the testimony,
if they speak not according to this word: it is because there is no light in
them.

Woe to the rebellious children (says ye Lord) that take council but not of
me, Esaias 30, se 1, 2
and cover with a covering, but not by my spirit, ye they may lay sin upon sin,
which walk forth to go down into Egypt (and have not asked at my mouth.)

Examples of David.

Thy word is a lantern unto my feet, Psa. 119, 105
and a light unto my path.

Also thy testimonies are my delight, Psalm. 119, 24
and my councellers.

7 That the word of God contains all things necessary unto salvation.
THe Law of the Lord is perfect, Psalm. 19, 7.
converting the soul.

And that thou have known the holy scriptures of a child, 2. Tim 3.. 15, 16,
17.
which are able to make thee wise unto salvation, through ye faith which is in
Christ Jesus. For the whole scripture is given by inspiratio^ of God, and is
profitable to teach, to improve, to correct, and to instruct in righteousness.
That the man of God may be absolute, being made perfect unto all good woorks.

Receive with meekenes the word that is grafted in you, James 1, 21.
which is able to save your souls.

Search the scriptures, John 5, 39.
for in them ye think to have eternal life.

Then if eternal life and salvation of our souls be obtained by the
scripures, and doctrine of the word contained therein, much good do the
Papists with the rest which they get more by the means of traditions and
unwritten verities.

8 Of Magistrates, and first what men are to be chosen.
Moreover, provide thou among all the people men of courage, Exodus 18.21.
fearing God, men dealing truly, men hating covetousness, and appoint such over
the^ to be rulers over thousa^ds, rulers over hundreds, etc.

9 That Magistrates are to execute Justice uprightly toward all.
ANd I charged your judges that same time, saying: Deuteronomy. 1, 16.
Hear the causes of brethren, and judge righteously between every man and his
brother, and the stranger that is with him, ye shall have no respect of persons,
but shall hear the small as well as the great: ye shall not fear the face of
man, for the judgment is Gods.

Ye shall not do unjustly in judgment, Deuitie. 19.


Thou shall not esteem a poor man in his cause. Exodus, 23.3.


Judges and officers shall thou make thee etc. and they shall judge the people
with righteous judgment. Deuteronomy. 17, 18.


10. That Judges and magistrates must take no rewards nor bribes, nor wrest
the Law.
ANd he set judges in the land through out all the strong Cities of Judah, 2.
Chron. 19 verse 5, 6, 7.
city by city: And said to the Judges take heed what ye do. For ye execute
not the judgments of man but of the Lord, and he will be with you in the cause
and judgment. Wherefore now let the fear of the Lord be upon you, take heed
and do it: for there is no iniquity with the Lord, neither respect of
persons, nor receiving of reward.

Hear this I pray you ye heads of the house of Jacob and princes of the house
of Israel, Mich. 3. verse 10, 11.
they abhor judgment and pervert al equity, they build up Zion with blood and
Jerusalem with iniquity, the heads thereof judge for rewards, etc: therefore
shall Zion for your sakes be plowed as a field.

To make good for the evil of their hands the prince asked, Mich. 7. verse. 3,
4.
and the judge judges for a reward. Therefore the great man speaks out of
the corruption of his heart, and so they wrap it up, the best of them is like a
brier, and the most righteous is sharper then a thorn hedge.

Thou shall take no gift, Exodus 23, 8.
for the gift blinds the wise, and peruerteth the words of the righteous.

Wrest not thou the law, Deuteronomy. 16, 19.
neither respect any person, neither take reward, for the reward blinds the
eyes of the wise, and peruerteth the words of the just.

Their rulers love to say with shame bring ye. Osea, 4, 18.


Woe unto them which justifies the wicked for a reward, Esaias, 5, 23.
and takes away the righteousness of the righteous from him. Read the 82.
Psalm.

11. That magistrates must punish the wicked, or else they shall provoke Gods
wrath against themselves, and be a cause to increase sin.
A Wise king scatters the wicked, Prou. 20, 26
and causes ye wheel to turn over them. For Princes are not to be feared for
good works, Rom 13. se 3, 4.
but for evil, will thou be without fear of the power? do well, so shall
thou have praise of the same, for he is the minister of God for thy wealth: but
if thou do evil, fear; for he bears not the sword for naught, for he is the
mininister of God to take vengeance on him that does evil.

Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, Eccles. 8,
10.
therefore the heart of the children of men is fully set in them to do evil.

Neither will I be with you any more except ye destroy the excommunicate from
among you. Iosu^. 7, 12.


Examples.

I put on justice, Job 29. verse 14, 15.
and it covered me, my judgment was as a robe and a crown. I was the eyes of
the blind, and I was the feet to the lame: I was a father unto the poor, and
when I knew not the cause I sought it out diligently, I brake also the jaws of
the unrighteous, and plucked the pray out of his teeth.

Betimes will I destroy all the wicked of ye land, Psalm. 101, ^.
that I may cut of al ye workers of iniquity from the city of the Lord.

Thus says the Lord, 1. Kings. 20. se 42.
because thou Ahab have let go out of thine hands a man (that is Benhadad king
of Aram) whom I appointed to die, thy life shall go for his life, and thy
people for his people. A worthy example to be noted of all magistrates, that
they may not spare and foolishly pity Idolaters and vile sinners, whom God in
his law commands to be slain.

12. That princes, magistrates, and men in authority ought to be religious,
and mainteiners and nursers of religion, and take especial delight in those
that fear God.
BE wise now therefore ye kings, Psalm. 10. se 11, 12.
be learned ye judges of the earth, serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice in
trembling. Kiss the son least he be angry and ye perish in the way, when
his wrath shall suddenly burn.

And when he (that is the king) shall sit upon the throne of his kingdom, Deuteronomy.
17. se 18, 19.
then shall he write him this law, repeated in a book by the priests of the
Leuits, and it shall be with him, and he shall read therein all the days of his
life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, and to keep all the words
of this law, and these ordinances for to do them. That his heart be not lifted
up above his brethren, and that he turn not from the commandment to the
right hand or to the left, but that he may prolong his days in his kingdom,
he, and his sons in the midst of Israel.

Let not this book (the Lords words to Joshua and in his person to all
magistrates) of this law depart out of thy mouth but meditate therein day and
night, Joshua. 1, 8.
that thou may observe and do according to all that is written therein. For
then shall thou make thy way prosperous, and then shall thou have good success.

Thou (that is the Church) shall suck the milk of the Gentiles, Esaias. 60, 16.
and shall suck the breasts of Kings, and thou shall know that I the Lord am
thy savior.

Kings shall be, Esaias. 49, se 23, 24.
thy (that is ye churches) nursing fathers and queens thy nurses, they shall
worship thee with their faces toward the earth, and lick up the dust of thy
feet, and thou shall know that I am the Lord.

In the Revelation it is written: Reave. 21, 24
That the kings of the earth shall bring their glory and honor unto the new
Jerusalem.

Example of David.

O my soul, Psalm. 16.2.
thou have said unto the Lord thou art my Lord, my well doing extends not to
thee: but to the Saints that are in the earth, and to the excellent: all my
delight is in them.

I am a companion of al them that fear thee and keep thy precepts. Psalm. 119,
63,


Mine eyes shall be unto the faithful of the land that they may dwell with me,
Psalm. 101, 6.
he that walks in a perfect way he shall serve me.

When I remembered these things I powered out my very heart, Psalm. 42, 4.
because I had gone with the multitude and led them into the house of God.

13. That all subjects are to obey their princes, and those that are appointed
under them, that is inferior magistrates in all things, not contrary to the
commandments of God, and to pay them tributes.
LEt every soul be subject unto the higher powers: Romans 13. se 1, 2, 3.
for there is no power but of God: whosoever therefore resists the power,
resists the ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receive to
themselves judgment. For princes are not to be feared for good works, but for
evil, will thou then be without fear of the power? do well, so shall thou
have praise of the same, etc. wherefore ye must be subject, not because of
wrath only, but also for conscience sake. For this cause ye pay also tribute,
for they are Gods ministers, applying themselves for ye same thing. Give to all
men therefore their duty, tribute to whom ye owe tribute: custom to whom
custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom ye owe honor.

Put them in remembrance that they be subject to ye principalities and powers,
Titus. 3, 1.
and that they be obedient and ready to every good work.

Submit your selves unto all manner ordinance of man for ye Lords sake, 1.
Peter. 2. se 13, 14.
whether it be to the king as unto the superior, or unto governors as unto
them that are sent of him, for the punishment of evil doers, and for the
praise of them that do well.

Honor al men, 1. Pet. 3.17.
love brotherly fellowship: fear God honor the king.

Give unto Caesar, Math. 22, 21
the things which are Cesars, and give unto GOD those things which are Gods.

And when they were come to Capernaum they ye received polle money came to
Peter and said, Math. 17. s. 24, 25, 26, 27.
does not your master pay tribute, He said yes. And when he was come into the
house Jesus prevented him, saying: what think thou Simon? of whom do the
kings of the earth take tribute or polle money? of their children or of
strangers? Peter said unto him of strangers: the^ said Jesus unto him, then are
the children free. Nevertheless least we should offend them, go to the sea and
cast in an angle, and take the first fish that comes up, and when thou have
opened his mouth thou shall find a piece of twenty pence, that take, and give
it to them for thee and me.

And the king said to his sergea^ts that stood about him, 1. Sam. 22, 1^
turn and slay the priests of the Lord, because their hand also is with David,
and because they knew when he fled and showed it not to me. But the servants
of the king would not move their hand to fall upon the priests of the Lord.

And when they had brought them they set them before the Council, Acts. 4.
verse 27, 28, 29.
and the chief priest asked them, saying: did not we straightly command you
that you should not teach in this manner etc? Then Peter and the Apostles
answered and said, we ought rather to obey God then men.

14. That none ought to curse or use railing or evil speeches of magistrates.
CVrse not the king, Eccles. 10, 20
no not in thy thought, neither curse the rich in thy bed chamber, for the
foul of heaven shall carry the voice, and that which has wings shall declare
the matter.

Thou shall not rail upon the judges, Exodus 22, 28.
neither speak evil of the ruler of the people.

Likewise notwithstanding the dreamers also defile the flesh, Iud. 8.
and despise government, and speak evil of them that are in authority. Yet
Michaell the archangell, etc.

Example of Paul.

I am not mad o noble Festus, Acts. 26, 29.
but I speak the words of truth and sobernes. Yet none of these things do let
why the ministers of Gods word should not after the example of John Baptist to
Herod, Mark. 6. 1. Kings. 21. se 20.
and Elias to Ahab, and others of Gods servants to other magistrates, if need
require, sharply reprove them when they swerve from godliness and become
wicked.

15. That good princes and magistrates are taken away, and an alteration of
states often made because of the sin and wickedness of the people.
FOr the transgression of a land there are many princes thereof, Prou. 28.^*
but by a man of understanding and knowledge a realm likewise endures long.

For lo, Esaias 3 se ^* 2, 3, 4.
the Lord God of hosts will take away from Jerusalem and from Judah the stay
and the strength: even all the stay of bread, and all the stay of water. The
strong man and the man of war, the judge and the prophet, the prudent and the
aged, the captain of siftie and the honorable, and the counceller and the
cunning artificer, and I will appoint children to be their princes, and babes
shall rule over them.

16. That the ministers and pastors of the Church ought diligently to seed
their flocks and teach their people, under pain of damnation, and that
faithfully without chopping and changing.
ANd of Leui he said, Deuteronomy. 33, 10.
let thy Thummin and thy Vrin be with thy holy one, etc. They shall teach Jacob
thy judgments and Israel thy law: they shall put incense before thy face.

And they (that is the Levites) read in the book of the law of GOD distinctly,
Nehem. 8.8.
and gave the sense, and caused them (that is the people) is understand the
reading.

O Son of man I have made thee a watchman unto the house of Israel, Ezech.
33. s,, 9.
therefore thou shall hear the word at my mouth, and admonish them from me.
When I shall say unto the wicked man, O wicked man thou shall die the death: if
thou do not speak and admonish the wicked of his way, the wicked man shall
die for his iniquity, but his blood will I require at thy hands. Neuerthelosse
if thou warn the wicked of his way to turn from it, if he do not turn from
his way he shall die for his iniquity, but thou have delivered thy soul.

Take heed unto your selves and to all the flock, Acts, 20, 28.
whereof the Holy ghost has made you the overseers, to feed the church of
God, which he has purchased with his own blood.

I charge thee therefore before God, 2. Timoth. 4 verse 1, 2.
and before the Lord Jesus Christ which shall judge the quick and the dead, at
his appearing and in his kingdom, Preach the word, be instant in season and
out of season, improve, rebuke, exhort, with all long suffering and doctrine.

The Elders which are amongst you, 1. Pet. 5. verse 1.2.
I beseech which am also an Elder, etc. Feed the flock of GOD that depends
upon you, caring for it not by co^straint, but willingly; not for filthy
lucre, but of a ready mind, etc.

Let a man so think of us as of the ministers of Christ, 1. Cor. 4.. 1, 2.
and disposers of the secrets of God, and as for the rest, it is required of
the disposers that every man be found faithful.

The Prophet that has a dream let him tell a dream, Iere. 23, 28.
and he that has my word let him speak my word faithfully, for what is the
chafe to the wheat says the Lord?

Therefore seeing we have received this ministration, 2. Corint. 4. se 1, 2.
as we have received mercy, we saint not, but have east of the clokes of
shame, and walk not in craftiness, neither handle we the word of God
deceitfully: but in declaration of the truth we approve our selves to every
man's conscience in the sight of God.

For we are not as many which make merchandise of the word of God, 2. Cor. 2.17.
but as of sincerity, but as of God in ye sight of God speak we in Christ. O
I would to God that all our ministers could thus in truth speak.

17. That ministers and pastors ought to be examples to their flocks in holy
conversation and godly life, otherwise they are a slander to the ministry.
BE unto them that believe an example in word, 1. Tim. 4.12
in conversation, in love, inspirit, in faith, and in patience.

In all things show thy self an example of good works, Titus 2, 7.
with vnedrrupt doctrine, with gravity and integrity, and with the, wholesome
word which cannot be condemned, that he which withstandeth may be ashamed,
having nothing conrerning you to speak evil of.

Feed the flock of God, 1. Pet. 5, 3.
etc. That ye may be examples to the flock.

Ye are witnesses and God also (says Paul) how holily, justly, 1 Thessalonians. 2.
se 10.
and vnblameablely, we behaved our selves among you that believe.

We give none occasion of offense in any thing that our ministry should not be
reprehended. 2. Cor. 4.6.


Brethren, be ye followers of me, Philip. 3. se 17, 18.
and look on them which walk so, as you have us for an example. For many
walk of whom I have told you often, and now tell you weeping, that they are
the enemies of the cross of Christ, whose end is damnation, whose God is their
belly, and whose glory is to their shame which mind earthly things.

18. That the pastors and ministers of Gods word are to be esteemed greatly
of, to be reverenced, and to be obeyed in their message, otherwise reproach is
offered to God.
LEt a man so think of us, 1. Cor. 4 1.
as of the ministers of Christ, and disposers of the secrets of God.

How bewtifull are the feet of them that bring glad tidings of peace, Romans 10,
15
(...) bring glad tidings of good things.

Now we beseech you brethren that ye acknowledge them, 1. These. 5. verse 12, 13.
which labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you, that
ye have them in singular love, for their works sake.

Obey them that have the oversight of you, Hebr. 13, 17*
and submit your selves, for they watch for your souls: as they that must give
accounts, that they may do it with joy and not with grief, for that is
unprofitable for you.

Verily, John. 13, 20.
verily I say unto you, if I se^d any, he that receives him receives me: and
he that receives me receives him that sent me.

He that hears you hears me, Luke. 10, 16.
and he that dispiseth you dispiseth me: and he that dispiseth me dispiseth him
that sent me.

Example.

And the trial of one which was in my flesh, ye despised not neither abhored,
Gal. 4.14.
but ye received me as an angel of God, yea as Christ Jesus.

Receive him therefore (that is Epiphroditus) in the Lord with all gladness,
Philip, 2, 29.
and make much of such.

19. That the people or parishes which have Gods word preached, diligently and
faithfully unto the^, are bound in conscience, liberally to sustain and
nourish those that preach unto the^.
BEware that you forsake not the Leuite, Deuteronomy. 12, 19.
as long as thou live upon the earth. The Leuits were appointed to teach the
people, which came of Leui Jacobs son. Deuteronomy. 33, 10.


And into whatsoever house ye enter first, Luke 10, ver. 5, 6, 7.
say peace be to this house, etc. and in ye house tarry still eating and
drinking such things as shall be set before you by them: for the laborer is
worthy of his wages.

My defense to the^ ye examine me is this: 1. Cor. 9. ver. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 11,
12, 13, 14.
have we not power to lead about a wife being a sister, as well as ye rest of
the Apostles, and as brethren of the Lord and Cephas? or I only and Barnabas
have not we power not to work? who goes a warfare any time at his own cost?
etc. If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing if we
reap your carnal things? Do ye not know that they which minister about ye holy
things eat of the things of the temples? and they which the altar? so also has
the Lord ordained that they which preach the gospel should live of the gospel.

The elders that rule well are worthy double honor, 1. Timoth. 5. se 17, 18.
(that is double reward) specially they which labor in the word and doctrine.
For the Scripture says, thou shall not mosel the mouth of the are that
treads out the corn, the labourer is worthy of his wages.

Let him that is taught in the word, Galath. 6.7.
make him that teaches him partaker of all his goods, be not deceived God is
not mocked.

20. That the not having or to be deprived of faithful Pastors and Ministers
is a sign of Gods wrath and displeasure against a people, and to have them is
a sign of mercy.
SVrely I will no more spare those that dwell in the land, Zachar. 11*, 6, 15,
16.
says the Lord, etc. And the Lord said unto me, take to thee yet the
instruments of a foolish shepherd, for lo, I will raise up a shephard in the
land, which shall not look for the thing that is lost, nor seek the tender
lambs, nor heal that which is hurt, nor feed that which stands, but he shall
eat the flesh of the fat, and tear their paws in pieces.

The days of visitation are come: Osei 9, v. 7.
the days of recompense are come: Israel shall know it: the prophet is a
fool, the spiritual man is mad for the multitude of thine iniquities:
therefore the hatred is great.

We see not our signs, Psalm. 74, 9.
there is not one Prophet more, nor any with us that knows how long.

Behold the days come says the Lord God, Amos 8, 11.
that I will send a famine in the land, not a famine of bread, and a thirst
for water, but of hearing the word of the Lord.

For lo, Esaias 3, v. 1, 2
the Lord God of hosts will take away from Jerusalem, etc. The judge and the
prophet, the prudent and the aged.

Behold, Esaias 24, s. 1, 2.
the Lord makes the earth empty, and he makes it waste, he turns it
vpside down, and scatteresh abroad the inhabitants thereof, and there shall be
like people like Priest, like servant like master.

Turn again, Ierem. 3. se 34 15.
O ye disobedient children, (says the Lord) for I am your Lord, and I will
take you one of a City and two of a tribe, and will bring you to Zion. And I
will give you Pastors according to mine heart, which shall feed you with
knowledge and understanding.

21 That parents ought to instruct their children, and bring them up in the
fear of the Lord, and not to provoke them with bitterness.
AND when your children ask you what service is this you keep, Exodus 12, s.
25, 27.
then ye shall say it is the sacrifice of the Lords passover, etc.

And the Lord said, Genesis 18, se 17, 19.
shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do? For I know him, that he will
command his sons and household after him, that they keep the way of the
Lord, and do righteousness and judgment.

And these words which I command thee this day shall be in thine heart, Deuteronomy.
6, se 7.8.
and thou shall rehearse them continually unto thy child, and shall talk of
them when thou tarriest in thine house, and as thou walk by the way, and
when thou lie down, and when thou risest up.

How he established a testimony in Jacob, and ordained a law in Israel,
Psalm. 78, se 5, 6, 7, 8.
which he commanded our fathers yt they should teach their children, that the
posterity might know it, and the children which should be borne should stand
up and declare it to their children, that they might set their hope on God,
and not forget ye works of God, but keep his commandments, and not to be as
their Fathers, a disobedient and rebellious generation.

Ye fathers, Ephesians. 6.1.
provoke not your children to wrath, but bring them up in instruction, and
information of the Lord.

Fathers, Collos. 3, 2.
provoke not your children to anger, least they be discouraged.

Teach a child in the trade of his way, Prou. 22, 6
and when he is old he shall not depart from it.

Example.

And he (that is Elisha the Prophet) 2 Kin. 2, ve. 23, 24.
went up from thence unto Bethel, and as he was going up the way little
children came out of the City and mocked him, and said to him: come up thou
bald head, come up thou bald head. And he turned back and looked on them, and
cursed them in the name of the Lord, and two bears came out of the forest,
and tore in pieces two and forty children of them. A just judgment of God
both upon the parents and children: upon the parents because they taught them
no better: upon the children for mocking the holy Prophet of God. But it is
made but a small fault in our days t^ floute Gods holy ministers, and deride
them by these and such like terms: Lo our Sir John; our pelting priest, yea
and knave priest. And thus they hate them, ^^^os* 5, 10.
as says the Prophet, that reprove in the gate, and not children, but those
that being of sufficient years should have more knowledge and fear of God.

22. That parents ought to give correction to their children if need require,
also beside instruction.
HE that spares his rod hates his ^^ou. 13, 24
son, but he that loves him chasteneth betime.

Withhold not correction from ye child, Prou. 23.13.
if thou smite him with the rod he shall not die, thou shall smite him with
the rod, and deliver his soul from hell.

Chasten thy son while there is hope, Prou. 19, 18.
and let not thy soul spare for his murmuring.

Foolishness is bound in the heart of a child, Prou. 22, 15.
but the rod of correction shall drive it away.

The rod and correction give wisdom, Prou. 29, 15.
but a child set at liberty makes his mother ashamed.

Correct thy son, Prou. 29, 17
and he will give thee rest, and will give pleasures to thy soul.

Example of Gods judgments.
Then the Lord said to Samuel, 1, Sam. 3. ver. 11, 12, 13.
behold I will do a thing in Israel, whereof whosoever shall hear, his two
ears shall tingle. In that day I will raise up against Eli all things that I
have spoken concerning his house, when I begin I will also make an end. And I
have told him that I will judge his house for ever, for the iniquity which he
knows, because his sons ran into a slander, and he stayed them not.

And Adonias the son of Haggith, 1. Kin 1, verse. 5, 6.
exalted himself, saying: I will be king, and he got him chariots and horsemen,
and ^^fty men to run before him. And his Father would not displease him from
his childhoode to say why have thou done so, and he was a very goodly man.
Behold what fruit comes of cockering children, even to be driven by them
out of our houses by Gods just judgment.

To let our children when they sin in our sight escape unpunished, 1, Sam. 2,
29
is to honor them more then God.

23 That children are to obey their parents in their lawful commandments.
CHildren, Collos. 3, 20
obey your parents in all things: for that is well pleasing unto the Lord.

Children, Ephesians. 6, 1.
obey your parents in ye Lord for this is right.

Honor thy father and thy mother. Exodus 20. Prou. 1, verse 10, 11.


My son, hear thy fathers instruction, and forsake not thy mothers teachinges.
For they shall be a comely orname^t unto thine head, and as chains for thy neck.

24 What law God appointed for the punishment of a disobedient son in
Israel.
IF any man have a son that is stubborn and disobedient, Deuteronomy. 21, ver 18.19.
which will not harken unto the voice of his father, and the voice of his
mother, and they have chastened him, and he would not obey them: then shall his
father and his mother take him, and bring him out to the elders of his City,
and unto the gate of the place where he dwells, and shall say to the elders of
his City, this our son is stubborn and disobedient, and he will not obey our
admonition, he is a riatour and a drunkard. Then all the men of the City shall
stone him with stones unto death: so thou shall take away evil from among you,
that all Israel may hear it and fear.

25 That all servants are to obey their masters, and to serve them
faithfully, and to bear patiently their rebukes without murmuring, and also to
honor them.
LEt as many servants as are under ye yoke count their masters worthy of all
honor, 1, Tim. 6,. 1.2.
that the name of God and his doctrine be not evil spoken of, and they which
have believing masters, let them not despise them because they are brethren,
but rather do service because they are faithful, and beloved, and partakers
of the benefit.

Let servants be subject to their masters, Titus 2, verse. 9, 10.
and please them in all things, not answering again, neither pickers, but
that they show all good faithfulness, that they may adorn the doctrine of God
our savior in all things.

Servants, Ephesians. 6, ver. 5, 6, 7.
be obedient unto them that are your masters according to the flesh, with
fear and trembling in singleness of your hearts, as unto Christ: not with
service to the eye as men pleasers, but as the servants of Christ, doing the
will of God from the heart with goodwill, serving the Lord and not men: and know
ye that whatsoever good thing any man does, ye same he shall receive of the
Lord, whether he be bond or free.

Servants, Collos. 3. se 22, 23, 24, 25.
be obedient unto them that are your masters according to the flesh, in all
things: not with eye service as men pleasers, but in singlenes of heart
fearing God, and whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as to the Lord and not
unto men knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive the reward of the
inheritance, for ye serve the Lord Christ, but he that does wrong, shall
receive for the wrong that he has done, and there is no respect of persons.

Servants, 1, Pet. 2. se 18, 19, 20. 21.
be subject to your masters with all fear, not only to the good and courteous,
but also to the froward. For this is thank worthy, if a man for conscience
toward God endure grief, suffering wrongfully. For what praise is it if when
ye be buffeted for your faults, ye take it patiently; but and if when ye do
well, ye suffer wrong and take it patiently, this is acceptable to God. For
hereunto ye are called, for Christ also suffered for us, leaving for us an
example that ye should follow his steps.

Jacob an example of a faithful servant to Laban.

This twenty year have I been with thee, Genesis 21, verse 38, 39, 40.
thine ewes and thy goats have not cast their young, and the Rams of thy
flock have I not eaten. Whatsoever was torn of beasts I brought it not unto
thee, but made it good my self: of mine hand did thou require it, were yt
stolen by day, or stolen by night, I was in the day consumed with heat, and
frost in the night, and my sleep departed from mine eyes.

26 That Masters and Mistresses owe duties to their servants, and what those
duties are.
ANd ye Masters, Ephesians. 6, 9.
do the same thing unto them (that is your servants) putting away threatening,
and know that even your master also is in heaven, neither is there respect of
person with God.

Ye masters, Collos. 4, 1.
do you unto your servants that which is just and equal, knowing that ye also
have a master in heaven.

A servant will not be chastened with words, Prou. 29, 19
though he understand, yet will he not answer. Such a servant then when he is
known must have the scourge.

He that delicately brings up his servant from his youth, Prou. 29, 21
at length he will be even as his son: which is by masters to be considered
of.

Example of Jobs good dealing with his servants far from rigor.

IF I did condemn the judgment of my servant, Job 31, verse 13, 14, 15.
and of my maid when they did contend with me, what then shall I do when God
stands up, and when he shall visit me, what shall I answer? he that has
made me in the womb, has he not made him? has not he alone fashioned us in
the womb? Hereby may those masters see their wickedness, which will not hear
their servants speak, but upon a simple surmise and brainsicknes, do evil
entreat them by cruel stripes, when indeed there is no just cause.

Thou shall not oppress an hired servant, Deuteronomy. 24, 14
that is needy and poor, neither of thy brethren, nor stranger, thou shall
give him his hyre for his day.

27 What the duties of husbands are unto their wives.
LIkewise ye husbands, 1, Pet 3, 7.
dwell with them (that are your wives) as men of knowledge, giving honor unto
the woman, as unto the weaker vessel, even as they which are heirs together
of the grace of life, that your prayers be not interrupted.

Let the husband give unto the wife due 1, Cor. 7, ^
benevolence, and likewise also the wife unto the husband.

Husbands, Collos. 3, 19
love your wives, and be not bitter unto them.

Husbands, Ephesians. 5. se 25, 26, 28.
love your wives even as Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it,
that he might sanctify it, etc. so ought men to love their wives, as their
own bodies. He that loves his wife, loves himself.

28 What the duties of wives be unto their husbands.
Wives, Ephesians. 5.22.
submit your selves unto your husbands, as unto the Lord: for the husband is ye
wives head, even as Christ is the head of the Church, and the same is ye
savior of his body: therefore as ye church is in subjection to Christ, even so
let the wives be to their husbands in all things.

The man is the woman's head. 1, Cor. 11, 3. 1, Cor. 7, 3.


Let the wife give unto her husband due benevolence.

Wives, Collos. 3, 18.
submit your selves unto your husbands, as it is comely in the Lord.

Likewise also the women, 1. Tim. 2, 9.10, 11, 12, 13
that they array themselves in comely apparel, with shamefastnes and modesty,
not with broidered hair, or gold, or pearls, or costly apparel, but as
becomes women that profess the fear of God with good works. Let the women
learn in silence with all subjection, I permit not a woman to teach, neither
to usurp authority over the man, but to be in silence: for Adam was first
formed, then Eve, and Adam was not deceived, but the woman was deceived, and
was in the transgression: notwithstanding through bearing of children she shall
be saved, if they continue in faith and love, and holiness with modesty.

Let the wife see that she fear her husband. Ephesians. 5, 33.


Unto the woman he said (that is the Lord) I will greatly increase thy sorrow,
Genesis 3, 16.
and thy conceptio^s, in sorrow shall thou bring forth children, and thy desire
shall be subject to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee.

Let your women keep silence in the Churches, 1, Cor. 14, 34, 35.
for it is not permitted unto them to speak: but they ought to be subject as
also the law says, and if they will learn any thing, let them ask their
husbands at home, for it is a shame for women to speak in the Church.

Likewise let the wives be subject to their husbands, 1, Pet. 3, verse 1, 2,
3, 4.5, 16.
that even they which obey not the word, may without the word be won by the
conversation of the wives. While they beheld your pure conversation, which is
with fear: whose apparelling let it not be outward, as with broidered hair,
and gold put about, or in putting on of apparel. But let the hid man of the
heart be vncorrupt with a meek and quiet spirit, which is before God a thing
much set by. For even after this manner in times past, did the holy women
which trusted in God, attire themselves, and were subject to their husbands.
As Sara obeyed Abraham, and called him Sir, whose daughters ye are whilst ye
do well, not being afraid of any terror.

Duty of husband and wife.

The wife has not the power of her own body, 1, Cor. 7, 4.5
but the husband: and likewise also the husband has not power of his own
body, but the wife. Defraude not one another, (that is, leave not one another
bed) except it be with consent for a time, that ye may give your selves to
fasting and prayer, and again come together, that Satan tempt you not for
your incontinencie.

29 That one Christian ought to instruct edify, and exhort another.
WHerefore exhort one another, s, These, 5, 11
and edify one another even as ye do.

Take heed brethren, Heb. 3, ver. 13, 14.
least at any time there be in any of you an evil heart, and unfaithful to
depart away from the living God: but exhort one another daily while it is
called to day, least any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin.

And let us consider one another to provoke unto love, Heb. 10, 2.
and to good works, not forsaking the fellowship that we have among our
selves, as the manner of some is, but let us exhort one another, and that so
much the more, because you see that the day draws near.

Then spoke they that feared the Lord, Mal^.3, 16
every one to his neighbor, and the Lord harkened and heard it, and a book
of remembrance was written before him for them that feared the Lord.

The righteous teaches the house of the wicked. Prou. 21, 1


The lips of the righteous feed many. Prou. 10, 21


Let every man as he has received ye gift, 1, Pet, 4, 10.
minister the same one to another, as good disposers of the manifold grace of
God.

30 That every Christian is bound in conscience, when his brother sins, to
rebuke him for his sin.
THou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart, Leuit. 19, 17
but thou shall plainly rebuke thy neighbor, and suffer him not to sin.

Let the righteous smite me, Psalm. 141, 5.
for that it is a benefit, and let him reprove me, and it shall be a
precious oil that shall not break my head, for within a while I shall even pray
in their miseries.

We desire you brethren, admonish the^ that are unruly, 1, These, 5, 14
comfort the feeble minded, bear with the weak, be patient toward all men.

31 That private offenses are to be rebuked privately or secretly.
IF thy brother trespass against thee, Math. 18, 15
go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone, if he hear thee, thou
have won thy brother.

32. That open sin must have open rebuke.
THem that sin rebuke openly, 1. Tim. 5.20
that the rest also may fear.

And when Peter was come to Antioch I withstood him openly, Galat. 2, 11.
for he was worthy to be rebuked.

He that rebukes a man shall find more favor at the length, Prou. 28, 23.
then he that flattereth him with his lips, why then should any man cast any of
these doubts? why then I shall loose his good will, and I am afraid he will not
take it well, having his promise of God.

A reproof enters more into him that has understanding, Prou. 17.
then an hundredth stripes into a fool.

A scorner loves not him that rebukes him, Prou. 15, 12.
neither will he go unto the wise.

A wise son will obey the instruction of his father, Prou. 13, 1.
but a scorner will hear no rebuke.

Better is it to hear the rebuke of wise men, Prou. 7, 7.
then the song of fools.

He that hardneth his neck when he is rebuked, Prou. 29, 1.
shall suddenly be destroyed and cannot be cured.

33. That no Christian ought to have any fellowship with any wicked man, who
professing christianity, leads his life lewdly to the slander of the
profession, but to avoid such a one as filthiness and dirt.
IF any that is called a brother (that us to say a Christian man) be a
fornicatour, 1. Cor. 5.
or covetous, or an idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner,
with such one eat not.

Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, Ephesians. 5.11.
but even reprove them rather.

If any man obey not our sayings, 1. These. 3. verse 14.
note him by letter, and have no company with him that he may be ashamed.

He that walks with the wise shall be wise, Prou. 13, 20.
but a companion of fools shall be afflicted.

For, Epes. 5. verse 6.7.
for such things comes the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience, be
not therefore companions with them.

They that forsake the law praise the wicked, Prou. 28, 4.
but they that keep the law set themselves against them.

Lord who shall dwell in thy tabernacle, Psalm. 15.1, 4.
etc. He in whose eyes a vile person is contemned: but he honors them that
fear the Lord.

Example.

Iehu the son of Hannani ye Seer went to meet him (that is Iehoshaphat who went
to the war with Ahab king of Israel) and said to king Iehoshaphat, 2. Chron.
19.
would thou help the wicked, and love them that hate the Lord? therefore
for this thing the wrath of the Lord is upon thee.

Yet after this did Iehoshaphat king of Judah join himself with Ahaziah king
of Israel who was given to do evil, 2. Chron. 20 s. 35, 36, 37
and he joined with him to make ships to go to Tarshish, and they made the
ships in Ezion Gaber, then Eliezer the son of Dodauah of Meresha prophesied
against Iehoshaphat, saying: because thou have joined thy self with Ahaziah
the Lord has broken thy works, and the ships were broken that they were not
able to go to Tarshish.

34. That all Christians ought to be full of good works, and to what end.
FOr we are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works, Ephesians.
2, 10.
which God has ordained, that we should walk in them.

This is a true saying, Titus 3, 8.
and these things I will thou should affirm, that they which have believed
God might be careful to show forth good works, these are good and profitable
to men.

Who gave himself for us, Titus 2, 14.
to redeem us from all iniquity, and to purge us a peculiar people unto
himself, zealous of good works.

Charge them that are rich in this world that they be not high minded, 1. Tim.
6, 17
and that they trust not in uncertain riches but in the living God, which
gives us abundantly all things to enjoy, that they do good and be rich in
good works, and ready to distribute and communicate.

End of good works.

Let your light so shine before men, Math. 5.16.
that they may see your good works, and glorify your father which is in
heaven.

And have your conversation honest among ye Gentiles, 1. Pet. 2, 12.
that they which speak evil of you as of evil doers, may by your good works
which they shall see, glorify God in the day of their visitation.

And this I pray that your love may abound, Philip. 1. se 9, 10, 11.
yet more and more in knowledge and in all judgment, that ye may discern
things that differ one from another, that ye may be pure and without offense
until the day of Christ, filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are
by Jesus Christ unto the glory and praise of God.

Join moreover virtue with your faith, 2, Pet. 1. se 5, 6, 7.
and with virtue knowledge, and with knowledge temperance, and with temperance
patience, and with patience godliness, and with godliness brotherly
kindness, and with brotherly kindness love. For if these things us among you
and abound, they will make you that ye neither shall be idle, nor unfruitful in
the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, for he that has not these things, is
blind, and cannot see far of, and has forgotten that he was purged from his
old sins.

And let ours learn to show forth good works for necessary uses, Titus 3.14.
that they be not unfruitful.

Now good Reader this being ended, there remains nothing but thy diligence,
carefully to practice that which thou shall here find, as thy calling shall
require, and bind thee, which that thou may do, I shall not cease to pray. And
thus in Christ I bid thee farewell.

FINIS.

