THE CRONICLE History of Henry the fifth, With his battle fought at Agin Court
in France. Together with Ancient Pistol.

As it has been sundry times played by the Right honorable the Lord
Chamberlain his servants.

VERITAS VIRESCIT VULNERE
TC



LONDON Printed by Thomas Creed, for Tho. Millington, and John Busby. And are
to be sold at his house in Carter Lane, next the Powle head. 1600.

The Chronicle History of Henry the fifth: with his battle fought at Agin Court
in France. Together with Ancient Pistol.
Enter King Henry, Exeter, 2. Bishops, Clarence, and other Attendants. Exeter.
SHall I call in Thambassadors my Liege?

King. Not yet my Cousin, til we be resolude
Of some serious matters touching us and France.

By. God and his Angels guard your sacred throne,
And make you long become it.

King. Shure we thank you. And good my Lord proceed
Why the Law Salicke which they have in France,
Or should or should not, stop us in our claim:
And God forbid my wise and learned Lord,
That you should fashion, frame, or wrest the same.
For God does know how many now in health,
Shall drop their blood in approbation,
Of what your reverence shall incite us too.
Therefore take heed how you impawne our person.
How you awake the sleeping sword of war:
We charge you in the name of God take heed.
After this coniuration, speak my Lord:
And we will judge, note, and believe in heart,
That what you speak, is washed as pure
As sin in baptism.
Then hear me gracious sovereign, and you peers,
Which owe your lives, your faith and services
To this imperial throne.
There is no bar to stay your highness claim to France
But one, which they produce from Faramount,
No female shall succeed in salicke land,
Which salicke land the French unjustly gloze
To be the realm of France:
And Faramont the founder of this law and female bar:
Yet their own writers faithfully affirm
That the land salicke lies in Germany,
Between the floods of Sabeck and of Elm,
Where Charles the fifth having subdude the Saxons,
There left behind, and settled certain French,
Who holding in disdain the German women,
For some dishonest manners of their lives,
Established there this law. To wit,
No female shall succeed in salicke land:
Which salicke land as I said before,
Is at this time in Germany called Mesene:
Thus does it well appear the salicke law
Was not devised for the realm of France,
Nor did the French possess the salicke land,
Until 400. one and twenty years
After the function of king Faramount,
Godly supposed the founder of this law:
Hugh Capet also that usurped the crown,
To fine his title with some show of truth,
When in pure truth it was corrupt and naught:
Conuaid himself as heir to the Lady Inger,
Daughter to Charles, the foresaid Duke of Lorain,
So that as clear as is the summers Sun,
King Pippins title and Hugh Capets claim,
King Charles his satisfaction all appear,
To hold in right and title of the female:
So do the Lords of France until this day,
Howbeit they would hold up this salick law
To bar your highness claiming from the female,
And rather choose to hide them in a net,
Then amply to embrace their crooked causes,
Usurped from you and your progenitors.

K. May we with right and conscience make this claim*

By. The sin upon my head dread sovereign.
For in the book of Numbers is it writ,
When the son dies, let the inheritance
Descend unto the daughter.
Noble Lord stand for your own,
Unwind your bloody flagge,
Go my dread Lord to your great graunsirs grave,
From whom you claim:
And your great Uncle Edward the black Prince,
Who on the French ground played a Tragedy
Making defeat on the full power of France,
Whilst his most mighty father on a hill,
Stood smiling to behold his Lions whelpe,
Foraging blood of French Nobility.
O Noble English that could entertain
With half their Forces the full power of France:
And let an other half stand laughing by,
All out of work, and cold for action.

King. We must not only arm us against the French,
But lay down our proportion for the Scot,
Who will make rode upon us with all advantages.

By. The Marches gracious sovereign, shall be sufficient*
To guard your England from the pilfering borderers.

King. We do not mean the coursing sneakers only,
But fear the main entendement of the Scot,
For you shall read, never my great grandfather
Unmasked his power for France,
But that the Scot on his unfurnished Kingdom,
Came pouring like the Tide into a breach,
That England being empty of defenses,
Has shook and trembled at the brute hereof.

By. She has bin then more feared then hurt my Lord:
For hear her but examplified by her self,
When all her chiualry has been in France
And she a mourning widow of her Nobles,
She has her self not only well defended,
But taken and impounded as a stray, the king of Scots,
Whom like a caytiffe she did lead to France,
Filling your Chronicles as rich with praise
As is the owse and bottom of the sea
With sunken wrack and shiplesse treasury.

Lord. There is a saying very old and true,
If you will France win,
Then with Scotland first begin:
For once the Eagle, England being in pray,
To his unfurnish nest the weazel Scot
Would suck her eggs, playing the mouse in absence of the cat:
To spoil and hauock more then she can eat.

Exe. It follows then, the cat must stay at home,
Yet that is but a cursed necessity,
Since we have trappes to catch the petty thieves:
Whilste that the armed hand does fight abroad
The advised head controlles at home:
For government though high or low, being put into parts,
Congrueth with a mutual consent like music.

By. True: therefore does heaven divide the fate of man in diverse functions.
Whereto is added as an aim or but, obedience:
For so live the honey Bees, creatures that by awe
Ordain an act of order to a peopeld Kingdom:
They have a King and officers of sort,
Where some like Magistrates correct at home:
Others like Merchants venture trade abroad:
Others like soldiers armed in their stings,
Make boot upon the summers velvet bud:
Which pillage they with merry march bring home
To the tent royal of their Emperor,
Who busied in his majesty, behold
The singing masons building roofes of gold:
The ciuell citizens lading up the honey,
The sad eyde Justice with his surly humme,
Delivering up to executors pale, the lazy caning Drone.
This I infer, that 20. actions once a foot,
May all end in one moment.
As many Arrows losed several ways, fly to one mark:
As many several ways meet in one town:
As many fresh streams run in one self sea:
As many lines close in the dyall center:
So may a thousand actions once a foot,
End in one moment, and be all well borne without defect.
Therefore my Liege to France,
Divide your happy England into four,
Of which take you one quarter into France,
And you withal, shall make all Gallia shake,
If we with thrice that power left at home,
Cannot defend our own door from the dog,
Let us be beaten, and from henceforth lose
The name of policy and hardiness.

Ki. Call in the messenger sent from the Dolphin,
And by your aid, the noble sinews of our land,
France being ours, we will bring it to our awe,
Or break it all in pieces:
Either our Chronicles shall with full mouth speak
Freely of our acts,
Or else like toonglesse mutes
Not worshipped with a paper Epitaph:
Enter Thambassadors from France. Now are we well prepared to know the Dolphins
pleasure,
For we hear your coming is from him.

Ambassa. Pleases your Majesty to give us leave
Freely to render what we have in charge:
Or shall I sparingly show a far off,
The Dolphins pleasure and our Embassage?

King. We are no tyrant, but a Christian King,
To whom our spirit is as subject,
As are our wretches fettered in our prisons.
Therefore freely and with vncurbed boldness
Tell us the Dolphins mind.

Ambas. Then this in fine the Dolphin says,
Whereas you claim certain Towns in France,
From your predecessor king Edward the third,
This he returns.
He says, there is naught in France that can be with a nimble
Galliard won: you cannot revel into Dukedomes there:
Therefore he sends meeter for your study,
This tun of treasure: and in lieu of this,
Desires to let the Dukedomes that you crave
Hear no more from you: This the Dolphin says.

King. What treasure Uncle?

Exe. Tennis balls my Liege.

King. We are glad the Dolphin is so pleasant with us,
Your message and his present we accept:
When we have matched our rackets to these balls,
We will by Gods grace play such a set,
Shall strike his fathers crown into the hazard.
Tell him he has made a match with such a wrangler,
That all the Courts of France shall be disturbd with chases.
And we understand him well, how he comes ore us
With our wilder days, not measuring what use we made of them.
We never valued this poor seat of England.
And therefore gave our selves to barbarous license:
As it is common seen that men are merriest when they are from home.
But tell the Dolphin we will keep our state,
Be like a King, mighty and command,
When we do rowse us in throne of France:
For this have we laid by our Majesty
And plodded lide a man for working days.
But we will rise there with so full of glory,
That we will dazell all the eyes of France,
I strike the Dolphin blind to look on us,
And tell him this, his mock has turned his balls to gun stones,
And his soul shall sit sore charge for the wastfull vengeance
That shall fly from them. For this his mock
Shall mock many a wife out of their dear husbands.
Mock mothers from their sons, mock Castles down,
I some are yet vngotten and unborn,
That shall have cause to curse the Dolphins scorn.
But this lies all within the will of God, to whom we do appeal,
And in whose name tell you the Dolphin we are com^ing on
To venge us as we may, and to put forth our hand
In a rightful cause: so get you hence, and tell your Prince,
His lest will savor but of shallow wit,
When thousands weep, more then did laugh at it.
Convey them with safe conduct: see them hence.

Exe. This was a merry message.

King. We hope to make the sender blush at it:
Therefore let our collectio^ for the wars be soon provided:
For God before, weell check the Dolphin at his fathers door.
Therefore let every man now task his thought,
That this fair action may on foot be brought.

Exeunt omnes. Enter Nim and Bardolfe. Bar. Godmorrow Corporal Nim.

Nim. Godmorrow Lieftenant Bardolfe.

Bar. What is ancient Pistol and thee friends yet?

Nim. I cannot tell, things must be as they may:
I dare not fight, but I will wink and hold out mine Iron:
It is a simple one, but what tho; it will serve to toste cheese,
And it will endure cold as an other man's sword will,
And there is the humor of it.

Bar. In Faith mistress quickly did thee great wrong,
For thou weart troth plight to her.

Nim. I must do as I may, tho patience be a tired mare
Yet she will plod, and some say knives have edges,
And men may sleep and have their throtes about them
At that time, and there is the humor of it.

Bar. Come in faith, I Will bestow a breakfast to make Pistol
And thee friends. What a plague should we carry knives
To cut our own throats.

Nim. In Faith I Will live as long as I may, that's the certain of it.
And when I cannot live any longer, I Will do as I may,
And there is my rest, and the randeuous of it.

Enter Pistol and Hosts Quickly, his wife. Bar. Godmorrow ancient Pistol.
Here comes ancient Pistol, I prithee Nim be quiet.

Nim. How do you my Host?

Pist. Base slave, call thou me host?
Now by gads lugges I swear, I scorn the title,
Nor shall my Nell keep lodging.

Host. No by my troath not I,
For we cannot bed nor board half a score honest ge^tlewome^
That live honestly by the prick of their needle,
But it is thought straight we keep a bawdy house.
O Lord heeres Corporal Nims, now shall
We have wilful adultry and murder committed:
Good Corporal Nim show the valor of a man,
And put up your sword.

Nim. Push.

Pist. What do thou push, thou prickeard cur of Iseland:

Nim. Will you shog off? I would have you solus.

Pist. Solus egregious dog, that solus in thy throat,
And in thy lungs, and which is worse, within
Thy mesfull mouth, I do retort that solus in thy
Bowels, and in thy Iaw, perdie: for I can talk,
And Pistolls flashing fiery cock is up.

Nim. I am not Barbasom, you cannot conjure me:
I have an humor Pistol to knock you indifferently well,
And you fall foul with me Pistol, I Will scour you with my
Rapier in fair terms. If you will walk off a little,
I Will prick your guts a little in good terms,
And there is the humor of it.

Pist. O braggard vile, and damned furious wight,
The Grave does gape, and groaning
Death is near, therefore exall.

They draw. Bar. Hear me, he that strikes the first blow,
I Will kill him, as I am a soldier.

Pist. An oath of mickle might, and fury shall abate.

Nim. I Will cut your throat at one time or an other in fair terms,
And there is the humor of it.

Pist. Couple gorge is the word, I thee defy again:
A damned hound, think thou my spouse to get?
No, to the powdering tub of infamy,
Fetch forth the lazar kite of Cresides kind,
Doll Tear-sheete, she by name, and her espowse
I have, and I will hold, the quandom quickly,
For the only she and Paco, there it is enough.

Enter the Boy. Boy. Hosts you must come straight to my master,
And you Host Pistol. Good Bardolfe
Put thy nose between the sheets, and do the office of a warming pan.

Host. By my troath heel yield the crow a pudding one of these days,
I Will go to him, husband you will come?

Bar. Come Pistol be friends.
Nim prithee be friends, and if thou will not be
Enemies with me too.

Ni. I shall have my eight shillings I won of you at beating?

Pist. Base is the slave that pays.

Nim. That now I will have, and there is the humor of it.

Pist. As manhood shall compound. They draw.

Bar. He that strikes the first blow,
I Will kill him by this sword.

Pist. Sword is an oath, and oaths must have their course.

Nim. I shall have my eight shillings I won of you at beating?

Pist. A noble shall thou have, and ready pay,
And liquor likewise will I give to thee,
And friendship shall combind and brotherhood:
I Will live by Nim as Nim shall live by me:
Is not this just? for I shall Sut^er be
Unto the Camp, and profit will occrue.

Nim. I shall have my noble?

Pist. In cash most truly paid.

Nim. Why there is the humor of it.

Enter Hosts. Hosts. As ever you came of men come in,
Sir John poor soul is so troubled
With a burning tashan contigian fever, it is wonderful.

Pist. Let us condoll the knight: for lamkins we will live.

Exeunt omnes. Enter Exeter and Gloucester. Glost. Before God my Lord, his Grace
is too bold to trust these traitors.

Exe. They shall be apprehended by and by.

Glost. I but the man that was his bedfellow
Whom he has cloyed and graced with princely favors
That he should for a foreign purse, to sell
His Sovereigns life to death and treachery.

Exe. O the Lord of Massham.

Enter the King and three Lords. King. Now sirs the winds fair, and we will
aboard;
My Lord of Cambridge, and my Lord of Massham,
And you my gentle Knight, give me you thoughts,
Do you not think the power we bear with us,
Will make us conquerors in the field of France?

Masha. No doubt my Liege, if each man do his best.

Came. Never was Monarch better feared and loved then
is your majesty.

Gray. Even those that were your fathers enemies
Have steeped their galls in honey for your sake.

King. We therefore have great cause of thankfulness,
And shall forget the office of our hands:
Sooner then reward and merit,
According to their cause and worthiness.

Masha. So service shall with steeled sinews shine,
And labor shall refresh it self with hope
To do your Grace incessant service.

King. Uncle of Exeter, enlarge the man
Committed yesterday, that rayled against our person,
We consider it was the heat of wine that set him on,
And on his more advice we pardon him.

Masha. That is mercy, but too much security:
Let him be punished Sovereign, least the example of him,
Breed more of such a kind.

King. O let us yet be merciful.

Came. So may your highness, and punish too.

Gray. You show great mercy if you give him life,
After the taste of his correction.

King. Alas your too much care and love of me
Are heavy orisons against the poor wretch,
If little faults proceeding on distemper should not be winked at,
How should we stretch our eye, when capital crimes,
Chewed, swallowed and disgested, appear before us:
Well yet enlarge the man, tho Cambridge and the rest
In their dear loves, and tender preservation of our state,
Would have him punished.
Now to our French causes.
Who are the late Commissioners?

Came. Me one my Lord, your highness bad me ask for it to day.

Mash. So did you me my Sovereign.

Gray. And me my Lord.

King. Then Richard Earl of Cambridge there is yours.
There is yours my Lord of Masham.
And sir Thomas Gray knight of Northumberland, this same is yours:
Read them, and know we know your worthiness.
Uncle Exeter I will aboard to night.
Why how now Gentlemen, why change you color?
What see you in those papers
That has so chased your blood out of appearance?

Came. I do confess my fault, and do submit me
To your highness mercy.

Mash. To which we all appeal.

King. The mercy which was quit in us but late,
By your own reasons is forestald and done:
You must not dare for shame to ask for mercy,
For your own conscience turn upon your bosoms,
As dogs upon their masters worrying them.
See you my Princes, and my noble Peers.
These English monsters:
My Lord of Cambridge here,
You know how apt we were to grace him,
In all things belonging to his honor:
And this vilde man has for a few light crowns,
Lightly conspired and sworn unto the practices of France:
To kill us here in Hampton. To the which,
This knight no less in bounty bound to us
Then Cambridge is, haah likewise sworn.
But oh what shall I say to thee false man,
Thou cruel ungrateful and inhumane creature,
Thou that did bear the key of all my counsel,
That knewst the very secrets of my heart,
That almost might a coined me into gold,
Would thou a practisde on me for thy use:
Can it be possible that out of thee
Should proceed one spark that might annoy my finger?
It Is so strange, that tho the truth does show as gross
As black from white, mine eye will scarcely see it.
Their faults are open, arrest them to the answer of the law,
And God acquit them of their practices.

Exe. I arrest thee of high treason,
By the name of Richard, Earl of Camhridge.
I arest thee of high treason,
By the name of Henry, Lord of Masham,
I arest thee of high treason,
By the name of Thomas Gray, knight of Northumberland.

Mash. Our purposes God justly has discovered,
And I repent my fault more then my death,
Which I beseech your majesty forgive,
Although my body pay the price of it.

King. God quit you in his mercy. Hear your sentence.
You have conspired against our royal person,
Joined with an enemy proclaimed and fixed.
And from his coffers received the golden earnest of our death
Touching our person we seek no redress.
But we our kingdoms safety must so tender
Whose ruin you have sought,
That to our laws we do deliver you.
Get ye therefore hence: poor miserable creatures to your death,
The taste whereof, God in his mercy give you
Patience to endure, and true repentance of all your deeds amiss:
Bear them hence.
Exit three Lords. Now Lords to France. The enterprise whereof,
Shall be to you as us, successively.
Since God cut off this dangerous treason lurking in our way
Cheerly to sea, the signs of war advance:
No King of England, if not King of France.

Exit omnes. Enter Nim, Pistol, Bardolfe, Hosts and a Boy. Host. I prethy
sweet heart, let me bring thee so far as Stanes.

Pist. No fur, no fur.

Bar. Well sir John is gone. God be with him.

Host. I, he is in Arthors bosom, if ever any were:
He went away as if it were a crysombd child,
Between twelve and one,
Just at turning of the tide:
His nose was as sharp as a pen:
For when I saw him fumble with the sheets,
And talk of flowers, and smile upon his fingers ends
I knew there was no way but one.
How now sir John quoth I?
And he cried three times, God, God, God,
Now I to comfort him, bad him not think of God,
I hope there was no such need.
Then he bad me put more clothes at his feere:
And I felt to them, and they were as cold as any stone:
And to his knees, and they were as cold as any stone.
And so upward, and upward, and all was as cold as any stone.

Nim. They say he cride out on Sack.

Host. I that he did.

Boy. And of women.

Host. No that he did not.

Boy. Yes that he did: and he sed they were devils incarnat.

Host. Indeed carnation was a color he never loved.

Nim. Well he did cry out on women.

Host. Indeed he did in some sort handle women,
But then he was rumaticke, and talked of the whore of Babylon.

Boy. Hosts do you remember he saw a Flea stand
Upon Bardolfes Nose, and sed it was a black soul
Burning in hell fire?

Bar. Well, God be with him,
That was all the wealth I got in his service.

Nim. Shall we shog off?
The king will be gone from Southampton.

Pist. Clear up thy cristalles,
Look to my chattels and my moueables.
Trust none: the word is pitch and pay:
Men's words are wafer cakes,
And holdfast is the only dog my dear.
Therefore cophetua be thy counselor,
Touch her soft lips and part.

Bar. Farewell hosts.

Nim. I cannot kis: and there is the humor of it.
But adieu.

Pist. Keep fast thy buggle boe.

Exit omnes. Enter King of France, Bourbon, Dolphin, and others. King. Now you
Lords of Orleance,
Of Bourbon, and of Berry,
You see the King of England is not slack,
For he is footed on this land already.

Dolphin. My gracious Lord, it is meet we all go forth,
And arm us against the foe:
And view the weak and sickly parts of France:
But let us do it with no show of fear,
No with no more, then if we heard
England were busied with a Moris dance.
For my good Lord, she is so idely kingd,
Her scepter so fantastically borne,
So guided by a shallow humorous youth,
That fear attends her not.

Con. O peace Prince Dolphin, you deceive your self,
Question your grace the late Ambassador,
With what regard he heard his Embassage,
How well supplied with aged Counselors,
And how his resolution andswered him,
You then would say that Harry was not wild.

King. Well think we Harry strong:
And strongly arm us to prevent the foe.

Con. My Lord here is an Ambassador
From the King of England.

Kin. Bid him come in.
You see this chase is hotly followed Lords.

Dol. My gracious father, cut up this English short,
Self love my Liege is not so vile a thing,
As self neglecting.

Enter Exeter. King. From our brother England?

Exe. From him, and thus he greets your Majesty:
He wills you in the name of God Almighty,
That you deuest your self and lay apart
That borrowed title, which by gift of heaven,
Of law of nature, and of nations, longs
To him and to his heirs, namely the crown
And all wide stretched titles that belongs
Unto the Crown of France, that you may know
It Is no sinister, nor no awkeward claim,
Picked from the worm^ holes of old vanished days,
Nor from the dust of old oblivion rackte,
He sends you these most memorable lines,
In every branch truly demonstrated:
Willing you ouerlooke this pedigree,
And when you find him euenly derived
From his most famed and famous ancestors,
Edward the third, he bids you then resign
Your crown and kingdom, indirectly held
From him, the native and true challenger.

King. If not, what follows?

Exe. Bloody co^straint, for if you hide the crown
Even in your hearts, there will he rake for it:
Therefore in fierce tempest is he coming,
In thunder, and in earthquake, like a Jove,
That if requiring fail, he will compel it:
And on your heads turns he the widows tears,
The Orphans cries, the dead men's bones,
The pining maidens groans.
For husbands, fathers, and distressed lovers,
Which shall be swallowed in this controversy.
This is his claim, his threatening, and my message*
Unless the Dolphin be in presence here,
To whom expressly we bring greeting too.

Dol. For the Dolphin? I stand here for him,
What to hear from England.

Exe. Scorn and defiance, slight regard, contempt,
And any thing that may not misbecome
The mighty sender, does he prise you at:
Thus says my king. Unless your fathers highness
Sweeten the bitter mock you sent his Majesty,
Heel call you to so loud an answer for it,
That caves and wombely vaultes of France
Shall chide your trespass, and return your mock,
In second accent of his ordenance.

Dol. Say that my father render fair reply,
It is against my will:
For I desire nothing so much,
As odds with England.
And for that cause according to his youth
I did present him with those Paris balls.

Exe. Heel make your Paris Lover shake for it,
Were it the mistress Court of mighty Europe,
And be assured, you will find a difference
As we his subjects have in wonder found:
Between his younger days and these he musters now,
Now he ways time even to the latest grain,
Which you shall find in your own losses
If he stay in France.

King. Well for us, you shall return our answer back
To our brother England.

Exit omnes. Enter Nim, Bardolfe, Pistol, Boy. Nim. Before God here is hot
service.

Pist. It Is hot indeed, blows go and come,
Gods vassals drop and die.

Nim. It Is honor, and there is the humor of it.

Boy. Would I were in London:
I Would give all my honor for a pot of Ale.

Pist. And I. If wishes would prevail,
I would not stay, but thither would I hie.

Enter Flewellen and beats them in. Flew. Gods plud up to the breaches
You rascals, will you not up to the breaches?

Nim. Abate thy rage sweet knight,
Abate thy rage.

Boy. Well I would I were once from them:
They would have me as familiar
With men's pockets, as their gloves, and their
Handkerchers, they will steal any thing.
Bardolfe Stole a Lute case, carried it three mile,
And sold it for three hapence.
Nim stole a fire shouell.
I knew by that, they meant to carry coals:
Well, if they will not leave me,
I mean to leave them.

Exit Nim, Bardolfe, Pistol, and the Boy. Enter Gower. Gower. Gaptain
Flewellen, you must come strait
To the Mine, to the Duke of Gloucester.

Fleu. Look you, tell the Duke it is not so good
To come to the mines: the concuaueties is otherwise,
You may discuss to the Duke, the enemy is digd
Himself five yardes under the countermines:
By Jesus I think heel blow up all
If there be no better direction.

Enter the King and his Lords alarm. King. How yet resolves the Governor of
the Town?
This is the latest parley we will admit:
Therefore to our best mercy give your selves,
Or like to men proud of destruction, defy us to our worst,
For as I am a soldier, a name that in my thoughts
Becomes me best, if we begin the battery once again
I will not leave the half achieved Harflew,
Till in her ashes she be buried,
The gates of mercy are all shut up.
What say you, will you yield and this avoid,
Or guilty in defense be thus destroyed?

Enter Governor. Gouer. Our expectation has this day an end:
The Dolphin whom of succor we entreated,
Returns us word, his powers are not yet ready,
To raise so great a siege: therefore dread King,
We yield our town and lives to thy soft mercy:
Enter our gates, dispose of us and ours,
For we no longer are defensive now.

Enter Katherine, Allice. Kate. Allice venecia, vous aues cates en,
Vou part fort bon Angloys englatara,
Coman sae palla vou la main en francoy.

Allice. La main madam de han.

Kate. E da bras.

Allice. De arma madam.

Kate. Le main da han la bras de arma.

Allice. Owy e madam.

Kate. E Coman sa pella vow la menton a la coll.

Allice. De neck, e de cin, madam.

Kate. E de neck, e de cin, e de code.

Allice. De cudie ma foy Ie oblye, mais Ie remember,
Le tude, o de elbo madam.

Kate. Ecowte Ie rehersera, towt cella que Iac apoandre,
De han, de arma, de neck, du cin, e de bilbo.

Allice. De elbo madam.

Kate. O Jesus, Iea obloye ma foy, ecoute Ie recontera
De han, de arma, de neck, de cin, e de elbo, e ca bon.

Allice. Ma foy madam, vow parla au se bon Angloys
Asie vous aues ettue en Englatara.

Kate. Par la grace de deu an petty tanes, Ie parle milleur
Coman se pella vou le peid e le robe.

Allice. Le foot, e le con.

Kate. Le fot, e le con, o Jesus! Ie ne view poinct parle,
Sie plus deuant le che cheualires de franca,
Pur one million ma foy.

Allice, Madam, de foot, ele con.

Kate. O et ill ausie, ecowte Allice, de han, de arma,
De neck, de cin, le foot, e de con.

Allice. Cet fort bon madam.

Kate. A loves a diner.

Exit omnes. Enter King of France Lord Constable, the Dolphin, and Burbon.
King. It Is certain he is past the River Some.

Con. Mordeu ma via: Shall a few spranes of us,
The emptying of our fathers luxerie,
Outgrow their grafters.

Bur. Normanes, basterd Normanes, mor du
And if they pass vnfoughtwithall,
I Will sell my Dukedom for a foggy farm
In that short nooke I Will of England.

Constable. Why whence have they this metal?
Is not their clymate raw, foggy and cold.
On whom as in disdain, the Sun looks pale?
Can barley broth, a drench for swollen Iades
Their sodden water decockt such lively blood?
And shall our quick blood spirited with wine
Seem frosty? O for honor of our names,
Let us not hang like frozen Iicesickles
Upon our houses tops, while they a more frosty clymate
Sweat drops of youthful blood.

King. Constable dispatch, send Montioy forth,
To know what willing ransom he will give?
Son Dolphin you shall stay in Rone with me.

Dol. Not so I do beseech your Majesty.

King. Well, I say it shall be so.

Exeunt omnes. Enter Gower. Go. How now Captain Flewellen, come you from the
bridge?

Flew. By Jesus there is excellent service committed at ye bridge.

Gour. Is the Duke of Exeter safe?

Flew. The duke of Exeter is a man whom I love, and I honor,
And I worship, with my soul, and my heart, and my life,
And my lands and my livings,
And my uttermost powers.
The Duke is look you,
God be praised and pleased for it, no harm in the worell.
He is maintain the bridge very gallently: there is an Ensign
There, I do not know how you call him, but by Jesus I think
He is as valient a man as Mark Anthony, he does maintain
the bridge most gallantly: yet he is a man of no reckoning:
But I did see him do gallant service.

Gouer. How do you call him?

Flew. His name is ancient Pistol.

Gouer. I know him not.

Enter Ancient Pistol. Flew. Do you not know him, here comes the man.

Pist. Captain, I thee beseech to do me favor,
The Duke of Exeter does love thee well.

Flew. I, and I praise God I have merrited some love at his hands.

Pist. Bardolfe a soldier, one of buxsome valor,
Has by furious fate
And giddy Fortunes fickle wheel,
That Gods blind that stands upon the rolling restless stone.

Flew. By your patience ancient Pistol,
Fortune, look you is painted,
Plind with a mufler before her eyes,
To signify to you, that Fortune is plind:
And she is moreover painted with a wheel,
Which is the moral that Fortune is turning,
And inconstant, and variation; and mutabilities:
And her fate is fixed at a sphericall stone
Which roules, and roules, and roules:
Surely the Poet is make an exelle^t description of Fortune.
Fortune look you is and excellent moral.

Pist. Fortune is Bardolfes foe, and frowns on him,
For he has stolen a packs, and hanged must he be:
A damned death, let gallows gape for dogs,
Let man go free, and let not death his windpipe stop.
But Exeter has given the doom of death,
For packs of petty price:
Therefore go speak the Duke will hear thy voice,
And let not Bardolfes vital thread be cut,
With edge of penny cord* and vile approach.
Speak Captain for his life, and I will thee requite.

Flew. Captain Pistol, I partly understand your meaning.

Pist. Why then rejoice therefore.

Flew. Certainly Ancient Pistol, it is not a thing to rejoice at,
For if he were my own brother, I would wish the Duke
To do his pleasure, and put him to executions: for look you,
Disciplines ought to be kept, they ought to be kept.

Pist. Die and be damned, and fig a for thy friendship.

Flew. That is good.

Pist. The fig of Spain within thy Iawe.

Flew. That is very well.

Pist. I say the fig within thy bowels and thy durty maw.

Exit Pistol. Fle. Captain Gour, cannot you hear it lighten and thunder?

Gour. Why is this the Ancient you told me of?
I remember him now, he is a bawd, a cutpurse.

Flew. By Jesus heeis utter as praue words upon the bridge
As you shall desire to see in a summers day, but its all one,
What he has sed to me, look you, is all one.

Go. Why thi^ is a gul, a fool, a rogue that goes to the wars
Only to grace himself at his return to London:
And such feliowes as he,
Are perfect in great Commanders names.
They will learn by rote where services were done,
At such and such a scence, at such a breach,
At such a conuoy: who came off bravely, who was shot,
Who disgraced, what terms the enemy stood on.
And this they con perfectly in phrase of war,
Which they trick up with new tuned oaths, and what a berd
Of the Generals cut, and a horid shout of the camp
Will do among the foming bottles and ale washed wits
Is wonderful to be thought on: but you must learn
To know such slanders of this age,
Or else you may maruellously be mistook.

Flew. Certain captain Gower, it is not the man, look you,
That I did take him to be: but when time shall serve,
I shall tell him a little of my desires: here comes his Majesty.

Fnter King, Clarence, Gloucester and others. King. How now Flewellen, come you
from the bridge?

Flew. I and it shall please your Majesty,
There is excellent service at the bridge.

King. What men have you lost Flewellen?

Flew. And it shall please your Majesty,
The partition of the adversary has been great,
Very reasonably great: but for our own parts, like you now,
I think we have lost never a man, unless it be one
For robbing of a church, one Bardolfe, if your Majesty
Know the man, his face is full of whelkes and knubs,
And pumples, and his breath blows at his nose
Like a cole, sometimes red, sometimes plew:
But god be praised, now his nose is executed, and his fire out.

King. We would have all offenders so cut off,
And we here give express commaundment,
That there be nothing taken from the villages but paid for,
None of the French abused,
Or abraided with disdainful language:
For when cruelty and lenity play for a Kingdom,
The gentlest gamester is the sooner winner.

Enter French Herald. Hera. You know me by my habit.

Ki. Well the^, we know thee, what should we know of thee?

Hera. My masters mind.

King. Unfold it.

Heral. Go thee unto Harry of England, and tell him,
Advantage is a better soldier then rashness:
Although we did seem dead, we did but slumber.
Now we speak upon our kue, and our voice is imperial,
England shall repent her folly: see her rashness,
And admire our sufferance. Which to ransom,
His pettinesse would bow under:
For the effusion of our blood, his army is too weak:
For the disgrace we have borne, himself
Kneeling at our feet, a weak and worthless satisfaction.
To this, add defyance. So much from the king my master.

King. What is thy name? we know they quality.

Herald. Montioy.

King. Thou do thy office fair, return thee back,
And tell thy King, I do not seek him now:
But could be well content, without impeach,
To march on to Callis: for to say the sooth,
Though it is no wisdom to confess so much
Unto an enemy of craft and vantage.
My soldiers are with sickness much infeebled,
My Army lessoned, and those few I have,
Almost no better then so many French:
Who when they were in heart, I tell thee Herald,
I thought upon one pair of English legs,
Did march three French men's.
Yet forgive me God, that I do brag thus:
This your heir of France has blown this vice in me.
I must repent, go tell thy master here I am,
My ransom is this frail and worthless body,
My Army but a weak and sickly guarde.
Yet God before, we will come on,
If France and such an other neighbor stood in our way:
If we may pass, we will: if we be hindered,
We shall your tawny ground with your red blood discolor.
So Montioy get you gone, there is for your pains:
The sum of all our answer is but this,
We would not seek a battle as we are:
Nor as we are, we say we will not shun it.

Herald. I shall deliver so: thanks to your Majesty.

Glos. My Liege, I hope they will not come upon us now.

King. We are in Gods hand brother, not in theirs:
To night we will encampe beyond the bridge,
And on to morrow bid them march away.

Enter Burbon, Constable, Orleance, Gebon. Constable. Tut I have the best armor in
the world.

Orleance. You have an excellent armor,
But let my horse have his due.

Burbon. Now you talk of a horse, I have a steed like the
Palfrey of the sun, nothing but pure air and fire,
And has none of this dull element of earth within him.

Orleance. He is of the color of the Nutmeg.

Bur. And of the heat, a the Ginger.
Turn all the sands into eloquent tongues,
And my horse is argument for them all:
I once writ a Sonnet in the praise of my horse,
And began thus. Wonder of nature.

Con. I have heard a Sonnet begin so,
In the praise of ones Mistress.

Burb. Why then did they immitate that
Which I writ in praise of my horse,
For my horse is my mistress.

Con. Ma foy the other day, me thought
Your mistress shook you shrewdly.

Bur. I bearing me. I tell thee Lord Constable,
My mistress wears her own hair.

Con. I could make as good a boast of that,
If I had had a sow to my mistress.

Bur. Tut thou will make use of any thing.

Con. Yet I do not use my horse for my mistress.

Bur. Will it never be morning?
He ride too morrow a nule,
And my way shall be paued with English faces.

Con. By my faith so will not I,
For fear I be outfaced of my way.

Bur. Well i will go arm my self, hay.

Gebon. The Duke of Burbon longs for morning

Or. I he longs to eat the English.

Con. I think heel eat all he killes.

Orle. O peace, ill will never said well.

Con. I Will cap that proverb,
With there is flattery in friendship.

Or. O sir, I can answer that,
With give the devil his due.

Con. Have at the eye of that proverb,
With a Iogge of the devil.

Or. Well the Duke of Burbon, is simply,
The most active Gentleman of France.

Con. Doing his actiuitie, and heel still be doing.

Or. He never did hurt as I heard off.

Con. No I warrant you, nor never will.

Or. I hold him to be exceeding valiant.

Con. I was told so by one that knows him better the^ you.

Or. Whose that?

Con. Why he told me so himself:
And said he cared not who knew it.

Or. Well who will go with me to hazard,
For a hundred English prisoners?

Con. You must go to hazard your self,
Before you have them.

Enter a Messenger. Mess. My Lords, the English lie within a hundred
Paces of your Tent.

Con. Who has measured the ground?

Mess. The Lord Granpeere.

Con. A valiant man, a. an expert Gentleman.
Come, come away:
The Sun is hie, and we wear out the day. Exit omnes.

Enter the King disguised to him Pistol. Pist. Ke ve la?

King. A friend.

Pist. Discus unto me, art thou Gentleman*
Or art thou common, base, and popeler?

King. No sir, I am a Gentleman of a Company.

Pist. Trailes thou the puissant pike?

King. Even so sir. What are you?

Pist. As good a gentleman as the Emperor.

King. O then thou art better then the King?

Pist. The kings abago, and a heart of gold.

Pist. A lad of life, an impe of fame:
Of parents good, of fist most valiant:
I kis his durtie shoe: and from my heart strings
I love the lovely bully. What is thy name?

King. Harry le Roy.

Pist. Le Roy, a Cornish man:
Art thou of Cornish crew?

Kin. No sir, I am a Wealchman.

Pist. A Wealchman: know thou Flewellen?

Kin. I sir, he is my kinsman.

Pist. Art thou his friend?

Kin. I sir.

Pist. Figa for thee then: my name is Pistol.

Kin. It sorts well with your fierceness.

Pist. Pistol is my name.

Exit Pistol. Enter Gower and Flewellen. Gour. Captain Flewellen.

Flew. In the name of Jesus speak lewer.
It is the greatest folly in the worell, when the ancient
Prerogatives of the wars be not kept.
I warrant you, if you look into the wars of the Romans,
You shall find no tittle tattle, nor bible babble there:
But you shall find the cares, and the fears,
And the ceremonies, to be otherwise.

Gour. Why the enemy is loud: you heard him all night.

Flew. Gods sollud, if the enemy be an Ass and a Fool,
And a prating cocks-come, is it meet that we be also a fool,
And a prating cocks-come, in your conscience now?

Gour. I Will speak lower.

Flew. I beseech you do, good Captain Gower.

Exit Gower, and Flewellen. Kin. Tho it appear a little out of fashion,
Yet there is much care in this.

Enter three Soldiers. 1. Soul. Is not that the morning yonder?

2. Soul. I we see the beginning,
God knows whether we shall see the end or no.

3. Soul. Well I think the king could wish himself
Up to the neck in the middle of the Thames,
And so I would he were, at all adventures, and I with him.

Kin. Now masters god morrow, what cheer?

3. S. I faith small cheer some of us is like to have,
Ere this day end.

Kin. Why fear nothing man, the king is frolike.

2. S. I he may be, for he has no such cause as we

Kin. Nay say not so, he is a man as we are.
The Violet smells to him as to us:
Therefore if he see reasons, he fears as we do.

2. Sol. But the king has a heavy reckoning to make,
If his cause be not good: when all those souls
Whose bodies shall be slaughtered here,
Shall join together at the latter day,
And say I dyed at such a place. Some swearing:
Some their wives rawly left:
Some leaving their children poor behind them.
Now if his cause be bad, I think it will be a grievous matter to him.

King. Why so you may say, if a man send his servant
As Factor into another Country,
And he by any means miscarry,
You may say the business of the master,
Was the author of his servants misfortune.
Or if a son be imployd by his father,
And he fall into any leaud action, you may say the father
Was the author of his sons damnation.
But the master is not to answer for his servants,
The father for his son, nor the king for his subjects:
For they purpose not their deaths, when they crave their services:
Some there are that have the gift of premeditated
Murder on them:
Others the broken seal of Forgery, in beguiling maidens.
Now if these outstrip the law,
Yet they cannot escape Gods punishment.
War is Gods Beadel. War is Gods vengeance:
Every man's service is the kings:
But every man's soul is his own.
Therefore I would have every soldier examine himself,
And wash every moath out of his conscience:
That in so doing, he may be the readier for death:
Or not dying, why the time was well spent,
Wherein such preparation was made.

3 Lord. In Faith he says true:
Every man's fault on his own head,
I would not have the king answer for me.
Yet I intend to fight lustily for him.

King. Well, I heard the king, he would not be ransomde.

2. L. I he said so, to make v^ fight:
But when our throats be cut, he may be ransomde,
And we never the wiser,

King. If I live to see that, I Will never trust his word again.

2. Sol. Mas you will pay him then, it is a great displeasure
That an elder gun, can do against a cannon,
Or a subject against a monarke.
You Will nere take his word again, your a nasse go.

King. Your reproof is somewhat too bitter:
Were it not at this time I could be angry.

2. Sol. Why let it be a quartell if thou will.

King. How shall I know thee?

2. Sol. Here is my glove, which if ever I see in thy hat,
I Will challenge thee, and strike thee.

Kin. Here is likewise another of mine,
And assure thee i will wear it.

2. Sol. Thou dare as well be hanged.

3. Sol. Be friends you fools,
We have French quarrels anow in hand:
We have no need of English broils.

Kin. It Is no treason to cut French crowns,
For to morrow the king himself will be a clipper.

Exit the soldiers. Enter the King, Gloucester, Epingam, and Attendants. K. O God
of battles steel my soldiers hearts,
Take from them now the sense of rekconing,
That the apposed multitudes which stand before them,
May not appall their courage.
O not to day, not to day o God,
Think on the fault my father made,
In compassing the crown.
I Richards body have interred new,
And on it has bestowd more contrite tears,
Then from it issued forced drops of blood:
A hundred men have I in yearly pay,
Which every day their withered hands hold up
To heaven to pardon blood,
And I have built two chanceries, more will I do:
Tho all that I can do, is all too little.

Enter Gloucester. Glost. My Lord.

King. My brother Glosters voice.

Glost. My Lord, the Army stays upon your presence.

King. Stay Gloucester stay, and I will go with thee,
The day my friends, and all things stays for me.

Enter Clarence, Gloucester, Exeter, and Salisburie. War. My Lords the French are
very strong.

Exe. There is five to one, and yet they all are fresh,

War. Of fighting men they have full forty thousand.

Sal. The odds is all too great. Farewell kind Lords:
Brave Clarence, and my Lord of Gloucester,
My Lord of Warwick, and to all farewell.

Clar. Farewell kind Lord, fight valiantly to day,
And yet in truth, I do thee wrong*
For thou art made on the true sparks of honor.

Enter King. War. O would we had but ten thousand men
Now at this instant, that does not work in England.

King. Whose that, that wishes so, my Cosen Warwick?
Gods will, I would not loose the honor
One man would share from me,
Not for my Kingdom.
No faith my Cosen, wish not one man more,
Rather proclaim it presently through our camp,
That he that has no stomach to this feast,
Let him depart, his pasport shall be (...),
And crowns for conuoy put into his purse,
We would not die in that man's company,
That fears his fellowship to die with us.
This day is called the day of Cryspin,
He that outliues this day, and sees old age,
Shall stand a tiptoe when this day is named,
And rowse him at the name of Cryspin.
He that outliues this day, and comes safe home,
Shall yearly on the vygill feast his friends,
And say, to morrow is S. Cryspines day:
Then shall we in their flowing bowls
Be newly remembered. Harry the King,
Bedford and Exeter, Clarence and Gloucester,
Warwick and York.
Familiar in their mouths as household words.
This story shall the good man tell his son,
And from this day, unto the general doom:
But we in it shall be remembered.
We few, we happy few, we bond of brothers,
For he to day that sheads his blood by mine,
Shall Be my brother: be he nere so base,
This day shall gentle his condition.
Then shall he strip his sleeves, and show his skars,
And say, these wounds I had on Crispines day:
And Gentlemen in England now a bed,
Shall think themselves accursed,
And hold their manhood cheap,
While any speak that fought with us
Upon Saint Crispines day.

Glost. My gracious Lord,
The French is in the field.

Kin. Why all things are ready, if our minds be so.

War. Perish the man whose mind is backward now.

King. Thou do not wish more help from England cosen?

War. Gods will my Liege, would you and I alone,
Without more help, might fight this battle out.
Why well said. That does please me better,
Then to wish me one. You know your charge,
God be with you all.

Enter the Herald from the French. Herald. Once more I come to know of thee
king Henry,
What thou will give for ransom?

Kin. Who has sent thee now?

Her. The Constable of France.

Kin. I prethy bear my former answer back:
Bid them atchieue me, and then sell my bones.
Good God, why should they mock good fellows thus?
The man that once did sell the Lions skin,
While the beast lived, was killed with hunting him.
A many of our bodies shall no doubt
Find graves within your realm of France:
Tho buried in your dunghils, we shall be famed,
For there the Sun shall greet them,
And draw up their honors reaking up to heaven,
Leaving their earthly parts to choke your clyme:
The smell whereof, shall breed a plague in France:
Mark then abundant valor in our English,
That being dead, like to the bullets crasing,
Breaks forth into a second course of mischief,
Killing in relaps of mortality:
Let me speak proudly,
There Is not a piece of feather in our camp,
Good argument I hope we shall not fly:
And time has worn us into slouendry.
But by the mas, our hearts are in the trim,
And my poor soldiers tell me, yet ere night
Thayle be in fresher robes, or they will pluck
The gay new clothes ore your French soldiers ears,
And turn them out of service. If they do this,
As if it please God they shall,
Then shall our ransom soon be levied.
Save thou thy labor Herald:
Come thou no more for ransom, gentle Herald.
They shall have naught I swear, but these my bones:
Which if they have, as I will leave am them,
Will yield them little, tell the Constable.

Her. I shall deliver so.

Exit Herald. York. My gracious Lord, upon my knee I crave,
The leading of the vaward.

Kin. Take it brave York. Come soldiers lets away:
And as thou please God, dispose the day.

Exit. Enter the four French Lords. Ge. O diabello.

Constable. Mor du ma vie.

Or. O what a day is this!

Bur. O lour dei houte all is gone, all is lost.

Con. We are enough yet living in the field,
To smother up the English,
If any order might be thought upon.

Bur. A plague of order, once more to the field,
And he that will not follow Burbon now,
Let him go home, and with his cap in hand,
Like a bace leno hold the chamber door,
Why least by a slave no gentler then my dog,
His fairest daughter is contamuracke.

Con. Disorder that has spoyld us, right us now,
Come we in heaps, we will offer up our lives
Unto these English, or else die with fame.
Come, come along,
Lets dye with honor, our shame does last too long.

Exit omnes. Enter Pistol, the French man, and the Boy. Pist. Eyld cur, eyld
cur.

French. O Monsire, ie vous en pree aues petie de moy.

Pist. Moy shall not serve. I will have forty moys.
Boy ask him his name.

Boy. Comant ettes vous apelles?

French. Monsier Fer.

Boy. He says his name is Master Fer.

Pist. I Will Fer him, and ferit him, and ferke him:
Boy discus the same in French.

Boy. Sir I do not know, what is French
Forfer, ferit and fearkt.

Pist. Bid him prepare, for I will cut his throat.

Boy. Feate, vou preat, ill voulles coupele votre gage.

Pist. Onye ma foy couple la gorge.
Unless thou give to me egregious ransom, dye.
One point of a fox.

French. Qui dit ill monsiere.
Ill ditye si vou ny vouly pa domy luy.

Boy. La gran ransom, ill vou tueres.

French. O lee vous en pri petrit gentelhome, parle
A cee, gran capataine, pour auez mercy
A moy, ey Iee donerees pour mon ransom
Cinquante ocios, Ie suyes vngentelhome de France.

Pist. What says he boy?

Boy. Marry sir he says, he is a Gentleman of a great
House, or France: and for his ransom,
He will give you 500. crowns.

Pist. My fury shall abate,
And I the Crowns will take.
And as I suck blood, I will some mercy show.
Follow me cur.

Exit omnes. Enter the King and his Nobles, Pistol. King. What the French
retire?
Yet all is not done, yet keep the French the field.

Exe. The Duke of York commends him to your Grace.

King. Lives he good Uncle, twice I saw him down,
Twice up again:
From helmet to the spur, all bleeding ore.

Exe. In which array, brave soldier does he lie,
Larding the plains, and by his bloody side,
Yoke fellow to his honor dying wounds,
The noble Earl of Suffolk also lies.
Suffolk first did, and York all hasted ore,
Comes to him where in blood he lay steept,
And takes him by the beard, kisses the gashes
That bloodily did yane upon his face,
And cryde aloud, tarry dear cousin Suffolk:
My soul shall thine keep company in heaven:
Tarry dear soul awhile, then fly to rest:
And in this glorious and well foughten field,
We kept together in our chiualdry.
Upon these words I came and cheerd them up,
He took me by the hand, said dear my Lord*
Commend my service to my sovereign.
So did he turn, and over Suffolkes neck
He threw his wounded arm, and so espoused to death,
With blood he sealed. An argument
Of never ending love. The pretty and sweet manner of it,
Forced those waters from me, which I would have slopt,
But I not so much of man in me,
But all my mother came into my eyes,
And gave me up to tears.

Kin. I blame you not: for hearing you,
I must convert to tears.
Alarm soundes. What new alarm i^ this?
Bid every soldier kill his prisoner.

Pist. Couple gorge. Exit omnes.

Enter Flewellen, and Captain Gower. Flew. Gods plud kill the boys and the
lugyge,
It Is the arrants piece of knavery as can be desired,
In the worell now, in your conscience now.

Gour. It Is certain, there is not a Boy left alive,
And the cowerdly rascals that ran from the battle,
Themselves have done this slaughter:
Beside, they have carried away and burnt,
All that was in the kings Tent:
Whereupon the king caused every prisoners
Throat to be cut. O he is a worthy king.

Flew. I he was born at Monmorth.
Captain Gower, what call you the place where
Alexander the big was borne?

Gour. Alexander the great.

Flew. Why I pray, is not big great?
As if I say, big or great, or magnanimous,
I hope it is all one reconing,
Save the frase is a little varation.

Gour. I think Alexander the great
Was borne at Macedon.
His father was called Philip of Macedon,
As I take it.

Flew. I think it was Macedon indeed where Alexander
Was borne: look you captain Gower,
And if you look into the mappes of the worell well,
You shall find little difference between
Macedon and Monmorth. Look you, there is
A River in Macedon, and there is also a River
In Monmorth, the Rivers name at Monmorth,
Is called Wye.
But it is out of my brain, what is the name of the other:
But it is all one, it is so like, as my fingers is to my fingers,
And there is Samons in both.
Look you captain Gower, and you mark it,
You shall find our King is come after Alexander.
God knows, and you know, that Alexander in his
Bowls, and his alles, and his wrath, and his displeasures.
And indignations, was kill his friend Clitus.

Gower. I but our King is not like him in that,
For he never killd any of his friends.

Flew. Look you, it is not well done to take the tale out
Of a man's mouth, ere it is made an end and finished:
I speak in the comparisons, as Alexander is kill
His friend Clitus: so our King being in his ripe
Wits and judgments, is turn away, the fat knite
With the great belly double: I am forget his name.

Gower. Sir John Falstaff.

Flew. I, I think it is Sir John Falstaff indeed,
I can tell you, there is good men borne at Monmorth.

Enter King and the Lords. King. I was not angry since I came into France,
Until this hour.
Take a trumpet Herald,
And ride unto the horsemen on yon hill:
If they will fight with us bid them come down,
Or leave the field, they do offend our sight:
Will they do neither, we will come to them,
And make them skyr away, as fast
As stones enforst from the old Assirian slings.
Besides, we will cut the throats of those we have,
And not one alive shall taste our mercy.
Enter the Herald. Gods will what means this? know thou not
That we have fined these bones of ours for ransom?

Herald. I come great king for charitable favor,
To sort our Nobles from our common men,
We may have leave to bury all our dead,
Which in the field lie spoiled and trodden on.

Kin. I tell thee truly Herald, I do not know whether
The day be ours or no:
For yet a many of your French do keep the field.

Hera. The day is yours.

Kin. Praised be God therefore.
What Castle call you that?

Hera. We call it Agincourt.

Kin. Then call we this the field of Agincourt.
Fought on the day of Cryspin, Cryspin.

Flew. Your grandfather of famous memory,
If your grace be remembered,
Is do good service in France.

Kin. It Is true Flewellen.

Flew. Your Majesty says very true.
And it please your Majesty,
The Wealchmen there was do good service,
In a garden where Leekes did grow.
And I think your Majesty will take no scorn,
To wear a Leake in your cap upon S. Dauies day.

Kin. No Flewellen, for I am wealch as well as you.

Flew. All the water in Wye will not wash your wealch
Blood out of you, God keep it, and preserve it,
To his graces will and pleasure.

Kin. Thanks good countryman.

Flew. By Jesus I am your Majesty's countryman:
I care not who know it, so long as your majesty is an honest man.

K. God keep me so. Our Herald go with him,
And bring us the number of the scattred French.
Exit Heralds. Call yonder soldier hither.

Flew. You fellow come to the king.

Kin. Fellow why do thou wear that glove in thy hat?

Soul. And please your majesty, it is a rascals that swagard
With me the other day: and he has one of mine,
Which if ever I see, I have sworn to strike him.
So has he sworn the like to me.

K. How think you Flewellen, is it lawful he keep his oath?

Fl. And it please your majesty, it is lawful he keep his vow.
If he be perjured once, he is as arrant a beggarly knave,
As treads upon too black shues.

Kin. His enemy may be a gentleman of worth.

Flew. And if he be as good a gentleman as Lucifer
And Beelzebub, and the devil himself,
It Is meet he keep his vow.

Kin. Well sirrah keep your word.
Under what Captain seruest thou?

Soul. Under Captain Gower.

Flew. Captain Gower is a good Captain:
And has good littrature in the wars.

Kin. Go call him hither.

Soul. I will my Lord.

Exit soldier. Kin. Captain Flewellen, when Alonson and I was
Down together, I took this glove off from his helmet,
Here Flewellen, wear it. If any do challenge it,
He is a friend of Alonsons,
And an enemy to me.

Fle. Your majesty does me as great a favor
As can be desired in the hearts of his subjects.
I would see that man now that should challenge this glove:
And it please God of his grace. I would but see him,
That is all.

Kin. Flewellen know thou Captain Gower?

Fle. Captain Gower is my friend.
And if it like your majesty, I know him very well.

Kin. Go call him hither.

Flew. I will and it shall please your majesty.

Kin. Follow Flewellen closely at the heels,
The glove he wears, it was the soldiers:
It may be there will be harm between them,
For I do know Flewellen valiant,
And being touched, as hot as gunpowder:
And quickly will return an injury.
Go see there be no harm between them.

Enter Gower. Flewellen, and the Soldier. Flew. Captain Gower, in the name of
Jesus,
Come to his Majesty, there is more good toward you,
Then you can dream off.

Soul. Do you hear you sir? do you know this glove?

Flew. I know the the glove is a glove.

Soul. Sir I know this, and thus I challenge it.

He strikes him. Flew. Good plut, and his. Captain Gower stand away:
I Will give treason his due presently.

Enter the King, Warwick, Clarence, and Exeter. Kin. How now, what is the
matter?

Flew. And it shall please your Majesty,
Here is the notablest piece of treason come to light,
As you shall desire to see in a summers day.
Here is a rascal, beggarly rascal, is strike the glove,
Which your Majesty took out of the helmet of Alonson:
And your Majesty will bear me witness, and testimony,
And auouchments, that this is the glove.

Soul. And it please your Majesty, that was my glove.
He that I gave it too in the night,
Promised me to wear it in his hat:
I promised to strike him if he did.
I met that Gentleman, with my glove in his hat,
And I think I have been as good as my word.

Flew. Your Majesty hears, under your Majesty's
Manhood, what a beggarly lousy knave it is.

Kin. Let me see thy glove. Look you,
This is the fellow of it.
It was I indeed you promised to strike.
And thou thou have given me most bitter words.
How can thou make us amends?

Flew. Let his neck answer it,
If there be any marshals law in the worell.

Soul. My Liege, all offenses come from the heart:
Never came any from mine to offend your Majesty.
You appeard to me as a common man:
Witness the night, your garments, your lowliness,
And whatsoever you received under that habit,
I beseech your Majesty impute it to your own fault
And not mine. For your self came not like your self:
Had you been as you seemed, I had made no offense.
Therefore I beseech your grace to pardon me.

Kin. Uncle, fill the glove with crowns,
And give it to the soldier. Wear it fellow,
As an honor in thy cap, till I do challenge it.
Give him the crowns. Come Captain Flewellen,
I must needs have you friends.

Flew. By Jesus, the fellow has metal enough
In his belly Hark you soldier, there is a shilling for you,
And keep your self out of brawles and brables, and dissentio^s,
And look you, it shall be the better for you.

Soul. I Will none of your money sir, not I.

Flew. Why it is a good shilling man.
Why should you be queamish? Your shoes are not so good:
It will serve you to mend your shoes.

Kin. What men of sort are taken uncle?

Exe. Charles Duke of Orleance, Nephew to the King,
John Duke of Burbon, and Lord Bowchquall.
Of other Lords and Barrons, Knights and Squiers,
Full fifteen hundred, besides common men.
This note does tell me often thousand
French, that in the field lies slain.
Of Nobles bearing banners in the field,
Charles de le Brute, hie Constable of France.
Jacques of Chattillian, Admiral of France.
The Master of the crosbows, John Duke Alo^son.
Lord Ranbieres, hie Master of France.
The brave sir Gwigzard, Dolphin. Of Nobelle Charillas,
Gran Pry, and Rosse, Fawconbridge and Foy.
Gerard and Verton. Vandemant and Lestra.
Here was a royal fellowship of death
Where is the number of our English dead?
Edward the Duke of York, the Earl of Suffolk*
Sir Richard Ketly, Dauy Gam Esquier:
And of all other, but five and twenty.
O God thy arm was here,
And unto thee alone, ascribe we praise.
When without strategem,
And in even shock of battle, was ever heard
So great, and little loss, on one part and an other.
Take it God, for it is only thine.

Exe. It Is wonderful.

King. Come let us go on procession through the camp:
Let it be death proclaimed to any man,
To boast hereof, or take the praise from God,
Which is his due.

Flew. Is it lawful, and it please your Majesty,
To tell how many is killed?

King. Yes Flewellen, but with this acknowledgement,
That God fought for us.

Flew. Yes in my conscience, he did us great good.

King. Let there be sung, Nououes and te Deum.
The dead with charity enterred in clay:
We Will then to Calice, and to England then,
Where nere from France, arriude more happier men.

Exit omnes. Enter Gower, and Flewellen. Gower. But why do you wear your Leeke
to day?
Saint Dauies day is past?

Flew. There is occasion Captain Gower,
Look you why, and wherefore,
The other day look you, Pistolles
Which you know is a man of no merits
In the worell, is come where I was the other day,
And brings, bread and sault, and bids me
Eat my Leeke: it was in a place, look you,
Where I could move no discentions:
But if I can see him, I shall tell him,
A little of my desires.

Gow. Here a comes, swelling like a Turkecocke.

Enter Pistol. Flew. It Is no matter for his swelling, and his turkecocks,
God please you Ancient Pistol, you scall,
Beggarly, lousy knave, God please you.

Pist. Ha, art thou bedlem?
Do thou thurst base Troyan,
To have me fold up Parcas fatal web*
Hence, I am qualmish at the smell of Leeke.

Flew. Ancient Pistol. I would desire you because
It does not agree with your stomach, and your appetite,
And your digestions, to eat this Leeke.

Pist. Not for Cadwalleder and all his goats.

Flew. There is one goat for you Ancient Pistol.

He strikes him. Pist. Bace Troyan, thou shall dye.

Flew. I, I know I shall dye, mean time, I would
Desire you to live and eat this Leeke.

Gower. Enough Captain, you have astonished him.

Flew. Astonished him, by Jesus, I Will beat his head
Four days, and four nights, but I Will
Make him eat some part of my Leeke.

Pist. Well must I byte?

Flew. I out of question or doubt, or ambiguities
You must byte.

Pist. Good good.

Flew. I Leekes are good, Ancient Pistol.
There is a shilling for you to heal your bloody coxkome.

Pist. Me a shilling.

Flew. If you will not take it,
I have an other Leeke for you.

Pist. I take thy shilling in earnest of reconing.

Flew. If I owe you any thing, i will pay you in cudgels,
You shall be a woodmonger,
And by cudgels, God bwy you,
Ancient Pistol, God bless you,
And heal your broken pate.
Ancient Pistol, if you see Leekes an other time.
Mock at them, that is all: God bwy you.

Exit Flewellen. Pist. All hell shall stir for this.
Does Fortune play the huswye with me now?
Is honor cudgeld from my warlike lines?
Well France farewell, news have I certainly
That Doll is sick. One mally die of France,
The wars affords naught, home will I trug.
Bawd will I turn, and use the slyte of hand:
To England will I steal,
And there I Will steal.
And patches will I get unto these skarres,
And swear I gat them in the Gallia wars.

Exit Pistol. Enter at one door, the King of England and his Lords. And at
the other door, the King of France, Queen Katherine, the Duke of Burbon, and
others. Harry. Peace to this meeting, wherefore we are met.
And to our brother France, Fair time of day.
Fair health unto our lovely cosen Katherine.
And as a branch, and member of this stock:
We do salute you Duke of Burgondie.

Fran. Brother of England, right joyous are we to behold
Your face, so are we Princes English every one.

Duk. With pardon unto both your mightines.
Let it not displease you, if I demand
What rub or bar has thus far hindered you,
To keep you from the gentle speech of peace?

Har. If Duke of Burgondy, you would have peace,
You must buy that peace,
According as we have drawn our articles.

Fran. We have but with a cursenary eye,
Oreviewd them: pleases your Grace,
To let some of your Counsel sit with us,
We shall return our peremptory answer.

Har. Go Lords, and sit with them,
And bring us answer back.
Yet leave our cosen Katherine here behind.

France. Withal our hearts.

Exit King and the Lords. Manet, Hrry, Katherine, and the Gentlewoman. Hate.
Now Kate, you have a blunt wooer here
Left with you.
If I could win thee at leapfrog,
Or with vawting with my armor on my back,
Into my saddle,
Without brag be it spoken,
I Would make compare with any.
But leaving that Kate,
If thou take me now,
Thou shall have me at the worst:
And in wearing, thou shall have me better and better,
Thou shall have a face that is not worth sun-burning.
But do thou think, that thou and I,
Between Saint Denis,
And Saint George, shall get a boy,
That shall go to Constantinople,
And take the great Turk by the beard, ha Kate?

Kate. Is it possible dat me sall
Love de enemy de France.

Harry. No Kate, it is impossible
You should love the enemy of France:
For Kate, I love France so well,
That I Will not leave a Village,
I Will have it all mine: then Kate,
When France is mine,
And I am yours,
Then France is yours,
And you are mine.

Kate. I cannot tell what is dat.

Harry. No Kate,
Why I Will tell it you in French,
Which will hang upon my tongue, like a bride
On her new married Husband.
Let me see, Saint Dennis be my speed.
Quan France et mon.

Kate. Dat is, when France is yours.

Harry. Et vous ettes amoy.

Kate. And I am to you.

Harry. Douck France ettes a vous:

Kate. Den France sall be mine.

Harry. Et Ie suyues a vous.

Kate. And you will be to me.

Har. Wilt believe me Kate? it is easier for me
To conquer the kingdom, the^ to speak so much
More French.

Kate. A your Majesty has false France enough
To deceive de best Lady in France.

Harry. No faith Kate not I. But Kate,
In plain terms, do you love me?

Kate. I cannot tell.

Harry. No, can any of your neighbors tell?
I Will ask them.
Come Kate, I know you love me.
And soon when you are in your closset,
You Will question this Lady of me.
But I pray thee sweet Kate, use me mercifully,
Because I love thee cruelly.
That I shall dye Kate, is sure:
But for thy love, by the Lord never.
What Wench,
A straight back will grow crooked.
A round eye will grow hollow.
A great leg will wax small,
A curld pate prove balde:
But a good heart Kate, is the sun and the moon,
And rather the Sun and not the Moon:
And therefore Kate take me,
Take a soldier: take a soldier,
Take a King.
Therefore tell me Kate, will thou have me?

Kate. Dat is as please the King my father.

Harry. Nay it will please him:
Nay it shall please him Kate.
And upon that condition Kate I Will kiss you.

Ka. O mon du Ie ne voudroy fair quelke chosse
Pour toute le monde,
Ce ne point votree fachion en fouor.

Harry. What says she Lady?

Lady. Dat it is not de fasion en France,
For de maids, before da be married to
May foy ie oblye, what is to bassie?

Har. To kis, to kis. O that it is not the
Fashion in Frannce, for the maids to kis
Before they are married.

Lady. Owye see votree grace.

Har. Well, we will break that custom.
Therefore Kate patience perforce and yield.
Before God Kate, you have witchcraft
In your kisses:
And may persuade with me more,
Then all the French Council.
Your father is returned.
Enter the King of France, and the Lords. How now my Lords?

France. Brother of England,
We have orered the Articles,
And have agreed to all that we in sedule had.

Exe. Only he has not subscribed this,
Wh're your majesty demands,
That the king of France having any occasion
To write for matter of graun^,
Shall name your highness, in this form:
And with this addition in French.
Nostre tresher filz, Henry Roy D'anglaterre,
E hear de France. And thus in Latin:
Preclarissimus filius noster Henricus Rex Anglie,
Et here is Francie.

Fran Nor this have we so nicely stood upon,
But you fair brother may entreat the same.

Har. Why then let this among the rest,
Have his full course: And withal,
Your daughter Katherine in marriage,

Fran. This and what else,
Your majesty shall crave.
God that disposes all, give you much joy.

Har. Why then fair Katherine,
Come give me thy hand:
Our marriage will we present solemnise,
And end our hatred by a bond of love.
Then will I swear to Kate, and Kate to me:
And may our vows once made, unbroken be.

FINIS.

