THE MERRY WIVES OF WINDSOR.

With the humors of Sir John Falstaff* As also the swaggering vain of
Ancient Pistol, and Corporal Nym.

Written by William Shake-Speare.

Newly corrected.



LONDON: Printed by T. H. for R. Meighen, and are to be sold at his Shop, next
to the Middle Temple Gate, and in S. Dunstans Churchyard in Fleet Street, 1630.

THE MERRY WIVES OF VVINSOR.
Actus primus,
Scena prima.
Enter Justice Shallow, Slender, Sir Hugh Euans, Master Page, Falstoffe,
Bardolph, Nym, Pistol, Anne Page, Mistress Ford, Mistress Page, Simple.
Shallow. SIr Hugh, persuade me not: I will make a Star Chamber matter of it,
if he were twenty Sir John Falstoffe, he shall not abuse Robert Shadow Esquire.


Slen. In the County of Gloucester, Justice of Peace and Coram.


Shall. I (Cosen Slender) and Cust* alorum.


Slen. I, and Rotulorum too; and a Gentleman borne (Master Parson) who writes
himself Armigero, in any Bill, Warrant, Quittance, or Obligation, Armigero.


Shall. I that I do, and have done any time these three hundred years.


Slen. All his successors (gone before him) has don't: and all his Ancestors
(that come after him) may: they may give the dozen white Luces in their Coat.


Shall. It is an old Coat.


Euans. The dozen white Lowses do become an old Coat well: it agrees well
passant: It is a familiar beast to man, and signifies Love.


Shall. The Luse is the fresh-fish, the salt-fish is an old Coat.


Slen. I may quarter (Coz).


Shall. You may, by marrying.


Euans. It is marring indeed, if he quarter it.


Shall. Not a whit.


Euan. Yes per-lady: if he has a quarter of your coat, there is but three
Shirts for your self, in my simple conjectures; but that is all one: if Sir
John Falstaff have committed disparagements unto you* I am of the Church and
will be glad to do my benevolence, to make attonements and compremises
between you.


Shall. The Council shall hear it, it is a Riot.


Euan. It is not meet the Council hear a Riot: there is no fear of Got in a
Riot: The Council (look you) shall desire to hear the fear of Got, and not
to hear a Riot: take your viza-ments in that.


Shall. Ha; of my life, if I were young again, the sword should end it.


Euans. It is petter that friends is the sword, and end it: and there is also
another device in my praine, which peradventure prings goot discretions with
it. There is Anne Page, which is daughter to Master Thomas Page, which is
pretty virginity.


Slen. Mistress Anne. Page? she has brown hair, and speaks small like a
woman.


Euans. It is that ferry person for all the world, as just as you will desire,
and seven hundred pounds of Moneies, and Gold, and Silver, is her Grand* sire
upon his deaths-bed (Got deliver to a joyful resurrections) give, when she is
able to overtake seventeen years old. It were a goot motion, if we leave our
pribbles and prabbles, and desire a marriage between Master* Abraham, and
Mistress Anne Page.


Slen. Did her Grand, sire leave her seven hundred pound*


Euan. I, and her father is make her a petter penny.


Slen. I know the young Gentlewoman, she has good gifts.


Euan. Seven hundred pounds, and possibilities, is goot gifts.


Shall. Well, let us see honest Master Page is Falstaff there*


Euan. Shall I tell you a lie? I do despise a liar, as I do despise one that
is false, or as I despise one that is not true: the Knight Sir John is there,
and I beseech you be ruled by your well-willers: I will peat the door for
Master Page. What hoa? Got-plesse your house here.


Master Page. Who Is there?


Even. Here is go 't's plesting and your friend, and Justice Shallow, and here
young Master Slender: that peraduentures shall tell you another tale, if
matters grow to your likings.


Master Page. I am glad to see your Worships well: I thank you for my Venison
Master Shallow.


Shall. Master Page, I am glad to see you: much good do it your good heart: I
wished your Venison better, it was ill killed: how does good Mistress Page?
and I thank you always with my heart, la* with my heart.


M. Page. Sir, I thank you.


Shall. Sir, I thank you: by yea, and no I do.


M. Pa. I am glad to see you, good Master Slender.


Slen. How does your fallow Greyhound, Sir, I heard say he was out* run on
Cotsall.


M. Pa. It could not be judged, Sir,


Slen. You Will not confess: you will not confess.


Shall. That he will not, it is your fault: it is your fault: it is a good dog.


M. Pa. A Cur, Sir.


Shall. Sir: he is a good dog, and a fair dog, can there be more said? he is
good and fair. Is Sir John Falstaff heerr?


M. Pa. Sir, he is within: and I would I could do a good office between you.


Euan. It is spoke as a Christians ought to speak.


Shall. He has wronged me Master Page.)


M. Pa. Sir, he does in some sort confess it.


Shall. If it be confessed, it is not redressed; is not that so (M. Page?) he
has wronged me, indeed he has, at a word he has: belecue me, Robert Shallow
Esquire, says he is wronged.


Ma. Pa. Here comes Sir John.


Fall. Now, Master Shallow, you will complain of me to the King?


Shall. Knight, you have beaten my men, killed my dear, and broke open my Lodge.


Fall. But not kissed your Keepers daughter?


Shall. Tut, a pin: this shall be answered.


Fall. I will answer it strait, I have done all this:
That is now answered.

Shall. The Council shall know this.


Fall. 'T were better for you if it were known in Council: you will be laughed at.


Eu. Pauca verba; (Sir John) good worts.


Fall. Good worts? good Cabidge; Slender, I broke your head: what matter have
you against me?


Slen. Marry sir, I have matter in my head against you, and against your
cony-catching Rascals, Bardolf, Nym, and Pistol.


Bar. You Banbery Cheese.


Slen. I, it is no matter.


Pist. How now, Mephostophilus?


Slen. I, it is no matter.


Nym. Slice, I say; pauca, pauca: Slice, that is my humor:


Slen. Where Is Simple my man? can you tell, Cosen?


Eua. Peace, I pray you* now let us understand: there is three Vmpires in this
matter, as I understand; that is, Master Page (fidelicet Master Page,) and
there is my self, (fidelicet my self) and the three party is (lastly, and
finally) mine Host of the Garter.


Ma. Pa. We three to hear it, and end it between them:


Euan. Ferry goo't, I will make a priefe of it in my notebooke, and we will
afterward orke upon the cause, with as great discreetly as we can.


Fall. Pistol.


Pist. He hears with ears.


Euan. The Teuill and his Tam: what phrase is this? he hears with ear? why,
it is affectations.


Fall. Pistol, did you pick M. Slenders purse?


Slen. I, by these gloves did he, or I would I might never come in mine own
great chamber again else, of seven groates in mill-sixpences, and two Edward
Shouelboords, that cost me two shilling and two pence a piece of Yead Miller:
by these gloves.


Fall. Is this true, Pistol?


Fuan. No, it is false, if it is a picke-purse.


Pist. Ha, thou mountain Forreyner: Sir John, and Master mine, I combat
challenge of this Latin Bilboe: word of denial in thy labras here; word of
denial; froth, and scum thou lie.


Slen* By these gloves, then 'twas he.


Nym. Be auis'd sir, and pass good humors: I will say marry trap with you, if
you run the nut-hooks humor on me, that is the very note of it.


Slen. By this hat, then he in the red face had it: for though I cannot
remember what I did when you made me drunk, yet I am not altogether an ass.


Fall. What say you Scarlet, and John?


Bar. Why sit, (for my part) I say the Gentleman had drunk himself out of his
five sentences.


Eu. It is his fi^e senses: fie, what the ignorance is.


Bar. And being fap, sir, was (as they say) casheerd: and so conclusions past
the Car-eires.


Slen. I, you spoke in Latten then to: but it is no matter; I Will nere be drunk
whilst I live again, but in honest, civil, godly company for this trick: if
I be drunk, I Will be drunk with those that have the fear of God, and not with
drunken knaves.


Euan. So got udge me, that is a virtuous mind.


Fall. You hear all these matters denied, Gentlemen; you hear it.


Ma. Page. Nay daughter, carry the wine in, we will drink within.


Slen. Oh heaven: This is Mistress Anne Page:


Master Page. How now Mistress Ford?


Fall. Mistress Ford, by my troth you are very well met: by your leave good
Mistress.


Master Page. Wife bid these gentlemen welcome: come, we have a hot Venison
pasty to dinner; Come gentlemen, I hope we shall drink down all unkindness.


Slen. I had rather then forty shillings I had my book of Songs and Sonnets
here: How now Simple, where have you been? I must wait on my self, must I?
you have not the book of Riddles about you, have you?


Sim. Book of Riddles? why did you not lend it to Alice Short-cake upon
Alhallowmas last, a fortnight before Michaelmas.


Shall. Come Coz, come Coz, we stay for you: a word with you Coz: marry this
there is as 'twere a tender, a kind of tender, made a faire-off by Sir Hugh
here: do you understand me?


Slen. I Sir, you shall find me reasonable, if it be so, I shall do that that
it reason.


Shall. Nay, but understand me*


Slen. So I do Sir.


Euan. Give care to his motions; (Master Slender) I will description the matter
to you, if you be capacity of it.


Slen. Nay, I will do as my Cozen Shallow says: I pray you pardon me, he is a
Justice of Peace in his Country, simple though I stand here.


Euan. But that is not the question: the question is concerning your marriage.


Shall. I, there is the point Sir.


Eu. Marry is it* the very point of it, to Mist. Anne* Page.


Slen. Why if it be so* I will marry hervpon any reasonable demands.


Eu. But can you affection the'o man, let us command to know that of your
mouth, or of your lips: for diners Philosophers hold, that the lips is parcel
of the mouth* therefore precisely, can you carry your good will to the maid?


Shall. Cosen Abraham Slender, can you love her?


Slen. I hope sir, I will do as it shall become one that would do reason.


Euan: Nay, got's Lords, and his Ladies, you must speak possitable, if you can
carry-her your desires toward her.


Shall. That you must.

Will you, (upon good dowry) marry her?


Slen. I will do a greater thing then that, upon your request (Cosen) in any
reason.


Shall. Nay conceive me, conceive me, (sweet Coz): what I do is to pleasure
you (Coz) can you love the maid?


Slen. I will marry her (Sir) at your request; but if there be no great love in
the beginning, yet Heaven may decrease it upon better acquaintance, when we
are married, and have more occasion to know one another; I hope upon
familiarity will grow more content; but if you say mary-her, I will mary-her,
that I am freely dissolved, and dissolutely.


Euan. It is a fery discretion-answere; save the fall is in the'ord,
dissolutely; the ort is (according to our meaning) resolutely: his meaning is
good.


Sh* I, I think my Cosen meant well.


Slen. I or else I would I might be hanged (la*)


Sh. Here comes fair Mistress Anne; would I were young for your sake, Mistress
Anne.


An. The dinner is on the Table, my Father desires your worships company.


Sh. I will wait on him, (fair Mistress Anee.


Euan. Od's plessed-will; I will not be absence at the grace


An. Will It please your worship to come in, Sir?


Sl. No, I thank you forsooth, heartily; I am very well.


An. The dinner attends you Sir.


Sl. I am not a hungry, I thank you, forsooth; go Sirrah, for all you are my
man, go wait upon my Cosen Shallow; a Justice of peace sometime may be
beholding to his friend, for a Man; I keep but three Men and a Boy yet, till
my Mother be dead; but what though, yet I live like a a poor Gentleman borne.


An. I may not go in without your worship; they will not sit till you come.


Slen. I*faith, i will eat nothing, I thank you as much as though I did.


Anne. I pray you Sir walk in.


Slen. I had rather walk here (I thank you) I bruiz'd my shin the other day,
with playing at Sword and Dagger with a Master of Fence (three veneys for a
dish of slew'd Prunes) and by my troth, I cannot abide the smell of hot meat
since. Why do your dogs bark so? be there Bears in the Town?


An. I think there are, Sir, I heard them talked of.


Slen. I love the sport well, but I shall as soon quarrel at it, as any man
in England, you are afraid if you see the Bear loose, are you not?


An. I indeed Sir.


Slen. That Is meat and drink to me now; I have seen Sackerson loose, twenty
times, and have taken him by the Chain, but (I warrant you) the women have so
cride and shrekt at it, that it past. But women indeed, cannot abide'em, they
are very ill-fauour'd rough things.


Ma. Pa. Come, gentle M. Slender, come; we stay for you.


Slen. I Will eat nothing, I thank you Sir.


Ma. Pa. By cock and pie, you shall not choose, Sir: come, come.


Slen. Nay, pray you lead the way.


Ma. Pa. Come on Sir.


Slen. Mistress Anne: your self shall go first.


An. Not I Sir, pray you keep on.


Slen. Truly I will not go first, truely-la* I will not do you that wrong.


An. I pray you Sir.


Slen. I Will rather be unmannerly, then troublesome, you do your self wrong
indeede-la.

Exeunt.
Scena Secunda.
Enter Euans, and Simple. Euan. Go your ways, and ask of Doctor Caius house,
which is the way; and there dwells one Mistress Quickly; which is in the manner
of his Nurse; or his dry-Nurse; or his Cook; or his Laundry; his Washer, and
his Ringer.


Si. Well Sir.


Euan. Nay, it is petter yet; give her this letter; for*t is a'oman that
altogeathers acquaintance with Mistress Anne Page; and the Letter is to desire,
and require her to solicit your Masters desires, to Mistress Anne Page. I pray
you be gone: I will make an end of my dinner; there is Pippins and Cheese to come.

Exeunt*
Scena Tertia.
Enter Falstaeffe, Host, Bardolfe, Nym, Pistol, Page. Fall. Mine Host of the
Garter?


Ho. What says my Bully Rooke? speak schollerly, and wisely.


Fall. Truly mine Host; I must turn away some of my followers.


Ho. Discard, (bully Hercules) casheere; let them wag; trot, trot.


Fall. I sit at ten pounds a week.


Ho. You Are an Emperor ( Caesar, Keiser and Pheazar) I will entertain
Bardolfe; he shall draw; he shall tap; said I well (bully Hector?)


Fa. Do so (good mine Host.)


Ho. I have spoke, let him follow, let me see thee froth, and live: I am at a
word: follow.


Fall. Bardolfe, follow him; a Tapster is a good trade, an old Cloak, makes a
new Ierkin, a withered Seruingman, a fresh Tapster; go, adieu.


Ba. It is a life that I have desired, I will thrive.


Pist. O base hungarian wight, will thou the spigot wield:


Ni. He was gotten in drink, is not the humor conceited


Fall. I am glad I am so acquit of this Tinderbox, his Thefts were too open, his
filching was like an unskillful Singer, he kept not time.


Nim. The good humor is to steal at a minuntes rest.


Pist. Convey: the wise it call: Steal? foh: a fico for the phrase.


Fall. Well sirs, I am almost out at heels.


Pist. Why then let Kibes ensue.


Fall. There is no remedy: I must conicatch, I must shift,


Pist. Young Ravens must have food.


Fall. Which of you know Ford of this Town?


Pist. I ken the wight; he is of substance good.


Fall. My honest Lads, I will tell you what I am about.


Pist, Two yards, and more.


Fall. No quips now Pistol; (Indeed I am in the wast two yards about; but I am
now about no waste: I am about thrift) briefly; I do mean to make love to
Fords wife; I spy entertainment in her, she discourses, she craves, she
gives the leere of inuitation; I can construe the action of her familier style,
and the hardest voice of her behauior (to be englished rightly) is I am Sir
John Falstafs.


Pist. He has studied her will; and translated her will out of honesty, into
English.


Ni. The Anchor is deep; will that humor pass?


Fall. Now, the report goes, she has all the rule of her husbands Purse; he has
a legend of Angels.


Pist. As many devils entertain; and to her Boy say I.


Ni The humor rises it is good; humor me the angels.


Fall. I have writ me here a letter to her; and here another to Pages wife, who
even now gave me good eyes too; examind my parts with most judicious illiads;
sometimes the beam of her view, gilded my foot, sometimes my portly belly.


Pist. Then did the Sun on dunghill shine.


Ni. I thank thee for that humor.


Fall. O she did so course over my exteriors with such a greedy intention, that
the appetite of her eye, did seem to scorch me up like a burning-glasse;
here is another letter to her; She bears the Purie too; She is a Region in
Guiana; all gold, and bounty; I will be Cheaters to them both, and they shall
be Exchequers to me; they shall be my East and West Indies, and I will trade
to them both; Go, bear thou this Letter to Mistress Page; and thou this to
Mistress Ford; we will thrive (Lads) we will thrive.


Pist. Shall I Sir Pandarus of Troy become,
And by my side wear Steel? then Lucifer take all.

Ni. I will run no base humor; here take the humor-Letter;
I will keep the hauior of reputation.

Fall. Hold Sirrah, bear you these Letters rightly,
Sail like my Pinnasse to these golden shores.
Rogues, hence, auaunt, vanish like haile-stones; go,
Trudge; plod away in the hoose: seek shelter, pack,
Falstaff will learn the honor of the age,
French thrift, you Rogues, my self, and skirted Page.

Pist. Let Vultures gripe thy guts, for gourd, and Fullam
holds, and high and low beguiles the rich and poor,
Tester i will have in pouch when thou shall lack,
Base Phrygian Turk.

Ni. I have opperations.
Which be humors of revenge.

Pist. Will thou revenge?


Ni. By Welkin, and her Star.


Pist. With wit, or Steel?


Ni. With both the humors, I;
I will discuss the humor of this Love to Ford.

Pist. And I to Page shall eke unfold
How Falstaff (varlet vile)
His Dove will prove; his gold will hold,
And his soft couch defile.

Ni. My humor shall not cool; I will incense Ford, to deal with poison; I
will possess him with yallownesse, for the revolt of mine is dangerous; that
is my true humor.


Pist. Thou art the Mars of Malcontents; I second thee; troop on.


Exeunt. Scoena Quarta:
Enter Mistress Quickly, Simple, John Rugby, Doctor Caius, Fenton. Qu. What,
John Rugby, I pray thee go to the Casement, and see if you can see my Master,
Master Doctor Caius coming; if he do (In Faith) and find any body in the
house; here will be an old abusing of Gods patience, and the Kings English.


Ru. I Will go watch.


Qu. Go, and we'll have a posset for it soon at night, (in faith) at the
latter end of a Sea-cole-fire: An honest, willing, kind fellow, as ever
servant shall come in house withal: and I warrant you, no tel-tale, nor no
breedebate: his worst fault is, that he is given to prayer; he is something
peevish that way: but no body but has his fault: but let that pass. Peter
Simple, you say your name is?


Si. I, for fault of a better.


Qu. And Master Slender's your Master?


Si. I forsooth.


Qui. Does he not wear a great round Beard, like a Glouers paring-knife?


Si. No forsooth, he has but a little wee-face; with a little yellow Beard, a
Caine colored Beard.


Qu. A softtly-sprighted man, is he not?


Si. I forsooth, but he is as tall a man of his hands, as any is between this
and his head; he has fought with a Warrener.


Qu. How say you; oh, I should remember him, does he not hold up his head (as
it were?) and strut in his gate?


Si. Yes indeed does he.


Qui. Well, heaven send Anne Page, no worse fortune, Tell Master Parson, Euans,
I will do what I can for your Master; Anne is a good girl, and I wish --


Ru. Out alas, here comes my Master.


Qu. We shall all be shent; Run in here, good young man, go into this
Closset: he will not stay long? what John Rugby? John; what John I say? go
John, go enquire for my Master, I doubt he be not well, that he comes not
home, ( and down, down, downe'a, etc.


Ca. Vat is you sing? I do not like des-toyes, pray you go and vetch me in my
Closst, vnboyteene verd; a Box, a greene-a-Box; do intend vat I speak?
greene-a-Box.


Qu. I forsooth i will fetch it you: I am glad he went not in himself: if he
had found the young man he would have been horne-mad.


Ca. Fe, fe, fe, fe, may foy, il fait for chando, le man voi a le Court la
grand affairs.


Qu. Is it this Sir?


Ca. Ouy met le au mon pocket, de-peech quickly:
Vere is dat knave Rugby?

Qu. What John Rugby, John?


Ru. Here Sir.


Ca. You are John Rugby, and you are Jack Rugby; Come, take your Rapier, and
come after my heel to the Court.


Ru. It Is ready Sir, here in the Porch.


Ca. By my trot, I tarry too long, od's-me: que ay ie oublie dear is some
Simples in my Closset, dat I will not for the varld I shall leave behind.


Qu. Ay-me, he will find the young man there, and be mad*


Ca. O Diable, Diable; vat is in my Closset?
Villain, La-roone; Rugby, my Rapier.

Qu, Good Master be content.


Ca. Wherefore shall I be content-a?


Qu. The young man is an honest man.


Ca. What shall de honest man do in my Closset, here is no honest man dat shall
come in my Closset.


Qu. I beseech you be not so flegmaticke; hear the truth of it. He came of an
errand to me, from Parson Hugh.


Ca. Vell.


Si. I forsooth: to desire her to --


Qu. Peace, I pray you.


Ca. Peace-a-your tongue: speake-a-your Tale.


Si. To desire this honest Gentlewoman (your Maid) to speak a good word to
Mistress Anne Page, for my Master in the way of Marriage.


Qu. This is all indeed-la: but i will nere put my finger in the fire, and need
not.


Ca. Sir Hugh send-a you? Rugby, ballow me some paper: tarry you a littell-a
while.


Qu. I am glad he is so quiet: if he had bin thoroughly moved, you should have
heard him so loud, and so melancholy; but notwithstanding man, I Will do yoe
your Master what good I can; and the very yea, and the no is that French Doctor
my Master, (I may call him my Master, look you, for I keep his house; and I
wash, ring, brew, bake, scowre, dress meat and drink, make the beds, and do
all my self.)


Simp. It Is a great charge to come under one bodies hand.


Qui. Are you a uis'd of that? you shall find it a great charge: and to be up
early, and down late; but notwithstanding, (to tell you in your ear, I would
have no words of it) my Master himself is in love with Mistress Anne Page; but
notwithstanding that I know Ans mind, that is neither here nor there.


Caius. You, Jack 'Nape; glue-'a this Letter to Sir Hugh, by gar it is a
shallenge: I will cut his troat in de Park, and I will teach a scuruy
Iack-a-nape Priest to meddle, or make: -- you may be gone: it is not good you
tarry here; by gar I will cut all his two stones; by gar, he shall not have a
stone to throw at his dog.


Qui. Alas, he speaks but for his friend.


Caius. It is no matter'a v^r dat; do not you tell-a-me dat I shall have Anne
Page for my self? by gar, I will kill de Jack Priest; and I have appointed
mine Host of de Iarteer to measure our weapon, by gar, I will my self have
Anne Page.


Qui. Sir, the maid loves you, and all shall be well; We must give folks
leave to pr^te; what the good ier.


Caius. Rugby, come to the Court with me: by gar, if I have not Anne Page, I
shall turn your head out of my door: follow my heels, Rugby.


Qui. You shall have An-fooles head of your own; No, I know Ans mind for that;
never a woman in Windsor knows more of Ans mind then I do, nor can do more
then I do with her, I thank heaven.


Fenton. Who Is with in there, hoa?


Qui. Who Is there, I troa? Come near the house I pray you.


Fen. How now (good woman) how do thou?


Qui. The better that it pleases your good Worship to ask?


Fen. What news? how does pretty Mistress Anne?


Qui. In truth Sir, and she is pretty, and honest, and gentle, and one that is
your friend, I can tell you that by the way, I praise heaven for it.


Fen. Shall I do any good think thou? shall I not loose my suit?


Qui. Troth Sir, all is in his hands above; but notwithstanding (Master Fenton)
I Will be sworn on a book she loves you; have not your Worship a wart above
your eye?


Fen. Yes marry have I, what of that?


Qui. Well, thereby hangs a tale; good faith, it is such another Nan; (but (I
detest) an honest maid as ever broke bread: we had an hours talk of that
wart; I shall never laugh but in that maids company, but (indeed) she is given
too much to Allicholy and musing; but for you -- well -- go too --.


Fen. Well, I shall see her to day; hold, there is money for thee. Let me have
thy voice in my behalf; if thou see her before me, commend me. --


Qui. Willi^? I faith that we will; And I will tell your Worship more of the
Wart, the next time we have confidence, and of other wooers.


Fen. Well, farewell, I am in great haste now.


Qui. Farewell to your Worship; truly an honest Gentleman: but Anne loves him
not, for I know Ans mind as well as another does, out upon it, what have I
forgot.

Exit.
Actus Secundus.
Scoena Prima.
Enter Mistress Page, Mistress Ford, Master Page, Master Ford, Pistol, Nim,
Quickly, Host, Shallow. Mi. Page. What, have I escaped Loue-letters in the
hollyday-time of my beauty, and am I now a subject for them? let me see.

Ask me no reason why I love you, for though Love use Reason for his
precisian, he admits him not for his Counsailour: you are not young, no more
am I: go to then, there is simpathie: you are merry* so am I: ha, ha, then
there is more simpathie: you love sack, and so do I: would yout desire better
simpathie? Let it suffice thee (Mistress Page) at the least if the Love of
Soldier can suffice, that I love thee: I will not say pity me, it is not a
Souldier-like phrase; but I say* love me:

By me, thine own true Knight, by day or night:
Or any kind of light, with all his might,
For thee to fight, John Falstaff.
What a Herod of Jury is this? O wicked, wicked world.
One that is well-nye worn to pieces with age
To show himself a young Gallant? What an vnwaied
Behavior has this Flemish drunkard picked (with The Devils name) out of my
conversation, that he dares In this manner assay me? why, he has not been
thrice In my Company, what should I say to him? I was then Frugall of my mirth:
(heaven forgive me,) why i will Exhibit a Bill in the Parliament for the putting
down of men, how shall I be revenged on him? for revenged I will be? as sure
as his guts are made of puddings.


Mis. Ford. Mistress Page, trust me, I was going to your house.


Mis. Page. And trust me, I was going to you: you look very ill.


Mis. Ford. Nay, i will nere believe that; I have to show to the contrary.


Mis. Page 'Faith but you do in my mind.


Mis. Fords Well: I do then; yet I say, I could show you to the contrary; O
Mistress Page, give me some counsel.


Mis. Page. What Is the matter, woman?


Mis. Ford. O woman; if it were not for one trifling respect, I could come to
such honor.


Mis* Page. Hang the trifle (woman) take the honor; what is it? dispense with
trifles; what is it?


Mis. Ford. If I would but go to hell, for an eternal moment, or so; I could
be knighted.


Mis. Page. What thou lie? Sir Alice Ford? these Knights will hacke, and so
thou should not alter the article of thy Gentry.


Mis* Ford. We burn daylight; here, read, read; perceive how I might be
knighted, I shall think the worse of fat men, as long as I have an eye to make
difference of men's liking; and yet he would not swear: praise women's modesty;
and gave such orderly and welbehaued reproof to all uncomeliness, that I
would have sworn his disposition would have gone to the truth of his words: but
they do no more adhere and keep place together, then the hundred Psalms to
the tune of Greenesleeues: What tempest (I troa) threw this Whale, (with so
many Tuns of oil in his belly) a'shoare at Windsor? How shall I be revenged on
him? I think the best way were, to entertain him with hope, till the wicked
fire of lust have melted him in his own grease. Did you ever hear the like?


Mis. Page. Letter for letter; but that the name of Page and Ford differs; to
thy great comfort in this mystery of ill opinions, here is the twyn-brother of
thy Letter; but let thine inherit first, for I protest mine never shall: I
warrant he has a thousand of these Letters, writ with blancke space for
different names (sure more) and these are of the second edition; he will print
them out of doubt, for he cares not what he puts into the press, when he would
put us two; I had rather be a Giantesse and lie under Mount ^elion. Well; I
will find you twenty lascioious Turtles ere one chaste man.


Mis. Ford. Why this is the very same; the very hand, the very words, what does
he think of us?


Mis. Page. Nay I know not; it makes me almost ready to wrangle with mine own
honesty; I Will entertain my self like one that I am not acquainted withal, for
sure unless he know some strain in me, that I know not my self, he would
never have boorded me in this fury.


Mis. Ford. Boording, call you it? I Will be sure to keep him above deck.


Mis. Page. So will I, if he come under my hatches, I Will never to Sea again.
Let Us be revenged on him; let us appoint him a meeting, give him a show of
comfort in his Suite, and lead him on with a fine baited delay, till he has
pawned his horses to mine Host of the Garter.


Mis. Ford. Nay, I will consent to act any villainy against him, that may not
sully the chariness of our honesty; oh that my husband saw this Letter; it
would give eternal food to his jealousy.


Mis. Page. Why look where he comes; and my good man too; he is as far from
jealousy, as I am from giving him cause, and that (I hope) is an unmeasurable
distance:


Mis. Ford. You are the happier woman.


Mis. Page. Let Us consult together against this greasy Knight; Come hither.


Ford. Well, I hope, it be not so.


Pist. Hope is a curtall-dog in some affairs;
Sir John affects thy wife.

Ford. Why sir, my wife is not young.


Pist. He wooes both high and low, both rich and poor, both young and old, one
with another ( Ford) he loves the Gally-mawfry ( Ford) perpend.


Ford. Love my wife?


Pistol. With liver, burning hot: prevent:
Ot go thou like Sir Acteon he, with
Ring-wood at thy heels: O, odious is the name.

Ford. What name Sir?


Pist. The horn I say* Farewell.
Take heed, have open eye, for thieves do foot by night.
Take heed, ere summer comes, or Cuckoo* birds do sing.
Away sir Corporal Nim.
Believe it ( Page) he speaks sense.

Ford. I will be patient; I will find out this.


Nim. And this is true; I like not the humor of lying, he have wronged me in
some humors; I should have borne the humored Letter to her, but I have a
sword, and it shall bite upon my necessity, he loves your wife; There Is the
sh^^t and the long: My name is Corporal Nim, I speak, and I avouch; it is true:
my name is Nim, and Falstoffe loves your wife, adieu, I love not the humor of
bread and cheese: adieu.


Page. The humor of it (quoth'a*) here is a fellow frights English out of his
wits.


Ford. I will seek out Falstaff.


Page. I never heard such a drawling-affecting rogue*


Ford. If I do find it: well*


Page. I will not believe such a Catai^^, though the Priest o'th'Towne
commended him for a true man.


Ford. 'Twas a good sensible fellow, well.


Page. How now Meg?


Mis. Page. Whither go you ( George?) hark you.


Mis. Ford. How now (sweet Frank) why art thou me* lancholy?


Ford. I melancholy? I am not melancholy:
Get you home, go.

Mis. Ford. Faith, thou have some crochets in thy head, Now, will you go,
Mistress Page?


Mis. Page. Have with you, you will come to dinner George* Look who comes
yonder; she shall be our Messenger to this paltrie Knight:


Mis. Ford. Trust me, I thought on her; she will fit it:


M. Page. You are come to see my daughter Anne?


Qui, I forsooth: and I pray how does good Mistress Anne?


Mis. Page. Go in with us and see, we have an hours talk with you.


Page. How now Master Ford?


Ford. You heard what this knave told me, did you not?


Page. Yes, and you heard what the other told me?


Ford. Do you think there is truth in them?


Page. Hang *em slaves: I do not think the Knight would offer it: But these
that accuse him in his intent toward our wives, are a yoke of his discarded
men, very rogues, now they be out of service*


Ford. Were they his men?


Page. Marry were they.


Ford. I like it never the better for that,
Does he lie at the Garter?

Page. I marry does he: if he should intend this voyage toward my wife, I
would turn her loose to him, and what he gets more of her, then sharp words,
let it lie on my head.


Ford. I do not misdoubt my wife, but I would be Ioath to turn them together,
a man may be too confident, I would have nothing lie on my head, I cannot be
thus satisfied.


Page. Look where my ranting-Host of the Garter comes: there is either liquor
in his pate, or money in his purse, when he looks so merrily: How now mine
Host?


Host. How now Bully-Rooke, you are a Gentleman, Caueleiro Justice, I say.


Shall. I follow, (mine Host) I follow, Good-euen, and twenty (good Master Page)
Master Page, will you go with us? we have sport in hand.


Host. Tell him Caueleiro-Iustice: tell him Bully-Rooke.


Shall. Sir, there is a fray to be fought, between Sir Huge the Welsh Priest,
and Caius the French Doctor.


Ford. Good mine Host o'th'Garter, a word with you.


Host. What say thou, my Bully-Rooke?


Shall. Will you go with us to behold it? My merry Host has had the measuring
of their weapons, and (I think) appointed them contrary places: for (believe
me) I hear the Parson is no Iester* hark, I will tell you what our sport
shall be.


Host. Have thou no suit against my Knight? my guest-Caualeire?


Ford. None, I protest, but i will give you a pottle of burned sack, to give me
recourse to him, and tell him my name is Broom, only for a jest.


Host. My hand, (Bully,) thou shall have egresse and regresse, (said I well*)
and thy name shall be Broom. It is a merry Knight, will you go An-heires?


Shall. Have with you mine Host.


Page. I have heard the Frenchman has good skill in his Rapier.


Shall. Tut Sir, I could have told you more. In these times you stand on
distance, your Passes, Stoccado's, and I know not what: it is the heart (Master
Page,) it is here, it is here, I have seen the time, with my long-sword, I
would have made you four tall fellows skippe like Rattes.


Host. Here boys, here, here, shall we wag?


Page. Have with you, I had rather hear them scold, then fight.


Ford. Though Page be a secure fool, and stands so firmly on his wives
frailty: yet, I cannot put-off my opinion so easily, she was in his company at
Pages house, and what they made there, I know not. Well, I will look further
into it, and I have a disguise, to sound Falstaff, if I find her honest, I
loose not my labor, if she be otherwise, it is labor well bestowed.

Exeunt.
Scoena Secunda.
Enter Falstaff, Pistol, Robin, Quickly, Bardolffe, Ford. Fall. I will not
lend thee a penny.


Pist. Why then the world's mine Oyster, which I, with sword will open.


Fall. Not a penny, I have been content (Sir,) you should lay my countenance to
pawn; I have granted upon my good friends for three Repreeues for, and your
Coach* fellow Nim, or else you had looked through the grate, like a Geminy of
Baboones: I am damned in hell, for swearing to Gentlemen my friends, you were
good Soldiers, and tall-fellowes. And when Mistress Briget lost the handle of
her Fan, I took't upon mine honor thou had it not.


Pist. Did not thou share? had thou not fifteen pence?


Fall. Reason, you rogue, reason; think thou I Will endanger my soul, gratis?
at a word, hang no more about me, I am no gibbet for you: go, a short knife,
and a throng, to your Manor of Pickt-hatch; go, you will not bear a Letter for
me you rogue? you stand upon your honor: why, (thou vnconfinable baseness)
it is as much as I can do to keep the terms of my honor precise; I, I, I my
self sometimes, leaving the fear of heaven on the left hand, and hiding mine
honor in my necessity, am feign to shuffle: to hedge, and to lurch, and yet,
you Rogue, will en-sconce your rags; your Cat-a-Mountaine-lookes, your
red-lattice phrases, and your boldbeatingoathes, under the shelter of your
honor? you will not do it? you?


Pist. I do relent: what would thou more of man?


Robin. Sir, here is a woman would speak with you.


Fall. Let her approach.


Qui. Give your worship good morrow.


Fall. Good Morrow, good-wife.


Qui. Not so, and't please your worship.


Fall. Good, maid then.


Qui. I Will be sworn.
As my mother was the first hour I was borne.

Fall. I do believe the swearer; what with me?


Qui. Shall I vouch-safe your worship a word, or two?


Fall. Two thousand (fair woman) and i will vouchsafe thee the hearing.


Qui. There is one Mistress Ford, (Sir) I pray come a little nearer this
ways; I my self dwell with Master Doctor Caius.


Fall. Well, on; Mistress Ford, you say.


Qui. Your worship says very true; I pray your worship come a little nearer
this ways.


Fall. I warrant thee, no-bodie hears; mine own people, mine own people.


Qui. Are they so? heauen-blesse them, and make them his Servants.


Fall. Well; Mistress Ford, what of her?


Qui. Why, Sir; she is a good creature; Lord, Lord your Worship's a wanton:
well, heaven forgive you, and all of us, I pray --


Fall. Mistress Ford, come, Mistress Ford.


Qui. Marry this is the short, and the long of it; you have brought her into
such a Canaries, as it is wonderful; the best Courtier of them all (when the
Court lay at Windsor) could never have brought her to such a Canarie: yet there
has been Knights, and Lords, and Gentlemen, with their Coaches; I warrant you
Coach after Coach, letter after letter, gift aftee gift, smelling so sweetly;
all Musk, and so rushling, I warrant you, in silk and gold, and in such
alligant terms, and in such wine and sugar of the best, and the fairest, that
would have won any woman's heart: and I warrant you, they could never get an
eye-winke of her: I had my self twenty Angels given me this morning, but I
defy all Angels in any such sort, as they say) but in the way of honesty: and
I warrant you, they could never get her so much as sippe on a cup with the
prowdest of them all, and yet there has been Earls; nay, (which is more)
Pentioners, but I warrant you all is one with her.


Fall. But what says she to me? be brief my good she- Mercury.


Qui. Marry, she has received your Letter; for the which she thanks you a
thousand times; and she gives you to notify, that her husband will be absence
from his house, between ten and eleven.


Fall. Ten, and eleven.


Qui. I, forsooth; and then you may come and see the picture (she says) that
you wot of; Master Ford her husband will be from home: alas, the sweet woman
leads an ill life with him; he is a very iealousie-man; she leads a vere
framepold life with him, (good heart.)


Fall. Ten, and eleven.
Woman, commend me to her, I will not fail her.

Qui. Why, you say well: But I have another messenger to your worship:
Mistress Page has her hearty commendations to you to; and let me tell you in
your ear, she is as fartuous a civil modest wife, and one (I tell you) that
will not miss you morning nor evening prayer, as any is in Windsor, who ere be
the other: and she bade me tell your worship, that her husband is seldom
from home, but she hopes there will come a time. I never knew a woman so doat
upon a man; surely I think you have charms, la: yes in truth.


Fall. Not I, I assure thee; setting the attraction of my good parts aside, I
have no other charms.


Qui. Blessing on your heart for it:


Fall. But I pray thee tell me this; has Fords wife, and Pages wise acquainted
each other, how they love me?


Qui. That were a jest indeed they have not so little grace I hope, that were a
trick indeed: But Mistis Page would desire you to send her your little Page of
all loves; her husband has a marvelous infection to the little Page; and
truly Master Page is an honest man; never a wife in Windsor leads a better
life then she does; do what she will, say what she will, take all, pay all,
go to bed when she list, rise when she list, all is as she will; and truly
she deserves it; for if there be a kind woman in Windsor, she is one; you
must send her your Page, no remedy.


Fall. Why, I will.


Qui. Nay, but do so then, and look you, he may come and go between you
both; and in any case have a nay-word, that you may know one another mind,
and the Boy never heed to understand any thing; for it is not good that
children should know any wickedness; old folks you know, have discretion, as
they say, and know the world.


Fall. Farethee-well, commend me to them both, there is my purse, I am yet thy
debtor; Boy, go along with this woman, this news distracts me.


Pist. This Puncke is one of Cupids Carriers,
Clap no more sails, pursue* up with your fights:
Give fire; she is my prize, or Ocean whelme all.

Fall. Say thou so (old Jack) go thy ways I Will make more of thy old body
then I have done: will they yet look after thee? will thou after the expense
of so much money, be now a gainer? good Body, I thank thee; let them say it is
grossly done, so it be fairly done, no matter.


Bar. Sir John, there is one Master Broom below would feign speak with you,
and be acquainted with you; and has sent your worship a mornings draught of
Sack.


Fall. Broom is his name?


Bar. I Sir.


Fall. Call him in: such Broomes are welcome to me, that that ore'flowes such
liquor; ah ha, Mistress Ford and Mistress Page, have I encompassed you? go
to, via.


Ford. 'Blesse you sir.


Fall. And you sir; would you speak with me?


Ford. I make bold, to press, with so little preparation upon you.


Fall. You Are welcome, what is you^ ^ill? give us leave Drawer.


Ford. Sir, I am a Gentleman that have spent much, my name is Broom.


Fall. Good Master Broom, I desire more acquaintance of you.


Ford. Good Sir John, I sue for yours; not to charge you, for I must let you
understand, I think my self in better plight for a Lender, then you are; the
which has something emboldned me to this vnseason'd intrusion: for they say,
if money go before, all ways do lie open.


Fall. Money is a good Soldier (Sir) and will on.


Ford. Troth, and I have a bag of money here troubles me; if you will help to
bear it (Sir John) take all, or half for easing me of the carriage:


Fall. Sir, I know not how I may deserve to be your Porter.


Ford. I will tell you Sir, if you will give me the hearing.


Fall. Speak (good Master Broom) I shall be glad to be your Servant.


Ford. Sir, I hear you are a Scholar; ( I will be brief with you) and you
have been a man long known to me, though I had never so good means as
desire, to make my self acquainted with you. I shall discover a thing to you,
wherein I must very much lay open mine own imperfection: but (good Sir John) as
you have one eye upon my follies, as you hear them unfolded, turn another
into the Register of your own, that I may pass with a reproof the easier,
since you your self know how easy it is to be such an offender.


Fall. Very well Sir, proceed:


Ford. There is a Gentlewoman in this Town, her husbands name is Ford.


Fall. Well Sir.


Ford. I have long loved her, and I protest to you, bestowed much on her;
followed her with a doting observance; Engrossed opportunities to meet her*
freed every slight occasion that could but nigardly give me sight of her* not
only brought many presents to give her, but have given largely to many, to
know what she would have given briefly, I have pursued her, as Love has pursud
me, which has been on the wing of all occasions; but whatsoever I have
merited, either in my mind, or in my means, meede I am sure I have received
none, unless Experience be a Jewel, that I have purchased at an infinite
rate, and that has taught me to say this.

``Loue like a shadow flies, when substance Love pursues,
``Pursuing that that flies, and flying what pursues*

Fall. Have you received no promise of satisfaction at her hands?


Ford. Never.


Fall. Have you importuned her to such a purpose?


Ford. Never.


Fall. Of what quality was your love then?


Ford. Like a fair house, built on another man's ground, so that I have lost my
edifice, by mistaking the place where I erected it.


Fall. To what purpose have you unfolded this to me?


Ford. When I have told you that, I have told you all: Some say, that though
she appear honest to me, yet in other places she enlarges her mirth so
far, that there is shrewd construction made of her. Now (Sir John) here is
the heart of my purpose: you are a Gentleman of excellent breeding, admirable
discourse, of great admittance, authenticke in your place and person, generally
allowed for your many warlike, court-like, and learned preparations.


Fall. O Sir.


Ford. Believe it, for you know it: there is money, spend it, spend it, spend
more; spend all I have, only give me so much of your time in exchange of it,
as to lay an amiable siege to the honesty of this Fords wife: use your Art of
wooing; win her to consent to you; if any man may, you may as soon as any.


Fall. Would it apply well to the vehemence of your affection that I should win
what you would enjoy? Methinkes you prescribe to your self very preposterously.


Ford. O, understand my drift; she dwells so securely on the excellency of her
honor, that the folly of my soul dares not present it self; she is too bright
to be looked against. Now, could I come to her with any detection in my hand;
my desires had instance and argument to commend themselves, I could drive her
then from the ward of her purity, her reputation, her marriage vow, and a
thousand other her defenses, which now are too-too strongly embattaild against
me; what say you to it, Sir John.


Fall. Master Broom, I will first make bold with your money, next, give me your
hand; and last, as I am a Gentleman, you shall, if you will, enjoy Fords wife.


Ford. O good Sir.


Fall. I say you shall.


Ford. Want no money (Sir John) you shall want none.


Fall. Want no Mistress Ford (Master Broom) you shall want none; I shall be
with her (I may tell you) by her own appointment, even as you came in to me,
her assistant, or go between, parted from me; I say I shall be with her
between ten and eleven, for at that time the iealious rascallyknaue her
husband will be forth; come you to me at night, you shall know how I speed.


Ford. I am blessed in your acquaintance; do you know Ford Sir?


Fall. Hang him (poor Cuckoldly knave) I know him not: yet I wrong him to call
him poor; They say the jealous wittolly-knaue has masses of money, for the
which his wife seems to me well-fauourd: I will use her as the key of the
Cuckoldly-rogues Coffer, and there is my harvest* home.


Ford. I would you knew Ford, sir, that you might avoid him, if you saw him.


Fall. Hang him, mechanicall-salt-butter rogue; I will stare him out of his
wits; I will awe-him with my cudgel: it shall hang like a Meteor ore the
Cuckolds horns: Master Broom, thou shall know, I will predominate over the
pezant, and thou shall lie with his wife* Come to me soon at night: Ford's a
knave, and I will aggrauate his style: thou (Master Broom) shall know him for
knave, and Cuckold. Come to me soon at night.


Ford. What a damned Epicurian-Rascall is this? my heart is ready to crack
with impatience: who says this is improuident jealousy? my wife has sent to
him, the hour is fixed, the match is made; would any man have thought this? see
the hell of having a fair woman: my bed shall be abused, my Coffers ransacked,
my reputation gnawne at, and I shall not only receive this villainous wrong,
but stand under the adoption of abominable terms, and by him that does me
this wrong: Terms, names: Amaimon sounds well; Lucifer, well; Barbason, well;
yet they are Devils additions, the names of fiends: But Cuckold, Wittoll,
Cuckold* the Devil himself has not such a name. Page is an Ass, a secure
Ass; he will trust his wife, he will not be jealous; I will rather trust a
Fleming with my butter, Person Hugh the Welshman with my Cheese, an Irish man
with my Aqua-vitae-bottle, or a Thief to walk my ambling gelding, then my
wife with her self. Then she plots, then she rumiuates* then she devises;
and what they think in their hearts they may effect; they will break their
hearts but they will effect. Heaven be praised for my jealousy: eleven
o'clocke the hour, I will prevent this, detect my wife, be revenged on
Falstaff, and laugh at Page. I will about it, beter three hours too soon,
then a mynute too late: fie, fie, fie: Cuckold, Cuckold, Cuckold.

Exit.
Scena Tertia.
Enter Caius, Rugby, Page, Shallow, Slender, Host. Caius. Jack Rugby.


Ru. Sir.


Caius. Vat loathe clock* Jack.


Rug. It Is past the hour (Sir) that Sir Hugh promised to meet.


Caius. By gar, he has save his soul, dat he is no-come: he has pray his
Pible well, dat he is no-come, by gar ( lack Rugby) he is dead already, if he
be come.


Rug He is wise Sir; he knew your worship would kill him if he came.


Caius. By gar, de herring is no dead, so as I will kill him* take your Rapier,
( Jack) I will tell you how I will kill him.


Rug. Alas sir, I cannot fence.


Cai. Villainy, take your Rapier.


Rug. For bear, here is company.


Host. 'Blesse thee, bully-Doctor.


Shall. 'Saue you Master Doctor Caius.


Page. Now good Master Doctor.


Slen. 'Giue you good morrow, sir.


Caius. Vat be all you one, two, tree, four, come for?


Host. To see thee fight, to see thee foigne, to see thee trauerse, to see thee
he^re, to see thee there, to see thee pass thy puncto, thy stock, thy
reuerse, thy distance, thy montant: Is he dead, my Ethiopian? Is he dead, my
Francisco? ha Bully? what says my Esculapius? my Gallen? my heart of Elder?
ha? is he dead bully-Stale? is he dead?


Cai. By gar, he is de Coward Iack-Priest of de vorld: he is not show his face.


Host. Thou art a Castalion-king Vrinall; Hector of Greece (my Boy)


Cai. I pray you bear witness, that me have stay, six or seven, two tree
hours for him, and he is nocome.


Shall. He is the wiserman (Master Doctor) he is a curer of souls, and you a
curer of bodies; if you should fight, you go against the hair of your
professions* is it not true, Master Page?


Page. Master Shallow; you have your self been a great great fighter, though
now a man of peace.


Shall. Body-kins M. Page, though I now be old, and of the peace; if I see a
sword out, my finger itches to make one; though we are Justices, and Doctors,
and Churchmen (Master Page) we have some salt of our youth (...) us, we are
the sons of women (Master Page.)


Page It Is true, Mister Shallow.


Shall. It will be found so, (M. Page) M. Doctor Caius, I am come to fetch you
home, I am sworn of the peace you have showed your self a wise Physician, and
Sir Hugh has shown himself a wise and patient Churchman; you must go with
me, M. Doctor.


Host. Pardon, Guest-Iustice; a Mounseur Mockewater.


Cai. Mock-vater? vat is dat?


Host. Mock-water, in our English tongue, is Valor (Bully.)


Cai. By gar, then I have as much Mock-vater as de Englishman; scuruy-lade
dog-Priest* by gar, me vill his ears.


Host. He will Clapper claw thee tightly (Bully.)


Cai. Clapper de claw? vat is dat?


Host. That is, he will make thee amends.


Cai. By gar, me do look he shall clapper-de-claw me, for by-gar me vill have
it.


Host. And I will provoke him to it, or let him wag:


Cai. Me tanck you for dat.


Host. And moreover, (Bully) but first, Master Ghuest, and M. Page, and eeke
Cauale^ro Slender, go you through the Towneto Frogmore.


Page. Sir Hugh is there, is he?


Host. He is there, see what humor he is in; and I will bring the Doctor about
by the Fields; will it do well?


Shall. We will do it.


All. Adieu, good Master Doctor.


Cai. By-gar, me vill kill de Priest, for he speak for a Iackan-Ape to Anne
Page.


Host. Let him die; sheath thy impatience, throw cold water on thy Choler; go
about the fields with me through Frogmore, I will bring thee where Mistress Anne
Page is, at a Farm-house a Feasting; and thou shall woo her, Cridegame, said I
well?


Cai. By-gar, me danck you vor dat; by gar I love you, and I shall procure'a
you de good Guest; de Earl, de Knight, de Lords* de Gentlemen, my patients.


Host. For the which, I will be thy adversary toward Anne Page, said. I well?


Cai. By-gar, it is good, vell said.


Host. Let us wag then.


Cai. Come at my heels, Jack Rugby.

Exeunt.
Actus Tertius.
Scoena Prima.
Enter Euans, Simple, Page, Shallow, Slender, Host, Caius, Rugby. Euans. I pray
you now, good Master Slenders seruingman and friend Simple by your name; which
way have you looked for Master Caius, that calls himself Doctor of Physic.


Simp. Marry Sir, the pittie-ward, the Parke-ward, every way, old Windsor way,
and every way but the Towne-way.


Euan. I most fehemently desire you, you will look that way.


Simp. I will sir.


Euan. 'Plesse my soul: how full of Chollors I am and trempling of mind; I
shall be glad if he have deceived me: how melancholies I am? I will knog his
Vrinalls about his knaves costard, when I have good oportunities for the orke*
Please my soul. To shallow Rivers to whose falls; melodious Birds sing
Madrigalls: There will we make our Peds of Roses: and a thousand fragrant
posies. To shallow: 'Mercie on me, I have a great dispositions to cry:
Melodious birds sing Madrigalls: -- When as I sat in Pabilon: and a thousand
vagram Posies. To shallow, etc.


Sim. Yonder he is coming, this ^ay Sir Hugh.


Euan. He Is welcome: To shallow Rivers, in whose falls:
Heaven prosper the right: what weapons is he?

Sim. No weapons, Sir; there comes my master, Master Shallow, and another
Gentleman; from Frogmore, over the style, this way.


Even. Pray you give me my gown, or else keep it in your arms.


Shall. How now Master Parson? good morrow good Sir Hugh, keep a Gamester from
the dice, and a good Studient from his book, and it is wonderful.


S^en. Ah sweet Anne Bage.


Page. 'Saue you, good Sir Hugh.


Euan. *Pleasse you from his mercy-sake, all of you.


Shall. What? the Sword, and the Word?
Do you study them both Master Parson?

Page. And youthful still, in your doublet and hose, this raw-rumaticke day?


Euan. There is reasons, and causes for it?


Page. We are come to you, to do a good office, Master Parson.


Euan. Fery-well, what is it?


Page. Yonder is a most reverend Gentleman; who (be-like) having received wrong
by some person, is at most odds with his own gravity and patience, that ever
you saw.


Shall. I have lived foure-score years, and upward; I never heard a man of his
place, gravity, and learning, so wide of his own respect.


Euan. What is he?


Page I think you know him; Master Doctor Caius the renowned French Physician.


Euan. Got's will, and his passion of my heart, I had as liefe you would tell
me of a mess of poriedge.


Page. Why?


Euan. He has no more knowledge in Hibocrates and Galen, and he is a knave
besides: a cowardly knave, as you would desires to acquainted withal*


Page. I warrant you, he is the man should fight with him.


Slen. O sweet Anne Page.


Shall. It appears so by his weapons; keep them a sunder, here comes Doctor
Caius.


Page. Nay good Master Parson, keep your weapon.


Shall. So do you, good Master Doctor.


Host. Disarme them, and let them question; let them keep their limbs whole,
and hacke our English.


Cai. I pray you let-a-mee speak a word with your ear; vherefore vill you not
meet a me?


Euan. I Pray you use your patience in good time.


Caius. By gar, you are de Coward: de Jack dog: John Ape.


Euan. Pray you let us not be laughing-stocks to other men's humors; I desire
you in friendship, and I will one way or other make you amends; I will knog
your Vrinal about your knaves Cogs-combe.


Cai. Diable; Jack Rugby: mine Host de Iarteer; have I not stay for him, to
kill him? have I not at de place I did appoint?


Euan. As I am a Christians soul, now look you; this is the place appointed,
i will be judgment by mine Host of the Garter.


Host. Peace, I say, Gallia and Gaul, French and Welsh, Soule-Curer, and
Body-Curer.


Cai. I, dat is very good, excellant.


Host. Peace, I say, hear mine Host of the Garter, Am I politic? Am I
subtle? Am I a Machiuell? Shall loose my Doctor? No, he gives me the Potions
and the Motions. Shall I loose my Parson? my Priest? my Sir Hugh? No, he gives
me the Proverbs, and the No verbes. Give me thy hand (Celestial) so; Boys of
Art, I have deceived you both; I have directed you to wrong places; your hearts
are mighty, your skins are whole, and let burned Sack be the issue; Come*
lay their swords to pawn; Follow me, Lad of peace, follow, follow, follow*


Shall. Trust me, a mad Host: follow Gentlemen, follow.


Slen. O sweet Anne Page.


Cai. Ha'do I perceive dat? Have you make-a-de. sot of us, ha, ha?


Euan. This is well, he has made us his vlowting-stog: I desire you that we may
be friends; and let us knog our praines together to be revenge on this same
scall scuruycogging-companion the Host of the Garter.


Cai. By gar, with all my heart; he promise to bring me where is Anne Page, by
gar he deceive me too.


Euan. Well, I will smite his noddles; pray you follow.


Scoena Secunda.
Mist. Page, Robin, Ford, Page, Shallow, Slender, Host, Euans, Caius. Mist.
Page. Nay keep your way (little Gallant) you were wont to be a follower; but
now you are a Leader: whether had you rather lead mine eyes, or eye your
masters heels?


Rob. I had rather (forsooth, go before you like a man* Courtier. then follow
him like a dwarf.


Mis. Page. O you are a flattering boy, now I see you will be a


Ford. Well met mistress Page, whether go you.


Mis. Page. Truly Sir, to see your wife, is she at home?


Ford. I, and as idle as she may hang together for want of company; I think
if your husbands were dead, you two would marry.


Mis. Page. Be sure of that, two other husbands.


Ford. Where had you this pretty weather-cocke?


Mist. Pa. I cannot tell what (the dickens) his name is my husband had him of,
what do you call your Knights name sirrah?


Rob. Sir John Falstaff.


Ford. Sir John Falstafe.


M. P. He, he, I can never hit on's name; there is such aleague between my
goodman, and he; is your Wife at home indeed.


Ford. Indeed she is.


Mis. Page. By your leave sir, I am sick till I see her.


Ford. Has Page any brains* Has he any eyes? Has he any thinking? Sure they
sleep, he has no use of them: why this boy will carry a letter twenty mile
as easy, as a Canon will shoot point-blanke twelve score: he pieces out his
wives inclination, he gives her folly motion and advantage: and now she is
going to my wife, and Falstaffes boy with her; A man may hear this shower sing
in the wind; and Falstaffes boy with her: good plots, they are laid, and our
revolted wives share damnation together. Well, I will take him, then torture my
wife, pluck the borrowed veil of modesty from the so seeming Mistress Page,
divulge Page himself for a secure and wilful Acteon, and to these violent
proceedings all my neighbors shall cry aim. The clock gives me my Qu, and my
assurance bids me search, there I shall find Falstaff: I shall be rather
praisd for this, then mocked, for it is as possitiue, as the earth is firm,
that Falstaff is there: I will go.


Shall. Page, etc. Well met Master Ford.


Ford. Trust me, a good knotte; I have good cheer at home, and I pray you all
go with me.


Shall. I must excuse my self Master Ford.


Slen. And so must I Sir,
We have appointed to dine with Mistress Anne,
And I would not break with her for more money
Then i will speak of.

Shall. We have lingered about a match between Anne Page, and my cozen Slender,
and this day we shall have our answer.


Slen. I hope I have your good will Father Page.


Page You have Master Slender, I stand wholly for you, But my wife (Master
Doctor) is for you altogether.


Caius. I be-gar, and de Maid is loue-a me: my nursh-aQuickly tell me so mush.


Host. What say you to young Master Fenton? He capers, he dances, he has cies
of youth* he writes verses, he speaks holliday, he smells April and May, he
will carry't, he will carry't, it is in his buttons, he will carry't.


Page. Not by my consent I promise you. The Gentleman is of no having, he kept
company with the wild Prince, and Pointz: he is of too high a Region, he
knows too much: no, he shall not knit a knot in his fortunes, with the finger
of my substance, if he takes her, let him take her simply; the wealth I have
waits on my consent, and my consent goes not that way:


Ford. I beseech you heartily, some of you go home with me to dinner; besides
your cheer you shall have sport, I will show you a monster; Master Doctor, you
shall go, so shall your Master Page, and you Sir Hugh.


Shall. Well, fare you well:
We shall have the freer woing at Master Pages.

Cai. Go home John Rugby, I come anon.


Host. Farewell my hearts, I will to my honest Knight Falstaff, and drink
Canarie with him.


Ford. I think I shall drink in Pipe-wine first with him, i will make him dance.
Will you go, Gentles?


All. Have with you, to see this Monster.

Exeunt.
Scoena Tertia.
Enter Master Ford. Master Page, Servants, Robin, Falstaff. Ford, Page, Caius,
Euans. Mis. Ford. What John, what Robert.


M. Page. Quickly quickly; Is the Buck-basket --


Mis. Ford. I warrant. What Robin I say.


Mis. Page. Come, come, come.


Mi Ford. Here, set it down.


M. Page. Give your men the charge, we must be brief, be ready here hard by
in the Brew house, and when I suddenly call you, come forth, and (without any
pause, or staggering) take this basket on your shoulders; that done trudge with
it in all have, and carry it among the Whitsters in Dotchet Mead, and there
empty it in the muddie ditch, close by the Thames side.


Mis. Page. You will do it?


M. Ford. I ha told them over and over, they lack no direction. Begone, and
come when you are called.


M. Page. Here comes little Robin.


Mis Ford. How now my Eyas Musket, what news with you?


Rob. My M. Sir John is come in at the back door Mist. Ford, and requests
your company.


Mis. Page. You little lack-a-lent, have you bin true to us.


Rob. I, i will be sworn; my Master knows not of your being here: and has
threatened to put me into everlasting liberty, if I tell you of it; for he
swears he will turn me away.


Mis. Page. You Are a good boy; this secrecy of thine shall be a Tailor to
thee, and shall make thee a new doublet and hose. I Will go hide me.


Mis. Ford. Do so, go tell thy Master, I am alone; Mistress Page, remember you
your Qu.


Mis. Page. I warrant thee, if I do not act it, hiss me.


Mis. Ford Go too then; we will use this unwholesome humidity, this grosse-warry
Pumpion, we'll teach him to know Turtles from Iayes.


Fall. Have I caught thee, my heavenly Jewel? Why now let me die, for I have
lived long enough; This is the period of ambition; O this blessed hour.


Mis* Ford. O sweet Sir John.


Fall. Mistress Ford, I cannot cog, I cannot prate (Master Ford) now shall I
sin in my wish; I would thy Husband were dead, i will speak it before the best
Lord, I would make thee my Lady.


Mis Ford. I your Lady Sir John? Alas, I should be a pitiful Lady.


Fall* Let the Court of France show me such another; I see how thine eye would
emulate the Diamond; Thou have the right arched-beauty of the brow, that
becomes the Ship-tyre, the Tyre-valiant, or any Tire of Venetian admittance.


Mist. Ford. A plain Kerchiefe, Sir John.
My brows become nothing else, nor that well neither.

Fall. Thou art a tyrant to say so: thou would make an absolute Courtier, and
the firm fixture of thy foot, would give an excellent motion to thy gate, in
a semicircled Farthingale. I see what thou were if Fortune thy foe, were not
Noture thy friend: Come, thou can not hide it.


Mist. Ford. Believe me, there is no such thing in me.


Fall. What made me love thee? Let that persuade thee: There Is something
extraordinary in thee. Come I cannot cog, and say thou art this and that, like
a many of these lisping hauthorne buds, that come like women in men's
apparel, and smell like. Bucklers-berry in simple time: I cannot, but I love
thee, none but thee; and thou deseru'st it.


M. Ford. Do not betray me sir, I fear you love M. Page*


Fall. Thou might as well say, I love to walk by the Counter-gate, which is a
hateful to me, as the reeke of a Lime-kill.


Mis. Ford. Well, heaven knows how I love you,
And you shall one day find it.

Fall. Keep in that mind, I Will deserve it.


Mist. Ford. Nay, I must tell you, so you do;
Or else I could not be in that mind.

Rob. Mistress Ford, Mistress Ford, here is Mistress Page at the door, sweating,
and blowing, and looking wildly, and would needs speak with you presently.


Fall. She shall not see me, I will ensconce me behind the Arras.


M. Ford. Pray you do so, she is a very tatling woman.
What Is the matter? How now?

Miist. Page O mistress Ford what have you done?
You Are shamed, you are overthrown, you are undone for ever.

M. Ford. What Is the matter, good mistress Page?


M. Page. O weladay, mist. Ford, having and honestman to your husband, to give
him such cause of suspicion.


M. Ford. What cause of suspicion?


Mis. Page. What cause of suspicion? Out upon you:
How am I mistook in you?

Mis. Ford. Why (alas) what is the matter?


Mis. Page. Your husband's coming hither (Woman) with all the Officers in
Windsor, to search for a Gentleman, that he says is here now in the house,
by your consent to take an ill advantage of his absence, you are undone.


M. Ford. It Is not, so, I hope.


Mist. Page. Pray heaven it be not so, that you have such a man here: but it is
most certain your husband's coming, with half Windsor at his heels, to
search for such a one, I come before to tell you, if you know your self clear,
why I am glad of it, but if you have a friend here, convey, convey him out. Be
not amazed, call all your senses to you, defend your reputation, or bid farewell
to your good life for ever.


M. Ford. What shall I do? There is a Gentleman my dear friend, and I fear
not mine own shame so much, as his peril. I had rather then a thousand pound
he were out of the house.


M. Page. For shame, never stand (you had rather, you had rather) your
husband's here at hand, bethink you of some conueyance: in the house you
cannot bide him. Oh, how have you deceived me? Look, here is a basket, if he
be of any reasonable stature, he may creep in here, and throw foul linen
upon him, as if it were going to bucking; Or it is whiting time, send him by
your two men to Datchet-Meade.


M. Ford He Is too big to go in there, what shall I do?


Fall Let me see it, let me see it, O let me see it:
I Will ^n i will in, follow your friends counsel, i will in.

Mist. Page. What Sir John Falstaff? Are these your Letters Knight?


Fall. I love thee, help me away: let me creep in here: i will never --


M. Page. Help to cover your Master (Boy:) Call your men (Mist. Ford.) You
dissembling Knight.


Mis. Ford. What John Rugby, John; Go, take up these clothes here, quickly:
Where Is the Cowle-staffe? Look how you drumble? Carry them to the Landresse in
Datchet meade: quickly* come.


Ford. 'Pray you come near; if I suspect without cause, Why then make sport at
me, then let me be your jest, I deserve it: How now? Whether bear you this?


Ser. To the Landresse forsooth?


Mis. Ford. Why, what have you to do whether they bear it? You were best
meddle with buck-washing.


Ford. Bucke? I would I could wash my self of the Buck:
Bucke, bucke, bucke, I bucke; I warrant you Bucke,
And of the season too, it shall appear.
Gentlemen, I have dreamed to night, i will tell you my dream, here, here,
here be my keys, ascend my Chambers, search, seek, find out: i will warrant
we will vnkennell the Fox. Let me stop this way first: so, now vncape.


Page. Good master Ford, be contented:
You wrong your self too much.

Ford. True (master Page) up Gentlemen,
You shall see sport anon:
Follow me Gentlemen.

Euans. This is fery fantastical humors and iealousies.


Caius By gar, it is no-the fashion of France:
It is not jealous in France.

Page. Nay follow him (Gentlemen) see the issue of his search.


Mis. Page. Is there not a double excellency in this?


Mis. Ford. I know not which pleases me better,
That my husband is deceived, or Sir John.

Mis. Page. What a taking was he in, when your husband asked who was in the
basket?


Mis. Ford. I am half afraid he will have need of washing, so throwing him
into the water, will do him a benefit.


Mis. Page. Hang him dishonest rascal: I would all of the same strain, were
in the same distress.


Mist. Ford. I think my husband has some special suspicion of Falstafs being
here: for I never saw him so gross in his jealousy till now.


Mist. Page. I will lay a plot to try that, and we will yet have more tricks
with Falstaff; his dissolute disease will scarce obey this medicne.


Mis. Ford. Shall we send that foolishion Carrion, Mistress Quickly to him, and
excuse his throwing into the water, and give him another hope, to betray him to
another punishment?


Mis. Page. We will do it; let him be sent for to morrow eight a clock to
have amends.


Ford. I cannot find him; may be the knave bragged of that he could not
compass*


Mis. Page. Heard you that?


Mis. Ford. You use me well, M Ford? Do you?


Ford. I, I do so.


M. Ford. Heaven make you better then your thoughts


Ford. Amen.


Mis. Page. You do your self mighty wrong (M. Ford)


Ford. I, I; I must bear it.


Euan. If there be any pody in the house, and in the chambers, and in the
coffers, and in the presses; heaven forgive my sins at the day of judgment.


Caius. Be-gar, nor I too: there is no bodies.


Page. Fie, fie, M Ford, are you not ashamed? What spirit, what devil suggests
this imagination? I would not ha your distemper in this kind, for the wealth of
Windsor castle.


Ford. It Is my fault (M. Page) I suffer for it.


Euans. You suffer for a pad conscience; your wife is as honest a o'mans, as I
will desires among five thousand, and five hundred too.


Cai. By gar, I see it is an honest woman.


Ford. Well, I promisd you a dinner, come, come, walk in the Park, I pray you
pardon me: I will hereafter make known to you why I have done this. Come wife,
come Mist Page, I pray you pardon me. Pray hartly pardon me.


Page. Let Us go in Gentlemen, but (trust me) we will mock him; I do inuit you
to morrow morning to my house to breakefast: after we'll a Birding together, I
have a fine Hawke for the bush. Shall it be so:


Ford. Any thing.


Euan. If there is one, I shall make two in the Company.


Cai. If there be one, or two, I shall make-a-theturd.


Ford. Pray you go, M. Page.


Euans. I pray you now remembrance to morrow on the lousy knave, mine Host.


Cai. Dat is good by gar, withal my heart.


Euan. A lousy knave, to have his gibes, and his mockeries.

Exeunt.
Scoena Quarta.
Enter Fenton, Anne Page, Shallow, Slender, Quickly, Page, Mist. Page. Fen. I
see I cannot get thy Fathers love,
Therefore no more turn me to him (sweet Nan.)

Anne. Alas, how then?


Fen. Why thou must be thy self.
He does object, I am too great of birth,
And that my state being galled with my expense,
I seek to heal it only by his wealth.
Besides these, other bars he lays before me,
My Riots past, my wild Societies,
And tells me it is a thing impossible
I should love thee, but as a property.

Anne. May be he tells you true.


Fen. No, heaven so speed me in my time to come,
Albeit I will confess, thy Fathers wealth
Was the first motive that I wooed thee ( Anne:)
Yet wooing thee, I found thee of more value
Then stamps in Gold, or sums in sealed bagges^
And it is the very riches of thy self,
That now I aim at.

Anne. Gentle M. Fenton.
Yet seek my Fathers love, still seek it sir,
If opportunity and humblest suite
Cannot attain it, why then hark you hither.

Shall. Break their talk Mistress Quickly,
My Kinsman shall speak for himself.

Slen. I Will make a shaft or a bolt on it, slid, it is but venturing.


Shall. Be not dismayed.


Slen. No, she shall not dismay me*
I care not for that, but that I am affeard.

Qui. Hark ye, Master Slender would speak a word with you


Anne. I come to him. This is my Fathers choice.
O what a world of vilde-ill-fauour'd faults
Looks handsome in three hundred pounds a year?

Qui, And how does god Master Fenton?
Pray you a word with you.

Shall. She Is coming; to her Coz:
O boy, thou had a father,

Slen. I had a father (Mistress Anne) my uncle can tell you good jests of him;
pray you Uncle, tell Mistress Anne the jest how my Father stole two Geese out of
a Pen, good Uncle.


Shall. Mistress Anne, my Cozen loves you.


Slen. I that I do, as well as I love any woman in Glocestershire.


Shall He will maintain you like a Gentlewoman.


Slen. I that I will, come cut and long-taile, under the degree of a Squire.


Shall. He will make you a handred and fifty pounds ioynture.


Anne. Good Master Shallow let him woe for himself.


Shall. Marry I thank you for it, I thank you for that good comfort: she calls
you (Coz) i will leave you.


Anne. Now Master Slender.


Slen. Now good Mistress Anne.


Anne. What is your will?


Slen. My will? Odd's-hart-lings, that is a pretty jest indeed: I never made my
Will yet (I thank Heaven:) I am not such a sickely creature, I give Heaven
praise.


Anne. I mean (M. Sender) what would you with me?


Slen. Truly, for mine own part, I would little or nothing with you: your
father and uncle has made motions if it be my luck, so; if not, happy man be
his dole, they can tell you how things go, better then I can: you may, your
father, here he comes.


Page. Now Master Slender; Love him daughter Anne.
Why how now? What does Master Fenton here?
You wrong me Sir, thus still to haunt my house.
I told you Sir, my daughter is disposd of.

Fen. Nay Master Page, be not impatient.


Mist. Page. Good Master Fenton. come not to my child.


Page. She is no match for you.


Fen. Sir, will you hear me?


Page. No, good Master Fenton.
Come M. Shallow: Come son Slender, in;
Knowing my mind, vou wrong me (M. Fenton.)

Qui. Speak to Mistress Page.


Fen. Good Mistress Page, for that I love your daughter
In such a righteous fashion as I do,
Perforce, against all checkes, rebukes, and manners,
I must advance the colors or my love,
And not retire. Let me have your good will.

Anne. Good mother, do not marry me to yond fool:


Mist. Page. I mean it not, I seek you a better husband.


Qu. That Is my master, Master Doctor.


Anne. Alas I had rather be set quicki'th earth,
And bowl'd to death with Turnips.

Mist Page. Come, trouble not your self good Master
Fenton, I will not be your friend, nor enemy:
My daughter will I question how she loves you,
And as I find her, so am I affected;
Till then, farewill Sir, she must needs go in,
Her father will be angry.

Fen Farewell gentle Mistress; farewell Nan.


Qu. This is my doing now; Nay, saine I, will you cast away your child on a
Fool, and a Physician:

Look on Master Fenton, this is my doing.


Fen. I thank thee: and I pray thee once to night,
Give my sweet Nan this Ring: there is for thy pains:

Qu. Now heaven send thee good fortune, a kind heart he has: a woman would
run through fire and water for such a kind heart. But yet, I would my Master
had Mistress Anne, or I would Master Slender had her: or (in sooth) I would
Master Fenton had her; I will do what I can for them all three, for so I have
promised, and i will be as good as my word, but speciously for Master Fenton.
Well, I must of another errand to Sir John Falstaff from my two Mistresses:
what a beast am I to slack it.

Exeunt.
Scoena Quarta*
Enter Falstaff, Bardolfe, Quickly, Ford. Fall. Bardolfe I say.


Bar. Here Sir.


Fall. Go, fetch me a quart of Sack, put a tossed in it. Have I lived to be
carried in a Basket like a barrow of butchers Offall? and to be thrown in the
Thames? Well, if I be served such another trick, i will have my brains 'tane out
and buttered, and given them to a dog for a New-yeares gift: The rogues
slighted me into the River with as little remorse, as they would have drown'de
ablinde bitches Puppies, fifteen in the litter: and you may know by my size,
that I have a kind of alacrity in sinking: if the bottom were as deep as
hell, I should down. I had been drowned, but that the shore was sheluy and
shallow; a death that I abhor: for the water swelles a man; and what a thing
should I have been, when I had been swelled? I should have been a Mountain
of Mummie.


Bar. Here Is M. Quickly Sir to speak with you.


Fall. Come, let me pour in some Sack to the Thames water: for my bellies as
cold as if I had swallowed snowbals, for pills to cool the reins. Call her
in.


Bar. Come in woman.


Qui. By your leave; I cry you mercy?
Give your worship good morrow.

Fall. Take away these Challices;
Go, brew me a pottle of Sack finely.

Bard. With Eggs, Sir?


Fall. Simple of it self; I Will no Pullet-Spersme in my brewage. How now?


Qui. Marry Sir, I come to your worship from M. Ford.


Fall. Mis. Ford? I have had Ford enough; I was thrown into the Ford, I have my
belly full of Ford.


Qui. Alas the day, (good-heart) that was not her fault; she does so take on
with her men; they mistook their promise* erection.


Fall. So did I mine, to build upon a foolish Woman's


Qui. Well, she laments Sir for it, that it would yern your heart to see it;
her husband goes this morning a birding; she desires you once more to come to
her, between eight and nine; I must carry her word quickly, she will make you
amends I warrant you.


Fall. Well, I will visit her, tell her so* and bid her think what a man is;
Let her consider his frailety, and then judge of my merit.


Qui. I will tell her.


Fall. Do so. Between nine and ten say thou?


Qui. Eight and nine Sir.


Fall. Well, be gone; I will not miss her.


Qu. Peace be with you Sir.


Fall. I marvel I hear not of Master Broom; he sent me word to stay within;
I like his money well: Oh, here he comes.


Ford. Bless you Sir.


Fall. Now M. Broom, you come to know
What has past between me, and Fords wife.

Ford. That indeed (Sir John) is my business.


Fall: M. Broom I will not lie to you,
I was at her house the hour she appointed me.

Ford. And sped you Sir?


Fall. Very ill fauouredly M. Broom.


Ford. How so sir, did she change her determination?


Fall. No (M. Broom) but the peaking Curnuio her husband (M. Broom) dwelling
in a continnall larum of jealousy, comes me in the instant of our encounter,
after we had embrast, kissed, protested, and (as it were) spoke the prologue of
our Comedy* and at his heels, a rabble of his companions, thither provoked and
instigated by his distemper, and (forsooth) to search his house for his wives
Love.


Ford. What? While you were there?


Fall. While I was there.


Ford. And did he search for you, and could not find you?


Fall. You shall hear. As good luck would have it, comes in one Mist. Page,
gives intelligence of Fords approach: and in her invention, and Fords wives
distraction, they conuey'd me into a bucke-basket.


Ford. A Buck-basket?


Fall. Yes, a Buck-basket: ram'd me in with foul Shirts, and Smockes, Socks,
foul Stockings, greasy Napkins, that (Master Broom) there was the rankest
compound of villainous smell, that ever offended nostrill.


Ford. And how long lay you there?


Fall. Nay, you shall hear (Master Broom) what I have suffered, to bring this
woman to evil, for your good: Being thus crammed in the Basket, ^ couple of
Fords knaves, his Hindes, were called forth by their Mistress, to carry me in the
name of foul Clothes to Datchet lane; they took me on their shoulders met
the jealous knave their Master in the door; who asked them once or twice what
they had in their Basket? I quaked for fear lest the Lunatique Knave would
have searched it: but Fate (ordaining he should be a Cuckold) held his hand:
well, on went he, for a search and away went I for foul Clothes; But mark
the sequel (Master Broom) I suffered the pangs of three several deaths:
First, an intolerable fright, to be detected with a iealious rotten Bell*
weather: Next to be compassed like a good Bilbo in the circumference of a
Pecke, hilt to point, heel to* head. And then to be stopped in like a strong
distillation with stinking Clothes, that fretted in their own grease think
of that, a man of my Kidney; think of that; that am as subject to heat as
butter; a man of continual dissolution, and thaw: it was a miracle to
scapesuffocation. And in the height of this Bath (when I was more then half
stewed in grease (like a Dutchdish) to be thrown into the Thames, and coold,
glowing hot, in that serge like a Horseshoo; think of that; hissing hot:
think of that (Master Broom.)


Ford. In good sadness Sir, I am sorry, that for my sake you have sufferd all
this.

My suite then is desperate: You Will undertake her no more?


Fall. Master Broom: I will be thrown into E^ta, as I have been into Thames,
ere I will leave her thus; her Husband is this morning gone a Birding, I have
received from her another ambassie of meeting; 'twixt eight and nine is the
hour (Master Broom.)


Ford. It Is past eight already Sir,


Fall. Is it? I will then address me to my appointment; Come to me at your
convenient leisure, and you shall know how I speed: and the conclusion shall
be crowned with your enjoying her: adieu; you shall have her (Master Broom)
Master Broom, you shall cuckold Ford.


Ford. Hum: ha? Is this a vision? Is this a dream? do I sleep? Master Ferd
awake, awake Master Ford* there is a hole made in your best coat (Master Ford:)
this it is to be married; this it is to have Lynnen, and Buckbaskets: Well, I
will proclaim my self what I am* I will now take the Leacher; he is at my
house; he cannot escape me; it is impossible he should: he cannot creep into
a halfe-penny purse, not into a Pepper-Boxe. But lest the Devil that guides
him, should aid him, I will search impossible places: though what I am, I
cannot avoid; yet to be what I would not, shall not make me tame; If I have
horns, to make one mad, let the proverb go with me, i will be hornemad.

Exeunt.
Actus Quartus.
Scoena Prima.
Enter Mistress Page, Quickly, William, Euens: Mis Page. Is he at M. Fords
already think thou?


Qui. Sure he is by this; or will be presently; but truly he is very
courageous mad, about his throwing into the water. Mistress Ford desires you to
come suddenly.


Mis. Page. I Will be with her by and by; i will but bring my yong-man here to
School; look where his Master comes; it is a playing day I see: how now Sir
Hugh, no School to day?


Euans. No, Master Slender is let the Boys leave to play.


Qui. 'Blessing of his heart.


Mis. Page. Sir Hugh, my husband says my son profits nothing in the world at
his Book; I pray you ask him some questions in his Accidence.


Euans. Come hither William; hold up your head; come.


Mis. Page. Come-on Sirrah; hold up your head; answer your Master, be not
afraid.


Euans. William, how many Numbers is in Nownes?


Will. Two.


Qui. Truly, I thought there had bin one Number more, because they say
od's-Nownes.


Euan. Peace, your tatlings. What is (Fair) William?


Will. Pulcher.


Qu. Powlcats? there are fairer things then Powlcat, sure.


Euans. You are a very simplicity o'man; I pray you peace. What is (Lapis)
William?


Will. A Stone.


Euan. And what is a Stone ( William?)


Will. A Peeble.


Euan. No; it is Lapis; I pray you remember in your praine.


Will. Lapis.


Euans. That is a good William; what is he ( William) that does lend Articles:


Will. Articles are borrowed of the Pronoune; and be thus declined*
Singulariter nominatiuo hic haec, hoc.


Euan. Nominatiuo hig, hag, hog; pray you mark; genitive huius; Well: what is
your Accusatiue-case?


Will. Accusative hinc.


Euan. I pray you have your remembrance (child) Accusatiuo hing, hang, hog.


Qui. Hang-hog, is latten for Bacon, I warrant you.


Euan. Leave your prables (o'man) What is the Focatiue case ( William?)


Will. O, Vocatiuo, O.


Euan. Remember William, Focatiue, is caret:


Qui. And that is a good root.


Euan. O'man, forbear.


Mis. Page. Peace.


Euan. What is your Genitive case plural (William?)


Will. Genitive case?


Euan. I.


Will. Genitive horum, harum, horum.


Qui. Vengeance of Ginyes case; fie on her; never name her (child) if she be a
whore.


Euan. For shame o'man.


Qui. You do ill to teach the child such words: he teaches him to hic, and
to hac; which they will do fast enough of themselves, and to call horum; fie
upon you.


Euan. O'man, art thou Lunaties? Have thou no understandings for thy Cases, and
the numbers of the Genders? Thou art as foolish Christian creatures, as I would
desires.


M. Page. Prithee hold thy peace.


Euan. Show me now ( William) some declensions of your Pronounes.


Will. Forsooth, I have forgot.


Euans. It is Qui, que, quod; if you forget your Quies, your Ques, and your
Quods, you must be preeches: Go your ways and play, go.


M. Page. He is a better scholar then I thought he was.


Euans. He is a good sprag* memory: Farewell Mis. Page.


Mis. Page. Adeu good Sir Hugh.

Get you home boy, Come we stay too long.

Exeunt:
Scoena Secunda.
Enter Falstaff, M. Ford, Mist. Page. Servants, Ford, Page, Caius, Euans
Shallow. Fall. Mis. Ford, Your sorrow has eaten up my sufferance; I see you are
obsequious in your love, and I profess requital to a hairs breadth, not only
Mistress Ford, in the simple office of love, but in all the accustrement
complement, and ceremony of it: But are you sure of your husband now?


M. Ford. He Is a birding (sweet Sir John.)


Mis. Page. What hoa* gossip Ford; what hoa.


Mis. Ford. Step into the chamber, Sir John*


Mis. Page. How now (sweet heart) whose at home* besides your self?


Mis Ford. Why none but mine own people.


Mis. Page. Indeed?


Mis. Frod. No certainly; Speak louder.


Mis. Page. Truly, I am so glad you have no body here.


Mist. Ford. Why?


Mis. Page. Why woman, your husband is in his old lines again; he so takes on
yonder with my husband, so railes against all married mankind; so curses all
Eues daughters, of what complexion soever; and so buffettes himself on the
for-head; crying peere-out, peere-out, that any madness I ever yet beheld,
seemed but tamenesse, ciuility, and patience to this his distemper he is in
now. I am glad the fat Knight is not here,


Mis. Ford. Why, does he talk of him?


Mis. Page. Of none but him, and swears he was carried out the last time he
searched for him, in a Basket; Protests to my husband he is now here, and has
drawn him and the rest of their company from their sport, to make another
experiment of his suspicion: But I am glad the Knight is not here; now he
shall see his own foolerie.


Mis. Ford. How near is he Mistrs Page?


Mist. Page. Hard by, at street end; he will be here anon*


Mist. Ford. I am undone, the Knight is here:


Mist. Page. Why then you are utterly shamed, and he is but a dead man. What a
woman are you? Away with him, away with him; Better shame, then murder.


Mist. Ford. Which way should he go? How should I bestow him? Shall I put him
into the basket again?


Fall. No, I Will come no more in the Basket.

May I not go out ere he come?


Mist. Page. Alas: three of Master Fords brothers watch the door with Pistols,
that none shall issue out: otherwise you might slip away ere he came: But what
make you here?


Fall. What shall I do? I Will creep up into the chimney.


Mis. Ford. There they always use to discharge their Birding-peece: creep
into the Kill*hole.


Fall. Where is it?


Mis. Ford. He will seek there on my word; Neither Press, Coffer, Chest,
Trunk, Well, Vault, but he has an abstract for the remembrance of such
places, and goes to them by his Note; There is no hiding you in the house.


Fall. I Will go out then:


Mist. Ford. If you go out in your own semblance, you die Sir John, unless
you go out disguised.


Mis. Ford. How might we disguise him?


Mis. Page. Alas the day I know not, there is no woman's gown big enough for
him: otherwise he Might put on a hat, a muffler, and kerchiefe, and so escape.


Fall. Good hearts, divise something; any extremity, rather then a mischief.


Mis. Ford. My Maids Aunt the fat woman of Brainford, has a gown above.


Mis. Page. On my word it will serve him: she is as big as he is; and there is
her thrum'd hat, and her muffler* too: run up Sir John.


Mis. Ford. Go, go, sweet Sir John: Mistress Page and I will look some linen
for your head.


Mis. Page. Quick, quick, we will come dress you straight: put on the gown
the while.


Mis. Ford. I would my husband would meet him in this shape; he cannot abide
the old woman of Brainford; he swears she is a witch, forbad her my house, and
has threatened to beat her.


Mis. Page. Heaven guide him to thy husbands cudgel; and the devil guide his
cudgel afterward.


Mis. Ford. But is my husband coming?


Mis. Page. I in good sadness is he, and talks of the basket too, howsoever
he has had intelligence.


Mis. Ford. We Will try that: for i will appoint my men to carry the basket again,
to meet him at the door with it, as they did last time.


Mist. Page. Nay, but he will be here presently: let go dress him like the
witch of Brainford.


Mist. Ford. I Will first direct my men, what they shall do with the basket: Go
up, i will bring linen for him straight.


Mist. Page. Hang him dishonst Varlet,
We cannot misuse enough:
Well leave a proof by that which we will do,
Wives may be merry, and yet honest too:
We do not act that often, jest, and laugh,
It Is old, but true, Still Swine eats all the draugh.

Mist. Ford. Go Sirs, take the bas basket again on your shoulders: your Master
is hard at door: if he bid you set it down, obey him* quickly, dispatch.


1 Ser. Come, come, take it up.


2 Ser. Pray heaven it be not full of Knight again.


1 Ser. I hope not, I had liefe as bear so much lead.


Ford. I, but if it prove true (Master Page) have you any way then to vnfoole
me again. Set down the basket villain: some body call my wife: Youth in a
basket: Oh you Panderly Rascals, there is a knot: a gin, a pack, a conspiracy
against me. Now shall the devil be sham'd-What wise I say: Come, come forth:
behold what honest clothes you send forth to bleaching.


Page. Why, this passes Master Ford, you are not to go loose any longer, you
must be pinnion'd.


Euan^: Why, this is Lunaticks: this is mad, as a mad dog.


Shall. In deed Master Ford, this is not well indeed.


Ford. So say I too Sir, come hither Mistress Ford, Mistress Ford, the honest
woman, the modest wife, the virtuous creature* that has the jealous fool to
her husband: I suspect without cause (Mistress) do I?


Mist. Ford. Heaven be my witness you do, if you suspect me in any dishonesty.


Ford. Well said Brazen-face, hold it out: Come forth sirrah.


Page. This passes.


Mist. Ford. Are you not a shamed, let the cloths alone.


Ford. I shall find you anon.


Euan. It Is unreasonable; will you take up your wives clothes? Come, away.


Ford. Empty the basket I say.


Mis. Ford. Why man, why?


Ford. Master Page, as I am a man, there was one conuay'd out of my house
yesterday in this basket: why may not he be there again, in my house I am sure
he is; my Intelligence is true, my jealousy is reasonable, pluck me out all
the linen.


Mist. Ford. If you find a man there, he shall dye a Fleas death.


Page. Here Is no man.


Shall. By my fidelity this is not well Master Ford: This wrongs you.


Euans. Master Ford, you must pray, and not follow the imaginations of your
own heart: this is iealousies.


Ford. Well, he is not here I seek for.


Page. No, nor no where else but in your brain.


Ford. Help to search my house this one time: if I find not what I seek, show
no color for my extremity; Let me for ever be your Table-sport; Let them say
of me, as jealous as Ford, that searched a hollow Wall-nut for his wives
Lemman. Satisfy me once more, once more search with me.


Mist. Ford. What hoa (Mistress Page,) come you and the old woman down; my
husband will come into the Chamber.


Ford. Old woman? what old woman's that?


M. Ford. Why it is my maids Aunt of Brainford.


Ford: A witch, a Queen, an old couzening queen: Have I not forbid her my
house. She comes of errands, does she? We are simple men, we do not know
what is brought to pass under the profession of Fortune telling, She works by
Charms, by Spells, by the Figure, and such dawbry as this is, beyond our
Element: we know nothing. Come down you Witch, you Hagge you, come down I
say.


Mis. Ford. Nay, good sweet husband, good Gentlemen, let him not strike the old
woman.


Mis. Page. Come mother Prat, Come give me your hand.


Ford. I Will Prat-her: Out of my door, you Witch, you Hagge, you Baggage, you
Poulcat, you Runnion, out, out: I Will conjure you, i will fortune tell you.


Mis. Page. Are you not a shamed?
I think you have killed the poor woman.

Mis. Ford. Nay he will do it, it is a goodly credit for you.


Ford. Hang her witch.


Euan. By yea, and no, I think the o'man is a witch indeed: I like not when a
o'mans has a great peard; I spy a great peard under his muffler.


Ford. Will you follow Gentlemen, I beseech you follow; see but the issue of my
jealousy. If I cry out thus upon no traile, never trust me when I open again.


Page. Let Us obey his humor a little further;
Come Gentlemen.

Mis. Page. Trust me he beat him most pitifully.


Mis. Ford. Nay by the Mass that he did not; he beat him most vnpittifully,
me thought.


Mis. Page. I Will have the cudgel hallowed, and hung ore the Altar, it has done
meritorious service.


Mis. Ford. What think you? May we with the warrant of woman-hood, and the
witness of a good conscience, pursue him with any further revenge?


Mist. Page. The spirit of wantonness is sure scared out of him, if the devil
have him not in fee-simple, with find and recovery, he will never (I think) in
the way of waste, attempt us again.


Mist. Ford. Shall we tell our husbands how we have served him?


Mist. Page. Yes, by all means: if it be but to scrape the figures out of your
husbands brains: if they can find in their hearts, the poor vnuertuous fat
Knight shall be any further afflicted, we two will be still the ministers.


Mist. Ford. I Will warrant, they will have him publicly shamed, and me thinks
there would be no period to jest, should he not be publicly shamed.


Mist. Page. Come, to the Forge with it, then shape it: I would not have things
cool.

Exeunt.
Scoena Tertia.
Enter Host and Bardolfe. Bar. Sir, the Germane desires to have three of your
horses: the Duke himself will be to morrow at Court, and they are going to
meet him.


Host. What Duke should that be comes so secretly? I hear not of him in the
Court: let me speak with the Gentlemen, they speak English?


Bar. I Sir, I Will call him to you.


Host. They shall have my horses, but I Will make them pay: I Will sauce them, they
have had my houses a week at command. I have turned away my other guests they
must come off, I Will sauce them, come.

Exeunt.
Scoena Quarta*
Enter Page, Ford, Mistress. Page, Mistress Ford, and Euans. Euan. It Is one of
the best discretions of a o'mans as ever I did look upon.


Page. And did he send you both these Letters at an instant?


Mist. Page. Within a quarter of an hour.


Ford. Pardon me (wife) henceforth do what thou will:
I rather will suspect the Sun with gold,
Then thee with wantonness: Now does thy honor stand
(In him that was of late an Heretic)
As firm as faith.

Page. It Is well, it is well, no more:
Be not as extreme in submission, as in offense,
But let our plot go forward: Let our wives
Yet once again (to make us public sport)
Appoint a meeting with this old fat-fellow,
Where we may take him, and disgrace him for it.

Ford. There is no better way then that they spoke of.


Page. How? to send him word they will meet him in the Park at midnight? Fie,
fie, he will never come.


Euans. You say he has bin thrown in the Rivers: and has bin grievously
peaten, as an old o'man: me-thinkes there should be terror in him, that he
should not come: Me-thinkes his flesh is punished, he shall have no desires,


Page. So think I too.


M. Ford. Devise but how you will use him when he comes, And let us two devise to
bring him thither.


Mis. Page. There is an old tale goes, that Herne the
Hunter (sometime a keeper here in Windsor Forest)
Does all the winter time, at still midnight,
Walk round about an Oak, with great raged horns,
And there he blasts the tree, and takes the cattle,
And make milch-kine yield blood, and shakes a chain
In a most hideous and dreadful manner.
You have heard of such a Spirit, and well you know
The superstitious idle-headed-Eld
Received, and did deliver to our age
This tale of Herne the Hunter, for a truth.

Page. Why yet there want not many that do fear
In deep of night to walk by this Hernes Oak:
But what of this?

Mist. Ford. Marry this is our devise,
That Falstaff at that Oak shall meet with us.

Page. Well, let it not be doubted but he will come,
And in this shape, when you have brought him thither,
What shall be done with him? What is your plot?

Mis. Page. That likewise have we thought upon and thus:
Nan Page (my daughter) and my little son,
And three or four more of their growth, we will dress
Like Vrchins, Ouphes, and Fairies, green and white,
With rounds of waxen Tapers on their heads
And rattles in their hands; upon a sudden,
As Falstaff, and I, are newly met,
Let them from forth a saw* pitrush at once
With some diffused song: Upon their sight
We two, in great amazedness will fly:
Then let them all encircle him about,
And Fairy-like to pinch the unclean Knight;
And ask him why that hour of Fairy Revel,
In their so sacred paths, he dares to tread
In shape profane.

Ford. And till he tell the truth,
Let the supposed Fairies pinch him, sound,
And burn him with their Tapers.

Mis. Page. The truth being known.
We'll all present our selves; dis-horne the spirit,
And mock him home to Windsor.

Ford. The children must
Be practiced well to this, or they will neu'r do it.

Euan. I will teach the children their behauiours and I will: be like a
Iacke-an-Apes also, to burn the Knight with my Taber.


Ford. That will be excellent,
I Will go buy them vizards.

Mis. Page. My Nan shall be the Queen of all the Fairies, finely attired in a
robe of white.


Page. That silk will I go buy, and in that time
Shall M. Slender steal my Nan away,
And marry her at Eaton: go, send to Falstaff straight.

Ford. Nay. I Will to him again in the name of Broom,
He Will tell me all his purpose: sure he will come.

Mist. Page. Fear not you that; Go get us properties
And tricking for our Fayries.

Euans. Let us about it,
It is admirable pleasures, and ferry honest knaueries.

Mis. Page. Go Mis. Ford,
Send quickly to Sir John, to know his mind;
I Will to the Doctor, he has my good will,
And none but he to marry with Nan Page;
That Slender (though well landed) is an Idiot,
And he, my husband best of all affects;
The Doctor is well monied and friends
Potent at Court; he, none but he shall have her,
Though twenty thousand worthier come to crave her.

Scoena Quarta.
Enter Host, Simple, Falstaff, Bardolfe, Euans, Cains, Quickly. Host. What
would thou have? (Boore) what? (thick skin) speak, breathe, discuss;
brief, short, quick, nap.


Simp. Marry Sir, I come to speak with Sir John Falstaff from Master Slender.


Host. There Is his Chamber, his House, his Castle his standing bed and
truckle-bed: it is painted about with the story of the Prodigal, fresh and new:
go, knock and call: he will speak like an Anthropophaginian unto thee; Knock
I say.


Simp. There Is an old woman, a fat woman gone up into his chamber; i will be so
bold as stay Sir till she come down I come to speak with her indeed.


Host. Ha* A fat woman? The Knight may be robbed; I Will call. Bully-Knight, Bully
Sir John; speak from thy Lungs Military; Art thou there? It is thine Host,
thine Ephesian calls.


Fall. How now mine Host?


Host. Here Is a Bohemian-Tartar taries the coming down of thy fat-woman. Let
her descend (Bully) let her descend* my Chambers are honorable; Fie, priuacy?
Fie.


Fall. There was (mine Host) an old-fat-woman even now with me, but she is gone.


Simp. Pray you Sir, was it not the Wise-woman of Brainford?


Fall. I marry was it (Mussel-shell) what would you with her?


Simp. My Master (Sir) my master Slender, sent to her seeing her go thorough
the streets, to know (Sir) whether one Nim (Sir) that beguiled him of a chain,
had the chain or no*


Fall. I spoke with the old woman about it.


Sim. And what says she, I pray Sir?


Fall. Marry she says, that the very same man that beguiled Master Slender of
his Chain, cozon'd him of it.


Simp. I would I could have spoken with the Woman her self, I had other things
to have spoken with her too, from him.


Fall. What are they? let us know.


Host. I; come, quick.


Fall. I may not conceal them (Sir.)


Host. Conceal them, or thou di'st.


Sim. Why sir, they were nothing but about Mistress Anne Page, to know if it
were my Master fortune to have her, or no.


Fall. It Is, it is his fortune*


Sim. What Sir?


Fall. To have her, or no: go; say the woman told me so.


Simple May I be bold to say so Sir?


Fall. I Sir: like who more bold.


Simp. I thank your worship: I shall make my Master glad with these tidings.


Host. Thou are clearkly; thou art clearkly (Sir John) was there a wise woman
with thee?


Fall. I that there was (mine Host) one that has taught me more wit, then ever
I learned before in my life: and I paid nothing for it neither, but was paid
for my learning.


Bar. Out alas (Sir) cozonage: mere cozonage.


Host. Where be my horses? speak well of them varletto.


Bar. Run away with the cozoners: for so soon as I came beyond Eaton, they
threw me off, from behind one of them, in a slough of mire; and set spurs,
and away; like three Germane-diuels; three Doctor Faustaffes.


Host. They are gone but to meet the Duke (villain) do not say they be fled:
Germans are honest men.


Euans. Where is mine Host?


Host. What is the matter Sir?


Euan: Have a care of your entertainments: there is a friend of mine come to
Town, tells me there is three Cozen-Iermans, that has cozened all the Hosts of
Readius, of Maidenhead; of Cole-brooke, of horses and money: I tell you for
good will (look you) you are wise, and full of gibes, and vlouting-stocks: and
it is not convenient you should be cozoned. Fare you well.


Cai. Ver'is mine Host de Iarteere?


Host. Here (Master Doctor) in perplexity, and doubtful delemma.


Cai. I cannot tell vat is dat: but it is tell-a-me, dat you make grand
preparation for a Duke de Iamanie: by my trot; der is no Duke that the Court is
know, to come* I tell you for good will; adieu.


Host. Huy and cry, (villain) go: assist me Knight, I am undone: fly, run:
huy, and cry (villain) I am undone.


Fall. I would all the world might be cozond, for I have been cozond and
beaten too: if it should come to the ear of the Court, how I have been
transformed; and how my transformation has been washd, and cudgeld, they
would melt me out of my fat drop by drop, and liquor Fishermens-boots with
me: I warrant they would whip me with their fine wits, till I were as
crest-falne as a dride-peare I neur prosper'd since I forswore my self at
Primero: well, if my wind were but long enough; I would repent; Now? Whence
come you?


Qui. From the two parties forsooth.


Fall. ^^e Devil take one party, and his Dam the other: and so they shall be
both bestowed; I have suffered more for their sakes; more then the villainous
inconstancy of man's disposition is able to bear.


Qui. And have not they suffered? Yes, I warrant; speciously one of them;
Mistress Ford (good heart) is beaten black and blew, that you cannot see a
white spot about her.


Fall. What tell thou me of black, and blew? I was beaten my self into all
the colors of the Rainebow: and I was like to be apprehended for the Witch of
Braineford, but that my admirable dexterity of wit, my counterfeiting the
action of an old woman delivered me, the knave Constable had set meith'
Stocks, in the common Stocks, for a Witch.


Qui. Sir: let me speak with you in your Chamber, you shall hear how things
go, and (I warrant) to your content: here is a Letter will say somewhat:
(goodhearts) what a-doe here is to bring you together? Sure, one of you does
not serve heaven well, that you are so crossed.


Fall. Come up into my Chamber.

Exeunt.
Scoena Sexta.
Enter Fenton, Host. Host. Master Fenton, talk not to me, my mind is heavy:
I will give over all.

Fen. Yet hear me speak; assist me in my purpose,
And (as I am a gentleman) i will give thee
A hundred pound in gold, more then your loss.

Host. I will hear you (Master Fenton) and I will* (at the least) keep your
counsel.


Fen. From time to time, I have acquainted you
With the dear love I bear to fair Anne Page,
Who, mutually, has answered my affection,
(So far forth, as her self might be her chooser)
Even to my wish; I have a letter from her
Of such contents, as you will wonder at;
The mirth whereof, so larded with my matter,
That neither (singly) can be manifested
Without the show of both: fat Falstaff
Has a great Scene; the image of the jest.
I Will show you here at large (hark good mine Host;)
To night at Hernes-Oke, just 'twixt twelve and one,
Must my sweet Nun present the Fairie Queen;
The purpose why, is here* in which disguise
While other lests are something rank on foot,
Her father has commanded her to slip
Away with Slender, and with him, at Eaton
Immediately to Marry; She hatst consented* Now Sir,
Her Mother, (even strong against that match
And firm for Doctor Caius) has appointed
That he shall likewise shuffle her away,
While other sports are tasking of their minds,
And at the Deanery, where a Priest attends
Strait marry her: to this her Mothers plot
She (seemingly obedient) likewise has
Made promise to the Doctor; Now, thus it rests,
Her Father means she shall be all in white;
And in that habit, when Slender sees his time
To take her by the hand, and bid her go.
She shall go with him; her Mother has intended
(The better to deuote her to the Doctor;
For they must all be masked, and vizarded)
That quaint in green, she shall be loose en-roab'd,
With Ribonds pendant, flaring'bout her head;
And when the Doctor spies his vantage ripe,
To pinch her by the hand, and on that token,
The maid has given consent to go with him.

Host. Which means she to deceive? Father, or Mother.


Fen. Both (my good Host) to go along with me:
And here it rests, that you will procure the Vicar
To stay for me at Church, 'twixt twelve, and one,
And in the lawful name of marrying,
To give our hearts united ceremony.

Host. Well, husband your device; I Will to the Vicar,
Bring you the Maid, you shall not lack a Priest.

Fen. So shall I evermore be bound to thee;
Besides, i will make a present recompense.
Exeunt.
Actus Quintus.
Scoena Prima.
Enter Falstaff, Quickly, and Ford. Fall. Prithee no more prattling; go, i will
hold, this is the third time: I hope good luck lies in odd numbers: Away, go,
they say there is Divinity in odd Numbers, either in nativity, chance, or
death: away.


Qui. I Will provide you a chain, and i will do what I can to get (...) a pair of
horns.


Fall. Away I say, time wears, hold up your head and mince. How now Master
Broom? Master Broom, the matter will be known to night, or never. Be you in
the Park about midnight, at Hernes-Oake, and you shall see wonders.


Ford. Went you not to her yesterday (Sir) as you told me you had appointed?


Fall. I went to her (Master Broom) as you see, like a poore-old-man, but I
came from her (Master Broom) like a poore-old-woman; that same knave ( Ford
her husband) has the finest mad devil of jealousy in him (Master Broom)
that ever governed Frenzy. I will tell you, he beat me grievously, in the
shape of a woman: (for in the shape of Man (Master Broom) I fear not Goliath
with a Weauers beam, because I know also, life is a Shuttle) I am in have, go
along with me, i will tell you all (Master Broom:) since I plucked Geese, plaide
Trewant, and whip^ Top, I knew not what'twas to be beaten, till lately-Follow
me, i will tell you strange things of this knave Ford, on whom to night I will be
revenged, and I will deliver his wife into your hand. Follow, strange things in
hand (Master Broom) follow.

Exeunt.
Scena Secunda.
Enter Page, Shallow, Slender. Page. Come, come: we will couch in the
Castle-ditch, till we see the light of our Fairies. Remember son Slender, my


Slen. I forsoothe, I have spoke with her, and we have a nay-word, how to know
one another. I come to her in white, and cry Mum; she cries Budget, and by that
we know one another.


Shall. That Is good too: But what needs either your Mum, or her Budget? The
white will decipher her well enough. It has struck ten a* clock.


Page. The night is dark, Light and Spirits will become it well: Heaven
prosper our sport. No man means evil but the devil, and we shall know him by
his horns. Lets away: follow me.

Exeunt.
Scoena Tertia.
Enter Mis. Page, Mis. Ford, Caius. Mist. Page. Master Doctor, my daughter is
in green, when you see your time, take her by the hand, away with her to the
Deanerie, and dispatch it quickly; go before into the Park; we two must go
together.


Cai. I know vat I have to do, adieu.


Mist. Page. Fare you well (Sir:) my husband will not rejoice so much at the
abuse of Falstaff, as he will chafe at the Doctors marrying my daughter; But
it is no matter; better a little chiding, then a great deal of heartbreake.


Mis. Ford. Where is Nan now? and her troop of Fairies? and the Welch-deuill
Herne?


Mist. Page. They are couched in a pit hard by Hernes Oak, with obscured
Lights; which at the very instant of Falstaffes and our meeting, they will at
once display to the night.


Mis. Ford. That cannot choose but amaze him.


Mis. Page. If he be not amazed, he will be mocked; If he be amazed, he will
every way be mocked.


Mis. Ford. We Will betray him finely.


Mist. Page. Against such Lewdsters, and their lechery,
Those that betray them, do no treachery.

Mi. Ford. The hour drawes-on; to the Oak, to the Oak.

Exeunt.
Scoena Quarta.
Enter Euans and Fairies. Euans. Trib, trib Fairies; Come, and remember your
parts: be pold (I pray you) follow me into the pit, and when I give the
watch-'ords, do as I pid you; Come, come trib, trib.

Exeunt.
Scoena Quarta.
Enter Falstaff, Mistress Page, Mistress Ford, Euans, Anne Page, Fairies, Page,
Ford, Quickly, Slender, Fenton, Caius, Pistol. Fall. The Windsor-bell has
stroke twelve: the Minute draws on: Now the hot-bloodied* Gods assist me;
Remember love, thou was it a Bull for thy Europa, Love set on thy horns. O
powerful Love, that in some respects makes a Beast a Man: in some other, a Man
a beast. You were also (Jupiter) a Swan, for the love of Leda: O omnipotent
Love, how nere the God drew to the complexion of a Goose: a fault done first in
the form of a beast, (O Jove, a beastly fault:) and then another fault, in the
semblance of a Foul, think on it (Jove) a fowlefault. When Gods have hot
backs, what shall poor men do? For me, I am here a Windsor Stagge, and the
fattest (I think) in the Forest. Send me a cool rut-time (Jove) or who can
blame me to piss my Tallow? Who comes here my Do?


M. Ford. Sir John? Art thou there (my Dear?)
My male-Deere?

Fall. My Do, with the black Scut? Let the sky rain Potatoes: let it
thunder, to the tune of Greenesleeues, haile-kissing Comfit, and snow Eringoes;
Let there come a tempest of provocation, I will shelter me here.


Mis. Ford. Mistress Page is come with me (sweet heart.)


Fall. Divide me like a brid'd-Bucke, each a Haunch: I will keep my sides to my
self, my shoulders for the fellow of this walk; and my horns I bequeath your
husband. Am I a Woodman, ha? Speak I like Herne the Hunter? Why, now is Cupid
a child of conscience, he makes restitution. As I am a true spirit, welcome.


M. Page. Alas, what noise?


M. Ford. Heaven forgiue-our sins.


Fall. What should this be?


M. Ford. M. Page. Away, away.


Fall. I think the devil will not have me damned,
Lest the oil that is in me should set hell on fire;
He would never else cross me thus.

Enter Eairies. Qui. Fairies black, gray, green, and white,
You Moone-shine reuellers, and shades of night.
You Orphan heirs of fixed destiny,
Attend your office, and your quality.
Crier Hob-goblyn, make the Fairy Oyes.

Bist. Elues, list your names: Silence you aerie toys.
Cricket, to Windsore-chimnies shall thou leap;
Where fires thou find'st vnrak'd, and hearths unswept,
There pinch the Maids as blew as Bill-berry,
Our radiant Queen, hates Sluttery.

Fall. They are Fairies, he that speaks to them shall die,
I Will wink, and couch: No man their works must eye.

Euan. Where Is Bid? Go you, and where you find a maid
That ere she sleep has thrice her prayers said,
Raise up the Organs of her fantasy,
Sleep she as sound as careless infancy,
But those as sleep, and think not on their sins,
Pinch them arms, legs, backs, shoulders, sides, and shins.

Qu. About, about:
Search Windsor Castle (Elues) within, and out:
Strew good luck (Ouphes) on every sacred room,
That it may stand till the perpetual doom,
In state as wholesome, as in state it is fit,
Worthy the Owner, and the Owner it.
The several Chaires of Order, look you scowre
With juice of Balm; and every precious flower,
Each fair Instalment, Coat, and seu'rall Crest,
With loyal Blazon, evermore be blessed.
And Nightly-meadow-Fairies, look you sing
Like to the Garters-Compasse, in a ring,
Th'expressure that it bears: Green let it be,
Mote fertile-fresh then all the Field to see;
And, Honey Soit Qui Mal-y-Pence, write
In Emrold ruffes, Flowers purple, blew; and white,
Like Saphire-pearle, and rich embroidery,
Buckled below fair Knight-hoods bending knee;
Fairies use Flowers for their characterie:
Away, disperse: But till it is one a clock,
Our Dance of Custom, round about the Oak
Of Herne the Hunter, let us not forget.

Eu. Pray you lock hand in hand: your selves in order set.
And twenty glo-wormes shall our Lanthornes be
To guide our Measure round about the Tree.
But stay, I smell a man of middle earth.

Fall. Heavens defend me from that Welsh Fairy,
Lest he transform me to a piece of Cheese.

Pistol. Vilde worm, thou wast ore-look'd even in thy birth.


Qui. With Triall-fire touch me his finger end;
If he be chaste, the flame will back descend
And turn him to no pain: but if he start,
It is the flesh of a corrupted heart.

Pist. A trial, come.


Euan. Come: will this wood take fire?


Fall. Oh, oh, oh.


Qui. Corrupt, corrupt, and tainted in desire.
About him (Fairies) sing a scornful rhyme,
And as you trip, still pinch him to your time.
The Song.
Fie on sinful fantasy: Fie on Lust, and Luxirie.
Lust is but a bloody fire, kindled with unchaste desire,
Fed in heart whose flames aspire,
As thoughts do blow them higher and higher:
Pinch him (Fairies) mutual: Pinch him for his villainy.
Pinch him, and burn him, and turn him about,
Till Candles, and Starlight, and Moone-shine be out.

Page. Nay do not fly, I think we have watched you now; Will none but Hern^
the Hunter serve your turn?


M. Page. I pray you come, hold up the jest no higher.
Now (good Sir John) how like you Windsor wives?
See you these husband? Do not these fair yoakes
Become the Forest better then the Town?

Ford. Now Sir, who is a Cuckold now?
Master Broom, Falstaffes a Knave, a Cuckoldy knave,
Here are his horns Master Broom;
And Master Broom, he has enjoyed nothing of Fords, but his Buck-basket, his
cudgel, and twenty pounds of money, which must be paid to Master Broom, his
horses are arrested for it, Master Broom.


M. Ford. Sir John, we have had ill luck: we could never meet: I will never
take you for my Love again, but I will always count you my Dear.


Fall. I do begin to perceive that I am made an Ass.


Ford. I, and an Ox too; both the proofs are extant.


Fall. And these are not Fairies;

I was three or four times in the thought they were not Fairies, and yet the
guiltiness of my mind, the sudden surprise of my powers, drove the
grossness of the foppery into a received belief, in despite of the teeth of
all rhyme and reason, that they were Fairies. See now how wit may be made a
Iacke-a-Lent, when it is upon ill employment.


Euans. Sir John Falstaff, serve Got, and leave your desires, and Fairies will
not pinse you.


Ford. Well said Fairy Hugh:


Euans. And leave you your iealouzies too, I pray you.


Ford. I will never mistrust my wife again, till thou art able to woo her in
good English.


Fall. Have I laid my brain in the Sun, and dri'de it, that it wants matter to
prevent so gross ore-reaching as this? Am I ridden with a Welsh Goat too?
Shall I have a Coxcombe of Frize? It Is time I were choked with a piece of
toasted Cheese.


Euan. Seese is not good to give putter; your belly is all putter.


Fall. Seese, and Putter? Have I lived to stand at the taunt of one that makes
Fritters of English? This is enough to be the decay of lust and late-walking
through the Realm.


Mis. Page. Why Sir John, do you think though we would have thrust virtue
out of our hearts by the head and shoulders, and have given our selves without
scruple to hell, that ever the devil could have made you our delight?


Ford. What, a hodge-pudding? A bag of flax?


Mis. Page. A puftman?


Page. Old, cold, withered, and of intolerable entrails?


Ford. And one that is slanderous as Satan?


Page. And as poor as Job?


Ford. And as wicked as his wife?


Euan. And given to Fornications, and to Tauernes, and Sack, and Wine, and
Metheglins, and to drinkings and swearings, and starings? Pribles and prables?


Fall. Well, I am your Theme: you have the start of me, I am dejected: I am not
able to answer the Welsh Flannell, Ignorance it self is plummet ore me, use
me as you will.


Ford. Marry Sir, we will bring you to Windsor to one Master Broom, that you
have cozon'd of money, to whom you should have bin a Pander: over and above
that you have suffered, I think, to repay that money will be a biting
affliction.


Page. Yet be cheerful Knight: thou shall eat a posset to night at my house,
where I will desire thee to laugh at my wife, that now laughes at thee: Tell
her Master Slender has married her daughter.


Mis. Ford* Doctors doubt that;

If Anne Page be my daughter, she is (by this) Doctor Caius wife.


Slen. Whoa hoe, hoe, Father Page,


Page. Son? How now Son.
Have you dispatched?

Slen. Dispatched? I Will make the best in'Glostershire know on it: would I were
hanged la, else.


Page. Of what son?


Slen. I came yonder at Eaton to marry Mistress Anne Page, and she is a great
lubberly boy. If it had not been in the Church, I would have swing'd him, or he
should have swing'd me. If I did not think it had been Anne Page, would I
might never stir, and it is a Post-masters Boy.


Page. Upon my life then, you took the wrong.


Slen. What need you tell me that? I think so, when I took a Boy for a
Girl: If I had been married to him, for all he was in woman's apparel) I
would not have had him.


Page. Why this is your own folly,
Did not I tell you how you should know my daughter, By her garments?

Slen. I went to her in green, and cried Mum, and she cride budget, as Anne
and I had appointed, and yet it was not Anne, but a Post-masters boy.


M. Page. Good George be not angry, I knew of your purpose: turned my daughter
in white, and indeed she is now with the Doctor at the Denerie, and there
married.


Cai. Ver is Mistress Page: by gar I am cozoned, I ha married oon Garsoon, a
boy; oon pesant, by gar. A boy, it is not An Page, by gar, I am cozened.


Mis. Page. Why? did you take her in white?


Cai. I be gar, and it is a boy; be gar I Will raise all Windsor.


Ford. This is strange: Who has got the right Anne?


Page. My heart misgiues me, here comes Master Fenton*
How now Master Fenton?

Anne. Pardon good father, good my mother pardon


Page. Now Mistress;
How chance you went not with Master Slender?

Mis. Page. Why went you not with Master Doctor, maid?


Fen. You do amaze her: hear the truth of it.
You would have married her most shamefully,
Where there was no proportion held in love:
The truth is, she and I (long since contracted)
Are now so sure that nothing can dissolve us,
The Offense is holy, that she has committed,
And this deceit looses the name of craft,
Of disobedience, or vnduteous title,
Since therein she does euitate and shun
A thousand irreligious cursed hours
Which forced marriage would have brought upon her.

Ford. Stand not amazed, here is no remedy:
In Love, the heavens themselves do guide the state,
Money buys Lands, and wives are sold by fate.

Fall. I am glad, though you have taken a special stand to strike (...) that your
Arrow has glanced.


Page. Well, what remedy? Fenton, heaven give thee joy,
What cannot be eschew'd, must be embraced.

Fall. When night-dogges run, all sorts of Dear are chased.


Mis. Page. Well, I will muse no further: Master Fenton,
Heaven give you many, many merry days:
Good husband, let us every one go home,
And laugh this sport ore by a Country fire,
Sir John and all.

Ford. Let it be so (Sir John:)
To Master Broom, you yet shall hold your word,
For he, to night, shall lie with Mistress Ford.
Exeunt.
FINIS.

