A Sermon declaringe how vue at Justified by faith

Imprinted at londun by William hyl at the sign of ye grene hyl, and there to
be soulde

WHAT IT Is TOO BE: justified by Christ and the way how we are justified and
reproving error concernig it. Translated out of latin into English by E. T.
For as much as iustificacion which we have through christ is most propre to
a Chrystyan man, and is the well spring of al other gifts, virtuous and
goodness, yt shall be meet first to se what we call to be justified by christ or
to be just through christ, That we may give thanks to god the father and
christ our lord for his great gifts first god does not justify or absolute
the^ guilty or pronounce him just (for thus singnifiethe justify) as a
Tyraunte is wont to do whoo when he hears one of his guard accused be he
never so mischeuous he defends him, excuses him: and will not have him
accounted gyltie, be his myschefe neuerso manifest and so he justifies him
neither punishes him acordynge to his deserts, rather he will have him
accounted as a good just and honest parsone the which manner of iustifyinge is
deceytfull* wicked, and tyranny called. But god does iustefy ye sinner after
this sort. For as he is just so is his judgment rightuous. As David
witnesses. Lord thou art just, and thy judgment is rightuous. For the which
cause he favors us, not whiles we sin, neither accompteth us a just whiles
we are in sin, nether allows sinners as ^h^ Tyranne does. But ye God
nether does justify men as a good king does for it is the part of a good
Prince when an innocente and gyltles parson is in ieopardy to defend his
innocencye against false accusacions and openly to pronounce him his just and
set him free as he deserves to be. But yet neither after this sort, we can
be justified as gyltles. For we are by nature sinners. There are that will
forgive the faults and pardon him for none other cause but yt they are sorry
for their evil dead neither do require him to satisfye, but deliver him
freelye. But god does not so iustefy the sinner not because he can not but
because so it semethe good to him to forgive noman with out satysfactyon as
after shall be declared. Neither are we therefore Iustyfyede because we can give
GOD any thing of our own to counterpaise owre curses and sins. For there
is nothing in man that can satisfye before god for the least sin yea man is
not worthy to obtain the least drop of mercy at gods hand as Jacob says
to god in genesis, I am less then al thy mercies for as sambros say the the
redemption of christ's blood should wax vile. Neither the perrogatiue of man's
good works would neue place to the mercy of god, if justification, which is
freely given, weredone to works that went before the^ it should not be a free
gift of ye geuer but ye wage and reward of ye worker as spaule cries if we
are justified by the works of the law then is CHRIST dead in vain neither
can we say this truly that we are made just partly by the satisfaction of
christ and partly by our own for so we might boaste of our selves which is
contrary to S, paul's doctrine. For he says he that does glory let him
glory in god. And how often does all the scripture warn to give god al
honor and glory of iustifing man by faith no regard had of our merytes I
will tell the^ truth plainlye if the least jot of our iustificacion hong of
our selves the promise of God were not true. As S. Paul wytnessethe in his
epistle to the Romans bysydes that as Agath the Prophet and paul the
apostle write, all those things are fylthie and unclean that the unclean goo
about or do, but al those are unclean whoesoeuer they be that are not
justified of god, wherefore their mercyes can not please God ne appease his
wrath by any means This esaye willing to declare compares all our own
righteousness to a clothe defiled with women's flowers, And s. Austen affirmith
that all the deservings of men were lost in adam after he had transgressed and
doonne that sin whereby we were al condemned and made void of righteousness.
For by Adam we are all dead but by Christ we are referred to life. Therefore
good brethren weighe with me how that a man can of himself redeem and pay
ransom for so great sins: that is to wit how he being dead can restoore
him self to life again for this cause Christ said not the ruler of the
Synagooge thou shalt sasatysfye for part, and I will fullfyll that that thou
canne^ste not. But he said to him only believe. And have a sure confydence.
Paul in the, Epistle to the. Romans. Ad. Galat. Does prove that no man Is
Iustyfyed neither by the Law of virtuous lyuinge neither by man's justice yea
rather man's justice did crucify Christ by the Jews and condemn him before
ponce pylate and did persecute, trouble and torment the same Christ diversely
but Saul after called paul in his me^bres. But I pray you when has such a
justice as can make men just and blessed. First after paul the law, does
increase sin and does not take it away ye law does bind and condemn
and not loose and set tree, yt kyllethe and not quickneth, Moreover the
pharesee did pronunce him self partlye bye him self and partlye bye god, and
therefore he gave god thanks, but because he gave not the whole glory to god,
and to him self ignorance, as the publica^ did, he was not justified. Let us
call to remembrance the parable of the sheep herd that leaving the xcix.
Shepes which me anethe then that will iustifyfye them selves) did seek, and
find that sheep that was soste and brought her to her Foulde. Bye the Which
thing are meant sinners, that acknowledge there sins and trust to be saved and
made just only by the mercy and bountefullnes of god there is in certain
cytyes and contreys a law or custo^e whether it be that in the last weke of
lent we call the passion weke certain thieves and prisoners are delivered and
let out of preso^ paying no fine by no deed of there own but ye only mere mercy
of ye prices with custom I do not try out in this place whether it be good or
badde. The clemencye of princes I praise if they have any superstycion therein
ye I disrpaise. This fact does express unto us liuelye ye goodness of god for
as those prisoners are delivered where as they deserved no such thing but rather
extrem pu^ishme^t, se^blably ar we saved by ye mercy of god only christ being
our mediator and aduocat will ye be assured yt this is so mark the thief yt was
hanged not for from christ tell me what good did he at any time why Christ
should say unto him this day thou shalt be with me in parradyce he was
scourged ye will say he was tormented and hownge on the cross I answer that
he deserved for his meschefe not only those but greater yea everlasting death
for by those punishementes happelye he might satisfye man's law yet al his
pains were never able to co^terpaise GODS justice if he had been put to death a
thousand times if any object that that was done by a wonder and by a special
preuillege with them I will say that all those that are saved are saved by a
little mirracle and by the mere mercy of GOD for somuche as it is euedent that
one manne is not better then an other by nature but by grace for by nature we
are all equal in daungier of everlasting dampnatyon. And as Sayncte Paul
Callethe us the Chylderne of Wrath.

But the rich, the Lord GOD by his great mercy did choice whoome he would
have before the begyuning and creatyon, of the Woorlde, and whom he did chewse
them he called, whom he called them he justified, whom he justified them he
glorified. This saying is none of mine but of Paul's the a postle therefore our
iustificacion, our salvation and our blessedness are al wholye to be grunded in
Christ, and we partly i^ Christ and partly in our selves for the which cause
Paul taught ye Corinthians yt no man can lay any other foundacio^ besides yt
which is laid i^ Jesus Christ whosoever they be that stable ye fou^dacio^ of
there salvation on any other the^ i^ him they are not wise ne expert in heavenly
things, as yt which bulde not upon the suer rock, but on ye lowse sand which
house is not able to stand when any tempest of wynd or of great flood of the
sea shall assail it as our savior Christ teaches the galathia^s which being
deceayued by false prophets did challenge to be saved partly by their oune
meritis, partly by christ's which there opinion Paul can not bear i^ no wise,
but does exagite it as pestiferus, and derogatine from ye glory of God for
look how much ye give to Man's merits (co^cerni^g justification) be they
never so good and holy, so much ye take a way from the glory of god, and so
much is plucked from ye body of christ as is put to the merits of man wherefore
no man oght to think yt he is made just because he satisfies god him self
either in part or whole It is also an error yt certain me^saie the works ye
goo before iustificacio^ although they be not good of the^ selves yet to please
god through Christ and to be compted of him as merits, whereon they conclude
ye they are justified by christ as without whom those works were void and
in vain. To them I answer that this works are sin and wy first an euel
tree can not bring forth good fruits. Secondarelye because without faith and
a sure trust in the merit of God exhibited for, Christ no man can please
god. And paul also counts the gay works the justice of the law which he had
don before his justification as a hurt and a vile thing. And wryttynge to
Thimothe does teach that we were saved before the world through Christ not
according to our deseruinges but to his prepensed will and grace. To the which
saying Austen stuck stoutlye as his works do witness, who then will say that
sin does please the ryghtuouse God and that they for Christ's sake are
reputed as merits that so sin may make satiffaction for sin? Christ died
for our sins not to allow them but to emproue and dampne them), and too
teach that nothing do the displease him but sin But they say to them that
love God all things are good. It is true: but how do they love God whom they
know not? As yet not redeemed to god through faith and borne spirituallye as
yet not lyghtened with his holy sprite as yeat not delivered from the prison of
darkness and grafted in the kingdom of his beloved and gracious son of
God. And the place of Paull is not to be understand of sin but of the cross
and afflictions as those things that go before and the following of the place
declare the the more a worthy justice of god that shall not only not condemn
sin but take it for virtue and also so ^^ well rewarded let the opinions so
absurd* and wicked befarre both from the heart and the mouth of Christen men,

Lastelye some men would think that we are justified by Christ as by an
aduocat mean or entercessyo^ and ye he obteyneth of his father for us
remission of sins which we do not deny how be it they that ^o say neither
nothyngene all that in the thing is to be said for these things that be of
greater weight the^ these be they yt pass over for first christ did take upon
hi^ the sins of his and would have attributed to him (such was his great love
toward us his father agreinne to it, yea willing so to be which Esayas saw
long or it came moreover he not only took them to himself but as though he
had done them self who yet only and no more but he was with out all spotte
of sin would pay our rau^so^ wc ye most bitter kid of death wherbi he fully
co^trepesed and satisfied y^ justice, nether therwt content he gave us his
innocence, righteousness bolines and wysdom and, which is above all this gave us
his sprit, that thereby we being quickened not with our own sprite but with the
sprite of Christ and that we newborn ye truylye borne again might call
rightly God ye father and stand before him without fear although we had never
been defiled with the least spot of sin For he that spared not his own Son
but gave him for us how can it be that he will not give us all things with
hi^ Now therefore we are just without sin gyltles and innocents, not only
by our own righteousness that we are without sin for Christ has our sin
upon him and made it his and has vanquised it by his death but alsoo by the
righteousness of Christ and the purite which he has given us most
abundantly, wherwt we being well cled and adorned may boldly apere before god
this heavenly gifts these virtues these heuenle and eternal treasures only
faith, and sure persuasyon of the mercy of God conteynethe in it and the
bygger the faith is the greater also are they extemed by faith all other gifts
are measured, fayethe is the righteousness of a Christen man, faith is the
justify catyo^ This is it that we call to be justified by Christ the which he
that has truly attained, theye have attained it all that with all their heart
put their whole confydence and trust in Christ he may truly say with.
Paul I am crucyfyed with Christ yet I live not now but Christ in me what
need I hold you longer with more words. He that thus is justified may
stand before the judgment seat of God with as good a countenance with as
like favor as Christ him self for there is like state of the head and other
members. For who dare either accuse or condemn them that God has chosen them
that god has promised just and for whom Christ is medyator and intercessour.
They are clothed with Christ and all his garments wherefore as Iaacob pleased
his father in Esau his stead having on Esau his clothes Semblably will take us
for no, true sons clothed with the righteousness of Christ and will give us
the enheritaunce of his heavenly kingdom. with Jesus Christ his son to whom
be all honor and glory for ever and ever

Amen
Finis
To the right worshipful and his singular good Master Siluester, Butler,
George Bancrafte, Wishethe prosperitye and health, boeth of body and soul.
WHen I considered with my self the great and dangerous, abuses in the
administracion of such sacraments as our savior Jesus Christ left to his
mystical body the church of the fayethfull, to be externe signs, and tokens
of such gifts as God has, and does daily work in us, to his own glory,
and salvation of our souls* I can find, perceive, and prove none to be
somuche abused, as the holy and sacret supper of our Lord. For where as he
ordined, that holy sacrament of his body, and blood to be eaten and dronken in
remembrance of his passion whose fruit they taste therein, which have there
steadfast faith in him. And thereby show forth the Lords death until he
come, and as bread is made, of many grains, and wine of many grapes, so the
members of the congregation of Christ's church. Haueinge one God, one fayeth,
and one Baptism, are put in remembrance in eateinge and drinkinge yt they are
one body, whereof Christ is ye head. The beally bishopes of Babylon ye Romish
Antichrist, have anullyd extripate, and clean abolished ye ordinance of
Christ and use of thappostelles, in the administracion thereof. And have of
their own brain excogitated devised and brought in to the church a new, and
straynge ordinance for the same, which is as contrary to christ's will and
purpose, touching that blessed supper as heaven to earth, light to darkness,
life to death, and they call it the blessed Mass but it may be truly called
a diluesh Masking, for menes eyes, are masked there with yt they cannot se the
truth, but through that detestable abominacion have been, brought to most
miserable perdicio^, for they apply it to souldyoures in war for fair weather
and rain for the plage pockes and such other diseases for beasts sick of ye
morren for preseruacion of health, and for remission of sins, boeth for the
quick and dead I will not, speak how God is mocked therein and Christ had in
derision they pley booe pepe, with seste me, or seste me not. My pene abhoreth
to write what duckinge knellenge lickinge kissing or Crossing and breathing
these diuilles apes have devised in this whorishe Mass there desguisinge In
apparel at Mass has picked many a pore man's purs and has robbid their
souls of the true fruits of the spirit, for all such somes of money that men
should have bestowed on their pour parents, children and nedie neighbors
was to little for their vestime^tes albes, stoles chalices, corporaces, altar
clothes, Massbockes, and such other, wherein Christ has no delight for
Christ and the Appostelles vsede none such disguisynge in the
admininistracion of this blessid Sacrament of Christ's body and blood but were
contendid with such ramente as they were accustomed daily to were and so these
shameless Idolaters, showing them selves of what generation they are, dare so
bouldlye face out such manifest lies against gods glory ye plain truth, and
ordinance of christ What shall I speak of these holy mumers (I would have
said holy Mass mongers) that when they here of any rich manes death they
flock together like rauennes to a dead Carre^. Not to conforte them that
mourn for the dead with hope of ye resurrection of the flesh, not to give
thanks to God for them that are departed in the fayeth of Christ nor to pray
that we, departinge in the same fayeth may with them receive like reward but
to get money with Requiem eternal and pro quorum memoria corpus Christi sumitur
with censing dashing of holy water, and such other like Iuglinges so that the
right use of it is clean altered as thought christ had never ordained it in
remembrance of his death and passion and for as much as in this treatise
folowinge the true use of the Lords supper and also the deuelishe patchinge of
the popish Mass is in few words lively declared I have thought it good to
translate the same into the english tongue to the edifinge of my dear brethren
in Christ praiinge God the father of our savior Jesus Christ, that these
things may shortly be reformed that the pore flock of Christ be no more
deceyuede with such craftye conueiaunce to keep them in co^tenual blinded for
lucres sake, to ye great danger of their souls and pernicious derogacio^ of
gods glory to whom be honor and glory for ever

AMEN
FOr as much as God has commanded us by his Appostle i. Pet. iii.
Peter (Oh ye fathers of our country) in wisdom gravity and godliness to be
ready at all times to give an answer to every man, that asks us a reason of
our faith it is mete yt we should more gladly answer to a question proponed
being requirede of you our most Sovereign Magistrates to whom we know
also what is our duty in other things. We have affirmed and upon sure
ground, and reason proved, in our public sermons, that the popish Mass, is
not an offering for ye quick and dead but a most detestable abominacio^
before god And therefore a man will not belyue how glad we are, which love the
truth, that you our most prudent senators require of us an answer to this
question for we conceive great hope that God which moves you to desire to
atteine the knowledge of the light and truth, will of his infinite mercy
encrese his grace in you that after the example of the godly kings, Ezechias
and Iolias when the truth diligently serched out and truly known, you will
take away, abolishe and utterly distroye all such tradicions of man as are
repugnante to the word of God. And al such things as are taught and set
fourth contrary to the ordinance of god and wholesome doctrine of Christ,
which things stire up the anger and griuouse displeasure for God against us
miserable creatures for in so doing, you shall norishe confirm and establishe
peace unity and concord in this noble city of Basell, and bring your
subjects to a sincere and godly form of lyuinge, that at ye day of
Judgment the blood and condempnacion of most detestable sinners shall not be
required at your hands being our Magistrates and gouerners but rather you
shall be rewarded of God and receive in this world praise and glory boeth of
your subjects and of straingers for nothing can rather win the favor of
subjects to their Maiestrates and rulers and bring them to obedience then the
word of God, and his commandments frelye preachede and without danger of
ponishement, as you may evidently perceive by Iosue Ios. i.
and the people of God committed to his governance. And strayngers are moved
with nothing so much as when there se the truth, the glory of god and an
honest order of lyuinge magnified and had in reverence, for God does keep the
city that seeks his glory.

First of all we proteste that in our puklyke sermones and in this writynge we
not here speak nor write against the most holy ordinance of Christ or the
Apostles in the administracio^ of ye Lords supper, but we both speak and
write against ye abuses yt be crept into the church, and are obstinatli
defended, by co^tinuau^ce of time without ye hollie scriptures, to ye great
hinderau^ce of the fruits of christ's passion and crafty deceiueinge of ye
unlearned people contrary to Christ's ordinance and administracio^ of ye
apostles yt common rumor is through ye maliciouse envy, and faulse forgid lies
of some popish preachers and of some other yt are even against us which know ye
truth, yt we goo about to let abolishe, and bring to naught all good works,
they feign this on there own head, as they do al other things for nothing,
can be more greauouse to us then, to here that men do not live after ye
commandments of God. And we know through the grace of God. What ceremonies,
and what pert of ye ceremonies is profitable and mete for christen me^ and our
purpose matained with a good conscience is to use well sincerly, and without any
faulsly devised tracions, so much of this sacrament of our Lords super, as
was most perfectly begone, and ordiened of Christ our master and there can no
man prove that our intent was other wise at any time and this by ye assistaunce
of gods grace, we will affirm by the only scriptures of God. Now we will in
gods name declar and show forth our reasones for this question proponed.
Vndoubtely al such as do not regard and care for ye only glory of god teach
nothing that is godly, true, or in aniwise profitable. Math. ii.
For god says by Malachi. ye prophet. And now, Oh ye priests this
commandment touches you if you will not hear it nor regard it my name,
says the Lord, of hosts I will send accursse upon you, and will Curse
your blessing yea curse them will I if ye do not take heed It is therefore
manifest that God being griuousely displeased cursseth the^ that regard not
his name and glory, for God is gellouse and a consuming fire. He will have his
name magnified Deuteronomy. v.
and prayesid the Iues and gentiles did fall into lewd minds Rom, i.
and corrupt Judgments because they knew God, and did not glorifi him as
God. The lord Esa. i. 42
him self says, I will give my glory to none other. Finallye Math, 12.
he that seeks not gods glory does another desire to increase it nor does
speak, live, nor is of God but is adomination before God. For whosoever is not
with 1. Cor. 2.
Christ as who says yt God may be glorified, he is abominacio^ before God and
is his enemy when the Esai. ^3.
natural man perceyueth not the things that pertayne to the To. xi.
spirit of God. And his thought is as fare in sunder, from the will of God, as
ye earth from heaven for in deed man touching his own knowledge, does know
nothing less the^ ye will of God. Who therefore Luc, xvi.
can tell what is the will of God and his true glory Christ says, that
which is highly estimede, among men is abominacion before God, for men are
ever prone and ready to fall and forsake the truth, to follow and cleave to
there own profit, and inuencions whereof Idolatry and othere abominacions,
come up and have Prove. iii.
there begynynge, wherefore the wise man says, trust in the lord Deuteronomy. xii.
with all thine heart, and not in thine own, wisdom. And Moses says, you
shall not do after al things that we do here this day eueri man what seems
him good in his own eyes, it is therefore folishely spoken to say, what thing
soever that a man does for gods sake is a good work, and worthey to be
rewarded, for then eueri man might have knoledge sufficientli without any
teaching or doctrine of the word of God. But how should a man be then of an
vndoubting conscience or with what hope, might a man live to please God. Where
the knoledge of ye will of God wantethe, there most also hope and fayeth want,
namely in trouble and affliction what so ever truly is not of fayeth is sin
where Syne is there is abominaon before God. Therefore god has declared his
will and mind, by thapostles. And Christ him self (that our knowledge may be
sure, and our oppinion undoubtful) how god ought to be truly worshipped.
Moreover he has given us astrayght commandment to keep his law, that we shall
turn another to the right nor yet to the Deuteronomy. xviii.
last hand that we shall another add nor take away any thing from it, he
that will not harken to the prophet that I will raise up says the Lord, I will
require it of him, after the law was given and the truth was known, God
would be worshipped, as his word teaches and the offense was the^ much more
greuouse. Albeit king Saull did kill and offer fat Oxen, i. R. xv.
to the true living God which was a good work in apparau^ce: yet because the
scripture of God did not teach him so to do, God therefore was griuoslye
displeased with him. For although he offered his sacrifice to God, yet that
accounted he to him for Idolatry. ii. Re. vi.
Oza died suddenly because he tuched, the arc against the Lords
commandment, yet he thought it had been a good deed. Did not the earth
swallowe up Corah and his adhere^tes because they would Nume. xvi.
take upon them the office of the priests. The Israhelites, did think it a
godly and goodlye thing to Deuteronomy. xvi.
have pleasant groves night unto the altar of God, but him did it not please.
They though it a goodly fact at Tophet in Jerusalem, Jerome. vii.
to kyl and offer there own sons but the more they did so ye greater was there
abominacion before god For god says he never commanded them nether came it
ever into his thought. God commanded Iosue Iose. i.
to be strong and bold, that he might observe, and do according to all the
law, which Moses commaundyd him, and that he should turn there from, nither
to the right nor to the left hand yt he might do wisely in all things Esa. xxx.
he took in hand, god by his prophet Esaias says, alas for the disobedient
children, that will take counsel without me and will take, asecerete advise,
and not out of my spirit, therefore add they sin unto sin, and Christ
says Math. vi.
in vain do they serve me, teachinge the doctrines and precepts of men, the
proud herted Jews did stand so well in there own conceit for their
tradicions and inventions, that for love they had to them, they despised hated,
and at last killide our master Christ John. xxi.
our aduersaris dare say yt Christ and the apostles taught many things,
which are not written in the scripture, and that Christ said his Disciples
could not bear away all that he had taught this cauil repungnau^t to the true
understanding of the scripture may be an occasion, and cause of great
errors for there with all lies and herisies may be confirmed they will say
albeit it is not written, yet the appostles taught it by word of mouth, and
also the scriptures of God, should be an imperfect doctrine, which thing to
off^r^ne, is blasphemy against the holy ghost considering that the^ all ye
doctrine of our faith should be put in question. Therefore surly so much is
contained in holy scripture as is necessary unto salvation to eueri one that
believes They say could the church err so long time as it has? If your
doctrnie be true the, true church has not errede, which has the word of god
only. The church verily must be tried by the word of God and not the word of
god by the church whether the church that believes be of many or of few,
for the church is known by the fruits, and not because, it consists of
many, and has her begynynge of the word of God, and her fruits, are tried by
the word, whether the true christan church brought them forth or no if it be
the true christen church John. ^.
she hears no another voice but Christ's her shepherde and brydgrome, which
the appostles preached to the church, and if an angel came out of heaven
teaching any other doctrine then this, let him Gala. i.
be accurssed, if we love and follow the doctrine that Christ taught and being
his disciples, we shall not be excluded, from the true church so long as we
keep with us the word of God. But he is puffed up with pride and does i.
Timo. vi.
know nothing at all that will not obey the word of God, he therefore which does
know nothing, can not teach us religion, and ye true worshippinge of god, if
the Mass be vsede as it has been hitherto, it can in no wise agree with the
word of God, but is so much repugnaunt as what thing is most. The Mass
therefore is a diuilishe Idolatry, and detestable abominacion, against God, and
ye maynteners thereof, shall incur, his displeasure for ever this thing we will
prove two ways first because the popish Mass, is used in nothing like the
supper that Christ ordained, and differs nolesse from it then black to white
they sin therefore so griuouslye as did Achas ye made an altar at Jerusalem
iii. Regu^. xvi.
like that which was at Damasco^, and cast the aultare of god out of the
temple so they have, lest the true use of our Lords supper, And instead of
it have instituted and ordeinede the Mass of their own folishe devise, and
oppinion which is a great and blasphemouse abominacio^ before god Moreover we
will prove by there erroures and abusinge of ye mass, which they call an
offeringe for the quick and dead, that it is an horible abominacion, for if
the Mass were ordained of Christ, which is faulse yet by there abusinge of it
they would make it a blasphemouse, and heinous abominacion before god,
undoubtedly we ought to follow truly, and sencelye, that thing which is
absolutely Deuteronomy. vi.
sufficient of it self alredie

First let us consider and expende the manner and order that Christ used at
the institucion of this holly and sacrete supper, and then we will confer the
abuse with the truth. But we ought to learn all these things of the
Evangelists, and of Saint Paul, and of none other. Verily the true Mass,
which is worthy al kinds of praieses, is the Mass which Christ ordained, at
his last supper before he should suffere, Luk, xxii.
for when the hour was come, he sat down and the twelve appostles with him,
and he said unto the^, I have inwardly desired to eat this passover with
you, before that I suffer, for I say unto you hence forth I will not eat of it
any more until it be fulfilled in ye kingdom of God and he took the cup and
gave thanks and said, take this and deuid it among you, for I say unto you,
^ will not drink of the frut of the vine, until the kingdom of god come, and
he took bread and when he had given thanks he brake it, and gave it unto
the^ saying, this is my body which is given for you, this do in remembrance
of me. Like wise also when he had supped he took the cup saying, this cupe is
the new, testament, in my blood which is shed for you.

These words Saint Luke Luke xxii. Math. xxvi.
writes, the other euangelestes writ the same, but they differ in some
words, as Math said, Drink all of this, for this is my blood, which is the
new testamente that is shed for many, for Mat. xiiii.
the remission of sins, and saint Mark says, they al drank of it meaning
the cup. Saint Paul does expound Christ's words saying this do as often as
you drink it in remembrance of me for as often times, as you shall eat this
bread and drink this cup ye shall show forth the Lords death tell he come,
but let a man examyne him self, and so let him eat of the bread and drink
of the cup Saint John does not declare the ordinance of this sacrament.

But he teaches, from the.xiii. John.xiii. xii^^ xv. xvii. xviii.
Cap. to the.xviii. how Christ did use his supper and what he did at it, he
washed his disciples, fete he preached to the^ and commanded them to be in
charity he exhorted them to patience, he strengthend confirmed and establyshed
their faith toward god and prayed for them to his father, but especially he
rebuked Judas the traitor. S. Paul says we being many are one bread, and
one body in Cor. ^.
so much we all are partetakers, of one bread and ye Evangelists, report
that Christ did finishe his holy supper with thanks geueyng. The some and
ground of the hole matter proponed, consists in the sentences of scripture
now rehearsed but because Christ says search the scripture we therefore John. v.
will are counsel, of the word of God in other plases and debate how the
Lords supper ought to be vsede let us first divide these questions into four
parts, first some things are common, both to the ministre, and receiuour of
the Sacrament, moreover some things belong only to the ministers thyrdly some
things perteyne to the receyuer only, and finally some things must be
observed in the sacrament alone. First let us expende and consider what is the
dutes of ye ministers and laity together at this holly supper. Christ was the
minister and the.xii. aposteles, were the receyuers, and laity Luke.xxii.
for S, Luke says when the hour was come Christ and the.xii. apostles i. Co.
xiiii.
sat down to be an example to us to do all things in the congregation with
comlynes and order. For we se, yt Christ, observed boeth time and place, but
yet those ought not to be understood that we shall leave the true meaning,
and follow the bare letter, ye time and place was most myte, for him to go
about that godly work, and thanks giuinge, boeth because the easter lamb
ought to be eaten in ye evening, and ye night of Christ's passion was at hand
but it is most mete, to us to minister that sacrament, before dinner that the
laity shall receive it standing and not sittyng, and also that it be broken in
two pieces, before the administracio^ to ye laity and not when it is
ministered, for the evangelists, commanded and decrered nothing in these
externe thing, but an honest order, for it is impossible that we should do
and observe, the self same order of receyueinge the sacrament that the
apostles did for the^ no mo then. xii. should receive it at once And hat of one
minister it should also be recyued in the evening. Moreover Christ did eat the
easter lamb with his disciples, and refused that bodily meat and drink saying
he would eat no more, of that until it were Luke. xxii.
fulfilled, in the kingdom of God, nor drink of the fruit of the vine until
the kingedome of God come, that we after his example should neythere seek, for
a carnal supper to fill the belly nor be addicte and given to the obseruau^ce
of the Iuishe ceremonies and shadows of the truth, but that with an unfeigned
faith we should wc thanks giving receive the spiritual fode in the word and
promises of God. Also both the minestres and receivers ought to come to the
Lords table, in charity, and proteste true mutual love, one to an other, for
Saint John says Christ did ernestly preach, charity John. xxiii. xiiii. xv.
xvi. xvii.
to his disciples and loved the^ to the end, for we being one congregation
are members of one body and brethren in deed, by Christ. For as saint Paul
says though i. Cor. x.
we be many, yet are we one body when we are partakers, of one bread,
finally it is mete that one, tarry for anothere, except some matter of great
importance let us, and that we continue in prayer to the end Judas alone,
departied away before the other to his own destruction. Saint Paul says,
brethren when you come together ^, Cor xi,
to eat, let one tarry for annother and if any man be hu^grie let him Math.
xxvi. Mar^. xiiii.
eat at home. Saint Mathewe and Saint Mark say that after they had said
grace, they went up into the hill of Olives Now let us learn what is the
function and office of the minister, and stuard of the mysteries of God this we
are taught of Christ him self in ye administracion of ye sacrament to his
disciples wherein diverse and su^dri things are to be diligently noted and
observed. First how he did give him self to al his disciples and ministers
and in especially to the preachers, being an example in washinge of their
fete, that they should do the same and be prompte and ready at all times to
minister, and do service to eueri man. Moreover here is to be noted that
Christ did willingelye and of purpose shone and abhor al externe and
outward pompes and solemn sightes, that he might printe in our hertes
things of greater importance, also when he had washed their feet. he went
again to the table and put on John. xiii.
his accustomed rament teaching his disciples* by this example to go about
such things as ought to be most chifflye regarded, for he then ernestly
preached the Gospel admonished and rebuked Judas the teaytoure, and taught his
disciples, to be in charity patience, and hope of things to come, so John.
xvi.
plainly and manifestly, yt they said you speak not now in parables.

Note also that Christ gave Math. xvi,
thanks to God the father, before he gave the sacrament to his disciples,
exhorting them to remember i. Cor xii.
and show forth thereby his passion until he come. Finally he called upon his
father with a fervent John. xvii.
desire, and prayed for all the^ that beliue. Now touching the John. xvii.
receyuers, of our Lords supper, they gave great attendaunce, to the word
and doctrine of Christ, and with obedience received the sacrament of the body
and blood, of Christ, Saint Mark says they al did drink, by his saying
no man is excepted. Finally let us expende and consider of what thing Mar^.
xiiii.
the sacrament is made, undoubtedly it is made of bread wine, and the word,
for there cannot be the sacrament of our Lords supper where any of these
lacks, Christ verily took material bread and wine, chosinge them for the
use of the sacrament, we read not that he took water grapes or any such other
thing, and he sayede these words. This is my body which shall be give for you,
and this cup Luke. xxii.
is the new testamente, in my blould which shall be shed for you by these
words the bread, and wine are made the sacrament, and holly tokens of Christ's
body and blood, these words offer to us ye promesses of the Joyful Gospel,
which if we receive, with a true faith, we eat spiritually in spirit ye flesh,
and blood of christ and thereby obtain life eternal.

The sacrament is like a written Testament, that promises great gifts and is
sealed with two seals, that ought to be kept hole and vnbroke^ if all these
things before rehearsed, were observed and kept then the Lords supper should
be truly used, the Mass (as they call it) should perfectly be holy, for god
praised therein, would regard it, and we should receive of it, great fruits and
goodness, for therebye we are enstructed to believe in god, and love our
neighbor excludinge all sedicion, and disobedience that peace patience and
concord, may take place and rule, against this doctrine, nothing can be
proved, and debated by the holy scripture for it is grounded on most sure
principles, and fundacion, referringe, all things to fayeth and ^ Ti. i. John.
i. ^i. iii. iiii. v.
charity, by the which two al things ought to be tried, paraduenture they
will answer, that noman can find fault with our sayeinge, but yet it is,
expediente to Join other ceremonies with the approved use in the
administracion of this sacrament, of our Lords supper as have been, used
hitherto, and so the hollye thing shall be worthei the greater praise. We
answer that it is nomatter though these ceremonies, were omited and left
which were excogitate, and found out by man's reason and a true christian man
will not be offended there with, as lightyng of candeles singing, ringing of
belles, deckinge of aulters gyltynge of Images, velvet and enbrodered
ornaments, relics of saints, Organs pricksonge descant and such other,
which do not edify the congregation, that they may increase in godliness
fayeth and charity, for as Saint Paul Act. xv.
says bodily exercise, is litel profitable, but rather when these externe
things, are highly esteemed and defended with touth and nail, as we have
seen, by experience: these percepts of god, faith, humility charity and
preachinge of the word are little regarded, when these true good things that
please God, and are taught us of the scripture do wonderfully work in us
godliness, and Justice. If this multitude of ceremoneis had pleased God and ben
thought profitable to bring men to godliness and virtuous living. No doubt
but Christ would have taugth the, The apostles would have observed and kept
them, and S Paul would have greatly magnified and praised the^ and if god
would yt his noble works should have been had in reverence, setfurth and
extolled, with sumptuouse ceremonies, he would have thaught our fathers of the
private church to use them after a most gorgiouse facion, as they did, in
Jerusalem when Solomon's temple was dedicated i. Regu^. viii.
where many fat Oxen, were slain, and much monye spente also when Aaron the
high priest was consecrated, and when the arc of couenaunte was made if god
would that we should do so, this multitude of ceremonies had been laufully
instituted in the primative church but christ wuld that we should be occupied
with weightier matters, and less regard ths externe pomp, then heavenly and,
celestial for ceremonies, are nothing but figurs, to shadow and hyde the
truth from the unlearned. A man therefore ca^ use no better, order in the
administracion of our Lords supper, then that which Christ him self used,
but we are not pleased with Christ when we are not pleased with the order and
way, that he takes. Naama^ when he dispiced that plain way to wash
himself in Iorda^ remained always a leper, and when he did wash himself i.
Cor. iii.
as the prophet commanded him he was healped. Verily me^nes wisdom in matters
of god, is folishnes we cannot set forth, and minister the Lords supper, more
purely then when we follow there in Christ, and his disciples for that which
men put to of there own brain, without authority of scriture is merlie
faulce, albe it they ascribe the same to the holly ghost. What fool hardines is
this to ad join their dremes to the spirit of God, does it of necessity
follow that when two or three Bishops are assembled together, that the holly
gooste does decre and make laws by them? we must examine and try there
constitucions, and decres, whethere they agree with Christ's doctrine, and do
extolle teach and establishe fayeth, and charity or no, for in so do ynge a
man may easlye perceive that the hollie ghost is not the author of such dirtie
tradicions and lousy laws, but rather yt it is blasphemy, to think that the
office of the hollye gooste is to institute and ordain such supersticious,
and unprofitable ceremonies.

They yt know the nature of the holy ghost, by the word of God are assured
that he commanded not such trifles and superfluouse things, to be done, as
have been constituted, and decreed, in mani general cou^sailes for he does not
renew, ye shadows, of the imperfect old law nor laith on christian men's
shoulders, the yoke, that another the apostles nor fathers of the old testamente
could bear, for noman Math. i^*
does put new wine into old botteles, nothere sows apiece of new cloth
into an old garment but our aduersaris most blasphemously affirm that although
they constitute and ordain many ceremonies contrary to the liberty of the
Gospel and repugnaunte to Christ's ordinances yet they are made and ordained
by the holly ghost.

Now we have declared the true doctrine of Christ, touching the
administracion of the sacrament of our Lords supper we will also consider the
popish Mass with it. Let us first show and declare the abuse boeth in the
function and office of the minister, and of the receyuer for this is the chief
error of ye papisties, not because they do not observe time and place but
forasmuch they regard not the liberty of a christen man who^ Christ set at
liberty with sheddynge of his own blood. And lay snares for men's co^sience
with precepts in externe things as in ornaments oyleing a supersticiouse
auriculare confession, and in other like things innumerable, for both the
ministers and receivers of the sacrament think it a capital offense if they
omite and leave any of these beggarly tradicions of me^ behind and undone
defending them under pretense of good order, when there can be nothing more
confuce and out of order then to make the Lords supper subject to men's
co^stitutions and precepts in extrene things from which Christ our master
made it free.

They Judge it a much more heinouse offense, to omyte any of the vain
tradicions of man undone, then if a man should be a fornicator, a dicer a
dronckeard a blasphemer of god, or in any other such vices, an abominable
sinnercondeminge of heresy all such as neglecte these ceremonies and un godly
constitutcions of theirs, and Christ's ordinance being nothing wourth or
without there cererimonies invented of their own brain, it must therefore be
a detestable abominacion, to trouble christian men's liberty after this sort,
for if it might co^tinew still free, men might let orname^tes pass and such
other externe things, for the holy ghost does not teach, them which set
things out of order, after this sort. The true honor and service, of God is
subject nothere to time place nor person charity in edefiynge thy
neighbor, in these things, ought to rule all congregacions. For all christian
congregacions use not one kind, and order in their ceremonies. Themperoure
Charles first of ye name did labor to bring al churches to agree in one
kind and order of ceremonies but he could never bring it to pass, for it was
against god, and therefore it could never be brought to effect. If we should
be compelled to observe and keep such precepts of men being profitable another
to faith nor charity, me^ may Judge that we have not yet eaten the easter
lamb, that is to say. That greater burdens, are leyde on our necks, the^
ever was on the Iues which thing is abominacio^ before God, and that they have
done so to us, the deuersitie of ornaments, and many other folishe
cerremonies, which they have borrowed of the Iues, do manifestly declare and
testify as it shall appear hereafter. Also they contemn their neighbors
which beliue in Christ, and desire to be incorporate, to him by charity and
excommunicate, curse, and suspen de them for not obseruyng some of their vain
ceremonies wherein they break charity which ought chifely to remain among
them that, are pertakers of the Lords supper. There is no true christen
church, where charity is not, all that church therefore with the Mass, is
obominable before god.

The praires of that congregation, are not hard of God which fereth not to
come to ye communion of Esai. i.
Christ's body and blood, with hertes full of envy malice and hatered, and
with hands full of blood finally if any thing be abominable before god it is ye
mass, for it oppresses ye christian liberte, it has brough in a great
multitude of Iueshe Gala. iiii. v.
cereimonies, and has no regard to christen charity. s Paul speakeing of
the conscience exhorts us to persiste, in liberty, and suffer not our selves
to be lead under the yoke of bondage. Also he teaches us, that our works
are unprofitable without charity. Now let us declare and open the abuses of
the ministers we freely knoledg and confess that al though many ministers of
the sacrament be unmeet and reprouide of god, through their abominable and
vicious living, yet the sacraments remain sacraments, through the
ministracion of the word, but this we affirm, that the virtue and efficacy
of the sacraments is not like, neither ye holy ghost works like effect when a
man receives the sacraments of an ungodly, and impudente sinner, and when he
receives them of agodlye, and true christen man for albeit the sacrament is
present, yet there is in it neither grace nor virtue for both ye sinner and he
yt co^se^tth are equally punished as both the byeres, and sellers of Doves
were driven out of the temple: so both the minister of the sacrament, and the
receyuer shall be gyltie of Christ's Luke. xviiii.
body and blood. These minister is giltye because he does minister
vnwortheylye for truly i. Co. ii.
his service is abominable before god for if there were, no worse things then
the living of the ministers to make the Mass and an bominacion before God,
yet their impuritie of life, is inoughe to make it vnpure and filthy before
the face of God. By what place of scripture can they prove, that the Mass is
holy, accepted of god, and a profitable work for the quick and dead of what
ministry so ever it be said? In deed by non for how can the dead help the
dead, eithere a sinner make a sinner rightouse, every man knowing that sin
pleases not god, may perceive what theye can do with God, for what so ever is
not of fayeth is sin. Their Mass therefore ^om. xiiii.
is sin and abominable before God.

Now let us consider what fu^ction and office Christ through his own
example committed to the ministres and stewardes of the sacrament when he
washed his disciples fete, it was done to teach the ministers of gods word
that they should not exaulte them selves as Lords and masters over the
laytye, for Saint Peter says, thelders, ought to be an example and mirror
to ye flock of Christ for pride is a great abominacion before God Christ
iruly can not be pleased with servants that are puffed up with pride. But
where is there any humility among them? none at all. I will not speak of
there shaue^ crowns, miters, silver staves, bishops ringes, or other such
costlye, and rich robes, and ornaments, In deed they are much more precious,
then Christ's pour simple garments but truly: the remembrance of Christ's
passion, cannot be showed forth after the right way in such more the^
princely aparell. For another goulde nor silver was seen at Christ's death
albeit they, by this rich raiment have inverted and devised, a glisteringe
pretense, of mystical understanding, Saint. i. Pe. ii.
Peter could not, suffer excess of apparrile in gentylwomen, much less in
the administracion of our Lorddes Supper, and in them that should be an example
to al othere in Godly conversation and living, their prydde can not be hyd,
for they believe, and labor to perswadde other that by the Bishops
anoynetynge* a mark is printed in their souls, whereby they are made of
greater authority, the^ angels or s. Marye ye virgin. yea, and this mark the^
say they, can by no means be put away They extole therefore, them silues,
above al men and set them selves at liberty, from all burdenes, and bondage,
that other me^ are charged with all their will is to be Lords over all me^ and
all service due to the^. They magnifi and extolle, there prayers in there holly
Mass and set the popes name before the, kings in their canon, if a man yea a
good, and godly man touch the Chalice nor the sacrament by chance, it is a
Capital offense, they judge it an heinouse abominacion, to ministre, the
sacrament to the laity under boeth kinds. And why because they are not
anointede, and made popish priests. Their pride also is opened and showed
forth nothing more then in their offering and sacrifice for they are fully
persuaded that they offer to god, his son Jesus Christ, for remission of
sins, boeth for quick and dead.

This presu^ptuouse arogancie, must needs be an abomination before god, a man
cannot find in these proud papists, neither liberality in doing of good
deeds, or service to other where unto they are chiffelie chosine. But it is
their property to serve dame Aueris, and their own bealis. If reward be
promised, they are redye to sing Mass, but if no reward come the^ will they
another sing nor say. For no penny, no pater noster. Undoubtedly Ephesians. vi.
every couetouse man is an Idolater. For where couetousenes reigns, as
Saint Paul says, there is Idolatry, which is abominacion before god These
couetuouse popish priests are therefore, abominable before god. And another
sort of these papists will sing Mass, not for money, but for fear of
losing their fate promocions But what great sin is this to do these things
against their conscience? For they do it fearinge least other wise they
should want a living. Oh what mistrust have they in God who fedeth and
clotheth birds, and other living creatures, and thus have they made a banquet
of the most holly supper of our lord, for fylthy lucre and gaynes. If aman
should desire one of the laytie, which is a good and godly man, to receive the
sacrament, and he should have for his labor a couple of grotes or a testarne,
he would not only refuse it, but grievously taking ye matter, yt any man should
have such an opinion in him.

Notwithsta^dinge these Mass mongers think it great honesty to receive
money for their Masskinge, when it is to their great shame and rebuke. This
saing of Saint Paul, he that serves the altar must live also thereof: does
not make for them for S. Paulle i. Cor. ix.
does teach nothing elses by this sainge, but that the preachers of the Gospel
may without groudge of conscience provide of the gods of the church, for
such things as they lack. And this argument, is taken of the preistes of
tholde law. That as they had there living, for offringe of sacrifices, so the
ministres, of the gospel should have their living, for preaching of the same.
For Saint Paul did no more mean by this text, that priests should sing
Mass for the quick and dead then he purposed, to teach men, how to war
Their intent, is not to serve Christ our true altar, but the god there Heb.
iii.
own bealies woe be to them, that maintain, this patched popish Mass, either
with rewards counsel or any other way, for in so doing they give no less
occasion to these papists to commite most heinouse offenses then the
Pharesies and rulars of the people, did to Judas the traytoure. Here we omyte
and passover their filthye, whoredom, continual hate maliciouse, envy
unfruitful Idelnes, and such othere abominacions which make the^ reprouable,
both before god and man, and through this their ungodly conuersacio^, all men
for the most part, are driven from the true service of God a man therefore
cannot think how much god aborreth the^ and their deeds. If these proud
impudent papists, had never so little remorsse of conscience, they would
abhor, and be ashamed of them selves. Feign these Mass mongers the popes
creatures, to be godly liberal, and that they are not proud in their
ornaments and ceremonies, but walk in christen liberty notwythstandinge the
contrary is plainly seen in them, yet they would men, should have such
oppinion in the^. And let us come to there function and office wherein they can
do nothing well and truly, nether with good will, nor in knowledge. Our lords
Supper ought never to be ministered with out the remembrance of Christ's death,
nor without a sermon, or exhortacio^, and that in a language that the
congregation may perfictly understand, to their edificacion, ^ Cor. xiiii.
as Christ also taught, his disciples. In the mass is nothing but mockes, and
they make Idolatry of the Gospel and Epistiles which the holy ghost gave us
for our consolacio^ correction and exhortacion But these popish, priests have
made of the^ an externe pomp, extollynge them selves above the Iues and
Gentiles, with there glistringe shows, of vain ceremonies the Ieues and
Genetiles therefore laughed the^ to scorn vsinge them as foles and madmen. The
Euangelestes require an other kind of working, and exercise, then sensinge
wastinge of candles, singing of pricksong and kissinge of golden books. It were
more mete to preach the grace of our lord Jesus Christ, but Christ is not
spoken of at al, among the^ and the light ye should be set upon the
candelsticke, is hide under ye bushel. Now where the word of God, is kept
under and hyd away there is nothing, but darkness and error we have therefore
plainly declared and proved that this hinderaunce of Gods word is an heinouse
abominacio^ in the sight of God. And this is out of question that every Mass
wherein the word of god is not preached and that in a language that the
congregation may understand it, is a most pyuyshe Idolatrye. But as they
follow not Christ in there sermons and preachinge, so do they not observe his
order and manner, of thanks giueinge, and prayer. For they have such a rabble
of vain ceremonies, ye devout prayer, can have no place they have also many
collectes, that true christen me^ ought not to say. Many read, that which
they understand not. When they Mass for monye and other causes before rehearsed,
how can it be possible, that they being whore mo^gers and al together carnally
minded, should pray and give thanks with a devout and pure conscience.
Though they also seem to them selves, to be devout Math. vi.
men yet in prayinge, they make much lip labor and their Mal. ii.
hertes are far of. They are therefore abominable before god. For as he says,
by Malachias, there blessinge shall be accursed. When they come to the
distrubucion of the sacrament, they break it, in there pieces one piece for
the quick, another for them that are in heaven and the third for the dead
being in purgatory, and at last eat all them selves but it were more mete
to feed others, and be without the^ selves. They ordeine a feast, and call no
gestes to it, nor will eat of one lofe, and one cupe among them selves: but
every man will have his own aultare his own lof and cup. Wherein do these
things agree with our Lords supper.

Neither Iwe nor gentile, can mock and delude Christ's ordinances, more then
these ungodly wretches, it is marvel that the eareth opens not to swalowe
the^ quick in to hell. Now touching the laytye it were against reasone, to
rebuke the^ but rather to be sorye, and bear with their weakness, and
ignorance. Whosoever comes to our Lords table, ought to hear the word of
God, as ye apostles did. But how ca^ they here, when no man preaches They
ought to make an answer, and say Amen to their prayer. But they another know
nor understand, what they say and so they ertol and magnify noughtie and
vain trifeles for frutfull and godli matters, and for the lively word of God
they believe in fond folish fables. It is necessary yt we pray to God that
his people may be delivered, from the hunger of gods word, that they may
know how miserabli, they have been deceived by these faulse preachers. What
shall the unlearned people do, when lies and erroures so much prevail, and
they being captives, and prisoners under Antichrist, gods enemy. They receive
ye sacrament but once in the year, and in one kind contrary to Christ's,
ordinance It must therefore be unthankful, and abominable before God when his
church is spoiled and distroyed after such sort. Finally there are some
erroures and abominacions found in the very sacrament. For the material
substance of it ought to be bread and wine, as it is in deed, as S. Paul i.
Cor. xi.
so calls it both before ye consecration and after. But the papists, teach
yt, not her bread nor wine remain after ye co^secracion but accidents only ye
is, color savor taste ruddines and such other. And with such manifest lies
they blind men's eyes to believe that, y^ thing is in the sacrament which is not
there, and that, that is not in the sacrament which is there in deed.

Allexander first pope of ye name decred and ordiened. That water should be
menglide, with wine, which thing is repungnaunte to Christ's ordinance. For
he commanded no such thing to be done. If we will expend, and consider, the
words of Christ our Master, touching this sacrament we may easly perceive
what Satan goes about. The papists mu^ble in latin, and the belles make
such ringinge that the hears, can not understand what is said, or song. They
have put to also, in the consecracio^ words that are not in the Gospel as Enim
truly, and Eleuatis oculis in ^el^ lifting up his eyes to heaven. And Eterni
Of the everlasting. Also Misteriu^ Fidei. The mystery of ye fayeth. But these
are matters of small weight, they leave unsaid words of grater importau^ce which
is Quod pro nobi^ trad^tur aut frangitur. That shall be delivered or broken for
you. And men's ears are stopped with plaing one the organs, and descante songs.
When these words are spoken least, they should doubt in any thing that is
said. If the people remember christ's passion at ye time the priests are not
thanks worthy, for they should boeth remember, the words of the passion,
and also give thanks to God for the same, but they shall not do so, if the
priests can let the^. It is therefore, manifest that the papists follow not
Christ's example in the supper at their popish Mass yet they say there Mass
is holy when there is nothing more vnhollye. They brag that saint James
did use this Mass at Jerusalem Saint Mark at Alexandria, and Saint Peter at
Antioche: but they have no history toucheinge this matter worthy credit.
Though they used our lords supper, as Christ our master did and as S Paul
also at Corinth: yet they did not use it as the pynishe papists do now the
Mass. That Ignatius, Policarpe and Ireneus make mention of, is not like this
popish mass. They confess yt Basilius Magnus Ihero^e and Ambros vsede
another order, in the administracio^ of our Lords supper, then is now used
and that diverse have used, diverse facio^s therein, by there own words.
Therefore it is manifest, that this kind of massinge is not the ordinance of
Christ, but invented by man's wit, and policy without ye word of God. And
now I will declare by the testimony of aunciente histories what popes, and
when they patchilde together this beggerlye Mass of theires.

Halowing of aultares and temples.

Felix, frist pope, of that name, commanded temples and aultars to be hallowed
in the year of our Lord God. cclxix.

Aulters

^er^us, first of that name, ordained aulters and Saints, in the year of our
Lord. Cxxiiii.

Altar clothes.

Boniface commanded aultares to be covered with fine linen cloth, in the year
of our Lord. cccx

Chalices.

Urban and Seuerine ordained challices of goulde and silver, in the year of our
Lord. ccxv.

Albes and corporasses*

Siluester did ordain, albes and corporasses in the year of our Lord. cccxiii.

Candeles and ornaments,

Gregory did ordain, light at mass, and certain Ornaments in ye year of our
Lord. ccccclxxxxii.

Procession

Agabetus did ordain procession on Sondayes, about the church in the year of
our Lord. cccccxxxii.

Holly water.

Alexander did ordeine water to be mingled with wine unleavened bread and holly
water in the year of our Lord. cxii.

Confiteor and the office

Pontianus ordained Co^fiteor before mass in the year of our Lord. ccxxv. And
Selestinus ye office in ye year of our lord. ccccxxiiii

Kyrie eleison.

Gregori did ordain, Kyrie eleson at Mass in the year of our Lord.
ccccclxxxxii.

Gloria in excelsis

Telesphorus, made Gloria inexcelsis, in ye year of our lord. cxxix

Collectes and grayle

Gelasius made the Collectes Preface, and graile, in the year of our Lord.
CCCC. lxxxx.

Anastasius ordained that we should stand, when the Gospel is read in the
year of our Lord. CCCCix.

Martine made the Creed in the year of our Lord cccxxxiiii.

The canon is patched together of many, and therefore one sentence is
repugnau^t with an other many superstouse words are in it they call upon
certain peculiare Saints in it.

And offer for souls, in purgatory they bless and cross as if great virtue
and powere were therein, and read nothing so reverently as this their clouted
canon.

Gregory made the Offertorye and Damasus gloria patri. They ca^ not therefore
say, that they minister, the sacraments of our Lords supper as ye apostles
did when their doctrine is repugnau^te and contrary, one to a another. This is
sufficient to prove that the Mass should be abhorred because it does lay for
men's consience, snares of men's traditions. They will have the priests to be as
ye priests of ye old law and bring, shadows in time of light, stretching out
the arms, deuidinge the hosts, and such other Ieuish customs It was
therefore, the dyueles devise to bring into the church, such lewd laws for
the true living word of God. If circumcision, hurts as S. Paul, witnesses,
who can deny that the priesthod of Aro^, variety of ornaments, and
anoyntynge, do nothing avail and profit in this time of the new law. Much
less profit is therefore received of man's inventions and vain dreams, that
keep men occupied from the exercise of true godliness, and humility of mind.
And excite men's hertes with singynge and organplayng to acertayne carnal
delight and pleasure, rather the^ to ye true glory of god as did ye grove which
was by the temple of Jerusalem albeit therefore these ceremonies are
glisterynge in men's eis yet they are vile, and of no reputacion before Christ,
who requires not the visour and shadow of a thing, but ye very thing it self
ye mass therefore which was ordiened and constituted of Antichrist, and
maintained of his most best assured adherentes is an abominacion before God,
through this externe pomp and such other things, before rehearsed Finally
they fere not to say, that Christ's body is offered in ye mass I will not
contend, and strive with them if they take, this word offer to signify
remember, according to the sense and meaning of Christ's words, albeit the
ministers alone pronounce and speak these words. Yet such thanks giving, and
remembrance belongs not only to them alone, but also to the whole
congregation. We deny not that the Doctoures called the Mass an offeringe,
which is the remembrance of an offering once made as Saint Augustine does
plainly, declare sayeinge in this offering is thanks giving and remembrance
of Christ's body, and blood which he offered and shede for us But the
papists are not pleased with this offering for they will have, a greater
offering which is an offering represe^tatiue when Christ dyed once for ever,
and ca^ die no more. They say that these words (do this in my remembrance)
signify the consecracion, offering and remembrance, but this is a faulsely
devised and forgide interpretation. For Christ at his holly and Sacrete
supper, Took bread and gave thanks, brake it and gave it to his disciples.

Commaundynge them to eat, and in like wise the wine. The^ he preached to them
his death and passion that they should do after his example, with a sincere
and true faith, and there is not one Iotte, that can prove ye administracio^ of
this most blessed sacrament to be an offering, represe^tatiue of Christ his
own offering, and although Christ would have had, his body present, bodily
in this bread, yet in no wise his words signify ye he offered him self in
this holy supper for he would have given his body to the^ reallie, and not
in the sacrament, It is not inoughe, for these piuishe papists to offer
christ's body to God except they offer it also for remission of sin, for
health of ye body and for hope of eternal life. For other wise it should not be
so highly esteemed. If they continewe still in these errors, against the plain
truth, they will The belefe of a true christian. To. iiii.
deny Christ. For he that knows Christ, is certainly assured that he is
god, and man the savior of the world, that in him, as in the true sede of
David, al nations are blessed and that no man can come to the father but by
him. For the father Ga. iii. John. xi.
does so love him, that for his sake, his anger toward us is pacified for he is
our righteousness, holiness and redemption that noma^ Cor. i.
is saved, but by his name only that he alone fulfilled, the work of our Act.
iiii.
redemption with out any helper. And finally, yt he did sufficiently satisfy
Esae. lxiii.
for our sins on the cross if we beliue truly on him. This is ye Heb. x.
ground, of our christen faith, where on christ's church is builded. And Math.
xvi.
he that denies Christ to be his perfect, and sufficient redemer by once
sufferinge death on the cross makes him an insufficient priest and unable,
redemer. And therefore they deny Christ in that they deni his full power and
virtue in our redemption. These Maskinge Mass priests, in their often
offeringe of Christ deny that we are Justified by faith only ascribinge part
of our iustificacion to good works contrary to ye plain scriptures of Ephesians,
ii.
God for we are saved by grace, and not of works And they magnify and extolle
the Mass above all other good works, makeinge them se^lues fellow priests,
with Christ wherein they show, of what generation, they be even as they spring
of Lucifer, the father of pride, now let us expende and consider, whether
Christ commanded his disciples, to make an offeringe of the sacrament, of his
holy supper or whether he offered, him self therein or no. Undoubtedly,
Christ's words, diligently observed and noted we may perceive easlye ye
Christ offered no sacrifice, therein. To take and break bread does not signifye
to offer. To give thanks is not to do sacrifice, for else he had done
sacrifice in fedynge, five thousand with the few barlye loves, to give his
disciples to eat. And to say do this in remembrance of me, in showing forth
the Lords death, until he come, is not an offering. To belyue that Christ was
given us ye he gave his body to death for us, yt he shed his blood, not at ye
supper, but on the cross to redeem us from syn, is not an offering Finally to
prove ye testament and ye believe on ye which was commanded in the testament,
does not signify to offer. How will you now prove your, offering in the
Mass. We come to the Lords table we take and eat, trusteinge in Christ's
promesses, how do we the^, give to him again. If a king should give a ringe
to a pore man for a gage, not that he should be heir of his lands and goods,
but that it should help him, and that he thereby should remember his
liberalitye, and mercy, and ye people might commend, and praise him for that
fact, the poor man receives it to give it again, to ye king thynkinge to do
him a great pleasure, to make him rich with his own gift, were not this a mad
man? So may al such be Judged, as offere to Christ again, ye which he gave us
for our own use and profit, and that thereby we should keep in remembrance
his love, and mercy toward us. Christ did not lift up the sacrament over his
head as these proud papists do. They obiecte and say that God ca^ give some
things, and receive them again, as the sacrifices of tholde law. Though
they were the gifts Psalm. x,
of God, Yet they were given to him again, and though a co^trite heart is the
gift of god, yet it is a sacrifice to God. If we were commanded, to offer
sacrifice as they were, then their objection should be of some strength and
efficacy. But we have no such commandment neither the scriptures make
mention of these popish sacrifices. For Christ is of greater power and
reputacio^ then that these proud popish prelates, other can or ought to offer
him to his father. Christ sits on the fathers right hand, and once
satisfied for the sins of the Atc. vii.
true Christen church, with a most sufficient and perfect sacrifice.

Dare we then most miserable wretches enterprise, to do this thing again. He
that does offer up sacrifice is better the^ the sacrifice. They therefore are
better the^ Christ their sacrifice, he offered us a sacrifice to God, and do we
goo about to offer him? He that offerreth up sacrifice, ought to be as pure as
ye sacrifice. Oh how pure they make Christ now. He as a testament maker, gave
his disciples the sacrament in his supper, none other wise the^ as a written
testament, wherein by faith in Christ, we receive Christ's body and blood, the
virtue and fruits of the same. If we give him his testamente again as if he
required it of us, should not we have the testament maker in a contempt? And
should Aba. xi.
not the promise in the testamente, be of effect? Who ahboreth not this kind
of blasphemy, when we consider the hyghnes of Christ's priesthod and what this
word sacrifice contains in it, we may easlye perceive what Injury we do to
think that we offer Christ's body as the papists do S. Paul declares unto
us ye pristhod of christ saiing it is mete ye we Hebru. vii
have such a godly and undefiled bishop, made higher then heaues which needs
not, to offer daily. First for his own sins, and the^ for the sins of the
people as the bishop of the old law for Christ did this once in offeringe up
his own body, and in an other place he says Christ being the high priest,
of the good things to come came by a greater, and more perfect Tabernacle,
which was not made with hands that is to say was not of this kind of
bulding. Neither came he by ye blood of gotes and calves but by his own
blood, he entered once into this holly place, and found eternal redemption,
for we are made hollie, by gods fre mercy, through the offering of christ's
body done once for all. For Christ verily being one sacrifice, offered up for
our sins, sits on his fathers right hand, lokeing for the thing that
remayneh until his enemise be made his fotestole, for with one offering he made
perfect, those that are sa^tified. Saint Paul teaches us by Melchisedech.
That Christ is king of peace and righteousness. By these places of scripture it
is Manifest that Christ, ought to be offered no more. For Christ's death is so
perfect a sacrifice, yt by ye one offering we are made clean from sin for
ever. And touching his body he is no more in this world. There is to be
noted that Saint Paul says that Christ is once offered The papists, say
often. He says all things are co^summate and, made perfect by one
sacrifice. The papists will have moneie masses. Note also that Christ offered
him self and so did not the church byshopes nor priests, and this word
co^summate or made perfect does blanke them, that they have nothing to
answer, for the holy ghost confuteth their sophistry and cauilacions, with so
manifest and plain arguments as can not be denied.

Note also this word everlasting. Christ is an everlasting priest, for he
made satisfaction, for all the sin of the whole world, and this sacrifice
has a continual efficacitie, and virtue in all the^ that believe in it, and
show it forth with thanks giuinge for the same It is truly a great
unthankfulness to say it is necessary to offer christ again, an other way for
ye sins of the world. They seek many euations to defend their often
offering. One is this they say Christ offreth him self Sacramentally, and they
are but ministres. But they declare not this word sacrament what thing it is,
lest they should utter the truth. The sacrament is no another thing then a
token, for us to remember, that Christ being an only sacrifice, took away our
sins once on the cross. If they would declare it after this sort, we
should sone agree. But when no man does resist them herein they may do with
there Mass what so ever pleases them. They rule fortune at their own
pleasure. Victory in battle is optained by their Mass, satisfaction for
sin, and what thing is it that the Mass cannot do. And they make their
bostes, that they deserve by this holy work what thing so ever is needful. But
when they are put to there answer the^ they fly to this euacio^ before reherssed
Christ offers him self therein, and we are nothing else but ministers
their cannon which they magnify and extol above the gospel, does
manifestly open and detecte their ungodliness, and blasphemi, for before they
come to the consecracion they say I offer present and give to God an holy
and undefiled sacrifice, for the peace of the whole congregation of holly
church, when as it is nothing but bread and wine. And it is named the
sacrament And albeit they beliue, that it is not then our Lords body, yet
they offer it fore all the world. This must needs be plain Idolatry to give
to bread and wine, the honor and glory of Christ who gave himself for the
church to reconsile and make his father, atone with us. How can Christ offer
offer himself in the sacrament before he is there? I think men may now
easlye perceive how much their lies, and answer differ fro^e their deeds and
masses. What an heinouse offense is this to offer, a piece of bread, and a
little wine, for the only Sacrifice of Christ the high priest. And shall ye
bread and wine be of like efficacitye, and power to redeem sin with ye blood
of Jesus Christ? But they are much more blasphemouse after ye consecracion
sayng, that the bread and wine are turned into the natural body, and blood
of Christ for they say, we offer to thy holly majesty, an holly offeringe,
holy bread of life everlasting, and cup of everlasting health, which we
pray the vochsafe to regard and look upon, with thy most merciful eyes, and
cherful countenance, and let them be as acceptable to the as ye reward of
rightuouse Able and sacrifice of our father Abraham Make the^ an hollye and
clean sacrifice that they may be brought to thin altar by ye hands of ye
angel. These are the words of the ca^non If they speak of Christ, as they
commonly understand it, how ca^ their Imaginacion take place, where they say,
that Christ offered him self in the sacrament. For they pray for Christ,
and desire of god that he may be in such favor with God as Abel and Abraham
and that the Angel may bring him to the altar of god. For they ca^ not take
bread of eternal life to signify the people, although christ were in the
bread bodily, yet he should not be offered to God for that were great,
derogacio^, to the honor of his priesthod. Great in conuenience does follow
to say that the Mass is a sacrifice for sins. For saint Paul says,
forgiveness of sins is not without sheddinge of blood. How is Christ then
offered in the Mass when there is no offeringe without blood, for if there be
any sacrifice, that suffers not and is without blood. Saint Paul's
Arguments are folishe, and of no strength or virtue, saying. Christ offreth
himself no more or else he must necessarily dye once again, and must have
died oftentimes sens the begininge of the world. But undoubtedly, S Paul does
know the true sense and meaneinge of holly scripture better the^ any of all the
papists. For a sacrifice for sin is never offered without blood. This saying
therefore, that some thing was offered in the old law, as bread without
blood, makes nothing for there purpose. For when the bodies of lyuinge
creatures are slain, and sacrifice is offered for sins, blood must be shed.
They cannot therefore prove, by scripture that Christ's blood is offered in
the Mass, otherwise then in remembrance, and thanks giving. And this is done
both of the ministers and receiuours. For as prayer, so thanks giving also
belongs, to al men. He that gives thanks, says not I offer any thing more
than a thanfull heart and praise to God. If the people were taught this
doctrine. They would not bestow so much money on masses and upon the
fou^dacions of chauntries, and fraternities as they have done, through
persuacion, that remission of sins, is obtained in the Mass, not by grace
promised to them that believe, but by offering of Christ the son of God and
by prayeinge for him. Phie, I am ashamed, to rehersse this abominable
balasphemie of theirs in matters of God. The papists in as much as in them
lies, kill and crucify Christ again in there sacrifice of the Mass, doing
no other wise then if Christ as yet were not ascended into heaven, to his
father he that does this, makes Christ subject to death and crucifieth him
again. For Christ entered not nor enters in to the hollye place of heaven,
but by his blood. Let us labor, that Christ may dwell in our hertes They
obeicte, ye if it be derogacion to Christ's honor, and dignity, and that the
merit of his passion be not perfect because we offer Christ again: fayeth,
Baptism and kepinge of gods commandments may diminishe the dignity of
Christ, and full merits of his passion, and therefore it should not need to
do any good works. This is a folish and an unmeet: comparisio^. The offeringe
verily of Christ again, is contrary to fayeth and good works. For they
glorifye ye merittes of Christ's passion, when the offeringe of him again is
great derogacion to the same. They do as a man that lyghteth a candle, in a
bright sunnye Day, saying all though the sun gives a light clear inoughe
it of self: yet it is necessary, and profitable that more light be put
thereto. But a man may answer sayeing why do you mock your self?

You have the bryghte day in derision, as if the sun were not sufficient
with out your light. So although ye merits of Christ's passion, are sufficient
to forgive sin as the son is to make a light day yet, the popish
massmo^gers will offer him up, again The sacrifice of the Mass, for remission
of sins (though there be none such) is like a candel lighted in a bright
sunny day, and so slander the true sacrifice, to be imperfect. But as we se,
by ye brightness of the day, so by ye knowledge of Christ's merits we perceive
the goodness of God toward us and fayeth is profitable to us as a gift of
God, and through faith we do good works, willingly as obediente childerne,
but no other good works* then such as are commanded by God.

We have now declared the sacrifice of the Mass, to be against gods
commandment, the words of God and his glory. And now we will prove these
arguments and assertions to be dreams of scriptur preposterously understood
and plain lies, which not only cannot prove and affirm the Mass to be a
sacrifice but also whollye make against it It is therefore evidently perceived
that this popish Mass is an horrible abominacion, before God. That they ought
to dispute prove and affirm, by Christ's ordinances with sure demonstracions,
and plain textes, of scripture, that the Mass is a sacrifice. But there is
not one word or example, that makes for them, as I have before declared. They
would wrast and turn this saying (Do this in my remembrance) to maintain
there lies as who say God would these words, should signify to offer, or do
sacrifice. When they must be this understood, what so ever you have seen
heard or done, do it in remembrance of me but they cannot find, in all the
supper. That Christ did offer up sacrifice. They obiecte, that every bishop
chosen of men and appointed for men touching these things, that belong to
god: does offer gifts and sacrifices first for himself and then for the
people. This assercion is of no virtue or strength, for here Saint Paul
speaks of the priests of the old law, which were a figure only of Christ
as ye may easly perceive by these words following the same text saying. No man
must take upon him, the dignitye of priesthode cxcepte he be called of God as
Aaron, and they which were of the lymage of Aaron. But what is become, of these
priests? Al they were deposed, and abolished by Christ's death, and Christ
become a priest in their sted, not of the order of Aaron but of Melchisedeche a
man therefore, may know that this place, of Paul makes nothing, for their
Maskinge sacrifice. And if they will have it to agree, both to the priests, of
the old law and new Testamente: they most prove whether they be, priests or
no. As the name of priest makes not a priest, but his deeds, like as a
beggar, named prince, heringe princes to be rulers of people, and countries. If
he claim a people, and country which he may rule; and govern shall he
therefore (...) a people, and country to rule* So the popish priests that are
priests in name only, hearing that the priests of the old law did offer
sacrifice for sins after gods co^maundeme^te, if they cleime the same
authorite shall they therefore have it? But this is a hard saying, to say
there are no priests now in the new law. Let no man be offended there with,
for undoubtedly, there be no priests now appointed of God to offer for
sins, but every christian man is ordained of Christ, to be a priest to
pray, to give thanks and praise to god and to offer up them selves in
sacrifice Saint Peter says you are a chose^ generation, a royal priesthode
and a holly people meaning therbye al christen people, as by all christian men.
The holy ghost teaches the priests of the new testamente, that is to say al
christen people are of much more honor and dignitye then wear the priests
of the old law, but none of these priests can offer for sins. Yet they
obiecte, how can the church continewe, if we shall have no priests to teach
correct rebuke, and exhort the people. We answer that God will ever raise up
some in the congregation, to do these things. And Christ has ordained in all
congregacions a shepherde, and preachers, but no massmongers which have
brought in to the church many errous, by their vain ceremonies and maskynge.
Also where Saint Paul says, if we sin wyllinglye, after we know the
truth there is no sacrifice left to purchese us remission of sins these
papists gather of this saing yt there is no sacrifice to help them, that
sin, wylfullye, but that there is a sacrifice yet remayninge for the
fayethful, which is their mass. They faulsely understand the text. For S.
Paul says a little before, ye there is no more sacrifice remaining for them
whose sins are forgyuen al ready, and therefore one place expounds
another, and plainly declares, ye there is left no more sacrifice for them,
that sin of set purpose or for the that have obtained remission of sins
alredie, for Christ offered him self for ye syn of those ye believe in him, and
will not offer him self again, for the^ ye believe not, but wilfully remain in
their sins. They obiecte yt we have an altar, whereof it is not leaful for
the^ to eat which minister in ye tabrenacle, meaning by this altar a heap
of stones joined together, which they call an altar, but Christ him self is
our altar where on we lay our prayers which are our spiritual sacrifices,
for no prayeres are accepted of God the father, but by Christ. For he says if
you ask my father any thing in my name, he will give it you. And saint Paulle
expounds, his own sainge. Let us offer says he at al times by him a
sacrifice of praise which is the fruits of our lips confessing his name. We
lie therefore, when we call the mass our Lords altar for Christ is our only
altar and S Paul, in all his Epistle to the Hebrews, does knoweledge none
other sacrifice for sins, but Christ once offered on ye cross. The papists
have no place of the new testament to make with the^ and therefore, they seek
help of the old testamente. And first of the book of Genesis they say
Melchisedech. Was the Genes. xiiii.
figure of Christ, for he was the priest of the hygheste. And as David says
Christ is an eternal priest after the order of Melchisedech And therefore he
offered bread and wine undoubtedly Melchsedech was ye figure of Christ but
Saint Paul manifestly declares in what things, he was the figure of Christ.
In the rehersinge of the honors and dignitye of Melchisedech which is that he
was an eternal priest, and king of peace, and ryghtuousnes. There is not one
word, of the offeringe of bread and wine. They cannot find in the book of
Genesis that Melchisedech did sacrifice to God, but that he offered bread and
wine to Abrahame, for sustenau^ce of his people, as Christ offered to us his
word. Melchisedeche brought bread and wine and Abrahame paid him tithes
Christ after the same sort gave us the sacrament of his body and blood, but
he did not offer it to God. The scripture shewith forth Melechisedech under the
figure of an eternal an only priest. But the papists appointe othere priests
to be Christ's viccars after his asce^cio^ in to heaven. If a man should agree
with them ye Christ offered to God bread and wine, yet they cannot prove,
that he killed him self in sacrifice under bread, and wine. Also if Christ
offered nothing but bread and wine: the priests of the old law did much
better in kyllinge of living creatures, to offer them in sacrifice The papists
cannot, tell what to say, and when they bring authority of scripture it
makes against them and are confuted with there own sayings as one that is
slain with his own weapon. Moreover they bring such places of scripture as
speak of mele and unleavened bread, as of the bread, that was ever sta^dinge
one the table of ye unleavened bread and two loves of ye first fruits Also
where they are judged holy, because they offer to ye Lord, an host of bread,
and chiefeli they make great bragges of the saying of Malachias a clean host
is offered to my name in all places, for my name is magnified, among the
gentiles. And in what place so ever they find the offering of bread and wine,
they apply it to signify, the bodily offeringe of Christ in the Mass. They
believe that they cannot er, and that these dreams, are confirmed by the law,
prophesiyng thereby as they did of purgatory, that where soever they sound this
word fiere written in the bible, they applied it to signify purgatory, as they
do in this matter when they can bring no probable reason, that Christ's body
ought to be offered in the Mass. And when, they find any mention of blood and
other sacrifices they wraste the^ to Christ's body taking witness of the
old doctors when they no better understand them, then they do the bible.
Now we will briefly make answer to their allegations and declare the true
maintenau^ce of such places as they allege to make for their purpose. And
first we will declare, the saying of Malachias whereby it may be perceived,
what the other places signify. He rebuked the I wish priests who gave them
selves all together to couetuousnes, when they should have occupied them
selves to offer a pure people to the Lord, and to fassion there manners after
gods commandments as the Chapter folowinge does testifye. They ought to
have taught the people godliness, and all kinds of virtue but they fed the
people with foleshe, and vain tradicons of men and offered to ye Lord an ungodly
people and folishe herted Here is named the filthye bread, the blind, lame,
and broken sacrifice. They may perceive that the unclean bread can not
signify, ye pure body of Christ that bread and sacrifice therefore does
signify, the people as saint Paul says we are one bread and one body, and
that he does service to God in preachinge the Gospel, to make the Gentiles an
acceptable sacrifice to God. When the priests therefore made an ungodly and
sinful people by there doctrine and evil example, God rebuked them and
thretneth, that he would ordeyne other priests, in their stead that should
offer a pure Sacrifice, not only among the Jews, but also a monges the
gentiles, that is to say, they should enstructe, the people with true godliness
and with true honor and worship of god. He therefore did prophesy of the
priests which should come to offer sacrifice of justice, that is to say, the
holy apostles and all other faithful ministers of gods word. And therefore the
people of God which is Christ's spiritual body, is brough and offered by
their doctrine to God as S. Paul says I have spoused the Corinthi, to
Christ, meaning no other thing by these words, but that by his preaching and
miracles, he has brought and offered in sacrifice to god the Gentiles which
were before carnal and fleshly minded. And therefore To. xii.
be exorteth the Romans through the mercy of God to give their bodies to be
aliuely facrifice John. iiii.
holly and acceptable to God. The people of God is spirituallye the meat which
Christ desired most and are the twelve loves of sweet bread, which being
converted by the preachinge of the twelve apostles does continually appear
before the face of God. These are the true preistes. And ye they may bring to
effect there enterprice, it is mete, that they be holly that is* That they
abstain from all things, that pluckethe them from the true worshipping of
god. This bread is called sometime undefiled. For christian me^ ought to walk
in the truth without Hypocrisy and feigned lies, and to be anointed with oil,
that is to say with the grace of the hollye ghost, true charity, and mercy
this is ye true sense and meaning of this text of scripture, declared and
proved by other plases of scripture. But the papists though they allege the
doctors yet they can prove the meaning and understanding of this text by no
place of all the scripture Beade in the scripture betokneth the word of God. For
Christ says, man does not live only by bread but every word yt proceeds,
from ye mouth of god The priests ought sincerly to minister this bread to the
people, and in this significacion the spiritual bread is not a sacrifice, but
ye administracion of the word, and of ye ministres of god. This is the true
manna and angels fode which was given to men, from heaven to be their
sustenau^ce. By these things a man may easly perceive what offeringe the
Apostles and true priests made. Undoubtedly a faithful people who^ they brought
to god with wholesome doctrine, but they offered not the natural body of Christ
after the opinion of these fleshly minded papists, for yt were done to crucify
christ again. They believe Daniel his saying makes much for there purpose
where he says yt their daily sacrifice, called in (...)* should cease for
aliene, by this they understand their Daily sacrifice. The Mass that now
begins to cease this application is falsely devised. For the sacrifice that
Daniel speak of was offered eueri day at two several Exodus, xxix.
times which was in ye morning and evening, and that sacrifice with other I
wyshe sacrifices ceased when Christ ye only true sacrifice offered himself on
ye altar of the cross. You may therefore easly perceive ye, yt was not ye
sacrifice of the mas, for it is not done, both in the morning and theuening, as
ye other was. and Eusebius says our lords supper under some byshopes was
ministered but once or twyse, in the year, the history of ye dayelie sacrifice,
that Daniel speaks of, was fulfilled under Antiochus the tiran, for in his
time there was no sacrifice offered in ye temple of god for the space of three
or four years In deed this is true. Antiochus, was the figure of Antichriste
for he took a way ye true worshipping and honor of god. And trust in god, and
faith is extinguished, when 5 men trust more, in their own power and works
the^ in gods grace they have certain other dreams and assertions but of no
virtue or strength. One is, they say the easter lamb was offered every year,
so Christ the true Easter Lamb ought to be offered often times nothing ca^
be more folishe then this Argument. For the easter la^be, was not offered for
sins but only was slain and eaten in remenbraunce of the deliuerau^ce of the
Israelits out of Egipte. But now the papists offer for sins the sacrifice
of the mass. For they are not contented with thonly remembrance of Christ's
death* Other sacrifices were offered again, for they were imperfect, but
Christ being a perfect and sufficient sacrifice ought to be offered once, for
ever. They object that wha^ the preachers and doctors did sacrifice at ye
election of Paul and fasted, ye holly ghost fayed etc. the greek word yt they
translate to signify to do sacrifice, has in this place ye signification yt
it has in ye. xiii. Cha. to the Romans, ye is to minister as a To. xiii.
magistrate in ye common wealth. And therefore after ye translacion of the
papists every maiestrate is apreist. But they yt will be esteemed, to be witty
and learned amongeste the^ reason after this manner when Christ offered
himself) the church also which is his spowse, may offer him for sins in the
Mass. For Christ and his church so agree and so consent together. That what
so ever the one does the other agrees to the same. But this is a lie. For if
Christ died for us, then the church must do the same. Christ is the bread and
high priest. Ergo we are the bread and high priest also. Christ was offered
say they with pain, and sufferinge of the body. Ergo he ca^ be offered and
suffer not. He was once a sacrifice, ergo he ca^ be a sacrifice again. But
this there talk is vain and foleshe. For we seek not what Christ might do but
what he did. And what the scripture teaches. Also they obiecte yt it is better
to give, then to take. In sacrifice we give, and in our Lords supper we take
it is therefore better to offer. But let them first prove who gave the^
authority to do sacrifice after this man. It is better to be a savior the^ a
creature and seruante. Therefore as it is a great blasphemy, a man to say he
is a god, and savior, so it is great blasphemy yt sinners shall go about to
offer Christ for remission of sins. So thus it co^eth to pass, ye the more
they defend their errourres ye more ungodly they show the^ selves against Gods
majesty Some of ye papists doubt not to say yt we sin daily, therefore daily
sacrifice is necessary. And they say Christ took away the sin past only which
is called original sin (...) satisfacion for other sins, must be made other
wise, yt is by works and sacrifices And they put to many other things yt
differ so much from the doctrine of faith as any christen man hearing the^ may
easly perceive. For the^ it were co^seque^t that Christ is neither God nor a
true savior. Now we have declared, what the Mass is. Not a sacrifice for
sins but an horible abominacio^ before God. Al Christian me^ ought therefore to
shone and fle from it and tourn to the true use of our Lords Supper
according to his most holy ordinance. To whom be honor and glory for ever

AMEN
Fines

