The fourth part of Commentaries of the Civil wars in France, and of the
low country of Flaunders: Translated out of Latin into English, by Thomas
Tymme Minister.

Seen and allowed.

Imprinted at London by Henry Binneman, for Humfrey Toy.

Anno. 1576.

blazon or coat of arms of Ambrose Dudley, Earl of Warwick HONI ^ SOIT ^ QVI
MAL ^ ^ Y ^ PENSE ^ OMNIA TEMPVS HABENT

To the right honorable Lord Ambrose Dudley, Earl of Warwick, Baron of
Lisle, of the most honorable order of the Garter Knight, General of the
Queens Majesty's Ordinance, within her highness realms and dominions.
IT is commonly seen (right honorable) that all men occupy them selves most in
the reading of those matters, wherein they have delight, either for that they
are naturally disposed thereunto, or else well experienced in the same. The
which consideration being joined with the Argument of this my book, I could
not devise with my self a more fit patron, to whom I might dedicate the
same, than to your honor. For such noble courage has nature wrought in you,
found out by effect in martial affairs, as I persuade my self you will
delight and recreate your self much, with the reading of the valiant acts,
done by diverse courageous persons, in these last civil wars of France.
Accept therefore (right honorable) my choice, and pardon my boldness, which
good will has caused me to show, presuming upon your honorable courtesy, by
which I am drawn, as by the loadstone, to offer this simple present to your
honors hands: I wish the same might in any part be answerable to your
worthynesse. Wherefore not to stay your honor with longer speech, I take my
leave, reco^mending my poor pains to your honors protection.

Your honors most humble Thomas Tymme.

The Translatour to the Reader.
THe increasing of new troubles and wars in France, has also increased the
matter, and given larger occasion of the publishing of this fourth part of
Commentaries, the which contains (as the other three parts do) three
books: the first of the three in the Latin Copy reckoned the tenth. But
because we have to our third part already a tenth Book annexed containing the
sum of those things which are written in the first Book of this fourth
volume. I have thought good not to translate the same in order as it lies, but
only to gleane out those principal matters which are different from the other:
for that it is superfluous in one work to print one and the self same thing
twice. This fourth part comprehends the acts and gestes of the civil
wars, from the time of the last peace concluded in Anno 1571. unto the death
of King Charles the ninth, who dyed in Anno. 1574. In the which there is set
before thee (right Christian Reader) a large discourse, not only of the
affairs of France, but also of the low country of Flaunders, as time and
occasion offers the same. Accept my good will bestowed in translating this
part to benefyte the English reader.

THE TABLE.
ADmiral misliketh ye wickedness of his soldiers. Pa. 5. Affairs of the
Prince of Orange in the low country. Pa. 38. Articles of composition. Pa. 116.
Assalt diverse times given. Pa. 50. 51. Assalt made by the^ of Rochel. Pa. 44.
Answer of the Gentlemen of Rochell to the King. Pa. 9. Answer of them of
Nismes. Pa. 24.
B.
Backsliders from ye ki^gs power Pa. 44
C.
Cities held by them of the Religion. Pa. 3. Cities in Languedoc taken by
policy. Pa. 58. Commandment to beseege Rochell. Pa. 42. Constancy in the
Religious to defend themselves. Pa. 4. Cruelty somewhat mitigated. Pa. 3.
Cruelty showed at Harlem. Pa. 59.
D.
Daulphine possessed by the kings garrison. Pa. 27. Deanuil comes into
Languedoc with an army. Pa. 34. Deanuil trauelleth in vain in Languedoc. Pa.
35. Deanuil abstayneth from war. Pa. 58 Description of Rochell. Pa. 43. 45.
Discipation of them of the Religion. Pa. ^. Diverse cities in Languedoc taken by
policy. Pa. 58. Duke of Anjou subtly persuades to peace. Pa. 44. Duke of
Anjou received with triu^ph to ye seege of Rochel. Pa. 47 Duke of Anjou chosen
King of Polonia. Pa. 86. Duke of Anjou in peril of his life. Pa. 87. Duke de
Aumal slain. Pa. 52.
E.
Earthquake. Pa. 72 Edict proclaimed to call home again all fugitives. Pa. 28.
Edict of peace published. Pa. 89. Extremities in ye kings camp. Pa. 74.
F.
Falsehoode in ye Catholics. Pa. 23. Famine in Harlem. Pa. 68. Famine in
Sanserre. Pa. 100. Fast solemnly proclaimed in Rochell. Pa. 8. Fear upon all
countries after the murder. Pa. 1. Fish by Gods providence never seen before,
came into Rochel in the seege. Pa. 85.
G.
Gadagne parleyeth with them of Rochell. Pa. 48.
H.
Harlem defieth ye D. of Alba. Pa. 40. Harlem beseeged. Pa. 40. Harlem vitailed
by the Prince of Orange. Pa. 67. Harlem yielded to the Duke of Alba. Pa. 69.
Harlem put to the sword. Pa. 69.
I.
Irruptio^s made by them of Rochell. Pa. 2.
K.
King persecuted the^ of ye Religion in Switzerlande. Pa. 29.
L.
Letters sent to the^ of Rochel. Pa. 15. Letters hortatorie from ye Duke of
Anjou, to peace. Pa. 45. Letters concerning peace. Pa. 48. Letters of
Mongomerie to them of Rochell. Pa. 85. Liefetenantships appointed in Languedoc.
Pa. 119.
M.
Messe^gers of Sa^ser revolted. Pa. 36. Meelnine yielded to the Duke of Alba.
Pa. 39. Milles overthrown by the Catholics. Pa. 34. Mombrune a valiant manne
of Daulphine. Pa. 27. Mombrune armeth him self in Daulphine. Pa. 60.
Mongomeries Navy within the sight of Rochel. Pa. 78. 80. Mo^gomerie la^deth at
Belile. Pa. 81 Mons. Cosine slain. Pa. 82. Mons. Sanroman general of the
Religious. Pa. 59. Mons. Candale slain. Pa. 53. 54. Mons. La Noe hardly
escapes death. Pa. 49. 50. Mons. Grandrise shirmisheth with the Kings camp.
Pa. 48. Mons. La Noe general of Rochell. Pa. 43. Mons. La Noe comes to
Rochell. Pa. 31. Mons. Biron put into the bloody book. Pa. 13. Monsterous
calfe. Pa. 42. Mountauban defieth ye king. Pa. 18. Mountes receives succors.
Pa. 38 Murder at Bordeaux. Pa. 17.
N.
Narden in Calamity. Pa. 40. Negligence in the^ of Sanser. Pa. 62. Nismes
refuses to receive the kings garrison. Pa. 19. Noble men within Rochell are
assayed to be brought to defection. Pa. 33.
O.
Occasion of peace with Rochel. Pa. 86 Open war proclaimed against Rochell.
Pa. 86.
P.
Peace concluded between ye king and them of Rochell. Pa. 88. Pibrach inuayeth
against those of the Religion. Pa. 4. Preparation of war against Languedoc.
Pa. 25. Provision of war. Pa. 2. Policy practiced to take Rochell. Pa. 7.
Q.
Queen of England Godmother to ye French kings daughter. Pa. 30
R.
Rochel assalted by policy. Pa. 7. Rochel refuses to receive mons. Biron. Pa.
14. Rochel prepares for defense. Pa. 17 Rochell put to proscription by the
King. Pa. 30. Rochell beseeged. Pa. 32. Rochel battered and assalted. Pa. 70.
71.
S.
Sanserre refuses to receive the kings garrison. Pa. 26. Sanserre beseeged.
Pa. 63. Sanserre valiantly defends it self. Pa. 63. Sa^ser oppressed with
famine. Pa. 100 Sign in the air. Pa. 76. Security in de Gordes. Pa. 61.
Sole^n fast proclaimed in To. Pa. 8. Sommiron beseeged. Pa. 35. 53. Sommiron
yielded up. Pa. 54. Scaling ladders overthrown. Pa. 76 Smoke made in Rochell.
Pa. 76. Star never seen before. Pa. 42. Succors sent by the Prince of Orange
intercepted by the Duke of Alba. Pa. 42. Zwitzerland disqueted with the
troubles of France. Pa. 1.
T.
Treason practiced against. Rochell. Pa. 43. Truce taken for a parley. Pa. 52.
Truce broken. Pa. 87.
V.
Villeneuf taken by treason. Pa. 21. Villeneuf taken by them of the Religion.
Pa. 55. Victory gotten by women. Pa. 77.
VV.
War provided for. Pa. 2. War most miraculous. Pa. 6. War openly proclaimed
against Rochell. Pa. 17. War prepared against Langu. Pa. 25


Fault escaped in Printing.
Page. 3. line last save three, Read the deep judgment of God. And in the
same line, for begin, read began.

Additions to the tenth Book of Commentaries, necessary to be considered in
the reading of the Tragical murder committed at Paris and in other places of
France.
THE Kings Edict being proclaimed (as we have said in the ninth Book of
Comme^taries) ye foreign soldiers were dismissed, Anno. M.D.LXX.
and specially they of Germany. The^ every one with speed went home to their
houses which they had not seen before by the space of three years: and, as
after a great tempest, all men desired a quiet and peaceable time: as well the
Catholics as they of the Religion, who also them selves felt the sore harms
of wars.

They of the Religion yielded up all their cities almost, except those which
the King had granted unto them by his Edict, as Rochell, La Charity, and
Sanserre.

The garrisons which came in the Kings name were received into the surrendered
cities, who then more quietly behaved them selves than they were wont before
time upon the conclusion of peace when war was ended. Thus by little and
little men's minds were glad to be at rest, being weeryed with the bloody and
loathsome experience of long and tedious wars, wishing peace: in so much that
they of the Religion had forgotten the former injuries, the which was the
harder to do, because of the falsehoode and treason showed against them: yea,
the Catholics seemed to love peace, and friendly to embrace them of the
Religion. For it was reported, that the kings will and mind was, to have the
peace firmly established. Therefore all men deemed that all things tended to
peace by this happy beginning.

The Queen of Nauar and other nobles come to Rochell.
THE Queen of Nauar came to Rochell with the Prince her son, and with the
rest of her family: the Prince of Conde also and the Admiral, and the rest of
the peers which professed the Religion, came thither that they might there,
the more safely attend the proceedings of the late concluded peace. But within
few months, every one privily got him home to his own house, being weery of
so long delay.

The marriage between the King and the Emperors daughter.
THE King took the daughter of the Emperor Maximilian to wife: the which all
men said was a great occasion to further the peace. The marriage was celebrated
with great royalty, and the new Queen was received of the men on both parts
with great joy, as the happy beginning of fyrme and constant peace: and fame
opposed her gentle nature and disposition, against the troublesome and churlish
inclination of the Queen mother: and men were in great doubt it would come to
pass that the king for the favor and liking that he had of his new wife,
whom he was said to love entierly, would grow in dislike of the Queen
mother, whose nature he could not brook long before, saying that he neither
would nor could bear any longer her imperious ambition.

The common custom of humane affairs brought a special credit to this
report, that the new Mistress and Lady should put the old dame quite out of
favor. Hereunto were added the forces of domestical reasons. The King had two
brethren, the Duke of Anjou, of whom we have spoken often times before: and
the Duke of Engolesme. The Duke of Anjou, was more in favor with his mother,
and had gotten to him self a name, and singular credit among the nobles, both
by his service in the wars, and also by his happy success in the same:
beside also the honor which the Catholics gave unto him, who had him in more
estimation almost than the King him self: in so much that he received a
yearly revenue of two hundred thousand Frankes of the Clergy, upon
condition to be the patron and defender of the Church.

The Duke of Anjou being thus plentifully mayntayned, the King his brother (as
it is credibly reported) had him in suspicion: Hartburning between the King
and the Duke of Aniou.
and that it appeared manifestly by evident speeches and deeds that the King
bare privy grudge against his brother. Also that the King said, that he
would not be weeried with new troubles of wars: and that of late they of the
Religion had bin falsely accused unto him. On the contrary part, the Duke of
Anjou showed him self an enemy to those of the Religion: boasted of his
victories over them: did hurt them by all means that he could: favored those
whom the King hated, and hated those whom the King loved. Thus it evidently
appeared, that there was enmity between those two brethren, in so much that it
seemed necessary for the King, to defend him self against his brothers power,
least be should begin any new trouble, and to diminishe the authority of his
mother which had continued over long, thereby to win to him self the hearts
of those of the Religion: for that it was more for his safety to trust unto
the aid and strength of them of the Religion, than to ye Catholics. These
kinds of reasons stooke in the minds of wise men, moving them to think that
the King would incline to peace, and also seek to win unto him those of the
Religion. But the quite contrary was provided for, by so great subtility and
craft of the Queen mother, who being the chief workmistresse of these
deceyts, made the King the chief minister and instrument of them. The King
trauayled to bring this one thing especially to pass, that he might thoroughly
persuade and certify the Queen of Nauar, and the Admiral (by whose
counsayles al ye affairs of those of ye Religion were ordered) of his assured
good will, both to observe and keep ye peace, and also to defend them, yt so
they might trust unto him. The subtle means and practices which he used to
bring this thing to pass, we have showed in ye.x. book. Only we are here to
note ye deep judgment, which now begin to provide great and sharp
punishments. It is wonderful yt after so many experiments of treson, yt the
Admiral being of a pregna^t wit, and having experience of great matters, could
not beware of ye subtle deceits of a and a young man: when as he him self often
times said, that he suspected the crafty wit of the Queen.

About this time letters came from the Princes of Germany (as we have said in
the tenth Book) to show their glad minds for the peace concluded to whom
the King wrote again of his willingness to establish the same.

NEVERTHELESS the Catholics could not temper and stay them selves in
certain places. At Orange there was committed a great slaughter, Murder
committed at Orange upon those of the Religion.
notwithstanding that the King had made warrantise of the contrary to the
Prince of Orange. For all they of the Religion which were fled away in time of
the former war, were returned thither again upon trust and warrant of the
Kings Edict: upon whom, they mistrusting no such thing, the soldiers being
let into the town, fell with violence, the townsmen which were Catholics,
setting them a work, and assisting them, so that they slew without all pity
or mercy a great number of men, women and children. Notwithstanding, the Kings
garrison, which as yet remained in the Castle, was a safeguard for many, the
which if it had not suppressed the rage of the people, a greater number of the
Religious had bin slain.

Notwithstanding the Prince of Orange urged the King, to yield unto him Orange
and the rest of the dominion, which he did at the last: mons. Berchon a wise
man, being sent for the same purpose, who received in the Princes name, both
the Castle and the Town, and the whole County.

After the which, commandment was given in the Princes name, that the men of
both parts should live ever afterward peaceably, according to the tenor of
the Edict, and that the use of both Religions should be free. Those which were
guilty of the murder committed, at the first stale away for fear of
punishment, notwithstanding being at the last persuaded both with the words and
sufferance of mons. Berchon, they returned into the City again. For mons.
Berchon wonderfully dissembled the love which he bare unto the Religion, in
so much that he would not come to the sermons of the same, as though he favored
the Catholics. Thus the authors of the murder being allured to Orange again,
were at the last apprehended, and put to death.

About the same time also certain of the reformed Church of Rhoane were put to
death by the common people: Murder at Roane.
and in diverse other places also murders were committed against the Edict.

Hereupon the Queen of Nauar, the Princes, and other of the Peers, sent
Briquemald, Teligni, La Noe, and Cauaignes, which were noble and wise men, to
the King, to complain to his majesty of these violations of the Edict, and to
require reformation of the same.

The King very lovingly received them, declaring how great grief the hearing
of these things was unto him: and taking great oaths, according to his custom,
promised that he would so punish the breakers of his Edict, that they should
be an example to all others. Therefore at the kings commandment certain of
the chief of the Senate of Paris were sent out of hand to Rhoane, to sit upon
that murder, and to punish the offenders according to law. Marshall Momorencie
also received charge concerning this matter. Notwithstanding the greatest part
of those murderers fled away at the rumor hereof. Therefore many of their
goods were confiscate: and three hundred of those which were absent were
condemned to dye: also certain of the rascal sort were hanged.

After this certain men were put in commission, to see if there were any thing
committed against the Edict in any part of the Realm: to hear also the
complaints of the plaintifes, and to satisfye them according to the form of
the Edict. But these commissioners, even as they had done before time, used
only instead of justice and equity, a counterfayte and outward show of law.

IN a certain village of the territory of Valentz called Monboch, a certain
young man of the Religion, of honest parentage, found by chance in a man's house
vestments and Coapes for Mass. These in jest and derision he put upon him,
running up and down the streets, making a jest and scorn of Popish rytes.
He being accused for this to the Commissioners, was apprehended, and kept in
close prison for certain days: and afterward a great fine being set upon his
fathers head, he was adjudged to the Galley: the which punishment in France,
belongs unto vagabunds and thieves.

THEY of the Religion had a great sum of money to pay for the wages of the
Reisters, to whom a large sum was yet due: the sureties for the which were
the Princes, the Admiral, County Rochfoucault, and certain of the principal
nobles: some part the king had paid. For the payment of this sum, a great
tribute was laid upon those of the religion, namely, that every one should pay
toward this sum, the fifth part of his revenues, until the same were fully
paid and discharged. For the gathering whereof, there were certain
Collectours appointed by the kings letters in every province, notwithstanding,
with the appeal of the Queen of Nauar, and of the Princes.

This burden, after so great spoil and waste made by wars, seemed too many to
be very great, in so much, that it kept back a great many of those which had
professed the reformed religion, from coming into the congregation.
Notwtstanding the greater part of them of the religion, gladly paid that
tribute, upon hope of peace, and for the desire they had to enjoy the religion.
Besides this tribute, there were other subsidies also to be paid to the king,
the greatness whereof, foreyne nations would scarce believe. Subsidies and
taxes.
For there is no Christian nation under the sun, that bears the burden of
so many subsidies and taxes, as does the realm of France, whereby incredible
sums are gathered. Nevertheless, these subsidies were paid with great
willingness of mind, that within few months great treasure came unto the
king. Besides these charges, every Church was to maynteine their ministers,
and to provide for other necessities.

Besides this, the places appointed for holy assemblies and preachings of the
word, were very inconvenient. Therefore it is wonderful, that the Churches
stood amidst so many stumbling blocks and inconveniences. Notwithstanding,
great was the number of them of the Religion in every place, growing and
increasing, notwithstanding these extremities.

WE spoke before, The first motion of the marriage.
concerning those whom the Queen of Nauar, and the Princes sent unto the king.
They as we noted, obtained not only at the hands of the king, that the
violating of the kings Edict should be reformed, but also such familiarity
with the king, that in ample manner he did express his mind, not only
concerning the establishing of peace, but also that he would for the more
certain continuing of the same, give his sister Margaret in marriage to Prince
Henry, son to the Queen of Nauar. But this was the beginning of the
lamentable tragedy of Bartholmewtide.

The report hereof was no doubt, very acceptable to the Queen of Nauar, and
to her son: notwithstanding it is said, that the Admiral at the first had
this motion in suspicion, who going with Theligni to the Queen of Nauar about
this matter, the said Theligni showing ye kings good will expressed at large,
both toward the Queen of Nauar, and also toward the Admiral him self, is said
to contend in word greatly against the same. Notwithstanding, letters being
often sent concerning the daily speech of the king, the Admirals mind began by
little and little to be persuaded, and to judge very well of the king in all
things, thinking that a young man which was of a mild nature and a lover of
peace, could not dissemble: and although he feared the subtle and crafty wit
of the Queen mother, nevertheless the matter was come to that point, that the
king would not hearken to her counselles, in dispyght of his brother the Duke
of Anjou, whose power he had greatly in suspicion.

It is said also yt mons. Momorencie, who was cousin germane to the Admiral,
prevailed much in persuading ye Admiral. And the king to serve his turn, made
great account of Momorecie, committed unto him ye charge of weighty affairs,
and daily talked with him about secret matters of privy counsel: For there is
an old and continual hatred (as we have oftentimes said) between the houses
of Momorencie and of Guise: in so much that Momorencie thought, that not only
the Admirals death but his also was sought: and that for this cause he was
always suspected and out of favor with ye Queen.

THE Guises therefore seemed daily more and more to be out of favor with the
King: contrariwise, he seemed to use the King familiarly: and protested his
singular good will toward the Admiral: also he co^ferred with him about
weighty affairs, for the exployting whereof, he said he had need of the help
and aid of the Admiral.

The Queen also according to her manner protested, that she desired nothing
more, than that all former matters being forgotten, an assured peace might be
established.

And the sum of all their communications and speeches was this, that the
Queen of Nauar, the Princes, and the Admiral should come unto the King, and
be thoroughly persuaded of his singular good will toward them. By which
means it might come to pass, that a firm friendship might be made, their
minds being reconciled by familiar speech.

These things being daily brought both by letters of Momorencie, and also by
speeches of messengers, the Queen of Nauar was not only thoroughly persuaded
hereof, but also the mind of the Admiral fully vanquished and overcome.

Anno. M.D.LXXI.
IN this year there befell such a sharp cold winter, that the River of Rosne
was frosen quite over all along the channel: and, which was never hard of
before, County Volt a noble man, went over the river on foot with his whole
family and others, commanding his Mules to go before him laden with carriage
out of the country of Viuaretz into Daulphine. A great frost.


IN Languedoc and in Prouance most temperate Regions, the Olive trees, fygge
trees, Orange trees, and Pomegranat trees were almost dead with cold: Vines
also starued in many places, to ye great spoil of most fertile countries.
Whereupon ensued a great dearth, which the godly interpreted as a forewarning
of Gods great judgments.

IN the month of March of this present year there was holden a general
Synod of the reformed Churches at Rochell, upon grant from the Kings
majesty by his letters. A Sinode holden at Rochell.
There came to this Synod godly and learned men from all parts of the Realm,
as Antoni Chande a man of noble parentage, Nicolaus Gelazius, and many others.
Thither came also Theodore Beza, upon request of ye Princes letters to the
Senate of Geneua, and was made chief in that Synod, being chosen according to
manner and custom by voices. It pleased also the Queen of Nauar, the Princes,
peers, and nobles of the Religion to be present in this assembly. In this
Synod were specially handeled the manner of reforming the Churches: the
principal point of doctrine: Ecclesiastical discipline, a new manner whereof
Johannes Morelius went about to bring in a little before diverse other things
also were handled, concerning certain other new forms in the Lords supper.

ABOUT the same time the messengers of the Princes returned from the King,
having large gifts given them, and bringyng with them joyful tidings,
concerning the Kings assured good will toward the Queen of Nauar, toward the
Princes, the Admiral and the other noble men: concerning public peace and
the expected matrimony: and concerning preparation to be sent at the Kings
commandment into the low country: which ye messe^gers said they themselves
should understand by ye kings own mouth: willing the^ to go with all speed unto ye
king, which was ye principal point of their embassage.

Hereuppon the Queen of Nauar thought that she could not but go unto the
King, fearing least if she should deny the same, or should defer the time, the
King would be displeased, seeing also M. Biron was come unto her strayte after
the return of the messengers with the same message from ye king, to the end
she might make the more speed.

Notwithstanding ye wiser sort suspected her going: to who^ the marriage in
persons of contrary religion seemed dangerous, and contrary to the express
word of God. Nevertheless worldly reasons prevailed, yt the lamentable tragedy
might go forward, yt is to say, that ye just providence of god might find a
way to bring great matters about, and to punish both their sins, he used both
their sins after a certain wonderful manner.

Therefore the Queen of Nauar came to the Court with a great train, The
Queen of Nauar comes to the Court.
which at that time was at Blay. For whose honorable entertainment, it can
scarce be told what great preparation was made by the King, the Queens, the
kings brethren, his sister, and by the whole Court: insomuch that every
courtier went forth to meet her as to receive that which above all other
things had a long time been desired. The King for his part showed all duties
of humanity in welcomming the Queen of Nauar, that by any manner of means he
might.

THE chief and greatest business was about the marriage: the contracte whereof
could not be made without the presence of the Queen of Nauar. The King and
Queen by all means uttered their good wills: The mind of the Queen of
Nauar was thoroughly persuaded of the same: they disagreed not about the dowry:
For a large dowry meet for such a State was offered: and the Queen mother
was very careful for the bestowing of her only daughter, she making a show as
though she would spare nothing to further the same.

Many things were handled concerning the contracte of matrimony: concerning the
ancient society and friendship between the house of Valoys, of Borbon, and of
Aubeter: and very notable things were at large spoken on both parts concerning
the restoring of the kingdom into his former state by the mean of a fyrme
peace.

There remained two doubts, which seemed to trouble both parts, namely the
respect of contrary religion: and the place where the marriage should be
celebrated. For the Queen of Nauar would not have the same at Paris: which
city she feared, both for that the same was addicted to the Romish Religion,
and also an enemy to the house of Nauar.

The King said that he would not have the manner of royal marriages altered,
which were wont to be celebrated there: and the rather because the same did
greatly make for the assured sign of peace, when the same should be seen to
be openly celebrated in the Metropolitan city of the realm, as it were in
the face of the whole world. And now although both parts were persuaded, that
this marriage might be made very profitably, yet notwithstanding there was
great doubt concerning the manner of celebratyng the marriage. The Queen of
Nauar being zelously addicted to the reformed religion, would in no wise
consent that the marriage should be celebrated after the Romish fashion:
neither the Queen mother would condescend that they should be married after
the order of the reformed Religion. Thus there was great dissension between
the two women, whereas they were agreed of the principal matter.

The King at the first entreated the Queen of Nauar to grant unto him and to
his sister this liberty: for that it appertayned to his dignity, that the
form of the ancient Religion, which he had received from his auncetors might
be used in the marriage of his sister. When the Queen of Nauar had constantly
excused her self, and that the King perceived he prevailed nothing at all, it
is reported, that using his accustomed oaths, he said that he would set his
sister at liberty from the laws of Rome, and also from the rytes of the
Religion: and that he him self would celebrate the marriage, than the which
there could not be a more pompous celebration. The which rumor was spread abroad
among the Courtiers, and this new imagination pleased many very well: for
whatsoever the King says or does, that does the Frenchman like, insomuche that
they frame both their speech and their apparel according to the Kings guise.

To remove this doubt respite was taken on either part. The King sent
letters unto Pope Pius the fyfth, to obtain license for his Sister to marry
with Henry Borbon his Coosyne, least the respect either of consanguinitie or
of Religion might hinder the marriage: License to marry sent for to Rome.
for that it was for the wealth of the Realm: Furthermore that it would please
his holiness to give them leave to use such rytes in celebrating matrimony as
might best serve their turn.

The Pope altogether misliketh of the Kings request, the which he often times
denied to grant, affyrming the same to be most unlawful.

On the other part also the Queen of Nauar consulted with the ministers of
the reformed Religion, what might be done in this matter. Of the which diverse
verdictes and judgments were given. Some urging the simplicity of the word
of god, thought it wicked by any manner of means to contracte such matrimony,
the which was therefore much more dangerous in noble personages, because the
affairs in hand did not belong to one house alone, but also almost to the
whole Realm. The which speeches notwithstanding were not gracious and
acceptable to the Queen of Nauar and to the rest of the nobles, persuading
themselves that they should all generally receive great profit by that
marriage. Therefore the matter was committed to a few, by whose determination
the same was to be ended: and they concluded nothing but that which they knew
would please ye Queen of Nauar and the nobles. Then the matter being approved
upon their sentence and determination, began to grow in greater likeing, and
to please more of ye ministers, whose judgments were afterward required in
public asse^blies of ye churches of France.

Thus the woorser counsel took place, and not only the Queen of Nauar, but
also the greatest part of them of the religion, earnestly wished that marriage.
All the controversy stood on this point, by what way most conveniently and
with lest offense of either part the marriage might be solemnized.

THE Admirals wife being dead, he married another of the noble house of Royen,
The Admiral marries his second wife.
being daughter to the County of Entremont, and heir to great possessions.
This stock belongs to the County of Sauoy: and this rich noble woman, was
desired in marriage of many noble men and peers also of Sauoy. Notwithstanding
the Admiral prevailed both by the means of the Kings letters to Philibert
Duke of Sauoy (whose authority was great in making that noble marriage) and
also by his own fame and name of Religion, which was most acceptable to that
heroical Lady: and so took her to his wife, which many gathered to be an
argument of most fyrme peace.

THE Admiral thought it necessary for the expedition of the affairs in the
low country, to enter into league with Elizabeth the Queens majesty of
England. And good occasion (as he thought) was offered, for that her majesty
is single, and the Duke of Anjou the Kings brother wanted a wife. The Duke of
Anjou thought him self worthy so great a marriage, both for that he was the
Kings brother, and also because he had won to him self great renown and
praise, by his valiant acts in martial affairs.

The charge to bring this matter to pass was committed to M. Momorencie, a
wise man, and one of the chief nobles and governors of France.

The end declared the causes of this league: both that by this practice the
minds of the Admiral and of all the rest which ought necessarily to be
blinded for the better finishing of the wicked fact, might be deceived: all
the whole matter being cloked with provident care for the dispatche into the
low country: and also that Momorencie a man of sharp wit might not through
his familiarity and conference with the King smell out the counsels of the
tragedy which was in hand: and finally that England being bound by the name
of this league, might not stir as offended at the wickedness of the fact, the
which also came to pass. These were the reasons why the league was made with
ye Queens majesty of England, as has since appeared by the success it
self.

AVTVMNE of this present year was very unseasonable, flowing with continual
and vehement showers of rain. A great part of the houses and buildings of
Feraria fell down, to the present ruin of the whole City. Nere unto Geneua
at the straytes of Ecluse, a great part of a hill was broken down with the
freat and violence of the waters, and fell down into the River of Rosne, Floudes
of water.
with the which the water was so stopte that it did ouerflowe: and the said
River was so checkte with the floude, that the stream having his contrary
course backewarde, caused the wheels of those milles that stood upon the
same to run amiss, and to turn the Milstones the wrong way: to the wonder
of such as saw the same, the like whereof was never seen before. There was
also so great an Earthquake in a certain village near unto Geneua, An
erthquake
that all the houses in the same were overthrown: and a certain piece of
ground belonging to the fame, was removed out of his place, and houses that
were strongly builte, and trees also that were great and talle, were
overthrown. Also the Suburbs of Lions called Aguilot, was almost quyte
overthrown with this vyolence of waters, and the greateste part also of the
stonewoorke of the Bridge upon the River of Rosne.

An army was prepared to go to Bordeaux, and to the famous havens of Broages
the charge whereof was committed to Mons. Strozzi, and to Baron d'Guarde. The
rumor concerning the war to come increased more and more, even as fame is
wont to prevent things to come. But it was given out that this war should
be in the low country. Therefore the Spanish Ambassadors made often
complaints unto the King, as though by his majesty's commandment war should
have been taken in hand against the King of Spain his sovereign. But the
King excused him self with wonderful dissimulation, insomuche that they of
the Religion by so doubtful an answer deemed that the Kings mind was fully
persuaded concerning the war of the low country.

About the same time also Lodowic Nassau brother to the Prince of Orange, came
to the Court accompanying the Queen of Nauar, and entered into league with the
King in his brothers name, the same being subscribed and sealed.

At such time as the Navy was preparing in the Occean Sea, Anno. M.D. LXXII.
appointed with six thousand footmen and a great number of pieces: there went a
common ieste abroad, that the Navy went into the Isle of Florida to fetch
gold, but in very deed the simpler sort of the commen people said, that this
preparation was not only by the Kings sufferance, but also by his express
commandment, for the low country. This preparation pleased the most part
of the people very well: and all men of both parts, were ready to join
together in the same war, with so good will, as if they had never felt the
calamities of war. On the other part, a great number of Catholics and of
those of the Religion, according as they were joined together by affinity and
acquaintance, went to another war, namely into Italy against the Turk,
against whom he seeking to win the Isle of Malta, they bended their whole
force and power. Therefore men went thither with a great train of noble men of
France, among which Marquis d'Menie brother to the Duke of Guise was one.

Notwithstanding the greater part went to the war of the low country,
Captains being sent into all parts of the Realm, to gather such Soldiers as
would serve in that war of their own accord, and their wages was paid them
out of the Kings treasury.

THE delay of this marriage seemed to be very long to all men, but especially to
the^ which looked for and desired the same, the cause whereof was made the
Popes prohibition, notwithstanding ye kings letters oftentimes sent for license
and his request to the Cardinal Alexandrin, for the same purpose.

THE first day of May in this present year, Pope Pius the fyfth dyed, the
which offered hope to the King (as he said) to obtayn of ye new Pope license to
end ye marriage. Yet notwithstanding the Queen of Nauar plainly showed her
self not to regard any such license, for the which cause were made so many
delays: and she complained hereof oftentimes unto the King.

SHORTLY after, the Popes death being noysed, the King commanded the Cardinal
of Loraine to go to Rome to be present (as it was reported) at the Popes
election. The King said that he had given him in charge to procure the Popes
dispensatio^, that once at the last that marriage might be finished.

The Cardinal promising faithfully to accomplish the Kings commandment
concerning the Pope, altogether renouncing the Court, seemed in the judgment
of the wyser sort, beside common reports, to provide for his own safety,
least he him self should be in danger in so great favor of them of the
Religion, or in ye proclayming of a new war.

All which things were so handeled by the crafty dealing of the Queen mother,
the King also framing both his countenance and also his speech accordingly,
that even the most fine wits in the court, thought that there was nothing
but truth meant.

A Synod at Nismes.
IN the month of May there was a Synod at a noble City in Languedoc called
Nismes, of the reformed Churches. To this Synod, by the benefit of the Kings
letters, came the Ministers and chosen men of the reformed Churches from all
parts of the Realm. The question was moved concerning ecclesiastical
doctrine. At this Synod were present Theodore de Beza, Anthonius Chandoeus,
Nicolaus Gelazius, and diverse other learned and famous men. Gelazius was chosen
to be the moderator of this Synod.

THERE was at this time a great famyne in Languedoc and about the Sea coast,
Famine in Languedoc.
being of it self a very fruitful soil: and it continued so sore, that dead
bodies starued with hunger lay in the streets. For this cause the Synod
brake up their sittyng at Nismes, and appointed a vacation, both for that
victualles wanted to serve so great a multitude, and also to provide for the
poorer sort, least they should be at charge for law matters.

THE peace which men now more largely enjoyed, had almost losed the reins of
al liberty, in so much, that he which now professed the Religion, seemed to
differ nothing at all, neither in speech nor in manners from the Catholic.
And now there began to be a great famine of the word of God: men's minds
being annoyed with tedious curiosity, and in many also of luke warm zeal, in
such wise, that a great number of those of the Religion, could now scarsely
abide to hear a Sermon of ordinary doctrine, as not eloquent and courtly
enough. Thus by peace and ease, things commonly wax worse and worse. Is it
then any marvel, if the Church be oftentimes afflicted and overwhelmed with
troubles and calamities, when it abuses peace, and the happy success of
things?

THERE is upon the sea coast of Flaunders a city called Vlishing, standing
very conveniently for trafike and intercourse to Andwerpe. The townsmen of
this city being weary of the cruelty of the Spaniards, slew the Lieftenant
which was set by the Duke of Alba to keep the town, and certain of his
garrizon, and took the city. And when the Duke of Alba sent a new supply to
recover the town, they valiantly repulsed them, and set them selves at
liberty. By their example many cities of the low country were encouraged:
and the noble towns of Zeland and Holland, were said to favor the Prince of
Aurenge, and to desire liberty.

THE Queen of Nauar being poisoned to death with a pair of perfumed gloves
(as is said in the tenth book) the King, Queen, and the whole court seemed
to take her death very grievously. The King to put away all suspicion of
poison, commanded that the dead body should be ripped up by physicians, and so
the causes of her death found out. The physicians taking a view of ye body,
reported that she dyed of a pleurisy: the more secret cause, which was the
poisoning of the brain, being not found, for that they did not search the
head. Therefore to stop the rumor, her death was spread abroad in public
writings and bills. Her body was carried to Vendosme, and there sumptuously
buried, according to the manner of the religion. The King and Queen to declare
their sorrow and grief, put on mourning weed, and commanded all the court to
do the like. The Queen of Nauar being thus dead, the King so dealt with her
son Henry, with the Admiral, and with the rest of the noble me^ of the
religion that her death seemed to hasten forward the marriage. Therefore within
few days, the mourning for the Queen of Nauar was laid aside in the court.
The King practiced another subtletie, to appoint the day of marriage, for the
which, so many delays had been hitherto made. He said oftentimes to the Prince
of Nauar and to the Admiral, that this time was differred by a certain
superstitious care of his mother, of his sister, and of the Cardinal of Borbon,
who minded to marry them, looking for the Popes dispensation, by which they
were to have leave to marry. He feigned therefore, that he had received letters
from Rome from his Ambassador, by which he gave them to understand, that the
cardinal of Lorhain by his diligence had obtained ye Popes dispensation, which
he would send with all speed possible: and that he had sent him word hereof
out of hand, that the King might not think the same long a coming. Therefore
the King showed these letters unto his mother, to his sister, and to the
Cardinal of Borbon. The Queen rejoiced, and said that the same was
sufficient, to end the matter (even as if she had not known that they were
feigned letters, and that there was no impediment now, but that the marriage
might be solemnized. Therefore it was agreed by consent on either part, that the
marriage day should be the.xviiij. of August.

THE town of Mountes was besieged by the duke of Alba, Lodowic Nassau was in
the town, with a great number of the nobility of France. M. Genlis a noble
man, came with 500. horsemen, and.4000. footmen, with the kings consent, to
succor the besieged. But the duke of Alba, having privy intelligence from ye
king of the coming of M. Genlis (of the which he suspected nothing) encountered
with him, and distressed very sore, many of his soldiers being slain, some
wounded, and some taken prisoners. Also monsieur Genlis and La Noe, generalles
of that army, were taken prisoners. The rumor of this overthrow seemed to be
very grievous unto the King, and to the whole Court. And by and by the King
sent his letters unto mons. Monducet his Ambassador in the low country,
which was with the Duke of Alba, to see that no injury nor harm were done to
mons. Genlis, and to the rest which were taken in battle* Monducet did the
kings Embassage diligently to the Duke of Alba. The Admiral being certified of
these commandments of the king, and also of the diligence of Monducet with
the Duke of Alba, was wonderfully persuaded of the kings faithful meaning, to
take war in hand: whom he heard oftentimes to say; that he would one day
be revenged on the Duke of Alba, and on the Spaniardes. In the mean time, the
king gave commission to the Admiral to levy a new army, that with a fresh
supply of soldiers, he might succor the besieged.

The minds of them of the religion were greatly joyous, because of the
marriage at hand. Notwithstanding, pitiful rumors went abroad daily: which
they for the most part would in no wise believe, construing al things to the best.

It is most certain that many wise men, An admonition to the Admiral.
after the death of the Queen of Nauar, suspected that there was some fraud
colored under the pretense of matrimony, and that the same deceit was
specially practiced to ensnare the Admiral. And it is certainly true, that the
Admiral was oftentimes admonished, both by words, and also by letters, not to
adventure him self in so great an assembly, and that too within the walls of
Paris, where the Guises were in great favor and estimation.

And amongst other admonitions, one delivered unto him a book the sum and
scope whereof was this. Remember that this is a decree of the Catholics
confirmed by authority, That there is no faith to be kept with Heretics: by
which name they of the religion are specially called. Remember that there is
everlasting hatred, kindled against those of the religion, by the envy of the
former wars: so that there is no doubt, but that the full purpose and intent
of the Queen is, to destroy by all manner of means those of the Religion. That
an Italyan woman, of the Popes progeny, and of a subtle and crafty wit, can
not but seek all extremities against her enemies, consider in what schole the
king has bin trained and brought up: that for this 12. years space, he has
learned of his scholemasters, to swear, to blaspheme, to forswear, to join
him self with whoores and harlots, to dissemble his faith, his religion, and
his thoughts, to change and frame his countenance, and to rejoice in blood:
that he might suffer his subjects to be slain like beasts. Thou know that
the King is persuaded in the doctrine of Machiauel, how that he ought not to
suffer in his realm any other religion than that, upon the which his state
stands: and that he has often learned this, that it is not possible for his
kingdom to be quiet, so long as there are two religions at once in the same.
And it is certain, that hatred is planted in the kings mind being a young man,
and he has bin often times persuaded by false arguments, that they of the
religion have gone about to spoil him both of his kingdom, and also of his
life. Thou art deceived, if that thou think that the king, or any other such
prince as he is, will at any time suffer those subjects which shall by war
rise against him, though upon never so just a cause to use and enjoy the
benefit of his laws. But be thou rather persuaded of this, that this is
naturally ingraue^ in the minds of kings and princes to revenge that by force
of arms, which is done against them by like force. And that a King and Princes
will freely break those covenants, which they have made either for fear, or
for necessity, so soon as those causes shall cease. And that they hold this
for a law, That those conditions which the Prince has made with the
subjects, ought not to be kept, specially when he made them in war: ye
faith ought to be broken for the kyngdoms sake: That they make no conscience to
deceive the subjects, under the color of a solemn oath.

These are the subtle sleyghts of Princes: this is the discipline to preserve
kingdoms. Antonius Commodus, at the last ceassing from his pleasures, spente
that time in devising murders against the noble men of his Realm, and at the
last determined to kill Julian, whom, in the sight of men, he loved and
reverenced as a father.

Antonius Caracalla an enemy of Alexandria, because certain verses were soong
against him, commanded all the young men of the city to be gathered together,
under the color of a muster and to be slain, and that every soldier should
kill his host where he lay. Thus the City being replenished with murders, he
had no other excuse to cloak the same, but to write unto the Senate, that they
had every one deserved death, and that this answer ought to suffice them.

Lysander the chief Captain of the Lacedaemonians, calling fourscore of the
men of Miletus together, under the color of society and friendship,
commanded them to be slain. Seruius Galba showed the like cruelty upon six
thousand Spanyardes. Antonius Spinola calling unto him colourably the chief
men of the Isle of Corsica to make them a banquet, commanded their heads to be
chopped off.

Charles the seventh King of France, after he had reconciled him self with
the Duke of Burgundy, and confirmed the same with a matrimonial league, and had
also solemnly sworn to forgive all things past, sent for him to the town of
Monterell, under the color of friendship, and there slew him. There are many
other examples, from among the which I have taken these few, to the end thou
may know that the King being a young man has diligently learned that
doctrine which is contained in the.18. chapter of that Book which concerns
the doctrine of a Prince set forth by Machiauell. Even as it cannot be
unknown unto thee, that the king the very same day that the Queen of Nauar
came to ye Court of Blaij. Iestingly demanded of the Queen mother, adding
thereunto* acording to his manner, a blasphemous oath, if he had not behaved
himself exceeding well. To the which ye Queen answered again, that he had
begone very well, but it would profit little except he went forward. But I will
(says he) addyng his accustomed oaths, bring them every one into thy net.
These are the Kings words. Hereby it may be gathered, what the end of these
familiarities and friendshippes will be, showed toward thee and to other
noble men of the Religion. Look diligently to thy self: and be assured
that there is no other remedy for thee to escape their snares, than to get thee
away betimes from this Court, which is a most fylthy, and unclean Sodom.

THIS Book being red, the Admiral answered with angry mood the man, in
whose name the same was offered, That these things served not the time, that
they might have bin spoken conveniently in time past: but now there was no
cause remaining of suspicion: God had altered the Kings mind: he would never
believe that such falsehoode could have place in his Kings mind: nay he was
persuaded that France had never a better King than Charles the ninth: and that
although the Duke of Anjou were an enemy to the Religion, yet at the last he
would forsake that hatred, for the reverence sake of that affinity which he
should have with the King of Nauar. That a league was made with England, into
the which also he minded to enter with the Princes of Germany which
professed the Religion, to show his affection toward the Religion, myndyng to
have in his company one of the sons of the County Palatine, and some one of
the noble men of England which was zealous in the Religion. That he had given
his faith to the Prince of Orange and to his brother, to aid him against the
Spanyardes, in so much that he was the chief and efficient cause of the
preparation of war into the iowe country. That in stead of the Army which
was committed to the conduct of Mons. Genlis, a new supply was prepared: that
the affairs of the low country were in good case. That the Kings Ambassador
did daily advertise him of the counsayles of the Duke of Alba. That the same
Navy, of which Mons. Strozzi and Baron de Guard have charge, is prepared for
no other end than to remove the Spanish navy, and to go with speed to
Vlishing to the Prince of Orange, that there may be open war in the low
country. Finally, that the King did all things with great care, for the
confirmation of peace, by the benefyte whereof, there was no doubt but that the
affairs of the Religion should have good success. Wherefore he prayed him
and all others of the same opinion, that they would not trouble his mind with
those suspicions, being occupied with better things: but rather that they
would pray unto GOD, that he would bring that to good effect which was
happyly begun, to the peace and tranquillity of the Realm and his Church.

ABOUT the same time almost, Mons. Momorencie was returned out of England,
having entered into league in the Kings name with the Queens highness of
England, concerning that marriage which was entreated in the name of Henry
Duke of Anjou, it is unknown what hindered the same. It is said that her
majesty utterly refused the match. But howsoever the case stood, I am
persuaded that God of his singular goodness, provided for her Majesty and
also for the Realm of England, from the which he has turned away great
calamity.

THE Prince of Orange having gotten a great army, in the which were said to be
twenty thousand footmen, and eight thousand horsemen, entered the low
country. At whose coming the Cities in diverse places were yielded unto him: in
so much that within a short time he had in his power four and forty Cities: and
the greatest part of Zeland and Holland. Among these cities he had Mechline. In
ye mean time the Duke of Alba beseeged Mounts, in the which was Lodowic brother
to the Prince of Orange, with a great number of noble French me^.

Shortly after this was the cruel slaughter of the Admiral and other noble men
and gentlemen, committed at Paris, and in other places of the Realm, which is
at large set forth in the tenth Book of Commentaries already translated, and
therefore here omitted.

AFTER the murder, the king commanded the King of Nauar and the Prince of
Conde to come before him. Who being in his presence, he says unto them, That
after so long time of wars, by which his kingdom has bin greatly
endammaged, he has found out at the length undoubted remedies to take away
clean all the causes of war, and has therefore commanded the Admiral to
be slain, the wicked author of mischeuous troubles, and that the same
punishment was provided in the City for all lewd and naughty persons,
infected with ungodly superstition. That he remembered what great harm he had
received both of the King of Nauar, and also of the Prince of Conde, who were
the Captains and ringleaders of desperate persons, and seditiously held war
against him: to revenge so great injuries he had now cause and occasion
offered him. Notwithstanding he said he would forgive matters past and done for
their ages and consanguinities sake: deeming that they were not so much to be
blamed as the Admiral and other most mischeuous persons their counsaylers,
who either already had bin punished for their deserts, or else were now under
the same. These things therefore he said he would pardon, upon condition that
they would ever after amend their former faults with more faithful obedience,
and would return to the Religion of the Catholic faith, that having
renounced the doctrine of profane superstition, which had already caused so
great troubles and wars, they would wholly embrace the ancient Religion,
and return to the lap of the Church of Rome. That he would ever after have but
one only Religion embraced in his Realm, and the same which he had received
from his auncetors. Therefore he willed them to consider whether they would
obey in these things, or else suffer such punishmente as their fellows had
done.

The King of Nauar being abashed with these sharp speeches, aunsweared humbly
unto the king, that he remembered his faith, and the consanguinitie lately
entered with his majesty: and that he would do those things which might please
and content his mind: most heartily beseeching him to consider how great a
thing a man's conscience is, and how hardly he could renounce that Religion,
which he had learned, and in the which he had bin trained up from a child.
Notwithstanding he spoke these things with great submission and fear.

The Prince of Conde perceiving the present peril, answered the King, but not
without fear of mind, that his majesty had so solemnly given his faith to him
and to the rest of the Religion, that he could not persuade him self, that he
would break so faithful an oath, nor harken to the counsels of his
adversaries. And as touching yt obedience which his majesty required of him,
and which he had ever hitherto faithfully showed to the same, he minded never
to forsake it during life. But as touching the Religion, he had free leave of
ye king to exercise the same, and from God the true knowledge thereof, to whom
he knew he should give an account for ye same. Adding yt him self and all that
he had was in the kings power. And he willed him to do what soever pleased him
both with his life and also with his goods: yet nevertheless he was fully
determined never to depart from that Religion, which he knew for certain to be
true, though it were to ye present peril of his life.

The King was sore offended with this aunsweare of the Prince of Conde: and
calling him obstinate, seditious, and the son of a seditious person, tells
him that if he do not repent him within three days, he should suffer death for
his perverse obstinacy.

There were spared also certain of the household servants of the king of Nauar
which were gentlemen, mons. Grammo^ts, Durase and certain others, which
promised that they would do, whatsoever the king commanded them. These being
never earnest lovers of the Religion were pardoned, that they might be
instruments afterward to withstand the same.

This garboyle and bloody stir being thus made in the City and in the
Castle, there were left as yet those which dwelt and aboade in the suburbs,
Mongomerie escapes with others by flight.
and some of the nobility, as M. Chartres, Mongomeri, Briquemauld, Bellouez,
Fontene, and diverse other noble men.

Commandment was given by the king to the Provost of the marcha^ts, to have a
thousand armed men in a readiness to intercept those of the religion which
were in the suburbs of Sangerman. And he had given the whole charge of this
matter unto M. Marcell one of the chief Magistrates of the city.
Notwithstanding the prepared soldiers came not at the hour appointed, through
the negligence of ye said magistrate.

The king had appointed M. Mongeron chief ouerseer of the execution of his
purpose. He looking for his soldiers, and seeking for the Duke of Guise, to
complain to him of this matter, certain hours were spente.

In the mean time, one of the Religion seeing the city all on a roar, running
unto the river, got in convenient time a boat, and so cut over the river, and
certified Mongomerie of the trouble in the city. This was about five of the
clock.

Mongomerie gave M. Chartres to understand hereof: and so by opening the matter
from one to an other, it was generally known by and by to all that were in the
village or suburbs. Notwithstanding it seemed almost incredible. The greatest
part believed that the king was not privy to so great wickedness: so far
they were from thinking that it should be don by his commandment: othersome
being as yet persuaded of the kings good will, thought that the kings own
person was assaulted by the Guyses, for the hatred that they bare to the
Religion, which he seemed to favor.

Therefore amidst this variety of opinions, they knew not themselves what way
they were best to take. Some thought it best to go out of hand to the king
to the Castle of Lowre, least they might be deceived of the kings will: other
some said, that it was needful and necessary for them to go and aid the
king: The third and wyser sort, nothing doubting but that this was done by
the kings commandment, betook them to flight.

But while they made delay, they might easily have bin taken, had not an other
impediment happened.

The Duke of Guise seeing that he could not have a band of soldiers of the
Parisians, they following the pray and spoil, devised a new way, which was,
that he would go himself with certain soldiers to the suburbs of
Sangerman, while the shot and spearemen of the kings guard gave an assault from
the river upon the which stood the suburbs, over against the castle of
Lowre.

But his purpose and devise took not effect. For when the Guise would have
gone forth with his soldiers, he was constrained to stay, the porter of the
gates having delivered the wrong keys, the other not to be found. Before
therefore the keys could be brought, such delay was made, that M. Chartres,
Mongomerie, and others escaped away, and yet not without further peril. For
they saw on the other side of the shore bands of soldiers approaching to
ship, and heard cries made from the Castle, that they fled: and saw also
great stoare of shot discharged at them, both from the Castle, and also
from the ships. Also it is said, that the king him self, stood upon the
top of his tower, crying and swearyng, and dischargyng shot. Then they which
were in the suburbs, leauyng all their goods, road away without boots and
spurs, with as much speed as possible they could. They were scarce out of
sight when the soldiers were landed on the other side, who brake into the
houses, and took their pray. Nevertheless they which fled, were pursued by
the Guyse, by Duke d'Aumale, by the Earl of Engolesme, and others to Monfort,
which is distant from Paris the space of eight leagues. Whereupon he returning
belayed the country, that such as fled away might be taken. Thus
certain of the noble men of the Religion were preserved.

Also the Lord Assier, mons. Sanroman, Cugier, and diverse other noble men and
Gentlemen, were saved by the Guyses means: To this end and purpose, to lay
all the envy and blame upon the king and people, as though it had bin his only
purpose to revenge his own private spite upon the Admiral, and also that
they whom he had saved in so great peril, might for ever by such a benefit
be bound unto him: the which in deed came to pass.

THE Monday following, which was the.xxv. day of August, the Sun shined
very bright and clear. Whereupon the king looking out of his window of the
Lower, cried with oaths that the fair day did rejoice for the slaughter of
the Hugonots. Thus also said other of the court: And James Carpenter by a
public bill called this bright day, the light of August.

About noone in the Churchyard of Saint Innocent there, sprang up a bremble
bushe, which the Frenchmen call white thorn, contrary to the time and season
of the year. Of the which when the people heard, they ran thither in great
number, to see this strange miracle, the like whereof has not bin seen.
Some say that this was made to grow by the practice of a certain Priest,
which is not unlike. But the common people said, that God by a manifest sign
did approve ye murder lately committed: and that now both the Catholic
faith, and also the kingdom of France had recovered their former glory, and
should after this triumphantly flourishe. Therefore the trumpets sounded in
diverse places of the city. Notwithstanding it is certain, that the like kind
of whitethorne or hauthorne, sprang up about the same time in other places
also: whether it were long of the temperatenesse of the season or no, I know
not. Many seriously alluding to the names of ye things, affirmed yt the white
thorn sproong up to the commendatio^ of ye Innocents, and not to approve the
murders, because it flourished in yt place which had to name S. Innoce^ts. But
if so we mark this miracle, what other thing does ye same signify unto us tha^
this, That albeit ye Church seemed by this deadly wound to be quite slain, yet
notwithstanding it should come to pass, yt it being revived by a certain
singular and extraordinary power, should flourish, and should firmly stand
amidst these overthrows. It is not far unlike the miracles showed to Moses
in the bushe, the which though it were set on fire, was not consumed.

THE King and the Queen determined by their privy counsel, to have this
murder proceed against other cities also thereby mynding to destroy utterly
them of the Religion, least mons. Momorencie, by their help and aid, should
take in hand any new enterprise. He at this time was gone apart to Insuladam,
a town of his dominion. D'Anuil was at Paris, who with the rest of his
brethren, had drunk of the same cup with the Admiral, if they might have been
brought altogether within the compass of the same snare. But it seemed not a
sure and safe way to kill one, and to leave the rest of the brethren alive no
so great power, of the house and stock of Momorencie.

The Thursday following, being the eight and twenty of August, the King
commanded a Iubile, and a general procession about the city, in the which he
in his own person, with the rest of the Court was present, to give God thanks
openly as they said, because their enterprise had such desired success.

The same day the King caused it to be openly published, that he was the
author of that murder, forbidding the use of the reformed religion throughout
his whole realm, until he had taken other order: notwithstanding, he said
that he would not have these things so to be taken, as though his Edictes of
pacification were broken. And this is the sum of the said late Edict.

The King desiring that all his peers, noble men, gentlemen, and others, might
understand the true cause why the Admiral and his adherents were slain of
late in this city, because it may otherwise be reported than truth would, he
certifyeth all men generally, That what so ever was done herein, was done by
his express commandment: and not for Religions sake, or by any manner of
means, to break his Edict of pacification, which he would have to stand in
full force, and to be faithfully observed and kept, but that he might prevent
the wicked conspiracy of the Admiral and his fellows, against his person, his
royal dignity, his mother, his brethren, the King of Nauar, and against the
Princes and other noble men which were in favor with the King. Therefore he
gives all men to understand, that he wills and commands all those of
the Religion, to live in security and peace at home with their families, under
his protection and guard, as they had hitherto done.

And he gives straight charge and commandment to all governors of provinces
and other officers, that no man do oppress them of the Religion, either in
life or in goods, upon pain of death. Notwithstanding, his will and pleasure
is, to take away those troubles and offenses, which may grow by sermons and
other exercises of the Religion, that none of the Religious, noble man or
gentleman, of what state and condition so ever he be, shall have any private or
public assemblies for no cause, until he has otherwise provided: upon pain
of loss both of life and also of goods.

The which things, how well they do hang together, all men may see. The King
says here, that he would have the former Edictes of pacification stand in
force: and yet nevertheless, forbids holy sermons and other assemblies,
upon pain of death. He affirms, that he would have all men to live in peace
and security at home: and yet notwithstanding, he plainly testifies him
self to be the author of murders. And as touching the conspiracy made by
the Admiral, and the rest which were at Paris, they themselves, which take
part with the Catholics, do scorn it as a forged lie.

GREAT murders were committed at Lions, and in diverse other cities: so that
within one months space, there were at the least three thousand men slain:
But of all the rest, the wicked and cruel murder, committed in the city of
Paris, in the kings presence, exceeded and far passed the rest.

AND al governors of provinces obeyed not those bloody commandments, given by
the king. The County d'Tende, answered the kings commandment, and his
letters sealed with his privy seal, saying: That he did not think this to be
the kings deed, but the deed of such as forged and pretended his name, for
that a few days before, he had received quite contrary commandments by
the kings letters. And he affirmed that he would obey those first letters, as
meet and worthy to proceed from a king, and would fulfill the same as the
kings undoubted commandment. As for the other commandment (says he) it
seems so cruel and barbarous, that he would not obey the king if he were
present to command the same. Notwithstanding, this County d'Tende, fought
stoutly in the former war, against those of the Religion.

He which brought these letters and this bloody commandment to County
d'Tende, was called mons. d'Mole, a gentleman borne in Arles, who within one
year after, was beheaded at Paris by the kings commandment.

County d'Tende, within few days after being at Auinion, was by some of ye
kings appoyntme^t poisoned to death, Cou^tie de Retz being appointed to succeed
him. Mons. Santhera^ governor of Auuergne answered to the same commandment,
yt he would not obey contrary commandments, being colored and cloaked under
the kings name: affirming therefore, that he would satisfy the first of ye two,
for that it agreed with ye kings dignity, and with his Edicts, and that he was
no hangman, but ye kings lieftena^t, to govern ye kings subjects with equity and
peace.

The ninth day of September, the king being troubled with a sudden fear,
commanded his armor to be brought, and the captains of his guard to come
unto him: he swears that he has determined to destroy those yt remained of
the^ of the religion: willing the^ to go every man to his charge, for he would
first begin with the prince of Conde. Then the Queen his wife entreated him,
that he would not rashly take in hand a matter of so great weight. The king
being persuaded by the earnest beseeching of his wife, laid aside his armor,
and dispatched his guard. The day following he called before him the Prince of
Conde, and offered unto him three things, of the which he willed him to chose
one: that is to say, Mass Death, or perpetual imprysonment. To this choice
the Prince of Conde answered, that by the aid and assystance of God, he would
never chose the first: and that he left the other two to the Kings will and
pleasure. But at the last he was by the means of one Rozarius, a Minister
sometime of the reformed Church of Orleans, drawn to that abiuration, the copy
whereof is set down in the tenth book of Commentaries. By the subtle
persuasions I say of this man, he did fall away from the truth, and openly
renounced the Religion, and went to the Mass, and to other rytes of the
Romish Church.

Thus by the example of the Prince of Conde, and the king of Nauar, many which
were accounted of the Religion, fell from the same. And the King of Nauar and
the Prince of Conde, solemnly set forth their defection, by the Kings
commandment. For when they had renounced the Religion at Paris, they sent
letters unto the Pope, in the which they declare, that to their great sorrow
and grief, they have been drawn away from the fellowship of the Church by that
false doctrine, even from their childhoode, the blame whereof they laid not
upon their parents, but upon those wicked men which had seduced them.
Notwithstanding, they said it was come to pass in good time through the
goodness of God, that they should acknowledge their error, and seriously
detest the same in mind. Therefore they humbly beseeched the Pope, as a father
to forgive them their former offenses, and to receive them again into the
bosom of the Church, and they would show ever after all such obedience, as
became reverent children to show: and that it would please him to certify
them by his letters, whereby their consciences might be assured of pardon
granted.

Therefore the Pope sent his pardon to the Prince of Conde, and to the King of
Nauar, that they might not only fight under his banner, but also might be at
continual war with the reformed religion: such was the calamity of those
times.

After this, the King of Nauar made an Edicte concerning them of Bearne,
concerning the abolishing of the reformed Religion. By the commandment of the
Queen of Navarre his mother, when she was alive, the states of Bearne
assembled themselves together to take order concerning religion, and by the
free consent of the states, the Mass was abrogated throughout all the dominion
of Bearne.

Thither the king of Navarre sent Mons. Grammont with authority to prefer
the Edict, by which he forbade all that were within his dominion to use the
reformed religion: notwithstanding he gave leave unto them of the Religion to
sell away their land, and to provide for themselves in the space of one year,
and then to go whither soever they would.

THE Pope hearing of these murders, went himself with his whole College of
Cardinals, first of all to the Church of S. Mark, and gave very large thanks
unto God. Then the next day after, he celebrated a solemn Mass, and
commanded a Iubile. Thanks were given to God for the destruction of the
enemies of the truth, and of the Church in the realm of France: for the
victory gotten against the Turks: and also prayer was made for the kingdom of
Polonia, that the king might prove such a one as would seriously defend and
maintain the Catholic religion of Rome.

In ye Evening there was a tryumpha^t peale of Gunnes in the Castle of
Santangell, and the French men which were in the City made diverse joyful
bankets in many places of the same: as though now after so long contentions, a
full conquest were made, and the everlasting peace and tranquillity of the
Church of Rome gotten.

The French men had also a general procession about the City: in the which
the Pope was present with his whole College of Cardinals, and a great number
of dishes according to the custom were carried in the same. A Cardinal also
sang Mass in the Church of S. Lodowic, where were a great multitude of
people assembled together.

THERE were also about this time diverse things written both in French and in
Latin, to commend the handling of that murder. Antonius Muretus made an
oration at Rome in commendation of the king, and when he had done, caused the
same to be published, commending the king for his haughty and constant mind,
and also for his excellent wisdom,

Pibrachus set forth an Epistle, in ye which he makes a very subtle discourse
of all this history, to make the Admiral guilty of treason, and the cause of
the Religious hateful. Notwithstanding he pretended the love of religion, the
which in time past he both knew and had professed, and had afterward abiured
the same.

There was also an other Epistle spredde abroad of Peter Carpenter of Tholose
a lawier, who being a counterfeyt professor of the religion, spoke evil of the
Admiral, and of the whole cause: The which Epistle was answered by one
Franciscus Portus, a godly man, and expert in the Greek tongue. Therefore
amidst the tragical mournings of them of the Religion, these were the triumphs
of the Catholics.

THE king also celebrated the order of S. Michael, which was a feast dedicated
to those noble men which were of the order, who bare about them the order of
S. Michael fighting with the devil. At this feast were many noble men: and
among the rest, the king of Navarre, and the Prince of Conde.

THE xxvij. day of October, the Senate of Paris pronounced a sore sentence
against the Admiral being dead, and against his memory and children. He was
condemned as one guilty of treason: as an enemy to peace, and a common
troubler of the state: as the author of a conspiracy against the king, and
against the state. His memory was condemned to everlasting ignominy. And to
the end there might remain some monument of those faults, it was decreed that
his body if it could be found, should be drawn through every street of the
city, after it had stood in the Market place four and twenty hours, and if
the same could not be found, then his Image should be made stuffed with straw,
and so be drawn in stead of the same as aforesaid, and so to the place of
execution called the Forkes of Montfalcon. It was also decreed that his Arms,
Crest, and Shield, should be drawn in like manner to the fore named place: And
that in what places soever they were found, they should be broken down by the
hangman as a token of his everlasting ignominy. Also that all his goods that
either he or his aunceters had received by the benefit and liberality of
kings, whether they were moveable or immovable, should come unto the crown.
His children were pronounced unnoble and base, and unworthy to have any
public office, or to enjoy their goods, which if they had any within the
Realm, they were confiscate to the king. His chief house Chastillon, was
beaten down to the ground, that never any thing might be builded there again:
The trees of the Orcharde were cut down, and the Gardens about the said house
turned vpsidedowne: and it was decreed that a brazen pyller should be erected
where the house did stand, with this decree of the Senate in the same.

It was also decreed that the xxiiij, of August every year, there should be a
general procession about the City, to give thanks unto God, and to celebrate
the memory of that day, in the which that cruel murder was committed.

AMIDST these troubles, many of the Religion which sought to provide for the
safeguard of their conscience and life, fled into foreign nations. Some into
England, Germany, Strausburge, and Heidelberge: also othersominto
Switzerland, to Basile, and to the towns of Berne, to Lausanna, and to other
Cities: and the greatest part to Geneua. Also Rochel, Mountauban, Nismes, and
certain Cities in the Country of Viuaretz, and Seuenatz, were left as places
of refuge, as we will declare hereafter.

The two sons of the Admiral by the singular providence of God escaped
imminent destruction, and the County Laual the son of D'andelot, with the
daughter of the Admiral which was Thelignies widow, came to Geneua, after that
to Berne, and tarying certain months at Basil, they returned to Berne
again, being very lovingly enterteyned of the people.

The eleventh Book of Commentaries, concerning the temporal and
Ecclesiastical state of the Realm of France in the reign of Charles the
ninth.
Whilst the whole Realm of France was woonderfully distract and confounded,
Anno domini. 1572.
by that horrible and butcherly murder committed, and amiddest the violence of
contrary motions, when as some triumphed as conquerers, and other some being
overcome, were overwhelmed with sorrow and grief, all men for the most part,
whether they were Catholics, or of the Religion, were sore afeard and
astonyed. Yea the fyerbrandes of furies did burn even in the very triumph of
victory the authors and chief instruments themselves of that detestable
slaughter: A general fear insued that horrible murder.
in so much that they being as it were out of their wits at these first
beginnings, pretermitted many occasions, by which they might have brought
their purpose about conveniently. Notwithstanding the outrage to bring their
cruel purpose to pass pricked them forward, that the Religion might be
utterly destroyed and extinguished in the kingdom of France. But their
devilish counsayles had quite contrary success afterward: diverse practices
also were used on both sides, as we will declare hereafter in order.

Furthermore, ye horror and fear of that garboyle was spread to all those
countries bordering upon France. Switzerland and Germany disquieted with the
troubles of France.
Strasburge very carefully held watch and ward. In Switzerlande the Cities of
contrary Religion, showed them selves plainly to stand in fear one of
another: and there were in diverse parts musters made, and rumors spread
abroad for truth, That if the King made a perfect conquest of his subjects,
he would sow civil discordes in Switzerlande: that a nation not only
excelling heretofore in civil concord, but also having gotten great
authority and credit with the kingdoms, bordering therevppon, and selling
their friendship for great stipendes and sums of money, should contend and
be at wars in it self. They of Bern seemed most of al to be assalted, whose
power is great among the Switzers, by reason of the amplenes of their populous
dominion. The cause of discord was, for that the Cities in Switzerla^d, which
were named to be of ye Religion, seemed not to co^desce^d and agree to give
unto the king a band of Catholics, to aid him to raze and root out for ever
the remnant that remained of them of the Religion, because they did much
abhor that butcherly murder of France: for that seemed both to be against
the Religion, which they professed, and also to tend to their own private
peril: as, when that the King had destroyed his own subjects he might cause
troubles and tumult in Switzerland, by the means of the towns in the which
the Catholics inhabited: who were very desirous to receive the Kings pay:
notwithstanding what happened afterward we will declare anon.

Provision for war.
BY THE Kings commandment horsemen were dispatched and sent into all parts
of the Realm: and every man received charge, to watch and ward diligently.
Also the Governors of every province had commandment not to be absente from
their charge at any time without the Kings assured commandment, to look
diligently that there arose no tumultuouse trouble, and with all care and
industry to seek and syft out narrowly all conuenticles and assemblies of
such as professed the Religion, and severely to punish them.

The great dissipation of them of the Religion.
IN all parts of the Realm, and in every City of the same, they were
apprehended which kept their houses upon trust and assurance of the Kings
Edict. Many were slain and put to death, and all men had their goods put to
spoil by the Kings officers, even as if they had bin enemies lawfully
vanquished. Notwithstanding, many escaped and fled into forrayne nations. There
was scarce one man found which professed himself to be of the Religion: all
were either in exile, or hydden in corners, or else (saving a few) constrained
to forsake the Religion, and to live more catholykely than the Catholykes them
selves.

THEY of the Religion being after this manner vanquished, there seemed nothing
to remain but their utter destruction. Cruelty somewhat mitigated.
Whereupon the Kings officers were not so forward in their affairs as else
they would have bin, thinking that they did but lose their labor in a matter
most easy to be finished.

Notwithstanding an army was prepared, and the King by his letters instantly
required Monsieur Beleur (which was his Lidgar in Switzerlande for the same
purpose) to send with all speed a band of Switzers.

FOR there remained as yet certain cities, which were held and guarded by
those that were left of the Religion, as Rochel, Sanxer, and in Languedoc,
Montauban, Castres, Nismes, Those Cities which were held by them of the
Religion.
Milliaud, Aubenac, Priuac, Mirebel, Ganges, Anduz, and certain other towns
of no fame, in the territory of Viuaueretz, and Seuenats. Notwithstanding it
seemed to many, yea and to the most part of such as professed the Religion,
great folly joined with madness, after so great a slaughter almost of all yt
professed ye Religion, ye kings power being nothing deminished, and having ye
whole kingdom ready at his commandment, for the^ to enterprise and presume to
defend them selves against ye army of so mighty a king, after so great
co^sternatio^ and fear, The purpose of the Religious condemned of many.
when as not only none of ye Princes, but also not one noble man almost was
left in France, which durst so much as profess the love he bare to ye
Religion.

There were also, and that not a few, which said that it was great wickedness
and unlawful for subjects, having no authority from princes or chief
magistrates, to bear armor against their king though he were wicked, that by
ye effect and success it self it had appeared, that the forceable resistance
of them of ye Religion hitherto was ungodly, though it were collected by the
authority of the princes, and by lawful titles, both for that the king was in
his minority, and also because the breaking of the kings Edicts might be
lawfully punished, for that the kings will was in express words declared: That
in this enterprise all things fail, and that the king is a man: that there
want Princes to whom the authority of governing the kingdom should belong:
and that the king does plainly profess, that he will not hurt them of the
Religion, but that he commanded that murder to be committed with purpose to
destroy the Admiral and other the chief aucthors and instruments of the
war, that the kingdom afterward might remain in peace. And that although
in this matter he exceeded the rule of reason, yet it was not lawful for the
subject to rebel against him, or for the subject to punish his lord and king
for his offense. There were also some which utterly condemned the government of
the prince of Conde and of the Admiral, in their acts and exployts of the
years past: and through the envy of the lamentable success, have brought ye
whole cause in hatred. And those false accusations of Carpenter and Pibrach (in
their Epistle to that famous man Stanislaw Heluidius) were oftentimes objected
by exulcerated and gaulled minds, to make the remembrance of ye former wars
detestable. So that a man would have thought that the Religion had bin
extinguished for ever in France: and concerning this matter, many of them
disputed with odious words, which in time of the former wars, had highly
commended the causes to take the same in hand. And thus calamity was counted
for great reproach and shame, such is the great rashness of men in judging of
matters.

Those few of the Religion uncertain what to do.
ALSO, in those Cities, which as yet had not received the Kings Garrisons,
these dissentions were very ryfe: and the Citizens being distract and
uncertain what to do, seemed not so much to delay and defer the Kings
Garrison, as to spend the time, to the end that every one might get for him
self ye more convenient opportunity and occasion to flee and escape away, or
else to get favor again: this was the common will and purpose of the Townsmen.

Constant purpose of defense.
Notwithstanding God used the diligence of a few, to bring the rest to a
constant purpose: and the fear of the cruel murders committed, persuaded the
people to defend them selves, that for so much as they were in undoubted peril
of death, they might, if it so pleased the Lord, choose the more honest kind
of death, by the lawful right of necessary defense, the Magistrate him self
urging them thereunto.

THEREFORE amidst so many and so great difficulties and extremities, it seemed
impossible that Religion should stand by any manner of means: and so
everlasting destruction seemed to be brought upon the Churches of France. A
notable miracle of this fourth motion, after the murder.
In these straits of great calamity, the providence of God, of such beginnings
as were so weak, and so far from the judgment of humane reason, made a way
for so much more glory, as the disorder and confusion of all things was past
hope of recovery. The chief Captains were gone, the aid and help of
foreign Princes wanted: yet notwithstanding the present help, and helping
favor of God in due time, failed not. Yet for all that there remain such
great things of so weak and feeble a beginning, even until this day, that
this same seems to be especially the counsel and finger of God, that the
force and strength of noblemen being cut off, he alone might be counted the
author of his work, and might make manifest his manyfolde wisdom in this
work. I may not dissemble, (and in making this a preface for the narration to
come, I swerve not from my purpose) both those noble men and ringleaders, which
took upon them ye ordering and defense of this cause, and also in part, they
of the Religion themselves in the former years past offended many ways. Much
disorder verily and many faults came by the civil wars, in so much that among
those of the Religion, the purity of Religion being contaminated and defiled
with true occasions of true accusations, was evil spoken of. For it is well
known that the Admiral him self, in those former wars, protested, not
once, but often, That he had rather dye any kind of death, than he would be
counted any longer a Governor and Captain of such a lewd and wicked route
of common soldiers, The Admiral misliked the wickedness of his soldiers.
most unworthy of the bare name of Religion: for such he knew many of his band
to be. God therefore justly punished those me^ which abused his Religion:
nevertheless he did not, neither will he leave unfinished the work which he
has begone. But is there any man so blind which sees not, what great
punishments remain for those, which for the mortal hatred they bear to the
poor Religion, have set to their helping hand, to commit a most detestable
fact, seeing that to fill up the measure of extreme wickedness, all show of
right and equity is set aside, in so much, that there remains no excuse for
the same? But to return to our purpose again.

THEREFORE, this fourth war is more wonderful than the three first, because
of most weak and feeble beginnings it had greater and more notable success:
in so much that when the Prince of Conde, the Admiral, and other noble men
with help and aid from forreyne Princes, took part, no such worthy effects
ensued: the reason and ground of the cause never more evidently shyned, from
out of the deep pit of extreme calamity, without any aid of strangers, and
without the means of greater helps, than it shall appear by the
co^memoration of this history. This then was the Kings state, and this was the
case of them of the Religion, after that butcherly murder committed on Saint
Bartholmewes day, being the four and twenty of August.

For (as we have said) that small remnant of them of the religion were brought
to this exigent, that seeing them selves far unequal to match with the Kings
power, they were ready of their own accord to yield them selves into his
hand. Notwithstanding, when they saw that murders were committed upon them
of the Religion, with no less cruelty than before, in diverse cities, all they
which were in the Kings power, and in the danger of the Catholics, began to
look about them, and at the length to devise some honest way, whereby they
might defend them selves. So that in the deep desperation of all things
serving for necessary defense, desperation found out a way, and a sure and
certain persuasion to bring the same to effect, supplied most effectual
reasons of defense in this confusion and nakedness. The happy defense of
Rochell, did not a little encourage the minds of other men, to fyrme and
valyant constancy. First of all therefore we will begin with Rochell: and
then we will speak severally of the rest in order.

MONSIEUR Strossi, and the Lord de Guarde, received charge to take Rochell,
and we have oftentimes said, Policy used to take Rochell.
that a navy of ships was provided there already to the same end. They then
go about to get in their soldiers into Rochell, sometime under the color to
buy merchandise, and sometime under the color of visiting their frindes.
Notwithstanding, they of Rochell were always vigilant and wary: and hearing of
the cruel murder committed at Paris, caused more dilygent watch and ward to
be kept. In the mean time, monsieur Strossi* and de Guarde, urged them of
Rochell, with the authority of the Kings letters, both to receive into the
town the Kings garrison, and also to give unto them great plenty of victuals
to furnysh their ships.

This they of Rochell, denied and withstoode, that the navy might depart from
thence: affyrming that they did nothing against their duty and ancient
pryuiledges, by which they were exempted from al garrisons, saving from that
which they should levy within their own city, and whereby they had leave to
defend them selves by force of Arms, and that they could not spare any of
their provision of victuals.

Then they which were for the King, found fault with the townsmen of Rochel,
because many came unto them from diverse parts of the realm, and were received
into the city without any let. To this they of the town answered, that they
admitted no strangers, but only the inhabitants of the realm, which came
about their affairs and merchandise, the which was nothing contrary either
to their office or custom, whenas the Kings soldiers had leave to come into
the city.

They were also required by the Liefetenant of Guian, mounsieur Monpaz which
was their neighbor, not to show themselves obstinat and wilful, in refusing to
receive the kings garrison, showing them that the king was careful for their
safety, and that therefore he did so provide for them: and that it was not
lykely that he would bring any detryment or damage to his Cities: also that
he had justly punyshed the wickedness of Rebels by the slaughter at Paris:
not minding continually to be severe against his subjects. Therefore he
affyrmed that it was more for their safety to deserve the Kings favor by
obedience.

There came certain noble men of the Religion to Rochell from those places
which were nearest adjoining thereunto, as from the territories of Santonge,
Onic, Poictou, and Lymosin, which sought the safety of their life: there came
also about these first beginnings, about five and fifty Pastors or Ministers
of Churches: and of the common sort of people about a thousand and five
hundred soldiers, out of diverse parts of the Realm, and many which were
escaped from the slaughter of Paris.

A solemn fast appointed in Rochell.
The nynth and eleventh day of September, there was appointed at Rochel a
common and solemn fast to be held, the which rite the Church observed in
old time in time of trouble, to a laudable and fruitful end.

They of Rochel having obtained at the hands of Monsieur Strossi, and Baron de
Guardes safe conduct, sent messengers unto the King, beseeching him that the
navy might be removed from that part by his commandment, for that the
country thereabout had received great damage thereby.

THE King had given commandment to Monsieur Biron a noble man to govern
Rochel: who (as we have said before) had taken great pains in the former
wars, about the entreaty of peace. This noble man delivered to them of
Rochel very friendly and loving letters, by which he exhorts them to obey the
king, and to commit them selves quietly to his trust, because he had received
authority from the king to govern them: in so doing they should see by
proof, that he esteemed nothing more than of their safety.

Strait after this came Monsieur Audenarz a noble man also, in the Kings name,
with very large letters of the Kings in the which the king exhorted them to
show their obedience, giving them to understand that he determined in his
mind nothing more, than to keep and defend them in their houses in peace and
safety, under the guard and warrant of his Edictes: requiring them hereupon to
acknowledge him to be a true and faithful interpreter of his own mind.

Monsieur Audenarz being admitted into the Senate of Rochel, persuaded very much
to this end and purpose, certifying them of the singular good will of the king
toward them. He promises that the king will grant them the liberty of
Religion, upon condition that they would receive Monsieur Biron, and would
grant free recourse and trafique to all strangers whatsoever inhabiting the
realm. To this, they of Rochel answered the king by their letters, the true
copy whereof, is as follows.

The answer of the Gentlemen, Captains, Burgeses, and other being in the
town of Rochel, to the commandments that have been given them in the name of
the king, to receive garrisons.
WE the Gentlemen, Captains, Burgeses, and others now being in the town of
Rochel, do give answer to such commandments as are given to us in the name
of his Majesty, that we cannot acknowledge that the same which is signified
unto us, and the publishing of the proclamation required at our hands, do
proceed from his Majesty. And thereof we call to witness his Majesty
himself, his letters of the.xxij. and.xxiiij. of August, his own signet, and
the publishing of the same letters, by which his said Majesty lays all the
fault of all the trouble lately happened, and of the cruel slaughter done at
Paris, upon those of the house of Guise, protesting that he had enough to do
to keep himself safe within the Castle of Loure, with those of his guard. And
we shall never suffer our selves to be persuaded, that so foul an enterprise,
and so barbarous a slaughter has at any time, entered into the mind of his
majesty, much less that the same has been done by his express
commandment, as the paper imports which you have exhibited unto us, nor
that his Majesty has been so ill advised, as himself to cut off his own
Arms, or to defile the sacred wedding of Madam his own sister, with the
shedding of so much noble and innocent blood, and with the shame of so eruel a
fact to distaine the nation of France, and the blood royal which has
heretofore ever among all nations borne the name of frank and courteous: nor
that he has had mind to deliver matters to writers to set forth a tragical
history, such as antiquity has never heard spoken of the like, and such as
the posterity cannot report without horror. But that it was first laid at
Rome, and afterward hatched at Paris, by the Author of all the troubles of
France. And howsoever it be, we are ready to maintain that out of the mouth
of his Majesty does not proceed whote and cold, white and black, and that
he does not now say one thing, and by and by another, as he should do if
the Paper that ye presented unto us had passed from him, protesting that he
will inuiolably keep his Edict, and immediately breaking the same, in declaring
that he commanded those murders to be committed, having also made protestation
before, that it is to his great grief, and done by the outrage and violence of
those of the Guise, against whom he was not able to make resistance in time,
as his Majesty desired. And in this quarrel, we the Gentlemen, Captains, and
other that make you this answer, are ready to try it by combat, man to man,
or otherwise to mainteyne the honor of our king against all those that so
profane holy things, and as much as in them lies do by such words and tytles
vyllanously defile the excellency of his majesty, and of the noble princes of
his blood. Which we may right well conjecture and estimate, by the slaughters
that are yet in doing, as well in the town of Paris, as else where, upon so
many noble men, gentlemen and other, men, women, and children, and upon a great
number of young scollers (the maintenance under God, of Realms and commonweals in time to come) and by many other barbarous, unnatural, and unmanly
acts generally committed. We think therefore and judge that herein treason is
enterprysed against the person of his Majesty, and of my Lords his brethren,
and that the Guisians mean to invade the crown of the realm, as they have of
long time practiced: and howsoever it be, we say that his Majesty is forced,
by the power that they have taken upon them and usurped, by mean of the
rebellious stir of the commons of Paris. As for that which they say that the
Admiral and those of the Religion had conspired against the kings Majesty and
his brethren, these be allegations of as great truth and of as good
likelyhoode, as their manner of proceeding in justice has been orderly,
beginning at execution before the examination of the fact. But it is now no
need to tarry for time to discover it, for the matter is plain to be seen with
eye and groped with hand, and all those of the Romish religion that have
remaining any drop of nature of man, do confess it and hold down their heads
for shame, cursing both with heart and mouth the cruel executors of this
abominable enterprise, and the wicked disturbers of common quiet, which can
yet no more suffer, tha^ they hitherto have done, that this poor realm should
long enjoy the benefit of that peace, which the king alone next under God had
wisely caused to be made, and to be accordingly observed, whereof this realm
began to feel the good taste, to the great co^tentment of al persons, except the
enemies of peace and of this realm, namely the Guisians. Finally, when his
majesty being out of their hands and power, shall declare what is his pleasure,
we will endeuer us to obey him in all things, wherein our consciences, which are
dedicat to god alone, shall not be wounded, in which case we will rather forsake
ye earth than heaven, and our frail and transitory houses, rather tha^ the
heavenly mansions. But hitherto the law of nature and the duty that we owe
unto our natural prince, to the preservation of his crown, and to the safety
of our lives, our wives, and children, does command us to stand upon our guard,
and not to put us in the mercy of thost that have received the same bloody
commission from the Guisians under the pretended name of the king, to use us in
ye same manner as they have wickedly, traitorously and unnaturally done to those
about his majesty, and as it were under his wings and under the skirts of his
robe which the trayters strangers have stained with the true French blood, without
that his Ma. has bin able to remedy it, nor to slay their cursed attempts: so
much less is he able now so far off to defend us as he would, which his
Majesty's good will being known unto us, does arm us for our defense, and for
the safegarde of our lives, and of the privileges which he has given us,
until such time as he shall be able by himself to defend us against his
enemies and ours.

This answer being made by them of Rochel, Monsieur Audenarz caused them to
send unto the king, putting them in hope to receive an answer in due and
convenient time. Therefore they sent with him another to entreat with the king
on their behalf.

And Monsieur Audenarz, according to his charge, left nothing undone to
persuade them of Rochel to yield themselves unto the king, all the while he
abode there, making unto them many fair promises, thinking that as he had done
therein his faithful duty toward the king, so they also should do him no
less service.

Monsieur Biron came to the City, and very diligently visited those noble men
of the religion, which as yet kept their houses, and with vehement speeches
seemed greatly to detest those murders committed, earnestly requyring them to
persuade with the Citizens of Rochel, to put themselves into his guard and
tuition, which should be (as he said) for their profit.

He sent the kings letters to them of Rochel, by which he commanded them to
submit themselves out of hand to the government of Monsieur Biron, and to obey
him.

Monsieur Biron also procured the king of Nauarres letters to be sent unto
them, dated at Paris the tenth day of September, in the which he required the
like at their hands, and very greatly commended Monsieur Biron.

Whereupon, they of Rochel sent two messengers to Mons. Biron to salute him:
for they stood doubtful what to do, whether they should receive Monsieur
Biron yea or no: for it was reported that they of Rochel would incline unto
him, the which to do was not without great peril.

Monsieur Biron talking with the messengers of Rochel in a secret place,
bewailed and lamented with many tears the outrage of the murders committed,
showed how greatly he was grieved for the fame: and gave thanks unto God that
his name could not be regestred and expressed in so infamouse an history:
desired the messengers to certify Rochel from him that he wished them to
consider in what peril they were: and that they should wisely use and take
those means for their safety which God offered unto them, least they repented
them to late with great damage: that they alone were not able to stand
against the Kings power, the which being complete was ready to vanquish and
overthrow the remaynder of them of the Religion: showing also that this was the
only remedy, for them to submit themselves to his authority, or at least to
admit and suffer him with one or two more of his train, to come into the
town, that he might thereby certify the king of their obedience: the which
being done, he would bring to pass, that they should sustain no hurt by the
kings Army, but would out of hand dispatch away the Navy, which was prepared
to assail them by force.

There were also certain of the chief Citizens, which favored Mons. Biron:
and his judgment was well lyked of the two messengers, who returnyng showed
both the imminent mischief of the great peril, and also that the only
remedy to withstand the same rested in the counsel of M. Biron, whom report
blased not only to be distayned and defiled with horrible furies of murders,
but also that he himself was brought into great peril: Notwithstanding in
this matter he did only make a counterfeyte lamentation, to pleasure the king,
even as aforetyme he had employed his mortal labor in perswadyng the Admiral.
Nevertheless it is certain that the name of Monsieur Biron was written in the
bloody book, that he might have his part with others in the butcherly murder
of Paris. Therefore, to get unto himself the kings favor by some notable
service, he went about to yield up the^ of Rochel unto the king: The which if
it had come to pass, it had been a hundred to one, that the extreme slaughter
should have made a lamentable end of that re^nant of the Religious, so that
not one should have been left alive. But Rochel was a great let to hinder those
mischievous cou^sayles and practices, and occasions to prevail notablely were
offered to them of the Religion, both by these delays, and also by ye happy
success of ye affairs of Rochel.

The messengers as we said being come into the town, told the matter unto
the Senate: and as they were in consultation devising what way they were best
to take, word was brought to the Mayor of the City, (which is the chief
governor) that ships were to be seen at the promontorie or point commonly
called Chef d'Bais: the which being entered the haven, by the commandment of
M. d'Guard, letters were brought also, by which he gives them of Rochel to
understand, that he was certified by the kings letters, that Mons. Biron would
be at Rochel the same day with power: and admonishes them to take diligent
heed that they gave him honorable entertayme^t as it was agreeable to his
person: and withal to remember that they had to do with a great and most
mighty king, of whose goodness it should be better for them to taste, than of
his severity, for that he intended to punish them according to their deserts,
which would impugn and resist his commandments.

At this very instant, while they hong doubtful and knew not which way to
take in these extremities, Rochel refuses to receive Monsieur Biron.
and the open threatnyngs of Monsieur d'Guard, having confirmed the increased
opinion concerning the kings will in this point, they agreed and concluded with
one consent not to receive Mons. Biron, and that upon this occasion. At the
very same time there came a messenger from Montauban with letters, by which
they certified them of Rochel, yt Castre a city in Languedoc, the which was
held by them of the Religion, and after many fair promyses of the king
concerning their safety being yielded into the hand of Monsieur Creuset a
noble man dwelling unto them, was sacked, and the Religious in the same most
cruelly murdered.

Amidst so great distress, they of Montauban were sore afeard and very careful
concerning their own private peril: and they admonished them of Rochel what
they were best to do in so great extremity, namely, to take wise deliberation.
The present peril of the inhabitants of Castre, troubled and disquieted them
of Rochel: whereupon they determined not to receive Monsieur Biron, until such
time as they had provided for their own safety and security: of which their
determination they gave Mons. Biron to understand out of hand.

MONSIEUR Biron answers them again, that he was very sorry that they were
bent to that which would bring their own destruction: yet notwithstanding he
said he would hyde the matter from the king by special excuses, until such
time as they had advised themselves better: willing them not to hurt
themselves by this dangerous determination, and to beware least their rash
wilfulness turned them to displeasure: Finally he promised that he would
endeavor himself all that he could to persuade the king that the Navy might
be dismissed and sent some otherway.

LOVING letters were sent unto them again from the king, the Queen mother,
and from the Duke of Anjou, by several messengers, though the letters tended to
one effect. The king sought to persuade them of his singular good will toward
them, and promised unto them al faith and humanity in preseruyng them. They of
Rochel answer by letters again, They give thanks unto the king, and beseech
him that he would command the navy to avoid that cost, for they were in such
great fear at that present, that they knew not what to do. The which if it
would please the king to command, they might certainly assure themselves of
the kings good will toward them, and should also the more duetifully obey him.

By reason of these delays of the king, occasion was given to them of Rochel
to cast away fear, and to take unto them better courage: whereas if the king
had set upon them with all his force at the first brunte of the murder, their
overthrow had been the more lykely.

Therefore being admonished by common counsel, and being taught both by the
general evil, and also by the present example of the men of Castre, they of
Rochel prepare themselves to their defense. They make, according to the manner,
new Magistrates: they create Captains for the war: they muster men, both of
the town, and also forreyners which came thither for refuge: they appoint that
certain ministers and also strangers should be of the counsel concerning
matters for the town. Monsieur Sanstephen a noble man was made general of the
horsemen.

The Captains were of more fame, as Mons. Essarz, mons. Riuier, Mons. Lyzi,
Mons. Norman, Mons. Virolet, Mons. Nouel, and diverse others, whose names we
express, because of the siege following.

Again Mons. Biron sent letters to them of Rochel from Broage, a famous haven
where the Navy road: Mons. Strossi, and Mons. d'Guarde sent letters to them
also: but the letters of mons. Biron were more friendly than the other: in the
which he affyrmed that he would procure the kings commandment for the
dismissyng of the Navy, so that they of Rochel would promise to the king to
obey such governors as he would appoint over them. Monsieur d'Guarde wrote
more sharply unto them willing them to receive one condition or other, either
of peace or of war: affirmyng that the king should have his authority by
either.

They of Rochel answered, that many things were promised them, but little or
nothing performed: that it was evident to all men what great cause they had to
embrace and love peace: and what damage and hurt they had received by wars,
and therefore how greatly they ought to deteste the same: That they had heard
oftentimes, that the king was very careful for their safety, yet
notwithstanding the kings officers did annoy and endammage them very much, and
that they in the mean time behaved themselves modestly and obediently toward
the king, as all men might see.

Mons. Biron and d' Guard practiced after the same manner by letters: and
caused Mons. Ouarz a noble man of that part, and named to be of the religion to
write to them of Rochel after the same effect, and to show in how great
peril and danger they were in: and to admonish them to beware least by their
obstinacy they cast them selves into present destruction.

The King also commanded monsieur Durans, which was a Solicitour in the
affairs of Rochel (being at the same time at Paris) to go unto Rochel, and to
persuade ye Townsmen to receive monsieur Biron, and with him he sent to them
of Rochel loving letters of bountiful good will.

Monsieur Thecan, the chief governor in ye Senate of Paris, wrote unto
certain of his friends of the chief Citizens, that they would take diligent
pains in this matter, and would bring to pass that they of Rochel might
receive the conditions offered by the king.

They of Rochel write unto monsieur de Guard,, complaining both of the sundry
damages done unto them in time of ye entreaty of peace, and also which were
yet done unto the^ daily.

AMIDEST this intercourse and passage of letters too and fro, Murder at
Bordeaux.
there was a cruel slaughter made upon those of the Religion at Bordeaux,
upon which occasion they of Rochel demanded whether they could look for
peace, seeing violente and outrageous murders were still committed, and seeing
assaults of greater and more vehement slaughter were made upon them. For the
Ships of the Merchants of Rochel, which had made their voyage and were
returned from forrayne countries were diversely spoiled, and their merchandise
taken from them.

Now the kings power, with open war assailed them of Rochel, Open war against
Rochel
in somuche that marchantes were restrained of their passage and intercourse,
and the Kings navy abode upon the coast of Rochel, robbing and spoiling all
parts thereaboutes, while the Army which should come by land, was a
preparing.

IN the mean time they of Rochel diligently applied their grape gathering for
the wine press, Rochell prepares for defense.
and brought into the City five and twenty thousand tons of wine, which
did them great pleasure at what time they were besieged. And all men both
townsmen and also strangers labored paynefully in in fortifying the town
with rampires and bulwarks.

The state of Montauban.
AND thus the state of Rochel being known, before we come to the noble
besieging of the same, the order of the story requires, that we show the
state of other Towns also, in the which the remnauntes of the godly religious
were preserved.

They of Montaubane had the kings letters sent unto them: notwithstanding they
continued in their former purpose, by which during all the former civil
wars they were very circumspect in not admitting any one that came from the
king, into the City: but amidst the great treasons and lyings in wait of
their neighbors of Tholouze preserved them selves until these hard and
extreme beginnings.

NISMES, the Townesme^ not knowing what way they were best to take, was almost
ready to be yielded up to the King. Many of the principalles of the Religion
stale out of the City, carrying their families to another place, and got
themselves into such places as were near unto the same. Also some of them
having forsaken the Religion, got them speedily to the Cities of the
Catholics, hoping thereby the more conveniently to obtain pardon of the
King: and many of them to show that they were seriously returned to the
Catholics, detested the Religion all that they could with odious words.

MONSIEUR Ioyeuse Lefetenant of Languedoc, writ oftentimes to ye inhabitants of
Nismes, to receive the Kings Garrison: Who, at ye first answered by delays, yt
they would obey the king: yet notwithstanding because of ye late murdering of
their brethren and fellow partakers with the^ of the Religion, they had great
cause to be careful for their safety. Notwithstanding Monsieur Ioyeuse
persuaded them of the singular good will of the king by his letters often times
affyrming yt they should live quietly and in safety by ye benefit of ye kings
Edict of peace.

There is in Nismes the Kings court kept, nowithstandyng it is lawful for a
man to appeal from the same to the Senate of Tholouze, The richer sort mind to
yield up the City.
in the which City there was more plenty of Lawyers, and more store of rich
Citizens.

Many of them were almost at the same point, to yield them selves in time to
the King, and with speedy obedience to win the kings favor.

Notwithstanding the greatest part of ye common sort of people, and certain
also of the chief men, The better part of the Religious mind to hold the City.
(among whom was Mons. Clauson a Counsailer of ye court, who as he was wise and
godly, so also he was of great authority) withstoode this purpose, not minding
to put the^ selves into present peril of death: And lest those of the kings
side should take ye City, and let into the same ye soldiers which were under ye
conduct of Mons. Ioyeuse which lay in wait about the city night and day, and
sought diligently al occasions to take ye same, the said mons. Clauson himself
very carefully held watch and ward with the townsmen of ye gates of ye city,
least any man should come in or out without their knowledge.

Mons. Clauson, being the author of this manly and wise purpose,
notwithstanding yt he was a learned and grave man, yet he endeavored him self
to play the soldier, having always a diligent eye in governing the Consulls
(for so the Magistrates of the town are called) least any treason should be
wrought by those which were inclined to ye king, he gave the soldiers their
watchword, appointed to every man his charge and place, viewed the walls
round about, and was very diligente and necessary about all things
apperteyning to a Captain.

THE people assembled together in the Guild haule by the warning of the
Consulls oftentimes. Variety of counsayles.
And then the most wise men and of greatest experience, consulted what was best
to be done: they looked one upon another, doubted what to determine, and
devising many ways could like of none to take.

The greatest part of those which were counted wysest, disliked the purpose to
defend the city against the force of the Kings army, as proceeding from
bold and mad rashness most perilous: thinking that better means might be
devised, by which the City might be yielded up, and so a general safety
provided for: and wishing that this way should be taken with all speed.
Notwithstanding ye authors themselves of this counsel, while these things were
in consultatio^, went about to provide privately for their families, and carried
them out of the city: and they them selves went out also by heaps.

In this diversity of contrary Judgments and affections of all sorts and
estates of men, the dissentions diversely rising between the people and the
governors, seemed out of all doubt to make a way and entrance for the kings
power: and amiddest these controversies, to give occasion to the enemy suddenly
to overcome them to their great calamity and destruction.

NOTVVITHSTANDING this purpose prevailed, namely, that there should be no have
made in this matter: that consultation should be had about the same hereafter:
that God most assuredly would aid his servant in his own cause: but if so
be they must sustain the force of their enemies, and suffer death, that
nothing could happen more better unto them: and that the same should be far
more tolerable, than to put them selves into the hands of murderers, of whom
they might look for the same pardon which they had given to others of the
Religion in Paris, in Lions, in Tholouz, and in diverse places else. Therefore
that it should be a more honest and easy death which they should suffer in
defending them selves against the violence of their unjust enemy, than to be
slain and executed by the hangmen: That the same defense was just both by the
law of God and man, that they used not violence in setting upon the enemy, but
withstood just violence with just defense. That thieves and murderers were
armed in the Kings name and by the kings authority: and that therefore they
withstoode not the king: That if they dyed in this defense their death should
be precious before God, and have the honor of martyrdom. And that there is no
doubt but that God at the length will have compassion upon them, and will help
them by one way or other unlooked for, that patience and prayer was needful,
that in delay there was less peril, but in haste there was most present
destruction: seeing by delay those occasions might grow, which might give
them ability to bring notable things to pass. Monsieur Clauson declaring
these things at large, it was agreed by the consent of the greater number,
not to receive at all the kings garrison, but to tarry for a more convenient
time: and yet notwithstanding to occupy the mind of monsieur Ioyeuse with
convenient answers.

THEN, they certified the indwellers of Seuenatz and Viuaretz their neighbors
(which wholly depended upon them) of their purpose, and exhorted them to
constancy of mind, and to a better hope. For they were assaulted in like sort
by the kings instruments. Monsieur Leuger a noble man, and knight of the order
was sent into Viuaretz to take and hold the same.

IN these first beginnings they of the religion, held these towns Aubenac,
Priuac, Pusi, Villeneufe. Notwithstanding, it was not long ere the Catholics
had taken Pusi, the convenient situation whereof much annoyed the^. And monsieur
Leuger practiced this way to take Villeneufe.

Villeneufe is but a small town, yet notwithstanding, it is situate very
conveniently for that part: being appointed for a lower court, from whence the
appeal is to Nismes: and it belongs to the kings Excheaker. Villeneufe taken
by treason.
The Religious of Villeneufe, agreed with the Catholics of the town to join
together, and to defend one another with mutual hearts and hands: saying,
that they were brethren and fellow citizens, and that those barbarous and
outrageous murders, were to be resisted with all their power. And taking an
oath one to the other, they indent, that two captains should be chosen by
general consent: and that the same should watch and ward day and night by
turn: and so, that the Catholics should have for their captain, one of
them of the Relygion, and the religious a Catholic, to the end all suspicion
might be taken away. They of the relygion, named for their captain monsieur
Baron: and the Catholics named for the^ monsieur Mirambel, both good and
expert Captains. This good and laudable purpose had ill success: by which it
appears how ill two Religions agree together, and abide in one seat.

The townsmen thinking that they had hereby provided very well for their
safety, and they of the Relygion being persuaded of the faith of the
Catholics, are thereby neglecting their business, behold, the city was
taken by monsieur Leuger thus.

Captain Mirambel told monsieur Leuger that there was an easy way made for
him to take the city: in so much, that he should only need to approach
somewhat nearer the city, with some ambushme^ts of soldiers, and so coming
to the gates of the city, he should be let in by him, promysing so to order
the matter, and to appoint such warders about the gates, that he should easily
have his purpose.

Monsieur Leuger preparing his soldiers out of hand, drew near to the city,
and came with a troop of horsemen unto the gates: gave monsieur Mirambel to
understand, that he was come thither with the kings power, commanding him
upon his allegiance to set open the gates unto him. There at that time monsieur
Biron walked before the gates unarmed, with certain of the chief townsmen:
him all amazed monsieur Leuger saluted, at his so sudden coming upon them.
Monsieur Mirebel commanded the gates of the city to be set open: and mons.
Leuger entered the city: then the armed troops of the Catholics came
flockyng round about him, he fortifyeth the gates: and by and by the troops
of horsemen and of foot men which stayed at a vyllage hard by, ran unto
him.

Amydst these salutations, the Catholics, and they of the Relygion fleeyng
together unto him, monsieur Biron stale away priuyly, and came to the next
town by, called Mirebel, which was by the Kings Edict an appointed place, to
receive the holy assemblyes of the professors of the Religion of Villeneufe,
and told to mons. Pradel a noble man, whose land lies in and about that
place, what had happened in the city: and so they agreeing together, took
them to the Castle of Mirebel, which afterward did them great pleasure.

Mons. Leuger at the first, entreated the chief of the Religion very gentlely:
seeking to persuade them that his purpose was to govern them with peace and
equity, under the protection of the Kings Edicts, and to trouble no man's
conscience. In the time of this truce, many that professed the Relygion, stale
away to Mirebel, and fortyfyed the same out of hand. By the means hereof,
Villeneufe being afterward recovered (as we will declare hereafter) did
greatly further the affairs of the Relygious in Languedoc. Of the which I
speak particularly, that men may understand and see, of how weak and small
begynnings, the affairs of the Religion grew and took so good success.

The inhabitants of Aubenac and Priuac, followed the counsel of the cytizens
of Nismes, concerning the ways of defense. Notwithstanding, that monsieur
Leuger in the mean time, urged them to receive the garrizon. The example of
falsehoode in the Catholics.
They neither made plain denial, nor yet admitted the Kings garrizon: but
they so handeled monsieur Leuger, that for their money, they should buy and
delay the time of receiving the Kings garrizon. For this cause the Consulles of
Aubenac, having obtained truce at his hands, went to Villeneufe, and paid
the money required. Notwythstanding, one of them being a very honest and rich
Citizen, named Valeton, and of the Religion also, was held captyue by monsieur
Leuger, against the law of Arms, for that he came under trust, and was put
also to his ransom, even as if he had been taken in battle, the which
being paid, he was held captyue nevertheless, until such time as
Villeneufe, which they of the Relygion had taken, was delivered up to him, as
we will declare hereafter. These experimentes of Catholic falsehoode,
confyrmed the Relygious, as it were in obstinate constancy, in so much, that
they chose rather to suffer any thing, than to come into the hands of their
false forsworn enemies. This was the state of many places in Languedoc.

AND because they of Nismes were urged oftentimes by the letters of mons.
Ioyeuse, to abstain from holy Sermons, according to the form of the kings
Edict: left by that occasion they might be found guilty before the king: after
deliberation had of the matter, they determined for the present necessity, not
to have Sermons in the day time, but in the night. It can not be expressed,
how much weeping and lamentation the people made at that last Sermon. Yet
nevertheless, men came to the preaching of the word more plentifully and
earnestly than they did before: for the more that afflictions do increase, the
more precious is the word of God unto the godly.

The inhabitants of Viuaretz and Seuenatz, followed the example of the citizens
of Nismes: in those cities which they held, they had their Sermons in the
night, the which notwithstanding, continued but for a few days.

The answer of the citizens of Nismes.
NEVERTHELES monsieur Ioyeuse was not contented with this argument of
obedience: oftentimes he urged them of Nismes, to receive the kings garizon:
the which if they would do, he promised them that within few days, they
should be both free from the same, and also should have liberty and peace,
both of body and conscience.

The citizens of Nismes answered very copiously in writing, that they could
not receive that garrizon, showing the reasons wherefore: not that they refused
to obey the king, but that they might provide for the safety of their life,
and for the liberty of their conscience: Because such occasions had already
fallen out, as seriously required them to seek the same at this time. Therefore
they beseech monsieur Ioyeuse, not to interpret the same otherwise than they
purposed and meant. That they desired nothing but peace and tranquillity, and
to show their obedience to the king. That if so be lawful remedies might be
provided to take away their just fear, they were ready to yield them selves
into the hands of the king their Lord and Prince. But if so be old treasons
and snares were practiced, and if so be they could obtain no more than they
had obtained in time past, they were ready to suffer all manner of extremity,
rather than that they would willingly cast them selves upon the cruel and
bloody swords of spoiling murderers: for that it was great madness, for any
man willyngly to cast him self into peril. Then having amplifyed the
iniquity of those murders committed, and also having declared the dishonestie
of the foreshewed falsehoode, they show that it is lawful for Christians, both
by all law of God and man, to defend them selves against force and injury:
and that they do not bear armoure against the king, but against thieves and
murderers, furiously abusing the authority of the Kings name, without
punishment. That they did plainly perceive what they them selves were, and also
what, and how great the force of their enemies was: That present death was
before their eyes, but yet that they did not doubt, but that God, which is most
righteous and just, would help them miserable wretches in due time, that
either they might defend their life against the violence of murderers, or else
by martyrdom, might dye an honest death: the which should testify to al
posterities for ever, both how great the iniquity of their enemies was, and
also how great their constancy and virtue, in standing strongly and
valiantly, in a good and godly cause. That they committed the success of ye
whole matter unto God, and that this was their only joy in so great
perplexity, namely, that they were unjustly afflicted: also that they were
encouraged by the testimony of a good conscience, the happy success whereof
they looked for, both in life, and also in death.

ARMIES were prepared in the Kings name in diverse places, in Languedoc, in
Guian, in Dolpheny, in Prouance, Preparation of war against Languedoc.
countries bording upon Languedoc, for the war of Languedoc. Notwithstanding,
they of Nismes were first assaulted, the which being destroyed, the
Catholics thought that the rest would more easily give place. Also d' Anuil
was looked for to come with a power, for yt he has chief government of
La^guedoc. They of Nismes prepare for their defense all that they can, they
fortify the city, overthrow the suburbs, as hurtful to the same, carry in
victuals, and do diligently set al things in order, eue^ as if they should be
besieged by the diligence and prudence of mons. Clauson. Notwithstanding,
Nismes was not besieged by ye kings power: the occasion whereof we will show in
order. Now we are in this place to note the state of Sanserre, which we said
the relygious held also, The state of Sanserre.
at the first beginning of the cruel slaughter, whose constancy in wonderful
extremities, is worthy to be remembered for ever. The history of these our
times, is full of many and of such rare examples on both parts, the which we
will briefly note according to our purpose, obseruyng so much as we may the
order of time.

They of Sanserre, being styrred up with the news of that horrible slaughter
of Paris, and being assaulted with continual lyings in wait of the bordering
enemy, kept their city with diligent watch and ward: thither those of the
Religion which were escaped the murders, fled from the places there about,
from Burges, (for Sanserre is in the territory of Berry) from La Charity, from
Orleans, from Gijon, and from other places.

Notwythstanding, commandment was given out of hand to them of Sanserre in
the Kings name, by mons. Castres, governor of that part, to admit and obey the
Kings decree, by which he forbad the service of the Relygion, and according to
the form thereof, to abstain from holy Sermons, and to receive a garryzon to
keep the city.

The same form of commandment also, had the same answer of the men of
Sanserre, which they of Rochel and Nismes had given, as we have said: namely
that they neither could nor ought to receive the armed enemy against them
selves. And that therefore they must wait for that time, in the which they
might safely commit them selves to the external and foreine soldier, also
they affyrmed, that they were by their ancient pryuiledge, exempted from that
burden.

Wherefore they fortify them selves all that they may, and repair the breaches
of their wastes, which were sore battered in the former war. They send a
messenger to the Court, commendyng their cause to monsieur Fontenei, one of
their corporation and liberty, that he would make intercession to the King for
them, and would excuse them. Notwythstanding, all things were prepared for
mortal war, and what happened thereupon, we will show when we come to the
time and place, belongyng unto the same.

IN Daulphine, they of the relygion had not one town in their possession, no
not so much as a village. The state of the religious in Daulphine.
All the cityzens were taken by the Kings garryzons: the greatest part of them
of the relygion, being desirous to save their life, either feigned an abiuration
of the relygion, or else fled into the next cities of Viuaretz, and into
forreyne countries. To tell it is incredible, Many fell away from the Religion.
how many defections and Apostacies there were in a very short time, even in
the greatest cities, where the congregations were most peopled. At the first,
very many without constraynt, even by the very report of the murder at Paris,
and at Lions, fell away, and came by heaps to the catholics: some being
scarsly threatened, became weakelyngs and turnecoates. So that a man might see
great heaps of hypocrites and dissemblers of the Relygion, which frequented
the temples, and used all the rytes of the Catholics, even as it were with
stryuing who should be most forward.

Many of the nobility also which had followed the relygion, and had valiantly
behaved them selves, The behavior of the noble men in Daulphine.
in the times of the former wars, abiured now the relygion: others were dumb
at home, with great astonyshment of continual fear, least they should be
intercepted and taken by monsieur d' Gordes Lieftenant, who notwithstanding,
went about to persuade them of their secure and safe estate, and to seduce them
from the relygion, by loving letters.

MONS. Mombrune, one of the most noble men in Daulphine, came not to the
assembly of the funeral marriage. For ye providence of God reserved him to do
him great service, as we will declare when we come to the time of the same.
Mombrune, a noble and valiant man.
But he having, by his service in ye former wars, diverse and sundry ways
employed, gotten great fame among the^ of the religion, mons. d'Gordes, at the
kings commandment only, labored to intercept him, fearing that he would be
another occasion of new troubles.

Mombrune kept his house: therefore mons. d' Gordes sent very loving letters
unto him, seeking thereby to persuade him of the singular good will and
benevolence toward him. Only keeping him self quiet, he should be in rest and
security, and in the Kings high favor. Thus Mombrune seemed to many, to have
given over the care for religion, and to be quyte discoraged with the
unhappiness of the time. Notwtstanding he at ye last cast aside al negligence,
as we will declare hereafter

THE kings Edict is published, to reduce the^ home again, which were fled away
either into foreign nations, or else into those cities, which they of the
religion held. That (by the prescript of the kings Edict) pardon should be
granted for all things past, The Kings Edict for the calling home of such as
were fled.
to such as would return home again, with prouiso for the safety of their
life and conscience, so that they would live peaceably at home. And in the
same Edict, the king threatened those that would not obey his commandment, to
make their goods confiscate, as if they were rebels. And he testified, that he
did not punish the Admiral and his adherentes, to this end and purpose, that he
might show severity for ever, upon his subjects of the new opinion: (for so
he called the Religion) but rather to provide a necessary remedy for the
disordred kingdom, though the same in outward show seemed to be sharp. Also
whereas many of his people through fear, were fled either into those cities
which the rebels held, or else into foreign nations, that he earnestly lamented
their case, eue^ as it becomes a good master of a house, for yt they received
so much hindrance and loss, by being banished from their houses. Therefore he
wills and straightly commands them to repair with all speed unto their
houses: being assured that they should have peaceable coming, so that they
came wtin twenty days: and the religious, leaving the cities which they held
seditiously, to give their names unto the lieftenant of the Province, and to
promise faithfully, that they would be hereafter the trusty subjects of the
king. But if so be they would obstinatly absent them selves, and carelessly
contemn his clemency, then to be assured that he would be severe in punishing
them, according to their deserts. Also except they appeared at the day
appointed, that he would confyscate their goods, to the end they might know
what it is to abuse the clemency of their prince: That he did offer and
proclayme this in time, least any man should sustain the punishment afterward
for his presumptuouse boldness and rashness.

This was published the.xix. of November. But howsoever the king by those words
of the Edict would seem to provide for the consciences of the Religious, it
cannot be of any wayght or credit in ye judgment of wise men. For a little
before many of the kings letters patents were sent abroad thorough out the
Realm, by which most unjustly he constrained those, which had not once set
their foot out of the Realm, and whose condition for that cause ought to have
bin much better, to renounce the Religion, and to embrace Papistrie.

Many there imagined and coniectured that the great mass of money gathered out
of the proscription of the Religious, would be sufficient to maintain
war, and so they of the Religion should be wounded with their own swords.

Therefore the goods of the Religious were daily vewed and put in inventory,
the which is always the beginning of Confiscation, so that the goods of the
Religious being absent, were almost put in an Inventory, but yet were not
confiscate: the cause whereof was the contrary success which the King looked
not for. If the King had had such success in his war at Rochel as he
desired, it seemed that confiscations should have flowed with murders beyond
all measure thoroughout the whole Realm upon them of the Religion to their
utter destruction.

Under the color and pretense of that Edict, the king sought to bring to
pass by his Legate mons. Belleure, The King goes about to drive them that
were fled for Religion, out of Switzerlande.
with ye Switzers which professed the Religion, that those Frenchmen of the
Religion, which were fled into their country might be constrained to forsake
the same, for many were fled, especially to Bern and to Basile. Notwithstanding
the Ambassador lost his labor, for they extended still that same humanity
that they did before toward those fugitives.

Almost about this time a daughter was borne to the king. Whereupon he
entreated Elizabeth the Queen of England, that she would promise for his young
daughter in the holy Sacrament of Baptism, (which we call the office of a
Godmother.) To this request the Queens Majesty granted, and sent the Earl
of Worceter into France to the king to be her deputy for the same. The Queen's
Majesty Godmother to the French kings daughter.
There was no man but he saw well enough that the king at that doubtful time
went about to coorry favor with the Queen of England, least she should help
the poor Inhabitants of Rochel, and to this end the league was made.

We said before that they of Rochel answered mons. Biron, that they would not
receive him into the City, They of Rochell are put to proscriptio^ by the King.
before such time as the king had provided for their security by assured
pledges, not minding to come to composition with bare words. But the King
purposed to make those at his commandment by dint of sword and open force,
whom he could not win with words and deceyt. Therefore he delivers
letters to mons. Biron, by which he banisheth them from his protection and
favor, except they obey this his last commandment, as Rebels, traitors,
and the troublers of the common peace, protesting that he would persecute them
with mortal war accordingly: he commands all his governors and officers
to persecute them with war, and by all other means, eue^ as if they were
guilty of high treason: and pronou^ceth yt whatsoever they do herein against
them, shall be allowed and maynteyned.

At the same time mons. Noe a noble man, and in the former wars one amongst
the rest most valiant, came out of ye low Country of Flaunders called Belgic,
and was reconciled to the King, and in token of his recovered favor, the king
gave unto him the goods of Teligni, (whose Sister mons. Noe had married) which
otherwise had bin confiscate as the goods of others that were slain were in
the slaughter of Paris.

The king gave him in charge to persuade with them of Rochel, that he might
bring them if it were possible to take those conditions of peace which he
offered unto them. They of Rochel wondering at his coming after this sort,
sent unto him their letters of safeconduct, that he might come to ye village
called Tadon the fyfth day of November, and to do unto them that message which
he had brought unto the^ from ye king.

Thither came, mons. l' Noe, and the Burgeses of Rochell, La^guilleir,
Rechenart, Villers, and Merelle. Mons. le Noe comes to Rochel.
Mons. l' Noe declared unto them, that he had received commandment from the
King and Queen, to tell the^ yt it appertayned greatly to their profit, to
yield up the City into the kings hand and power, yt they might thereby
deliver themselves from that destruction, presently like to ensue by the siege
at hand, and might also obtain great peace for other Churches, that he
propounded this condition in the kings name, whom if they would admit to be
their Governor according to the kings appointment, they had free liberty to
use and enjoy the Religion.

Notwithstanding mons. l' Noe, having declared his good will and love which he
bare to Religion, privately persuaded them of Rochel, to admit none in the
kings name into the City, before such time as they were sufficiently assured
of their security and safety.

The Burgeses of Rochel had only authority and leave to hear, but no license
at all to determine any thing. Wherefore they returning certifyed the Senate of
the condition offered by mons. l' Noe, and mons. l' Noe being come into the
City received this answer, That Rochel would not admit mons. Biron, beseeching
the king that he would point some other which loved the reformed Religion
to be their ouerseer, or else to suffer them to live peaceably under the
obedience of his laws.

In the mean time mons. l' Noe being solicited both by the Senate it self of
Rochel, and also required by certain other Ministers of the Church, to embrace
the Religion, says that he was no less fervent toward the Religion, than he
had bin before time: and that he determined in him self to return unto them so
soon as he had done his embassage unto the king. The which he performed
within few days after, and was lovingly enterteyned of them of Rochel.

After this they of Rochel co^sulted how they might get ye Isle of The, the
which was both near and also commodious for them. The charge to atchieue this
enterprise was committed to mons. Essarz. He, being furnished with certain
Ships loosed from Rochel haven about the dead time of the night, that he
might deceive the enemy ryding at anchor not far from him. Now there were
come nere to the City two Ships of ye Kings navy under a color to bring
letters to them of Rochel in the name of mons d' Guarde: but in very deed they
were sounding or plumming for the depth of the water, for the which cause they
had one with them very expert in the same. Whiles they were thus occupied, they
were boorded by the Ships of Rochel: the which having slain one of their
chief Cpptaynes, took one of the Ships, and sent all their tackeling and
carriage into the City, the other Ship being afeard, escaped away. Then they of
Rochel returned into the City again. This was a foretoken that they should
have good success in the war which was prepared against them.

The beginning of the seege of Rochell.
THE fourth day of December mons. Biron came to the city with seven cornets of
horsemen, and eyghteene ensigns of footmen, having also with him two great
brass pieces, to begin the seege.

In the mean time diverse came dyuersly to this war from al parts of the
Realm: and of those also not a few which aforetime had served the Prince of
Conde in the war, and had now forsaken the Religion, showing them selves to be
more mortal enemies to the same than the Catholics them selves.

They of Rochel held those villages that bordered upon their City, as Maraim,
Mose, Nouaille, which were under ye charge of Captain Norman, and Andiui, and
the Isle of The, under the charge of Captain Virolet.

They determined not to abide the force of so great an army, but to make have
unto the City: notwithstanding Captain Norman purposed first to assay the
enemy. Therefore he marched forth with his bands of footmen, having
acco^panying him only fyftie horsemen, and so approached nere ye enemy: but
being to weak, he had the repulse, and was constrained to fly into a Country
place belonging to a noble man, the which notwithstanding was of sufficient
strength, and was called Grimelde: whither also Captain Virolet sought to come.

Then Mon. Biron beset the house, and battered the same with his field pieces:
insomuch that there seemed to be no way for them to escape destruction, had not
captain Norman taken this last shift. For he leaving his horses, went forth
with his men on foot in the dead time of the night, and breaking through the
scoute watches, got to the city with his men in safety. But captain Virolet
seeking too carefully to save his horses, was taken himself: notwithstanding
he turned by and by to the Catholics side, hoping yt if he would seen in that
war, he should have great rewards: but the end falling out otherwise than he
was promised, he got him home into Britain: where within a while after he was
slain, being recompensed with that reward of the new wars.

Then there came daily new bands of soldiers. M. Strozzi being general of ye
french footme^ took Pilleborean: M. d'Goast with six ensigns of footmen
took Ronsel: and M. Biron took Santandre, which were the suburbs of Rochel.
These they fortified with ditches and bulwarks against the sudden eruptions
of those within the City.

The townsmen from al quarters, villages and farms nere unto them, carried
into the City so much as they could all manner of vittaile: notwithstanding the
kings side found great plenty in those places, for the carriage whereof they
of Rochel, had not provided in due time.

Because the king perceived that those noble men which were come out of other
parts of the realm to Rochel would much profit them of Rochel, The noble men
within Rochel are assayed to be brought to defection.
and would indammage much his intended siege, he assayed those noble men by his
letters, promising unto them, that if they would come forth of the City, they
should be in safe security, and should also receive a large recompense.
Notwithstanding this persuasion took not effect. For not one of them at that
time fell unto the king.

There was a general fast appointed at Rochel, according to the usual manner
of the French Churches.

Mons. Biron went about to break the channels and conduyt pipes which conveyed
water to the fountain or conduit which served the city, thereby to take away
from the citizens the use of water. But although they had broken the conduit
pipes in many places, yet notwithstanding they lost their labor, by reason of
the great plenty of diverse springs which came from sundry places. By this
occasion there was a great skirmish between both parts: in the which the
Lieutenant of Captain Normans band was slain, and of mons. Birons part his
Standardbearer called Saintgenez, and diverse other on both sides.

A ship of Rochel being removed to the entry or mouth of the haue^, Certain
milles overthrown by the Catholykes,
was assailed by the kings ships, but so yt they gained nothing at al thereby.
They also overthrew.iiii. milles which joined to the city, and carried from them
great plenty of corn, which they of Rochel had by negligence left in them.

But before we come to the forceable besieging of Rochel, and to enter into a
new year, the order of the history begun, requires that we note by the way
what was done in other places by the Religious.

About the end of November d'Anuil being come into Languedoc at the kings
commandment, and having received great charge and commission to war against
those remnants which remained of the Religion, marched forth with his prepared
armies, minding as it should seem to besiege Nismes. Notwithstanding this
occasion disappointed him of yt purpose.

There is a little town nere unto Montpellier called Sommiron, the which
though it be but small, yet notwithstanding it is of sufficient force and
strength, both for the apt situation thereof, and also because it has a well
defenced castle in the same. In this town mon. Ioyeuse had left certain great
bard horses with a garrison of certain soldiers, d' Anuil comes into Languedoc
with an army
suspecting no force to be offered by them of the Religion, which seemed to be
almost dead: but behold, unlooked for a notable captain called mon.
Saintgremian took the city, the castle, and the horses of mon. Ioyeuse.

Therefore d'Anuil having given a vain assault to Vzes (the which is an ancient
city of Languedoc in the territory of Cursol) and having gone throughout the
whole territory of Vzes, The unprofitable war of d'Anuil in Languedoc.
having taken the castle of Sangene by surrender, and won a little town called
Cauuis, and seeming now to come to assail Nismes with a great army, he first
of al purposed to assault Sommiron with his whole force, least he should have
Montpellier a near enemy unto him, or least he might be stayed from the pray
and booty any longer which lay open to the sight of his army.

D'Anuil therefore besieges Sommiron, omitting nothing by which he might give a
strong assault to the same: Sommiron is besieged.
notwithstanding the unhappy succes of that siege as it diminished ye strength
of the Catholics in that country, so also it greatly enlarged the power of the^
of the Religion, which thenceforth began to have better success: and the fear
of those first attempts being set apart, they of the Religion behaved
themselves in their affairs much more constantly than they did before in the
former civil wars: having taken a large and plentiful country, not so much by
ye forces of great armies, as by dilligent painfulnes. The state of them in
Languedoc.
Sommiro^ was thus besiged by d'Anuil four months: a great mass of money being
wasted by the Catholics in vitailing so populous an army, insomuch that they
were weary of war, beside the loss both of common soldiers, and also of those
noble me^ which were mortal enemies to ye Religion, being brought thither eue^
as it were against their wills, yt they might be slain. To be short they of the
religion in La^guedoc had an open way made for the^, to bring notable things to
pass from thenceforth, as we will show hereafter.

Of Sanserre we have spoken before. The affairs of Sanserre.
To intercept and take the which, the same subtle practices were used, that
were practiced in the Cities mentionrd before. They of Sanserre had entreated
monsieur Fontene a certain noble man (as we have said) to speak unto the
king on their behalf, and not to suffer their name to be dishonested by
slanderous reports.

Mons. Fontene took this for an occasion to begin greater familiarity. He
sends unto them M. Candaillet, a certain old courtier, to assure the^ of his
good will: but that he himself was only earnestly busied in working their
safety, that they might show all the arguments that might be to the king of
their obedience. Therefore the men of Sanserre assembled together with monsieur
Candaillet, and testify that they will yield unto the king all obedience,
requiring one thing only at his hands, which was, that they might have
liberty of life and conscience, according to the form of the Edict: for the
faithful perfourmance whereof they said that they would yield unto him an
hundred of their chief Citizens for pledges. This was the beginning of great
dissension among the Citizens, which almost oppressed the City in this first
beginning.

Monsieur Candaillet returned to the Court being accompanied with five of the
chief Citizens of Sanserre, of which two were Catholics, and three were
Religious. These had commission subscribed with the hands of the chief
Citizens, that they would allow and confirm whatsoever they did according to
the form of the same.

The Messengers of Sanserre, so soon as they were come into the Court, and had
spoken to the King and Queen (whether it were by threatenings, or upon hope of
certain rewards) craved pardon of the king in the name of all the citizens of
Sanserre, whose persons they represented, as though they had grievously
offended against him: and beseeched the king that he would send M. Fontene to
Sanserre with a power, promising to undertake that he should be welcome to ye
Inhabitants therabouts. Therefore mon. Candaillet goes before to tell them of
Sanserre of the coming of mon. Fontene. The which when they heard, wondering at
the matter, and being greatly offended therewith, they assemble themselves
together to consult of the same: and at the last accord, That for so much as the
Messengers had don that thing by the kings persuasion against the form of
their commission, they might lawfully refuse and reject their act and
agreement. They send out to meet with mon. Fontene, and to tell him that they
are sorry for the rashness of their deputies, in that they had caused him to
come unto Sanserre: certifying him withal, that they knew his great good will,
for the which they gave him thanks: promysing that they would yield unto him
great honor, and would most friendly entertayne him, so that he would come
to their city in time of peace. But for so much as it was a troublesome time,
they beseeched him to take it in good part, that they could not suffer him to
come into the city.

Notwithstanding Mons. Fontene came to Cosne, a town two leagues from
Sanserre, that from thence he might the more conveniently prosecute his
business. The Deputies also of Sanserre, were returned from the Court.

Then contentions began to grow among the Citizens about the receyuyng of
Monsieur Fontene. For the Deputies persuaded with certain of the chief
citizens to receive Mons. Fontene into the city: showing the danger which
otherwise might come unto the town: On the contrary part others, but
specially forreners, thought it not meet to receive him.

Monsieur Fontene understanding that he was most of all resisted by forreners
to enter into the city, wrote unto them: affirmyng that there was no cause why
he should betray their safety: but rather that he had a care for the same.
Notwithstanding that it was not meet that through their counsel the
miserable townsmen should run into peril: and that they ought not to be the
procurers of them to resist the king, seeing if they would they could not.
Therefore if they would determine to go to any other place, he would bring to
pass that they should be safeco^ducted whether soever they would: for the
faithful performance whereof he said they should have pledges.

The forreners sent two Deputies to M. Fontene, by which they desire that they
may have the liberty of conscience and the peace and tranquillity given unto
them by the king according to the prescripte of the pacificatorie Edicte,
affirmyng that they had done injury to no man, but came unto Sanserre upon
purpose to shun those murders which were committed in other places, and were
received into the city with the good leave of the townsmen. Therefore that
there was no cause why their abode should be grievous or offensive to any man
so much that they should depart to any other place. To this monsieur Fontene
more angerly answered, that he would satisfy the kings commandment in doing
that which should be for the purpose, and also for the kings dignity.

Therefore that which could not be brought to pass by policy, was assayed by
force. Therefore those townsmen which thought good to admit monsieur Fontene
into the town in the kings name, by subtle deceit took the castle: and
took with them into the same monsieur Racam the brother of monsieur Fontene.
But when monsieur Fontene was come with his army more near to the city, to
put a more strong garrison into the Castle: behold, the townsmen which were of
the Religion gave a violent assault upon the castle, by which they put the
warders to flight and took the same, even the same day.

At that time they of Sanserre could not with courage enough bend themselves
to war: notwithstanding being admonished by present peril, they began to arm
themselves with courage, and to make preparation for their own defense.

THe affairs also of the low country according to the order of the story
begone, are not to be omitted, but briefly touched.

The Prince of Orange, having an army well appointed, prospered well in his
affairs in the low country of Flaunders, The affairs of the Prince of Orange
in Belgie.
having gotten into his hands the most noble cities, about that time that the
murders were committed at Paris.

Therefore when he had taken Mechgeline, and Audenard, and constrained Louen to
pay unto him a great sum of money, Mountes receives succors.
he came to Mountes with all his power, both to help his brother the Grave
Lodouic, and also to deliver the town compassed with a strayte siege by the
Duke of Alba.

The Prince of Orange arrived with great speed to the Duke of Alba his camp:
whose coming by appearance should have brought great detriment to the Duke of
Alba being hemd in on every side by his enemies: notwithstanding the Prince of
Orange being slow in biddyng battle by reason of the importunate calling of
ye soldiers for wages, departed without any attempt given. And retyring, the
Duke of Alba devised to work him some secret mischief. For the which
purpose he sent after him five hundred well appointed soldiers with calliuer
shot, and a troop of horsemen to follow the pursuit, who setting upon the
Princes camp in the night and killyng the watch, made great slaughter with a
Canbusadow upon his army, killyng many, and wounding not a few.

When horrible news of the French slaughters came to the ears of the Grave
Lodouic, by which he and his fellows were not a little troubled, and being
out of hope to have succors from his brother the Prince of Orange: the Duke of
Alba also daily more vehemently assaulting him, the enemy being repulsed, the
Grave Lodouic began to entreat a truce upon the yeeldyng up of the town: the
which being granted, composition was made that he should depart from
Mountes with leave to accompany him a thousand and five hundred armed men, and
to carry horses and other necessary cariages: having sworn not to bear armor
against King Philip by the space of one year after. So the Grave Lodouic being
wounded, returned home into Germany, after the surrender of a most fine City
to the Duke of Alba.

THEN the Prince of Orange went a part into Brabant: and seeing that Mechgeline
was assaulted, Mechgeline yielded by the Prince of Orange to duke of Alba.
and the minds of the townsmen discouraged, both by the evil success of the
affairs of France, and also by the late news of winnyng of Mountes, and
perceiving that they would without al doubt incline to the Duke of Alba, he
went secretly away and left the town empty. The which the Duke of Alba
took, and spoiled, and carried from thence a great booty. Then he reserved to
him self Die, Termund, Rurmund, and Audenarde. Afterward Zutphen being taken
by the Duke of Alba: so great a fear came upon the^ which took part with the
Prince of Orange, yt even as if a perfect conquest were made, and that there
had been no need of soldiers, the Duke of Alba dismissed many of his Germane
horsemen. Therefore daily cities came to the Duke of Alba crauyng pardon for
their fault, and utterly renouncyng the Prince of Orange.

The Duke of Alba besieged Narden a town of Hollande which was held by the
garryson of the prince of Orange, the which the townsmen yielded up upon
certain conditions. Notwithstanding the Spaniard breakyng his faith,
outragiously murdered both them of the garrison, and also the townsmen. At the
which captain Methyne being displeased (who came out of Spain into the low
country and was judged to be the successor of ye Duke of Alba) and very angry
with Frederick son to the Duke of Alba, The calamity of them of Narden.
got himself to Hertoghenbosh, and tarried there to long until he was sent for
by the king to come home again, after that he was admonished of those
dissetions among the chief Captains of the low country. The calamity of
those of Narde^ made the other cities of Holland more constant, least they
should yield themselves to him, whom they should find a more dangerous
friend than the mortal enemy.

Harlem persisteth in defiance of the duke of Alba.
THEREFORE, they of Harlem being ready to yield themselves to the Duke of Alba,
hearing of the cruelty showed upon them of Narden, changed their purpose, and
received the garrison of the prince of Orange: choosing rather to die than to
yield themselves willingly into the power of the Duke of Alba. The garrison of
the prince of Orange fortified the town very diligently, being before very
weak of it self.

In the society and frendshyp of the prince of Orange, the most part of the
cities of Hollande do persist as Leijden, Roterdam, Dort, the county of Hage,
Enckhuyse, Goude, Briel, and the rest. But Amstredam the Metropolitan city
was fortified with a very strong garrison of the Duke of Alba: But al Zeland
except Middelburg, took part with the prince of Orange.

THE Duke of Alba besieged Harlem with a great host, and very furiously gave
assault to the same. The townsmen with wonderful strength and courage
defended themselves: so aptly placyng the fortifications in the City, that
some time when the Spaniarde was received even into the bosom of the town,
was constrained to retire again both with great destruction, and also with
infamy and reproach. So that both parts behaved them selves very valiantly.

About this time began the bitter cold of winter, which gave occasion to the
Spaniards to prevail much, the Marshes with the which that country is
replenished, being frosen with Ise: But their presuming upon the Ise did
somewhat anoy them. The Spaniards made a bridge upon pyles and stakes, that by
the same they might pass over the Ise and break into the City: but the
Townsmen so urged them, yt being constrained to retire upon heaps over ye
bridge, the which being ouercharged with weight, brake and drowned a great
number of Spanyardes: some report more some less, but by certain conjecture
six hundred was the least: the Catholics dyminishe the number, and write but
two hundred.

The Prince of Orange sending soldiers to aid the Citizens of Harlem, was
disappoynted of his purpose, Succors sent from the Prince of Orange,
intercepted by the Duke of Alba
for they were intercepted by the Duke of Alba unlooked for, and slain with a
great slaughter: one cornet of horsemen escaping away, and seven Ensigns of
footmen, so that seven hundred are said to be slain in that place.

About that time, it is said that there was in the territory of Amsterdam a
Calfe cast, A monstrous Calfe.
which had two heads and two backs, and double feet, that is to say eight
in all, the which lived for certain hours.

The seuententh day of November there appeared a star in the sign Cassiopeia
of wonderful bigness, A new Star. Cassiopeia, is a sign in the fyrmamente
which has twelve stars, and is figured like a woman, sitting in a chair.
and excelling in brightness. Of this star diverse men gave their judgments,
and was likened to that star which was seen about Scorpio in the time of
Augustus Caesar, at the birth of our Savior Christ. And it was said that as
that star did signifye the first coming of Christ, so this did betoke^ his
last coming to judgment: Verses concerning this, were published abroad by
the learned. This Star appeared in the fyrmame^t for the space of nine
Months.

IN THE BEGINNING of this new year, notwithstanding the uncomfortable time of
winter, the furious force of war, both in France and in the low country was
nothing at all diminished.

The king gave straight charge and commandment, upon pain of great
punishments throughout the whole Realm of France, that all noble men should
go to the beseeging of Rochel: Commandments to beseege Rochel.
One pain or punishment was, the loss of honor: that is to say, that such
noble men as went not unto this war, should be counted rusticall, base, and
tributarie.

The denouncing of this pain, caused the noble men, yea those which aforetime
professed the Religion, to come to the war by heaps from all parts of the
Realm.

THERE were carried to the Kings Camp seven and thirty great pieces of
ordinance: and about the same time there came threescore ensigns of footmen:
Preparation for the seege.
mons. Biron, with all diligence and labor made ditches, bulwarks, rampires,
rolling trenches, hardelles, and all munitions and engines apperteyning to the
siege of the City.

In the mean time he entreats them of Rochell to give pledges or hostages,
because of Gadagne, an Abbot which was to come unto them in the Kings name, to
declare unto them the kings last will and determination. They of Rochel
aunsweared, that if it would please Gadagne to certify them of the kings
pleasure by letters, They of Rochell are assayed by letters. An irruption by
the^ of Rochell.
they would make an answer: but as for the giving of hostages, or the
letting of any man into the City, especially at that time, they neither could
nor would.

ABOUT the evening of the twelfth day of this month, they of Rochel brake
forth upon ye kings Camp, and slaying many took mons. Grandfiefe a noble man,
and carried him into ye city.

After certain days, some soldiers being privily come from the Ships at the
first watch when the gates were shut, and being passed over the ditch, were
assailed by the warders of the Kings camp. Another eruption.
In this tumult the City was raised, and the townsmen brake forth, by which
occasion there was so sore a fight and skirmish, that a few only of the
townsmen being slain and wounded, there was of the kings part a hundred and
five and fyftie slain, and many sore hurt.

Then the Catholics began to practice by subtle means to intercept them of
Rochel. Mons. Triabalde a noble man entered into the City under a colored
pretense of fleing to them of the City, and assayeth to bring ye noble men
which were there, Treason practiced against Rochell.
but especially mons. Languillier, who had the chief authority over Rochel,
to defection. But seeing yt he could not prevail, and searing least they of
the town would punish him for his falsehood, returned to ye kings Camp at ye
next eruption out of the city.

About this time there were new platformes made for them of Rochel, but those
soldiers which were appointed to give the enterprise, were for the most part
slain in the fury of the common people, the rest after examination had by the
Magistrate were brought forth of prison and hanged.

The Citizens of Rochel made mons. l' Noe their general: Mons. le Noe general
of Rochell.
notwithstanding so that the chief authority and power of other matters
should rest in the hands of the Magistrate. And certain other special things
befell among them, the which to this day are known to few, and to me also
uncertain, that I dare not commit them to writing.

The Citizens came always thither where they thought they might find the
enemy. Therefore there was a sore battle fought at Tadon and at Netre, two
villages near to Rochel, in which the kings part was put to the worst. And
thus they never suffered the enemy to be at rest.

The twenty day of January mons. de Guarde brought the kings navy to the
promontorie called Chef de Bois, and seeking to stop the^ of Rochel of their
passage, sunk a huge empty Ship, (commonly called the Caraque) in the sea,
and with great waytes and towes made the same immouable and ankerfast. Upon
this he reared a fort called le Eguille, The fort called le Eguille. 41. The
fort called Corceille. 42.
from whence he thundered and discharged great shot against yt part of ye town
which was opposite to ye same. Over against one end of ye Caraque there was
another fort called Corceille, and oueragainst ye other end of the same a
third fort, The fort of the new haven. 43.
called the fort of the new haven. And thus the haue^ was defended on both
sides, the Caraque being in the midst.

There appeared in the ocean sea a little beyond the haven within the vewe of
the town two Ships, which seemed to bear sail as though they would ariue
at the City. Therefore the townsmen went out of the City even upon a heap to
the number of fourscore, having certain soldiers froonting them with targets
and shields, intending with matter that they carried with them to fire the
Caraque. The which notwithstanding they attempted in vain, being terrifyed
with the thundering shot which flew from the Eguille fort, and also with the
hardness of the enterprise, and so returned into the city.

The Duke of Anoiu sent letters from the town called Samnessan to mons. le
Noe, The Duke of Aniou uses subtle persuasions to peace.
and commands him to signify unto the men of Rochel in his name, that the
king would forgive them both their lives and goods: so that they would yield
them selves into his hands, the which if they did refuse, he would by force
enter ye City, and execute such punishment upon them, as they should thereby
be made an example for all others.

There fled to Rochel from the Kings army, diverse which aforetime had
followed the Religion, Backslyders from the kings power.
and were constrained by the extremity of the times to fight under the Kings
banner. By these the kings counsel was bewrayed to the^ of Rochel.

A violent assalt by them of Rochell. A legion commonly conteyneth. 6000
footmen, and 732. men of Arms. A band contains sometime more me^ and
sometime less.
The syxt day of February, they of the town made another eruptio^ or violet
assault under the conduct of mons. l' Noe, in ye which they fought so valiantly
that of ye Legio^ of Sammartine one whole band was almost slain: many also were
taken prisoners, which notwythstanding were dismissed without paying any
ransom. Notwithstanding they which were known to be instruments of the
murder, found no such favor.

The eight day also ye besieged townesme^ gave another assault, in the which
they lost only five, but the kings part many soldiers.

Mons. l' Noe chose unto himself a well apppoynted and strong band of noble and
old experienced soldiers, choice men which offered willingly their service.

THE Duke of Anjou being come near unto the city sent again two letters to
the citizens of Rochell: Letters hortatorie from the Duke of Aniou, to peace.
the first concerned the noble men: the second appertayned to the townsmen and
forreners which were fled thither. In the which letters, he declares that the
king was not so uneasy to be reconciled, and unwilling to show grace, but
that if they would repent them, and crave pardon at his hands, he would
receive them to his favor again: but if they did obstinately refuse his
grace, they might assure them selves to feel the power and severity of their
most renowned Lord: and could not impute ye cause of that their destruction, to
any other than to the^ selves. They of Rochell answered the Duke of Anjou with
thanks giving, beseeching him to labor with the King, that the matter might
be brought to assured peace and tranquillity: and that especially they might
have the liberty of their conscience.

THE fiftenth day of this month, the Duke of Anjou came with great authority
and countenance into the kings camp, being accompanied with his brother the
Duke of Alanson, the king of Nauar, the Prince of Conde, the Dauphin, which
were of the kings blood: the Guise, Duke D'Aumal, Marquis d'Meyne, Duke
d'Bouillon, Monluce, Count Rochfoucalt, the Lord Acier, who after the death of
his brother, succeeded him in the inheritance, and was called Duke D'Vzes, who
having forsaken the religion, took part with the catholics. There were many
other noble men also: and there was so great a multitude of noble men, that to
besiege and assault one city, men came from al parts of the realm, with all
forces that might be possible. But before we come to speak of the noble siege,
A topographicall description of Rochell.
it seems necessary, yt we make breef description of ye situation of Rochel,
and of the most famous places, therein made notable by valiant exploytes.

Rochel by situation, extends it self so far into the Ocean sea, that it
is almost compassed about therewith: Salt maryshes. 16.
and it is closed almost round about with salt maryshes, very convenient for
the making of salt: but that part which tends toward the country of
Poictou, is fyrme and fast ground. On that part stands the temple called
L'temple d' Cogne, Cogne fort. 10
the which was fortified with a countermure, and now bears the name of Cogne
fort. So that the temple was ouerthrown, that the steeple might serve for a
watch tower, and the rest of the matter of the temple for a fort.

The tower Moreille. 13.
Over against the salt maryshes stands the tower of Moreille, which defends
that region in large compass, by reason of the tall and high munition of the
same.

Sannicolas tower. 18.
Next after this, follows the tower of Sannicolas, the which is compassed about
both with a natural moorysh ground, and also with witty skyll: for on the
right hand, the Ocean floods beat upon the same: and the swelling flood of the
sea, fills the dytch thereof, whether at the length the flood may come: for
from that place unto Cogne gate, the dytches of the city are almost dry.

From Sannicolas gate, to the gate d'Moulinez, the Sea extends it self, with
all one course and level: and to defend that part against the assaults that
might be given by the navy, there was a very strong bulwark made, which was
called Sannicolas fort. Sannicolas forte. 19. Sannicolas gate and the
bulwarks. 20. Sannicolas tower. 21. The tower of the haven. 22


Next to this stood Sannicolas gate, with bulwarks adjoining to the same: and
then Sannicolas tower, over against the which was the tower of the haven, the
said haven dividing them both: And to the end the Kings navy might have no
passage into the haven, there was fastened a strong iron chain from one of the
said towers to the other. Between the tower of the haven and the Lantern
tower, there was reared a very strong wall made by Masons, and furnyshed with
ordinance. The Lantern tower. 23.
The Lantern tower served to give light in the night to sailors, or to such
as came into the haven in time of peace. The Citadel. 1
Next unto this was placed a notable forte, called the Citadel, being no less
strong, than it was great and large, in so much, that it was to that part of
the city as it were an Armorie, or storehouse of Artillery. This Citadel was
compassed about with a wall of main strength, The tower of Gayor. 2.
at one corner whereof the tower of Gayor has his place: Between the which
and the next point toward the Kings camp, The new gate bulwark and
platform. 3. The forte of the Castle. 4. The place of Cockslem. 5. The bulwark
le Euangile. 6, Cogne bulwark. 9.
were framed diverse bulwarks and fortes, as the new gate bulwark, and
platfourme, the forte of the Castle: the place of Cockslem, and the bulwark
called l' Euangile, now battered down.

At the other fourth corner of the wall was a very strong bulwark, called Cogne
bulwark. Many other fortes were reared, which are to be seen in the platform
belonging to this description. Also it is to be noted, that the haven called
Chef de bois, where the Kings Navy road, is two miles distant from the gate
of Rochell.

THE Duke of Anjou therefore being received with tryumphant peales of the great
field pieces, went to Neullj to abide there: where he tarryed the whole time
of the siege, with the rest of the Princes, and greatest part of the nobles.
The same day he took a view of the walls of the City, and mustred the
Army.

The day following, the townsmen brake out at three several places of the
City, and having slain an hundred of their enemies, returned into the City
again, with loss of a few of their men.

Then was there a place appointed, from whence the walls of the city might be
conveniently battered, the battery being laid to the gate of Cogney: and by
the commandment of the Duke of Anjou, a countermure was made, and fortified
with hurdels to bear and defend the shot.

Also he forgot not to practice subtily mischief, under the pretense of parley:
to ye end the city might be assailed with two engines, namely by outward force,
and by inward craft and deceit. For ye citizens did not well agree among
themselves: some enclining to peace, of the which the duke of Anjou, at that
time had made an offer unto them: others thinking it better to stand manfully
to their own defense: saying, that the offered peace was nothing but a snare to
betray them, according to the old manner.

Captain Norman going to spoil and rob with two galleys, took a ship, laden
with fifty tun of wine of Burdeux, and five and twenty tun of wheat, and
returned with his men in safety into Rochell haven, notwithstanding that he was
assailed by mons. d' Guarde, with great force.

THE Duke of Anjou, having taken a view of the Bulwark which bordered on the
sea coaste, and mynding to return into the Kings camp, sent before him two
hundred horsemen, commanding them to skyrmishe with the townsmen, that he in
the mean time might pass by, with the more safety. While these and certain
troops of the townsmen were in skyrmish at that place, certain horsemen,
over whom mons. Grandrise a noble man was captain, carrying behind every of
them a foot man, Mons. Grandrise skirmisheth with the kings camp.
with callyuer shot, set upon the Kings soldiers unprepared in another part of
the camp, of whom they slew many, and took some prisoners, and brought with
them certain horses into the city.

SHORTLY after they of Rochell being dyuersly solicited, were contented at the
length to parley with the Kings Lieftenants: mons. l' Noe with Pierrez, Mortie,
and Maurisson, being chosen for this purpose, came into the Kings camp, and so
entered into parley with mons. Biron, Strozzi, Villequier, and Gadagne, and to
this parley also came the County d' Retz, and at the length certain of the
chief townsmen.

GADAGNE having spoken at large to mons. l' Noe, and to his fellows, of the
singular good will of the King, toward them of Rochell, offered at the last
to them in writing, the sum of those conditions, upon the which the King
would come to composition of peace: the which conditions were these: First,
that the inhabitants of Rochell, though they had grievously offended his
majesty, for that they being abashed with a certain vain fear, would not
obey his commandments oftentimes sent unto them, were notwithstanding freely
pardoned, so that they would receive mons. Biron into the city, and would
obey him. Secondly, that he would grant unto the^ the free use of Relygion,
according to ye form of the pacificatorie Edict, in the which he would have
nothing neither diminished nor altered: and for this he would make them most
ample and large assurance. Thyrdly, that he would give unto those which would
depart to any other place, full leave and liberty to depart, and to carry
their goods whether soever they would, or otherwise to use them at their own
pleasure.

They which were deputed for Rochel, made answer, that they had hitherto in no
point disobeyed the king, but had ever showed themselves his faithful
subjects. That, by the dangerous and troublesome state of the time they were
constrained to this necessary defense of themselves, least they should fall
into the hands and wills of their enemies as others had done, which had
embraced with them the same religion. That they desired of the king this one
thing, namely, that they might enjoy the liberty of their consciences by the
benefit of the Edict of peace. But seeing the cause in hand was not their
alone, but belongyng also to the rest of the reformed Churches, they also
earnestly required this thing that consideration of them might be had in like
manner: For So Much as they could do nothing of themselves without their consent.
And thus they parted.

The day followyng, Mons. l'Noe being beset with sixtene horsemen having
encountered and charged a greater troop, Mons. l Noe hardly escapes death.
and was pursuyng the chase, was so near his death, that if a Captain had not
put himself between the enemy and l'Noe, he had been slain. But the
Captain thereby purchased his deaths wound.

The deputies of Rochel being returned into the city, told the whole matter
unto the Senate. The Senate called before them the Pastors of the Church, to
have their judgment concerning these matters. The Pastors answered, That for
so much as they were demanded of those things which specially belonged to
conscience and to Gods prerogative, it was a matter of great wayghte: and
therefore that they ought not to make answer to the same, before they had
craved wisdom of God. Affirmyng that peace was to be wished, but not such a
peace as should be more perilous and mortal than war: as might plainly
enough appear by those former and late examples. That it was not likely that
the king coming upon them with his whole power and proclaiming open war,
would make convenient and profitable conditions of peace: notwithstanding that
they ought to endeavor themselves to forslow nothing that might be for the
peace of the Churches, seeing they sought not war, but their needful and
necessary defense. Notwithstanding, that those conferences and parleys did not
seem to be safe and without peril: wherefore they thought it better to deal by
writing, whereby they might also have a more convenient mean to deliberate.
Furthermore that they ought to have a consideration of the common utility of
all Churches, and that therefore they ought to do nothing for their own private
cause, except the use of the same peace should be extended to other Churches.

The next day the people were called together, that a final determination
might be made concerning this matter. And the people lyked of that judgment of
the Pastors, whereof we have spoken even now.

This assembly was scarce dismiste, when as the kings Army was approached the
gate of the city, which ran forceably together on a heap to break open the
same. Whereupon they of the town brake forth and repulsed the kings power by
little and little: and aid coming still on both parts, there was a sore
skyrmishe at that place, both sides valiantly quittyng themselves. This
skyrmishe continued very whot the space of sire hours. Another assault.
Monsieur l'Noe was in great peril of his life, his breast plate being broken
with diverse violent strokes, and his horse slain under him. The speedy coming
of the night ended this battle. Of the townsmen twelve were wantyng, and
seven and twenty were wounded. But of the kings part there are said to be a
hundred and fifty slain. Wonderful was the boldness and courage of the
women in the midst of the fight, coming almost into the danger of the
conflict, bringyng to such as were wounded wine and other comfortable things.

The next day which was the last of February, the thundryng Cannon shot
began to batter the walls and gate of Cogne. The kings soldiers begin the
assault.
Whereby the co^sultations of the disagreyng townsmen were disturbed, and
constrained they were by necessity to defend themselves.

The same day the townsmen gave an assault, having mons. l'Noe, and Norman
their Captains: at the which assault many on both parts were slain.

Mons l'Noe contrary to the agreed and concluded determination, brought to
pass, that the said determination being revoked in the public assembly of
the Senate and people, it was agreed that the kings Deputies should be heard
again, that the matter might be rather ended by peace than by war. Whereupon
Monsieur Strozzi and Mandreuille, were sent into Rochel for hostages. And
Monsieur l'Noe, and James Henry Mayre, came unto the Duke of Anjou, as it was
agreed by the senate and people.

Nevertheless the battery proceeded against Cogne forte: whose fortification
within few days were beaten down.

When the Duke of Anjou had heard the Deputies of Rochel, answered in the
Kings name, that the king would add nothing unto those former conditions
rehearsed unto them already by Gadagne. That, if they were wise, they would
embrace them betymes while the kings grace and goodness was offered unto them:
and not to presume upon vain confidence to have help and aid out of
England.

With this answer they of Rochel returned to make report: and then came
again to the Kings camp, requyryng that both the City, and also the
territory of Rochel might have one and the self same use of the Religion:
and also that the same benefit might belong to the rest of the Churches
dispersed throughout the Realm. To the which County de Adretz, made answer
that the kings pleasure was to have the City only partaker of that benefit:
as for the other Churches, that he would provide for them at his own
pleasure, and according to his wisdom: willing the^ of Rochel to receive the
benefit offered, ye which the king would afterward grant unto their fellows.
This answer was not liked. The which being brought to the Citizens, they al
agreed, that al ways of defense lawful were to be sought: and that rather than
they should run into present peril, they ought rather to prefer just war,
than to embrace reprochful and suspected peace: for God would defend their
cause.

While these things were in communication, the great gunnes shook and
battered the walls of the town. The townsmen also having their pieces and
shot well defenced with bulwarks and rampyers, discharged lustyly from the
City, in so much that many on the kings part were at diverse times hurt and
slain. Among the rest, from that forte which we said is called l'Euangele,
there was discharged a Canon shot, which runnyng through hardell trenche not
sufficiently fortified with earth, Duke D'aumall slain.
slew Duke d'Aumall as he stood privily behind the same, being uncle by the
fathers side to the Duke of Guise. And so the funeral exequies of this noble
peer, was joined with the daily slaughters of noble men, and common soldiers.

Always the thunderyng shot went off against the townsmen laboryng to repair
the breaches of their walls: notwithstanding to the small hurt of the
townsmen, busily occupied there aboutes.

Truce taken for a parley.
Nevertheless a truce was taken for one day for a parley, during which time
the dischargyng of shot was forbidden on either part. Monsieur l'Noe, and
Meniuuille went forth to the parley, in the name of the townsmen.

The day followyng the thundryng shot went off afreshe, and the townsmen
making an assault to Tadon, made a light skirmishe, in the which they had good
success, and in the dead time of the night the townsmen clothyng themselves
with white shyrtes, went forth and had taken the trenche of defense when they
were repulsed by the kings soldiers, and many being slain and wounded on both
sides, they came into the City again.

Now leaving for a while to speak of the siege of Rochel, let us say somewhat
of the affairs of other countries.

Sommiron was urged by D'anuil, The siege of Sommiron.
and having made wide breaches in the walls, sought by his Soldiers
oftentimes to break into the city: the townsmen in the mean time fortifying
and defending the same with wonderful strength, having monsieur Gremian a noble
man of Montpellier their captain, whose fortitude also the enemy had in
admiration.

They of Montaubane, being under the conduct of Vicount Paul, succored the
besieged, they of D'Anuils part nothing at all hyndering them: conueying unto
them reasonable store of vittayle, and also of gunpowder. They of Nismes, and
the borderers of Seuenatz valiantly succored at all assayes their oppressed
brethren and fellows. They of the territory of Viuaretz being let by the
domestical enemy, went not to that war.

Thus a great army, well furnished with artillarie and ordinance, labored in
vain for the space of four months in the besieging of the town, sustayning
great overthrow and slaughter of men. For it is said that of the Catholics
side were slain five thousand men.

Monsieur Candale of Guian a notable famous man, Monsieur Candale slain.
who had married one of the sisters of mons. Momorenci, brought unto d'Anuil his
kinsman two Ensigns of footmen Gascoynes, who among the Frenchmen are
accounted the most expert and painful Soldiers. These scorned the vain labor
of those that followed the siege, and noted the constancy of the town, with
bragges what they would do more than their fellows before them. Therefore
monsieur Candale, being provoked by his soldiers craved of Mons. d'Anuil, that
he and his band might have leave to give the first assault to the town. His
request was granted. And there was a sufficient breach made in the wall of
the town. At the which when monsieur Candale assayed by fault to enter, he
was so received that he was repulsed with loss of three hundred men at that
assault. With this loss M. Candale was so angry, that he protested to d'Anuil
that he abhorred the civil wars by which one Frenchman killed another, to
serve and please the minds of vile and naughty knaves: for such were his
words.

The day following mon. Candale seeking to recover the loss of his honor, was
slain himself: which greatly chafed and grieved his soldiers, but specially
d'Anuil, who was dishonored and defamed with that delay of war, and unhappy
success, and was said by the Catholics to delay and spend the time for the
nonce to the kings great loss and detriment.

For the whole house of Momorencie were appointed to be slain with the Admiral
their kinsman, in the slaughter of Paris: but what was the let hereof we have
showed already. Notwithstanding the wyser sort affirm, that d'Anuil by his
exployts in that war of Languedoc, showed himself forward to do all that he
was able, that he might win the kings favor.

When there was no occasion left to take Sommiron, and the kings army lingering
the siege, behold mon. Gremian desires parley: and upon notable conditions he
agreed with dAnuil concerning the yielding up the town, namely that al both
soldiers and townsmen, should depart with their armor, and all their goods
in safety, that they should have respyt for seven days, and that hostages
should be taken on either part, until the agreement were fully ended.

Therefore the garrison and townsmen, having monsieur Gremian their captain,
came forth of the city armed with their families and goods, and came in
safety to the next Cities of Seuenatz, the hostages abiding in the mean time
at Nismes. The yielding up of Sommiron seemed incredible to the Catholics,
Sommiron yielded up, upon good conditions.
which were without al hope to receive the same: and to the dishonor of d'Anuil
they reported, that mons. Gremian to gratify d'Anuil, had willingly yielded up
the City unto him. Notwithstanding in very deed Sommiron was brought into
those strayts and extremities, that they wanting both vittail and also
goonpowder, and having no aid from their fellows (who could scarcely help
themselves sufficiently) could not but yield up the town at that time.

From this time forward the Catholics warred not against them of the Religion
in Languedoc: and the year following brought a wonderful alteration, as we
will declare hereafter.

ABOUT this time there befell a new occasion to further the affairs of the
Religious in Languedoc. Concerning Villeneufe, which was intercepted by mon.
Leugere, we have spoken before. The banished Citizens of Villeneufe, used these
means to recover their city. We said before that a little town called
Mirebel, was taken by mon. Baron and Pradel: whether the most earnest favorers
of the Religion of Villeneuf fled. Villeneufe in the territory of Viuaretz is
taken by them of the Religion.
They therefore being in Mirebel which was situate upon the higher ground, from
whence they might see far off, had always Villeneufe before their eyes,
insomuch that the present occasion was always in the minds of the poor
banished Citizens to recover their country. Amidst the straytes of the siege
of Sommiron, those extremities of Mirebel are repeated, being besieged round
about with enemies.

There came to mon. Pradel a certain soldier a Coppersmith, which was newly
come from Villeneufe: who affyrmed that he had devised a way to take the city,
in show ridiculous and fond, but yet such he said, as was not to be
rejected, being much more easy than that which was practiced in taking of
Nismes in the time of the former war.

There was at the walls of Villeneufe a hole, out of the which the water of
the town, only in the time of rain, runs to purge the ways and channels:
and the same had an iron grate before it. That hole this Soldier had viewed,
and reported the same to be such, that the bars of iron might easily be
broken up: through the which he affyrmed they might easily pass into the town.

The matter being told to mon. Baron a Captain, was ieasted at.
Notwithstanding, at the instance of mon. Pradel, it was agreed that this device
should be put in practice. Monsieur Baron was gone apart to Priuac to keep the
city, which being brought into peril by the dissentions of the townsmen and
inhabitants therabout, by his industry abode in the faith and power of them of
the Religion. To take Villeneufe there lacked more succors: for the which they
of Aubenac, and other of their fellows were to be entreated. The matter could
not be so secretly kept, but that it brast forth and came to the ears of
Monsieur Leuger. He therefore increased his garrison, and appointed those to
keep watch and ward which in the City had abiured the Religion.
Notwithstanding there was not one in the City which knew of this purpose and
counsel.

To bring this matter to pass, it was appointed that they should tarry for a
dark night. Monsieur Baro differing the matter as deuoyde of all warrelike
policy, and fearing the danger of this purpose, certain months passed on,
and the matter not assayed. In the mean time monsieur Leuger being deceived
and mocked by false Messengers, watched many nights, having his men in a
readiness in arms. So that he thought these reports to be but vain and
false.

Monsieur Pradelle at the length brought to pass, that in the beginning of the
month of March, having gathered succors together, monsieur Baro came with his
soldiers from Priuac to Mirebel. He came in the evening, notwithstanding so,
that he had day light for certain hours, and the watchmen and scoutes of
mon. Leuger which lay at Mirebel in secret watch certified him out of hand of
the coming of monsieur Baro, and telling him that he would come the same night
unto the city. Monsieur Leuger, though he were oftentimes mocked, yet
notwithstanding by this report he being styrred to look about him, commanded
the gates of the city to be shut betymes: and those which abiured the
Religion, as suspected to be put apart in diverse places: to double the watch:
insomuch that the town being conveniently walled about, was replenished with
a standing watch. He commanded bonfires to be made in every street of the
City, and Cresset light to stand in every window, in such wise as the whole
City was bright and shining. And he himself with certain choice men went
round about his watch. In this so diligent watching, they of the Religion had
nothing deceived his expectation, and if they had come at the appointed hour,
they could not have prevailed: For one a clock after midnight was the hour
appointed, at the which time, watches are commonly of less force.

And why they came not at the said hour appointed, this was the cause mons.
Baro showing the danger of the attempt, thought it good not to take the same in
hand: many valiant soldiers agreed hereunto, being moved with authority.
Notwithstanding, mons. Pradelle prevailed, that the attempt might be given: and
when he had made his prayers unto God, in the midst of his soldiers, all men
were so encouraged, that they went forward, as men persuaded and assured of
victory.

While the matter was thus in controversy, the time was delaied. Mons. Leuger
deeming that they were the accustomed wiles and mockes, left off his serious
watch: by which time the day star appeared. Wherefore all men being desirous
of sleep departed. And monsieur Leuger him self went home to sleep, for that
he had watched all the night.

They of the religion come unto the city when all things were at rest, through
the compassing valleys shadowed with hills, with the which Villeneufe was
compassed on that side. And when the iron bars were pulled up, they entered in
at the forsaid hole: and they that entered first, came unto the chief watch, and
slew certain soldiers whom they found asleep, and some between sleeping and
waking. And thus they ran through the city, crying, the town is taken. Thus
the greater part being entered in at the hole, not one shot being discharged
from the walls against them, opened one gate. Whomsoever they met, they slew.
Mons. Leuger being waked with the noise of this tumult, went out of his house,
but being constrained by force to retire again, he kept him self close in the
same, being lately well fortified. The Catholics also betook them to the
tower of the greater gate, and to another also of great height beside the
temple. But such as were found armed in any place of the city, were slain by
the^ of the religion, insomuch that the streats were filled with dead bodies.
Many popish prelates also were slain, which were come thither from diverse
cities therabouts, to hold a Synod. And after they had assailed the two towers
and the house of mons. Leuger, to ye hurt and detrime^t of both parts, the said
three places were yielded the third day, and mons. Leuger departed, being in
great peril of the catholics, in so much that he could scarsly be in safety in
his house, being accused of treason. Thus faith being violated, he is also
accused of treason, by false surmise. So great fear came upon all this
country, that no doubt, they of the religion might easily have taken the next
city, but that the soldiers being busied about the pray, would not go else
where. A great booty was carried out of this little town, and much money for
raunsomes was received, which by the negligence of the captains, was put to
private uses.

The Catholics by this sudden fear being awaked, held al those cities which
were near unto them, they which had taken Villeneufe, being gone no further.
Notwithstanding they of the religion, took certain little towns which bordred
upon them: and fortified Gorce, and Saluasse, that they might have free passage
from Viuijers to Nismes.

D Anuil abstaineth from war.
D'ANVIL having placed the tail and remaynder of his armies in diverse towns,
from thence forth mitigated the force of war.

Diverse cities in Languedoc taken by policy
Nevertheless, by them of the religion, diverse towns and castles in sundry
places of Languedoc were taken daily, rather by policy, than with ye displaied
ensign. About this time a walled town called Florensac, being not far from
Narbo^ was taken: Neither was there any Diocese in Languedoc, in the which day
by day some news fell out. The particular repetition of which things, we have
thought more convenient to defer unto another time, and for another book.

Pusis taken.
They of the religion also took Pusis, a town bordering upon the river of
Rosne, which before that time by the negligence of the townsmen, was fallen into
decay. Cursol also which lies over against Valentz in Dauphine, was strongly
fortified.

These things falling out in this order, after the besieging of Sommiron, they
of the religion in Languedoc, began to look more seriously about them, and
to take better order in their affairs. For in their first beginning of war,
the captains and ringleaders being none of the nobility, but borne of base
parentage, every man governed his soldiers as him lysted, whereupon many
dissentions arose among them, when as one would not obey the others counsel,
according to the nature of Frenchmen, which is to like well of their own
gouenment. Therefore the inhabitants of Nismes (with whom they of Viuijers and
Seuenatz were joined) determined to choose certain of the nobility, whose
commandment the other captains should not refuse to obey. And to this order
of government accorded mons. Sauroman, a noble man, and one deserving to be
loved for his godliness and his modesty, who in the very same government
before time, had very profitably bestowed great diligence and pains. Who
escaping the cruel slaughter of Paris, fled into Switzerlande. Him, after
deliberation had they chose, and entreated him by their letters, Mons. Sanroman
chosen to be general by them of the religion.
to take upon him that charge. At the first he doubted what he were best to
do, whether he were best to join him self with them, being in so great
peril. Nevertheless after certain months, he came unto them at the last, as
we will declare hereafter.

ABOUT this time the Churches of Languedoc sent into Germany to crave help,
that they might be able to sustain the force of war, which they were
assured would shortly be moved against them. For this treaty mons. Calueri,
and Valli, strong and wise men, in the midst of the continual assaults of ye
enemy were sent. They went especially to ye county Pallatine: of whose
compassion and good will, in pitying their estate, and in readiness to help
the^, they certified their fellows, and put them in hope of aid. But for the
present necessity, they received nothing. And as they returned home again,
making a longer iourny, because of the lyings in wait of ye enemies, mons.
Valli came home in safety: but mons. Calueti was taken by mons. d' Gordes in
Dauphine: and being kept in ward certain months, was at the length by reason
of a peace which came in ye mean time, and by the entreaty of d'Anuil
restored. Al which things we will entreat of together hereafter in one place.

Monbrune armeth himself in Dauphine.
WE spoke before of mons. Monbrune, and of the noble men of Daulphine. He lying
secretly at home, and seeming to have no care for religion, but to provide for
his own private ease and profit, and to seek to win the kings favor, came forth
at the last, contrary to the expectation of all men, and armed him self.

Mons. d' Gorges sent unto him straight after sugared letters, promising unto
him ever and among, in the kings name, both domestical peace, and also
liberty of conscience, feeding him with friendly promises, if so be he would
serve the king: or at least if he would be quiet, and seek his own profit.
Nevertheless in the mean time he went about to betray him, seking to spoil
him of all the succors of his friends, and so to intercept him.

Mons. Monbrune being certified hereof, having both conscience toward the
religion, and having abandoned out of his mind, the whole conceived fear of
the butcherly murder, and they of Languedoc having good success of their
constancy: began to persuade with his private friends of the nobility, which
favored the religion, and kept their houses to come abroad: and after
deliberation had, they agreed together to take Valentz, Mo^til. Leucrest, which
were noble cities in Daulphine, by them of the Religion, which as yet were in
them. And they made their neighbors of Viuaretz acquainted with this matter.

But when their purpose failed in taking those towns, and certain bands of
the inhabitants, in the territory of Viuaretz also, when they were come over
the river of Rosne, being intercepted by the horsemen of mons. d'Gordes, the
said mons. Monbrune took certain small empty towns of no fame, in the hill
country of Daulphine, near unto the Diocese of Dien, as Orpier, Diofet, and
Serra, which were kept with no garizons. Mons. d'Gordes being in security, and
nothing at all fearing the styrring of them of the Religion, and the townsmen
whereof favoring also the Religion.

And then mons. Monbrune having with him a few of his friends to the number of
eyghteene horsemen, and two and twenty old soldiers only, went out of his
house, not knowing certaynely what to do, and having no sufficient trust in the
strength of those few, so great fear remained by the remembrance of that
lamentable time.

About the same time by his travail in the parts of Troiz, which lies among
the hills of the Alps (and yet no barren soil) these noble men, mons.
Ledigner, Champolian, and Morge took the chief City called Meuza, and diverse
other small towns, and gathered together a great multitude of the Religious
(which are many in those parts) which at that time lay hyden in secret places
after the cruel slaughter committed.

MONS. d' Gordes notwithstanding, not deeming the peril of that hill country
to be so great, The security of monsieur de Gordes.
in so weak and small beginnings, sent out certain troops of horsemen only
to intercept Mombrune and his fellows, but he prevailed not. Whereupon he
certifyed the King of a new commotio^. Notwithstanding even at these first
beginnings, Monbrune took certain troops of Soldiers belonging to mons. de
Gords, straggling here and there, and offered up the first fruits of greater
slaughter to come.

OF these small beginnings it can scarce be told how greatly his strength
increased within few days, insomuch that the kings side had not a more
terrible and fearful enemy in the Realm of France, which we will briefly
note hereafter in due time and place.

WE said before that the Citizens of Sanferre were in great extremities by
reason of domestical dissentions, and that a Castle was taken from them, and
recovered also by them the same day again. Of the affairs of Sanserre.
Being taught by this dangerous admonition, they begin more exquisitely to
order and appoint all things in the City, and ordain mons. Ioanneau the
Lieftenant of the town and a payneful man to be their General and governor by
his name and authority: and their captains for the war they chose mons.
Flore, and Mine, and certain others: they mustered the townsmen and appointed
bands of Soldiers.

Notwithstanding as yet they were not beseeged by ye kings army, and many, but
especially mons. Ioanneau could not be persuaded that the king amidst the
extremities of Rochel and Languedoc wars, would beseege the City.
Nevertheless the more wise and provident sort considered and thought that he
would not leave that unassaulted, which was in the very heart and midst of
the Realm. This security brought to pass, that they of Sanserre left many
necessary things undone: The negligence of them of Sanserre.
but especially it caused them to neglect the provision of corn for the City,
of which they might have provided great store in so fertile a country, in the
which their store houses, so near after harvest, were replenished almost with
all manner of fruits. The pulling down also of the suburbs and other
villages adjoining unto them was pretermitted, which notwithstanding was
necessary to be done against the seege, least the same places might serve
their enemies turn, which they did afterward in very deed to the great
anoyance of the town. But principally their carelessness in providing corn
brought upon them so great a famine, that the same might seem to be nothing
inferioure, nay rather to exceed the famine of Jerusalem, and that of
Samaria. Beside this, they erred in hopyng for succors by which they persisted
constant to their own hurt and detriment, they which ought to have aided
them, either not doing their duty, or else so unfurnished that they could not
help. Notwithstanding both their constancy and also their wonderful industry
is worthy to be remembered of such as shall come hereafter, and specially
being in a good cause it deserves great praise and commendation.

This history is written in French by one named Lerry, an approved witness to
be credited, being at that seege even to the last moment, from whose writing,
and others information we will according to our manner and purpose, set down
that which is only necessary.

After that they of Sanserre had skirmished certain days with their
neighbors of Cosne, and had taken from them the pray and booty, they were
beseeged the ninth day of January of this present year with a copious army,
containing five hundred horsemen, and five thousand footmen, beside those
which were borne and dwelling in that country, who came thither of their own
accord to get them renown. The Lord of Chastre, knight of the order, the
kings governor of ye country, was general of the Army. He had for the
battery sixtiene great pieces: and he caused a great number of trenches and
bulwarks to be made for their defense in the seege.

When they of the town saw them selves besieged, The seege of Sanserre.
and then too late fearing the scarcity of corn, they determined to thrust
out of the City the rusticall multitude. But they to whom the executing
hereof was committed, so handled the matter, that the greater part of the
common people remained still in the City: whereupon ensued both to the
miserable people, and also to the whole City an intolerable mischief. So
many groase ouersights could not but bring great calamity to them of Sanserre.

The Lord of Chastre, sending an Heralt, summoned them of Sanserre to yield up
the town: the which if they would do willingly, he promised that he would
persuade the King to deal with them in clemency: but if they refused, he
threatened to show all severity against them. To this the Sanserreans made no
answer, but stayed the Heralt from returning again, and kept him in the
City: the which act was against the law of arms, and committed by the
indiscreet counsel of the chief rulers, which notwithstanding was disliked
of the most part of the townsmen. This Act turned afterward to the great
displeasure of mons. Iohanneau the author of ye same.

Thus the Sanserreans prepared themselves for their defense, The courage of the
Sanserreans in defe^ding the^selfs.
being greatly encouraged by the good success of their former beseeging, of
the which we have spoken in another place. They disquieted the enemy by often
eruption, by the good conduct of mons. Flore an expert and valiant Captain,
who both took great pains, and also had happy success in his affairs. And
it is certain, so far forth as we may judge of humane matters humanly, that
if the Sanserreans had provided in time sufficient store of corn, the enemy
had had the same success which he had in the former war.

All things necessary for the siege being diligently provided by the Lord of
Chastre, the syxteene day of February of this present year, the walls of the
City began to be battered with sixteen great pieces of ordinance, two of the
which were planted upon a higher place of ground, and bent against the face of
the City, to the great anoyance of the townsmen.

But before that time of the battery, there was fled a certain soldier out
of the Kings army unto the townsmen, which bewrayed the place, which the
enemy by battery intended to make sauteable: to the which place the townsmen
came with speed, fortifying the same with a new countermure: notwithstanding
they saw the enemy bend his force against another place of less strength.
Yet nevertheless by proof he found the same contrary to his expectation, so
well fortefyed, that when he had for the space of three days done nothing but
batter the same (for in those three days space there were certaynely told
three thousand and five hundred shot of ordinance) they had made a very small
breach in the wall.

Also credible persons which abode in this seege even until the end of the
same, report a wonderful thing worthy to be remembered, namely, that amiddest
so many terrible thundryng shot, there was not one hurt, except one only
damsel which was slain not with the shot, but with the fyery flame of a
piece: howbeit houses in diverse places of the town were shaken and rent, and
the weapons in the hands of soldiers broken in pieces, also the helmets taken
off from some of their heads, and the rubbish and stone work flewe about the
ears of many, without doing them any hurt: Also at what time there was a
sermon, the house it self wherein the people were assembled together, was
filled with the rubbish of the next houses were beaten down, which things I
would not report except they were approved true, that it may appear that not
without cause the Sanserreans almost all perished with famine, which were
delivered out of so great perilles, but that God by his singular providence
ordered the whole matter, in whose hand is both life and death.

The breach being made as is aforesaid, An Engine was a four square thing made
of boordes and quarters for men to go under to defend the^ selves from stones
and shot.
the L. Chastre determined to approach the walls with Engines, that he might
win the gate Viet which was next unto the breach. Also at other parts of ye
wall the soldiers undermined, yt with diverse assalts made together ye
Sanserreans might be unable to resist.

The ninetienth day of March, the Kings army bente with might and main gave
an assalt at the breach, and in the mean time the ordinance which was planted
on the higher ground discharged lustely at the face of the town. The
townsmen feared the shaking and blowing up of the mines, standing in doubt
least they should break forth at those places where they were, and fearing
least while they were occupied in one place, on the other part an entry might
be made for the enemy. So that they were in sore conflict with diverse
extremities.

Notwithstanding they had such success in the end, that the enemy was not
only repulsed, but slain also with a great slaughter, in so much that he was
discouraged any more to give any assalt unto the town, being taught by the
example of the former wars.

Wherefore the L. of Chastre perceiving that it was but lost labor, beside the
great spoil also of his men, to give any more assalts to the town, and being
warned by the error of mons. Martinenge, who aforetime was general in the
other seege, but in vain, devised another way of beseeging, thinking it good
to leave off the assalting of the same, and rather with strong bulwarks to
enclose it, that neither they which were within the City might come forth,
nor yet those which were without might have access to them which were within:
yt so he might co^strayne the townesme^ being brought to extreme famine, to
give up ye town, the which in deed came to pass.

Therefore the day following which was the twenty of March, he displaced his
Artillery, and ouerthrewe and burnt the fortifications which he had erected
about the City, and the whole army almost trussed up bag and baggage.

Then the townsmen thought that the L. Chastre, being out of hope to take the
City discamped, but his intent was otherwise: for he practiced another kind
of strayt seege, as we have said. Therefore the L. Chastre erected seven
bulwarks, severally situated according to the conueniencie of the place, in
necessary places, fortifyed such places of the hamlets adjoining thereunto, as
served his turn: hemde in the City with broad trenches, that the townsmen
might have a narrow space left them between the City and the ditche: placed
horsemen and footmen in conueniente order, and commanded a most strayt kind
of watch and ward, in such wise that it was not possible by any means, that
any man should go out or come into the City.

The Sanserreans send for succors.
When the townsmen saw them selves to be thus enclosed, they sent to diverse
places for succors, but specially into Germany, and into Languedoc. But what
came thereof we will show in order hereafter.

Concerning the affairs of the low country.
WE said before that Harlem a town in Hollande was beseeged by the Duke of
Alba, in winning whereof the Spaniards, and contrariwyse in defending of the
same the Prince of Orange his soldiers took great pains. The wall being
battered down with shot, was so fortifyed again by the garrison in the town,
that trenches being conveniently made by wonder labor round about within the
City, the inner parts of the City were deemed more fyrme and strong than the
very walls were before.

Whilst this City was beseeged, and valiant acts showed on both parts, many
things in the mean time diversely fell out.

The seven and twenty day of January, the Spanish navy was taken by the
Flisshiners, notwithstanding it escaped away again with great slaughter.

IN THE mean time the Prince of Orange labored by all means possible to
vittayle them of Harlem being oppressed with famine: The Prince of Orange
vittayleth Harlem.
and by due and convenient arrival from the bordering Cities there aboutes, as
from Leyden, and Delfe, and by the benefyte of the hard cold winter, the way
being frosen hard with Ise, he brought to pass that victuals were conveyed to
the townsmen.

In the beginning of March a new supply of Spanyardes to the number of five
ensigns, came into the Camp. The Flisshiners encountered happily at Ternese,
with the navy of the Duke of Alba.

THE Prince of Orange (according to the variable chance of war, or rather by
the manifold providence of the Lord of hosts) going about to succor them of
Harlem with ships, County Bossu the Kings Liefetenant of Hollande,
encountering with him and being of more force, took certain ships,
whereupon ensued a new slaughter upon the Prince of Oranges part, by the means
of them of Amsterdam.

ABOUT this time also the Reisters which were under the pay of the Duke of
Alba, taking with them the footebande with shot, made an inroade in the
territory of Leyden, robbing and spoiling the same, and carrying away a great
booty.

WITHIN few days after they of Harlem brake forth upon the kings army as
they were triumphing upon the success of their victories, and were celebrating
the feast of Easter, and slew a great many, and wounded many, and for the
good success hereof, they brake forth again the day following upon the
Duke of Alba his camp, and having slain certain and disturbed the camp,
they returned into the City again. But when they brake forth in the euenyng
of the same day, and came in the dead time of the night upon the Reisters
Camp, the Reisters were with fear so astonyed, having not yet breathed since
their late Conflictes, that leauyng their Tents, they betook them unto their
heels most cowardlye, they of Harlem following the chase and making a great
slaughter of their enemies. Notwithstanding the townsmen, having this success,
not mynding to assail the rest of the army, for that they saw them selves
unable to make their party good, retired into the City again.

THE Kings power, whereof the County Bossu was general, and the power of the
Prince of Orange striued who should be Lords of the Sea, whereupon diverse
conflictes were had between them, because the pre-eminence of the water might
either help or hinder the town of Harlem. Therefore the Orengians went about
to win the rampire, thereby to stop the intercourse and passage of
Amsterdam, by which vittayles were carried into the Duke of Alba his camp:
But the men of Amsterdam came forth and skirmished with the Orengians: and
behold as they were buckeling together, a great number of Rusticall laborers
were discovered.

The Orengians suspecting that the Spaniards were come, were discomfyted: and
so for fear leaving eight of their Ships in the power of the enemies, were
slain by heaps by them of Amsterdam, the rest cowardlye ran away.

Thus the other practice to aid the beseeged in Harlem, was made frustrate, ye
County Bossu defending that sea coast with the Spanish navy.

But when the Duke of Alba had supplied fresh soldiers in the room of such as
were slain, picking them out both from among the Reisters, A famine in Harlem.
and Burgundians, and also out of the old seruitours of the garrisons of the
low country: and the^ procuring a more strayt seege notwithstanding the
constante seeking of the Prince of Orange to succor, there came in the mean
time a sore famine upon them of Harlem, for it is a City both copious of it
self, and was also replenished with a garrison of soldiers.

The Prince of Orange being only busily occupied in delyuering of Harlem,
levied so great an army as he could out of Hollande and Zelande, minding to
break into the City, to help the besieged. The general of this army under
the Prince of Orange, was William Bronchorste Lord of Batte^burge. He came at
the last with his power to the duke of Alba his camp, and having slain at the
first onset ye rereward of the Reisters, encou^tred courageously with the rest
of the army: But the duke of Alba his part, taking unto the^ courage, so
defended them selves, that they did not only repulse the Orengians, but also
destroyed them with a great slaughter.

For it is said, that there were a thousand and five hundred slain: the
enemy having taken in the spoil fourtene ensigns, ten field pieces, and
thirty wagons. Also the Lord of Battemburge him self was slain.

THVS the Duke of Alba having a great victory, Harlem surrendered up to the
Duke of Alba.
followed more vehemently the siege of Harlem. Then they of Harlem being brought
to great distress, by the siege which dured eight months, and by the sore
famyne, yielded up the town upon evil conditions: as that they should submit
them selves to the will and pleasure of the conqueror.

And to the end the soldiers should not have the spoil and booty of the
city, he commanded two hundred and forty thousand crowns to be given unto
them. Then the Spaniardes showing all cruelty upon the townsmen, tormenting
them by all manner of means. The Duke of Alba commanded six hundred of the
soldiers to be hanged: Cruelty showed at Harle^.
three hundred were brought out of the city half naked, and cast into the
water: a sight most pitiful, and an act with barbarous cruelty most
detestable: seeing that the greatest part of victory consists in lenity
and mercy. This happened the eleventh day of July.

NOw to return to Rochell.

The Rochellians perseuered in their defense, notwithstanding that they were
now by no small occasion weakened. And, as the matter then seemed to require,
they committed the whole ordering and charge of the war, to certain approved
me^, namely to mons. Norma^, Riuier, Charle, Essarz, and Garguole: reserving
the name of authority and power to the Mayor, who notwithstanding did nothing
of him self, without the advice of the Senate.

THE same day the kings side prepared a fresh for the battery: the townsmen
with no less haughty courage of mind, discharged the thundering shot from the
fort l'Euangile, against the kings camp, to the great annoyance of the same.

The day following, the kings ordinance went off so thick, that the roaring
strokes thereof could scarce be numbered: and so held on all the next day. The
townsmen in the mean while by night left nothing undone, to repair and
fortify the breaches of their walls.

County d' Retz was stricken behind in the reins of the back with a
Calieuer shot, being come out of the covent of the Engynes.

The same night mons. Norma^ made an inroade, even unto the enemies trenche,
notwithstanding he was constrained to retire again into the city, with loss
of two of his men, beside those which were wounded. The day after he came again
to ye same place, purposing by overthrowing ye hardels of the enemy, to kill
many of the^: but he had like success as he had before

BUT for so much as we are to describe greater conflictes in this noble siege,
being such as our age has not seen, and so much the more noble, for that
after the final destruction as it were of the Religious, the wonderful
constancy of the Rochellians had most happy success, by the wonderful
goodness of God: we think it meet and convenient to our purpose, to speak
somewhat more largely, and particularly to show the exploytes and acts of
every day severally.

MARCH.
The sixtene day of March the kings part made baskets, over against the
bulwark l'Euangile, planting those pieces of ordinance which were in the fort
of Corceile (by which we said the passage into the haven from the sea was
stopte) between them. The townsmen fortify that part against the battery.

Mons. Fontene was chief captain of the watch and ward of the Mines commonly
called Cazemates, which were made in the dytch, serving to make eruptions, and
to repulse the enemy from the walls. He, taking with him ten of his
soldiers, came unto that part of the kings camp, which was near unto the
Lazerhouse, where he found twelve noble men sitting at supper, whom he slew,
notwithstanding that they promised him very large raunsomes to redeem their
life, and when he had done, returned in safety unto the city again. This
was done in the night of the same day.

The seuententh day was spent wholly in giving an assault. The day following,
when the kings camp went about by trenches and baskets to approach more near
unto the walls, there ensued a sore battle, the townsmen coming out of the
town to withstand the enemy.

The next day after, the townsmen came again to the same fortification, and
for all that the enemy could do, they ouerthrewe their baskets and burdels,
and tumbled great woolpackes full of wool into the ditch, and slaying at the
same place three score of them, chased the rest to the castle Palereau.
Palereau.
The same day at night certain shot of the kings camp, came into the trench
of the bulwark l'Euangile, and taking some of the townsmen unawares slew them.

The twenty day, the battery was begone again with forty three great pieces,
which were planted in several places: notwithstanding the walls of the city
were not much impaired: the roofes of houses in diverse places were pulled
down, whereat many a vain shot was discharged. There were told the same day a
thousand and five hundred strokes.

The two and twenty day, a new assault was intended to be given, about three
of the clock in the afternoon: but because the town began to discharge
against them, whereby many of the Kings camp were slain, they stayed their
former purpose, and encountered the town with main shot, until six of the
clock in the evening.

It was told the townsmen, that the enemy had determined the same day to
win the tower, which stood between the gate Rambalde, and the Bulwark l'
Euangile: and the treasons of the city were feared. Therefore the townsmen
prepared them selves for defense, appoynting in diverse necessary places watch
and ward.

All this while the townsmen took great pains in making bulwarks in the city
of earth, compact with turffes and stakes to bind the same.

One of the kings mines was overwhelmed, to the great spoil of the pioners.
That night there was in the city a great earthquake, An earthquake.
the which some say, was the cause of the ouerturning of the said mine, but in
my judgment it is unlikely. From the last day of February, unto the six and
twenty of this month, there were told twelve thousand and seven hundred
strokes of the kings gunnes.

The same day by the commandemente of the Mayor, one Chale, whose name was
famous in Rochell, and whom we reckoned before among the captains of the
war, went out of the city, for that the Rochellians had him in suspicion,
and so came unto the kings camp.

The day following, the townsmen made an eruption upon a troop of horsemen,
which they discovered to stand at Tadon: and after a skyrmishe, by which both
parts sustained loss, they retired.

The eight and twenty day of March, the whole army of the king was set in
battle array, even as if they would have given an assault to the gate of
Cogne, and to the bulwark l'Euangile. Notwithstanding, after they had for the
space of one hour discharged shot one against the other, with the loss and
hurt of both parts, they sounded the retraycte. About six of the clock in
the evening the kings camp returned again, and placing a troop at Sannicolas
gate, the rest stood in battle array at Cogne gate.

Their purpose was to take the Cazemates, which were in the dytche. And for
this cause forty of the kings soldiers went down into the dytche,
notwythstanding, they were so repulsed by the townsmen, that many of the kings
camp fell into the ditch. In the mean time the great gunnes thundered both
from the town, and also out of the kings camp: from which forty shot were
discharged.

The day following was spent only in giving an assault. But the next day after
that there was a sore battle fought between the Rochellians and the kings
camp. The cause of the battle was this. Three soldiers went out of the
town, and set upon the first watch of the kings camp. Then the whole camp
armed themselves. By and by there came out of the town others to rescue the
first: whereupon the enemy came on by heaps, upon whom the Caliuer shot came
as thick as hail: and such a tempest of great shot drove against the
threesquare battle, which was set in array wedgewise to pearce into their
enemies, that of the forefront of the same, five with targettes were slain,
and after them many other soldiers. There appeared at Tadon certain horsemen,
at the first but few in number, to allure the townsmen to battle: but when
they saw that none would come forth to encounter with them, a greater number
discovered themselves: over whom County Luden was general. These horsemen
being within the leuel of Sannicolas tower were a fair mark: so that their
horses and they themselves were overthrown and slain in great number with the
violent shot of the same.

About the evening the kings side to requite the late sustained loss, slew
with their great Gunnes certain Soldiers and Captains.

The next day the kings scoutewatche was hanged by the decree of the
Rochellians: who was said to bewray and disclose the secrets of the
townsmen. The same day two soldiers fled from the kings camp to Rochel. The
kings camp in the Evening changed their accustomed manner of watch: and shot
off twelve great pieces against the townsmen.

The day following which was the first day of April, April.
the townsmen in the dead time of the night shot off a piece of ordinance,
which in the day time they had leuelled and bent against the tents which were
pytched beside Palercau, by the which many sleeping upon their couches were
slain. Whereupon the kings camp discharged incontinent at them again a
great peale, by which two of the Captains belonging to the town were slain.
The same day Captain Dange fled from the kings camp to Rochel.

IN the kings camp, by reason of the great multitude of soldiers in the same,
and the penury of the country therabout, vittayles were so dear, that the
soldiers privily stale away: and the horsemen and noble men, which upon their
own charge mainteyned war, for that prouender was scarce and hard to be
gotten, went home to their houses. Upon this contempt and negligence of warlyke
order and provision, insued also in the camp great sickness, insomuch that
within few days, the sickness destroyed more than the sword had done. The
forragers of corn were constrained to carry provision from Paris, and from the
places theraboutes: but, notwithstanding that the king gave strayt
commandment in this behalf, it profited little. The king also in this
backsliding of the noble men, gave strayte charge to restrain the same: but in
vain. Thus whiles delays of this siege were made, the kings camp was brought
into great extremity: and all men thought that the Duke of Anjou should have
been constrained to raise and dissolve the siege, The extremity of the kings
camp.
without his purpose. Whereupon the king wrote unto his brother, willing him to
make speed in assaulting the town: and to win the same out of hand, or
else to raise the siege. For by this time the Duke of Anjou had spent five
Months. Therefore he appointed the sixth day of April to give an assault, on
the which day the whole army assailed the town.

THE seventh day, about five of the clock in the morning, the kings camp
began a fresh to batter with greater violence than they had done, before the
gate Cogne, and the Bulwark l'Euangile. Thus after long battery, that part of
ye wall was beaten down to the ground, The Cazemates taken and forsaken again.
and the greatest part of the bulwark l'Euangile battered down. Therefore the
kings army prepared themselves to enter the breach. Who took out of every
band only twenty: and first of all, the forefront took two of the Cazemates
from the townsmen: which notwithstanding they enjoyed but few hours. For the
townsmen lustily discharged their great Gunnes against them, whereby they
slew many of the kings soldiers: and when they of the town had made a new
supply of men, they constrained their enemies to forsake their Cazemates: an
act verily at the first assault very manly and valiant.

In the mean time, about the same hour the kings army gave an assault on the
other part at the bulwark l'Euangile, and setting unto the same a bridge made
with proppes and shores, they took some part of the same: then to this part
they came running by heaps, having two hundred Corslettes bearing shields and
targets before them. At the same moment also the great Gunnes went off as
thick as possible they might against the town, and the townsmen sustained
great loss and damage. For the accounte being made, it is said that there
were heard the same day two thousand and five hundred blows of great Gunnes.
The townsmen valiantly put forth themselves for their defense against their
assayling enemies. The women courageously threw also upon them fiery hoopes,
pitch barrels burning, and balls of fire, and such kind of fireworke, by
which they did greatly anoy them.

Thus the enemies preuayling nothing at all were repulsed. Of the townsmen
there were threescore slain, and certain chief Captains also, and many
wounded. And of the kings side (as has appeared by their own writings and
report) there were above three hundred slain, and many wounded. Among the
noble men were wounded the Duke of Niuern, the Marquis of Neme one of the Duke
of Guises brethren, and M. d'Gast, of Daulphine, which was in great favor with
ye duke of Anjou.

The day following about eight of the clock, the kings army gave another
assault to the town: notwithstanding the townsmen repulsed them with like
courage as they had done before, and with the same success. Also they
preferring themselves to give the like assault about five of the clock in the
afternoon, the townsmen being in like manner ready to receive them, left off
their enterprise.

A sign in the air.
The same night there was manifestly seen in the air a great fire, which had
the form and similitude of a Dragon, which fell into the sea in the sight of
many.

Smoke made in the City.
The townsmen to the end they might have liberty to mend and repair their
walls, made a smoke so thick and dark, that the whole camp was enclosed as
it were with a cloud. In the mean time there were thrown out of the City
in plentiful wise such fire works as we named before, to the great horror
and fear of the besiegers, as they themselves report.

The next day, the kings army stood in battle array, even as if they would
have given an assault: notwithstanding the Rochellians being ready to receive
them, they stayed from their purpose. In the mean time there were discharged
from the kings fortifications fourscore shot of great Gunnes. In the evening
the enemies made a great shoute and cry in the camp of purpose, as if they
had been oppressed with some enemy (which we call a false Alarm) thereby to
entice forth the townsmen.

The tenth day, about four of the clock in the morning, the enemy stood
arrayed in diverse pearcing battayles. Which was a sign of an intended assault.
Whereupon all the townsmen prepared for their defense, women also were
appointed to their charge, yea children were not idle: About six of the
clock, the kings power with great violence assailed the bulwark l'Euangile.
And on the other part many of the enemies were discovered to scale the gate
Moline.

At Tadon County Luden being with his band, was also come to the tower of
Moline: notwithstanding he was soon repulsed thence by the whotte and fearce
shot of the great Gunnes discharged by the town. Ladders were set to the
walls, The scaling ladders are overthrown.
and the townsmen in the mean time making no resistance, they climb them:
but when many of them were come to the top of the Ladders, and the said
Ladders fully replenished, by and by those townsmen which before lay hid,
discovered themselves, being prepared with spears and long poales, and
overthrew their ladders with so violent an assault, that even with one force,
as it were, they being repulsed, the troops which abode at the lower part of
the walls were made afearde with the great noise and cry of those that fell:
and being put to flight with the great plenty of shot, ran away like mad
men, and cast themselves headlong into the Marshes for fear.

Then incontinently the women went forth with spits and shouels, and such like
apt weapons belonging to women's war, The victory gotten by women.
with the which they laid at those whom they found overthrown, and easily
slew them, and carried away the spoil, no man resisting him. On the other part,
the townsmen no less valiantly behaved themselves in fight at the Bulwark
l'Euangile, insomuch that the showering Gunshot never missed the heads of the
Catholics, who were also much annoyed with fireworkes cast out of the town
upon them. Therefore the kings side was constrained to retire, above three
hundred soldiers of his being lost at that charge.

The next day after the Catholics fortefyed with a rampire that part of the
Bulwark l'Euangile, which they had taken: and when they had set themselves in
battle array making a show as if they would have given a new charge, they
departed without any enterprise, perceiving that the townsmen prepared
themselves for their defense.

They made also a mine for that bulwark: and made a rampire over against the
same to anoy the townesme^: for ye which the townsmen provided in making a
cou^termine with a gate to the same conveniently, belonging for sudden
eruptions.

About six of the clock in the evening the Rochellians cried Alarm upon this
occasion: A certain woman, which was gone down into a certain Wineseller to
draw wine, heard the voice of a man speaking: By which she thought that the
enemies had made their mines so far: and therefore cried out. The people at
this cry armed themselves. But after inquiry made of the matter, it was
found out that certain of the townsmen, by the commandment of the Mayor,
were searchyng for the conducte pypes which served the town with water.

The same day great stoare of corn, and great plenty of munition for war
was brought into the kings camp.

The day followyng, another part of the bulwark l'Euangile which remained of
the former breach, was beaten down by a violent battery: by the fall whereof
many both of the Townsmen and also of the Catholics, were slain, and with
them a certain Captain which had conducted a band of soldiers to that
part to give an assault.

The next day there was nothing done worthy to be spoken of, saving that the
townsmen castyng fire into the ditche burnt certain soldiers and pioners.
The same day the townsmen brake forth at the Casemates belongyng to the
bulwark l'Euangile, and slew many of the kings soldiers, and brought their
armor into the City. On the other part the great gunnes went off from the
town against the kings fortes, whereby many of the Catholics were slain.

The nientene day ships were discryed in the sea appoinpoynted and prepared
for war: Mongomeries navy within sight of Rochel.
the which road at anchor within a mile of Rochel haven called Chef-de bois.
By and by the Kings navy was prepared: and out of the kings army bands of
soldiers were appointed to defend the coaste: and others to furnishe the
ships: and strayte way a notable peale of thunderyng shot was rung between
them.

This night at the commandment of the Rochellians, a Captain went forth
with one ship, and notwithstanding that the enemy resisted, he came in
safety unto the Navy of Mongomerie, of whom they received a sign that aid
was come to them of Rochel. Notwithstanding those ships were divided in the
morning. So the Catholics returned into the camp. About the euenyng there
came a messenger, which told that those ships were not far off.

Whereas the townsmen went about with great diligence to repair the breach
and ruin of the bulwark l'Euangile, the Catholics sought to beat it down
with shot. Two of the kings army fled to the gate d'Molines to the townsmen
notwithstanding the showers of shot which were discharged after them.

The townsmen made a countermine, against that mine which the catholics had
made for the bulwark l'Euangile. To this they set fire, but because there was
not sufficient store of gunpowder in the same, their labor was lost.

The next day a new charge was given. The same day there came unto Cogne,
Monsieur Oars, and Rolli, to speak with the Mayor in the Duke of Anjou his
name. The cause of this parley was, that ways might be taken for peace. To
the kings Ambassadors came the Mayor, Nortius the Pastor of the Church, and
Monsieur Essarz, and diverse others: and when they had spente certain hours in
communication together, they returned into the City. About eight of the clock
the Catholics blewe up the mine which they had made at the bulwark
l'Euangile. The earth falling ouerthwartly slew many of the Catholics, and
fiftene of the townsmen. At this tumulte all the whole city was armed: but not
one of the Catholics appeared.

The day followyng, a fresh assault was given, that the pioners which made a
mine, by the noise of the gunnes might not be perceived of the townsmen.

The next day the same Ambassadors came again about the treaty of peace:
when as notwithstanding their fellows persisted no less vehement than they
did before in giving the assault.

In the dead time of the night of the same day, a piercyng battle of the
Catholics, being conducted by skillful and valiant captains wanne the
ditche: notwithstanding they were constrained to retire with great loss of
their men. Then began the great gunnes to thunder.

The twentieth day, there was a sore charge given against the bulwark
l'Euangile by the Catholics: And even in the midst of the fight, fire was
put into the mine, the which the Townsmen foreseeing, avoided the danger
thereof, and beguyled the enemy. They fought for the space of five hours
without stay or retraite. Fifteen of the Townsmen only were slain, and
thirty hurt: but very many Catholics were lost, who sustained great
damage by the townsmen at the draw bridge, out of the Casemates.

The last day the townsmen made an inroade to the forts of the Catholics, and
slew many of them: and then with loss of some of their men, returned into the
city again. The Rochellians send their requests concerning the peace to the
duke of Anjou.

May.
The first day of May, the townsmen set up upon the walls green boughs, in
token of joy, and sang Psalms unto God, playing with cornets and trumpets, and
joining thereto the noise of Gunnes. In the night they burnt up the greatest
part of the draw bridge.

The next day Monsieur Oars brought the kings answer from the Duke of Anjou to
the Rochellians concerning their demands. In the night followyng, the
townsmen brake out of their countermine into the Catholics mine, and dryuing
from thence the Catholics, and placyng watch and ward there, they overthrew
the same.

The two next days were spente with two fortunate eruptions, and with taking
consultation concerning the kings answer: Every townesman without exception,
had leave to come to this consultation: and the day and place of meeting was
appointed.

The fourth day of this month, the Navy spoken of before, was more plainly
to be seen, at the sight whereof, the Catholics without delay armed
themselves. For it was County Mongomerie with fifty sail great and small.
And thus it fared with Mongomerie. Mongomerie coming into England, labored
by all means to obtain aid at the hands of Elizabeth the Queens majesty
of England. The which her Majesty denied, because of the league which she
had made with the king. Therefore Mongomerie took an other way, getting into
his hands partly by loan, and partly by gift, of English, Frenchemen, and the
low countrymen of Flaunders forty thousand frankes: and got leave of the
Queens majesty to furnishe a navy so well as he could. Thus after long
travail he furnished fifty ships. But occasion fell out, which delayed for
a time that expedition and preparation. The Earl of Worcester a noble man of
England went into France in the Queens name, to baptize the new borne
daughter of the French king, and to be one of the sureties or witnesses for ye
said child in her highness name. In this passage certain Frenchmen and Flemings
set upon him, taking from him one of his ships, and killing certain of his
men. Her highness taking displeasure hereat, commanded the matter to be
enquired after: for the which inquisition she sent the Lord Admiral, who
setting upon all the ships of the Frenchmen and Flemings, took and carried
away whatsoever came to his hands. So that twenty of Mongomeries ships were
lost. So he came to the coast of Rochell with twenty ships of his navy
diminished. When he saw the kings navy prepared, and new ships also to be
furnished with other soldiers, he durst not proceed in this enterprise:
wherefore without assayling his enemies, he directed his course an other way,
and unlooked for at Bell'Isle, and there landed, and took both the Isle and the
castle. The Rochellians perceiving that Mongomerie was departed, and therefore
being without hope of aid, fortifyed the haven all that they could with new
garrisons. Notwithstanding before Mongomeries departure, they sent out one unto
him in a skyffe, wylling him not to put himself in peril for their sakes: for
they trusted yet in the goodness of GOD, and were of that mind, that they
would rather suffer any manner of extremity, than to yield themselves into the
hands of such men as were full of all treason, falsehood, and perjury. After
the which message Mongomerie sent a ship unto the City with goonpouder and
victual, which came safely into Rochell, notwithstanding the kings force. And
after this (as we said) Mongomerie took a new viage.

After he had tarried in the foresaid Island certain days, and knew not well
which way to take, his soldiers also being obstinate and disobedient, returned
into England, having lost his travail, with a few ships, the rest being
left upon the sea to rob and spoil, one of the which (whereof Monsieur
Hippinnill was captain) went to the enemy.

To fortify the siege of Rochel there came into the kings camp the fifth day
of May four thousand Switzers. Therefore certain days following were spent in
skyrmishes, loss of men being sustained on both parts. And amongst the
chieftaines that were slain, Mons. Cossine slain.
Monsieur Cossine captain of the kings guard, being one of those which slew
the Admiral, was one.

CERTAIN Catholics got up unlooked for upon the bulwark l'Euangile, and
took the watch of the same, the warders being a sleep, The forte l'Euangile
almost won.
some of the which they slew. Whereupon if the townsmen had not succored them in
time, and resisted the other, or if a greater number of the Catholics had
been present, the city had been in great danger.

The next day the townsmen gave a worthy charge upon the Catholics of whom
they slew many. There brake out of the city five hundred at Cogne gate, and
charged the enemy being entrenched and suspecting no such thing, by reason
whereof they slew many of them, and put the rest to flight, and choked three of
their great gunnes by driuyng into them cross bars of iron. As they were
thus occupied, there came succors from the kings camp: and then began a sore
skirmish. Notwithstanding the townsmen brought with them into the city eight
of the catholics Ensigns, and great plenty of armor and apparel:

There were slain in this skyrmish two hundred catholics, or thereabouts, and
twenty only of the townsmen were wanting. The townsmen with great triu^phe set
up on their walls those Ensigns which they had taken from their enemies.

The six and twenty day of this month the Catholics began a new battery,
after the which they give a fresh assault to the town, being the most
notable of all the rest that happened in this siege. The coming of the
Switzers was the cause of this assault: who craved leave of the Duke of Anjou
that they might give an assault to the city, thereby to declare their love
toward the king.

Therefore al their bands set themselves in battle array between the well and
le Rouse, about seven of the clock. The which they of Cogne perceiving,
discharged five great pieces, the shot whereof fell among the thickest of them,
to their great damage. Therefore they shyfted their standing. Also other bands
of the Catholics were set in battle array in diverse places, eue^ as if they
would give an assault. In the mean time the great gunnes went off lustely on
either part. But the greatest hope of the Catholics rested in their mines,
which were made in three several places. The first mine having fire given unto
it, did small hurt, making a breach no bigger than for two men to enter at:
which breach the townsmen stopte with great diligence. Strait after the
second was blown up with great force: and the third made a great noise
ouerthrowyng a great part of the wall: notwithstanding so that the rubbell and
matter of the wall fell into the town: by the convenient falling whereof the
passage into the City was stopte against the Catholics. The Duke of Anjou
was present himself, that by his presence he might encourage the soldiers. And
the first onset was given by Mons. d'Gaste: but the townsme^ so received him,
that he was constrained to retire with great loss of his men. After him
followed Mons. d'Goaz, who with his band entering the breach with a violent
charge, at the first enforced the Rochellians to give back: but yet they
persisted so valiantly in fight, that they slew Mons. Goaz, and diverse other
chief captains and soldiers, and caused the rest to retire. Then came the
third band, who gave the third assault with like success as the other had
done. During these assaults, the women took such great pains in castyng
down fire works in such abundant manner, that they deserve a great part of
the praise of that victory. And by the miste of a certain smoke which ye
townsmen made of purpose, they fought with small loss of me^, the number being
forty only. But of the Catholics, there were above four hundred slain,
most of the which were captains, and soldiers of great skill, which fought in
the forefront. At Tadon also the townsmen had as happy success in their
fight against the Catholics at the time, as they had before, going now about
to win the City by scaling the walls at that part. The walls of the town
were shyning bright with the flame of the burning fyrebrandes which lay in the
ditches.

The next day the townsmen to scorn the enemy, armed their scullyons and
slaves, and brought them forth at Cogne gate, with naked swords in triumphant
wise in their hands. The Catholics armed themselves: and they straight way
retire into the City: the townsmen in the mean time calling the Switzers to
battle in dirision.

The Catholics put into ye ditches certain gunnes, to shake down the
Casemates: but in vain. By the commandment of the Mayor threescore men, and
women, and children of the rascal sort of people, were brought out of the
City. The Rochellians were solicited to peace, Letters concerning peace.
a Harault being sent unto them with letters of certain of their familiar
friends which were in the kings camp. In fine, the kings singular good will to
be at peace with them, was declared: they were also exhorted not to deprive
them and theyrs of so good an occasion of peace. The townsmen went forth to
displace the fortes which were made over against the gate of Sannicolas,
whereupon ensued a great tempest of shot as thick as hayle, to the annoyance
of both parts.

June.
The day following, which was the first of June, four townsmen making those
afearde which lay in the next trenches, and thought no doubt that there had
been a greater number, and putting them to flight, no man making resistance,
overthrew their baskets and bulwarks.

There entered into ye City two Soldiers with letters from Mongomerie: in the
which he gave them to understand that he was constrained to return into
England, to bring a greater power, with the which he would shortly come unto
them: Letters of Mongomerie to the Rochellians.
Encouraging them to go forward in the same constancy, in the which they
had by the goodness of God continued until that day.

The Catholics fortifyed the trench which was at the bulwark l'Euangile, and
that part allo which was somewhat nearer to Sannicolas. A certain Soldier
craving leave of the Mayor to go forth of the City, under pretense to assail
the enemy, fled into the kings camp. The Casemates were daily assaulted, but
in vain.

BUT the townsmen were not only urged with external enemies, but also with
domestical and inward extremities. Many were weary of the war: and many
feared the famine, by which the townsmen feared great destruction. Diverse
men diversely communed together, mislyking all that they could of those
extremities: there were many of the rycher sort which were grieved for the
wasting and loss of their goods: insomuche that by all manner of means they
desired peace. Therefore they withstoode the whole assembly. And certain also
had determined to take the gate, and to go out of the same. For this cause
certain of the wellbyer sort by the decree of the Senate, were put in prison.
As yet the penury of corn did not grieve the townsmen, and yet
notwithstanding their store was greatly diminished, which they feared daily
more and more. But the Rochellians had store of Saltfishe and wine. And it is
wonderful which certain honest and credible persons do report, which were at
that siege, how that a certain kind of fish came into the haven in such
plentiful manner, contrary to their woonted custom, A new kind of fish in
the time of the siege came to Rochel.
that the poorer sort used to eat them in stead of bread, and that the same
plenty went away almost the same day, when the kings army departed upon the
conclusion of peace. On the contrary part, no less extremities urged the king,
as the scarcity of money, and the impaciencie of the nobles, which were
weary of the war, could by no means be restrained. And the king was unable
to hemme in or enclose the town of Rochel, the same being so large and
populous, and the sea coast being so near unto the same. Therefore both parts
were fully determined to conclude a peace. And to further this matter the, Duke
of Anjou, had joyful and acceptable news concerning the kingdom of Polonia.
Duke of Aniou chosen king of Polonia.
For the Duke of Anjou, by the means of the nobles of Polonia, was made king
of Polonia, in the place of Sigismond, the former king of the same.

MONLVCE Bishop of Valence, had solicited the matter to the noble men of
Polonia with great diligence, and with golden sermons: the which also he
caused to be put in print, thereby seeking to win unto his master a kingdom.

A great scruple and doubt was objected about the murders of Paris, the causes
whereof by open rumors were laid upon the Duke of Anjou. Notwithstanding
Monluce so ordered the matter, that in the name of the Duke of Anjou, he
persuaded the states of Polonia: Concerning the success of the which election
we will speak in another place.

Occasion of peace.
This therefore was a special occasion to raise the siege. All this while the
Catholics came oftentimes to Cogne gate to entreat for a peace.

Amidst these communications of peace, the City was very near intercepted,
through the great security of the townsmen. For a hundred Catholics with
Ladders clymed up to the top of the walls, and took a view of their
Fortes: the which being discovered, the townsmen cried Alarm, and with
speedy dispatch they were repulsed and put to flight: but fiftene of them were
slain by falling from the walls into the City.

For joy of the news of Polonia, there were triumphant shouts, and thundering
peale of great gunnes, both in the kings camp, and also in the navy. There
fell down twenty cubits of the walls at this peale. To the ruin and
breach whereof the townsmen ran out of hand, suspecting that the enemy
was come, and stood armed in a readiness for certain hours.

After long contentions it was at the last agreed between the kings army and
the Rochellians, that the said Rochellians should go and submit themselves to
the Duke of Anjou, and desire peace of him. Whereupon the Rochellians received
in the name of the Duke of Anjou assurance of truce, and were cleared of the
name of Rebels, with the which before time they were called: the Rochellians
complaining of the same unto the messengers that were sent unto them.

The same day the duke of Anjou went down into a mine. A soldier knew him,
who by and by discharged at him his piece: The Duke of Aniou is in peril of his
life.
with the shot whereof he slew a noble man which stood hard by him: and some
of the hail shot ran through the ruff of the shirtband of the duke of Anjou,
and yet he had no harm: but not without great peril of his life.

The Rochellians had intelligence given them that treason was a working against
them under the color of a parley, whereby they were admonished to look
diligently about the^, and to be in a readiness. Notwithstanding the
Ambassadors of peace come at the day appointed, and by common consent truce is
taken: the which notwithstanding was not observed, the townsmen complaining
that the kings soldiers had taken a view of their ditch to their damage. So
that the truce being broken, a fresh battle began between them, Truce broken.
wherein seven of the kings side were slain, and of the townsmen, one young
man. About the Evening, by the Majors commandment, all the Citizens and other
townsmen which were there present, were called together to hear the principal
points and conditions of the kings peace.

There came into the kings camp Ambassadors from Polonia, for the joy of whose
coming, many peales of great gunnes were shot off. mons. l'Noe returned to
the parley with the townsmen in the name of the Duke of Anjou, the kings
ordinance shooting off in the mean time. Shot also was discharged from the sea
coast into the City: and at a window a nurse with a young infant was slain.

The Ambassadors concerning the peace making, returned again. But the purpose
of the Catholics was in time of the parley to blow up a mine. This the
townsmen understood: whereupon all men at the Majors commandment were
ready in armor. Therefore they determined to defer the matter until the
parley were ended. They had great hope to prevail in the breaking up of the
mine. About the Evening fire was set to the mine, the which being blown up,
ouerthrewe the wall, notwithstanding to such advantage for the townsmen, that
the enemy could not so easily enter as before he might have done: also one of
the kings great Gunnes fell into the ditche. In the mean time the ordinance
in the ships upon the sea coast were not unoccupied.

Peace concluded between the king and the^ of Rochel.
The cause of another parley was, for that the Rochellians said that they had
not their own cause alone in hand, but the cause of other of their brethren
also: requyring that they which had borne armor for the same cause, might be
provided for by the same benefit of the Edict.

They of Nisme, and of Montauban, and others which had taken their part, were
easily admitted to the same benefit. But at the first the Duke of Anjou
excluded them of Sanserre, and Daulphine. He greatly withstood the Sanserreans,
whom he thought might easily be overcome, being far set and separated from
the help of their fellows. About that time the rising of them of Daulphine
having Mombrune and other noble men their captains, was very weak and of
small power. Notwithstanding he promised that he would have consideration of
them both, and that they should be partakers of the same benefit with the
Rochellians. Nevertheless in the Edicte it self, of the which we will make
mention anon, he speaks nothing at all of them, notwithstanding the condition
of the Rochellians. This also was the kings drift, namely that by private
Covenants and agreements, he might divide the religious one from another.
Therefore he thought it good to take peace with the Rochellians, to shune the
reproach of the foil, as though by constraynt he had raised his siege. Also
the presence of the Ambassadors of Polonia urged him, before whom he thought it
not convenient for his dignity to sustain so great dishonor: and therefore he
provided for the same by a special remedy: least with shame, his army should
be constrained to depart after so long a siege: specially such honorable and
famous personages of a strange country being present. The Duke of Anjou said,
that both at their instance, and also at the intercession of the Rochellians,
he forgave much. The Rochellians both earnestly desired to be delivered from
the extreme troubles of the long siege, and also were very careful for that
which should follow afterward. Therefore at the last they concluded with the
Duke of Anjou. The covenants whereof ye shall hear anon.

THE Duke of Anjou sends to the King, the agreement made with the
Rochellians, that he might confirm the same by his authority, and might cause
it to be drawn in form of an Edict. In the mean while, truce was taken for
six days. The townsmen come into the kings camp, bring wine unto his
soldiers, and receive meat and other food of them again: they saluted also
and talked friendly one with another. Notwtstanding, watch and ward was kept
diligently within the city, and to awake those which were secure upon trust of
a large peace, a tumult was raised of purpose by captain Norman, even as if
the enemy had bin come. At the last the kings forts and bulwarks were
overthrown: and the great gunnes carried away. The townsmen also for joy made
bonfiers in diverse places of the town: and certain noble men had free leave
to go from the kings camp, and to enter into the city.

The tenth day of June monsieur Biron, having certain Heraldes of Arms
attending upon him, The Edict proclaimed.
entered into the city: and in every corner and principal streate of the town,
proclaimed the Edict of peace in the kings name. The same day Ships laden
with Wheat, and other victual came into the haven, with the scarsitie and
penury whereof, the Rochellians began now to be urged.

The tenure of the Edict now follows, as it was set down and signed by the
King.

The Edict of peace, made the.11. of August An. 1573
CHARLES by the grace of God, king of France to all present, or to come,
greeting.

Our intent has always been, and is, after the example of our predecessors,
to rule and govern our realm, and to receive of our subjects their obeisance
to us due, rather by gentle and by loving manner, than by force. Wherefore our
most dear and well-beloved brother the King of Polonia, having full
understanding of our will and pleasure, has appointed and deputed certain of
the chief personages of our privy counsel being with him, to hear and
understand, the complayntes, griefs, and supplycations, of the Mayor,
Sheriffs, and Counselors, dwellers, and inhabitants of our town of Rochel,
Gentlemen and others that are there abiding. And for as much as it is so, that
now in the end, our most dear brother the said king of Polonia, according to
our pleasure and good will, has (by the advice of our most dear and
well-beloved brethren the Duke of Alencon, and King of Navarre, and our most
dear and well-beloved cousins, the Prince of Conde, and Prince Dauphine: the
Dukes of Langueuille, of Guise, Neuers, and of Vzes: the Lord of Monluce,
Count of Retz, of Biron, of Villequier, of the chapel Auxursins, of Losses,
of Vanguion, of S. Supplice, of Malicorne, of Suze, the graund* Prior of
Champaigne, and other great and notable personages being with him) made
agreement with the said inhabitants of Rochel, Gentlemen and others retired
thither, upon the points and articles that shall be hereafter specified, as
well for them selves, as for the inhabitants of our towns of Montaubane and
Nismes, the gentlemen and others retired unto the^, and others our subjects,
for whom they have made suit.

We let you understand, that, considering we cannot do better, than to follow
the counsel which is given us by our said brethren, and others aforesaid, who
for the zeal they have to the honor of God, with the experience they have in
many things, and the affection they bear toward the well ordering of our
affairs, have more knowledge than any other in those matters, what is meet
and necessary for the profit and commodity of our realm. We by the advice
and counsel of ye Queen our most honorable lady and mother, and our privy
counsel, for ye matters and causes aforesaid, and for other good and great
considerations thereunto specially moving us, have said, declared, decreed and
ordained by this our present Edict: and our will and pleasure is as follows.

FIRST, that the remembrance of all things that have happened, by occasion of the
troubles and styrs in our said realm, since the.24. of August, in Anno
MDLXXII, shall remain wholly quenched and appeased, as things that had never
happened: neither shall it be lawful or permitted to any of our Atturneys
general, or any other person either public or private, in what time so ever,
or for what occasion so ever it be, to make any mention there, nor any process
or suit thereupon, in any court or jurisdiction.





Rochel, Montauba^ and Nismes, to live and remain in rest, we have permitted,
and do permit unto them, the free exercise of the religion, called Reformed,
within ye said towns, the same to cause to be exercised wtin their own houses,
or place to them appertayning (except always public places) for the^, their
families and others that will be there present.









place soever they shall resort unto, be it within or without the Realm, so
that it be not in the lands of such Princes, with whom we may have wars.

Rochel, Mountaban, and Nismes, and other before named, shall remain quit and
discharged of all sums of money, goods, deptes, arrerages of rents, profits
and revenues of Ecclesiastical persons, and others which they shall
sufficiently make apparent to have bin by them taken or levied, since the
said. 24. of August, so that neither they nor their committies, nor those that
have fournished them with any thing, or delivered the same unto them, shall any
ways be charged nor condemned therefore at this present, nor for the time
past, nor at any time hereafter.



than those which are above to them permitted, and that without Arms, upon
pain to be rigorously punished, as co^temners of our commandments and
ordinances.





Rochell, Montauban, and Nismes, since the said.24. of August last past: which
have bin given without hearing the parties, or their Proctors by them
appointed, since the said.24. of August last past, also the execution of the
same, as well in caces civil as criminal shall be void, revoked and adnulled.
And the processes shall remayn in ye same estate as they were before, and the
foresaid persons shall enter again upon their temporal goods, whatsoever
seysures, sales, and judgments have bin made by us or otherwise, without
making any recompense for the same.



Rochel and Nismes, as well partayning to the Crown as others, of what
religion soever they be, yt have bin put out thereof, by reason of the same
Religion, and of these present troubles, shall be set again in their estates,
charges, and offices, and other officers of other towns and places shall
observe our declarations thereupon made and published.

Toulouse) in respect of those of Mountauban: and in the mean time they shall
not be constrained to appear personally.

Rochel, Mountauban, and Nismes, yt they shall enjoy their privileges, both
ancient and lately granted, and their authorities of jurisdiction and other
rites, in which they shall be mainteyned and preserved, without having any
garrison, neither shall be made there any castles, fortes, or Citadels without
the consent of the inhabitants of the same towns. Who for a demonstration and
surety of their obeisance, observation and mainteyning of our will and
intention, shall deliver for the space of two years, four of ye principal
burgeses and inahbitants of each of ye said towns, being of ye said Religion
called reformed, ye which shall be by us chose^ out of those yt they shall name
unto us, and those to be changed every three months, or in such other time as
shall seem good unto us, and they shall be put in such Towns and places as
shall please us to appoint within fyftie miles off at the farthest from the
said Towns, except in our Towns of Paris and Toulouse. And to the end there
be no occasion of complaynt or suspicion, we will set in ye said Towns for
governors, good men and well affectioned to our service, such as shall be
unsuspected, willing nevertheless, that the keeping of their Towns, Towers
and Fortresses, shall remain in the hands of the said inhabitants, according
to their ancient Privileges.

Polonia. We do ordeyne that the forces as well by land as by Sea, shall be
withdrawn from before the said Towns, the Fortes made as well of the one part
as of the other, shall be raced and overthrown: the free traffic and
passages shall be open again in all the Towns, Burrowes and Villages, Bridges
and passages of our said Realm: the Forces and Garrisons which have bin
placed by occasion of these present troubles (since the said.24. of August) in
Towns and other places, houses and Castles, apperteyning to our subjects of
what religion so ever they be, shall depart incontinent, to leave unto them
free and entire enjoying as they had before they were dispossessed of them.

and restore them to the owners, for the price which they paid.









We also charge all our well-beloved and faithful people holding our Courts of
Parliamente, Chambers of our accounts, Courts of Assistance, Bayliffes,
Seneshals, Prouostes, and other our Justices and officers to whom it shall
appertain or their Lieutenants, that they cause this our present Edict and
Ordinance to be read, published, and registered in their Courts and
Jurisdictions, and to keep, maynteyne, and inuiolably to observe the same in
all points: and that all those to whom it shall appertain, may enjoy, and
fully and peasibly use the content thereof. Ceassing and causing to be ceased
all troubles and empeachments to the contrary, for such is our pleasure. In
witness hereof, we have signed these presents with our own hand, and to the
end it may remain a thing sure and stable for ever, we have to the same
caused to be set our Seal.

Given at our Castle of Bollogne, in the Month of July, in the year of grace.
1573. and of our reign the thirtenth. Signed, CHARLES.
And more lower was written, By the King being in his Counsel. Signed,
DENEVF-VILLE.
And sealed with a Labell of red and green silk, and with green wax, with
the great Seal.

Read, published, registered, and the kings Attorney general being thereupon
heard, at Paris in Parliament, the.11. of August. 1573. Signed, DE HEVEZ.
Collation made with the original. Thus signed, DE HEVEZ.




THIS was the end and success of the war of Rochell, at what time the kings
power being complete, and they of the Religion of small force, and as it were
utterly vanquished, there seemed to be a perfect victory and conquest offered:
the which if it had come to pass (as by Gods wonderful providence it fell out
otherwise) according to the kings will, there would have bin no less
outrageous murders committed in all parts of the Realm, to destroy those that
remained of the Religion, than before time: in so much that the blood of ye same
would have flowed even into forreyne nations also. But contrary to all hope and
reason it fell out otherwise, the ministers and instruments of the murders them
selves, coming to this war to receive the just vengeance of God for the
innocente blood which they had shed. So that certain noble men, and also of
the common sort were slain in great number which came by heaps to this
war.

CONCERNING the Sanserreans we have spoken before, how that the Lord Chastre
leaving off to assalte the town any more, entrenched the same round about,
and made diverse bulwarks and rampires, placing in the said trenches a very
strong garrison to hemme and enclose the townsmen on every side: Also we said
that by reason of their negligence in providing corn and vittayle aforehand,
there ensued a wonderful and almost incredible famine, which the translator
thought good to set down at large as ye same is described by mons. Lyrre, who
served in the town even until the same was yielded up, as is said before.

Therefore whereas in the month of March vittayles began to wax short and
skante within Sanserre, and specially Beef and such other flesh which men
use to eat ordinaryly. The xix. day of the same month a Carthorse of
Monsieur le Vailly de Iohanneau governor of the said town, being killed with
the shot of a Canon at the assault as he was drawing of fagots and Earth to the
Rampire was cut in pieces, slain, carried away, and eaten by the common people
and the poor laborers and handicrafts men, who made report to every man that
they never eat better beef in their lives, which thing made diverse that could
not easily come by other flesh to be desirous of it: who ye fourth day of
April next following killed an Ass, which was sold presently for.iiij. pound
Turnois a quarter, and found to be good meat of al such as did eat of it
boiled, roasted, or baked, and specally ye liver of it being roasted with Cloves
was like the liver of Veale. Truly at the first, some feeding more of it tha^
they were wont to do of other meats, were sorry that they had eaten of it. But
within few days after, and before the.xx. day of the same month: it was a
common food eue^ among the dayntiest sort.

And although there were many Asses and Mulets in Sanserre by reason of the
high situation of the place, which was il for Charets to come unto: yet within
one month they were all killed, dispatched and eaten in sted of Beef, so as
there was not one left.

By means whereof having made too great wast of their flesh, in hope they
should not have endured so long a seege: they were very sorry afterward yt they
husba^ded the matter no better.

In the month of May they began also to kill their horses, which thing was the
cause that as well to preuente the stinche and infection that might ensue, by
reason of the panches and dung in several houses where every man killed them
at their pleasure, as also to take order that the flesh should not be
devoured so in corners nor sold at excessive price, the council took order that
the Horses should be killed and sold in the ordinary shambles, Every souse
is.i. penny ob. English.
appoynting the flesh of a fat horse to be sold but at iij. sowses the
pound, and the lean at two sowses, which thing was don by reason of the
extreme covetousness of certain persons, who felt not the hand of God fierce
upon them in that so miserable time.

For as shall be declared hereafter in July and in the beginning of August, a
pound of Horseflesh was sold at eyghteene, twenty, and two and twenty sowses.
And notwithstanding all the order and policy that could be taken, the best
chepe was between ten and thirteen sowses the pound, and the offals thereof
were yet much more excessiuely deerer, which thing did maruellously grieve the
poor people. And I must here tell you that horse flesh (by the report of
such as tasted well of them both) is better than the flesh of Asses or Mules.
For although it be more nesh raw than sodden: yet is it more fyrme and
substantial, and it agrees better with the nature of it to be boiled than
roasted. And if a man will make good pottage with it, whether he put it into the
pot fresh or poudred, he must give it longer seething, than to beef. The taste
of it is somewhat like Porke, but yet somewhat nearer the taste of Beef. If a
man will bake it, he must neither perboyle it, nor sees it before, but season
it with salt, vinegar, and pepper, and let it bake sokingly in the crust. The
fat of it is like the fat of Porke, and byteth not the delicate tongue, and the
liver is yet delicater than the rest.

But the famine increased more and more, and the Cats also having their turn,
were within a little while all killed, slain and eaten up as Conyes, in so much
that the store and increase of them failed, and in less than fiftiene days
they were sold at.xv. sowses the quarter.

Moreover by reason of the penury wherewith many men were pinched, they fell to
catching of Rats, Moles, and Mice, and the hunger that pressed them, made them
to devise, invent, and find out all manner of traps: and ye should have seen
the poor children glad and well apayed when they had caught any Mice, which
they broyled upon the coals most commonly, without fleaing or bulking of the^.
By reason of the great scarcity of them, men did rather devour them than eat
them, and there was neither tail of beast, feet nor skin, which was not
suddenly gathered together, to serve for sustenance to a great number of needy
people.

Those that were not driven to so great necessity, did eat roasted Rattes,
howbeit, they are much better stewed. Yea and which thing (I would not have
believed, without I had had experience of it, or at least wise were well
assured of it.) Dogs were not spared, but without lothing or mislyking, they
were killed as ordinarily for meat, as men kill sheep at other times. Some of
them were snetched, killed, and sold for an hundred sowses, and for six
pounds Turnoys a piece, The pound Turn is, is about two shillings six pence
English.
and it was novelty to buy a quarter of a Dog for.xx. and xxv. sowses: such
as did eat of them said, that the flesh of them is very good, and they made
great cheer with the feet, the inwards and bellyes of them stewed with spices
and herbs. In so much that the heads of Calves, Horses, and Lambs, and the
legs of Greyhoundes and Hounds, being roasted, were thought to be fine meat,
and eaten as the inwardes of an Hare. But specially the young sucking and the
little whelps, were taken for young Rabbet suckers. Nevertheless (to say what
I know, by tasting thereof my self) Dogs flesh is very flashe and
wallowish sweet.

About the beginning of July, when there remained yet twenty Horses of
service, which were spared against the uttermost extremity, the belly which
has no ears, and necessity the Scholemistresse of cunning, made diverse men
to try whether the skyns of Oxen, Kyne, Sheep, and other cattle, which hung
a drying in men's store houses and Garrets, could supply the place of their
bodies. And out of doubt, after that men had assayed it, and well washed,
scraped, and scalded them: they found such savor in them, that as soon as it
was known, as many as had any skynnes, dressed them after the foresaid
manner, and roasted them upon a Gredyron like Trypes. Such as had any suet,
grease, or tallow, made Fricases of them in a pot, and other some did eat them
with vinegar.

Howbeit above all skynnes, the Calves skynnes were found to be exceeding
good, and I have eaten of them so delycate, that if I had not been told of
it, I would have thought that I had eaten of the best Trypes in the world.
Afterward, the skynnes of Horses and of all other beasts came into the play:
and the ears that remained upon the Asses skynnes, were not left behind, but
were held and esteemed to be as tender and good meat as Hogs souse. The
best manner of dressing all sorts of Hydes and skins, is not to pyll them
and scalde them (as I said before) but to nail them, and strain them upon a
boorde, and so to sindge and scrapt off the hair of them more easily, as men
do sindge Bacon hogs. Afterward they must lie soaking a day or twain in
water, and the water must be changed often times, and then they must be dreast
and sodden, as we dressed them at our return from a voyage which I made into
the land of Brazilie, called America, in the year of our Lord 1558. where
having continued five months upon the sea, without setting foot on land,
when as the hunger lasted still, which we had endured by the space of a month
before, we were driven to eat the dry Hydes of beasts, as big as a
Bullock of a year old, which the wild people call a Tappirowson, for we
did but lay them upon the coals, and had not the skill to soften them, as men
did the dry skynnes at Sanserre.

The dearth was so great, that one foot of leather, or one pound wayght of
any manner of beasts skynnes whatsoever they were, was sold for twelve or
fyfteene Sowses, and some skynnes were retayled for more than thyrtie Frankes,
A Frank or pound is about two shillings six pence English.
selling them upon Tallyes and Skores, as in a Caterie or victualing house. And
for as much as the provision of skins failed, by reason of the narowe search
of such as were pinched with hunger: The finer witted sort began to work
maisteries with Parchment, which taking good success, made the people fall to
it as to other things before, in so much that not only the skynnes of clean
Parchment were eaten, but also the Letters, Scrolles, and Books, as well
prynted as in written hand, were eaten without any stop, and the oldest and
auncientest Books of an hundred or sixscore years old, were sought out
every where, and eaten up without seething of them.

The manner of the dressing of them, was to steep them a day or twain as
need required, changing the water often, and to scrape them with a knyfe, as
I told you before of the skynnes. Then they boiled them a day or twain till
they became soft and tender, which was perceived by this, that in drawing them
out, and in breaking of them with ones fingers, they were seen to be clammy,
and men fried them as Tripes. Other some boiled them with Herbs and Spices
after the manner of a hotchpotch. Other some broyled them upon the coals.

And I have seen men eat the very letters, in so much that the printing and
written hand appeared still, and a man might have read the morselles in the
platter, when they were ready to be eaten. And to omit nothing wherewyth the
famished people might be relieved, the horse hooues that were cast upon the
dunghilles, and the old horns and clees of Oxen and Kine, being gathered up
in the streates, were eaten and devoured of diverse folk, who left nothing
behind them among the dung, no more than if Duckes and Hens had scraped and
pecked them, and the very horns horns of Lanternes were not forgotten: now
if the streates and lanes were so narrowly sought and searched, to fill men's
bellyes with the things that Swine and dogs would have refused, and made none
account of: the houses also were ransacked throughout, where any moist or
sauerly sustena^ce was thought possible to be had.

And for the better verifying of the thing that I spoke at the beginning, the
headstalles, raines, poytrels, croupers, and all other horseharnesse, specially
of Whitleather, how old so ever they were, were dressed, sodden, broyled and
fried. And ye should have seen al kind of dressing of them upon the stalles,
where the retaylers of such victuals sold them very dear. Also the young
children that had any leather gyrdles, flocked together, and broyling them upon
the coals, brake their fast with them, as it had been with Chitterlings made
of guts. The greasy leatherne aprons of Shoomakers, and other artificers, and
the sins of Oxen and other beasts, that had served four or five years for
wanties and packsaddles, upon Asses and Mules, and for such other uses, were
put to the same purpose. Moreover the leather Bottels, wherein vinegar had hung
a long while, the feet of Stagges, Hindes, and Gotes, whereat kayes were
hanged, and the feet of great Swyne were not forgotten, but being boiled,
roasted, and fried, did serve many men for sustenance.

This is not all, for the pilches made of old leather, which the Vinedressers
of the town used in plashing the Vines, and the old shoosoules were also
sodden and eaten. Furthermore the parings and scraps of points, and the
shreddings, and other such Pedlery stuff, were not cast upon the dunghils, but
were fried as Tripes. The skins of Sheep, Gotes, Lambs, and other things that
were to be conveyed to France, unto Lions and other places, notwithstanding,
the leathersellers had dyed them, served in stead of steakes of mutton, and in
stead of guts to make puddings in, and such other Galimawfreys made of such
scrapings and parings, wherewith they filled them together with herbs and
spices, and sold them very dear: which thing I speak to make you perceive
that no manner of thing that could be found like the things aforesaid, having
any moisture, taste, or savor, were left behind. As for herbs, they that
had any Gardens, made more account of them, than of a good Farm.

For besides that, they found them selves with them, dressing them after all
fashyons that they could devise, if any of them had herbs to sell, (and
specially myngling them with a little Bran) they made bread of them. If any
man had of it to sell, he had what he would ask for it, and there was not a
lease of Colwortes given for less than a Liart or four Deniers. Other herbs
were sold after the same rate, A Liard is the fourth part of a souse A Deniere
is the twelfth part of a souse
and the poor people eat greedily, of al sorts of roots and wild weeds, yea
and even of Hemlocke roots, through the eating whereof, above a hundred
persons became swollen, and were poisoned and dyed. And yet notwithstanding, if
a man that saw them gathering of them, and plucking them up, had showed the^
the danger wherein they did cast themselves, he had spoken to deaf ears, for
their bellyes would not consent nor hearken to it.

Paradine in his Story of our time, says that in the dearth which fell in this
realm of France, in the year of our Lord God. 1528. many men poisoned
themselves with the roots of Hemlocke. And Matheolus in his Commentary upon
Dioscorides says, that he saw a countryman and his wife almost out of their
wits, by eating of it unawares.

About the beginning of July, when corn was so scarce in Sanserre, that more
than three parts of the people had no bread at all to eat. Such as had or
could come by any Linseede, or Hayseede, or by the Hay it self, or other seeds
that were never erst thought upon to be eaten, did grind them and poune the^,
in a mortar, and made bread of the^, according also as they did of all other
sorts of herbs, yea and even of the straw of wheat brayed, pilled, steeped,
and finely shred. Also Nutshels were stamped in morters of iron, and being
beaten into powder, served for Meal to make paste and bread of. Moreover, men
did also bray Slats, and made bread of the^ stieped in water, salt and vinegar.
The old refuse of talow, candles, and smeery grease, and old fat and
kitchinstuffe, served to make brewesse and fritters.

The.viij. day of July they began to fall to the residewe of the Horses that
were left, which were soon killed and eaten, and they were sold (by report)
at their weight of Gold: in so much that the last week of the said month, a
pound of horse flesh was sold for twenty and two and twenty sowses, the heads
of them at.vij. pound, ten Sowses a piece, the feet at six pound, which
is.xxx. Sowses a Foot, a pound of the Liver at.xxviij. sowses, and a Liver was
found to wey well near ten pound, which amounted to.xiiij. pound the whole
Liver. The heart of a horse was sold at.xxviij. sowses the pound, and there
were of them that weyed more than seven pound, so as the whole heart came almost
to ten pound. The Skin was sold for meat at.viij. pound and.x. pound, and
the inwards at.xv. sowses the pound: whereof many folks made Sawsages, which
were found to be better than the Sawsages that are made of Hogs flesh. And a
pound of the Grease was sold at thirty sowses. Howbeit ye shall hear yet a
more owgly thing: which is, that the blood of a Horse made in Puddings,
(wherein was a fifth or sixth part of herbs) weying forty pound, were sold
for.xiiij. sowses the pound, which amounts to.xxviij. pound Turnoys. And
therefore I cannot but say that the insatiable covetousness of such as sold
them so dear to the poor souls that were too much pinched otherwise already,
shall not escape unpunished. For (as it has been told them often times by Gods
word) the end of such bloodsuckers is always to burst when they be once full.
It seems that there could not any thing be added to set out the miserable
state of a town beseeged, and so narrowly beset and hemmed in on all sides
with strong Bulwarks, and trenches, as it was very hard and in manner
impossible to go out of it or into it, and much more to bring or convey any
vittels into it.

For alas, the same thing fell out in Sanserre, which is reported by the
Prophet Jeremy in the fourth Chapter and fifth verse of his Lamentations, to
have happened in the seege of Jerusalem, where such as had been wont to feed
of fine and dayntie meats, perished for hungre in the streets, and yet were
feign to eat the dung of men, and other beasts. For I am able to say that
the excrements, dung and offals were gathered up and eaten, and men were seen
to fill their disshes with dung and to feed of it, and they said they found
it as good as Bread, and moreover they gathered up all kind of fylth and
uncleanness in the streets, scraping abroad the dunghils to seek for old
bones, old horns and other things incredible to such as saw it not, and which
had bin able to have poisoned me^ not only in eating them, but also even with
the stinch of them.

But O eternal God, behold yet further the fullness of gods judgment, for as
he protests in the.xxvj. of Leuiticus and in the.xxviij. of Deuter. that if
they disobeyed his word and commandments, he would bring them to such an
afterdeale, that when they were beseeged the mothers should eat their own
Children: the poor people of Sanserre having not yet thoroughly profited by the
knowledge that God sent them, nor fared ye better by his scourges and
chastiseme^ts, fell to ye committing of an ougly barbarous and unkindly crime
wtin their walls.

For the.xxj. of July it was discovered and complained of, yt a Vinekeeper
named Potard, and Eugenie his wife, and an old woman that dwelt with them
named Philip Ienillie otherwise called Lumeroy had eaten ye head, brains,
Liver and intrails of a young daughter of theirs about the age of three years,
which had dyed of hunger for want of food, which happened not without the
great astonishment and terror of all such as heard of it. And surely when I my
self, going to ye place of their aboade, had seen the bones and skull of the
head of the said dead child dressed and gnawed, and the ears of it eaten,
together also with the tongue of a finger thickness, sodden and ready to be
eaten, at the very time when they were apprehended: and the two thighs, legs
and feet, in a kettle with vinegar, spices, and salt, ready to be set upon the
fire to boil: and the two shoulders, arms, and hands, cleaving together, but
yet clyued and opened in the bulk of the breast, ready likewise to be eaten: I
was so abashed and dismayed at it, that all my body quaked. For although I had
dwelled ten months together among the beastly Americanes, in the land of
Brazilie, where I saw them oftentimes eat man's flesh, for they did eat the
prisoners whom they took in the wars: yet did it never trouble my mind
so much to see them do so, as it vexed me to behold the said rufull sight, the
like whereof (I believe) was never erst seen in our realm of France.

The father, the mother, and the old woman being taken and put in prison,
confessed the fact without denial. The mother said it was greatly to her
grief, that her child was so elit in pieces, and that where as she had put up
the body in a winding sheet, and left it upon a beer, while she went into the
town about a certain business, minding to have buried it when she came
again: at her retune, she found it vnlapped out of the sheet that she had
wound it in, the body of it ripped, and the bowels taken out of the belly, and
the head, purtenance and tongue boiling in a pot upon the fire, which thing she
showed to her husband, and he told her that the said Philip had moved him
to do it, testing him that it were pity to let the flesh rot in the ground,
and moreover, that the liver was very good to heal a swelling which he had,
and thereupon they eat the broth of it, and gave her likewise of it also, who
did eat of it to. The old woman dyed the same morning in the prison. And for
as much as the Judges found by search, that this ouerbeastly cruelty was
committed rather of wantonness than by extremity of famine, and that the
selfsame day before the said Potard and his wife and the old woman had given
them in alms a mess of herbpottage and a quantity of wine, for there was as
then no talk of bread: To the intent to cut off the practicing of such
horrible deeds within the Town, the said Potard the father was condemned to
be burnt quick, and his wife to be hanged, being first drawn upon a Hardle
to the place of execution together with the body of the old woman which was
yet unburied. Upon the man's words in that he told his wife that the old woman
had persuaded him to eat of his own child, it came to my remembrance how I
had marked that the old women of the wild Americanes aforesaid, are more
desirous, greedy and longing to eat of man's flesh, than the men, or the young
women, or the Children are.

For when they see any Prisoner taken, they never leave till they have caused
him to be slain with such solemnity as they observe there, which I have
described in the discourse that I have made concerning that Voyage. When the
flesh is laid upon a Bouean as they term it, that is to say upon a Gridiron
of a three foot high, they throng about it to lick up the fat that droppeth
down the staves of the Gridiron, saying in their tung Vgaton, that is to say,
good, good.

And I believe that the old folks desirousnesse to eat man's flesh after that
sort, is for that they would by that means become young again. But I will
leave the discoursing of that matter to Physicians, and declare unto you for a
conclusion of this rufull Story, that about the.xxv. of June, one being sore
pinched with the rage of hunger, asked of me whether that in that extreme
necessity it were evil or offensive to God, to eat of a dead man's buttocke
that he liked well of or no. Which demand seemed so odiouse unto me, that
leaving him in the dout and remorse of his own conscience, I told him that
the Wolves and wild beasts did not eat one another.

In the month of June, by reason of the great dearth and scarcity of
vittailes, many poor people were thrust out of the Town, which thing was done
many times after. These being not suffered to pass the trenches and standings
of their enemies that beseeged them, nor to return into the Town again: were
feign to eat the buddes of Vines and Mulbery trees, gray Snayles and read
Snayles, and weeds: and after long pining, the most part of them died between
the said trenches and the town ditches. Howbeit among other pitiful things,
one is, that a Vinekeeper and his wife were found dead together in their
Vineyard, and two young Children of theirs lay crying and wayling by them,
whereof the younger was not past a six weeks old, which were sought out and
sent for by a noble Lady of the Town, who did put them out to nurse, or else
they had dyed out of hand. And as there dyed many in the Vineyards by the
counterscarf, and in the towndiches: so there died many more in the houses, and
they tumbled down thick in the streets, in somuche that some times there
were buried.xx or.xxx. in a day.

But specially the Children that were under twelve years old dyed almost
every chone. I believe that the natural appetite and heat that is in youth,
wherthrough they be always desirous to feed, because their stomachs are warm
and better able to digest than elder folks, and therewithal have not like
patience and discretion, hasted the death of the said silly children, which lay
drawing of their breath, even til their bones peered out of their Skins, and
made woeful moan, crying out with lamentable voice before they yielded up their
Ghost, alas we starve for hungre.

That man's heart must have bin harder than the stony rock, and his ears deafer
than the Adamant, which should not have bin moved at the hearing of such things.
There was a boy of ten years old, who lying in the pangs and extremity of
death, when he heard and saw his father and mother lamenting by him and
handling his arms and legs which were as dry as a stick, said unto them:
Why weep ye thus to see me dye for hunger? I ask no Bread of you, for I know
ye have it not. But since it is Gods will to have me die so, it behooves you to
take it in good worth, did not the holy men Job and Lazarus suffer hunger as
well as I? have not I red of it in my Bible? And so having made his poor
father and mothers heart to cleave and their bowels to irne and sorrow so much
the more, because they perceived that God had given him so noble a mind: he
gave up the Ghost and yielded his soul unto God.

The.xxx. day of July and more than.xv. days before, ye should have seen
great numbers of poor folk lie staruing in the streets, with grisly
countenance resembling rather dead bodies of earth than living persons, which
with an hollow and piteouse voice made lamentable moan, saying. Alas, if I
might eat but one bit of bread of hey I should do well. Alas, although I had any
chafe remaining (for sometimes they had chafe given them) yet were I not able
to pill it and to temper it, for I am over far spent. The wretched mothers
carrying the bodies of their dead Children to the Churchyard (and dragging those
after them by the hand that were left alive) would say unto them, alas my
poor Babe it will not be long ere thou follow thy brother or sister that goes
before thee.

Never was there any thing heard of more pitiful and lamentable. But the
greatest grief yt nipped such as heard and saw these things, was yt they had
not for the most part wherewith to remedy it, but were fain to behold ye sore
and yet had not any medicin or plaster to lay unto it. Nevertheless, even in
the midst of this great distress and calamity, ye should have seen wonderful
constancy, in so much that they cried out unto God still, saying: Alas Lord
deliver us from the scourges and rods wherewith thou do justly beat and
chastis us for our sins sake. Have pity upon thy poor people, and in the
midst of thy wrath remember thy mercy. Or if it be thy pleasure that we shall
dye after this sort, grant us thy grace to trust in thee eue^ to ye last gasp.

About the.xv. of July and so forth to the end of the same month, and the
beginning of August. the penury grew so great that they began to kill the
rest of the Horses that had been reserved for the said extremity. For the
outcry of the people, and specially of the Soldiers (howbeit that some which
were most needy cried not) was so great by reason of the famine, that the
owners of them had much a do to keep them from them. Nevertheless they
sold them exceedyngly dear. For the horses that were killed in Sanserre to be
eaten, which could not have bin sold at other times for ten crowns a piece,
were now sold for threescore, fourscore, yea and a hundred crowns a piece,
and some at a hundred and fifty crowns. Last of all there was killed a Got,
which was sold at ten pound Turnois the quarter, which amounted in all to
five and fifty pound, as the woman that caused it to be killed confessed.
Herewithall the blood also was sold at sixteen or seventeen Crowns.

Also six Kine, and all the rest of the Gotes that had bin continually
reserved to have milk to feed Children with, were killed likewise, and I
believe there was not left past one Cow alive within the whole Town. A pound
of the said Cow Beef was sold for thirteen and fourteen Sowses, and for
twenty Sowses.

The eyghteenth day of August, a pound of the Tripes was sold for ten
Shillings Turnoys, where as in time of peace, half a pound was worth no more
but a Liard. A pound of new Corn (which the morrow after that they were
sure of peace was sold for six Blanks) was now fold for eyghteene Sowses and
eight Deniers, whereas it had bin sold before for xxv. sowses: and five quarters
of Gotes flesh was sold for.xx. Sowses. A Hen was sold for a Crown and three
frankes: and a Cock or a Pullet for as much: and an Egg for five or six
sowses. During the month of July and the first part of August, for as much as
there were certain feeldes of Corn between the Town and the Trenches of the
enemies, such as were dispersed in the Vineyards, (namely such as had been put
out of the Town) together with certain venturers and others that stole out in
the nights, went as closely as they could in great danger of their lives, to
cut down and gather up the said Corn. But few of them escaped, because that
they which kept the Trenches having their Scoutes set by them, discovered them
immediately, and some dispatched them with Hargubusse shot, so as they went no
more out of the field. The little that was brought home was sold exceedingly
dear: insomuch that a little sheafe wherein there was not past an handful of
Corn, was sold for.xij. or.xv. sowses, and it was seen that five sowses were
refused for fifty ears of corn, and happy was he that could come by it for
any price, how great soever it were.

For we practiced that which is said in Job, namely that a man will give skin
for skin, and all that he has for his life.

The season of sour grapes whereof many folks lived, came now in very good
time. Some did eat them raw, some baked in an Oven, some boiled in water, and
othersome fried and sawced with Mustard and spices.

The ripe Bullaces and other wild fruits that could be gathered among the
Vines and Bushes about the Town, were narrowly sought for and sold at the
pleasure of such as brought them. Also the Thistles served us in steed of
Ortichoks, and Nettles instead of Spinach. To conclude this small discourse,
in less than three months during the siege of Sanserre, there was eaten more
than two hundred Horses, Mares, Colts, Asses, Mules and other beasts of
burden, so that of all the number that were in the Town after the beseeging
of it, there was but one left alive, instead whereof there was slain an Ass
that was caught among the Vineyardes.

At the beginning of August the dearth and famine had killed more than four
times as many in Sanserre in six weeks as the sword had done in seven months
and a half, during which time the seege lasted. For in the Muster book kept
of all the Soldiers and other people that were slain from the beginning of
the seege to the twenty of August, as well with shot of Canon and Hargubusse
as otherwise, were found but fourscore and ten: and I am sure that the number
of such as died for hunger in the Town and of such as were about those that
were shut up in the same, was more than four hundred persons.

Who would not quake now at the hearing of such judgments which God executed
upon the town of Sanserre? For they that were beseeged felt by experience how
true the saying of the Prophet is, that such as escape the Sword shall be
overtaken with hunger, and that the hand of GOD (as the Psalm writer says)
stretches out whether soever he lists. Nevertheless let not such as read
this Book think that they which were beseeged in Sanserre, were the
wickeddest and most abominable sinners in the world. For although they
acknowledge their sins before God, and have sufficient warning to walk
better in his fear hereafter: yet is it not to be concluded, that such as
are chastised most roughly are therefore most wicked. For as it is said in
the Scripture, the Child whom the father loves shall not be exempted from
the Rod.

And as our Lord Jesus Christ said to the Jews of his time. Those upon
whom the Tower in Silo fell, and those men whose blood Pilate mingled with
their Sacrifice, were no greater sinners than other men. But if they that have
knowledge of these things amend not their life, they shall all perish
miserably. Which thing I speak by the way, to the intent that the seege and
famine of Sanserre may serve for an example, not only to such as were at it,
but also generally to all men, and specially to those that are Protestants,
who have justly lost a part of their liberty which they had to serve God
openly, and so has almost the whole Realm, because they used it not to their
profit. And therefore I must not rest so much upon second causes, nor take
upon me to discourse of diverse things that have come to pass in this Realm,
within one year, against the intent of our King.

For God who governs all things by his wonderful providence, has guyded and
directed the whole in such wise, according as he says in his word, that it
is he that smites and makes the wound, and it is he that heals it again
There. is no more for us to do, but to profit our selves by the things that are
past, by amending our lives hereafter.

IN these great extremities the chief governors of the town knew not what
to do, and to yield them selves into the hands of the enemy seemed unto them
more cruel than death it self: they had sent messengers into diverse places,
to crave aid and succor of their fellows, but in vain. They which had some
ability to help the miserable beseeged Sanserreans, therefore refused to aid
them, not that they misliked of their cause, or thought them worthy of so
great miseries: but because they wanted money, the which in this unhappy time
was hard to come by. Notwithstanding, the Kings treasure was spent in leuying
bands of horsemen and footeme^, to destroy the remaynder of miserable men. They
which had a good will to help, were in so great extremities, that being
brought them selves into great peril, were scarce able to withstand their
assayling enemies. When they saw that their first messengers could not speed
of their purpose, they sent again at the last (namely the.24. of July) Mons.
Flore, Mine, and Crucian, the chief Captains, to prove whether their
presence might prevail more to get help and succors, than their fellows had
done before. These went out of the City with great peril, and within
certain dais were taken and slain by their enemies.

AFTER news hereof was brought to ye Sanserreans, they notwithstanding
determined with them selves, to continue constant unto the end, being still in
hope to receive succors. Thus, while they armed them selves to perseuera^ce
with new promises, tidings was brought them, that the king had taken peace with
them of Rochell and Languedoc, but that there was no me^tio^ made at al of
them: so yt there seemed to be no hope at al of aid. Therefore while contentio^s
arose among ye townsmen, some thinking it best to persist, other affirming yt
so to do was mad wilfulness, and yt they had rather dye once with the sword,
than to make a long death with famine: The Sanserreans come to composition.
Mons. Ioanneau the governor of the Town, came at the last to parley with
Mons. Martinenge a noble man, in whom the Sanserreans reposed great trust. The
townsmen could scarsly be persuaded that they should escape with life. But
when the Lord Chastre had at the first by Mons. Martinenge, and afterward by
letters persuaded the Sanserreans, that every one should have their lives
pardoned, then all men were glad hoping for peace, and that so great miseries
would have an end at the last. Therefore after certain days conference with
the Lord Chastre, they agreed together upon these Articles.

FIRST that the Sanserreans, and those which were come unto them out of other
cities of the Realm, should be under the benefyte of the pacificatorie Edict,
made the fourth day of August with the Rochellians, that is to say, that they
should have the free use of the Religion, which others expressed in the same
Edict, had.

Chastre, that no manner of dishonest violence should be offered to their
lives, wives, and daughters.



Chastre forty thousand frankes, for the payment whereof, they should have
their goods preserved from the spoil of the Soldiers, and it should be
lawful for them to carry or sell the same else where at their own pleasure,
the which money was distributed to the Soldiers by the appointment of the
Lord Chastre.



Chastre should name, until these things were fully performed and
accomplished.

Therefore the last day of August the Lord Chastre entered into the city, with
a great train of armed men. And by and by were taken away from the
Sanserreans, their drums, trumpets, and ensigns. Mons. Ianneau, within
certain days after was secretly slain, and never known how. There was placed
in the town a very great garrizon. And over and above the foresaid sum of
forty thousand Frankes, they were very straightly charged to pay new
tributes. And concerning the use of Religion, the which notwithstanding was
promised in the first article of the agreement, there was neither speech nor
performance to this day.

The king sent the armies of the Switzers into Daulphine, to terrify the
inhabitants of Languedoc, and mons. Monbrune that they might receive the
covenant of the peace of Rochel. Notwithstanding, when they had remained
certain weeks in Daulphine, when also Monbrune had traveled diligently to
and fro to withstand them, and could not raise them of Languedoc, in so much
that a great mass of money should have been spent to no purpose, those
returned again into their country, which were returned from the siege of
Rochel, and had escaped the perils of their journey.

The twelfth Book of Commentaries, concerning the Temporal and
Ecclesiastical state of the Kingdom of France, in the reign of Charles the
ninth.
THE Rochelleans had made a peace with the King, without the knowledge of them
of Nismes, and others of Languedoc, although they also were expressly contained
in the covenants of agreemente. Notwithstanding the Edict being read did not
satisfye them, but affyrmed, that the experiments of the former times
replenished with diverse murders, did prove, that these pacificatorie means
were snares, to intercept and entangle those with the pretense of peace, whom
they could not by force of Arms, and with war overcome. Therefore they
thought good to consult and participate this matter with their fellows, and
perceive it needful to provide for the same by a common assembly of the
Churches which were left. So that after tidings was brought unto them of the
Edict made, they sent into the Army a messenger to the Duke of Anjou, to give
him thanks on their behalf, beseeching him, that for so much as the cause in
hand was general, and because it belonged to many of the reformed Religion to
know these things in convenient time, that he would give them leave to assemble
them selves together in a fit place, and that to the same end he would grant
them his letters patents for their assurance.

These letters patents were granted and made, and all they of the Religion, to
whom knowledge might be given, were warned to be at Milliaud in Languedoc.
Whereupon there came many from all parts of the Realm, according as the time
would suffer them.

THIS was a notable occasion to provide for things again time to come. For in
this assembly they considered and scanned how they might order their affairs
afterward: and so provided for the^ selves both laws civil and also martial.

In the large province of Languedoc there are many provinces, the which were
replenished with a great number of the Religious, which held diverse cities
and Towns in sundry parts of the same, having also amongst them the
Catholics, in so much that the keeping of those places was very perilous, by
reason that their enemies were so mixed with them.

Therefore to the end their affairs might ever afterward be ordered after a
more firm and constant manner, they appointed two generalties or
Lieftenantships for the territory of ye Religion, in the which all the
Religious of that province were contained, namely ye Liefetenantship of
Montauban, and the Liefetena^tship of Nismes. Montauban, to have ye
prehemine^ce over those parts of ye higher Languedoc, and Nismes of the lower:
in ye which the territory of Seuenatz and Viuaretz were coprehe^ded. They
appointed to every Liefetenantship a Liefetenant which was some famous noble
man. And they appointed ye office of these Liefetenantships to endure, so long
as ye civil war should hold either openly or secretly, that they might have
the chief authority in martial affairs: notwithstanding so, yt their power
might be subject to the judgment of ye Senate. Every country or diocese had
his senate, according to the ancient manner of France, and they continue in use,
especially in that part, eue^ unto this day: these Senats they call particular
states. But the Liefetena^tship, in the which many diocesses are contained, is
called the chief or high Senate, which consists of certain choice men out
of every country or shyre: notwithstanding so, that the sentences of every
Senate in matters of great weight were examined and straightly ouerlooked. It
was also ordained that by the decree of that high Senate or court the
Lefetenant should rule and govern those affairs which belonged unto the war.
These Liefetenants had a certain stipend assigned unto them, the whole rule
and charge of the treasure belonged to the Senate, the Liefetenant by his
office having nothing to do with the same.

AND to mayntaine war, they took these ways: namely, that the people might
be restrained, so much as might be from martial robbing, and that countries
might not be wasted and spoiled: they charge the towns and villages by a writ
out of the kings Excheaker to pay tribute, yea and those towns also in the
which the Catholics inhabited, lenying such a sum as might be sufficient
to mayntaine garrizons in them. They call for a Co^tribution. Thus they were
gently entreated, which paid the commanded tribute: husbandry also was
permitted and mayntained. So that those places inhabited by the Catholics, did
obey, for fear of robbing, spoiling, and burning. Thus they went about to cut
off all occasion of martial liberty, so much as might be taken away among so
many outrageous furies of war: and they provided for the continuance of
longer war, if so be no reasonable and indifferent condition were offered by
the king. Furthermore, they gathered the tithes and revenues of the priests,
and appointed collectors for the same.

Hitherto all occasion to hold war, seemed after so great slaughters of men
made, to be taken away from the Religious: but this way which they now
devised, brought to pass, that they of the Religion were able to mayntaine
garrizons in diverse places: the which when need required, being come together
in one, by the commandment of the Lieftenant, would have made a sufficient
army: by this means also the catholics power was weakened: Vicount Pauline
was made Lieftenant of Montauban: and mons. Sanroman, (of whom we spoke
before) being come from Switzerland to Nismes, was made Lieftenant of the same,
after he had taken his oath. The coming of Sanroman brought to pass, that the
discordes of the captains disagreeing among them selves hitherto, being
appeased, their affairs had more happy success in Nismes, and in the cities
adjoining thereunto: all men obeying with all their hearts the commandment
given by him, and also by the Senate.

Therefore now at the last necessity and experience, the schoolemistresse of
fools taught ye religious for their necessary defense, a new kind of order,
not used in the time of the former wars, and more convenient: And these
things were handled very well in the assembly or convocation at Milliaud.

These things being thus provided to establish a certain order, the men of
Languedoc also determined in this convocation, to require certain things of
the king for the confirmation of peace: for the former Edict did not satisfy
them, as we said before, neither did the name of peace so move them by and by,
that without consideration and respect all conditions were received, because
the light credit of the Princes before time, taught them to beware.

Therefore they sent unto the king, Mons. Yolet, Philip, Cherenac, and others
which were active and prudent men. The sum of their message was, To give
thanks unto the king for singular good will, which he declared that he had to
establishe peace in his kingdom. That the same remedy was so necessary, the
kingdom by so long wars being in decay and almost overthrown, that it could
not be any longer deferred without present destruction. That they were minded
to show all obedience to their Lord and king. But because the tragical and
lamentable memory of the murders lately committed on S. Bartholmewes day,
does show how dangerous a thing it is for the king their sovereign to be
ruled by the evil counsayles of wicked counsaylers: they most humbly beseeched
his majesty not to think it strange that they, to whom it specially belonged,
sought the most convenient ways for the establishing of peace. That it was
lately brought to pass, that the king by the practices of evil counsaylers,
contrary to his good nature, declared him self by his public letters, to be
the author and chief cause of that wicked fact, the which notwithstanding a
few days before he openly detested: the contrary show whereof was too
shameful in the sight of al nations. That they were persuaded of his own good
will toward them: but they greatly feared, least his mind should be led by
his counsaylers as aforetime: and that therefore they would provide for them
selves, and seek to save their lives and the lives of their friends, being
taught by the pitiful example of their fellows.

THESE things being uttered, First of al they require, that for the security
of peace, and to avoid new troubles, they might keep those Cities, which
they had already in possession, with their own garrisons of men, and the same
to have their wages paid them out of the kings treasury.

These seemed to be large petitions: and in very deed their speech to the
king exte^ded farther, in so much that the Queen said in displeasure and
anger, That the prince of Conde him self if he were alive, and were even in
the very midst of the kingdom with twenty thousand horsemen, and five
hundred thousand footeme^, and had also in his hands the chief Cities of ye
Realm, would not crave ye one half of those things. Wherefore she came to
every one of these messengers, and sought to win the^, sometime by fair
promises, and otherwhile by threatenings. But it was so provided in the assembly
at Milliaud, yt the messengers of themselves should do nothing, but only offer
the letter unto the king, and should refer the kings answeares unto the Senate,
yt the whole matter might be allowed by the authority of the same. Days of
respit were taken for a month and a half: and so the messengers being
honorably received into every City, returned home again. The Catholics
could scarsely be persuaded, but that the most mighty princes favored the
cause of the Religious, and pretended that the great liberty which the
Religious had, was the cause why they so thought. The king was said to desire
peace, being warned by the success of the war at Rochell, and in Languedoc.

In the mean time, Preparation for the viage into Polonia.
preparation was made for the voyage into Polonia, the Queen and the new King
providing al things for great magnifice^ce, notwithstanding they had not money
according to their will. About ye same time in ye which the Ambassadors of
Polonia were at Paris, a very bold and wicked fact was committed. There was a
certain Citizen in Paris of great wealth named Nantoilet, Nantoilet robbed by
the new king of Polonia.
a Catholic and one of the chief magistrates of the City. To this man's
house came ye new king, of whom he was very courteously entertained. But ye
Duke of Aniou being in ye house began to quarrel with the said Nantoilet, first
with words, at ye which the other had great marvel: Then his servants began
to spoil, carried away his plate and jewels, brake open his cofers, and carried
away a great mass of money. Thus the outrage of murders brake the raines of
shame, running into all impudent boldness.

AFTER that Harlem was taken the Prince of Ora^ge took Alcmar a City of
Holland, The affairs of the low Country.
the Citizens being divided within the^ selves: at what time one gate was taken
by that part which held of ye Duke of Alba, and ba^ds both of horsemen and
footmen sent from the said Duke were now within the view of ye City.
Notwithstanding the Prince of Orange putting to flight the said power enjoyed
the City. The Flisshingers took the Castle Ramekins the fifth of August. The
Ramekeins Castle taken by the Flissinners.
Also the said Flisshingers, the thirtenth day of ye same month, encountered
with the navy of the Duke of Alba, which loused from Antwerpe, to carry
victual to Middelburge, part whereof they chased away, and the rest came to
Middelburge. Furthermore the Prince of Orange took the town of Mounts in
Brabant.

The twentieth of September the Orangians fought with happy success upon the
coast of Amsterdam: in the which fight the Duke of Alba had a great overthrow,
with loss of a great number of his Ships, and also of his men.

The eleventh day of October, the Orangians after a long battle fought upon
the sea, got the victory of the King of Spaynes navy, of whom they slew a
great number, and took the County Bossu, Lord Admiral of the whole navy.

In the beginning of December the Duke of Alba forsaking his authority of
government in the low country being Brussels, by the authority and commission
of the kings letters, put over his said office to Lewis de Requizence great
Commander of Castile, and then prepared for his return into Spain.

THE new King of Polonia, notwithstanding that the Ambassadors of Polonia made
great have, found daily new delays to defer his journey, whether it were for
the pleasure and delight which he had in his own country, or for grief to
leave a more noble kingdom, the assured possession whereof his mother had
promised unto him. The king him self urged his departure: in so much that it is
reported he said in anger, That either he, or himself must needs go into
Polonia. For the secret grudges of emulation which was in either of them, could
not be so covertly restrained, but that often times they brast forth. The
Queen loved the Duke of Aniou more than the king, whose great towardness she
greatly feared. It is certainly reported, that the Queen said to Henry,
being very careful concerning his departure, Be of good cheer, only go,
thou shall not remain long in Polonia. By the rumor hereof, many thought that
the Queen meant little good unto the King, and that hereof that evil which
happened within a while after unto him proceeded: the which verily I would not
set down, if so be the same had not bin objected unto the Queen her self by
letters written by certain Courtiers, which knew well enough the affairs of
the Court. Yea it is most certain, that the Queen was so addicted unto her
son Henry, that she hated her other two sons.

HENRY having couenaunted and agreed with his brother concerning those things
which appertayned to their affairs, departed at the length from Paris, the
eight and twenty of September. The king said, that he would bring him on his
way to the bounds and limits of his kingdom.

The which he could not perform, for that he fell sick of a soar fever at
Vitri a town in Champaigne: most men thinking that he was poisoned.
Therefore the king took his leave of his brother and went no further: who
went through Germany, as his journey lay, and was courteously entertained of
the Princes of the same: notwithstanding he heard them in every place
grievously detest the murders of France, the principal cause whereof was laid
to his charge in obeying the wicked counsayles of his mother.

About the same time Frauncis Hotomanus, a famous Lawyer, a man endued with
godliness and singular learning, published a book, which he entitled
Francogallia, and dedicated the same to Frederic County Palatine. In the same
book, the said Hotomanus declares with exquisite reason, what was the state
of ye kingdom of France in old time, bringing the same to memory again out
of the ancient antiquities of the history of France. Because the country of
France was called in old time Gallia or Gaul: and was afterward by the
Francones of Germany conquered, he caleth it here by the name of a compounde
word Francogallia, and the people Franco Galli, that is to say, French Gauls.
And he declares, that although the French Gauls, took in old time their
kings from the Nobility, and therefore chose them such kings as were come of
kingly race, and had bin royally trained and brought up, whether the same were
of the number of their children, or of their near kinsmen: yet nevertheless
ye kingdom of France of old time was wont to be given not by right of
inheritance as a private patrimony, but by ye judgment and free electio^s of
ye people. For proof whereof he brings many things out of the express words
of ye Testament of Charles the great, and out of the elections of Pharamund, of
ye sons of Pipin, of Charles, and of Charlemain, of Chilperic, of Clothar, of
Ottho, and of other kings, of whom he has made a long catalogue: alleging ye
very words of ye histories, notwithstanding so, yt the kingdom should be
divided by ye decree and consent of ye states, one while to one, and sometime
to more of ye sons of the kings. And that as the authority to choose kings, so
also the power to displace and depose them from their rule, was in old time in
the hands of the states of the people and in the public assembly of the
Realm. Therefore yt kings were created in France by fyrme laws, and not tyra^ts
ordained, with free authority and power to do what soever them lists. For
the which matter he brings many examples, namely of the two Childerickes,
which kings were deposed from ye kingdom by the decree of ye states: of
Theoderic which was displaced with Ebroin his Lord great master: of Chilperic,
of Charles the gross, also of Ottho which was chosen king instead of Charles
ye son of Lewis the stutter: and he takes the credit of their judgments,
and most urgent causes, out of the very midst of ye history. He shows also
what things were specially handled in the solemn assembly of ye states: and
also what was the authority of the same. And first of al concerning ye
creating or displacing of a king: secondly, concerning peace and war, and
common laws: thirdly, concerning great honors, high offices, and governments
of the commonwealth: Fourthly, concerning the assigning of the patrimony in
part to the children of the king being deceased, and concerning the appointing
of dowry to daughters: finally, concerning al those things which appertain to
the weal public. The power of ye said assembly of States was such (says
he) that without the authority or sentence of the same, the king could
determine nothing, but must follow the authority and will of the States: which
said authority and will, were called The decrees of the states.

And now when as this kingdom of France has continued almost a thousand and
two hundred years, there are said to be in all this time only three houses of
kings, that is to say, of the Merouins, who taking their original of Meroue,
continued yt stock two hundred fourscore and three years: of Charlouins, who
springing from Charles ye great grew in yt stock three hundred thirty and
seven years: and of Capenites, who beginning at Hugh Capet, have now held ye
kingdom five hundred and fourscore years. The which Hugh Capet got ye royal
dignity, yt Charlouins being deposed, namely Lewis ye fifth the.xxxj. king of
France, and the.xij. king of the stock of the Charlouins, his children being
dead in ward. And then he proves by many examples, yt the royal dignity
stood fyrme by the decree of the States in the times of the first reign both
of the Merouins, and also of the Charlouins, and was continued also in the
house of the Capenites. And first by that notable controversy celebrated and
made famous with ye momuments of the French histories, and with the great
wars which rose of the same, between Philip Valoys, and Edward borne of
Isabel the sister of Charles. Who, when king Charles the fair, dyed without
heirs male, contended for the kingdom. When the matter grew thus to
contention, it pleased the States to prefer Philip Valoys being of royal
line, to whom the kingdom was adjudged. Another example he brought from the
lamentab e time of King John, who joining battle with the English men near
unto Poictiers, was taken and carried prisoner into England. So great calamity
being received, the hope was left in the authority of the states alone.
Therefore by the decree of the said States, there were approved men of all
sorts and conditions chosen, to whom the charge and affairs of the Realm
were committed: howbeit there were three of the Kings sons, namely Charles,
Lewis, and John: of the which three the eldest was of lawful age to govern.
A third example he brings from the year of our Lord. M.CCCLXXV. at what time
Charles the fyfth surnamed wise, appointed by his will and testament Philip
Duke of Borbon his wives brother, to be the tutor and guardian of his sons:
and Jews Duke of Aniou his brother to be the governor of the Realm, until
such time as Charles his son came unto his full and lawful age:
nevertheless it was decreed by a counsel, holden at Paris, that the will
should be frustrate, and the gouernmente of the kingdom committed to the said
Lewis the childs uncle, upon condition that in his government he would do
nothing without the advice and consent of other honest and approved persons in
the said counsel: and also that the wardship and education of the child
should be committed to the Duke of Borbon. A fourth example he brings from
ye year of our Lord.M.CCCXCII. at what time Charles the sixth son of the
said King sodaynely fell mad, it was decreed by the authority of the states,
that the government of the Realm should be committed to the Dukes of Berry,
and Burgundy. Also he fetches a fifth example from the year. M.CCCCXXVI. when
as Philip Duke of Burgundy, and Humfrey Duke of Gloucester, were at mortal
debate to the great detriment of the common wealth: and at the length agreed
between them selves, to make an end of all controversies by combat. In this
contention the States were vmpiers, and decreed, that both of them should put
off their armor, and rather end their controversies by law, than by dinte of
sword. Then he alleges a sixth example from the year M.CCCC.Lxxxiiij. when
as Lewis the.xj. being dead, and leaving behind him his son Charles of the
age of thirtene years, it was decreed by an assembly of States at Towers, that
the education of the child should be committed to Anne the kings sister: and
that the government of the Realm should be set over to certain choice and
approved persons in the said assembly: notwithstanding that Lewis Duke of
Orleans being the next of kin required the same. He sets down also a
seventh Argument taken from that war, which was held in the time of the said
Lewis the eleventh, which was of all other kings the most crafty and subtle,
which also greatly diminished the authority of the States, at what time the
kingdom was so governed by him, that in many things the duty of a good prince
and of one loving his country, was wanting, the authority of the States began
to be required, that by the same the common wealth might be provided for: and
so by the aid of many Princes and noble men war was holden, which was
therefore called, the war of the common wealth. And verily, at that time the
authority of the States began to decay* the which notwithstanding Lewis feigned
to have in great estimation. Finally, he handeleth that question. Whether the
government of the kingdom of France, by the law of France, ought to come to
the Distaffe: and by many reasons and examples he shows, that women ought to
be removed from the government of the Realm no less than from the
inheritance of the same.

And thus disputing he offers to the secret judgments of men by the state
of the ancient kingdom, an express Image of those calamities, by which all
things at the last in the kingdom of France, are come to great disorder and
confusion, the authority of the states of the Realm being overthrown and
suppressed, and a strange woman having gotten into her hands the royal
government.

M. Mombrune took about this time Monerb, a walled town in the County of
Venaiz: and Nium, a town bordering upon the County of Daulphine, and new
small towns and bands of men, specially out of Prouance came daily unto him.
And he invaded the territory of Grenoble, to the great terror and fear of
those that dwelt in the same. He took also the rich Abbay of Viri, and slew
the Garrisons which kept the same. The Monks of the great Charterhouse
fearing to have so ill a neighbor, fortifyed themselves with Garrisons of
Soldiers. Thus M. Mombrune was feared in all that country round about.

Again truce was taken for a month and a half. Nevertheless the burning
desire of wars was great in Languedoc and in Daulphine. And under the
pretense of that truce, the King and Queen, made a great show that they
desired peace: but in deed they practiced nothing else but bloody war.

Puygallard of Poictou to get Rochell, byred with the kings money and by the
kings commandment certain Soldiers of Rochell to betray the City. And the
chief of this conspiracy in the town was mons. Grandfiefe a famous man, who
valiantly behaved himself in the time of war for the defense of Rochell.
Thus it was agreed amongst them, that a Bulwark and one of the Gates should
be taken, to the which Puygallard should come incontinent with certain bands
of Soldiers. The conspiracy was discovered. They of Rochell took many of the
townsmen. M. Grandfiefe was slain. And when inquiry was made of this
conspiracy, the conspirators answered, that they had done nothing without the
kings commandment, mons. Puygallard being the author: the which also certain
letters found about Grandfiefe did plainly testify. They of Rochell made
complaint hereof to the king. The king denied the said enterprise to be taken
in hand by his commandment: willing them to punish those that were found
guilty of the conspiracy, saying that he gave them leave and authority so to
do: only he willed them to beware that they did nothing contrary to the Edicte.

Therefore they of Rochell, according to their manner of execution put many of
the Conspirators to death by the while: of the which many were Citizens. This
was done about the the end of the month of December.

ORANGE was held by Berchon in the name of the Prince of Orange: and Berchon
with the inhabitants of Auinion which bordered about him, and of Venais also,
abstayned of purpose from war. Notwithstanding many of the Citizens of
Orange, having M. Glundag a valiant man of Daulphine their Captayn, took the
Castle and town of Orange, Berchon mistrusting no such thing, who went
straight way to Cortes, a little town in the territory of Orange. After this
M. Glandag warred very sore against Auinion, and against the inhabitants of ye
county, robbing and spoiling them, yea and the marchantmen as they went about
their affairs were robbed in the common high way. The said Glandag him self
for all this boasted, that he did not like of the reformed Religion: and that
only the point of his sword was religious: meaning thereby that he did not
embrace the doctrine of the religion, but the cause of ye religious. By such
like examples great offense was taken against them of the Religion.

THIS new year comprehends the beginnings of new and weighty matters,
with diverse success both of king Charles the ninth, by whose strong and
flourishing youth infinite victories to the utter destruction of the religion
were prognosticated, and also by the death of Charles Guise Cardinal of
Lorhayne, a notable ancient enemy of the reformed Churches, which we will set
down according to our manner and purpose.

MANY of the noble men enuyed the government of the Queen, (for whatsoever was
done by king Charles was attributed unto her) for yt she (as it is said) being
through effeminate and rash hastines moved to displeasure, one while against
some, another while against other some, sought by all means possible to hurt
those, which might in any case withstand her government and for that she being
a woman, and (which was more) a strange woman, should have the government of
the state so many years already, against the ordinance of the ancient laws
of France. and to the great reproach of the realm of France. Therefore she had
provoked many of the noble men to hate her: especially because the authority
of the nobles, to whom the prerogatives of the realm pertayned, being by her
taken away, and translated to her self alone, she advanced base borne men and
strangers to great honor and to large riches and possessions, and especially
County d'Retz, who being the son of a Florentine Promoter called Gordes, and
his mother a famous harlot, himself also at the first being but a servant to a
Forraiger, came to so great riches and authority, that he was not only
checkemate with princes and noble men, but also far excelled them. Now, because
these large promotions and gifts could not but be drawn out of the kings
treasury, that is to say, from the blood of the miserable people, lately
oppressed with intolerable burdens of tributes, many of the noble men daily
complained, that the common wealth was betrayed and trodden under foot. And the
foul troubles of new wars, did greatly amplify and increase complayntes:
through the which wars ye Citizens being armed with mortal hatred one against
another, by ye instigation and encouraging of a strange woman, with shameful
madness killed and destroyed one ye other, to satisfy the wicked appetites and
desires of an ungodly Italian. Hitherto she had pretended ye cause of Religion:
notwithstanding she sought this one thing only by these civil discords, namely,
That when she had destroyed ye French me^, she might bring in Italians into ye
kingdom of France, and so she might easily reign alone, having gotten such
men about her as stood subject and bound unto her.

Also the great misliking of the murder on Saint Barthelmewes day, made her to
be the more enuyed and despised, adding all that might be to that notable
hatred* conceived against her: because by the same fall, not only many noble
houses, were deprived of their brethren and kinsmen, the more noble sort of
them of the religion being slain: but also that the death of the noble princes
and peers was sought, notwithstanding that they always had embraced the
Romish Religion: and that a manifest way was made to the utter destruction of
the nobles of France by this entrance, and that, because this ambitious woman
would leave nothing undone to show cruelty, that she might rule and govern
after her own will.

Amidst the garboyle of the murders, they which suspected their blood to be
sought, were at rest, and were gone at the kings commandment to the war, to
destroy those which remained of the Religion, who being but few and weak,
seemed to be brought easily to destruction within few days. But when the
Queens counsels and devises took not effect, and new murders were made,
when there was preparation of war against Rochell and Languedoc: then men
more freely began to speak against those murders, and to detest those civil
wars stirred up by the commandments of the Queen, when as the contrary
success had frustrated and deceived even as it were in the very entry, the
imagined victories concerning the utter destruction of those of the Religion.
And there was none which did not greatly condemn the causers and workers of
those murders. Peace was earnestly desired and hoped for all men, when as the
space of two years, had almost drowned the memory of the former troubles and
injuries, and after so many spoils made by wars, new calamity was feared,
insomuch that all men feared the cause of new troubles. And the remembrance of
the pretended marriage celebrated with falsehood, was most detestable, to the
everlasting reproach of France.

Therefore in steed of tryumphes for the destruction of the remaynder of the
religious, there sprang up new enemies from among the Catholics themselves:
and that of them also which were present in those murders, and were
instruments of the same: who being taught by time it self, and by the event
and success of the matter, did not only detest that wicked fact, but also
prepared them selves to revenge the same.

And there was no small number of these new enemies: but the factions were
copious and plentiful, having over them noble and famous Captains. So many as
could not abide to fail their country in extremity, being now at the last
cast, and which being free from ye Queens liberality and preferme^t and which
misliked of the insolent promotio^ of strangers: so many, I say seemed to be
called, eue^ as it were with ye sound of a trumpet, to ye society of this new
counsel. The greatest injury seemed to be given to ye king of Nauar, for yt
his marriage was dishonored and polluted, with the funerals of his friends and
family: and he himself had come in peril of life, except by a foul and
shameful shift he had forsaken ye religion, in ye which he was brought up and
instructed, and for ye which, by ye aid and furtherance of his mother he had
held war. The Prince of Conde was with no less prouocations allured: and beside
ye old causes, ye late peril of his life in the furious murders, and the
remembrance of the war of Rochell to destroy those who had valiantly behaved
themselves under his conduct to defend his house and stock. Also vehement
causes stirred up ye house of Momorencie. For by the death of ye Admiral which
was so cruelly slain, the blood of Momorencies brethren no doubt was sought:
and they were not ignorant ye their names were valde in ye number of those
which were slain on Saint Barthelmewes day and that if they might have been
shut up altogether they had dyed with the Admiral and his fellows. For the
Queen envied the authority of the house of Momorencie. And it evidently
appeared ye Marshall Cosse, and all other which by consanguinitie, affinity,
or by any other means belonged unto these houses, were appointed for the same
slaughter. Yea, there was occasion of these new matters sown in ye kings own
line. The Duke of Alanco^ the kings youngest brother being hated of his mother,
greatly misliked his in others government, and detested that wicked and
horrible fact of the bloody marriage. So that the Duke of Alancon seemed to be
of their side. Therefore for this cause he was hated of his mother. These were
the beginnings of great matters, the which what success they had we will show
hereafter.

The countries being wearyed with long calamities of wars, required of the
king that there might be an assembly of the States, that extreme necessity at
the last might provide a remedy for so great troubles. The Queen answered that
the king and she did like very well of this request: (for the king being daily
more and more sick, the Queen of her self had the government of all things)
and she appointed the assembly of States at Compien.

The Prince of Orange held the greatest part of Zealand, as we said before,
except Midelburge, the chief City of that country and Armac, the most famous
haven of that City, and of the whole Isle. The same he beseeged with all the
forces of the inhabitants of the Islelande, and with other succors appertayning
to the same.

The kings Navy to succor them of Middelburge loosed from Andwarpe the xxv. of
January. In this preparation, the kings Soldiers sustained great damage and
hurt. For suddenly a great Iron piece brake in the Ship, by the violent breach
whereof thirty me^ were slain, and certain also which stood upon the shore.
The Ship it self was by and by dashed in pieces upon the flat: another ship
after this was ouertakte with waves. And when they came within the sight of the
town of Mountes, the Soldiers of the Navy to salute the kings Garrison, gave
them a peale of shot. By occasion whereof fire being unwittingly cast into
the goonpoulder which was in one of the ships, most horribly brent all the
Soldiers that were in the same. For all this they went forward with their journey
toward Middelburge. The Navy of ye prince of Orange encou^tred with the^, ye
Duke Reguisence ye kings Lieftena^t in the low country loking upon the^ from
the shore of the town of Barrow. Then began a fierce battle between them,
both parts manfully quiting themselves. Notwithstanding.v. of the kings
Ships being at the first overcome, the Admiral her self also was
constrained to flee, and to forsake her fellows. The chief Captain whose
name was Julian Roman, a man of great fame among the Spaniardes, sliding out of
the ship by a roape into a skiffe, forsook the Navy. The Prince of Orange his
Navy being conquerers, pursued the chase, and took ninetene Ships of war.
The Admiral himself was slain. All the Spaniardes, and spectally the old
Soldiers of service, which were taken, were cast over boorde to feed fishes.
Then the Prince of Orange more vehemently urged the siege of Middelburge, and
so within few days it was brought to pass, that Moundragon, being without
all hope of help, yielded up the City of Middelburge and Armac. This was the
ninetene of February of this year. The trueltie showed at the seege of Harlem
was not here recompensed. The Prince of Orange rather conquered with lenity
and gentleness, than otherwise, he granted life also to the morrow mass
Priests: but the Captains and Centurions he sent prisoners to Elishing,
having given leave to Mountdragon their chief Captain to redeem them, for the
which cause he, leaving behind him assurance of faith, and twelve hostages,
went to Andwerpe, that he might make exchange of Captives. This Mountdragon so
highly commended the humanity, clemency, and faith of the Prince of Orange
unto the kings Lefetenant Regnisence, that he brought himself in suspicion
with him, and also into great peril.

ABOUT this time Mongon an expert Captain, in the first civil wars of
great name and fame for killing of Mottecondrin, took certain small towns in
the country of Velay, and certain strong Castelles: and he was now approached
to the City of Puij, which was full of rich Marthants: having already taken
the Castle Espaule; which was within see sight of the City, by the subtle
practice of Guiard of Puij, a man of no religion and yet pretending to be of
the religion. Now the spoiling Soldier being made rich with the pray, bought
of the Soldiers of the Castle of Espaule, one of the Captains being
corrupted with money by the men of Puij, both the head of mons. Guiard, and the
Castle it self. Also M. Mongon himself on the other part, was by treason
slain. And thus within few days, they of the Religion were driven out of the
country of Velay, by the treachery and wickedness of the spoiling
irreligious Soldiers.

There stands upon the bancke of the River of Rosne a Castle called Perand.
This Castle did the Lord of the same (who from the time of the slaughter at
Paris feigned the abiuration of Religion) take, and a little town also called
Andace, fortifying the said Castle with a Garrison of Soldiers of the
Religion. About the same time also by his means was taken the Castle
Maleuall, in the country of Forest. By reason whereof the intercourse of them
of Lions was much endammaged. Therefore they being styrred up by this their
anoyance, beseeged the Castle Perand: and within certain days assalted and
won the same, M. Sanroman making small have to succor it ^ and then
overthrew all the forces thereof, that it might never anoy them afterward.

CONCERNING the assembly of states appointed to be holden by the Queen, we
have spoken before. The ancient manner of France is, that before the general
assembly of States, the particular assemblies of the states of every province
Assie together, that by deliberation they might determine, what should be
handled in the general assembly. This manner the Queen shunneth of purpose,
and gives charge to certain exquisite persons; to go into every province, and
to hear the complayntes of the people, and to bring the same unto the king and
to her. The same authority she gave also to them of the Religion, for whose
affairs special provision seemed to be made. Notwithstanding he to whom this
charge was committed, was taken at Lions, by the Lifetenant Mandelot, and was
kept in ward certain months.

THE Queen was much troubled in mind, and very careful for the avoiding of
diverse dangerous straytes. For she did perceive that they of the religion were
not only sproong up in great number, but also that they were more wise, and by
the late success also of matters, more constant and courageous: and that
therefore she should have a sore conflict with them. To these were added new
enemies, who having no regard to religion, but only a care of civil affairs,
would have the government reformed and in better state. And she was not
ignorant how that the most famous of the nobles, were both authors and also
instruments of that counsel. She knew that her son the Duke of Alancon was
an enemy unto her government: furthermore, that the King of Navarre and the
Prince of Conde were very angry with the peril and damage which they had
received in their own persons: therefore the ambicious woman suspected that
they also were of this counsel, to remove her from the government of the
Realm. The Kings health bring past all hope of recovery, and the near
approachyng of his death, was given out by his soothsayers (whose help and
counsel the Queen greatly used) which caused her to fear least according to
the custom of the laws and ordinances of the Realm the government of the
same should be set over unto the Duke of Alancon: whereby the counsels and
devises of her enemies, had an open way made for them to take effect.

To take away these inconveniences, the woman by long experience of matters and
by government in great affairs being more circumspect and subtle than the
wisest, purposed to provide all means and ways. She joined policy and force
together, that she might not fail to bring her purpose to pass. She pretended
the kings name in all causes and in every place, whom notwithstanding she made
very seldom privy to her counsels, because he was sick, as she pretended.
She very carefully provided, that the kings armies should be in a readiness at
her commandment, under the color of war against Languedoc, the which was
certainly said to be prepared, except they of the Religion in Languedoc would
receive these conditions commanded in the Edicte of Rochell: And the County
D'Retes having received a great sum of money, gathered soldiers together in
Germany. Also ye end of her policies was, that the authors of the new sturres
should be destroyed by a new murder. Above the rest d'Anuil withstood these
mischeuous devises, who being far from the Court, seemed plainly to make
delay, notwithstanding that he was oftentimes commanded in the kings name to
come: at what time he being in a great and large country most fit and
convenient for his purpose by reason of ye power of them of ye religion, seemed
to be in possibility to enjoy both ye kings army, and also the noble cities
therein, he beheld daily other enemies, who^ the queen saw to be less
appliant to do injury. Therefore there came oftentimes letters of the king to
d'Anuil: that either setting all excuse aside and leaving the province in peace
he would come unto the king, or else verily that he should be apprehended amidst
these communications of peace. And for this purpose M. Sansulpis, and M.
Villeroy were sent to d'Anuil under the color of peace, special
commandments of the Queen concerning this matter being given to M. Suz and
Mongeron, who in those parts were of great authority among the Catholics.

On the other part the Queens enemies had their secret counsels, the end
whereof was, that an assembly of States might be had even by mere
commandment, and that the government of the Realm might be restored to a
better state: concerning the which matter what we know, we will speak anon.
Therefore while the Queen sent often messengers into Languedoc concerning
peace, both d'Anuill was diligent in his affairs, and also they of the
Religion wished peace.

Nevertheless they of the religion made new delays daily by those
co^municatio^s of peace (which they called a collation) and messengers were
sent to and fro from the Court into Languedoc. These things thus continued
from January unto the month of March.

AT THE last, Henry Valoys came into Polonia, and was received with great
pomp of the Polonians. And after that the royal Funeralles belongyng unto
kings was celebrated for Sigismond, The Coronation of the King of Polonia.
who notwithstanding dyed in June in the year M.D.Lxxij. the new king was
crowned in a great assembly of the nobles and people of Polonia, at Cracouia,
by the Arche bishop of Guesuen, the eightenth of February of this present year.

M. Mombrune toward the end of the month of March, came with his army into
that part of Daulphine, which lies upon the coast of the River of Rosune,
and took certain small towns, as Loriol, Liberon, Ale^, Gran, and Roynac, and
repaired the decayed walls of Liberon and Loriol. After this, he made an
inroade and invasion of all that country, violently assayling the gates of
Valence, of L'Crest, and of Montile. And he conspired against the most noble
Cities, and specially against Montile the which conspiracies the Catholics
turned to the destruction of many. Upon this occasion the noble men of the
Religion, which lay in corners until ye time, seeing the present peril that
king over their heads, came and joined themselves with Mombrune.

WE SAID before that Orange was taken by Glandag, to give occasions of war.
Whilst he was absent, Berchon by the help and industry of certain of the
Citizens of Orange took the Castle and the City: notwithstanding part of
the townsmen were sore afearde, and they also of the Religion which dwelt there
aboutes, as if Berchan would have restored the Romish Religion, and evil
entreated them of the religion. Nevertheless he going about no new thing, gave
the^ to understand, that he held the Castle and the City in the name of
his Prince, that all Citizens, without difference of Religion might live
peaceably according to the form of the Edicte. And so their neighbors of
Auinion which seemed to be in possibility to get that City, to the which they
bare always a privy grudge, were put out of all hope to obtain the same.
Berchon was said to be very familiar with Cardinal Arminiae the Popes Legate,
but not without great suspicion of a sum of money received.

ABOUT the same time, the Catholics thought that they had occasion offered
them to get Nismes by treason. There is a little town near unto Nismes called
Margaret, of the which M. Santaial a noble man, had the government with a
strong garrison, who by the means of certain of the Catholics of Nismes,
dealt with a certain captayn of the townsmen named Deron: and promised a great
sum of money to tell him by what means he might get the City. The captain
by and by bewrayed this matter unto M. Sanroman the Liefetenant, who commanded
him to offer diligently his traueile unto Santaial, to covenant with him for
his reward, and to appoint the day and the manner of the enterprise. Then
Deron without delay, under color of a privy escape, spoke with Santaial,
received his reward, and prescribes the day, and the manner how he might
bring his purpose to pass. The which being done, he informed Sanroman of the
whole matter. The manner of this treason should be thus, namely, that one of
the gates of the city should be left open for Santaial to enter. Therefore the
gate was left open according to covenant on the day appointed, the warders
using great silence: notwithstanding all things were prepared to receive the
enemy. But none of the Catholics appeared, having intelligence of deceyt,
notwithstanding that for this purpose bands of the catholics were come out
of the country of Viuaretz and Daulphine, and from diverse other places. About
the same time also D'Anuill should have been taken by treason, which was
bewrayed, and the traitor hanged. These were two practices of great wayght to
further the Queens purpose, if they had success according to her mind.

ABOUT the same time, they of Villeneufe (of whom we spoke before) slew
certain bands of the Catholics, without loss of any one of their men: and
took a little town called Aubenac not far from the River of Rosne: and slew
the Garrison almost which remained of those that were slain of Lions.

CHRISTOPHER son of the Count Palatine, joined himself with Grave Lodowic,
who until that day had borne no Armor, according to the form of the oath
which he took at Mountes. Who brought an army of two thousand horsemen unto
his brother the Prince of Orange. And while he tarried at Mastricte the space of
two months, looking for his footeband of Gascoines, and practicing by
counsel in the mean time to take the Castle of Andwerp, was at the last very
sore charged with the kings power in the territory of Mokens, within the
dominion of Cleueland, two miles from Nijmegen. And having until the evening
valiantly withstood their force, took Sig. Lasso, a man of great fame among
the Spaniardes. The day following, about the break of the day, the kings
parts giving a fresh assault, at what time the Grave Lodowic had sent away
part of his horsemen to provide forage, and the Lance knights came on very
slowly to the battle, the Spaniardes got at the last the victory, but not
without bloodshed, the chief Captains Christopher and Lodowic being lost in
that conflicte: whose death was doubted a long time. Notwithstanding this is
certain, that they had received so many wounds before they were slain, that
they being diligently sought for among the dead bodies of such as were
slain, could not be known. This slaughter happened the seuentene of April
of this present year.

About the beginning of February, there brake forth new bands of new men in
the country of Poictou, which called themselves Politikes and Malecontentes:
of the which some professed that they sought the reformation of the realm:
other some the revenge of their parents and kinsmen which were slain in the
furies on Saint Barthelmewes day. These joined themselves with those of the
Religion: who almost about the same time had begoon war a fresh in the
conntrey of Poictou, having Monsieur L'Noe their Captain.

ALSO at the same instante almost County Mongomeri, coming out of England
into Normandy, took Sanlo, and Charent, towns near unto the Sea coast: and
in Normandy the lower he took the town called Donfro. Therefore these new
commotions of the Politikes and of the Religious caused new musters of men in
those parts, and it was said that this was the beginning of great matters,
and that many noble men would come unto this war. But whereunto this came we
will show by and by.

Almost at the same time, namely the last of February, there was great fear in
the Court. It was told the Queen that there was certain troops of horsemen
seen ryding to and fro near unto Sangerman, where the king at that time lay.
This so sudden fear caused the number to be thought the greater. M. d'Guitri
a noble man, was Captayn over those troops, which contained five hundred
horsemen. The Queen told the king hereof, being at the point of death, and
caused him to be removed out of hand from Sangerman to Paris. And she sent
messengers unto M. d'Guitri, to know of him in the kings name, what his intent
was. Who delivered unto the messengers certain petitions concerning the
reformation of the Realm, and the restoring of the authority of the states:
and so within few days after, departed, not knowing what would ensue thereof.
In the mean time the Queen apprehended many in the Court, and in diverse
places of Paris, whom she thought to be guilty of this conspiracy: among
which, of the nobility was M. Coconass, and d'Mole of Arles, one of the
familiar friends of the Duke of Alanson.

Also, at the same time the Marshalles Momorencie and Cosse were in the Court.
They within certain days after, were at the commandment of the king and
Queen apprehended by the Kings Guard, and were openly in the sight of all men,
carried into the Castle of Bastill.

The Queen also caused Rumors to be spread abroad, that they were the authors
of a bold conspiracy, concerning the intercepting of the King, and the
setting over of the kingdom to the Duke of Alancon, to the end they might
rule all things as they themselves lusted. Therefore she commanding the
household servants of the king of Nauar, and of her son the Duke of Alanson
to be taken away, caused them to be kept close prisoners, that they might go no
whether nor do any thing without keepers. She deprived D'Anuil also of the
government of Languedoc as accessarie to the said conspiracy: and she sent the
Prince d'Alphine the son of Monpenser into Daulphine with great power to be
governor of Languedoc and she wrote unto the Senate of Tholose concerning the
same deprivation of d'Anuill. Also she commanded the Lord d'Acier by her
letters, who was an enemy to d'Anuill, to aid d'Alphine in the custody of
Languedoc, and to bring unto him all the power he was able to make. All these
things were done in the kings name.

Mombrune, about the very coming of the Prince D'Aulphine, slew five Ensigns
of footmen at a town called Pontereaw.

In the mean time D'Anuill lay still, doing all things in the kings name:
neither did he enterprise any thing any whit the more when he understood of the
imprisonment of his brother. But the kings letters which Prince d'Aulphine sent
unto the lord d'Acier, were intercepted at Pusin, and came to his hands, and
by that he perceived the treason wrought against him: then began he more
openly to deal with them of the religion, and to talk also with mons.
Sanroman, and to take certain cities: but somewhat to late. For he lost the
more noble cities by his long delay. But he took Mountpellier, Boucar, Lunell,
and Pozenac and from Pozenac he was repulsed by the treason of a certain
Captain, to whom he had committed both the City and also his daughter which
was but two years old.

Two noble men beheaded
At the last, by the kings commandment, M. Coconass, and d'Mole were arayned
in the Senate of Paris, and were condemned of high treason against the kings
person and the state: for which they were put to death, and their goods
confiscate to the King Rumors were spread abroad that the Momorencies and
Marshall Cosse, were the chief authors of their conspiracies: and yet
notwithstanding it is evidently known, that neither Cononas nor d'Mole, nor
any of those which were apprehended, had committed any such thing. Men said
that the Duke of Alanson sought to flee unto Lodowic Nassau, because he knew
that treason was practiced against him. The Senate doubted to condemn them for
this cause: for that the house of Nassau were called by the king in his Edicte,
his friends. But to the end the treason might appear by the confession of
those that were apprehended, the king pronounced Lodowic Nassau to be his
enemy. And so the Senate gave sentence against them. Amidst these domestical
confusions of the court, all things were ordered either by blind treason, or
else by mad violence. Wise men blamed much the lingering delay of ye Marshals,
who deferring the time, lost all occasions to bring any thing well to pass:
and so behaved themselves, that they seemed never so much as to have those
matters in their thought. Notwithstanding it was certainly reported, that a
great number of the nobility of France, abhorring long ago the government of
the Queen, and of strangers, because they were not only rejected, but were
also in danger of their life to fill up those furies on Saint Barthelmewes
day, had determined to reuyue again the authority of the States, and to
reform all things according to the prescript of the ancient laws of the
Realm. To this also there was added a new cause, namely the dispayred health
of the King. Therefore he being dead, it was said, that their purpose was to
give the government of the Realm unto the Duke of Alanson, in the absence of
his brother, which was next heir unto the Crown. It was also necessary for
the peace and tranquillity of the Realm, that Religion should be provided for.
We will in another place set down the form of that protestation, in the which
d'Anuill declares the causes why he armed him self.

Treason also was practiced against the Prince of Conde. Who at that time was
at Amiens, the chief city of Picardie. And having intelligence of the
treason, went out of Amiens a hunting, as he pretended, according to his
woonted manner: and so coming home to his house, and making M. Tore one of the
brethren of Momorencie acquainted with his purpose, came with all posting speed
into Germany, where he was very courteously received.

Within few days after, ye king of Nauar published a bil, by which he clered
himself from all suspicio^ of the said co^spiracie against ye king. Men said yt
this was made by the subtle practice of ye Queen, yt the hatred and spite of
ye whole matter might light upon the heads of ye Marshals. And thus he
begins.

Because I understand that certain deceyuers have dishonestly and wickedly
spread abroad false rumors concerning me, by the which to the dishonor of my
name, that duty which I owe unto my sovereign Lord the King, is brought in
doubt, as though I were partaker of that conspiracy lately revealed at
Sangerman: I have (I say) for this cause entreated the Kings majesty to give
me leave to write these things, thereby evidently to signify my will unto all
men. Therefore my desire is that all men know, that the same matter is most
false and feigned, and such as never came in my mind. And I am so far from
being guilty of this fact, that I am rather persuaded (according to the bond
both of nature, and also of divine and humane laws) to spend my life and
goods, and to loose my friends, for the dignity of my sovereign Lord the King
and the safety of his faithful subjects, and by all manner of means to
withstand their enterprises, who being Rebels to the King, do trouble the
peace and tranquillity of ye realm. The like bill also was severally published
by the Duke of Alanson.

WE spoke before concerning the coming of County Mongomerie into Normandy.
And, he was not long in the town of Sanlo, but M. Matigon the Kings
Lefetenant of the lower Normandy beseeged the same. So soon as Mongomerie saw
that the same was beseeged, after deliberation had, he went out of the town
with a hundred and threescore horsemen, (for he had not two hundred in all) and
came to Danfro, which, as we said before, he had taken. Danfro is a little town
of the lower Normandy, in the territory of Passi the Duke of Alansons
dominion, which town was hitherto obscure, and now by the calamity of
Mongomerie made famous, being walled round about with a weak wall, yet
notwithstanding fortified with a strong Castle: all along the same ran the
river of Meisne. Mongomerie purposed for the refreshing of his horses to tarry
there certain days, and then to join him self to the succors of his
fellows, which came daily out of diverse parts of Normandy and of other
quarters therabouts. So soon as Mons. Matigon heard hereof, how yt Mongomerie
was within the walls of Donfro, he came without delay to Donfro, leaving part
of his army at the seege of Sanlo: and with the sound of Trumpets gathered
together from all parts a great number of those country men, and sent unto
the King for more aid. There came therefore unto him of the Kings Soldiers
from all places: the city was beseeged, and the walls suddenly battered with
great guns. Mongomerie at the first sought to deliver him self out of the
town: the which when he could not do, he left the City, and took the
Castle. He had with him scarce a hundred and fyftie Soldiers: who being out
of hope, sought all occasions, either by color of eruption, or by parley to
flee unto the enemy. The Castle was battered with ordinance. The first charge
Mongomerie valiantly withstoode, to the great hurt of his enemies: but when he
saw that his men fell away from him, and that he wanted things necessary for
the defense of him self and the Castle, he desired to parley with M.
Matigon: and yielded him self and his men unto him upon certain conditions:
namely that he and his might depart with their lives: that for certain days
he might go whether he would: and that he should depart without loss of
life in safety so soon as he had delivered up the Castle. And thus he
yielded up the castle and him self to M. Matigon. Then the Kings Soldiers
runnyng through the breaches of the walls into the Castle, slew whomsoever
they met contrary to their faith and promise. And Mongomeri was by and by
brought unto the King. But what was decreed concerning him, we will show
hereafter. And within few days Saulo and Charent were yielded up to the King.
This was the success of Mongomeries war. He was taken the xxvij. day of May
of this year.

THE King was sick daily more and more. And being sore grieved and payned
certain months, The death of king Charles
dyed the thirty day of May, being Whitsunday, otherwise called Pentecoste: he
being of the age of xxv. years. All momuments and chronicles will for ever
declare that his reign and time of government, was most disquiet and
troublesome with cruel and outrageous garboyles of civil wars, notable with
examples of unspeakable treason and cruelty, and most lamentable to all the
inhabitants of France, all order being trodden under foot by the subtle
practices of strangers. His sickness was wonderfully cloaked and in secrecy
covered: wherefore I cannot perticularly express any thing for certain. Time
shall discover and bewray every circumstance. Most certain it is, that he was
sick of a bloody flixe. And it is reported for truth among the greater part,
that ye blood issued from diverse parts of his body, that in his bed he
tumbled and tossed and could take little rest, horribly cursing and blaspheming
the name of God, which he had used to do even from his childehood, and that in
great fume and anger he called and repeated oftentimes the name of the
Momorencies. And because it was vehemently suspected that he was poisoned, to
make him with more ease to vomit (men say) that he was bolstered up with
pillowes that his feet might lie hyer than his head, whereby he cast out such
abundant store of blood, that he dyed within few hours after: And he did
nothing but blaspheme until the last gasp. Concerning his last will and
testament, as the Queen offered the same to the Senate of Paris, we will speak
in another place.

WE spoke before of the victory gotten over the Prince of Oranges part at
Neijmegen. The Spaniards being proudly puffed up with the success thereof,
four thousand of them, to whom Don d'Auila, Liefetenant of the Castle of
Andwerpe, and also Captain of the army had promised the pay of xxxviij.
months, which was due unto them, if they got the victory against Lodowic:
these four thousand, I say, raising sedition against the City of Andwerpe
(being the most famous and rich town of Marchantes in all Europe) brake forth
in the night by a bridge which they had set to the walls, the Spaniardes which
were in the Castle suffering the same. Then coming into the market place, and
placing watch and ward in diverse places, made a great cry for payment of
their money: threatening the general spoil of the City if they were not
satisfied out of hand. Concerning the which matter, while the Citizens of
Andwerpe consulted with the Kings deputy, the Spaniardes in the mean time by
the space of two months spoiled and took their pleasure of the City in
most shameful manner. The Duke Reguizens the Kings deputy, fayning that he
was greatly displeased with this sedition of the Spaniardes, (for there are
some which believe that he was the author and cause of all that tumult, because
the states of the low country had before that time refused to pay that money
which he often times required of them) having at the last obtained of the
Spaniards ye sum of CCCC.M. Crowns, pardoned the Spaniardes for the
sedition, and professed with taking an oath that he would never for that matter
either generally or particulerly execute any punishment upon them: whereat all
the States were not a little offended. For of this tumult this happened, that
the Prince of Oranges part being greatly abashed with the slaughter at
Nijmegen, received now again courage and boldness, all the while that the
Spaniardes continued the tumult in Andwerpe. Moreover it happened that while
the Spaniardes were occupied in receiving and paying of money, on Whitsunday in
Saint Michaels house, which stands upon the key or shore of the River of
Scelde, the Prince of Oranges Navy, took and carried out of the channel of
Schelde in the sight of many standers by upon the shore, four and twenty
ships of war, laden with gunnes, armor, and victual. This is most
certain, that there could happen nothing more convenient to promote the
affairs of the Prince of Orange, nor any thing more effectual to overthrow
the force of the Spaniardes, than that tumult raised in Andwerpe. The which
shall daily more and more appear by the success of the same.

Yea come Lord Jesus.
TO THE READER.
For So Much as in this history we have in diverse places briefly touched the
affairs of the low country, we thought it necessary to add to the end of
this work this Epistle following, which contains a sum of the tumults of
the low country: The same being at the first published in the Dutch tongue in
the year of our Lord. M.D.LXXIII. in the month of September, and afterward by
a certain Dutchman turned into Latin, and sent unto us with this title as
follows.

A Supplication to the Kings Majesty of Spain, made by the Prince of Orange,
the States of Hollande and Zealand, with all other his faithful subjects of the
low Cou^treyes, presently suppressed by the tyranny of the Duke of Alba, and
Spaniardes. By which is declared the original beginning of the commotions and
troubles happened in the said low country.
MOst Sovereign Lord, your Majesty's most obedient and lamenting subjects of
the low Countries, as they have often pondered with them selves, the natural
affection and fatherly good inclination, which your Majesty has (since the
time that your grace by the power of almighty God received the dominion and
regiment of the said countries) always and continually showed: so have they
had a sure hope and undoubted affiaunce, that your Majesty as well upon their
daily complaints and lamentations, as upon the pitiful declarations and
remonstrances of some christian Princes and Potentates unto your Majesty,
mercifully have considered of our pitiful and most miserable suppression,
wherewith we by reason of the great and unsupportable force, arrogance, and
wicked regiment of the Duke of Alba are suppressed, and mercifully have
regarded the most miserable ruin and destruction of these your natural low
countries, who always have bin most faithful and obedient, both to your
Majesty, and also your Graces predecessors. Not doubting but that your
Majesty would grievously have been moved, that he under pretense of
protecting and defending the Romish religion, under the color of your
Majesty's name, should presume to frustrate and break all ye privileges,
customs, and rightes, whereunto your Majesty and your predecessors have
sworn, persecuting your faithful subjects in body and goods, and destroying
your countries, in none other sort, but as if he had declared himself to be
an open enemy of your Majesty and the subjects of the same.

Therefore have they always earnestly attended, that your Majesty no longer
suffering the said force, would have provided some convenient means for ye
safegarde of your countries, and deliverance of your poor and suppressed
subjects, and have a respect to the duetifull office of a king, whom the
almighty God, the king of all kings has placed and ordained as a protector of
the righteous, and a fatherly pastor of the people under your subjection, to
defend and preserve them from all force and violence: and likewise to remember
the manifold and faithful services, which your said countries and subjects,
have from time to time most faithfully don to your Majesty and your
predecessors.

But they now (to their extreme greek) considering that all their former
supplications are as nothing regarded and in vain, and that all other the
remonstrances of sundry Princes and Potentates, have sorted no such effect as
might have turned to their comfort and consolation, and they in their
consciences assuring themselves, that your Majesty has no reasonable occasion
upon evil will or displeasure, so to alienate and turn your self from your
lamentable subjects: can not but undoubtedly suspect, that through malice and
false information of some, who having more regard to their private lust and
appetite, tha^ to the service of your Majesty, have daily labored to bring
your Majesty's countries into your displeasure, Wherein they have always most
manifestly and unfeignedly pretended and trauayled, not only by letting and
defending that our humble supplications and faithful warnings should come to
your Majesty's ears, misconstruing the same to the worst, and peruersly
accusing them to your Majesty, thereby to bring the country into dissension
and commotion, and so under your name to suppress and make desolate the same,
and so with the goods and blood of your subjects to quench their greedy and
insatiable appetite.

This is that (O most sovereign King) which your said subjects do, and have
not without occasion esteemed to be the greatest calamity that might happen
unto them, as considering that the way and means whereby they might complain
and show their griefs to your Majesty, as to their bountiful and natural
Protector (so by God appointed as a refuge in their extremity) is by the
ungodly dealing of their enemies taken away from them: a thing which always
has bin permitted to unreasonable creatures: namely to suffer them in their
extremity and need to sue for remedy and redress.

And therefore although they had resolved and taken in hand with patience to
attend the time of redress, thinking yt your Majesty would at last have
opened your ears and eyes to hear and see their miserable estate, from which
your Majesty by reason of their said evil willers is now let. But now
considering in the end their suppression, the longer the more to increase and
to become more insufferable, tending not only to their damage and destruction,
but also of your majesty's heritage and countries, which in times past have
flourished in all prosperity, and now come to ruin: they could not for the
faithful obedience and aliance sake wherein they are bound to your Majesty and
their native country, but now once again by writing, request your Majesty
to consider and weigh the original occasion of the desolation of your
countries, and by whose means the same is come to pass, and consequently
execute the office of a true King, in defending the righteous, and delivering
your countries from this tyranny and oppression.

And first we humbly beseech your Majesty to call to mind and consider,
that these your countries in times past having bin divided amongst sundry
Lords and rulers, are since by marriages, agreementes, and mutual treaties, in
time, and orderly by lawful succession and conueniences come under the house
of Burgondie, and afterward, by means of marriages contracted with the most
famous house of Austria, and consequently allied with the most mighty
kingdom of Spain, yet always with express condition, that every and
singular the countries and provinces should possess and enjoy their own
policies, rights and liberties in times paste accustomed, without that any
province or country should be burdened of the dominion of the other, or by any
means be deprived of their customs or liberties, but be bound jointly to live
one with another under one Prince and head, as many children under one father,
to the intent with one accord to defend their Prince and common weal against
al strangers and foreign force.

Also the Princes of the country willing as fathers to show and declare their
love and affection to every one, did at their solemnizatio^ and entering into
their dominion and rule, by a solemn oath bind themselves to use and keep
each country in their rightes and franchises, without suffering that any of
them should be enfringed or deminished, or that ye one Province should have
dominion or rule over the other, much less be subject unto any foraine
dominion or power: upon which conditions he is accepted and taken as a supreme
Lord and Governor over the countries, and thereuppon receives the oath of
obedience and faithfulness of his subjects.

Of which the premises needs not any further or larger rehearsal, whilst that
undoubtedly your majesty does sufficiently remember, how that the Emperor
Charles, of most noble memory, following the presidentes of his predecessors,
and acknowledging that the said oath of solemnization is the only and right
fundation, upon which does consist as well the might and authority of a Prince,
as the faith and obedience of his subjects, did in his life time, and presence
of your majesty, cause your Majesty to receive the said countries under the
said oath, and swear your Majesty to the joyful income in all the lands and
most of the towns, as next successor and only heir of his imperial
majesty: and afterward the same Emperal majesty departing out of these
countries, and your Majesty receiving the full dominion, and administration of
the Land, did once again, in presence of the deputied of the countries then
assembled, rehearse and strongly confirm the said privileges. So that in all
times past the said countries have enjoyed and bin ruled by their former
privileges and liberties.

Out of which has followed such faithfulness and obedience of the subjects
toward their Prince, and such unity and love amongst each other, that the
countries by god his providence, have flourished with most happy prosperity,
the Princes then adorned with all honor and high dignities, and greatly
redoubted and feared of their enemies.

And because it needs not to rehearse any thing out of the old histories,
being notwithstanding explenished with many presidents, it has appeared in all
the wars of the Imperial majesty, what earnest care he had to the defense
and mayntenaunce of his countries in rest and quietness.

Likewise your Majesty can well remember, that he taking his leave of these
countries, did specially and earnestly recommend the state thereof unto your
majesty: Yea your majesty being at his arrival burdened with grievous wars
and extreme charges, has by experience found that all your subjects both
great and small, every one to his state and ability, have bin ready to
venture both life and goods in service of your Majesty. Wherein as well the
Lords and nobles, as commons, have so acquitted and behaved themselves, that
your majesty has vanquished and overcome your enemies, gotten great praise
and renown of al kings and potentates, and made a final end of al wars and
dissentions, wherewith many years before your auncetors and countries were
troubled.

Now if it might please your Majesty, (which your lamentable and faithful
subjects do most humbly require) to enquire of and consider the original
occasions of the alterations of such and good quiet prosperity, into such
miserable commotions and extremities, wherewith the countries are now
suppressed: your majesty shall find them to spring out of the malice and envy
which some (being about your Majesty) do bear to the prosperity and welfare
wherewith God almighty has blessed your countries and subjects.

Which envy and cancred malice, being further incensed and stuffed with
insatiable avarice and unmeasurable prodigality, has brought the^ to such
cruelty and tirannie, that they altogether forgetting al affection and service
which they did owe unto the country wherein they have gotten great honor and
benefits, have (to ye great prejudice of the service of your Majesty and
common wealth of these countries) prooured by all means and practices this
most heinous fire of commotion, to the intent to aspire to the dignity surpassing
the states of the land, yea of your majesty.

And knowing well that to compass that devise, it was a matter impossible, the
customs and liberties of the cou^tryes remaining in force, which do altogether
contrary their wicked pretense: considering besides, how diligent and
faithful they of the said countries were every one in his vocation (according
to their oath) to stand to the maintenance of the same: they attempted in
perverse manner to interpret to your Majesty the doings and procedings of the
Lords, governors, and states of the land, tending to the mayntenaunce of the
said rightes, and liberties, in such sort as if they tended to disobedience
or rebellion toward your Majesty.

Amongst which, specially some being spiritual persons, have by all means
attempted and sought, under pretense and shadow of religion to confederate
with other foraine prelates, and so by secret attempts and practices, to bring
the country in hatred of your Majesty, to the intent that they with their
confederates which are by oath allied not with your Majesty, but with strange
rulers and countries in Italy, and else where, specially with the Pope of
Room, might here bear rule and governance, etc. and as possibility and
commodity served, to enlarge and confirm the same.

For when they first, perceived that in all the countries here abouts yea over
all Christendom, their rude and manifest abuses, and errors, by reason of the
negligence and avarice of the priests were discribed, and specially when it
began to grieve the chief and notablest persons, that they which ought only
to meddle with instructing of the people, in the faith and fear of God, and to
execute his service with all fidelity, according to the example of the
Prophets and Apostles, did in stead thereof, not only contrary to God his
commandment, but also to the decrees of the former Popes, and to al
ordinances of the old counsels, yea against all statutes and vsages of Princes
and countries take upon them to deal in worldly and Civil policies: yea also
in matters touching warfare and rule of countries, seeking to suppress all
degrees, and to reserve the general government too themselves, taking in
hand too bring all estates in disdain and hatred of the Princes, as well the
subjects of your Majesty, as of diverse other kings and Potentates, accusing
them slanderously with sedition and rebellion: whereby they have styrred and
provoked in all cuntries, troubles, and dissension, wars and bloodshed,
setting the subjects at discord with their rulers, and the rulers against the
subjects, and generally turned all things vpside down, and brought in
execrable confusion and error, not esteeming who was endamaged, so as they
might atchieue the accomplishment of their rule and dominion, and bring all
things under their rule and authority.

And to that intent, have they sought, to plant in this country the
inquisition, devised and invented in Spain, by certain Jews, and Renegados,
by that means to break all privileges, rightes, and ancient customs, and to
make frustrate all sworn contracts, vsages, and counselles, and so to get a
full power and dominion over all your Majesty's faithful servants, which stand
to the oath which they have made to your Majesty, not acknowledging any
foraine Lords, spiritual or temporal, which might seek by false accusations to
impute unto your subjects, heresy and rebellion, to the intent thereby to
attain to their purpose.

For better accomplishing whereof have they by force urged and brought in the
new Bishops, contrary to all landrights, and sworn privileges, to the
empairing of your Majesty's authority: chosing them not for virtue, prudence,
or learning (being most of them, of the most rude and vnlearnedst sort) but
only for that they take them, as faithful and true assistentes, in the
executing of their tyranny and cruelty.

Their said ungodly enterprises and consequences of the same being the longer
the more espied, have the most notablest Lords, Governors, and Gentlemen, with
the towns and country, given intelligence and knowledge to your Majesty by
continual supplications, remonstrances and other possible means, how much
the authority of your Majesty should be empaired, shortened and deminished,
by the said Inquisitors and Bishops, being most of them strangers and
outlanders, by oath bound unto foraine Princes, and (as they pretend) exempt
of your jurisdiction, and by the same have alleged the evident impossibility
to bring in such innouations, and novelties, but that it would tend to the
utter ruin and destruction of the whole country: seeing that it was most
apparent that the bringing in thereof was but a borrowed cloak to shadow their
doings, in abusing of your Majesty, and suppressing of such as would control
their wicked and most notorious procedings and abuses, which they themselves
can scarce conceal. Of which the number in these countries is so great and
manifold, and daily does yet more increase: that if your Majesty would have
bin ruled by their persuasions and counsel in executing of rigor and
extremities, they would have made your Majesty a king without subjects, and
your subjects without rulers, as is most notorious by the innumerable number of
those, which in these countries have under pretense of religion been executed
and murdered, as well with fire and water as with the sword: besides an
infinite multitude which are fled out of the country, bearing with them all
occupations and notable sciences to the instructing of others, and unspeakable
prejudice of your Majesty and countries.

Whereupon your Majesty was in the end occasioned to a myld moderation of the
placardes, by the same declaring that your meaning was not to bring in the
Inquisition: which likewise was by the Duchess of Perma, and the Lords and
Governors of the country in the behalf of your Majesty, solemnly promised
to all the Towns and subjects, and accordingly published by open
proclamations, by commandment of the Magistrates. But shortly after, all that
was over turned by means of the aforsaide persons, who in deed seem to have
firmly persuaded your majesty, that such was to the diminishing of your
majesty's reputation and dignity, unjustly alleging, that your subjects
would withdraw them selves from the duetifull obedience of your majesty. So
that it is evident that your majesty upon their informations, was moved to
send the Duke of Alba out of Spain into these countries, to the intent with
arms and force to compel your Majesty's subjects, to that which they of them
selves have with all humility and obedience at all times offered.

And notwithstanding that the aforesaid Lords and Towns of these countries
had good occasion to think that they should be greatly wronged through force
of foraine soldiers, and rule of a strange Governor, not being of their
Country, nor of your Majesty's kindred or descent, but such a one as did bear
toward them a most cancred hatred, had means sufficient to prevent his
coming into the country: yet because he came in the name of your Majesty,
and to make evident that they had not rebelled or declined from the obedience
of your Majesty, trusting to their conscience and right, have willingly and
honorably received him with all such as it pleased your Majesty to send with
him, opening to him the gates of the Towns, delivered into his hands the
fortresses and strong holds, and entertained garrisons, only for that he
declared, that such was the will and pleasure of your Majesty to be thereby
assured of the fidelity and obedience of your subjects, which were accused to
your Majesty as rebels and traitors. Therefore, reason would have required,
that the aforesaid Duke of Alba should by all means and diligence have informed
your Majesty of such your subjects true obedience and inclination: and before
he had proceeded to the execution of rigor, taken good and full information of
their complaints: and chiefly touching the bringing in of these new Bishops
and Inquisitors, contrarying God and all rightes, and that upon good and true
report thereof made to your Majesty, redress and remedy might have been had.

But now clean contrariwise, so soon as he was received and was in
possession of the force and rule of the Country, has without keeping of any
order of Justice, or having regard to the landrightes and privileges whereunto
your Majesty is sworn: not only put to death and chased away the most part
of the Lords and governors of these countries, by your Majesty elected and
placed, but also generally declared all the privileges and liberties to be
forfaited, and the Country to be used as a country newly conquested by force
of arms, to the use of him and his associates, and so consequently freely to
deal with the lives and goods of your subjects, as their lusts and appetites
shall require.

And if possibly might be laid before your Majesty's eyes the excessive force
and not heard off cruelties which here have bin used since the beginning of his
government, by spoiling, robbing, chasing away, and desolating: by
apprehending, taking, banishment, and confiscating of goods, yea by burning,
hanging, heading, hacking, racking, and most horrible and not before heard off
torments and murtherings of the Subjects of your Majesty, as well Noble as
innoble, poor as rich, young as old, widows and orphans, men, women, and young
maidens, of what state, quality, or condition soever they were: we doubt not
but that your Majesty would be amazed to hear the rehearsal thereof: yea and
would be grieved at the same, that under your name such unnatural cruelty
and tyranny should be used as neither Phalaris, Nero, Pharao, Herod, or any
other Heathen Tyrant could have invented the like, as now is used toward your
faithful subjects, which with their lives and goods have always labored to
keep the Crown on your Majesty's head, against al your enemies.

And that your Majesty would also have taken remorse of so many innocent
infants chased away out of their native Country into strange lands: so many
poor widows and orphans, and also upon the lamentable cry of the whole
Country which now are suppressed by this most horrible tirant.

For there is none which could defend or preserve his goods from their
avarice, their wives or daughters from their filthy lusts, or their lives from
their bloudthirstinesse. Nobility, Riches, manhood, or good service done in
times past, could nothing prevail, if once he was entered into hatred of them.
And without taking regard to the Iudisdictions or ordinary courses of the
country, has stopped the Jurisdictions of all Justices, either in civil or
criminal causes which in any wise concern the confiscations pronounced in his
bloody Counsel, in such sort as neither spiritual or temporal persons,
widows or orphans, hospitals, Spittels, Lazarous houses, or other which had
good and deuable revenues, amongst that confiscated goods, could get any
payment or satisfaction. But the Duke of Alba has gotten all into his hands,
without any mind to discharge any the premises, notwithstanding the diverse
and earnest solicitations and requests to him made in that behalf by the
states of the Countries, delaying the poor agreeued subjects with dilatorie
and vnfounded apostillations, the one always contrarying the other, and
without sending over the matters to the prouincial Counsels or ordinary
Justices, to the intent to make the^ despair of any satisfaction to be made by
the court, where by process they have bin summoned to their excessive charge,
and upon sums of small value have been forced to greater charges than the
principal has amounted unto, not suffering any lawful transport to be made of
any one debte for the other. To consider what number of honest women and young
maidens they have with force and violence ravished, and that the one after the
other: yea misused some even to the death. How often have they compelled the
husband to remain with the wife, and the father with the daughter, to force
them with their eyes to behold their most vilanous filthiness, and made them
as instruments to the accomplishing of their luxurious lust, using such
unnatural and beastly fashions, that we are in a manner abashed and astonished
to declare the same to your Majesty. How often has it happened, that the
husband seeking to defend his wife or daughter of their rauishment, that they
have altogether as furious curres, run out of the house together crying Spania,
Spania, murdering a number of the poor commons. How m ny women great with
child have they ripped up the bellies of, and murdered the fruit in their
wombes.

Have they not fleyed and pulled off the skin of some men being alive, and
headded their drums with the same skin? others have they not tosted with small
fires, nipped the^ with red burning tongs even to the death, and consequently
murdered a number, and made them dye a hundredth deaths? How many women have
they chased from their husbands, and children from their parents: yea what is
there under the heavens so honest or holy which they have not defiled and
trodden under foot? Verily amongst all other Nations, yea amongst the
cruellest. the burying of the dead, has always bin permitted and reverenced.

But this Tirant in the despyte of God and nature, is so obstinate and
perverse, that he has caused to be taken out of the grave the carcasses of
the dead, and conveyed under the gallows, under pretense that some of them
dying without shrifte, and others without houseling, had forfaited their goods,
which he took as confiscated. What is there amongst men more holy and honest,
than is the state of Matrimony being the only and true foundation of all
mutual love and friendship, the original of the love, bond of peace, and the
direct way of al dealings amongst men: whereof this Tyrant makes so little
account, that he seuereth the men from their wives, and the wives from their
husbands, being joined together in the congregation before God and his Angels,
clean contrary to the commandment and institution of almighty God, and
rightes, and al under pretense that they were joined together in the way of
heresy: but to say truth, it is only in spoiling manner, to match the
beautiful and rich Matrons with his Soldiers and ruffians, and finally by
his cruelty burst in sunder the original band tending to the intertayning of
all mutual love: murdering and killing the women which in time of extremity
had relieved their husbands, and the children for succoring the necessity of
their parents, yea those which had only with a letter comforted any of them.
And to the end that nothing should by him be left undefiled, has he trodden in
most despitefull manner under foot the most holy Sacrament of Baptism,
whereby we are incorporated in the body of Jesus Christ and communion of God
his Church, willing and commanding that those children which were Christened
openly and lawfully according to the institution of Jesus Christ, in the name
of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, should once again be baptized, under
pretense that they were Christened as Heretics, and repugnant contrary to all
godly and natural rightes, ordinances of the Church, and decrees of Councels.

Furthermore it needs not to rehearse to your Majesty, the grievous exactions
invented by him, one after another, and without measure does urge of the poor
commons, as the hundrethes, twenties, yea the tenth penie, of all goods,
mouables and immouables, of all goods bought and sold, demanding, yea and
urging by execution contrary to the advice and counsel of all estates in these
countries, not of the clear gains of the same, but the tenth, and twenty
penie of the capital sum of all sales. Whereby not only all trades and
trafficques, are abandoned out of the land, but likewise the subjects of the
same, deprived from the getting of the living, of them, their wives, and
children. And notwithstanding that the states, have at sundry times done their
endeavor largely to infourme the said Duke of ye inconveniences which might
follow upon the said demand: and requested that he would in their behalf
advertise your Majesty thereof: would not hearken to them but shaked them off
without any comfort: although he was by intercession of the counsel and
estates of the land thereunto most earnestly instanced, and so thereby caused
the decay of al merchandise, compelled the inhabitants through misery to flee
away into other countries. And yet it is apparent, yt when any necessity is
toward for payment of the soldiers, no money is to be had, in such sort that
the Spanishe soldiers are at after dele in their payment xxviij. months and
the Dutch most of them constrained to go a begging from door to door: of
which some have by famine and misery perished. Notwithstanding the great
sums which the states have levied and paid to the paying of the said
soldiers, and yet nevertheless have his garnisons consumed and eaten out the
most part of ye towns, and suppressed ye same with ye Seruitio, which they
have bin forced to minister to the said Spanish soldiers, and those which have
given most money, as well to him, as to Don Frederico, or any of theirs, have
bin the first that were discharged of the said bondage of Seruitio. With
which garrisons he has most vexed ye towns situated within the heart of the
country: leaving the borders and other places of importance without any
garrison, whereby in some places, things are come to alteration: besides that by
reason of lack of pay, his Spanish soldiers are fallen into a most licentious
and unspeakable order of life, threatening, beating, robbing, spoiling, and by
all manner of cruel exactions using your subjects: whereby is manifest, that
under pretense of your Majesty's name and religion, he sets nothing but to
fill his greedy and bloudthirsty appetite, being to the contrary most notorious
that he has so little regard to the service of your Majesty, as to the
maintenance of the common weal of the low countries, which he suffers
utterly to perish and go to ruin.

But what needs it with words to express this, as if he had not sufficiently
manifested whereunto his proceedings have tended, showing it being blinded with
his most insatiable presumpteousnesse, and desire of vain glory: as in a token
of a Tropheum, or sign of victory in his notorious proceedings, as before
rehearsed has caused to be erected within the castle of Andwerpe, a brazen
Image standing upon the nobility and states of the country. We leave now
vnrehearsed what his meaning was thereby, but when, or where, has it been
seege that any Tirant in his life time has caused any such Image to be
erected. We find that the Roman Emperors and Kings, which in a manner had
brought the whole world under their subjection, have sometimes caused to be
erected Images of brass and stone: as at this present the Popes of Rome, who
pretend to he gods vicar, yet it is done by ordinance and consent of the
counsel and commons, or at the least by their advise and sufferaunce: but that
they in their life time have done such, is not to be found by any examples or
Cronicles, considering it to be a manifest token of mad arrogancy and
insupportable pride. We find only that Nabuchodonozar, who caused himself to
be honored as a God, set up the like Image, commanding all men to kneel and
bow unto the same: yet durst he not do it but by consent of the chief and
nobles of his country.

But this Tirant does as well in his presumpteous arrogantie as in execrable
tirannie surpass all other tiraunts: who as though he would not only
advance himself to the room of theking, but likewise in God his place: has
without the advice, counsel, or ordinance of any, in his life time erected
this proud Image, to the defacing and emparing of your Majesty's dignity,
showing thereby his force and tyranny wherewith he has subdued and brought
under foot these countries.

And in like manner he has not been afraid, following the example of the
tirant Herod: to place himself upon the market place of Andwerpe, in your
Majesty's stool and cloth of estate: which never had bin touched by any
Lieftenant before, sitting there representing the absence of your Majesty, as
an Idol, and under pretense of publishing of a pardon: which never Queen,
Duke, or any Governors or Gouernaunts of these countries have done the like:
tending to the manifest disestimation and abasing of your Majesty's honor and
dignity.

These proceedings, most sovereign king are become so apparent and evident
unto all the world, that all strange nations, and Potentates, have a terror
and execration thereat, insomuch as even the Duke of Alba his soldiers, and
servants, do protest and say, that they can not esteem such for good, much
less that the service of your Majesty, and welfare of the country, should
therein consist.

Besides, that we can not think that your Majesty being thereof sufficiently
and truly infourmed, would permit such forces and violences, for it was never
heard that any King or Potentate, has so unmercifully dealt with his subjects.
Your Majesty's auncetours of most famous memory, have in most mild and Gentle
manner behaved them selves toward their subjects, that they have thereof given
a most laudable example not only to their successors, but also to other
Christian Princes, Dukes, and rulers, that when so ever any dissension was
risen between the subjects and Magistrates, by reason of misgouernement, and
taken arms in hand: and being again brought under obedience by their Lords
and rulers, were never molested with these examples of cruelty, but by
express capitulation from word to word, confirmed all their privileges and
liberties, and the same to enjoy their full effect.

So as we should greatly wrong your Majesty, if we should persuade our
selves that your Majesty were so far diuerted from the example of your
predecessors, and from the duty of all other Christian Princes and
Potentates, that in stead of ministering right and Ius ice to your obedient
subjects, and giving audience to their most pitiful complaints, should send
such a tirant in such sort cruelty to murder them, destroying the country,
and burthening your subjects with most intolerable slavery, servitude, and
thraldom.

And now the said Duke presenting unto us his feigned pardons, under the name
of your Majesty, for our rebellions and misdemeanors (as he terms them) we
could not accept the same without depriving of your Majesty's dignity.

Knowing well, that your Majesty will not, before having heard the justness of
our cause, condemn us of rebellion. Where is there any that justly have
informed your Majesty of our dealings, or when did ever your Majesty give
ear unto any, but such as were our manifest enemies? Reason requires both
parts to be heard, before sentence should be pronounced. And therefore in the
Cronicles of Alexander the great, is much commended: who whenever he heard
any parties, leaned with his head upon his shoulders with one of his ears
closed, and being asked why he so did, answered that the latter party ought as
well have audience as the first, which order has always bin had in estimation
of all nations, as being conformable to all natural rightes. So as no
offendour, what grievous crimes soever he had committed, shall be judged or
condemned, but that he shall first answer unto such accusations as are alleged
against him.

Now most merciful and sovereign Lord and King, we do most humbly prostrate
our selves under the foot of your Majesty, most heartily requesting the same,
yt it would please your Grace to bend toward us one ear, and (as in a
ballaunce) equally to wey our estates. Your Majesty has by posts letters and
other means, bin informed of this present estate, and our mouths have bin
closed up, our tongues pearsed with red burning Irons, and our lips seared up
with burning tongs, because we should not give our necessity to understand. The
ways have as yet bin taken from us, so that our lamentable cries could never
come unto, or pearce the ears of your majesty.

How then can your Majesty condemn us of rebellion (which alwais we have had
in hatred) because that ye Duke of Alba, does seek to bring us under his
subjection with his letters of pardon, and we nothing esteeming of the same:
which he perceiving, and that with force he can not (by god his providence)
prevail, we cannot therefore accept his said letters, as being direct to us who
never strayed from your obedience, except it were that we would take and
acknowledge the Duke of Alba for our king: for him only have we resisted and
not your Majesty, whom we with life and goods (so long as it shall please God
to permit us the same) will faithfully serve and obey. And therefore his pardon
does nothing touch us, which tends only to the Towns which have bin seduced
from the Kings obedience. But we mark his intent, knowing that either he would
be king himself, or else that we by enticement of his subtle pardons should
condemn our selves. For we receiving pardon, must acknowledge our selves
gilty of commotions and rebellion against our King, of tumult and sedition, yea
of heresy and declining from the Christian faith, and in fine, to the
depriving of the honor of God and the kings Majesty. This is his seeking,
that by receiving of his false and fained pardons, we should by our
subsignations and seals confirm the same, to the intent that he hereafter
might thereby defend and excuse himself of tyranny, before your Majesty and
al other christian Princes and Potentates, saying, that if we had not found
our selves culpable in these grievous offenses for which we were punished and
tormented, we would never have received any remiss or pardon.

Wherein we take God, the searcher and knower of all hearts, and your Majesty
to witness, that if we have committed any such offenses, as by the said
pardon are laid to our charge, that we do altogether refuse all pardon, but
desire as the most wickedst and vilest creatures on earth to make satisfaction
for our offenses with our blood, and do not refuse, O most merciful King, one
after another, to suffer most extreme torments, if it may be found that we
have offended in such order as is presumed.

And do request the Duke of Alba, (if any petition will take place with him)
that all such as come to him for pardon, acknowledging the pretended offense,
that he without showing of mercy, do entreat them in such sort as their
offenses (according to right have) deserved, commending him therein in giving or
maintayning any faith or credit with him as one so unfaithful to god and his
king, as has not bin abashed so greatly to abuse and contemn their majesty's.

But what is it, it shall not be found that ever we have thought any such
matter, much less in effect showed ye same. We have always bin faithful and
seruisable to our King, and sought to serve God, the father of our Lord Jesus
Christ in spirit and truth, according to his word and commandment, so far
as our feeble nature would permit, even to the last drop of our blood.

But considering that the Duke of Alba in stead of executing equity and
Justice, and hearing of their complaints and greefes, and persecuting of your
Majesty's promises, has contrary to all right and reason, and our rightes and
privileges, suppressed us with most cruel tyranny, destroyed our Countries,
and used us more severely, than ever Jews or Turks have don against their
vaquished enemies. And in the mean space has he accused us to your Majesty,
and all other christian Potentates with false accusations of rebellion and
heresy: and we never could come to our answer, or receive any comfort in the
universal world. So as by necessity we have bin forced to take the arms in
hand, and by all means possible sought to defend our poor native Country
from such execrable tyranny: and rather with one accord to spend our lives,
than to fall into the hands of such a Tyrant: wherein we mean to persist,
except that it please your Majesty with merciful ears to attend to our
complayntes, and minister to us Justice against such oppression and tyranny.
For God be thanked, we are not so ill instructed in his word, but that we know
very well, that as well our life as death consists in his hands, and that
this death which no man can escape, is but as a ready path to the life
everlasting.

Therefore, seeing our death may be a pleasure to other, we choose rather to
dye an honorable death in the behalf of the liberties and common weal of our
Country, than to fall into such servitude, and become footestooles unto most
arrogant aliants, who always have hated us. For at the least we shall thereby
leave to our succors such a good fame, as it may be said, that their
Predecessors had rather with renown to dye with honor, than live in all
bondage and shame.

We contend for the liberty of our consciences, in defense of our wives and
children, our blood and goods, that is to say, whether the Duke of Alba with
his accomplices shall according to his self will be a Lord and Governor, or
that we to the behoof of your Majesty, O most Sovereign King, shall defend it
from him. We know that the limits of our lives are set, and shall not by the
pardon of the Duke of Alba surpass the same. Therefore we only desire your
Majesty, that it may please the same to weye and consider our cases, and not
to suffer, that we by accepting such pardons, should for ever be reputed as
rebels to God and our King, which we never thought.

For we are fully persuaded, that although we had received those pardons, yet
would it nothing have prevailed for safeguard of our lives, for thereby the Duke
of Alba might have had the better action against us to proceed with most
severity, and might better have answered for himself, if we had confessed our
selves gilty of rebellion, both against God and the King his Majesty. For then
no man would have moved us, although we had been slain and murdered as
disturbers of the peace and common wealth and not worthy to live.

And although it were not so, yet it is apparent by all the Duke of Alba his
proceedings, that he means to observe no faith with us, for seeing that he
has openly perpetrated the oath which the Duches of Parma, with all the Lords
and governors of the country, in the name of your Majesty, had sworn so
solemnly to these towns: yet has he in these latter wars, sufficiently
expressed his perverse meaning in diverse towns, as at Monts in Henauld has he
contrary to his oath, caused a number of Burgeses to be hanged, at Naerden he
has executed his cruelty in such sort as in a town of like bigness has not
ben hard of: and now at Harlem has he or at the least in his name, Don
Frederico assured the soldiers of their lives, and thereunto certain Lords
as pledges they bound themselves: and yet has he even to the young pages:
caused them to be murdered one with another, and their naked carcasses to the
scandale of all women, and virgins, left lying upon the scaffold a day and a
night. And such as had consented to the delivery of the town, and were entered
into his service, has he caused to be carried to the Galies, and upon the
Fuycke before Harlem when he had promised the soldiers their lives, suffered
them to perish with hunger, saying: yt he had assured them of their lives, and
not of meat and drink. As also the Burgeses of Harlem, whom he had assured
their lives, has he compelled to be Myners before the town of Alkmer, where
they are by the inhabitants slain: which does pass all barbarous tyranny and
cruelty, and is a most manifest token wherewith he seeks to maintain his
untrue proceedinges.

So yt it is evident yt he means not to observe any oaths or promises, but
for a small time: to ye intent he might the better have his will of others, and
because he might the better hereafter defend his case, against your Majesty,
and other Princes, does produce this pardon: for if we do accept ye same we
must needs acknowledge our selves guilty of such offenses, as he lays to our
charge, and is not bound to the observing of any oath: for by ye counsel holde^
at Constance, it was above ij. hundred years enacted yt no faith is to be kept
with heretics.

For whereas he does in his pardon subtly allege yt such offenses as have been committed, were don more upon evil suggestio^, and evil will, tha^ of their
own nature and inclination. This is but a subtle policy, wherewith he me^t to
deceive ye simple, and bring them under his yoke: and to furnish himself of
power to suppress all such as he thinks good, and that without reproach of
any, seeing that it stands in his judgment who has offended the premises
or not.

But once consider most sovereign King, how that the righteous God has
deceived this subtle dealer in his proceedinges, for in this pardon wherein he
pretends most grievously to accuse us, he does by express words confess,
that he can by no means think that we could not have been so altered or
changed, but upon evil suggestion, or else we should have continewed in all
faith and willingness, which we always have showed to your Majesty.

For if it be so, that we before this last offense (as he terms it) have
showed to your Majesty all obedience as he himself witnesses? Why has he
then used such cruelty and persecution? Wherefore has he in such sort
destroyed the towns, burned the villages, and places: murdered the
inhabitants, and spoiled them of all their goods: has not he by his
soldiers by fire consumed Catwicke upon Zea, Sandwicke and Alfen, and that
long before these transgressions, whereof he complayneth, were begone. Did not
they pretend to set fire on the town of Vtretcht, which was so well addicted
unto them, have not they in Rotterdam, whereas they were received as friends,
cruelly murdered a number of Burgeses, was there not fo^nd by Pachecho a bil of
innumerable number, as well of the nobility, as most substantial commons in
sundry and diverse towns, which by commandment of the Duke should have bin
murdered, if matters by Gods provision had not altered. And whereunto tended
the demand of the tenth penny, to none other end but that we should at his
hands buy our goods, which he pretended to be confiscated: whereby it
appears that he and his adherents are sworn enemies unto your Majesty:
whilst he does in such sort execute his tirannie, murder, burning, and with
such force and servitude, does agreeue us your subjects, whom he him self
does allege to have bin most faithful unto your majesty. So as thorough
necessity we have bin compelled to enter into arms to resist his force and
tirannie: which his servants could not deny, who diverse times have said that
they would so long vex and trouble this country and inhabitants thereof,
that in the end they should be forced to rebel, and so have occasion to bring
it under subjection, and spoil the same of all their substance: which is to
be approved by some letters, whereby was written, that this it was for which
they longed. It is very true most sovereign King, that ye Duke does here
allege, as that your subjects would never had rebelled, but upon suggestion
of certain evil disposed, which evil disposed are none other than the Duke
himself, with his bloody counsel, and sanguine adherents, which of mere set
evil will, and insatiable avarice, have sucked the sweat and blood of your
subjects, and of long time so earnestly persecuted, and grieved to the
uttermost, that they for defense of themselves, their wives, children, and all that which in this world they do esteem of, have bin forced to take arms in
hand. Therefore where as he presumes that he has so lovingly dealt with other
towns: take example by Tourney, Valencien, Lysle, Ipre, Maestricht, Deuenter,
and likewise by Machlin, Oudenard, Dermonde, and Naerden, where they have by
murdering, robbing, ha^ging, rauishing of women, and with diverse outrages
persecuted ye poor commons.

Besides this, has there been murdered at Bruxels at sundry times above CC.
and.xxx. Burgeses, and that long before the beginning of these wars, as also
in a commotio^ at Gaunt, which happened amongst ye Spaniards, whereof the
commons have been slain lx. or lxx. besides an infinite number of men and
women, which at sundry times have been murdered: which we leave to enlarge
here, seeing those their proceedinges are accounted merciful dealings,
besides other most wicked insole^ces used in ye said towns.

And therefore he needs not to threaten us, that if we do not accept his
pardon, that no rigor which may be devised, shall be left unexercised toward
our persons, by desolation, hunger and sword, in such sort, as no remembrance
shall be left of them present For we are certain, that here about he has sought
as much as is to him possible: and would undoubtedly have used further cruelty
(whereof he boasts so much) if the fear which he has, that the Countries
would not any longer abide his cruelty, had not let him.

He does not so much esteem the service of your Majesty, nor regards your
heritage and countries, as that he would abstain from ruining and destroying
the same: yea utterly to root out the relics and memories thereof, so far
as it were to him possible, as the burning and desolating which he before these
wars, has used, do sufficiently bear witness. But we trust that the
almighty God will never suffer that your Majesty should permit your Countries
altogether to fall into the force of such a Tyrant and destroyer.

For, whereas he here alleges that we have put on arms against your
Majesty: that we utterly deny. For we protest before your Majesty, yea before
God and his Angels, that our meaning or pretense was never such. For we will
adventure our selves and all that we have in this world, as likewise we have
done toward your Majesty's predecessors, with life and goods to stand to the
defense of your majesty against all your enemies and ill willers.

But this we will acknowledge before the universal world, that (being
thereunto extremely constrained) we have taken arms in hand against the tyranny
and abuses of the Duke of Alba and his accomplices, to deliver our lives and
goods, wives and children from the bloudthirstie hands of his ministers: and if
he do prevail against us, rather choose to dye an honorable death, and leave
a fame to our successors, than to yield and bow to such a tyrant, and suffer
our country to live under unsupportable slavery. So else we should be abashed
and ashamed to show our faces in any other Countries, as having neglected the
service of your Majesty. And therefore have all the Towns ioinctly and
severally taken in hand and sworn the one after the other, to abide all
sieges, if need be, to the uttermost* though to the loss of their lives and
goods, yea rather set fire of our own howses, than to yield to the force of
this Tyrant.

For we are well assured, that at the hands of such a Tyrant, as regards no
oath, and has so often and cruelly threatened us, there is no more to be looked
for, but that he would rather color the rivers and streams with our blood,
and to be hang the country with our bodies, to satiate his bloudthirstie lust
and appetite.

Therefore we prostrate our selves before the feet of your Majesty, desiring
the same for God his sake, who has set the Crown upon your head, and given
the Scepter into your hand, once to bow your ears to our reasonable
complayntes. We do not desire to be dissolved from the obedience of your
Majesty, but only that we may have our consciences free to Godwarde, to hear
his holy word, and to follow the same, to the intent to give an account at the
day of Judgment of our souls, and that we may atchieue such discharge for
our miserable native Country, which always has done such faithful service to
your majesty, from the yoke and bondage of foraine Nations and Spanish
Souldioures, and to suffer the Country to enjoy those liberties, privileges
and customs, as your Majesty, and the most puissant Emperor Charles, your
Majesty's most noble father (of famous memory) have to your Subjects solemnly
sworn.

Then will we at the commandment of your Majesty lay down our weapons and
arms, and will venture body, goods, and all that we have in the world, in the
service of your majesty by water or by land, where and when so ever your
Majesty shall command the same: and your Majesty shall find that we are not
altered or abastarded from you, but rather that we do excel in faithful
service all our predecessors, which hereby we do promise and swear to your
majesty, beseeching even as we do faithfully mean it, so to take mercy of
our souls.

Desiring that this our declaration and oath be openly published and declared
to all Kings, Potentates, Lords and Nations, to the intent they may know that
we are no Rebels toward our King, for we never learned such of our
predecessors: But that we of mere force and necessity have bin constrained
to take on arms against the enemies and usurpers of his majesty's name.

Requesting therefore all christen Princes and Potentates, that they will be
moved with a pityfull compassion of our miseries, (and much doubting that this
our supplication, and declaration shall be kept back and suppressed, as other
our former Requests have bin, and not come to our Kings hands:) that they will
thereof inform his Majesty, to the majesty, to the intent our just cause may
come to light, and that his Majesty may be acquitted of the innocent blood,
which this Albanish Tyrant does shed. This we heartily desire, and we al will
pray unto almighty God, for their prosperity to remain for ever.

FINIS.
IMPRINTED AT London by Henry Binneman for Humfrey Toy. Anno Domini. 1576.


