THE SIXTH Tragedy of the most grave and prudent author Lucius, Anneus, Seneca,
entitled Troas, with diverse and sundry addicions to the same. Newly set forth
in English by Jasper Heywood studient in Oxenforde.

Anno domini. 1559.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

TO THE MOST HIGH and verteouse princess, Elyzabeth by the grace of god Queen
of England, France, and Ireland defender of the faith her highness most humble
and obedient subiect^ Jasper Heywood studient in the university of Oxford
wissheth health wealth, honor, and felicity.
IF consideration of your graces goodness toward us all your loving subjects
which flyeng fame by mowthes of men resowndes had not fully in me repressed al
dread of reprehension (Most noble princess and my drad sovereign Lady) If
the wisdom that God at these years in your highness has planted, had not
seemde to me a strong defense against all byt of shameless arroga^ce (reproach
whereof flong with disdainful words from ireful tongues, as adders stinges
should strike me) finally if the learning with which GOD has endued your
maies^ye had not ben to me a comfortable persuasion of your gracious favor
toward the simple gift and duty of a scholar, I would not have incurred so
dangerous note of presumption, in attempting a subject to his princess, a
simple scholar to so excellently learned, a rash young man to so noble a Queen
by none other sign to signify allegiance and duty toward your highness save
by writing: when often times is the pen the only accuser in some points of him
that therewith does endite. But now, to si (most gracious Lady) that thing come
to pass which to the honor of him and for the wealth of us god has ordained,
a Princess to reign over us, such one, to whom great fredome is for us to
serve, what joy may serve to triumph at that blissful day, or what should we
spare with pen to preach abroad that inward gladness of heart that flows from
the breasts of us your most loving subjects? beseching god that it may please
him to grant your grace long and prosperous governance of the imperyal crown
of England. Then well understanding how greatly your highness is delighted in
the sweet sap of fine and pure writers, I have here presumed to offer unto
you such a simple new years gift as neither presents gold nor perle, but
duty and good will of a scholar, a piece of Seneca translated into English
which I the rather enterprise to give to your highness, as well for that I
thought it should not be unpleasant for your grace to se some part of so
excellent an author in your own tongue (the reading of whom in laten I
understand delights greatly your majesty) as also for that none may be a
better judge of my doings herein, then who best understands my author: and
the authority of your graces favor toward this my little work, may be to
measure defense and shield^ against the sting of reprehending tongues. Which I
most humbly beseching your highness end^ with prayer to god to send us long the
fruition of so excellent and gracious a Lady.

To the readers.
ALthough (gentle Reader) thou may perhaps think me arrogant, for that I
only among so many fine wits, and towardly youth, (with which England this
day florisheth) have enterprised to set forth in english, this present piece,
of the flower of all writers Seneca, as who say not fearing what grauer heddes
might judge of me, in atte^pting so hard a thing, yet upon me pondering what
next ensues, I trust both thy self shall clear thine own suspicion, and thy
changed opinion, shall judge of me more rightful sentence. For neither have I
taken this work first in hand, as once ente^ding it should come to light (of
well doing whereof I utterly dispayred) and being done but for mine own
private excercyse. I am in mine opinion herein blameles, though I have (to
prove my self) pryuatly taken and part which pleased me best. of so excellent
an aucthor, for better is time spent in the best then other, and at first to
attempt the hardest writers, shall make a man more prompt, to translate the
easyer with more facility. But now sins by request, and frendshyp of those, to
whom I could deny nothing, this work against my will, extorted is out of my
hands, I needs must crave thy patience in reading, and facility of judgment:
when thou shall apara^tly see, my wi^les lack of learning, praying the to
consider. how hard a thing it is for me, to touch at full in all points, the
aucthoures mind, (being in many places very hard and doubtful and the work
much corrupt by the defaute of evil printed books) and also how far above
my power, to keep that grace, and majesty of style, that Seneca does, when
both so excellent a writer, has past the reach of all imitacion, and also
this our english tongue (as many think and I here find) is far unable, to
compare with the latten, but thou (good reader) if I in any place, have swerued
from the true sense. or not kept the royalty of speech, meet for a tragedy,
impute the tone to my youth: and lack of judgment, the other to my lack of
eloquence. Now as concerning sundry places augmented and some altered in this
my translacion. First forasmuch as this work seemed unto me, in some places
vnpersyite (whether left so of the author or part of it lost as time deuoureth
all things I wotte not) I have (where I thought good,) with addicyon of mine
own pen, supplied the want of some things, as the first Chorus, after the
first act beginning thus. O ye to whom etc. Also in the second act. I have
added the speech of Achilles spright, rising from hell to require the sacrifice
of Polixena beginning in this wise. Forsaking now etc. Again the three last
staves of the Chorus after the same act, and as for the third Chorus which in
Seneca begins thus, Que vocat sedesi for as much, as nothing is therein but a
heaped noumbre of far and strange countreies, consydering with my self, yt
the names of so many unknown countries mountains. deserts, and woods
should have no grace in the english tongue, but be a strange and unpleasant
thing to the readers, (exce^e I should expound the histories of each one,
which would be far to tedious) I have in the place thereof, made a another
beginning in this manner. O Jove that leadst etc. which alteracyon may be borne
withal, seeing that the Corus is no part of the substance of the matter. In
the rest I have for my sclender learning, endeavored to keep touch with the
Latten, not word for word or verse for verse as to expound it, but
neglecting the placing of the words observed their sense. Take ^entle reader
this in good worth, with all his fautes favor my first beginninges, and amend
rather with good will, such things as herein are ^mis, then to deprave or
discommende my labor and pains, for the fautes, seeing that I have herein, but
only made way to other that can far better do this or like, desyring them
that as they can, so they would. Fare well gentle reader, and accept my good
will.

The preface to the tragedye.
THe ten years stege of Troy, who list to here
And of thaffaires, that there befell in fight
Read ye the works, ye long sins written were
Of all thassautes and of that latest night,
When Turrets tops, in Troy they blased bright
Good clerks they were, that have it written well
As for this work, no word thereof does tell.
But dares Phrygian, well can all report
With dictis eke of Crete in grekishe tongue
And Momere tells, to Troy the Greeks resort
In scanned verse, and Maro has it song
Each one in writ has pend a story long
Who doubts of ought, and casts care to know
These antique authors, shall the story show.
The ruins twain^ of Troy, the cause of each
The glittering holmes, in field the banners spread
Achilles yres, and Hectors fightes they teach
There may the iestes of many a knight be red^
Patroclus, Pyrrhus, Ajax, Diomed,
With Troylus, Paris, many other more,
That day by day, there sought in field full sore.
And how the Greeks at end an engine made
A hugye horse where many a warlike knight.
Enclosed was, the Troianes to invade
With Synons craft, when Greeks had fained flight
While close they lay, at Tenedos from sight,
Or how Eneas else as other say,
and false Antenor did the town betray.
But as for me. I naught thereof endight,
Mine author has not all that story ^end.
My pen his words in english must resight.
Of latest woes that fell on Troy at end,
What final fates the cruel gods could send.
And how the Greeks when Troy was burnt, g^n wre^^
Their ire on Trojans, thereof shall I speak.
Not I with spear who pierced was in field,
Whose throat there cut, or head y^orued was,
Ne bloodshed blows, that rent both ^arge and shield
Shall I resight. all that I over pas.
The work I w^ight, more woeful is alas,
For I the mothers tears must here complain,
And blood of babes, that giltles have been slain.
And such as yet, could never weapon wrest,
But on the lap are wont to dandled be,
Ne yet forgotten had the mothers breast,
How greeks them slew, alas here shall ye se,
To make report thereof, ay woe is me,
My song is mischief, murder miserye.
And hereof speaks, this dolfull tragedye.
Thou fury fell, that from thy deepest den
Could cause this wrath of hell, on Troy to light,
That workest woe, guide thou my hand and pen,
In weepyng verse of sobbes and sighs to wright,
As does mine aucthor them be wail aryght,
Help woeful Muse for me besemeth will
Of others tears, with wrepyng ^ye to tell.
When battred were to ground the towers of Troy
In writ as ancient authors do ^esight.
And Greeks again repayrde to sens with joy.
Up ryseth here from hell ^chilles spright.
Uengeance he craves with blood his death to quight.
Whom Paris had in Phoebus temple slain,
with guile betrapt for love of Polyxeyne.
And wrath of hell there is none other price
That may assuage: but blood of her alon^
Polyxena he craves for sacrifice,
With threatninges on the grecians many one
Except they shed her blood before they gone.
The sprightes the hell, and depest pittes byneathe,
O virgin dear, alas, do thrust thy death.
And Hectors son, Astyanax, alas,
Pore seely fool his mothers only joy,
Is judge to die by sentense of Calchas
Alas the while, to death is led the boy,
And tumbled down from Turrets ^ops in Troy.
What ruthful tears may serve to wayle the woe,
Of Hectors wife that does her child forgot
Her pinching pang of heart, who may express,
But such as of like woes, have borne a parte^
Or who bewail her ruthful heuinesse
That never yet has felt thereof the smart?
Full well they wot the w^^s of heavy heart.
What is to leese a babe from mothers breast,
They know that are in such a case distressed.
First how the Queen lamentes the fall of Troy.
As has mine author done, I shall it wright
Next how from Hectors wife they led the boy.
To dye, and her complaints I shall resight,
The Maidens death then must I last endyght.
Now who that list the Queen's complaint to hear.
In following verse, it shall forthwith appear.
The speakers in this tragedy.
Hecuba Queen of Troy. A company of women. The spright of Achilles.
Talthybius, a Grecian. Agamemnon, King of Greeks. Calchas. Pyrrhus. Chorus.
^ndromacha. An old man Trojan. Ulysses. Astyanax. Helena. The messenger.
TRO AS OF SFNECA
The first act
Hecuba. WHo so in pomp of proud estate,
or kingdom sets delight:
Or who that joys in princes court
to bear the sway of might.
Ne dredes the fates which from above
the wavering gods down flinges:
But fast affiaunce fixed has,
in frail and fickle things:
Let him in me both see the face,
of fortunes flattring joy:
And eke respect the ruthful end,
of the (O rumons Troy)
For never gave she plainer proof,
then this ye present se:
How frail and brittle is thestate,
of pride and high degree.
The flower of flowring Asia, lo^
whose fame the heavens resounde,
The worthy work of gods above,
is batered down to ground.
And whose assautes they sought afar,
from west with banners spredde,
where Tanais cold her branches seven.
abroad the world does shed.
With hugye host and from the east,
where springes the newest dea,
Where Luke warm Tygris channel runs,
and metes the ruddy sea.
And which from wandering land of Scythe,
the band of widows sought:
With fire and sword thus battred be,
her turrets down to naught.
The walls but late of high renown.
lot here their rumous fall:
The buildings burn and flashing flame,
swepes through the palace all.
Thus every house full hye it smokes,
of old ^ssara^lls land:
Ne yet the ^^ame witholdes from spoil.
the gredo victours hand.
The surging smoke the asure sky,
and light has hid away:
And (as with cloud beset) troyes ashes
staynes the dusky day.
Through pearst with ire and gredy of heart,
the victor from a far.
Does vewe the long assauted Troy,
the gain or ten years war.
And eke the miseries thereof,
abhorres to look upon,
An though he see it yet scant himselfe^
beleues it might be won,
The spoils thereof with gredy hand.
they snatche and bear away:
A thousand ships would not receive
a boorde: so huge a pray.
The prefull might I do protest,
of gods adverse to me,
My contries dust, and Troiane king,
I call to witness thee.
Whom Troy now hides and underneath
the stones, art over trod:
With all the gods that guide thy ghost,
and Troy that lately stood.
And you also yt flocking ghostes,
of all my children dear:
Ye lesser sprightes: what ever ill,
has happened to us here.
What ever Phoebus waterishe ^ace,
in fury has foresaid:
At raging rise from seas, when erste,
the monstres had him frayde.
In childbed bands I saw it yore,
and wist it should be so:
And I in vain before Cassandra
told it long ago.
Not false Ulysses kindled has
these fires, nor none of his:
Not yet deceitful Sinons craft,
that has been cause of this.
My fire it is wherewith ye burn,
and Paris is the brande:
That smoketh in thy towers (O Troy)
the flower of Phrygian land.
But ay alas unhappy age,
why doste thou yet so sore,
Bewail thy contries fatal fall.
thou knew it long before.
Behold thy last cala^tte^,
and them bewail with tears:
Account as old Troies ouerturne^
and past by many years.
I saw the slaughter of the king;
and how he lost his life:
By thawlters side (more mischief was)
with stroke of Pyrrhus knife.
When in his hand he wound his locks.
and drew the king to ground:
And hid to hiltes his wicked sword,
in deep and dedly wownde.
Which when the gored king had took,
as willing to be slain,
Out of the old man's throat he drew.
his bloody blade again.
Not pity of his years, alas,
in man's extremest age:
From slaughter might his hand withhold,
ne yet his ire assuage.
The gods are witness of the same
and eke the sacrifies,
That in his kingdom holden was,
that flat on ground now lies.
The father of so many kings
Pryam of ancient name,
Untombed lies and wants in blase
of Troy: his funeral flame.
Ne yet the gods are wreakt, but lo^
his sons and daughters all,
Such lords they serve as does by chance
of lot, to them befall.
Whom shall I follow now for pray?
or where shall I be led?
There is perhaps among the greeks,
that Hectors wife will wed.
Some man desires Helenus spouse
some would Antenors have,
And in the greeks there wantes not some
that would Cassandra crave.
But I alas most woeful wight,
whom no man sekes to choose,
I am the only refuge left,
and me they clean re^use,
Ye careful captive company
why stints your woeful cry?
Bea^e on your breasts and piteouslye
complain with voice so hye,
As mete may be for Troyes estate,
let your complaints rebounde
In tops of treese: and cause the hills,
to ring with terible sound.

The second scene.
The women. Hecuba NOt folk v^apt, nor new to weep (o Queen^)
thou wilst to wayle, by practice are we taught
For all these years, in such case have we been
since first the Trojan guest, and my clas sought^
Ana saylde the seas, that led him on his way
with sacred ship, to Cibell dedicate
From whence he brought, his vnrepyning pray,
the ^^use alas, of all this dyre debate
Ten times now hid, the hills of Id^y be,
with snow of silver hew, all over laid.
And bared is for Trojan roges each tree,
ten times in feelde, the harvest man afraid,
The spykes of corn has reapt, since never day
his wayling wantes, new cause renewes our w^.
Lift up thy hand, (o Queen) cry well away:
we follow thee, we are well taught thereto.

HEC. Ye faithful fellows of your casualtie
Untye that tire, that on your heads ye wear,
And as behooves state of misery,
let fall about your woeful necks. your hear.
In dust of Troy, rub al your arms about.
in slacker wede, and let your breasts ^e tide
Down to your bellies, let your limbs lie out,
for what wedlock should you your bosoms hyde?
Your garments loose, and have in readiness
your furious hands, upon your breasts to knock
This habit well besemeth our distres
it pleases me, I know the Trojan flock
Renew again your long accustomed cries
and more then erst, lament your miseries.
We bewail Hector.

WOE. Our hear we have untied, now every chon^
All rent for sorrows of our cursed cac^
our locks out spreades^ the knots we have undone
And in these ashes slayned is our face.

HEC. Fill up your hands and make thereof no spare^
for this yet lawful is, from Troy to take,
Let down your garments from your shoulders bare
and suffer not your clamor so to slake.
Your naked breasts wait for your hands to smight
now dolor deep, now sorrow, show thy might
Make all the coasts that compass Troy about
witness the sound, of all your careful cry
Cause from the caves, the Echo to cast out
Rebounding voice of al your misery:
not as she wontes, the latter word to sound
But al your woe, from far let it rebounde
Let all the seas it hear, and eke the land
Spare not your breasts with heavy stroke to stryke
beat ye your selves, each one with cruel hand
For yet your wonted cry does me not like
We bewail Hector.

WOE. Our naked arms, thus here we rent for thee,
and bluddy shoulders, (Hector) thus we tear:
Thus with our fistes, our heads lo beaten be
and al for there, behold we hale our hear.
Our dugges alas, with mothers hands be torn
and where the flesh is wounded round about
Which for thy sake, we rent thy death to morn
the flowing streams of blud, they spring therout,
Thy countries shore, and destinied delay,
and thou to weeried Trojans wast an aid.
A wall thou wast, and on thy shoulders Troy
ten years it stood: on thee alone it stayde,
With thee it fell: and fatal day alas
of Hector both, and Troy but one there was.

HEC. Enough has hector: turn your plaint and moan
and shed your tears for Pryame every chone.

WOE. Receive our plaintes, O lord of Phrigian land,
and old twice captive king, receive our fear,
While thou were king, Troy hurtles then could stand
though shaken twyse, with Grecian sword it wear,
And twyse did shot of Hercles quyuer bear:
at latter los of Hecubes sons all
and roges for kings, that high on pyles we rear:
thou father shu^st our latest funeral.
And beaten down, to Jove for sacrifies.
like liueles, block, in Troy thy carkas lies.

HEC. Yet turn ye once your treares, another way,
my Pryames death, should not lamented be
O Troianes all, full happy is Pryame say,
for free from bondage, down descended he,
To the lowest ghostes: and never shall sustain
his captive neck, with Greeks to yoked be
He never shall, behold the Atrides twain
nor false Ulysses ever shall he see,
Not he a pray, for Greeks to tryumphe at
his neck shall subject, to their conquestes bear
Ne give his hands, to tie behind his back
that to the rule of scepters wonted wear
Nor following Agamemnons chart, in band
shall he be pomp, to proud Mycenas land.

WOE. Full happy Pryame is, each one we say
that took with him his kingdom, then that stood
Now safe in shade, he sekes the wandering way
and treades the paths of all Elizius wood,
And in the blessed sprites, full happy he,
again there sekes, to mete with Hectors ghost,
Happy Pryame, happy who so may see,
his kingdom all, at ones with him be lost.

Chorus added the tragedy by the translatour.
O Ye to whom, the lord of land and seas,
of life and death, has grafited here the power
Lay down your lofty looks, your pride app^as
the crowned king, flees not his fatal hour.
Who so thou be, that leadst thy land alone
thy life was limite, from thy mothers womb,
Not purple robe, not glorious glittring throne,
ne crown of gold, redemes the from the tomb
A king he was, that waiting for the veil,
of him that slew, the Minotaure in fight.
Begylde with blackenes, of the wonted sail
in seas him sonke, and of his name they hight.
So he that wild, to win the golden spoil
and first with ship, by seas to seek renown,
In lesser wave, at length to death began boil,
and thus the daughters, brought their father downe^
Whose songs, the woods has drawn, and rivers held.
and birds to hear his notes, did theyrs forsake,
In piece meal thrown, amid the Thracian feelde,
without return has sought the Stigian lake.
They sit above, that hold our life in line,
and what we suffer, down they fling from hye
No carke, no care, that ever may untwine
the thrids, that wouen are above the sky,
As witnest he, that sometime king of Greece,
had Jason thought, in drenching sees to drown
who scapte both death, and gaynde the golden fleece,
whom sates advance, there may no power pluck down
The highest god, sometime that Saturn hight
his fall him taught to credit their decryes
The rule of heavens: he lost it by their might
and Jove his son, now turns the rolling skies.
Who weneth here to win eternal wealth,
let him behold this present perfect proof,
And learn, the secret step, of chances stelth,
most nere alas, when most it semes aloof.
In slipper joy, let no man put his trust
let none despair, that heavy happes has past
The sweet with sour, she mingleth as she lust
whose doubtful web, pretends naught to last.
Frayltie is the third, that Clothoes rock has sponne
now from the distaffe dr^wne, now knapt in twain
With all the world, at length his end he won,
whose works have wrought, his name sholl great remain
and he, whose trauelles, twelve, his name display,
that feared naught, the force of worldly hu^t,
In fine alas has found his fatal day,
and dyed with smart of Dianyra^s shurt,
If prowes might eternity procure,
then Pryame yet should live in lyking lust
^y portly pomp of pride, thou art unsure
^o learn by him, o lunges ye are but dust.
and Hecuba that waileth now in care,
that was so late of high estate a Queen
a mirror is, to teach you what you are
your wavering wealth, o princes, here is seen.
Whom dawne of day, has seen in high estate
before sons set, alas has had his fall
The cradelles rock, apointes the life his date
from settled joy, to sodayn funeral.
The second act. The sprite of Achilles added to the tragedy by the
translatour.
The first seeane.
FOrsaking now the places tenebrous,
and deep dens of thinfernal regione
from all the shadows of ^listous
That wander there the paths full many on^.
Lo, here am I returned all alone.
The same Achill whose feerce and heavy hand
Of all the world, no wight might yet withstand.
What man so stout of all the Grecians host.
That has not sometime craved Achilles aid,
and in the Trojans, who of prowes most
That has not fearde to see my banners splayde
Achilles lo, has made them all afraid.
and in the Greeks has been a pillar post,
That sturdy stood against there Toiane host.
Where I have lackte, the Grecians went to wrack
Troy has proud what Achilles sword could do
Where I have come the Troianes fled a back,
Retiring fast from field their walls unto,
No man that might Achilles stroke fordo,
I dealt such stripes amid the Trojan route,
That with their blood I stainde the fields about.
Mighty Memnon, that with his Persian band,
Would Pryames part with all his might mayntayn^
Lo now he lythe and knows Achilles hand
amid the field is Troylus also slain.
Ye Hector great, whom Troy accounted plain
The flower of chiualry that might be found,
all of Achilles had their mortal wound,
But Paris lo, such was his false disceite,
Pretending marriage of Polyxeine,
Behind the altar lay for me in wait
Where I unawares have fallen into the train
And in Appolloes church he has me slain
Whereof the bell will now just vengeance have,
And here again, I come my right to crave.
The deep Auerne my rage may not sustain
Nor bear the angers of Achilles spright
From Acheront, I rent the soil in twain
and through the ground, I grat^ again to sight
Hell could not hide Achilles from the light,
Uengeans and blood does Orcus pit require,
To quench the furies of Achilles ire.
The hateful land^ that worse then Tartar^ is
and burning thrust excedes of Tantalus,
I here behold again, and Troy is this
O, travel worse, th^n slon^ of Sisyphus
and pains that pass the panges of Tityus
To light more loathsome surie has me sent
Then hooked whele, that I^ions flesh does rent.
Remembered is allow where spretes do dwell
The wicked slaughter wrought by wyly way,
Not yet revenged has the depest hell,
Achilles blood on them that did him slay
But now of vengeans comes the yrefull day
and darkest dens of Tartare from beneath
Conspire the fates: of them that wrought my death.
Now mischief, murder, wrath of hell drawth nere
and dyre Phlegethon flood does blood require
Achilles death shall be revenged here
With slaughter such as Stygian lakes desire
Her daughters blood shall slake the sprites ire,
Whose son we slew. whereof does yet remain,
The wrath beneath, and hell shall be their pain.
From burning lakes the furies wrath I threate,
and syer that naught but streams of blood may slake
The rage of wind and seas these ships shall beat,
and Ditis deep on you shall vengeans take,
The sprites cry out, the earth and seas do quake
The poole of Styx, ungrateful Greeks it seath,
With slaughtred blood revenge Achilles death.
The soil does shake to bear my heavy foot
and fearth again the sceptours of my hand
The poales with stroke of thunderclap ring out
The doubtful stars amid their course do stand,
and fearful Phoebus hides his blasing brand.
The trembling lakes against their course do slyte,
For dread and terrur of Achilles spryte.
Great is the raunsom, ought of dew to me,
Wherewith yt must the sprites, and hell appease,
Polyxena shall sacrifised be,
Upon my tomb, their yreful wrath to please,
and with her blood, ye shall assuage the sease
Your ships may not return to Greece again
Til on my tomb Polyxena be slain.
And for that she should then have been my wyle,
I will that Pyrrhus render her to me,
and in such solemn sort byreeue her life,
as ye are wont the weddinges for to see,
So shall the wrath of hell appeased be,
Naught else but this may satisfye our ire,
Her will I have, and her I you require.
The second scene.
Talthybius. Chorus. ALas how long the lingering greeks
in heaven do make delay,
When either war by seas they seek
or home to pas their way.
CHO. Why show what cause does hold your ships
and Grecian navy stays,
Declare if any of the gods
have stopped your homeward ways.

TAL. My mind is masde my trembling (...)
quake and are afearde,
For stranger news of truth then these
I think were never heard.
Lo I my self have plainly seen,
in dawning of the day,
When Phoebus first began to approach,
and drive the stars away.
The earth all shaken suddenly
and from the hollow ground,
My thought I heard with roaring cry
a deep and dreadful sound.
That shoke the woods and all the treese
rong out with thunder stroke,
From Ida hills down fell the stones
the mountayn tops were broake.
and not the earth has only quak^e
but all the sea likewise,
Achilles presence felt and knew
and high the surges rise.
The cloven ground Erebus pitts
then showed and depest dens,
That down to Gods that guide beneath,
the way appearde from hence.
Then shoke the tomb from whence anon
in flame of fyrie light,
appears from the hollow canes
Achilles noble spright.
as wonted he his Thracian arms
and banners to disploye
and welde his weighty weapons well,
against thassautes of Troy.
The same Achilles seemed he than
that he was wont to be
amid the hosts, and casely could
I know, that this was he.
With carkas slain in furious fight
that stopped and filde each flood,
and who by slaughter of his hand
made Xanthus run with blood
as when in chariote high he sat
with lofty stomach stought.
While Hector both and Troy at once
he drew the walls abought.
alowde he cryde and every coaste,
rang with Achilles sound
and thus with hollow voice he spoke.
from bottom of the ground.
The greeks shall not with little price
redeem Achilles ire,
A princely ransom must they give,
for so the fates require.
Unto my ashes Polyxene,
spoused shall here be slain,
By Pyrrhus hand, and all my tomb
her blood shall ouerstayn^.
This said, he straight sanke down again
to Plutoes deep regione,
The earth then closde the hollow caves
were vanished and gone.
Therewith the wether waxed clear,
the raging winds did slake,
The tombling seas began to rest,
and all the tempest brake.

The third scene.
Pyrrhus. Agamemnon. Calchas. WHat time our sails we should have spread,
upon Sygeon seas,
With swift return from long delay,
to seek our homeward ways.
Achilles rose whose only hand,
has given greeks the spoil.
Of Troia sore annoyde by him
and leueld with the soil.
With speed requighting his abode
and former long delay,
At Scyros yl^ and Lesbos both^
amid the Egeon sea.
Till he came here in doubt it stood,
of fall or sure estate
Then though ye have to grant his will
ye shall it give to late.
Now have the other captains all,
the price of their manhood,
What else reward for his prowes,
then her all only blood?
Are his deserts think you but light,
that when he might have fled,
And passing Pelyus years in peace,
a quiet life have led.
Detected yet his mothers crafts,
forsook his woman's wede^
And with his weapons proved himself,
a manly man in deed?
The king of Mysya Telephus
that would the greeks withstand^
Coming to Troy forbidding us,
the passage of his land.
To late repenting to have felt,
Achilles heavy stroke,
Was glad to crave his health agayne^
where he his hurt had took.
For when his sore might not be salued
as told Appollo plain,
Except the spear that gave the hurt
restored help again.
Achilles plasters cured his cuttes
and saved the king alive
His hand both might and mercy knew
to s^ay and then revive.
When Thebes fell: ^etion saw it
and might it not withstand.
The captive king could naught redres
the ruin of his land.
Lyrnesus little likewise felt
his hand and down it fill,
With rume ouerturned like
from top of haughty hill.
and taken Brys^is land it is
and prisoner is she caught
The cause of strife between the kings
is Chryses come to n^ught.
Tenedos isle well known by fame
and fertile soil he took
That sostreth ^atte the Thracian flocks
and sacred ^illa shook.
What boots to blase the brute of him
whom trompe of fame does shew^
Through all the coasts where C^icus flood
with swelling stream does flow^
The ruthful ruin of these realms
so many towns bette down.
another man would glory count
and worthy great renown.
But thus my father made his way
and these his iourneys are,
And battayles many one he sought.
while war he does prepare.
As whisht I may his merits more
shall yet not this remain.
Well known and counted praise enough^
that he has Hector slain?
During whole life the Grecians all
might never take the town
My father only vanquished Troy^
and you have pluc^^ it down,
Rejoice I may your parents praise
and brute abroad his acts
It seems the soon to follow well
his noble fathers acte^.
In sight of Pryame Hector slain
and Memnon both they lay.
With heavy cheer hi^ parents wayt^^
to mourn his dying day.
Himself abhorde his handy works
in ^ight that had them slain
The sons of Coddes I chilles knew^
were borne to dye again.
The woman Queen of Amasons
that greende the Greeks full sore
Is turnde to flight then ceast out fear
we drade their bows no more.
If ye well way his worthiness
Achilles ought to have
Though he from Argos or Mycenas
would a virgin crave.
Doubt ye herein? allow ye not
that straight his will be done.
And count ye cruel Pryanies blood
to give to Peleus son?
For Helens sake your own childs blood,
appeasde Dyanaes ire,
^ wonted thing and done ere this,
it is that I require.
AG. The only fault of youth it is
not to refrain his rage^
The fathers blood already sturres,
in Pryames wanton age
Sometime Achilles grieuo^s checkes
I bare with pacient heart,
The more thou may the more thou oughtf^e,
to suffer in good part.
Whereto would ye with slaughtred blood
a noble spirit slain?
Think what is mete the greeks to do
and trojans to sustain.
The proud estate of tiranye
may never long endure.
The king that rules with modest mean^
of safety may be sure.
The higher step of princely state
that fortune has us synde,
The more behouthe a happy man
humility of mind.
And dread the change that chance may bring
whose gifts so sone be los^e
And chiefly then to fear the gods,
while they the favor most.
In beating down that w^rr^ has (...),
by proof I have been taught,
What pomp^ and pride, in twinke of Iye,
may fall and come to naught.
Troy made me fierr^ and proud of mind,
Troy makes me frayde with all:
The Greeks now stand where Troy ^^te fell,
each thing may have his fall.
Sometime I grau^^ I did my self,
and sceptors proudly beat,
The thing that might advance my harte^
makes me the more to fear.
Thou Priame perfect proof presen^st.
thou art to me eftsoon:
A cause of pride, a glass of f^^re,
a mirror for the nones.
Should I account the sceptors owght,
but glorious vanity?
Much like the borrowed brayded here,
the face to bewtefie.
One sudden chance may turn to naught.
and maime the might of men,
With fewer then a thousand ships,
and years in les then ten.
Not she that guides the, slipper whel^,
of fate: does so delay:
That she to all possession grauntes,
of ten years settled stay.
With leave of Greec^ I will confess,
I would have wo^ne the town,
But not with ruin thus (...),
to se it beaten downe^
But lo the battle made by night
and rage of fervent mind,
Could not abide the brideling bitte
that reason had assinde.
The happy sword once staynde with blood
insatiable is,
And in the dark the fervent rage
does strike the more amiss.
Now are we wreake on Troy to much
let all that may remain.
A virgin borne of princes blood
for offering to be slain
And given be, to stain the tom^e
and ashes of the ded,
And under name of wedlock se
the giltles blood be shed,
I will not grant: for mine should be
thereof both fault and blame,
Who when he may forbids not
offense: does will the same.

PYR. And shall his sprightes have no rewar^^
their angers to appayse?

AG. Ye^ very great, for all the world^
shall celebrate his praise.
And lands unknown that never s^w
the man so praisde by fame,
Shall here and keep^ for many years,
the glory of his name.
If bloodshed veil his ashes ought
strike of an oxe^ head.
And let no blood that may be cause
of mothers tears be shed
What furious fran^ye may this be
that does your will so lead,
This earnest careful suit to make
in travail for the dead?
Let not such envy toward your father
in your heart remain,
That for his sacrifice ye would
procure an others pain.

PYR. Proud tyrant while prosperiti^
thy stomach does advance,
And cowardly wretch that shrinks for fer^
in case of fearful chance.
Is yet again thy breast enflamde,
with brande of venus might?
Will thou alone so often deprive
A chilles of his right?
This hand shall give the sacrifice
the which if thou withstand.
A greater slaughter shall I make,
and worthy Pyrrhus hand.
And now to long from princes slaughter
does my hand abide,
And meet it were that Poly^eine
were laid by Priames side.

AG. I naught deny but Pyrrhus chief
renown: in war is this,
That Priam slain with cruel sword,
to your father humbled is.

PYR. My fathers foes we have them known,
submit themselves humblye,
And Pryam presently ye wotte,
was gladdde ^o crave mercye^
But tho^ for fear not stout to rule,
lie close from ^oes up shit:
While thou to Ajax and ulysses,
doos^e thy will commit.

AG. But needs I must and will confess
your father did not fear:
When burnt our fleet with Hectors brandes,
and Greeks they slawghtred weate,
While loytring then a loofe he lay,
unmindful of the ^ight.
In stead of arms with scratche of quill,
his sownding harp to smight.

PYR. Great Hector then despising the
Achilles songs did fear:
And thessale ships in greatest dread,
in quiet peace yet wear.

AG. For why aloof the thessale fleete^
they lay from Tro^ans hands,
And well your father might have rest,
he felt not Hectors brandes,

PYR. Well semes a noble king to give
an other king relief,

AG Wh^e have thou then a worthy king
be^ieued of his lyefe?

PYR. ^ point of mercy sometime is,
what liue^ in care to kill.

AG. But now your mercy moves you
a virgins death to will.

PYR. Account ye cruel now her death
whose sacrifice I crave.
Your own ders daughter once ye know,
your self to thaulters g^ue.

AG. Naught else could save the Greke^ from sta^,
but thon^^e blood of her:
A king before his children ought,
his country to prefer.

PYR. The law does spare no captives blood
nor wilthe their death to stay.

AG. That which the law does not forbid,
yet shame does often say nay.

PYR. The conqueror what thing he list,
may lawfully fulfill.

AG. So much the les he ought to list,
that may do what he will.

PYR. Thus boast ye these as though in all
ye only dare the stroke:
When Pyrthus loosed has the greeks,
from bond^ of ten years yoke.

AG. Has S^yros isle such stomaks bred^

PYR. No bretherns wrath it knowt^.

AG. Beset about it is with wave.

PYR. The seas: it do enclose.
^hyestes noble stock I know,
and Atreus eke full well,
And of the bretherns dire debate.
perpetual feign does tell.

AG. And thou a bastard of a maid,
deflowred privily.
Whom (then a boy) Achilles gate,
in filthy letchery.

PYR. The same Achill that does posses,
the reign of gods above.
With ^hetys seas: with ^^cus sprightes,
the starred heaven with Jove.

AG. The same Achilles that was st^ine,
by stroke of paris ^onde

PYR. The same Achilles, whom no god,
durst ever yet withstand

AG The stoutest man I rather would^
his chekes he should refrain,
I could them tame, but all your bragges,
I can full will sustain.
For even the captives spares my sword:
let Calchas called be.
If destenies require her blood.
I will thereto agree.
Calchas whose counsel ruled our ships,
and navy hither brought,
Unlokst the po^le and have by art,
the secrets thereof sought.
To whom the bowelles of the beast,
to whom the thunder clap,
And blas^ng star with flaming train,
betokens what shall ha^.
Whose words with decrest price I bought,
now tell us by what mean,
The will of Gods agrees that we
return to Greece again.

CALL. The fates apoint the Greeks to bye
their wale^ with wonted price.
And with what cost ye came to Troy,
ye shall repair to Greece
With blood ye came, with blood ye must,
from hence return again,
And where Achilles ashes lies,
the virgin shall be slain,
In ^^mely sort of habite^ such
as maidens wont ye se,
Of Thessalie, or Myeen^s else,
what time they wedded be.
With Pyrrhus hand she shall be slain,
of right it shall be so.
And meet it is that he the son,
his fathers right should do.
But not this only stays our ships,
our sails may not be spread,
Before a worthier blood then thine,
(Pol^^ena) be shed.
which thirst the fates, for ^ri^mes nephew,
Hectors little boy:
The greeks shall tumble hedlong down,
from highest tower in Troy.
Let him there die, this only way
ye shall the gods appeas,
Then spread your thousand sails with joy,
ye need not fear the seas.

Chorus.
MAy this be true or does the fable feign,
When corpse is dead the sprite to live as yet^
when death our ties with heavy hand does strain
And fatal day our leames of light has shet,
And in the tomb, our ashes once be set,
Has not the soul likewise his funeral,
But still alas do wretches live in thrall?
Or else does all at once together dye^
And may no part his fatal hour delay.
But with the breath the soul from hence does flie^
Amid the clouds to vanish quite away,
As dankye shade fireth from the yon^^ by day?
And may no jot escape from destenie,
When once the brande has burnde the body?
What ever then the rise of some may see,
And what the weste that setts the son does know,
In all Neptunus reign what ever be,
That restles seas do wash and over flow,
with purple waves still tombling to and fro.
Age shall consume: each thing that liuthe shall die,
With swifter race then Pegasus does fly.
And with what whyrle, the twice six signs do fly,
With course as swift, as rectoure of the spheres,
Does guide those glistring globes eternally,
And Hecate her changed horns repeares,
So drauthe on death, and life of each thing wears,
And never may the man, return to sight,
That once has fel^ the stroke of Parcas might.
For as the fume that from the fire does pas,
With turn of hand, does vanishe out of sight
And swifter then the northen boreas,
With whirling blaste and storm of raging might,
Driuthe far away and puttes the clouds to flight,
So flees the spright that rules our life away,
And nothing taryeth after dying day.
Swift is the race we run, at hand the mark,
Lay down your hope, that weight here ought to wy^.
And who dredes ought, cast of thy careful carke,
Will thou it wotte what state thou shall be in,
When dead thou art? as thou had never bin.
For gredy time it does devour us all,
The world it swayes to Chaos heap to fall.
Death-hurtes the corpse and spares not the spright,
And as for all the dens of Tenare deep,
With Cerberus kingdom dark that knows no light,
And streightest gates that he there sits to keep,
They fansyes are, that follow folk by sleept
Such rumors vain, but feigned lies they are,
And fables, like the dreams in heavy care.
These three staves following are added by the translatour.
O dreadful day: alas the sorry time,
Is come of all the mothers ruthful woe,
Istranax, alas thy fatal line,
Of life is worn, to death straight shall thou go,
The sisters have decreed it should be so,
There may no force alas escape their hand,
The mighty Jove their will may not withstand.
To see the mother, her tender child forsake.
What ientle heart that may from tears reframe,
Or who so fierce that would not pity take,
To see alas the gilties infant slain.
For sorry heart the tears mine ^yes do stain,
To think what sorrow shall her heart oppress,
Her little child to leese remedylesse,
The double cares of Hectors wife to wayle,
Good Ladies have your tears in reddines,
And you with whom should pity most prevail.
Rue on her grief: bewail her heaviness.
With sobbing heart, lament her deep distres
When she with teares^ shall take leave of her soon,
And now (good ladies) here what shall be done.
The third act.
Andromacha. Senex. Ulysses. ALas ye careful company
why hal^ ye thus your hears?
Why beat you so your boiling br^stes
and stain your iyes with tears?
The fall of Troy is new to you
but unto me not so,
I have foresene this careful case
ere this time long ago
When fierce Achilles Hector slew
and drew the corpse abought
Then then me thought I wist it well,
that Troy should come to naught.
In sorrows sonke, I sensles am
and wrapped alas in woe,
But soon except this babe me held,
to Hector would I go.
This seely soole my stomach tames
amyd my miserye,
And in the hour of heauiest happes,
permittes me not to dye,
This only cause constraynth (...) yet
the Gods for him to pray,
with trackt of time prolonges my pain,
delays my dying day.
He takes fro me the lack of fear
the only fruit of ill.
For while he lives yet have I left
whereof to fear me still.
No place is left for better chance,
with worse we are oppressed:
To scare alas and se no hope,
is worste of all the rest.
SEN. What sudden fear thus moves your mind,
and vexes you so sore?

ANDR. Still still alas of one mishap
there ryseth more and more.
Not yet the doleful destenyes
of Troy become to end

SEN. And what more grievous chances yet
prepare the gods to send?

SEN. The caves and de^s of hell be rent
for Trojans greater fear,
And from the bottomes of their tombs
the hidden sprightes appear.
May none but Greeks alone from hell
return to life again?
Would god the fates would finishe soon
the sorrows I sustain,
Death thankful were, a common care
The Trojans all oppres,
But me alas amaseth most
the fearful heaviness.
That all astonished a^ for dread,
and horror of the sight:
That in my sleep appearde to me,
by dream this latter night.

SEN. Declare what sightes your dream has showed
and tell what does you fear.

ANDR. Two parts of all the silent night,
almost then passed wear.
And then the clear seven clustred beams
of stars: were fallen to rest.
And first the sleep so long unknown
my weried iyes oppressed.
If this be sleep the astonished mase,
of mind in heavy mood,
When suddenly before mine iyes,
the spright of Hector stood.
Not like as he the Greeks was w^nt
to battle to require
Or when amid the Grecians ships,
he threw the brandes of fire.
Nor such as raging on the Greeks,
with slaughtring stroke had slain,
And bare in deed the spoils of him
that did Achilles feign.
His countenance not now so bright.
Nor of so lively chere,
But sad and heavy like to owres,
and cladde with ugly hear.
It did me good to se him though,
when shaking then his head:
Shake of thy sleep in have he said,
and quickly leave thy bed.
Convey into some secret place,
our son, O faithful wife,
This only hope there is to help,
find mean to save his life.
Leave of thy piteous tears he said
do thou yet wail for Troy?
Would god it lay on grownde full flat,
so ye might save the boy.
Up stir he said thy self in have,
conueye him priuelie,
Save if ye may the tender blood.
of Hectors progeny.
Then straight in trembling fear I w^nte
and roulde mine iyes abought
Forgetting long my child, pore wre^che,
and after Hector sought.
But straight alas^ I wist not how
the spright away did passt,
And me forsook before I could,
my husband once embrasse.
O child: O noble fathers brood
and Trojans only joy,
O worthy seed of thauncient blood.
and beaten house of Troy.
O image of thy father lo,
thou lively bearst his face,
This countenance, (...) my Hector ^ad,
and even such was his pace.
The pitche of all his body such,
his hands thus would he bear.
His shoulders high, his th^etning (...)
even such as thine they wear.
O son: begotte to late for Troy
but borne to soon for me,
Shall ever time yet come again
and happy day may be,
That thou may once revenge, and build
again the towers of Troy,
And to the town and Trojans both
restore their name with joy?
But why do I, forgetting state
of present desteny.
So great things wishe^ enough for captives
is to live only.
Alas what priuy^ place is left
my little child to hyde?
What seat so secret may be found
where thou may safely bide?
The tower that with the walls of gods
so valiant was of might,
Through all the world so notable
so flourishing to sight,
Is turnde to dust: and five has all
consumde that was in Trope^
Of all the town not so much now
is left to hyde the boy.
What place were best to choose for guyle
the holly tomb is here,
That thenmies sword will spare to spoil^
where lythe my husband dear.
Which costly work his father buylt^
king Pryame lyberall,
And it up raysde with charges great,
for Hectors funeral.
Herein the bones and ashes both
of Hector lo they lie,
Best is that I commit the son
to his fathers custodye.
A cold and fearful swet does roune,
through out my members all,
Alas I careful wretch do fear,
what chance may the befall.

SEN. Hide him away: this only way
has saved many more,
To make the enmies to believe,
that they were dead before.
He will be sought: scant any hope
remains of fatenes^
The payse of his nobility
does him so sore oppres.

ANDR. What way were best to work: that none
our doings might bewray?

SEN. Let none bear witness what ye do
remove them all away.

ANDR. What of the enmies ^ske me: where
Astianax does remain?

SEN. ^hen shall ye boldly answer make
that he in Troy was slain.

ANDR. What shall it help to have him hyd?
at length they will him finde^

SEN. At first the enmies rage is fierce
delay does slake his mind.

ANDR. But what preuailes, since free from fear
we can him never hyde?

SEN. Let yet the wretch take his defense
more careless there to bide.

ANDR. What land unknown out of the w^y
what unfrequented place,
May keep thee safe? who aids our fear?
who shall defend our case?
Hector Hector, that evermore
thy friends did well defend,
Now chiefly aid thy wife and child
and us some succor send.
Take charge to kept and cover close
the treasures of thy wife,
And in thy ashes hyde thy soon
preserve in tomb his life.
Draw nere my child unto the tomb
why fliest thou backward so?
Thou take great scorn to lurk in deus
thy noble heart I know.
I see thou art asham^e to fear
shake of thy princely mind,
And bear thy breast as thee behoues
as chance has thee assinde.
Behold our case: and see what flock
remains now of Troy
The tomb: I woeful captive wretch
and thou a sely boy.
But yield we must to sorry (...)
thy chance must break thy breast,
Go to: creep underneath, thy fathers
holy seats to rest.
I fought the fates, may wretches help^
thou have thy sauegarde there.
If not: all ready then pore fool
thou have thy sepulchere.

SEN. The tomb him closely hydes: but le^^
your fear should him detraye,
Let him here lie, and far from hence,
go ye some other way.

ANDR. The les he fears that fears at h^^de
and yet if need be so,
If ye think meet a little hens
for safety let us go.

SEN. A little while keep silence now
refrain your playnt and cry,
His cursed foot now hythee moves
the lord of Cephalye.

AN. Now open earth, and tho^ my spouse
from Styx rent up the ground,
Deep in thy bosom hyde my son,
that he may not be sound.
Ullysses comes with doutfull pace
and changed countenance
He knittes in heart deceitful craft
for some more grievous chance.

ULY. Though I be made the (...)
of heavy news to you^
This one thing first I shall desire
that ye take this for true.
That though the words come from my mo^th,
and I my message tell,
Of truth yet are they (...) of mine
ye may believe me well.
It is the word of all the Greeks
and they the authors be,
Whom Hectors blo^^^ (...)
their countries for to see.
Our careful trust of peace unsure
does still the Greeks detayne,
And evermore our doutfull fear,
yet draws us back again.
And ^u^^reth not our weried hands,
our weapons to forsake,
In child yet of Andromach^,
While Troian^ comfort take,

AN. And ^^yth your Augure Calchas so?

ULYS. Though Calchas nothing said
Yet Hector tells it us himself,
Of whose seed are we frayde.
The worthy blood of noble men
oftimes we see it plain,
Does after in their heirs succeed
and quickly sprynges again.
For so the horneles yong^ng yet,
of high and sturdy best,
With lofty neck, and braunched browe,
does shortly rule the rest.
The tender (...), that of the lopped
stock does yet remain,
To match the tree that bare the boughe,
in time startes up again.
With equal to^^e to former wood,
the rowme it does supplye,
And spreddes on soil allow the shade,
to heaven his branches hye.
Thus of one spark by chance yet le^^
it happens so full often.
The fire has quickly caught (...)
and ^^amthe again aloft,
So fear we yet least Hectors blood,
might rise ere it be long,
Fear castes in all thextremitie
and often interprets wrong.
If ye respeckte our case, ye may
not blame these old souldiars
Though after years and months twice (...),
they fear again the wars.
And other travails, dreading Troy,
not yet to be well won,
A great thing does the Grecians move,
the fear of Hectors soon.
Ryd us of fear, this stays our (...),
and pluckes their ^acke again,
And in the haven our n^u^e sticks,
till Hectors blood^ ^e slain.
Count me not ^^erce for that by fates
I Hectors son require,
For I as well if chance it would
Orestes should desire.
But sins that needs it must be so,
bear it with pacient heart,
And suffer that which Agamemnon,
suffered in good part.

AN. Alas my child would god (...),
yet in thy mothers hand,
And that I knew what destenies,
the held, or in what land.
For never should the mothers ^^^th,
her tender child forsake,
Though through my dressed the (...) all,
their cruel weapons struck.
Nor though the Greeks, with pinching bands
of iron: my hands had bound,
Or else in fervent flame of fire
besette my body round.
But now my little child (poor wretch)
alas where might he be?
Alas what cruel destenye,
what chaunc^ has hapt to thee?
Art thou yet rangeing in the feeldes
and wandrest there abroad?
Or smothered else in dusty smoke
of Troy: or ouertrode^
Or have the Greeks thee slain alas
and laughed to see thy blood^
Or torn art thou with Jaws of beasts
or cast to fowls for fo^de?

ULY. Dissemble not, hard is for thee
Ulysses to disceiue,
I can full well the mothers crafts
and subteltie perceive.
The policy of Goddesses,
Ullysses has undone,
Set all these feigned words aside,
tell me where is thy soon?

ANDR. Where is Hector? where all the rest?
that had with Troy their fall^
Where Pryamus? you ask for one
but I require of all.

ULY. Thou shall constrained be to tell
the thing thou do deny.

AN. A happy chance were death, to ^e^
that does desire to dye,

ULY. Who most desires to dye: would ^aynest
live when death drawthe on,
These noble words with present fear
of death: would soon v^ ^ou.

ANDR. Ulysses if ye will constrayne
Andromacha with fear,
Threten my life, for now to dye
my chief desire it wear

ULY. With steps, with fire, tormenting death
we will the truth out wrest.
And dolor shall thee force, to tell
the secrets of thy breast.
And what thy heart has deepest hyd
for pain thou shall expres
Oftymes thextremitie preuayles,
much more then ientlenes.

ANDR. Set me in midst of burning flame,
with wounds my body rent,
Use all the means of cruelty,
that ye may all invent.
Prouethe with thyrst, and hunger both,
and every torment try,
Pearce through my ^ides with burning yrons,
in prison let me lie.
Spare not the woorst ye can deuyse
(if ought be worse then this)
Yet never geat ye more of me
I wot not where he is,

ULY. It is but vain to hyde the thing
that straight ye will deteckte.
No fears may move the mothers heart.
she does them all neglecte.
This tender love ye bear your child,
wherein ye stand so stout.
So much more circumspectly war^the,
the Greeks to look about.
Least after ten years trachte of time.
and battle borne so far.
Some one should live that on our children,
might renew the war.
As for my self, what Calchas says,
I would not fear at all.
But on Telemachus I dread,
the smarte of wars would fa^.

AN. Now will I make Ulysses glad,
and all the Greeks also.
Needs must thou woeful wretch confess.
declare thy hidden woe.
Rejoice ye sons of Atreus,
there is no cause of dred.
Be glad Ullysses tell the Greeks,
that Hectors son is ded.

ULY. By what assurance prouest thou that^
How shall we credit the?

AN. What ever thing the en^ies hand.
may threaten, h^ppe to me
Let spedy fates me slaye forthwith,
and earth me hide at ones,
And after death from tomb again,
remove yet Hectors bones,
Except my soon already now,
do rest among the ded,
And that except Astyanax.
into his tomb be fed.

ULY. Then fully ^re the fates (...)
with Hectors childs disceace:
Now shall I bear the Grecians word,
of sure and certain peace.
Ulysses why what do thou now?
the Greeks will every chone,
Believe thy words: whom credit she thou?
the mothers tale alone.
Think thou for sauegarde of her child
the mother will not lie?
And bread the more the worse mischaunce,
to give her son to dye?
Her faith she binds with bond of oath,
the truth to verify,
What thing is more of weight to fear,
then so to swear and lie?
Now call thy crafts together all,
bestirre thy wits and mind,
And show thy self Ulysses now,
the truth herin to find.
Search well the mothers mind: behold
she weeps and waileth out,
And here and there with doutfull pace,
she rangeth all about.
Her careful ears she does apply,
to harken what I say,
More fraide she seems then sorrowful.
Now work some wilye way.
For (...) there is,
and crafty pollecie,
Yet once again by other (...),
I will the mother tri^.
Thou wretched woman may reioye^,
that dead he is: alas
More doleful death by desteny
for him decreed there was.
From Turrets top to have been cast
and cruelly been slain.
Which only tower of all the rest,
does yet in Troy remain.

ANDR. My spright fa^^th me, my limbs do qua^e,
fear does my wits confound,
And as the y^e congeales with frost.
my blood with cold is bound.

ULYS. ^he trembles to^ this way, this way
I will the truth out wrest,
The mothers fear detecteth all
the secrets of her breast.
I will renew her fear: go ^ears
bestyrre ye spedely,
To seek this enmy of the Greeks,
where ever that he lie.
Well done, he will be found at length,
go to, s^ill seek him out,
Now shall he dye: what do thou fear?
why do thou look about?

ANDR. Would god that any cause there were,
yet left that might me fray,
My heart at last now all is l^^t,
has laid all fear away.

ULYS. Sins that your child now has ye say
already suffered death.
And with his blood we may not pourge
the hosts as Calchas says.
Our flete pass not (as well inspired,
does Calchas prophecy)
Till Hectors ashes cast abroad,
The waves may pacify,
And tomb be rent, now sins the boy
has escaped his desteny.
Needs must we break this holy tomb
where Hectors ashes lie.

ANDR. What shall I do? my mind distracted,
is with double fear,
On the one my son, on the other side
my husbands ashes dear.
Alas which part, should move me most,
the cruel gods I call,
To witness with me in the truth,
and ghostes that guide thee all.
Hector, that nothing in my soon
is else that pleases me,
But thou alone^ god grant him life,
he might resemble the,
Shall Hectors ashes ^rowned be?
bide I such cruelty,
To see his bones cast in the seas?
yet let Astianax dye^
And can thou wretched mother bide,
thint own chyldes death to see?
And (...) from the hy^ towers top
that hedlong thrown he be?
I can, and will take in good part,
his death and cruel pain,
So that my Hector (...) death,
^e not removed again.
The boy that life and senses has
may feel his pain and dye,
But Hector lo his death has plaste,
at rest in tomb to lie.
What do thou stay? determyne which
thou will preserve of twain.
Art thou in doubt? save this: lo here
thy Hector does remain.
Does Hectors be, the one quick of spright
and drawing toward his strength
And one that may perhaps revenge
his fathers death at length.
Alas I can not save them both
I think that best it wear.
That of the twain I saved him,
that does the Grecyans fear.

ULY. It shall be done that Calchas words
to us does Prophecye^
And now shall all this sumpteous work
be thrown down utterly.

AN. That once ye sold?

UL. I will it all
from top to bottom rende

ANDR. The faith of Godds I call upon
Achilles us defend.
And Pyrrhus aid thy fathers right

ULY. This tomb abroad shall lie

ANDR. O mischief, never durst the Greeks
show yet such crueltye.
Ye strain the Temples, and the Godds
that most have fauorde you,
The dead ye spare not, on their t^^bes
your furye rages now.
I will their weapons all resist
my self with naked hand,
The ire of heart shall geeue me strength,
their armoure to withstand.
As fierce as did the Amasones
beat down the Greeks in fight,
And Menas once enspyrde with God,
in sacryfice does smyght:
With spear in hand, and while with furious
pace she treades the ground.
And wood as one in rage: she strikes
and feelythe not the wound:
So will I run on midste of them
and on their weapons dye,
And in defense of Hectors tomb,
among his ashes lie.

ULY. Cease ye ^ does rage and fury vain
of woman move ye ought.
Dispatch with speed what I command,
and pluck down all to naught.

ANDR. Slay me rather here with swoorde
rid me out of the way.
Break up the deep Auerne, and ryd
my destenies delay.
Rise Hector and byset thy foes
break thou Ulysses ire,
A spright art good enough for him,
behold he casts fire.
And weapon shakes with mighty hand
do ye not Greeks him see?
Or else does Hectors spright appear
but only unto me?

ULY. Down quight withal.

AN. What will thou suffer
both thy son be slain,
And after death thy husbands bones
to be removed again?
Perhaps thou may with prayer yet
appease the Grecians all,
Else down to ground the holly tomb
of Hector, straight shall fall.
Let rather dye the child poor wretch
and let the Greeks him kill,
Then father and the son should cause
the tone the others ill.
Ulysses, at thy knees I fall,
and humbly ask mercy.
These hands that no man's feet else knew,
first at thy fete they lie,
Take pity on the mothers case,
and sorrows of my breast,
Uouchsafe my prayers to receive,
and grant me my request.
And by how much the more the gods
have the advanced hye,
More easily strike the poor estate,
of wretched misery.
God grant the chaste bed of thy godly
wife Penelope,
May the receive, and so again
La^rta may the sea.
And that thy son Telemachus,
may mete thee joyfully,
His graundsers years, and fathers witt^.
to pass full happily.
Take pity on the mothers tears,
her little child to save,
He is my only comfort left
and thonely joy I have.

ULY. Bring forth thy son and ask.

The second scene.
Andromacha. COme hither child out of thy dens to me
thy wretched mothers lamentable store,
This pa^e Ulysses, ^oe this bade is he,
that stays your ships, ^ stareth you so sore.
Submit thy self my soon with humble hand,
and worship flat on ground, thy masters feet,
Think it no shame, as now the case does stand
the thing that fortune wilth a wretch is mete,
Forget thy worthy stacke of kingly (...).
think not on Pryames great nobilite,
And put thy father Hector from thy mind,
such as thy fort (...) thy stomach be^
Behave thy self (...), bend thy knee,
and though thy grief pearce not thy tender years,
Yet learn to wretched (...) by me,
and take ensample a^ thy mothers (...)^
Once Troy has seen the weping of a thylde,
When little (...),
And he to whom all beasts in strength (...) yield,
that made his (...) take their (...)
His little enmies tears yet ouerc^^^,
Pryame (he said) receive thy liberty,
In sent of honor keep thy kingly name,
but yet thy sceptors rule more faythfullye^
Loc such the conquest was of Hercules
of him yet learn your hearts to mollifye.
Do only Her^tes cruel weapons pirate
and may no end be of your crueltye?
No less then Pryame kneeles to thee this boy
that lies and asks only life of thee.
As for the rule and governance of Troy
where ever fortune will there let it be.
Take mercy on the mothers ruthful tears
that with their streams my checkes do ouerflowe
And spare this giltles infants tender years
that humbly falls at thy feet so low.

The third scene.
Ulysses. Andromacha. Astyanax OF trenthe the mothers great sorrow,
does move my heart fall sore.
But yet the mothers of the Greeks,
of need must move me mo^e.
To whom this hope may cause in time
a great calamytis.
ANDR. may ever he the burnt ruynes
of Troy reedifie?
And shall these hands in time to come,
ereckt the town again?
If this be thonely help we have,
there does no hope remain
For Troy, we stand not now in case
to cause your fear of mind,
Does ought avail his fathers force,
or stock of noble kind?
His fathers heart abated was.
he drawn the walls abought.
Thus evil happs, the haughetest heart
at length they bring to naught.
If ye will needs oppress a wretch
what thing more grievous wear.
Then on his noble neck he should
the yoke of bondage bear?
To serve in life, does any man
this to a king deny?

ULY. Not Ulysses wylth his death
but Calchas Prophecy

ANDR. O false invent or of discryt^
and heinous crueltye.
By manhood of whose hand in war,
no man did ever dye.
But by disceite and craftye train
of mind that mischefe seeks,
Before this time full many one
dead is: ye of the Greeks.
The Prophets words and giltlesse gods
sayste thou my son require?
Nay: mischief of thy breast it is
thou dooste his death desire.
Thou night soldier, and stought of hearts
a little child to stay,
This enterprise thou tak^^^ alone
and that by open day.

ULY. Ulysses manhood well to Greeks
to much to you is known,
I may not spend the time in words,
out navy will be gone.

AN. A little stay, while I my last
farewell give to my child
And have with often embracing him,
my gredy sorrows filde.

ULY. Thy greuons sorrows to redress,
would god it lay in me,
But at thy will to take delay
of time, I grant it thee.
Now take thy last leave of thy son,
and fill thy self with tears,
Often times the weping of the eyes,
the inward grief out wears.

ANDR. O dear, o sweet, thy mothers pledge,
farewell my only joy.
Farewell the flower of honor left
of beaten house of Troy
O Trojans last calamity
and fear to Grecians part
Farewell thy mothers only hope,
and vain comfort of heart.
Often wished I thee thy fathers strength.
and half thy graundsyres years.
But all for naught, the Gods have all
dispoynted our desires.
Thou never shall in ^egall court
thy sceptors take in hand
Nor to thy people give dec^^ese
nor lead with law thy land.
Nor yet thine enmyes overcome
by might of handy stroke,
Nor lend the conquered nacyons all
under thy seruyle yoke.
Thou never shall beat down in fight
and Greeks with sword pursewe,
Nor at thy Charyot Pyr^hus pluck
as Achylles Hector drew.
And never shall these tender hands
thy weapons welde and wreste,
Thou never shalt in woddes pursue
the wild and mighty beast.
Nor as accustomde is by guyse
and sacryfice in Troy,
With measure swifte: between the aulters
shalt thou dance with joy.
O grievous kind of cruel death
that does remain for thee,
More woeful thing then Hector^ death
the walls of Troy shall see.

ULYS. Now break of all thy mothers tears
I may no more time spend.
The grievous sorrows of thy heart
will never make an end.

ANDR. Ulysses spare as yet my tears
and grant a wht^e delays,
To close his eyes yet with my hands
ere he depart away.
Thou dye^^ but young: yet fearde thou art
thy Troy does wait for thee.
Go noble heart thou shall again
the noble Trojans see.

^S. Help me mother?

AN. Alas my child
why takste thou hold by me?
In vain thou callte where help none is
I can not succoure thee.
As when the little tender beast
that hears the Lion cry,
Straight for defense he seeks his dam
and crowching down does lie.
The cruel beast when once removed
is the dam away,
In greedy iawe with ravening bit
does snatch the tender pray
So straight the enmies will thee take
and from my side the Bear.
Receive my kiss and tears poor child
receive my rented hear.
Depart thou hence now full of me
and to thy father go,
Salute my Hector in my name
and tell him of my woe.
Complain thy ^^ others grief to him
if former cares may move,
The spryghtes: and that in funeral flame
they leese not all their love.
O crewell Hector suffrest thou
thy wife to be opprest^
With bond of Grecyans heavy yoke
and lie thou still at rest^
Achylles rose ^ take here again
my tears and rented hear,
And (all that I have le^te to send)
this kiss thy father bear.
Thy coat yet for my comfort leave
the tomb has touched it
If of his ashes ought here lie
I will seek it every whit.

ULY. There is no measure of thy tears
I may no longer stay
Defer no farther our return
break of our ships delay.

Chorus altered by the translater.
O Jove that leadst the lamps of fire
and dekst with slamyng star^es the sky
Why is it ever thy desire
to care their course so orderly?
That now the frost the leaves has worn
and now the spryng does cloth the tree,
Now fyry Leo rypes the Corn
and still the soil should changed be?
But why art thou that all doos^e guide
between whose hands the poales do sway^
And at whose will the Orbs do slide
careless of man's estate always?
Regarding not the good man's case,
nor caring how to hurt the ill
Chance bears rule in every place,
and turns man's estate at will.
She geues the wrong the upper hand
the better part she does oppress,
She makes the highest low to stand
her kingdom all is orderlesse.
O par^itte proof of her frayltie,
the princely towers of Troy bet down
The flower of Asya here ye see
with turn of hand quight ouerthrown^
The tuthfull end of Hectors son
whom to his death the Greeks have led
His fatal hour is come and gonne
and by this time the child is ded
Yet still alas more cares increase,
o Trojans doleful destenye,
Fast does approach the maids decease
and now Polyxena shall dye.
The fourth ackte.
Helena. Andromacha. Hecuba. WHat ever woeful wedding yet,
were cause of funeral.
Of walling, tears, blood, slaughter (...)
or other mischief^ all,
I worthy match for Helena,
and meet for me it ware,
My wedding torche has been the cause,
of all the Trojans care.
I am constrainde to hurt them yet,
after their overthrow
The false and fained marriages,
of Pyrthus must I show.
And give the maid the Greeks attir^
and by my policy,
Shall Marys sister be betraide,
and b^ (...) shall dye.
But let her be begu^^ed thus,
the les should be her pain
If that ^nware, without the fear
of death: she might be slain.
What ceasest thou the will of Gr^ekes,
and message to fulfill?
Of hurt constrainde the fault returnthe
to thauthor of the ill.
O noble virgin of the famous
house: and stock of Troy,
To thee, the Gresians have me sent
I bring the news of joy.
The gods ^ue on thy afflicted state,
more merciful they be,
A great and happy marriage lo,
they have preparde for the.
Thou never should if Troy had stood,
so nobly wedded be,
Nor Priame never could prefer,
the to so hye degree.
Whom flower of all the G^^cyon name,
the prince of honor hongur hie.
That bears the scepters over all.
The land of Thessal^e,
Does in the law of wedlock chose
and for his wife require^
To sacred rig^tes of lawful bed,
does Pyr^hus thee desire
Lo Thetys great with all the rest,
of gods that guide by se^.
Each one shall thee account as theyrs,
and joy by wedding ^ea.
And Peleus shall thee daughters call,
when thou art Pyrthus wife,
And Ner^us shall account thee his
the space of all thy life.
Put of thy mourning (...) now.
this regal vesture wear
Forget henceforth thy cantiue state,
and semely broyde thy hear.
Thy fall has lift thee higher up.
and does thee more advance.
Often to be taken in the war,
does bring the better chance.
AN. This ill the Trojans never knew
in all their griefs and pain,
Before this time ye never made,
us to rejoice in vain.
Troy towers give light, o semely time
for marriage to be made
Who would refuse the wedding day
that Helayne does persuade?
The Plague and Ruin of each part
behold doste thou not see,
These tombs of noble men: and how
their boanes here scattered be?
Thy bryde bed has been cause of this
for thee all these be ded,
For thee the blood of Asya both
and Europe has been shed.
When thou in joy and pleasure both
the fighting folk from far,
Haste veude: in doubt to whom to wish
the glory of the war.
Go to prepare the maryages
what need the torchis light?
Be hold the towers of Troy do shine
with brandes that blase full bright.
O Trojans all set to your hands,
this wedlock celebrate:
Lament this day with woeful cry
and tears in seemly rate.

HELE. Though care do cause the want of (...)
and reasons rule deny.
And heavy hap does oftimes hate
his mates in myserye,
Yet I before most hateful judge
dare well defend my part,
That I of all your grievous cares
sustain the greatest smarte.
Andromach^ for Hector weeps,
for Priame Hecuba,
For only Paris privily
bewayleth Helen^.
A hard and grievous thing it is
captivity to bear.
In Troy that yoke I suffered long
a prisoner whole ten year.
Turnde are the fates, Troy beaten down.
to Greece I must repeat,
The native country to have lost
is ill, but worse to fear.
For dread thereof you need not care
your euilles all be paste.
On me both parts will vengeauce take
all lights to me at last.
Whom each man prisoner takes God won
she stands in slipper stay,
And me not captive made by lotte
yet Paris led aways
I have been cause of all these wars
and then your woes were wrought,
When first your ships the Spartane seas
and land of Grecia sought.
But if the Goddess wild it so
that I their pray should be,
And for reward to her beautyes judge
she had appointed me.
Then pardon Paris: think this thing
in wrathful judge does lie,
The sentence Menclaus geues
and he this case shall try.
Now turn thy plaintes ^ndromache.
and weep for Polyxeyne.
mine iyes for sorrows of my heart.
their tears may not refreyne.

AN. Alas what care makes Heleyue weeps
What grief does she lament?
Declare what crafts Ulisses castes,
what mischief has he sent?
Shall she from heyght of Idey hill
be hedlong tombled down?
Or else out of the turrets top
in Troy, shall she be thrown?
Or will they cast her from the cliues,
into Svgeon se^es?
In bottom of the surging waves,
to end her ruthful days?
Show what thy countenance hides, ^ tell
the secrets of thy breast:
Some woes in Pyrthus wedding are
far worse then all the rest.
Go to, give sent case on the maid,
pronounce her destenye:
Delude no longer our mishaps,
we are preparde to dye.

HELL. Would god there pounder of the gods
would give his dome so right:
That I also on point of sword
might leese the loathsome light.
Or at Actulles tomb, with stroke
of Pyrrhus hand be s^ayne:
And bear a part of all thy fates
O wretched Polyxeyne.
Whom yet Achilles wooth to wed.
and where his ashes lie^
Requires that thy blood be shed,
and at his tomb to die.

AN. Behold lo, how her noble minds
of death does gladly hear.
She decks her self: her regal weed,
in semely wise to wear.
And to her head she settes her hand,
the broyded hear to lay^
To wed she thought it death: to dye,
she thinks a wedding day.
But help, alas, my mother sowndes.
to hear her daughters death.
Arise: pluck up your heart and take,
again the panting breath.
Black good mother how slender stay^
that does thy life sustain?
A little thing shall happy thee.
thou art almost past thy pain.
Her brethe returns: she does revive,
her limbs their life do take.
So se when wretches feign would die^
how death does them forsake.

HEC. Does yet Achilles live alas,
to work the Trojans spite?
Does he rebel against us yet?
O hand of Paris light.
The very tomb and ashes lo^,
yet thirsts for our blood.
A happy heap of childern ^ate^
on every side me stood.
It weried me to deal the mo^
there is kiss among them all
The rest are lost and this alon^,
now does me mother call.
Thou only child of Hecuba,
a comfort left to me,
A stayer of my sorry state,
and shall I now leese thee?
Depart O wretched soul, and from
this careful carcas fly,
And case me of such ruthful fates,
to se my daughter dye.
My weping wettes, alas my eyes^
and stains them over all,
And down my cheeks the sodein streams
and showers of tears do fall.
But thou dear daughter may be glad
Cassandra would rejoice,
Or Hectors wife thus wed to be
if they might have their choice.

AN. We are the wretchis Hecuba
in cursed case we stand,
Whom straight the ship shall toss by seus
into a foreine land.
But as for Heleyns grieves be gone
and turned to the best,
She shall again her native country
see: and live at rest.

HELE. Ye would the more envy my state
if ye might know your own,

AN. And grouthe there yet more grief to me
that er^te I have not known?

HELE. Such ma^^ters must ye serve as does
by chance of lotts befall

ANDR. Whose servant am I then become
whom shall I master call?

HELE. By lotte ye fall to Pyrrhus hands
you are his prisoner.

ANDR. Cassandra is happy: fury saues
perhaps and Phoebus her.

HELE. These king of Greeks Cassandra keeps
and his captive is she

HEC. Is any one among them all
that prisoner would have me?

HELE. You chaunsed to Ulysses are
his pray ye are become.

HEC. Alas what cruel, dyre and yrefull
dealet of the dome.
What god unjust does so divide,
the captives to their lords?
What grievous arbiter is he?
that to such choice accordes.
What cruel hand to wretched folk,
so evil fates has cast?
Who has among Achilles armor,
Hectors mother plaste?
Now am I captive and beset,
with all calamitee.
My bondage greeues me not, but him
to serve it shameth me.
He that Achilles spoils has won,
shall Hectors also have:
Shall barraine land enclosde with seas,
receive my boanes in grave?
Lead me Ulysses where thou will.
lead me, I make no stay,
My master I, and me my fates,
shall follow every way.
Let never calm come to the seas,
but let them rage with windt,
Come fire and sword, mine own mischafice
and Priames let me find.
In mean time haps this deep distres
my cares can know no calm:
I ran the race with Priamus
but he has won the Palm.
But Pyrthus comes with swiftened pace
and thretning brows does wrest.
What stayest thou Pyrthus? strike thy sword
now through this woeful breast.
And both at ones the parents of
thy fathers wife now slay,
Murderer of age, lykes thee her blood?
he drawth my daughter away.
Defile the gods and stain the sprighte^^
of hell with slaughtred blood,
To ask your mercy what auayles?
our prayers do no good.
The vengeance ask I on your ships,
that it the gods may pleas,
According to this sacrifice.
to guide you on the seas.
This wish I to your thousand sails,
Gods wrath light on them all,
Even to the ship that bears me,
what ever may befall.

Chorus.
A Comfort is to man's calamity
A doleful flock of fellows in distres.
And sweet to him that morurnes in miseri^
To hear them wayle whom sorrows like oppr^^
In depest care his grief him bytes the les,
That his estate bewailes not all alone,
But sees with him the tears of many one.
For still it is the chief delight in woe,
And joy of them that sonke in sorrows are,
To see like fates byfall to many more,
That may take part of all their woeful fare.
And not alone to be oppressed with care.
There is no wight: of woe that does complayn^,
when all the rest do like mischaunce sustain.
In all this world if happy man were none,
None (though he were) would think himself a wretch,
Let once the rytche with heaps of gold be gone,
whose hundred head his pastors ouerretche,
Then would the poor man's heart begin to stretche
There is no wretch whose life him does displease
But in respect of those that live at ease.
Sweet is to him that stands in deep distres,
To see no man in joyful plight to be,
Whose only vessel, wynd and wave oppres,
Full sore his chance bewayles and wepeth he,
That with his own none others wrack does se
When he alone makthe shipwrak on the sand
And naked falls to long desired land.
A thousand sail who sees to drenche in seas
with better will the storm has ouerpast
His heavy hap does him the less displease,
When broken boardes abroad be many cast
And shypwrackt ships to shore they flit full fast,
With doubled waves when stopped is the flood,
With heap of them that there have lost their good.
Full sore did Phryxus Hellens loss complain,
What time the leader of his flock of sheep,
Upon his back alone he bare them twain,
And wet his golden locks amyd the deep.
In piteous playnt alas he began to weep
The death of her it did him deep displease,
That shypwrak made amyd the drenchyng seas.
And piteous was the playnt and heavy mood
Of woeful Pyr^ha and eke Deucalion,
That naught beheld about them but the floode,
When they of all mankind were left alone
Amyd the seas full sore they made their moan
To see themselves thus left alive in woe
When neither land they saw nor fellows more.
A non these playnts, and Troianes tears shall quasie,
And here and there the ship them toss by seas
When trompets sound shall warn to hoyse up sail
And through the waves with wynd to seek their way^^:
Then shall these captives go to end their days
In land unknown: when once with hasty ore
The drenching deep they take and shonne the shore.
What state of mind shall then in wretches ^e,
When shore shall synke from sight and seas arise?
When I dey hill to lurk aloof they see?
Then point with hand from far where Troia lyse,
Shall child and mother: talking in this wise:
Lo yonder Troy, where smoke it fumeth hye,
By this the Troianes, shall their country spy.
The fifth act.
Messenger. Andromacha. Hecuba. ODyre fierce, wretched, horrible,
o civil fates accutlle,
Of Matsh (...) years bloodshed blows.
the wofulst and the wurste.
A la^ which should I syr^^ bewail?
thy cares Andromacha^
Or else lament the wretched age
of woeful ^ecaba?
HEC What ever ^^ns calamities
y^ wayle for mine it is
I bear the smart of all their woes,
each other feels but his.
Who ever he, I am the wretch
all happes to me at last.

MES. Slain is the maid, and from the w^lles
of Troy: the child is cast.
But both, (as them became) they took
their death, with s^omack stout.

ANDR. Declare the double slaughters then^
and tell the whole throughout.

MES. One tower of all the rest ye known
does yet in Troy remain,
Where Pryam wonted was to sit,
and vewe the armies twain.
His little Nephew the with him
to lead and from a far,
His fathers ^ightes with fire and swoord^
to show, and feats of war.
This tower, sometime well known by fame,
and Trojans honor most.
Is now with captains of the Greeks,
beset on every coaste.
With swift recourse and from the ships.
in clustred heaps anon.
Both tagge and ^agge, they run to g^^^^
what thing should there be done.
Some clime the hills, to seek a place^
where they might see it best,
Some on the rocks a tiptoe stande^
to ouerlooke the rest.
Some on their temples wear the Pyne,
some beeche, some crowns o^ baye.
For garlandes torn is every tree,
that stands in their way.
Some from the highest mowntaynes top,
aloof beholds all
Some sca^e the buyldings half yburnte,
and some the ruynous wall
Ye some there wear (o mischief lo)
that for the more despyght,
The tomb of Hector sitts upon,
beholders of the sight.
With pryncely pace Ulysses then,
past through the preasyd b^nde
Of Greeks, king Pryames little Nephew,
leadyng by the hand.
The child with vnrepining gate
past through his enmyes hands,
Up toward the walls, and as anon
in turretts top he stands,
From thence adowne, his lo^tye looks
he cast on every part,
The nearer death more free from care
he seemde, and fear of heart.
Amyd his ^oes, his stomach swelles,
and fierce he was to sight,
Like Tigers whelye, that threats in vain
with toothlesse chap to byght,
Alas, for pittye them each one,
(...) on his tender years,
And all the rowte that present were,
for him they shed their tears.
Yea not Ulysses them restraynde,
but tricklyng down they fall,
And only he, wept not, (poor fool,)
whom they bewailed all.
But while on Gods Ulysses callde,
and Calchas words expound,
In midste of Pryames land alas,
the child leapte down to ground.

AN. What crewell Colchus could or scythe
such slaughter take in hand?
Or by the shore of Caspyan sea,
what barbarous lawles land?
Busyrides to thaulters yet,
no infantes blood has shed:
Nor never yet were children slain,
for feast of Dyomed.
Who shall alas in tomb thee lay,
or hyde thy limbs again?

MES. What lymmes from such a hedlong fall,
could in a child remain?
His bodies payse, thrown down to ground,
has battred all his boanes,
His face, his noble fathers marks,
are spoylde against the stoa^es.
His neck unjointed is: his head
so dashte with flint stone stroke,
That scattred is the brain about,
the sculle is all to broake.
Thus lies he now dismembered corpse,
deformde, and all to rent.

ANDR. Lot herein does he yet likewise,
his father represent.

MES. What time the child, had hedlong fallen
thus from the walls of Troy.
And all the Greeks them selves bewaylde,
the slaughter of the boy.
Yet straight return they back, and at
Achilles tomb again
The second mischief go to work,
the death of Polyxeyne
This tomb the waves of surging seas,
beset the utter side.
The other part the feeldes encloase
about, and pastors wide.
In vale enuyroned with hills,
that round about do rise.
A sloape on heyght erected are
the banks, in theater wise.
By all the shore then swarm the Greeks
and thyck on heaps they prease:
Some hoape that by her death, they shall
their ships delay release.
Some other joy, their enmies stock
thus beaten down to be:
A great part of the people, both
the slaughter hate and see.
The Trojans eke, no less frequent
their own calamyties,
And all affrayde, beheld the last
of all their myseryes.
When first proceedyd torches bright
as guise of wedlock is.
And author thereof led the way
the lady Tyndaris.
Such wedlock (pray the Trojans then)
god send Herinyona^
And would god to her husband so,
restorde were Helena.
Fear masde each part, but Polyxene,
her bashefull look down cast:
And more then erste her glyttring eyes,
and beawty shynde at last.
As swetest semes then Phoebus light.
when down his beams do sway,
When stars again, with night at hand,
oppress the doutfull day.
Astonished much the people were,
and all, they her commend.
And now much more then ever ^arst,
they praysde her, at her end.
Some with her beauty moved were,
some with her tender years:
Some to behold the turns of chance,
and how each thing thus wears.
But most them mones her valiant mind,
and lofty stomach hye,
So strong, so stout, so ready of heart,
and well prepaide to dye.
Thus pass they forth, and bold, before
king Pyrrhus gothe the maid,
They pity her, they meruell her,
their hearts were all afraid.
As soon as then, the hard hill top.
(where dye she should) they trod.
And hye upon his fathers tomb,
the youthful Pyrrhus stood.
The manly maid she never shronke,
one foot, nor backwarde drew
But boldly turns to meet the stroke,
with sloute unchanged he^^e
Her courage moves each one, and ^oe
a strange thing monstrouse like.
That Pyrthus even himself stood still,
for dread, and durst not stryke.
But as he had, his glittering sword,
in her to hills up done,
The purple blood, at mortal wound,
then gusshing out it spoon.
Ne yet her courage her forsook,
when dyeng in that stownde,
She fell as therthe should her revenge,
with Ireful rage to grownde.
Each people wept: the Trojans first,
with preuye fearful cry.
The Grecians ^ke, each one bewaylde,
her death, apparently.
This order had the sacrifice,
her blood the tomb up droonke,
No drop remaynth above the ground,
but down forthwith it soon^e.

HEC. Now go, now go ye Greeks, and now,
repair yt safel^e home.
With careless ships, and hoysed sails,
Now cut the sallt sea ^ome.
The child and virgin, both be slain,
your battels^^^ysht are.
Alas where shall I end my age?
or whether bear my care?
Shall I my dawghter, or my nephew?
or my husband moan?
My country else, or all at once?
or else my self alone?
My wish is death, that children does
and virgins fiersly takes
Where ever crewell death does haste
to stryke, it me for sakes.
Amyd the enmies weapons all,
amyd both sword and fire,
All night sought for, thou fleeste from me,
that do thee most desire.
Not flame of fire, not fall of tower,
nor cruel enmyes hand,
Has ryd my life: how near alas,
could death to Pryame stand?

MES. Now captives all, with swyft recourse
repair ye to the seayes,
Now spread the ships, their sails abroad,
and forth they seek their ways.

Imprinted at London in Fletestrete within Temple bar, at the sign of the
hand and star, by Richard Tottyll.

Cum priuilegio ad impris mendum solum.


