The Tragical History of HAMLET Prince of Denmark.
Enter two Sentinels. 1. STand: who is that?


2. It Is. I.


1. O you comemost carefully upon your watch,


2. And if you meet Marcellus and Horatio,
The partners of my watch, bid them make haste.

1. I will: See who goes there.


Enter Horatio and Marcellus. Hor. Friends to this ground.


Mar. And leegemen to the Dane,
O farewell honest soldier, who has relieved you?

1. Barnardo has my place, give you good night.


Mar. Holla, Barnardo.


2. Say, is Horatio there?


Hor. A piece of him.


2. Welcome Horatio, welcome good Marcellus.


Mar. What has this thing appeared again to night.


2. I have seen nothing.


Mar. Horatio says it is but ourfantasie,
And will not let belief take hold of him,
Touching this dreaded sight twice seen by us,
Therefore I have entreated him along with us
To watch the minutes of this night,
That if again this apparition come,
He may approve our eyes, and speak to it.

Hor. Tut. it will not appear.


2. Sit down I pray, and let us once again
Assail your ears that are so fortified,
What we have two nights seen.

Hor. Well, sit we down, and let us hear Bernardo speak of this.


2. Last night of al, when yonder star that is west
ward from the pole, had made his course to
Illumine that part of heaven. Where now it burns,
The bell then towling one.

Enter Ghost. Mar. Break off your talk, see where it comes again.


2. In the same figure like the King that is dead,


Mar. Thou art a scholar, speak to it Horatio.


2. Looks it not like the king?


Hor. Most like, it horrors me with fear and wonder.


2. It would be spoke to.


Mar. Question it Horatio.


Hor. What art thou that thus vsurps the state, in
Which the Majesty of buried Denmark did sometimes
Walk? By heaven I charge thee speak.

Mar. It is offended.

exit Ghost.
2. See, it stalks away.


Hor. Stay, speak, speak, by heaven I charge thee speak.


Mar. It Is gone and makes no answer.


2. How now Horatio, you tremble and look pale,
Is not this something more than fantasy?
What think you on it?

Hor. Before my God, I might not this believe, without the sensible and true
avouch of my own eyes.


Mar. Is it not like the King?


Hor. As thou art to thy self,
Such was the very armor he had on,
When he the ambitious Norway combated.
So frownd he once, when in an angry parle
He smot the sleaded pollax on the ice,
It Is strange.

Mar. Thus twice before, and iump at this dead hour,
With Marshall stalk he passed through our watch.

Hor. In what particular to work, I know not,
But in the thought and scope of my opinion,
This bodes some strange eruption to the state.

Mar. Good, now sit down, and tell me he that knows
Why this same strikt and most obseruant watch,
So nightly toils the subject of the land,
And why such daily cost of brazen Cannon
And foreign mart, for implements of war,
Why such impresse of ship-writes, whose sore task
Does not divide the sunday from the week:
What might be toward that this sweaty march
Does make the night joint labourer with the day,
Who is it that can inform me?

Hor. Mary that can I, at least the whisper goes so,
Our late King, who as you know was by Forten*
Brass of Norway,
Thereto pricked on by a most emulous cause, dared to
The combat, in which our valiant Hamlet,
For so this side of our known world esteemed him,
Did slay this Fortenbrasse,
Who by a seal compact well ratified, by law
And heraldrie, did forfeit with his life all those
His lands which he stood seized of by the conqueror,
Against the which a moity competent,
Was gaged by our King:
Now sir, young Fortenbrasse,
Of inapproued mettle hot and full,
Has in the skirts of Norway here and there,
Sharkt up a sight of lawless Resolutes
For food and diet to some enterprise,
That has a stomach in it: and this (I take it) is the
Chief head and ground of this our watch.
Enter the Ghost. But lo, behold, see where it comes again,
He cross it, though it blast me: stay illusion,
If there be any good thing to be done,
That may do ease to thee, and grace to me,
Speak to me.
If thou art privy to thy countries fate,
Which happly foreknowing may preuens, O speak to me,
Or if thou have extorted in thy life,
Or hoorded treasure in the womb of earth,
For which they say you Spirits often walk in death, speak to me, stay and
speak, speak, stop it Marcellus.

2. It Is here.

exit Ghost.
Hor. It Is here.


Marc. It Is gone, O we do it wrong, being so maiesticall, to offer it the show
of violence,
For it is as the air invelmorable,
And our vain blows malicious mockery.

2. It was about to speak when the Cock crew.


Hor. And then it faded like a guilty thing,
Upon a fearful summons: I have heard
The Cock, that is the trumpet to the morning,
Does with his early and shrill crowing throat,
Awake the god of day, and at his sound,
Whether in earth or air, in sea or fire,
The strauagant and erring spirit hies
To his confines, and of the truth here of
This present object made probation.

Marc. It faded on the crowing of the Cock,
Some say, that ever against that season comes,
Wherein our Saviors birth is celebrated*
The bird of dawning sings all night long,
And then they say, no spirit dare walk abroad,
The nights are wholesome, then no planet strikes,
No Fairie takes, nor Witch has power to charm,
So gracious, and so hallowed is that time.

Hor. So have I heard, and do in part believe it:
But see the Sun in russet mantle clad,
Walks ore the deaw of yon hie mountain top,
Break we our watch up* and by my advise,
Let us impart what we have seen to night
Unto young Hamlet* for upon my life
This Spirit dumb to us will speak to him:
Do you consent, we shall acquaint him with it,
As needful in our love, fitting our duty?

Marc. Lets do it I pray, and I this morning know,
Where we shall find him most conveniently.

Enter King, Queen, Hamlet, Leartes, Corambis, and the two Ambassadors, with
Attendants. King Lords, we here have writ to Fortenbrasse*
Nephew to old Norway, who impotent
And bedridden, scarcely hears of this his
Nephews purpose: and We here dispatch
Young good Cornelu^^, and you Vol(...)
For bearers of these greetings to old
Norway, giving to you no further personal power
To business with the King,
Then those related articles do show:
Farewell, and let your haste commend your duty.

Gent. In this and all things will we show our duty.


King. We doubt nothing, heartily farewell*
And now Leartes; what is the news with you?
You said you had a suit what is it Leartes

Lea. My gracious Lord, your favorable license,
Now that the funeral rites are all performed,
I may have leave to go again to France,
For though the favor of your grace might stay me,
Yet something is there whispers in my heart,
Which makes my mind and spirits bend all for France.

King Have you your fathers leave, Leartes?


Cor. He has, my lord, wrung from me aforced grant,
And I beseech you grant your Highness leave.

Kiug With all our heart, Leartes fare thee well.


Lear. I in all love and duty take my leave.


King. And now princely Son Hamlet,
What means these sad and melancholy moodes?
For your intent going to Wittenberg,
We hold it most unmeet and inconvenient,
Being the Joy and half heart of your mother.
Therefore let me entreat you stay in Court,
All Denmarkes hope our coosin and dearest Son.
Exit.
Ham. My lord, it is not the sable suit I wear:
No nor the tears that still stand in my eyes,
Nor the distracted hauiour in the visage,
Nor all together mixed with outward semblance,
Is equal to the sorrow of my heart,
Him have I lost I must os force forgo,
These but the ornaments and suits of woe.

King This shows a loving care in you, Son Hamlet,
But you must think your father lost a father,
That father dead, lost his, and so shall be until the
General ending* Therefore cease laments;
It is a fault against heaven, fault against the dead,
A fault against nature, and in reasons
Common course most certain,
None lives on earth, but he is borne to die.

Que. Let not thy mother loose her prayers Hamlet,
Stay here with us* go not to Wittenberg.

Ham. I shall in all my best obey you madam.


King Spoke like a kind and a most loving Son,
And there is no health the King shall drink today,
But the great Canon to the clouds shall tell
The rowse the King shall drink unto Prince Hamlet.

Exeunt all but Hamlet. Ham. O that this too much grieved and fallied flesh
Would melt to nothing, or that the universal
Globe of heaven would turn al to a Chaos*
O God, within two months; no not two ^ married,
Mine uncle: O let me not think of it,
My fathers brother: but no more like
My father, then I to Hercules.
Within two months, ere yet the salt of most
Unrighteous tears had left their flushing
In her galled eyes: she married, O God, a beast
Deuoyd of reason would not have made
Such speed: Frailty, thy name is Woman,
Why she would hang on him, as if increase
Of appetite had grown by what it looked on.
O wicked wicked speed, to make such
Dexterity to incestuous sheets,
Ere yet the shoes were old,
The which she followed my dead fathers corse
Like Nyobe, all tears: married, well it is not,
Nor it cannot come to good:
But break my heart, for I must hold my tongue.

Enter Horatio and Marcellus. Hor. Health to your Lordship.


Ham. I am very glad to see you, (Horatio) or I much forget my self.


Hor. The same my Lord, and your poor servant ever.


Ham. O my good friend, I change that name with you* but what make you from
Wittenberg Horatio?


Marcellus. Marc. My good Lord.


Ham. I am very glad to see you, good even sirs:
But what is your affair in Elsenoure?
We Will teach you to drink deep ere you depart.

Hor. A trowant disposition, my good Lord*


Ham. Nor shall you make me truster
Of your own report against your self:
Sir, I know you are no trowant*
But what is your affair in Elsenoure*

Hor. My good Lord, I came to see your fathers funeral.


Ham. O I pre thee do not mock he fellow studient,
I think it was to see my mothers wedding*

Hor. Indeed my Lord, it followed hard upon.


Ham. Thrift, thrift, Horatio, the funeral baked meats
Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables,
Would I had met my dearest foe in heaven
Ere ever I had seen that day Horatio;
O my father, my father, me thinks I see my father.

Hor. Where my Lord?


Ham. Why, in my minds eye Horatio.


Hor. I saw him once, he was a gallant King.


Ham. He was a man, take him for all in all,
I shall not look upon his like again.

Hor. My Lord, I think I saw him yesternight,


Ham. Saw, who:


Hor. My Lord, the King your father.


Ham. Ha, ha, the King my father keyou*


Hor. Ceasen your admiration for a while*
With an attentive ear, till I may deliver,
Upon the witness of these Gentlemen
This wonder to you.

Ham. For Gods love let me hear it.


Hor. Two nights together had these Gentlemen,
Marcelllus and Bernardo, on their watch,
In the dead vast and middle of the night.
Been thus incountered by a figure like your father,
Armed to point, exactly Capap^^
Appeeres before them thrice, he walks
Before their weak and fear oppressed eyes
Within his tronchions length,
While they distilled almost to gelly.
With the act of fear stands dumb,
And speak not to him: this to me
In dreadful secrecy impart they did.
And I with them the third night kept the watch,
Where as they had delivered form of the thing.
Each part made true and good,
The Apparition comes: I knew your father,
These hands are not more like.

Ham. It Is very strange.


Hor. As I do live, my honored lord, it is true,
And we did think it right done,
In our duty to let you know it.

Ham. Where was this?


Mar. My Lord, upon the platform where we watched.


Ham. Did you not speak to it?


Hor. My Lord we did, but answer made it none,
Yet once me thought it was about to speak,
And lifted up his head to motion,
Like as he would speak, but even then
The morning cock crew loud, and in all haste,
It shruncke in haste away, and vanished
Our fight.

Ham. Indeed, indeed sirs, but this troubles me:
Hold you the watch to night?

All We do my Lord.


Ham. Armed say ye?


All Armed my good Lord.


Ham. From top to toe?


All. My good Lord, from head to foot.


Ham. Why then saw you not his face?


Hor. O yes my Lord, he wore his beuer up.


Ham. How looked he, frowningly?


Hor. A countenance more in sorrow than in anger.


Ham. Pale, or red?


Hor. Nay, very pal


Ham. And fixed his eyes upon you.


Hor. Most constantly.


Ham. I would I had been there.


Hor. It would a much amazed you.


Ham. Yea very like, very like, staid it long?


Hor. While one with moderate pace
Might tell a hundred.

Mar. O longer, longer.


Ham. His beard was grisleld, no.


Hor. It was as I have seen it in his life,
A sable silver.

Ham. I will watch to night, perchance t'wil walk again.


Hor. I warrant it will.


Ham. If it assume my noble fathers person,
I Will speak to it, if hell it self should gape,
And bid me hold my peace, Gentlemen,
If you have hither consealed this sight,
Let it be tenible in your silence still,
And whatsoever else shall chance to night,
Give it an understanding, but no tongue,
I will requit your loves, so fare you well,
Upon the platform, twixt eleven and twelve,
I Will visit you.

All. Our duties to your honor.

excunt.
Ham. O your loves, your loves, as mine to you,
Farewell, my fathers spirit in Arms,
Well, all is not well. I doubt some foul play,
Would the night were come,
Till then, sit still my soul, foul deeds will ris
Though all the world orewhelme them to men's eyes.
Exit.
Enter Leartes and Ofelia. Leart. My necessaries are inbarkt, I must aboard,
But ere I part, mark what I say to thee:
I see Prince Hamlet makes a show of love
Beware Ofelia, do not trust his vows,
Perhaps he loves you now, and now his tongue,
Speaks from his heart, but yet take heed my sister,
The Chariest maid is prodigal enough,
If she unmask her beauty to the Moon.
Virtue it self scapes not calumnious thoughts,
Belieu't Ofelia, therefore keep a loofe
Lest that he trip thy honor and thy fame.

Ofel. Brother, to this I have lent attentive ear,
And doubt not but to keep my honor firm,
But my dear brother, do not you
Like to a cunning Sophister,
Teach me the path and ready way to heaven,
While you forgetting what is said to me,
Your self, like to a careless libertine
Does give his heart, his appetite at full,
And little recks how that his honor dies.

Lear. No, fear it not my dear Ofelia,
Here comes my father, occasion smiles upon a second leave.

Enter Corambis. Cor. Yet here Leartes? aboard, aboard, for shame,
The wind sits in the shoulder of your sail,
And you are staid for, there* my blessing with thee
And these few precepts in thy memory.
"Be thou familiar, but by no means vulgar;
"Those friends thou have, and their adoptions tried,
"Graple them to thee with a hoope of steel,
"But do not dull the palm with entertain,
"Of every new vnfleg'd courage,
"Beware of entrance into a quarrel; but being in,
"Bear it that the opposed may beware of thee,
"Costly thy apparel, as thy purse can buy.
"But not expressed in fashion,
"For the apparel often proclaims the man.
And they of France of the chief rank and station
Are of a most select and general chief in that:
"This above all, to thy own self be true,
And it must follow as the night the day,
Thou can not then be false to any one,
Farewell, my blessing with thee.

Lear. I humbly take my leave, farewell Ofelia,
And remember well what I have said to you.
exit.
Ofel. It is already locked within my heart,
And you your self shall keep the key of it.

Cor. What is it Ofelia he has said to you?


Ofel. Something touching the prince Hamlet.


Cor. Mary well thought on, it is given me to understand,
That you have bin too prodigal of your maiden presence
Unto Prince Hamlet, if it be so,
As so it is given to me, and that in way of caution
I must tell you; you do not understand your self
So well as befits my honor, and your credit.

Ofel. My lord, he has made many tenders of his love to me.


Cor. Tenders, I, I, tenders you may call them.


Ofel. And withal, such earnest vows.


Cor. Springes to catch woodcocks,
What, do not I know when the blood does burn,
How prodigal the tongue lends the heart vows,
In brief, be more scanter of your maiden presence,
Or tendering thus you will tender me a fool.

Ofel. I shall obey my lord in all I may.


Cor. Ofelia, receive none of his letters,
"For lovers lines are snares to entrap the heart;
"Refuse his tokens, both of them are keys
To unlock Chastity unto Desire;
Come in Ofelia, such men often prove,
"Great in their words, but little in their love.

Ofel. I will my lord.

exeunt.
Enter Hamlet, Horatio, and Marcellus. Ham. The air bites shrewd; it is an
eager and
An nipping wind, what hour is it?

Hor. I think it lacks of twelve,

Sound Trumpets.
Mar. No, it is struck.


Hor. Indeed I heard it not, what does this mean my lord?


Ham. O the king does wake to night, and takes his rowse,
Keep wassel, and the swaggering vp-spring reeles,
And as he dreams, his draughts of renish down,
The kettle, drum, and trumpet, thus bray out,
The triumphs of his pledge.

Hor. Is it a custom here?


Ham. I mary is it and though I am
Native here, and to the manner borne,
It is a custom, more honored in the breach,
Then in the observance.

Enter the Ghost. Hor. Look my Lord, it comes.


Ham. Angels and Ministers of grace defend us,
Be thou a spirit of health, or goblin damned,
Bring with thee airs from heanen, or blasts from hell:
Be thy intents wicked or charitable,
Thou come in such questionable shape,
That I will speak to thee,
I Will call thee Hamlet, King, Father, Royal Dane,
O answer me, let me not burst in ignorance,
But say why thy canonizd bones hearsed in death
Have burst their ceremonies: why thy Sepulcher,
In which we saw thee quietly interred,
Has burst his ponderous and marble Jaws,
To cast thee up again: what may this mean,
That thou, dead corse, again in complete steel,
Reuissets thus the glimses of the Moon,
Making night hideous, and we fools of nature,
So horridely to shake our disposition,
With thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls?
Say, speak, wherefore, what may this mean?

Hor. It beckons you, as though it had something
To impart to you alone.

Mar. Look with what courteous action
It waves you to a more removed ground,
But do not go with it.

Hor. No, by no means my Lord.


Ham. It will not speak, then will I follow it.


Hor. What if it tempt you toward the flood my Lord.
That beckles ore his bace, into the sea,
And there assume some other horrible shape,
Which might deprive your sovereignty of reason,
And drive you into madness: think of it.

Ham. Still am I called, go on, i will follow thee.


Hor. My Lord, you shall not go.


Ham. Why what should be the fear?
I do not set my life at a pinnes fee,
And for my soul, what can it do to that?
Being a thing immortal, like it self,
Go on, i will follow thee.

Mar. My Lord be ruled, you shall not go.


Ham. My fate cries out, and makes each pety Artiue
As hardy as the Nemeon Lions nerve,
Still am I called, vnhand me gentlemen;
By heaven i will make a ghost of him that lets me,
Away I say, go on, i will follow thee.

Hor. He waxes desperate with imagination.


Mar. Something is rotten in the state of Denmark.


Hor. Have after; to what issue will this sort?


Mar. Lets follow, it is not fit thus to obey him.

exit.
Enter Ghost and Hamlet. Ham. I Will go no farther, whither will thou lead me?


Ghost Mark me.


Ham. I will.


Ghost I am thy fathers spirit, doomd for a time
To walk the night, and all the day
Confinde in flaming fire,
Till the foul crimes done in my days of Nature
A repurged and burnt away.

Ham. Alas poor Ghost.


Ghost Nay pity me not, but to my unfolding
Lend thy listening ear, but that I am forbid
To tell the secrets of my prison house
I would a tale unfold, whose lightest word
Would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood,
Make thy two eyes like stars start from their spheres,
Thy knotted and combined locks to part,
And each particular hair to stand on end
Like quils upon the fretfull Porpentine,
But this same blazon must not be, to ears of flesh and blood
Hamlet, if ever thou did thy dear father love.

Ham. O God.


Gho. Revenge his foul, and most unnatural murder:


Ham. Murder.


Ghost Yea, murder in the highest degree,
As in the least it is bad,
But mine most foul, beastly, and unnatural.

Ham. Haste me to know it, that with wings as swift as meditation, or the
thought of it, may sweep to my revenge.


Ghost O I find thee apt, and duller should thou be
Then the fat weed which roots it self in ease
On Lethe wharffe: brief let me be.
It Is given out, that sleeping in my orchard,
A Serpent stung me; so the whole ear of Denmark
Is with a forged Prosses of my death rankely abusde:
But know thou noble Youth: he that did sting
Thy fathers heart, now wears his Crown.

Ham. O my prophetike soul, my uncle! my uncle!


Ghost Yea he, that incestuous wretch, won to his will with gifts,
O wicked will, and gifts! that have the power
So to seduce my most seeming virtuous Queen,
But vertne, as it never will be moved,
Though Lewdness court it in a shape of heaven,
So Lust, though to a radiant angle linckt,
Would fate it self from a celestial bed,
And prey on garbage: but soft, me thinks
I sent the mornings air, brief let me be,
Sleeping within my Orchard, my custom always
In the after noone, upon my secure hour
Thy uncle came, with juice of Hebona
In a vial, and through the porches of my ears
Did power the leaprous distilment, whose effect
Hold such an enmity with blood of man,
That swift as quickesiluer, it posteth through
The natural gates and allies of the body,
And turns the thin and wholesome blood
Like eager dropings into milk.
And all my smoothe body, barked, and tetterd over.
Thus was I sleeping by a brothers hand
Of Crown, of Queen, of life, of dignity
At once deprived, no reckoning made of,
But sent unto my grave,
With all my accounts and sins upon my head,
O horrible, most horrible!

Ham. O God!


ghost If thou have nature in thee, bear it not,
But howsoever, let not thy heart
Conspire against thy mother aught,
Leave her to heaven,
And to the burden that her conscience bears.
I must be gone, the Glo-worme shows the Mattin
To be near, and gin's to pale his ineffectual fire:
Hamlet adue, adue, adue: remember me.
Exit
Ham. O all you host of heaven! O earth, what else?
And shall I couple hell; remember thee?
Yes thou poor Ghost; from the tables
Of my memory, i will wipe away all sawes of Books,
All triuiall fond conceits
That ever youth, or else observance noted,
And thy remembrance, all alone shall sit.
Yes, yes, by heaven, a damnd pernicious villain,
Murderons, bawdy, smiling damned villain,
(My tables) meet it is I set it down,
That one may smile, and smile, and be a villayne;
Atleast I am sure, it may be so in Denmark.
So uncle, there you are, there you are.
Now to the words; it is adue adue: remember me,
So it is enough I have sworn.

Hor. My lord, my lord.

Enter. Horatio, and Marcellus.
Mar. Lord Hamlet.


Hor. Ill, lo, lo, ho, ho.


Mar. Ill, lo, lo, so, ho, so, come boy, come.


Hor. Heavens secure him.


Mar. How is it my noble lord?


Hor. What news my lord?


Ham. O wonderful, wonderful.


Hor. Good my lord tell it.


Ham. No not I, you will reveal it.


Hor. Not I my Lord by heaven.


Mar. Nor I my Lord.


Ham. How say you then? would heart of man
Once think it? but you will be secret.

Both. I by heaven, my lord.


Ham. There Is never a villain dwelling in all Denmark,
But he is an arrant knave.

Hor. There need no Ghost come from the grave to tell you this.


Ham. Right, you are in the right, and therefore
I hold it meet without more circumstance at all,
We shake hands and part; you as your business
And desiers shall lead you: for look you,
Every man has business, and desires, such
As it is, and for my own poor part, i will go pray.

Hor. These are but wild and wherling words, my Lord.


Ham. I am sorry they offend you; heartily, yes faith heartily.


Hor. There Is no offense my Lord.


Ham. Yes by Saint Patrike but there is Horatio,
And much offense too, touching this vision,
It is an honest ghost, that let me tell you,
For your desires to know what is between us,
Or emaister it as you may:
And now kind friends, as yon are friends,
Scholars and gentlmen,
Grant me one poor request.

Both. What i st my Lord?


Ham. Never make known what you have seen to night


Both. My lord, we will not.


Ham. Nay but swear.


Hor. In faith my Lord not I.


Mar. Nor I my Lord in faith.


Ham. Nay upon my sword, indeed upon my sword.


Gho. Swear.


The Ghost under the stage. Ham. Ha, ha, come you here, this fellow in the
sellerige,
Here consent to swear.

Hor. Propose the oath my Lord.


Ham. Never to speak what you have seen to night,
Swear by my sword.

Ghost. Swear.


Ham. Hic and vbique; nay then we will shift our ground:
Come hither Gentlemen, and lay your hands
Again upon this sword, never to speak
Of that which you have seen, swear by my sword.

Ghost Swear.


Ham. Well said old Mole, can work in the earth? so fast, a worthy Pioner,
once more remove.


Hor. Day and night, but this is wondrous strange.


Ham. And therefore as a stranger give it welcome,
There are more things in heaven and earth Horatio,
Then are Dreamed of, in your philosophy,
But come here, as before you never shall
How strange or odd socre I bear my self,
As I perchance hereafter shall think meet,
To put an Anticke disposition on,
That you at such times seeing me, never shall
With Arms, incombred thus, or this head shake,
Or by pronouncing some undoubtful phrase,
As well well, we know, or we could and if we would,
Or there be, and if they might, or such ambiguous:
Giving out to note, that you know aught of me,
This not to do, so grace, and mercy
At your most need help you, swear

Ghost. swear.


Ham. Rest, rest, perturbed spirit: so gentlemen,
In all my love I do commend me to you,
And what so poor a man as Hamlet may,
To pleasure you, God willing shall not want,
Nay come lett's go together,
But still your fingers on your lips I pray,
The time is out of joint, O cursed spite,
That ever I was borne to set it right,
Nay come lett's go together.
Exeunt.
Enter Corambis, and Montano. Cor. Montano, here, these letters to my son,
And this same money with my blessing to him,
And bid him ply his learning good Montano.

Mon. I will my lord.


Cor. You shall do very well Montano, to say thus,
I knew the gentleman, or know his father,
To inquire the manner of his life,
As thus; being amongst his acquaintance,
You may say, you saw him at such a time, mark you me,
At game, or drincking, swearing, or drabbing,
You may go so far.

Mon. My lord, that will impeach his reputation.


Cor. I faith not a whit, no not a whit,
Now happily he closes with you in the consequence,
As you may bridle it not disparage him a jot.
What was I about to say,

Mon. He closes with him in the consequence.


Cor. I, you say right, he closes with him thus,
This will he say, let me see what he will say,
Mary this, I saw him yesterday, or the other day,
Or then, or at such a time, a dicing,
Or at Tennis, I or drincking drunk, or entering
Of a house of lightness viz. brothell,
Thus sir do we that know the world, being men of reach,
By indirections, find directions forth,
And so shall you my son; you ha me, ha you not?

Mon. I have my lord.


Cor. Well, fare you well, commend me to him.


Mon. I will my lord.


Cor. And bid him ply his music


Mon. My lord I will.

exit.
Enter, Ofelia. Cor. Farewell, how now Ofelia, what is the news with you?


Ofe. O my dear father, such a change in nature,
So great an alteration in a Prince,
So pitiful to him, fearful to me,
A maidens eye never looked on.

Cor. Why what is the matter my Ofelia?


Of. O young Prince Hamlet, the only flower of Denmark,
He is bereft of all the wealth he had,
The Jewel that ador'nd his feature most
Is filcht and stolen away, his wit's bereft him,
He found me walking in the gallery all alone,
There comes he to me, with a distracted look,
His garters lagging down, his shoes untied,
And fixed his eyes so steadfast on my face,
As if they had vowed, this is their latest object.
Small while he stood, but gripes me by the wrist,
And there he holds my pulse till with a sigh
He does unclasp his hold, and parts away
Silent, as is the mid time of the night:
And as he went, his eye was still on me,
For thus his head over his shoulder looked,
He seemed to find the way without his eyes:
For out of doors he went without their help,
And so did leave me.

Cor. Mad for thy love,
What have you given him any cross words of late?

Ofelia I did repel his letters, deny his gifts,
As you did charge me.

Cor. Why that has made him mad:
By heaven it is as proper for our age to cast
Beyond our selves, as it is for the younger fort
To leave their wantonness. Well, I am sorry
That I was so rash: but what remedy?
Lets to the King, this madness may prove,
Though wild a while, yet more true to thy love.
exeunt.
Enter King and Queen, Rossencraft, and Gilderstone. King Right noble friends,
that our decre cousin Hamlet
Has lost the very heart of all his sense,
It is most right, and we most sorry for him:
Therefore we do desire, even as you tender
Our care to him, and our great love to you,
That you will labor but to wring from him
The cause and ground of his distemperancie.
Do this, the king of Denmark shall be thankful.

Ros. My Lord, whatsoever lies within our power
Your majesty may more command in words
Then use persuasions to your liege men, bound
By love, by duty, and obedience.

Guil. What we may do for both your Majesty's
To know the grief troubles the Prince your son,
We will endeavor all the best we may,
So in all duty do we take our leave.

King Thanks Guilderstone, and gentle Rossencraft.


Que: Thanks Rossencraft, and gentle Gilderstone.


Enter Corambis and Ofelia. Cor. My Lord, the Ambassadors are joyfully
Returned from Norway.

King Thou still have been the father of good news.


Cor. Have I my Lord? I assure your grace,
I hold my duty as I hold my life,
Both to my God, and to my sovereign King:
And I believe, or else this brain of mine
Hunts not the train of policy so well
As it had wont to do, but I have found
The very depth of Hamlets lunacie.

Queen God grant he has.


Enter the Ambassadors. King Now Uoltemar, what from our brother Norway?


Uolt. Most fair returns of greetings and desires,
Upon our first he sent forth to suppress
His nephews leuies, which to him appeared
To be a preparation against the Polacke:
But better looked into, he truly found
It was against your Highness, whereat grieved,
That so his sickness, age, and impotence,
Was falsely borne in hand, sends out arrests
On Fortenbrasse, which he in brief obays,
Receives rebuke from Norway: and in fine,
Makes vow before his uncle, never more
To give the assay of Arms against your Majesty,
Whereon old Norway overcome with joy,
Gives him three thousand crowns in annual fee,
And his Commission to employ those soldiers,
So levied as before, against the Polacke,
With an entreaty herein further shown,
That it would please you to give quiet pass
Through your dominions, for that enterprise
On such regardes ofsafety and allowances
As therein are set down.

King It likes us well, and at fit time and leisure
We Will read and answer these his Articles,
Mean time we thank you for your well
Took labor: go to your rest, at night we will feast together:
Right welcome home.
exeunt Ambassadors.
Cor. This business is very well dispatched.
Now my Lord, touching the young Prince Hamlet,
Certain it is that he is mad: mad let us grant him then:
Now to know the cause of this effect,
Or else to say the cause of this defect,
For this effect defective comes by cause.

Queen Good my Lord be brief.


Cor. Madam I will: my Lord, I have a daughter,
Have while she is mine: for that we think
Is surest, we often loose: now to the Prince.
My Lord, but note this letter,
The which my daughter in obedience
Delivered to my hands.

King Read it my Lord.


Cor. Mark my Lord.
Doubt that in earth is fire,
Doubt that the stars do move,
Doubt truth to be a liar,
But do not doubt I love.
To the beautiful Ofelia:
Thine ever the most unhappy Prince Hamlet.
My Lord, what do you think of me?
I, or what might you think when I saw this?

King As of a true friend and a most loving subject.


Cor. I would be glad to prove so.
Now when I saw this letter, thus I bespake my maiden:
Lord Hamlet is a Prince out of your star,
And one that is vne quall for your love:
Therefore I did command her refuse his letters,
Deny his tokens, and to absent her self.
She as my child obediently obeyed me.
Now since which time, seeing his love thus crossed,
Which I took to be idle, and but sport,
He straitway grew into a melancholy,
From that unto a fast, then unto distraction,
Then into a sadness, from that unto a madness,
And so by continuance, and weakness of the brain
Into this frenzy, which now possesses him:
And if this be not true, take this from this.

King Think you it is so?


Cor. How? so my Lord, I would very feign know
That thing that I have said it is so, positiuely,
And it has fallen out otherwise.
Nay, if circumstances lead me on,
I Will find it out, if it were hid
As deep as the center of the earth.

King. how should we try this same?


Cor. Mary my good lord thus,
The Princes walk is here in the galery,
There let Ofelia, walk until he comes:
Your self and I will stand close in the study,
There shall you hear the effect of all his heart,
And if it prove any otherwise then love,
Then let my censure fail an other time.

King. see where he comes poring upon a book.


Enter Hamlet. Cor. Madame, will it please your grace
To leave us here?

Que. With all my heart.

exit.
Cor. And here Ofelia, read you on this book,
And walk aloof, the King shall be unseen.

Ham. To be, or not to be, I there is the point,
To Die, to sleep, is that all? I all:
No, to sleep, to dream, I mary there it goes,
For in that dream of death, when we awake,
And borne before an everlasting Judge,
From whence no passenger ever retur'nd,
The undiscovered country, at whose sight
The happy smile, and the accursed damned.
But for this, the joyful hope of this,
Whol'd bear the scorns and flattery of the world,
Scorned by the right rich, the rich curssed of the poor?
The widow being oppressed, the orphan wronged,
The taste of hunger, or a tirants reign,
And thousand more calamities besides,
To grunt and sweat under this weary life,
When that he may his full Quietus make,
With a bare bodkin, who would this endure,
But for a hope of something after death?
Which pusles the brain, and does confound the sense,
Which makes us rather bear those euilles we have,
Than fly to others that we know not of.
I that, O this conscience makes cowardes of us all,
Lady in thy orizons, be all my sins remembered.

Ofel. My Lord, I have sought opportunity, which now I have, to redeliuer to
your worthy hands, a small remembrance, such tokens which I have received of
you.


Ham. Are you fair?


Ofel. My Lord.


Ham. Are you honest?


Ofel. What means my Lord?


Ham. That if you be fair and honest,
Your beauty should admit no discourse to your honesty.

Ofel. My Lord, can beauty have better privilege than with honesty?


Ham. Yea mary may it; for Beauty may transform
Honesty, from what she was into a bawd:
Then Honesty can transform Beauty:
This was sometimes a Paradox,
But now the time gives it scope.
I never gave you nothing.

Ofel. My Lord, you know right well you did,
And with them such earnest vows of love,
As would have moved the stoniest breast alive,
But now too true I find,
Rich gifts wax poor, when giuers grow unkind.

Ham. I never loved you.


Ofel. You made me believe you did.


Ham. O thou should not a believed me!
Go to a Nunnery go, why should thou
Be a breeder of sinners? I am myself indifferent honest,
But I could accuse my self of such crimes
It had been better my mother had never borne me,
O I am very proud, ambitious, disdainefull,
With more sins at my beck, then I have thoughts
To put them in, what should such fellows as I
Do, crawling between heaven and earth?
To a Nunnery go, we are arrant knaves all,
Believe none of us, to a Nunnery go.

Ofel. O heavens secure him!


Ham. Where Is thy father?


Ofel. At home my lord.


Ham. For Gods sake let the doors be shut on him,
He may play the fool no where but in his
Own house: to a Nunnery go.

Ofel. Help him good God.


Ham. If thou do marry, I Will give thee
This plague to thy dowry:
Be thou as chaste as ye, as pure as snow,
Thou shall not escape calumny, to a Nunnery go.

Ofel. Alas, what change is this?


Ham. But if thou will needs many, marry a fool,
For wisemen know well enough,
What monsters you make of them, to a Nunnery go.

Ofel. Pray God restore him*


Ham. Nay, I have heard of your paintings too,
God has given you one face,
And you make your selves another,
You fig, and you amble, and you nickname Gods creatures,
Making your wantonness, your ignorance,
A pox, it is scuruy, I Will no more of it,
It has made me mad: I Will no more marriages,
All that are married but one, shall live,
The rest shall keep as they are, to a Nunnery go,
To a Nunnery go.
exit.
Ofe. Great God of heaven, what a quick change is this?
The Courtier, Scholar, Soldier, all in him,
All dashed and splinterd thence, O woe is me,
To a seen what I have seen, see what I see.
exit.
King Love? No, no, that is not the cause,
Some deeper thing it is that troubles him.
Enter King and Corambis.
Cor. Well, something it is: my Lord, content you a while,
I will my self go feel him: let me work,
I Will try him every way: see where he comes,
Send you those Gentlemen, let me alone
To find the depth of this, away, be gone.
Now my good Lord, do you know me?
exit King. Enter Hamlet.
Ham. Yea very well, you are a fishmonger.


Cor. Not I my Lord.


Ham. Then sir, I would you were so honest a man,
For to be honest, as this age goes,
Is one man to be picked out of ten thousand.

Cor. What do you read my Lord?


Ham. Words, words.


Cor. What Is the matter my Lord?


Ham. Between who?


Cor. I mean the matter you read my Lord.


Ham. Mary most vile heresy:
For here the Satyricall Satyr writes,
That old men have hollow eyes, weak backs,
Gray beardes, pitiful weak hammes, gowty legs,
All which sir, I most potently believe not:
For sir, your self shall be old as I am,
If like a Crabbe, you could go backward.

Cor. How pregnant his replies are, and full of wit:
Yet at first he took me for a fishmonger:
All this comes by love, the vemencie of love,
And when I was young, I was very idle,
And suffered much ecstasy in love, very near this:
Will you walk out of the air my Lord?

Ham. Into my grave.


Cor. By the mass that is out of the air indeed,
Very shrewd answers,
My lord I will take my leave of you.

Enter Gilderstone, and Rossencraft. Ham. You can take nothing from me sir,
I will more willingly part with all,
Old doting fool.

Cor, You seek Prince Hamlet, see, there he is.

exit.
Gil. Health to your Lordship.


Ham. What, Gilderstone, and Rossencraft,
Welcome kind Schoole-fellowes to Elsanoure.

Gil. We thank your Grace, and would be very glad
You were as when we were at Wittenberg.

Ham. I thank you, but is this visitation free of
Your selves, or were you not sent for?
Tell me true, come, I know the good King and Queen
Sent for you, there is a kind of confession in your eye:
Come, I know you were sent for.

Gil. What say you?


Ham. Nay then I see how the wind sits,
Come, you were sent for.

Ross. My lord, we were, and willingly if we might,
Know the cause and ground of your discontent.

Ham. Why I want preferment.


Ross. I think not so my lord.


Ham. Yes faith, this great world you see contents me not,
No nor the spangled heavens, nor earth, nor sea,
No nor Man that is so glorious a creature.
Contents not me, no nor woman too, though you laugh.

Gil. My lord, we laugh not at that.


Ham. Why did you laugh then,
When I said, Man did not content me?

Gil. My Lord, we laughed, when you said, Man did not content you.
What entertainment the Players shall have,
We boorded them a the way: they are coming to you.

Ham. Players, what Players be they?


Ross. My Lord, the Tragedians of the City,
Those that you took delight to see so often.

Ham. How comes it that they travel? Do they grow restie?


Gil. No my Lord, their reputation holds as it was wont.


Ham. How then?


Gil. In Faith my Lord, novelty carries it away,
For the principal public audience that
Came to them, are turned to private plays,
And to the humor of children.

Ham. I do not greatly wonder of it,
For those that would make mops and moes
At my uncle, when my father lived,
Now give a hundred, two hundred pounds
For his picture: but they shall be welcome,
He that plays the King shall have tribute of me,
The ventrous Knight shall use his foil and target,
The lover shall sigh gratis,
The clown shall make them laugh
That are tickled in the lungs, or the blanke verse shall halt for it,
And the Lady shall have leave to speak her mind freely.
The Trumpets sound, Enter Corambis. Do you see yonder great baby?
He is not yet out of his swaddling clowts.

Gil. That may be, for they say an old man
Is twice a child.

Ham. I Will prophecy to you, he comes to tell me a the Players,
You say true, a monday last, it was so indeed.

Cor. My lord, I have news to tell you.


Ham. My Lord, I have news to tell you:
When Rossios was an Actor in Rome.

Cor. The Actors are come hither, my lord.


Ham. Buz, buz.


Cor. The best Actors in Christendom,
Either for Comedy, Tragedy, History, Pastoral,
Pastoral, Historical, Historical, Comicall,
Comicall historical, Pastoral, Tragedy historical:
Seneca cannot be too heavy, nor Plato too light*
For the law has writ those are the only men.

Ha. O Iepha Judge of Israel! what a treasure had thou?


Cor. Why what a treasure had he my lord?


Ham. Why one fair daughter, and no more,
The which he loved passing well.

Cor. A, still harping a my daughter! well my Lord,
If you call me Iepha, I hane a daughter that
I love passing well.

Ham. Nay that follows not.


Cor. What follows then my Lord?


Ham. Why by lot, or God wot, or as it came to pass,
And so it was, the first verse of the godly Ballet
Will tell you all: for look you where my abridgement comes:
Welcome masters, welcome all, Enter players.
What my old friend, thy face is vallanced
Since I saw thee last, come thou to beard me in Denmark?
My young lady and mistress, burlady but your
Ladyship is grown by the altitude of a chopine higher than you were:
Pray God sir your voice, like a piece of vncurrant
Gold, be not cracked in the ring: come on masters,
We Will even to it, like French Falconers,
Fly at any thing we see, come, a taste of your
Quallitie, a speech, a passionate speech.

Players What speech my good lord?


Ham. I heard thee speak a speech once,
But it was never acted: or if it were,
Never above twice, for as I remember,
It pleased not the vulgar, it was cauiary
To the million: but to me
And others, that received it in the like kind,
Cried in the top of their judgments, an excellent play,
Set down with as great modesty as cunning:
One said there was no sallets in the lines to make the^ sauory,
But called it an honest method, as wholesome as sweet.
Come, a speech in it I chiefly remember
Was Aeneas tale to Dido,
And then especially where he talks of Princes slaughter,
If it live in thy memory begin at this line,
Let me see.
The rugged Pyrrus, like th'arganian beast:
No it is not so, it begins with Pirrus:
O I have it.
The rugged Pirrus, he whose sable arms,
Black as his purpose did the night resemble,
When he lay couched in the ominous horse,
Has now his black and grimme complexion smeered
With Heraldry more dismal, head to foot,
Now is he total guise, horridely tricked
With blood offathers, mothers, daughters, sons,
Backed and imparched in calagulate gore,
Rifted in earth and fire, old grandsire Pryam seeks:
So go on.

Cor. Before God, my Lord, well spoke, and with good accent.


Play. A none he finds him striking too short at Greeks,
His a(...)d rebellious to his Arm,
Lies where it falls, unable to resist.
Pyrrus at Pryam drives, but all in rage,
Strikes wide, but with the whiffe and wind
Of his fell sword, th'unnerued father falls.

Cor. Enough my friend, it is too long.


Ham. It shall to the Barbers with your beard:
A pox, he is for a Iigge, or a tale of bawdry,
Or else he sleeps, come on to Hecuba, come.

Play. But who O who had seen the mobled Queen?


Cor. Mobled Queen is good, faith very good.


Play. All in the alarm and fear of death rose up,
And over her weak and all ore-teeming loins, a blancket
And a kercher on that head, where late the diadem stood,
Who this had seen with tongue inuenom'd speech,
Would treason have pronounced,
For if the gods themselves had seen her then,
When she saw Pirrus with malicious strokes,
Mincing her husbands limbs,
It would have made milch the burning eyes of heaven,
And passion in the gods.

Cor. Look my lord if he has not changde his color,
And has tears in his eyes: no more good heart, no more.

Ham. It Is well, it is very well, I pray my lord,
Will you see the Players well bestowed,
I tell you they are the Chronicles
And brief abstracts of the time,
After your death I can tell you,
You were better have a bad Epiteeth,
Then their ill report while you live.

Cor. My lord, I will use them according to their deserts.


Ham. O far better man, use every man after his deserts,
Then who should escape whipping?
Use them after your own honor and dignity,
The less they deserve, the greater credit's yours.

Cor. Welcome my good fellows.

exit.
Ham. Come hither masters, can you not play the murder of Gonsage?


players Yes my Lord.


Ham. And could not thou for a need study me
Some dozen or sixteen lines,
Which I would set down and insert?

players Yes very easily my good Lord.


Ham. It Is well, I thank you: follow that lord:
And do you hear sirs? take heed you mock him not.
Gentlemen, for your kindness I thank you,
And for a time I would desire you leave me.

Gil. Our love and duty is at your command.


Exeunt all but Hamlet. Ham. Why what a dunghill idiote slave am I?
Why these Players here draw water from eyes:
For Hecuba, why what is Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba?
What would he do and if he had my loss?
His father murdered, and a Crown bereft him,
He would turn all his tears to drops of blood,
Amaze the standers by with his laments,
Strike more then wonder in the iuidiciall ears,
Confound the ignorant, and make mute the wise,
Indeed his passion would be general.
Yet I like to an ass and John a Dreams,
Having my father murdered by a villain,
Stand still, and let it pass, why sure I am a coward:
Who pluckes me by the beard, or twites my nose,
Giue's me the lie in the throat down to the lungs,
Sure I should take it, or else I have no gall,
Or by this I should a fatted all the region kites
With this slaves offell, this damned villain,
Treacherous, bawdy, murderous villain:
Why this is brave, that I the son of my dear father,
Should like a scalion, like a very drabbe
Thus rail in words. About my brain,
I have heard that guilty creatures sitting at a play,
Has, by the very cunning of the scene, confessed a murder
Committed long before.
This spirit that I have seen may be the Devil,
And out of my weakness and my melancholy,
As he is very potent with such men,
Does seek to damn me, I will have sounder proofs,
The play's the thing,
Wherein I Will catch the conscience of the King.
exit.
Enter the King, Queen, and Lords. King Lords, can you by no means find
The cause of our son Hamlets lunacie?
You being so near in love, even from his youth,
Me thinks should gain more than a stranger should.

Gil. My lord, we have done all the best we could,
To wring from him the cause of all his grief,
But still he puts us off, and by no means
Would make an answer to that we exposde.

Ross. Yet was he something more inclined to mirth
Before we left him, and I take it,
He has given order for a play to night,
At which he craves your highness company.

King With all our heart, it likes us very well:
Gentlemen, seek still to increase his mirth,
Spare for no cost, our coffers shall be open,
And we unto your selves will still be thankful.

Both In all we can, be sure you shall command.


Queen Thanks gentlemen, and what the Queen of Denmark
May pleasure you, be sure you shall not want.

Gil. We Will once again unto the noble Prince.


King Thanks to you both: Gertred you will see this play.


Queen My lord I will, and it joys me at the soul
He is inclined to any kind of mirth.

Cor. Madame, I pray be ruled by me:
And my good Sovereign, give me leave to speak,
We cannot yet find out the very ground
Of his distemperance, therefore
I hold it meet, if so it please you,
Else they shall not meet, and thus it is.

King What is it Corambis?


Cor. Mary my good lord this, soon when the sports are done,
Madam, send you in haste to speak with him,
And I my self will stand behind the Arras,
There question you the cause of all his grief,
And then in love and nature unto you, he will tell you all:
My Lord, how think you on it?

King It likes us well, Gerterd, what say you?


Queen With all my heart, soon will I send for him.


Cor. My self will be that happy messenger,
Who hopes his grief will be revealed to her.
exeunt omnes
Enter Hamlet and the Players. Ham. Pronounce me this speech trippingly a the
tongue as I taught thee,
Mary and you mouth it, as a many of your players do
I Would rather hear a town bull bellow,
Then such a fellow speak my lines.
Nor do not saw the air thus with your hands,
But give every thing his action with temperance.
O it offends me to the soul, to hear a robustious periwig fellow,
To tear a passion in totters, into very rags,
To split the ears of the ignoraut, who for the
Most part are capable of nothing but dumb shows and noises,
I would have such a fellow whipped, for over doing, tarmagant
It out, Herodes Herod.

Players My Lord, we have indifferently reformed that among us.


Ham. The better, the better, mend it all together:
There be fellows that I have seen play,
And heard others commend them, and that highly too,
That having neither the gate of Christian, Pagan,
Nor Turk, have so strutted and bellowed,
That you would a thought, some of Natures journeymen
Had made men, and not made them well,
They imitated humanity, so abominable:
Take heed, avoid it.

Players I warrant you my Lord.


Ham. And do you hear? let not your Clown speak
More th^n is set down, there be of them I can tell you
That will laugh themselves, to set on some
Quantity of barren spectators to laugh with them,
Albeit there is some necessary point in the Play
Then to be observed: O it is vile, and shows
A pitiful ambition in the fool that uses it.
And then you have some again, that keeps one suit
Osieasts, as a man is known by one suit of
Apparel, and Gentlemen quotes his ieasts down
In their tables, before they come to the play as thus:
Cannot you stay till I eat my porrige? and, you owe me
A quarters wages: and, my coat wants a cullison:
And your beer is sour: and, blabbering with his lips,
And thus keeping in his cinkapase of ieasts,
When, God knows, the warm Clown cannot make a jest
Unless by chance, as the blind man catches a hare:
Masters tell him of it.

players We will my Lord.


Ham. Well, go make you ready.

exeunt players.
Horatio. Here my Lord.


Ham. Horatio, thou art even as just a man,
As e're my conversation cop'd withal.

Hor. O my lord!


Ham. Nay why should I flatter thee?
Why should the poor be flattered?
What gain should I receive by flattering thee,
That nothing has but thy good mind?
Let flattery sit on those time-pleasing tongs,
To gloss with them that loves to hear their praise,
And not with such as thou Horatio.
There is a play to night, wherein one Scene they have
Comes very near the murder of my father,
When thou shall see that Act afoote,
Mark thou the King, do but observe his looks,
For I mine eyes will riuet to his face:
And if he do not bleach, and change at that,
It is a damned ghost that we have seen.
Horatio, have a care, observe him well.

Hor. My lord, mine eyes shall still be on his face,
And not the smallest alteration
That shall appear in him, but I shall note it.

Ham. Hark, they come.


Enter King, Queen, Corambis, and other Lords. King How now son Hamlet, how
fare you, shall we have a play?


Ham. Y faith the Camelions dish, not capon crammed, feed a the air.

I father: My lord, you played in the University.


Cor. That I did my L: and I was counted a good actor.


Ham. What did you enact there?


Cor. My lord, I did act Julius Caesar, I was killed in the Capitol, Brutus
killed me.


Ham. It was a brute part of him,
To kill so capital a calfe.
Come, be these Players ready?

Queen Hamlet come sit down by me.


Ham. No by my faith mother, here is a mettle more attractiue:
Lady will you give me leave, and so forth:
To lay my head in your lap?

Ofel. No my Lord.


Ham. Upon your lap, what do you think I meant contrary matters?


Enter in a Dumb Show, the King and the Queen, he sits down in an Arbor, she
leaves him: Then enters Lucianus with poison in a Vial, and powers it in his
ears, and goes away: Then the Queen comes and finds him dead: and goes
away with the other. Ofel. What means this my Lord? Enter the Prologue.


Ham. This is myching Mallico, that means my chief.


Ofel. What does this mean my lord?


Ham. you shall hear anon, this fellow will tell you all.


Ofel. Will he tell us what this show means?


Ham. I, or any show you will show him,
Be not afeard to show, he will not be afeard to tell:
O these Players cannot keep counsel, thei'le tell all.

Prol. For us, and for our Tragedy,
Here stowpiug to your clemency,
We beg your hearing patiently.

Ham. Is It a prologue, or a poesy for a ring?


Ofel. It Is short my Lord.


Ham. As women's love.


Enter the Duke and Duchess. Duke Full forty years are past, their date is
gone,
Since happy time joined both our hearts as one:
And now the blood that filled my youthful veins,
Runs weakly in their pipes, and all the strains
Of music, which whilome pleased mine ear,
Is now a burden that Age cannot bear:
And therefore sweet Nature must pay his due,
To heaven must I, and leave the earth with you.

Duchess O say not so, lest that you kill my heart,
When death takes you, let life from me depart.

Duke Content thy self, when ended is my date,
Thon may (perchance) have a more noble mate,
More wise, more youthful, and one.

Duchess O speak no more for then I am accursed,
None weds the second, but she kills the first:
A second time I kill my Lord that is dead,
When second husband kisses me in bed.

Ham. O wormwood, wormwood!


Duke I do believe you sweet, what now you speak,
But what we do determine often we break,
For our demises still are overthrown,
Our thoughts are ours, their end's none of our own:
So think you will no second husband wed,
But die thy thoughts, when thy first Lord is dead.

Duchess Both here and there pursue me lasting strife,
If once a widow, ever I be wife.

Ham. If she should break now.


Duke It Is deeply sworn, sweet leave me here a while, My spirits grow
dull, and feign I would beguile the tedious time with sleep.


Duchess Sleep rock thy brain,
And never come mischance between us twain.
exit Lady
Ham. Madam, how do you like this play?


Queen The Lady protests too much.


Ham. O but she will keep her word.


King Have you heard the argument, is there no offense in it?


Ham. No offense in the world, poison in jest, poison in jest.


King What do you call the name of the play?


Ham. Mouse-trap: mary how trapically: this play is
The image of a murder done in guyana, Albertus
Was the Dukes name, his wife Baptista,
Father, it is a knauish piece a work: but what
A that, it touches not us, you and I that have free
Souls, let the galld jade wince, this is one
Lucianus nephew to the King.

Ofel. Ya're as good as a Chorus my lord.


Ham. I could interpret the love you bear, if I saw the poopies dallying.


Ofel. You Are very pleasant my lord.


Ham. Who I, your only jig-maker, why what should a man do but be merry? for
look how cheerfully my mother looks, my father died within these two hours.


Ofel. Nay, it is twice two months, my Lord.


Ham. Two months, nay then let the devil wear black,
For i will have a suit of Sables: Jesus, two months dead,
And not forgotten yet? nay then there is some
Likelihood, a gentleman's death may outliue memory,
But by my faith he must build churches then,
Or else he must follow the old Epitithe,
With hoh, with ho, the hobi-horse is forgot.

Ofel. Your jests are keen my Lord.


Ham. It would cost you a groaning to take them off.


Ofel. Still better and worse.


Ham. So you must take your husband, begin. Murdered
Begin, a pox, leave thy damnable faces and begin,
Come, the croking raven does bellow for revenge.

Murd. Thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, and time agreeing.
Confederate season, else no creature seeing:
Thou mixture rank, of midnight weeds collected,
With Hecates bane thrice blasted, thrice infected,
Thy natural magic, and dire property,
One wholesome life vsurps immediately.
exit.
Ham. He poisons him for his estate.


King Lights, I will to bed.


Cor. The king rises, lights hoe.


Exeunt King and Lords. Ham. What, frighted with false fires?
Then let the stricken dear go weep,
The Heart vngalled play,
For some must laugh, while some must weep,
Thus runs the world away.

Hor. The king is moved my lord.


Hor. I Horatio, i will take the Ghosts word
For more then all the coin in Denmark.

Enter Rossencraft and Gilderstone. Ross. Now my lord, how is it with you?


Ham. And if the king like not the tragedy,
Why then belike he likes it not perdy.

Ross. We are very glad to see your grace so pleasant,
My good lord, let us again entreat
To know of you the ground and cause of your distemperature

Gil. My*lord, your mother craves to speak with you.


Ham. We shall obey, were she ten times our mother.


Ross. But my good Lord, shall I entreat thus much?


Ham. I pray will you play upon this pipe?


Ross. Alas my lord I cannot.


Ham. Pray will you.


Gil. I have no skill my Lord.


Ham. why look, it is a thing of nothing,
It Is but stopping of these holes,
And with a little breath from your lips,
It will give most delicate music.

Gil. But this cannot we do my Lord.


Ham. Pray now, pray heartily, I beseech you.


Ros. My lord we cannot.


Ham. Why how unworthy a thing would you make of me?
You would seem to know my stops, you would play upon me,
You would search the very inward part of my heart,
And diue into the secreet of my soul.
Zownds do you think Iam easier to be pla'yd
On, then a pipe? call me what Instrument
You will, though you can frett me, yet you can not
Play upon me, besides, to be demanded by a sponge.

Ros. How a sponge my Lord?


Ham. I sir, a sponge, that sokes up the kings
Countenance, favors, and rewards, that makes
His liberality your store house: but such as you,
Do the king, in the end, best seruise;
For he does keep you as an Ape does nuttes,
In the corner of his law, first mouths you,
Then swallows you: so when he has need
Of you, it is but squeefing of you,
And sponge, you shall be dry again, you shall.

Ros. Well my Lord we will take our leave.


Ham Farewell, farewell, God bless you.


Exit Rossencraft and Gilderstone. Enter Corambis Cor. My lord, the Queen
would speak with you.


Ham. Do you see yonder clowd in the shape of a camel?


Cor. It Is like a camel in deed.


Ham. Now me thinks it is like a weasel.


Cor. It Is backed like a weasell.


Ham. Or like a whale.


Cor. Very like a whale.

exit Coram.
Ham. Why then tell my mother i will come by and by.
Good night Horatio.

Hor. Good night unto your Lordship.

exit Horatio.
Ham. My mother she has sent to speak with me:
O God, let never the heart of Nero enter
This soft bosom.
Let me be cruel, not unnatural.
I will speak daggers* those sharp words being spent,
To do her wrong my soul shall never consent.
exit.
Enter the King. King O that this wet that falls upon my face
Would wash the crime clear from my conscience!
When I look up to heaven, I see my trespass,
The earth does still cry out upon my fact,
Pay me the murder of a brother and a king,
And the adulterous fault I have committed:
O these are sins that are unpardonable:
Why say thy sins were blacker then is ieat,
Yet may contrition make them as white as snow:
I but still to persevere in a sin,
It is an act against the universal power,
Most wretched man, stoop, bend thee to thy prayer,
Ask grace of heaven to keep thee from despair.

he kneeles. enter* Hamlet Ham. I so, come forth and work thy last,
And thus he dies: and so am I revenged:
No, not so: he took my father sleeping, his sins brim full,
And how his soul stood to the state of heaven
Who knows, save the immortal powers,
And shall I kill him now,
When he is purging of his soul?
Making his way for heaven this is a benefit,
And not revenge: no, get thee up again,
When he is at game swaring, taking his carowse, drinking drunk,
Or in the incestuous pleasure of his bed,
Or at some act that has no relish
Of salvation in it, then trip him
That his heels may kick at heaven,
And fall as low as hell: my mother stays,
This physic but prolongs thy weary days.
exit Ham.
King My words fly up, my sins remain below.
No King on earth is safe, if Gods his foe.
exit King.
Enter Queen and Corambis. Cor. Madame, I hear young Hamlet coming,
I Will shrowde my self behind the Arras.
exit Cor.
Queen Do so my Lord.


Ham. Mother, mother, O are you here?
How is it with you mother?

Queen How is it with you?


Ham, I Will tell you, but first we will make all safe.


Queen Hamlet, thou have thy father much offended.


Ham. Mother, you have my father much offended.


Queen How now boy?


Ham. How now mother! come here, sit down, for you shall hear me speak.


Queen What will thou do? thou will not murder me: Help hoe.


Cor. Help for the Queen.


Ham. I a Rat, dead for a Duckat.
Rash intruding fool, farewell,
I took thee for thy better.

Queen Hamlet, what have thou done?


Ham. Not so much harm, good mother,
As to kill a king, and marry with his brother.

Queen How* kill a king!


Ham. Ia King: nay sit you down, and ere you part,
If you be made of penitrable stuff,
I Will make your eyes look down into your heart,
And see how horride there and black it shows.

Queen Hamlet, what mean thou by these killing words?


Ham. Why this I mean, see here, behold this picture,
It is the portraiture, of your deceased husband,
See here a face, to outface Mars himself,
An eye, at which his foes did tremble at,
A front wherein all virtue* are set down
For to adorn a king, and guild his crown,
Whose heart went hand in hand even with that vow,
He made to you in marriage, and he is dead.
Murdered, damnably murdered, this was your husband,
Look you now, here is your husband,
With a face like Unlcan.
A look fit for a murder and a rape,
A dull dead hanging look, and a hell-bred eye,
To affright children and amaze the world:
And this same have you left to change with this.
What Devil thus has cosoned you at hob-man blind?
A! have you eyes and can you look on him
That slew my father, and your dear husband,
To live in the incestuous pleasure of his bed?

Queen O Hamlet, speak no more.


Ham. To leave him that bare a Monarkes mind,
For a king of clowts, of very shreads.

Queen Sweet Hamlet cease.


Ham. Nay but still to persist and dwell in finne,
To sweat under the yoke of insamie,
To make increase of shame, to seal damnation.

Queen Hamlet, no more.


Ham. Why appetite with you is in the waine,
Your blood runs backward now from whence it came,
Who Will chide hot blood within a Virgins heart,
When lust shall dwell within a matrons breast?

Queen Hamlet, thou cleaues my heart in twain.


Ham. O throw away the worser part of it, and keep the better.

Enter the ghost in his night gown. Save me, save me, you gracious
Powers above, and houer over me,
With your celestial wings.
Do you not come your tardy son to chide,
That I thus long have let revenge slip by?
O do not glare with looks so pitiful!
Lest that my heart of stone yield to compassion,
And every part that should assist revenge,
Forgo their proper powers, and fall to pity.

Ghost Hamlet, I once again appear to thee,
To put thee in remembrance of my death:
Do not neglect, nor long time put it off.
But I perceive by thy distracted looks,
Thy mother's fearful, and she stands amazde:
Speak to her Hamlet, for her sex is weak,
Comfort thy mother, Hamlet, think on me.

Ham. How is it with you Lady?


Queen Nay, how is it with you
That thus you bend your eyes on vacancie,
And hold discourse with nothing but with air?

Ham. Why do you nothing hear?


Queen Not I.


Ham. Nor do you nothing see?


Queen No neither.


Ham. No, why see the king my father, my father, in the habit
As he lived, look you how pale he looks,
See how he steals away out of the Portall,
Look, there he goes.
exit ghost.
Queen Alas, it is the weakness of thy brain,
Which makes thy tongue to blazon thy hearts grief:
But as I have a soul, I swear by heaven,
I never knew of this most horride murder:
But Hamlet, this is only fantasy,
And for my love forget these idle fits.

Ham. Idle, no mother, my pulse does beat like yours,
It is not madness that possesses Hamlet.
O mother, if ever you did my dear father love,
Forbear the adulterous bed to night,
And win your self by little as you may,
In time it may be you will loathe him quite:
And mother, but assist me in revenge,
And in his death your infamy shall die.

Queen Hamlet, I vow by that majesty,
That knows our thoughts, and looks into our hearts,
I will conceal, consent, and do my best,
What stratagem soever thou shall devise.

Ham. It is enough, mother good night:
Come sir, I Will provide for you a grave,
Who was in life a foolish prating knave.

Exit Hamlet with the dead body. Enter the King and Lords. King Now Gertred,
what says our son, how do you find him?


Queen Alas my lord, as raging as the sea:
Whenas he came, I first bespake him fair,
But then he throws and tosses me about,
As one forgetting that I was his mother:
At last I called for help: and as I cried, Corambis
Called, which Hamlet no sooner heard, but whips me
Out his rapier, and cries, a Rat, a Rat, and in his rage
The good old man he killes.

King Why this his madness will undo our state.
Lords go to him, inquire the body out.

Gil. We will my Lord.

Exeunt Lords.
King Gertred, your son shall presently to England,
His shipping is already furnished,
And we have sent by Rossencraft and Gilderstone,
Our letters to our dear brother of England,
For Hamlets welfare and his happiness:
Happly the air and climate of the Country
May please him better than his native home:
See where he comes.

Enter Hamlet and the Lords. Gil. My lord, we can by no means
Know of him where the body is.

King Now son Hamlet, where is this dead body?


Ham. At supper, not where he is eating, but
Where he is eaten, a certain company of politic worms are even now at him.
Father, your fatre King, and your lean Beggar
Are but variable services, two dishes to one mess:
Look you, a man may fish with that worm
That has eaten of a King,
And a Beggar eat that fish,
Which that worm has caught.

King What of this?


Ham. Nothing father, but to tell you, how a King
May go a progress through the guts of a Beggar.

King But son Hamlet, where is this body?


Ham. In heaven, if you chance to miss him there,
Father, you had best look in the other parts below
For him, and if you cannot find him there,
You may chance to nose him as you go up the lobby.

King Make haste and find him out.


Ham. Nay do you hear? do not make too much haste,
I Will warrant you he will stay till you come.

King Well son Hamlet, we in care of you: but specially in tender
preservation of your health,
The which we price even as our proper self,
It is our mind you forthwith go for England,
The wind fits fair, you shall aboorde to night,
Lord Rossencraft and Gilderstone shall go along with you.

Ham. O with all my heart: farewell mother.


King Your loving father, Hamlet.


Ham. My mother I say: you married my mother,
My mother is your wife, man and wife is one flesh,
And so (my mother) farewell: for England hoe.

exeunt all but the king. king Gertred, leave me,
And take your leave of Hamlet,
To England is he gone, never to return:
Our Letters are unto the King of England,
That on the sight of them, on his allegiance,
He presently without demanding why,
That Hamlet loose his head, for he must die,
There Is more in him than shallow eyes can see:
He once being dead, why then our state is free.
exit.
Enter Fortenbrasse, Drum and Soldiers. Fort. Captain, from us go greet
The king of Denmark:
Tell him that Fortenbrasse nephew to old Norway,
Craves a free pass and conduct over his land,
According to the Articles agreed on:
You know our Randevous, go march away.
exeunt all.
enter King and Queen. King Hamlet is ship't for England, fare him well,
I hope to hear good news from thence ere long,
If every thing fall out to our content,
As I do make no doubt but so it shall.

Queen God grant it may, heavens keep my Hamlet safe:
But this mischance of old Corambis death,
Has piersed so the young Ofeliaes heart,
That she, poor maid, is quite bereft her wits.

King Alas dear heart! And on the other side,
We understand her brother's come from France,
And he has half the heart of all our Land,
And hardly he will forget his fathers death,
Unless by some means he be pacified.

Qu. O see where the young Ofelia is!


Enter Ofelia playing on a Lute, and her hair down singing. Ofelia How should
I your true love know
From another man?
By his cockle hatte, and his staff,
And his sandall shoone.
White his shrowde as mountain snow,
Larded with sweet slowers,
That bewept to the grave did not go
With true lovers showers:
He is dead and gone Lady, he is dead and gone,
At his head a grass green turffe,
At his heels a stone.

king How is it with you sweet Ofelia?


Ofelia Well God yield you,
It grieves me to see how they laid him in the cold ground,
I could not choose but weep:
And will he not come again?
And will he not come again?
No, no, he is gone, and we cast away moan,
And he never will come again.
His beard as white as snow:
All flaxen was his pole,
He is dead, he is gone,
And we cast away moan:
God a mercy on his soul.
And of all christen souls I pray God.
God be with you Ladies, God be with you.
exit Ofelia.
king A pretty wretch! this is a change indeed:
O Time, how swiftly runs our joys away?
Content on earth was never certain bred,
To day we laugh and live, to morrow dead.
How now, what noise is that?

A noise within. enter Leartes. Lear. Stay there until I come,
O thou vilde king, give me my father:
Speak, say, where is my father?

king Dead.


Lear. Who has murdered him? speak, i will not
Be juggled with, for he is murdered.

Queen True, but not by him.


Lear. By whom, by heaven I Will be resolved.


king Let him go Gertred, away, I fear him not,
There Is such divinity does wall a king,
That treason dares not look on.
Let him go Gertred, that your father is murdered,
It Is true, and we most sorry for it,
Being the chiefest pillar of our state:
Therefore will you like a most desperate gamster,
Swoop-stake-like, draw at friend, and foe, and all?

Lear. To his good friends thus wide I Will open mine arms,
And lock them in my heart, but to his foes,
I will no reconcilement but by blood.

king Why now you speak like a most loving son:
And that in soul we sorrow for for his death,
Your self ere long shall be a witness,
Mean while be patient, and content your self.

Enter Ofelia as before. Lear. Who Is this, Ofelia? O my dear sister!
Is It possible a young maids life,
Should be as mortal as an old man's saw?
O heavens themselves! how now Oselia?

Ofel. Well God a mercy, I a bin gathering of flowers
Here, here is rue for you,
You may call it herb a grace a Sundays,
Here Is some for me too: you must wear your rue
With a difference, there is a dazie.
Here Love, there is rosemary for you
For remembrance: I pray Love remember,
And there is pansey for thoughts.

Lear. A document in madness, thoughts, remembrance: O God, O God!


Ofelia There is fennel for you, I would a given you
Some violets, but they all withered, when
My father died: alas, they say the owl was
A Bakers daughter, we see what we are,
But can not tell what we shall be.
For bonny sweet Robin is all my joy.

Lear. Thoughts and afflictions, torments worse than hell.


Ofel. Nay Love, I pray you make no words of this now:
I pray now, you shall sing a down,
And you a down a, it is a the Kings daughter
And the false steward, and if any body
Ask you of any thing, say you this.
Tomorrow is saint Valentines day,
All in the morning betime,
And a maid at your window,
To be your Valentine:
The young man rose, and dan'd his clothes,
And dupt the chamber door,
Let in the maid, that out a maid
Never departed more.
Nay I pray mark now,
By gisle, and by saint Charity,
Away, and fie for shame:
Young men will do it when they come too'^^
By cock they are too blame.
Quoth she, before you tumbled me,
You promised me to wed.
So would I a done, by yonder Sun,
If thou had not come to my bed.
So God be with you all, God bwy Ladies.
God bwy you Love.
exit Ofelia.
Lear. Grief upon grief, my father murdered,
My sister thus distracted:
Cursed be his soul that wrought this wicked act.

king Content you good Leartes for a time,
Although I know your grief is as a flood,
Brimme full of sorrow, but forbear a while,
And think already the revenge is done
On him that makes you such a hapless son.

Lear. You have prevailed my Lord, a while I Will strive,
To bury grief within a tomb of wrath,
Which once vnhearsed, then the world shall hear
Leartes had a father he held dear.

king No more of that, ere many days be done,
You shall hear that you do not dream upon.
exeunt om.
Enter Horatio and the Queen. Hor. Madame, your fonne is safe arriv'de in
Denmark,
This letter I even now received of him,
Whereas he writes how he escaped the danger,
And subtle treason that the king had plotted,
Being crossed by the contention of the winds,
He found the Packet sent to the king of England,
Wherein he saw himself betrayed to death,
As at his next conversion with your grace,
He will relate the circumstance at full.

Queen Then I perceive there is treason in his looks
That seemed to sugar over his villainy:
But I will soothe and please him for a time,
For murderous minds are always jealo^s,
But know not you Horatio where he is?

Hor. Yes Madame, and he has appointed me
To m^ ete him on the east side of the City
To morrow morning.

Queen O fail not, good Horatio, and withal, commend me
A mothers care to him, bid him a while
Be wary of his presence, lest that he
Fail in that he goes about.

Hor. Madam, never make doubt of that:
I think by this the news be come to court:
He is arriv'de, observe the king, and you shall
Quickly find, Hamlet being here,
Things fell not to his mind.

Queen But what became of Gilderstone and Rossencraft?


Hor. He being set a shore, they went for England,
And in the Packet there writ down that doom
To be performed on them poynted for him:
And by great chance he had his fathers Seal,
So all was done without discovery.

Queen Thanks be to heaven for blessing of the prince,
Horatio once again I take my leave,
With thousand mothers blessings to my son.

Horat. Madam adue.


Enter King and Leartes. King. Hamlet from England! is it possible?
What chance is this? they are gone, and he come home.

Lear. O he is welcome, by my soul he is:
At it my iocund heart does leap for joy,
That I shall live to tell him, thus he dies.

king Leartes, content your self, be ruled by me,
And you shall have no let for your revenge.

Lear. My will, not all the world.


King Nay but Leartes, mark the plot I have laid,
I have heard him often with a greedy wish,
Upon some praise that he has heard of you
Touching your weapon, which with all his heart,
He might be once tasked for to try your cunning.

Lea. And how for this?


King Mary Leartes thus: I Will lay a wager,
Shall Be on Hamlets side, and you shall give the odds,
The which will draw him with a more desire,
To try the maistry, that in twelve venies
You gain not three of him: now this being granted,
When you are hot in midst of all your play,
Among the foyles shall a keen rapier lie,
Steeped in a mixture of deadly poison,
That if it draws but the least dram of blood,
In any part of him, he cannot live:
This being done will free youfrom suspicion,
And not the dearest friend that Hamlet lov'de
Will ever have Leartes in suspect.

Lear. My lord, I like it well:
But say lord Hamlet should refuse this match.

King I Will warrant you, we will put on you
Such a report of singularity,
Will bring him on, although against his will.
And lest that all should miss,
I Will have a potion that shall ready stand,
In all his heat when that he calls for drink,
Shall be his period and our happiness.

Lear. It Is excellent, O would the time were come!
Here comes the Queen.
enter the Queen.
king How now Gertred, why look you heavily?


Queen O my Lord, the young Ofelia
Having made a garland of sundry sorts of flowers,
Sitting upon a willow by a brook,
The envious sprig broke, into the brook she fell,
And for a while her clothes spread wide abroad,
Bore the young Lady up: and there she sat smiling,
Even Mermaide*like, twixt heaven and earth,
Chaunting old sundry tunes incapable
As it were of her distress, but long it could not be,
Till that her clothes, being heavy with their drink,
Dragged the sweet wretch to death.

Lear. So, she is drownde:
Too much of water have thou Ofelia,
Therefore I will not drown thee in my tears,
Revenge it is must yield this heart relief,
For woe begets woe, and grief hangs on grief.
exeunt.
enter Clown and an other. Clown I say no, she ought not to be buried
In christian burial.

2. Why sir?


Clown Mary because she is drowned.


2. But she did not drown her self.


Clown No, that is certain, the water drowned her.


2. Yea but it was against her will.


Clown No, I deny that, for look you sir, I stand here,
If the water come to me, I drown not my self:
But if I go to the water, and am there drowned,
Ergo I am guilty of my own death:
You Are gone, go you are gone sir.

2. I but see, she has christian burial,
Because she is a great woman.

Clown Mary more's the pity, that great folk
Should have more authority to hang or drown
Themselves, more than other people:
Go fetch me a stope of drink, but before thou
Go, tell me one thing, who buildes strongest,
Of a Mason, a Shipwright, or a Carpenter?

2. Why a Mason, for he buildes all of stone,
And will endure long.

Clown That Is pretty, to it again, to it again.


2. Why then a Carpenter, for he buildes the gallows,
And that brings many a one to his long home.

Clown Pretty again, the gallows does well, mary how dooes it well? the
gallows dooes well to them that do ill, go get thee gone:

And if any one ask thee hereafter, say,
A Graue-maker, for the houses he buildes
Last till Doomes-day. Fetch me a stope of beer, go.

Enter Hamlet and Horatio. Clown A picke-axe and a spade,
A spade for and a winding sheet,
Most fit it is, for it will be made, he throws up a shouel.
For such a ghest most meet.

Ham. Has this fellow any feeling of himself,
That is thus merry in making of a grave?
See how the slave joles their heads against the earth.

Hor. My lord, Custom has made it in him seem nothing.


Clown A pick-axe and a spade, a spade,
For and a winding fheete,
Most fit it is for to be made,
For such a ghest most meet.

Ham. Look you, there is another Horatio.


Why mai't not be the scull of some Lawyer?
Me thinks he should indite that fellow
Of an action of Battery, for knocking
Him about the pate with his shouel: now where is your
Quirkes and quillets now, your vouchers and
Double vouchers, your leases and free-holde,
And tenements? why that same box there will scarce
Hold the conueiance of his land, and must
The honor lie th^re? O pitiful transformance!
I prithee tell me Horatio,
Is parchment made of sheep-skinnes?

Hor. I my Lord, and of calues-skinnes too.


Ham. I faith they prove themselves sheep and calves
That deal with them, or put their trust in them.
There Is another, why may not that be such a ones
Scull, that praised my Lord such a ones horse,
When he meant to beg him? Horatio, I prithee
Lets question yonder fellow.
Now my friend, whose grave is this?

Clown Mine sir.


Ham. But who must lie in it?


Clown If I should say, I should, I should lie in my throat sir.


Ham. What man must be buried here?


Clown No man sir*


Ham. What woman?


Clown. No woman neither sir, but indeed
One that was a woman.

Ham. An excellent fellow by the Lord Horatio,
This seven years have I noted it: the toe of the pesant,
Comes so near the heel of the courtier,
That he gawles his kibe, I prithee tell me one thing,
How long will a man lie in the ground before he rots?

Clown I faith sir, if he be not rotten before
He be laid in, as we have many pocky corses,
He will last you, eight years, a tanner
Will last you eight years full out, or nine.

Ham. And why a tanner


Clown Why his hide is so tanned with his trade,
That it will hold out water that is a parlous
Deuourer of your dead body, a great soaker.
Look you, here is a scull has bin here this dozen year,
Let me see, I ever since our last king Hamlet
Slew Fortenbrasse in combat, young Hamlets father,
He that is mad.

Ham. I mary, how came he mad?


Clown I faith very strangely, by loosing of his wits.


Ham. Upon what ground?


Clown A this ground, in Denmark.


Ham. Where is he now?


Clown Why now they sent him to England.


Ham. To England! wherefore?


Clown Why they say he shall have his wits there,
Or if he have not, it is no great matter there,
It will not be seen there.

Ham. Why not there?


Clown Why there they say the men are as mad as he.


Ham. Whose scull was this?


Clown This, a plague on him, a mad rogues it was,
He powered once a whole flagon of Rhenish of my head,
Why do not you know him? this was one Yorickes scull.

Ham. Was this? I prithee let me see it, alas poor Yoricke I knew him Horatio,

A fellow of infinite mirth, he has carried me twenty times upon his back,
here hung those lips that I have Kissed a hundred times, and to see, now they
abhor me: Where Is your jests now Yoricke? your flashes of meriment: now go to
my Ladies chamber, and bid her paint her self an inch thick, to this she must
come Yoricke. Horatio, I prithee tell me one thing, do thou think that,
Alexander looked thus?


Hor. Even so my Lord.


Ham. And smelt thus?


Hor. I my lord, no otherwise.


Ham. No, why might not imagination work, as thus of Alexander, Alexander
died, Alexander was buried, Alexander became earth, of earth we make clay, and
Alexander being but clay, why might not time bring to pass, that he might
stop the boung hole of a beer barrel?

Imperious Caesar dead and turned to clay,
Might stop a hole, to keep the wind away.

Enter King and Queen, Leartes, and other lords, with a Priest after the
coffin. Ham. What funerall's this that all the Court laments?
It shows to be some noble parentage:
Stand by a while.

Lear. What ceremony else? say, what ceremony else?


Priest My Lord, we have done all that lies in us,
And more than well the church can tolerate,
She has had a Dirge sung for her maiden soul:
And but for favor of the king, and you,
She had been buried in the open fields,
Where now she is allowed christian burial.

Lear. So, I tell thee churlish Priest, a ministering Angel shall my sister be,
when thou lie howling.


Ham. The fair Ofelia dead!


Queen Sweetes to the sweet, farewell:
I had thought to adorn thy bridale bed, fair maid,
And not to follow thee unto thy grave.

Lear. Forbear the earth a while: sister farewell:

Leartes leapes into the grave. Now power your earth on, Olympus hie,
And make a hill to over top old Pellon: Hamlet leaps in after Leartes
What Is he that coniures so?

Ham. Behold it is I, Hamlet the Dane.


Lear. The devil take thy soul.


Ham. O thou praiest not well,
I prithee take thy hand from off my throat,
For there is something in me dangerous,
Which let thy wisdom fear, hold off thy hand*
I lou'de Ofelia as dear as twenty brothers could:
Show me what thou will do for her:
Wilt fight, wilt fast, wilt pray,
Wilt drink up vessels, eat a crocadile? I Will doot:
Come thou here to whine?
And where thou talk of burying thee a live,
Here let us stand: and let them throw on us,
Whole hills of earth, till with the height thereof,
Make Oosell as a Wart.

King. Forbear Leartes, now is he mad, as is the sea,
Anon as mild and gentle as a Dove:
Therefore a while give his wild humor scope.

Ham. What is the reason sir that you wrong me thus?
I never gave you cause: but stand away,
A Cat will meaw, a Dog will have a day.

Exit Hamlet and Horatio. Queen. Alas, it is his madness makes him thus,
And not his heart, Leartes.

King. My lord, it is so: but we will no longer trifle,
This very day shall Hamlet drink his last,
For presently we mean to send to him,
Therefore Leartes be in readynes.

Lear. My lord, till then my soul will not be quiet.


King. Come Gertred, we will have Leartes, and our son,
Made friends and Lovers, as befittes them both,
Even as they tender us, and love their country.

Queen God grant they may.

exeunt omnes.
Enter Hamlet and Horatio Ham. believe me, it greeues me much Horatio,
That to Leartes I forgot my self:
For by my self me thinks I feel his grief,
Though there is difference in each others wrong.

Enter a Bragart Gentleman. Horatio, but mark yon water-flie,
The Court knows him, but he knows not the Court.

Gent. Now God save thee, sweet prince Hamlet.


Ham. And you sir: foh, how the muske-cod smells!


Genesis I come with an embassage from his majesty to you


Ham. I shall sir give you attention:
By my troth me thinks it is very cold.

Gent. It is indeed very rawish cold.


Ham. It Is hot me thinks.


Gent. Very swoltery hot:
The King, sweet Prince, has laid a wager on your side,
Six Barbary horse, against six french rapiers,
With all their acoutrements too, a the carriages:
In good faith they are very curiously wrought.

Ham. The cariages sir, I do not know what you mean.


Gent. The girdles, and hangers sir, and such like.


Ham. The word had been more cousin german to the phrase, if he could have
carried the canon by his side,
And howe's the wager? I understand you now.

Gent. Mary sir, that young Leartes in twelve venies
At Rapier and Dagger do not get three odds of you,
And on your side the King has laid,
And desires you to be in readiness.

Ham. Very well, if the King dare venture his wager,
I dare venture my skull: when must this be?

Gent. My Lord, presently, the king, and her majesty,
With the rest of the best judgment in the Court,
Are coming down into the outward palace.

Ham. Go tell his majesty, I will attend him.


Gent* I shall deliver your most sweet answer.

exit.
Ham. You may sir, none better, for you are spiced,
Else he had a bad nose could not smell a fool.

Hor. He will disclose himself without inquiry.


Ham. Believe me Horatio, my heart is on the sudden
Very sore, all here about.

Hor. My lord* forbear the challenge then.


Ham. No Horatio, not I, if danger be now,

Why then it is not to come, there is a predestiuate providence in the fall of a
sparrow: here comes the King.


Enter King, Queen, Leartes, Lords. King Now son Hamlet, we hane laid upon
your head,
And make no question but to have the best.

Ham. Your majesty has laid a the weaker side.


King We doubt it not, deliver them the foiles.


Ham. First Leartes, here is my hand and love,
Protesting that I never wronged Leartes.
If Hamlet in his madness did amiss,
That was not Hamlet, but his madness did it,
And all the wrong I e're did to Leartes,
I here proclaim was madness, therefore lets be at peace,
And think I have shot mine arrow over the house,
And hurt my brother.

Lear. Sir I am satisfied in nature,
But in terms of honor I Will stand aloof,
And will no reconcilement,
Till by some elder masters of our time
I may be satisfied.

King Give them the foyles.


Ham. I Will be your foil Leartes, these foyles,
Have all a laughed, come on sir:
a hit.
Lear. No none.

Here they play:
Ham. Judgment.


Gent. A hit, a most palpable hit.


Lear. Well, come again.

They play again.
Ham. Another. Judgment.


Lear. I, I grant, a tuch, a tuch.


King Here Hamlet, the king does drink a health to thee


Queen Here Hamlet, take my napkin, wipe thy face.


King Give him the wine.


Ham. Set it by, I Will have another bowt first,
I Will drink anon.

Queen Here Hamlet, thy mother drinks to thee.


She drinks. King Do not drink Gertred: O it is the poysned cup*


Ham. Leartes come, you dally with me,
I pray you pass with your most cunningst play.

Lear. I! say you so? have at you,
I Will hit you now my Lord:
And yet it goes almost against my conscience.

Ham. Come on sir.


They catch one another Rapiers, and both are wounded, Leartes falls down,
the Queen falls down and dies. King Look to the Queen.


Queen O the drink, the drink, Hamlet, the drink.


Ham. Treason, ho, keep the gates.


Lords How is it my Lord Leartes?


Lear. Even as a coxcombe should,
Foolishly slain with my own weapon:
Hamlet, thou have not in thee half an hour of life,
The fatal Instrument is in thy hand.
Vnbated and invenomed: thy mother's poysned
That drink was made for thee.

Ham. The poysned Instrument within my hand?
Then venom to thy venom, die damned villain:
Come drink, here lies thy union here.
The king dies.
Lear. O he is justly served:
Hamlet, before I die, here take my hand,
And withal, my love: I do forgive thee.
Leartes dies.
Ham. And I thee, O I am dead Horatio, fare thee well.


Hor. No, I am more an antike Roman,
Then a Dane, here is some poison left.

Ham. Upon my love I charge thee let it go,
O fie Horatio, and if thou should die,
What a scandale would thou leave behind?
What tongue should tell the story of our deaths,
If not from thee? O my heart sinckes Horatio,
Mine eyes have lost their sight, my tongue his use:
Farewell Horatio, heaven receive my soul.
Ham. dies.
Enter Uoltemar and the Ambassadors from England. enter Fortenbrasse with his
train. Fort. Where is this bloody sight?


Hor. If aught of woe or wonder you would behold,
Then look upon this tragic spectacle.

Fort. O imperious death! how many Princes
Have thou at one draft bloudily shot to death?

Ambass. Our ambassie that we have brought from England,
Where be these Princes that should hear us speak?
O most most unlooked for time! unhappy country.

Hor. Content your selves, I Will show to all, the ground,
The first beginning of this Tragedy:
Let there a scaffold be rearde up in the market place,
And let the State of the world be there:
Where you shall hear such a sad story told,
That never mortal man could more unfold.

Fort. I have some rights of memory to this kingdom,
Which now to claim my leisure does inuit me:
Let four of our chiefest Captains
Bear Hamlet like a soldier to his grave:
For he was likely, had he lived,
To a proved most royal.
Take up the body, such a fight as this
Becomes the fields, but here does much amiss

Finis

