Much ado about Nothing. As it has been sundry times publicly acted by the
right honorable, the Lord Chamberlain his servants. Written by William
Shakespeare.

LONDON Printed by V. S. for Andrew Wise, and William Aspley. 1600.

Much ado about Nothing.
Enter Leonato governor of Messina, Innogen his wife, Hero his daughter, and
Beatrice his niece, with a messenger.
Leonato. I Learn in this letter, that don Peter of Arragon comes this night
to Messina.


Mess. He is very near by this, he was not three leagues off when I left him.


Leona. How many gentlemen have you lost in this action?


Mess. But few of any sort, and none of name.


Leona. A victory is twice it self, when the atchiuer brings homeful numbers:
I find here, that don Peter has bestowed much honor on a young Florentine
called Claudio.


Mess. Much deserved on his part and equally remembered by don Pedro he has
borne himself beyond the promise of his age, doing in the figure of a lamb,
the feats of a lion, he has indeed better bettred expectation then you must
expect of me to tell you how.


Leo. He has an uncle here in Messina will be very much glad of it.


Mess. I have already delivered him letters, and there appears much joy in
him, even so much that joy could not show itself modest enough, without a
badge of bitterness.


Leo. Did he break out into tears?


Mess. In great measure.


Leo. A kind ouerflow of kindness, there are no faces truer then those that
are so washed, how much better is it to weep at joy, then to joy at weeping?


Beatr. I pray you, is Signior Mountanto returned from the wars or no?


Messen. I know none of that name, lady, there was none such in the army of
any sort.


Leonato What is he that you ask for niece?


Hero My cosen means Signior Benedicke of Padua.


Mess. O he is returned, and as pleasant as ever he was.


Bea. He set up his bills here in Messina, and challengde Cupid at the Flight,
and my uncles fool reading the challenge subscribde for Cupid, and challengde
him at the Burbolt: I pray you, how many has he killed and eaten in these
wars? but how many has he killed? for indeed I promised to eat all of his
killing.


Leo. Faith niece you tax Signior Benedicke too much, but heel be meet with
you, I doubt it not.


Mess. He has done good service lady in these wars.


Beat. You had musty vittaile, and he has help to eat it, he is a very
valiant trencher man, he has an excellent stomach.


Mess. And a good soldier too, lady.


Beat. And a good soldier to a Lady, but what is he to a Lord?


Mess. A lord to a lord, a man to a man, stufft with all honorable virtues.


Beat. It is so indeed, he is no less then a stuffed man, but for the stuffing
well, we are al mortal.


Leo. You must not, sir, mistake my niece, there is a kind of merry war
betwixt Signior Benedicke and her, they never meet but there is a skirmish of
wit between them.


Beat. Alas he gets nothing by that, in our last conflict, 4 of his five wits
went halting off, and now is the whole man gouernd with one, so that if he have
wit enough to keep himself warm, let him bear it for a difference between
himself and his horse, for it is all the wealth that he has left, to be known
a reasonable creature, who is his companion now? he has every month a new
sworn brother.


Mess. Is It possible?


Beat. Very easily possible, he wears his faith but as the fashion of his hat,
it ever changes with the next block.


Mess. I see lady the gentleman is not in your books.


Beat. No, and he were, I would burn my study but I pray you who is his
companion? is there no young squarer now that will make a voyage with him to the
devil?


Mess. He is most in the company of the right noble Claudio.


Beat. O Lord, he will hang upon him like a disease, he is sooner caught than
the pestilence, and the taker runs presently mad, God help the noble Claudio,
if he have caught the Benedict, it will cost him a thousand pound e^e a be
cured.


Mess. I will hold friends with you Lady.


Beat. Do good friend.


Leon. You will never run mad niece.


Beat. No, not till a hot January.


Mess. Don Pedro is approacht.

Enter don Pedro, Claudio, Benedicke, Balthazar and John the bastard.
Pedro Good signior Leonato, are you come to meet your trouble: the fashion of
the world is, to avoid cost, and you encounter it.


Leon. Never came trouble to my house, in the likeness of your grace; for
trouble being gone, comfort should remain: but when you depart from me,
sorrow abides, and happiness takes his leave.


Pedro You embrace your charge too willingly: I think this is your daughter.


Leonato Her mother has many times told me so.


Bened. Were you in doubt sir that you asked her?


Leonato Signior Benedicke, no, for then were you a child.


Pedro You have it full Benedicke, we may guess by this, what you are, being
a man, truly the Lady fathers her self: be happy Lady, for you are like an
honorable father.


Be. If Signior Leonato be her father, she would not have his head on her
shoulders for all Messina as like him as she is.


Beat. I wonder that you will still be talking, signior Benedicke, no body
marks you.


Been. What my dear lady Disdain! are you yet living?


Bea. Is it possible Disdain should die, while she has such meet food to
feed it, as signior Benedicke? Courtesy it self must convert to Disdain, if
you come in her presence.


Been. Then is courtesy a turne-coate, but it is certain I am loved of all
Ladies, only you excepted: and I would I could find in my heart that I had
not a hard heart, for truly I love none.


Beat. A dear happiness to women, they would else have been troubled with a
pernicious suter, I thank God and my cold blood, I am of your humor for that,
I had rather hear my dog bark at a crow, than a man swear he loves me.


Been. God keep your Ladyship still in that mind, so some Gentleman or other
shall escape a predestinate scratcht face.


Beat. Scratching could not make it worse, and twere such a face as yours were.


Been. Well, you are a rare parrat teacher.


Beat. A bird of my tongue, is better than a beast of yours.


Ben. I would my horse had the speed of your tongue, and so good a continuer,
but keep your way a Gods name, I have done.


Beat. You always end with a iades trick, I know you of old.


Pedro That is the sum of all: Leonato, signior Claudio, and signior
Benedicke, my dear friend Leonato, has invited you all, I tell him we shall
stay here, at the least a month and he heartily prays some occasion may
detain us longer, I dare swear he is no hypocrite, but prays from his heart.


Leon. If you swear my lord, you shall not be forsworn, let me bid you
welcome, my lord, being reconciled to the Prince your brother: I owe you all
duty.


John I thank you, I am not of many words, but I thank yo^


Leon. Please it your grace lead on?


Pedro Your hand Leonato, we will go together.

Exeunt. Manent Benedicke and Claudio.
Clau. Benedicke, did thou note the daughter of Signior Leonato?


Been. I noted her not, but I lookte on her,


Clau. Is she not a modest young lady?


Been. Do you question me as an honest man should do, for my simple true
judgment? or would you have me speak after my custom, as being a professed
tyrant to their sex?


Claudio No, I pray thee speak in sober judgment.


Been. Why in faith me thinks she is too low for a hie praise, too brown for a
fair praise, and too little for a great praise, only this commendation I can
afford her, that were she other then she is, she were unhandsome, and being no
other, but as she is, I do not like her.


Claudio Thou think I am in sport, I pray thee tell me truly how thou
like her.


Been. Would you buie her that you enquier after her?


Claudio Can the world buie such a jewel?


Been. Yea, and a case to put it into, but speak you this with a sad brow?
or do you play the flowting jack, to tell us Cupid is a good Hare finder, and
Vulcan a rare Carpenter: Come, in what key shall a man take you to go in the
song?


Claudio In mine eye, she is the sweetest Lady that ever I looked on.


Bened. I can see yet without spectacles, and I see no such matter: there is her
cousin, and she were not possessed with a fury, exceedes her as much in beauty,
as the first of May does the last of December: but I hope you have no intent
to turn husband, have you?


Claudio I would scarce trust my self, though I had sworn the contrary, if
Hero would be my wife.


Bened. Is It come to this? in faith has not the world one man but he will
wear his cappe with suspicion? shall I never see a batcheller of three score
again? go to in faith, and thou will needs thrust thy neck into a yoke, wear
the print of it, and sigh away sundaies: look, don Pedro is returned to seek
you.

Enter don Pedro, John the bastard.
Pedro What secret has held you here, that you followed not to Leonatoes?


Been. I would your Grace would constrain me to tell.


Pedro I charge thee on thy allegiance.


Ben. You hear, Count Claudio, I can be secret as a dumb man, I would have
you think so (but on my allegiance, mark you this, on my allegiance) he is in
love, with who? now that is your Graces part: mark how short his answer is,
with Hero Leonatoes short daughter.


Clau. If this were so, so were it vttred.


Bened. Like the old tale, my Lord, it is not so, nor it was not so: but
indeed, God forbid it should be so.


Claudio If my passion change not shortly, God forbid it should be otherwise.


Pedro Amen, if you love her, for the Lady is very well worthy.


Claudio You speak this to fetch me in, my Lord.


Pedro By my troth I speak my thought.


Claudio And in faith, my Lord, I spoke mine.


Bened. And by my two faiths and troths, my Lord, I spoke mine.


Clau. That I love her, I feel.


Pedro That she is worthy, I know.


Bened. That I neither feel how she should be loved, nor know how she should
be worthy, is the opinion that fire can not melt out of me, I will die in it
at the stake.


Pedro Thou wast ever an obstinate heretic in the despite of Beauty.


Clau. And never could maintain his part, but in the force of his will.


Been. That a woman conceived me, I thank her: that she brought me up, I
likewise give her most humble thanks: but that I will have a rechate winded in
my forehead, or hang my bugle in an invisible baldricke, all women shall pardon
me: because I will not do them the wrong to mistrust any, I will do my self
the right to trust none: and the fine is, (for the which I may go the finer,) I
will live a bacheller.


Pedro I shall see thee ere I die, look pale with love.


Been. With anger, with sickness, or with hunger, my Lord, not with love:
prove that ever I loose more blood with love then I will get again with
drinking, pick out mine eyes with a Ballad-makers pen and hang me up at the
door of a brothel house for the sign of blind Cupid.


Pedro Well, if ever thou do fall from this faith, thou will prove a notable
argument.


Been. If I do, hang me in a bottle like a Cat, and shoot at me, and he that
hits me, let him be clapped on the shoulder, and called Adam.


Pedro Well, as time shall try: in time the savage bull does bear the yoke.


Been. The savage bull may, but if ever the sensible Benedicke bear it, pluck
off the bulls horns, and set them in my forehead, and let me be vildly
painted, and in such great letters as they write, here is good horse to hyre:
let them signify under my sign, here you may see Benedicke the married man.


Claudio If this should ever happen, thou would be horn mad.


Pedro Nay, if Cupid have not spent all his quiver in Venice, thou will quake
for this shortly.


Bened. I look for an earthquake too then.


Pedro Well, you will temporize with the hours, in the mean time, good
signior Benedicke, repair to Leonatoes, commend me to him, and tell him I will
not fail him at supper, for indeed he has made great preparation.


Bened. I have almost matter enough in me for such an Embassage, and so I
commit you.


Clau. To the tuition of God: from my house if I had it.


Pedro The sixth of July: your loving friend Benedicke.


Bened. Nay mock not, mock not, the body of your discourse is sometime
guarded with fragments, and the guardes are but slightly basted on neither, ere
you flowt old ends any further, examine your conscience and so I leave you.

exit
Claudio My liege, your Highness now may do me good.


Pedro My love is thine to teach, teach it but how,
And thou shall see how apt it is to learn
Any hard lesson that may do thee good.

Clau. Has Leonato any son, my lord?

Pedro No child but Hero, she is his only heir:
Do thou affect her Claudio?

Claudio O my lord,
When you went onward on this ended action,
I looked upon her with a soldiers eye,
That likt, but had a rougher task in hand,
Than to drive liking to the name of love:
But now I am returnde, and that warre-thoughts,
Have left their places vacant: in their rooms,
Come thronging soft and delicate desires,
All prompting me how fair young Hero is,
Saying I likt her ere I went to wars.

Pedro Thou will be like a lover presently,
And tire the hearer with a book of words,
If thou do love fair Hero, cherish it,
And I will break with her, and with her father,
And thou shall have her: wast not to this end,
That thou beganst to twist so fine a story?

Clau. How sweetly you do minister to love,
That know loves grief by his complexion!
But lest my liking might too sudden seem,
I would have salude it with a longer treatise.

Pedro What need the bridge much brother then the flood?
The fairest grant is the necessity:
Look what will serve is fit: it is once, thou love,
And I will fit thee with the remedy,
I know we shall have reuelling to night,
I will assume thy part in some disguise,
And tell fair Hero I am Claudio,
And in her bosom i will unclasp my heart,
And take her hearing prisoner with the force
And strong encounter of my amorous tale:
Then after to her father will I break,
And the conclusion is, she shall be thine,
In practice let us put it presently.
exeunt. Enter Leonato and an old man brother to Leonato
Leo. How now brother, where is my cosen your son has he provided this
music?


Old He is very busy about it, but brother, I can tell you strange news that
you yet dreampt not of.


Leo. Are they good?


Old As the events stampes them but they have a good cover: they show well
outward, the prince and Count Claudio walking in a thick pleached alley in
mine orchard, were thus much ouer-heard by a man of mine: the prince discovered
to Claudio that he loved my niece your daughter, and meant to acknowledge it
this night in a dance, and if he found her accordant, he meant to take the
present time by the top, and instantly break with you of it.


Leo Has the fellow any wit that told you this?


Old A good sharp fellow, I will send for him, and question him your self.


Leo. No, no, we will hold it as a dream til it appear it self: but I will
acquaint my daughter withal, that she may be the better prepared for an
answer, if peradventure this be true: go you and tell her of it: coosins, you
know what you have to do, O I cry you mercy friend, go you with me and I will
use your shill: good cousin have a care this busy time.

exeunt. Enter fir John the bastard, and Conrade his companion.
Con. What the goodyeere my lord, why are you thus out of measure sad?


John There is no measure in the occasion that breeds, therefore the sadness is
without limit.


Con. You should hear reason.


John And when I have heard it, what blessing brings it?


Con If not a present remedy, at least a patient sufferance.


John I wonder that thou (being as thou say, thou art, borne under Saturn)
go about to apply a moral medicine, to a mortifying mischief: I cannot
hide what I am: I must be sad when I have cause, and smile at no man's jests,
eat when I have stomach, and wait for no man's leisure: sleep when I am
drowsy, and tend on no man's business, laugh when I am merry, and claw no man
in his humor.


Con. Yea but you must not make the full show of this till you may do it
without controllment you have of late stood out against your brother, and he
has taken you newly into his grace, where it is impossible you should take true
root, but by the fair weather that you make yourself, it is needful that you
frame the season for your own harvest.


John I had rather be a canker in a hedge, then a rose in his grace, and it
better fits my blood to be disdained of all, then to fashion a carriage to rob
love from any: in thy, (though I cannot be said to be a slatering honest man) it
must not be denied but I am a plain dealing villain, I am trusted with a
mussel, and enfraunchisde with a ^ogge, therefore I have decreed, not to sing in
my cage: if I had my mouth I would bite: if I had my liberty I would do my
liking: in the mean time, let me be that I am, and seek not to alter me.


Con. Can you make no use of your discontent?


John I make all use of it, for I use it only,

Who comes here? what news Borachio?

Enter Borachio.
Bor. I came yonder from a great supper, the prince your brother is royally
entertained by Leonato, and I can give you intelligence of an intended marriage.


John Will it serve for any model to build mischief on? what is he for a fool
that betrothes himself to unquietness?


Bor. Mary it is your bothers right hand.


John Who, the most exquisite Claudio?


Bor. Even he.


John A proper squier, and who, and who, which way looks he?


Bor. Mary one Hero the daughter and heir of Leonato.


John A very forward March-chicke, how came you to this?


Bor Being entertained for a perfumer, as I was smoking a musty room, comes
me the prince and Claudio, hand in hand in sad conference: I whipped me behind
the arras, and there heard it agreed upon, that the prince should woo Hero for
himself, and having obtained her, give her to Count Claudio.


John Come, come, let us thither, this may prove food to my displeasure, that
young start up has all the glory of my overthrow: if I can cross him any way,
I bless my self every way, you are both sure, and will assist me.


Conr. To the death my Lord.


John Let us to the great supper, their cheer is the greater that I am
subdued, would the cook were a my mind, shall we go prove what is to be done?


Bor. We Will wait upon your lordship.

exit. Enter Leonato, his brother, his wife, Hero his daughter, and Beatrice
his niece, and a kinsman.
Leonato Was not count John here at supper?


brother I saw him not.


Beatrice How tartely that gentleman looks, I never can see him but I am
heart-burn'd an hour after.


Hero He is of a very melancholy disposition.


Beatrice He were an excellent man that were made just in the midway between
him and Benedick, the one is too like an image and says nothing, and the other
too like my ladies eldest son, evermore tatling.


Leonato Then half signior Benedickes tongue in Count John's mouth, and half
Count John's melancholy in Signior Benedickes face.


Beatrice With a good leg and a good foot uncle, and money enough in his
purse, such a man would win any woman in the world if a could get her good
will.


Leonato By my troth niece thou will never get thee a husband, if thou be so
shrewd of thy tongue.


brother Infaith she is too cursed.


Beatrice Too cursed is more then cursed, I shall lessen Gods sending that way,
for it is said, God sends a cursed cow short horns, but to a cow too cursed, he
sends none.


Leonato So, by being too cursed, God will send you no horns.


Beatrice Just, if he send me no husband, for the which blessing, I am at him
upon my knees every morning and evening: Lord, I could not endure a husband
with a beard on his face, I had rather lie in the woollen!


Leonato You may light on a husband that has no beard.


Beatrice What should I do with him, dress him in my apparel and make him my
waiting gentle woman? he that has a beard, is more then a youth: and he that
has no beard, is less then a man: and he that is more then a youth, is not
for me, and he that is less then a man, I am not for him, therefore I will
even take sixpence in earnest of the Berrord, and lead his apes into hell.


Lenoato Well then* go you into hell.


Beatrice No but to the gate, and there will the devil meet me like an old
cuckold with horns on his head, and say, get you to heaven Beatrice, get you
to heaven, heeres no place for you maids, so deliver I up my apes and away to
saint Peter: for the heavens, he shows me where the Batchellers sit, and there
live we as merry as the day is long.


brother Well niece, I trust you will be ruled by your father.


Beatrice Yes faith, it is my cosens duty to make cursie and say, father, as
it please you: but yet for all that cousin, let him be a handsome fellow, or
else make an other cursie, and say, father, as it please me.


Leonato Well niece, I hope to see you one day fitted with a husband.


Beatrice Not til God make men of some other metal then earth, would it not
grieve a woman to be ouer-masterd with a piece of valiant dust? to make an
account of her life to a clod of waiward marle? no uncle, i will none: Adams
sons are my brethren, and truly I hold it a sin to match in my kindred.


Leonato Daughter, remember what I told you, if the prince do solicit you in
that kind, you know your answer.


Beatrice The fault will be in the music cousin, if you be not wooed in good
time: if the prince be too important, tell him there is measure in every thing,
and so dance out the answer, for here me Hero, wooing, wedding, and repenting,
is as a Scotch ijgge, a measure, and a cinquepace: the first suite is hot and
hasty like a Scotch ijgge (and full as fantastical) the wedding manerly modest
(as a measure) full of state and aunchentry, and then comes Repentance, and
with his bad legs falls into the cinquepace faster and faster, til he sincke
into his grave.


Leonato Cousin you apprehend passing shrewdly.


Beatrice I have a good eye uncle, I can see a church by daylight.


Leonato The reuellers are entering brother, make good room.

Enter prince, Pedro, Claudio, and Benedicke, and Balthaser, or dumb John.
Pedro Lady will you walk about with your friend?


Hero So, you walk softly, and look sweetly, and say nothing, I am yours for
the walk, and especially when I walk away.


Pedro With me in your company.


Hero I may say so when I please.


Pedro And when please you to say so?


Hero When I like your favor, for God defend the lute should be like the case.


Pedro My visor is Philemons roof, within the house is Jove.


Hero Why then your visor should be thatcht.


Pedro Speak low if you speak love.


Been. Well, I would you did like me.


Mar. So would not I for your own sake, for I have many ill qualities.


Been. Which is one?


Mar. I say my prayers alowd.


Been. I love you the better, the hearers may cry Amen.


Marg. God match me with a good dauncer.


Balth. Amen.


Marg. And God keep him out of my sight when the dance is done: answer Clarke.


Balth. No more words, the Clarke is answered.


Vrsula I know you well enough, you are signior Anthonio.


Antho. At a word I am not.


Ursula I know you by the wagling of your head.


Antho. To tell you true, I counterfeit him.


Vrsula You could never do him so ill well, unless you were the very man:
heeres his dry hand up and down, you are he, you are he.


Antho. At a word I am not.


Ursula Come, come, do you think I do not know you by your excellent wit? can
virtue hide it self? go to, mumme, you are he, graces will appear, and there is
an end.


Beat. Will you not tell me who told you so?


Bened. No, you shall pardon me.


Beat. Nor will you not tell me who you are?


Bened. Not now.


Beat. That I was disdainefull, and that I had my good wit out of the hundred
merry tales: well, this was signior Benedick that said so.


Bened. What Is he?


Beat. I am sure you know him well enough.


Bened. Not I, believe me.


Beat. Did he never make you laugh?


Bened. I pray you what is he?


Beat. Why he is the princes ieaster, a very dull fool only his gift is, in
devising impossible slanders, none but Libertines delight in him, and the
commendation is not in his wit, but in his villainy, for he both pleases men
and angers them, and then they laugh at him, and beat him: I am sure he is in
the Fleet, I would he had boorded me.


Been. When I know the Gentleman, i will tell him what you say.


Beat. Do, do, heel but break a comparison or two on me, which peradventure,
(not marked, or not laughed at) strikes him into melancholy and then there is a
partrige wing saved, for the fool will eat no supper that night: we must
follow the leaders.


Been. In every good thing.


Beat. Nay, if they lead to any ill, I will leave them at the next turning.

Dance exeunt
John Sure my brother is amorous on Hero, and has withdrawn her father to
break with him about it: the Ladies follow her, and but one visor remains.


Borachio And that is Claudio, I know him by his bearing.


John Are not you signior Benedicke?


Clau. You know me well, I am he.


John Signior, you are very near my brother in his love, he is enamourd on
Hero, I pray you dissuade him from her, she is no equal for his birth, you may
do the part of an honest man in it.


Claudio How know you he loves her?


John I heard him swear his affection.


Borac. So did I too, and he swore he would marry her to night.


John Come let us to the banquet.

exeunt: manet Clau.
Claud. Thus answer I in name of Benedicke,
But hear these ill news with the ears of Claudio:
It Is certain so, the Prince wooes for himself,
Friendship is constant in all other things,
Save in the office and affairs of love:
Therefore all hearts in love use their own tongues.
Let every eye negotiate for it self,
And trust no Agent: for Beauty is a witch,
Against whose charms, faith melts into blood:
This is an accident of hourly proof,
Which I mistrusted not: farewell therefore Hero.
Enter Benedicke
Benedicke Count Claudio.


Claudio Yea, the same.


Been. Come, will you go with me?


Claudio Whither?


Been. Even to the next willow, about your own business, county: what fashion
will you wear the garland of? about your neck, like an Usurers chain? or
under your arm, like a Lieutenants scarffe? you must wear it one way, for the
prince has got your Hero.


Claudio I wish him joy of her.


Bened. Why that's spoken like an honest Drouier, so they sell bullockes: but
did you think the Prince would have served you thus?


Claudio I pray you leave me.


Benedicke Ho now you strike like the blindman, it was the boy that stole your
meat, and you will beat the post.


Claudio If it will not be, i will leave you.

exit
Benedicke Alas poor hurt foul, now will he creep into sedges: but that my
Lady Beatrice should know me, and not know me: the princes fool! hah, it may
be I go under that title because I am merry: yea but so I am apt to do my
self wrong: I am not so reputed, it is the base (though bitter) disposition of
Beatrice, that puts the world into her person, and so gives me out: well, i will
be revenged as I may.

Enter the Prince, Hero, Leonato, John and Borachio, and Conrade.
Pedro Now signior where is the Count, did you see him?


Benedicke Troth my lord, I have played the part of Lady Fame, I found him
here as melancholy as a Lodge in a Warren, I told him, and I think I told
him true, that your grace had got the goodwil of this young Lady and I offered
him my company to a willow tree, either to make him a garland, as being
forsaken, or to bind him up a rod, as being worthy to be whipped.


Pedro To be whipped, what is his fault?


Benedicke The flat transgression of a Schoole-boy, who being ouer-ioyed with
finding a birds nest, shows it his companion, and he steals it.


Pedro Will thou make a trust a transgression? the transgression is in the
stealer.


Benedicke Yet it had not been amiss the rod had been made, and the
garland too, for the garland he might have worn himself, and the rod he
might have bestowed on you, who (as I take it) have stolen his birds nest.


Pedro I will but teach them to sing, and restore them to the owner.


Benedicke If their singing answer your saying, by my faith you say honestly.


Pedro The lady Beatrice has a quarrel to you, the Gentleman that daunst
with her, told her she is much wronged by you.


Bened. O she misusde me past the indurance of a block: an oak but with one
green leaf on it, would have answered her: my very visor began to assume
life, and scold with her: she told me, not thinking I had been my self, that
I was the Princes iester, that I was duller than a great thawe, huddleing jest
upon jest, with such impossible conuciance upon me, that I stood like a man at
a mark, with a whole army shooting at me: she speaks poynyards, and every
word stabbes: if her breath were as terrible as her terminations, there were no
living near her, she would infect to the north star: I would not marry
her, though she were endowed with all that Adam had left him before he
transgrest, she would have made Hercules have turned spit, yea, and have cleft
his club to make the fire too: come, talk not of her, you shall find her the
infernal Ate in good apparel, I would to God some scholar would conjure
her, for certainly while she is here, a man may live as quiet in hell, as in
a sanctuary, and people sin upon purpose, because they would go thither, so
indeed all disquiet, horror, and perturbation follows her.

Enter Claudio and Beatrice.
Pedro Look here she comes.


Benedicke Will your grace command me any service to the worlds end? I will go
on the slightest arrand now to the Antypodes that you can devise to send me
on: I will fetch you a tooth-picker now from the furthest inch of Asia: bring
you the length of Prester John's foot: fetch you a hair off the great Chams
beard: do you any embassage to the Pigmies, rather than hold three words
conference, with this harpy, you have no employment for me?


Pedro None, but to desire your good company.


Benedicke O God sir, heeres a dish I love not, I cannot endure my Lady Tongue.

exit.
Pedro Come Lady, come, you have lost the heart of signior Benedicke.


Beatrice Indeed my Lord, he lent it me awhile, and I gave him use for it, a
double heart for his single one, mary once before he won it of me, with false
dice, therefore your grace may well say I have lost it.


Pedro You have put him down Lady, you have put him down.


Beatrice So I would not he should do me, my Lord, lest I should prove the
mother of fools: I have brought Count Claudio, whom you sent me to seek.


Pedro Why how now Count, wherefore are you sad?


Claudio Not sad my Lord.


Pedro How then? sick?


Claudio Neither, my Lord.


Beatrice The Count is neither sad, nor sick, nor merry, nor well: but civil
Count, civil as an orange, and something of that jealous complexion.


Pedro I faith Lady, I think your blazon to be true, though i will be sworn, if
he be so* his conceit is false: here Claudio, I have wooed in thy name, and
fair Hero is won, I have broke with her father, and his good will obtained,
name the day of marriage, and God give thee joy.


Leonato Count take of me my daughter, and with her my fortunes: his grace
has made the match, and all grace say Amen to it.


Beatrice Speak Count, it is your Qu.


Claudio Silence is the perfectest Herault of joy, I were but little happy if I
could say, how much? Lady, as you are mine, I am yours, I give away my self
for you, and doat upon the exchange.


Beat. Speak cousin, or (if you cannot) stop his mouth with a kiss, and let
not him speak neither.


Pedro Infaith lady you have a merry heart.


Beatr. Yea my lord I thank it, poor fool it keeps on the windy side of
Care, my coosin tells him in his ear that he is in her heart


Clau. And so she does coosin.


Beat. Good Lord for aliance: thus goes every one to the world but I, and I am
sunburned, I may sit in a corner and cry, heigh ho for a husband.


Pedro Lady Beatrice, I will get you one.


Beat. I would rather have one of your fathers getting: has your grace ne re a
brother like you? your father got excellent husbands if a maid could come by
them.


Prince Will you have me? lady.


Beatr. No my lord, unless I might have another for working-daies, your grace is
too costly to wear every day: but I beseech your grace pardon me, I was born
to speak all mirth, and no matter.


Prince Your silence most offends me, and to be merry, best becomes you, for
out a question, you were borne in a merry hour.


Beatr. No sure my lord, my mother cried, but then there was a star daunst,
and under that was I borne, cosins God give you joy.


Leonato Niece, will you look to those things I told you of?


Beat I cry you mercy uncle, by your graces pardon.

exit Beatrice.
Prince By my troth a pleasant spirited lady.


Leon. There Is little of the melancholy element in her my lord, she is never
sad, but when she sleeps, and not ever sad then: for I have heard my daughter
say, she has often dreampt of unhappiness, and wakt her self with laughing.


Pedro She cannot endure to hear tell of a husband.


Leonato O by no means, she mockes al her wooers out of suit.


Prince She were an excellent wife for Benedick.


Leonato O Lord, my lord, if they were but a week married, they would talk
themselves mad.


Prince County Claudio, when mean you to go to church?


Clau. To morrow my lord, Time goes on crutches, til Love have all his rites.


Leonato Not til monday, my dear son, which is hence a just seuennight, and
a time too brief too, to have al things answer my mind.


Prince Come* you shake the head at so long a breathing, but I warrant thee
Claudio, the time shall not go dully by us, I will in the interim, undertake one
of Hercules labors, which is, to bring Signior Benedick and the lady Beatrice
into a mountain of affection, the one with the other, I would feign have it a
match, and I doubt not but to fashion it, if you three will but minister such
assistance as I shall give you direction.


Leonato My lord, I am for you, though it cost me ten nights watchings.


Claud. And I my Lord.


Prince And you too gentle Hero?


Hero I will do any modest office, my lord, to help my cousin to a good husband.


Prince And Benedicke is not the vnhopefullest husband that I know: thus far
can I praise him, he is of a noble strain, of approved valor, and confirmde
honesty, I will teach you how to humor your cousin, that she shall fall in love
with Benedicke, and I, with your two helps, will so practice on Benedicke, that
in dispight of his quick wit, and his queasie stomach, he shall fall in love
with Beatrice: if we can do this, Cupid is no longer an Archer, his glory shall
be ours, for we are the only loue-gods, go in with me, and I will tell you
my drift.

exit. Enter John and Borachio.
John It is so, the Count Claudio shall marry the daughter of Leonato.


Bora. Yea my lord, but I can cross it.


John Any bar, any cross, any impediment, will be medcinable to me, I am
sick in displeasure to him, and whatsoever comes athwart his affection, ranges
euenly with mine, how can thou cross this marriage?


Bor. Not honestly my lord, but so covertly, that no dishonesty shall appear
in me.


John Show me briefly how.


Bor. I think I told your lordship a year since, how much I am in the favor
of Margaret, the waiting gentlewoman to Hero.


John I remember.


Bor. I can at any unseasonable instant of the night, appoint her to look out
at her ladies chamber window.


John What life is in that to be the death of this marriage?


Bor. The poison of that lies in you to temper, go you to the prince your
brother, spare not to tell him, that he has wronged his honor in marrying the
renowned Claudio, whose estimation do you mightily hold up, to a contaminated
stale, such a one as Hero.


John What proof shall I make of that?


Bor. Proof enough, to misuse the prince, to vex Claudio, to undo Hero, and
kill Leonato, look you for any other issue?


John Only to dispight them I will endeavor any thing.


Bor. Go then, find me a meet hour, to draw don Pedro and the Count Claudio
alone, tell them that you know that Hero loves me, intend a kind of zeal both
to the prince and Claudio (as in love of your brothers honor who has made this
match) and his friends reputation, who is thus like to be cosen'd with the
semblance of a maid, that you have discover d thus: they will scarcely believe
this without trial: offer them instances which shall bear no less
likelihood, than to see me at her chamber window, hear me call Margaret Hero,
hear Marg term me Claudio, and bring them to see this the very night before
the intended wedding, for in the mean time, I will so fashion the matter, that
Hero shall be absent and there shall appear such seeming truth of Heroes
disloyalty, that jealousy shall be called assurance and all the preparation
overthrown.


John Grow this to what adverse issue it can, I will put it in practice: be
cunning in the working this, and thy fee is a thousand ducates.


Bor. Be you constant in the accusation, and my cunning shall not shame me.


John I will presently go learn their day of marriage.

exit Enter Benedicke alone.
Been. Boy.


Boy Signior.


Been. In my chamber window lies a book, bring it hither to me in the orchard.


Boy. I am here already sir.

exit.
Been. I know that, but I would have thee hence and here again. I do much
wonder, that one man seeing how much an other man is a fool, when he dedicates
his behauiours to love, will after he has laughed at such shallow follies in
others, become the argument of his own scorn, by falling in love, and such a
man is Claudio, I have ^nowne when there was no music with him but the drum
and the fife, and now had he rather hear the taber and the pipe: I have known
when he would have walked ten mile a foot, to see a good armor, and now will he
lie ten nights awake caruing the fashion of a new dublet: he was wont to
speak plain, and to the purpose (like an honest man and a soldier) and now
is he turned ortography, his words are a very fantastical banquet, just so many
strange dishes: may I be so converted and see with these eyes? I cannot tell, I
think not: I will not be sworn but love may transform me to an oyster, but
i will take my oath on it, till he have made and oyster of me, he shall never make
me such a fool: one woman is fair, yet I am well, an other is wise, yet I am
well: an other virtuous, yet I am well: but till all graces be in one woman, one
woman shall not com in my grace: rich she shall be that's certain, wise, or i will
none, virtuous, or i will never cheapen her: fair, or i will never look on her,
mild, or come not near me, noble, or not I for an angel, of good discourse,
an excellent musician, and her hair shall be of what color it please God hah^
the prince and monsieur Love, I will hide me in the arbor.

Enter prince, Leonato, Claudio, Music.
Prince Come shall we hear this music?


Claud. Yea my good lord: how still the evening is,
As hushed on purpose to grace harmony!

Prince See you where Benedicke has hid himself?


Claud. O very well my lord: the music ended,
We Will fit the kid-foxe with a penny worth.
Enter Balthaser with music.
Prince Come Balthaser, we will hear that song again.


Balth. O good my lord, tax not so bad a voice,
To slander music any more then once.

Prince It is the witness still of excellency,
To put a strange face on his own perfection,
I pray thee sing, and let me woo no more.

Balth. Because you talk of wooing I will sing,
Since many a wooer does commence his suit,
To her he thinks not worthy, yet he wooes,
Yet will he swear he loves.

Prince Nay pray thee come,
Or if thou will hold longer argument,
Do it in notes.

Balth. Note this before my notes,
There Is not a note of mine that's worth the noting.

Prince Why these are very crotchets that he speaks,
Note notes forsooth and nothing.

Been. Now divine air, now is his soul ravished, is it not strange that
sheep guts should hale souls out of men's bodies? well a horn for my money
when alls done.

The Song.
Sigh no more ladies, sigh no more,
Men were deceivers ever,
One foot in sea, and one on shore,
To one thing constant never,
Then sigh not so, but let them go,
And be you blithe and bonnie,
C^^^^^^ng all your soundes of woe,
(...) hey nony nony.
Sing no more ditties sing no more,
O^ ^^^p^ so (...) and heavy,
The fraud of men was ever so,
S^^ce (...) first was leauy,
Then s^g^ not so, etc.

Prince By my tr^th a good song.


B^^^^. And (...) (...) singer my lord.


Prince Ha (...) (...) (...), thou singst well enough for a shift.


Ben. And (...) (...) bin a dog that should have howld thus, they w^u^^ ^ave
hanged him, and I pray God his bad voice (...) ^o m^scheefe, I had as live have
heard the night-rauen, come wh^^ plague could have come after it.


Prince Yea mary, do thou hear Balthazar? I pray thee get (...) some
excellent music: for to morrow night we would have it at the lady Heroes
chamber window.


Bal^^. The best I can my lord.

Exit Balthazar.
Prince Do so, farewell. Come hither Leonato, what was it y^u t^^d me of to
day, that your niece Beatrice was in love with s^^nior Benedicke?


C^^ O I, stalk on, stalk on, the foul sits. I did never think that lady
would have loved any man.


L^^ No nor I neither, but most wonderful, that she should so dote on signior
Benedicke, whom she has in all outward be^^^^^rs seemd ever to abhor.


B^^e. Is It possible? sits the wind in that corner?


Leo. By my troth my Lord, I cannot tell what to think of it but that she
loves him with an enraged affection, it is past the (...) of thought.


Prince May be she does but counterfeit.


Claud. Faith like enough.


Leon. O God* counterfeit? there was never counterfeit of passion, came so
near the life of passion as she discouers it.


Prince Why what effects of passion shows she?


Claud. Bait the hook well, this fish will bite.


Leon. What effects my Lord? she will sit you, you heard my daughter tell you
how.


Claud. She did indeed.


Prince How how I pray you! you amaze me, I would have thought her spirit had
been invincible against all assaults of affection.


Leo. I would have sworn it had, my lord, especially against Benedicke.


Been. I should think this a gull, but that the white bearded fellow speaks
it: knavery cannot sure hide himself in such reverence.


Claud. He has taken the infection, hold it up.


Prince Has she made her affection known to Benedicke?


Leonato No, and swears she never will, that's her torment.


Claudio It Is true indeed, so your daughter says: shall I, says she, that have
so often encountered him with scorn, write to him that I love him?


Leo. This says she now when she is beginning to write to him, for she will be up
twenty times a night, and there will she sit in her smock til she have writ a
sheet of paper: my daughter tells us all.


Clau. Now you talk of a sheet of paper, I remember a pretty jest your daughter
told of us.


Leonato O when she had writ it, and was reading it over, she found Benedicke
and Beatrice between the sheet.


Claudio That.


Leon. O she tore the letter into a thousand halfpence, raild at her self, that
she should be so immodest to write, to one that she knew would flout her, I
measure him, says she, by my own spirit, for I should flout him, if he writ to
me, yea though I love him I should.


Clau. Then down upon her knees she falls, weeps, sobs, beats her heart,
tears her hair, prays, curses, O sweet Benedicke, God give me patience.


Leonato She does indeed, my daughter says so, and the ecstasy has so much
ouerborne her, that my daughter is sometime afeard she will do a desperate
outrage to her self, it is very true.


Prince It were good that Benedicke knew of it by some other, if she will not
discover it.


Claudio To what end: he would make but a sport of it, and torment the poor
Lady worse.


Prince And he should, it were an alms to hang him she is an excellent sweet
lady, and (out of all suspicion,) she is virtuous.


Claudio And she is exceeding wise.


Prince In every thing but in loving Benedicke.


Leonato O my Lord, wisdom and blood combating in so tender a body, we have
ten proofs to one, that blood has the victory, I am sorry for her, as I have
just cause, being her uncle, and her guardian.


Prince I would she had bestowed this dotage on me, I would have daft all
other respects, and made her half my self: I pray you tell Benedicke of it,
and hear what a will say.


Leonato Were it good think you?


Claudio Hero thinks surely she will die, for she says she will die, if he
love her not, and she will die ere she make her love known, and she will die
if he woo her rather than she will bate one breath of her accustomed
crosnes^e.


Prince She does well, if she should make tender of her love, it is very
possible heel scorn it, for the man (as you know all) has a contempt^ble
spirit.


Claudio He is a very proper man.


Prince He has indeed a good outward happiness.


Claudio Before God, and in my mind, very wise.


Prince He does indeed show some sparks that are like wit.


Claudio And I take him to be valiant.


Prince As Hector, I assure you, and in the mannaging of quarrels you may say
he is wise, for either he auoydes them with great discretion, or undertakes
them with a most christianlike fear.


Leonato If he do fear God, a must necessarily keep peace, if he break the
peace, he ought to enter into a quarrel with fear and trembling.


Prince And so will he do, for the man does fear God, howsoever it seems
not in him, by some large iestes he will make: well I am sorry for your niece,
shall we go seek Benedicke, and tell him of her love?


Claudio Never tell him, my Lord, let her wear it out with good counsel.


Leonato Nay that's impossible, she may wear her heart out first.


Prince Well, we will hear further of it by your daughter, let it cool the
while, I love Benedicke well* and I could wish he would modestly examine
himself, to see how much he is unworthy so good a lady.


Leonato My lord, will you walk? dinner is ready.


Claudio If he do not doat on her upon this, I will never trust my expectation


Prince Let there be the same net spread for her, and that must your daughter
and her gentlewomen carry: the sport will be, when they hold one an opinion
of an others dotage, and no such matter, that's the scene that I would see,
which will be merely a dumb show: let us send her to call him in to dinner.


Benedicke This can be no trick, the conference was s^dly borne* they have the
truth of this from Hero, they seem to pity the Lady: it seems her
affections have their full bent: love me? why it must be requited: I hear how
I am censurde, they say I will bear my self prowdly, if I perceive the love
come from her: they say too that she will rather die than give any sign of
affection: I did never think to marry, I must not seem proud, happy are they
that hear their detractions, and can put them to mending: they say the Lady is
fair, us a truth, I can bear them witness: and virtuous, us so, I cannot
reprove it, and wise, but for loving me, by my troth it is no addition to her
wit, nor no great argument of her folly, for I will be horribly in love with
her, I may chance have some odd quirkes and remnants of wit broken on me,
because I have railed so long against marriage: but does not the appetite
alter? a man loves the meat in his youth, that he cannot endure in his age.
Shall quippes and sentences, and these paper bullets of the brain awe a man
from the carreere of his humor? No, the world must be peopled. When I said I
would die a batcheller, I did not think I should live til I were married, here
comes Beatrice: by this day, she is a fair lady, I do spy some marks of love
in her.

Enter Beatrice.
Beatr. Aganst my will I am sent to bid you come in to dinner.


Been. Fair Beatrice, I thank you for your pains.


Beat. I took no more pains for those thanks, then you take pains to thank
me, if it had bin painful I would not have come.


Been. You take pleasure then in the message.


Beat. Yea just so much as you may take upon a knives point, and choke a daw
withal: you have no stomach signior, fare you well.

exit.
Been. Ha, against my will I am sent to bid you come in to dinner: there is a
double meaning in that: I took no more pains for those thanks the^ you took
pains to thank me, that's as much as to say, any pains that I take for you is as
easy as thanks: if I do not take pity of her I am a villain, if I do not love
her I am a Jew, I will go get her picture,

exit. Enter Hero and two Gentlewomen, Margaret, and Ursley.
Hero Good Margaret run thee to the parlour,
There shall thou find my cousin Beatrice,
Proposing with the prince and Claudio,
Whisper her ear and tell her I and Vrsley,
Walk in the orchard, and our whole discourse
Is all of her, say that thou ouer-heardst us,
And bid her steal into the pleached bowere
Where hony-suckles ripened by the sun,
Forbid the sun to enter: like favorites,
Made proud by princes, that advance their pride,
Against that power that bred it, there will she hide her,
To listen our propose, this is thy office,
Bear thee well in it, and leave us alone.

Marg. I Will make her come I warrant you presently.

Hero Now Vrsula, when Beatrice does come,
As we do trace this alley up and down,
Our talk must only be of Benedicke,
When I do name him let it be thy part,
To praise him more than ever man did merit*
My talk to thee must be how Benedicke,
Is sick in love with Beatrice: of this matter,
Is little Cupids crafty arrow made,
That only wounds by hearsay: now begin,
For look where Beatrice like a Lapwing runs
Close by the ground, to hear our conference.
Enter Beatrice.
Ursula The pleasantst angling is to see the fish
Cut with her golden ores the silver stream,
And greedily devour the treacherous bait:
So angle we for Beatrice, who even now,
Is couched in the wood-bine couerture,
Fear you not my part of the dialogue.

Hero Then go we near her that her ear loose nothing,
Of the false sweet bait that we lay for it:
No truly Vrsula, she is too disdainful,
I know her spirits are as coy and wild,
As haggerds of the rock.

Ursula But are you sure,
That Benedicke loves Beatrice so entirely?

Hero So says the prince, and my new trothed Lord.

Ursula And did they bid you tell her of it, madame?

Hero They did entreat me to acquaint her of it,
But I persuaded them, if they lou'de Benedicke,
To wish him wrestle with affection,
And never to let Beatrice know of it.

Vrsula Why did you so, does not the gentleman
Deserve as full as fortunate a bed,
As ever Beatrice shall couch upon?

Hero O God of love! I know he does deserve,
As much as may be yielded to a man:
But nature never framde a woman's heart,
Of prowder stuff then that of Beatrice:
Disdain and Scorn ride sparkling in her eyes,
Misprising what they look on, and her wit
Valewes it self so highly, that to her
All matter else seems weak: she cannot love,
Nor take no shape nor project of affection,
She is so self indeared.

Vrsula Sure I think so,
And therefore certainly it were not good,
She knew his love lest she will make sport at it.

Hero Why you speak truth, I never yet saw man,
How wise, how noble, young, how rarely featured.
But she would spel him backward: if fair faced,
She would swear the gentleman should be her sister:
If black, why Nature drawing of an antique,
Made a foul blot: if tall, a lance ill headed:
If low, an agot very vildly cut:
If speaking why a vane blown with all winds:
If silent, why a block moved with none:
So turns she every man the wrong side out,
And never gives to Truth and Virtue, that
Which simpleness and merit purchases.

Vrsula Sure, sure, such carping is not commendable.

Hero No not to be so odd, and from all fashions,
As Beatrice is, cannot be commendable,
But who dare tell her so? if I should speak,
She would mock me into air, O she would laugh me
Out of my self press me to death with wit,
Therefore let Benedicke like couerd fire,
Consume away in sighs, waste inwardly:
It were a better death, then die with mockes,
Which is as bad as die with tickling.

Vrsula Yet tell her of it, hear what she will say.

Hero No rather I will go to Benedicke,
And counsel him to fight against his passion,
And truly i will devise some honest slanders,
To stain my cousin with, one does not know,
How much an ill word may impoison liking.

Vrsula O do not do your cousin such a wrong,
She cannot be so much without true judgment,
Having so swift and excellent a wit,
As she is prisde to have* as to refuse
So rare a gentleman as signior Benedicke.

Hero He is the only man of Italy,
Always excepted my dear Claudio.

Vrsula I pray you be not angry with me, madame,
Speaking my fancy: signior Benedicke,
For shape, for bearing argument and valor,
Goes foremost in report through Italy.

Hero Indeed he has an excellent good name.

Vrsula His excellence did earne it, ere he had it:
When are you married madame?

Hero Why every day to morrow, come go in,
I Will show thee some attyres, and have thy counsel,
Which is the best to furnish me to morrow.

Vrsula She Is limed I warrant you,
We have caught her madame.

Hero If it prove so, then loving goes by haps,
Some Cupid kills with arrows some with traps.

Beat. What fire is in mine ears? can this be true?
Stand I condemned for pride and scorn so much?
Contempt, farewell, and maiden pride, adieu,
No glory lives behind the back of such.
And Benedicke, love on I will requite thee,
Taming my wild heart to thy loving hand:
If thou do love, my kindness shall incite thee
To bind our loves up in a holy band.
For others say thou do deserve, and I
Believe it better then reportingly.
exit. Enter Prince, Claudio, Benedicke, and Leonato.
Prince I do but stay til your marriage be consummate, and then go I toward
Arragon.


Claud. I Will bring you thither my lord, if you will vouchsafe me.


Prince Nay that would be as great a soil in the new gloss of your marriage,
as to show a child his new coat and forbid him to wear it, I will only be bold
with Benedick for his company, for from the crown of his head, to the sole of
his foot, he is al mirth, he has twice or thrice cut Cupides bow-string, and
the little hangman dare not shoot at him, he has a heart as sound as a bell,
and his tongue is the clapper, for what his heart thinks, his tongue speaks.


Been. Gallants, I am not as I have bin.


Leo. So say I, me thinks you are sadder.


Clau. I hope he be in love.


Prince Hang him truant, there is no true drop of blood in him to be truly touched
with love, if he be sad, he wantes money.


Been. I have the toothache.


Prince Draw it.


Been. Hang it.


Clau. You must hang it first, and draw it afterward.


Prince What? sigh for the toothache.


Leon. Where is but a humor or a worm.


Been. Well, every one cannot master a grief, but he that has it.


Clau. Yet say I, he is in love.


Prince There is no appeerance of fancy in him, unless it be a fancy that he
has to strange disguises, as to be a Dutchman to day, a Frenchman to morrow,
or in the shape of two countries at once, as a German from the waste
downward, all slops, and a Spaniard from the hip upward, no dublet: unless he
have a fancy to this foolery, as it appears he has, he is no fool for
fancy, as you would have it appear he is.


Clau. If he be not in love with some woman, there is no believing old signs,
a brushes his hat a mornings, what should that bode?


Prince Has any man seen him at the Barbers?


Clau. No, but the barbers man has bin seen with him, and the old ornament
of his cheek has already stufft tennis balls.


Leon. Indeed he looks younger than he did, by the loss of a beard.


Prince Nay a rubs himself with ciuit, can you smell him out by that?


Claud. That's as much as to say, the sweet youthe's in love.


Been. The greatest note of it is his melancholy.


Claud. And when was he wont to wash his face?


Prince Yea or to paint himself? for the which I hear what they say of him.


Claud. Nay but his jesting spirit, which is now crept into a lute-string, and
now gouernd by stops.


Prince Indeed that tells a heavy tale for him: conclude, conclude he is in
love.


Claud. Nay but I know who loves him.


Prince That would I know too, I warrant one that knows him not.


Claud. Yes, and his ill conditions, and in dispight of al, dies for him.


Prince She shall be buried with her face upwards.


Been. Yet is this no charm for the tooth-ake, old signior, walk aside with
me, I have studied eight or nine wise words to speak to you, which these
hobby-horses must not hear.


Prince For my life to break with him about Beatrice.


Claud. It Is even so, Hero and Margaret have by this played their parts with
Beatrice, and then the two bears will not bite one another when they meet.

Enter John the Bastard.
Bastard My lord and brother, God save you.


Prince Good den brother.


Bastard If your leisure served, I would speak with you.


Prince In private?


Bastard If it please you, yet Count Claudio may hear, for what I would speak
of, concerns him.


Prince What Is the matter?


Bast. Means your Lordship to be married to morrow?


Prince You know he does.


Bast. I know not that when he knows what I know.


Claud. If there be any impediment, I pray you discover it.


Bast. You may think I love you not, let that appear hereafter, and aim
better at me by that I now will manifest, for my brother (I think, he holds
you well, and in dearness of heart) has help to effect your ensuing
marriage: surely suit ill spent, and labor ill bestowed.


Prince Why what is the matter?


Bast. I came hither to tell you, and circumstances shortened, (for she has bin
too long a talking of) the lady is disloyal.


Clau. Who Hero?


Bastar. Even she, Leonatoes Hero, your Hero, every man's Hero.


Clau. Disloyal?


Bast. The word is too good to paint out her wickedness, I could say* she were
worse, think you of a worse title, and I will fit her to it: wonder not till
further warrant: go but with me to night you shall see her chamber window
entered, even the night before her wedding day, if you love her, then to morrow
wed her: But it would better fit your honor to change your mind.


Claud. May this be so?


Prince I will not think it.


Bast. If you dare not trust that you see, confess not that you know: if you
will follow me, I will show you enough, and when you have seen more, and
heard more, proceed accordingly.


Claudio If I see any thing to night, why I should not marry her to morrow in
the congregation, where I should wed, there will I shame her.


Prince And as I wooed for thee to obtain her, I will join with thee, to
disgrace her.


Bastard I will disparage her no farther, till you are my witnesses, bear it
coldely but till midnight, and let the issue show it self.


Prince O day untowardly turned!


Claud. O mischief strangely thwarting!


Bastard O plague right well prevented! so will you say, when you have seen
the sequel.

Enter Dogbery and his compartner with the Watch.
Dog. Are you good men and true?


Uerges Yea, or else it were pity but they should suffer salvation body and
soul.


Dog. Nay, that were a punishment too good for them, if they should have any
allegiance in them, being chosen for the Princes watch.


Uerges Well, give them their charge, neighbor Dogbery.


Dogbery First, who think you the most desartlesse man to be Constable?


Watch I Hugh Ote-cake sir, or George Sea-cole, for they can write and read.


Dogbery Come hither neighbor Sea-cole, God has blessed you with a good name: to
be a welfauoured man, is the gift of Fortune, but to write and read, comes by
nature.


Watch 2 Both which master Constable.


Dogbery You have: I knew it would be your answer: well, for your favor sir,
why give God thanks, and make no boast of it, and for your writing and reading,
let that appear when there is no need of such vanity, you are thought here
to be the most senseless and fit man for the Constable of the watch: therefore
bear you the lantern: this is your charge, You shall comprehend all vagrom
men; you are to bid any man stand, in the Princes name.


Watch 2 How if a will not stand?


Dogbery Why then take no note of him, but let him go, and presently call the
rest of the watch together, and thank god you are rid of a knave.


Verges If he will not stand when he is bidden, he is none of the Princes
subjects.


Dogbery True, and they are to meddle with none but the Princes subjects: you
shall also make no noise in the streets: for, for the watch to babble and to
talk, is most tolerable, and not to be endured.


Watch We will rather sleep than talk, we know what belongs to a watch.


Dogbery Why you speak like an ancient and most quiet watchman, for I cannot
see how sleeping should offend: only have a care that your bills be not
stolen: well, you are to call at all the alehouses, and bid those that are drunk
get them to bed.


Watch How if they will not?


Dogbery Why then let them alone til they are sober, if they make you not then
the better answer, you may say, they are not the men you took them for.


Watch Well sir.


Dogbery If you meet a thief, you may suspect him, by virtue of your office,
to be no true man: and for such kind of men, the less you meddle or make with
them, why the more is for your honesty.


Watch If we know him to be a thief, shall we not lay hands on him?


Dogbery Truly by your office you may, but I think they that touch pitch will
be defilde: the most peaceable way for you, if you do take a thief, is, to
let him show himself what he is, and steal out of your company.


Uerges You have been always called a merciful manne, partner.


Dog. Truly I would not hang a dog by my will, much more a man who has any
honesty in him.


Verges If you hear a child cry in the night you must call to the nurse and
bid her still it.


Watch How if the nurse be asleep and will not hear us.


Dog. Why then depart in peace, and let the child wake her with crying, for the
ewe that will not hear her lamb when it baes, will never answer a calfe when
he bleates.


Verges It Is very true.


Dog. This is the end of the charge: you constable are to present the princes
own person, if you meet the prince in the night, you may stay him.


Verges. Nay birlady that I think a cannot.


Dog. Five shillings to one on twith any man that knows the statutes, he may
stay him, mary not without the prince be willing, for indeed the watch ought to
offend no man, and it is an offense to stay a man against his will.


Uerges Birlady I think it be so.


Dog. Ha ah ha, well masters good night, and there be any matter of weight
chances, call up me, keep your fellows counsels, and your own, and good
night, come neighbor.


Watch Well masters, we hear our charge, let us go sit here upon the
church bench till two, and then all to bed.


Dog. One word more, honest neighbors, I pray you watch about signior Leonatoes
door, for the wedding being there to morrow, there is a great coil to night,
a diew, be vigitant I beseech you.

exeunt. Enter Borachio and Conrade.
Bor. What Conrade?


Watch Peace, stir not.


Bor. Conrade I say.


Con. Here man, I am at thy elbow.


Bor. Mas and my elbow itcht, I thought there would a scabbe follow.


Con. I will owe thee an answer for that, and now forward with thy tale.


Bor. Stand thee close then under this penthouse, for it drissells rain, and I
will, like a true drunckard, utter all to thee.


Watch Some treason masters, yet stand close.


Bor. Therefore know, I have earned of Dun John a thousand ducates.


Con. Is it possible that any villainy should be so dear?


Bor. Thou should rather ask if it were possible any villainy should be so
rich? for when rich villains have need of poor ones poor ones may make what
price they will.


Con. I wonder at it.


Bor. That shows thou art vnconfirm'd, thou know that the fashion of a
dublet, or a hat, or a cloak, is nothing to a man.


Con. Yes it is apparel.


Bor. I mean the fashion.


Con. Yes the fashion is the fashion.


Bor. Tush, I may as well say the foole's the fool, but see thou not what a
deformed thief this fashion is?


Watch I know that deformed, a has bin a vile thief, this vij. year a goes up
and down like a gentle man: I remember his name.


Bor. Did thou not hear some body?


Con. No, it was the vane on the house.


Bor. See thou not (I say what a deformed thief this fashion is, how giddily
a turns about all the Hot-blouds, between fourteen and five and thirty,
sometimes fashioning them like Phataoes soldiers in the rechie painting,
sometime like god Bells priests in the old church window, sometime like the
shaven Hercules in the smircht worm-eaten tapestry, where his cod piece seems
as massy as his club.


Con. All this I see, and I see that the fashion wears out more apparel then
the man, but art not thou thy self giddy with the fashion too that thou have
shifted out of thy tale into telling me of the fashion?


Bor. Not so neither, but know that I have to night wooed Margaret the Lady
Heroes gentlewoman, by the name of Hero, she leanes me out at her mistress
chamber window, bids me a thousand times good night: I tell this tale vildly I
should first tell thee how the prince Claudio and my master planted* and placed,
and possessed, by my master Don John, saw a far off in the orchard this
amiable encounter.


Conr. And thought they Margaret was Hero?


Bar. Two of them did, the prince and Claudio, but the devil my master knew she
was Margaret, and partly by his oths, which first possessed them, partly by the
dark night which did deceive them, but chiefly, by my villainy, which did
confirm any slander that Don John had made, away went Claudio enragde, swore
he would meet her as he was appointed next morning at the Temple, and there,
before the whole congregation shame her, with what he saw o re night, and send
her home again without a husband.


Watch 1 We charge you in the prince name stand.


Watch 2 Call up the right master Constable, we have here recouerd the most
dangerous piece of lechery, that ever was known in the common wealth.


Watch 1 And one Deformed is one of them, I know him, a wears a lock.


Conr Masters, masters.


Watch 2 You Will be made bring deformed forth I warrant you.


Conr Masters, never speak, we charge you, let us obey you to go with us.


Bor. We are like to prove a goodly commodity, being taken up of these men's
bills.


Conr. A commodity in question I warrant you, come we will obey you.

exeunt. Enter Hero, and Margaret, and Vrsula.
Hero Good Vrsula wake my cousin Beatrice, and desire her to rise.


Ursula I will lady.


Hero And bid her come hither.


Ursula Well.


Marg. Troth I think your other rebato were better.


Hero No pray thee good Meg, i will wear this.


Marg. By my troth's not so good, and I warrant your cousin will say so.


Hero My cosin's a fool, and thou art another, i will wear none but this.


Mar I like the new tire within excelently, if the hair were a thought
browner: and your gown's a most rare fashion in faith, I saw the Duchess of
Millaines gown that they praise so.


Hero O that exceedes they say.


Marg. By my troth's but a nightgown it respect of yours, cloth a gold and
cuts, and lac d with silver, set with pearls, down sleeves, side sleeves, and
skirts, round vnderborne with a bluish unsell, but for a fine queint graceful
and excelent fashion, yours is worth ten on it.


Hero God give me joy to wear it, for my heart is exceeding heavy.


Marg. It Will be heavier soon by the weight of a man.


Hero Fie upon thee, art not ashamed?


Marg. Of what lady? of speaking honorably? is not marriage honorable in a
beggar? is not your Lord honorable without marriage? I think you would have me
say, saving your reverence a husband: and bad thinking do not wrest true
speaking, i will offend no body, is there any harm in the heavier, for a husband?
none I think, and it be the right husband, and the right wife, otherwise it is
light and not heavy, ask my lady Beatrice else, here she comes.

Enter Beatrice.
Hero Good morrow coze.


Beat. Good morrow sweet Hero.


Hero Why how now? do you speak in the sick tune?


Beat. I am out of all other tune, me thinks.


Mar Clap's into Light a love, (that goes without a burden,) do you sing it,
and i will dance it.


Beat. Ye Light alone with your heels, then if your husband have stables enough
you will see he shall lack no barnes.


Mar. O illegitimate construction! I scorn that with my heels.


Beat. It Is almost five a clock cousin, it is time you were ready, by my troth I
am exceeding ill, hey ho.


Mar. For a hawk, a horse, or a husband?


Beat. For the letter that begins them al, H.


Mar. Well, and you be not turnde Turk, there is no more sailing by the star.


Beat. What means the fool trow?


Mar. Nothing I, but God send every one their hearts desire.


Hero These gloves the Count sent me, they are an excellent perfume.


Beat. I am stuffed cousin, I cannot smell.


Mar. A maid and stuffed! there is goodly catching of cold.


Beat. O God help me, God help me, how long have you professed apprehension?


Mar. Ever since you left it, does not my wit become me rarely?


Beat. It is not seen enough, you should wear it in your cap, by my troth I
am sick.


Mar. Get you some of this distilled carduus benedictus, and lay it to your
heart, it is the only thing for a qualme.


Hero There thou prickst her with a thissel.


Beat. Benedictus, why benedictus? you have some moral in this benedictus.


Mar. Moral? no by my troth I have no moral meaning, I meant plain holy
thissel, you may think perchance that I think you are in love, nay birlady I
am not such a fool to think what I list nor I list not to think what I can,
nor indeed I can not think, if I would think my heart out of thinking, that
you are in love, or that you will be in love, or that you can be in love: yet
Benedicke was such another and now is he become a man, he swore he would never
marry, and yet now in dispight of his heart he eats his meat without
grudging, and how you may be converted I know not, but me thinks you look
with your eyes as other women do.


Beat. What pace is this that thy tongue keeps?


Marg. Not a false gallop.

Enter Vrsula.
Ursula Madame withdraw, the prince, the Count, signior Benedicke, Don John,
and all the gallants of the town are come to fetch you to church.


Hero Help to dress me good coze, good Meg, good Vrsula.

Enter Leonato, and the Constable, and the Headborough.
Leonato What would you with me, honest neighbor?


Constable and Dog. Mary sir I would have some confidence with you, that decernes
you nearely.


Leonato Brief I pray you, for you see it is a busy time with me.


Constable and Dog. Mary this it is sir.


Headb. Yes in truth it is sir.


Leonato What is it my good friends?


Con and Do. Goodman Verges sir speaks a little of the matter, an old man sir,
and his wits are not so blunt, as God help I would desire they were, but
infaith honest, as the skin between his brows.


Head. Yes I thank God, I am as honest as any man living, that is an old man,
and no honester then I.


Constable and Dog. Comparisons are odorous, palabras, neighbor Verges.


Leonato Neighbors, you are tedious.


Constable and Dog. It pleases your worship to say so, but we are the poor Dukes
officers, but truly for mine own part, if I were as tedious as a King I could
find in my heart to bestow it all of your worship.


Leonato Al thy tediousness on me, ah?


Constable and Dog. Yea, and't twere a thousand pound more than it is, for I hear as
good exclamation on your worship as of any man in the city, and though I be
but a poor man, I am glad to hear it.


Head. And so am I.


Leonato I would feign know what you have to say.


Head. Mary sir our watch to night, excepting your worships presence, ha taken a
couple of as arrant knaves as any in Messina.


Constable and Dog. A good old man sir, he will be talking as they say, when the
age is in, the wit is out, God help us, it is a world to see: well said in faith
neighbor Verges, well, God's a good man, and two men ride of a horse, one must
ride behind, an honest soul in faith sir, by my troth he is, as ever broke
bread, but God is to be worshipped, all men are not alike, alas good neighbor.


Leonato Indeed neighbor he comes too short of you.


Constable and Do. Gifts that God gives.


Leonato I must leave you.


Constable and Dog. One word sir, our watch sir have indeed comprehended two
aspitious persons, and we would have them this morning examined before your
worship.


Leonato Take their examination your self and bring it me, I am now in great
haste, as it may appear unto you.


Constable It shall be suffigance.

(exit
Leonato Drink some wine ere you go: fare you well.


Messenger My lord, they stay for you, to give your daughter to her husband.


Leon. I Will wait upon them, I am ready.


Dogb. Go good partner* go get you to Francis Sea-cole, bid him bring his
pen and inckehorne to the Jail: we are now to examination these men.


Verges And we must do it wisely.


Dogbery We will spare for no wit I warrant you: heeres that shall drive some
of them to a noncome, only get the learned writer to set down our
excommunication, and meet me at the Iaile.

Enter Prince, Bastard, Leonato, Friar, Claudio, Benedicke, Hero, and Beatrice.
Leonato Come Friar Francis, be brief, only to the plain form of marriage,
and you shall recount their particular duties afterward.


Fran. You come hither, my lord, to marry this lady.


Claudio No.


Leo To be married to her: Friar, you come to marry her.


Friar Lady, you come hither to be married to this count.


Hero I do.


Friar If either of you know any inward impediment why you should not be
conjoined, I charge you on your souls to utter it.


Claudio Know you any, Hero?


Hero None my lord.


Friar Know you any, Count?


Leonato I dare make his answer, None.


Clau. O what men dare do! what men may do! what men daily do, not knowing what
they do!


Been. How now! interiections? why then, some be of laughing, as, ah, ha, he.


Claudio Stand thee by Friar, father* by your leave,
Will you with free and unconstrained soul
Give me this maid your daughter?

Leonata As freely son as God did give her me.


Claudio And what have I to give you back whose worth
May counterpoise this rich and precious gift?

Prin^n Nothing, unless you render her again.


Claudio Sweet Prince, you learn me noble thankfulness:
There Leonato, take her back again,
Give not this rotten orange to your friend,
She Is but the sign and semblance of her honor:
Behold how like a maid she blushes here!
O what authority and show of truth
Can cunning sin cover it self withal!
Comes not that blood, as modest evidence,
To witness simple Virtue? would you not swear
All you that see her, that she were a maid,
By these exterior shows? But she is none:
She knows the heat of a luxurious bed:
Her blush is guiltiness, not modesty.

Leonato What do you mean my lord?


Claudio Not to be married,
Not to knit my soul to an approved wanton.

Leonato Dear my lord, if you in your own proof,
Have vanquished the resistance of her youth,
And made defeat of her virginity.

Claudio I know what you would say: if I have known her,
You will say, she did embrace me as a husband,
And so extenuate the forehand sin: No Leonato,
I never tempted her with word too large,
But as a brother to his sister, showed
Bashful sincerity, and comely love.

Hero And seemde I ever otherwise to you?


Claudio Out on thee seeming, I will write against it,
You seem to me as Diane in her Orb,
As chaste as is the budde ere it be blown:
But you are more intemperate in your blood,
Than Venus, or those pampred animalls,
That rage in savage sensuality.

Hero Is my Lord well that he does speak so wide?


Leonato Sweet prince, why speak not you?


Prince What should I speak?
I stand dishonourd that have gone about,
To lincke my dear friend to a common stale.

Leonato Are these things spoken, or do I but dream?


Bastard Sir, they are spoken, and these things are true.


Bened. This looks not like a nuptial.


Hero True, O God!


Claud. Leonato, stand I here?
Is this the prince? is this the princes brother?
Is this face Heroes? are our eyes our own?

Leonato All this is so, but what of this my Lord?


Claud. Let me but move one question to your daughter,
And by that fatherly and kindly power,
That you have in her, bid her answer truly.

Leonato I charge thee do so, as thou art my child.


Hero O God defend me how am I beset,
What kind of catechizing call you this?

Claud. To make you answer truly to your name.


Hero Is it not Hero, who can blot that name
With any just reproach?

Claud. Mary that can Hero,
Hero itself can blot out Heroes virtue.
What man was he talked with you yesternight,
Out at your window betwixt twelve and one?
Now if you are a maid, answer to this.

Hero I talked with no man at that hour my lord,

Prince Why then are you no maiden. Leonato,
I am sorry you must hear: upon mine honor,
My self, my brother, and this grieved Count
Did see her, hear her, at that hour last night,
Talk with a ruffian at her chamber window,
Who has indeed most like a liberal villain,
Confessed the vile encounters they have had
A thousand times in secret.

John Fie, fie, they are not to be named my lord,
Not to be spoke of,
There is not chastity enough in language,
Without offense to utter them: thus pretty lady,
I am sorry for thy much misgouernement.

Claud. O Hero! what a Hero had thou bin,
If half thy outward graces had bin placed,
About thy thoughts and counsels of thy heart?
But fare thee well, most foul, most fair, farewell
Thou pure impiety, and impious purity,
For thee i will lock up all the gates of Love.
And on my eie-liddes shall Conjecture hang,
To turn all beauty into thoughts of harm,
And never shall it more be gracious.

Leonato Has no man's dagger here a point for me.

Beatrice Why how now cousin, wherefore sink you down?

Bastard Come let us go: these things come thus to light,
Smother her spirits up.

Benedicke How does the Lady?

Beatrice Dead I think, help uncle,
Hero, why Hero, uncle, signior Benedicke, Friar.

Leonato O Fate! take not away thy heavy hand,
Death is the fairest cover for her shame
That may be wished for.

Beatrice How now cousin Hero?

Friar Have comfort lady.

Leonato Do thou look up?

Friar Yea, wherefore should she not?

Leonato Wherefore? why does not every earthly thing.
Cry shame upon her? could she here deny
The story that is printed in her blood?
Do not live Hero, do not open thme eyes:
For did I think thou would not quickly die,
Thought I thy spirits were stronger than thy shames,
My self would on the rereward of reproaches
Strike at thy life. Grieved I I had but one?
Chid I for that at frugall Natures frame?
O one too much by thee! why had I one?
Why ever wast thou lovely in my eyes?
Why had I not with charitable hand,
Took up a beggars issue at my gates,
Who smirched thus, and mired with infamy,
I might have said, no part of it is mine,
This shame deriues it self from unknown loins,
But mine and mine I loved, and mine I praisde,
And mine that I was proud on mine so much,
That I my self* was to my self not mine:
Valewing of her, why she, O she is fallen,
Into a pit of incke, that the wide sea
Has drops too few to wash her clean again,
And salt too little, which may season give
To her foul tainted flesh.

Ben. Sir, sir, be patient, for my part I am so attired in wonder, I know not
what to say.


Beat. O on my soul my cousin is belied.

Been. Lady, were you her bedfellow last night?

Beat. No truly, not although until last night,
I have this tweluemonth bin her bedfellow.

Leon. Confirmd, confirmd, O that is stronger made,
Which was before bard up with ribs of iron,
Would the two princes lie, and Claudio lie,
Who loved her so, that speaking of her foulness,
Washed it with tears! hence from her, let her die.

Friar Hear me a little, for I have only bin silent so long, and given way
unto this course of fortune, by noting of the lady, I have marked,

A thousand blushing apparitions,
To start into her face, a thousand innocent shames,
In angel whiteness beat away those blushes,
And in her eye there has appeard a fire,
To burn the errors that these princes hold
Against her maiden truth: call me a fool,
Trust not my reading, nor my observations,
Which with experimental seal does warrant
The tenure of my book: trust not my age,
My reverence, calling, nor divinity,
If this sweet lady lie not guiltless here,
Under some biting error.

Leonato Friar, it cannot be,
Thou see that all the grace that she has left,
Is, that she will not add to her damnation,
A sin of perjury, she not denies it:
Why seekst thou then to cover with excuse,
That which appears in proper nakedness?

Friar Lady, what man is he you are accusde of?

Hero They know that do accuse me, I know none,
If I know more of any man alive
Then that which maiden modesty does warrant,
Let all my sins lack mercy, O my father,
Prove you that any man with me conuerst,
At hours unmeet, or that I yesternight
Maintaind the change of words with any creature,
Refuse me, hate me, torture me to death.

Friar There is some strange misprision in the princes.

Been. Two of them have the very bent of honor,
And if their wisdoms be missed in this,
The practice of it lives in John the Bastard,
Whose spirits toil in frame of villainies.

Leonato I know not, if they speak but truth of her,
These hands shall tear her, if they wrong her honor,
The prowdest of them shall well hear of it.
Time has not yet so dried this blood of mine,
Nor age so eat up my invention,
Nor Fortune made such havoc of my means,
Nor my bad life reft me so much of friends,
But they shall find awakte in such a kind,
Both strength of limb, and policy of mind,
Ability in means, and choice of friends,
To quit me of them thoroughly.

Friar Pawse awhile,
And let my counsel sway you in this case,
Your daughter here the princess (left for dead,)
Let her awhile be secretly kept in,
And publish it, that she is dead indeed,
Maintain a mourning ostentation,
And on your families old monument,
Hang mourneful epitaphes, and do all rites,
That appertain unto a burial.

Leon. What shall become of this? what will this do?

Friar Mary this well carried, shall on her behalf,
Change slander to remorse, that is some good,
But not for that dream I on this strange course,
But on this travail look for greater birth:
She dying, as it must be so maintaind,
Upon the instant that she was accusde,
Shall be lamented, pitied, and excusde
Of every hearer: for it so falls out,
That what we have, we prize not to the worth,
Whiles we enjoy it, but being lackt and lost,
Why then we rack the value, then we find
The virtue that possession would not show us
Whiles it was ours, so will it fare with Claudio:
When he shall hear she died upon his words,
Th Idaea of her life shall sweetly creep,
Into his study of imagination,
And every lovely Organ of her life,
Shall come apparelld in more precious habit,
More moving delicate, and full of life,
Into the eye and prospect of his soul
Then when she liude indeed: then shall he mourn,
If ever love had interest in his liver,
And wish he had not so accused her:
No, though he thought his accusation true:
Let this be so, and doubt not but success
Will fashion the event in better shape,
Then I can lay it down in likelihood.
But if all aim but this be leuelld false,
The supposition of the ladies death,
Will quench the wonder of her infamy.
And if it sort not well, you may conceal her,
As best befits her wounded reputation,
In some reclusiue and religious life,
Out of all eyes, tongues, minds, and injuries.

Been. Signior Leonato, let the Friar advise you,
And though you know my inwardnesse and love
Is very much unto the prince and Claudio,
Yet, by mine honor, I will deal in this,
As secretly and justly as your soul
Should with your body.

Leon. Being that I flow in grief,
The smallest twine may lead me.

Friar It Is well consented, presently away,
For to strange sores, strangely they strain the cure,
Come lady die to live, this wedding day
Perhaps is but prolonged, have patience and endure.
exit.
Been. Lady Beatrice, have you wept all this while?

Beat. Yea* and I will weep a while longer.

Been. I will not desire that.

Beat. You have no reason, I do it freely.

Been. Surely I do believe your fair consin is wronged.

Beat. Ah, how much might the man deserve of me that would right her!


Been. Is there any way to show such friendship?

Beat. A very even way, but no such friend.

Been. May a man do it?

Beat. It is a man's office, but not yours.

Been. I do love nothing in the world so well as you, is not that strange?


Beat. As strange as the thing I know not, it were as possible for me to say,
I loved nothing so well as you, but believe me not and yet I lie not, I confess
nothing, nor I deny nothing I am sorry for my coosin.


Bened. By my sword Beatrice, thou love me.


Beat. Do not swear and eat it.


Bened. I will swear by it that you love me, and I will make him eat it that
says I love not you.


Beat. Will you not eat your word?


Bened. With no sauce that can be devised to it, I protest I love thee.


Beat. Why then God forgive me.


Bened. What offense sweet Beatrice?


Beat. You have stayed me in a happy hour, I was about to protest I loved you.


Bened. And do it with all thy heart.


Beat. I love you with so much of my heart, that none is left to protest.


Bened. Come bid me do any thing for thee.


Beat. Kill Claudio.


Bened. Ha, not for the wide world.


Beat. You kill me to deny it, farewell.


Bened. Tarry sweet Beatrice.


Beat. I am gone, though I am here, there is no love in you, nay I pray you let
me go.


Bened. Beatrice.


Beat. In faith I will go.


Bened. We Will be friends first.


Beat. You dare easier be friends with me, than fight with mine enemy.


Bened. Is Claudio thine enemy?


Beat. Is a not approved in the height a villain, that has slaundered,
scorned, dishonored my kinswoman? O that I were a man! what, bear her in hand:
until they come to take hands and then with public accusation vncouerd
slander, vnmittigated rancour? O God that I were a man! I would eat his
heart in the market place.


Bened. Hear me Beatrice.


Beat. Talk with a man out at a window, a proper saying.


Bened. Nay but Beatrice.


Beat. Sweet Hero, she is wronged, she is slaundred, she is undone.


Bened. Beat?


Beat. Princes and Counties! surely a princely testimony, a goodly Count,
Count Comfect, a sweet Gallant surely, O that I were a man for his sake! or
that I had any friend would be a man for my sake! But manhood is melted into
cursies, valor into complement, and men are only turned into tongue, and trim
ones too: he is now as valiant as Hercules, that only tells a lie, and swears
it: I cannot be a man with wishing, therefore I will die a woman with grieuing.


Bened. Tarry good Beatrice, by this hand I love thee.


Beatrice Use it for my love some other way than swearing by it.


Bened. Think you in your soul the Count Claudio has wronged Hero?


Beatrice Yea, as sure as I have a thought, or a soul.


Bened. Enough, I am engagde, I will challenge him, I will kiss your hand, and
so I leave you: by this hand, Claudio shall render me a dear account: as you
hear of me, so think of me: go comfort your coosin, I must say she is dead,
and so farewell.

Enter the Constables, Borachio, and the Town clearke in gowns.
Keeper Is our whole dissembly appeard?


Cowley O a stool and a cushion for the Sexton.


Sexton Which be the malefactors?


Andrew Mary that am I, and my partner.


Cowley Nay that's certain, we have the exhibition to examine.


Sexton But which are the offenders? that are to be examined let them come
before master constable.


Kemp Yea mary, let them come before me, what is your name, friend?


Bor. Borachio.


Ke. Pray write down Borachio. Yours sir.


Con. I am a gentleman sir, and my name is Conrade.


Ke. Write down master gentleman Conrade: masters, do you serve God?


Both Yea sir we hope.


Kem. Write down, that they hope they serve God: and write God first, for God
defend but God should go before such villains: masters, it is proved
already that you are little better than false knaves, and it will go near to
be thought so shortly, how answer you for your selves?


Con. Mary sir we say, we are none.


Kemp A marvelous witty fellow I assure you, but I will go about with him:
come you hither sir, a word in your ear sir, I say to you, it is thought you
are false knaves.


Bor. Sir, I say to you, we are none.


Kemp Well, stand aside, fore God they are both in a tale: have you writ down,
that they are none?


Sexton Master constable, you go not the way to examine, you must call forth
the watch that are their accusers.


Kemp Yea mary, that's the eftest way, let the watch come forth: masters, I
charge you in the Princes name accuse these men.


Watch 1 This man said sir, that don John the Princes brother was a villain.


Kemp Write down prince John a villain: why this is flat perjury, to call a
Princes brother villain.


Borachio Master Constable.


Kemp Pray thee fellow peace, I do not like thy look I promise thee.


Sexton What heard you him say else?


Watch 2 Mary that he had received a thousand ducats of don John, for accusing
the Lady Hero wrongfully.


Kemp Flat burglarie as ever was committed.


Constable. Yea by mass that it is.


Sexton What else fellow?


Watch 1 And that Count Claudio did mean upon his words, to disgrace Hero
before the whole assembly, and not marry her.


Kemp O villain! thou will be condemnd into everlasting redemption for this.


Sexton What else?


Watch This is all.


Sexton And this is more masters then you can deny, prince John is this morning
secretly stolen away: Hero was in this manner accusde, in this very manner
refusde, and upon the grief of this sodamlie died: Master Constable, let
these men be bound, and brought to Leonatoes, I will go before and show him
their examination.


Constable Come, let them be opiniond.


Couley Let them be in the hands of Coxcombe.


Kemp Gods my life, where is the Sexton? let him write down the Princes officer
Coxcombe: come, bind them, thou naughty varlet.


Couley Away, you are an ass, you are an ass.


Kemp Do thou not suspect my place? do thou not suspect my years? O that
he were here to write me down an ass! but masters, remember that I am an
ass* though it be not written down, yet forget not that i am nasse: No thou
villain, thou art full of pretty as shall be proud upon thee by good witness.
I am a wise fellow, and which is more, an officer, and which is more, a
householder, and which is more, as pretty a piece of flesh as any is in
Messina, and one that knows the Law, go to and a rich fellow enough, go to,
and a fellow that has had losses, and on that has two gowns and every thing
hansome about him: bring him away: O that I had bin writ down an ass!

exit. Enter Leonato and his brother.
Brother If you go on thus, you will kill your self,
And it is not wisdom thus to second grief,
Against your self.

Leonato I pray thee cease thy counsel,
Which falls into mine ears as profitlesse,
As water in a syue: give not me counsel,
Nor let no comforter delight mine ear,
But such a one whose wrongs do suit with mine.
Bring me a father that so loved his child,
Whose joy of her is ouer-whelmd like mine,
And bid him speak of patience,
Measure his woe the length and breadth of mine,
And let it answer every strain for strain,
As thus for thus, and such a grief for such,
In every lineament, branch, shape, and form:
If such a one will smile and stroke his beard,
And sorrow, wagge, cry hem, when he should groan,
Patch grief with proverbs, make misfortune drunk,
With candle-wasters: bring him yet to me,
And I of him will gather patience:
But there is no such man, for brother, men
Can counsel, and speak comfort to that grief,
Which they themselves not feel, but tasting it,
Their counsel turns to passion, which before,
Would give preceptiall medcine to rage,
Fetter strong madness in a silken thread,
Charm ach with air, and agony with words,
No, no, it is all men's office, to speak patience
To those that wring under the load of sorrow
But no man's virtue nor sufficiency
To be so moral, when he shall endure
The like himself: therefore give me no counsel,
My griefs cry louder then advertisement

Brother Therein do men from children nothing differ.

Leonato I pray thee peace, I will be flesh and blood,
For there was never yet Philosopher,
That could endure the tooth-ake patiently,
How ever they have writ the style of gods,
And made a push at chance and sufferance.

Brother Yet bend not all the harm upon your self,
Make those that do offend you, suffer too.

Leonato There thou speakst reason, nay I will do so,
My soul does tell me, Hero is belied,
And that shall Claudio know, so shall the prince,
And all of them that thus dishonor her.
Enter Prince and Claudio.
Brother Here comes the Prince and Claudio hastily.

Prince Good den, good den.

Claudio Good day to both of you.

Leonato Hear you my Lords?

Prince We have some haste Leonato.

Leonato Some haste my lord! well, fare you well my lord,
Are you so hasty now? well, all is one.

Prince Nay do not quarrel with us, good old man.

Brother If he could right himself with quarrelling,
Some of us would lie low.

Claudio Who wrongs him?

Leona. Mary thou do wrong me, thou dissembler, thou:
Nay, never lay thy hand upon thy sword,
I fear thee not.

Claudio Mary beshrew my hand,
If it should give your age such cause of fear,
Infaith my hand meant nothing to my sword.

Leonato Tush, tush man, never fleere and jest at me,
I speak not like a dotard, nor a fool,
As under privilege of age to brag,
What I have done being young* or what would do,
Were I not old, know Claudio to thy head,
Thou have so wronged mine innocent child and me,
That I am forced to lay my reverence by,
And with gray hairs and bruise of many days,
Do challenge thee to trial of a man,
I say thou have belied mine innocent child.
Thy slander has gone through and through her heart,
And she lies buried with her ancestors:
O in a toomb where never scandal slept,
Save this of hers, framde by thy villainy.

Claudio My villainy?

Leonato Thine Claudio, thine I say.

Prince You say not right old man.

Leonato My Lord, my Lord,
I Will prove it on his body if he dare,
Dispight his nice fence, and his active practice,
His May of youth, and bloome of lustihood.

Claudio A way, I will not have to do with you.

Leonato Can thou so daffe me? thou have killed my child,
If thou kilst me, boy, thou shall kill a man.

Brother He shall kill two of us, and men indeed,
But that's no matter, let him kill one first:
Win me and wear me, let him answer me,
Come follow me boy, come sir boy, come follow me
Sir boy, i will whip you from your foyning fence,
Nay, as I am a gentleman I, will.

Leonato Brother.

Brother Content your self, God knows, I loved my niece,
And she is dead, slanderd to death by villains,
That dare as well answer a man indeed,
As I dare take a serpent by the tongue,
Boys, apes, braggarts, Jackes, milke-sops.

Leonato Brother Anthony.

Brother Hold you content, what man! I know them, yea
And what they weigh, even to the utmost scruple,
Scambling, out-facing, fashion-monging boys,
That he, and cogge, and flout, deprave, and slander,
Go antiquely, and show outward hidiousnesse,
And speak of half a dozen dangerous words,
How they might hurt their enemies, if they durst,
And this is all.

Leonato But brother Anthony.

Brother Come it is no matter,
Do not you meddle, let me deal in this.

Prince Gentlemen both, we will not wake your patience,
My heart is sorry for your daughters death:
But on my honor she was chargde with nothing
But what was true, and very full of proof.

Leonato My Lord, my Lord.

Prince I will not hear you.

Leo. No come brother, away, I will be heard.
Exeunt amb.
Bro. And shall, or some of us will smart for it.
Enter Ben.
Prince See see, here comes the man we went to seek.

Claud. Now signior, what news?

Bened. Good day my Lord:

Prince Welcome signior, you are almost come to part almost a fray.


Claud. We had likt to have had our two noses snapt off with two old men
without teeth.


Prince Leonato and his brother what think thou? had we sought, I doubt we
should have been too young for them.


Bened. In a false quarrel there is no true valor, I came to seek you both.


Claud. We have been up and down to seek thee, for we are high proof
melancholy, and would feign have it beaten away, will thou use thy wit?


Bened. It is in my scabberd, shall I draw it?


Prince Do thou wear thy wit by thy side?


Claud. Never any did so, though very many have been beside their wit, I will
bid thee draw, as we do the minstrels, ^^^w to pleasure us.


Prince As I am an honest man he looks pale, art thou si^ke, or angry?


Claud. What, courage man: what though care killed a catte, thou have mettle
enough in thee to kill care.


Bened. Sir, I shall meet your wit in the careere, and you charge it against
me, I pray you choose another subject


Claud. Nay then give him another staff, this last was broke cross.


Prince By this light, he chaunges more and more, I think he be angry indeed.


Claud If he be, he knows how to turn his girdle.


Bened. Shall I speak a word in your ear?


Claud. God bless me from a challenge.


Bened. You are a villain, I jest not, I will make it good how you dare,
with what you dare, and when you dare: do me right, or I will protest your
cowardice: you have killd a sweeete Lady, and her death shall fall heavy on
you, let me hear from you.


Claud. Well I will meet you, so I may have good cheer.


Prince What, a feast, a feast?


Claud. I faith I thank him he has bid me to a calves head and a capon, the
which if I do not carue most curiously, say my kniffe's naught, shall I not
find a woodcocke too?


Bened. Sir your wit ambles well, it goes easily.


Prince I Will tell thee how Beatrice praisd thy wit the other day: I said thou
had a fine wit, true said she, a fine little one: no said I, a great wit:
right says she, a great gross one: nay said I, a good wit, just said she, it
hurts no body: nay said I, the gentleman is wise: certain said she, a wise
gentleman: nay said I, he has the tongues: that I believe said she, for he
swore a thing to me on monday night, which he forswore on tuesday morning,
there is a double tongue theirs two tongues, thus did she an hour together
trans-shape thy particular virtues, yet at last she concluded with a sigh, thou
wast the properst man in Italy.


Claud. For the which she wept heartily and said she cared not.


Prince Yea that she did, but yet for all that, and if she did not hate him
deadly, she would love him dearly, the old man's daughter told us all.


Claud. All all, and moreover, God saw him when he was hid in the garden.


Prince But when shall we set the savage bulls horns one the sensible
Benedicks head?


Clau. Yea and text underneath, here dwells Benedick the married man.


Bened. Fare you well, boy, you know my mind, I will leave you now to your
gossep-like humor, you break jests as braggards do their blades, which God be
thanked hurt not: my Lord, for your many courtisies I thank you, I must
discontinue your company, your brother the bastard is fled from Messina: you
have among you, killed a sweet and innocent lady: for my Lord Lack beard, there
he and I shall meet, and till then peace be with him.


Prince He is in earnest.


Claudio In most profound earnest, and i will warrant you, for the love of
Beatrice.


Prince And has challengde thee.


Claudio Most sincerely.


Prince What a pretty thing man is, when he goes in his dublet and hose, and
leaves off his wit!

Enter Constables, Conrade, and Borachio.
Claudio He is then a Giant to an Ape, but then is an Ape a Doctor to such a
man.


Prince But soft you, let me be, pluck up my heart, and be sad, did he not say
my brother was fled?


Constable. Come you sir, if justice cannot tame you, she shall nere weigh more
reasons in her balance, nay, and you be a cursing hypocrite once, you must be
looked to.


Prince How now, two of my brothers men bound? Borachio one.


Claudio Hearken after their offense my Lord.


Prince Officers, what offense have these men done?


Constable. Mary sir, they have committed false report, moreover they have spoken
untruths, secondarily they are slanders, sixth and lastly, they have belyed a
Lady, thirdly they have verefied unjust things, and to conclude, they are
lying knaves.


Prince. First I ask thee what they have done, thirdly I ask thee what is their
offense, sixth and lastly why they are committed, and to conclude, what you lay
to their charge.


Claud. Rightly reasoned, and in his own division, and by my troth there is one
meaning well suited.


Prince Who have you offended masters, that you are thus bound to your
answer? this learned Constable is too cunning to be understood, what is your
offense?


Bor. Sweet prince, let me go no farther to mine answer: do you hear me,
and let this Count kill me: I have deceived even your very eyes: what your
wisedoms could not discover, these shallowe fools have brought to light, who in
the night o^erheard me confessing to this man, how Don John your bro^her
incensed me to slander the Lady Hero, how you were brought into the orchard,
and saw me court Margaret in Heroes garments, how you disgracde her when you
should marry her: my villainy they have upon record, which I had rather seal
with my death, then repeat over to my shame: the lady is dead upon mine and my
masters false accusation: and briefly, I desire nothing but the reward of a
villain.


Prince Runs not this speech like iron through your blood?


Claud. I have drunk poison whiles he vtterd it.


Prince But did my brother set thee on to this?


Bor. Yea, and paid me richly for the practice of it.


Prince He is composde and framde of treachery,
And fled he is upon this villainy.

Clau. Sweet Hero, now thy image does appear
In the rare semblance that I loved it first.

Constable. Come, bring away the plaintiffes, by this time our sexton has reformed
Signior Leonato of the matter: and masters, do not forget to specify when time
and place shall serve, that I am an ass.


Con. 2 Here, here comes master Signior Leonato, and the sexton too.

Enter Leonato, his brother, and the Sexton.
Leonato Which is the villain? let me see his eyes,
That when I note another man like him,
I may avoid him: which of these is he?

Bor. If you would know your wronger, look on me.

Leonato Art thou the slave that with thy breath have killd
Mine innocent child?

Bor. Yea, even I alone.

Leo. No, not so villain, thou beliest thy self,
Here stand a pair of honorable men,
A third is fled that had a hand in it:
I thank you Princes for my daughters death,
Record it with your high and worthy deeds,
It Was bravely done, if you bethink you of it.

Clau. I know not how to pray your patience,
Yet I must speak, choose your revenge your self,
Impose me to what penance your invention
Can lay upon my sin, yet sinnd I not,
But in mistaking.

Prince By my soul nor I,
And yet to satisfy this good old man,
I would bend under any heavy weight,
That heel enjoin me to.

Leonato I cannot bid you bid my daughter live,
That were impossible, but I pray you both,
Possess the people in Messina here,
How innocent she died, and if your love
Can labor aught in sad invention,
Hang her an epitaph upon her toomb,
And sing it to her bones, sing it to night:
To morrow morning come you to my house,
And since you could not be my son in law,
Be yet my nephew: my brother has a daughter,
Almost the copy of my child that's dead,
And she alone is heir to both of us,
Give her the right you should have given her cousin,
And so dies my revenge.

Claudio O noble sir!
Your over kindness does wring tears from me,
I do embrace your offer and dispose,
For henceforth of poor Claudio.

Leonato To morrow then I will expect your coming,
To night I take my leave, this naughty man
Shall face to face be brought to Margaret,
Who I believe was packt in all this wrong,
Hired to it by your brother.

Bor. No by my soul she was not,
Nor knew not what she did when she spoke to me,
But always has bin just and virtuous,
In any thing that I do know by her.

Constable. Moreover sir, which indeed is not under white and black, this
plaintiff here, the offendour, did call me ass, I beseech you let it be
remembered in his punishment, and also the watch heard them talk of one
Deformed, they say he wears a key in his ear and a lock hanging by it, and
borows money in Gods name, the which he has used so long, and never paid,
that now men grow hard hearted and will lend nothing for Gods sake: pray you
examine him upon that point.


Leonato I thank thee for thy care and honest pains.


Constable. Your worship speaks like a most thankful and reverent youth, and I
praise God for you.


Leon. There Is for thy pains.


Constable. God save the foundation.


Leon. Go, I discharge thee of thy prisoner, and I thank thee.


Constable. I leave an arrant knave with your worship, which I beseech your worship
to correct your self, for the example of others: God keep your worship, I
wish your worship well, God restore you to health, I humbly give you leave to
depart and if a merry meeting may be wished, God prohibit it: come neighbor.


Leon. Until to morrow morning, Lords, farewell.


Brot. Farewell my lords, we look for you to morrow.


Prince We will not fail.


Claud. To night i will mourn with Hero.


Leonato Bring you these fellows on, weel talk with Margaret, how her
acquaintance grew with this lewd fellow.

exeunt Enter Benedicke and Margaret.
Bened. Pray thee sweet mistress Margaret, deserve well at my hands by helping
me to the speech of Beatrice.


Mar. Will you then write me a sonnet in praise of my beauty?


Been. In so high a style Margaret, that no man living shall come over it, for
in most comely truth thou deseruest it.


Mar. To have no man come over me, why shall I always keep below stairs.


Been. Thy wit is as quick as the greyhounds mouth, it catches.


Mar. And yours, as blunt as the Fencers foiles, which hit, but hurt not.


Been. A most manly wit Margaret, it will not hurt a woman: and so I pray
thee call Beatrice, I give thee the bucklers.


Marg. Give us the swords, we have bucklers of our own.


Been. If you use them Margaret, you must put in the pikes with a vice, and
they are dangerous weapons for maids.


Mar. Well, I will call Beatrice to you, who I think has legs.

Exit Margarite.
Been. And therefore will come. The God of love that sits above, and knows me,
and knows me, how pitiful I deserve. I mean in singing, but in loving,
Leander the good swimmer, Troilus the first imploier of pandars, and a whole
book full of these quondam carpet-mongers, whose names yet run smoothly in
the even rode of a blancke verse, why they were never so truly turned over and
over as my poor self in love: mary I cannot show it in rhyme, I have tried, I
can find out no rhyme to Lady but babie, an innocent rhyme: for scorn, horn,
a hard rhyme: for school fool, a babbling rhyme: very ominous endings, no, I was
not borne under a riming plannet, nor I cannot woo in festival terms: sweet
Beatrice would thou come when I called thee?

Enter Beatrice.
Beat. Yea signior, and depart when you bid me.


Been. O stay but till then.


Beat. Then, is spoken: fare you well now, and yet ere I go, let me go with
that I came, which is, with knowing what has past between you and Claudio.


Been. Only foul words, and thereupon I will kiss thee.


Beat. Foul words is but foul wind, and foul wind is but foul breath, and
foul breath is wholesome, therefore I will depart vnkist.


Been. Thou have frighted the word out of his right sense, so forcible is thy
wit, but I must tell thee plainly, Claudio undergoes my challenge, and either I
must shortly hear from him, or I will subscribe him a coward, and I pray thee
now tell me, for which of my bad parts did thou first fall in love with me?


Beat. For them all together, which maintaind so politic a state of evil,
that they will not admit any good part to intermingle with them: but for
which of my good parts did you first suffer love for me?


Been. Suffer love! a good epithet, I do suffer love indeed, for I love thee
against my will.


Beat. In spite of your heart I think, alas poor heart, if you spite it for
my sake, I will spite it for yours, for I will never love that which my friend
hates.


Been. Thou and I are too wise to woo peaceably.


Beat. It appears not in this confession, there is not one wise man among
twenty that will praise himself.


Been. An old, an old instance Beatrice, that lived in the time of good
neighbors, if a man do not erect in this age his own toomb ere he dies, he
shall live no longer in monument, then the bell rings, and the widow weeps.


Beat. And how long is that think you?


Been. Question, why an hour in clamor and a quarter in rhewme, therefore is
it most expedient for the wise, if Don worm (his conscience) find no
impediment to the contrary, to be the trumpet of his own virtues, as I am to
my self so much for praising my self, who I my self will bear witness is
praise worthy, and now tell me, how does your cousin?


Beat. Very ill.


Been. And how do you?


Beat. Very ill too.


Been. Serve God, love me, and mend, there will I leave you too, for here comes
one in haste.

Enter Vrsula.
Vrsula Madam, you must come to your uncle, yonder is old coile at home, it is
proved my Lady Hero has bin falsely accusde, the Prince and Claudio mightily
abusde, and Don John is the author of all, who is fled and gone: will you come
presently?


Beat. Will you go hear this news signior?


Been. I will live in thy heart, die in thy lap, and be buried in thy eyes: and
moreover, I will go with thee to thy uncles.

exit. Enter Claudio, Prince, and three or four with tapers.
Claudio Is this the monument of Leonato?

Lord It is my Lord.

Epitaph. Done to death by slauderous tongues,
Was the Hero that here lies:
Death in guerdon of her wrongs,
Gives her fame which never dies:
So the life that dyed with shame,
Lives in death with glorious fame.
Hang thou there upon the toomb,
Praising her when I am dead.

Claudio Now music sound and sing your solemn hymn.

Song
them, but I think they are more flexi Pardon goddess of the night,
Those that slew thy virgin knight,
For the which with songs of woe,
Round about her tomb they go:
Midnight assist our moan, help us to sigh and groan.
Heavily heavily.
Graves yawne and yield your dead,
Till death be uttered,
Heavily heavily.
Lo. Now unto thy bones good night, yearly will I do this right.

Prince Good morrow masters, put your torches out,
The wolves have preied, and look, the gentle day
Before the wheels of Phoebus, round about
Dapples the drowsy East with spots of gray:
Thanks to you al, and leave us, fare you well.

Claudio Good morrow masters, each his several way.

Prince Come let us hence, and put on other weeds,
And then to Leonatoes we will go.

Claudio And Hymen now with luckier issue speeds,
Then this for whom we rendered up this woe.
exeunt. Enter Leonato, Benedick, Margaret Ursula, old man, Friar, Hero.
Friar Did I not tell you she was innocent?

Leo. So are the Prince and Claudio who accusd her,
Upon the error that you heard debated:
But Margaret was in some fault for this,
Although against her will as it appears,
In the true course of all the question.

Old Well, I am glad that all things sorts so well.

Bened. And so am I, being else by faith enforst
To call young Claudio to a reckoning for it.

Leo. Well daughter, and you gentlewomen all,
Withdraw into a chamber by your selves,
And when I send for you come hither masked:
The Prince and Claudio promisde by this hour
To visit me, you know your office brother,
You must be father to your brothers daughter,
And give her to young Claudio.
Exeunt Ladies.
Old Which I will do with confirmd countenance.

Bened. Friar, I must entreat your pains, I think.

Friar To do what Signior?

Bened. To bind me, or undo me, one of them:
Signior Leonato, truth it is good Signior,
Your niece regards me with an eye of favor.

Leo. That eye my daughter lent her, it is most true.

Bened. And I do with an eye of love requite her.

Leo. The sight whereof I think you had from me,
From Claudio and the Prince, but what is your will?

Bened. Your answer sir is enigmaticall,
But for my will, my will is, your good will
May stand with ours, this day to be conioynd,
In the state of honorable marriage,
In which (good Friar) I shall desire your help.

Leo. My heart is with your liking.

Friar And my help.
Here comes the Prince and Claudio.
Enter Prince, and Claudio, and two or three other.
Prince Good morrow to this fair assembly.

Leo. Good morrow Prince, good morrow Claudio:
We here attend you, are you yet determined,
To day to marry with my brothers daughter?

Claud. I Will hold my mind were she an Ethiope.

Leo Call her forth brother, here is the Friar ready.

P. Good morrow Bened* why what is the matter?
That you have such a February face,
So full of frost, of storm, and cloudiness.

Claud. I think he thinks upon the savage bull:
Tush fear not man we will tip thy horns with gold,
And all Europa shall rejoice at thee,
As once Europa did at lusty love,
When he would play the noble beast in love.

Been. Bull Jove sir had an amiable low,
And some such strange bull leapt your fathers cow,
And got a calfe in that same noble feate,
Much like to you, for you have just his bleate.
Enter brother, Hero, Beatrice, Margaret, Ursula.
Clau. For this I owe you: here comes other recknings.
Which is the Lady I must seize upon?

Leo. This same is she, and I do give you her.

Claud. Why then she is mine, sweet, let me see your face.

Leon. No that you shall not till you take her hand,
Before this Friar, and swear to marry her.

Claud. Give me your hand before this holy Friar,
I am your husband if you like of me.

Hero And when I lived I was your other wife,
And when you loved, you were my other husband.

Claud. Another Hero.

Hero Nothing certainer.
One Hero died defilde, but I do live,
And surely as I live, I am a maid.

Prince The former Hero, Hero that is dead.

Leon. She died my Lord, but whiles her slander lived.

Friar All this amazement can I qualify,
When after that the holy rites are ended,
I Will tell you largely of fair Heroes death,
Mean time let wonder seem familiar,
And to the chapel let us presently.

Ben. Soft and fair Friar, which is Beatrice?

Beat. I answer to that name, what is your will?

Been. Do not you love me?

Beat. Why no, no more then reason.

Been. Why then your uncle, and the prince, and Claudio,
Have been deceived, they swore you did.

Beat. Do not you love me?

Been. Troth no, no more then reason.

Beat. Why then my cousin Margaret and Vrsula
Are much deceived, for they did swear you did.

Been. They swore that you were almost sick for me.

Beat. They swore that you were welnigh dead for me.

Been. It Is no such matter, then you do not love me.

Beat. No truly, but in friendly recompense.

Leon. Come cousin, I am sure you love the gentleman.

Clau. And i will besworne upon it, that he loves her,
For here is a paper written in his hand,
A halting sonnet of his own pure brain,
Fashioned to Beatrice.

Hero And here is another,
Writ in my cosins hand, stolen from her pocket,
Containing her affection unto Benedicke.

Been. A miracle, here is our own hands against our hearts: come, I will have
thee, but by this light I take thee for pity.


Beat. I would not deny you, but by this good day, I yield upon great
persuasion, and partly to save your life, for I was told, you were in a
consumption.


Leon. Peace I will stop your mouth.


Prince How do thou Benedicke the married man?


Been. I Will tell thee what prince: a college of witte-crackers cannot flout me
out of my humor, do thou think I care for a Satyr or an Epigramme? no, if a
man will be beaten with brains, a shall wear nothing hansome about him: in
brief, since I do purpose to marry, I will think nothing to any purpose
that the world can say against it, and therefore never flout at me, for what I
have said against it: for man is a giddie thing, and this is my conclusion: for
thy part Claudio, I did think to have beaten thee* but in that thou art like
to be my kinsman, live vnbruisde, and love my cosen.


Clau. I had well hopte thou would have denied Beatrice, that I might have
cudgelld thee out of thy single life, to make thee a double dealer, which out
of question thou will be, if my coosin do not look exceeding narrowly to thee.


Been. Come, come, we are friends, lets have a dance ere we are married, that we
may lighten our own hearts, and our wives heels.


Leon. We Will have dancing afterward.


Been. First, of my word, therefore play music, Prince, thou art sad, get
thee a wife, get thee a wife, there is no staff more reverent then one tipped
with horn.

Enter Messenger.
Mess. My Lord, your brother John is taken in flight,
And brought with armed men back to Messina.

Been. Think not on him till to morrow, i will devise thee brave punishments for
him: strike up Pipers.

dance.
FINIS.

