A GODLY AND LEARNED Commentary upon the excellent book of Solomon, commonly
called Ecclesiastes, or the Preacher:

In the which Commentary are briefly and plainly laid down the method,
sense, and use of that most profitable sermon, on the which, yet there has
never bin set forth any exposition in the English tongue before this time, in
such large and profitable manner.

Written in Latin by JOHN SERRANVS, and newly turned into English by John
Stockwood, Schoolmaster of Tunbridge.

LONDON Printed by John VVindet for John Harrison the younger. 1585.

To the right woorshipful M. Thomas Vane of Buston, Esquire, and one of her
Majesty's Justices of the peace within the County of Kent: And also unto the
right worshipful M. Henry Vane of Hadlow, Esquire, John Stockwood
Schoolmaster of Tunbridge wishes all happiness in this life, and in the life
to come, the sound fruition of those joys which are eternal and never shall
have ending.
Having finished the translation of this most singular and profitable work
(the commendation whereof I think altogether impertinent and needelesse for me
in this place to handle, especially, seeing the preface of the Author, and the
judgment of that most learned and profounde Divine, M. doctor Fulke prefixed
and set before it, do thoroughly and sufficiently perform the same.) Entering
into some consideration with my self, unto whom I might worthily dedicate and
offer up this my simple labor, such as it is, (simple I call it, not in
regard of the matter and substance of the work, the which in this respect may
very well beseem the favorable and gentle acceptance of the best, but in
regard of mine own simplicity and plainness in translation) I called to my
remembrance (right worshipful) the great and undeserved courtesy very lately
received at both your hands, the which being such, as is not only privately
known unto my self, but also publicly recorded in the memory of many other
welwillers and wishers unto you both, albeit that concerning your own very
worshipful and frindly natures, I doubted not but that you would right
courteously accept of private thanks, where there wants ability of making
deserved recompense: yet could I not persuade my self to go clear from
suspicion of unthankfulness among others, if I should not leave some public
testimony of my thankfulness for that benefit, which is publicly known to
have bin received. And albeit this way I stand chiefly beholding unto the
right worshipful your loving and well-beloved son in law, yet considering
your worshipful approbation and good liking of his most frindly courtesy
extended toward me in the same, and also your own friendly travail and
labor to that effect: as I worthily acknowledge my self much bound unto you
both, so I trust it shall not be misliked in common thankfulness to have
joined two such gentlemen together, as besides the near band of consanguinitie
and affinity, do for many other respects the one so well like and love the
other. Accept therefore, I most humbly beseech you, this small token of mine
unfeigned and dutiful good will, proceeding from such a one, who, though in
worldly respects he be not comparable unto many, which account them selves
many ways bound and beholding unto you, yet in all grateful remembrance of
such surpassing kindness found at your worships hands would be loath to be
exceed of any, of whom at any time you have best deserved. The Lord bless
and preserve both your good w. and all yours, and grant you with them and
others unto whose hands this my simple labor shall hereafter come, to reap
such fruit thereby, as I by taking upon me to finish and publish the same, have
unfeignedly wished, and heartily hope for: to wit, that God may be glorified,
you edified, his Church and people instructed and profited in further knowledge
and increase of his truth, and in expressing the fruits of the same in a godly
and holy conversation through Christ our Lord. Amen.

From the School of Tunbridge the 24. day of June, 1585. Your w. very
singularly bound and beholding, John Stockewood Schoolmaster of Tunbridge.

Unto the godly Christian Reader.
IN what account this work is to be had, the learned in Divinity need not to
be admonished. The text of holy Scripture being such, as of it self deserves
all reverence: the Commentary so framed, as a taste of it being taken, it will
easily procure a good appetite to embrace the whole thoroughly. But that such as
be desirous of heavenly wisdom, and yet have not attained to such ripeness
of judgment, as they can of themselves discern of books (that in these days
are set forth in great numbers) which are most for their profit, may be put in
mind of the excellency of this treatise to the furtherance of their godly
study, I thought good, being thereto required, in few words to encourage
them to undertake the reading thereof to the end they may reap such profit
thereby, as may delight them for the present, and the fruit thereof remain
with them for ever. The wisdom of God, in all the holy scripture inspired of
God, shows it self, according to the matter whereof it entreats, to be
most excellent. The argument of this sermon being of wisdom, uttered by that
instrument of the holy Ghost, whom God chose above all men (except him in
whom all the treasures of wisdom are laid up, our Savior Christ I mean) in
whom he would place the excellency of understanding, about the attaining
whereof all the wise men of the world dulled their wits in vain: there must
needs be opened unto us thereby a certain and undoubted way unto the holy
closet of true knowledge and heavenly wisdom. Solomon himself the Preacher,
a right figure of our Savior Christ, both in his peaceable and glorious
kingdom, and in his excellent and supereminent wisdom, was a man so prepared
of God, to be a most notable storehouse of Sapience, as no mean of coming
thereby in him was wanting. For first by natural towardness, good education,
study, and other ordinary means, he attained to such extraordinary
knowledge, as even in his tender years, which age is most subject to folly,
he obtained the name and credit of a wise man before he was a grown man,
which not one among ten thousand even in his gray hears deserves to carry.
Secondly by special grace and divine revelation, he was aduau^ced to the
highest degree of wisdom and understanding, so that no man either before him
or after him might aspire to the like. And last of al, before the endighting of
this divine preaching, he had the principal of al his former knowledge, and
matter of this sermon confirmed by experience, which among men is counted to
have so great moment to the obteining of wisdom, as no man lightly is counted
wise, which unto knowledge and learning has not joined practice and
experience. And although the same Solomon, by the secret and yet most wise
judgment of God, was suffered for all his wisdom to fall into such folly from
which many thousa^ds of gods children, not co^parable to him in knowledge, are
preserved by grace, to show a most clear distinction between these two gifts
of God, the one of wisdom to know, the other of strength to stand: yet must
no man surmise that any thing thereby is derogated from the authority of those
writings, which the spirit of God has appointed by that his instrument to be
penned, for the perpetual instruction of his Church in all ages. And lest of
all of this book, which as it appears to have been written in the latter
end of his days, so it is thought of many learned men, that it is a
testimony of his repentance after his fall. If any thing therein seem hard
to be understood (as some things are in deed, which the unsteadfast and ungodly
pervert, as they do the rest of the scriptures to their own destruction.)
These difficulties are so well opened, and the true and natural sense of the
whole text with the right scope and e^de thereof, is so lea^nedly expressed in
the Commentary, that in mine opinion, no man has either with more
faithfulness, sincerity, or dexterity, to the satisfying of the best
l^arned, interpreted this book of Ecclesiastes, then this learned man
Serranus. Finally, the same Commentary* is so truly translated, by one which
is a learned Divine himself, and understands the work whereof the
Commentary entreats (as every one does not that takes upon them to
translate in these days) that the studious Reader, by the assistance of Gods
spirit shall undoubtedly find such fruit of his travail, as he shall never
repent him of his labor bestowed in reading.

Thy loving brother in Christ, W. Fulke.

A Praeface of John Serranus upon the Book of Solomon, called Ecclesiastes, or
the Preacher, containing the Argument and Contents of the Books.
IN the beginning certain points seem to be set down in the way of a Praeface
concerning the authority end, method, and use of this Book: that these
matters being understood, a more sure and fit way may be made unto the reading
of this most excellent Sermon and also unto the most notable profit which
thereby may and ought to come unto us.

Because that some do doubt of the person of Solomon, it co^^eth to pass that
hereby they take occasion of impea^^^ng not only the authority of this Sermon,
but also of all other his writings: as if the same privilege of credit and
authority were not to be given unto them, which is unto the canonical
Scriptures.

And concerning Solomon, Sundry opinions concerning the person of Solomon
the opinions of the learned are diverse, and that for most weighty
considerations, for in regard of the notable testimonies of the goodness of
God toward him, some think very well of his salvation, and hold that there
is no doubt to be made of the same, albeit he fell into a most foul fault,
the which could not make void in him the excellent gifts of God: amongst
the which, that gift of forgiveness of sins not to be repented of, and the
foundation of the same, the eternal election of God, obteyneth the first
place: and therefore that it is not meet that by reason of such a fault we
should doubt of his salvation, no less then of many other holy men, whose
notable faults are plainly set down in the books of the scripture, to the
end that in this miserye of man his infirmity and weakness we might
perceive the steadfastness of GOD his mercy, making those whom he will, The
reasons of them that doubt of the salvation of Solomon.
worthy of eternal life. Some others do in such sort weigh the
circumstances of his most grievous sin, that they make a very great doubt of
his salvation. For the Scripture does flatly set down, that the heart of
Solomon went aside from the God of Israel, and that by foul abusing of the
goodness of God toward him, as unto whom God had appeared twice. Moreover
that this fell out unto him at the last end almost of his life, after so
many and so great tokens of God his mercy and liberality toward him, in
that age, wherein if ever, he ought in deed to have had been wise. That it was
also a shameful kind of fault against true religion, the which in the
faithful (howsoever they are sometimes diversely carried away of their own
lusts) does take such deep root, that it cannot choose at al times, but bring
forth most plentiful fruit of reverence and constancy. To conclude, that there
appears no testimonye of his repentance, and that the renting asunder of the
kingdom, which within short time followed, does teach that God did in no
wise forgive unto him this fault.

The mind of the Author touching the salvation of Solomon.
Doubtless the fault of Solomon was most grievous, and cannot by any means be
excused. For that he which had received such singular gifts of GOD about
the last time of his life, did of wicked rashness fall away unto
Superstition, and to the offense of the church and destruction of many, did
set up public Monumentes and tokens of that his fallinge away, it is a
thing so shameful, as is that which is most shameful.

Yet are not these things to this end set down unto us, that we should take
upon us so much authority over the secret judgments of God, that we
should conclude so singular a person whom the Lord would have to be a
Figure of his Christ, to be appointed unto everlasting destruction, wherefore
as it is a point of rashness certaynely to pronounce of so weightye a matter:
so on the contrary part, it is a token of safenesse and modestye, in matters
of such importance, and nothing at all appertayning unto our knowledge, by
staying our judgment to be wise out of the word of God, and there out only
to gather those things which he will have of us to be known.

The fall then of so excellent a personage, To what end the fall of Solomon is
set forth unto us
is therefore set forth unto us, that we should know with how great
carfulness we ought to walk between the sleightes of the Devil and sin,
in whose snares the best men are sometimes entrapped: and moreover that we
holilye use the gifts of God, least being puffed up with them, we be deprived
of his grace, of the which being void, and trusting unto our strength, we must
needs run headlong into assured destruction. Further the express and plain
setting down of the fault of Solomon, appertains unto the Historye
following of the scattering of the kingdom of Israel, the cause whereof to
have rested in the posterity of David, is plainly proved by this notable sin
of Solomon. But for all this, whatsoever may be determined either of the
salvation or damnation of Solomon, The fall of Solomon is no discredit to his
writings, And why?
this notwithstanding must be holden for certaintye, that the reproach of his
falling away or punishment, makes nothing at all against his Writings, and
that therefore the authority of them is not hereby lessened nor diminished: For
as much as Solomon is not the Author, but only the Writer and interpreter of
the truth in them contained and taught, for the authority of doctrine must
not hang upon the person of the minister, but altogether upon the dignitye of
the Author. And there is nothing, either in this or in the rest of the
writings of Solomon, the which does not very well agree with the truth of the
Prophets and Apostles, the which is all one and simple truth: as with one
afsured consent, the learned and right minded antiquity has acknowledged: and
the Hebrew copy it self numbered among the holy writings does sufficiently
declare.

Therefore I will not make any longer stay in the proof of that matter, the
which I set down as sure, and agreede upon: namelye, that the writings of
Solomon, and also this Sermon, are Canonical Scripture, and plainly agree
with the truth, and that God would have them remain abroad for the edifying
of his Ghurch. Only we are to beg of him that we may learn the pure and true
meaning of this Sermon, and apply it unto our profit.

The chief and or scope of this discourse.
Having laid down the authority of this Book, the next is, that we see what
is his scope, that is, his chief end, and what is the matter whereof it
entreats. They which have in such sort marked out this end, that they
say, that Solomon in setting forth the vanity of this life (that is to say of
the councels and doings of men) minded to make us contented, and to be of
quiet minds in the common affairs and chances of this life, that we should
use with thanks giving the creatures of God, which through his blessing are
frankely given unto us, being contented with things present, without careful
pensiveness for things to come: do in deed say something, but yet do not
plainly enough set down the matter: like as they do not also who do think
the principal point of this work thus to be divided: namely that this whole
sermon is an auouching of doctrine concerning God his providence, and a
confuting of such things as may be objected against it, in the which are
comfortes to strengthen our minds against the confusion of things, and
threatninges against those unbridled outrages of men of lewd disposition,
which in this life run rashlye on on ahead without all fear as it were of
punishment. For these places are very excellently handled in this discourse,
yet are they not to be judged the chief and principal end of the same, but
they are fitly applied for the proof thereof. Now the rules of a true
demonstration do require, that the thing it self be severed from the
circumstances of the same. And as the thing or matter is one, so ought it to be
noted out with one certain name, and not to be darkelye shadowed with a long
discourse of many words, least that it be confounded with the circumstaunces
of the same, the which were altogether disagreeing from good order of teaching.

Therefore I take the principal end of this discourse to be, OF THE CHIEF,
or, SOVEREIGNE GOOD, the which by his contrary is notably declared. For when
as Felicity or happiness is the principal and chief end of our whole
life, and that all men with the whole labor and endeavor of their wills and
studies are carried thereunto, and because in that common consent and desire of
one and the same thing, there are so many and diverse opinions of men of all
sorts, and yet in the mean season the greatest part of men are led far and
wide away from Felicity or happiness, it is altogether needful that there
should be extant a plain doctrine of Felicity, whereupon we might certainly
rest: least in stead of true happiness, we lay hold upon the show and shadow
of happiness. The which doubtless will come to pass, if we follow the
guiding and leading of the wit of man, which with pe^siue, rash, and wandering
error, seeks felicity in things of this world The which pensiveness and
error of men, Solomon does here so artificially describe and paint out, being
a fit judge of this controversy, that the heat and earnestness of those
reasoninges, and debating the matter cannot more liuelye be laid before us. For
first he teaches that happiness is no where to be found in things of the
world, viz. he shows, What happiness is not, against the arguments of man his
reason, dreaming falsely of a vain show of happiness. Then having confuted the
errors of this corrupt reason, he teaches What felicity or happiness is,
and as he had parted and severed it from all the counsels and dealinges of
the life of man: so he does altogether place it in the fear of God, that is
to say, in the true knowledge of the true God, and in his diligent and earnest
service: and finally he does diversely and singulerlye declare the use of this
knowledge. That this is the true end, and handling of this whole discourse,
the things being diligently weighed, I hope that all learned and sober minded
men will confess with me, and that the same may fitly be divided into three
points. For first the contrary member of this principal question is set down
by the way of confutation, namely, that true felicity is never to be found in
any worldly matter, yea and that the title of happiness is falsely given unto
them, for as much as in them there is no sufficiency or fullness, so that the
mind may be content with his own estate, but most great want of all things.
Secondlye, the especial matter of this discourse is showed, and that expressly,
What true felicity or happiness is, the which is wholly placed in godliness. And
he teaches that the same is not a vain and idle contemplatio^, but indeed a
workful and effectual, the which goes far and wide, through the life of ours.
Thirdly the use of this most notable doctrine, is at large set forth, and in
discoursing thereof, throughout all the parts of man his life, a great part of
this treatise is occupied. For he diligently teaches and notes a double
force, and as it were reason of this use. First that we should strengthen our
minds with convenient remedies against the want and vainness of fleeting and
brittle things, that is, of such things as are to be found in this mortal and
miserable life, and therefore that we should turn our selves from the
uncertain and cumbersome state of the same, unto things heavenly and
everlasting, and unto that hope of restoring: and in the mean season assure
our selves that the providence of God will watch over our affairs, that
trusting unto his aid, having our minds pacifyed, we should bear the toils
and labors of this life, and being contented with the present state of
things, we should use and enjoy the creatures of God, and abandoning the
desires of vayn things, whereunto worldly men in vain do give themselves,
we should seek sound sufficiency and fullness of mind without the love of
this world, and among all the garboyles of the life of man, look for unto our
selves an happy end. Secondly that we should earnestly think upon the leading
of our life godly and honestly: the which is the way unto happiness, and the
second effect of this use.

All these things are plentifully and notably discoursed by Solomon, with a
certain and constant row of Arguments: the Objections which seem to be
against this doctrine are diligently rehearsed, because these profane and
worldly cogitations and thoughts do stir up great and daily turmoiles in the
minds of men. Against these also are set down convenient and fit remedies, to
ease our minds of the abashmente of these confusions and garboyles which do
compass and beset this life of ours: there are adioined many promises to
comfort the hearts of the faithful, and threatenings against the authors and
workers of those sturs, and that for the sake of the godly, least that they
should be too much dismayde at the outward felicity of desperate and lewd
persons, therefore as the state of this discourse is most simple and one,
namely concerning felicity or happiness, so there are used in the same,
especial points of doctrine touching God his providence, Sundry notable
matters handled in this discourse.
touching the true and right use of his benefits, touching the vanity of man
his affections, and lusts abusing the good Creatures of GOD, touching the true
and sound sufficiency or contentedness of mind, and such other like: and that
with such picked frame of words, with such pithie strength of sentences, with
such a several row of arguments in so great varyetye of matter, that the
sharp wit of all the Philosophers (and that in this common place of Felicity
or happiness, then which in all Philosophy there is handled nothing more
weighty and notable) compared with this treatise seems to be utterly cold
and of small accountes. The discourses of all the philosophers nothing
comparable to this Sermon.
Which thing shall appear by the reading of the discourse it self: it shall
moreover be delightsome in the mean season, seuerallye to point out by
setting down the particular parts of the discourse, the things which
generally and breefely I have showed.

This therefore is the particular distribution or handling of this whole
discourse.
First of all is laid down the contrary part of the principal question, The
disposition and order of this discourse.
the which is at large handled from the very beginning, even unto the end of
the 4 chap. that felicity or happiness is not at all in those things and
affairs which are usual in this life. Therefore is the general proposition
set down in the beginning by way of confutation, That all things which are
under the sun are vain, and that Felicity is not comprised in them.
Afterward there are reasons brought to prove the same, taken from the
sufficient reckoning up of parts, by induction or alleging of those things
in the which man his reason does place happiness, the which do most clearly
appear in the fellowship of men, and use of life. What is more beautiful or
excellent then knowledge? yet he teaches that felicity is not in it, and
that in the first chapter.

Secondly he teaches that it is not in Pleasure, nor in the Wisdom of man,
by the aid whereof notwithstanding, it is thought that the life of man in
every respect may conveniently be lead the which discourse he continues unto
the 16 verse of the third chapter. ^leasure and the Wisdom of man. Virtue.
And what shall we say of Virtue? Are not they amongst men most happy, which
direct their life according unto her rule? And he considers of virtue
according unto the manner of men, and not in regard of her self, that is to
say, according unto that issue which it comes unto among men most usually.
Solomon makes answer, that such are the affairs of men, that among so
sundry and many torments of fortune, as they say, virtue is not sufficiently
able to defend her self: nay that in that kind of life there is sometime
great miserye, because that innocence is many times injured and oppressed
under the pretense and title even of law or justice, and the very throne of
justice is the minister of great ungodliness and injustice: also in the common
course of life, the best men often go to the pot, and the worst of all sit (as
they say) on Cockhorse. And in a thing so honorable and royal, this is the
head of cheifest misery, for that over and above the raunging of such outrages
in the life of man, and the rewarding of Godliness with so pitiful a wages,
yet notwithstanding the good do die as well as the bad, as if death without
any difference did swallow them up, and in such sort, that nothing seems to
be left after this life. For so does man his reason judge, whereof there cannot
choose but be perceived an infinite misery of this mortal life, as if the
estate of the dead, or of them which never lived, were far better then the
estate of them that live. Which thing he does from the sixteenth verse of the
third chapter, unto the fourth verse of the fourth chapter.

Those sorts of life being after this manner examined, he comes unto certain
particular trades of life, Single life.
and notes those in which seems to be either less trouble, or more
commodity. The single life is commended, as being quit and free from those
great encombrances, wherewith the married life is often laden. The life of
Noble men.
The life of noble and great men by a certain singular privilege seems to
excel other kinds of life, yet he teaches that happiness is neither in the
one nor the other: and therefore by the conclusion of the induction he
confirms that general sentence: that al is vanity: the which (as we have
said) he was to prove by way of confutation first of all, before that he showed
the contrary: that is to say, both what true happiness is, and by what means
we attain thereunto.

Before he come to that second point, he sets down certain things in the
manner of a Praeface. For meaning to place true happiness in the fear of the
Lord, that is, in the true knowledge of GOD, he teaches that it is not a
certain outward observing and keeping of ceremonies, or a bosting of Religion,
consisting in many words: and this he does from the fourth chapter, verse
seventeenth unto sixte verse of the fifte Chapter, and afterward does so
discourse the matter, that breefely showing and setting down the sum of the
whole disputation in these words, Fear God, he shows the use thereof fully
and throughlye even unto the last end of the book, which is the third part of
the whole disputation.

Of Godl^nesse, in which he placed the chief point of happiness, he teaches
a double use. The first, namelye, Godliness.
that it ministers fit and convenient remedies against that carfulness of
mind, the which is wont to arise of the want of worldly things: which want
he had before declared at the full. Secondlye that it teaches a way to frame
our life well and honestly.

He uses therefore an especial garnishing and as it were poolishing of those
things, the which he had taken before for the making unto happiness
according unto the common judgment of man his reason, and as he had taught
that happiness was far from them, so he strengthens our minds against
them. Therefore in the 5. chapter, and seventh verse, he entreats first of
the remedies against that most grievous tentation. Of the which he had spoken
cap. 3. ver. 16. How namely it comes to pass that innocence is punished
under the show and title of justice, and they oftentimes become the ministers
of injustice, the which by God are appointed the keepers and maintayners of
Justice, ver. 7.8.9. From the 10. ver. he begins to entreat of the remedies
against the want and vanity of riches (...) setting out that same disease it
self many ways unto the 8. ver. of the 6. chapter.

In the eyghth verse of the sixth Chapter, he teaches a remedy against the
vanitye of man his knowledge, of the which he had entreated in the very
beginning of the disputation. Then he minds to show remedies against the
quiddities and hardness of man his wisdom, of the which also he had spoken
chapter 2 and 3. from the third verse of the 7. chapter. unto the 8. verse,
he teaches remedies against triumphing pleasure. From that eyghth verse of
the seventh chapter unto the eyghteenth verse of the same chapter, he teaches
remedies against impatiencie, the which arises of sorrow concerning things in
trouble and out of order: and then especially, when as virtue is evil
entreated even under the color and show of justice, of the which matter he
had entreated chapter third, and fourth, and fifth.

From thence he makes himself an entrance unto the second part of the use
which he teaches to proceed of godliness, namely of the framing of our life
aright: in the which second part notwithstanding he very fitly repeateth many
things which appertain unto the first part. First of all he sets down
general rules concerning the framing of our life well and honestly whose sure
and certain safegarde he says to consist in godliness it self: from the
ninteenth verse of the seventh chapter unto the twenty and one verse of the
same.

Then he gives a lesson for the avoiding of curiosity, unto the 22 verse of
the same seventh chapter, from the 23. ver. unto the end of the chapter, Of
avoiding of lust and Wantonness.

In the 8. chap. ver. 1. Of Modesty unto the second verse.

From that unto the fifth, of Prudence, whereby we may know safely how to
behave our selves with Kings and great personages.

From the 5. ver. unto the 15. ver. of the 9. chap. Of stoutnes of mind to
behave our selves constantly and courageously in so great hurliburly of things
of this world, that we be not overwhelmed with those waves, where is
discoursed a notable place Of the end of the wicked.

There is handled an excellent comparison of Wisdom with Folle, from the 16.
ver. of the 9. chap. unto the 3 ver of the 10. chap. from the 4 ver. of the
same chapt. unto the 7. is taught a lesson of modesty, Of the keeping of modesty
eue^ toward waiward and bad magistrates. The 8. ver. of the same chap. of
avoiding of deceit, and Of babbling, ver. 9.11. Then of Industry and diligence,
ver. 15. of a King, ver. 16 and 17. that is to say, how available it is for
the common wealth to have a good king. The 18 ver. of the same cha. of
Slouthfulnes, that is to say, of the having no care for a man his household,
against the which he matcheth thrift and profitable diligence ver. 18. Herevpo^
taking occasion in the 10 chap. he sets down a most holy precept concerning
Charity, to help the poor, albeit there appear no hope of recovering of that
which we give unto the^. In the 12. chap. applying that doctrine unto young men,
the which do most need the same, he teaches a most wholesome and necessary
lesson, Soberly to use this life, and with the earnest thinking upon death, as
it were with a bit to hold in and rule the delites and wanton pleasures
thereof, and not to let pass the occasion to do well: least we be overtaken
with death at unawares. Therefore he warns young men in their flourishing and
strong age, earnestly to think upon old age, yea and also death it self.

So he makes an end of the whole disputation, and as the rules of a true
demonstration do require, he sets down the sum of the disputation in
plain words, The end of the whole law is heard, Fear God, etc. Of which words
doubtless the contents and matter of the whole disputation is to be judged,
as if he should say: That which was to be proved. And he does in such sort note
the chief and principal end, that he does withal show the chief and
essential parts of the disputation He declares by way of praeface that he
brings not these things neither from the opinion of the common people, nor
from the schools of man his wisdom, but fetches out of the very storehouse
of the truth* which sou^deth in the Church of God, grounded on sure sentences
of God his decrees, as namely that happiness consists in godliness, and in the
true use thereof, that is in the keeping of the commandments of God: That this
is all man, or the whole of man, that is the principal and chief end of man
his life* the master end, as they use to speak. Finally that God by his
providence does wisely order things that are entangled, and will in his time
repair them.

The issue therefore of the whole disputation is perfect and full. That
happiness is not to be found in things of this world: That the same does
consist in godliness, to wit, by the which we are joined unto God, that we
may obtain life everlasting, that is, true and perfect happiness: that the
use and profit of Godliness is very great and very excellent, the which does
plentifully flow through all the parts of our life.

This seems to be the description and frame of this discourse, in the which
with a wonderful knitting together of arguments, and a lofty and indeed
philosophical kind of writing is handled a most weighty place of true moral
philosophy, Concerning the chief and soueraign good, and of the way to attain
it, and of the use of the same But after a far other sort, then the moral
Philosophers are wont to do, which in their darkness and ignorance have hard
and scarcelye retained some certain small sparks of the original truth, the
which are here very plainly declared.

And in the very manner of reasoning there is apparent, a notable example of
that order of disputing, which is to be found among the more sounder
philosophers, the which do prove their matters with most invincible and
strongest reasons, the which in their art they call Demonstrations: The matter
first is barely set down, then is it afterward more finely polished and
garnished: the matter is canuased to and fro: there are used many inductions:
the principles and certain conclusions which spring of them, are plainly and
evidently showed: the laying open of them is diligently handled, the use often
repeated: a recital and abrigement of the whole disputation and discourse,
showing the matter and principal circumstances of the same. And it shall be
profitable in the Table following, to set down the sum and chief points, of
the discourse which is most obscure and hard.

A Table of the Doctrine contained in this discourse.
The principal and chief end of this sermon is, concerning the chief and
sovereign good, in defining and setting out of the which because that men do
many ways go awry, laying hold only upon a shadow of happiness in stead of
true happiness, therefore Solomon In the first place shows What happiness
is not, and generally teaches, that the same is not in worldly things, the
which he proves by the reckoning up of the cheifest parts of the life of
man, to wit, That it is not in the knowledge of man, Nor in Pleasure, Nor in
man his Wisdom, Nor in virtue also herself, if i^ be considered by the issue
and falling out of things, Nor in any kind of life, either of private or of
great and famous personages.
Cap. 1.12. ver. to the end of the chapter. Cap. 2. ver. 1. and 2. Ca. 2. v. 3.
to the 3. cap. ver. 15. Cap. 3. ver. 16. unto the 6. ver. cap. 4. Chap. 4.
verse 4. unto the end of the Chapter.

In the second place he teaches What happiness is: namely, to fear God,
that is to say, to worship God with a true and unfeigned mind, the which is the
scope and drifte of the chief question. Cap. 5. ver. 6. and 12. ver. 13.
In the 3. place he handles. The use of the doctrine of happiness, the which
he sets down to be double, to wit, In ministering remedies against the
vanity of the life of man. In a rule of well and honest framing of our life.
Cap. 5. ver. 9. unto the 6. cap. v. 8. Cap. 7. ver. 9. unto the end: where he
gathers the sum and abridgement of the whole discourse.



These things being thus set down, it remains, that we should understand
what is the use of this most notable discourse. The use of this discourse The
policy of Satan.
For Satan has sundry ways abused the truth of this Doctrine, impudently to
establish al kind of lies, whereof has come to pass, that this book being
obscured and darkened with these unfit and wrong interpretations, could not
choose but lie in moldinesse and dust, that is to say, Against such as abuse
the words of this sermon.

Absurdities rising of the miss understanding of some places of this book.

1 Philosophye condemned.

2 The mortality of the soul.

3 Doubting of our salvation.


be little esteemed and regarded, Some being vnluckilye given unto man his
Philosophy, and by the self same thing bewraying their mind far indeed from
true Philosophy, out of this that Solomon does earnestlye find fault with
vain Philosophy* would conclude that Philosophy is vain, whereas Solomon
says, That all things are hard and full of labor: as if all other actions
of life were to be laid aside, that they may wholly give themselves unto the
study of those hard matters. Lewd and wicked persons make bold to thrust upon
us the Epicurish, and godless frantike opinion of the mortality of the soul,
out of the words of Solomon, for that he says, that there is all one end of a
fool, and of a wise man, of a man, and of a beast. Out of these words, A man
knows not love or hatred. Mad and unskillful Sophisters, do shake the
foundation of our Faith: that is, the assured persuasion and undoubted assent
and belief of the goodness of god toward us, without the which the knowledge of
our salvation is altogether vain: vain are the sentences of promises, upon
the which as upon undoubted and sure principles and grounds of best knowledge
faith staying, gathers everlasting conclusions of the perpetual goodness and
mercy of God toward us: and finally vain is the Author himself of those good
things (which God forbid that we should so much as once think) who has so
holily promised these things unto us, and whose promises, when as we lay
hold on by faith, we do as it were by our seal confirm him to be true.

Whereas Solomon often says, that al things are vanity, 4 The utter
overthrow of the whole course and trade of life.
and wills us to forsake the world, some frantike spirits have affyrmed
that hereby is established the forsakinge and giving over of those duties in
which the trade and course of the society and fellowship of man does
consist, that is, the utter overthrow and destruction of life: as if marriages,
gouernementes. necessary labors in the Church, in the common wealth, and in
our families at home, and such other things, which appertain unto the
maintaynaunce of this life, were condemned, that through the unprofitable
idleness and giving over all things in them forsooth which wholly intend to
consecrate and hallowe themselves unto God our minds should be troubled, and
shunnish all company of men, then the which nothing can be imagined and
devised more pernicious and hurtefull. Of the which devises notwithstanding
there have been many unhappy mayntainers among the auntiente Doctors of the
Church: Ancient Doctors patrons of fooleries.
and have laid the foundations of iniquity and superstition, whilst contrary
unto the flat prohibition of the Apostle, they urge too earnestly bodily
exercise. What needs many words? Out of this plain truth the frantike and
profane boldness of me^ has brought in infinite idols and shadows of truth not
through any fault of this most excellent doctrine. The book of the Preacher a
very hard book.
For albeit there is no man but that he may see this Book to be dark and
hard to understand (as Peter says of Paul) yet in vain do frantike heads
take occasion of erroures unto their own destruction of things amiss
understood, like as they do of other scriptures* when as this doctrine is not
only true and altogether aunswerable and agreeing with the canonical
scripture, but is also very profitable for the well framing of the life of man.

The which Rocks that we may avoid, certain rules are of us to be set down
before unto the which we may as it were diligently leuel in the searching out
of the meaning of the words and the use and profit is particularlye to be
showed, the which we ought to reap by reading this sermon.

Let the first rule be, that Solomon does oftentimes speak, Certain rule^
necessary for the true understanding of this sermon.
not according unto his own mind, but according unto the judgment of reason
being corrupted, albeit he seem to lay down things barely and playnelye:
namely of purpose so precisely framing his speech, that the image of this
blind reason may be more clearly and lively represented. So there are often
chaunginges of speech, The first rule (...).
the which, if Solomon his purpose be not throughlye examined, may seem to
have a clean contrary force and meaning.

The Second, that we must not give judgment of the whole sentence by some
part of the sentence, 2 The second rule.
but must weigh the whole it self by his circumstances, comparinge together
the things that go before with the things that follow. For as it is a point of
inciuilitie (as the Lawers do teach) to catch some one parcel of the law, not
viewing the whole law, so is it no point of a Divine, snatching at some
certain words, to judge of the whole sentence. For many things are spoken in
some respect, and that most truly, the which in them selves and simplye
should not be true: as it shall appear by the places themselves.

The third, 3 The third rule.
that Solomon does not condemn the things themselves, and creatures of God,
as knowledge, the pleasant use of things, prudence, riches, honors, and other
such like, but the abuse of these things, that is to say, the studies,
counsels, desires, endeavors of mankind abusing the good creatures of GOD.
For it is blasphemy to condemn the creatures of God, the which cannot be but
very good, whereas all the fault of the vanity of them is to be laid upon
man, as being cause thereof. For whatsoever God has created (says the
Apostle) is good, and nothing to be refused, if it be taken with thanks
giving: the which use also of the creatures Solomon does evidently and
clearly teach.

The fourth, that the ground of all these precepts, the which seem to be mere
civil, and to appertain unto this life, 4 The fourth rule.
must be wisely noted, that they may be distinguished from politic or
Philosophical precepts, with the which otherwise they might after a sort both
in words and meaning seem to agree. Namely that the knowledge of the redeemer
is the life, and as it were the soul of all this doctrine, and therefore that
forgiveness of sins and repentance, the promise of everlasting life in the
person of the son of god, and to be short his voice sounding in the true
church unto the true and sound understanding of this doctrine, ought first of
al to be laid down, and to be the everlasting and in deed chief principles of
the same. Herby shall this holy Philosophy be distinguished from heathen and
profane: and the sound and lively portraiture of virtues, which are here set
down unto us, shall be severed from politic virtues, that is to say, from
the shadow and show of virtue: that we should not reckon Solomon in the
same number with Hesiodus, The precepts of Solomon do greatly differ from the
precepts of the Heathen Philosophers.
Pythagoras, Phocylides, Plato, and the rest of the teachers of the Heathen:
like as Solomon him self does also plainly witness that his doctrine is the
self same, the which to wit he has learned from one Pastor, that is Moses
the minister of the law, or rather from Christ the everlasting teacher of his
Church, and that he only applied it as it were pricks unto the men of his
time, and taught it in the Church, in whose bosom he must rest himself,
whosoever will truly profit in the same and thereby reap assured and
certain commodity. Although we must also know this, that always the chief
light of the word of God is to be sought out of the doctrine of our Lord
Jesus Christ delivered by his Apostles, least any man should think that we do
so commend one, and the same light of the fathers before Christ, that by the
coming of Christ him self we did not perceive the son to have shined more
brightly then at noone day.

Through the guidance and help of these rules, and the true laying open of the
words, the meaning of this sermon will not be ambiguous or doubtful, nor the
use and profit uncertain, the which no doubt will be manifold by the sure and
certain understanding of this most excellent doctrine.

1 The first profit.
This truly is very great and most profitable, to know the way not only how
to lead this life well and happily, but also the way how to come unto that
everlasting happiness, which remains for us in Heaven. For when as this
cause has moved all men, of all ages (in whom there have any sparks of truth
remained) that setting aside all other things they have given themselves wholly
to search out the best state of life: A way to attain unto happiness.
no doubt they spent their so great care and travail in that study for the
hope to live happily: and yet it is manifest that they have been so busied in
this matter, that they may seem not so much to have attained the thing which
they sought, as to have made vows of a thing most excellent. Therefore the
authority of this doctrine ought to be most honorable unto us, whereby we
may attain not only unto the knowledge, but unto the sure and sound
knowledge of so worthy a matter, not having Plato, Aristotle, Cicero, or some
other blind man to our guide, but Christ himself the true archeleader unto
life, as who is unto us from his father the way, the truth, and the life. In
laying open this happiness. What it is, and what way we may attain unto it,
this sermon is chiefly occupied.

Also in so great imbecillitie and weakness of mankind, 2 The second profit. To
bear our selves valiantly and stoutly among the discommodities of this life.
among so many mazes of so great confusions, out of which there is no way to
be found out, it can hard and scarsly be chosen, but that our minds shall be
greatly amazed: when as we behold the falls of mankind, the overthrows of
kingdoms, the deaths as well of good as bad, the good in their life time to
be often troubled with great miseries, the wicked not only to be safe and
free from troubles, but also to flourish, and to be endued with wealth and
kingdoms. Against these so dangerous awhapementes as it is needful that our
minds should be strengthened with convenient remedies, so this sermon does
yield unto us those remedies clearly and plentifully.

And among all the vanities of the life of man this is the most vain, that
there can scarsly any man be found, 3 The third profit. A remedy against
discontentednesse with our estate.
which lives content with his estate: the which is ingraffed in all men by the
blot of sin, that they are carried about to and fro with vain desires: yea,
and more over do defraude and bereave themselves of the use of things
present, and vex themselves in vain with care and carking for things to
come, and cannot soundly enjoy the benefits of God. But if perfect
contentedness of mind be a true note of happiness: doubtless this pensive
and toylesome care and carking is a token of chiefest unhappiness. This sermon
afoordeth fit remedies against this miserable and restless vanity also, and
that so conveniently and plentifully, that there can be nothing so pensive and
toylsome in this life, which may not be assuaged with these remedies. 4 The
fourth profit, that in the common society we do our duties.


It should be an ouerthart satietie and contentedness of mind, carelessly to
despise the duties of life, such as the law commands. Therefore Solomon
teaches, that we ought to be in such sort prepared, that we be so far
forth content with the present state of things, that we withdraw not from God
that obedience the which we owe unto him. The which he teaches to be the true
use of that same godliness, which he affirms to be the sure way unto
happiness Therefore that God is to be obeyed, the duties of our calling
diligently to be done, and all the encumbrances, the which are linked with the
same, to be borne and suffered with a quiet mind.

5 The fifth profit, that we follow our vocation and calling.
He sets down a way and mean how to bear these encumbrances with a
constant mind: that is to say, that we heedefully follow the rules of God his
commandments, refrain from man his curiosity, the which through confidence
in it self stirs up unto things beyond the compass of our vocation: that we
should not walk proudly and rashly in the ministry of our vocation, trusting
unto our own strength: but that we ask help of God, and be obedient unto him,
what event or issue soever do in the end fall out, and out of his promise
persuade our selves. that so far as he shall see it expedient, our course shall
profit the church, according unto the proportion and measure of our gifts.

6 The sixth profit, that we strengthen our minds by the word of God with
sound patience
But least that we might suppose that in this book is set before us a certain
kind of Phylosophical mortification or patient enduring of labors, Solomon
does diligently teach, that the lively doctrine of the church concerning the
forgiveness of sins and life everlasting with the persuasion whereof is joined
the gift of regeneration or newbirth, is the foundation of these comforts, the
which good minds do understand to be true and healthful. For, for this cause
he will have us to enter into the house of god, and to come to hear the voice
of that only pastor, of whom he does plainly confess that he has received all
that he has. To wit, that the son of God apeareth not only the judge of our
fightings, but also to fight with us, that by his power we may overcome, yea,
and also that his power getting the victori might triumph in our infirmity or
weakness. A difference between heathenish and Christian patience.
This Christian patience therefore, of the which the preacher entreats so
plainly in this book, does far and wide differ from heathenish or
Philosophical patience the which consists only in this, to think that there
is nothing befalling to a man, but that it may befall unto it, to count all
things under it self that may happen unto a man, and despicing them to contemn
all humane chances, and to be wholly fitted and framed by reason, by whose rule
it suffers it self to be governed, and suffers those pains for duties
sakes, the which reason has ordained to be suffered. But in as much as that
same reason it self is blind, we must also hold that the guidance of the same
is preposterous and overthwart: and that therefore there is no true patience: no
right framing of duties, before the which the acknowledging of the true God
does not shine, the which is the rule of true obedience: to wit, that we
bear with a quiet mind the labors and miseries the which god wills us to
bear, and that we obey his commandments, albeit that it be with the assured
hasard of our lives, moreover that we beg and wait for help from him and that
through the hope of this help from God, we constantly persevere and continue in
the raze of our calling begun, and that with assured conte^tednes and quiet of
mind, we assuage the sorrow, the which by reason of the incumbra^ces of this
life cannot choose but greatly dismay our minds, and that we hope for happy
success such and so great as the lord shall please to give.

These and other most excellent profits may be gathered by the reading of this
sermon: as for the places in which these profits are contained, I did not think
good for this cause severally to set down, because that every foot they come
in the way of the reader. But hereout let us learn so to frame our selves,
that abandoning the vanity of worldly desires, we wholly give our selves unto
the service of God, and that we go in that path of happiness, the pledges whereof
we have in this life through assured and sound quietness of mind, and the
pleasant use of the gifts of God, until that at the appointed time, we attain
unto the possession of perfect happiness the which God has laid up for us in
heaven. This setting down of the manifold profit of this book, will prepare the
mind of the reader unto the more full reading of this sermon. Let it be enough
for us to have noted the chief points.

Now in the laying open of the words themselves there lies no small hardness.
Great hardness in the words of this book.
For in the very phrase of speaking (the which in deed is poetical, and
therefore more lofty with the garnishments of figures) Solomon seems beyond
the common course of speaking, to have used a certain more exqui^te braveness
of a more fine and excellent pensill. Such a kind of loftiness and majesty of
speech, as we also see especially in Esaias: albeit neither Moses, nor Job,
nor David are without their grace and exquisiteness in writing. So the holy
Ghost, whose judgment concerning things is best, has also used the best and
most elegant words: so that they are to be taken for stark fools who accusing
the simplicity of the scripture of childishness and not knowinge how to
speak, do therefore refuse it, because they are not able to conceive the
finenesse and trimnesse of the same. For when as they are blind in the things
themselves, why should they not be blind also in the words? And let us set
against their unskillfulness the forceable and pithie eloquence of the holy
Ghost most far in speaking exceeding all the gifts without question of all
heathen writers. An this verily is true, if not only the words, but rather
the power and force of the scripture be weighed, so that those things which in
some Prophets may seem base, and as it were creeping on the ground, do yet
notwithstanding with their weight, and their heavenly majesty throw down and
as it were trample under their feet all the flourishing and furniture of man
his wisdom.

Vale.
A Commentary of John Serranus, upon the Preacher of Solomon.
The first Chapter.
1 The words of the Preacher, the son of David, King in Jerusalem.
The Exposition.
THere is no doubt but that by this name of the Preacher, Solomon noted under
the name of the Preacher.
Solomon is noted after a certain kind of excellency, for as much as the
names of David his father, and the kingdom of Israel (the chief city whereof
was Jerusalem) are plainly expressed. But at what time he wrote these things,
it is not in deed certain: The time uncertain when this book was written.
yet the conjecture is likely to be true, that he wrote these things in his
last age: for he writes in such sort, as if he had learned this doctrine by
very great experience of things and long use: and there is a peculiar
circumstance hereafter, cap. 12. And this Preface he sets down before this
most excellent discourse of the chief and sovereign good, to get unto him
self authority and attention or heedefull hearing by the gloriousnes and
dignity of his person: for it is not one of the common sort that speaks, or
secretly whispereth some thing: but he does evidently preach, who being
garnished by God with great and glorious gifts, and renowned in the Church of
God with princely dignity, has lawful authority to teach, for it is not to
be thought that it came to pass at all adventure, that Solomon was endued with
that same extraordinary wisdom. Yet do I not think that Solomon preached
these things out of the Pulpit, for I allow the conjecture of Luther, that the
Hebrew word which is translated the Preacher, is rather to be referred unto the
matter it self then unto the person of Solomon: the which doctrine he did not
only teach diligently unto the men of his time to serve unto all occasions,
but also would have it to be common, that it might be understood of all men,
and being committed unto writing that should last for ever, might be delivered
over unto posterity, Diverse callings are not to be hudled up together.
and be profitable unto the Church. For Solomon did not huddle up together
diverse functions and callings, that is to say the office of a King and of a
Preacher. For whereas the holy history does bear record that he preached in
the dedication of the temple, that was a thing extraordinary, beyond the
general duty of kings in maintaining and spreading abroad of true doctrine:
and yet was not such, that the bounds of callings should be broken, the which
how pernicious and hurtful it is, the holy history does teach by the
lamentable example of Ozias no bad king otherwise. The Hebrew word Koheleth,
the Greeks translate a Preacher in the masculine gender, that is to say, such
a one as does teach in an assembly, or in the congregation and Church: whereas
notwithstanding the Hebrew word is the feminine gender, the which the
interpreters do in such sense expound, that they say, this word Nephesch,
soul, is to be understood, in the same, that the gender may agree, as if it
were a Preaching soul. And it seems to be a very fit kind of speaking,
whereby the great earnestnes of the preacher is more expressly signified: as
if namely not his mouth, but his mind did speak, that is to say, his mind
after a sort were to be seen in his words.

By the name of Words, What is to be understood by this name Words.
according unto the usual manner of the scripture, he understands certain
grave, weighty, and profitable sayings, not common or worn, but such as are
worthy the minding, and very meet to be well kept in memory: as in the
Psalms, and in other places, and, the words of Jeremy, or, the word of the
Lord which was given by Ozeas, and such like, the which are wont to be set
down in the beginnings of the Prophets. And by this kind of speaking this
also seems to be signified, that the matter is not set forth barely and
simply, or by writing, and in common speech, but such as is to be uttered by
the public ministry of the Church: and that the same in deed is a
profitable doctrine, the which sounds in the Church, and that it is the
office of the ministers, that they speak.

The doctrine.
The dignity of the ministry.
1 The authority of the word does not in deed hang upon the person of the
minister: yet provision must be made, that the dishonestie of the minister hurt
not the dignity and gloriousness of his ministry. Now let the Ministry
of the Church be reckoned vile and base with wretched men, when as so notable a
king had it in so great a price, that he would peculiarly be termed by that
title.

The office of princes and magistrates.
2 The especial duty also of Princes and of all chief Magistrates is
signified: namely that they be maintainers of true religion: and that therefore
they diligently labor about this one thing, that the people may be rightly
instructed in sound doctrine: which is the true and sound foundation and
strengthening of all commonweals. And truly by better right might we call
that common wealth happy, in which the King or Prince, either were a divine,
or a divine, king, then a Philosopher, such Philosophers as were the wicked
Emperors and unhappily learned, Marcus the Philosopher, and Iulianus the
Apostata or backslider, in whom the knowledge of Philosophy and learning was
an hurtful instrument to the plague and destruction of their subjects. On the
contrary side the examples of David, Solomon, Ezechias and other godly kings
have taught, that the earnest study and care to plant religion is the most
sure foundation of the common wealth, wherewith it being established, may
happily and prosperously be increased.

3 Furthermore the word Koheleth, What the word Koheleth does teach us.
the which is taken from a verb which signifies to call together an
assembly, shows two things. One, that this is the true way to be wise, which
is not occupied only in bare speculation, but that which is altogether
referred unto practice and the common profit of the Church.

4 The second, that the same is a true consent and agreement of kings and
people, that with joined minds they embrace true doctrine, and that Princes
ought to be guides and preseruers of that agreement. For both the title of a
Preacher is given unto king Solomon: and also this word Preaching does plainly
import a multitude great or small, to be preached unto. Let princes therefore
and people know, what is the true and sure way to increase the public peace:
Princes.
that the one employ their travel, that the voice of pure doctrine may sound
in the Church, and that they sharply punish false doctrine, and that herein
especially they use their authority: People.
and let the other with all diligence and reverence execute the commandment of
their Princes in maintaining and spreading abroad of true doctrine.

A general confutation, touching the vanity of man
2 Vanity of vanities, said the Preacher: vanity of vanities, all things are
vanity.

3 What profit is there unto a man of all his labor, wherewith he labors
under the sun?

4 One generation passes, and an other generation comes: but the earth
stands for ever.

5 The sun rises and the sun goes down, and returns again unto the
place from whence he rises.

6 He goes unto the South and fetteth about unto the North: the wind goes
round about, and the wind returns unto his circuites.

7 All the rivers go into the sea, and the sea is not filled: the rivers
return unto the place from whence they go, that they may return again.

8 All things are laboursome, neither is a man able to utter it: the eye is not
satisfied with seeing, nor the ear filled with hearing.

9 What is there which has been? the self same thing which shall be: and
what is there that has been done? the self same thing that shall be done,
and there is no new thing under the sun.

10 Is there any thing, of which it may be said, behold this thing, it is new?
it has bin in ready in the ages, which have been before us.

11 There is no remembrance of the former things: and also concerning the
latter things which shall be, there shall be no remembrance of them amongst
those which shall be afterward.


The exposition.
2 Vanity, etc.] The purpose of Solomon in all this sermon.
The purpose of Solomon in all this Sermon (as has been said already in the
preface) is to teach, what is happiness, and what is the way and means for to
obtain the same. The which that he may show, because that the greatest part
of men is deceived under the name and show of happiness, in the first place
he teaches what happiness is not, that is to say, he refuteth all those
things, in the which the corrupt and mad reason of man is wont falsely to
place happiness: that this part of the argument being proved, the other may
be the more strongly and clearly inferred. The proposition then of the
principal argument consisting in confutation is this: In the ways and matters
belonging unto man there is no happiness, the which he proves for that All
things belonging unto man are heaped up with most great vanity, for this
Vanity is quite and clean contrary unto felicity or happiness, the true
and proper mark whereof is contentedness of mind joined with reason. A note
of tru^ felicity.
Solomon his demonstration therefore consisting in confutation is full and
perfect after this manner.

Mayor.
CE Nothing is more contrary unto happiness, then vanity.

Minor.
SA But in all the parts of the life of man vanity rules far and wide.

Conclusion.
RE. Therefore happiness can by no means be found in the life of man.

The Minor or second sentence of the argument, namely that vanity bears the
swindge in all the life of man, he proves diligently by a long recital of
many examples by induction from the fifth Chapter unto the sixth, where he
flatly sets down an assured proof of the contrary demonstration, to wit,
wherein true happiness is placed. The several parts of the induction we
shall examine in their places. This is the general proposition, The general
proposition.
Vanity of vanities, etc. that is to say, whatsoever is in this life, is most
vain, neither can there any thing be excepted. Yea in a word man himself is
but a very bubble. Is there any man therefore well in his wits which will
think that he can find happiness in man? This is the framing and setting out
of the argument. Now the words are to be considered.

He first of all affirms that he says this, to show that he does not bring
any uncertain and doubtful matter, but a doctrine of full and undoubted
credit: and such in deed, as chiefly does belong unto the office of a
Preacher: An especial duty of a Preacher.
who especially ought to labor this, that man may be proved guilty of
vanity, and through this knowledge of his frailty and corruption be brought
unto God, of whom he must beg and have remedy of his misery.

Now this proposition is set forth with great garnishment of figures.
Substantives in stead of adjectives.
Substantives are used in stead of adjectives for the more forcible and earnest
expressing of the matter, where he says, Vanity of vanities: as if not only
the things appertaining unto men were vain, but also men themselves vain and
most vain, yea and vainer then vanity it self, and as it were an heap of
all vanities together. Repetition of the same words.
Also the repetition of the same words does give a weight and increase unto
the sentence. It also appertains unto the making of the speech more
vehement, and moving of affection, in that he does not flatly set down of
whom he speaks this, albeit in the verse following he plainly shows that he
understands it of man, which short kind of speaking is very fit for vehement
and earnest speech.

And further by this name All (as we have already taught out of the second
rule) he does not understand all things created simply in themselves, What is
to be understood by this word (all)
but such things as are belonging unto man, that is to say, counsels,
affairs, all actions, which are usual in this life, least we might suppose
the nature of the things themselves to be here condemned, the which almighty
God has made. For his purpose is to speak of man his happiness, that is, so
far as happiness may befall unto man: and when as he was to prove, that man
is most far from the same, he was also to set down his vanity, and not the
vanity of other creatures. And therefore I do not hold with them the which do
suppose that Solomon speaks generally of all things. For albeit that it be
true, that the creatures which otherwise are good, are but mere vanity if
they be compared with God, because there is in them nothing firm nor stable:
yet that does nothing at all agree with the proper meaning of this place. For
his purpose is to speak of man. Nazianzen.
Therefore Nazianzen in his Paraphrasis does thus expound these words: How
vain and unprofitable are the things and endeavors of me^, what soever are
belonging unto men. Yet is it notwithstanding true, that the vanity of man
has rau^ged so far, that it has with the infection of his sin, infected
also all other things created, as the Apostle teaches, Romans 8. chap. 5.20. But
the meaning of this place is simple and plain, namely, that in the affairs
of men, in their business and actions there is great vanity, and therefore
happiness is away from them: as which are miserable, full of trouble, unquiet,
combersome, fleeting and unstable through uncertain alterations, and in a word
altogether in bondage unto corruption.

The doctrine.
1 In that he so precizely condemns all the things of men of vanity, and
foresaith that he does it as a Preacher, An especial duty of the servants
of God.
we are taught that it especially appertains unto the office of the servants
of God, earnestly to condemn the vanity of men, and to thunder against the
pride of men, that the wit of man rest not in it self, but seek his felicity
and happiness without himself. Let therefore their lying vain bablings go,
who whilst by sundry disputations they seek man his happiness in man, they
throw man down headlong into a bottomless gulf of infelicitie or
unhappiness. This namely is the difference between the truth and a lie: the
one pleads man guilty of his infirmity and weakness, with an healthful
condemnation: the other keeps man within himself with an hurtful error.

2 It is also a true note of true pastors, A true note of true pastors.
with admonitions and reprehensions, according as occasion and necessity shall
require, to apply this general reproof of vanity unto al ye parts of life,
and there is no doubt but that this way of teaching is a right dividing of the
word. Contrariwise flattery, is a badge of false teachers.

3 And out of this clear and express description of the vanity of man we do
learn, Men ought diligently to think upon their vanity.
how diligently we ought to think upon our vanity, that we may walk with
great carfulness in this course of our life and vocation: for if Adam in
Paradise left tokens of his so sorrowful inconstancy, what shall we do in
this mire of vanity? Let therefore this decree of God concerning our vanity
come into our mind, and let us not go about to wash it off with vain
exceptions: for this vanity is not peculiar and proper either to some one age,
or unto certain persons, or unto some one part of our mind, but common both
unto all men and ages, and unto all parts of the mind, so that there is
nothing in man to be excepted, unto the which this infection of vanity has
not reached. And there is a very notable picture of this our vanity in David.
If man and vanity (says he) be put in a balance, men shall be found lighter
even then vanity it self. Yea and in the very mind it self there is most
great and most vain vanity: and the companion and nurse of this vanity is
corruption and perverseness, as appears by the saying of the workemaister
complaining of the deprauation and naughtines of his work, that all the
imagination of the thought of the heart of men is wicked continually. This is
in deed to know a man his self, to stand in need of remedy, that we may be
eased of our grief the disease being known, that we diligently run unto the
remedy.

The exposition.
3 What profit The chief proposition of the confutation being set down, He
proves all men and all affairs of men to be subject unto vanity.
he comes unto the proouing of the same, and in plain words teaches, unto
what subject he attributes this vanity, namely unto man: whom he pleads
guilty of this vanity. The sum and effect is, that this is a token of most
vain vanity, for that men reap no commodity, of so many and so great
labors, which they so toilesomely take in this life. For this is the Chief
circumstance of that vanity, the which he goes about to prove, Namely, that
all the labors of men are vain, if they be considered by the outward event
and issue of the same.

The interrogation or asking of a question after the manner of the Hebrews,
What this figure interrogation imports.
besides the grace of the figure, makes unto the certainty and vehemency of
this matter: for that he entreats of a thing that is not doubtful, but yet
such a thing about the which we all ought to labor with all the thought of our
mind, as which is the chief point of all our life. And unto this question the
answer must be made, namely, that no profit comes unto men of their labors,
that the proposition may be full, That there is nothing in man, whereby any
profit may arise unto him for the attaining of happiness: yea and moreover
whatsoever is in him, the same to be most vain: for that he is not able for to
enjoy neither good things present, nor absent. In getting of them, there is
great labor, great weariness: in keeping them most great careful and pensive
hardness, and in loosing of them the greatest pain of all. The lawful
labors of our callings not condemned.
For his meaning is not to condemn the lawful labors in our vocation: but by
the issue and falling out of things belonging unto men (as we taught in the
first rule) he does judge of the labors themselves, the which many times
pass away in vain unto men besides their purpose and meaning.

Men's labors are lost sundry ways.
Now men's labors do perish and are lost unto them sundry ways. Namely
through the self same miserable care and carking pensiveness, By overmuch
care and pensiveness.
whereby it comes to pass, that men cannot enjoy even the present good
things, and therefore have no more that which they have, then that which they
have not. Moreover, by the losses and ouerthrowings of the things themselves.
By the loss of things.
By how many and how notable experiences is it found true, that men do roll
the stone of That is, they take endless pains to no purpose By death it self.
Sisyphus, and profit not one whit, yea that they build the tower of Babel? To
conclude by death it self, the which does cause us, will we nill we to leave
behind us heaps of things that are most dear unto us, for according unto the
first rule we have to note, that Solomon speaks according unto the judgment
of man his reason, which determines of the things themselves by the issues of
the things: she sees death to be the end of all things, and that all one
estate tarrieth for all men later or sooner, the which without all doubt shall
come at the last at his time. This is the knitting together and meaning of
those words.

The old translater has very well expressed the Hebrew word which is
translated Profit, saying, What is there more remaining unto a man? It
signifies that which remains, that is to say, profit or commodity, that
which is over and above, Romans 4. advantage, or gain. What is the fruit of
labor? For after labor fruit is looked for, but what remains unto men
after so many labors taken? Nothing, that is, weariness and vain hopes.

Furthermore he does most clearly set down the endeavors of men. The Hebrew
word signifies misery or trouble, to wit, that carking and pensive toil,
wherewith men turmoyle themselves, Menedemus.
as he in Terence vexing and toyling himself: in which number are even the
most wise and also the most witty.

He says All, All.
to signify and express that incessant wearing, wherein men wrestle, so long
as they live in the course of this life: when a man is come unto the goal, he
must begin again at the setting forth. And it is a race in which one must run
too and fro, and not right forth, in which namely there is no end, but the
easing of one weariness, is for the most part the beginning of a greater.

He adds, Under the Sun, Under the Sun.
both to express the place of this pilgrimage, in the which we must try
these masteries, that is to say, this vale of miseries lying under the Sun:
and also to comprehend whatsoever the whole world does contain: least we might
think that there were some part of the earth (as it might be the fortunate
ylandes) free from the miseries incident and falling out unto the life of man:
but that we should know, that how far soever the earth stretches, even there
this calamity and misery tarryeth waiting for all men. But the name of the
Sun is more maiesticall, as the which namely being the brightest of all the
stars does as it were view all lands with his light, neither is there any
thing in the whole world, the which does not feel his efficacy, force and
power.

The Doctrine.
Without the blessing of God our labors are in vain.
1 In the government and ordering of our whole life, experience teaches this
to be true, both in the ruling of the common wealth, and also of our private
families, that the house is builded in vain, unless God do build it, and
that the city is watched in vain, unless God do watch it and guard it: and
to be short that the endeavors of men are to none effect, unless they be
vpholden with a certain singular blessing of God. We must not therefore be so
sottish and foolish, as to depend upon our own strenghtes, but ought to commit
unto God both the common wealth, and our families, yea and moreover the course
of our vocation and whole life, and earnestly to call for his help, that he
would not suffer our labors to be in vain: if we depend upon our selves we
shall find that the victory is not of the strong man, nor good success of
the wise. With this remedy therefore we are to help this uncertainty of
life, that according unto the compass of our calling we do in such sort
follow honest labors, that we burn not with desire that can not be filled,
but beg our daily bread of God, and whatsoever issue he shall give unto us,
that we reckon the same as gain, and cut off long hopes with short space that
we have to live.

2 Furthermore, The reward of our labors is not to be looked for in this life.
we ought in such sort to frame our selves, that we do not enclose ye fruits
and profits of our labors with the bounds of this life: but our life is in
such sort to be led, that our conversation be in heaven: let us here sow in
faith and hope, the which we may reap in deed in heaven: and let us know
that there is reserved for us of God a reward of all our labors.

3 Let us also remember our infirmity and weakness, Men musical to
remembrance their infirmity.
let us know that we are under the Sun: and therefore let us modestly keep
our selves in this lowness of our estate: yea and moreover let us consider the
end of those men to be shameful, which are proud in so great uncertainty,
and set their own counsels against the providence of God, the which is in
deed after the manner of Giants to seek to clime up to heaven, and through
foolishnes and madness most shameful to forget their own estate.

4 Also when as the Lord has laid upon this life of ours this condition, The
encombrances of this life are to be borne with prayer and patience.
let it not be any wonder unto us in this life, if we feel such pricks, but
let us assuage these common burdens and discommodities of life by calling upon
the name of God and with silence, and let us so much the more diligently think
upon that better estate, which abides for us in another life: and let us
assuredly hold, that very death it self is an entrance unto the life that is
happy and immortal.

Man has no strength at all in heavenly things.
5 Now if in bodily and worldly things man his ability be so weak, how much
more weak shall it be in those things which appertain unto the life
everlasting: in which the powers of man are not only feeble, but also none at
all?

The exposition.
4.5.6.7. One generation I read these four verser in one rewe together,
because that they contain but one certain and simple matter, to prove that
first and principal proposition concerning the vanity of the life of man. It
is therefore the Second circumstance of that general confutation, The second
circumstance.
taken from the uncertainty of mankind, making a comparison with things
without life: the which according unto the ordinances and laws of their
natures, do constantly keep their courses among the sundry ruins and changes
of mankind. And it agrees with the argument and matter already laid open
after this manner, How can man reap any certain fruit and profit of his
labors, when as all mankind is carried about hither and thither with a most
uncertain motion? For in this universality of nature, there are some certain
and as it were set duties and offices of things, the which are kept assuredly.
The earth.
The Earth stands in the middle place of the whole world, as namely the
center thereof, and the seat and dwelling place of all living creatures. The
Sun.
The Sun has his risings and goings down, the which he keeps with an
unwearied course. The Wind, The Wind.
albeit that it have his passages from sundry parts of the heaven, yet it
keeps the same constantly. Rivers.
Likewise the ebbing and flowing of Rivers from sea unto sea is diverse and
manifold, but yet the same such, that it remains all one and constant. To be
short all things according unto the measure of their creation, have their
settled and steadfast bounds, within the which they keep themselves: but what
is more unsteadfast then mankind, what more weak, when as several and
particular men do daily die, and are daily changed with a certain unstable
and vnsteadie motion, so that one age diversely follows another with sundry
chaunges, and there fall out horrible rents in mankind, in the overthrows of
cities, kingdoms, families, and in the destructions of men themselves? Here
therefore is a comparing of man with other things created, by whose more strong
estate his weakness and uncertainty is more evidently showed.

That this is the proper and true meaning of this place, Diverse expositions of
this place.
the circumstances themselves being wisely and diligently weighed, I hope the
learned will judge: albeit that it be diversely expounded by the interpreters.
Some think that it is a Al is vanity, So that Solomon begins at the very
grounds and causes of things, that is, with such things as by their restless
motion declare their vanity: and as concerning the Sun they say that he
plainly speaks these things, the which is the cause of the generation and
destruction of these inferior things, and has great rule over them. Others do
in such sort consider of the similitude, The Rabines and Ierom.
The Rabines and Ierom transform and turn all these things into strange
allegories, in reckoning up of the which I would be afraid to abuse the
patience of the reader, with the rehearsal of so vain trifles. Therefore
letting pass these things, I nothing doubt but that the wise reader will be
satisfied with the former exposition, as being the most plain and most true.
The sum and effect is, Hereby the vanity of the life of man does most
especially appear, for that whereas all things created, yea such as are void
of reason do steadfastly keep the set courses of their creation, man
contrariwise is often changed every hour, and his ages do pass away in great
diversity and alteration.

Now the words are diligently to be weighed and considered. Dor.
The Hebrew word Dor does signify an age, or world, or rather, (as the learned
Hebrews affirm) the days which man lives in this world: the word being
derived of a verb which signifies To dwell: that so the condition and estate
of man may be signified, as which namely is such, that it has here no certain
abiding place, but only as it were an Inn to lodge in granted unto it. For
so man ought to think. Men therefore succeed and come one into the place of
another, and sundry are the alterations of sundry men, and often are the
chaunges of mankind, the which are noted by the express words of going and
coming: as if the life of man were uncertainly tossed up and down as it were
with flowing and ebbing. Of this shortness and inconstancy wherewith mankind is
diversely tumbled about, as there are notable descriptions eue^ among the
heathen writers, so this life of his especially, and daily experience, do
hereof set forth true and lively pictures.

The word standing.
Against this uncertainty of men he sets the constant firmenes and
stayednesse of the earth, But the earth stands for ever, the word therefore
of sta^nding is matched and set against the words of going and coming, by the
which we have said the change of mankind to be noted. And he has very fitly
used the word of standing, speaking of the Earth, to signify the immovable
firmness thereof, the which as being the center of the world does stand in
deed, as in the Psalm. 104. ver. 5. the true Philosophy does say. The earth
then observes and keeps the office enjoined unto it of God, both to be the
midst of the whole world, and also the seat of living creatures, when as in the
mean season not only some particular men do die, but also many generations
of men, cities, kingdoms, empires, are diversely changed. Gnolam, or Hholam.
Also the word Gnolam, (or according unto some) Hholam, is known to signify
the space either of a long time, or else everlasting. But in this place unto us
Christians it is manifest out of the doctrine of divine and true Philosophy,
that it is not taken for an everlasting time, but only for a long time: which
Philosophy teaches that the world is not eternal, but that it shall perish
at his time, albeit these things also are spoken by the way of comparison in
regard of the shortness of the life of man being as it were but of a days
continuance, so that in this respect the earth may seem to have a certain
eternity. He makes mention of the earth in the first place, as being better
known unto us, and in which do befall those changes of mankind, whilst it as a
most strong pillar, remains firmly among those alterations of worldly things
belonging unto man.

Verse 5. He says also that the Sun does his office as it were his task, The
Sun.
with a constant and perpetual race, so that he never wandreth from his
appointed course. And he uses a notable and very lively description of his
course, as if the Sun did continually run as it were between certain
marks of a race or goal, and did so seek unto the mark, that so soon as he
is come thither, he runs again the same race renewing his way, and so with
running too and fro, goes from the East unto the West, and so back again
from the West unto the East: and so without ceasing executes the parts of his
office since the time of his creation. The word Schoeph signifies not only
to breath, but also as Mercerus has noted very well, to look upon. And both
significations agree very well with this place: for the Sun is set forth as
it were panting and striving to reach unto his mark: the which he looks upon
to this end, as they do which are desirous to come unto the mark: such manner
of descriptions as are eueriwhere to be found in both Greek and Latin Poets,
the which of purpose I ouerpasse. The Sun therefore with set bounds of his
race, and equal distances of time, points and marketh out the year,
months, days, and does constantly continue in this his vocation as it were,
when as mankind every foot receives diverse forms, diverse changes and
alterations.

Verse. 6. I altogether understand the whole sixth verse of the Wind, The
wind.
and not of the Sun, as other interpreters do. Namely, the issuings forth of
the winds as contrary one to another, out of the four quarters of the world:
the which cannot be said of the Sun, the which is carried about from the East
unto the West, through the force of the first mouer or firmament, and with a
peculiar motion of his own, proceeds from the West unto the East: and goes
not into the South or North. And he makes mention of one wind, the which goes
through the four quarters of the world diversely by set and constant spaces,
or at least wise, by whose commandment, as it were the commandment of some
great King, all the winds are moved: The opinion of the old Philosophers
touching the winds.
in which words there appear some steps of the opinion of the old
Philosophers concerning the winds, who did think that there was but one wind
only, and that the same was diversely moved and carried hither and thither.
Doubtless it is a thing most true, that the wind is not every beating of the
air, and that the diverse names according unto the terming of them by men,
were not given in vain: but that the powers and qualities of the winds are
diverse and contrary, the which do blow from certain and set places, and do
order their blastes with a certain greater power some one then an other: as is
showed, Psalm. 104. and 107. The which miracles of the winds, the writings of
the Philosophers: do show not only unto the learned: but also the most evident
effects do make apparent unto the unskillful. But the more deep and through
discourse of this matter I leave unto the schools of the Philosophers.

He says also that the Waters do constantly keep the course appointed them
by God: The waters.
and that in such sort, that the rivers do rise out of the sea, and return
into the sea again, with a certain vnceasing passage. The exquisite and exact
treatize of the waters, like as of the winds I turn over unto the
Philosophers: neither do I bring strange doctrine into these writings, yet is
it the duty of an Interpreter at least wise to note by the way, such things
as are spoken by the way. Aristotle his opinion concerning the beginning of
rivers.
Aristotle notes this to be the original and beginning of rivers, namely that
the air thickened in the earth by reason of cold does resolve and turn into
water: and that it does not only draw out water in the holes of the earth,
that it may spring forth from thence, but also to minister and yield
continually new matter, for rivers to come thereof. The opinion of old
Phil^sophers.
Yet this was the opinion of old Philosophers concerning the beginning of
rivers, That they both arise out of the sea through secret and privy passages
of the earth, and do flow again and run into the sea, which appears both
out of diverse places of Plato, Plato.
and also out of the flat words of Aristotle, finding fault with this
opinion, which Solomon does here set down, but that this last opinion is more
agreeable unto reason then the former, it is manifest by plain reason: for
except the water of the sea, were conueighed as it were by certain secret
pipes through the earth, and except all the water of all the rivers, which
runs into the sea, did again come forth of the sea: who does not see that
it can by no means by chosen, but that the water, if it were but only of the
river Rhodanus running ever since the beginning of the world, should now long
ago have filled the whole sphere of the air? Moses.
Moses doubtless a true teacher of true Philosophy, teaches that God would
have the waters gathered into one place, and the dry land to appear: of the
which principle of natural Philosophy we ought not to seek any better
Interpreter, then the holy Ghost himself, who in David Psalm. 104. says, That
the earth at the first was covered with the waters as with a garment: but that
it departed at the certain commandment of God, and that there were appointed
unto it certain bounds, within the which it should keep it self, and that
the floods and fountaynes do spring from thence, for the diverse uses of
living creatures, yea and especially for man himself. Questionless, it is
manifest by the very principles of nature, that the earth as the heauiest
element, by the law and ordinance of her nature, ought to take the lowest part
of the whole world: and therefore that the water, as next unto the earth in
heaviness, should also have possessed the place next unto the earth, that is
to say the face of the whole earth, unless the peculiar commandment of God
the workmaster had stepped in between: by the force and power of which
commandment some part of the earth should remain dry, from the waters, and
should afoord a place for all living creatures, and for man especially, to dwell
in, for whose sake all living creatures were created. Now that the sea might
fulfill this commandment of God, there were made passages and as it were pipes
underneath the earth, by the which plenty of water might be conueighed, and
might also be given for the use of living creatures. That this is the reason of
the conueighing of rivers as it were by pipes underneath the earth, the which
come out of the sea, and return again into the sea, An absurdity.
the absurdity of the contrary doctrine seems for to confirm and prove.
For who will believe, that of the air thickened in the holow passages of the
earth, so great plenty of water can be yielded, that it is sufficient to make
so many and so mighty rivers? But this is unto me a most strong reason, why I
do believe the original and beginning of rivers to be such, No natural
Philosopher comparable unto Solomon.
because Solomon says so: the best natural Philosopher of all Philosophers
far away in my judgment: whose Phisickes and natural Philosophy if they
were extant and abroad, I would prefer them before all the writings of Plato
and Aristotle. But enough and too much of this matter.

There are therefore certain and set offices of the Earth, The Sun, The
VVindes, The rivers, and all other things created have their proper and
appointed works and service, in which they are constantly occupied: but both
several and particular men do daily die, and so many and so great changes do
fall out even unto mankind it self, that he seems by no means to be able
to stand: the which doubtless is a most certain argument and token of his
inconstancy and vanity.

The doctrine.
1 In that he sets before us so notable a picture of our uncertainty, Vain
is the endeavor of man to continue the memory of his name upon earth.
it appears how vain the study of man is to have themselves and their name
that must die, to continue many ages, the which vanity as the holy Ghost does
sharply rebuke, so are there many notable examples of God his judgment
against it, not only in persons, and families, in the common course of life,
but also in famous Monarchies the which albeit they were grounded upon great
foundations, yet are they so fallen, that hard and scarsely there are remaining
any tokens of them. Such chaunges and overthrows the Earth has seen, the
Sun has seen, the Rivers and other things created have seen, the which
those Gyantes with their expeditions have wearied: yet they are dead, these
continue even unto this day.

2 Of like vanity do men offend, It is vain for men that have no assurance
of their life, to make accounts as if they had a long time to live.
when as being yet alive they certainly determine of things to come for many
years: when as they can not make accountes in so great uncertainty of life,
by any means of one day, which clear sightednesse of the wit of man, the holy
Ghost accuses of folly or madness: and experience does plentifully teach
the same accusation to be true: that we should betimes learn to live for the
present, and commit all our affairs unto the providence of God, and so order
our life, as if we should die to day or to morrow.

3 That which he says of the firmness and steadfastness of things without
life, is diligently to be marked. How many chaunges do happen even in things
without life, famous examples do declare. The causes of the chaunges that fall
out in the world are not to be ascribed unto fortune, nor yet unto nature
simply.
The causes of such chaunges are by no means to be laid upon fortune, as some
ungodly persons do, pretending for the excuse of their foolish opinions a
certain madness void of all Philosophy: (for what is more far from the
knowledge of Philosophy, then to take away Cause out of the world?) neither
are they simply to be attributed unto nature: saving so far as nature, is a
fellow worker and servant of God the workemaister. There fall out then great
alterations in the things themselves, either by Waters, Fires, Earthquakes, or
other greater casualties. But yet nature her self, among those particular
chaunges, from the time of her creation even unto this day, is, and shall be
preserved, so long as it shall please the Workemaster: who has given unto it,
if it be compared with particular things, in a manner an immortal and
everlasting firmness, but yet the same at his will and pleasure wholly, as
also the more sounder Philosophers do acknowledge, who as they affirm the
world to be created by God: so also they say that there was given unto it an
immortality (but such as was renewed by God and wholly fitted by the pleasure
and will of ye Workmaster) that look by what power the world was knitte and
compact together, by the same likewise it is to be dissolved, when, and after
what manner it shall please the Workmaister. This place does not prove the
world to be everlasting.
Away therefore with those profane Smatterers in Philosophy, who out of this
place falsely understood, do fondly maintain that the world is said to be
everlasting.

4 It is more over to be noted in that same good order of nature, The constant
course of things natural, condemns the inconsta^t lightness of man.
and in the constant observation of the same, how great reproach is as it were
with a burning iron marked in our lightness. All creatures do their duty,
they keep the laws appointed unto them without weariness, they obey their
Maker. Only man, for whose sake the world was made, rebelleth against God, and
breaking the laws of his creation, is carried away headlong into all outrage
of sin: according as it is cast into the teeth not only of the rascal sort,
but even of the very same that were taught by the voice of God, by the
Prophet, The Ox and the Ass have known the crib, etc.

5 This furthermore is to be remembered, God can alter the course of nature.
that this certain order of nature is in such respect and so far constant
and steadfast, that God notwithstanding, the maker and Lord thereof, may
change it at his pleasure, accordingly as he is disposed either to execute his
judgments upon men, or bestow benefits upon them: as it is manifest both by
the flood, and also by that history of Joshua worthy to be remembered, at whose
commandment the Sun stood still, Gene. 7.17.8.22. Ios. 10.12.

The exposition.
Diverse expositions of this place.
All things] This place is diversely expounded. Some think that it is a
conclusion of the things going before: that if the first Elements and
principles be subject unto vanity, and continual alteration, how much more
the things that have their beginning and are made of them? And that therefore
the conclusion is after this manner, That man is not able in words to utter the
weariness of those things, how greatly they are daily changed, and never
continue in one estate. Some think that the studies of Philosophers are found
fault withal, wherewith they search out the natures and causes of things, as
if this were evil, and not able to be uttered. Others judge that this is the
plain meaning of these words, That the vanity of man is so diverse and
manifold, that it can by no means be expressed in words.

I detest the sophistical and foolish ignorance of them, which say that the
study about the searching out of the things themselves is to be condemned, if
they think this to be understood simply: for that they think the singular
gifts of God, as sciences and arts, to be refused because of their hardness.
Sciences and arts are not to be rejected because of their hardness.
But hereof shall anon be spoken more conveniently in his place. I cannot
embrace the opinion of the former and latter, albeit that it be not disagreeing
with the truth, because it is not agreeable with the proper meaning of this
place.

What then? Truly I take it to be a new reason used to prove that principal
proposition concerning the vanity of man, from the weakness of man his wit,
making a comparison with the things themselves; to wit, in understanding of the
which there is great hardness and darkness: A third circumstance.
so that this is the Third circumstance of that general confutation of the
vanity of the life of man. That the wit of man is not able to understand the
things themselves, how then can it at his pleasure determine of them? And yet
that men do so bear themselves, as if by their counsels and endeavors they
were able to rule the whole world. I think therefore that here he entreats
expressly of the weakness of the wit of man, the which in as much as it is
the better part of man, there cannot be alleged a fitter reason, to prove the
vanity of man.

By these words Kol debarim, I understand all things: (according unto the
propriety of the Hebrews, which put Daber a Word, for the thing it self: as
the Greek words L^gos and Rhema are often taken, Luke 3.15.) but especially
belonging unto men, of the which his purpose is chiefly to speak: and yet do
I not shut out natural things, so far as they may be known. He calls the^
laborsom passiuely, as in knowing and understanding the which, much paintaking
and labor is to be used, as if he should say, all things are entangled and
wrapped in great hardness, lie in great darkness. And it is manifest by the
whole discourse, that he speaks of such things as befall unto the society and
fellowship of mankind.

The wit of man is not able to understand the natures of things.
Such therefore says he is the nature of things: contrariwise, he teaches
that the strength and power of the wit of man is weak in comprehending and
understanding of them. The tongue is not able to express them, nor the other
senses to apprehend them. The word Isch I take in his proper signification,
Isch.
for a certain singular, and excellent man, according unto the common
signification of that word: that he may flatly note all the powers of the wit
of man, how great and excellent soever they may be. (Neither is a man able to
utter them) that is to say, the tongue is not sufficiently able to express
them. And by that which follows, or which may be concluded hereupon ought to
be understood that the wit it self is not able enough to conceive them, for
the things which we conceive in mind, we utter by speech: and reason goes
before speech: and speech is the waiter and servant of reason. He adioyneth the
other senses, or rather the instrument of the senses, by which comes the true
powers to judge of things, to wit the eye, in seeing: the ear, in hearing:
which are the chief instruments to attain unto knowledge by: yet he affirms
all them to be ineffectuall and of no force, unto the certain conceiving of
things: he grants that we have a desire in deed both to hear and also to
see, but the same unprofitable: as namely in the which the mind ca^ not soundly
rest and be satisfied.

9 What is there the which] He gives a reason why he termed the things
laboursome, and shows that he speaks expressly of things belonging unto
men: for he says, Under the Sun, that is to say, in this life: Great
uncertainty in the things of men.
as we have expounded before. Namely that the things and affairs belonging
unto men are such, that they can hard and scarsely be comprehended and
conceived, because they are carried about with unsteadfast and uncertain
changing, and for that the same run back again as it were in a certain
circle, and with a wandering violence are driven about too and fro: whereby
their uncertainty and inconstancy may be perceived. Therefore that there is
nothing new, but that the self same thing in diverse ages does after a diverse
sort arise and come up again, so that nothing can be defined or found out. He
uses an asking of a question for the vehemency and making plain of the
matter, and repeateth the same speech in two verses all to one end.

10 and 11. There is some thing] For this is no new argument, but a garnishing
of the old. And this kind of speech used after the manner of imitation, or
counterfaiting of another man his speech, gives a light and beautifying unto
the sentence: like as also these words, There is no remembrance, etc. are used
to amplify and increase the matter in this sense, Like as the remembrance of
things done before, so far as appertains unto us, is perished, so also the
remembrance of the things that are now, in regard of our posterity, shall
after the like manner perish: for the things which are now done of us, and are
present unto us, shall be past unto our posterity. Therefore whither soever
the sharpness of the wit of man can pearse, The memory of all times must
perish.
what momentes of time soever it can conceive in mind, it altogether comes
to pass that the remembrance both of time present, time past, and also time to
come, must needs perish. This is that imaginary or supposed eternity of me^,
most like unto a swift dream, so that no man is able to determine any certain
thing of it. Thus by the manifold and unsteadfast change of things he
describes and sets forth the darkness and hardness of them.

Against the foolish opinion of the Academik Philosophers.
Yet is it not his meaning to bring in an uncertain knowledge or doubting of
things, either such as Anaxagoras, or such as the Academik Philosophers held
and maintained, as if in things all things were so uncertain and
vndeterminable, that we ought to doubt of all things: (for that the
uncertainty of things, such as we find by experience in our selves, arises
not of the things themselves, but of our own selves) but this simply is his
meaning, that by the often change of things falling out, unto men, it is
altogether manifest, that Happiness can by no means be found in this life,
tossed about with so many tempests and storms of chaunges and alterations.

And of this saying there is a most strong and very evident demonstration and
proof. Let us view and behold the process of time past, so far as we are able
to call unto mind. In how great variety and uncertainty shall we find the
whole course of old histories to be? No certainty in the most ancient
histories.
We shall have no certain and assured knowledge, but a rugged and rustie
gessing at those matters. And out of infinite store of examples to take one or
two, that whole age the which went before the flood and those first Monarchies,
of Assyria, Babylon, and Persia if you except those things which are written in
the Books of the scriptures. What are they else I pray you, then horns and
fenowednesse of forworne antiquity? The common wealth of Rome.
The Roman common wealth, albeit that it were lighthened with a greater light
of histories, yet it lies in great darkness and uncertainty: so that as hard
and scarcely any small fragment is remaining of the same, so scarcely could
the memory of things done, whilst it lived and flourished, be preserved. But
that I let not pass more near and home examples, which of us is ignorant in
how great darkness the history of the kingdom of France is wrapped? The
kingdom of France.
I speak not only of the beginnings of the first kings Pharamundus,
Merouaeus Clodouaeus, and others of greater name, in the histories of the which
there is none well in his wits, which sees not many ridiculous and fond tales
to be told: but even of the more famous and renowned Carolus Magnus, Hugo
Capetius, who in the light of histories ought to be better known, and also for
the original and beginning of their families, of the which afterward kings
have come^. But what do I speak of the persons themselves? The laws also,
upon the which that great and famous Monarchy was grounded, and especially
that law, which is called Lex Salica, Salica lex.
the foundation of the kingdom of France, with how great uncertainty is it
striuen about: so that unless we did know it to be received from the fathers
as it were by tradition, we were utterly to judge it to be a mere idol, and
counterfeit of a thing that never was? That I deal no more at large upon so
very large a matter. Moreover this unsteadfastness of things belonging unto men
does especially appear by the things themselves, in the which is apparent
that restless and insatiable desire of the heart of man the which can by no
means be satisfied with things present whatsoever they be. Examples of the
which insatiable desire the common course of life does plentifully afoord. We
no more have those things which we have, then those things which we have not,
and therefore we do no less desire the things which are in our power, then
the things which are not. And moreover the desires of the same things do daily
renew. We stumble daily at the same faults and at the same offenses. Pyrrhus.
Pyrrhus swallowed down in his mind diverse countries, for whom his own
country Epirus might have been enough and too much. One world was not
sufficient for Alexander of Macedonia. Alexander.
Julius Caesar was not contented to bear the chief rule in his common wealth.
Such is the mad covetousness of man his desire imagining the same things, to
be as it were new, when as they come again, even the same, and the half is
more then the whole. And that there is no New thing to be found in the society
of mankind, appears by all the chaunges and alterations of kingdoms and
Empires, in the which nothing else comes to pass then that which has been,
and one form of a common wealth springs of another, according as the wise
politikes do show. Of a Monarchy comes a Democraci: and of a Democraci a
Monarchy: The people of Rome.
The people of Rome being weary of the tyranny of their kings drove them out
of their kingdom, and altering the form of government, set themselves at
liberty, made unto themselves Consuls and Tribunes, reserved the highest power
and authority unto themselves. The same people, after that the common wealth
once grew unto a mighty greatness, making a law for a King, gave away all
the authority from themselves unto Caesar, that is to say, placed a King to
reign over them. So nothing is new in mankind. The same arts and subtilties
are put in ure again at this day, the which were used long ago. That which
liked us long ago, and with long wearing and lothsomnesse was grown out of
use, now recovering again his old authority, begins to please. This is
the circle of things belonging unto man, as it were the turnings and windings
of a Labyrinth or Mace, by which we go oftentimes the same way. Thus far is
it to be understood that there is no new thing under the sun, that is to
say, in this life.

The other sayings which are alleged as contrary unto this, I create a new
heaven, etc. And, Behold all things are new. And, Of the new creature in the
Church, and such like, are foolishly and besides the purpose set against this:
and it were a folly to stay any longer in confuting of them.

The doctrine.
For as much as the knowledge of humane things is so uncertain and so weak,
as we must at no hand so handle the matter, that we place happiness in this
life that is fleeting, miserable and subject unto a sepulcher full of
forgetfulness: so are our minds to be enlightened with the light of a certain
better knowledge, We are to hope for a far better life, then this present.
that we may also grow up into an hope of a better and a more happy life, in
the which doubtless we shall find assured and immortal happiness: the
knowledge of the which happiness is to be set against the miseries of this
unsteadfast and uncertain life, that we may both overcome them with a more
valiant mind, whilst we are in this life, and may also most certainly see and
behold out of the darkness of this dungeon, that immortal light, the which in
that place abides for us in most ample and full manner.

2 Against man his curiosity we are also to set this remedy, A remedy
against the curiosity of man.
namely to know that the sharpness of the wit of man is blind even in the
viewing of the things of this world, until that it be enlightened with the
true light of the knowledge of God: upon the which only we ought to depend,
that the word of God may be a lantern unto our feet, that is to say, the
guide of our whole life: that they are in deed the true and faithful
counsailours, and that we think the same to be a most safe way to judge both
of our own and also other men's matters: and as the Gospel contains promises
of both lives, so also that it shall be very well with us in regard both of
body and mind, if we do follow the guidance of the same, that is to say, if
we seek the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and do make him the
principal and chief end of our whole life.

A bridle for our insatiable desire.
3 And as for our insatiable and restless desire, let us thus bridle it, that
we be contented with things present, and seek for nothing more: let us
earnestly embrace the golden sufficiency and contentednes, and as it were
fasten our minds with this nail, least that leaping hither and thither with
an unadvised sway, it take from us tranquillity and quietness, which is the
only solace of our life: and therefore let us bid so hurtful an enemy to depart
most far away from us, who otherwise will take away from us that which in
life is most needful to live withal.

The true causes of such chaunges as fall out in this life, are to be sought
for out of the word of God.
4 Moreover, let us search out of ye monuments of God his providence, that is to
say, out of the word written, the causes of the chaunges, wherewith both the
common life of man, and also the society and fellowship of all mankind is
sundry ways dismayed: and let us know, that then in deed we shall be very
well sharpsighted even in the discerning of politic affairs, when we shall
be wise out of the same word, in the which there is no doubt that these
fountains of true antiquity are contained: namely, that God the governor of
mankind does most wisely rule all even the very smallest and least points
thereof, that he does govern families, common wealths, kingdoms, all empires,
and every particular man: but especially that he has a singular care over his
Church, ye which he preserves amongst hurliburlies of the world, the ruins
and overthrows of kingdoms and empires: and therefore that she is not only
the keeper of true antiquity, but also the witness and discrier of all those
chaunges, she her self being not at all subject unto alteration or change.
Therefore as Habacuc says, Let us go up into the watchtower, that is to
say, let us out of the word of God, and in the bosom of the Church behold the
confusions of the perishing world, and let us wisely judge of them,

This is the general proof of the confutation, A short repetion of the
principal proves of the first confutation.
namely, that in the whole life of man there is great vanity: the which
Solomon has proved by the unsteadfastness and shortness of life, the
unprofitable success of man his labors ye weakness of the wit of man, the
forgetful darkness of the things themselves, and the sundry chaunges and
alterations of the same.

A confutation of the wisdom of man, that is to say, that in the wisdom of
man there is great vanity.
12 I the Preacher have been King over Israel in Jerusalem.

13 And I have given mine heart to search and find out with wisdom that
which is done under heaven (this sore travail has God given unto the sons
of men, to toil themselves therein.)

14 I have seen all the works which are done under the sun: and behold
they are all vanity, and vexation of spirit.

15 That which is crooked can not be made right, and the want can not be
numbered.

16 I spoke with mine heart, saying, Behold I am become great, and have added
wisdom above al those, which have been before me in Jerusalem, and mine
heart has seen a multitude of wisdom and knowledge.

17 And I have given mine heart to know wisdom and knowledge and madness
and foolishness: I knew also that this was vexation of spirit.

18 For in the multitude of wisdom is much anger: and he which increases
knowledge, increases sorrow.


The exposition.
12 I] Hitherto he has generally showed with sound arguments the vanity of the
life of man (as has been by us declared) now he begins to rehearse
particular reasons to prove by induction the general proposition from whence
he took the beginning of the discourse, That al things are vanity. And he
fetteth the first argument of the An inductio^ is a kind of argument by
reckoning up of many particulars in the end co^cluding a general.
induction from himself, and after a sort sets forth himself abroad for
an example of vanity, to show that flesh is so foolish, that man his reason
is so blind, that it can be amended by no examples. For he speaks in such
sort of himself, that when as he had made proof or trial of sundry kinds
of life, he confesses himself to have been altogether disceiued, for that he
found vanity in those things, in the which he searched for happiness. He
witnesses therefore that he himself comes forth, not as some odd
Philosopher discoursing of matters at home in his study, or as a scholar
rehearsing the Latins of his master, but as he that both had been a long time
conversant in the Church, and also had diligently given himself unto the
knowledge of this most excellent thing. For the words of this preface are to
be valewed by their weight for he calls himself a Preacher, to this end, Why
he calls himself a preacher.
to show that he himself understands the things which he teaches. Neither
did God without cause indue him with singular wisdom, as else where we have
alleged out of the holy scripture. Why he terms himself a King.
The term of Kingly dignity, is adjoined for the same cause: and that not of
every kingdom, but of the kingdom of Israel, the which God had dedicated as
a peculiar jewel of prise unto himself, and that in Jerusalem, to wit, an
holy place and full of Majesty, the which God had reserved as a sanctuary
unto himself. So the naming both of a kingdom, and also of the chief city
makes for the increasing and also the making plain of the matter. It is
therefore as much as if he should say, Doubtless being taught by experience, I
set forth my self a witness of the doctrine which I teach, such a one as no
exception is to be taken against: as who being garnished both with singular
gifts of God, and also long and much conversant in his Church, having borne a
most high office could not choose but to have gathered very great experience
of things. The exposition of Nazianze^.
So Nazianzen, I set not down these things rashly without aduisement as being
now first conversant in the Church, but having been made King of the Hebrews
in Jerusalem, I have sufficiently considered all things.

What does he gather hereof? that he being furnished with those great
opportunities and helps for the doing of things, had notwithstanding more
toil and grief then good success, that he attained not unto the things which
he enterprized, by the force and benefit of his own wisdom and power: and
in a word that he could not by these helps find happiness in the things
belonging unto men. To this end he alleges his own example by this reason:
An argument from the greater unto the lesser.
If I have had no good success with my counsels, what may other men being
fortified with lesser helps hope for?

And hereby may be gathered, that this book was written by Solomon in the
times of his very last age, as it evidently appears by these words.

The doctrine.
1 They no doubt are true teachers, Who are true teachers.
who do soberlie and earnestly join practice unto contemplation of things
and knowledge of the same, that is, which are persuaded and assured of that
which they teach, by certain experience. In which kind of doctrine the
Apostles did chiefly excel, who do teach that the cross is to be borne, in
bearing the cross in their own persons. Away therefore with the vain
speculations of such wizardes as can only debate of matters at home in their
studies, who reason coldly and generally, as it were out of the school of
Philosophers, concerning things appertaining unto godliness. But let those be
unto us teachers of greater account, which have experience joined with doctrine.

2 But out of the lamentable example of Solomon endued with so many and so
worthy gifts, The fall of Solomon ought to teach us to walk circumspectly.
we have cause why to walk with great carfulness. For he did not so well and
profitably apply unto himself the true way of being wise, the which his
purpose is to teach in this book, as he was able to set it down unto others.
But if he had as earnestly detested the vanity of things falling out unto men,
as he does rightly teach the same, he would not have given so great an offense
unto the Church of God through his so foul fall, at the very last point almost
of his lif. The which notwithstanding does not call into doubt the truth of
this doctrine, but by a notable argument teaches how earnestly we ought to
think upon the lawful use of the gifts of God, whereunto no doubt we have
need of a new gift of God. Which falls as they are more shameful in those,
whom God has beautified above others with excellent gifts: so ought they in
this behalf to labor more carefully, and after the example of the Apostle,
keep under their bodies, and bring them into subjection: least whilst they
have preached unto others, they themselves become reprobates or ofcastes: but
that they may in the end say with the same Apostle, I have fought that good
fight, I have ended my race, I have kept the faith, etc.

Knowledge without the gift to use it, does little avail.
3 Here out also we do learn, that knowledge does little or nothing at all
profit, unless there be reason and power to use it: therefore the same Apostle
said unto Timothy, Consider what I say, God give thee understanding in all
things. Doctrine therefore is so to be learned, that we weigh the same, apply
the same unto our selves, refer it unto all the parts of our life, the which
comparing and applying of doctrine is as necessary for our souls, as is the
applying of remedies unto our bodies.

The exposition.
Solomon himself deceived in the searching for happiness.
13 and 14. And I gaue] Having spoken first of himself, he comes unto the
matter: and he says that he himself first of all was disceiued in that thing,
the which did seem most of all to contain happiness, to wit, Wisdom: by
the which one mark especially, man does far excel other living creatures.
Notwithstanding he denies happiness to be in this wisdom: yea if vanity be
any where in things belonging unto man, here especially he says that she is to
be found. He says therefore that wisdom is the head and ring leader of
chiefest vanity, but how far, and after what manner we will show in his
place.

And by the word Wisdom, every man sees that he understands the wisdom
of man: but of what things he here speaks (for the subject or matter
whereabout the wisdom of man is occupied is of many sorts) Diverse judgments
concerning this place.
the opinion of the learned is diverse. For many do think that Solomon does
not speak of any natural consideration or of the works of God (for these are
their express words) that is to say, of nature, and natural things, about
the consideration whereof the wit and labor of man does oftentimes sweat and
take pain: but that he speaks of the consideration of counsels, actions
and issues of things in the government of man concerning the common wealth or
private families, so that the meaning should be: I determined with my self to
set my things in very good order, to strengthen and establish my kingdom
after a very excellent manner: but I perceived and learned by experience, that
there fell out unto me good success in my affairs so far, as the power and
providence of God were with me: when as God withdrewe his hand, in the very
midst of mine enterprises, albeit never so great, that al things went with me
most unhappily, and that I did nothing else, then miserably to turmoyle and vex
my self. And that this is the meaning of this place, they say does apeare by
this kind of speaking, under the Sun, by the which Solomon is wont to
signify the affairs of men: and that the works of God and Nature are not
hemmed in within so narrow bounds. And truly there is no doubt but that the
consideration of things belonging unto men also is comprehended under the name
of this wisdom, Reasons to prove that Solomon speaks of the works of
nature.
but I suppose that he speaks not hereof in this place, but that his purpose
is to speak of the whole consideration of nature: and why I so think, these
are my reasons. If he should entreat of man his prudence, it should be a and
agreeable, do at no hand bear it. For they speak of such a kind of
knowledge, the which is wholly occupied in searching and contemplation, the
which can not agree with man his wisdom, the which albeit she have her
knowledge, yet is she chiefly called back unto action and practice.

Therefore I think that Solomon speaks of that kind of searching, the which
does not only look unto a family and city, and unto the society and
fellowship of mankind, He speaks of the knowledge of all Philosophy.
but also with deep and exquisite order does behold and consider the causes
and effects of Nature it self, and the multitude of those miracles, which are
extant in this Theater of the world, tries out and brings unto light the
principles and grounds of things, and that which is general and simple, as the
foundation of true knowledge, and mounteth up most far above nature, even
unto GOD himself. To be short, I think that he speaks of all Philosophy,
by examining whereof, he does first search, whether happiness may be in
things appertayning unto man.

For the best men, The best men have given themselves unto the study of
Philosophy.
abandoning the desire of glory and of money, and counting all other things as
nothing, by giving themselves unto the contemplation and study of the nature
of things, have always thought that they followed the best kind of life, and
that this contemplation and knowledge of things did far excel all other
studies, (as being a life free and delivered from the troublesome sturres of
this life, given unto the contemplation and truth of things and full of great
satietie and contentednes of mind, and therefore coming more near unto
happiness:) and of the sound Philosophers those, the which have said that the
first and chiefest points of happiness, that is to say, altogether happiness
it self is in God alone, nay that God himself is true happiness, have
attributed the second place unto knowledge it self, namely, after God
himself, with whom that same mild and quiet contemplation should join the
minds of men, and that same excellent knowledge of things they adorned with
that most honorable name of Wisdom. Moreover, there is no doubt that from
thence Solomon took the beginning of that his experience, for he wished for
wisdom above al other things, and obtained it of God, and greatly increased
it in the knowledge of nature and of natural things, setting forth also most
excellent books concerning this matter, as it is manifest by the holy history.

The knowledge of Philosophy is not condemned, but the abuse of the same.
But he does not condemn the searching and knowledge of nature and natural
things, which are seen in the principles, grounds, causes, and effects of the
same: but the abuse of this knowledge which is manifold, either when as and
know those things does trouble and disquiet our minds, and does breed a
tediousnes and grief, from the which satietie and contentedness of mind,
which we seek, is most far: or when as we wholly depend and stay Solomon
condemns knowledge or wisdom: and not the sober marking of order and cunning
in the workmanship of the world, being notable testimonies of God, and of his
providence, the consideration whereof to be very fit for a Christian, no man
well in his wits ever yet denied. But this blaming of wisdom is not simply
and in it self to be understood, but in a certain respect, adding these
circumstances: as we have given warning before out of the second rule.

But the words themselves are diligently to be weighed and considered. The
exposition of the words.
He says that He gave his heart, that is to say, he diligently applied himself
unto the knowledge of that matter. For by the words of Searching and Finding
out (for the Hebrewe word signifies a diligent and skillful searching out of
things) he understands that same power which is graffed into man to know the
truth: whereof he is called Alphestes that is to say, a searcher out, the
which seeds of things are to be garnished in time, with learning and pains
taking. He adds, In wisdom, to distinguish and sever out the witty and
skillful searching from the vain and foolish madness and curiosity of
ignorant persons, the which wisdom of man notwithstanding he says altogether
to vanish away. So the Apostle attributes wisdom unto them which weakened the
simplicity of the cross, that is all the efficacy and strength of our
salvation. 1. Cor. 1.17. He afterward lays down the matter of this finding
out and searching. Whatsoever is done under heaven, that is to say, whatsoever
is in the nature of things. For he sets down this word Heaven, as some
certain thing of more majesty in the good orderlinesse of Nature, for that it
has power over the things beneath it. He says then, under Heaven, not as if
the mind of man did wander up and down seeking also above Heaven: but because
these things that may be seen are for the most part the matter whereabout
humane sciences are occupied, and for that, whatsoever men do otherwise
determine, all these cogitations are bounded within these listes and limits.
For whereas the Philosophers do dispute of things intelligible, or that may be
understood and separate from matter, they are the shapes of things and not
things themselves that have their being, like as the more sounder among them
have acknowledged.

This was his study, this was his endeavor to attain unto most excellent
knowledge. But of what sort was it? This toil or travail, etc. He shows
that this carfulness to come by knowledge was entangled and bewrapped with
many troubles and cares, so that it is a most hard cross unto it self. The
Hebrewe word.
The Hebrew word in his original signification does signify affliction:
moreover a pensive and cumbersome toil, when as a man does so give himself
unto a thing, that after he has much weried him self, he reapeth no profit
of his labor. He adds Evil, or miserable and cumbersome, and sundry ways
troublesome, such a kind of miserable toyling about the study of Philosophy,
as antiquity has portraited out unto us under the picture of Prometheus tied
unto the rocks of Caucasus, whose liver should continually without ceasing be
eaten by a Vulture: or untoward and unjust, as which holds the truth as it
were captive in a lie. For this is the commendation of the schole of the
Philosophers by the verdit of the holy ghost, The schools of Philosophers send
forth many varlets, and in what sense.
out of which school how many, and how notorious lewd persons have there
proceeded, and do daily proceed? I speak of Philosophy in a certain respect,
namely as it is learned of many, and not of it self, for it is a singular gift
of God: but lewd persons do many ways abuse it, and it is unto them in this
behalf an evil toil or travail, whether of both ways soever you take it,
either for a careful and troublesome travail, or for a travail joined with
perverseness and wickedness. He says, That God has given it unto the sons
of men: not as if God did instill or put error or ignorance into the minds of
men (for God, as he is the cause and author of all good things, so is he also
of truth, and at no hand any cause of evil) but for to show the assured and
strong judgment of God against the curiosity of men, the which wandering from
the simplicity of his truth he has punished not only with the vain endeavor
of laboursome, How God punishes the curiosity of men.
but also unprofitable, yea, and also altogether hurtful toyling, for a cause
unto us in deed hid and unknown, but yet notwithstanding always just. Yet he
calls them the Sons of men, that they should know that through the
knowledge of good and evil they are not made Gods immortal, as the treacherous
and lying Devil went about to persuade Adam: but that they should know
themselves to be mortal men, subject unto misery and death, to the end that
they should seek for immortality unto them selves after an other manner, and
by an other means. This is the first Circumstance of vanity, against the
knowledge of man, namely, that it is joined with much and unprofitable
wearisomnes, that is by the vain and unprofitable issue of the study of
Philosophy.

14 I have seen all things.] He says that he has seen, to testify that he
speaks of assured and certain things, that is to say, that he brings a
demonstration grounded upon true and sound arguments, and certain experience.
And that nothing should be excepted, he says, all things, to signify, that
he has diligently viewed all the parts of nature, yea, and moreover the
fellowship it self of mankind, which is the greatest part of nature. For he does
expressly comprehend it under this kind of speaking, under the Sun, as we
have already declared.

And what, I pray you, gathered he by that same diligent searching? Behold all
things, etc.] The learned interpreters expound the word which is commonly
translated Affliction, both by the word Affliction, and also by the word
Feeding, according unto the double signification of the original verb from
whence it comes (the which signifies both to afflict, and also to feed) the
which double interpretation agrees with the words and meaning very well.
Feeding therefore of the mind: (for the Greeks have translated it Boskesin
and nomen, as also Ierom notes.) He calls that grievous and pensive
carfulness, the which feeds upon the minds of men with a certain
vainenesse: with the which kind of speaking Hoseas has resembled the vanity
of idolatry, Ephraim is fed with the wind, that is to say, is given unto most
vain things, in as much as he makes himself a slave unto idolatry.
Affliction or trouble of spirit, for that in the troublesome and painful
endeavor to know things, the mind is diversely worn and broken with cares,
like as the body is broken with labors: Which either feeding or affliction of
spirit, is altogether repugnant unto sufficiency and contentednes, the which
is sought for unto true and sound happiness. No profit of all our toyling to
come to the knowledge of things.
Yet lest there might seem to come great profit of those labors, as they say
that the roots of virtue are bitter, and the fruit most sweet, and that
pains must go before virtue as it were a path to lead unto most pleasant rest,
he says further expressly: and vanity, to teach that the mind of man is in
vain turmoyled with unreasonable labors in that same seeking out of things,
that is to say, that it bestirreth it self apace, but goes never a whit
forward, and that the fruit of al those things is mere vanity.

15 Crooked.] This place is expounded diverse Preacher has noted before,
namely, that in things appertaining unto men, there is so great vanity and
corruption, that they can by no means be restored lived, was given unto vices,
should be restored again into his former estate: or, that he which was of a
blockish wit could not be fit unto the searching out of the natures of things.
Others

I for my part, The interpretation of the author of this commentary.
the matter being diligently weyed by the circumstances of the same, do expound
this place far otherwise. Solomon does now entreat of the vanity of man's
knowledge, the serching out of the which he has pronounced to be altogether
unprofitable and unfruitful. Of this reproof he brings this reason taken
from the nature of the thing it self, from the vain and unprofitable endeavor
of man his searchings, the which albeit they diversely discourse concerning the
things themselves, yet can they by no means change the nature of them, as if
he should say: Albeit the learned do many ways weary themselves in the
searching out of the nature of things, and do dispute to and fro of one and
the same matter, yea and do vary not only in diverse, but also repugnant and
contrary opinions, yet shall they not by disputing bring to pass, that that
which is crooked shall become straight, and that the wantes in numbers shall be
fulfilled, that is to say, that the nature of things shall be changed. The
Hebrewe Megnuvath or Mehhuvath.
word signifies perverse, that is to say, crooked, a Feminine in the
signification of the Neuter according unto the propriety of the Hebrewe
tongue. And the other word Lithcon, is taken intransitiuely, for to be right
or straight. The meaning therefore is plain, that the diverse opinions of the
Philosophers concerning nature, are an assured argument to prove the vanity of
the knowledge of man, for that, how soever the opinions of the Philosophers
concerning the natures of things be diverse and disagreeing, nevertheless,
notwithstanding the things themselves remain all one, and are by no means
changed. No wisdom of man is able to change the nature of things.
For the sharpness of wit in the Philosophers, albeit never so exquisite and
cunning, cannot make three to be four, or four, five, that is, even to be
odd. The opinion of men, albeit never so different and disagreeing, A foolish
dotage of Protagoras.
shall not change the nature of things: for the imagination of Protagoras is
most false, and very fond, that man is the measure of all things, that is to
say, that things so far have their being, how far, and after what sort men
do conceive and imagine of them, the which untruth, most absurd and contrary
unto reason, some frantike heads in our time have gone about to set abroach
again, under the name of Libertines, as if sin were nothing else but a
certain imagination. Against this frenzy of monstrous boldness, the word of
God does yield us sound reasons. Now in the diverse opinions of Philosophers as
it were in a certain combat of Giants one against another, there are notable
testimonies of this vanity. They in deed prattle much of the nature of
things, but shall things therefore be changed at their pleasure? And shall the
world be without end, Aristotle.
because Aristotle has said, that it is eternal? or shall the minds go out
of one body into another to and fro, Plato.
because that Plato has raked it out of the iakes of Pythagoras, and set it
down in writing? Therefore the vain and curious bablings of the Philosophers
though never so famous, making much unadvised trifling about things unknown
unto them, and as it were by decrees, determining of the nature of things, are
here laughed to skorne by Solomon: But they are no Pretours Edictes, or
commandments of Magistrates that may not be broken, and much less of God:
Nature remains the same, and shall not be changed, and shall bewray the most
light vanity of contrary opinions.

I do therefore understand these words of all Philosophy in general, The true
use of Philosophy is not condemned.
the confutation whereof he now begins, not as if the true and lawful use
thereof were condemned: but only the abuse, the which to be diverse and
manifold, there is no doubt at all. These things ought also to be referred unto
the cumbersome and troublesome disposing of the counsels of me^, the ends
and issues whereof are not ruled by the conduct and help of man his wisdom,
the which many times falls out to be vain, and of no force. But because he
will entreat of this matter in his place in the second Chapter, I have thought
it better to refer thither the handling of this place.

16 I did speak.] To the end the matter may be the more effectualy laid forth,
he does more clearly repeat his own example, the which he had noted before,
and does set out those surmizes of proud wisdom, and shows that he knew
welinough of his great wisdom, and how he used al diligence in getting of it,
and also that he profited greatly in the knowledge thereof: in which respect he
is likewise commended in the scripture. 1. King. 3.12. and 4.21. and in other
places, Solomon excelled in all kind of wisdom.
namely, that Solomon excelled in all kind of wisdom, and also far passed all
the wisdom of the East, it is apparent by notable testimonies of the Scripture.
He was able therefore well and soundly to judge of such matters. This his
study he amplifieth in the next verse.

The pains and diligent study of Solomon.
17 And I gave mine heart.] that is to say, I applied my self with all
earnestness of mind to the searching out of those matters, and I diligently
searched whatsoever is contained within the compass of Philosophy: nay I
employed al my travail, that no kind of knowledge might be unknown unto me:
that which had never so small show of knowledge, I was minded to view all the
same, and to comprehend it in my mind: that the things being tried, I might be
able to give the more sound judgment of the^. Hereunto is that same frame of
words referred, Wisdom and knowledge, madness and foolishnes, that nothing
should be excepted which might carry either the name, or show of knowledge or
learning. By these words madness and foolishnes he means either some
certain high points of learning, or else his purpose was to portrait out the
nature of man's learning, which after a sort is but as it were a mad wisdom:
accordingly as the Apostle precisely terms Philosophy vain disceit. Through
Philosophy, says he, Philosophy termed vain disceit.
and vain disceit: not as if he did altogether condemn Philosophy it self,
but he speaks so generally, according to the bad supposition of such as abuse
it: of which sort was a good part of Philosophers, the which in the study of
Philosophy, did not set before themselves a good end, And this kind of
speaking is borrowed from the common use of speech, in the which is
comprehended all kinds of all sciences appearing but even in show, as that
saying of Plato, attaining unto the nature of understanding and foolishnes,
whereby is signified all knowledge and searching out of Nature. Neither does
the judgment of Ierom seem disagreeing herewith: Ierom.
That Solomon had an equal study to know wisdom and knowledge, and on the
other side, errors and foolishnes: that his true wisdom might be tried in
desiring the one, and shunning the other: for contraries are understood by
contraries: and the first and chiefest wisdom is, to have wanted folly: and he
cannot want folly, which has not understood it. Whereupon also many things
have proved hurtful among the things created, that in shunning of them we
might be instructed unto wisdom. But in this also, like as in other things, he
says that he fed the winds, and could not comprehend the perfect truth.

Of that earnest and troublesome study of Philosophy he witnesses that he
reaped nothing else, then that he acknowledged the same also to be affliction of
spirit. Of the Hebrew word, which is translated affliction, we have spoken
before. The meaning is: That in the study of Philosophy, A new argument.
he found nothing else but most great vanity. It is therefore a new argument
taken from the subject and matter of the study of Philosophy: namely, that
such is the vainenesse of men's writings, that whilst under the name and study
of wisdom, it will know the things themselves, it apprehends with a
troubled judgment only the shadows and shows of things in steed of the true
essence and nature of them. For that the mind does not rest in this knowledge,
but is cumbred and troubled with diverse doubtings. It is not therefore a
science, when as the mind is in a continual wavering, and there is no
certain and constant apprehending of things, nay the companion of this
searching is anger, sorrow, indignation, which are affections and accidents of
doubting, and are especially repugnant unto science and knowledge, unto the
which persuasion and contentedness of mind is especially proper: for he does
more lively set out this affliction of mind in the xviij. verse.

18 Because in the multitude etc.] In what respect there is no contentedness
of mind in the wisdom of man.
He means then that the wisdom of man being destitute and void of the true
knowledge of the true God, does not only want sound satietie and
contentedness of mind (in the which notwithstanding is true felicity and
happiness,) but is encumbred with infinite doubtings. Therefore In the
multitude of wisdom there is much anger: and He which increases knowledge,
increases sorrow: because that knowledge is to be gotten with great labors
both of body and mind, yet with no better success, whereupon the mind
cannot choose but be greatly vexed with that thing, the which it sought after
with so great toil of heart, being in the end altogether mocked: The
Philosophers abused their learning.
as by experience we have to see in the Philosophers themselves, in whom
learning had no good success, that is to say, so far off is it, that learning
did profit them any thing at all, that contrariwise they did most foulie abuse
it unto their own destruction. Unto whom doubtless very fitly and truly
agrees, that which Festus wickedly and wrongfully laid unto Paul, That much
learning made them mad. There are also extant and abroad confessions, and
complaints of these doubtings, of the which it shall not be inconvenient to
note some here by the way, even out of the mouth of that Philosopher,
Complaints of Philosophers touching the doubtfulnesse of things.
whom very learned antiquity has had in admiration as the Prince and chief
of Philosophers: Sometimes a man will believe a saying to be true without any
garnishing or flourish of Rhethorike, and a little while afterward it will
seem unto him to be false, sometime to be, and sometime not to be: and again,
one while one way, and another while an other way. And, neither in deeds nor
yet words is there any thing at all sound or steadfast, but al things in deed
are turned up and down, as it were in the often ebbing and flowing River
Euripus, and tarry no time in any thing. And in another place in a matter of
great weight, he says, that he was carried about as with a tempest or a
wave: by the which very word the Apostle has noted the often changeable
vanity of man his doctrine, Tossed and carried about with every wind of
doctrine.

A brief repetition of the principal points of this confutation.
And thus far entreats Solomon of the wisdom of man, the which we have
said to have been the first point of the confutation taken in hand, whereby
he would teach: That there is no felicity or happiness in this life. He began
with Wisdom, in the which, if in any thing, the felicity and happiness of
men seems especially for to shine forth. But he teaches that in it is very
great vanity, and therefore that happiness is far from it, the which he
does in such sort teach, that as was meet for him, which had taken upon him
the confutation of man his knowledge, proving the same confutation with most
strong reasons, making the demonstration of the vanity, Solomon his
demonstration
the which he will have to be in the science and knowledge of man, by the
setting down of the four causes, to wit, the End, the Efficient, the Matter,
and the Form. For what end I pray you does the knowledge of man set before
it self, The end.
but to follow after curiouse matters, and altogether unprofitable, and to
reap thereof nothing in deed but mere vanity? The which he has taught
verse 13. and 14. The efficient.
What other thing does it bring to pass then mad and foolish uncertainty,
and miserable and careful doubting, and an idle meddling with nothing in the
life of man, among those same crabbed and cumbersome contemplations of things?
verse. 15. The matter.
How monstrous things does it imagine which are no where in the nature of
things, yea, and moreover vanishes away in those her devises? verse. 17.
Therefore the matter of this knowledge, is not any thing, but the idol of a
thing, and an opinion varying this way and that way. And what I pray you is
this knowledge, but indignation and weariness, sundry ways turmoyling and
tormenting the mind among the uncertain waves of doubting? The form.
This is forsooth the perfection and as it were the life of man his knowledge.
Therefore in as much as the same in four causes does go astray from true
knowledge, how can it deserve the name of knowledge? And more over in as much
as it is filled with vanity, and the same most vain, happiness can not be
found in it. Thus has been declared the first branch of the confutation,
Concerning the vanity of the knowledge of man.

The observation of doctrine.
Every man by his own danger ought to be a warning unto others.
1 Whereas he sets down his own example, we learn that it is right and
meet that we should not only grow wiser by our own peculiar danger, but
also be a warning unto others to take heed by showing them of our own
experience, least at unawares they run against the rocks of the same error.
For we provide very ill both for our selves and others, unless that daily we
learn somewhat by our own experience, least we be worse then the Heathen man,
which said that he waxed old every day learning something.

2 The name of Wisdom is honorable in deed, and by all desires to be wished
for, the seeds of that reason, the which do make a difference between us and
other living creatures, We must not be carried away with a vain show of
wisdom.
are very excellent: but we must take diligent heed lest we be carried
headlong with a certain vain study, counterfaiting the name and show of
wisdom. We must play the Philosophers, says one, but briefly. The knowledge
of Philosophy is an excellent gift of God, and has very great uses in all
the parts of life, but we are to take heed, least that in steed of true and
sound Philosophy, we embrace vain error. For that same vain Philosophy
faulteth in the material cause, in the formal, in the efficient, and in the
final cause. There is every where affliction of spirit, and most great
vanity, no where contentedness of mind, no where happiness, if it be
separated from the true knowledge of the true God. Iulianus the Apostata.
For it had been better for Iulianus the Apostata or backslyder never to have
known learning, then by apposing or setting his wicked learning against the
known truth which he detested and abhorred, to have brought upon him self
the greater destruction. For how many at this day were godly ignorance better
then wicked learning, wherewith being blinded, they run headlong into the
frenzy of Atheism or thinking that there is no God, and being puffed up with
the swelling of that counterfeit knowledge, they cannot away with the
simplicity of the truth which is taught in the Church of God. O unlearned and
wicked learning. Of this vanity are guilty not only the masters and
professors of curious arts (as is the whole Iudiciarie Astrology altogether
void of judgment, Iudiciarie Astrology.
the devises of Alcumistes or Minerallists, the dotages of Magike, and such
like fooleries) but also the captains and ringleaders in Philosophy, as Plato
and Aristotle, the reading of whom is not (I grant) to be refused: A
necessary rule for the reading of Plato and Aristotle, etc.
but yet are they in such sort to be read, that they infect not our minds with
their Circean inchauntments: but that seuering and shutting out the true use
from the abuse, we embrace with sober minds the true and profitable knowledge
and use of things, in such manner, and so far as the Lord would have extant in
them, that we forsake falsehood and vanity, and in a word that in their
darkness we seek out the sparks of the original truth. And against all
these phrensies and errors we are to set the simplicity of the word of God,
the which to be the undoubted wisdom we make no doubt at all. For the Apostle
teaches a very short and near way of being wise, namely Christ, and him
crucified, who of his father is made unto us wisdom, etc. To be wise without
Christ, is plain folly: all knowledge which is not referred unto that end, is
madness, with what show of wisdom soever it be covered. This is a sound
confutation of all man his wisdom and Philosophy, the which howsoever it
has known God, yet it has not glorified God, and therefore has vanished
away in her own cogitations and devices. But we have spoken of this matter at
large elsewhere in his place.

3 Whereas out of the travail about the study of Philosophy we do only
reap feeding or affliction of spirit, anger, indignation, and sorrow, We
must profit by our learning.
let us not be in the number of them, which always learn, and never come unto
the knowledge of the truth: we must especially labor to strengthen our minds
with the assured persuasion of the word of God: for from thence shall we have
true and sound rest. Let us not disquiet our minds with diverse goings about
the bush for knowledge. One thing is enough, if we choose that same better
part, we shall certainly find it to be the guide of our whole life. The
knowledge of salvation is the chief knowledge.
Now the same is to be craved at the hand of God: neither are we to rejoice
in that we know sundry sciences, but that we understand the knowledge of
salvation, the which contains promises of both lives. And the same shall then
at last engender in our minds true and sound quietness, if we shall know our
names to be written in the book of life. Which foundation being laid, we
shall no doubt carry away most plentiful profit out of humane sciences, as
it were out of the spoils of the Egyptians.

A confutation of pleasure: That is to say, That in pleasure there is great
vanity. The second Chapter.
1 I said in mine heart come now, I will prove thee in joy, and behold thou
pleasure: and see, this also is vanity.

2 Of laughter I said, thou art mad; and of joy, Whereunto serves this?


The exposition.
That happiness is neither in pleasure, nor in the prudence of man.
SOLOMON thus far has taught that happiness is not in the wisdom of man:
now he teaches, that it is not in pleasure, nor in the prudence of man, the
which discourse he continues from this place unto the third Chapter, ver. vij.
And he very fitly passes from one contrary unto another. For the study of
sciences and arts is clean contrary unto a voluptuous and intemperate life:
for the one wears away it self with great labors and toils both of mind
and body: the other altogether gives it self unto ease and joy. Solomon
therefore having had experience of the crabbed encumbrances of the
Philosophical life, says that after a long and earnest deliberation in the
end he set down with him self, that the life which is spent in pleasure, is
better then other kinds of life. And he sets down a notable description of
a mind reasoning with it self, of vain principles gathering vain
conclusions. To what end Solomon gave himself unto pleasure.
For to this end Solomon teaches that he applied his mind unto pleasure, not
to commend a voluptuous life, but to find fault with the vanity thereof, and
to condemn the blind vainesse of the nature of man in allowing and embracing
of the same. For of this Preface.

1 I said in mine heart, etc.] this is the meaning, The he, after that he was
not satisfied in that his former purpose to get wisdom, took another course,
and being wearyed with the painful study of the thornie life about the
knowledge of Philosophy, of purpose speedely gave him self unto the contrary
part. For in these words he shows that with settled purpose he embraced a new
kind of life, Nazianzen.
as Nazianzen does very well expound it: And thinking to have this in deed, I
determined to turn my self unto an other course of life, and to give over my
self unto delight, and to make trial of sundry kinds of pleasures. For, To
say in heart, is so to consider of any matter, as that you conclude and
determine some certain thing. For thinking or considering, is the speech of
the mind reasoning without words: as speech is the thinking by express
words, because, that which we conceive in mind, we utter by speech, as the
interpreter thereof.

Now what were those new thinkings upon a new life after that he had had
trial of the mysteries of man his wisdom, he teaches in these words, A
lively resembling of the mind reasoning with it self.
Come now, that is to say, Go to, let us consider a little more diligently of
this matter, and let us gather our mind together: for he speaks unto him
self, the which imitation or resembling of the mind reasoning with it self,
is far more plain and effectual, then if the matter were nakedly and barely
set down. For the wauings and tossings of the thoughts of man rashly turning
them selves hither and thither are by this means notably expressed. Go to then
(says Solomon) forsaking the study and labor of those things in the which I
have wearied my self in vain, I will prove my self in joy: or, I will pour
out my self into joy: or, I will give my self unto joy. Some expound it one
way, and some another, according unto the sundry significations of the
Hebrewe verb. The meaning is, I will give my self wholly unto pleasure, I
will leave nothing undone unto the seeking out of all pleasures, to fill my
self with them: I will ouerflowe in delites, I will wholly drown my self in
them, I will let lose the raynes unto mine appetite. In a word, he shows
that of a settled purpose of mind, he does more freely give over himself unto
pleasure, and diligently, as he himself thinks best, seek all occasions to
enjoy her. The which he signifies also by another kind of speaking, And
behold good: for, To see, To behold good or pleasure.
or behold good, or pleasure, is to enjoy pleasure: the kind of speech with
the Hebrews growing hereupon, because We have our eyes fastened upon that
thing, the which we do love.

And what I pray you does the mind gather by that same taste of pleasure?
Behold, this also is vanity, that is to say, that by his own experience he
acknowledged, that in pleasure there is most great vanity: and that felicity
and happiness is most far from that kind of life.

The doctrine.
1 Such is altogether the nature of man, Man carried headlong into contrary
studies.
that being carried away with the rage of desires, it is driven headlong by
outward things into contrary parts. So we may oftentimes see that stern
severity is losed into a certain dissolute kind of licentiousnes: that they
which have lived an hard life, forsaking their censorlike severity, do
licentiously give over them selves unto pleasure. The daily life does afoorde
us examples of this inconstancy of man. Ioas.
Ioas King of Judah, first of all from a child, being very well brought up
through the care and diligence of Ioiada the high Priest, and in the beginning
of his kingdom profitably showing his singular care for the restoring of the
pure worship of God, yet notwithstanding had a clean contrary end of his life,
his both care and manners being shamefully altered and changed. The Empire of
Rome also has felt the hurtful change of manners in Caligula. Themistocles,
Lucullus, and others mo, abandoning utterly the care of the common wealth, have
given themselves wholly unto pleasure and ease, that they might behold Neptune
raging a far off from the land, that it might behold the turmoyles and
hurliburlies of the world, themselves being at quiet, and without the danger
of the same, like unto one that sees the Seas to work and be tombled together
with the vehemency of the winds, himself standing safely upon the shore.

It is not possible for the life of man to be altogether void of trouble.
2 This way of searching out of happiness Solomon also in this place marketh
with the name of vanity, accordingly as himself had had experience by his
own example, to the end we should know that it is a most vain surmize to
think that any mortal man can so lead his life, that as it were in the
fortunate Islands it should be altogether free and without all discommoditie and
sorrow. This life no doubt is subject unto sundry miseries, the which who so
goes about altogether to eschew, he must needs go out of this life, for so
long as we shall be conversant in this life, we shall have continual enemies,
with whom we must continually fight. We must seek for fit remedies against
this case, and the nearer and greater troubles, so far as in us lies, are to
be avoided, but we must not think it possible to escape them all: and
therefore we ought so to frame our selves, that even in the very midst of
the tempests of our calamities and miseries, we may have assured rest and
quiet: as the Apostle wills us, doubling the commandment, that we should
always rejoice.

3 More over, The things themselves in themselves are not condemned.
out of the third rule we are to bear in mind, that the things themselves in
themselves are not condemned, that is to say, pleasure, ease, joy: nay, God
would have testimonies of his fatherly goodness to be seen in the most sweet
pleasures, with the which he would season the miseries and troubles of this
mortal life. But we must moderately and soberly use all things appertaining
unto this life, like as we must do life it self, with prayer and giving of
thanks, having them as if we had them not, and in such sort as beholding in
them the pledges of God his good will toward us, we rest wholly in God the
author of them, and count it a most vain vanity, to stay upon things that are
vading and fleeting. The Wise man therefore witnesses, that he found vanity
in pleasure, and gives reasons, why he so thought.

The exposition.
2 I said of laughter.] He shows that being taught by experience, taking
accountes with him self he certainly determined, (for this the word Saying
betokens) that in pleasure there was most great vanity, and that of it there
can come no profit unto true and sound satietie and contentednes of mind.

The figurative kind of speakinge, bringing in the person of pleasure, that
he may speak unto her as it were being present, gives a gravity and grace
unto the sentence. He brings in Laughter and joy, Laughter.
as the guard of pleasure, by the name of the one understanding all sportfull
things, wherewith men go about to put away all grief out of their minds, that
they may with full swinge follow after pleasure: I^^.
and by the other, that tryumphing and immoderate pleasure, wherewith men do
cheer their minds, that they may enjoy perpetual delites. He casts
laughter in the teeth, that he is mad, and bids joy as it were in contempt
and disdain to auaunt as vain and unprofitable: noting her in the third
person, to set out this contempt the more lively: then the which manner of
speaking, nothing could be devised more excellent. He says that laughter is
mad, Why laughter is said to be mad.
because that unbridled pleasure makes men mad and frantike: as which in the
minds of men does trouble the office of reason. He affirms joy to profit
nothing, because that the feeling of pleasure is not only unprofitable and
unfruitful, but because the end thereof also is sorrowful, for pleasure
bought with pain, as one says, is hurtful. Then the which what can be more
vain? In pleasure then is most great vanity, and therefore happiness is
far from it.

The doctrine.
1 Now the reasons wherewith he proves pleasure to be guilty of vanity, are
in deed very strong and pithie. There is no man that can doubt, that there
has been nothing given unto man by God, more excellent than the mind. This
also is manifest, No greater enemy unto the mind then pleasure.
that nothing is so great an enemy unto this heavenly present and gift as
pleasure, as the which quenches all the light of the mind, and does, as it
were dazel the eyes of the mind, a foe doubtless unto reason, and having
nothing to do with virtue: for where pleasure bears rule, what place, I pray
you, can there be for reason or virtue? The government of reason being
banished, what other thing can there range in the mind of man, then mere
madness, with a blind violence running unto his own destruction? Therefore
pleasure brings to pass, that greatest vanity bears rule in man, that is
to say, madness and fury: and therefore makes a man most unhappy.

2 And most lamentable effects do declare, that pleasure is not only
unprofitable, but also crowded up with infinite evils: whereof has grown this
common saying: One pleasure does bring a thousand woes unto men. The
discommodities of pleasure.
He that entangleth himself in the snare of pleasure, does voluntarily run
headlong unto his own destruction, and wound himself with infinite sorrows.
Among others, they are most plentiful witnesses of inconveniences which
follow pleasure, who have most of all given themselves unto pleasure, whom
repentance their companion ouertaketh too late: neither need we to seek
far for the proof of this vanity. Therefore Solomon by a notable figure
speaks unto pleasure her self, that she being witness of her own shame,
spite of her teeth and whether she will or no, may be brought unto the
confession of her wickedness.

What pleasure it is that is condemned.
3 Yet is not all pleasure simply and in it self (as I have said) condemned: but
filthy, gross immoderate, that is to say, fleshly, and worldly pleasure. For
there is a certain honest pleasure of things, which appertain even unto the
use of this life, and it is lawful to use the things themselves pleasantly and
soundly: Neither is the counterfeit rigorousnes of hypocrites to be borne who
carry the countenance of grave Sages, and life like rechlesse roysters. The
things themselves are not condemned, but the immoderate desires of the things,
and the unbridled lusts after them: And to shunnish the world, is not to
abstain from things, but from the intemperat desires of them, that according
unto the commandment of Paul, we should learn to use this world, as not
using it: and of James, to keep our selves unspotted of the world, unto which
holy things it is meet for all Christians to be consecrated, that they may
earnestly shun the world, and renounce the filthy desires of the world.

4 There is also another kind of holy and unblameable pleasures, to wit, Joy
and quiet of mind.
Joy and quiet of mind, as the true child of true contentedness, so also of
happiness and felicity. This does not the holy ghost condemn, the which
else where he does greatly commend: that among the sorrows and troubles of
this world we should strengthen our minds with the same, and without drowning
sail over this sea of miseries by the conduct and guidance thereof.

5 Yet notwithstanding honest pleasure otherwise is condemned, being considered
barely, Honest pleasure without the fear of God is condemned.
and simply in it self without the fear of God, in which alone is true
felicity and happiness. Therefore by this censure are condemned all the
honest pleasures of the Heathen Philosophers, albeit never so fair in show, as
also their temperanties, because they swerue from the truth: neither are they
in deed to be accounted true virtues, but shadowish and servile resemblances
of virtues: as a more sound Philosopher has in flat words acknowledged: Who
notwithstanding knew not the truth, nor the clensing thereof.

A confutation of the Prudence of man, that is to say, That there is vanity
also in the Prudence of man, and that happiness is away from it.
3 I sought in my heart to withdraw my flesh from wine, and to bring mine heart
unto wisdom, and to keep it from folly: until I might see what was that
goodness of the sons of men, who do labor under the Sun, the number of the
days of their life.

4 I have magnified my works, I have built me houses, I have planted me
vineyardes.

5 I have made me orchardes, and pleasant gardens, and have planted in them
trees of all fruit.

6 I have made me pondes of waters, that I might water with them the woods
that grow with trees.

7 I have gotten men servant, and maid servant, and I have had children of
the house: Moreover I have had great possession of Oxen, and cattle, above all
them which were before me in Jerusalem.

8 I have heaped up also unto my self silver and gold, and treasure to be
desired of Kings and provinces: I have gotten me singers, and singing women,
and the delites of the sons of men, chosen women out of the pray.

9 And I was great, and increased above all them which were before me in
Jerusalem: and moreover my Wisdom remained with me.

10 And all things which mine eyes desired I kept not from them: neither did I
keep my heart from all joy: for my heart has rejoiced in all my labors: and
this was my portion of all my labor.

11 And I looked on all my works, the which my hands had made, and on the
labor wherewith I had labored to work: and behold all is vanity, and
affliction of spirit, and there is no chief profit under the Sun.

12 And I turned to behold Wisdom, and madness, and folly, for what is man
to come after the King (to know) the things which men have done already?

13 And I saw that wisdom is more profitable then folly, as the light is
more profitable then darkness.

14 The eyes of a wise man are in his head, but a fool walks in darkness:
and I knew also that the same condition falls unto them all.

15 Therefore I said in mine heart, if as it falls out unto a fool, so also
it falls out unto me: Why have I then labored to be more wise? Therefore I
said in mine heart, that this also is vanity.

16 For there shall be no remembrance of the wise man with the fool ever: for
that now the days which are to come, shall all be forgotten: and as a wise man
dies so does also a fool.

17 Therefore I hated the life it self, because the work displeased me, which
was done under the Sun, for all is vanity and affliction of spirit.

18 I hated also all my labor, wherewith I labor under the Sun: because I
shall leave it unto a man, which shall be after me.

19 And who knows whether he shall be a wise man, or a fool? yet he shall
have rule over all my labor, wherewith I have labored, and wherewith I have
been wise under the sun, this also is vanity.

20 And I turned me to call back mine heart from all my labor wherewith I have
labored, and wherewith I have been wise under the sun.

21 For there is a man whose labor is in wisdom and knowledge, and in
rightnesse of mind: yet he shall give his portion unto a man that has not
labored herein: this also is vanity, and a great grief.

22 For what falls out unto a man for all his labor and affliction of his
heart, wherewith he has labored under the sun?

23 For all his days are sorrows, and indignation his travail: yea in the
night his heart rests not: this also is vanity.

24 There is then no profit in man, but that he eat and drink, and show his
soul pleasure of his travail: this also I have seen that it is of the hand
of God.

25 For who would eat, and who would take care to flow in delites, rather then
I?

26 Because unto a man which is good before him, he gives wisdom and
knowledge, and joy: but unto the sinner he gives pain, to gather and heap
up, to give unto one that is good before God. This also is vanity and
affliction of spirit.

The third Chapter.
1 To all things there is an appointed time, and a time unto every purpose
under the sun.

2 A time to be born and a time to die: a time to pla^t and a time to pluck up
that which has been planted.

3 A time to kill, and a time to heal: a time to pull down, and a time to
build up.

4 A time to weep and a time to laugh: a time to mourn, and a time to dance.

5 A time to throw stones abroad, and a time to gather stones together: a time
to embrace, and a time to depart from embracing,

6 A time to get, and a time to loose: a time to keep, and a time to cast away.

7 A time to cut, and a time to sow together: a time to keep silence, and a
time to speak.

8 A time to love and a time to hate: a time of war, and a time of peace.

9 What profit has he that works of the thing wherein he trauaileth.

10 I have seen the travail which God has given unto the sons of men, to
occupy themselves therein.

11 He has made every thing beautiful in his time: also he has set the World
in their heart, that man should not find out the work, which God makes from
the beginning even unto the end.

12 I know that there is nothing better in them, then to rejoice, and to do
good in his life.

13 And also that every man eats and drinks, and sees the commodity of al
his labors, this is the gift of God.

14 I know that whatsoever God does, it shall be for ever, to it there is
nothing to be added, nor to be taken from it: for god does it that they should
fear before him.

15 That which has been, now is: and that which shall be has now been: and
God requires the time that is past.


The exposition.
All this whole place from the 2. Chapter verse. 3. unto the 3. Chapter, verse
15. I read in one course and text together. For all these things are alleged
to prove one and the self same thing, namely, unto the confutation of the
Prudence of man, the which Solomon does therefore plead guilty of vanity, to
shut out felicity or happiness from it, and to prove this new proposition,
There is also great vanity in the prudence of man: Like as he had already
proved concerning Wisdom and Pleasure. Under the name therefore of
Wisdom, What kind of wisdom is here spoken of, and how it differs from
that mentioned in the Chapter before going.
he does not understand the same wisdom the which he has spoken of in the
Chapter before going, namely a searcher and seeker out of things by study of
mind and meditation, but a civil Prudence: by the which, man being a living
creature endued with reason, and delighting in company, does know how to
govern himself and his family, and also the common wealth: and does wisely
judge of the disposing and success of things, the which no doubt is an
especial point of wisdom. For what should it avail to know the miracles and
wonders of nature, unless thou did know thy self? What should it avail
to understand the numbers and the motions of things, the greatness of the
stars, their distances one from another, and their mouings, and to
comprehend and conceive by contemplation the whole heaven, unless thou
should know wisely how to govern thy self, thy family, the city, in the
which thou dwell? And therefore the sounder Philosophers are commended, The
practice of the more sounder Philosophers.
the which, whereas others of elder times bestowed all their labor and study
in the laying open of nature, and discourses of Meteores or things done above
and in the air, they contrariwise called down Philosophy as it were from
heaven, and placed her in cities, and brought her into houses, and caused her
to enquire of life and manners, and of good things and evil things, that is to
say, they diligently taught Ethikes, or concerning Manners, Oeconomikes, or
concerning household government, and politikes, or concerning the ruling of
cities and common wealths. Now therefore Solomon plainly and expressly
deals with man his prudence and wisdom, and proves the same guilty of
vanity, as hitherto he has done all knowledge in general. And he does in
such sort describe and set forth the same, that it can not be more lively
represented or expressed. For as prudence has her speculation, and her
Precepts, so also is she especially to be seen and perceived in the actions
and uses of life. He therefore deals exactly or thoroughly with them both unto
the full description of the same: alleging also his own example, to show
that he speaks principally of a thing certain and well known.

Solomon does not simply condemn the wisdom of man.
Now, according unto the first rule, the which we have set down at the
beginning, we are to note, that Solomon speaks of this matter after the
manner of men, that is, according unto the judgment of man his reason: least
we should think that he condemns Prudence or the wisdom of man in it
self, that is to say, the way to order our life well and temperatly, to govern
our family wisely and duly, to rule the common wealth profitably, and the wit
to judge of things likely to fall out hereafter, by the long and diligent
observation of things gone before, that we may provide both for our selves,
and for our families, and for the common wealth, and may know the way to order
the society and fellowship of man commodiously, and to preserve it, among the
horrible tempests of men's devises and practices. The knowledge of all the
which things Prudence or the wisdom of man does promise and profess: but how
far, and to what effect, it shall appear by this sermon.

Solomon took a middle course of life.
3 I have searched out] The meaning is, that he followed a wise and perfect
course of a civil life, in betaking himself unto a certain middle kind of
life, that he might both withdraw himself from a dissolute or reachlesse and
intemperate life, and yet not forgo and ouerpasse such things, which might
make for the living pleasantly and merrily: nor contrariwise forslewe those
things which might beseem a wise and a thriftie person. But did thoroughly labor
in that which appertained unto the leading of his life well and blessedly. That
this is the power and force of the wisdom of man, there is no man well
experienced in the affairs of the world which doubts. The Philosophers
which have discoursed of manners, have taught that virtue is a mean: and in
politic me^, such as are wont most to be praised, is that mean or middle way
to be seen, that they shunnish the foul and frantike outrages of dissolute
and careless persons, and yet fall not into a stern clubbishnes, hating all
company and fellowship of men: (which kind of melancholic sadness and never
being merry, is often seen in those that are to much given unto study) but
do love a pleasant and merry life, and do follow honest pleasures: yet are
delited conveniently as occasion serves with the study of learning and honest
things, and seek that delight both of quiet and business. And more over they
do wisely and painfully look unto the matters of their house, and order them
finely: and do not cast away the care of the common wealth, nor take such a
course as that they will live by themselves, and meddle with no matters of the
common wealth, but do both judge wisely of worldly matters, and diligently
employ their labor about the common wealth, as occasion shall require: yet
nevertheless will they not intermeddle themselves in troublesome cases, but
endeavor to provide both for themselves and for theirs. That this is a lively
image of a prudent or wise and civil man, there is none but sees certain such
like branches whereof (if the calamities of their country would have suffered)
the histories do set forth unto us in Lucullus, in Cicero, in Themistocles: and
in a more lively image, and in a matter far more weighty, the holy history
does portraite out unto us in Solomon, Solomon a pattern of a politic life.
so that not unworthily has he showed himself a pattern of a politic life:
the which he does here artificially set out.

He uses therefore a very fine frame of words, To search in the heart.
saying, That he searched in his heart, that is to say, that he weighed and
considered in his mind a certain other course of living ciuilly, and royally,
that forsaking those extremes of a Philosophical and of a dissolute or
rechlesse life, he would moderately betake himself unto a certain middle way.
That he would draw out his flesh in wine. The Hebrew word signifies to draw
or to draw out. The word, Wine.
By this word Wine, according unto the propriety of the Hebrew tongue is
signified a merry and pleasant kind of life. The meaning therefore is, how he
might most give him self unto pleasantness, and deliver himself from cares
and troubles: yet might apply his heart unto wisdom, accustom him self unto
wisdom, that is to say, so follow pleasure, that he might seek after a
prudent and wise course of living. And that he might lay hold on folly, that
is, not abstain from a more free and merry life, not so to give himself unto
the study of wisdom, but that sometimes he might give himself leave to
follow pleasure.

This is the plain and clear meaning of these word: Against such, as out of
this place would establish Monkerie.
so that the dotage of foolish Sophisters is to be detested, who through the
ignorance of the Hebrewe tongue (being disceiued by the words of the common
translation) would out of these words build the mad devise of a Monkish
life. But this by no means can be gathered of the words: and Jerome
(otherwise a blind patron of Monkerie) does expound this place after this
manner: Ierom.
I was minded to lead my life in pleasures, and to deliver my flesh from all
cares, and to bring my self a sleep with pleasure, as it were with wine, etc.
Also against those idols and counterfaiting of temperance, and the infamy and
reproach of an honest and sober life, (for this is the description of a Monkish
life) we have to oppose and set the decree of the holy ghost against the
unprofitable using of bodily exercise. 1. Tim. 4. ver. 8.

Now to what end Solomon followed this middle kind of life, he teaches in
these words, until that I did see, that is to say, had learned and assuredly
tried out by experience, what was that good thing of the sons of men, that
they might labor under Heaven, in the number of the days of their life: that
is to say, How this life of man might be led well and blessedly: what is the
right way to order and dispose a man his life well and profitably. For so are
those words simply to be expounded, under Heaven, that is to say in this
life: In the number of the days of their life, that is to say, So long as men
live here in this world, so long as they remain in this life. The sum and
effect is: When as he had found happiness neither in the searching out of the
mysteries and secrets of knowledge, nor yet in the dissolutenes of pleasure,
that he took an other course to seek out that happiness, that avoiding those
two extremes, he might follow a certain middle kind of life, the which did
neither refuse pleasure, nor yet the study of wisdom: and that he did this to
this end, that he might know what was the right course for men to live. And
what way and course he took to obtain this end, he himself will by and by
declare.

The doctrine.
Great lightness in the changing of the course of our lives.
1 In the changing of a new trade of life, that same lightness is also seen,
the which we have noted before. The mind of man is never at rest, it is
always carried about hither and thither, which is a punishment of our pride.
For, so long as we do not trust unto God: but leaning unto our own strength,
do seek help in our own selves for our own affairs, we cannot choose but
be tossed to and fro with very great troubles: even as the Prophet says,
That his mind which extolleth him self, will never be right in him, that is
to say, he shall never have settled rest.

2 All men have engraffed in them this care and desire of loving and pursuing
after happiness: All men desire to attain unto happiness.
but the lightness of man his wit does stray most far from that end, although
he labor never so busily about that matter: and this desire is no small
cross, when as letting pass necessary things, such things as are not
necessary, are with great care and great travail sought after: yea, Miserable
curiosity.
further this curiousness and painfulnesse is miserable which seeking for
gold, finds coals, that is, which in stead of the truth of that
happiness, which it imagined, embraces a vanishing shadow and show of
happiness. These are the goodly graces of worldly men, that is to say, no
true virtues, but only shadows and vizardes of virtues.

3 And it is the greatest vanity for a man to seek to rule himself by his own
counsel and device: A great vanity for a man to rule himself by his own
counsel.
the which vanity is entangled and bewrapped with diverse discommodities. For
doubtless many thorns and cares do hedge in his counsels: and many times
they are disapointed with the vain and unprofitable fallings out of things: his
desire is never satisfied, not content with things present, it looks diversely
after things to come. The father builds a house, ye which he himself
enjoys not, but leaves it unto his children. The children being not content
therewith, do themselves build a new, and do not properly enjoy neither their
fathers goods, nor yet their own, whilst they are still seeking after new.
In disposing the course of their life, men do toil themselves diverse ways,
they neglect the certain and only way to live well: they curiously follow
after hidden things, and contemn that which is easy to be found. A worthy
lesson.
For no man shall ever know any way to live well, who has not learned to
commit himself unto the providence of God, and wholly to depend and stay
upon the same.

The uncertain shortness of this mortal life.
4 Out of this kind of speaking, In the number of the days of their life, like
as out of the meaning of all these words, let us learn to know the
uncertain shortness of this mortal life. For the number of our days is short,
and uncertain. For who lives longer than the number set down by Moses, to
wit, the space of 70. or 80. years? And how great a multitude of people is
there which never come thereunto? The which account when as we are ignorant of,
that is, when as we know not how long we shall live, the Lord is to be prayed
unto, to teach us to number our days, accordingly as the same Prophet does put
us in mind.

The Exposition.
From the 4. verse until the 11. Solomon has set down as it were by the way
of a Preface, that he gave his mind wholly unto a prudent and civil life that
he might live well and blessedly: now what course he held unto that happiness,
he goes forward to declare. Household and private goods are the foundation of a
common wealth, and the foundation of a family is the skill to thrive, that is
to say, the means and diligence to gather wealth and heap up riches. He
witnesses, Solomon gave himself to gather riches.
that he diligently applied himself hereunto, and sets down a lively
description of the same.

He says therefore generally, that he magnified his works, that is to say,
that he handled his matters famously and royally, the which royal and famous
administration and ordering of things of his, All these things are lawful
being rightly used.
he by and by does severally set down. That he builded houses, planted
vineyards, made orchardes and parkes, planted in them trees of al fruits: made
him ponds of water to water the wood, got men servants and maid servants,
cattle, had a great number of servants borne in his house, and finally, heaped
up unto himself great riches, and added unto this royalty a great number of
singing men and singing women, as kings and mighty men are wont to do, all
which things do appertain unto such an administration and ordering of an
household, as in all points is exquisite and perfect, so that there be a right
regard to use them, the which Solomon forthwith says that he had. That his
wisdom remained with him, that is to say, that in his desire to get wealth,
and in this abundance of riches and plenty, he was not foolish and sottish,
as that blind God of riches is wont to make rich men foolish: but that he
excelled in settled and constant prudence, that in the ordering and disposing of
his things he was not only sharp sighted and diligent (for he speaks of
civil Wisdom) but also that he used the goods which he had gotten frankly,
and royally. The which he signifies in these words, Solomon frankly spent the
goods which he had gotten.
And all things which mine eyes desired, etc. that is to say, that he
permitted unto himself the most frank use of his goods, not like unto
covetous swinepannels, which dare not touch their bread and wine, but gape
after their riches the which they have with great toil heaped up. He says
that the same sound use of riches was the portion of his labor, that is to
say, that this one thing remains unto man of his riches, when as in the end
rich men are compelled to leave them. The sum and effect is: that he let
pass nothing, which might appertain unto an happy and blessed life, so
far as civil men could attain unto. The holy history reckons up the
royalty of Solomon his works, and his most singular wisdom, which brought
the Queen of Saba unto him, 1. King. 3. chapt. unto the 11. that I stand not
severally to handle every thing the which are to be understood simply, and not
by an alligorie: so that no doubt, Against Jerome and others, who where the
sense is plain, make needelesse allegories.
the itche of Ierom is intolerable, who in so plain and clear places has
unseasonably taken occasion mystically to discourse matters according to his
mad desire, to turn all things into needelesse allegories.

2 These things thus set down, what does he gather thereout? And I looked
back unto all my works, the which, etc. After that, says he, that I had
labored in these matters with all pains both of mind and body, and had
reaped notable fruit of my labors, so that I easily excelled all the kings of
Israel; which had been before me: at the length the things being diligently
considered and examined, I found that of so many and great labors I had
gotten nothing but mere vanity and affliction of Spirit. He says
therefore that there is the very self same reproof of vanity in the
Prudence or wisdom of man, the which was before in knowledge and pleasure:
like as he does of purpose repeat the same words of vanity and affliction, or
trouble of spirit: and by a fine figure where one word carries contrary
signification, concludes that this especially is the reward of the things in
this world. For the words are plain, And there is no especial profit under
the Sun, to wit, besides those vanities whereof he speaks. Goodly then (I
warrant you) are the rewards of man's wisdom after the susteining of so many
and so great labors.

The doctrine.
Care to provide for our families is not condemned.
1 Care and diligence to preserve and also to increase a man his household goods
is not condemned: the which is not only profitable, but very necessary, unto
the use and opportunity of this life, as which is an especial band to keep
together the society and fellowship of mankind, and hereof there are notable
testimonies in the word of God, That a faithful man ought duly to order his
family and his goods: and that it becomes Christians, to govern well their
children, and their own houses, and to govern their houses. There is also an
excellent example of this household carfulness, and thriftinesse in Christ,
Ch^s^.
who would have the fragments of the fishes and bread to be gathered together.
And contrariwise, that he which casts away the care of his family, has
denied the faith, and is worse then infidels, whom nature has taught, either
not to beget children, or else to abide the pain and labor in bringing of
them up, and instructing them, albeit that it be never so tedious and toylsome,
that is to say, that I may set down the words themselves out of a more sound
Philosopher. A man ought either not to beget children, or else to take great
pain and labor in bringing of them up, and instructing them. When as
therefore he says, that he found vanity in the care and ordering of matters
belonging unto his family, that is fitly to be understood by the first and
third rule, namely that we should know that he speaks according unto the
supposition and judgment of man his reason, Solomon speaks according unto
the judgment of man.
the which does judge of things by the issue and falling out of the same. For
many things are out of square about the caring how to increase our household.
In the getting of richesse there is great and much labor, Troubles about
riches,
pensive and thornie carfulness, vain and unprofitable bus^ing of our
selves: in keeping them there is infinite carking and fearfulness: and yet
there are sundry and manifold dangers, that they be not lost. Many times also
great patrimonies are hurtful unto our posterity. Yea, and in getting of
goods lawfully, there is too much greedines, the which does bereave men of
quiet of mind. Now that the immoderate desire to gain, and the issues of
things falling out to no purpose, is vanity, who is there that doubts: and
therefore who does not see, that the felicity and happiness the which we seek
for, is not in any matter belonging unto a family, although it be otherwise
good and commendable in it self. We must not in such sort be careful for our
families, that in the mean season we forslew better matters.


2 What must we then do? In the course which we take to gain and get wealth,
the which otherwise is good and honest, we must take diligent heed, that we be
not so delited with this desire and care for our household matters, that we
prefer it before the meditation and thinking upon better things. The Apostle
teaches, speaking of honest matrimony: That they which are married, and
occupied about the caring for their family, can not think upon those things
which are belonging unto God. How far then do we withdraw our selves from
God, when as we deal in such sort about our household matters, that we make
them the principal work of our life: whereas in regard of our salvation,
they ought only to be as it were by matters? Christ objected unto Martha being
too greedily occupied about her household business, Martha.
that she was troubled about many matters, but that one was sufficient.
Therefore our families are soberly and moderatly to be looked unto, and
ordered, least that being entangled with a greater care of the things
appertaining unto this life, then is meet, we be drawn from the thinking upon
a better life, yea, even then, whilst we are disposing and ordering of such
things, the which otherwise are good and profitable.

Against busibodies and such as meddle with every man his matters.
3 Furthermore, let us not be doing with things not needful, nor be meddling
with many matters, but let us so be occupied about our own business, that
having to do like busy bodies with every man's matters be away from us: and
let us think that the same is a commodious and profitable course of looking
unto our families, which may make us void of pensive carfulness, according
unto the rule of the Apostles, and may leave unto us more leisure to think
upon our salvation, and the duities of life. They therefore do greatly
offend, which do entangle themselves with sundry, and unnecessary business,
and whilst they shunnish poverty, do shunnish themselves, that is to say,
do not enjoy themselves, but are busied in a continual werying both of mind
and body.

4 And let us use things, Things to be used in such sort as they are ordained
of God.
as they are ordained of God: let us serve in the government of the common
wealth: let us seek things belonging unto our family: let us learn needful
things: let us acknowledge God, who has ordained all these things, and let us
know him in general to be the governor of mankind, and particularly of our
own families: Let us crave at his hands good success in our affairs, such
and so great as he shall know to be expedient for his own glory, and for our
salvation. Herein let us keep the compass and form of our vocation and
calling. And let us earnestly give him thanks, that he has preserved us and
our families, and has given unto us things necessary for the maintenance of
this life.

5 But if the issues and fallings out of things be not answerable unto our
endeavors, or hope, What is to be done when as things fall out contrary unto
our hope.
let us not be vexed with immoderate cares and sorrows, and let us not heap
up new, and greater inconveniences unto the encombrances of things which we
sustain already, but let us have remedies at hand. Let us commend our
matters unto the providence of God, and being persuaded that they are ordered
and governed by him, let us patiently abide his pleasure, and rest in him.
There have been great, yea, home troubles in the families of holy men. I let
pass in how great hazard Abraham saw the chastity of his wife Sara, Abraham.
but he was longer to bear the want of children: when as Isaac was born, there
grow iarres between him and his wife for Ismaell, whom he is compelled to
put out of his house. And in the end in ye very latter end of his old age, he
sees the burial of his most dear wife Sara. Isaac.
Isaac, a man which other wise inioyed great tranquillity and quiet, yet the
grudges which were between his sons did trouble and grieve him. Whilst he
lives he sees Edom his first borne son, not only being mad after many
wives, but also thrust out of his famili, that is to say, out of the church of
GOD. Jacob.
Jacob in getting of his wives is constrained to endure an hard combat against
the covetousness of Laban: after that he had them in his own power: he bare a
long season their most bitter brawlings, and the heinous outrages of his
children. What needs many words? How great encombrances felt David and many
other holy men in their families? The which are put in writing to this end,
that we should know, how we ought to walk among such thorns, from the which
we may not think that we shall be free. The best and most excellent men
sometimes meet with the worst and dishonest wives: yea, and in good wives
otherwise, yet are there to be found foul staynes: want of issue, or the
deaths of children of great hope, or that which is more lamentable, their lewd
manners, and unlucky ends, the loss of friends, the loss of goods: and in a
word, combersome and troublesome business, are common matters, ye which are
brought upon the stage of our life. But is our mind therefore to be vexed with
vnasswagable sorrow, and is both house and care of household to be given over?
We ought rather so frame our selves, that we constantly follow our calling,
and rest in God, whether our labors and endeavors go forward or not go
forward, the which we have taken in hand, according unto the form of our
calling. Our house is to be governed, our family is to be instructed, our
children are to be brought up, our wife is to be ruled wisely, but so, that at
no hand thou think that the issue of thine affairs depends or hangs
upon thy self, nor that in any case thou trust unto thine own Wisdom. If
thou have children, instruct them diligently: if GOD call them unto himself,
take it not impatiently. Use thy goods present: A notable lesson.
but if they go from thee, imploye all thy diligence, that look how much
temporal goods departs from thee, so much spiritual may come unto thee,
that is to say, how much thine outward man is corrupted, so much thine
inward man may be renewed and restored. Only go not beyond thy bounds:
perform that diligence which thou art able, and ought to do: committ all
the falling out and success of the matter unto GOD, otherwise thou can not
choose but be vexed with great tormenting.

Against the pinching of covetous misers.
6 This also is to be noted, that Solomon witnesses of himself, that he
soundly enjoyed his goods. For the vanity of misery sundges is mad and
sottish, who dare not use the goods which they have gotten, and have no more
that which they have, then that which they have not. Yet that rich glutton,
the so fearful and unhappy end of whom is set down, followed his pleasures,
enjoyed his goods abundantly and gorgeously. But in that same plenty and store
of riches, and in the use of the same albeit never so frank and free, who
notwithstanding will place felicity or happiness?

No perfect quiet in any family.
7 We should therefore be far deceived, if we should think that we should
find perfect tranquillity and quiet in matters concerning our family, albeit
never so well ordered and sumptuous: in the which doubtless there is much
labor, and but little or no profit: but the more certain and heaped up
reward thereof is vanity, and affliction or trouble of spirit, that we
should make reckoning with our selves to seek for an everlasting dwelling, and
an inheritance elsewhere then in this world. To conclude, if we seek for
gain, that we should know that godliness, joined with satietie and
contentednes of mind, is great gain.

The Exposition.
12 And I looked backe] This place is diversely expounded. For some do so
expound it, This place diverse waye^ expounded.
as if Solomon would signify that he having had experience of the troubles
that are in keeping of an house, did seek after a more restfull and quiet
course of life, bidding farewell unto the care of the other, and set his mind
again unto wisdom, of the which he spoke in the first chapter. But that
this is not the true meaning of this place, I hope that the learned will agree
with me, if the circumstances be dulye considered. For Solomon no doubt, goes
forward with his discourse in hand, concerning Prudence or wisdom of man:
neither could he repeat again that which he had said before of man his
knowledge, without foolishly babbling or vain repetition of the same thing, for
the which who doubts that this writing is for? He has noted out that part of
Prudence, the which is occupied in the direction of household matters: the
which in deed of it self is of great weight unto the use of life. Solomon
now handles the cheifest part of prudence.
And now he does at large and excellently set down that which is the chiefest
and most notable part of Prudence, namely that which judges of the whole
life: the which teaches what is good, what is evil, what agreeable, what
disagreeable: judges of such things as fall out in the life of man, weying
the grounds and causes of men their actions: and therefore prescribes
counsel to order the issues of things, that a happy end may follow, shows
the danger that it may be avoided. The Books of Politikes or of such as have
written of common wealth matters are full of this excellent knowledge, and the
counsels of prudent men are directed by the guidance and help hereof. It is
likely that so families and Cities were founded and ordained, that so great
Empires sprang up and were increased, and that so the same were maintained and
preserved. But what is the success of this civil prudence or wisdom. Solomon
being taught also by his own trial and experience, will tell us hereafter: now
he teaches what it is, and upon how sure ground he speaks of the same.

Loking back.
By the word Loking back he means a certain and sure purpose (for the Hebrew
word does not simply signify to see, but to turn about one his self to
behold and mark a thing more heedfully) but yet so that with all the
inconstancye of a doubtful and wavering mind, which gazeth about hither and
thither, is thereby represented. For these things are to be joined with that
which went before, and with the words that follow after, in the which he
describes and sets out the alterations and chaunginges of diverse courses
and trades of life, The inconsta^cie of the mind of man.
the which do declare that the mind cannot stay long in any one sure and settled
thing. He says therefore that he looked back to see, that is to say, to mark,
try, vnstande, Wisdom and Madness, and Follye: that is to say, whatsoever
went under the name, or but under the show of civil Wisdom: as we have
expounded it before, for he repeateth again the same words. Civil Prudence
or Wisdom is questionless a most principal and profitable part of
Philosophy, and therefore the naming again of the same words does very well
agree unto it. The sum and effect is, that he speaks not of a thing that is
uncertain, but whereof he had good trial, knowledge and experience, as about
the study whereof, he raunged not (as they say) over the fields, but took
great pain and labor, and diligently gave himself unto the searching out of
all the parts thereof. Therefore he does very notablye allege his own
Example.

For what is a man, etc.) The words are somewhat hard, but the sense and
meaning is nothing doubtful. The very expres significations of the hebrew text
word for word is thus: What is man which should come after the King unto
those things which they have done already? Some (as many of the Rabbines, as
Jerome) by the word King understand God: The hebrew words I have left out of
purpose, because I suppose the^ needless unto the ignorant reader.
and that in sundry senses, either that we ought to be content with the
works of God: nor seek any further things then that which is made already,
and that we ought not to find fault with his works: as wicked Carpers use to
do: or, opportunity of time, that we ought so to prepare and frame our
selves, that God be not compelled to exercise his judgment against us: or, An
other interpretation.
do understand God, but in this sense That it is in the pleasure and power of
God alone that like as he has created us so he also governs the success of
our affairs, and that therefore there is no man, that in this behalf can imitate
and follow God, the King and Lord of all things, that is to say, do as he
does, for that is done, which he has commanded: his counsel and will does
direct the successes of things the which power can by no means befall unto any
man. But this exposition, albeit that it contain a very profitable doctrine,
yet it does not agree with the words and meaning. I therefore expound these
things of Solomon, in this sense: What man I pray you is there that could have
experience in more things then I? The exposition of the author.
Who when as I am King, and have had authority over so great a people, being
endued with singular gifts from God, and have also taken great pains to know
these things, have gotten most exact and perfect understanding of these
things: and by good right may be a witness of these things, such a one as no
exception can be taken against. I think that this is the plain meaning of
these words, I acknowledge in this place no want of words, or suppressing any
thing in silence, that is to be otherwise supplied, when as the words
themselves may be expounded clearly, and according unto the matter it self. I
expound the particle Eth for Gnal: which in comparisons is most usual: as if
he should say, as appertayning unto those things, or concerning those things
which are wont to be done, and which are to be seen in the common use and
course of life. And that he speaks of the knowledge and experience of those
things, it is manifest by the words going next before, so that the meaning is
plain, that in knowledge and experience of such things as appertain unto this
life (so far as of men they are wont to be done) he far exceeded all men.
And so I understand those words. The which they have already done, according
unto the propriety of the Hebrew tongue, that is to say, are done, or are wont
to be done, the which are in practice in the common course of man his life, and
this word Now, or Already, signifies an usual custom, and such as by use is
as it were grown up. This also carries with it a great vehemency or force,
where he says, What is man, for, What man? What is man
as it were with a certain contempt the more to express the force of the
comparison, and the word Adam, the which betokens a common and private
person, is matched against the king. It is also of more majesty that Solomon
speaks of himself in the third person, using the name of a King, and that
such a one as he was. To come after the King.
To come after the King is to follow the Kings steps, or to compare and
match himself with the King, as the Greeks use these words in the same
signification, elthein opiso, antibolein, and apantan. Solomon therefore
alleges his own example, not to make vaunt of his virtues ambitiously: but to
win greater authority unto his doctrine, when as namely he does not reason of
the matter which he propou^deth by uncertain hearsay, after the manner of schole
ezercise, or with certain dark sentences of rules but being taught by certain
and sound knowledge, and by long and diligente experience. Therefore there is
no need that these words should be included within a parenthesis.

The doctrine.
Why God will have us feel the troubles of this life.
1. God no doubt will have us to feel the thorns and troubles of this life, to
the end that we should turn our minds unto the thinking upon better and more
excellent things, and that we should be ashamed of our foolish and unprofitable
diligence.

2. Yet the rashness and lightness of the wit of man is hereby seen and
perceived: that which it has liked and embraced, The lightness of man his wit.
it by and by despises, He pulls down, builds up, changes square plots
into round. Now if in mere civil matters there be so great weakness (as
appears by that wavering rashness) how great is it in matters concerning
everlasting life.

3 By thexample of Solomon, What is true prudence.
we do learn that that is true prudence or wisdom, which is referred unto
the necessary use of life. For what does it profit to search after those
things which are done in heaven, and to be ignorant of those things which are
done at home: to behold things to come a far of, and not to see ye things which
are before our feet, and in daily practice in the common course of life?
Doubtless the idle contemplation of Philosophers in their studies at home, is
nothing else but mere trifling of idle and foolish men. Yet in that same
prudent and actual knowledge of things, Solomon did afterward deny that he
found that same true happiness which he sought for.

The Exposition.
13. And I saw that] Intending to speak of the vanity of the prudence or
wisdom of man, he necessarily sets down some things, as it were by way of a
Preface, least he might seem to confound together foolishness and prudence,
that is to say, take away the difference of good and evil, which were mere
folly.

He entreats therefore very fitlye and excellently of the difference of
wisdom and folly: as if he should say: is then therefore the study of wisdom
utterly to be cast away, as if there were no difference between wisdom and
folly, as if all things were disorderly, Great difference between wisdom and
folly.
and (as they say) hand over head shufled and tumbled up together? Solomon
answers That he has seen, that is by certain arguments found out, and
assuredly tried, that there is very great difference between wisdom and
folly, yea and the same so great, as is between light and darkness: and that as
light does far excel darkness, so also does wisdom by many degrees, surpass
folly namely in regard of her most great and most excellent profits. He
uses also a very notable resemblance, whilst he compares wisdom unto light,
and folly unto darkness. For like as light, as the first of al creatures, so
the most excellent, distinguishes and makes a difference between the forms
of things, and shows every one of the^ unto the eyes, to be known by their
natures: and contrariwyse in darkness al things are mingled together, and
nothing can be certainly perceived: so the mind being lightened by the force and
power of wisdom, does distinguish and sever good from evil, truth from
falsehood, and clearly understands the things themselves as they are, the
which folly blundering in dullness and ignorance, cannot discern but as it were
groping, is busy about the^ with a blind endeavor. The which as it is true in
the consideration of whole nature, so especially it has place in the society
and fellowship of mankind (of the which in this discourse his purpose is to
speak). For they take the sin out of the world, the which bereave the life of
man of the guidance and help of wisdom. The similitude of light and
d^rknesse usual in the scripture.
The similitude therefore of light and darkness is lively to show the difference
between light and darkness, the which similitude is usual in the scripture to
set out the estate of the godly and ungodly: for the one are said to be the
sons of the light, and to walk in the light: and the other, are said to be the
sons of darkness, and to walk in darkness. This kind of speech he sets
out with a new figure.

14. The eyes of a wise man are in his head.] whereby he signifies that a wise
man is sharp sighted and circu^spect, as namely through the benefit of that
wisdom wherewith he is endowed, marking and noting as it were with a certain
light the nature and circumstances of things wisely: yea and the very manner of
doing them, wherthrough every thing is to be handled and ordered fitly or
unfitly, The office of the eyes in the head of a wise man.
prudently understanding and considering what is done in season, what not, that
al things may be handled rightly and moderately. These are the offices of the
eyes, in the head of a wise man. Contrariwise, A fool walks in darkness, that
is to say, does al things uncircumspectly and rashly: for it is matched against
this kind of speech To have his eyes in his head, whereby such sharp
sightednesse is signified, by means whereof, we do in heart and mind at the
very beginning of a thing, before we take it in hand, throughlye see the
middle and end of the same. And, To walk in darkness, is to order things
confusedly and unwisely, according as they come to hand. To walk in darkness.
So the Greeks do speak of a fool, that he has his mind in his heels. As
we say in french. s^al entendement au talon. The difference therefore between
wisdom and folly is very great. But what I pray you follows thereupon? I
knew that all these had one end, that is to say, that it falls out alike
unto the wise man and unto the fool, as if he should say: Wisdom indeed
is witty and sharp sighted, and foolishness is blind and vncircumspecte:
yet is not wisdom of force so far, that she can bring things to pass at
her pleasure, and rule and direct the issues and fallinges out of the same.
The issue of wisdom and folly is many times all one, the expectation of
folly is disappointed, and so is also the expectation of wisdom. He
therefore fitly noted the difference of them both in themselves: but least any
man trusting unto the help of man his wisdom should imagine that the success
of things depends and hangs upon himself, and therefore should sacrifice
unto his net (as the Prophet speaks) that is to say attribute unto his own
industry or diligence, the happy success of things, and not acknowledge God to
be the author of them: he notes also expressly the vanity thereof, setting down
those circumstances, The first circumstance of man his prudence.
by the which the same is laid open unto the view of all men. The first
circumstance is, that both the wise and the foolish have all one end, or that
things fall out unto the^ both alike. Of which assertion there is a sure proof,
the which he will flatly set down ver. 16 Both of the^ are bewrapped in the same
inco^ueniences and miseries: the cou^sails of the wise man have no better
success the^ the counsails of the fool, nay the fool many times has better
succes in his counsails the^ the wise man, as both old and also daily examples
do plentifully declare. The counsels of Dion, Demosthenes, Cato, Cicero,
Brutus had most unhappy success. Julius triumphed in a most bad cause: Marius,
Sylla, Antonius had good success of their counsails, against the counsels
and industry of most wise men. This therefore is a very great and shameful
vanity of man his wisdom: that whilst it much besturreth it self, it
profits nothing at all. What does the wit of man hereout gather.

15. Therefore I said,] That is to say, I did thus reason with my self: if all
one issue befall unto the wise man and the fool, the travail which is taken
for the attaining of knowledge is altogether vain and unprofitable: and
therefore the study of wisdom is to be cast away. He therefore makes a notable
garnishing of this doubt in his own person, that the thing may more effectually
be set before the eyes, I says he, employed al my diligence to govern my
kingdom most wisely, and yet had I no such succes as I would: peradventure
some fool might have had as good succes as I. A thing diligently to be noted
through this whole discourse.
For these things are spoken according unto the suppositio^ of man his reason
(as we have noted in the first rule) the which does reason according unto the
outward falling out of things. Now it is euidente, that both the good and
the bad have succes of things in common, that is falling out unto them both
alike. Thereupon arise these troublesome and profane cogitations, the which he
marketh with the badge of Vanity, and says that when he had cast his
reckonings he himself so gathered. For this is the meaning of these words,
Therefore I said with my self, that this also was vanity, for he does not
entreat of any new matter, but of the self same the which he had noted ver. 14.
That wise men and fools had al one issue of things. The which doctrine he also
garnisheth and enlarges in the next verse: describing a most earnest affection
of that same vanity.

16. For there shall be no] of all the inconveniences, Man his reason judges
death to be the greatest discommodity
whereunto this life is subject (if we judge according unto the judgment of
corrupt reason) death it self is the greatest and the sorest, which seems to
be the end of al things. This Solomon affirms to be alike common, both unto
the wise man, and also unto the fool, using an interrogation or asking of a
question, for a great proof of the vanity of man. And how dies the wise man
with the fool? As if he should say: how can it come to pass that both the
wise man and the fool should be taken away with one and the same dart of
death: when as reason seems to require, that a wise man should be immortal by
the means of his wisdom? for this is the true meaning of these words, albeit
Jerome expound them otherwise. And he shows in the first words of this
verse the great inconvenience that comes by death, namelye that the
remembrance of the wise man as well as of the fool is swallowed up and
perishes by death. Memory or remembrance is a certain immortal thing,
commending even those that are dead: For an happy memory or remembrance
follows Abraham, Isaac, and other worthy men in the Church of God: and also
we do honor with an happy remembrance those eue^ among the Heathen, the which
have lived honestly, and have well deserved of mankind.

How great a trouble therefore and vanity is it, that the remembrance of a wise
man does perish as well as of a fool, for if a wise man, The remembrance of a
wise man perishes as well as of a fool.
so long as he lives in this life, be diversely molested through the arts and
practices of lewd persons, yet at least wise being dead, envy dying also with
him, he ought to carrye away glory and praise, as the assured reward of his
labors, his happy remembrance remaining alive behind him, but the common
course of life does show, that the remembrance of a wise man as well as of a
fool is blotted out, and buried with the wise man, in everlasting
forgetfulness. For albeit that the remembrance of famous men has been
preserved in the monumentes and records of histories, yet experience teaches
this, that many good men die daily, whose names also within no long space of
time are utterly forgotten: whereas in the mean season, the lewd acts of
desperate persons committed unto the destruction of mankind, do live yet
through the memory of writing, for Catilin, Nero, Co^modus, Heleogabalus, and
other monsters, are named in histories, as well as Aristides, Phocio^, Cato,
Octauius Augustus, etc. if happiness be sought after in the memory of things to
come, as if by the benefit thereof, we should not al die, and a great part of us
(as he says) should escape the grave, how unhappy has the condition of wise
men bin, whose remembrance, eue^ after they have accomplished valiant exploits,
is don away with perpetual oblivion and forgetfulness. These therefore are the
cogitations and thoughts of man his reason. There shall be no remembrance of the
wise man with the fool for ever, that is to say, the remembrance of the wise
man shall no more remain for ever, then the remembrance of the fool. The
reason is set down, Because that even by and by (for so the Greek writers do
very well interpret the hebrew word, that I might let pass other expositions)
all the days which are to come shall be forgotten, that is to say, within no
long compass of time the remembrance of the wise man and of the fool shall be
forgotten, All men shall quickly be forgotten.
the remembrance of the good and of the bad will easily vanish away:
forgetfulness will forthwith consume all men alike. The wit of man does most
greatly detest this weakness and frailnesse of man his nature, as a chief
calamity and misery. Therefore he says.

17. Therefore I hated] that is to say, my life was unto me no life, I was
weary of this life, He adds the cause, Because the work displeased me, etc.
all the ordring and disposing of the affairs of men, yea of all things which
befall in this life, was of me most hated, because of this notable disorder.
For all things are vanity and Affliction or trouble of spirit, that is to
say, heaped up with extreme vanity. Here also that old song takes place, Al
things are vanity, etc. Whatsoever the wisdom of man goes about, with what
strength or aid soever it do fortify it self, yet notwithstanding it is subject
unto miserable vanity. So it is not true, and sufficient wisdom brings
conte^tednes, but foolish wisdom, mocking the minds of men with a vain title.
And as hitherto he has spoken of the persons, Nothing perpetual in the
affairs of men.
so now he entreats of the things themselves. For there is nothing perpetual
in the affairs of men: great and everlasting ar the forgetfulnesses of
families, of cities, of empires, albeit never so great. These are the momuments
of man his immortality, these are the triumphs, these are the cognisa^ces: and
yet me^ do not know that they are mortal, being taught by so many and so great
experiences. This unruly rage of men's lusts is to be noted. For he says,
That he hated life it self, when as he earnestlye thought upon it: the which
must needs fall out unto those which do think upon the miseries thereof,
according unto the judgment of man his reason. For most woeful desperation
can no choose but be on every side. Pompeius Magnus.
Pompey the Great when he fled, his army being discomfited, and his matters
past all hope, is said with a chafing mind to have disputed of Justice, or of
the providence of God, whether he had any care of man his affairs, when as he
betrayed the good cause. Cato.
Cato, the best of the Romans, fell into such desperation, that he found no
other more present way to assuage his sorrow, then to kill himself. These are
the false collections of man his reason giving over it self unto immoderate or
unmeasurable sorrow.

This is the end of that same glorious prudence of man, when as it prescribes
and appoints counsels unto a right course of life, that an happy issue may
follow. As her endeavors are many times in vain and to no purpose, so of all
her counsels and labors she reapeth as a reward, mere vanity and feeding
of the wind. The discommodities have been set down, he will entreat of remedies
in their place, after that he has reckoned up other inconveniences also, with
the which the wisdom of man does wrestle.

The Doctrine.
Solomon does not simply co^demn wisdom.
1. In as much as he plainly puts a difference between wisdom and folly, it
is very manifest, that he does not simply and in it self condemn wisdom, but
according unto ye supposition of man his reason whose reasonings he does here
lively describe.

2. Prudence or the wisdom of man is a great gift of God, Prudence without the
word of God is mere vanity.
and a necessary light unto the life of man: but if it be considered in it
self, without the word of God, and godliness (the chief point whereof is the
forgiveness of sins, the true foundation of regeneration or new birth: that
is to say, of all virtues) it is great vanity. For as it is as it were aiming
and leuelling at a certain mark, Why God often times disappointeth the
counsails of the wise.
so God does oftentimes disappoint her counsels, to the end we should
learn to depend and stay upon his providence by the which no doubt the
successes of all things are directed and governed. We are therefore diligently
to follow those means, the which God leaves unto our power, but in as much
as we neither ought nor can perform the issues and fallings out of the same,
God is to be prayed unto that he will so dispose them, as he shall know
expedient for his glory and our salvation, and what end soever he shall
grant, we are to take it with quiet and contented minds. The creatures
doubtless are not in our power, but in the power of God the Creator, which in
deed gives unto us the use of them, and uses also our travail, so far as
him pleases: but that which we further put to of our own power, and go about
to order the same use of them by our own counsels, is altogether in vain.
God therefore forbids us to trust unto our own wisdom, We must not trust
in our own wisedom^
but that in such sort we crave prudence of him, that we wait for the
success thereof at his goodness.

The care of prudence is not to be cast of because of ill success in the same.
3 We must not therefore rest in the prudence of man: yet were it notwithstanding
peevish waywardness, for this cause to cast away the study of prudence,
because we have no good success therwithall: our calling is to be followed,
and the issue or falling out of things (as we have said) is to be committed
unto the providence of God, the which when as it disposes not only the end it
self, but also the means which tend unto the end: and prudence or wisdom
has no doubt the principal and chief place among those means: therefore
diligence is to be employed, that we follow the guidance and help thereof, so
far as it shall appear unto us, as the most certain light of our life, and
a very great gift of God (of whom chiefly depends the force and power of
the same.)

Against ambitious desire of fame.
4 We are no doubt to labor, that by doing well, we may get a good and an
happy name: yet the ambitious and proud desire of fame is to be driven out of
our minds, and the same such a desire, the which as if it did win us
immortal memory, does feed our minds with a vain imagination. Let this be
abundantly sufficient for us, that our names are written in the book of life.

A great difference between the death of the godly and ungodly.
5 Albeit the common necessity of death without any difference does entangle
and wrap in all mankind, yet is there a most great difference between the
godly and the ungodly. For unto the ungodly death is fearful, but of the godly
it ought to be wished for: unto whom it is an entrance unto assured and
everlasting happiness.

6 Death may lawfully be wished for, Death in some sort may be wished for.
using a certain prouiso or exception (as by the notable example of Paul)
appears. But this waywardness is to be blamed, because of the encumbrances
and troubles of this life, to take the matter so grievously, that we will be
weary of living. For we ought so to frame our selves that we may take the
discommodities of this life with a quiet and contented mind, as well as the
commodities: so to rejoice, as if we did not rejoice, and so to weep, as if
we did not weep.

The exposition.
18 I also hated etc.] The second circumstance of the vanity of man his
prudence.
He touches an other discommoditie of the prudence or wisdom of man, the
which is the second circumstance or note of that vanity, whereof it is
pleaded gyltie. The prudence of man is so busied in the contemplation of
precepts and rules, that it is especially discerned and perceived in the
practice or doing of those things, the which fall out in the common use of
life. In this behalf the course and way to gain which they call the skill to
get wealth, has the first place. For in this place Solomon does altogether
dispute according unto the supposition of man his wisdom. Goods gotten with
great labor, are many times by the heir carelessly spent.
He says therefore, that this is a great vanity, that the most wise men do
sweat and toil, and take much and long carke and care in getting of goods,
being yet uncertain who shall be their heir, a wise man or a fool: whereof
it often comes to pass, that the goods, which were gotten with great and
long labor, are lewdly and wastfully spent of a prodigal heir, which came to
the inheritance without any pain. Which thing, how true it is, daily examples
do sufficiently show: not only (as one says) When as the forsworn faith of
the father beguileth his partner and gest, and makes have to leave money to
his unworthy heir: but also (as they usually say in the French proverb) for
that, whether it be well or ill gotten, all things are dashed away at the
coming of a fool. Therefore he says, That he hated all his labor, etc. al
his endeavors, which are taken in hand to get riches, in what kind of trade or
course of life soever. For this is the meaning of these words, under the
Sun, and there is in this behoof a great fault committed of all men of al
estates and degrees. Because he shall leave his labor, (that is to say his
goods gotten by his labor, by a figure called Metonymia) unto a man which
shall come after him: for he shall not carry them away with him unto his
grave, to pacify death with a reward: as it is said Psalm. 49. He dilateth
and increases this discommoditie.

19 And who knows,] He uses an interrogation or asking of a question, unto
the greater force and vehemency or force of the matter: for the vehement
affection of the thing increases. For this is to be read with an anger and
displeasure, as if he should say: I shall leave all my goods unto mine heir
or successor, who, what manner of person he shall be, The cares of rich men.
neither I, nor any man else can tell: or else my son will prove lewd in
conditions, and will dash away all my goods. Or else, all my children will dye,
and my goods shall fall unto him which made continual war with me and my
children when I was alive (which kind of inconveniences are many times seen
among kinffolke) or else all my substance shall come unto one that is in deed
a forrainer and stranger, and an heir shall enjoy them that is utterly
unknown both unto me and mine. And yet he, be he what he will be, shall have
rule over all my labor, shall have the government and possession of all my
goods, shall enjoy and use the^, and shall appoint of them at his pleasure, the
which notwithstanding I have gotten with my great labor, and wherewith I have
been wise, that is to say, the which I have earned with my wisdom and
diligence. For by this word Wisdom (as I have noted before) he understands
that pains and diligence which men use to get riches, whereby they wisely
dispose their matters, and do get goods, honors, and all other external or
outward things. He concludes that this is vanity. For how vain a thing is
it, after that a man has toyld night and day, and has gotten that thing which
is necessary to live withal, not only to leave the same behind him, but also
to leave it unto such an heir, which will wastfully spend all his goods?
Solomon himself had experience of this vanity, whose son Roboam through
foolish heddines lost a kingdom so well founded, Roboam.
and so many and excellent things so worthily gotten. The proves therefore of
this vanity are not at all doubtful, the which the 39. Psalm does also set
down under the name of an image or shadow: A man passes away in an image, he
turmoileth, and heapeth together riches, and knows not for whom he gathers
them.

The doctrine.
We must not give over the care of our families because of the inconveniences
the which are incident thereunto.
1. This doubtless is a great vanity in worldly affires, that goods are gotten
with great labor for an uncertain heir: yet we must not so far let loose
the raines unto our impaciencie, that therefore we lay aside the care of all
things and the disposing of our families. For in as much as we are men, so
long as we are pilgrims in this world, we must not think our selves free
from any adventure that may befall unto man. Let us know therefore that the
house is built in vain, unless the Lord do build it: and, that an heir is a
gift from the Lord; and let us so think of the condition and estate of
worldly things, that acknowledging the uncertainty of riches, we may cast our
care from them upon the living God, giving unto us all things abundantly to
enjoy: so long as we shall have riches, let us use them liberally in doing good
unto our neighbors: let us lay up for our selves a good foundation against
time to come, that we may lay hold on eternal life, according unto the
commandment of the Apostle. In the mean season let us follow our vocation:
let us look unto our families: Our calling is diligently to be followed.
let us provide for things necessary by good and lawful means: let us plant
trees that may profit in the age to come after us, taking such care for our
children, as our parents have done before for us, let us follow the lawful
course of nature and society, and let us not hurt our families with peevish
carelessness. In the mean season, let us commit the success of our labors
unto the providence of GOD, and with quiet minds, let us wait for at his
hands things necessary and convenient in regard of this life, both for us
and ours. Let us set these remedies against the uncertainty of our affairs.

2. And of the hatred and loathing, A present remedy against too much
carefulnes.
the which is wont to rise in the hearts of men, by reason of the vanity of
our affairs: let us consider how fit a preservative there is against the
poisons of the over carking carfulness of men, in this most pleasant and
present remedy, Godliness with a mind content with his estate, is great gain.
And, Give us this day our daily bread.

The exposition.
20 And I turned about] Having set down those bickerings with the which the
prudence of man does diverse ways wrestle, the remedy remainth: least that we
should be swallowed up of the feeling of those inconveniences. Of this remedy
Solomon being now to entreat, shows by what degrees he did unwind himself out
of these encumbrances, to wit, after that through the experience of the
discommodities he had perceived, that happiness did not consist in the aids
of man his prudence, nay that in it there was great vanity at the length he
called back himself unto a certain more quiet and commodious course of life.

I turned about, says he, that is to say, after sundry windlasses, after the
goings about of diverse deliberations, I came at length unto this point (for
this is the signification of the Hebrewe verb, Sabbothi.
which is taken intransitiuely) that I called back mine heart, etc. that is to
say, that I did so far renounce every course, wherein this life of man is
contained, Ia^sch.
that I did at no hand place happiness therein. For the Hebrewe word is very
significant, by which is expressed a repenting or giving over the hope of a
former purpose. The Greeks do expound it by the verb Anataxasthai, to set in
order, but not aptly enough: for unto the filling up of the signification of
the word, there should have been added this word athuman, or, apeipoon,
utterly giving over, or, clean renouncing, or some such like. Nazianzen
translateth it very well: Nazianzen.
I was thoroughly resolved to lay aside and cast away these things, etc. Ierom,
I turned me to renounce in mine heart, etc. The effect is, that he having found
out the vanity of man his counsels and labors, was brought into such
streights, that he did plainly faint in mind, and gave over all his labor and
enterprise, that is to say, did determine with him self, never to apply his
mind or endeavor unto any thing, but like unto one that hated the company of
mankind, casting away both weapon and target, to withdraw himself from all
business. This is the simple meaning of these words.

He adds a cause, repeating the same argument, of the which he had spoken a
little before, concerning the vain and altogether unhappy issue of man his
wisdom.

21 Because there is a man.] The blame of that unhappy issue is not to be
laid upon the rashness or folly of men: for as much as there are men found,
which leave nothing unassayed in the disposing and ordering of their matters,
but do all things with great wisdom, wittilye and with all diligence trying
all things, and wisely disposing the means unto the bringing to pass of the
matter: and yet they run into the same streightes, into the which the most
foolish do run by the word chocmah, he understands the skill to order
things, Chocmah.
in taking of advise and counsel, and by the words Kischron and dagnath, he
means industry and opportunity in bringing things to pass, when things are
done both after such manner, and in so fit time, as is requisite. Yet that
circumspect prudence cannot avoid this most great inconvenience, but that an
unknown heir may succeed, the which he says to be a vanity, and great
evil. For it is ingraffed in us by nature to take great labor for desire and
hope of continuing our stock, because that we seem in our children to be
borne again, and to become as it were immortal. A great misery.
How great a misery or evil therefore is it, to have spent our whole life in
toyling and sparing, to get some thing to leave to our children that should
preserve our name and memory: the which notwithstanding when as we have hardly
gotten, we must leave unto an unknown heir?

Having therefore showed this inconvenience, the which no doubt is very great
and grievous, in the two next verses he makes a general conclusion of that
vanity, wherewith the prudence of man is enwrapped, being as it were a brief
repetition of the things going before.

22 and 23. For what.] This life is passed away with diverse labors both of
mind and body. And I pray you, what profit comes then hereby unto men?
namely this, sorrow, Continual vexations in this life.
indignation, vexations both by day and night, that there is no rest at any
time given from great labors and sorrows, no easement in a manner, no
intermission or ceasing. Then the which what can be imagined more vain, what
more miserable? What man therefore well in his wits will seek for happiness
in this life, by the help of man his Prudence or Wisdom?

The doctrine.
1 How truly this is spoken, experience, Nothing frames well without the
word of god.
a plentiful witness of things, does abundantly show: and as this vanity
is especially to be seen in those, who being enflamed with the love of
covetousness, as it were with a firebrande, go about and do enterprise great
matters (being ulcers of mankind, hurtful both unto themselves and also unto
others, such as the Courts of Princes, and great Cities do nourishe in great
numbers) yet this is found to be most true in the common course of life,
among all men of all degrees. Namely, that whatsoever they go about without
the light of godliness, besides the word of GOD, by the direction and
guidance of their own reason, cannot choose, but be heaped up with unquiet
troubles, and great vanity, that we may learn to tame the judgment of our
flesh, that is to say, our madness, and earnestly to be ashamed of our vanity.

Why God will have us feel our miseries.
2 God doubtless will have us to be touched with an earnest feeling of our
miseries, unto the which our life is subject, that through the knowledge of our
weakness and miseries, we might run unto the remedy.

Solomon therefore now at length in good time entreats of the remedies, and
after his manner, in good order, but not fully (for he will entreat of them in
their place at large) yet so far as seemed needful for the discourse in
hand. For it was dangerous, only to set down the difficulties or
encumbrances of the wisdom of man, and in the mean season with no remedy to
strengthen the minds of men being dismayde with these combats.

The Exposition.
Of the remedies against the incombrances of man his wisdom.
24 There is therefore no good thing.] Solomon has hitherto spoken of the
diseases of man his wisdom: now he entreats of the remedies, but how
far and after what manner, we are to declare. For I do not agree unto them,
which think that the issue and argument of the whole discourse is noted in
this verse: but I suppose that in this place a preparation only is made
thereunto. Before the truth can be taught unto any profit, first of all it is
requisite that the clouds of falsehood be scattered and driven away, because
that by reason of the common opinion growing in the minds of men, it is wont
to spread over them dangerous darkness. First of all we must be careful to
refute falsehood.
Therefore in refuting of falsehood ought to be our first care: but as the same
is manifold, so we must use many sorts of engines to overthrow the same,
that it being fitly put to flight, the truth may be avouched fitly and safely.
Therefore Solomon has dwelt long in the confuting of those things, in the
which the reason of man imagines happiness for to be. In all things he had
found vanity and vexation of spirit: but especially in the prudence of man,
against the which the combat is most dangerous. Against this vanity, which
is a most assured note of unhappiness, he should have matched sufficiency or
contentedness, the which likewise is a true note of happiness. But the
foundation of this sufficiency or contentedness also is to be strongly
proved, that there may be made a full demonstration of happiness. Therefore he
does in deed make himself away unto the principal and chief point of the
whole discourse, that is to say, unto the demonstration of happiness, yet
does he not in this place touch the same: but in the fifth Chap. verse. 7.
Fear God, the which he does in plain words declare Cap. 12. ver. 15. That
the end of the whole discourse is to fear God, for that this is the whole end
of man, that is to say, herein consists the true happiness of man, as his
chief end and scope. Vanity the inseperable companion of unhappiness.
As therefore vanity is an inseperable companion of unhappiness, so is
contentedness and quiet of mind, the inseperable companion of happiness. Of
this satietie and contentedness of mind he now entreats, opposing and
matching it (as we have said before) against the vanity of all those things
the which do fall out in this life: yet taking fitly occasion of speech from
that thing, in which he proved by sure arguments greatest vanity to be,
that is, in the wisdom of man, wherein by the judgment and opinion of man
his reason greater satietie and contentedness seemed to shine forth. What
then? if in the prudence and wisdom of man there be nothing but miserable
vanity, must the mind therefore be yielded over unto the tempest of careless
despair? or must she seek for elsewhere that satietie and contentedness of
mind? We must rather, says Solomon, think upon the remedy, the which we
shall find in the true use of GOD his benefits. This is the joining and
knitting together of these words with those that went before, unto the 16.
verse of the third Chapter. And unto this matter he uses evident and clear
arguments. These words are better to be read by asking a question.


There is no good thing.] An interrogation or asking of a question has a
greater grace, and more expresses the meaning, as if he should say, After
that it is found out, that there is great vanity in every trade of life, and
especially in that last end, were it not best for a man, and most excellent,
setting aside this so great carfulness of mind, to use and enjoy with a
quiet and pleasant mind the things which he has gotten with lawful
labor, and ascribing those benefits unto the bounteousnesse of GOD, with
thanks giving to apply them unto the sound use? Therefore he calls, to
eat and drink, To eat and drink.
pleasantly and merrily to enjoy the things present, the which appertain
unto this life: as he does by and by declare by an other kind of speech, To
show his soul good of his labor, that is to say, to delighte himself, and
cheer his mind with the sound feeling and use of the things them selves.
For, To see good, with the Hebrews, To see good.
is to enjoy the things themselves, with some pleasantness: which use in the
verse 26. he by and by calls gladness.

The sum and effect is, that the sound and pleasant use of the things
themselves does far excel pensive and troublesome carfulness: and
therefore as in the one there is great vanity, so in the other there is a
golden and an happy satietie or contentedness of mind. That this is the true
and right meaning of these words, the readers will nothing at all doubt,
being environed with the help of those rules, which we have set down at the
beginning, and wisely considering the circumstances of this place. For it is an
uncivil thing to give judgment of a whole law by some one branch of the
same law. We must also weigh the purpose of the speaker: the which not being
rightly perceived and understood, Great wrong don unto Solomon, by foolish
persons not understanding his meaning.
it cannot be chosen, but that we shall ascribe unto him foolish fancies
besides his meaning. As in this and such like places frantike persons have done
great wrong unto Solomon, whilst that they think him to be an vpholder of
Epicure like phrensies, as if he should teach that the sovereign and chief
good of man did consist herein, if he follow his pleasure.

But the bare words themselves, are not to be considered them selves by
themselves, and severally, but by the purpose of the speaker, and being joined
with the whole sentence. Christ bids, that if one give us a blow on the one
cheek, Not the bare words, but the purpose of the speaker is to be considered
in the scriptures.
we should hold him the other to strike. He bids, that if one hand
offend us, that we cut him off: if an eye, that we pull him out: that we
should gelde our selves for the kingdom of God, and such like. If a man will
stick unto the bare words, not considering the purpose of Christ: how
monstrous dotages should he father upon him, that is how fond and foolish
should him self be, like as Origin, who being accustomed to defile the plain
and naked truth, with the slabbersauce and dunge of allegories, expounded these
words simplye, which are altogether allegorical, and went in deed and gelded
himself: when as he rather should have renounced his philosophical pride
wherewith he turned the truth into a lie, and should have been wise according
unto the simplicity of the word of God, which kind of gelding of himself,
should have been both acceptable unto God, and profitable unto the church of
God, and also unto himself. The Prophet denies that God ever commanded the
Elders of the Jews to sacrifice unto him, and does detest all the ceremonies,
yea and also the temple it self. Who is he that sees not, that the bare
words, so as they do plainly sound, are disagreeing from the truth, and
therefore that they need interpretation? For the truth is not contrary unto it
self. But nothing is more forceable then those kind of speeches, neither could
any thing be devised more evident and plain and the darkness is not in them
but in our minds, namely by those excessive speeches of words, the dullness
of men is to be shaken of, which are nothing at all moved with the common and
usual manner of speaking. Christ therefore means, that injuries are patiently
to be borne, and that thus far, The meaning of the former sayings.
that we do not render evil for evil, and that we should redeem peace,
although it were to our own private discommoditie. He will have us to renounce
al things, yea even our own selves, that we may serve God freely, being
discharged of all business, the which might let our free course: and
therefore he does not command us after the manner of bedlames, with mad
violence to rage against our own bodies, neither does he bereave us of
common sense and reason, nor forbids lawful means of putting away injury.
That these things are spoken truly, and according unto the meaning, no man
well in his wits will deny: like as that same precise denuntiation or bold
saying of Jeremy speaking according unto the supposition of the Jews (because
that from their Ceremonies they shut out faith, The place of Jeremy.
the foundation of the worship of God) for in this respect he denies that God
commanded ceremonies unto the Jews. But that same lightning of speech was
more fit to terrifye and make afraid the boldness of Hypocrites, which do
sin, not of ignorance of the will of GOD, but of a lewd and wicked mind, as
the Prophet teaches, more at large in that sermon.

These Examples have I alleged, to show that in such precise and straighte
kind of speeches we must not stick unto the bare words, but that the
sentence it self is to be considered: and by it to give judgment of the
words: that which seemed to be spoken simplye is no doubt to be understood
but in a certain respect, neither do those kinds of speeches want either
their force or light the which I apply unto this place thus.

Solomon says that this only is good and profitable unto man, to eat and
drink: shall we understand these words in this sense and meaning as we do
these of the Epicures, How this place of Solomon is to be understood.
Let us eat and drink, After death there is no pleasure. Or these, These
things I have which I did eat, and which my gordged lust has devoured:
but those other and excellent things remain which I have left behind for
others, and such like grunting of Swine? The purpose of Solomon is to be
weyed, the whole sentence is to be examined, that we may clearelye understand
the force of the words, and to what end they are aleaged. His purpose
therefore is to teach by remedy of what things that vanity may be cured,
The purpose of Solomon.
the which he has showed to be in all the counsails and enterprises of men. He
sets down as a remedy against this, the sound and pleasant use of the
things themselves: This he calls To eat and drink that is, soundly to
enjoy those external and outward things, the which do appertain unto the
nourishment of the body. And he adds a plain exposition. To show his Soul
good of his labor, and least he might seem to speak of profane and
Epicure-lyke Gurmandize in eating and drinkinge, he will have God to be
acknowledged the author of those benefits, in these words, which follow by and
by, This also I have seen, that this is of the hand of God himself. And that
the matter may be more clearly understood in the next verses he sets
down a garnishing of the same sentence. Who then (unless he be a very fool)
will say that in this place the opinion of the Epicures is maintained? Solomon
does not maintain the opinion of the Epicures.
And he uses of set purpose the words of Eating and drinking, and that more
clearly and expressly, then if he had set down common and usual words. For
his meaning was to compare pleasure with the Prudence of man, this vanity
whereof he found fault with in these last words, that it cannot enjoy the
things which it has gotten with great labor: but in pleasure there is at
least wise a pleasant feeling of the things themselves, and some present
fruit is reaped. And the most simple use of honest pleasure is, to eat and
drink, and necessary provision for the maintaynance of life, the which those
that are most precise cannot simply condemn. Therefore he says afterward,
That our whole labor is for our mouth, that is to say, that men labor to
this end, that they may have wherewith to maintain this life, and he said,
To eat of their goods, for, to enjoy and use their goods. To conclude, these
words are not spoken by way of imitation, in the person of Belli-gods and
Epicures: but they teach the true and right use of the gifts of God, as it is
by him ordained, and they do limite it out by the simple measure of eating and
drinking, and do will these gifts to be of us received pleasantly and merrily,
namely that we may both acknowledge and worship God the author and giver of
them al. Therefore he adds, that the use of bodily benefits also, is the gift
of God, and that he has seen it, that is to say, Godliness the foundation of
contentednes.
understood it by assured arguments. Godliness, no question, is the
foundation of that same satietie or contentedness, of the which he will
entreat in his place: neither can it or ought it to be severed from this true
use by any means. For no man can have true and sound contentedness of mind
without godliness, yet this is true, that God has bestowed upon man many
benefits and the same very great, not only to cherish the mind of man but also
for the nourishing of his body, both for necessity, and also for delight. For
as God is the maker both of the minds and bodies, so he gives unto both that
which is needeful and convenient.

Moreover he by and by sets down (as we have said before) a garnishing of
the 24. verse. For it was needful that this necessary doctrine should
diligently be beaten into our minds. He had said that the good of man, that is
true co^tentednesse of mind did consist in the sound use of the things
themselves. This he confirms by his own example.

He alleges his own example.
25. For who,] That is to say, who does more soundlye and pleasauntlye enjoy
the things that he has gotten, then I do? Verilye I speak not of a thing
uncertain, and dark: I have learned by mine own Experience, how much the
use of things is to be esteemed.

In his own person therefore he exhorts every body whilst he may to use
and enjoy his own goods. For, for whom is it more meet and more convenient
to enjoy the things that he has gotten, then for him, who with his labor
has gotten them? By the word Eating, Eating what is signifies.
he means that lawful and sound use of things, which is ioyfullye received
with a good conscience, and with quiet of mind. For it were a mere folly, and
a thing altogether void of divinity, to preach of the quietness of mind, and
of the joyful using of the benefits of god, and in the mean season with vain
cares to vex and pyne away the mind. Let it therefore be a shame unto us to
teach those things, the which we cannot apply unto our selves: so that we may
truly say with the Apostle. I believed, and therefore have I spoken. The
Example of the Teacher is very effectual and of great force, mightilye to
inform and instruct the minds of the Scholars. Solomon lived not in all
points according unto that which he taught,
Solomon in deed was no Master that proudely trifled of high matters, as it
were above in the clouds: but yet I would to God he had applied unto his
profit all those things which he knew. Here the infirmity and frailty of
man is to be seen, so that the very best cannot so thoroughly in life and
manners express the knowledge of the best things, but that they often go
awrie. But we live not by examples, but by laws: by the which judgment
ought to be given of the very best men.

26. Further he had said, that the same sound use of the Creatures was the
gift of God: now he handles the same matter more exactlye, making a
comparison between that quietness or contentedness, and vanity or vexation
of spirit. A token of the love of God.
The sum and effect is, That quietness of mind, is a token of God his
loving kindness, as contrariwise that same pensive care to get riches, A
token of the wrath of God.
and when they are gotten, not only to have no use of them, but infinite
vexation of mind, is an assured testimony of the wrath and revenge of God
against the wicked. This is the plain meaning of these words.

Because unto a man which is good before him, that is, whom he loves, whom
he allows and embraces for good (for so does that kind of speech
signifye) He gives, that is, of his bounteousnesse bestows, Wisdom and
Knowledge, that is, the prudence and means to dispose and order his matters,
and Gladness, contentedness and quietness of mind, to use and enjoy with
gladness the things which he has gotten by wisdom and diligence.
Contrariwise, Unto the sinner, that is, unto the wicked and Hipocrite, or
infidel, he gives trouble, he lays this punishment in his just judgment
upon him, That he heapeth and gathers together riches, that is to say,
greatly turmoileth himself in hoarding up wealth: To this end forsooth, To give
those things which with so great labors he has heaped up, unto him that is
good before God, to him whom it pleases God, whom God has appointed his
heir and successor, one whom oftentimes he knows not, and which will lavish
and dash away those things, the which he with great labor and hard sparing
has hoarded up. This unhappy end of goods gotten with so great labors,
according unto the doctrine before largelye handled hitherto, he calls
Vanititie and feeding of the wind.

The abuse of prudence condemned by Solomon.
And he declares more plainlye wherefore and after what manner he hitherto
condemned Prudence, that namely which falsely concludes that is to say, the
abuse thereof, not in it self and simply (for it is the singular gift of God
for the preservation and maintainaunce of this life:) but so far as it
ingendreth in the minds of me^ a certain too earnest desire of fleeting and
fading things, it is no doubt to be condemned: because both by inwrapping our
minds with the thorns of cares, it makes us miserable, and also draws us
from the hope and love of heavenly things. And whereas he says, that this
quiet and peaceable conte^tednesse of mind is the gift of God: and contrariwise
entangled and combersome pensiveness, to be the punishment of God the judge
against wicked and lewd persons: moreover, when as he teaches that the issue
and end of these things is ruled by god (that is to say, that these things,
as he speaks, are done before God) he plainly calls us back unto the
providence of god, the which (as he says in another place) makes a difference
between the rich and the poor, and does constantly govern all the parts of
our life.

The Doctrine.
1. Against that vanity which has a large rule over all the parts of the life
of man, the sound and joyful use of the creatures of God, A present remedy
against the vanity of men.
is a most present remedy, the which he gives us unto this end, that we
should use them joyfully and soberlye with thanks giving. The use no doubt of
a thing carries a great stroke and force in all matters: and therefore they
deal preposterously, or ouerthwartlye and do peruerte and ouerturne the
liberal mind of God, the which do subject themselves, and become as it
were slaves unto those things, the which he has put under their power. In
which kind the couetouse misers, and prodigal spendthriftes do offend with
clean diverse and contrary affections: the one, with too great and immoderate
desire of getting: the other, with a desperate outrage in spending: but both of
them do foully ouerturne the pure and right use of the Creatures of God.

2. This use is so to be limited, that first of all we do hold, God
liberally provides both for soul and body.
That GOD the maker both of souls and bodies, does liberallye according unto
his bounteousnesse and prouydence provide for them both. As the body is created
of GOD, for the receiving of the soul, as it were a Stranger, so there is
great Friendeshippe and Affynitye between them both.

God therefore will have the body so far to be provided for, that the soul
may be well: between which and the body there must needs be a fellow
feeling, that if the body be ill at ease, the mind being grieved, can hard
and scarcelye do his duetye. God therefore has given for the maintainaunce
and nourishing of the body not only things necessary, but also serving for
pleasure and delighte, the feeling and use whereof should especially
appertain unto the mind, and he has in such sort disposed the judgment
and as it were the arts of them, that both the mind and body might be
profitablye and pleasauntly nourished by them. Which manifold bounteousnesse
of God the Prophet does lively set out, Psalm. 104.

3. Of this use, God makes his bounteousnesse common unto all living
creatures, but especially unto man.
this is as it were the first degree, That GOD a bounteous Father, will have
this his bounteousnesse to be common unto all living Creatures, but
especially unto mankind, unto whom he will not have himself be without
witness, whilst he deserves well at his hands by sundry kinds of
benefits (as the Apostle says) giving rain and fruitful seasons from
Heaven, and filling the hearts of men with meat and gladness. And these in
deed are great benefits of GOD, but yet such, that we must not think the
true and right use to consist in these. For as the greatest part of men
abuses them intemperatelye, this also is true; that the most temperate and of
sober men that are not regenerate, The unregenerate have no right to use the
creatures of God.
have not in their power the same right use of the Creatures: as who have no
right to use and enjoy them (for they are no Sons, but Strangers) and are
destitute or void of that wherewith all things created are sanctified, that
is to say, Faith, without the which whatsoever is done is sin.

Thus far all men not regenerate are usurpers or unlawful possessours of the
benefits of GOD, the which he would have extante in this world, to declare
his bounteousnesse especially toward mankind. This therefore is the first
general declaration of the bounteousnesse of god, in the use of his benefits.

4. The second degree is, wherein the true and right use altogether is to use
the gifts of GOD soberlye and soundlye with Faith and Prayer, The benefits of
God are to be used with faith and prayer.
the which is proper and peculier only unto the faithful, for whom (as the
Apostle says) GOD has created these his gifts, that they might use them.
For they are sons, and therefore Heirs of the world, by the promise made
unto Abraham. As therefore the right of all things does belong unto them, so
also is the possession and power, and way to use and enjoy them euidente to
be theirs. For the best right of getting a thing, is by inheritance.
Therefore as by right of inheritance the whole World appertains unto the
Faithful, so ought they diligently and earnestlye to think upon the right
and lawful use of those things which are contained within the compass of
the World: for the cheifest point of dominion does consist in the use.

Now the Apostle does define the use thus, And they which use this World as
not abusing it. How the faithful abuse the world.
The faithful do abuse the world which forgetting that they are heirs of
the World, do so serve the world, as if they were Husbandmen or Servants,
and not Lords, that is, when as they encumber their minds with diverse cares,
and do not use and enjoy the benefits of GOD with an appeased and quiet
mind: they voluntarily seek business to trouble themselves with all, and do
not enjoy that quietness which GOD would have them use, as heirs. We are
not ignoraunte of the conditions of Masters, and of Servants. The Husbandman
takes pains day and night in tilling and looking unto the ground of his
Master? The Servant, or he that does the business, goes about the
business of his Master with great pain and danger, whilst his Master
sits at home quietlye and at ease. The rich Master medleth not with the
troublesome burdens of his affairs, yet it falls out for his benefit and
profit whatsoever is paynfullye ordered and done by the Servants. The use
and profit of their goods returns unto the Masters, the pain and care unto
the Servants, by whose travail and service their things are done.

So the wise man admonishes us to think of the use of these fleeting things.
The applying of the former similitude.
That the use of the benefits of GOD, is the gift of God, through whose
liberality the Faithful use with a quiet mind, the goods which they have
gotten: Contrariwise, upon sinners, that is to say, upon men which are not
regenerate, he lays this punishmente, that they bestow much care and labor
in hoarding up of riches, and yet reap no fruit, no profit of their
labors. For they are not endued with that appeased and quiet mind, wherewith
the true use of things is received, and by the just judgment of god, those
goods the which with so great labors they have heaped together they often
times leave unto strange Heirs* In the mean season, Let the wicked
worldlings note this well.
for that they are strangers, and Intruders, and no lawful Possessours, they
do not eat and drink, nor show unto their Souls the profit of their
goods, as the Sons of GOD do: but as Thieves they devour other men's
goods, and vex themselves with infynite Lusts, and therefore are destitute
and void of the true use of things.

5. But many things seem contrary unto this Doctrine. Contraries unto this
doctrine in show and outward appearance.
For who is he that sees not that the Faithful are not only driven out of
the whole World, as draffe and excrementes, but every where to be pitifully
vexed, as of all men the most miserable? Contrarywyse, that the wicked rule
the roast, triumph, have Kingedomes and Empyres in their power, authority,
rule, riches especyallye above all other men?

Furthermore, Experience does plentifullye a^ abundantlye show that to be
true, which the Prophet speaks of the wicked. That no trouble presses them,
like as it does other men: and that they are free from the miseries, wherewith
other men are touched. Contrariwise, that the water of Sorrows and Greefes are
poured into the minds of the godly, as it were out of a full Cup. And there
are to be found often complayntes of holy men concerning this matter. As
concerning the first, for a strong and sound answer against this backbiting
of the flesh, Answer unto the former contrarieties.
this we ought especially and principallye to hold, that the assurance and
full persuasion of Faith is certain, and therefore certain, because that it
looks not upon those things which are subject, and lie open unto the eyes
of the body, but upon the things which are not seen with the eyes. But the
one, as being eternal, are most strong and sure: the other, as temporal, and
but for a time, most weak and brittle. Therefore, as from sure and
everlasting principles and grounds, there arise sure and everlasting
conclusions, so from the sure grounds of Faith we ought to look for sure and
everlasting conclusions, for that is a very worthy saying of the Apostle, Heb.
11.1.
That Faith is the substance of things hoped for, that is to say, that which
makes, that the things which are hoped for, be in deed, a sure proof of
things that are not seen, namelye for because it gathers a most sure
demonstration of the things which can not be noted and perceived with these
bodily eyes, as of things everlasting.

Let this reason therefore very greatly prevail with us, and so let this be
assured and certain, The fullness of our felicity is to be looked for in heaven
that that spiritual inheritance is also spiritually to be esteemed: and that
so far, that according unto the promise of the true God, is fulfilled in us
abundantly. Indeed the fulness of our happiness abides for us in heaven, yet
do we feel sure and undoubted Pledges thereof, in this life. I will
therefore speak of the lawful use of those things which do appertayn unto
this life, and of that contentedness of mind, wherein that same true use does
in deed consist: the which no man well in his wits will deny to be
assured Testimonies of that same inheritance, and according unto this true
principle or ground, That he is happy, which is contented. Be it, that the
Godly be banished, that they be vexed: contrariwise, let the wicked
triumph, let them bear the swaye: on the other side who well in his wits
will deny, that GOD is Faithful in his promises, Singular comforts.
that he does so order and rule the afflictyons, or troubles of the Godly
that are his, that in the middeste of their Battles, he also does
strengthen them, and gives again a ioyefull issue, that is, presses, but not
oppresses them, nay by the greatest feeling of affliction, gives greatest
tokens of his goodness, by the reward of most famous victory? Doubtless the
faithful in all their miseries do feel a singular contentedness of mind,
namely that same hope which never makes them ashamed: nay, the which in the
wart of things makes them more rich than the richest men, which are
profane and ungodly: On the other side: Terrors for the wicked.
What is it to be tormented with the Fyre-brandes of Conscience? the which
howsoever it do not always burn the minds of the wicked with like pain and
violence, yet sin lies always before ye doors: and, by what means soever
their minds are lulled a sleep, yet this is true, that they are not heirs
but strangers, and therefore that the right of those things, the which GOD in
this world has created for his sons, does at no hand belong unto them at
all. This does faith both see and believe, the which flesh is ignorant of, and
does skorne: yet the demonstration of faith is true, and the sclaunder of
flesh false and foolish. Let us therefore say that the worldlings (that we may
return again unto our comparison in hand) in whose power are kingdoms and
Empires, are the servants and ministers of the church, for the which, in the
fellowship of mankind, whilst they undertake sundry pains and troubles of
government, they prepare an house or resting place; that whilst they giving
themselves unto ye heaping up of wealth and getting of most combersome
promotions, vex both mind and body, the faithful may enjoy most quiet rest.
So whilst the godly enjoy contentedness, the unfaithful reap the fruit of
their inheritance, they endure only the burdens and toils of the world.
Furthermore, for as much as the fullness of our inheritance remains for us in
heaven, and that therefore we must travail thither through the rugged ways of
this world: let us remember that we shall then be the lighter and more ready
unto our journey, if we cast away the burden, as it were the pack of these
cares: and contrariwise that they shall not be fit for this voyage, which
shall be laden and let as it were with an huge weight of riches and honors.
Why god denies unto his the abundance of earthly things.
God therefore will deliver us from the hurtful store of earthly things, that
being free from the cares thereof, we may both enjoy things present soundly, and
more certainly hope for the happiness to come: of which double benefit, the
thornie cares of this world do deprive and bereave men: and therefore it is
true that the faithful only have the certain use of these things: the which
we set down at the beginning.

How the godly are to behave themselves in these earthly things.
6 How then shall the faithful use these things? namely so, that they neither
stay upon them, nor utterly refuse them, but use them indifferently. If they
have them, let them use them with thanks giving, and let them acknowledge in
them, and worship God the author. If they have them not, let them not greatly
care, and let them think that God does this way provide for their salvation:
let them rejoice, as not rejoicing: let them weep, as not weeping. This
mediocritie or mean, that same gorgeous wisdom of the flesh (as the
Philosophers do describe and prescribe it) does not teach, but the spirit of
God, the which in deed shows unto the faithful, that these are not
imaginations or quiddities, but true and certain demonstrations, the which the
faithful do find and feel in their whole life. These are the mysteries, in
the which that all the faithful ought to be nousled and entered, the Apostle in
the fourth to the Philippians does teach by his own example, which Apostle is
so to be reconciled with this place of Solomon, that they learn both to be
hungry, and also to abound. In this tranquillity or quietness of mind, the
faithful have true contentedness, the which we have often times said, to be a
true note of happiness.

7 These things being thus set down, the difference is manifest between the
afflictions wherewith the faithful are exercised, and those wherewith the
ungodly are pressed. A difference between the afflictions of the godly, and of
the ungodly.
God does afflict the faithful and the unfaithful, but after a diverse
manner: they weep and laugh both of them, but after a diverse manner also. GOD
afflicts the faithful, as a father: the unfaithful, as a judge and an
enemy. Both Cain and Esau wept, but to murmr against GOD, through the
horrible feeling of his wrath. David and Ezechias wept, to move the fatherly
love of God unto mercy with their tears, by the showing of their earnest
repentance. The unfaithful laugh, that they may weep: the faithful weep
that they may laugh, and they laugh, large joy beeinge powered into their
minds by the feeling of GOD his goodness. According unto the appearance and
show therefore of outward things judgment can not, Afflictions in the godly.
nor ought not certainly to be made either of the love or anger of God.
Afflictions, unto the sons of God, are testimonies of his love toward the^,
through the which he will have them enter into the kingdom of heaven.
Afflictions in the wicked
Unto worldly men, which place their chief felicity in these fleeting and
fading things, troubles cannot but be tokens of God being most angry with
them. God therefore lays vexation of mind upon the sinner, to weary
himself much in heaping up of richesse, and yet not to reap any profit of
his labors, but to leave his goods gotten with great toil, both of mind and
body unto an unknown heir, as a punishment: as he also threateneth the
hypocrites by the Prophet, That he will take from them their bread and their
wine, as an infinite discommoditie: for the unfaithful can most hardly forgo
those things. Contrariwise, God gives unto his, wisdom and knowledge, and
gladness, that is to say, wit, and good and prosperous success in disposing
of these things, and joy of mind in the sound use of them, as most certain
testimonies of his love toward them. A most sweet promise.
And there is a most sweet promise agreeable hereunto, That God will give
sleep unto his beloved, that is to say, that he will grant unto his,
prosperous success, even when they be as it were a sleep. Plenty threatened
unto the ungodly as a plague.
Contrariwise the Prophet threateneth unto the unfaithful and hypocrites,
plenty and store of earthly things, as great unhappiness, namely, that it
shall come to pass, that their name shall be written on earth: that is to say,
that they shall have none other but an earthly benefit. The effect is, that
calamities and troubles shall befall unto the unfaithful for a great
punishment, the which they, as too much fastened unto the earth and earthly
things, do greatly fear. Contrariwise, that the faithful, even in these
earthly things shall feel the goodness of God, that they may learn the true
way to use this world, with sure and sound contentedness of mind: the which
they must diligently set against that vanity, which bears sway in all the
parts of life, to the great misery of mankind.

8 Whereas he commends the joyful use of things, as the gift of God, it is
manifest that the rule is true the which we have so often repeated, namely,
that the things themselves, and the pleasure which is taken of them, A true
rule diligently in this whole discourse to be noted.
is not condemned, but the abuse of the things. For this general saying is
true: Whatsoever God has created is good: and nothing is to be refused, if it
be taken with thanksgiving, as the Apostle speaks in plain words: and
therefore, that the forbidding of marriage, meats, and other outward things,
which God has appointed for the use of men, is a doctrine of devils, etc.

9 In that he calls the lawful use of things, We ought not idly to live of
other men's labors.
our labor, it is brought to pass, that it is contrary to this doctrine of
true contentedness of mind, idly to enjoy other men's goods: the which bids
us to show unto our soul our own labor, and not the labor of others.
Doubtless as honest labor has been commanded unto man even from the
creation of the world: so idleness is a plague and destruction unto the whole
life of man.

10 Yet forasmuch as he calls this use the gift of God, proceeding from his
hand and liberality, it follows, that all the success of our labor does
depend and hang upon the providence of God, All the success of our labors
depends upon the providence of God
without the which all the enterprises of men are in vain: and therefore that
it is meet and right that we commend our labors unto him. And when as
things go well with us through the benefit and bounteousnes of God, we are
to give him thanks, neither ought we to handle the matter so, that we abuse
his gift, in prodigality and intemperancie.

In what respect Solomon condemns prudence.
11 Now it appears by this place, how far Solomon has condemned the
prudence or wisdom of man: that is, that he does not condemn it in her
self, but the abuse of it. For he does acknowledge diligence and painfulnesse
about matters concerning our family to be the gift of God, the which God uses
for the governing of the success of our affairs.

Quietness of mind in the use of things, is the gift of God.
12 Quietness of mind in the use of things appertaining unto men, is the gift
of God: carking and restles carefulnes, is a punishment, against ye infidelity
of profane persons, ye which is as much as they trust not unto God, there is
no marvel if they be tossed up and down with the waves of tediousnes and
impaciencie.

The third Chapter.
1 Unto every thing.] He brings a new remedy against the vanity of man's
wisdom, A new remedy against the vanity of man's wisdom.
the which whilst it goes about to rule it self, takes in hand many
needelesse things without a calling, as if it would bring under her power and
subjection the moments and seasons of times: the which when as they fall not
out according unto her wish, it cannot be chosen but that it must needs be
greatly dismayed. Against this same uncircumspect and unlawful hasting, the
stepmother of good order, the wise man sets the earnest thinking upon the
providence of God, by whose force and power, when as all things are duly
governed, he teaches that it lies not in the power of man his counsel to
prevent the time foreset by God: and therefore, that it is a good and present
remedy against the vanity of our counsels and enterprises, to depend and
stay upon the providence of God, and patiently to wait for those times and
seasons, the which he himself has appointed, and that we be not so foolish and
mad, as to think that the oportunities of fit times for the doing of things set
down and limited by god, can be changed by our prudence and industry. The
sum therefore and effect is, that, forasmuch as the courses of times are set
and determined, it were a mad and altogether an unprofitable thing, to go about
any thing further, and to be against the providence of God, the which rules
the moments and seasons both of things and times, yea, and also of our whole
life, but that the impaciencie and rashness of our flesh is to be restrained
and held in with this bridle: A bridle against the rashness of our flesh.
These things must needs have been done at this time, and after this manner,
because God has so appointed: but if thou shall be against it, whatsoever thou
further take in hand, shall be unprofitable and foolish.

1 Unto every thing] in the beginning he sets down a general saying and
sentence, That there are certain and set seasons and courses for all the
things and enterprises of men, the which the providence of God both has
appointed, and also does constantly order and dispose. The word Zeman
signifies a set time, Zeman. Kairos. Chephets.
occasion opportunity, ho kairos, a moment or point of time. Chephets he
calls a trade or course of life, to epitedeuma, a purpose, as beneath ver.
17. Mercerus notes, that in the style and phrase of speaking in the Talmud all
things are called Chephatsim, like as the Greeks have translated it to panti
pragmati, unto every thing. In that this word, under heaven is adioined, I
altogether understand it of the enterprises of men, not that it should be
referred unto God: by whose will notwithstanding these times of things are
appointed and disposed. For he had said unto every thing: by which word the
things of nature are understood. This generally set down he proves to be
true, by induction or bringing in of diverse and sundry things, the which may
be brought into two sorts, natural and civil, that is, those things which
consist in nature, and the which are conversant in the counsels and
enterprises of men. For these things are to be taken simply, and not to be
entangled with the forgeries of allegories, Needelesse allegories.
as many expositers foolishly do.

2 A time to be borne, or of bringing forth, and a time to die.] no doubt the
seasons and very moments of our birth and death are determined and set down,
the which the wisdom of man can by no means change. For the ends of our
life are in the hand of God. A time to plant, etc.] In things also without
life, nature has her certain and set courses appointed her by God. Plants do
grow up at their time, and do die also at their time. Yea, countries themselves
have their times: some time they are wonderfully garnished and increased and
beautified with cities: sometimes they are laid wast, and ly ruinous and at
decay. Some times Asia and Graecia flourished with cities: now they ly desolat.
Iewrie, how notable a change has it had?

3 and 4 A time to kill.] His meaning is, Prosperity and adversity governed
by God.
that prosperity and adversity is governed by God, as also by these words, A
time to weep, etc. to put us in mind that those diverse casualties of our
life, as sickness, death, burial, gladness, and all things both privately and
publicly, do come from the providence of God: He adds,

5 A time to scatter abroad.] Diverse interpreters do diversely expound this
place. This place diversely expounded.
I wittingly and willingly ouerpasse mad allegorical interpretations. For what
does it profit to load the reader with these trifles? I understand this place
simply of matters belonging unto household, that he should teach, that there is
a time of gain, and a time of loss. So To gather stones together, and to
throw them abroad, is to get goods, and to lose, as he says by and by. For
that which some say of building and pulling down a wall, is nothing at all unto
the purpose. With household matters he joins marriage: for these words A time
to embrace, Marriage.
etc. I understand of marriage: that he should signify that marriage, the
foundation of mankind, is governed by God: to the end we should learn in a
matter the most of weight of all the things which belong unto this life, to
depend upon the providence of god, having wives, as not having: as the Apostle
speaking of this matter, has said. He sets out the self same matter of
the courses and changes of family matters with other kinds of speaking also:
for the knowledge of this thing does especialiy appertain unto the wisdom of
man, of the which he speaks.

To cut.
7 A time to cut.] for that which he said To lose, he in this place by a figure
calls To cut: To sow up again, To sow up again.
he uses for to win again, or recover a loss. And he does not without
cause note the times of holding our peace and of speaking, as which in the life
of man bear great sway. Also he does not ouerpasse those things the which in
life do very much preuail, namely love and hatred, among private persons: war
and peace between cities, for the words are plain.

8 A time to love.] Doubtless there are to be found among men certain fellow
feelings and loving affections, as also the contrary, the which the providence
of God without all question does govern, diversely turning and stirring the
minds of men unto both parts, according unto his pleasure. And that war and
peace are ruled by God, both the word of god and also experience does
abundantly show. By this reckoning up therefore of diverse things is concluded
this general, That all things and enterprises has their proper and set times,
and that, War and peace ruled by God.
by the providence of GOD, both Nature her self, and also the fellowship of
man are wisely governed: yea, and all things the which do diuersely fall out
both in the one and the other. These things thus set down, he concludes.

9 What profit.] that is, if a man go about any thing against these times
ordained by God, albeit he use never so great labor and diligence, he shall
altogether lose it and weary himself. For this is the conclusion of the
things going before, and therefore this condition of foolish and overthwart
enterprise is to be understood. This conclusion he garnisheth and amplifieth
with a new circumstance, to the same end and purpose.

10 I have seen the trouble.] I have, says he, by assured arguments found
out the cause, why men do so miserably turmoyle themselves. God in his secret
but yet most just judgment, punishes one sin with another.
He says that God has given unto men that same pensive toil of life,
proceeding from unmeasurable carfulness, that is to say, trouble and
vexation, not that God does put that same wicked desire into the minds of men,
(for then he should be the cause and author of sin, which is great blasphemy)
but to express the force and power of the providence of God, who in his
judgment, secret in deed, and unknown unto us, but yet always just, does
punish that same great sin of distrust, and overthwart trustfulnesse with a
new sin, as with a penalty, that because men do neither trust unto God, and
yet do put too much trust in these fleeting and vading things, he does more
deeply drown them and drive them headlong, as it were estranged from
themselves, into the immoderat and unmeasurable desires of these things, that
they may feel what it is to have forsaken the Lord the fountain of living
water, as the Prophet speaks, that is as the Apostle plainly faith, according
as it liked not them to keep God in knowledge, and to acknowledge him, as was
meet: so God gave them up into a mind void of all judgment that they should
do those things which were not convenient nor seemly. After the same manner of
speaking Solomon says in the next verse, That God has set the world in the
heart of men: and why, we will show in a place more convenient. Therefore we
pray God that he will not lead us into tentation: for it is no question among
those which are but meanly exercised in the reading of the holy scriptures,
that sin is sent of God as a punishment of sin, and also is a greater
corruption of that natural corruption, which is in us. This therefore is the
cause, why men by the just judgment of God, are vexed with the immoderate
desires of these vading things as it were with torments, that they should live
a most miserable life, and even hereby become most wretched of all living
creatures.

11 He has made all things.] Men (says he) through their own fault, entangle
themselves in a certain infinite misery in this life, because forsooth they
set their minds too much upon these things, in the which they imagine a certain
eternity: and therefore, whilst being busied about this vain desire of
immortality, they employ themselves too much unto these fleetinge things,
hereof it comes to pass, that they neither behold the works of god, as
becomes, nor suffer themselves to be governed by him, and deprive themselves
of the true and right use of life, and of all the benefits of God. Hereof
comes that same misery of men, of the remedy whereof he will entreat in the
next verse. A comparison between the providence of God, and the rashness of man.
Now these words are more diligently to be considered. He makes a notable
comparison between the providence and goodness of God, and between the rashness
and corruption of man. He says therefore that God has made all things bewtiful
in their time, How the use of this is good.
that is to say, as the maker of al things, so also to have appointed unto al
things a certain order and opportunity of doing and working, and also an use
and manner of using. Therefore this use of things, as it is wisely ordained of
GOD, is good and happy in his proper and convenient time, that is to say, when
as we use things according unto the ordinance of God, and depend upon his help,
and rest only in him, and refer al our doings unto his glory, as unto the
principal end, all things cannot choose but go well with us. But so great is
the lightness and lewdnes of men, that they will not tarry the time appointed by
god, A place well worth the noting.
or else, that they neglect the same, and rashly take in hand the doing of
things, without any calling, without the warrant of his word, not calling for
his help, rashly trusting unto their own strength. Wherefore it comes to
pass that they have very small or unhappy success. Is there then I pray you
any cause, why men in this life are so greatly vexed? Yea, He has set the
world in their heart, that man should not find out the work which God has
made from the beginning, even unto the end. These words are diversely expounded
by the interpreters. Diverse expositions of this place.
I will first of al set down the most plain meaning, and that which seems
unto me to be the fittest: afterward I will touch the other expositions, and
leave them unto the judgment of the learned reader. Minding to show a cause of
that same pensive and toylsome trouble, wherewith the minds of men are
entangled, he said, that the providence of God had appointed a certain order
and time unto al things: now he teaches that the cause why men are so greatly
wearied, is this, because they cannot rest in this wise ordinance and
government of God: Why men so toil themselves with the cares of this world.
and that it is a point of great folly for mortal me^ to go about by their
counsels to prevent the wisdom of the immortal God, and therefore, where as
they have their minds set upon these vading and fleeting things (these he
understands by the word world) and drown themselves over head and ears in
worldly lusts, that this comes hereof, that they cannot earnestly think upon
those excellent works of God, that is to say, depend upon his providence, wait
for his help in due season: and therefore they do greatly weary themselves, vex
themselves with infinite labors: and howsoever they go about many vnneedful
things with out a calling and without faith, yet they get no good thereby, which
is a certain punishment of their unfaithful and bold hasting. The sum and
effect is, that me^ blinded with too much care of things perteining unto this
life, do not rest in the providence of god, and therefore that al things have
ill success with them. The word gnolam in the scriptures signifies either
diuturnitie or a long time, or eternity of time, Gnolam.
that is everlasting time, some times it signifies the world, so that it
agrees with the word Cheled, Psalm. 17. as aion in the new Testament,
Galath. 1.4. That he might take us out of this present evil world, aionos in
the Greek. Therefore some expound it the love of the world, and of earthly
things: others a certain opinion of eternity, as if they should always live
here: men are so given unto these things, Why God is said to have set the
world in the hearts of the wicked.
and pursue after them with so great desire. Both significations agree very
well with our exposition. God is said to have set love of the world, or vain
opinion of immortality in the hearts of men, because in his just judgment he
suffers them being blinded with the love of the world to be carried all
headlong into this madness, that for as much as they trust unto the world,
they should therefore feel the more the thorns of this world, as we have
expounded before. Which vanity of men in forging unto themselves an idol of
eternity, is lively described, Psalm. 49. He says that these men being
besotted with the mad love of the world, cannot find out the work of God from
the beginning even unto the end, that is to say, by no means, no not a jot,
albeit the works of God be most excellent and manifest, and do shine forth
in all the parts of our life, yet are they so blind, that they can behold
neither the beginning, nor the proceeding, nor the end. Or, that they
stubbornely remain in this blindness all their life time. This seems unto me
to be the true meaning of this place: yet others do so expound it, as if God
should be said, To set the world in the hearts of men, The exposition of
others.
because he does not only give the world into the hands of men, that they
may use things present: but also in their hearts, that they may use it
joyfully and with pleasure. Yet that man can not tell when the beginning or
end of the work is, when or how long he shall have these things, that the
sum and effect should be, that God has created things so, that men ought to
use them pleasauntly, and praise him the author of the^, and to have quietness
in him: but that the use becomes unpleasant unto them, because they have
wandering lusts, they intermeddle vain cares by means of distrust, etc. The
which things in deed are true, but yet (in my judgment) agreeing neither
with the words nor the meaning.

12. Against that restless madness of men, the which goes about to prevent
the providence of God, and procures men much trouble, he sets a good
remedy, namely that quiet of mind of the which he entreated before, and
repeateth the same words again, as it were a proverb.

13. I know that.] That is to say, when as the providence of God does dispose
the moments and times of all things, and that the industry or wit of man
albeit never so wise and diligent can not foretell the issues of things, much
less declare them: it is altogether manifest that it is much better in due
season and with contentedness of mind to enjoy the present benefits of God,
then to pine one his self in vain with diverse cares, because that the
joyful use of things joined with quietness of mind, A singular gift of god.
is a singular gift of God. But of these things in this respect we have
entreated in their place.

14. I know that whatsoever,] An other reason to beat down the curious
boldness of the wisdom of man, Another reason against the boldness of man
his wisdom.
that the decree of God is unchangeable and everlasting, and cannot by any
means be altered by the counsails of men. That therefore it is a foolish thing
for man to attempt any thing against the providence of almightye God, from the
which nothing can be taken, and to the which nothing ca^ be added of any
crearure by any means.

All the points and parts of time are in the power of God.
15 Of this omnipotency he brings forth a notable assured proof that all the
moments and points of time, both past and present, and to come, are in the
power of god, and are steadfastly governed by his might and pleasure: and
therefore that it is a point of incredible madness for men that are scarce of
a days continuance, to attempt any thing against the everlasting power and
providence of God, and to think that by their power and endeavors they can do
any good, when as both the times themselves, and the very issues and falling
out of things are ruled by him most effectually and constantly. But that the
profit of this doctrine may be the better perceived, and sealed up in our
hearts, he adds a grave pithie sentence after the manner of a crying out,
(they which the Rhetoricians call Epiphonema) as it were a certain thundering
and lightning wherewith either the dullness of men might be stirred up, or
their boldness and sauciness beaten down, That God does this, that men ^ay
fear before him, that is, that God would have the laws of his counsayles and
decrees to be eternal, that his infinite majesty and power being set
against our weakness, which is scarce of a days continuance, might
appear the more great, and of more power and majesty: and therefore that we
should learn to reverence and honor his almighty wisdom appearing in all his
works, and to depend and stay only thereupon, and to put this reverence as a
bridle upon the boldness of our counsels and desires, that being made
guilty with the true feeling of our infirmity or rather nulliti and want of
power to do any thing at all, we should in faith earnestly call for his help,
and wayt for the success of our affairs at his hands, and keep our selves
within the lists and bounds of our calling. And these threatninges are
profitably intermedled: for such is the disposition of the nature of men, that
so long as we do compare either our selves with our selves, or else with
others, the deceites or trappes of this life do too much fawn upon us, so
that it had great need to be beaten down with the earnest comparison of God
his Majesty. Further this noting of the fear of God shows, that Solomon
does not after the manner of Philosophers and Poets recite vain complaynts,
Solomon deals not after the manner of Poets and Philosophers.
but set down a rule most necessary for the life of man, appoint us listes
and bounds of our calling, condemn our trust in our self, curiousness and
other inordinate and wandering lusts, and shows the will of God, teaches fear
and faith that we should know how to behave and order our selves in our whole
life.

The words dark, but the sense plain and easy.
15. The words of the 15. verse in a sense and meaning that is not dark, are
somewhat dark. That which has been, now is: and that which is to come, has
already been, and God requires eth-nir-daph, that is to say, that which has
been driven forth, or that which is driven forth. By this word the learned
interpreters will have the time past to be signified, namely for because it is
as it were drive forth and chased of the time that follows it. And therefore
the old interpreter has translated it very well: He restores that which has
bin already gone. The going about of time therefore as well present, past, as
that which is to come, is here lively described, the which by diverse goinges
about, returning again, is all one in the present moment or minute of time.
For both the time past and also the time to come, is, whilst it is.

Al things present unto god.
But unto God all things are present, neither with him are there any
circumstances of time: and he himself without time or course of time, does
wisely govern all the same disposing of times, which he himself has made. To
this end I think that mention is made of time, and not (as the interpreters
do expound) to signifye that no new thing is made: in which sense in deed
these words are aleaged in the first chapter ver. 9. but they are repeated here
unto an other purpose, namely to set forth the eternitye of God, who always
both has been, is, and shall be the same, whilst in the mean season mortal
men, and all things which appertain unto this life, are daily changed sundry
ways. And dares man to take upon him the ruling of time to come, who can not
for certainty avouch, whether he shall live one minute of an hour: The other
foolish alegoricall interpretations of the word Nirdaph, the which are
brought of some as great mysteries, I avoid as corruptions of the true sense,
and ease both my self and the Reader of unprofitable labor in reciting them.

The Doctrine.
1. God, which has created this whole world, As God created, so does he still
govern the world.
does govern the same by the same power and providence, and has a singular
care of mankind, as for whose sake, he has created all other things.

God has appointed unto all things their seasons.
2. He has appointed unto all things their certain and set courses and
seasons, certain and limited times, and manner of doing: and therefore he does
effectually dispose the issues and fallings out of all things.

Man cannot at his pleasure dispose his affairs.
3. It lies not therefore in the counsel of man according to his own pleasure
to govern the issues of his affairs, nor to choose out due seasons for the
doing of things well, without a calling, and without ye certain help of God: as
it is manifest by the examples of holy and profane histories.

4. Hereby may be seen what is the cause why men are cumbred with so mad and
foolish lusts in this life: Why men ar troubled with foolish lusts.
namely for that being much given unto the desires of these fading and fleeting
things, they do imagine in them a certain immortality, and therefore with a
stubborn mind try all things, and many times things not necessary,
neglecting ye help of God, and rashly trusting unto their own strength through
this mad and unhappy sway of man his rashness and lewdnes, how should not al
things go to wrack: and whilst man his reason will frame ye sharpnes of his
folly unto al moments and seasons, how should he not most miserably be tossed
up and down in so variable a sea, or often changing gulf of the affairs of this
world?

5 This insatiable desire of men unto these fading and fleeting things, God as
a just judge does also grievously punish. The punishment of men's inordinate
lusts.
For God in his just judgment does wrap men in new darkness, which swell
with the trust in themselves, and in their own affairs, and voluntarily,
seuering themselves from the trust in God, both that they may ye more feel the
thorns and encombrances of the world, which they have preferred before him, and
also being willing to perish, might perish through their own fault. This is
the unhappy end and issue of man his counsails and devices.

6. The earnest thinking upon and persuasion of god his providence is a present
and fit remedy against these inconveniences, God his providence dulye
considered ministers remedies against the inconveniences of this life.
that look how many encumbraunces lie before us both publikelye and
priuatelye in the Sea of this life, so many remedies we might have at hand
against all the Torments (as I may so call them) of fortune, and all the
assaults and invasions of alterations and chaungings.

7. Al times ruled by God.
Namely let us hold for certain that all the disposing of al time is wisely
ruled and governed of the eternal God.

8. Life and death disposed by god.
That the times of our birth and death are disposed by his decrees, that our
life was given us to use, and not for a slavery and bondage, and that the rule
thereof is in his power, that we should commit both our life and also the life
of ours unto his pleasure.

9. That our family, marriage, and all the issues of our life either joyful or
sad, are ruled by the same God,

10. That the common wealth, peace, war, ple^tie or wastnesse of countries are
governed by the same God.

11. To conclude, yt all the fellowship of mankind friendship and hatred, and
all the motions of our mind, the which bear a great sway in our life, are
ruled also by the laws of his providence.

2. uses of this doctrine.
12. The use of this doctrine is twofolde, that God should be feared and
worshipped: and, that by this remedy the life of men might be provided for.

A remedy against the carelessness and boldness of men.
13. Namely the carelessness or the boldness of our flesh, is both to be
stirred up, and also beaten down by laying the brightness of God his majesty
before it, for we ought to call to our remembrance, that we seely souls that
have scarce a minute of an hour to live, have to deal with the immortal and
almighty God: that we may depend and stay upon him with reverence and fear,
and refer all the parts of our life unto his honor and glory.

The bounds of our calling are to be kept
14. Let us know that we have the bounds of our calling limited out unto us, and
let us carefully keep our selves within the fame, let us follow God calling
us, let us enterprise nothing rashly, let us abhor al curiosity and trust in
our selves and other inordinate lusts: let us wisely and diligently follow
lawful means, and a right course and order of doing things, staying upon
the guidance and help of the providence of God: Let us withdraw our minds from
the blind love of the world, in as much as we are mortal, let us so dispose of
our matters, that we may seem to have placed our immortality not in this
life, but in an other life, which tarrieth for us.

15. Moreover let us measure the fallings out of our affairs not by our own
counsails, but by the providence of God, and let us wayt for from the same,
whatsoever shall be profitable and expedient for our salvation.

16. Contentednes of mind to be set against greedy hasting.
Against this troublesome hasting and desire of ours, let us set the assured
quietness of mind, which proceeds from the persuasion of the providence of
God. If things go happily forward with us, let us give God thanks: if
otherwise, let us bear with a quiet mind those troubles, which God will lay
upon us.

17 Let us use and enjoy things present, let us live for the time present, let
us not wearye our minds with the casting for things to come: let us be only
careful for the worshipping of God, for the following of our calling, and
doing of our duty, and framing of our life according unto the form thereof,
and let us take no care of those things, of the which the Lord will have us
to be ignorant: finally let us commend our life unto God, and let us believe
that he will dispose our affairs for us to our benefit.

18. And let us apply these things unto all the parts of our life: We must
apply these things unto all the parts of our life.
whatsoever in the end shall happen unto us, let us thank God for it, let us
commit unto the providence of God our families, and the common wealth, our
life, children, goods, and whatsoever appertains unto us: let us know that
there is a time of gain, and of loss, of gladness and of sadness: that only
Christ be alwais our only gain and joy.

19. These are most present remedies against the pensive and cumbersome
carfulness of the Wisdom of man, whereby, we get unto our selves and
unto others much trouble. These things are to be learned out of the word of God.
These things are to be learned in the word of GOD, the use of these things
is in the Church. Plato, Aristotle, Cicero, will not teach these things:
neither in a word is there any use of this Doctrine in the life of Profane
men, albeit that it carry never so fair a show.

A confutation of the Virtue of man, being considered and judged of by the very
outward issue, that is to say, by the things which do befall unto men endued
with virtue: who of al men for the most part are the most miserable. There is
also set down a confutation of such actions, as fall out in the common life of
man, and of certain especial and principal kinds of life, from all which he
teaches happiness to be absent, so that namelye it is no where to be found
in the life of man.
16. And I saw further under the sun a place of judgment, and there was
ungodliness: and a place of justice, and there was ungodliness.

17. Then I said in mine heart* God shall judge the just and the ungodly:
because there is a time unto every will or purpose, and upon every work
there.

18. I said in mine heart concerning the affairs of the sons of men, that
God h^th purified them, and shows that they are al living creatures, or
beasts unto him.

19. Because that that which happens unto the sins of men, and that which
happens unto a beast, is all one, happening unto them: as the one dies, so
dies the other: and there is one spirit unto them al: and there is no more
unto a man then unto a beast, because al things are vanity.

20. All things go unto one place: al things are of the dust, and all things
shall return unto the dust again.

21. Who knows whether the spirit of the sons of men be that which goes
upward, or the spirit of a beast be that which goes down under the earth.

22. Therefore I saw that nothing is better, then that a man should rejoice in
his works: because this is his portion: for who can bring him to see that
which shall be after him.

The fourth Chapter.
1. And I turned me, and I saw all the oppressions which are done under the
sun and behold the tears of the oppressed, and there is no comforter unto
them: and in the hands of them which oppress them there is power, and there is
no comforter unto them.

2. And therefore I praised the dead, which are already dead, more then the
living the which live at this day.

3. Nay he is better then them both, the which has not yet ben: because he
has not seen the evil work which is done under the sun.

4. I saw also every labor, and all rightnesse of work, that it was the
envy of a man against his Neighbor. This also is vanity and vexation of
spirit.

5. A fool foldeth his hands together, and eats his own flesh.

6. The fullness of one hand with quietness, is better then the fullness of
both hands with labor and vexation of spirit.

7. Again I turned me, and saw vanity under the sun.

8. There is one man, and there is no second unto him, yea he has no son,
nor brother, and yet there is no end of all his labor, nay his eyes are not
satisfied with riches, neither does he think, For whom do I labor, and
make my soul to go away from that which is good, or from pleasure? This also
is vanity, and an ill trouble.

9. Two are better then one that is alone, because they have a better reward of
their labor.

10. Because if they fall, one shall lift up his fellow: Woe therefore unto
him that is alone: because when he falls, there shall not be a second to
help him up.

11. Also if two sleep together they shall have the more heat: but how can
there be heat unto him that is alone.

12. And if one prevail against him, two will stand against him: nay a thread
that is thrice twisted is not easily broken.

13. A poor and a wise child is better then a King that is old, and a fool,
which knows not any more to receive admonition.

14, Because one comes out of the house of those that are bound, to reign:
because that the poor is also borne in his kingdom.

15. I have seen all the living walking under the sun with that second
child which shall stand for him.

16. There is no end unto all the people, unto all the people I say, which has
bin before them: and they that come after shall not rejoice in him: because
this also is vanity and vexation of spirit.


The Exposition.
16. And moreover.] This is no doubt the beginning of a new speech and matter.
Hitherto Solomon has taught, that happiness is not either in knowledge, or in
Pleasure, or in the Wisdom of man it self: Now he teaches that it does
not consist in virtue it self, so far as judgment can be made of those
things, which often times are wont to come to pass unto men endued with
virtue, or also unto a good cause. For he speaks of those things which come
to pass in this life, and appear in outward show, and he speaks according
unto the supposition of our sense, that is so far as the reason of man can
judge of them. And he proves by three reasons, Three reasons to prove vanity
in a virtuous life. The first reason.
that there is vanity in this kind of life, the which is framed after virtue,
if so be we do measure things by the outward appearaunce. The first is, for
that in those places which are as it were the sanctuaries, of Law and of
judgments, Injustice and wrong does often times bear sway. The second, The
second reason.
because that there seems to be all one end of a man and of a brute beast,
when as men and brute beasts do the alike. The third reason.
The third, for that the best men, and such as are guiltless, are used very
ill at the hands of lewd and wicked persons. If only the advise of the eyes,
and of the reason of man without the word of GOD were required, this life of
men would seem to be in such confusion, that men would seem to be crushed in
pieces with the blind force of fortune, as it were heaps of e^ets or Pismiers.
Against this external or out ward disorder, he does here by and by set down a
remedy out of the word of God, least that the disease should be told unto
great danger, no remedy for the same being showed: But he will speak more
exactly and thoroughly of this remedy hereafter.

This is the tenor, course, and hanging together of words from this 16. verse
of the third chapter, unto the third verse of the fourth cha. Now the words
are further to be considered. He says again that he has seen under the
Sun, that is to say, that he has beheld in this life A place of judgment,
that is to say, in a place appointed for the keepin of law, and in the whole
administration of justice and judgments, That there was ungodliness, and in
the place of Justice that there also was ungodliness. For the same word is
repeated again by a fine dubling (which Figure is termed Anadiplosis.) And by
this word Ungodliness, or, Iniquitye, it is manifest by the contrary, that
breach of Law is understood, namelye that in that place, and by those
persons, the which by God are made the Judges of the Law, the law is broken.
The word Justice is also accordingly repeated to amplify the matter, by the
word Judgment and Justice he understands the right interpretation of
laws, that is to say, very natural equity, unchangeable and everlasting
right, which is the foundation of laws. And by the word Hatsedek, the
ordinances of laws, the which are the ba^ds of holding in of the fellowship of
men, and according unto the form whereof, the course of civil actions ought
to be discerned and ordered. If therefore in any place in the life of man,
honesty and good dealing ought to shine forth, it ought especially in those
places which are the honorable seats of law and justice* yet nevertheless so
great outrages do range in those places, Abuses of the places of justice.
that many times innocence and equitye are injured and oppressed under the show
of innoce^cie and equity. So virtue has not her felicity and happiness, the
which ought of al men to be regarded and defended, at leastwise of those, who
do profess themselves to be the keepers and maintayners of good and honest
things. A golden world.
How true this is, lamentable experience does enough and too much show, In this
golden world I mean, golden I say in this respect, that all things are to
be sold for gold, faith for gold, justice, for gold, laws and whatsoever in
this life is of most high and precious account, is to be had for gold: yea the
very thrones of judgments, the courts of Kings and Princes, are not only the
shoppes of these saleable arts, but public theaters and Stages of these
heinous sins, all shamefastness being set aside, so that right and equity
are to be sold at offer and proffer publicly, The exposition of others
and for a set price. Some learned interpreters do understand these words
more largelye: that many things are done unjustly in gouernementes that are
not Tyrannical, and that how great pains soever good Magistrates do take,
yet that they can not redress these great enormityes, and therefore that they
must tarry until God amend the^. The which in deed is true, and by
experience more true then were requisite. David and Ezechias being very good
Princes, had in their courts such ulcers, so that it is no marvel that in the
days of Ezechias the Prohets did so greatly complain of the corruptions of
that time. For good princes neither can have an eye into all things, and many
things are done by their courtiers, that is to say, lewd and bad persons, such
as they are wont to be, which are infected with the poison of the court. I say
nothing of negligence and ignorance, the which in this wary and subtle world
is only seen in those things which appertain unto the doing of duty, there
ignorance and negligence raungeth, and is easily excused. But when we have to
do for gain, there great diligence, and great quicksightednesse do reign and
flourish. Among these enormities of me^, good laws otherwise, ly dead and
silent even in the best ordered common wealths, I do not doubt, but that this
circumstance does after a sort appertain unto this complaint: yet the first
sense is more simple and more true.

Against this most bitter tentation he sets a fit remedy.

17 I said in mine heart] when as I beheld these enormities, A remedy
against the enormities of the world.
that so many things were wrongfully handled, that the gyltlesse were
oppressed, and that the guilty, not only escaped scotfree, but also did
wickedly triumph, I called back my self unto the remedy. Therefore I entered
into this consideration with my self, as namely being taken from the word of
God, God will judge the just and the ungodly: whatsoever was otherwise before
mine eyes, I surely determined with my self, that God had regard both of the
godly, and also the ungodly: that these things in the life of man fell not out
at all adventure or by chance: but contrariwise, that God the governor of
mankind, did for a time let lose the bridle unto lewd persons, that at length
he might call them to give accounts of their whole life, and, according as his
nature and office does require, might render trouble unto wicked men which had
troubled the good: and ease and rest unto the good, which had been afflicted.
For this does the justice, or rightful judgment of the just God require, the
which is not unknown even unto the more pure judgment of man his reason. It is
therefore an argument taken from the nature and office of God the Judge. But
because in this life many things are done amiss, and disorderly, he calls
back our minds from this disordered time unto the time of the restoring of
all things. Because there is a time unto every desire, that is to say, there
is a certain set and appointed time by God, unto the examining of all the
ways and manners of living, to try all the enterprises and purposes of men,
There is a time with god for the redressing of the enormities of this life.
to discuss and consider every thing severally. And upon every work there,
that is to say, there is no doubt a time to judge and examine every work in
that same last judgment, the which GOD has appointed and ordained for the
redressing of the enormities of this life. And he does signify that same last
judgment by a lively and maruailous express keeping back of some words,
which figure they call aposiopesis. He teaches therefore that there is
punishment reserved by God the judge both for lewdness and lewd persons, and
he matcheth this life with the other and second life: that they shall not go
away scotfree. There, that is to say, in that judgment to come, with that
which here, that is in this life, they proudly and without punishmente, sin
and offend in. Therefore there is here a double, contrariety, both of time
and place, the change of both which he says shall be great, and therefore
that in this knowledge of the just judgment of GOD there is a fit remedy
against the confusions of this life.

The doctrine.
1 This monstrous confusion, Under the color of law and right, much wrong is
many times committed.
plague and destruction of mankind rangeth euerywhere, that under the pretense
of law and right, law and right is many times broken: The Magistrate being
appointed by GOD the guardian of the innocent, often times becomes the hangman
of the innocent. For this is an old complaint even against that Magistrate
which was in the very bosom of the Church of God. Blood touches blood, they
have pitched nets in Mispath, or in judgment, that is to say, that all the
thieves and cutthroates are not in ye fildes and in the woods, but also to be
conversant and abiding in the streates and cities, in the privy chambers of
Courts and Palaces. These enormities are highly hated of GOD, that namely
those whom God has appointed his Ambassadors, should be authors and
ministers of injustice.

2 All these disorders cannot in deed be altogether restrained or redressed in
so great corruption of men: Magistrates ought to employ all their endeavor for
the reforming of abuses.
yet godly magistrates ought to employ all their endeavor hereunto: as being
mindful of their duitie, and of the most great account the which God the
highest Lord and Prince of all, will ask at their hands, that no place
within their jurisdictions be left unto such disorders: and that they have
before their eyes the form of government which is in the 101. Psalm.

3 God will not suffer these enormities unpunished, at the certain time and
place appointed for the redress thereof. Here is therefore a most excellent
setting down of that remedy, with ye which we ought to strengthen our minds,
least that among the tempests and storms of so great disorders and confusions
they should be dismayed, namely that we should hold assuredly, that God as the
maker of all things, so likewise the disposer and ruler, will no doubt in due
time redress those disorders and confusions, God in due time will redress the
disorders of this world.
the which in this life most often are committed. By the external and outward
view of the confusions in this world, ungodliness does there flatly deny the
providence of God, or else mocketh at it with vain cauils. But let us rather
conclude a true demonstration thereupon, of the last judgment, which shall be in
his time: as the Apostle does, who says plainly, that these confusions, when
as the godly are afflicted in this life, and the ungodly do triumph, are a
proof of the just judgment of God. For it must needs be that God is just,
otherwise he should not be God: for he cannot deny himself. And how I
pray you in these confusions, with the which this life for the most part is
compassed about, can God have his righteousness and justice, or how can it
appear that he is just? when as therefore justice does require that it should
go ill with the wicked, and well with the good (as the sparks left in our
nature do acknowledge) it follows necessarily, that God being both most just
and always just, has appointed both a time and a place for the redressing of
these confusions, that there may be a full restoring of things confused and out
of order. For it follows not, that if now many things be done
disordrously, that therefore they shall be so in time to come. Now is the time of
patience, the time to come shall be a time of judgment. In that the wicked
do now triumph void of all care, let us behold and wonder at the patience
of God, but let us in no case deny his justice, the which no doubt shall appear
at his due and convenient time. If now (says Augustine) manifest punishment
should correct every fault, Augustine.
nothing would be thought to be reserved unto that last day: therefore the last
judgment is patiently to be waited for. Yet are not the testimonies of God his
judgment to be ouerpassed. Such as the Lord will have extant and to be seen
even in this life. For he has not left himself without witness in the
common use and course of life: And that same general saying is true: God has
his judgments for the wicked, even in this life.
that heinous sins are punished with heinous punishments even in this life.
And truly, how many judgments of God have we seen to light upon the heads
of those men, who being armed with power and authority, have broken justice?
Few Tyrants dye without bloodshed, or being murdered. For this Iuuenall
means by dry death.
How many tyrants has either the memory of our fathers, or else our memory,
seen go down unto the son in law of Ceres (as the Poet speaks) without
murder or blood, and by dry death? How many examples and how worthy do the
histories of those four famous Monarchies, how many do the monuments and
records of other nations: How many do the writings of our own nation: yea,
and that in our time yield and afforde us? But these no doubt are the
beginnings of a greater, that is to say, of a more perfect and absolute
judgment: upon the which we ought to set our minds, and in the mean season
with peace and silence wait for the fit and due time, which if he prolong,
he will not prolong as the Prophet speaks. The godly and the ungodly shall
not be confounded and shufled up together, things shall not be preposterously
wrapped up together with a wandering error of Fortune. God shall judge the
godly and ungodly: there he shall put a difference between those things, the
which in this life are hudled together, he will at the appointed time bring
into his true form and fashion this confused and disordered heap of the things
of this world. The waiting for then of the judgment to come, ought to hold
up the minds of the faithful, that they faint not in the midst of the
skirmishes: but hope for that day, which shall bring deliverance and a full
victory unto their labors: but unto the ungodly a due recompense of their
wickedness. For this is the rendering of the just judgment of God, as the
Apostle speaks.

The Exposition.
18 I said in.] He has rehearsed, The second doubt.
and confuted the first doubt: now he comes unto the second, of the
confusion of the life of man in outward show and appearance, because that the
death of men and of beasts seems to be alike. Being to entreat of a matter
most hard, and entangled with dangerous doubting, he sets down before a
necessary and fit preface: I said in mine heart of the affairs of men, that
is to say, When as I did more earnestly think upon the estate and condition
of men, I thought thus with my self, that this seemed unto me a most hard
thing: to teach that he speaks not according unto his own judgment, but
according unto the outward show and appearance of the things themselves, so
far as the reason of man can give judgment of them: as he shows plainly
hereafter verse. 21. What is it then, whereof as it were by way of preface he
says that he thought so earnestly? That God has purged them, the Hebrewe
words are, A hard place
Lebaram haelohim, A hard place, and also diuersely expounded. I will recite
the more likely expositio^s, out of the which I will choose that which is more
agreeable both unto the words, and also the meaning, that is to say, the
which shall seem most simple and most fit. Solomon speaks according unto the
judgment of wicked and profane men, that is according unto the judgment of
man his reason falsely gathering. Others, and Solomon speaks not in their
person, but according unto the outward appearance of the very things
themselves simply: forasmuch as he brings nothing, the which is ungodly, or
sauoureth any way of ungodliness, nay the which is not agreeable unto the
Scripture, the which every where with these arguments blames and increases
the vanity of man: for that he does not teach any thing, but only bring
reasons of doubting. Therefore they expound the whole place thus: That God has
made men clear, that is to say, has plainly opened and declared unto men, and
has showed them, that they are unto him as it were beasts: that is, that
their estate does never aw hit differ from brute beasts: when as namely there
is the same common end unto them both, when as both of them indifferently are
subject unto death, live with the same vital spirit, have the same vital
powers, the same functions of life, eating, drinking, sleep, generation,
moving, and other external and outward properties, are taken out of the same
matter, namely out of the dust, and return again into dust. And in the end
of their life, is there any that knows, whether the spirit of man goes, and
whether the spirit of a brute beast goes, by what reasons can he make
difference between them? Things standing in this order, in as much as the
vanity of man is so great, and that in outward show and appearance his
condition differs not from brute beasts, that far the best kind of life is no
other, then that so long as he remains alive in this life, he use and enjoy
his labors joyfully and quietly, and season the sweet pleasure of the body
with the sound use of the benefits of God, and with lawful ioyfulnesse of
mind, using things present pleasant, and utterly rejecting the care of things
to come. I for my part do not disallowe either of the interpretations, A
middle interpretation.
yet does the middle way like me better. For I cannot think that Solomon
speaks simply either in his own person, or in the person of profane men, as
I suppose the learned, weighing the circumstances of this place will judge.
Again they do not unto the meaning of this place set down the end of these
words, the which no doubt is, the more to express the doubting of vanity, the
which falls into the external and outward consideration of virtue. For if
in this life law and right be broken, and good and gyltlesse men be every
where molested and troubled very sore: yet at leastwise there ought to be
some difference in their death: yet the good man dies as well as the badde. But
that this may be the more lively set forth (because he had spoken in an
other place of the like end of the good and badde) he speaks generally of
the end of man, and compares it with a brute beast, by the which comparison
the external or outward condition of man is no doubt more expressly
understood.

To conclude, I do not agree with them in the exposition of certain words.
They expound these words Lebaram, Lebaram.
That it will come to pass that he will make clear, so that the word
following, namely Velire^th should be of the same signification with the other,
and signify, That he might show: I am of an other judgment. For it stands
not with the use of this tongue in such sort to join words of one
signification together. Again, the placing of these words of one
signification, should be nothing wisely set down: for the first is more than
the latter, that is to say, lebaram, than halireoth: and therefore it should
be no increasing but a lessening: again, the accent is against it: for it is
a greater distinction in the accent which the Hebrews do call Athnach, the
which is diligently to be considered unto the finding out of the true meaning,
These are gra^mar matters in Hebrewe, and therefore beyond the reach of the
simple reader, and therefore rather appertains unto the learned, as does that
also which follows immediately after.
and finally, what need is there in this behalf to heap up words together
of one signification? Therefore I had rather have an other sense of those
words. For barar signifies not only to express or show a thing plainly,
but also to choose and to purify. Thus therefore do I expound it, That
Solomon considered these things with him self, concerning the condition and
estate of men. That GOD has chosen them, that is to say, out of the multitude
of all other living creatures has severed out man unto him self, and
dedicated him, as it were unto him, or has purified, altogether in the same
sense, that is to say, has consecrated him unto him as it were an honorable
and holy living creature: namely, imprinting in him his own image and
likeness. And yet has showed, that is to say, by certain and sure
arguments has laid as it were before his sight (for this is the
signification of the Hebrewe verb Raah in the conjugation Pihel) that men
themselves, men, I say, them very selves (for the Pronoune is significantly
repeated) indewed with so great gifts, are brute beasts unto them selves,
that is to say, in respect of their own estate, or of those things which
fall out unto them* even their own conscience, or experience it self being
witnesses, or simply, he has showed them: so that they cannot pretend or
colourably allege any thing for excuse, unto the knowledge of their own
condition and estate, And this interpretation, as it is more agreeable unto the
words, so is it also unto the meaning, and also contains a more plentiful,
and excellent doctrine. For it is a plain comparison, and the same contrary, a
comparison I say between his first estate, in the which man was created, and
that estate, wherinto he fell through his own fault, by reason of sin. For
that same image of God, if it by it self had remained in man constantly
without change, it had kept whole man from death, and had made him whole
immortal. But death is the reward of sin: A great difference between man
and brute beasts.
yet is there a great difference between man and brute beasts, the which were
never endued with this image of GOD, for in man after the entrance of sin,
there remains yet the image of GOD, but darkened with great and many
darknesses. It is therefore very wonderful, that the estate and condition of
man, and of a brute beast should be in a manner a like by reason of the like
issue and falling out of things unto them both.

19 Because that which happens..] that is to say, the same affections in the
common powers that maintain life (for he speaks only of these) do befall
unto men, as namely sickness, alterations of body, weaknesses; decaying and
vading away of strength: whereupon death is common unto them both, and in the
very dissolution and overthrow of the powers and strength, the Spirit is all
one, namely the vital spirit, accordingly as we have expounded before.

20 And they consist of principles and beginnings, Man and beasts are made all
of one matter.
which are all of one matter, that is to say, dust, and are resolved and do
return again unto the same dust, as unto their principles and beginnings. All
these things are such, as that they may be perceived and marked of all men.
For he entreats only of corporal and sensible powers and effects. In like
effects so far as they are apparent unto the external or outward view and
apprehension of our eye and senses, who can make a difference between the life
of man, and the life of a brute beast?

21 Who knows.] That is to say: If any body would consider, according
unto the judgment of man only, and examine by the balance of man his reason,
the outward show and condition of man and beast, the which every man sees to
be common unto them both: how shall he know to make a difference between
both their spirits, and perceive some certain more notable and precious thing
to be in man than in beast: so that the mind of man should ascend up into
heaven immortal, and the spirit of brute beasts go down into the earth,
that is to say, dye with the body, as namely, gross and mortal with his
gross and mortal body, being resolved into his principle, that is to say,
the earth: For he had assigned that for the matter of beasts, and so the
body when it dies, is said, To go down into the earth. The outward
condition therefore being only considered, the which is common unto man with
brute beasts, and taking the reason of man only into counsel, no man can
tell, whither the soul of man become heavenly and immortal, and remove up
into Heaven his old country, and dye not with the body: and when as there is
one issue and end common unto man and beast, in what respect, and in what
things the difference does consist: that the soul of man should have an
heavenly, and an immortal estate, and the spirit of a brute beast an
earthlye and mortal. The reason of man does not teach this, What man his
reason teaches.
the which of sensible things can only judge sensibly, that is to say, of
such things as are subject unto the senses, so as their nature does bear: but
rather it teaches this, that setting aside the care of virtue, the which no
reward does follow, men should busily labor in tricking and trimming up
of their body. For this is the conclusion of that doctrine, which holds the
soul to be mortal: contrariwise, the conclusion of that doctrine which
teaches that the soul is immortal, is this, that abandoning the care of
decking up the body, we should frame our lives according unto virtue and
wisdom. The wiseman therefore disputes of the condition of our soul,
according unto the outward appearance of things, and according unto the
judgment of man his reason: the which cannot find happiness in virtue it
self so far as may be judged of it by the effects of life. For who judging
by the compass of the reason of man, will judge virtue to be happy in the
midst of torments, and in death it self? The Philosophers therefore do
dote, and do deceive them selves and others, who according unto the reason of
man would conclude that virtue of her self is sufficient unto a blessed and
happy life. For on the rack, and in the very jaws of death the truth of
things will cry out against it, and plead them guilty of lying. The light of
God his spirit must instruct us in true virtue.
A new light is to be sought for, so that we may both understand true virtue,
and also that happiness, the which no doubt remains for virtue. The
forgeries therefore of Stoike Philosophers concerning virtue, do no less
vanish away at the brightness of this light, then the dreams of the Epicures
concerning pleasure.

22 Therefore I saw.] These are not the words of profane men by way of
imitation, as some interpreters do suppose: but he now repeateth as it were a
common saying, the former words, in the which he did set out the true use of
things: to show wherein the true contentedness of mind does consist. That
we are not to fasten and settle our minds upon these things, and in them to
limit and bound our hope, in the which doubtless we shall find nothing less
but mere vanity. Therefore that it is better with a quiet mind to use and
enjoy things present, laying aside the care of these things, the which cannot
choose but greatly torment our minds rejecting that trouble, which comes of
the consideration of them, and neglecting the study of things to come. Of the
true foundation of happiness he will deal thoroughly in his place. It was
sufficient for him in this place to set down a troublelesse remedy against
this present sickness, whereby this immoderate care might be buried, until
that the mind should soundly be strengthened with the food of true happiness.
We have spoken before of the interpretation of these words, that we go not
about a needelesse labor in repeating of those things the which we have
there declared at large. And concerning the immortality of the soul he will
set down a plain doctrine hereafter chapt. 12. ver. 9. the which is soundly
to be opposed and matched against these doubtings.

The Doctrine.
1. We ought not to disse^ble our doutes in religion, when we may be resolved
to our better instruction.
We need not strain any courtisie to acknowledge openly those doubtings,
wherewith our minds are held in suspense: yet a reverent and wise discretion
is to be used, least that through heat of contention we be ouerthwartly drawn
into diverse errors. Therefore we must so doubt that yet in the end our minds
may be strengthened with sound knowledge,

2. The doctrine of the immortality of the soul is most certain.
The doctrine of the immortality of ye soul is most certain, and is the
foundation of our hope. For what should we hope for in the other life, if our
souls did die with our bodies? but yet flesh and blood cannot teach us this
doctrine, that is to say the exquisit discourses of Philosophers, albeit never
so excellent, the which do rather entangle and make more dark the manifest
truth: I make no exception of Plato himself, Plato.
in whom notwithstanding the more plain and certain auouchment of this
doctrine is to be found, who if he have affirmed any thing agreeablye
concerning this matter, he fet it no doubt from a better and more happy
doctrine, the which neither he himself sufficiently understood, neither could
he sufficiently declare it unto others. Therefore the certain and sure
knowledge of this doctrine is to be fet from the word of God, the true and
ancient record of the truth.

Albeit that there be many things common unto man and beasts, yet is there a
great difference between the mind of the one, and the life of the other.
3. Albeit that all the vital powers, yea and also the vital spirit it
self, be common unto man, and also unto brute beasts: yet is there a most
great difference between the soul of a man, and the life of brute beasts, for
besides those powers of the body and of life, being mortal with the mortal
body of living creatures, that is to say, the senses and the powers and
effects of the senses, he has a certain and peculiar gift, the which is not
common with other living creatures, that is to say, Reason, the which so far
off is it that it is borne with the body, and dies with the body, that it
has nothing common with it, but comes as a stranger into the body: he
uses in deed the service of the body, and of those powers of the body, but in
such order, that the mind it self, the palace of Reason, is the Master and
self moouer of them, and the true beginning of moving, and therefore those
powers of the body are so long effectual, as the mind remains in the body,
out of the which when as he goes, both the body dies, and also all those
powers of the body do dye with the body. There are therefore in man two
things, Two things in man.
the one mortal, and the other immortal. The body is mortal, and whatsoever
is bodily that is to say, all the powers of ye body: the mind is immortal, that
is to say, reason, ye perfection of the mind. But when as things are to be
considered according unto their own nature, there is a difference to be made
between those powers of the body of man, and between the mind it self. As
therefore things compounde return unto their principles and matter whereof
they were made, and then the things compounde are no longer: so that which is
void of Composition, as it can never be dissolved, so neither can it dye
by any means. The compounde body therefore, and the powers of the body,
growing of the senses and instruments of the body do die, when death comes.

But the mind of man, being void of al composition, as namely being divine,
or coming from God, neither fears dissolution, nor death by any means: and
therefore when as the body dies, and returns into his principles, that is,
into the dust, the mind remains immortal and goes again into his country,
that is to say, into heaven, being delivered from the fetters of this prison.
This is to be understood of the souls of the faithful, as, appears plainly
in the doctrine next following.
Flesh sees not this: But shall it not be therefore true? And shall there be
no wind, because it is not seen? The reason therefore of man doteth, disputing
of divine and invisible things, according unto the outward show and
appearance, the which cannot be made but of divine and everlasting principles.

Death the reward of sin.
4. Death is in deed the wages of sin, common unto all men like as all men
sinned in Adam. And for as much as even the faithful are borne in that same
stain of sin which is by inheritance, He means original sin.
and so long as they do live in this life, do carry about with them the most
lamentable remnantes of this sin, it is therefore to be no marvel, if they
die as well as other men. Their death notwithstanding differs far and wide
from the death of wicked men: for unto them death is an entrance into extreme
unhappiness, and unto the godly on the other side, it is the entrance into
cheifest happiness.

The practice of such as repose their felicity in this life.
5. The blind and frantike sight of man his wit, because it sees nothing to
be left after death, and does enclose his felicity or happiness within the
narrow bounds and lists of this life and imagines that this life is his
chiefest portion: neglects the care of living well and honestlye, and is
wholly occupied in looking unto and trimming up of the body. Against this
profane cogitation or thought the earnest thinking upon the immortality of
the mind must be set: that we may know, that the minds or souls of all men
shall in such sort abide immortal in the other life, that for the godly there
remains everlasting happiness, and for the ungodly everlasting
unhappiness. The way unto them both is this life. Let those willinglye run
headlong unto everlasting misery, which do dream that nothing remains after
death, and in the end unto their own destruction do learn, that their
minds do remain unto extreme punishment: Let us, whilst we live, think
upon the garnishing of the better part of us, that is to say, of our minds,
and let us betimes tread the path unto everlasting happiness and bliss.

6. Against that same pensive and cumbersome carfulness of things,
Quietness of mind must be set against worldly carfulness.
that makes the life miserable and in deed no life, let us set sound
contentedness of mind, let us joyfully use things present, let us think
that the care of things to come does nothing at all appertain unto us, Let us
with quiet minds look unto that which is at hand. So we shall be void of a
double discommodity, wherewith they are troubled, which will be too wise
according unto the wisdom of the flesh. For they enjoy not things present,
nor attain unto things to come, and it falls out with them, as it did with
Esop his dog, that in vain snatched after the shadow when he had lost the
flesh.

The fourth chapter.
1. And I turned] He shows the third doubt, The third doubt.
why happiness does not consist even in virtue it self by reason of the
horrible disorder of worldly affairs, in that the good and guiltles are every
where afflicted and troubled, and oppressed, and that in such sort that the
disordered lust and boldness of lewd persons with all manner of injuries does
desperatelye rage, and scotfree rail against the good being destitute and
void of all comfort and help. Then the which tentation what can be devised
more sharp and bitter? Now in so great confusion and disorder, truly the
life cannot any way be a life: for when as the affairs of the World are
tossed up and down with the storm and tempeste of so great troubles, that
they, whose life ought to be defended of al men, are molested even by those,
in whose hand is power and authority, and when as to be short, nothing is
safe from the lewdness and boldness of wicked persons, Death seems far
to be preferred before life, in as much as it does set us free from such
discommodities and troubles. This is the tenoure of the words.

By the word Turning, are noted both the swiftness of our inconstant nature,
the which diversely gapeth after every thing: and also the stormy ebbing and
flowing of those things like unto the arm of the sea Euripus, Euripius is a
crike or haven of the sea ebbing and flowing seven times in a day.
diversely changing with sundry waves.

He garnisheth with new fygures the Oppressions, that is, the injuries which
are done Under the Sun, that is to say, in this life. Behold, says he,
not as in a new matter, and unheard of, but to signify the haynousnesse of the
crime albeit that it come to pass often, The tears of the oppressed: And he
says that, The hand of the oppressors is armed with power, that by a notable
representation he might set out as it were before the eyes, that, which
daily in this life falls out, namelye the poor sheep in the hand of the
Butchers, holding out their knyfe, lying ready bound to be slaughtered.
Things being thus disordered, he says, that yet there appears no comforter,
and this he repeateth again to the moving of affection, to show that innocence
and honesty are on every side laid utterly naked of comfort and help: and
therefore he concludes.

2 and 3. Therefore) That is, if life should be considered in regard of the
troubles and miseryes which are in it, that the estate of the dead were far
better than the estate of the living, or at least wise of them which never
saw the light of this life,

He yields a reason, Because he has not, etc. because that they are void of
the miseryes and troubles of this life. For he only weygheth the outward,
both troubles and greefes of this present life, the which is round about
besette with infynyte Mazes of myseryes, and such as we can find no way
out of. For life in it self is the gift of GOD. He speaks therefore both
according unto the outward appearance of things, and also according unto the
judgment of our sense. So this was a common saying among the Heathen: It is
best not to be borne, or so soon as you are borne straight ways to die, and
as it were out of a shipwreck to escape in this life as it were in a
tempestuous sea, the storms and torments of fortune: so that death is the
most safe haven of these miseries.

The doctrine.
Our daily life a pattern of the oppression of the innocent.
1. Our daily life does sufficiently and too abundantly minister a lively
description of this violence and oppression against the innocent: namely that
the more mighty do wickedly employ their authority to oppress the innocent,
and that at their pleasure they have the law in their own hands, as he says.
In so great disorder let God be called upon who is the god of revenge, the
judge of wickedness, the deliverer and defe^der of justice, and such as are
wrongfully oppressed, the Father of mercy and of comfort, the which no doubt
will help his in time. In the mean season we ought to possess our souls in
patience and in hope, waiting patiently for our God.

We must not heap greater troubles upon our troubles.
2. Moreover we must assuage the teadiousnes and wearisomnes, the which cannot
choose but be engendered in our minds by reason of so great disorders, neither
must we so far forth let out the bridle unto our greeues, that we heap upon
our life greater troubles, the which is otherwise entangled with incombrances
enough already: the remedy against this way wardnesse must be sought for out
of the word of God, and must be applied unto our necessities, neither must
we give the bridle unto this peevishness.

The last confutation of the Vanity of man, taken from the actions of common
life, and from certain especial and principal trades and manners of living.
The Exposition.
4. I beheld also,] He notes great vanity in the use also of common life. The
society and fellowship of mankind is preserved by traffike one with an other,
and in the dislikenesse and variety of diverse degrees of men there is great
consent and agreement, if men would so behave themselves as they ought. He
that best behaueth him self, is most hated.
But he teaches that there reigns so great envy among all men of al
degrees, that the arrows of envy are especially discharged upon him, the
which has handled his matters best of al others. For so do I understand those
words, Al labor and all perfection of work, that is, when as a man does so
order his things, that they go forward according unto his mind. The word
Kischron therefore signifies both industry and diligence, and also an happy
success of one his labor.

So also is the word Tsedek taken, Psalm 23. verse 3. Thou leadest me through
the paths of righteousness, that is to say, Thou do bless me, thou
give good and prosperous success unto mine affairs: and in James this word
Dikaiosune The anger of a man brings not to pass the righteousness of GOD,
that is to say, lets that things be not done well, nor as they ought to be:
for he calls the righteousness of God a right, an equal, and temperate
action. For according unto the propriety of the Hebrewe tongue notable and
great things are attributed unto God. Envy a let of many good matters.
Envy therefore is a great let of necessary and profitable things in life,
yet it often times follows those which handle their matters actiuely and
with good success: and therefore he shows that there is great vanitye in
that kind of life. As it is also commonly said in the Proverb, Envy
follows riches, and the complaints of envy are usual, and common It is a
piece of a verse taken out of Hesiodus, where he shows that men of the same
trade do envy each others thrifte: yea that one beggar is hateful unto an
other.
And the Potter, etc. What then in an idle and slouthful life is there any more
profit or quietness therein? He answers.

5, A Fool.] That is to say, a sluggishe and a slothful person, which
gives himself unto laziness, and casts aside al care of his business (he
calls him a fool, which is negligent, because there is nothing the which
does more dull and break the wit then laizie and sluggishe idleness) is not
in deed in danger of the same envy, the which is wont to follow the
painful and diligent, yet does he snarle and bewrappe himself in infinite
other troubles and encombrances. For Whilst he foldeth his hands, that is,
whilst he gives himself unto laziness, and waxes as it were benumbed with
idleness (he liuelye sets out the gesture of a slothful person) laying
aside the care of necessary things, He eats his own flesh, that is, he
miserablye leads a troublesome and unpleasant life, he wrastleth with
diverse encumbrances. For this is the sense and meaning of that kind of
speech: To eat his own flesh.
as the Greeks say, Daknein, or Pepteinker, to bite or to eat the hearter.
Hesiodus, Ker edak andros abonteo, It biteth the heart of a man that is
without cattle.

And Pindarus, Peptein anonumon geras, to pinche obscure old age, or to
consume, which is more then to eat. By the same Figure Homer calls cares
Thumoborous Eaters of the mind, for that they gnaw and bite the mind. The
Latins also say, animum coquere, sieve edere, and peredere, in the same
signification.

Now the heart of slothful persons is pined and fretten either for that
having wasted or disordered their goods, they live in penurye and want of
things needful, and therefore are cast into very great sorrows, and are
greeuouslye vexed. Moreover for that having had no care to their goods, their
other Affairs also become very full of troubles; for good debtors by not
calling upon, More ado in idleness then in well ordered business.
become ill. To conclude, because there is more business and trouble in
rechlesse and negligent idleness (which thing experience teaches to be most
true) then in business it self being ordered wisely and cheerfully or with a
good courage. For the things which are done with a lyuelye and good mind, are
done both more easilye and also more towardlye and with better success: yea
and further the mind is lightened in the very earnestness of labor, and is
maruaylouslye refreshed with the good going forward of things. On the contrary
side, nothing is more tedious, nothing more grievous then lazye idleness: as
the heaps of idle mates do find by Experience, the which with great
weariness rub out one day after an other. That same tedious and wearisome
life cannot choose but be most miserable. The which in the next verse he
does garnishe and amplify.

This place diversely expounded.
6. Better is] Albeit this place be diversely expounded. Some think these words
to be spoken by way of imitation in the person of a slothful body, whilst
he goes about to excuse his idleness, as if he should say: Why should ^
in vain toil my self with immoderate or unmeasurable labor? A full palm of
the hand is far better, that is to say, mean riches with quiet, then full
fistes, that is unmeasurable riches with labor and grief of mind. Others will
have it a Comparison between the slothful and the envious person. Others
think that they must be referred unto all that went before, where he had set
forth the vain cares and unmeasurable labors of men, as if he did condemn
all that same toylesome plentye. Truly I see not how these interpretations
being otherwise true in themselves, can agree both with the words, and also
with the meaning. I understand it more simplye, that Solomon does more
clearly declare that which he had spoken before of the tediousness of the
slothful person: The Exposition of the author.
that the amplifycation may be framed with such a like reason as this: For
as much as experyence teaches, that slothfulness is joined with great
tediousness, so that there is no doubt but that the slothful person does
as it were eat his own flesh: This surely is manifest, that althought it
might come to pass that great store and plenty might come as a companion
unto sluggishnesse, yet that the ioyfulnesse of a ready and lively mind is
far better then that tediouse abundaunce.

He uses a kind of speech set out with a representation of the thing as it
were by a picture, The Palm of the hand.
unto the more grace and vehemency of the matter, for he calls, The fullness
of the Palm of the hand, small riches, namelye as much as one can hold in
the palm of his hand being opened: The fullness of both fistes or handfuls, A
handful.
he terms great and heaped up riches: because that the hand drawn or
gathered in together can hold much more, and he brings both the fistes to
represent or set out the greater plentye. In a word, he signifies that
slothfulness is joined with great and restless tediousness, as the
company of rich idlepersons does find, the which takes great pains to pass
away the time, and abides an unpleasant life, whilst they wax dull with
idleness: Handicraftes men.
Contrariwise, handy crafts men whom they call Apocheirobiotous, that is,
such as live by their hands, whilst they get their living with the help
of their hands, with great earnestness of labor, they feel their meat and
drink to be much more sweet, and live a more healthie and merry life. This
seems unto me to be the plain and simple meaning of this place.

The reason also may be amplifyed or increased with a new circumstance: A
poor life with io^fulnes of mind, is better then great plenty with
tedious-idlenesse.
That the slothful person does dash away his goods, so that unto that
toilesome and troublesome tediousness, the indignity or shame of dishonest
penurye or want, may be added as a spur, his goods being shamefully spent
and wasted: so that the argument may be thus framed, It is showed by
experience that goods are dashed away through great negligence: but albeit
that great and plentiful store of things should follow plentifulnesse, when
as it is manifest notwithstanding, that negligence, is joined with tediousness
and lothsomnesse, a life is far better and more excellent with little goods,
seasoned with ioyfulnesse of mind, then the loathsome plenty of that same
careless and negligent idleness. Therefore it is proved that there is great
vanity in the idle life of the rich: and contrariwise that happiness is very
far from it. He has spoken therefore of two kinds of life altogether
diverse and contrary namely of painful and diligent persons, the which
handle their business diligently and with good success, whom envy: of idle
and slothful bodies, whom in their wealth and gross laziness great
tediousness and lothsomnesse is wont to follow, and has shut out happiness
from both kinds of living, albeit that of sundry men they be sundry ways
desired.

The Doctrine. Labor and diligence deserve great commendations, albeit they
often find the contrary.

1. Labor and diligence deserve no doubt great comme^dation, as namely by the
which the fellowship of mankind receaueth great commodities. For by these ways
things are ordered very well, and a path of good succes is made not only for
families, but also for common welths, but yet such is the corruption of man his
nature, that they hate and envy those especially, the which handle their
matters well and happilye, and among all degrees of all persons the brandes of
backbiting and slander do burst out into great flames. By these arts Satan
goes about to hinder notable wits, and to let the course of commendable
matters.

Our duty must not be forsaken for fear of envy.
2. And must we therefore lay aside the care of weldoing our duty, and forsake
our standing, for fear of being envied: and must we needs seek away to
pacify it, leaving virtue? Nay let us rather thus persuade our selves, that
envy follows virtue as a shadow, and therefore that no man shall live with
virtue and praise, but that he must feel the assaults and Darts of envy.
A remedy against envy.
But against this inconvenience we must set this remedy, that God is the
judge of our Combats: that he lays these blocks in our way, that we
should learn to seek for happy success of things not through our
industry and diligence, but from his providence: that we are not to set him
a time, in the which our labor shall have good success: that we must do
that, which comes to hand: that our calling is diligently to be followed:
that we must with a quiet and patiente mind weight for the success of our
labor from GOD: such and so far as he shall know to be expedient. He does
not therefore condemn labor, but vain carfulness and trust in our selves.

Idleness.
3. Idleness, is the plague and destruction of life, a stayne and hurt both of
body and mind, the ready way to the doing of evil. For this is true which
has been said of men of old time: That men by doing nothing, learn to do
evil.

4 Over and besides that, The most welthie ought to fly idleness.
slothfulness makes a broad path unto shameful poverty, and that for fear
thereof negligent persons ought to withrawe themselves from sluggishnes, and to
shake of their lazy drouzines: this also is plain, even that the most rich
ought to shunnish slothful and sluggish idleness: both for because this kind
of life is unpleasant and troublesome, and does fill abundance of riches,
albeit never so wealthy, with bitter tediousness: and also because it is
altogether unmanly and uncivil, for a man to meddle with nothing in the common
wealth. Doubtless, before sin, Adam was not idle in Paradise.
Adam was not idle in Heden, who is plainly said to be put by God into the
garden, for to dress and keep it. And when as all things created in the
theater of this world, do employ their daily labor about the doing of their
duties, how shameful were it for man, a most excellent and honorable
creature to be guilty of leaving his duty.

5 But since that both in the most labor some and painful life, and also in
wealthy and careless idleness there is great vanity, let us learn to seek
happiness elsewhere.

The exposition.
7 Again I turned.] Another example of vanity and unhappiness in a single
life: Discommodities of a single life.
the which notwithstanding many do desire, even among those which are counted
most wise, as the more quiet and pleasant life, and do utterly refrain from
marriage, as being beset with many troubles and encumbrances. For that Solomon
does speak of a single life, the whole place does show, and these plain
words, Also if two sleep together, they shall have more heat, but unto one
how shall there be heat? Which words who can rightly deny that they are
spoken of marriage? As also the Hebrewe writers do with one consent expound
it. Therefore I can not allow of their interpretation which only understand
these words generally of the communion and fellowship of men. This in deed is
true, that the foundation of marriage, is also the foundation of the society
and fellowship of mankind: and that saying, It is not good for man to be
alone, whereupon the institution and ordeining of marriage is grounded, does
also appertain unto the common joining together of men in fellowship, although
that properly and peculiarly it be spoken of marriage: and experience does
teach that all men do stand in need one of another help, and that every
several man also ought especially to employ his labors unto the common
joining of men together in fellowship, that they may be kept together in a
common band: as contrariwise the distraction and tearing asunder of the whole
society, is the overthrow also and destruction of particular persons: But yet
that the simple and plain sense may appear, the peculiar circumstance is to
be weyed, neither is the doctrine of things that are of kin and like one
unto another to be foysted into the place of the true meaning. He therefore
without all question entreats of a single life, Solomon in this place
entreats of a single life.
in the which howsoever it may seem more quiet and pleasant; he finds
notwithstanding great vanity, and proves by strong reasons, that happiness
is far from it: as he says by way of a preface, That after that he had
turned his mind unto that kind of life, that he again also found vanity
in this life beyond the former. And of this vanity these are the proofs.

8 There is a man.] By this word one, he understands a bacheler: the Greeks
call him Monoten, a single man. Nazianzen translateth it, memo nomenon, and
that lives alone, as namely unto whom there is not a second, that is to say,
a fellow. It is questionless principally to be understood of a wise. For of
all societies marriage is the first and chief. For the wife is joined with the
man not only in the fellowship and community of goods and substance but also
of body. He moreover sets down a circumstaunce to amplify the follye of
covetousness. That he is without not only a wife and children, but also
without brethren and kinsfolk (for the word Brother comprehends all, both
of kindred and affinity) so that he can appoint none of his for his successor
or heir. There are many of these fellows desiring a shamfull and unhappy
single life found: which are cumbred with more and greater carfulness,
through the distrust of wanting things necessary, albeit they be alone, then
those which have great families with far less goods. There be some that
yield natural causes of this diverse care, Natural causes of the diverse
dispositions of the married and single persons in sparing or spending.
that householders, either through the daily custom of their family, because
that many things are to be spent daily, become not so niggardly, or else for
that God does pacify and temper that same too much carfulness with hope of
issue to come, at whose hands, parents look to be helped in their old age:
but Bachelars bestow a little upon themselves only, or else upon a very
few with them for their living, and whilst they fear the discommodities and
charges of old age, that they become, I know not by what means, the more
sparing, and the more fearful: Why God punishes the contemners of marriage
with such cares.
but I for my part do think that this too pensive and carking carfulness
is laid upon single men by the just judgment of God, for that they contemn
and despise that same remedy the which God has given unto men, both for the
avoiding of fornication, and evil lusts, and also for the aid and help of
life, and yet that it comes to pass notwithstanding that they are enta^gled
with cares of most troublesome and woeful single life, and do fall into most
great inconveniences. These men wise enough otherwise, as we may see, yet
Solomon affirms to be so blind, that whilst they vex their bodies and
minds with great labors, yet they cannot make this reckoninge with
themselves, for the knowing of the vanity of this unprofitable carfulness:
For whom do I labor, etc. For what heir do I appoint these my goods, for
whose cause do I take such toil, that I do pinch even mine own belly, and
disapoint my self of things necessary? This he says to be great vanity,
the which follows a single life, against the which discommodities of a single
and sole life, he sets the commodities of marriage.

9 Better] That is to say, the commodity and profit of a married life is far
greater then of a single life. For two are better then one, it is better to be
two then one: and that in every matter: but here he speaks properly of
marriage, so that it is an exposition of the decree of God concerning marriage.
It is not good for man to be alone, let us make unto him an helper, like unto
him. This in deed is generally true (as I have said) of the society of
mankind, for man is a living creature as liking of fellowship, so also a
maintainer of company: for community cannot consist without society and
company: but this first of all agrees unto marriage, which is the foundation
and seed plotte of mankind.

The efficacy or force of this community is most great in marriage concerning
al parts of life. He yeldeth a reason why the profit is greater in a life that
is joined with a fellow, Because they have, A reason why there is more profit
in a life that has a fellow, then when as things ar don alone.
etc. He teaches two things, both that in the earnestness of labor, the
workers shall have more force, because that their strength does increase, and
their courage is kindled by mutual exhorting or chearing one of another, and
by the mutual example of the one and of the other, and also that you shall
have much more profit of your labor, when as you have obtained that which you
sought for, as namely your fellow being witness of your profit received, and
also rejoicing with you. For I pray you what should his happiness be, who did
possess great heaps of richesse, and yet should have none with whom he
might speak, or unto whom he might utter his happiness. It is therefore a
very great profit of thy labor, to have a fellow to be partaker of thy
joy, the which takes chief place in marriage, in the which the man and wife
are alike partakers of prosperity and adversity: as he teaches by and by.

Another commodity of marriage.
10 Because if they fall.] He therefore declares an other commodity of the
married life. That it yeldeth remedies against al chances and adventures of
life, the which are wont to betyde both body and mind, and goods, such namely
as in the raging sea of this our life men are accustomed to be troubled
sundry wise withal. Art thou sick? Thou have a wife at home, the which
looks unto thee with all carfulness. Is thy mind troubled with sorrow?
Thou powrest out thy grief into the bosom of thy most dear wife, and art
eased. Go thy matters but badly forward?

Thou have a fellow to help thee bear this burden. The joy is the better
increased, thy wife being glad and rejoicing with thee. But the single life
wants these commodities. Woe therefore unto him that is alone. He teaches,
that those who as if they were more wise then God, do seek a new way to
avoid miseries, the which this life is subject unto, do entangle and bewrap
themselves in most sharp thorns and troubles, and do find very great
inconveniences of that their single life. And therefore that they are paid
home with unhappiness, The miseries of a single life
in steed of the happiness whereon they dreamed in a single life. They lack
wife and children, but they lack not those discommodities for the easing or
removing whereof they want in vain the faithfulness and help of Wives and
children. I speak of such Batchelers as of purpose desire a single life,
forsaking marriage. He sets down an other commodity of marriage.

Another commodity of marriage.
11 If also.] The honest pleasure of marriage he notes by an honest kind of
speech. And the use of marriage is great in this corruption of mankind, for
the avoiding of fornication: with whose brands of lusts these seekers of a
single life in the mean while do burn: and whilst they desire, as they
say, to shun one mistress, they pull over their heads many mistresses, that
is to say, proud and faithless harlots. The profit of honest pleasure in the
bed undefiled is manifold, as the avoiding of detestable lust, and begetting of
children, the which he notes in the next verse that follows.

12 But if.] He says therefore that there is sure aid in the joining
together and agreement of man and wife. But if the third be added, that is to
say, children begotten of lawful marriage, increase the family: that then
the fellowship will be so great, that it cannot by any means be broken or
undone. This he does garnish with a fine kind of speech, saying A tripled
thread, The meaning of the words, A three fold coard or rope.
that is, a threefold cord, is not quickly, not very soon, not very easily
broken: the meaning whereof is, That there is great strength in concord or
agreement and fellowship. This is doubtless a fine saying, and confirmed or
warranted with great and notable examples. That through concord and agreement
small things do increase, and through discord and disagreeing great things
go to wrack, as the father exhorting his sons unto agreement, An example
teaching the force of unity and concord.
bids a bundle of sticks to be brought forth: and that every one easily
brake his stick being severed and alone by it self out of the whole bundle:
but that they could not do so in breakinge the bundle, when all the sticks
were bound together. Of the aid and strength of children in maintayning and
defending their parents there is a notable promise Psalm. 128. Children then
are a singular gift of God, and the treasure of marriage is precious: but God
is to be prayed unto, that he will grant the issue which he gives us, to
be happy. I have rehearsed the simple meaning of this place: the trifles of
allegories, the which Jerome in this place recites, Ierom.
it loatheth and wearieth me to set down. For what is it to mock the truth,
if this be not? for he violently draws all these things unto Christ.

The doctrine.
1 That same kind of life the which makes us void and sets us free from
cares, and that in the streites of this most wicked time, is especially to be
wished for of Christians: And the single life is void of most great cares,
whereunto marriage is subject. But yet does not the single life want his
discommodities, the which those that shall for this cause embrace, that
forsakinge marriage they may lead an odd happy life, being free from the
common miseries of life, they shall notwithstanding without all doubt, Of
whom, and to what end a single life may be desired.
find it beset with thornie troubles. Neither is a single life to be wished
for to this end, nor of all men indifferently: but both of those which are
endued with the gift of chastity, and also that therefore they may the more
freely give themselves wholly unto the service of God.

Marriage has most excellent commodities, especially in the faithful.
2 On the other side marriage, in these troubles of mankind, as it has his
discommodities, so also has it his most excellent commodities, unto the
faithful especially, in whom the use of that most honorable gift is
sanctified by God. For the decree of GOD is not deceitful, unto the which this
cause is made: It is not good for man to be alone. The profit therefore of
marriage is manifold. For it is a most sweet and most fit help and aid of
life, a steadfast foundation of the fellowship of man. What is more necessary,
what is more profitable and joyful for all the parts of life then a family?
the which truly does consiste of that most streite fellowship of man and
wife. It does also afoorde most present remedies, against all the chances of
life, the which are wont to happen both unto body and mind and goods. It
tameth the immoderat lust of the flesh with honest and unblameable pleasure. It
gives children for most great commodities of life, and to be short, without
marriage the fellowship of mankind cannot stand, and that I may turn again
upon these hot and unmeasurable praysers of a single life, those things the
which without any difference they do attribute unto a single life, marriage
has filled heaven and earth.

Now if in steed of those commodities discommodities be found in marriages,
The discommodities of marriage, are not to be imputed unto it, but unto our
selves.
that is not to be attributed unto marriage, but unto our selves, the which
abuse the good gifts of GOD: and therefore feel the just hand of God, the
which does so chasten our intemperatnesse, that the ships are broken in the
very haven (as Augustine speaks) that is to say, that there are troubles,
where as most quiet ought to reign. Such home encumbrances godly and
excellent men have felt. There wanted no iarres in the family of Abraham,
Abraham.
between him and Sara for their children: Jacob, by his wives and children:
Job, Jacob. Job.
by his wife: David, by Micholl, and especially, by the stubborn and mad
outrage of his children, have felt most grievous troubles. Yet this is more
constantly true, that such is the love, such is the friendship of man and wife
in a well ordered marriage, that there is great interparting both of bodies,
and of goods, and also of prosperity and adversity, the which makes
prosperity more full with a certain lawful and sound ioyfulnesse: and does
so assuage and temper adversity, that it is borne the more easilye and
lightly: to conclude, that GOD has not ordained it in vain for an help and
aid of this mortal life.

The exposition.
13 Better is a child.] Some suppose this to be a doctrine by it self, that
is, that it is a sentence cut off, and by no means agreeing with that which
went before: only, that occasion thereof is taken by the former speech. Which
is altogether to cut the knott, and not to lose it. Others note this knittinge
of it with the rest: that as he has said, that there is vanity in
covetousness, so he says, that there is also in ambition: the which truly
is not clearly enough said. I think this to be the plain tenor and order of
the words. He propounds or sets forth another example of the same vanity
in a kind of most honorable life, that is to say, of Kings and of great
men, in the which the common sort do think that there is chiefest
happiness. Contrariwise he teaches, Great vanity in the life of Kings and
great personages.
that in the same life, as it is wont to be used, there is greatest vanity,
lest we might think them to be exempted and privileged from the common
condition of men. He says, that a poor child that is wise, is better than
an old King which is foolish and has no wit. For it is great unhappiness, to
be unwise, and this is a foolish proverb: The pleasantest life is in not
being wise, for what other thing does make a difference between us and brute
beasts, but Reason? the which, if it do not her duty in us, it cannot
choose but make us most miserable, when as the sovereign good of man does
consist in reason, and in the lawful use of the same. And it is an argument of
comparison: For a King is set against a poor man, and a child against an old
man: so that the sense is: that the condition of the most poor, if they be
endued with true wisdom, is far better than the condition of the most
mighty Kings, if they be void of that same true wisdom. And he sets
down that which experience does enough and more then enough teach to be
true that Kings and great personages are often times void of this wisdom,
from whence came this old saying: The first discommoditie in princely dignity.
To be borne a King or a fool, and, the sons of great men are harms. The
first discommoditie therefore is, wherewith the royal dignity, otherwise
exempted from the common condition of other men, and set aloft, is troubled and
taynted: that there are many seen placed in that estate, the which are the
worst of all men in wit and manners. When as lamentable examples do often
prove this to be true, Solomon himself also a most mighty King, does no
injury unto Kings or kingly dignity, the which does lay before Kings that
vanity, whereunto their estate is also subject, that they should learn to
seek for virtue otherwhere then from their dignity. The life of such Kings is
no doubt miserable, therefore in old time the truth of an ancient fable did
attribute unto Midas King of Phrygia and a fool, Why King Midas in old fables
was feigned to have the head and ears of an ass.
the head and ears of an Ass, to represent in a lively picture their beastly
life. But the word of GOD does of all other most freely examine the
condition and faults of all men, that Kings may learn, that the more wise
then other men they ought to be (as whom namely they are appointed by God to
rule) the more earnestly to crave the greater wisdom at the hands of GOD,
after the example of Solomon: and also because that among so many and so great
allurementes, it could hard and scarsly be that their minds should continue
pure, unless they be stayed, and underpropped with a certain singular power
of God.

A reason of this folly in Kings and great men.
He brings a proof of this folly: For that he knows not any more to
receive admonition, that is to say, for that he is not capable of any
admonition or wholesome and sober counsel, but with a stubborn mind
refuses and despises the sayings of them that give him good counsel, the
which truly is usual and common unto mighty men. The old writers have said
very well, that that kind of men is altogether unprofitable and good for
nothing, which neither of themselves can give good counsel, nor follow him
that gives them good counsel. The complaint also of Alexander Mammea a most
mighty Emperor, is known: That the truth comes not unto the ears of
Princes, among so great a company of flatterers, that this his saying is
found also true: That none but horses are found trusty counsaylours unto
Kings: for that they do no otherwise with them than with the most vilest
bondslaues: but the Counsailours of Kings do of purpose corrupt the truth.
This is therefore a great discommoditie of Princes, Kings hardly understand
the truth of things.
that they hard and scarcely understand the truth of things, yea, and that
in those things especially, the which do appertain unto their office, and
ordering of their life. But this is most grievous, when as they can not abide
to hear sober admonition, but do stop their ears against good admonitions
in such sort, as if it were against charminges and enchauntments, as the
Prophet speaks. Hereupon Solomon teaches, that the life of Kings albeit
never so honorable and mighty, is made most miserable: and notes out this
first circumstance of that vanity and unhappiness, whereunto the dignity of
Kings is subject.

The second not^ of vanity in kingly dignity.
14 Because out of the house.] Another note of the same vanity from the
alteration and change of kingdoms. He says therefore, That one comes out
of the house of them that are in bands, that is to say, that mean and base
persons are sometimes lifted up unto that same high degree of kingly dignity.
Kings do boast of their antiquities and stock, as if their ancestors had
been before the Moon, and had not come of Adam, and as if their first father
had never been shut up within the Arc of Noah.

The Lord mocketh this proud and foolish imagination, when as he raises
up from the dunghill (as the Prophet says) such men, whom he makes to sit
on the thrones of Kings, that is to say, does establish and set them fast in
kingdoms. Joseph.
Joseph out of prison was advanced almost unto the throne of the kingdom.
David.
David does acknowledge that he was lifted up from the sheepefolde unto the
royal seat. Jeroboam came from a low place unto the kingdom of Israel,
Jeroboam.
that I speak nothing of obscure persons, as of Philip, ^ertinax, Maximinus,
how that they attained unto the top of the Roman Empire: as also in our
memory, that certain most honorable and renowned houses can reckon for
their authors and first beginners of their stock, men of no greater worship
then butchers and pedlars. And that it is no less marvel, when as Kings are
thrust out of their kingdoms: the which he notes in these words, Truly, or
yea also (for so I expound the particle Ki) There is one borne poor in his own
King dome. These words are diversely expounded, but I think this to be the
most simple and plain meaning. That sometimes there fall out so great
alterations and chaunges, even in kingdoms, that Kings being driven out of
their own kingdoms, of most rich become most poor, and seem to be certain
new men. He liuelye expresses this wonderful change by the word To be borne.
For those same extraordinary changes seem to be a certain new life. All ages,
all nations have seen examples of these chaunges also. Israel, Oseas, Judea,
Ioachim, Sedechias: Israel, Judea, Babylon, Sicilia.
Babylon, Nebuchadnezar: Sicilia, Dionysius: France the Chilperikes, etc. That
I reckon not up a long roll of every one particularly. And howsoever these
extraordinary chaunges are governed by the providence of God, yet are they
notable tokens of the vanity of man in noble and renowned personages. He notes
an other circumstaunce of the same vanity, from the unconstant and uncertain
judgment of the people, unto the which notwithstanding kings are subject.

15. and 16. I have seen all men] He liuelye sets forth the loathing and
weariness of the people, An other vanity in kingly dignity.
always fynding fault with the present king, and casting their eyes upon the
next successor, as it were upon the Sun rising. I have seen all men living
walking under the Sun with the second child or Son, which shall stand up
for him. That is, I have marked all the subjects of the same kingdom, to be
led as it were with the brunt of the same or all one mind, that they more love
the son that shall succeed, then the Father himself, which is king
already.

Some expound Those that live under the Sun, to be the noble men the
Courtiers, because that they live gorgeously, and that in such sort, as if
this life were proper unto them, and that the world were made for their sake.
For these be of great power both ways, to receive or to put away the King.
But There is no end unto all the people, to all I say, which has been
before them: also they which shall come after will not rejoice in him. Of
which words this is the meaning: that such is the itche of the people, that
there is no end, no measure may be limited or appointed unto their desire.
Him whom they have loved and honored when he was to reign, the same they
are wearye of, and cannot abide when he reigns: and that this is not a
fashion grown up within a few days, but most ancient, practiced and put in
ure many ages ago, out of all men's remembrance.

That such namelye is the inconstancye of the people, which is a beast of
many heads, such is their wantonness, unto the which notwithstanding
Kings are subject, and by the which they stand and fall, whereupon there
do arise infynite and endless alterations and chaunges in Kingdoms, That is
to say, he signifies that the people do give power and authority unto their
Kings because the King cannot be without his subjects: The King cannot be
without his subjects.
so the falling away of the people, brings overthrow and destruction unto
Kings and Kingdoms. He concludes therefore, that in great personages there
are evident and notable tokens of great vanity. This, says he, is altogether
vanity, etc. namelye that honorable and great personages borne of a certain
proper metal by themselves as it were, and severed from the common rabble of
other men, are yet notwithstanding subject unto the pleasure of the people.

To see these ebbings and flowings of the peoples favor in that commonwealth
especially, where the people bear the chiefest sway in, is in deed usual:
yea and in a Monarchy or kingdom how much the people may do, the Example
of Israel has taught, when Roboam the son of Solomon was thruste out:
Roboam.
the Example of the Romans, has taught, dryuinge out their Kings, The
Romans.
and recovering their liberty: the most often chaunges almost in all Nations
have taught us. He speaks therefore of most free nations among whom the king
had no more authority over the people, then the people over the King, as Caesar
speaks of the ancient Frenchmen, and the causes of these chaunges do most
often lie in the Princes themselves. For the people loves him of whom they
are well handled: hates him, of whom they are evil entreated: and his yoke
the which they cannot bear, they do in the end clean shake off. So Roboam
himself, the son of a most wise father, swaruing from the lessons and manners
of his father, procured the displeasure of the people against him, and was
turned out of his Kingdom. So the Romans drove out Tarquinios superbos,
waxing insolent and proud with immoderate rule and government: for these
causes they slew diverse Emperoures, which were indeed rather monsters then men,
being weary of their tyrannous rule bearing: as Commodus, Heliogabalus, etc.
albeit that they also sometimes raged against good Princes, as against
Alexander Mammea, etc. Such namely is the violence of the People, whom Princes
ought to win unto them by gentle and moderate government, for they hate him
whom they fear, and whom they hate, him they wish to perish. The love
therefore and good will of the people toward the Prince, is the sound
foundation of kingdoms.

The doctrine.
1. God the author and governor of the societye and fellowship of men, has
appointed unto himself the magistrate, as an Ambassador, by whose ministry
and service he would preserve and maintain the same society, God preserves
the society of mankind by Magistra^es.
in the necessary and wholesome difference of rulers and subjects. Their
dignity and excellency therefore is singular, whom God makes ministers of so
worthy and weighty matters, and he will also have the^ enjoy most great and
notable privileges about the condition of other men. Yet we must not think
that the life of great personages is in all points blessed and happy: but
rather that experience it self does abundantly teach that it is beset with
many and great encumbrances: the which are both inward through the blame and
fault of the magistrates themselves, and also outward by reason of many
alterations and chaunges the which are wont to be rife in the often ebbing and
flowing sea of this world.

2. The kingly dignity and power is both more ancient, How the kingly power is
both the best and the worst.
and also better then all other kinds of public governments, if it be limited
and bounded with good laws, and get a good and a wise governor (for it is the
image of a fatherlye rule, then the which there can be none on the earth
found out either more honorable, or more profitable) but if it have an evil
gouernoure, and a fool, then is it of all other the worst. And it comes to
pass by reason of the power of Kings, which is not to be corrected, and
through the allurements of a lose life, that their minds are many times
corrupted, both unto the hurt of themselves, and of their subjects. Let
kings therefore learn which seek happiness in a mild Gouernemente, to
beg Wisdom of GOD, and equitye in gouernmente: for foolish and unjust
rulebearing, as it is hurtefull unto the Subjects, so is it also unto the
Rulers.

A wise government is of God.
3. A wise and happy Gouernmente is of GOD, that the people may learn to
pray for a good and Wise Magistrate at his hand. Truly a good Prince is a
certain most rare Phoenix.

4. God does constantlye govern all the alterations and changes of all common
wealths, God is the governor of al common wealths.
neither is there here any place left unto fortune: neither yet unto the
industry or wit of man, the which wholly is fitted by the providence of God.

For Promotion comes neither from the East, nor from the Weast, nor from the
North. Because as the Prophet says: GOD is the Judge, he throws down one,
and sets up an other. He effectuallye rules the beginninges, the middle,
the increase, the decrease, the full points and ends of all Gouernementes.
The Scripture sets forth this true and certain cause of chaunges, whilst
he stirs up Kings, otherwise deaf and dull, to set forth the power of
GOD. For the things themselves, albeit Kings otherwise either hold their
peace, or also repine against it, do witness the singular Majesty and
providence of God, the chief King of all kings.

5. God doubtless has ordained gouernementes which come by inherytaunce,
Governments that come by inheritance, are ordained by God.
as it is manyfeste by the Kingdom of David: neither truly could it come to
pass without the power of GOD, that so many millions of people should
willinglye obey an Infant new borne and one man. This notwythstandinge is true
in Gouernementes that come by inherytaunce, that the power of Kings does
depend upon the power of the people, and therefore that Kings ought to
desire of GOD, that he would frame the minds of the people unto obedyence,
and because that the Word of GOD is the rule of this Obedience, A good lesson
for Princes.
that they ought to employe all their diligence, that the people may be
instructed in the true knowledge and obedyence of God.

They ought moreover by a just and mild government the which is set down by
laws to bind the hearts of the people unto them, the which doubtless loves
him, by whom they are well entreated. And they must call to mind that they
reign not over Beasts, but that they being men, are appointed by God to
govern men, unto whom they shall give accounts of their government. And
finally, they are to think yt it is a dangerous thing to have the patience of
the people tried and teazed, the which being often hurt, is wont to turn into
madness.

A rehearsal of that which hitherto has been taught.
6. Hitherto the preacher has taught that happiness is not in worldly things,
the which he has plentifully proved by sufficient reckoning up of the
parts first examining the general trades of living, and then the special.
And he has showed, the things being dulye weighed, that happiness is not
found either in the knowledge of man, or in Pleasure, or in the prudence of
man, no nor in the very outward appearaunce it self of Virtue or honesty, nor
in all kinds of life either of private or of honorable personages, in whose
estate notwithstanding, the reason of man, and the opinion of the common sort
does imagine a certain happiness for to be. He has removed therefore and
shut out from happiness all those things the which according unto the reason
of man, and judgment of the common people might fall into a certain
imagination of happiness, that is to say, he has at large discoursed against
the devices of folish reason, What happiness is not. Now he goes unto the
second part of this sermon. What happiness is, etc. What is the way and
means to obtain it: Of which two principal points we said in the preface,
that this sermon did consist, From hence therefore he takes the beginning of
this second part.

The second part of this Sermon: that is to say, what true happiness is, and
what is the way and means to obtain the same.
The fifth Chapter.
1. Have regard unto both thy feet, when as thou go unto the house of God,
that thou may be ready to hear rather then to give the sacrifice of fools:
for they do not perceive that they do evil.

2. Make no have with thy mouth, neither let thine heart make speed to bring
forth a word before God: because God is in heaven, and thou upon earth:
therefore let thy words be few.

3. For like as a dream comes of the multitude of business, so does the
voice of a fool of the multitude of words.

4. When thou have vowed a vow unto God, be not slow to pay it: because God
has no pleasure in fools. Pay therefore the things which thou have vowed.

5. It is better that thou vow not, then to vow, and not to pay.

6. Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin: and say not before the
Angel himself that there is a fault, why should God be angry for thy speech,
and scatter the work of thine hands?

7. Because that in the multitude of dreams there are both vanities and also
many words: but fear thou God.


The Exposition.
1. Have regard unto, or keepe] The tenoure of the matter in hand does
altogether require, that the beginning of the fifte chapter be taken from
hence. For it is not only a new argument, but also altogether a new place,
and in deed the most notable of all this whole Sermon, Concerning true
felicity or happiness. Meaning therefore to entreat of it, and to place it
in the earnest fear of God, that is in true godliness, he sets down a
necessary preface: and diligently teaches, by what notes Godliness ought to
be set out, least that in stead of true religion we should embrace a naked
shadow and show, and vanishing vizard of Religion.

This is the knitting and joining of this new matter with the words that went
before, least that with some interpreters we should think it to be a
sentence cut off from the rest, and yet that occasion thereof was taken I
know not upon what words. This therefore is the meaning: I have at large
declared what happiness is not, albeit that the reason of man do imagine it
to be in diverse things and parts of the life of man: I have taught with
sound reasons how far all those idols and indeed but bare shows sundry
ways invented by men, are from the truth, Now remains that I show wherein
true happiness does consist.

This therefore is the frame of this disputation, whose confutation has been at
large handled in the four first chapiters. For as the truth cannot be well
enough, mayntayned, unless falshoode be overthrown before, the which is
manifold and of sundry sorts: so also in overthrowing of falshoode far
longer travel and speech ought to be used.

The first law or rule of establishing of godliness truly and diligently
is, The first rule of true godliness.
that we worship GOD in the congregation according unto his word, that we
refrain from men's inventions: that we seek for wholesome doctrine in the
Church and true ministry, and that we reverently hear the Church when it
teaches, stay upon her voice, and do not embrace the inventions of men: but
that we worship GOD with a pure and sound mind, according unto his word, the
which is the rule of his will. For that it is great follye and madness,
whatsoever men of their own brain in this behalf invent, and altogether
unreasonable worship. So this law commands two things unto us, that we
ought to seek the word of GOD in the Church, with a pure mind and that the
inventions of men concerning the worship of GOD are to be avoided. To take
heed unto our feet when as we go unto the house of God, is to worship god
with a pure and sound mind, or, to carry a pure and sound mind in worshipping
of god, in which kind of speech the Apostle says: Peripatein axios, Kai
cuprosedros euaggelio, that is to say, to lead our life as is meet and
agreeable unto the Gospel. And this word Orthopodein also sprang from thence,
which signifies to walk with a right foot. And the Metaphor agrees very
well, for like as the body is both stayed up, and moves by the help of the
feet: so likewise is the mind by the power and strength of the will or
appetite.

In the mean season by the same kind of speaking, he plainly signifies
wherein the worship of GOD does consist, where wholesome doctrine is to be
sought, and how it is to be received. For there is no doubt but that the
Temple is signified by the naming of the House of GOD: But because the temple
was as it were the sum of all Ceremonies, by the naming thereof, it is
manifest that both the congregation of GOD, and wholesome doctrine which should
sound in the Church, and the true knowledge of GOD, is understood according
unto the use of the Scripture.

When as therefore he wills that the house of God be gone unto, he wills
us both to follow the word of God, and to keep our selves in the bosom of
the church, in the which only is salvation: and therefore he plainly notes
the true worship of the true God. When as he commands that we take heed
unto our foot, he commands pureness and soundness of mind to be
carefully used in the worship of God. To take heed unto our feet.
And this whole kind of speech is taken from the custom of the Law, for by
the express commandment of God, they went not unto the Temple but purifyed.
And by that same outward cleanness was signified inward pureness and
holiness, What was signified by the outward purifying in the law.
the which is the foundation of the worship of God. He makes manifest that
same fyguratiue kind of speech with a simple and plain kind of speaking,
Come to hear, rather then to give the sacrifice of fools, that is to say, to
the end thou may worship GOD after that manner, which is most convenient,
thou must employ all thy diligence that thou may be thoroughly persuaded of
the will of GOD, the which thou shall without all doubt know, if thou hear
him: and thou must not follow the inventions of men, or forge any thing out
of thine own brain, to offer unto God under the name and title of obedience.

The Preacher therefore by the word Giving does expressly signify the
traditions and inventions of men. Giving.
For this is a proper note of superstition, for that it would have it self
seem to offer certain merytes or deserts unto GOD: as appears by that
verse, Doratheous Peithei, etc.
Gifts please the Gods, etc. the which foolerye to be altogether repugnaunte
and against the nature of GOD, Plato an Heathen man did see: Plan.
and has confuted it by many reasons: and that by this means religion
should be made as it were a trade of merchandise after the way of
bargaining, I give that you should give again.

According unto the supposition and opinion of men he condemns, In what
respect Solomon condemns ceremonies, and this place is to be well marked for
that it expounds many other places of the scripture, where God himself by
his prophets does the like.
but not generallye, good ceremonies otherwise, and such as were ordained by
GOD (for GOD had appointed those sacrifices as seals of the forgiveness of
sins, and public testimonies of thanks giving) but for that superstitious
persons did offer them in such sort unto GOD, as if by their force and power
they should deserve Salvation, as it were by the work done as they say.
After this sort the Prophets deny that GOD ordained Sacrifyces, and do
forbid them unto the Jews.

There is namelye a notable saying of Samuel, unto the which Solomon seems
to have alluded and had respect: Is the Lord delyghted and pleased with
burnte offeringes and sacrifices, like as when a man hears the voice of the
Lord? Behold to hear is better then sacrifyce: and to give ear then the
fat of Rams. He therefore calls them Fools, the which both depart from
the Word of God, and do sever and shut out Faith from the Ceremonies by
him ordained. For as this is a reasonable Worship, and allowed and lyked of
GOD, when as we offer up and consecrate our selves unto him a living and holy
sacrifyce by Faith: so all deuyces of men concerning the worshippinge of GOD,
Against all men's devices in the worship of God.
with what show of Wisdom soever they be cloaked, are unreasonable, that is,
go about to be mad with reason.

And this word, To Hear, To hear.
signifies not only to receive the voice of GOD in his word, sounding by the
ministry of the church, but also to obey it: for both these must be joined
together. For how shall they believe him, of whom they have not heard? and
how shall they hear without a Preacher? and how shall they preach, unless
they be sent? Hearing therefore presupposes a Ministry of the Church, and a
lawful use of the same.

Again, if a man hear the word, and do it not, and is a forgetful hearer,
he doubtless has unhappy knowledge, as James says. Therefore we must
hear with the ears of the body and also with the heart: that our whole life
may be an express showing forth of this knowledge. He teaches further why
he had condemned the devices of men of follye and madness, and therefore
forbad them, Diverse expositions.
Because they know not, etc, This place is diverse ways expounded. The words
themselves are, Ki enam iodegnim lagnaschoth rang, that is, Word for Word,
because they know not to do evil, so that the meaning is, They do not
perceive how great an evil they commit, with how great wickedness they
entangle themselves, whilst they defyle themselves with vain and unprofitable
superstitions.

Others understand this Particle Rac, Only, in this sense, This one thing
only they know, to do evil and wickedlye: for as much as they refuse the
word of GOD, they can not choose to run headlong into great mischief.

Some say that the word Rang in the Chaldai tongue does signify Will, and
they expound it, Because they know not to do the will of God, the which sense
would very well agree: but because that form is never found in the Chaldai
tongue (as most learned Mercerus my Countrieman does note) and because the
Chaldai Paraphrast does also expound it Evil, it is better of the former
interpretations to take the one or the other, albeit in my judgment the former
be the more plain and simple.

The sum is, that al superstitious worships are a most great wickedness:
from the which therefore they ought with all their hearts to refrain the which
do purpose to worship God with a pure mind. The superstitious therefore know
not how great an evil they do commit, Good intents.
the which pretend or allege good intents (as they say) for an excuse of
their inventions, and do think that this same desire to worship God, the
which is also heaped up with diverse labors and charges (for in superstition
there is sparing for no cost, being most lavish both of body and goods) to be
an excellent virtue, but yet it is in deed a foul vice: because it is done
without the word of God, and without faith, without the which whatsoever is
done, is sin. An error of some brainsicke persons.
The error also of frantike and mad headded persons is confuted, the which
think that God may be worshipped in the opinion of any religion, and do so
speak of religion as of a matter indifferent. Against these foolish opinions
let us set this saying: That superstitious or godless persons know not how
great an evil superstition is, that is to say, that of all wickedness it is
the greatest, and the most wicked, the corruption of true religion, the which
can be but only one, and not manifold or of sundry sorts. If we expound
it: They only know to do evil: or, They know not but to do evil: for that
the cause is noted, namely the contempt and despising of the word of God. We
do fitly gather, that those do make shipwreck both of godliness and
honesty, the which do contemn or despise the word of God: and therefore
that they have stained themselves with all kind of wickedness. The which
argument is notably handled Psalm. 28. In the neglecting and contemning of the
word of God, lies the assured blot and depth of all lewdness. Solomon
therefore going fitly about to place true happiness in godliness, and to show
the most excellent use of the same, teaches that both the truth is to be
followed, and that falsehood is to be shunned: between the which and
godliness there can nothing be common. And therefore when as he says,
rather, his meaning is not to leave it unto our choice, as if it were a
certain thing indifferent, and yet that the one is better than the other: but
by this kind of speech borrowed from the common use of speaking, and usual
in the scripture, he means, that albeit superstition in sundry shows do
pretend religion, and that men do sundry ways dote under such colors, yet
that it is far better to hear God, of whom the pure and sound truth may be
received. This comparison therefore appertains unto the confuting of the
madness of man his deceitful reason, thrusting falsehood upon us under the
show of truth.

The second rule of establishing of godliness.
2 Make not have.] The second law or rule of establishing godliness, that we
avoid rashness, boldness, much babbling in matters appertaining unto God: and
contrariwise, that in things of so great weight we use advised wisdom and
modesty: and that we determine not any thing herein, but by the warrant of
the word of God going before, let us set down that for the assured guide of our
calling, let us set from hence the beginning of our faith, and life, and of all
our counsels, and let us refer all our things unto this end. Look
therefore how far godliness and the true knowledge of God do stretch unto
the governing of our whole life, to train our minds especially in the true
obedience of god, and to lead them into the way of our salvation, Nothing to
be taken in hand against the word of God.
so far also does this commandment and prohibition of avoiding those things,
the which do hinder true godliness in our minds, stretch. These things
therefore are clearly to be considered. Before he commanded us to hear, to
learn to take advice out of the word of God: now he forbids us that we take
not in hand any thing against that same manifest knowledge of the truth,
learned out of the word of God: whether God be to be prayed unto, (which is
the principal and the most honorable effect of faith) or whether any thing be
to be taught or affirmed in the church, or whether any thing also be to be don,
the which appertains unto this life, and in those things especially the which
do belong unto our calling, or whether there be any thing to be advised upon,
or to be done, that we take nothing rashly in hand without the counsel of
the word of GOD, that we meddle not with things not necessary, and not
belonging unto our calling. Finally, like as when we are carried away with
vanity, we are led from salvation, and from the true obedience of God, and
all our whole life is miserably troubled (as he has declared at large before)
so by the guidance and leading of godliness, we shall have sure ground of all
things. For it is a lantern unto our feet for our whole life. He therefore
will have rashness and hastiness to be most far from all the parts of our
life, and especially from the greatest and most excellent part. Rashness and
hastiness is the companion and waiting maid of boldness: much babbling, of
rashness. For such is the lightness of the wit of man, that look what it
has persuaded it self that it knows, although it be never so much
uncertain, it will blab it forth in such sort, as if it were most certain,
and will bewraye this vain imagination of opinion both in his talk, The
lightness of the wit of man.
and as it were show it in all his actions: and in this will boldness and
rashness most of all dote, which is far and wide from the feeling and
knowledge of her own infirmity. I speak of matters appertaining unto God, of
the which carnal men speak both more boldly, and also more largely, than of
those the which are handled in the common use of life. This rashness and
babbling does Solomon especially find fault withal namely, that we silie
souls, dare to take upon us unwisely and boldly, to prattle of matters
appertaining unto God, the which are unknown and hid from our reason: and when
as God has given unto us this singular dignity, that we may appear before
his majesty with quiet and assured minds, and to speak boldly with him as a
father, that we should not in our prayers make him a witness either of
profane thoughts, or of foolish speech. And that in this place prayer is
expressly noted, these words do show, Before God, to utter a word, or to
think: for the scripture says that we utter before God those things which
we ask of him: and he does no less hear the things which we think, then
which we utter with our mouth. For he is the searcher of the heart. Abraham
being about to speak before God, Abraham.
craves pardon at his hands to speak, and acknowledges himself to be
ashes. Contrariwise James finds fault with preposterous or disorderly
praying: ye ask, and do not receive because ye ask amiss. When as therefore
prayer is the first child of faith, it is certain that then prayer shall be
right, when as it shall be builded upon assured full persuasion of faith: and
faith does patiently hear God speaking, and hasteneth not, as the Prophet
speaks, He that believes will not hasten. The mind therefore being
persuaded what is the will of God, will ask of God those things which it
knows to be agreeable unto his will, and will not power out rash petitions or
requests before, and will patiently wayt for the issue, and will believe that
it will come in his due time. The Prophet does therefore attribute silence
unto prayer, Silence.
and James flatly commands us that we be slow to speak, ready to hear,
not commanding in deed any Pythagoricall or popish silence (that our faith
should be an unexpressed general faith, and rest upon other men's words,
requiring no reason) but in deed Christian: that namely reverently weying the
majesty of God speaking and commanding, we should suffer our selves to be
governed by him, and depend and stay only upon him. For this silence is to be
extended unto our whole life. Does God afflict or chastise us, does he toss
his church up and down with great and long troubles, does he make it subject
unto the lusts of the wicked? Let us lay out hand upon our mouth, and let us
not speak evil of God his providence: let us bridle our hastines with this
bit: If he slack, he will not slack. In the mean season let us with silence
and patience wait for the aid of the wise God both peculiarly for our selves,
and also for the whole church. This is a great point of that silence, Solomon
preaches of the holy authority of the word of God.
that we remember that we must open our ears, and that we must shut our
mouth, that is, that we must hear and hold our peace. Now this also is to be
observed, when as Solomon his meaning was by this law to establish godliness,
that he also preaches unto al men of the holy authority of the word of God,
namely that they heedefully hear the word of God, and avouch nothing in the
church, the which is not taught by him. Of this rashness and boldness are all
other doctrines guilty, what show of reason soever they do pretend. For they
speak rashly before God, and do swerve from the simplicity of the word of
God. It is therefore holy and godly silence to utter those things wisely the
which do appertain unto the doctrine of our salvation. For he does not
command us altogether to hold our peace, but he does forbid us that we do
not rashly speak any thing before God either with heart or mouth, that is to
say. If a man speak, let him speak as the oracles of God. If any man minister,
let him minister as through the power which god gives, that is, let him say
nothing in the church, the which is not agreeable unto faith, and rightly
divided, that is, not only true, and aunswerable unto sound doctrine, but also
fit for the edifying of the church. More over let him abide within the bounds
of his calling, and speak when as god opens his mouth. These bounds being
used, let hastines be avoided in speaking, the pureness of doctrine being duly
observed. Furthermore, when as the word of God ought to be a lantern unto our
feet, that is, to give light unto our whole life, and when as David used the
word of God as faithful counsailors, through whose benefit he far excelled
in wisdom: we must take diligent heed, In counsail^ taking we must not be to
hasty, but ask advise of god
that in taking counsel we have not before god: but go unto his mouth, and
ask, and obey his voice. For to much hasting and despising of sober counsel,
are in like sort blameable: of which diseases such as be sick, they pass the
bounds of their calling, they meddle with things not necessary, and do
entangle both themselves and others in most troublesome thorns and hurtful
cares. We must therefore ask counsel of God, and follow that steadfastly,
and swerve not from it any way. Thus far I think hasting to be forbidden,
both in praying unto God, and in uttering the doctrine of faith, and also in
the leading of our life: in the ordering of all which, the force and strength
of godliness bears the chiefest sway, for whose sake this hasting is
forbidden by Solomon. Hasten not therefore over thy mouth, that is to say,
prattle not any thing rashly forth with an hasty tongue, but heedefully
bethink thee what thou say, when thou appearest before God. And he speaks
according unto the custom of the law. To appear before God.
For they are said to Appear before God, the which come unto the temple. Where
God was present in the Arc. They are before God, which either pray unto him,
or do handle his word, or do think on him any manner of way. He sets the
mouth before the heart, because such is the force of rashness, that the tongue
many times runs before the mind: and he joins the hastiness or
speediness of the mouth with the hasting of the heart, because that the same
vanity is busy both in the heart, and also in the mouth. It is bred in the
heart, it bursteth forth and increases in the mouth. For many words do
increase folly. Wherefore we must neither think in our heart, nor utter any
thing with our mouth, the which may lead us from the authority of the word of
God. For both is a sin before God, for that forsooth God is both the witness
and also the judge of this lightness, as is by and by set down, Because God is
in heaven and thou art upon earth, that is, God is the beholder, the witness,
the judge: and remember thou that thou lie open unto his judgment. He makes
therefore a notable contrariety between God and earthly men, to frame our
minds unto this wise silence. Why Solomon matcheth God against men.
God is in heaven, a Lord and a judge: and thou art a mortal man upon earth,
will thou dare to mutter and murmr against GOD? Like unto these sayings: He
sees all the sons of men, he understands all their works. Again, He will
render unto every one according unto their works. For God is said to be in
heaven, not only in respect of the place, because he is set on high, and
looks down upon the heads of those that are under him: but also because
that he sits as judge in that same high throne. For in heaven are imprinted
the tokens of his divine majesty. Again, Why God is said to be in heaven.
because being freed from the dregs of this earth, he excels in most pure
judgment, whereby he may straightly look into all man his corruptions. God
therefore the judge of the world, both can, and does know and also will most
sharply punish al those which shall corrupt the purity of his word, and dare
assault heaven through their follye: but the spettle shall fall down upon
their own heads, for that they are on earth. And of al other wickedness,
boldness and rashness to corrupt the truth is the greatest: neither will God
suffer him to go unpunished, the which shall take his name in vain.
Therefore, let thy words be few, says he. He therefore matcheth sober and
still prudence against that same much babbling rashness and boldness. For in
such sense he will have few words to be uttered: as Christ in praying
condemns the much babbling of hypocrites. He garnisheth and sets out this
fond and foolish prattling with a notable similitude.

3 For like as, etc. That is to say, as dreams do weary that mind in the
night, the which was troubled with business in the day time: so men being made
drunken with prattling of many matters, are vexed as it were with the dreams of
their own inventions, and in that same multitude of words do bewray their
folly. He does therefore fitly compare the devices and vain words of men
unto dreams: like as Plato calls the vain hopes of men, dreams of them
that are awake. The cause of dreams, according unto the Philisophers.
Philosophers do make the representations of thoughts or actions of the day
time imprinted in our minds, to be the cause of dreams, or else the
disposition of the body by reason of the quality and manner of diet. And
false and vain imaginations of the mind do trouble reason, so that it
imbraceth the shadows of things in steed of the things themselves. So vain
men do persuade themselves of false things, and give themselves unto those
vain discourses, and let lose the raines unto the judgment of corrupt reason,
and so augment and increase their error. Nestorius.
Nestorius through the unwise swiftness and readiness of tongue, seeking the
smoke of popular glory or praise of the people had said in a sermon, Brag
not, o Jew, for thou have killed the son of Marie, and not the son of God,
and whilst he goes about to defend ambitiously that which he had improperly
spoken, he is carried so far with heat of words, that he rent in pieces and
pulled a sunder the natures in Christ. Euthyches.
Euthyches whilst he will amend this error of Nestorius, falls into another
extreme, that is to say, he confounds and mingleth together the same
natures of Christ, both which does plainly destroy Christ. Of this foolish
babbling there are yet apparent lamentable effects in the unhappy controversy
concerning the Supper of the Lord. For whilst they dispute even as it were
being at the point of dagger drawing, about the manner of the presence of the
flesh and blood of Christ in the supper, the proverb is fulfilled, that the
truth is lost in striving, and that unto the great hurt of the churches of
God. And from hence have sprung and also do spring all heresies, whilst many
things are curiously canuased in hard and dark disputations, and some new
thing is sought after besides Christ Jesus, and him crucified, which was the
strong and pithie eloquence of the old martyrs, the which did excel all man
his eloquence.

The third rule of establishing of godliness.
4 When thou vowest.] The third law or rule of establishing godliness,
Concerning the paiing of a vow in due time, the which in deed is spoken
according unto the custom of the law, yet no doubt it ought to be stretched
further. For he does not entreat particularly of vows and nothing else, but
of all other religious bands, wherewith our life being tied and bound is
consecrated unto God. Vows were prescribed or appointed by the law of God, as
testimonies of faith, and bands of that reverence and obedience the which we do
owe unto God, that our flesh getting too much liberty, as if it were in his
own power, should not wax more wild and unruly, but with this bridle put
into the mouth of it should be held and kept in, when as it should understand
that it was no more at his own liberty. Now this is a true and a sure vow,
the which David in his own person Psalm. 119. witnesses to have been
performed of all the faithful generally, A true vow.
saying: I have vowed unto the Lord, and will not break my vow, I will not
depart from the commandments of my God. This doubtless is a most honorable
and most holy vow, the which when as it is conceived necessarilye of all
the godly entering into the Church of GOD, and ought steadfastly to be kept in
our whole life, all diligence is to be used that it be not conceived or made
rashly of us, that is to say, we are to take great heed what we vow, when
as being received through baptism into the city of the church of God, we
take upon us to profess Christ, and by a solemn sacrament do bind our
selves unto him: Let us weigh the greatness both of the promise and also of our
estate: least that feeling the burden of the afflictions and troubles whereunto
the same is subject, we shamefully draw back our foot, as Christ gives
counsel, that when we will build, we should sit down, and reckon our
money: least that we be compelled to leave off the building begun unto the
being laughed to scorn of others. First of all therefore I understand these
words of vows simply, What vo^es betokened ^ the law.
as they were prescribed or appointed in the law: but because they were
solemn tokens of spiritual reverence and obedience, therefore I do extend
them unto that general vow of living well, that in these words this rule or
law should be enacted concerning the establishing of godliness. He which
professes godliness first of all ought to consider, that he do it not
rashly: but when as he has consecrated himself unto GOD that he steadfastly
continue all his life time in the same obedience through all the thorns and
encumbrances of afflictions. For it were better not to profess true religion,
then by shameful running away to forsake it. It is therefore a notable place,
concerning the constancy of the faithful in the profession of the truth, by
the way of contraries against the inconstancy and lightness of men, both
rashly triumphing in the light of the Gospel, and also rashly falling back
again from the same: according as prosperity or adversity does offer it
self unto them.

Hereupon are some times great heaps and companies of Christians in the
church: sometimes, as namely when affliction draws on, there are horrible
backslydings, and in a manner mere solitariness, they falling rashly from the
Church, which rashly had commen unto the Church. He says that God is greatly
offended with rash vows, namely: The pleasure of God is not in fools, that is
to say, that inconstancy and rashness of life displeases GOD: That God
does greatly detest rash vows. And therefore he warns that those things
are to be paid with a godly and holy mind, the which have been promised by
vow. The Papists.
This place concerning vows the Papists do canuas diverse ways, and by it
go about to establish their vows. I dispute not whether their vows be true
or no, whether they be to be paid or no. This notwithstanding is clear,
that they are guilty of this rashness, the which the wise man does in this
place condemn. For can any man holily vow continency, the which he has not
in his power? But hereof others have discoursed at large, and we our selves
also in another place.

5 He amplifieth and makes greater the fault of not paying a vow, saying:
That it is better not to vow, then to vow, and not to pay. That this is
impudently, to mock GOD, and therefore, that thou pullest great hurt and
punishment upon thine own head. For thus much does that kind of speaking
signify, Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin. And these words
Before the Angel, are all one with these that went before: namelye, Before
GOD: as the Greeks also have translated it, enopion tou theou, before GOD. And
this kind of speakinge sprang hereof, because GOD uses the service of Angels
in the governing of men, and so the names of the Lord and of his Ambassadors
are put one for another. Some say, that by the word Angel Christ is meant:
for that it is usual with the Fathers and Prophets, to call the son of GOD
an Angel, for that they knew him to be the Lord, promised unto the church, the
messenger of the wonderful decree concer- the deliverance of mankind, the Lord
and keeper of the church, and the almighty savior, delivering the elect from
sin and death. I judge more simply, Why mention is made of Angels.
that therefore mention is made of Angels, to amplify and increase the sin
of a rash and foolish vow, because the Angels are by God ordained keepers not
only of the affairs of men, of society it self, and of kingdoms and
Empires: but chiefly of the church it self, whose ministers they are said to
be, and sent forth for the service of the same: and therefore that they are the
beholders of all our actions, as they are said to wonder at the order of the
church, so that it shall be a matter altogether past shame, for a man to make
an Angel witness of his lewdness, or of his vain and shameless excuse. For
this is the meaning of these words: And say not before the Angel, that there
is an error, that is to say; make the Angel witness of thy shamelessness,
whilst thou excusest thine error, and do color it with certain gay
cloakes. There follows a more earnest rebuke or threatening. For why etc. That
is to say: Why will thou willingly run headlong into destruction, by
provoking God against thee, that he should be hard against thee and against all
thy doings? The interrogation or asking of a question is set down according
unto the use of the scripture, both for the stirring up of more earnest
affection, and also for adding of more force unto the sentence. The sum is,
that it will come to pass, that God will be angry, with that lying and foolish
rashness, and punish it severely. Ananias and Saphira felt this anger, the
which durst to lie unto God, and unto the holy Ghost, Ananias and Saphira.
and being constrained by no necessity, did boast and vaunte of lies. The vow
of Iephte but in an unlike case, Iephte.
had also an unhappy end, for when as he had made an evil vow, the vows
which were against the word of God ought not to stand: the which is a rule
both of instructing the conscience, and also of that obedience, the which the
Lord requires of us. Let our consciences therefore be instructed and
confirmed, and let us not make drunk our minds with the dreams of our own
devices, to turn the truth, whether the wisdom or lust of the flesh wills
us: but let us use the bridle the which Solomon puts upon us.

7. Because in the multitude.] He teaches that godliness is to be set as a
remedy most present against all the vanities wherewith this life is cu^bred
withal: of the which he makes a certain collection to this end, to show the
way of curing and healing of them: as if he should say, hitherto have I showed
how great vanities, as it were sights in a dream, do vex and trouble the
mind, and the whole life of man: and I have been somewhat long in reckoning up
those diseases: and I have showed that men perish especially through their own
fault. Against al these inco^ueniences, this only is a ready remedy, The fear
of God, the which will deliver us from all the encombrances of man his vanity:
as he says in plain words hereafter, cap. 7. ver. The fear of God.
18. He which fears God shall come out of all these, and in the end of this
discourse, he places happiness in the fear of the Lord, The end of the
whole word has been heard, Fear God, and keep his commandments: because
this is all man, that is to say, this is the sum and end of all this Sermon,
That God is to be feared, that is to say, to be worshipped with a godly and
pure mind according unto the appointmente of his law (the which is a true
definition of godliness) the which is the chief and principal end of the whole
life of man, A true definition of godliness.
and the true and sound foundation of man his felicity or happiness. In these
words therefore is the cheef point and issue of this sermon. For as before he
has showed what happiness is not, so he now teaches, What happiness is. And in
confuting of falsehood he used much more labor and diligence, then in teaching
of the truth: for as much as falsehood is of many sorts and diverse, truth is but
one, and most simple. These things therefore most breefly spoken, he sets as
a most sure and earnest demonstration against the troublesome surmises of
reason, the combats whereof his purpose was to set out with large discourse of
words. The right way of proving by demonstration does no doubt require, that
after that the matter has bin canuased and sifted more at large by granting
of particulars and supposals, and that similitudes and examples have bin used
for the making plain of the same, at the length we must come unto some one
thing that is most simple, and which cannot be improued, and therefore is
without al doubt and question: and then they that are skilful masters of
demo^stration say that the demonstration is well made. The holy ghost far more
skilful in Logike, then any of the best Philosophers.
The holy Ghost far excels the wit and diligence of all philosophers, even
the most skilful in demonstration, most wisely applying the rules of Logik and
reasoning well (whereof he is the true author, as of every gift of wit also)
unto the teaching and setting forth of the truth. Therefore he opposes or
sets these certain and short sayings as undoubted arguments against the
deceitful reasons, and fallations of corrupt reason: and therefore we ought
to embrace them as the most certain decrees of God, and not to be so much
careful about the proof as about the practice of the^. Therefore after Solomon
has breefly set them down, he by and by comes unto the use and practice of
the^, for the doctrine of godliness does not so much consist in knowledge, as in
practice, and in deed the knowledge must be applied unto practice. For what
does it profit to have known the doctrine of salvation, unless a man express
it in his life? Therefore by naming of the Fear of God, he understands true
religion and godliness, A note between true and false religion.
the which is marked out and known from the counterfeit and false knowledge of
God, False religion.
for that the one does indeed kindle a certain knowledge of God in the mind,
and causes some good words concerning God to be rife in the mouth, yet does
it not change the heart with earnest feeling of godliness: True religion.
but the other does in such sort lighten our mind, that it does renew the
heart with true newness of life. For God is known that he may be feared, that
is to say, that being known of us by his word, he should be acknowledged and
worshipped with all reverence as a father: whom namely we should love and
reverence, as one that has well deserved of us through his honorable and
bounteous liberality: that we should acknowledge him to be just, and to be
true as well in his threatninges as in his promises: to conclude, that we
should so acknowledge and worship him, as he will be acknowledged in his
word, that we may rest our selves both in his mercy and goodness, and also
bridle the wantonness of our flesh with the earnest thinking upon his
justice, that we may remember with whom we have to do. This same fear is not a
trembling before God as a judge and an enemy, whom we should be afraid of,
as of one being hateful and bitter unto us. This same servile or slauelike
fear is driven out of our hearts, Slavish fear.
by that same love wherewith we embrace god as a father, of whom as being namely
made friends with us, we are persuaded that we are loved, the holy Ghost
being our guide and master. For God is therefore feared of the faithful,
because that with him there is pardon: as the Prophet says. Psalm. 130.
The foundation therefore of this fear, is the Forgiveness of sins, the
which also is tied with an inseperable band unto Regeneration or new birth.
This is a description of the same true godliness, in the which he teaches
that the faithful have assured contentednes: and that therefore there is in it
aid enough to live well and blessedly, and that through it fit remedies are
ministered for the ouercomming of the miseries of this life, and finally he
shows that in it is contained a rule to live holily and honestly.

The doctrine.
1. Like as in the vanity of this life there can not choose but be great
trouble, Happiness cannot be found in this life.
and also unhappiness: so happiness is to be sought out of this life, as it
has been at large declared before.

2. In the fear of the Lord, that is to say, in true godliness is true and
sound contentedness, In the fear of the Lord is true contentedness.
and consequently felicity or happiness: neither can it be found else where:
but because hipocrits do counterfeite godliness, we must employ all our
diligence to learn to make a difference and to know true and right godliness,
from the visard and show of godliness.

3. These are the tokens of counterfeit godlynes, Tokens of counterfeit
godliness.
Will worship beside or without the word of God, as are the inventions and
forgeries of all superstitions, the which notwithstanding put on a false title
and show of true religion: New doctrine and b^ldnesse in teaching of strange
doctrines: hastiness and rashness in professing and receiving of religion.
Inconstancye and lightness both in rashly receiving, and disorderly giving over
of Religion.

Virtues to be matched against the blots of false religion.
4. Against these ulcers of true religion, we must set virtues, as namelye the
knowledge of the plain and cortaine truth, out of the word of God, sober and
modest silence in things that we know not: a sober and modest, and wise
utterance of the things that we do know out of ye word of God: a learned
conscience in those things which appertain unto our salvation: constancy and
gravity, in fyrmely holding the religion which we have received.

5. As invocation or prayer is a principal point of religion (for as much as
this privilege is granted unto us that we may appear before God, Invocation
or prayer.
and talk with him) so we have carefullye to labor that in the calling upon
God, we may both avoid the former blemishes, and also follow these virtues.

The third and last part of this Sermon: of the use of this Doctrine concerning
godliness, in the which he placed felicity or happiness. He makes two
parts of this use: The first is of the remedies against the outrages and
disorders that fall out in the affairs and matters belonging unto men. The
other of the way how to lead our life well and honestly.
A remedy against the tentation, the which is wont to arise of the
consideration of disorderousnesse of things. Of this remedy he will entreat
more at large hereafter, in the ninth chapter.
8. If in a country thou see the subtle oppression of the poor, and the
defrauding of judgment and justice, maruail not at the will of God: because he
on high, which is over him that is on high, marketh, and they that are on high
are over them.

9. Moreover the profit of the tilling of the earth is in all things, the King
seeks the furtherance of Husbandry.


The Exposition.
Having set down godliness as a most certain way unto happiness, now he
teaches at large the use thereof, the which in my preface at the beginning I
said was the chief point of this whole discourse. And he makes the use
hereof two fold. A twofold use of godliness.
The first namelye, that out of this true knowledge of God we should fetch
sure and fit remedies against the cumbersome and troublesome tentations the
which are wo^t to arise in our minds of the beholding of the affairs of men.
This trouble and pensiveness of mind does hinder our happiness, the which we
cannot be assured of among so sundry waves of doubting. The second use of
godliness he teaches to consist in the way to lead our life honestly: of
the which he gives certain rules both general and special. And he does in
such sort entreat of them both that he does both mingle the doctrine of the
remedies with his discourse properlye concerning manners, and contrarily:
namely so far and in such sort as the fitness of the process does require.
And this garnishing and as it were polishing of the matter was altogether
needful. For the fear of the Lord might have been showed in one word, as
it were the mark whereat we should aim and level: but because the doctrine of
godliness, is not a vain and idle contemplation or knowledge of the mind, but
is altogether active, and consists in doing effectually instructing every
point of our life, therefore the use of it was to be showed most diligently
and thoroughly: furthermore, whenas our mind is very greatly troubled with the
feeling of those outward things, and that not without great danger: it was
altogether requisite, to make hereof a more long discourse, that in so great
confusion or disorder our minds might have whereon assuredly to rest and stay.
The Wiseman therefore does here begin a new matter. He has described and
set out the vanity of men's affairs, from the which he has taught by most
strong arguments, that happiness is most far. He has showed the disease,
he was to teach the remedies. Therefore now he excellentlye teaches, how our
mind may rid and unwrap it self out of these temptations: and consequently be
at sound rest. He begins with a most sore and grievous tentation

8. If thou see,] A great tentation.
Of this tentation he had spoken in the third chap. ver. 16. etc. Namelye how
it comes to pass that in the place of judgment and justice, ungodliness
bears rule, that is to say, how law and right is often broken by the
Magistrate, the mayntayner of law and right, under the color of law, how
the guiltless are sore punished by them, under whose protection and defense
they ought to be safe from the iniuryes of lewd persons. This temptation
also greatly troubled Job, David, Jeremy. This he first touches, If thou
see a poor man, which ought to be helped with the help and aid of the
Magistrate, through the power of the more mighty, or under the pretense and
color of law, (this he calls Gezel mischphat, that is, the taking away or
breaking of law) to be oppressed in a country, and that by such as bear
the chief rule: Maruayle not at the will of God namelye, (for the Article
set before it, shows that by an excellencye a certain singular and
especial will is signified) that is, whether it seem so good unto GOD,
whether God regard these things, whether these things fall out by the
providence and power of GOD. For it is an exception of man his reason: Do
thou think that God cares for the things of men, does God see these outrages
and confusions.

An answer unto a doubt of man his reason.
The reason therefore of man, doubts of the providence of God because of these
hurlyburlies and troubles. Against this doubt Solomon sets down an
answer: Questionless (for I take this particle Ki, to be put more fully to
express the sense) he that is on high, wardeth or watches over him that is
on high, Marketh, beholds after the manner of a Watcheman, the things which
are here done by men, in his due time, or hereafter meaning to punish every
thing, and, They that are on high are over them, that is to say, over the
poor, and their subjects, men of lower condition and degree: as if he should
say: In deed Princes and mighty men, the which usurp a certain infynite
power and rule over men that are their inferiors, are no doubt higher than
their subjects: but God is higher than they. To what end? That he should
have an idle power and authority? Not so: for he is the Judge of the World:
but that he should execute most sharp punishmente upon those which do
abuse his authority, whom he marketh and notes for this purpose. For his
marking is not vain or idle. The Poet also has noted this self same as it
were course of manifold authority, Kings that are to be trembled at, have a
power over their own Flocks, and Jupiter, that is to say GOD, has power and
rule over the Kings themselves.

The sum is, that these outrages are not hid from GOD, who as he is the
maker of all things, so is he likewise the Gouernoure and Ruler of all
things, as who by his providence, does both govern all the parts of the
World, and especially watches over the affairs of men, and has regard both
of the godly and of the ungodly: and therefore that Tyrauntes, and Wrongedoers
shall not go away scotte free, with that wherein they offend against the
poorer sort, when as they are to give an accounte of their whole life unto GOD
the chief Lord and King. He therefore forbids us to Maruayle, namely in
this respect, that we should not stand as it were at a bay, in this careful
and cumbersome cogitation, or doubt of the prouydence of GOD, the which does
so much the more royallye and fully shine forth, for that it does wisely
order and dispose things so entangled and troublesome, and constantly refer
them unto a very good end. Furthermore this circu^staunce is to be weighed and
considered, That they that are on high, That is to say: Kings and all
Magistrates are over them: that is to say, are in authorytye above the rest.
For it seems to be against nature, that when as al men are of one nature, and
sprung of one original, and alike subject unto death, how it should come to
pass that they should be separated and severed with so great a difference
within themselves, and should one so greatly excel an other. The wonderful
providence of God.
In this so great inequality of men there seems to be great disorder and
confusion: in the which notwithstanding the wonderful providence of GOD
shines forth, out of so sundry kinds and degrees of men, gathering a
wonderful, harmony and agreemente. The fellowship of mankind could not
stand: one could not endure and bear an other, and therefore there should
raunge outrages of all lewdness, unless that me^ were held in as it were with
the bridle of some greater authority and power. So there must needs be
differences of such as rule and also of such as obey. For that state, where
there is no governor is the most certain destruction and overthrow of
mankind. God therefore preserves the society and fellowship of men by
distinguishing and making difference of degrees in superiors, and by laying
necessitye on both parts, in the which fellowship things are so ordained, that
neither can the superyours be without the inferiors, nor the inferyours
without the superioures by any means. The which profit in the manifold good
order of the society and fellowship of men, he notes in these words.

9. And the profit of the earth,] I will speak afterward of the sundry
Expositions of this place: I will first recite the simple and true meaning, as
it seems unto me. By this word Earth, I understand the men themselves: Earth.
as in those kinds of speeches. To go the way of the whole Earth that is to
say, to dye, as it is ordained for all men indifferently, and without
exception: and, All the Land came forth to receive David, that is to say, all
the inhabitants of the Land of Judah, and Hear O Earth, that is, all the
dwellers on the Earth, etc. the which is a fyguratiue kind of speaking: as
also by this word Them, he understood men that were inferioures and of low
degree. And he says, In all things, to signifye the common fellowship of all
men, which is manifold by distinct distances as it were and seperations of
degrees: so that the meaning is, In this difference of degrees, that the
superiors should rule the inferioures, there arises manifest profit unto all
mankind: because that in this many foldnesse and diversity, there is a great
harmonye and agreemente: and that the inferiors, are in such sort subject
unto the superioures, The superiors after a sort subject unto their inferiors.
that again after their certain manner, the superiors are subject unto
their inferioures, and so there is a mutual subjection of all men one toward
an other, as there is in the body, of all the members, albeit they have several
and peculiar powers and peculiar offices. This mutual subjection and need
that all men stand in one of an other, he shows by a fine kind of speaking:
The King serves the Field. For it is an amplyfying and increasing of the
matter in a comparison of things so unlike.

Field.
In the word Field, by a fyguratiue kind of speech, he understands Tillers of
the ground and husbandmen, which follow Husbandry, yea and al inferior
persons whom they call handicraftes men, in whom all rule is in the work of
their hands: against whom he sets the King, then whom nothing is more
high, or of more majesty among men. The sum is, that all men are tied and
knitte together with so necessary a band, that every one even of the
superiors does stand in need of the service and help of the inferiors. For
what? If Kings and other mighty men should til the earth, feed cattle, make
garments, and do other such like works? In this respect therefore the king
serves the Field, that is to say, stands in need of the help and service of
husba^dmen and base persons, so that he can by no means be without them, for
thus no doubt is the fellowship of men maintained, that same mutual need
wherein one stands of an other dryuing them unto concord and agreemente, in
as much as one altogether wants the help of an other. It is therefore a
double answer unto the question propounded, namely how it comes to pass, A
double answer.
that the magistrate abuses his authority and power against the poorer sort?
The first, that they shall give an account of their life unto GOD the chief
Lord and Judge, for that God does mark them to punish them, according unto
their deserving. The second, that the providence of GOD shines forth in this
confusion, who even by bad Magistrates does preserve the society of mankind.
Good Magistrates are indeed to be wished for (as he will say hereafter) but
it is better to endure and bear a Tyrant, Better to have a tyrant, then no
governor at all.
then to have no public power at all, whereby men may be kept in their
duetye, for Anarchi, or that state where there is no ruler, in stead of one
Tyrant, makes and armeth many, that is to say, overthrows and destroys
mankind. What is then to be done when as we are afflicted or troubled by
wicked Magistrates, We must not marvel: that is to say, we must not deny
the providence of God with angry and grudging minds, but we must do our
duetye, and hold this surely, that the Magistrate shall be most seuerelye
punished for the forsaking and breaking of his office. In the mean season,
that God a wonderful Worke-mayster, in his good time will bring forth light
out of this darkness, that is to say, will preserve the fellowship of men,
and in it, the church, even by ungodly Magistrates. This seems unto me to
be the most simple and plain meaning of this place. Other Expositions of this
place. He alludeth unto the fable of the poets, who do feine that Astraea the
goddess of Justice did first forsake the cities, and last of all the fields,
signifiing there by that neither city, nor country was void of disorder, and
un just dealing, leaving no place at all for justice to rest in.
Others do think that it is a commendation of the Husband man his life, the
which he matcheth against other trades of living, in the which there is
great vanitye: but that the tilling of the earth is most profitable, whereunto
even the King himself is compelled to serve. Which things truly I for my
part, do not see how they can agree with the things going next before, on the
which these do depend: nor how they can stand with the doctrine of this
sermon, the which condemns of vanity all trades of living, that is to say,
whatsoever is done under the Sun. And how quiet the country life is, the
poor Husbandmen do know, whom Astraea or Justice does last of all visit,
leaving first the cities: yet in the end she flewe up into heaven out of the
fields.

The country or husbandma^ his life has his commodities, and so also have
other trades of living: But Solomon his purpose was rather to reckon up their
discommodities, then their commodities. Others think that in this place is
contained a description of a good king, and that he is discerned and marked out
from a tyrant. Namely, that a tyrant does scatter and wast. But contrariwise
that a good Prince does maintain and cherish the society and fellowship of
men: and consequently the tilling of the ground, and all good arts, but what
makes these things unto the question in hand? and how will these middle
words: And the profit of the earth is in all things, hang together? But let
every man have his own judgment free.

The doctrine.
Of the providence of God in things confused or out of order, and entangled:
See before Cap. 4. ver. 16.

1 God watches over the affairs of men, God has a care of men's affairs.
and brings things confused and out of order unto a very good end.

2 God will punish with most sharp punishment the Magistrate that either does
not his duty, or entreats his subjects wrongfully. Bad Magistrates shall be
punished.


3 Albeit a tyrant be a most cruel beast, yet tyranny is less hurtful then
Anarchi, or such a state, where is no governor. The Magistrate is after a sort
subject


4 The Magistrate has no doubt lawful authority over his subjects: yet
notwithstanding in the good order of the fellowship of men, he is after a sort
subject unto his subjects. For he owes unto them a duty in doing them right
indifferently according unto law. So there is a mutual subjection of all
degrees one toward another, as of the parents toward their children, of the
master toward his servants, etc. as Paul says, being subject one unto
another, etc.

5 Against this pensiveness therefore, the which arises of the beholding of
things entangled and out of order we must set a convenient and fit remedy,
namely the earnest thinking upon the providence of God, the which blind
godlesnesse does not see.

A remedy against the vainitie of riches.
10 He that loves silver, shall not be satisfied with silver: and he that
loves to have a multitude, shall be without fruit, this also is vanity.

11 When goods are increased, they are increased which eat them: what good
then comes unto the owner thereof, but the beholding of his eyes?

12 The sleep of him that labors is sweet, whether he eat much or little:
but the fullness of the rich man will not suffer him to sleep.

13 There is an evil sickness the which I have seen under the Sun: riches
reserved unto the evil of the owners thereof.

14 And these riches do perish in the evil occupying: and he has begotten a
son, and there is nothing in his hand.

15 Like as he came forth of his mothers womb, so he returns naked thither
again: that he may go as he came, neither does he carry away any thing of his
labor, the which he has made to come into his hand.

16 This also is an evil sickness like as he came so shall he go away again: and
what profit shall he have that he has travailed for the wind.

17 Even all the days of his life he shall eat in darkness, and he shall have much
anger and sickness, and indignation.

18 Behold then what I have seen good: that it is comely to eat and drink and
to see good of all his labor, wherewith he labors under the Sun, in the
number of the days of his life, the which God has given unto him: because
this is his portion.

19 Also that God has given unto every man riches and wealth, and has given
him power to eat of the^ and to take his part, and to rejoice of his labor.
This is the gift of God.

20 For he does not much remember the days of his life, because that God
hears him in the joy of his heart.

The sixth Chapter.
1 There is an evil the which I have seen under the Sun and it is usual unto
man.

2 A man unto whom God has given riches, and wealth, and glory, and his
soul lacks nothing of al things that it desires: but God gives him not
power to eat of them, but a man that is a stranger shall eat them: this is
vanity, and an evil sickness.

3 If a man be get an hundredth children, and live many years, and the days
of his years be increased, and his soul be not satisfied with good it self,
and he have no burial, I said, an untimely fruit is better than he.

4 For he comes into vanity, and shall go into darkness, and his name
shall be covered in darkness.

5 Also for that he has not seen the Sun, nor known any thing: this has
rest more then the other.

6 And if he live a thousand years twice told, and see no good do not all men
go unto one place?

7 All the labor of man is for his mouth, and yet his soul is not filled.


The exposition.
Remedies against covetousness.
10 He that loves silver, shall not be satisfied] He sets down fit
remedies against covetousness, and that at large, as he ought to do the which
covetousness is wont to engender an endless carfulness in the mind, for the
desire of having has tainted the minds of all men, and taken deep root in
them. In this same rage of mad desire the mind cannot choose but be
miserably vexed. Many reasons therefore were to be brought together, wherewith
our minds might be strengthened against so strong a poison, and espying and
finding out the hurtfulnesse thereof, that we should most earnestly detest and
abhor it. The first reason.
The first reason, by showing the very great inconvenience that comes by it:
He which loves, etc. For the desire of having cannot be filled, and the love
of money increases, as much as the money it self increases. For this
doubtless is the property of sin, that the more a man makes of it, the
more fiersly it fares and rages. The books also of Heathen writers are full
of such refutations against this mad outrage of covetousness. The property of
sin.
He sets forth the same thing in other words: He that loves a multitude,
to wit, of money (for the Hebrewe word signifies riches, as the Latin word
Copiae is taken for wealth or riches) is without fruit, they have no profit at
all of riches, for covetous men do not use the present riches which they have,
but are tormented with the desire of wealth to come. Therefore they take great
toil, but unto no profit of theirs: for they stand always in need, being
poor in the midst of great wealth, and have no more that which they have,
then that which they have not. For they defraud themselves of the use of their
own goods: the which use notwithstanding is the true and sure profit of
riches. I let pass other expositions of the Rabines: He concludes this to be
vanity. For what is more vain, then for a man to take great toil to vex
himself? The second reason.


2 When as goods are increased.] The second reason: That the minds of rich
men are many times bereaved of the fruit even of those things the which they so
greatly love. And he uses a comparison of a bare or poor life. What has the
rich man regard unto? To hoard up great heaps of riches? What more? to live.
Also he does not think the life of poor men to be a life: and that it is
lawful for him to live at case, and to sleep a deep sleep, whilst poor
men get their living with great labor But how well those desires often times
fall out unto covetous men, Solomon teaches: to wit, that whilst riches do
increase, many servant also are to be maintained, many will resort unto
their houses, and by this means great revenues are spent with endless
charges: as in the courts of Princes, who enjoys the goods of Princes? The
Courtier. The Prince has but cloth and meat thereout: Flatterers, Sodomites,
proud persons devour the greatest part of their revenues. The kingdoms also
are entangled with great burdens of debt, neither can great tributes, and
customs suffice for the maintenance of their riot and excess. On the
contrariside, The poor man.
the poor man according unto the measure of his riches leads a thriftie and
an orderly life: so that some times he has more left at the years end, then
he which has large possessions. He sometimes shall both be combred with
greater business, and shall tie his heirs fast by the feet for debt. wicked
riches (says one) do increase, Horace calls it short wealth, because that
covetous men always lack^ some thing, albeit they have never so much.
yet short wealth has always I cannot tell what wanting unto it These things in
deed do not always fall out, yet because they sometimes fall out, they do
flatly descrie the vanity of riches. In this vanity of riches therefore, What
good is there (says he) unto their owner, that is to say: What commodity and
profit? saving the beholding of the eyes, that is to say: saving that he only
looks upon his goods, and feeds his eyes with the beholding of the^, but
receives no profit, the which he may constantly enjoy. For if the covetous man
only use his riches, he him self takes his portion, the rest that is left,
the rabble of maunch presents will consume and spoil. If he dare not use his
own goods, then shall he have less, he shall only delight his eyes with a
vain sight, rejoicing as it were at painted tables. But this is a very small
fruit of riches. After this manner the most poor may be rich, when as riches
ar showed him on this condition: Look upon these treasures, and when thou have
beheld the^ be packing. Servants that keep the door (as he says) have as good
right unto riches as this vain owner and master but in name. After this
condition and good upright dealing do the Mass priests sell their merchandise,
and do show their bread-god unto the people, and do make the people pay well
for the sight of him. Vain is the possession of riches, with the price whereof
the rich man his soul is not redeemed from death. Nay of the which he can reap
nothing besides a vain sight, and burden. Contrariwise, the poor man has
far greater use of his goods: for,

The commodities of a poor laboring life.
12 Sweet is the sleepe] That is to say, he that in small wealth gets his
living by his labor whether he eat little or much, leads a healthful life,
yea, and moreover sleeps sweetly. For sweet sleep, (as the Poet says)
does not disdain the poor cottages of country men. Health is preserved by
voidnesse of cares, honest business, sobriety, and labor. Contrariewise, the
moderate use of sleep (then the which there is none more better, or present
remedy for the cherishing of the mind) is lost in rich men, either through
too much care, or too much plenty and licentiousness. These are the pledges
of Kings and mighty men by riches: they are constrained to seek health by the
use of diverse medicines, the which in poor men, a spare diet preserves. Thus
also men find not that, which they seek in riches. Riches are often times
wastfully spent, often times also they make the life to be in deed no life,
they are hurtful unto health, they hinder the necessary functions and offices
of the body. But these things, as I have said, do not always fall out, but
many times: yet are they no obscure tokens of vanity. There is also another
stain of riches.

Another discommoditie of riches.
13 There is an evil.] This, says he, is another discommoditie of riches, that
being gathered together and kept with great labor, they turn unto the hurt of
the owners. But it is altogether vain and unprofitable to bestow great
travail upon that thing* the which will turn unto thine hurt. The which to be
most truly spoken of riches, daily examples do declare. For, how many do
procure unto themselves envy for their riches sake, and besides infinite
discommodities, at the length have their throats cut? Furthermore, riches
being gotten with great labors and cares, and left unto our children, turn
often unto their destruction also, and make a way unto infamous and shameful
poverty. The which circumstance he notes in the next verse.

14 And the riches are lost.] That is to say: In getting of riches there is
great and careful labor, so that there remains no profit unto the getter
besides troubles and encumbrances: when they are gotten, they turn not unto
the profit of the heir neither: accordingly as we many times see, many borne
of most wealthy houses to come unto great poverty. He sets down another
circumstance also, for to prove the vanity of riches, such as may plainly be
perceived.

15. and 16. Like as] We come into this world naked, and shall go out of it
naked: and shall carry away with us nothing but a winding sheet. Who sees not
this? and yet al run on in the same madness and folly. Therefore the Prophet
Psalm. 49. stirs up al men of al degrees unto the consideration of a thing
known and certain unto all men, nay the which, will they, nill they, comes
into the view and sight of al men. And this demonstration by sight the Apostle
lays before blind men, to beat back the madness of covetousness: We brought
nothing into the world, neither forsooth can we carry any thing out of the
world. All things therefore must be left behind us, the which also the
profane writer does acknowledge after his manner. We must leave the earth,
our house and loving wife, etc. And thou must in such sort go away as thou
came, and thou must not think that thou a rich man shall have any more then
I a poor man, as we come naked into the world, The beginning and end makes
all men alike.
so do we go naked out. The beginning and end makes al men equal, that they
should remember that they are mortal. What profit then shall there be that he
labors for the wind, that is to say in vain? Which kind of speaking Paul
has imitated or followed, As not beating the air: whereunto agrees this
saying in the same place, As not uncertain. And yet (alas) in those riches
which in the end thou leauest behind thee, how much toil, tediousness,
wayward and repyning indignation, is there?

17 Even all the days) They are gotten with great vexation both of mind and
body, and yet in the end are left behind. Therefore All the days of his life
he shall eat in darkness, he shall lead an unpleasant and miserable life, he shall
live miserlike, and in great carking and caring, so that even the very meat,
the which should be a pleasure in the refreshing and recreating of the body,
is unpleasant unto him: he shall shun the light and sight of men, and shall dwell
in darkness, and shall abandon the company of men, that he may spare some
thing. And much anger, He is angry, he chafeth. And sickness, grief of mind
by reason of sundry cares, is unto him, tediousnes and mad waywardnes shall
miserably vex his mind day and night, he shall wax faint with sundry cares:
neither shall he have any mean, but be al in his extremes, And rage, for
covetousness is a most unruly affection of the mind. There is therefore rage and
madness in getting of riches: great fear and trembling in keeping of them: yet
nevertheless must they be left behind us: neither will they serve the richman to
appease death, that when he comes, he will take some thing, and go his way,
as one says, who is he then well in his wits which will torment him self with
the care and toil of vain things, and such as do not profit at all? Against
this great vanity of riches he sets a true and sound remedy.

18 Behold therefore] Do you ask then what is the way to tame this desire, A
remedy against covetousness.
that makes our life miserable. Behold having tried all things, I have seen
this one thing good, that is to say, in this mortal life I have found this to
excel other things, that it is comely to eat and drink, that is to say This
only is the fruit of riches, to use them joyfully and with a quiet mind (for he
meneth not an Epicure like liberty, as we have showed at large before) that is
to say, To see good of all his labor, wherewith he labors under the Sun,
that we may freely and frankly use the goods which we have gotten with honest
labor. In the number of the days of his life, so long as we shall be alive in
this life, The which God has given him, the use of which life God has in such
sort given unto us, that he will not have us to envy and grudge our selves that
manner and course of living, the which of his liberality he has granted unto
us, and to miss turn it unto mad and foolish niggardlines. For it is a point
of care altogether void of reason and folish, to be desirous to be more
sparing, then God him self will have us: to take from our selves the use of
those things, the which God does bountifully give unto us. Because this is his
portion. This is the true and sure fruit of riches: and not that we should
either take from our selves the use of things present through vain cares and
with foolish cares determine of the time to come, stretche out long hopes
against hereafter, that then forsooth we may enjoy great heaps of riches. But
rather let us with quiet minds remember to order that which we have presently.

19. and 20. Also] That is to say, the lawful and joyful use of creatures with
thanks giving, is a singular gift of God, the which he will have us to enjoy, A
notorious wickedness.
or else he would not give it. It is therefore a notorious wickedness to contemn
the liberality of God. He then which through those pensive and unreasonable
cares does defraud and bereave him self of the use of the benefits of God,
Does not remember the days of his life, that is to say, does not remember
that the use of life is given him of God, that he should live a joyful and
quiet life: and therefore he wickedly abuses the liberality of God: Because
God ansereth in gladness, or hears, that is to say, God powers ioyfulnes
into his heart, gives matter of gladness, in that of his singular liberality he
grants unto him opportunity and fit occasion to lead his life well and
merrily. For this is the meaning of these words. So Paul speaks generally
of the benefits, the which God gives unto mankind: yet God has not left
himself without witness, doing good giving us shewers from heaven, and
fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with meat and gladness. And he the same
has showed, that the proper and peculiar use of those things belongs unto
the faithful, as we have declared in another place. God forsooth having
deserved well of all mankind, God is liberal especially unto those that are
his.
is especially liberal unto those that are his: whom he has made heirs of
all things in the world, and consequently of the world, that is to say, he
will have the use of things created to return wholly unto them: accordingly as
the law flatly commanded, that they should not come unto God but joyfully and
merrily. They therefore devour the benefits of God, and wickedly abuse them,
who being let with their desires and lusts, cannot find the pleasant taste of
them This remedy therefore does godliness teach unto the faithful, the which
is therefore in this fourth place repeated by Solomon. The which saying, wills
us to use things according unto the ordinance of God, as meat, drink, marriage,
and other things which belong unto this life, and to follow our calling with a
good conscience and faith. As for the issues and falling out of things, which
are not in our power, to commend them unto God, as the rule commands. Commend
thy life unto God, and he will do it. He does not therefore teach us to cast
aw^y riches, to lay aside Magistracy, to put away our wife, to forsake our
family: but according unto the compass of our calling to do that which
appertains unto our duty: soundly to enjoy the benefits of God, when we
have them: patiently, to bear the want of them, when we have them not, and not
to murmr against God: but to beg and look for all these things at his hand by
faith, so far forth as he shall know them to be expedient for his glory, and
for our salvation. Therefore neither labor, nor the care of labor is
condemned, but immoderate care touching the issue or end, What it is that is
h^re forbidden.
the which through either foolish persuasion by industry and diligence, or by
fortune, does assuredly promise it self an happy end, or else when as it is
vexed with distrust, and a care besides our calling, namely mad busy medlinge
having to do with things not necessary, and not belonging unto our calling,
and thereupon disquieting the mind. Let us have a care unto our affairs both
public and at home, let us get goods for our children with diligence and
labor: but let us not be grieved in mind, neither let us attribute unto our
selves the issues and falling out of our affairs, neither let us settle our
minds upon the love and desire of fleeting and vading things: let us use
things present with thanks giving, and leave things to come unto the
providence of God, who is more careful for us, then we our selves are, and
will never forsake us in our calling. This is a true most present remedy
against the deadly poison of covetousness.

The sixth Chapter.
He sets down furthermore another disco^moditie of unhappy riches, and the
same very notable, if any other may be found in this mortal life, the which
the preface does show.

1 There is an euil] A very great in deed and most miserable calamity, with
the snares whereof notwithstanding men many times are entrapped. He describes
therefore a rich man, the which wants nothing unto a pleasant and quiet life,
and yet does miserably vex him self, of which men the world is full.
Therefore he says: It is usual or common unto man.

The covetous man has no use of his riches.
2 A man unto whom God has giuen] He declares this discommoditie (of the
which he has entreated many times already) that the covetous person has no
use of his riches, yea, and that it is all one with him, as if he were
altogether without them, in as much as they are given of God to be used. And he
amplifieth and increases this unprofitable use of riches by a double
circumstance, for that neither the covetous man him self whilst he lives
(for he is altogether given to snudging and sparing) does use them, nor when
he is dead his heirs, that is to say, either his children, or such as lawfully
do succeed him: but strangers many times. The hope of children, in the which
parents after a sort do seem to be borne again, does thrust so sharp a spur
into the minds of men to get goods, that they seek ways and means for their
children to live honestly. But God very often disappointeth this hope, that we
should know that children are his gift, Children the g^ft of God.
and especially good children: and therefore make accounts, so far to have
care of our children, that we place all our hope both of our selves and also of
them in the immortal and almighty God, as who according unto the tenor of
his promise, is a father as of the fathers, so also of their children. It is
therefore a mad thing to have a mad care for thy children, the which thou
know not whether they shall live or no. So the Poet says very well: The
sparing and too pinching person for the care of his heir, is like unto a mad
man. He adioyneth an amplification of this vanity.

3. 4. and 5. If he beget, etc.] Be it, says he that the covetous man has
issue (for he puts an Hundredth, a certain number for an uncertain) let
him live never so many years, yet if he never use his riches, what is it else
then if he had never been? He joins life with burial, elegantly to signify
all the points and seasons of time, so that nothing at all is excepted, in a
kind of speaking commonly used, as when we say: He was nothing worth, neither
in his life nor in his death, to signify that such a man is nothing worth at
all. For so I take this kind of speech, And he have no burial. A similitude.
He garnisheth and sets out the condition of a covetous person, by the
similitude of an untimely birth, that the estate of the couetouse man may be
seen to be far worse then it. He says that the untimely birth comes in
vain, and that it goes into darkness, and that his name is covered in
darkness (for these words are to be understood of untimely birth, and not of
the covetous man) that is to say, that it dies, before it sees the light, as
he says in the next verse, that it neither has seen the sun, nor known any
thing, that is, that it had no feeling and in this respect that the untimely
birth has more rest, which was void of the miseries of this life, with the
snares whereof the miserly covetous person is entangled.

6. And if he live, etc.] Although he continue out never so long a time in
living, yet must he in the end yield unto the necessity of death death at the
length will catch him, albeit he strive never so much against it, and be never
so sore afraid of it. And death, the which unto the faithful is the beginning
of a better and a more happy life, unto those covetous misers, and profane
Edoms, the which prefer a mess of broth before everlasting life, shall be an
entrye into most unhappiness, and, not as they suppose, the last end of
misery: because that they place the end of their desires in this mortal life
Therefore they live most miserably, the which whilst they are alive enjoy not
their goods, The miserye of such as use not their goods.
in as much as they are given by god unto men for this. Therefore he says.

7. All the labor, etc.) As if he should say, therefore every man does labor and
take pain, that he may have means and ability to lead his life commodiously:
and yet the covetous person is so mad and foolish, that he is never
satisfied or filled. And to what end I pray you serves his abundance: for
there is no use of that which is over and above. Therefore the truth said:
Beware and take heed of covetousness for whenas goods do abound unto any man,
his life does not consist by his goods, and in an other place: Let your manners
be far from covetousness, be ye contented with things present. And that
acording unto the measure the which nature prescribes, the which doubtless is
content with a little, having wherewith we may be nourished and covered, the
rest are unprofitable burdens, and excrements of mad desire. And who I pray
you would take so many and so great labors for a thing unprofitable?
Therefore I understand these words For his mouth, of the things which do
appertain unto this life, for the maintainaunce of the same, wherewith a man
may nourish himself. Others expound these words otherwise, Other
interpretations.
for the manner and measure, the which signifycation is in deed usual unto
the scripture: so that the meaning should be, That unto all men there is
appointed a certain measure, according unto the compass whereof he ought to
labor, and for his power continue in labor according unto his calling. For
there are distinct and several duties of persons and also of ages.

A child ought to labor one way, a man an otherway, a magistrate an other way,
a private person an other way. So then he calls us back from the care of
other men's matters unto our own duties, and would will us chearefullye to
apply our selves in our own labor and task, being persuaded of the
goodness of God, and content with our own estate, Against busy meddling with
other men's matters.
and finally would condemn busy medlynge with other men's matters, of
which disease the greatest part of men are very sore sick. Both expositions
are agreeable both unto the words, and also unto faith. Let the Reader follow
whether he best likes.

The doctrine.
Profit by the knowledge of the discommodities of covetousness.
1 The discommodities of covetousness being known, do cause us the more
earnestly to detest covetousness. Therefore they are to be learned out of the
word of God, and by well practiced experience: neither are we so to use the
matter, that after the overthwart custom of men, we closely let in into our
minds and manners, covetousness under the title and color of good husbandry.

Strong and sure proofs of the vanity of covetousness.
2 The insatiable desire and burning lust of having, the restless and raging
carfulness, bereauing us of the true use of the creatures, and withholding
our mind and body from needeful rest, and vexing them both with endless
discommodities: riches hoarded up unto the hurt of the owner which are gotten
with great and pensive labor, and when they are gotten are kept with infinite
cares and pains, and yet do forsake their master in his greatest and most
extreme necessity: to be short, no use of them, neither unto our selves alive,
nor dead, when as they are most often left unto a stranger, are they not
strong, and in deed tried proofs of that vanity, which is in covetousness?

Remedies against these discommodities.
3 Against these discommodities godliness yeldeth present and fit remedies:
namely, that we should use and enjoy with a quiet and merry mind things
present, acknowledging with thanks giving, God to be the author of those
benefits, and our father, giving unto us this privilege, to use this world as
the heirs of this world, that we should follow our calling, go about with all
diligence and industry to do those things the which God shows us to be
belonging unto our duty: and that we commit the issue and falling out of
things unto his providence, meddle with nothing beyond our calling, yea, and in
our calling also that we abstain from things not necessary, that we use
prosperity joyfully, take adversity patiently, as at the hands of our father:
and finally, that we so use this world, as not using it, with thankful minds
receiving from God the things themselves unto that end, whereunto they were by
him ordained, as pledges of that same better life, the which we know to be
laid up for us in heaven. So we shall use the world, and not abuse it, as the
most part of men is wont to do. This is a golden saying of Augustine:
Augustine.
That riches, lest they should be thought to be evil, are given also unto the
good: and that they should not be esteemed great, or the chiefest jewels, to be
given also unto the bad. And again that they are taken from the good, that
they may be tried: and from the bad, that they may be grieved.

A Remedy against the vanitye of the knowledge of man.
8. What is there more unto a wise man then unto a fool? What shall it
profit a poor man having knowledge to walk before them that are alive?

9. The sight of the eyes is better then the soul that goes away: this also
is vanity, and vexation of spirit.


The Exposition.
8. What, etc.) A new reproof of the vanity of man his knowledge, the which
Solomon had noted before. The particle Ki is to fill up the sense for, surely,
truly: In what thing I pray you is a wise man better then a fool, what is
there more unto a poor man having knowledge to walk before them that are
alive? He matcheth a wise man against a fool: garnishing and amplyfying the
self same thing, he calls a poor man knowing to walk before them that are
alive, him which either excels other men in a certain singular knowledge of
things, or, the which knows how to live among me^: which things do very
well agree together, and do iumpe with a philosophical wit: as the more
sound Philosophers do show, who playnelye teach, that Philosophy is not a
quite and clean giving over of meddling with all things in the common wealth:
but that it does especially consist herein to prescribe a way of ordering our
Affairs, Wherein philosophy does especially consist.
both pryuate and public, and further that nothing does so much misbeseeme
a Philosopher, as rugged and rude sternenesse, that is to say, to have no doing
nor fellowship with men carrying a strange and big countenance: when as
there should be in him good, gentle, mylde manners, fit for society and
fellowship of life. So he should describe or set out a true philosopher by
his true notes. He calls him poor because it comes often to pass, that
they which give themselves wholye unto contemplation of things, do forslew
their family, and are poor: as experience shows, that learning is praised
in deed, but yet is a cold.

And this he speaks very aptlye and fitlye, having regard unto that which
went before. For he had described the folly and madness of a rich covetous
person. Well then says he, let some wise man come forth, yea and that such a
one as with so great study gives himself unto the earnest contemplation and
knowledge of things, that he has cast aside al desire of riches, and is poor,
has all the notes of a true philosopher: what profit has he more then that
same folish and mad rich churl? Experience will answer: just nothing. Not that
there is not a great difference between the^ both, and that the condition of
that same true Philosopher is not far better: but he speaks of things
belonging unto men, after the manner of men, according unto the outward
appearance and show of things falling out unto men, as I have often said
already. For what profit comes there unto Philosophers by their deep and
high knowledge of things? What profit that same bare knowledge of things (I
call it bare, being separated from the true knowledge of the true God. For so
it entreats of matters belonging unto men, considering them barely and
nakedly in themselves alone, as they say) brings, he teaches by and by:

9 Is better] The sum is, that sure and sound knowledge of things does
far excel the deep and high discourses of sharp witted men. The sight or
seeing of the eyes, what it means.
The sight or seeing of the eyes he calls the certain and proved knowledge
of things, as it were set before the eyes themselves, the certainty of the
very things themselves, for that it is before the eyes. The soul or mind
going away, he calls that same quickness and sharpness of the wit of man,
the which diversely busieth it self in the searching out of things, and is
never at rest: as the manner of deep and sharp wits is, which never make an
end of seeking, but are in continual and perpetual moving and occupying of
themselves. He therefore says that it is better to know the things
themselves as they are, then to wander too and fro in the searching out of
things: as the Philosophers do, which run through all Nature, and find not
where to settle their foot. Such is the giddye and harebrain lightness and
unsteadfastness of the wit of man, seeking out things that are and things that
are not (as are many of the forgeries and inventions of Philosophers)
contemning and despicing of the certain and constant knowledge of things, that
is to say, the true sight of things. Therefore he prefers a certine fetled,
stayed, and sound knowledge of things, such as experience teaches, A sound
knowledge is better then a wavering imagination.
before the wavering imagination of deep and sharp wits, the which can never be
at rest: and he says that in the sciences themselves the sight of the eyes
is better that is to say, that it is better to know and understand things, as
they are in deed, than to wander and roue out further in the searching out of
them: by which seeking there comes no greater satiety or fullness no not unto
the most sharp witted person, then unto the fond and folish miser telling his
coin: neither shall there be any more profit unto true contentedness of
mind in the torn and ragged garment of a Philosopher, then in the riches of
the covetous churl. For both are fed with the wind: as he says, that This
is vanity, to wit the unstayed and uncertain lightness of fantastical and
curious heads. For it were better for them to know themselves, and dulye to
order their familye, the which is usual in the common course of life: then to
trifle about unprofitable matters, and amongst these high speculations to fall
into the ditch, as did the Philosopher, Solomon does not simplye condemn all
Philosophy.
which was so deep in his contemplation and gazing upon the stars. Yet he
does not simplye and precysely condemn all Philosophye, but shows a blotte
of unprofitable searching: against the which he sets a remedy namelye
certain and sound knowledge of things such as godliness does teach out of
the word of GOD, laying before us the way of salvation, and the mean how to
frame our life well and happilye. This seems unto me to be the most plain
and simple meaning of this place. These are the tokens of faith so sure and
manifest unto the faithful: that even in this life amongst diverse combats
of the flesh and the World, yet they are said to sit with Christ in
Heaven: to wit through that same most certain full persuasion of faith, the
which sets before our eyes as if they were present, things that are most
far off. All the sen^es may be deceived, but the judgment of faith is
never deceived. This truly is a sure sight of the eyes. By how much
therefore is it better to know these things, then to run into the endless
laborynthes or mazes of subtilties passing away uncertainly too and fro? There
is therefore a most present remedy in the fear of the Lord, against the
unprofitable speculations of Philosophers, namely to know Jesus Christ, and him
crucified, and with forgiveness of sins to join true and earnest newness
of life.

Other interpretations I of purpose ouerpas the which the Reader may seek in
other Expositers, but in my judgment they go from the true meaning of this
place. And therefore I would not spend words in wast in reciting of them.

The Doctrine.
1. The condition and estate of man is no less unhappy then his folly, for
both of them albeit after a diverse way, do go astray from the right end. He
must therefore seek remedies of this vanity without himself.

2. A remedy against the uncertain knowledge of man.
Against the fleeting rashness of men their speculations, that is to say
uncertain knowledge, Godliness sets a certain and fit remedy, namely the sure
and certain knowledge of salvation, and the rule to frame our lives well and
blessedly in the word of God. It shows the end, and the way to come unto
that end, namely Christ, which of his father is made unto us wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption, so that we may most safely rest
and stay our selves in this short way and hedge in our selves within the
bounds of his wholesome knowledge, that we range not out, nor go either to
high or to low* in as much as the word is near unto us, and most certain
knowledge in our mouth and heart. This namely is that word of Faith, the
which we preach, as the Apostle says. The other points are to be ^et from
the first chapter, whereas he dealte more at large concerning man his knowledge.

A remedy against the vanity of man his Prudence.
10. That which is, the name of it has bin named already, and it is known
that it is man: and he can not strive with him, which is stronger then he.

11. Surely many words increase vanity, what is there more unto a man?

The seventh Chapter.
1. For who knows what is good for man in this life, in the number of the
days of the life of his vanity, and he has made them as a shadow? For who
will show unto man what shall be after him under the sun?


The Exposition.
10. That which is.) He enters into a new discourse. For as it is a reproof
of the prudence of man, so is it a remedy against the vanitye of the same. Of
the which vanity he has entreated at large before. He beats back therefore
the bragges and vauntes thereof by laying bars in the way of it. The title
of the prudence of man, wherewith he proudly vaunteth himself, is honorable
or of great majesty, I have made my Works great, and, I have bin great. For
politik men put such a trust in their own prudence and industrye or wit, The
vain confidence of worldly wise men.
that they think they can govern and order not only their own matters, but
also the whole world, and do seem unto themselves now no longer to be men.
The wise man replyeth: That which has been, the name of it is named already,
and it is known that it is man. Some understand these words generallye of
the things themselves, which were ordained by the firm and strong decrees of
God, so that they cannot be changed: for example whereof man is alleged. By
the word Name, the substance, quality, and breefely all accidents and
effects of a thing are understood.

I for my part, howsoever I think that these words generally may aptly be
spoken of the things, yet do I think them more simply to be expounded of man,
in this sense: whosoever at length they were, the which have been in times
before, and have every where obtained great famousnes of name, or whosoever
they be that now are, doubtless they were, or are nothing else but men. We
need not go far for the proof of this matter: this is known unto all men. And
that it may be better perceived what he would have to be understood by the
word Man, that is to say, that man should remember his estate, he adds, And
he cannot strive with him that is stronger then he. As if he should say:
let men take heed with whom they have to do, and whether they can attempt
any thing of their own industrye and wit, they shall find no doubt that
they have to do with God, whose Majesty does far exceed their power and
authority. When as they despise other men in regard of themselves, as being
inferior unto them, let them call to remembrance, that God is above them,
with whom they cannot strive, but that they must by and by be overcome: for
Death the Baylife of that most sovereign Lord and King, shall make these
lusty gallants, Death makes all men alike.
and such as think themselves shoased out from the common condition of men as
it were, death I say shall make them equal with other men, I have said (says
the Prophet) ye are Gods, and the sons of the highest all of you, but ye
shall die like men. And of purpose he uses the word Adam, whereby the common
sort of men is signified, as namelye base and mortal. Those famous Giants
therefore, and most stout persons, are men: and as they were taken out of the
earth, so shall they return unto the earth again. The majesty of God being
opposed or set against this miserable baseness of condition, is of great
force to beat down the pride of man his prudence. And albeit that man his
boldness do build up great heaps of fair reasons, and glorious shows of high
speeches, to set a fair face upon the baseness of his condition, yet the wise
man witnesses, that all these are used but in vain.

11. Surely words] what is there more unto a man? what profit may there come
thereby unto the^? Can they bring to pas that when as they are but men, they
shall not be subject unto the common estate and condition of the life man? An
other exposition,
It may also be otherwise expounded, Many words, that is to say, many things,
according unto the propriety of the hebrew tongue, do increase vanity, do more
bewray their folly: so that the sense should be, That all the aid and help of
man is in vain set against God: that the store of wealth, honors, friends,
fellowships, and other aids are but vain, if they be set or matched against
God: yea breeflye, vain shall all the attempts and endeavors of men be.

This shall be the first remedy against the pride of man his prudence, The
first remedy against the pride of man his prudence.
that we think that we have to do with God: that we are men subject unto the
power of God, and that therefore it shall be in vain, whatsoever we shall attempt
against him. Therefore that it is safe, to commit our selves unto his
providence and to live mindful of our calling in such sort, as is acceptable
unto our Lord: and when as al things stand most constantly and steadfastly by
his laws and decrees, that we crave and look for at his hands, the success
of all our counsels and affairs, so long as we shall be obedient unto his
voice* and commandment, calling us unto his obedience. On this foundation our
affairs shall surely stand: and in this remedy we shall find true firmness
and strength in our selves: contrariwise mere vanity in our own wisdom. Now
he yeldeth a reason of the former saying*

The seventh chapter.
1. For who) A most evident and plain argument of the vanity of man. For who
dares promise himself that he shall have perpetual prosperity and honor,
An evident argument of man his vanity.
wherein he excels other men. For this circumstaunce I think to be noted.
Days he said, and not years; more lively to express the shortness and
vanitye of life. He says flatly the number of life, yea and says expressly, of
his vanity, that he may the more show that life is vain: because it many
times comes to pass that after certain years of an happy and prosperous
estate, there comes misery rushing on in the end, for the day (as he says)
is sometime a mother, and sometime a stepmother. They therefore which have had
their childhood and youth famous, and have come^ unto man his age atchiuing
notable and prosperous exploits cannot tell whether they shall have a shameful
and miserable old age, in as much as the life of man is a Shadow, that is to
say, uncertain, wavering, chaungeable. And this is attributed unto God, by
whose providence all things are disposed and ordered. Al things therefore
belonging unto men are a shadow, subject unto infinite changes, God alone
without change.
when as with God alone there is no change, or shadow of turning (as James
says) that namely we mortal creatures should earnestly think upon the
immortal and unchangeable life, the which is laid up for us by God in heaven,
and that we should not be so sottish, as to bound our hope and happiness
within the commodities of this vadinge and changeable life. The pageant of this
life of ours is full of these chaunges, in the which those which are more
famous and of higher place, especially, are many times examples of horrible
misery: for of so many millions of men, and in so long space of years,
Pompeius.
Pompeius was not alone to wonder at the inconstancy of this life, when as in
all ages, there are most notable examples thereof, and many confessions of
men, yet no man can, (as he did after the Pharsalical overthrow running away)
accuse and find fault with the providence of GOD. For these changes of life
are not a play of Fortune at all-aduentures, but are governed by the certain
judgment of God, albeit unto us unknown. It is more safe betimes to think on
the vanity of our life, and whereas we want wisdom to fly unto the
providence of God, in the which no doubt we shall find true firmness. The
prudence of man cannot of it self avoid these rocks in so dangerous a sea.
In the departing out of life also, that is to say, in death there is a more
huge gulf, and such as cannot be passed thorough, so that the prudence of man
must needs be swallowed up in this wave: For who can show unto man what shall
be after him under the sun? That is to say, What estate, when he is dead,
there shall be in this life, to his heirs namely, for whom he would
provide? That this is the plain meaning of this place, both the tenor of the
argument, and the propriety of the words, from which we are at no hand to
depart, does declare. For I do not agree unto them, which do refer these
things unto the wicked and godless persons, who stand in doubt whither their
souls shall go. I simply understand it of the carfulness of the wisdom
of man, the which goes about to provide for her self, and for those that
belong unto her: but she is deceived in both. For neither whilst man is a
live, is he tossed up and down in so mighty waves of cares, for any profit
unto him self: neither after death does he provide for those which are his
whose estate, he cannot tell what it shall be: but does every foot hamper him
self in new snares of doubting, whilst he goes about by his own prudence
or Wisdom to measure the issues and fallinge out of things. For so do I
consider these words: After him, and Under the Sun: neither do I see, how
it can be referred unto the other life to come. A great tentation in parents
departing out of this life.
Parents going out of this life feel a great tentation about the care for
their children, which they leave behind them, as namely, whereunto they shall
come. Against this tentation the earnest thinking on the providence of God,
whose blessing is a most assured and most fruitful inheritance, is a most
present remedy.

The doctrine.
The remedy then against the vauntes and pride of man his prudence or
wisdom, is that we know our selves to be men, that is to say, that we
diligently weigh and consider the baseness of our condition and estate: the
which then at length shall be well known and seen of us, if we understand
that we have to do with God, and earnestly set his majesty before us: with
the brightness whereof al those shadows and shows of greatness and strength
will doubtless vanishe quite and clean away. Let us know that it shall be
well provided both for our selves, and ours, after that we shall be departed
out of this life, if we shall establishe our strength and steadfastness in the
providence of God.

The seventh Chapter, from the second verse. A remedy against the vanity of
man his pleasure.
2 A good name is better then good ointment: and the day of death, then the
day, in which a man is borne.

3 It is better to go unto the house of mourning, then unto the place ^f a
feast: because that it is the end of all men, and he that is alive will lay
it to his heart.

4 Anger is better than laughter; because that through the heaviness of the
countenance, the heart shall be made merry.

5 The heart of wise men is in the house of mourning, and the heart of fools
in the house of joy.

6 It is better to hear the rebuke of the wise, than that a man should hear
the song of fools.

7 For as the crackling of thorns under a pot, so is the laughter of a fool,
and this also is vanity.


The exposition.
He falls into a new discourse with a most pleasant joining of this that
follows with that which went before. Having spoken of the remedies against
the prudence or wisdom of man, against the which in this respect he did
oppose, or set mad joy and pleasure, now he teaches fit remedies against this
foolish and immoderat joy.

2 Better is] The use of sweet oyntmentes was praised in times past, and was
had in great price: Sweet oyntmentes in times past came especially from Syria.
and Syria especially yielded these commodities. Against the pleasure therefore
the which is delited with sweet odours, he sets the sweet smell of a good
name, the which he says far to excel them, as if he should say: Do thou
seek sound and true pleasure? Live so that thou may get a good name, and
without al doubt thou shall enjoy most great gladness, most great pleasure. But
unto them that are given unto pleasure, the fear of death is horrible, and
unto those especially, the which abound in plenty of riches. Therefore the
wise man adds very well: That the day of death is better and more excellent
then the day of birth: of which words the force and meaning is: That it is
better to think upon death, then to triumph in rejoicing pleasures. That this
is the true order and knitting together of this place: and consequently, the
right meaning, the words that go before compared with them that do come after
do declare. For he frames up all these things together to beat down the
rashness of triumphing and rejoicing pleasure, to the garnishing and
amplifying of the matter. Speaking unto men of matters concerning me^, he
deals after the manner of men. He notes not expressly (the which
notwithstanding is the foundation of our faith) everlasting life: he says
only that which experience teaches to be true, when as death swalloweth up
all men, that this even in death remains as a monument of man his felicity
or happiness, if a man have so lived, that the remembrance of him being dead
is praise worthy and commendable. For detestable and very miserable is the
remembrance of such as have lived like Sardanapalus, Nero, Heliogabalus.

3 It is better to go] That is to say: It is far better and more profitable
earnestly to think upon death, and to feel the encumbrances of the condition
of man, and to have experience of these discommodities both in our selves, and
also in others, then to fill our minds with delites as they do, which give
themselves to banquets, that is to say unto pleasure. For by the name of Feast,
he understands all kind of pleasure, among the which solemnities feasts
have the chief place. The purpose therefore of Solomon is, The purpose of
Solomon.
to call them back from the vanity of pleasure: and because that all of us by
nature are carried thereunto, to put a bit in the mouth of the lustiness of
the flesh, least it fling away a gallop with these as it were spurs of
delites. It shall therefore be a good remedy against these outrages of
pleasure. Consider what is the estate of the life of man, behold how many
heaps of dead bodies it has, we shall not always banquet and laugh. And why
this cogitation or thought is profitable, he sets down a reason: Because
that it is] The meaning of these words is plain, That at deaths there is an
image and representation of man his frailty and weakness, whose as it were
last end death is: namely, that in the things which befall unto other men,
every one should be put in mind of his own condition and estate. Of which
matter all men ought especially to think, so far as they will have
themselves very well provided for. Therefore he says: He that lives will
lay these things etc. That is to say, every man, so long as he remains in
this life, All me^ ough^ daily to have death before their eyes.
ought earnestly to think on this matter, and daily to set before him the
image of the common condition of all men, that is, of death, one even of the
blind Heathen has said: that Philosophy is the meditation or thinking upon
of death. We doubtless may say better and more truly, that it is a most
excellent gift of Christian verity, diligently to think on death, to the end
that we should so live as if we were to dye: and therefore to yield accounts
unto God of our life.

The doctrine.
1 A good name is a most pleasant fruit of life, because it commends a man
both when he lives, and also when he is dead, A good name is a most pleasant
fruit of life.
and an if any kind of pleasure be to be desired, that one is especially to be
wished for. We ought therefore to pr^f^rr^ far before all the pleasures of
riches, delights, and honors, this pleasure of a good name, the which we do
get by living well, temperately, ^ justly: and therefore especially to labor
about this thing, not that we may excel other men in riches, honors, and
delites, (the which do leave us at the last peril of death) but that we may so
live, that the remembrance of men that are alive, the which is acceptable unto
us, may witness that we have lived well, and that their good and frindly
speaking of us, may represent us as if we were alive, unto the minds of men.

2 But this is humane felicity: the which then at length is most sure, if it
stay upon this foundation, that our names are written in the book of life.
For this is a most sweet promise, common unto all the faithful in Christ
their head: Thou shall not suffer thine Holy one, or thy merciful to see
corruption. These delites therefore of eternity remain for them which have
led their lives godly and holily. The day of death is better unto them then the
day of birth. For when as no man can be said to be blessed and happy before
his death and last end, and in as much as this life is passed through infinite
dangers and shipwrackes of perils and miseries, No man happy before his death.
he is happy, which having commendably sailed over the sea, enjoys the
haven: whereas otherwise he that comes into life, is carried from the haven
into the maine, unto sundry and manifold kinds of misery.

The Exposition.
4. Anger is better] These things do plainly agree with that which went
before, and are only added to garnish and set out the matter with all. What
Solomon means by anger.
By the word Anger he understands just indignation against sin, which the
Greeks call Nemesis. For he does not speak of the corrupt affection of anger,
the which James denies to work the righteousness of God. For such an anger
is a madness, and that in deed most hurtful. He means therefore that
anger, of which it is spoken in another place, Be angry and sin not, etc.
Against this he sets laughter, that is to say, immoderate and intemperate
joy and gladness. He furthermore sets down a cause, namely for that the
end of the same holy sadness is many times joyful, and contrariwise the end
of madness and frantike joy and gladness lamentable and sorrowful. How true
this is, experience does too abundantly teach. David living idle and at ease,
David.
whilst he makes much of himself, and gives over himself unto pleasure,
lying, as it is likely in the lap of Bersabe, got unto himself great harm
thereby: but when he was sad and heavy being touched in conscience for his
sin, he diligently gave himself unto the making of Psalms, by occasion of
his wholesome heaviness he made assured matter of gladness for himself, and
for the church. There is therefore a certain sadness or heaviness according
unto GOD, the which must be set against the mad and frantic pleasure of
the flesh. Unto this purpose he adds:

The duty of the faithful.
5 The heart of wise men, etc.] That is to say, The faithful ought so to frame
themselves, that their minds may be stricken with a touch of the feeling of
the miseries the which are befalling unto man: and so fortify and strengthen
themselves, that they may be ready against the assaults of all chances and
adventures, and walk wisely among the thorns of this world: whereas
contrariwise the unfaithful, being made drunken with the unconstant joy of
the world, do with a blind heat and rage entangle themselves in the very
nets of calamity and miseries. He does therefore commend a certain wise
sadness: and condemns an unwise and mad gladness: the end whereof is gnashing
of teeth. His meaning is not to let loose the bridle unto the intemperate
waywardnes of those men who being never contented with the gifts of God, The
waywardness of some.
and the present state of things, seek every foot new causes of complaint for
this saying is not against that truth: Rejoice always. Yet notwithstanding
his purpose is to condemn the frantike and foolish joy of worldly men, The mad
joy of the world.
the which being brought asleep with a deadly slumber, mock at the
judgments of god, and do turn his threatenings into laughter. The feeling of
affliction and trouble is wholesome, although it be joined with sorrow: yet
notwithstanding must we so weep, that in the midst of death we are to
remember the goodness of God, who does wisely dispose all the seasons of our
life. Now he sets down a new circumstance.

6 It is better] Rebukes are wont to be unpleasant unto the flesh, The flesh
can not away to be rebuked.
the which pleasure especially cannot abide taking these pricks very
griuously. Contrariwise the wise man teaches: that the rebukes of the
faithful are better then the flatterings and praises of worldly men, the which
he means by the word Song. This same dissolute flattery which cannot abide
to be reproved brings many men unto destruction: on the other side, earnest
and wise rebuking is a most present remedy for the healinge of minds. So
far off is the Prophet from thinking a miss of the rebukes of the godly,
that he accounts of them as of a most sweet and precious oil.
Let men set this before the^ in the midst of their delites, and let them
rather like the freeness of reproving, then the smoke of fair and flattering
soothing. Let the righteous strike me (says the Prophet) in mercy: and let
the precious oil rebuke me: it shall not break mine head.

7 In the seventh verse he garnisheth and sets out the vain laughters of
profane men with a notable similitude, and shuts up this discourse after
his manner. That there is great vanity in this affectation and seekinge after
pleasure: to the end we should use fit remedies against it, such as hitherto
he has prescribed.

The doctrine.
A remedy against the vanity of pleasure.
The remedy therefore against this vanity of pleasure, is, that we earnestly
think upon the framing of our life well and honestlye, whereby we shall reap
most great fruit namely the most sweet savor of a good name. Let us set
before our eyes the common calamities and miseries of life, and let us persuade
our selves that they do appertain unto us: that among the delites of this
world we leave a place for these cogitations: Thou shall dye, Have regard
therefore that death may be unto thee an entrance unto eternal happiness: Let
us hear the voice of our God, daily reproving us, both by his word through
the ministry of his servants, and also by the holy ghost every foot
calling upon our conscience, and putting us in mind of our duty, and let us
obey him whilst we may: let us learn to tremble at his judgments: finally
let us think that this conscience of our duty, a most excellent effect
whereof is contentednes and quiet of mind, is of all pleasures far the
greatest. From thence he enters into a new discourse, Of the remedy against
this abashment wherewith our minds are cumbred by reason of the outrages,
wherewith this life is sundry ways shaken.

A remedy against this abashment of mind, the which arises of the feeling
of the troubles and disorders the which are incident or befalling unto men.
8 Surely oppression causes a wise man to go mad, and a gift does undermine
the heart.

9 The end of a thing is better then the beginning thereof, better is one that
is long suffering in spirit, then he that is proud in spirit.

10 Hasten not in thy spirit to be angry: because that anger rests in the
bosom of fools.

11 Say not, what is the cause that the former days were better then these:
because that thou do not in wisdom ask concerning this.

12 Wisdom is good with inheritance,, and it is the excellency of them
that see the sun.

13 Because that a man shall rest in the shadow of wisdom, and in an hot
shadow: but the knowledge of wisdom is more excellent, the which brings
life unto the owners thereof.

14. Behold the work of God: for who can make him straight, whom he has
made crooked?

15 In a good day be thou of good comfort: and in an evil day consider: God
also has made this contrary unto that, to this end, that man should not find
any thing after him.

16 I have seen all things in the days of my vanity: there is a righteous
man which perishes through his righteousness, and there is a wicked man that
prolongeth his days through his wickedness.

17 Be not thou just over much, and be thou not wise over much: wherefore
should thou be desolate?

18 Be thou not wicked over much, neither be thou foolish: wherefore should
thou dye not in thy time?


The exposition.
8 Surely oppression] Minding to entreat of the remedies against that most
grievous tentatio^, of the which he spoke in the third Chapter and sixth verse
(namely, how it comes to pass, that the innocent or giltlesse are troubled
unjustly, and that under the pretense and show of justice) he sets down by
way of a preface certain things altogether necessary unto this discourse. For
he shows the fountain of all these troubles and disorders, namely the mad
covetousness of men, which have regard neither of holiness nor honesty: And he
teaches that the providence of God does constantly watch in these confusions
or disorders, to bring these outrages albeit never so evil and harmfull in
themselves, unto a very good end: to be short, he wills us to bridle our
minds, that we be wise out of the word of God, not out of the sharpness of
man his reason, the which as it is blind, so is it not able to judge of so
great matters. And therefore, that we must not let loose the bridle unto our
impatiencie, We must not let loose the bri dle unto impacientie.
the which cannot choose but miserably grieve and vex our minds: but they are
to be strengthened with the help of that divine and wholesome wisdom, the
which is taken out of the word of God, that being dispatched out of the snares
of these troubles and disorders they may arise up unto the consideration of the
providence of GOD, the which does bring forth light out of so great
darkness. This is the sum and contents of this whole place unto the 18.
verse.

Oppression] By the word oppression, or wrong by a figure called Metonymia he
understands riches gotten by wrong, violence, oppression and deceit: and
briefly unlawful gains heaped up together by lewdnes and ungodliness. What
the desire of riches may work, if God his spirit be wanting.
His meaning therefore is, that the desire of money is insatiable and cannot be
filled, the which stirs up and drives men that carry the title and name of
wise men (such as are those that are lawyers) headlong into horrible
wickedness. Therefore that it is no marvel at all, if the world be
overwhelmed with so great confusion and disorder, when as the rage of
covetousness does so boil up in those unto whom the rule of things is
committed: and when as the infection of this desire raungeth far and wide in
all degrees of all men, so that nothing is so holy in all the life of men, the
which it does not miserably defile. For covetousness (says the holy
Apostle) is the root of all evil. This is the cause and beginning of all the
miseries wherewith this life is haunted. From thence do spring private and
public disorders, and stray abroad throughout all our life with very great
inconveniences: dissentions of families, discordes, forged wills, deceits,
stealing, wars, murder, and other co^fusio^s or disorders, wherwithal this
life of ours is horribly distracted and pulled asunder.

Amongst these troubles and disorders does the providence of God sleep? No:
but grows so much the more wonderful and honorable by these confusions, by
how much they are more entangled and combersome, when as he brings them back
continually unto a very good end. Solomon therefore teaches us that we ought
not to give judgment by things present: but that the end it self is to be
looked unto, by the which true and sound judgment may and ought to be given of
every matter.

God his providence sleeps not,
9 Better is] As if he should say, we must not rashly pronounce judgment of any
matter: but the end it self must be looked unto: we are not to stay at the
beginning. Our mind therefore is to be restrained, and we must not rashly give
it the bridle unto impatiencie and evil speaking. The outrages and disorders of
things are to be condemned: the lewdnes also of wicked persons is to be
condemned, but the providence of god is with all reverence to be praised, the
which contrary unto expectation and purpose of sinful men directs those
disordred matters unto a very good end. That this is the true meaning of this
place, all circumstances being wisely considered, I hope that the learned will
judge with me, for as for that which expositers do note here of perseuera^ce
or co^tinua^ce unto the end, it is I confess truly spoken: but not fitly, with
this mine exposition, the words next following agree very well, Better is a
patient or long suffering spirit then a proud spirit, for by a long suffering
spirit I understand that man which wisely and soberly weying al things, does
give a certain judgment. Against him is matched one that is proud in spirit,
that is he which being carried away with rash and proud prejudice or
foreiudgement, pronou^ceth judgment of most great matters. In the which
signification Habacuc in his 2 chap. 4 verse. uses the word Gnuppelah, He is
puffed up like a bubble, and denies the judgment of his proud mind to be
upright. The sum is, We must not give rash judgment in matters belonging unto
God his providence.
that we must not rashly give judgment of so weighty matters, the which do
appertain to the providence of god, but that we must stay our se^te^ce, that al
things are to be looked about with patience and reverence, and that the end is
to be waited for, by the which as it were the conclusion of all the matter, we
may give true and sober judgment. It is a rash, and to soon ripe judgment,
to co^demn a matter not yet known and tried: and doubtless a point of mad
pride, to take so much upon our selves as to determine of so great matters,
and such especially as appertain unto the majesty of God. But yet so far does
the rashness and pride of man his wit break out, that it dares to complain of
God, and to speak evil of his works. This pride of spirit is greatly
condemned, the which anger or indignation follows as a companion. Therefore
the wise man adds.

Anger,
10. Make not hast] By the word Anger he understands that same backbiting
waywardnes which dares to complain of the works of God, and to wax angry
against him, not tarrying for those seasons of time the which God has fitly
and duly ordained: although it seem otherwise unto the judgment of our flesh,
and unto corrupt reason. Such hasting is blame worthy, and clean against
faith: to wit, because faith does patiently wait for the providence of God,
the which without all doubt will come at his time: as the prophets say. He that
believes in him will not be hasty, and if he make delay, wayt for him,
because in coming he will come, and make no long tarryaunce. This same hastye
and forward anger, is peculiar unto fools, the which notwithstanding the
complaynts of David and Jeremy, do show sometimes to happen unto the faithful.
Psa. 73. and Iere. 9. Yet do they acknowledge themselves, whilst they do so
think of the ordering of humane affairs to dote, and to rage after the manner
of Beasts. For it is a point of extreme madness, to speak evil albeit that
it be never so little, of the works of God. Contrariwise the Prophet says him
to be a wise man, the which reverently beholds the wonderful providence of
God, guiding the raines of men their affairs, after such a manner, as many
times is unknown unto us, but yet always, just Psa. 107 ver. 43. Having spoken
these things very fitly by way of Praeface, he comes to the matter it self.

11. Say not) He teaches that this waywardnes is to be avoided, when as men
being impatient at the feeling of present calamities or troubles do co^plain of
God, upon whom they lay the cause of evil and hard times. This saying as it
is true in Empires and governments, so is it also in the whole course of our
life, The present estate is always heavy, and such as we cannot abide. We can
not a way with the present estate.
Indeed the present estate is grievous, for present discommodities are more
nerely felt. Yet these things are patiently to be borne of us, namely that we
take well in worth the condition the which the Lord shall lay upon us. Every
time has his discommodities. It is the point of a wise man quietly to bear
aduersitye, neither is the trouble to be increased with new care and grief,
as if one inconuenyence might be healed with an other: as it is said, Heal
not one evil with an other evil. He therefore would have us with a quiet
mind to bear the present estate, that we should remember to serve the time,
and not to blow against the winds. He condemns this vain carfulness
first of all of folly, for it is a notable diminution or lessening in the
Hebrew, Not according unto wisdom, that is to say, folishly and unwisely: Thou
shall ask concerning this, to wit curiouslye, and so as if thou would at
thy pleasure give judgment of things appertayning unto god. For this itch or
desire to be asking questions, is condemned as hurtful, yet it is lawful, and
expedient to doubt of things, that we may settle in our minds a certain
assured persuasion of doubtful things.

A remedy against curiosit^e.
11 After that he has condemned this curiosity of folly, he now teaches a
remedy to heal the same, namely wisdom, that is to say the true knowledge
of the true God, taken from out of his word. And he begins a most notable
description hereof, whilst he calls it an inheritance, and an excellency
of them that see the Sun, that is to say, the which does very greatly excel
in this life, and does fruitfully and wholesomly flow throw all the parts of
our life. Then the which inheritance nothing can be devised more sure, nothing
more ple^tiful, and in the verse next following he prefers it before all
riches, the profit whereof albeit that it be never so great in all the parts
of our life, yet the inheritance of Wisdom is both more plentiful and also
more certain: as the which in this life does preserve men through many
dangers of humane miseries, and does lead us into the possession of life
everlasting. The shadow of wisdom he calls the aid and help, the which
proceeds from the true knowledge of the true God. Through the light of this
knowledge we do clearly see the providence of God in the darkness of the
troubles and disorders of this world, and being safe by his goodness do walk
through all craggy places. That Solomon in this respect comme^deth wisdom in
this place, may appear by the circumstances themselves. Afterward he sets
down peculiar remedies.

13. Behold the work] The sum is, that we must not strive against God, whose
will can by no means be let. It is therefore as if he said, in as much
as the sight of man his wit dazeleth in so troublesome and cumbersome a maze
of things falling out unto men, it is a most present remedy to cut of occasion
of this careful curiosity, to assure our selves that it is the work of God,
the which it were wickedness for us sielie souls to speak evil of, neither
can it by any means be made undone again. Therefore that it is better for us
patiently to rest in his holy judgment, although the reasons of the same be
unknown unto us. The word Behold is full of force, by which a diligent and
earnest contemplation or beholding is signified. The work of God.
The work of God, by an excellency he calls that same wonderful providence
of God in governing of the world, as Christ speaking of that same providence
of his father in governing of things, says that he works John 14. For it is
the work of God the work master alone, to govern the world, the which he has
created. He adds, And who can make strait, or fit the thing the which he has
made crooked, or, perverted. He speaks of the alterations and chaunges of
things falling out unto men, the which are so lively expressed. Solomon
affirms that they cannot be let by the industry or wit of man, Or be
changed into any other thing, and therefore that the most safest remedy of
comfort is, I heald my tongue, O Lord because thou haste done it, as the
Prophet said. We must rest and stay upon the will of God, the which if it
should appointe even the world it self unto destruction, We must rest our
selves upon the will of God.
the which world God created, yet does it always most well and most iustlye.
And it is our parts both in private and also in public calamities or miseries
and troubles with the eyes of faith to behold the work of God, and to give
unto him the glory of justice and mercy. Whereunto appertains that most wise
saying of David entreating of this very self same matter, the which is Psa. 37
ver. 5. Roll thy way, that is to say, thy care upon the Lord, and hope in him,
and he will do it. He adds an other remedy to uphold our minds with sound
comfort. We must be content as well with aduersitye as prosperity.


15. In a good day, or in the day of wealth) This seems unto me to be the
simple and plain meaning of these words: we must live according unto the time,
that is to say, when as there shall be good success we must give God thanks,
and use his benefits with sobrietye: and that we must not lay so great care
upon our minds, that we be too much vexed or grieved, either with the
sorrow of present troubles, or with the conceit of miseries to come, and that
we be not dismayed or beaten down with those long and cumbersome
cogitations. Let us namely remember, that such is the condition and estate of
this life of man that it is diversely changed, sometimes with prosperity and
sometimes with adversity. And why should we think our selves to be free
from the common case and condition of all men? How we ought to behave our
selves in prosperity.
Therefore when as GOD gives a quiet estate unto our affairs. Let us not wax
proud and being lifted up with this foolyshe confydence in things present,
let us not tread down others: Let us not meddle with things which are not
to be meddled withal, or forslewe our calling, or wax cold and slack in our
duty: but let us soberly and rightly use these days as it were of truse, that
we may strengthen our minds against the tempest to come. This is, In a good
day to be in good, That is to say, to enjoy the benefits of GOD with a good
conscience, and thanks giving. What is to be done in the time of prosperity.
But if aduersitye shall come upon us: In the evil day Behold, that is to
say, consider the judgments of god, weigh diligently with thy self, why God
does afflict or punish thee, and understanding the cause of the evil, repent
and turn unto the Lord. He therefore would have the minds of the faithful
to be so prepared in private or public calamities and troubles, that they
should reverently behold the judgments of God, and rest and stay in them. For
this Beholding is opposed or set against the rash and proud impatiencie of
men, the which raungeth up and down furiously and intemperatelye. Why God
does alter and change things insuch diverse manner.
He yields a cause why that same sundry and manifold wisdom of God, does
so dyuersly alter and change the things and affairs of men, Least (says he)
that man should find out any thing after him, that is to say, God sends
these chaunges and alterations of things, that man should understand that it
lies not in himself to have power to govern himself, but that the issue and
end of all our matters do consist in the power and pleasure of god: the which
he can turn this way, or that way, as he himself pleases.

Therefore that it lies not in us either to keep prosperity, or to put from
our heads the storm of adversity. That the providence of God indeed has set
down certain second and middle causes, the which he will have us to use: and
therefore that we are at no hand so to behave our selves, that either in
prosperity we seek means not granted or unlawful, through rash and arrogant
curiosity, the which without all doubt will carry us headlong into most
grievous miseries: or else in adversity that we flee unto unlawful aids: yet
must we thus firmly and surely determine, That the providence of God does
govern and dispose the affairs of men with a certain chief rule and power,
justly no doubt and wisely, yet in such sort that we neither can nor may
peep and search into the causes of his works. For his dealing is such, that
his ways cannot be found out of us, neither lies it in the weakness of
man to attain unto the priuye chambers of so great mysteries or secrets. We
ought not to searched into the causes of God his works.
GOD therefore does so deal out of order, to cut of all occasion from the
reason of man, least that man should find out any thing after him. And now he
sets down examples of those works of God, of the which the reason of man
neither can, nor ought to determine or give judgment.

16. I have seen all things, etc.] A great disorder in this life.
That is to say, I have had experience of all these vanities and outrages in
this vain and mortal life, that it often times goes ill with the good, and
well with the bad: yea and that it goes il with the good even in this respect
for that they do well: and that it goes well with the bad, for that they do
lewdly and ungodly. He speaks of those things the which fall out many times in
this life. Cato dies in a good cause, Cato. Julius.
Julius triumphs in a badde. And how great hurliburlies are there daily
raised up against the Church by wicked and lewd persons: Then the which
disorder nothing can be devised more disorderous (if we do measure the thing
it self by the outward show and appearance) yet is it not our part to
judge of so great matters according unto the measure and compass of corrupt
reason.

We must both think and speak soberlye of those matters, in such sort
namelye that we may understand that God has the cheef judgment of these
things, and therefore (after that we have thus determined with our selves) that
we be not too careful of such things, the which when as God in his secret, but
always just judgment will have to be, it were a point of greatest madness
to seek to be wiser tha^ God himself. God will redress these disorders, at
what time, We must reverence the judgments of God, the causes whereof are
unknown unto us.
and in such manner as behooves. In the mean season it is our part to reverence
and worship the judgments of God, the causes whereof are unknown unto us, and
to hold for certainty that he in his good time will have a certain sure
redress for things out of square and order. In man his affairs and things of
this world, as they are entangled who sees not that there is great disorder,
but is God therefore to be blamed because that we know not the causes of his
works? As if the Sun were not either in the Firmamente, and had no pure and
clear light, because that the Fyrmamente is darkened with clouds? Solomon
therefore does teach that the same too much and surlye boldness in judging is
especially to be shunned and avoided, by an express and forcible kind of
speech, Be thou not just overmuch, and be thou not wise ouermuche. For he
says that they are just overmuch and wise overmuch, who under the pretense
of Justice and wisdom do proudly judge of the judgments of God: such as
were the swarms of Catharans, and Donatists, who because of the corrupt manners
of those which were conversant in the bosom of the church, His meaning is
that they made a separation and departure from the true Church.
made alter against alter, (that we may rather use this speech) and brake the
net. But this same ouermuche justice is great iniquytye: this overmuch
wisdom is great follye. For what is more unjust, what more foolish, then
to backbite, or speak evil of the works of God? This peevishness does
indeed happen unto very good men sometimes, the which also after the example
of the Prophet, ought in this respect sharpelye to rebuke and blame
themselves, and also to bridle and restrain this waywardness. Therefore this
admonition of Solomon, is diligently to be taken heed unto, the which
wills a wise and good discretion of us in this behalf to be used, that is
to say, that we should not be altogether senseless in the mysteryes or
secrets of so great matters (for they are worthy of consideration, and the
same in deed most diligent) nor contrariwise curiously and rashlye thrust our
selves into the inquiry of the causes of the same. For as blockish
sencelesnesse is to be condemned, so likewise is too too quick eyed, sharp
sightednesse, the which look wherein it is wise beyond measure and reason,
becomes stark foolish. As that same ignorance is greatly to be blamed,
which is ignoraunte of those things the which ought to be known: so is that
praise worthy, the which purposedlye is ignorant of those things, the which
God would not have of us to be known: and whilst it is wise too much,
becomes stark mad. The word of God is the rule of a temperate, and discreet
zeal, A notable saying worthy the due consideration.
and of wise, and profitable knowledge, and makes a difference between
learned ignorance and unlearned knowledge. The sum therefore is, that the
outrages and disorders of things falling out in the world are in such sort to
be considered, that we do both note and also condemn the sins of men: yet
not in such order, that we vex our selves in vain with too hot zeal, and too
sharp sighted knowledge of things: but hold this, that out of that darkness
of confusion, God will bring forth the light of due and good order. And albeit
that this same light do not shine out unto us, let us not strive to go any
further. The which were in vain to trouble our selves, and with unprofitable
cares to vex our minds, accordingly as Solomon teaches, Why should thou
be desolate, What is meant in this place by this word Dye.
and Why should thou die? For by this word Dye he understands this same
pensive and cumbersome care, wherewith the minds of men are miserably tormented.
With the which grief David confesses, that he himself was touched and
dismayed, that by his example we should both learn to acknowledge our own
weakness, and also to run unto the remedy: wherewith he does testifye, that
both he himself was greatly comforted, and it is in this place also lively
expressed unto us by Solomon.

The Doctrine.
The Remedy then against this abashmente, the which rises of the disorder of
things falling out unto men in this world, is, A remedy against the
abashment arising from the disorders of this life.
that we firmelye and surely hold that the providence of God does steadfastly
watch over the affairs of men: the which so far is it of, that it is
darkened in these darkenesses of confusyons and dysorders, that it rather
shines out of them the more brighter, and the more honorable and full of
majesty.

The outrages and enormities of the desires and lusts of men, and especially
the rage of covetousness, are in deed the next causes of these troubles and
disorders, and therefore are with all detestation or lothing to be condemned:
but yet we must arise up unto the providence of god, the which does bring all
those outrages of lewd persons unto a very good end, howsoever both Satan
and wicked men would have it otherwise. We must not therefore let loose the
bridle unto impatiencie, nor complain of the present estate, as if we would
refuse to bear the yoke the which the Lord shall lay upon us, but we must
judge wisely of the works of God according unto his word: we must depend and
hang upon his hand, and attribute nothing unto our own strength: and
commaundinge silence to our, indeed, foolish reason, we must reverence
that which we are ignoraunte of, and must voluntarilye be ignoraunte of that,
the which he will have us to be ignoraunte of, and must so live, that we
be not too much dismayed, neither with the grief of things present, nor
with the fear of things to come (when as unto every day the evil thereof
ought to be enough) and are to use the present gifts of God with
thanksgiving, and sound contentedness of mind: and in things out of
square and order, the end is to be waited for at the hand of God, even such
an end, and at such time as shall please the Lord himself. A brief re^ersal
of the contents of the first part, with the argument of the part which
follows.


Thus is the first part, Concerning the use of Godliness, ended: the which
part has showed remedies against the Vanitye of the life of man, by the
sufficient rehearsinge of them, according as hitherto he has reconed them
up. But because the mind of man is most greeuouslye troubled because of the
disorder of things falling out unto men in this life, the which seems to
stop up the light of the providence of God: therefore he stayed the longer
in the handling of this place, and began with it and also left at it, and will
meddle with it again hereafter: to the end that for all parts of our life,
we may have store of Weapons at hand against the most grievous and most
dangerous offense of all offenses. These matters being handled, he comes
unto the second part of the use of this Treatise, the which consysteth in
setting forth precepts and rules for the well and honest framing of our life,
by the which true Godliness especially shyneth forth.

The second part concerning the use of Godliness, unto the ordering of our
life well and honestly: whereof he sets down several precepts: from this
19 ver. unto the 10 ver. of the twelfth chapter. A Praeface concerning the use
and excellency of Godliness.
19. It is good for thee to learn this, yea also withdraw not thy hand from
this thing: for he which fears God, shall escape from all these.

20. Wisdom does strengthen a wise man more then ten mighty Princes that are
in the city.

21. Truly there is not a righteous man upon the earth, the which does
good, and sins not.


The Exposition.
19. It is good, etc.] From hence I take the beginning of a new discourse,
whereinto Solomon after his manner falls with a most pleasant joining of this
unto that which went before. For as these words may be an end of the former
discourse, so do they fitly make a way unto that which follows. For before
that he comes unto particular precepts, he sets down certain things by
way of a Praeface for the strengthening of our minds. He had said before,
that on the one side blockishe sencelesnesse, and on the other side curiositye
were to be shunned and avoided: now he wills this mean to be kept, A
mean to be kept.
that we so embrace the one, that we depart not from the other, that is to
say, we must not abate so much of that same ouermuche waywardness, that we
fall into blockishe sencelesnesse: or that these things are so curiouslye to
be searched after, that we should sin through boldness and pride.

Thus do the learned interpreters expound it, yet it may be simply expounded:
that this doctrine is with all study and diligence to be embraced, as being
especially necessary for all the parts of our life: and that we ought not to
be slack in a matter of so great weight. And he teaches in plain words,
wherein this remedy does consist, through the benefit and help whereof we
may rid our selves out of all the encumbrances of this life, namely, in
godliness: which causes that our feet slide not whilst the ungodly do
triumph, as the Prophet speaks: and does keep us safe and sound among all
the outrages of things most disordered and out of square. For this is the
meaning of these words: He that fears God, escapes out of all these.

20 And he entitleth godliness with the honorable name of Wisdom: whose
force and efficacy he does by and by set out by a most fine similitude. The
sum is: that in the true knowledge of the true God, the faithful have a sure
and certain remedy for the ordering of their whole life. Then he shows an
express necessity the which constrains us to run thereunto, to call for
the help and aid thereof.

21 Truly, etc.] Of which words, this is the meaning: that the blot and
blemish of sin is so great, that it wrappeth in all mankind, so that no man
is exempted and free from the same. And whereas the means consists in
wisdom only, whereby we may set our selves at liberty and free from this
common infection, he teaches that all diligence is to be used, that by all
means we may embrace wisdom. Necessity therefore makes wisdom or godliness
to be the more recommended unto us, so that in it we may be certain of the
true and assured victory.

A prohibition concerning backbitings and slanders.
22 Give not thine heart unto all the words, which men shall speak: least that
thou hear thy servant speaking evil of thee.

23 For he also many times has known thine heart, that thou also have spoken
evil of others.


The Exposition.
Against back bitings and slanders.
22 Give not, etc.] He teaches that backbiting is to be avoided, that is to
say, that neither we show our selves willing to hear backbitings, nor yet
defile our tongues with those infamous or slanderous reports: or at the least
wise, if our names be torn and rent with the evil speeches of backebiters,
that we be not dismayde in mind. And this is a thing of great importance in
our whole life, as James says: That he which knows to bridle his tongue is
a perfect man. Contrariwise, The discommodities of an evil tongue
as it is a chief virtue to refrain our tongue, so an unbridled tongue brings
an infinite evil upon men: as lamentable experience does teach: that with the
wind of evil speaking, a little spark does burn up a great wood. And of all
the troubles wherewith this life of men is encumbred, this unto good men is
far the most grievous, when as they are slanderously reported of, in steed
of that the which virtue sets before her an honest commendation, as a chief
reward for well doing. But the nature of backbiting and slander is, The nature
of slander.
to be an enemy unto truth and upright dealing: to speak evil of things
well done, or at leastwise of such things as of them selves are excusable: or
else because of some blemishes (as no doubt there are some in the very best
and most honest men and actions) generally to condemn good deeds and good
men. And this infection of backebiting does rage so far, that (as one
says) it seems unto many to be altogether meat and drink as it were. But
we ought to have not only a chaste tongue, but also chaste ears, lest that if
we shall speak evil and falsely of others, or be delited with such as do
backebite others, we our selves also have experience of the same harms against
our own good names. Therefore the Wiseman says: Least thou hear etc. that is
to say, least thou feel the reproaches even of vile and base persons. For by
the word servants, Servants.
he means not only those of our house, but also men in degree inferior unto
us. And the word servant is very significant and of great force. For it is not
without the judgment of God, that those which forsake their duty, suffer
punishment at their hands, of whom they ought to be loved and reverenced. Those
of our house therefore, and al those which are under our government, and whose
part it is to maintain our good name, shall speak evil of us, if we speak
evil of others. For he sets down in the next verse a reason of those
punishments, which are in deed as a reward again unto us.

23 For also, etc.] He teaches us that we have to consider that it comes
not to pass without the judgment of God, that they are evil spoken of, the
which have had no due regard of the estimation and good name of others. This
requital God pays again often times, that he which has slaundered others,
should himself be hurt with the venom of backbyting. The good, and such as
are no slaunderers are notwithstanding sometimes evil spoken of by others.
Yea, and it falls out unto good men, and such as are not to be touched with
this vice, to be wounded with the arrows of slander. Against which
discommoditie we must set that remedy, the which the Apostle teaches: That
we must walk through good report, and evil report. Let us only strengthen our
minds with a good conscience, which shall be unto us in steed of a brazen wall.
We must in deed have regard of our good name, because of our neighbor (as
the holy ghost gives us in charge) providing good and honest things before
men: and especially we are to labor, to prop up our minds with a good
conscience. If we must needs bear the slanders of envious persons, let us
comfort our selves with the testimony or witness of our conscience, and let
us not rest upon men, or seek the praise of the people. Let us so walk
through our evil report, if the world shall go about to empaire our good name
by slaundering us, whilst we do our duty according unto the compass of
our calling: A good conscience weighs not the slanders of the world.
and let us wait for the help of God, the defender of our innocence, who in
his good time will bring forth our light out of most thick darkness.

24 All these things have I tried in wisdom: I have said, I shall be wise,
and it went far off from me.

25 It is far off, what shall come thereof? And who shall find out that which
is most profounde and deep?


The exposition.
24. and 25. All these things, etc.] Minding to handle sundry precepts and
rules, the which do appertain unto the living well, he lays down before
an excellent doctrine, as it were the foundation of moral precepts: yea, and
by the confession of his own voidnesse of ability unto any goodness, he
witnesses how rash and vain the attemptes and endeavors of all men are,
Knowledge of true wisdom must be sought for without our selves.
to the end that we should diligently learn, that the study of true
wisdom is placed without our selves. That there is such corruption in men,
and that the same has taken so deep root in them, that it cannot be rooted
and pulled up without very great endeavor and labor. Therefore that no easy
and ready matter is gone about, when as the doctrine is taught, as touching
the way how to lead our life aright. For that both the knowledge, and also the
doing of so weighty a thing stands in most great hardness. So the holy ghost
does often exhort us unto repentance and newness of life. Not that this lies
in our power (for God gives us as the will, so also to work) but that our
dullness should be shaken off, The use of exhortations in the scriptures.
after that being privy unto our own weakness, or rather voidnesse of all
ability, to do any good, we do understand that we are to fly unto the
help and aid of God. Godliness, namely is true wisdom, not a certain
vain and idle contemplation or knowledge: but as it is the knowledge of our
salvation, and the badge of the forgiveness of sins: so is it also the
guider and leader unto true and unfeigned newness of life. But as forgiveness
of sins is a singular gift of God, so also is regeneration or newbirth: the
which is linked unto it by an inseperable band. Therefore Solomon does so open
the mystery or secret of regeneration, that he shows it to be without the
power of man. For whither soever the wit of man run out, which way soever it
turn it self, true wisdom does fly from it and can not abide it, the
which in deed is worthy of the name of true and healthful wisdom. That this
is the true meaning of the 24. and 25. verses, the learned will judge, things
being wisely considered. Other expositions I of purpose ouerpasse. The whole
sentence is finely seasoned with a figurative kind of speech.

The Reader may easily gather the doctrine out of the former exposition.
Therefore here and in other Moral precepts I will ease both my self and also
the Reader of this labor.

A prohibition concerning the avoiding of wantonness or whoredom.
26 I and mine heart have gone about, to know, to try out, and to search for
wisdom and reason: and to know the wickedness of folly, and the
foolishness of error.

27 And I have found out a thing more bitter than death, even a woman: because
her heart is as nets and snares: her hands as bands: he that is good before
God shall escape from her: but the sinner shall be taken by her.

28 Behold this have I found (says the preacher) one after another to find
out the count.

29 The which my soul has sought hitherto, and I have not found it: I have
found one good man of a thousand: but I have not found one good woman among
all these.

30 Only behold, this have I found, that God made man righteous: but they have
sought many inventions.


The Exposition.
26 I and mine heart etc.] He uses this preface to show that he speaks of a
thing that was not unknown unto him, nor yet any common matter: but very
great and hard. He says therefore that he turned his mind every way, that
he diligently searched all things, and used all diligence, that he might
thoroughly know the natures of al things, and finally understand the
difference of good and evil. To this purpose appertain these kinds of
speeches: To try out, To seek, To know: Reason, wisdom, wickedness, Error.
He will except nothing, that he may signify and express an exquisite and
perfect knowledge, as he did before in the first Chapter, and 17. verse.
Having set down these things by way of preface, he adds:

27. 28. and 29. And I found] It is a precept concerning the avoiding of
wantonness, A precepts concerning the avoiding of whore^^^ and harlots.
or letchery, and the allurements of harlots, with the which many are entangled
unto their own destruction. For by this word Woman, he understands not
every woman, but such a one as is unchaste, whose tricks and subtle shifts he
sets out in express words of Nets, Snares, and hands, from these
snares he says that the Wise man is free, but, that the sinner, that is to
say, a wicked and prophahe person, is entangled in them. Therefore in the
proverbs calling men back from the infamous lust of adultery, he teaches
that the ways of a man are before the eyes of the Lord, and speaking of an
adulterer, he says that he feared not the Lord. For it is a blind and profane
boldness, breaking the holy bands of faith and chastity, to lie with a
strange woman, or another man his wife. The wantonness of men has burste out
unto so great lewdness, that they scarce think fornication and adultery to be
any great sin: and albeit that they being compelled through shame, and
through the authority of the everlasting law of God have made laws against
these sins, yet those laws lie a sleep and are altogether idle. But the
spirit of God has no less said. Thou shall not commit adulterye, than Thou
shall not be a murderer or a thief: and does punish these same fornicatours
and Whoremaisters with very great punishments even by the self same women,
unto whose love giving over themselves, they do rage after more then a beastly
manner. The which thing Solomon does flatly note: That a woman is more bitter
then death it self: and that it is laid upon sinners by GOD, as a most
grievous plague, the which thing the examples of all both people and times have
showed: and Solomon himself has had experience hereof by a lamentable example
both for himself, and his, how great calamities and miseries those immoderate
loves of women are wont to bring.

27. and 28. He adds unto the amplifying of the matter, (and using also a
preface, that he knew the same by assured experience) a lively description of
women's nature, namelye, A lively description of women's natures.
that the nature of women is as it were made and given unto all naughtiness,
so that there is in it nothing good, nothing sincere: but that it is full of
the kinds of all wickedness. Yet these things must be rightly and wisely
understood. For he does not simply condemn the nature of women in it self,
as it was created of God: Solomon does not simply condemn the nature of women
but he speaks of the corruption of women's nature: not so in any case as if
all and singular women were entangled with these vices, but that often times
many women are touched with these vices, by reason of the vehement and sharp
swaye of nature. Therefore, where as Solomon in this place says that among a
thousand he has found one good man, but never any where a good woman, it is
to be understood by an excessive speech, or figure which the Rhetoricians
call hyperbole, to the end that the treacheries, which lie lurking under the
allurementes of women, might the better be expressed, that they may be the more
diligently avoided. For that he does not simply in it self condemn the nature
of women, he plainly declares in these words,

30 Only etc] As if he should say, I do not accuse the nature of women created
by god, neither yet the workmaster himself in nature: but I accuse those vices,
the which besides the first original estate of nature have through the fault
and corruption of men, bin brought into nature. Doubtless the nature it self of
women is not to be accused: but rather the blasphemies of Philosophers are to
be detested and abhorred, Vile speeches of Philosophers against women.
the which have termed womankind, a blemish and maime of nature: yet we must
confess, that which experience says to be most true, that there comes unto
the weakness of womankinde a certain sharp and vehement swaye of vices, so that
if women will suffer those natural affections to bear rule in them, there
cannot choose but be an infinite evil: as (accordingly as I have said) the
histories of all ages and nations by lamentable examples do witness. This
thing ought to cause us with all our heart to abhor the unlawful loves of
strange women. Moreover, that we walk warily and wisely with our own wives
also, as with the weaker vessels, being warned by the home discordes of holy
men, as of Abraham and Jacob, for women, Yea, and godly women also being
admonished with these speeches as it were Oracles, ought the more earnestly to
labor in bridling the pricks and prouocations of their own nature, that
through prayers and modesty they may correct and amend the same naughtiness
and subtlety that is naturally in them. So Paul beats down the pride of
women, putting them in mind, that Eua sinned first, and then that she caused
Adam to sin. We have also to mark that the corruption of man his nature is
in such sort attributed unto one man, that with all, the propagation or
spreading of it abroad must be acknowledged in his posterity: in as much as it
gets strength by going, and sin always is in travail with, and brings
forth new occasions of evils.

A precept concerning modesty, the which proceeds from true wisdom. The
eight Chapter.
1 Who is as the wise man? And who is as he that knows the interpreta^ion of
a thing? The wisdom of a man does make his face to shine, and the strength
of his face shall be changed.

2 I give thee counsel to take heed to the mouth of the King, and to the
word of the oath of God.

3 Haste not to go forth of his sight: stand not in an evil thing: for he
will do whatsoever pleases him.

4 According unto the word of the King there is power: and who shall say unto
him, what do thou?


The exposition.
1 Who is, etc.] Man his wisdom puffs up a man: but contrariwise the
wisdom of God does frame him unto true modesty. Of this kind of modesty
Solomon entreats in this place. For this is the meaning of these words: that
the efficacy and force of wisdom does especially shine forth herein, that
howsoever it set him before other men, the which is endued with it:
nevertheless notwhithstanding it does so dispose him, that the more he does
exceed others in virtue and praise, Wisdom makes a man, the more he
excels others in good gifts, the more to be more lovely and modest then
others.
so far does his modesty excel, what is then the force of wisdom in man.
This especially, says he, that it changes his countenance, that is to say,
it takes all sternnesse and proud loftiness out of his countenance, and
frames him unto true and sound modesty. He shows another kind of modesty,
the which consists in the due reverence and obedience of the magistrate.

2 I give thee counsel, etc.] True religion does not will us to be barbarous,
and such as cannot abide the company and fellowship one of another: but will
have us to love and maintain the society and fellowship of mankind, and to
contain our selves within it according unto the measure of civil honesty. The
first precept, as it were the foundation thereof is, Honor thy father and thy
mother. The calling of Magistrates and also obedience unto the^ is established
by the fifth commandment.
By which commandment the good order and obedience of magistrates is
established: For there must be degrees of such as rule, and of such as obey in
mankind, the plague and overthrow whereof is Anarchie, or such a state whereas
there is no governor at all. Solomon therefore wills us to behave our selves
wisely toward the magistrate, and least there should be licentiousness and
malepart sawcines, he compasses the life of man about with bounds, and
sets down obedience. I will, says he, and command, That thou take heed
unto the mouth of the King, that is to say, that with reverence thou obey the
commandments of the Magistrate. He adds an exception, least he might seem
to commend a certain infinite obedience, as if Kings might rule according unto
their pleasure and lust. And unto the word of the oath of God: The oath of God,
what it is.
The oath of God he calls the obedience the which we do owe unto God, as
namely being holy and unchangeable by all the bands of an oath. It is
therefore as if he should say, We must in deed obey the magistrate: but yet so
far, that God have reserved unto himself his authority and obedience, by
whose power and authority Kings do reign, we must in such sort obey the
King, that obedience unto god be not broken. For it is a right and due
obedience: first, that we obey the voice of God, the which also the mouth of
the King ought to sound: The chief duty of the magistrate.
For it is the first and the chief duty of the magistrate, that he be a
maintainer of true religion. Secondly, that we also obey the rule of the
magistrate, the which is not against the word of God, according unto the rule:
Give unto God the things which are belonging unto God: and unto Caesar, the
things which belong unto Caesar: For thus far may the obedience unto god very
well stand with the rule of the magistrate. Nay he resists God which resists
the magistrate commanding that which is right and lawful. What is to be done,
if the magistrate command things unlawful,
Otherwise, if the magistrate, do command ungodly and dishonest things, unto
the prejudice of an higher power, that is to say, of God, there is a rule: We
must rather obey God then men. Therefore the mouth of the King must be in such
sort taken heed Unto, that the authority of the oath of God remain safe and
sound. And least that curiosity, ambition, busimedling, covetousness, and such
like outrages should carry me^ away headlong, he sets down bounds, or
rather layth a bar in the way, that every one that is in subjection unto the
rule of the magistrate should keep himself within the limits of his duty:

3 Have not] as if he should say: Think not that it can come to pass, that if
thou fall into the displeasure of kings, that thou can escape their hands
and power. Do thou not know that Kings have long hands? Therefore, stand
not in an evil matter, that is to say: commit not any thing, whereby thou may
provoke the majesty of the King, who as he is the maintainer of the law, so
is he also the revenger and punisher of wickedness. For he will do whatsoever
pleases him, etc. Therefore chief and sovereign authority is given unto
Kings, that they may at their pleasure, do what pleases them, as he shows
in the next verse, describing and setting out this sovereign power and
authority of Kings: so he opposes or sets the power of Kings armed with
the sword against the licentiousness and pride of men, as the Apostle notably
teaches Romans 13. It is therefore meet and necessary, The Gospel does not
hinder, but mainte^ne the authorit^e of magistrates, and teaches the duty of
subjects, etc.
that the politic ordinance and good order of humane society be observed and
kept of the faithful, the which so far off is it, that it should be
impeached or hindered by the Gospel, that it is rather true, that the same is
especially stablished by this only foundation, as we also have before showed
at large concerning this matter.

A Precept concerning Patience, or christian Fortitude, or manhood. From this
place unto the 15. verse of the ninth Chapter.
5 He that keeps the cemmaundement, shall not know an evil thing: the heart
of a wise man knows both time and judgment.

6. For unto every purpose there is a time and judgment, because the misery of
man is great upon him.

7 Because he knows not what is to come: For who can tell him when that shall
be.

8. There is no man that has power over the spirit, to reteyne the spirit,
neither has he power over the day of death, neither is the casting forth of
darts his in the battle: neither shall ungodliness deliver the^ that possess
her.

9. I have seen all this, and I have given mine heart unto every work that is
done under the sun, and I saw a time to be at hand, when a man rules over a
man to his own hurt.

10 And then I saw the wicked buried, and they returned, and they which came
from the holy place, were forgotten in the same city, where they had done
right. This also is vanity.

11 Because the sentence of the Judges concerning an evil work is not given
speedily, therefore the heart of the sons of men is wholly upon this to do
evil.

12 Although a sinner do evil an hundred times, and god do prolong his
days, yet I know notwithstanding that it shall go well with them that fear the
Lord and have feared before him.

13. And it shall not go well with the ungodly, neither shall he prolong his
days, he shall be as a shadow, because he fears not before his face.

14. There is a vanity which is done upon the earth, because there are
righteous men, unto whom it falls out as if they had done the work of the
wicked: and there are wicked men unto whom it falls out as if they had the
work of the just, whereupon I said that this also is vanity.

15 And I praised joy, considering that there is nothing better for man under
the sun then to eat and drink and to rejoice: and that this at leastwyse
shall cleave unto him of his labor in the days of his life, the which GOD
has given him under the sun.

16 Therefore I gave mine heart to know wisdom and to see the business that
is done on earth, because he sees no sleep with his eyes day nor night.

17. And I saw concerning the wh^le work of God, that man can not find out
the work which is done under the sun, for the which man labors to seek
it, and finds it not: yea and if the wise man shall say that he gives his
diligence to know it, he can not find it.

The ninth chapter.
1 Surely I have put all this in mine heart, and to declare all this that the just
and the wise, and their works are in the hands of God: man knows neither love
neither hatred of all the things which are before them.

2 Al things fall out alike unto al men: and one end is unto the just, and unto
the wicked, unto the good and clean and unclean: to him also that
sacrifices, and unto him the which does not sacrifice: like as he that is
good, so also is he that sins: and he that swears is like unto him which
fears an oath.

3 This is evil among al things that are done under the sun, that there is
all one issue or falling out of things unto all: and also the heart of the
sons of men is full of evil, and madness is in their hearts, in their life:
and after this unto the dead.

4. For there is hope unto every one that is joined unto al them that are
alive: because a living dog is better then a dead Lion.

5 For they that are alive know that they shall dye: but those that are dead
know nothing, neither have they any more reward, because their remembrance is
forgotten.

6 Also their love, also their hatred, also their envy is already perished,
and they have no portion any more for ever, in all that is done under the sun.

7. Go, eat thy bread in joy, and drink thy wine with a merry heart: because
that now thy works are acceptable unto God.

8. At al times let thy garments be white, and let there not be oil wanting
upon thine head.

9 Live thy life with the wife whom thou have loved, all the days of the life
of thy vanity, the which God has given thee under the sun all the days of
thy vanity: because this is thy portion in this life, and of thy labor
wherewith thou labourest under the sun.

10. All which thine hand shall find to do, do it according unto thy power:
because there is no work, nor thought, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave
whether thou go.

11 I turned about and saw under the sun, that the race is not to the swift,
nor battle unto the strong, no, nor bread unto the wise, nor riches unto the
prudent, nor yet favor unto men of knowledge: but time and chance comes
unto them al.

12 Because man also knows not his time, as fishes are caught with the evil
net, and as birds are taken with the grinne: so shall the sons of men be
taken in the evil time, when as it shall fall upon them suddenly.

13. I have seen this wisdom also under the sun, and it is great unto me.

14. A little city and few men in it, and a great king came against it, and
besieged it, and builded great forts against it.

15. And there was found in it a poor man being wise, and he delivered the
city by his wisdom, and no man remembered this poor man.


The Exposition and Doctrine together.
5. He that keeps, etc. A hard battle.
) There is no greater nor harder battle in this life, then to overcome the
wandering waves and tempests of the same. But because these grow fast on upon us
on every side, and in the whole race of our life, there is none either more
common or more plentiful argument, whereon our talk ought to be more
occupied. For as much therefore as there are so many sorts of miseries in this
life, Solomon therefore does give us new remedies against them: and besides
the discourse handled before, now he begins a new garnishing of the same.
And first of all he lays down a general doctrine, He that keeps the
commmaundement knows no evil thing: The commandment.
The Commandment he calls the word of God, by the which alone we learn
what is to be done, what is to left undone, and after what manner our life is to
be ordered.

To know an evil thing is to feel and have experience of misery or trouble, To
know an evil thing.
or to be wrapped with greefes and losses. The sum is, that in the word of
God the faithful have true and certain quiet and rest, and albeit that they
be never so much tossed too and fro with the great waves of calamities and
miseries: yet out of it the wholesome remedy is to be set against all
encombrances. It is agreeable unto that most sweet promise, Blessed is the
man whom thou shalt instruct O Lord, and shall teach thy law; that thou may
give him rest from the evil days, etc. And the Prophet confesses in an other
place, that he then at length gate the victory out of a most grievous
tentation, when as be entered into the sanctuarye of the Lord: Habacuc.
And Habacuc says that in the confusions and disorders of things falling out
in this life among men, he stood upon his watch, and waited diligently what the
Lord would speak. Out of the word of God then and out of the diligent
meditation and study thereof, a true and present remedy may and ought to be set
for the ouercomming of all the calamityes and troubles of our life, so that we
may pray with David, Lead me through the way of the world. Yet Solomon his
meaning is not to say, that the faithful shall be free from all troubles:
(the which is against both the flat word of God, and also experience) but
this is the meaning, that albeit they be carried out into the maine sea of
miseries, The faithful must not look to be free from al troubles.
yet that they shall remain vndrownable in the midst of the waves, through the
guidance and leading of this divine knowledge shining always and safely unto
them, as a loadstarre, And he goes on to show the power of this wisdom.
that is to say, of the true knowledge of God.

A wise man knows time and judgment: by which words he does not only
signifye a right opportunity and occasion to do things, but also the issues
of them: so far forth namely as we are persuaded out of the word of God,
that no tentation takes us, but such as uses to fall out unto men, and that
GOD is faithful, and will together with the tentation at his due and good time
give away out of our battles and striuinges. Therefore we learn

6. For unto every purpose, etc.] The word Chaphets which they translate a
will, he signifies a purpose, an action, a kind or trade of life, as we have
noted before, the meaning is, That there are appointed and set times, and as
it were certain seasons for all things. That a Wise man does learn these out
of the word of GOD, and notes the peculiar properties of every several thing
and action, and does apply them wiselye, as may serve for his turn and
profit: and to place the chief point of their wisdom in the providence of
God, by the which let him be assuredly persuaded, that all his affairs are
governed: and therefore when as he has all things belonging unto him, reposed
in GOD, that he shall not be dismayed through evil and false rumors or
reports, as the Prophet speaks: albeit (the which an other said, upon
far unlike constancye) the world should go to wrack, and break in sunder,
The faithful holden up with the prop and stay of God his providence.
the fall thereof shall not make him afraid. The faithful among so many and
so great tremblinges, and fearinges, as namelye being tossed too and fro daily
with infynite storms, and tempests, could not choose but perish a thousand
times, unless they were held up with the proppe and stay of this godly
confidence or trust.

7. Because he knows not,) He goes on in his discourse begun: to wit,
concerning the manner how men ought to govern themselves in so great disorder
of things falling out unto men in this world. He describes and sets out
this disorder, and teaches fit remedies against the same, whereby true
constancy might be settled in our minds, to overcome all enco^brances valiantly
and stoutly. The which discourse he continues from this place unto the 13
verse of the ninth chapter. The particle Ki is not causal, but copulative only:
as before in the sixth chapter. A grievous doubt unto flesh and blood.
He sets down a most grievous doubt wherewith our minds are much troubled,
for that all men both good and bad do die indifferently, and all are as it
were blotted out and taken away with the common dart of death. Against the
which doubt, he will bring remedies, but first he shows reasons of the
doubting. Because he knows not, etc. The sum is That the end of this life is
uncertain. For who can judge of the end of death that is to come? The hour
then of death is uncertain, yet all must dye, whosoever they are. The which
he shows in the next verse.

8 There is no man, etc.] The necessity of dying lies upon all men: Al men
what soever, must needs dye.
no man of what authority or power soever, can by any means avoid it: no
albeit he would go about to fight with death in a set battle, and with a great
army and host of men, what sleights soever he use, and to what arts soever he
betake himself. This he expresses by a notable similitude. By the words
Mischlachath bammilchamath (the which they translate, Sending out, or, sending
in of war he means power and force, and that such as is armed with an
host of Souldiars: and by the word Reschang he signifies craft and
subtiltye furnished with wickedness and trecherye: All these things he says
to be manifest by continual experience of things: namely that lewd persons,
even at the same time when as they give over themselves unto wickedness, and
oppress their Neighbors by violence, are overtaken many times of Death when
they think not on it, and contrariwise, that godly men do dye with the same
Darte of Death. And these things are signyfied by express words, by the
word Returning he notes death: as in the Psalm 89. by the decree of the most
sovereign and high Emperor, Return ye sons of men: unless by the word
Returning you will also understand the perpetual memorial or remembrance of
them, The remembrance of the wicked after death makes them after a sort to
live again among men, but unto their great shame and reproach.
by the which they may very ill be said after death to live again among
men. By these words That holy men do come from the holy place and are
forgotten in the same city in the which they have done right, He means that
godly men, whilst they do live in the Church of God, and discharge their
calling, do also give place unto the necessity of death. This he says to be
vanity, to show that he has brought reasons of this doubting. The which
being showed, he by and by brings remedies. As if he should say, In as
much as death is common as well unto the godly as unto the ungodly, is there
then no difference between them both. Solomon answers

The wicked abuse the patience of God unto sinning.
11 and 12. Because,) Because, says he, that God does not by and by take
punishmente on the wicked, but waits for their amendmente with long patience:
therefore the ungodly flatter themselves in their sins, and let loose the
bridle unto ungodliness. But albeit they seem to sin without punishmente,
because God gives them a very long space of time, yet this ought to be sure
and settled in us, that they only shall in the end be happy, the which with
true fear serve GOD, and walk in his obedience godly and carefullye:
contrariwise, that the ungodly are unhappy: for whom there does the greater
punishment remain, by how much they have sinned the longer and the more
scotfree: so that by the longnesse of God his patience a greater destruction
ought to be foretokened unto them: after no other sort, then as the longer
shadow warns that the light will by and by fade away, and that the night is
hard at hand. This I take to be the plain and true meaning of this place.

By the word Sentence he understands the execution of the judgment of
GOD, that is, as the Apostle speaks, the revealing of the righteous judgment
of God: by the delay of the which judgment wicked men take occasion of
waxing mad in outrageousnesse of sinning.

The sum is, albeit that freedom from punishment may seem to be granted by
god unto the wicked in this life, so that they may triumph, as if they had
not only shaken off the yoke as it were, but also had received a reward of
their wickedness: A great difference between the godly and the ungodly.
yet that there is never the less a great difference between the godly and
the ungodly, the which no doubt shall in his time appear. He shows the
cause of the diverse end between them both. For that the godly do fear
before the presence of God, but the wicked do not, for this is a saying
always true, that true Religion is the way unto true and everlasting
happiness: like as ungodliness or Atheism is the way unto unhappiness. The
ungodly therefore shall be unhappy, whatsoever the outward appearaunce of
things falling out in this world shall show to the contrary: Contrariwise
the Godly shall be happy, as Christ has notably declared by the parable of
the rich glutton, and the poor Lazarus, yea and the truth also wrested out of
the mouth of Bileam, Bileam.
spite of his heart, Let my soul dye the death of the righteous.

An other tentation.
14. There is a vanity, etc.) He notes another tentation, That there is a
great disorder in life it self, as well as in common death: namelye for that
the godly many times have ill success: and contrariwise, the ungodly, good
success. The which disorder he marketh with the name of Vanity. For what is
more contrary unto reason, then that it should go ill with the good: and well
with the badde? Therefore man his reason says, That the faithful lose their
labor in serving of God, as the Prophet says, Of a truth I have cleansed mine
heart in vain, and have washed mine hands in innocence. Against this doubt,
Solomon sets down fit aunsweres.

The first answer unto the former ^ntation.
15. And I praised, etc.) The first answer, that we must not curiously give
over our selves unto these cogitations and thoughts, but that nothing is
better, nothing is more excellent (in as much as no man can rightly give a
cause of these disorders, wherewith the life of man is troubled) then ridding
our minds out of these cares, cherefully to use the benefits of God: and
committing our affairs unto the providence of GOD, that we go not about in any
case curiously to pry into the secrets of things unknown, as namely to
seek why the Lord deals after this and this manner. Therefore that it is the
best soberly to consider of these matters: and at no hand so to behave our
selves, that by reason of the too vehement or earnest conceiving of them, we be
bereft of the fruit of God his benefits. This is the first answer.

16. Therefore, etc) The second answer, if, The second Answer.
says he, thou search after the things that fall out unto men in this life,
and the causes of the same, albeit that thou bend all the sharpness of thy
wit unto the contemplation and study of so great secrets, employ all thy
labor and diligence, and defraude or keep thy self from sleep, and other
necessary helps for the mayntainaunce of this life: yet shall thy mind be
altogether astonished, and thy enterprise of searching shall be in vain.
Therefore he forbids that we be not wise according unto the judgment of
the reason of man: but out of the word of God, which is the true and sound
wisdom. In a word, he signifies, that it cannot possible be, that we
should understand the causes of those things, the which in the common life of
man, do after so sundry sorts fall out: yea and moreover that it is a most
vain thing, to vex our mind about the searching out of them too curiously:
but that we must stay and rest upon the word of God, from whence true oracles
or aunsweres must be set and taken.

The ninth Chapter.
The third answer.
1. Surely I have, etc.) The third answer, although it be so, that is to say,
that the reasons can not be yielded of these troubles and disorders: yet
nevertheless we are to hold for certainty, that all things are by God most
wisely governed. He says by way of Preface that he diligently travailed about
the searching out of all this matter: by which inquiry he says, that he
learned, That the just, etc.) That is to say, that GOD has a singular and an
especial care of good and godly men. Not as if GOD has cast away the care of
other men: but he diligently declares that which was in controuersitie, and
whereupon all the discourse was taken.

Who they are whom Solomon calls just and in what respect.
The just according to the use of the scripture he calls the faithful: whom
God namelye of his mere grace accounts for just, as being he that justifies
the ungodly, as the Apostle says, whilst he imputes unto them their faith
in him unto righteousness, and in whom also he imprinteth the testimonies of
righteousness, that is to say, of a pure and innocent or giltles life, as the
pledges of their election. He calls them Wise, because they are enlightened
with the true light of true wisdom, that is to say, with the knowledge of
God and with Godliness, the which is true and sound wisdom. This is one
chief point of this whole answer, yet he adioyneth a new and diligent
description of the wavering and uncertain condition, and estate of the life of
man. And yet (for so I expound the particle gam) man knows not neither love
nor hatred, etc. that is to say, Although it be most certain that God has an
especial care for the salvation of the faithful, yet such is the course of
things falling out unto men in this life, that it cannot be judged by their
outward show and appearance whom God loves, or whom he hates, for there
is every where such a co^fused shufling of things together, that there is all
together all one end, and the same common unto all men both godly and
ungodly: and when as lewd persons have passed all their life in wickedness,
yet at length they go unto death, as unto the last end of things: wherewith
they are taken away, like unto other men, the which seem with one dart of
Death to be slain quite. I read all this in one contexte and tenor together,
from this first verse unto the end of all the sixte verse: and think this to
be the true meaning of these words. The sum is: Howsoever things go in the
world, yet the providence of God watches continually over the faithful.
albeit the outward show of things do cast a certain infinite or endless
confusion before the eyes of man his reason, yet that this is sure and
certain, that the providence of God does continually watch over the salvation
and safety of the faithful. But the words with an exquisite and great
garnishing of figures, are more diligently to be examined. He says: that man
knows not either love or hatred of all things which are before them, that is
to say: It can by no means be judged, by the difference of those things, the
which sundry ways fall out in this life, what men are acceptable unto God or
no? for the words love and hatred are to be referred unto God and not unto
men, that is to say, What men God loves or hates. Therefore the old
translator has not translated them well, Man knows not whether he be worthy
of love or hatred. The Sophisters in deed half Pelagians (to speak most
modestly and gently of them) have lewdly corrupted this place, Against the
Papists corrupting this place.
to bring in a doubting, that is to say, a tormenting of the consciences of
men: as if the faithful ought not to be certainly persuaded in their
consciences, that they albeit never so unworthy, are loved of God for Christ
his sake, when as by faith the which he also gives unto them, they lay hold
upon his free promises: nor contrariwise, that sin is most greatly hated of
GOD: but that men ought to stand at this point, that they stagger and waver in
doubting. The which doctrine shakes the foundation of true religion: for it
takes away the efficacy and force of the promises and threatenings of God. The
very principal and in deed effectual effect of faith is, that persuasion or
trust, whereby we assuredly believe the forgiveness of sins, and that the
spirit of God is a witness unto our spirit, that we are the sons of God,
and do approach without fear unto the throne of grace. The which full assurance
or trust, he that takes away from faith, does altogether weaken and destroy
faith, and so far as in him lies, makes God a liar. As God is true in his
promises, so is he also in his threatenings.
Now as we are to believe that God is true in his promises, so must we also
doubtless believe that he has the same truth in his threatenings: and
therefore that he is greatly offended even with his children, when they sin,
that with this bitt we may be held back from wickedness, and rob not God
his providence of one of her eyes. For God is both just and also merciful: and
we must steadfastly agree unto his word, wherein we are taught that we are
the sons of God, and that the everlasting foundation of our faith stands
in such sort that it cannot be shaken, upon his free good will: also that God
is an enemy unto sin: that we may fear him because he is good. This is a
true doctrine, and agreeable unto faith, the which Sophisters do impurely
defile: and they foully corrupt this place, when as it does manifestly preach of
the providence of God, against such as deny his providence because of the
outward appearance of things, for that it goes ill with the good, and well
with the bad: and because of these sightes or disorder they do fall away from
God. For by these words, All things before them, all those things are
signified, which befall unto this life, and are apparent before the eyes of
men: by the outward consideration of which things cannot be gathered, whom
God does love or hate. And why he so says, he yeldeth by and by a reason.

2 All things fall out etc. That is, there is all one end unto the Godly, and
unto the ungodly. Yet does he wisely describe and set out the difference of
the men between them selves, unto whom, notwithstanding there is a common
end. He that sacrifices.
He calls Him that sacrifices, him that diligently gives himself unto the
service and worship of GOD, and does holily keep the service and ordinances
set down by the law. Contrariwise, he calls him that Sacrifices not, such
a one, as contemns the worship of GOD. The which is a token of a godless and
an impure heart. He calls him a Sinner, according unto the common use of the
scripture, which is a man of notorious lewdness and wickedness: Him that
swears, he terms such a one, as abuses an oath by swearinge either
profanely, Him that swears.
and when there is no need (as those do the which do spice their talk with
blasphemies, as if it were with ornaments of Rhethorike) or by forswearing in
an earnest matter. Which is a sign of lewd and extreme wickedness.

And he says, that there rangeth so great disorder among men, that there is
all one end unto all men. And that men take such a common course of life, as
if there were no feelinge after death, and that there should be no punishment
at all for sins, as if, after that they have passed over this life, they care
not how, when the race thereof is run, they must pass unto death, as unto a
common necessity, which should swallowe up, and blotte out for ever the
memorial of all men, whosoever they are. He marketh this profane cogitation
or surmize with express words: The heart of men is full of evil, and
madness is in their heart, in their life: and after this unto the dead. And in
the two next verses he paynteth out the triumph of death over all kind of
men.

4. and 5. For unto every one.] The effects of life and death compared together.
He compares the effects of death and life together, unto the garnishing and
amplyfying of the matter. Him that is joined unto all them that are alive, he
calls every living man, which has the use and benefit of life, of how
low or base condition or degree soever he be. Him he says to be better then a
dead man, whosoever at any hand he be, and in how great dignity soever he
did sometimes excel, using a proverb: That a living dog, is better then a
dead Lion. The use of which proverb serves to show the excellency and
commodity of life. Unto the same purpose appertain the words of the next
verse, Death vanquisheth man and al things belonging unto man.
of the which this is the plain and true meaning, that all things the which do
belong unto men, yea and also men them selves especially (if the outward show
and appearance be looked unto) do altogether die, and are taken away by death.
And it is a trim kind of speech seasoned with a fine figure: that Love,
Hatred, Envy, and other affections, whose dominion was large and wide, whilst
they were alive is extinguished and put clean out, with death and also with
the possessers of them, and that there shall be no profit of them before the
chief Judge, as unto whom accounts must be given of their whole life. And that
this is a disorder of things falling out in this life unto men experience it
self does sufficiently and abundantly teach. What then must we do among so
great outrages?

7 Go, eat.] These things he noted in the beginning of this place at the 15.
verse of the eight Chapter. Curiosity altogether unprofitable.
Now he gathers a general conclusion of the same, and that notably showing
the whole matter, the effect is, That curiosity is altogether vain and
hurtful, that it does vex and torment the mind, because of the outrages and
confusions of this life: that it is better with a sober and cheerful mind to
use the benefits of God, and diligently to apply our selves every man unto his
calling, and to bestow the powers of our mind about the discharging of it
faithfully and painfully, whilst that by means of life and occasion we may,
and to stay upon the blessing of God, whereupon doubtless all the happy
success of all things do depend. Go therefore, says he etc. that is to say:
Torment and vex not thy mind too much with these cares: but rather use and
inioye things present with assured quietness of mind: as for things falling
out unto men in this life the which thou can not help, suffer them to pass
and fleet away, as they come. And he does set forth and garnish this plain
sentence very finely with diverse words, Go, as if he should say, rid thy
self out of these mad cares: for what need is there, and what does it profit
thee to busy thy self about many matters? As it was by Christ objected unto
Martha too busily occupying her self about her household. Eat, drink, that
is to say: use and enjoy freely the commodities of this life. To this purpose
perteine these words,

8 At all times let thy garments be white, and oil upon etc.] By which
words he signifies that we must leave nothing undone for the enjoying of a
merry and pleasant life, namely, that cleanness and finenesse is not to be
ouerpassed, Against such as make an allegory of this place.
the which does make meat and drink more pleasant. For where as some do
allegorically expound these words, of the simplicity of the heart, it is
true I confess, and agreeable unto faith, but yet it is from the right meaning
of this place. And by Oil he understands sweet smelling oil, and other
precious oyntmentes, the which were much used in the East. For God does not
only give unto us things necessary for the maintenance of our life, but those
things also which do serve for honest and joyful pleasure: as is showed
Psalm. 104. Finally, says Solomon:

9 Live thy life, etc.] that is so say, enjoy thou the commodities of this
life with assured and sound contentedness of mind: A good wife is one of the
greatest blessings that may befall unto a man in this life.
with the wife, then especially, when as God has given thee a wife meet for
thee, and fit for thy mind and manners: then the which benefit, among the
blessings which appertain unto this life, nothing is better, nor more dear,
nothing more profitable nor more plentiful unto all the parts of life. All the
days, etc. If thou shall have obtained this benefit at the hands of God, use
it as a pasport to wander over the race of this miserable life: A prouiso
concerning the use of the things pertaining unto this life.
and dwell so with thy self, that thou have at home with thee as household
gestes, co^tentednes, and joy of mind. And he will have the use of all these
things pertaining unto life thus far to be free, that always a necessary
exception be understood, namely so far as God has created them, to be used of
the faithful soberly, and with thanks giving. For the wiseman in this place
speaks of the lawful use of things. This moreover must be supplied out of the
Apostle, That we fasten not our affection neither upon the getting of these
things, nor upon the using of them, nor upon the forgoing of them: but that we
possess them as not possessing the^, that we want and abound according unto
the pleasure of the lord: and finally, that we be always ready to live and dye
unto him, and not unto our selves. Now he adioyneth a new circumstance:

10 All that etc. He signifies, A present remedy for the avoiding of the
weariness of this life.
that it is a most present remedy for the avoiding of the tediousnes of this
life, that every one of us diligently follow his own vocation, and employ all
the powers of his mind about the discharging of it faithfully. For there is
nothing more busy than is idleness, the which fills the mind with vain
cogitations, as if there were not already present occasion to occupy it about,
They be the words of the Poet Horace, by the which he notes the folly of
such, as letting go the present occasion to do good, idly muse upon other
matters.
and to follow some trade: for so says he: The husband man or country man
waits until the river leave running. Contrariwise, the mind being occupied
about some certain business, is not cumbred with those curious wearinesses of
searchinge after needelesse matters. All that which thou shall find, he
says not that we must do whatsoever we list or please, but whatsoever
shall appertain unto our calling. And he gives to understand that there are
sundry sorts of callings, but that every man ought to be occupied in his own
calling, and that says he: According unto the power, that is, as thou art
able, and according unto the measure, the which God the upright arbitrer and
disposer of his own gifts, has imparted unto thee. For this is a true and
certain rule for all callings: A necessary rule for all callings.
Not to be wise above that we ought to be wise, but to be wise unto sobriety,
unto every one according as God has imparted the measure of faith. He
adds: Because there is no work etc. In the grave whither thou go. His
meaning is not (as the mad Epicures do say) that there is no sense or feeling
after death, and that therefore the whole man is destroyed: but this he
means, that we must labor in our calling, whilst it is day, before the
darkness of death overtake us, in the which there shall be no time to work. In
a word, he wills us diligently to follow our calling, and in it to use
faithful and painful labor, and diligently to take the opportunity and fit
times to do well, as the Apostle says: VVhilest we have fit time, let us do
good, that God may find us laboring in his work. But how far, and with what
mind we ought to work, he now further teaches.

11 I turned, etc.] These words do plainly agree with them that went next
before, yet they contain an excellent garnishing of the whole doctrine: That
the affairs of men are governed by the providence of god, Nothing has good
success with out the blessing of God.
the which doctrine is the foundation and principal point of this place. The
sum is: That all the endeavors of men are in vain, unless the blessing of
God be with them, the which only is the effectual way in deed for the doing
of things happily, or with good success, and (as one says) the perfection of
all well doing. By the words of Turning about and seeing, he shows that the
same thing was confirmed by experience, the which he had diligently marked.
That the race is not unto the swift: He teaches in express words, that the
issues and falling out of things are not in the hand, or industry of man, no
not in those things the which appertain unto this life, as Jeremy says: I
know Lord, that the way of man is not in man. Not as if a man were a block,
and that there were no election or choice of will in them: (the which politic
men call the beginning of doing) but because GOD does bend the same purpose
of the will of man, into what way he will, and does govern and dispose the
issues and fallinge out of things with an absolute and chief rule and power.
He teaches therefore that all the seasons of our whole life are without man,
All things pertaining unto this life ar governed by God.
and constantly governed by GOD: And of purpose reckons up such things as
are more notable in our life, the success of things valiantly atchiued,
wars, the way to govern our families, riches and wealth, knowledge: all
which he denies to be in the power of man.

By the Word Bread, he understands a convenient and moderate trade of
living, as is an Household: By riches and wealth, the greater states of Cities
and Kingdoms, for the saying of the Prophet is most true, If GOD build not
the house, etc. the which also he applies unto Cities and all governments:
Whereas he says that time and chance do happen unto all things, it is thus
to be understood, that we know that God does dispose the opportunities and
falling out of times by his certain providence. For that which God does, not
only beyond nature, and without the help of nature, but also against nature,
after a secret manner and unknown unto men, Chance.
that same do men call Chance. GOD therefore, says Solomon, does wisely
dispose things, neither are they in the power or wit of man, as if he should
say, I will thee to labor diligently in thy calling: yet so far forth
that thou trust not in thine own wisdom and strength: but that thou beg and
wait for help from God: and what issue soever fall out, that thou persuade
thy self that it was better so to have been, and that thou acknowledge thine
infirmity or weakness. Thus he applies this general doctrine of the
providence of God unto his purpose.

12 Because man also, etc.] The assured trust in God his providence is the
only remedy against the troubles and disorders of this world.
He applies that which he said before: that the works of men were in the
hand of God, that is to say, the whole doctrine of the providence of God,
unto the question in hand, that in so great uncertainty of this miserable and
troublesome life, we may know that the confidence and trust of this doctrine
is to be applied unto every one of us, least we be overwhelmed with the
waves of desperation: but let us strengthen our selves with the certainty of
GOD his providence, in these holy cogitations, against the doubtful and
uncertain assaults of fortune, as they say. For this is the only remedy
against the unsteadfast troubles of the life of man. The uncertainties of this
life he garnisheth and sets out with a notable similitude, likening men
unto fishes and birds, the which are taken on the suddeine with a nett.

13 And he brings a notable example of the wonderful providence of GOD, in
the government of the issues and fallinge out of things altogether unlooked
for, settinge a preface before it, that the matter may more heedefully be
noted. Also I have seen this Wisdom, etc. as if he should say: This
example I bring of the wisdom of GOD in the governing of the world. And it
is great unto me, that is to say, the consideration of so notable a thing is
of very great force with me, albeit that such matters pass by the eyes of men
unregarded, for that they think these things either to come to pass by
chance, or else by some ordinary means of nature: yet I nevertheless do
judge it to be a most great work, That which others attribute unto fortune,
the faithful must ascribe unto the providence of God.
yea, and of most great wisdom, that is to say, that whereas men do
attribute it unto Fortune, it is wisely to be noted and marked, that we may
make our profit thereof: and let them not slip away without consideration,
although they fall out daily in this life: and that we ascribe the cause of
all those things unto the providence of GOD, etc.

14 A little citie] He signifies that great matters are many times atchiued
of a few men, and that contrary unto the opinion and expectation of all men.
Themistocles.
Themistocles, when as the safety of Graecia was past all hope, forsaking
Athens, gave an overthrow unto the mighty host of Xerxes, the which was wont
to conquer others almost with the very name of it. Cyrus, Cyrus.
with a very small beginning won the most large Empire of the Chaldeans.
Alexander with a small army put to flight the great host of Darius,
Alexander.
and got the Empire of the East. And that I rehearse not infinite examples out
of the memory of all nations and ages, France.
my poor country within these few years has seen diverse spectacles or
sightes of such unlooked for issues among the rages and furies of civil wars.
After such sort is the providence of God wont to disapoint the enterprises of
men: as Marie notably teaches in her song, and daily experience does
abundantly prove. But for the better setting forth of the matter Solomon
uses an excellent comparison, and the same consisting of contraries: An
excellent comparison.
To wit, of a mighty King, and a poor man: of a small city, and few men to
defend it, of a strong and great army to assault it: yet, there was the
overthrow and here the victory and happy end. These are notable and evident
tokens of the providence of God, the which notwithstanding unthankful men do
not acknowledge.

15 And no man] Thus men that have very well deserved of others, are many
times evil requited for their labor: of which examples there are store, and
too many in all common wealths and kingdoms both of old and new times. The
unthankfulness and blockishnes of men.
But herein consists the great unthankfulness, and great blockishnesse of
men, that they do not acknowledge God to be the author of these things so
wonderful. And by the way he notes the difference between a good and wise
man: and a wicked and foolish man: of the which matter he will speak by and by.

A precept concerning true Wisdom. From this 16. verse unto the 8. verse of
the 10. Chapter.
16 Then I said, wisdom is better then strength, although the wisdom of the
poor be despised, and his words be not heard.

17 The words of wise men are rather heard in quietness then the cry of him
that rules among fools.

18 Wisdom is better then instruments of war: but one sinner destroys much
good.

The tenth Chapter.
1 As dead flies cause to stinck, and do putrify the ointment of the
Apothecarie, so a little folly causes him to stink that is in estimation for
wisdom and glory.

2 The heart of a wiseman is at his right hand, and the heart of a fool at his
left hand.

3 And also the heart of a fool faints, when as he goes by the way: and he
says of all men, that he is a fool.

4 If the spirit of him that rules rise up against thee, leave not thy place:
because that gentleness causes great sins to be quiet.

5 There is an evil the which I have seen under the Sun, like unto an
error that goes forth from the presence of him that rules.

6 The fool is set in great excellency: and the rich sit in a low place.

7 I have seen servants upon horses, and princes walking on the ground like
servants.

8 He that diggeth a pit shall fall into it: and he that breaks an hedge, a
Serpent shall bite him.

9 He that remoueth stones, shall hurt himself thereby: and he that cutteth
wood shall be in danger thereby.

10 If the sword be blunt, and one has not made clean the edge, he that
cutteth must put to more strength; but wisdom is the excellency of the doing
of a thing right.

11 If the serpent bite when he is not charmed, so is there no excellency unto
one that is full of tongue.

12 The words of the mouth of a wise man is grace, but the lips of a fool
destroy him.

13 The beginning of the words of his mouth is folly, and the end of his
mouth, is wicked madness.

14 And the fool multiplyeth words: and faith, Man knows not that which
shall be: and who shall show unto him, what shall be after him?

15 The labor of fools does weary them: the which notwithstanding know not
to go into the city.

16 VVo be unto thee o land, when as thy king is a child, and thy Princes eat
in the morning.

17 Blessed art thou o land, when as thy King is the son of nobles, and thy
princes eat in due season, for strength, and not for drunkenness.

18 Because of slothfulnes the roof bends it self to fall: and because of
the idleness of the hands the house droppeth through.

19 The Bakers make bread for laughter, and wine makes them merry that are
alive, and silver answers all.

20 Speak not evil of the King, no not in thy thought: and speak not evil of
the rich in thy bedchamber: because the fowls of the heaven shall carry the
voice, and that which has wings shall declare the matter.


The Exposition and the doctrine noted together.
16 From the words going last before he falls into a new matter, joining with
a pleasant knitting together that which went before with this that follows.
For he had spoken of the happy success of the wise man: who notwithstanding
that he had very well deserved of his city, the which he delivered from
present destruction, received none, or else a very sorry reward: now he
describes and sets out the efficacy and force of true, that is to say, of
Christian wisdom, and compares it with the folly of men and notably teaches
the use of it for every part of the life of man. Taking therefore occasion of
this discourse of that which went next before: Then, says he, I said. By that
example I considered, and plainly gathered the force of wisdom. To say.
For, to say, (as has been often noted) signifies certainly to affirm a
thing. He says therefore that he was thoroughly resolved That wisdom is
better then strengh, that is to say, that there is more force in wisdom unto
a good and happy life, then in strength: albeit that the madness and
lewdness of men be so great that they contemn and despise the voice of a good
and a wise man. And Solomon describes the nature and effects of wisdom and
folly.

17 The words of wise men, etc.] He does therefore so set out the effects of
them both, that by the comparison of folly he does increase the commendation
of wisdom. He says that the words of wisemen are heard in quietness
rather then the cry of him that rules among fools. Diverse men expound these
words diversely. I understand them simplye thus, This place diversely expounded.
Albeit that a wise man be void of those glorious shows and colors, that
profane men do proudlye set out themselves with: yet nevertheless, that
the godly simplicity of good men is, far more forcible and profitable then
the exquisite bragging of wicked men. So he sets Words in quietness, that
is to say, the modest and mild speech of the wise man, against The cry of
him that rules among fools, that is, against the loud and fyled speeches of
fools, yea even of those that carry the cheifest sway and authority. And he
says that the words of the wise are rather heard, then the words of the
fool, because there is in them more power and profit. Wise men therefore do
speak by the effects of that which follows of their speech. Therefore there
is in these words no contrariety with the words of the 16 verse, in which
this same was denied. Wise men are not heard of lewd and unthankful
persons, because these refuse their sober and profitable counsel: yet are
they heard, albeit that lewd men be never so much against it, because of the
manifest profit of them, the which do clearly shine forth by the fruitful
effects. Now after what manner, and by what effects the words of wise men
are heard, he teaches in the next verse.

18. Wisdom is better, etc.] For as by sober and Christian Wisdom many
commodities do redound unto all men, so follye and lewdness bring infinite
hurtes unto men. He calls him a sinner (as I have noted many times already)
the which is an ungodly and a profane person, against whom he matcheth A
Wise man that is to say, a godly and an honest man. For the chief point of
true Wisdom is, to live godly and honestlye. Solomon therefore describes that
same true wisdom, the which James calls the wisdom from above: the which
does not only teach the way of salvation, but also the means how to frame
our life well and blessedly: so that he that is endued therewith should not
only be profitable unto himself: but also should bring great and profitable
benefits unto all other men.

Against him he sets an ungodly and wicked man, of a badde and naughty
conscience, hurtful especially unto himself, and also unto other men: of
which like plagues and corruptions of mankind, there have been both many in
times past, and are also at this day, unto the overthrowing of common wealths
and families: whilst that they also procure hurt unto themselves, these
sinners albeit endued with singular wits, so far as concerns civil and
external matters, the holy ghost marketh with the reproach of folly and
madness, that we should know that it is a bottomless gulf of greatest and
most extreme madness, Most extreme madness to depart from the service of God.
to depart from the pure worship and service of God. These civil gifts,
albeit never so great and fair in show, yet are they so defiled with the
stayne of this badde Conscience, that they bring assured destruction unto their
own Masters, the which he shows in the next verse.

The tenth chapter.
1. As flies, etc.) Such, says he, The corruption of wicked folly.
is the corruption and infection of this wicked follye, that he which is
infected therewith, albeit he be otherwise endued with great and excellent
gifts, yet he stincketh shamefully, that is to say those same gifts are
altogether unprofitable and hurtful, and turn so much more unto his greater
condemnation, by how much they were more great and excellent.

By the word Oyntmente, according unto the use of the scripture, some precious
or excellent thing is signified, as, Unto a smell of sweet sauoure, speaking
of the efficacy and virtue of our redemption: A sauoure of knowledge, speaking
of the preaching of the Gospel: A savor of a sweet smell: speaking of the
bounteousnesse and liberality of Christian charity, which speeches are used
by Paul in his Epistles.

And by the word Folly (as I have said) I understand that same sinful
ignorance of GOD and of a man his own self: the which causes that excellent
gifts otherwise (as of knowledge, Wisdom, eloquence, yea of martyrdom and
miracles) are rotten Flies. If thine eye be dark says Christ, thy whole
body is made dark.

Saul. Judas.
Saul had excellent civil gifts, so also had Judas: but they were rotten or
stinking Flies in oyntmente. Civil gifts therefore are in such sort to be
wished for, that we especially beg of GOD the holy ghost, that is to say,
gifts not to be repented of, whose most holy effect is a good conscience:
that we may rejoice especially on this behalf, that our names are written in
the book of life: and with the holy Apostle so strive, that we may carry away
the reward. The stink therefore of an evil conscience is to be taken heed of
and eschewed. And this comparison of counterfeit wisdom being wont to be used
by the way of the old sound fathers in religion, may be alleged to discipher
out those also, which departing from true faith, and the feeling of the Lord
himself do in name only profess themselves to be of the Church of Christ,
Unto whom this comparison now adays may be fitly applied.
such as there have been many in times past, autors of heresies and schisms,
and is now adays also pretended under the name and title of Catholicisme.

2. The heart of a wise man, etc.) He goes on in the comparison of a wise
man and a fool. The wise man he says to have his Heart at his right hand:
and the fool, At his left hand, by a fyguratiue kind of speaking,
signifying that the knowledge of a good conscience, is the guide and leader of
our whole life. The Proverb is taken from this, that the right hand in a man
is ready to do things: and the left hand vnreadye: So to be at the right
hand, is to direct and govern, as Psalm, 16. A wise man then does govern
himself and his whole life well and happily: but a fool throws himself
willingly headlong unto destruction. This is that which he says.

A fool willingly seeks his own destruction.
3. By the way by which, etc. That is to say, He takes the way of
destruction, he willinglye runs unto his own overthrow. For it is known
that by the Word Way, a course and trade of life is signified. His heart
faints he is void of judgment and reason, that he may be carried with a
certain blind rage unto his own misery.

And yet he says, Such is his boldness and so great, that he says of all
men, He is a Fool, that is, he condemns others. Therefore he notes that
ambition, the which being rash and foolish, dares to condemn not only the
godly, but also furiously rises up against God, and through folly assaulteth
heaven, after the manner of Gyauntes. Having showed the nature of Wisdom and
follye, he sets down the effects of Wisdom for the ordering of our life
rightly and wisely, and that in most weighty and necessary matters.

How we ought to behave our selves toward an evil Magistrate.
4. If the spirit, etc.) He teaches how we ought to behave our selves
toward an evil Magistrate, and then especially when as we are come into
such streightes, as that we stand in his displeasure, in this danger we
must not set anger against anger, but overcome the anger of the mightyer, by
modestye and mildnes. The which doubtless is of great importance in this
life, into the which befall sundry encumbrances of those great dangers. For
it is an hard thing (as one says) to strive against our betters.

If the spirit of him that bears rule arise up against thee, that is to
say, if the Magistrate wax angrye against thee, by an express manner of
speaking, signifying the vehemency and force of anger. Forsake not thy place,
behave not thy self vnmodestlye, nor leave thy duty, passing the bounds of
thy duetye, attempt not any thing against the Magistrate, being provoked
with his doing of thee wrong. To forsake a man his place, To keep a man his
place
is to leave his duty: contrariwise where the Apostle wills to walk
stedfastlye, or as some translate it, Comely, his meaning is, that a man should
keep his place or degree as is meet and comely. Solomon therefore wills
great mildness and Wisdom to be used toward the angry Magistrate.

He yeldeth a reason of his counsel, Because gentleness or myldnesse. He
means that gentleness will pacify and assuage the mind of the angry
Magistrate, yea and moreover bring to pass, that the matter break not out
unto any further stir. And why he thus speaks, he goes on to show.

5. There is an evil, etc.) As if he should say, It is in deed a very hard
matter to bear the pride and furiousness of unjust men, yet of two
discommodities, the lesser is to be chosen: we must rather give place unto a
Tyrant, then that there should come greater inconvenience.

Ephoroi, or Overseers, were certain magistrates in the common wealth of the
Lacedaemonians appointed to see that the King kept the laws and did the people
no wrong, the which form of government remains yet in some places, as may
appear by this Author.
And he speaks of private persons, for the Ephoroi or Overseers in a common
wealth, the which are appointed unto the chief Magistrate, as it were bands
to bridle the higher power, ought to set themselves against a tirant waxing
insolent and proud against the laws and customs of his country. This is
indeed a great evil, that is, a great disorder, Under the Sun, in this life,
And like unto the error, in which the providence of God seems to be wanting.
Yet it comes forth from the face of him that rules, that is to say, it is
governed by the assured providence of God. He adds a new circumstance of
this matter.

6. and 7. A fool is set, etc.) In disordered and tyrannical gouernmentes,
Pickthanks, and proud vaunting Thrasoes being in favor and liking with the
tirant do bear the cheifest sway, Noble men being thrust out, unto whom the
laws do give authority: And it comes also often times to pass, that base
persons are exalted unto the place of great dignity, the rightful owners
being put back. In these great dangers, the grave counsel of the holy ghost
is, that we behave our selves wiselye, and discreetely, and cause no needelesse
broils, but rather that we give place unto the greater power of a tyrant,
albeit he be never so wicked: whom God in his just judgment will have to
reign to punish those, Why God will have a tyrant to reign.
which would not obey him ruling justly and mildly by his word. So the Prophet
willed the people of GOD oppressed by the unjust power of Babylon, to pray for
the peace of Babylon. Nothing is more repugnaunt or contrary unto true
religion, then disorder or disobedience, and the same civil. The gospel
takes not away, but establishes obedience unto Magistrates.
For the Gospel takes not away the authority of the Magistrate, and
politic government, but does establishe it: yea and moreover it wills
subjects to be obediente even unto evil Magistrates. For as concerning those
things the which appertain unto the worship of God, and the peace of our
consciences, there is extant a profitable exception of the same truth, the
which is never contrary unto it self, That it is better to obey God then men.
Neither is it the mind of Solomon to make men blocks (as some people are
idolators of their own Kings) but he teaches that we ought to behave our
selves wiselye and discreetelye among these outrages and disorders, least that
we heap up one evil upon an other: observing diligently the circumstances of
persons and times, the which he taught before to be one especial point of
christian wisdom.

8. 9. He that diggeth a pit) A precept for the avoiding of craftiness and
deceit, the which is matched against true and holy wisdom. By the one he says
that things go very ill forward with men, and with the other to have very
good success: and therefore that the true and sure way of doing things well
and happilye to consist especially in this upright and simple wisdom. Plain
and upright dealing with wisdom, is the way to make things go well with us.
Contrariwise, that it cannot be, but that by subtlety and deceit endless
trouble must arise unto crafty persons. For of ill counsayles there are wont
to be bad ends, according unto that rule: Heinous crimes are punishments even
in this life, and, With what measure ye met, with the same it shall be met unto
you again. The continual experience of things teaches this, from whence have
sprung these sayings.

He that against an other man
Plutarch de audiendis poetis.
Does mischief work and frame,
May make accounts that he himself,
Shall not escape the same.
And, Hesiodus.
Bad counsel forgde by craftye head
An other to entrap:
Does often fall by due desert
Into the forgers lap.


And the whole kind of speaking does excel with a notable garnishing of
Figures. For there are used similitudes and examples of deceytes, the which
deceytes are the effects of a crafty and subtle mind. The first similitude.
He that diggeth a pit, etc. which similitude is often in the scripture,
Psalm. 7. Proverb. 26. and in many places else. The meaning is that crafty
persons do perish through their own arts, and do procure harm unto their
own selves by the self same means, that they did practice against an other.
To this purpose are the other similitudes referred. The second.
He that teareth or pulls up an hedge, that is to say, as he which
breaks down the hedge of an other man his ground, a serpent comes out of
the hedge, and hurts him: so he that seeks the hurt of his Neighbor,
does willingly hurt himself.

He that remoueth a stone, The third.
As he hat plucketh up the bounds of an other man ^is ground, does bring
himself into very grea^e danger, namely into some great punishmen^ appointed
by laws, against such as pull up land marks: as was this law of the twelve
tables He that shall pluck up any bound, let him be punished. So says
he, He shall be confounded, that remoueth bounds, because it is a capital
crime of man his own private authority to remove marks. An other similitude,
He that cutteth wood, The fourth. The application of this similitude is easy
by that which went before.
as if a man cut wood in another man his wood, breaks his leg or his arm,
or some other joint, or brings himself into some other danger.

10. If the sword be blunt) An argument by comparison to amplify the efficacy
or force of wisdom, after this manner: industry and force earnestly used, may
do much, but wisdom is of far more force and is far more excellent, nay
it is the only way to do things well and with good success. Of these words
therefore this is the meaning, if the edge of the sword be blunt, and he which
uses it, do not whet it (for the Hebrews say, To make clean the face or
edge of a sword, for, To sharpen the point of it: because a sword is
scoured, and waxes brighte) and therefore he can not use it readily, and to
any purpose: if he put to more strength, he shall help the bluntness of the
sword. So he ignifyeth, that when as craft has no good success, we may
come unto open force, bu^ yet that this force is of it self of no value. He
sets down the other part of the comparison, But wisdom is the excellency
o^ doing a thing right: of the which words t^is I take to be the plain
meaning, Wisdom is of far more force then craft and strength, unto the
doing of things luckily* and therefore we are not to think that our affairs
will prosper with us by evil arts and subtlety, Our affa^res cannot prosper
by ^rafte and deceit.
as the Prophet gives warning: Trust not unto oppression, nor unto stealing,
neither be ye vain, etc. The Hebrew word the which they translate To do a
thing right, or, to direct, signifies to do a thing well and with good
success.

That same true wisdom therefore teaches the way to order things both
private and public with good success, the which also God does make to be
the servant of civil happiness: Contrariwise, subtlety, craft, busy meddling
are the overthrows both of families, and also public gouernmentes, as
experience is a most plentiful witness by very notable effects.

11. If a serpent bite, etc. Against slaundering and prattling.
) A precepte Concerning the avoiding of backbiting and prattling: against the
which, wisdom yields a fit remedy. And he sets out the discommodities
of this slanderous and poisoned Prattling by a notable similitude. If a
serpente bite, that is to say, Slander is like the biting of a Serpent, which
is not charmed. For it is commonly supposed, that the poison of serpents is
expelled, or driven out by charms. After which phrase of speaking the
Prophet describing the wickedness of the ungodly says They have poison like
unto the poison of a serpent, like unto the deaf adder the which stops her
ear the which hears not the voice of the Charmers. Doubtless slander, is
a sore plague, Slander the firebrand of dissentions.
and a fyrebrande of great dissentions, whereof do afterward ensue
hurliburlyes and garboyles in mankind. Therefore it was said in the law, be
thou not a backbiter among thy people. And the holy ghost in the fifteenth
Psalm, thrusts a slaunderer out of the possession of the kingdom of Heaven.
And in an other Psalm he denies that it can by any means be, that the
profession of true religion can be in the mouth of a sclaunderer. Why, says
he, have thou my law in thy mouth, and sit to backbite thy Neighbor?
And James says that his religion is in vain, which does not bridle his
tongue.

He calls the evil speaker and slaunderer, A Lord of tongue, who places
great power and authority in the sleightes and boldness of his tongue, as in
the 12 Psalm, the saucie boldness of such wicked persons is described, With
our tongues, say they, we will prevail and bear rule, etc. and in the Example
of the Varlet Doeg, there is a pattern of such poisoned monsters, such as the
courts of Princes are full of. But he says that the Pratler and he that is
full of tongue does not only hurt others, but also greatly hurt himself:
making a comparison with a good and a wise man.

12 The words of the mouth, etc.] A wise man so speaks, that he gets
himself favor: but a fool slays his self with his words as it were with
his own weapon. The memory of all times and people has seen such bad
counsailours, who as they have hurt others, so also have they hurt themselves.
Experience therefore is a true commentary of this doctrine. He shows a cause
of this unlucky end.

13. The beginning, etc] Because that in the beginning, in the midst, in the
end, that is, always a fool erreth, being carried away headlong with follye
and blindness, whereupon it cannot be otherwise, but that all things must
fall out ill unto him. Yet he does so please himself in the darkness of his
foolish blindness, The boldness of fools.
that albeit he see not the things before his feet, yet he dares in such
sort to pronounce of things most furthest off to come, as if he had them at
his own commandment. This is it that he says: And the fool, etc. Solomon
reprehendeth this folly, setting down a reason, Man knows not, 14 verse.
As if he should say, it is a point of extreme folly, to determine of things
to come, when as it lies not in the power of men to know things to come. For I
take these words to be spoken in the person of the Preacher, and not in the
person of the fool as the interpreters say: who in this plain sentence do
surmise a needelesse want of words. Therefore he concludes that this vanity
of fools is most hurtful unto themselves.

15. The labor of Fools, etc.) That is to say, Those ouerthwartly wise do
attempt many things in vain, they take much pain about unprofitable and
dangerous matters, and do procure many heavy happes both unto them selves,
and also unto others: and whilst they search after dark and hard matters they
become stark fools in common things the which are known unto all men. For
this is a description of hurtful busy meddling, wearying it self unprofitably
in all matters, saving such as are good and profitable. Not to know the way
into the city, in a prouerbiall kind of speech, Not to know the way into the
city.
signifies to be ignorant in a thing that is known unto all men by a
metaphor taken from those which leaving the high way, seek a near way, and
going very far about, do go wandering up and down, from the City, unto
the which they meant to take their journey. So foolish men whilst they
follow after high matters, leaving the common way, they do fall into great
errors, and do go very much out of the way. There are many examples of
such vanity in Contraries, who whilst they conceive great empires and
dignities in their minds, they stick fast many times in small matters, a
small stone breaks or beats back a great wave, as one says. Such are the
heathen Philosophers, following that same vain vanity nothing beseeming
Philosophers: who in needful and common matters being altogether boys, that
is to say, being ignoraunte of the way to live well, have vaunted of the
things, the which they have not seen, Horace.
as the Apostle says: as Democritus, who beholding the fyrmamente and stars,
suffered his ground to be spoiled by cattle. And in the common course of life
also, such kind of men are to be seen, who (as Bernarde says) do all things
saving that the which they ought to do. They know not the way into the city,
the which is a pattern of those curious ones, whom the Apostle says not to
work at all, but to be busy medlers with that wherewith they have nothing to
do, and would have them to be noted by an Epistle, as ulcers and cankers of
holy assemblies: as were those idle and busy widows, 1. Tim. ver. 13.

16 VVo be to thee o Land.] He spoke before of the manner how we ought to
behave our selves in the dangers of a disordered and tyrannical government:
now he preaches of an happy and unhappy government. Therefore I suppose
these two verses and the twentieth to be set out of their places by the
Rabines: The story of the Leuite his wife, wrong placed as it is likely.
as is manifest concerning that story the which is in the end of the Judges,
concerning the wife of the Leuite defiled by the Biniamites, in the which
mention is made of Phinees the son of Eleazar, the which could not live unto
that age. Yet am I afraid to change so much as one title in this place. But
if they be joined with the fifth verse, the sentence will run the more
aptly. Woe, therefore unto thee O land. He says, that the same land is
unhappy, the which meets with evil princes: contrariwise that that la^d is
happy, the which meets with good Princes. For it is a great plague, when as
they, by whose goodness, justice, wisydome, gravity, mankind ought to be
governed, do rush in as it were wolves unto the overthrow and destruction of
mankind. Thy King is a child. He speaks not simply of such as are children
in age (for kingdoms may be governed very well by children, that is, such as
are not of any great age, as contrariwise they may be governed very ill by
old men) but in wit and wisdom, so that they be carried away headlong with
evil counsel: a threatening of which like kind of children kings there is in
Esaias and Oseas. Plato.
Plato doubtless has said very well, that it can very hard and scarsly be,
but that a young mind having such authority as may not be controlled, the which
is not constrained to give accounts unto any man of his doings, will be full
fraught with folly and lust, and therefore be a cause of many troubles. He
says also that dissolute and lewd princes are the destruction and undoing of
kingdoms: which kind of monsters the Roman Empire has felt unto the
ouerthowe of the same: and our age does see some waxinge insolent and proud
in most noble kingdoms. Contrariwise he says that that kingdom is happy,
in which the King reigning by lawful authority, the which he has received
from his ancestors according unto the ordinance of laws (for he speaks of
a kingdom descending by inheritance, such as was in the house of David) does
so behave himself as becomes a godly and a good Prince. He therefore sets
the sobriety of a good and virtuous Prince, against the dissoluteness and
drunkenness of Tyrants. And he prescribes this rule of eating and drinking,
A rule for eating and drinking.
that we eat and drink so much, as may be sufficient to nourish and refresh
the body, so that it may be fit for the discharging of the duties of our
calling: not for beastly desire and gurmaundice in eating and drinking. For (as
one says) we do not live to eat, but we eat to live.

18 Because of slothfulnes.] Against slouthfulnes.
A precept concerning the auoydinge of slothfulness, and he also ministers
a remedy for the driuinge of it away, which is the true knowledge of GOD, the
use whereof he teaches. He sets down the discommodities of
slothfulness: namely, that through it the goods of a slothful and sluggish
person are wasted and consumed, the which he sets out by a notable
similitude. But it is expedient for the common wealth, that no man wastfully
spend his goods. There is a flat commandment of GOD, that he which labors
not, should not eat: when as it is commendable, just, necessary, that every
man should keep himself within some certain kind of calling. There is an
example of this honest labor in Ada^ eue^ before his fall: as who labored with
any pain in dressing the garden of Eden: but sin has made us subject unto
labor. This saying is found true: That men by doing nothing learn to do
evil: Idl^nes.
For idleness is the firebrande and matter of kindling many evils Having
showed the effects of slothfulness, he now declares the effects of
diligence, the which he matcheth against it.

19 For laughter.] Laughter he calls merrinesse and pleasantness of mind.
By the word Bread, Bread.
he understands necessary and fit helps to live withal. Wine is ordained
not only for the necessary uses of life, Wine.
but also for pleasure. Silver he says answers all, Silver.
because that the commodity of money is so great, that it flows out
plentifully, and is spread abroad into all the parts of man his life. Finally,
he comprehends al things the which appertain unto the leading of our life
commodiously and honestly: the which are furnished by diligence and industry
or pains taking: and therefore is by so much more to be preferred before
slothfulness, by how much it is more to be wished to lead our life easily and
happily then to live miserably and shamefully in the sluttishnesse and filthes
of poverty. This I think to be the plain and clear meaning of this place. In
this kind of speech: They make bread, the interpreters supply this word
Bakers, but needelesly: for it is an impersonall, as they say, according unto
the use of the Hebrews. They make bread, that is to say, bread is wont to be
made. So the use of bread is simply signified.

20 Even in thy thought.] Another effect of Christian wisdom
Another effect of Christian wisdom, of the which he had spoken in the fifth
verse following, namely how we ought to behave our selves in troublesome and
disordered kingdoms. Namely, that in this most wicked world we ought to use
so great wariness and heedefulnesse, that if the manners of the magistrate
dislike us, we should not tell it unto any body: for as much as that is joined
with very great danger. And in this kind of speaking, Speak not evil of the
King, no not in thy thought, there is an excessive speech, the which among the
Rhetoricians is a figure called Hyperbole, and the meaning of the words is as
if he should say, Be afraid to make thine own self as it were a witness of
those thoughts the which the Prophet utters in other words thus, lay thine
hand upon thy mouth in the confusions and disorders of kingdoms: for (as one
says) trusty or faithful silence has a safe and sure reward. It is lawful
for the servants of God to reprove princes, if their calling so require.
Yet he does not take away the holy liberty of the servant of God in
reproouing of Kings, when as their calling requires the same: but he shows
every private man how discreetly and wisely he ought to behave himself,
least he bring himself wilfully into trouble, and through unadvised zeal
become a cause and means of dangerous rashness. He shows a cause, and
sets it out by a similitude. That the authority of Kings is so great, and
such is their power, that even the very birds will bring unto them the things
which has been spoken or whispered in the ear in our secret closet. For they
have every where their harkeners, and long hands* but we ought to give our
diligence, to be wise as serpents, and simple as doves, that is to say, to
walk circumspectly, not as unwise, but as wise: diligently notinge the
circumstances of things, that is to say, according unto that, where of we are
generally put in mind redeeming the time, as the Apostle says: for the days
are evil.

A precept concerning Charity in releeuing the poor. From this place unto the
7 verse. The xj. Chapter.
1 Cast thy bread upon the face of the waters: for in the multitud of days
thou shall find it.

2 Give a portion of bread unto seven, that stand in need, or also unto eight:
for thou know not what evil shall be upon the earth.

3 If the clouds be full, they will power forth rain upon the earth: and if
the tree do fall toward the South, or toward the North, in the place that the
tree falls, there it shall be.

4 He that observes or has regard unto the wind, shall never sow: and he
that looks unto the clouds, shall never reap.

5 As thou know not which is the way of the spirit, and how the bones
grow in the womb of her that is with child: so thou know not the work of
God, that works all things.

6 In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening let not thine hand rest:
because thou know not whether is more convenient this or that: or whether
both of them be alike good.


The Exposition and the doctrine.
1 Cast thy bread.] A precept of Christian charity toward the poor.
A notable precept of the bounteousnesse of Christian Charity in releeuing of
the poor. The whole speech is figurative. Cast thy bread upon the waters,
that is to say: Give liberally of thy goods unto the poor: show thy self a
liberal and ready giver of thy wealth: and lay not out every thing in such
sort, that if there appear no hope of being requited again, thou will
therefore withdraw thine hand from well doing. But rather concerning those
helps, wherewith thou may relieve the poor, and such as stand in need of
thine aid, cast them upon the face of the waters, as if they should be lost,
albeit thou know not what end and success this thy liberality shall have.
This is an excessive kind of speech. He takes not away judgment in bestowing
our alms.
For he takes not away the judgment of wisdom that considering matters
wisely and diligently, we should bestow a benefit upon those, whom we shall
think worthy of our help, especially upon those which are of the household of
faith: but he will give us to understand, that we must make no delay in helping
the pore, whilst we too curiously search, whether they be worthy or
unworthy, of whom regard should be had. He will therefore have our bread to
be as it were cast upon the waters, as if it should perish and be lost. The
which doctrine is agreeable unto the commandment of our master Christ,
concerning the releeuing of the poor, Mat. 6. A promise.
Unto the precept he joins a promise, For in the multitude, etc. that is to
say, Albeit that the same thing seem to be clean lost, the which thou have
given unto a poor man, yet know thou this for certainty, that in the end
thou shall receive again with great gain, the benefit the which thou have
bestowed upon a poor man. For God doubtless unto whom we do owe our selves
and all that ever we have, and who owes nothing unto any creature, does give
his promise as if he were a surety, and does promise us faithfully that he
will pay us all those things again with most large increase, the which in his
name and for his sake we shall give unto the poor. In the multitude of days
then, that is to say, even then namely, when as thou shall look for nothing,
thou shall receive with most great gain the benefit the which thou have
bestowed upon a poor man. He does amplify the former precept with a new
circumstance.

2 Give a portion.] As if he should say, If thou bestow a benefit upon one or
two, think not that thou have discharged thy duty: but rather give a portion
of thy bread to seven or eight that stand in need: that is to say, Think that
thou ought to relieve so many with thy help, as thou shall be able to
help with thine aid: bound not in thy liberality within narrow bounds:
help all those, that thou art able to help, We must help as many as we are
able.
albeit that many do crave thy help. He said Seven, for a good or great
number, according unto the use of the scripture. He adds a new reason: For,
thou know not what evil shall be upon the earth, that is, what evil
remains for thee. Thou art a man, think not that there is any thing that may
happen unto a man, but that the same also may happen unto thee: suppose that
thou may have the like mishap befalling unto thee. Do therefore the same
unto a poor man, the which thou would have done unto thy self, if thou
were thy self in the same case, that he is. With what measure thou mettest
unto thy neighbors, think that with the same it shall be metten unto thee
again. For damnation shall be without mercy unto him that shows no mercy:
contrariwise, for honest liberality there remains a good reward. Think
also that it may come to pass, that thou shall dye shortly, and that occasions
to do good will slip from thee, whilst thou may, lay up a benefit, the
which thou shall receive with gain in heaven. To this purpose appertains the
verse following.

3 If the clouds be full.] As if he should say, From thence water comes,
where water is: there the tree is found, where he is, into what part or coast
of the heaven soever he shall fall. So if thou shall bestow any benefit upon the
poor, thou shall not lose it, but it is laid up and kept for thee by GOD,
according unto the rule of that promise, whereby he has bound himself unto
thee. This is the true and simple meaning of these words, and the garnishing
of the words that went before. In the multitude of days thou shall find thy
bread. Doubtless, thou shall receive fruit of thy liberality.

4 He that observes the wind.] he daily fyndeth delays, he will in the
end never sow at al. As therefore the issues and fallings out of things
naturally being unknown unto us even severally, do not let but that the works
of husbandry are done abroad at their set and appointed seasons: so ought we
not to be called back from our duty of releeuinge our brethren, albeit that
we see not the reward of our labors. He sets forth the same thing by new
symilitudes and examples.

5. As thou art ignorant.) That is to say, as thou see not the wind, yet
do feel his force and power, and albeit that thou see not the infant in the
womb of the mother, yet it is there indeed, and from thence comes forth at
his due time: so the works of God are dark indeed, the issues and fallings out
of things are unknown, yet must thou with assured hope do those things the
which God has commanded thee according unto thy duty, until that the issues
do follow and fall out. Christ used the similitude of the wind John. 3. ver. 8.
signifying the misterye of regeneration or new birth which springs from the
secret power of the holy ghost. And here is also notably set down a similitude
of a child in the mothers womb, and this doctrine besides his peculiar and
proper circumstance may be stretched further. Like as we know not how we are
formed or fashioned in the womb of our mother, What we man learn by this
similitude.
so the issues of many things can not be seen, and yet as by the very shape of
the infant we see that it is preserved by the wonderful providence of God,
that the mother is saved great with child, that life is powered into the shaped
body, that nourishment is made, apt and fit to nourish it with all, that the
enclosures are wonderfully opened, when as the child comes into the world,
that the child knows the due time to come forth: so let us know that all
our affairs are cared for of God, and that the issue of our calamities and
troubles is appointed by GOD, as Christ also by the similitude of a woman in
travel does describe the issue of our afflictions. But the proper
circumstance of the similitude requires, that it be understood of the issue
and end or success of liberality or bounteousnesse. This therefore being
determined, persuade thy self that thou shall have a certain effect of thy
charity.

No occasion of weldoing is to be let pass
6 In the morning sow.] That is to say, whilst thou may, and have occasion,
let pass nothing appertaining unto thy calling: upon every occasion be thou
ready to help thy neighbor, to deserve well of the Church, and of mankind.
Sow morning and evening. If here thou have no good success, thou shall have
good success elsewhere. Only do thy duty, watch diligently all occasions
to do well, and redeem them: do thy duty, and leave the success unto God.
For this doctrine may and ought generally to be applied unto the discharging
of our calling. The word sowing is used by Paul in this self same argument 2.
Cor. 9. verse. 6. whereas this place concerning the bounteousnesse of Chistian
charity is plentifully and notably handled: the which is so much the more
earnestly to be often taught, by how much in this most wicked world the
charity of many is not only waxen cold, but also clean frozen.

A precept concerning the use of life, and erst thinking upon death. From this
7. verse unto the 8. verse of the 12. Chapter.
7 Surely the light is sweet, and it is a pleasant thing unto the eyes, to
behold the Sun.

8 Truly if a man live many years, and rejoice in them all, and do call to
remembrance the days of darkness, because they are many: whatsoever comes
to pass he will judge to be vanity.

9 Rejoice, O young man in thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart,
and according unto the sight of thine eyes: but know thou that for all these
things God will bring thee unto judgment.

10 But take away anger from thine heart, and remove evil from thy flesh:
because that childhood and youth are vanity.

The twelfth Chapter.
1 And remember thy creator in the days of thy youth, before the evil days
come, and the years draw near, of which thou shall say, I have no pleasure
in them.

2 Before the Sun wax dark, and the light, and the Moon, and the Stars,
and the clouds return after the rain.

3 In the day in which the keepers of the house shall tremble, and the strong
men shall bow themselves, and the grinders shall cease, because they shall
diminish, and the powers shall wax dark which look through the windows.

4 And the doors shall be shut without, because of the abating of the sound of
the mill: and he shall arise at the voice of the bird, and all the daughters
of singing shall be abased.

5 Also they shall be afraid of an high ^hinge, and they shall fear in the
way: and the Almonde tree shall flourish, and the locust shall be a burden
unto him, and lust shall be driven away: because man goes unto the house of
his age, and the mourners go up and down in the street,

6 Before the silver coard be lengthened, and the golden ewer broken, and the
pitcher broken at the well, and the wheel be broken at the cisterne:

7 And dust return unto the earth, as it was: and the spirit unto God that
gave it.


The Exposition and doctrine.
7 Surely the light.] A most wholesome and profitable precept, that we
should use this present life soberly, and with the earnest thinkinge upon
death, as it were with a bit or bridle, hold back and rule the delights of
life and wanton pleasure. And this notable end he makes of the notable
doctrine concerning the use of godliness, the which in their places we have
said to be the third and last part of this whole discourse. He uses a
necessary and fit Preface, A necessary Preface.
The light in deed is sweet, and it is pleasant to behold the Sun, that is
to say, the light and use of this life is sweet, it is a pleasant thing to
enjoy the commodities of this life.

8 Truly if.] Yet if thou thoroughly consider the spaces and times of thy whole
life, although thou live many years, and so long as thou live, enjoy al kind
of pleasures: and do but set against them the discommodities and troubles, of
the which thou have had experience al thy life: and shall cast thine accountes,
what has befallen thee in all the course of thy life, no doubt thou shalt
find that in thy life there is great vanity: which thing is so manifest by
experience it self, that the Sun shines not more clearly at noone day.
What then does he I pray you gather hereof?

We must so live, that we remember that we shall dye.
9 Rejoice.] The sum and effect is, considering the vanity of our life, we
must so live, that we remember that we must dye, and therefore we are to use
this life soberly and moderately, and not so handle the matter that we be
made drunken with the delites and pleasures of the same. Now this doctrine is
common unto all men, yet Solomon applies it properly and peculiarly unto young
men: who through the strength and lustiness of age, and want of experience of
things, do not think that they shall dye: nor that strength of lusty age shall
fail them at any time: and therefore they follow pleasures the more
licentiously and intemperately. In another place in deed the wise man bids
us to rejoice, but in this sense and meaning, namely, that we should use the
commodities of this life merrily and joyfully: but that it is not so to be
meant in this place, these words do declare: Walk in the ways of thine
heart, etc. the which doubtless do not will that we should so do. This
therefore is to be understood to be a granting ironically or in mockage. As
if he should say, Go to, O young man, which art lusty in age, follow thy
pleasure and spare not, do what thou will according unto thy mind and lust,
yet know for all this that in the end at length, thou must give accountes
unto GOD of thy life. For as much then as thou shall have to do with so
mighty a Judge,

10 Take away anger our of thine heart] that is to say, begin a course of a
better and a more holy life, abandoning those evil lusts, whereunto thine age
is subject. By these words, Anger and evil, or wickedness, Anger.
he understands all the corrupt affections of man. And the principal point
of a new life is the mortifying of the old man, that the new may be restored
and repaired. By the word Anger, besides the common signification, he notes
a certain indignation or obstinacy, wherewith, he that is reprehended,
hardens him self against reprehensions. By malice, evil, or wickedness:
Evil, malice, or wickedness.
he signifies the most sower leven of sin, wherewith our whole life is
corrupted. Of that same disorder, the which is in us by our nature corrupted,
the first is, that same native sin that is borne with us, the which the
Apostle calls sinning or sinful sin: from this blot there is borne with us
rashness, the which first in children sins through a certain unadvised
and blind brunt or brayde: and as age increases and boldness is brought in to
sin, it becomes malice and obstinacy to sin. Theses are as it were
habites or grown practices and qualities of vices, that besides that same
natural stayne of sin, through an evil custom also of sin waxes and
grows more and more, that it is made more sinful, and becomes a corruption
of corruption. He counsayleth young men betimes to prevent or withstand these
evils, least that in an age that is prone and ready unto lust, licentiousness
of sinning, do grow from worse to worse. Therefore he does earnestlye beat
into their heads this admonition: Because childhoode, etc.] that is to say,
because it hard and scarselye falls out, that Wisdom accompanyeth young
age. Young age truly is very dangerous: The daungerousnesse of youth.
so that Paul nothing doubted to admonish Timothy, a youngman otherwise
endued with excellent gifts, and among other men as it were an Angel, that
he should take heed of that age, and fly youthful lusts: by which Word
he does not understand those intemperate dissolutenesses, and lewdenesse of
young men, the which no doubt Timothy was free and void of: but certain
fyttes and panges of those lusts the which commonly prick forward young
age, as ambition, lightness, pride, unskillfulness, and such like vices, the
which oftentimes accompanye unexperienced, and unadvised young age.

He goes forward with the same matter.

The twelfth chapter.
1. Remember thy Creator, etc.] That age seems, that I may so speak, by a
certain privilege to have liberty to be wanton, youth would have as it were
a certain privilege to be wanton.
as if as yet it were not time to be wise: as many at this day with this sorry
shifte wash of sober and grave admonitions. Contrariwise the Wise man
teaches, that the time of well doing is not any longer to be put off: but
that even in childhoode and youth we must make a beginning to be wise. And
therefore that it is meet that a young man Remember his Maker. We must begin to
be wise even in our youth.
For Godliness, is the principal point and foundation of framing our life
well and blessedlye.

Of which matter he says that we must think betimes, Before, etc. Before
that the time of old age, yea and that which more is, of death it self, and
too late repentance does approach: the which, the occasion being not taken,
suffers not to go back again, and to return unto the old opportunity of
doing well as it were recovering again a thing that was lost.

He that should forslew the seasons of sowing and reaping, should in vain
wish for them at an other time of the year. That is sown in youth, the which
must be reaped in stayed years and in old age it self. If this season of
sowing fly away, from whence shall we look for an harvest? The preacher
faieth therefore, that the time of age draws nigh, the which will come with
a still pace making no noyce and hastening on will beguile us before we be
aware: and death follows upon it many times ouertaking those which when
they have departed this life, did not yet now consider, for what cause they
came into this life. And Solomon in a notable kind of speaking does painte out
the whole matter as it were in a table. We must think on death betimes
The sum and effect of this whole place is, That we must think on death
betimes to the end to live well, that we die well. And he excellentlye
describes and sets out the order and course of nature. He might have said
that it comes oftentimes to pass that young men are taken away in the very
flower of their age, their body being lusty and in very good plighte, yea and
by sundry kinds of death when they think no such thing, and contrary unto the
expectation of all men, and that at such time also when as they seemed likelye
to prolong and continue out their life yet many years. But because young men by
the ordinary course of nature do promise unto themself a long life,
therefore he sets out before them this ordinarye course of nature. For young
men become old men: and in the end death comes: as they did sing sometimes
in the dance: We are that which you have been: you shall be that which we
are, we have been that which you are. One and the same age does not still
continue, neither is there any returning unto the age that is past. Go to
therefore says Solomon, Behold, O young man, what is the estate of the life
of man.

2. Before the sun wax dark) He makes a very lively and excellent
description of old age as it were in a table, A most lively description of old
age.
that the thing can not be more plainly and effectuallye set before the eyes
to be seen and viewed. Whereby shines forth the eloquence of the holy ghost,
fitly and aptly used in time, manner, and place, as need requires: Whereunto
no doubt the eloquence of all Heathen writers, albeit never so exquisit, The
eloquence of the holy ghost, when time and place requires.
gives place. Although in the words themselves, where the sense
notwithstanding and meaning is plain, there is great obscurity and darkness:
and as in alligories is wont to be diverse and sundry interpretations and
expositions. And he severally discusseth and handles all the circumstances, to
lay so many bars in the way of vain bragging youth, that it may at laisure
consider that the form and beautye of the members in good plight and liking,
will not remain unto them for ever, as if he should say, behold O young man the
beauty of thy body, and look upon every one of thy members, and by the
common estate of life, consider in what bravery they will end at the last. To
be brief, he describes the discommodities of old age. The sun wax dark.
By this kind of speech the interpreters do think to be meant, that the power
of seeing is diminished in old men, The sun wax dark.
which thing indeed is true: but that this cannot properly be understood of
the eyes, the words that follow do declare, in the which there is express
mention made of the eyes waxing dim. Therefore I take the simple meaning of
these words to be: That old men have not the use of those things, the which is
indifferently common unto all men: in so much as the Sun, the Moon the
stars do not sufficiently shine unto them. The which kind of speaking is
usual also unto the Prophets, to express and set out sorrowful and heavy
times. For when as the mind is overcome with grief and heaviness, the Sun
shines not bright enough, Clouds.
no not at noone day. And the clouds return after the rain, that is to say,
by reason of withered and feeble age diseases do increase daily more and more,
as fortokens of the tempest to come in death.

The keepers of the house.
3. When as the keepers of the house shall move themselves, that is to say, the
hands shall shake and tremble, and not do their duty sufficientlye. He
calls them keepers by a fine Metaphor because of their very great and
necessary ministry and service. And the strong men shall bow themselves.
The strong men.
Some do hereby understand the Thighs, but I had rather understand it of
the Reins and Kidneyes. For old men become crooked. Hestodus says, It
makes the old man crooked like a Wheel. Ovid, Crooked age shall come with a
still foot. And Strength dwells especially in the Reins and Kidneyes. The
Grinders shall cease, that is to say, the Teeth, because they grind the
meat, that being made small it may go down into the Stomach. The Grinders
Because they shall diminishe, not only in strenth, but also in number. For the
falling away of teeth is common unto old men. The lookers through the Windows
shall wax dim, that is the eyes. They shall be darkened, The lookers through
the windows.
they shall be more dim, for the diminishing or decaying of the sight, is a
common accident that happens unto old men.

4. And the doors shall be shut without etc. The doors without.
) He speaks of the mouth. The doors without he calls the lips, the
which are fitlye lykened unto a Door. The sound of the mill.
The Sound of the Mill, he terms the noice of the teeth, whose office in
old men is not liuelye and strong, because that appetite unto meat in them,
abateth and faints. To be brief, He signifies that old men cannot now
any longer eat, as they did when as they were young men. The voice of the
bird.
He rises up at the voice of the bird. By the word Bird I think is meant
the Cough, Fleume, the Rheum, and such like, the which do follow old men for
the most part for their breast is shaken with such diseases, and they that are
troubled with them, are wont to arise every foot, and to have little sleep. He
signifies therefore the rawnesse and weakness of Stomach in old men being not
able to digest whereof it comes that sleep in old men is but short or often
times broken, because of their often being shaken with the former diseases: or
else he means this because that old men take but little sleep, that
therefore they hear the crowing of the Cock. The daughters of Song or singing.
The daughters of singing shall be abased. In my judgment (letting pass the
expositions of others) he calls the voice the The daughters of singing. He
says that in old men the voice is dulled and waxes hoarse. And therefore in
steed of it that when as they were young men they did sing with a sweet and a
pleasant voice, then when they are old men they hold their peace.

Going decaieth in old me.
5. Also they shall be afraid of an high thing.) For old men are afraid to clime
up high places, and they go softly and fearfully. His meaning therefore is
that in an old cripled, crooked man, and such one as goes tooting on the
ground, as they say, his pase is altogether weakened, so that he goes
fearfully and carefully. And the Almond tree shall flourish. He means
hoarinesse the badge of old age. The Almond tree.
The Almonde tree among other trees does first bring forth flowers. After the
self same manner of speaking Sophocles calls an old man Flowring: as Mercerus
my country man has learnedlye noted. And Orpheus by the same metaphor
attributes unto old age A flower of Harvest, And the locust shall be a burden
unto him. The locust.
By the word Locust they understand the privy members, the which in old men
are stretched out. The which exposition seems to be the more simple and
plain, because it follows: And lust shall be driven away: the which words
do plainelye show that in old men the power of desiring not only of meat and
drink, but cheefely of lust does abate and wax cold, when as the vital and
natural desires do fail, but the privation and bereauing of those powers,
the which he rehearsed before, is an assured token of death drawing near,
Because man goes unto, etc. that is to say, by this means a way is made
unto death. For he calls death, The house of man his age, as the everlasting
seat, or dwelling place, in the which every man must dwell until the day of
the resurrection, or rising again. And the mourners, M^urners.
He signifies the grave. And sets out the manner of burial, yea and also
death it self. For the dead were wont to be lamented, women being hired for
this service, the which of the Latins were called Praeficae. And that this
custom was much used among the men of the east, The silver coard.
it does appear by many places.

6. The silver coard, etc.] Some do expound the silver coarde to be the
ridgebone of the back, the which is tied together as it were with certain
linkes. He calls it Silver, because of the white color, as appears in a
dead body. And the Coard in my judgment is said to be stretched out,
because that in death the joints are made more loose, and especially in old
men, whose reins are crooked. Others understand the sinowes, grisly muscles,
ioints cords: because that the sinowes are like unto white stringes: and in as
much as they are the instruments of the senses, and of moving, they have
especial force and power in the body of man.

The golden ewer, or pot.
The golden ewer, or golden pot, by which kind of speaking they say the
brain to be signified, or else that skin in the brain, the which is called
Pia Matter. Plato places the tower and fortress of life in the brain. Some
take it to be meant of the heart, because the heart is the fountain and spring
of the vital powers, and of the chief heat: and the similitude of gold
seems rather to agree unto it together with the spirits. The Pitcher be
broken. By the word Pitcher they suppose the hollow vein to be signified,
The Pitcher,
namelye the receiver of the blood which the vital powers do draw from the
liver, that from thence as it were by pipes, it may be conueighed by the
veins into the whole body, the which distribution and conueighing of the
blood into all the parts of the body Plato calls hydreian and diocheteusin.
By the word Fountain they say the liver is noted, Fountain.
the which is the principal and natural vessel to contain the blood. And by
this kind of speaking he means that the blood fails and so consequently
that death follows. Virgil, One and the self same way the blood and the life
do follow. The wheel.
The wheel be broken upon the Cisterne. They say that by the wheel the Head
is signified, because of the power attractiue: and that by the Cisterne is
meante the heart, from the which the natural powers are drawn after the like
manner as a bucket full of water is drawn out of the well by a wheel. The
Cesterne.
The original and first heat being quenched, when as the senses and all the
instruments of the senses wear and consume away, death follows. The which
in express words be by and by shows. And dust return, etc. there be a
separating of the soul and the body: the which is a true definition of death:
when as namely the two natures of that essence whereof man consists and has
his name, A true definition of death.
shall return unto their principles: the earthy unto the earth, and the divine
and heavenly unto God: and therefore the body be brought again unto the
earth: and the soul go unto heaven, and be joined with GOD, after whose Image
it was made. It is therefore a most notable place, Concerning the immortality
of the soul: To wit that there is in man one part earthlye, and mortal, an
other part divine and immortal: the one, that is to say the body, goes to the
earth: the other, that is to say, the soul unto GOD. This ancient or simple
truth is to be opposed or set against the devises of profane men, the which
have gone about to darken this truth with the tedious discourses of subtle and
deep disputations: the sparks whereof notwithstanding, have remained in the
minds of some of the heathen, even in spite of the teeth of the Devil.
Arist^tle.
Aristotle in this matter being wonderful obscure and dark, does entangle the
minds of the unwary and unskillful with dangerous suspicions. Plato.
In Plato there are greater remnantes of this truth, albeit he speak not so
rightly as he ought to do concerning this mystery or secret.

Every where notwithstanding he holds that this doctrine of the immortality
of the soul is the foundation of true Philosophy, and gathering the sum and
effect of this long disputation, he declares his judgment concerning this
matter in express and plain words, saying: The soul therefore is immortal
and free from all destruction. And when as death comes unto man, that indeed
which is mortal, as reason is it should, dies: but that which is immortal,
goes away sound and void of all corruption, giving place unto death.
Phocylides truly out of that ancient philosophy, Phocylides.
teaches the immortality of the soul in evident and clear words. The which
place also it shall not grieve me to set down, that it may appear that they
which either deny the immortality of the soul, or else call it into doubt,
are convinced and reproved of follye and madness, even through the force and
power of the light of nature: that I recite not the excellent testimonies of
Cicero touching this matter.

The bodies dead, the souls of men, The golden verses of Phocylides concerning
the immortality of the soul.

do vncorrupt remain:
For bodies from the earth we have,
and into it resolude again
We are but dust: to Heavens hie,
When body dies the soul does fly.
And these words of Solomon are expressly to be noted, to the end we may
know how wickedly and lewdly they deal the which take occasion out of this
book either to establish ungodly doctrines: or else do reiecte and refuse the
same as not sound. The place therefore the which is in the third chapter, verse
21 is to be understood by comparing it with this. In the end therefore of
this sermon, he enterlaced the mention of old age and of death, to the end
that we should understand that this is even an especial use of godliness, that
weying both the vanity of this life, and also the uncertain hour of death,
the which notwithstanding will certaynely come, we should so prepare and
frame our selves, that we may appear before God our Judge without blame, and
without spotte. The fear therefore of death drawing on, is no slow warner
unto a mind following at large the lusts of the flesh, to awake out of this
sleep of his, and unto this point Solomon refers this whole sermon, of the
which he makes a very excellent end.

The Conclusion and sum of this whole sermon.
8 Vanity of vanities, said the preacher all is vanity.

9 And the more wise that the Preacher was, the more he taught the people
knowledge, and caused them to hear, and searched forth, and prepared many
parables.

10. The Preacher sought to find out things that might please, and the right
scripture, even the words of truth.

11. The words of the wise are like pricks, and as nails driven in, of the
masters of gatherings, the which are given by one pastor.

12. And more then these, my son, take heed thou seek not: there is no end
of making many books and much doctrine, is an affliction or trouble unto the
flesh.

13 The end of all the word has been heard, fear God and keep his
commau^dements, for this is the whole man.

14 For God will bring every work unto judgment, which shall be upon every
secret thing, whether it be good or evil.


The Exposition and Doctrine.
8 Vanity of Vanities, etc.] A brief sum of al things handled at large in
this discourse before.
The treatise of the use of Godliness being ended, now he makes an end of
this whole disputation or discourse, orderly and breefelye comprehending the
sum and effect of those things the which he has at large declared before.
We have showed that the same was contained in 3 parts especially. The first by
manner and way of confutation godliness These three parts of this disputation
he does plainly note in this brief rehearsal and repetition. Vanity of
vanities, It is as much as if he should say. By the former discourse and
disputation therefore it is proved that felicity or happiness is no where in the
whole life of man. And he says that he taught not this rashly or unadvisedly.

9. And the more wise) Not as if he would win authority unto his doctrine by
the authority of his own person (when as rather the authority and dignity of
his person depends upon the doctrine) but by the things considered with wise
and grave study, and learned experience. He says then that he taught not these
things as one unprepared and unfurnished, but that he dealt in the searching
out of so great and weighty matters wisely and diligently: and he does
flatly witness that he brings not any thing of himself, Solomon brings
nothing of himself, but out of the word of God.
but out of the word of God, whose interpreter only he was, and that he
applied the general doctrine in it contained. For this is the meaning of these
words.

10 The preacher thought to find out words that might please, that is to
say: the which should be received with the consent of all men, and whose
authority should be autenticall, and to be believed of it self. This he
calls The right scripture, and The words of truth, the which namely were
committed to writing by Moses, at the certain commandment of God, and by the
instinct and moving of the holy Ghost. Of these words God is the author,
Moses the minister, the Prophets the interpreters. He calls therefore that
the right scripture, the which the Apostle called The scripture inspired by
God. He teaches that this pure and right scripture is the foundation of al
pure and sound doctrine.

The general doctrine of the word must particularlye be applied, according as
time, place, and persons does require.
11 The words of the wise] For in the word of God are principles and general
doctrine contained, the which the sound doctors and teachers of the Church,
do apply unto the circumstances of persons, places and times, and do convey
and fetch as it were rivers from thense. Therefore he says: That the words
of the wise, are as it were pricks or goades, and nails driven in, to sharpen
and prickeforwarde the minds of men, which at the general doctrine are dull
and without feelinge: and therefore the doctrine must be applied
particularlye. Therefore he calls the doctors and teachers of the Church,
the wise, and lords, or masters of gatherings, because they write books out
of the pure word of God, for the use and profit of the Church: not that they
are the authors of the doctrine, but ministers only. Therefore he adds: The
which are given by one pastor: As if he should say, Albeit there be in the
Church many teachers, yet they have received their doctrine from one, on whom
all of us also ought to depend and stay. And by these words one pastor, they
understand Moses: One pastor.
who was the minister of the law. But we must ascend up from Moses and the
Prophets unto Christ the true teacher of his Church, from whom alone both
Moses and the Prophets by the holy Ghost have drawn their doctrine, who as
he is author of the holy scriptures, so is he also the interpreter: as Peter
says, that no scripture of the Prophets is of any private interpretation. He
therefore will have all the faithful to depend upon one Pastor, and as to
beware of strange doctrine, so also many doctrins: for there is one way, truth
and life. Therefore he says:

12 And more then these] Be not carried about with the wind or tempest of
diverse doctrines, but rest thy self upon certain doctrine. Rashness and
inconstancy is no doubt to be condemned in all sciences, but especially in
the knowledge of our salvation. The only word of God is the stay and
foundation of our knowledge. The same is the only beginning of true wisdom:
to be wise without it, is to be stark foolish. He therefore teaches that we
ought diligently to beware and take heed of many and strange teachers: Many
and strange teachers ought heedefully to be avoided.
and finds fault with the evil custom or itch, that is to say, vain
glorious desire of writing many books. For many unhappy wits, practice to
imitate or follow good writers, and unto the great hurt of the Church do make
huge heaps or cartloades of foolish books. This disease therefore of vain
glorious writing has been in ure for many years ago, being not only great
trouble unto the writers, but also great hurt unto the readers or hearers.

13 The end of the word.] The other part of this discourse: True happiness
consists in the true fear of God.
That true happiness does consist in the true fear of GOD, The end, he
calls the principal and chief end, and drift: for this was the purpose of
the disputation or discourse at the beginning: What felicity or happiness
should be: it is therefore as much as if he should say, My intent and
purpose was to teach, what happiness was, and wherein it does consist, I have
taught that it does consist in the fear of God. Let this therefore be the
sum and end of my whole discourse: Fear God that thou may live happily:
For this is all or whole man, that is to say: This is the only principal
end of our whole life, whereat all men ought to leuel and aim. This is the
sovereign good of man: man, even all whatsoever he is, ought to direct all
his study and thoughts unto this end: or, if man be any thing, this only
he is: all other things are vain: all the accountes and doings of man ought
to be referred unto this alone. So in Heathen writers, to Solon, and to
Agathon, are taken for all one, namely for the principal and chief end, that
man ought to have regard unto, that is true happiness. And for a rule of this
godliness, he prescribes and appoints: The commandments of the Lord,
that is to say, his word, the which was the third part of this disputation,
that the use of true religion might be showed, for the right framing of our
life, and the strengthening of our minds against the outrages and disorders of
the life of man, with the diligent and earnest thinking upon the providence of
god, as he has at large declared. The sum and effect of which doctrine he
adds in these last words:

14 For God will bring every worke] He therefore teaches, that GOD does most
assuredlye watch over the affairs of men, God watches most assuredly over the
affairs of me^.
that he has regard both of the godly and also of the ungodly, and that in
that same last day of restoringe of all things, he will redress all the
disorders of this life: that it may go ill with the bad, and well with the
good: clean contrary whereunto it often falls out in this life. For this is
a principle known even unto the reason of man, That God will render unto every
one according unto his works. But the good are those in deed, whom God
adopteth or chooses in his son, and unto whom he does impute or reckon
the righteousness of his son, and therefore does acknowledge them for his.
And death is in deed the reward of sin: life everlasting, the gift of God.
This just judgment of God shall no doubt redress the disorders the which fall
out in this mortal life, and shall in the end at his good time, pull out the
hypocrites by the ears out of their lurking hoales into the manifest light of
his iudment.

So he has here set down the matter, and the principal end, and principal
circumstances of this discourse, namely, That happiness is not in any things
of this world belonging unto men. That it does consist in the true knowledge
of the true GOD: And that the same is the guide and leader of our whole life,
and does teach us the true and certain way to frame our lives well and
happily: that being furnished with fit remedies against all tentations, we
should live well, to the end we may dye well.

Even so come, Lord Jesus.
FINIS.
Imprinted at London, by John Windet, for John Harison the younger. 1585.


