THE Tragoedy of Othello, The Moore of Venice. As it has been diverse times
acted at the Globe, and at the Blackfriars, by his Majesty's Servants.

Written by William Shakespeare.

LONDON, Printed by N. O. for Thomas Walkley, and are to be sold (...) shop, at
the Eagle and Child, in Brittans Bursse, 1622.

The Stationer to the Reader.
TO set forth a book without an Epistle, were like to the old English
proverb, A blew coat without a badge, and the Author being dead, I thought
good to take that piece of work upon me: To commend it, I will not, for that
which is good, I hope every man will commend, without entreaty: and I am the
bolder, because the Authors name is sufficient to vent his work. Thus leaving
every one to the liberty of judgment: I have ventered to print this Play, and
leave it to the general censure.

Yours, Thomas VValkley.

The Tragedy of Othello the Moore of Venice.
Enter Iago and Roderigo. Roderigo. TVsh, never tell me, I take it much unkindly
That you Iago, who has had my purse,
As if the strings were thine, should know of this.

Iag. S'blood, but you will not hear me,
If ever I did dream of such a matter, abhor me.

Rod. Thou toldst me, thou did hold him in thy hate.

Iag. Despise me if I do not: three great ones of the City
In personal suite to make me his Leiutenant,
Often capt to him, and by the faith of man,
I know my price, I am worth no worse a place.
But he, as loving his own pride and purposes,
Euades them, with a bumbast circumstance,
Horribly stuffed with Epithites of war:
And in conclusion,
Non-suits my mediators: for certes, says he,
I have already chosen my officer, and what was he?
Forsooth, a great Arithmetition,
One Michael Cassio, a Florentine,
A fellow almost dambd in a fair wife,
That never set a squadren in the field,
Nor the division of a Battle knows,
More then a Spinster, unless the bookish Theorique,
Wherein the ^oged Consuls can propose
As masterly as he: mere pra^tle without practice,
Is all his souldier-shippe: but he sir had the election,
And I, of whom his eyes had seen the proof,
At Rhodes, at Cipres, and on other grounds,
Christian and Heathen, must be led, and calmed,
By Debtor and Creditor, this Counter-caster:
He in good time, must his Leiutenant be,
And I, God bles^e the mark, his Worships Ancient.

Rod. By heaven I rather would have bin his hangman.

Ia. But there is no remedy,
It Is the curse of service,
Preferment goes by letter and affection,
Not by the old gradation, where each second
Stood heir to the first:
Now sir be judge your self,
Whether I, in any just term am assigned
to love the Moore.

Rod. I would not follow him then.

la. O sir, content you,
I follow him to serve my turn upon him,
We cannot be all masters, nor all masters
Cannot be truly followed, you shall mark.
Many a dutious and knee-crooking knave,
That doting on his own obsequious bondage,
Wears out his time much like his masters Ass,
For noughe but prouender, and when he is old cashierd,
Whip me such honest knaves:
Others there are, who trimd in forms,
And vissages of duty, keep yet their hearts,
Attending on themselves, and throwing
But shows of service on their Lords*
Do well thrive by 'em,
And when they have lined their coats,
Do themselves homage,
Those fellows have some soul,
And such a one do I profess my self, -- for sir,
It is as sure as you are Roderig^,
Were I the Moore, I would not be Iage:
In following him, I follow but my self.
Heaven is my judge, not I,
For love and duty, but seeming so,
For my peculiar end.
For when my outward action does demonstrate
The native act, and figure of my heart,
In complement externe* it is not long after,
But I will wear my heart upon my sleeue,
For Doves to pecke at,
I am not what I am.

Rod. What a full fortune does the thicklips owe,
If he can carry'et thus?

Ia. Call up her father.
Rowse him, make after him, poison his delight,
Proclaim him in the street, incense her Kinsmen,
And tho he in a fe^tile climate dwell,
Plague him with ^lyes: tho that his joy be joy.
Yet throw such (...) of vexation out,
As it may loose (...) color.

Rod Here is (...) ^athers house, I Will call aloud.

Ia. Do with ^ike timorous accent, and dire yell,
As when by night and negligence, the fire
Is spied in populous Cities.

Rod. What ho, Brabantio, Seignior Braba^tio, ho,

Ia. Awake, what ho, Braba^ti^,
Thieves, thieves, thieves:
Look to your house, you Daughter, and your bags,
Thieves, thieves.

Brabantio at a window. Brab. What is the reason of this terrible summons?
What is the matter there?

Rod. Seignior, is all your family within?

Ia. Are all door lockts?

Brab. Why, wherefore ask you this?

Iag* Zounds sir you are robbed, for shame put on your gown,
Your heart is burst, you have lost ^alfe your soul;
Even now, very now, an old black Ram
Is tupping your white Ewe; arise, arise,
Awake the s^orting Citizens with the Bell,
Or else the Devil will make a Grandsire of you, arise I say.

Brab. What, have you lost your wits?

Rod. Most reverend Seignior, do you know my voice?

Bra. Not I, what are you?

Rod. My name is Roderig^.

Bra. The worse welcome,
I have charged thee, not to haunt about my doors,
In honest plainness, thou have heard me say
My d^ughter is not for thee, and now in madness,
Being full of supper, and distempering draughts,
Upon maliciou^ bravery, do thou come
To start my quiet?

Rod. Sir, sir, sir.

Bra. But thou must needs be sure
My spirit and my place have in them powe^^
To make this bitter to thee.

Rod. Patience good sir.

Bra. What, tell thou me of robbing? this (...),
My house is not a graunge.

Rod. Most grave Brabanti^,
In simple and pure soul I come to you.

Iag. Zouns Sir, you are one of those, that will not serve God, if the Devil
bid you. Because we come to do you service, you think we are Ruffians, you will
have your daughter covered with a Barbary horse; you will have your Nephews ney
to you; you will have Coursers for Cousens, and Iennits for Iermans.


Bra. What profane wretch art thou?

Iag. I am one sir, that come to tell you, your daughter, and the
Moore, are now making the Beast with two backs.

Bra. Thou art a villain.

Iag. You are a Senator.

Bra. This thou sha^^ (...), I know thee (...)*

Rod. Sir, I will answer any thing* But I bes^ech you,
If she b^ in her (...)
Let loose on me the Justice of the state,
For this delusion.

Bra. Strike on the tinder, Ho:
Give me a taper, call up all^y people:
This accident is not unlike my dream,
Belief of it oppresses me already:
Light I say, light.

Iag. Farewell, for I must leave you,
It seems not meet, not whole some to my pate,
To be produced, as if I stay I shall
Against the Moore, for I do know the state,
How ever this may gaul him with some check,
Cannot with safety cast him, for ^ee's embarked,
With such loud reason, to the Cip^es wars,
Which even now stands i^ act, that for their souls,
Another of his fathom, they have not
To lead their business, in which regard,
Tho I do hate him, as I do hells pains,
Yet for necessity of present life,
I must show out a flag, and sign of love,
Which is indeed but sign, that you shall surely
Find him: lead to the Sagittar, the raised sea^ch,
And there will I be with him. So farewell.
Ex^^.
Enter Barbantio in his night (...). Bra. It is too true an evil, go^e she is,
And what is to come, of my despised time,
Is naught but bitterness now (...),
Where did thou see her; O unhappy girl,
With the Moore saint thou? who would be a father?
How did thou know ^twas she? O thou deceiuest me
Past thought: what said ^he to you? get more ^apers,
Raise all my kindred, are they married think you?

Rod. Truly I think they are.

Bra. O heaven, how got she out? O treason of the blood,
Fathers from hence, trust not your Daughters minds,
By what you see them act, is there not charms,
By which the property of youth and manhood
May be abus'^? have you not read R^der^g^,
Of some such thing.

Rod. I have sir.

Bra. Call up my brother: O that you had had her,
Some one way, some another; do you know
Where we may apprehend her, and the Moore?

Rod. I think I can discover him, if you please
To get good guard, and go along with me.

Bra. Pray lead me on, at every house I Will call,
I may command at most ^ g^t weapons ho,
And raise some special Officers of night:
On good Roderigo, I Will deserve your pains.

Exe^nt. Enter Othello, Iago, and attendants with Torches. Ia. Tho in the trade
of war, I have slain men,
Yet do I hold it very stuffed of Conscience.
To do no contrived murr^er; I lack iniquity
Sometimes to do me service* nine or* ten times,
I had thought to have ierk'd him here,
Under the ribs.

Oath. It Is better as it is.

Iag. Nay, but he (...).
And spoke such scuruy, and prouo^ing terms
Against your Honor, that with the little godliness^ I have,
I did full hard forbear him: but I pray si^,
Are you fast married? For be sure of this,
That the Magnifico is much beloved,
And has in his effect, a voice potentiall,
As double as the Dukes, he will divorce you,
Or put upon you what ^estraint, and gre^uance,
That law with all his might (...)
We Will give him cable.

Oath. Let him do his spite,
My services which I have done the Seig^torie,
Shall out tongue his complaints, it is yet to know,
That boasting is an honor,
I shall provulgate, I fetch my life and being,
From men of royal height, and my demerrits,
May speak vnbonnited to as proud a fortune
As this that I have reached; for know Iago;
But that I love the gentle Desdemonae,
I would not, my vnhoused free condition,
Put into circum^cription and confine
For the seas worth,
Enter Cassio with lights* Officers, and torches. But look what lights come
yonder.

la. These are the raised Father and his friends,
You were best go in:

Oath. Not I, I must be found,
My parts, my Title, and my perfect soul,
Shall manifest me rightly: it is they.

la. By Ian^s I think no.

Oath. The servants of the Duke, and my Leiutenant,
The goodness of the night upon your friends,
What is the news.

Cas. The Duke does greet you General,
And he requires your have, post have appearance,
Even on the instant.

Oath. What Is the matter think you:

Cas. Something from Cipres, as I may divine,
It is a business of some heat, the Galleyes
Have sent a dozen frequent messengers
This very night, at one anothets heels:
And many of the Con^uls raised, and met,
Are at the Dukes already; you have bin hotly called for,
When being not at your lodging to be found,
The Senate sent above three several quests
To s^arch you out.

Otht* It Is well I am found by you,
I Will spend a word here in the house, and go with you.

Cas. Ancient, what makes he here?

Ia. Faith he to night, has boorded a land Carrick;
If it prove lawful prize, he is made for ever.

Cas. I do not understand.

Ia. He Is married,

Cas. To who?

Enters Brabantio, Roderigo, and others with lights and weapons. Ia. Marry to.
-- Come Captain, will you go?

Oath. Ha, with who?

Cas. Here comes another troop to seek for you.

Ia. It is Brabantio, General be aduisde,
He comes to bad intent.

Oath. Holla, stand there.

Rod. Seignior, it is the Moore.

Cra. Down with him theife.

Ia. You Roderigo, Come sir, I am for you.

Oath. Keep up your bright swords, for the dew will rust em,
Good Seignior you shall more command with years
Then with your weapons.

Bra. O thou foul thief, where have thou ^towed my daughter?
Dambd as thou art, thou haft enchanted her,
For i will refer me to all thing of sense,
Whether a maid so tender, fair, and happy,
So opposite to marriage, that she shund
The wealthy cu^^ed darlings of our Nation,
Would ever have (to incur a general mock)
Run from her gardage to the sooty bosom
Of such a thing as thou? to fear, not to delight,
Such an abuser of the world, a practiser
Of Arts inhibited, and out of warrant?
Lay hold upon him, if he do resist,
Subdue him at his peril.

Oath. Hold your hands:
Both you of my inclining and the rest,
Were it my Qu. to fight, I should have known it,
Without a prompter, where will you that I go,
And answer this your charge?

Bra. To prison till fit time
Of Law, and course of direct Session,
Call thee to answer*

Oath. What if I do obey,
How may the Duke be therewith satisfied,
Whose Messengers are here about my side,
Upon some present business of the State,
To bear me to him.

Officer. It Is true most worthy Seignior,
The Duke's in Council, and your noble self,
I am sure is sent for.

Bra. How? the Duke in Council?
In this time of the night? bring him away,
Mine Is not an idle cause, the Duke himself,
Or any of my Brothers of the State,
Cannot but feel this wrong, as twere their ow^e.
For if such actions, may have passage free,
Bondslaues, and Pagans, shall our Statesmen be.

Exeunt. Enter Duke and Senators, set at a Table with lights and Attendants.
Duke. There is no Composition in these news,
That gives them credit.

1 Sena. Indeed they are disproportioned,
My letters say, a hundred and seven Galleys.

Du. And mine a hundred and forty.

2 Sena. And mine two hundred:
But though they iumpe not on a just account,
As in these cases, where they aimed reports,
It Is often with difference, yet do they all confirm
A Turkish fleet, and bearing up to Ci^resse.

Du. Nay, it is possible enough to judgment:
I do not so secure me to the error,
But the main Articles I do approve
In fearful sense.

Enter a Messenger. One within. What ho, what ho, what ho?

Sailor. A messenger from the Galley.

Du. Now, the business?

Sailor. The Turkish preparation makes for Rh^des,
So was I bid report here, to the state.

Du. How say you by this change?

1 Sena. This cannot be by no assay of reason --
It Is a Pageant,
To keep us in false gaze: when we consider
The importancy of Cypress to the Turk:
And let our selves a gain, but understand,
That as it more concerns the Turk the^ Rhodes,
So may he with more facile question bear it.

D^. And in all confidence, he is not for Rhodes.

Officer. Here is more news.

Enter a 2. Messenger. Mes. The Ottamites, reverend and gracious,
Steering with due course, toward the Isle of Rhodes,
Have there inioynted with an after fleet
Of 30. ^^ile, and now they do resterine
Their backward course, bearing with frank appearance.
Their purposes toward Cypress: Seignior Montano,
Your trusty and most valiant seruitor;
With h^^ free du^y recommends you thus,
And p^ayes you to b^leeue him.

Du. It Is certain then for Cypress,
Ma^cus Lucci^^os is not here in Town^.

1 Sena. He Is (...) Florence.

Du. Write (...) us, wish him post, post have dispatch;
(...) Othello, Roderigo, Iago, Cassio,
(...) and Off^cers.
(...) Brabantio and the valiant Moore.
(...) strait employ you,
(...) Ottaman;
(...) Seig^ior,
(...) your help to night,

Bra. So did I yours, good your Grace pardon me,
Neither my place, nor ought I heard of business
Has raised me from my bed, nor does the general care
Take any hold of me, for my particular griefs,
Is of so floodgate and orebearing nature,
Tha^ it engluts and swallows other sorrows,
And it is still it self.

Du. Why, what is the matter?

Bra. My daughter, O my daughter.

All. Dead?

Bra. I to me:
She is abused, stolen from me and corrupted,
By spells and medicines, bought of mountebancks,
For nature so preposterously to err,
Saunce witchcraft could not.

Du. Who ere he be, that in this foul proceeding
Has thus beguild your daughter of her self,
And you of her, the bloody book of Law,
You shall your self, read in the bitter letter,
After its own sense, tho our proper son
Stood in your action.

Bra. Humbly I thank your Grace;
Here is the man, this Moore, whom now it seems
Your special mandate, for the State affairs
Has hither brought.

All. We are very sorry for it.

Du. What in your own part can you say to this?

Bra. Nothing, but this is so.

Oath. Most potent, grave, and reverend Seigniors,
My very noble and approved good masters:
That I have ta^e away this old man's daughter,
It is most true: true, I have married her,
The very head and front of my offending,
Has this extent no more. Rude am I in my spe^ch,
And little blessed with the set phrase of peace,
For since these arms of mine had seven years pith,
Till now some nine Moons wasted, they have used
Their dearest action in the tented field,
And little of this great world can I speak,
More then pertaines to feate of broyle, and battle,
And therefore little shall I grace my cause,
In speaking for my self; yet by your gracious patience,
I will a round vnuarnish'd tale deliver,
Of my whole course of love, (...) what charms,
What coniuration, and what mighty Magic,
(For such proceedings am I charged (...))
I won his daughter.

Bra. A maiden never bold of spirit,
So still and quiet, that her motion
Blushed at her self: and she in spite of nature,
Of years, of Country, credit, every thing,
To fall in love with what she feared to look on?
It is a judgment maimd, and most imperfect,
That will confess perfection, so would err
Against all rules of Nature, and must be driven,
To find out practices of cunning hell,
Why this should be, I therefore vouch again,
That with some mixtures powerful ore the blood,
Or with some dram coniur'd to this effect,
He wrought upon her.

Du. To youth this is no proof,
Without more certain and more ouert test,
These are thin habits, and poor likelihoods,
Of modern seemings, you prefer against him.

1 Sena. But Othello speak,
Did you by indirect and forced courses,
Subdue and poison this young maids affections?
Or came it by request, and such fair question,
As soul to soul affoordeth?

Oath. I do beseech you,
Send for the Lady to the Sagittar,
And let her speak of me before her father;
If you do find me foul in her report,
Not only take away, but let your sentence
Even fall upon my life.

Du. Fetch Desdemona hither.

Exit two or three. Oath. Ancient conduct them, you best know the place;
And till she come, as faithful as to heaven,
So justly to your grave ears I Will present,
How I did thrive in this fair Ladies love,
And she in mine.

Du. Say it Othello.

Oath. Her Father loved me, often invited me,
Still questioned me the story of my life,
From year to year; the battles, seiges, fortunes
That I have past:
I ran it through, even from my boyish days,
Toth' very moment that he bade me tell it.
Wherein I spoke of most disastrous chances,
Of moving accident of flood and field;
Of heire-breadth scapes ith imminent deadly breach;
Of being taken by the insolent foe:
And sold to slavery, and my redemption thence,
And with it all my trauells History;
Wherein of Antrees vast, and Deserts idle,
Rough quarries, rocks and hills, whose heads touch heaven,
It was my hent to speak, such was the process:
And of the Cannibals, that each other eat;
The Anthropophagie, and men whose heads
Do grow beneath their shoulders: this to hear,
Would Desdemona seriously incline;
But still the house affairs would draw her thence,
And ever as she could with have dispatch,
She Would come again, and with a greedy ear
Devour up my discourse; which I observing,
Took once a plyant hour, and found good means
To draw from her a prayer of earnest heart,
That I would all my pilgrimage dilate,
Whereof by parcel she had something heard,
But not intentiuely, I did consent,
And often did beguile her of her tears,
When I did speak of some distressed stroke
That my youth suffered: my story being done;
She gave me for my pains a world of sighs;
She swore I faith it was strange, it was passing strange;
It Was pitiful, it was wondrous pitt^full;
She wished she had not heard it, yet she wished
That heaven had made her such a man: she thanked me,
And bad me, if I had a friend that loved her,
I should but teach him how to tell my story,
And that would woo her. Upon this heat I spoke:
She loved me for the dangers I had past.
And I ^ou'd her that (...) did pity them.
This only is the witchcraft I have used:
Here comes the Lady,
Let her wit^esse it.

Enter Desdemona, Iago, and the rest. Du. I think this tale would win my
daughter to, --
Good Braba^tio, take up this mangled matter at the best,
Men do their broken weapons rather use,
Then their bare hands.

Bra. I pray you hear her speak.
If she confess that she was half the wooer,
Destruction ^ite on me, if my bad blame
Light on the man. Come hither gentle mistress:
Do you perceive in all this noble company,
Where most you owe obedience?

Des. My noble father,
I do perceive here a divided duty:
To you I am bound for l^fe and education;
My life and education both do^ learn me
How to respect you, you are Lord of all my duty,
I am hitherto your daughter, But here is my husband:
And so much duty as my mother showed
To you, preferring you before her father.
So much I challenge, that I may profess^,
(...) Moore my Lord,

Bra. God bu'y, I ha done:
Please it your Grace, on to the State affairs;
I had rather to adopt a child then get it;
Come hither Moore:
I here do give thee that, with all my heart
I would keep from thee: for your sake Ie^ell,
I am glad at soul. I have no other child,
For thy escape would teach me tyranny,
To hang clogs on em, I have done my Lord.

Du. Let me speak like your self, and lay a sentence
Which as a greese or step may help these lovers
Into your favor.
When remedies are past, the griefs are ended,
By seeing the worst, which late on hopes depended*
To mourn a mischeife that is past and gone,
Is the next way to draw more mischief on;
What cannot be preserved when fortune takes,
Patience her injury a mockery makes.
The robbed that smiles, steals something from the thief,
He robs himself, that spends a bootelesse grief.

Bra. So let the Turk, of Cypres us beguile,
We lose it not so long as we can smile;
He bears the sentence well that nothing bears,
But the free comfort, which from thence he hears:
But he bears both the sentence and the sorrow,
That to pay grief, must of poor patience borrow.
These sentences to sugar, or to gall,
Being strong on both sides, are equivocal:
But words are words, I never yet did hear,
That the bruised heart was pierced through the ^are:
Beseech you now, to the affairs of the state.

Du. The Turk with most mighty preparation makes for Cipre^: Othell^, the
fortitude of the place, is best known to you, and tho we have there a
substitute of most allowed sufficiency, yet opinion, a sovereign mistress of
effects, throws a more safer voice on you: you must therefore be content to
slubber the gloss^ of your new for^^nes, with this more stubborn and
boisterous expedition.


Oath. The tyrant custom most great Senators,
Has made the flinty and steel Cooch of war,
My thrice driven bed of down: I do ag^ize
A natural and prompt alacrity,
I find in hardness, and would undertake
This present wars against the Ottamites,
Most humbly therefore, bending to your State,
I crave fit disposition for my wife,
Due reverence of place and exhibition,
Which such accommodation? and besort
A^ leuels with her breeding.

Du. If you please, bee'^ at her fathers.

Bra. I Will not have it so.

Oath. Nor I.

Desd. Nor I, I would not there reside,
To put my father in impatient thoughts,
By being in his eye: most gracious Duke,
To my unfolding lend a gracious ^are,
And let me find a charter in your voice,
And if my simpleness. --

Du. What would you -- speak.

Des. That I did love the Moore, to live with him,
My down right violence, and scorn of Fortunes,
May trumpet to the world: my hearts subdued,
^uen to the utmost pleasure of my Lord:
I saw Othelloes vissage in his mind,
And to his Honors, and his valiant parts
Did I my soul and fortunes consecrate:
So that dear Lords, if I be left behind,
A Mothe of peace, and he go to the war,
The rites for which I love him, are bereft me,
And I a heavy interim shall support,
By his dear absence, le^ me go with him.

Oath. Your voices Lords: beseech you let her will,
Have a free way, I therefore b^g it not
To (...) the (...) of my appe^^e,
No^ to com^^y with (...), the young affects*
In my defunct, and proper satisfaction,
But to be free and bounteous of her mind,
And heaven defend your good souls that you think
I will your serious and good business scant,
For she is with me; -- (...), when light-wingd toys,
And feathered Cupid foyles with wanton dullness,
My speculatiue and active instruments,
That my disports, corrupt and taint my business,
Let huswiues make a skellet of my Helm,
And all indigne and base adversities,
Make head against my reputation.

Du. Be it, as you shall privately determine,
Either for stay or going, the affairs cry have,
And speed must answer, you must hence to night,

Desd. To night my Lord?

Du. This night.

Oath. With all my heart.

Du. At ten in the morning here weel meet again.
Othello, leave some officer behind,
And he shall our Commission bring to you,
With such things else of quality or respect,
As does concern you.

Oath. Please your Grace, my Ancient,
A man he is of honesty and trust,
To his conueyance I assign my wife,
With what else needful your good Grace shall think,
To be sent after me.

Du. Let it be so:
Good night to every one, and noble Seignior,
If virtue no delighted beauty lack,
Your son ^n law is far more fair then black.

I Sena. Adue brave Moore, use Desdemona well.

Bra. Look to her Moore, have a quick eye to see,
She has deceived her father, may do thee.

Ex^^nt. Oath. My life upon her faith: honest Iago,
My Desdemona must I leave to thee,
I preethee let thy wife attend on her,
And bring her after in the best advantage;
Come Desdemona, I have but an hour
Of love, of worldly matters, and direction,
To spend with thee, we must obey the time.

Rod. Iago.

Exit Moore and Desdemona. Iag* What say thou noble heart?

Rod. What will I do think thou?

Iag. Why go to bed and sleep.

Rod. I will incontinently drown my self.

Iag. Well, if thou do, I shall never love thee after it,
W^y, thou silly Gentlem^n.

Rod. It is silliness to live, when to live is a torment, and then we have a
prescription, to dye when death is our Physician.


Iag. I ha looked upon the world for four times seven years, and since I
could distinguish between a be^efit, and an injury, I never found a man that
knew how to love himself: ere I would say I would drown my self, for the
love of a Ginny Hen, I would change my humanity with a Baboone.


Rod. What should I do? I confess it is my shame to be so fo^d, but it is not
in my virtue to amend it.


Iag. Virtue? a fig, it is in our selves, that we are thus, or thus, our bodies
are gardens, to the which our wills are Gardiners, so that if we will plant
Net^les, or sow Lettice, set Isop, and weed up Time; supply it with one gender
of herbs, or distract it with many; either to have it sterrill with
Idleness^, or manured with Industry, why the power, and corrigible Authority of
this, lies in our wills. If the balance of our lives had not one scale of
reason, to poise another (...) sensu^lity; the blood and baseness of our
natures, would conduct us to most preposterous conclusions. But we have reason
to cool our raging mo^ions, our carnal stings, our vnbitted lusts; whereof I
take this, that you call love to be a sect, or syen.


Rod. It cannot be.


Iag. It is merely a lust of the blood, and a permission of the will: Come, be
a man; drown thy self? drown Cats and blind Puppies: I profess me thy
friend, and I confess me knit to thy de^er^ing, with cables of perdurable
toughness; I could never better st^ede thee then now. Put money in thy purse;
follow these wars, defeat thy favor with an usurped beard; I say, put money
in thy purse. It cannot be, that Desdemona should long continue her love unto
the Moore, -- put money in the purse, -- nor he to her; it was a violent
commencement, and thou shall see an answerable sequestration: put but money in
thy purse. -- These Moors are changeable in their wills: -- fill thy purse
with money. The food that to him now, is as lushious as Locusts, shall be to
him shortly as acerbe as the Colloquintida. When she is sated with his body,
she will find the error of her choice; she must have change, she must.
Therefore put money in thy purse: if thou will needs ^damme thy self, do it
a more delicate way then drowning; make all the money thou can. If
sanctimony, and a frail vow, betwixt an erring Barbarian, and a super subt^e
Vexetian, be not too hard for my wits, and all the tribe of hell, thou shall
enjoy her; therefore make money, -- a pox a drowning, it is clean out of the
way: seek thou rather to be hanged in compassing thy joy, then to be drowned,
and go without her.


Rod. W^lt thou be fast to my hopes?

Iag. Thou ar^t sure of me -- go, make money -- I have told thee often, and I
tell thee again, and again, I hate the Moore, my cause is hearted, thine has
no less reason, let us be communicatiue in our revenge against him: If thou
can cuckold him, thou do thy self a pleasure, and me a sport. There are
many eue^ts in the womb of Time, which will be delivered. Tra^erce, go, provide
thy money, we will have more of this to morrow, Adiue.


Rod. Where shall we meet in the morning.

Iag. At my lodging.

Rod. I Will be with thee betimes.

Iag. Go to, farewell: -- do you hear Rod^rigo?

Rod. what say you?

Iag. No more of drowning, do you hear?

Rod. I am changed.
Exit Roderigo.
Iag. Go to, farewell, put money enough in your pur^e:
Thus do I ever make my fool my purse:
For I mine own gained knowledge should profane,
If I would time expend with such a snipe,
But for my sport and profit: I hate the Moore,
And it is thought abroad, that twixt my sheets
Has done my office; I know not, if it be true --
Yet I, for mere suspicion in that kind,
Will do, as if for surety: he holds me well,
The better shall my purpose work on him.
Cassio's a proper man, let me see now,
To get this place, and to make up my will,
A double knavery -- how, how, -- let me see,
After some time, to abuse Othelloe's ear,
That he is too familiar with his wife:
He has a person and a smooth dispose,
To be suspected, framed to make women false:
The Moore a free and open nature too,
That thinks men honest, that but seems to be so:
And will as tenderly be led bit'h nose -- as Asses are*
I have it, it is ingender'd: Hell and night
Must bring this monstrous birth to the worlds light.
Exit.
Actus 2.
Scoena 1.
Enter Montanio, Governor of Cypres, with two other Gentlemen. Montanio. What
from the Cape can you discern at Sea?

1 Gent. Nothing at all, it is a high wrought flood,
I cannot twixt the haven and the main
Descry a sa^le.

Mon. Me thinks the wind does speak aloud at land,
A fuller blast never shook our Battlements:
If it ha ruffiand so upon the sea.
What ribs of Oak, when the huge mountain (...),
Can hold the morties, -- What shall we hear of this?

2 Gent. A segregation of the Turkish Fleet:
For do but stand upon the banning shore,
The chiding billow seems to pelt the clouds,
The wind shak'd surge, with high and monstrous (...),
Seems to cast water, on the burning Bear,
And quench the guards of th'euer fired pole,
I never did, like molestation view,
On the incha^ed flood.

Mon. If that the Turkish Fleet
Be not inshelter'd, and embayed, they are drowned,
It is impossible they bear it out.

Enter a third Gentleman. 3 Gent. News Lords, your wars are done:
The desperate Tempest has so banged the Turk,
That their designe^ent halts: Another ship of Venice has seen
A grievous wrack and sufferance
On most part of the Fleet.

Mon. How, is this true?

3 Gent. The ship is here put in:
A Veronessa, Michael Cassio,
Leiutenant to the warlike Moore Othello,
Is come ashore: the Moore himself at Sea,
And is in full Commission here for Cypres,

Mon. I am glad on it, it is a worthy Governor.

3 Gent. But this same Cassio, tho he speak of comfort,
Touching the Turkish loss, yet he looks sadly,
And prays the Moore be safe, for they were parted,
With foul and violent Tempest.

Mon. Pray Heaven he be:
For I have served him, and the man commands
Like a full Soldier:
Lets to the sea side, ho,
As well to see the vessel that is come in.
As to throw out our eyes for brave Othello.

3 Gent. Come, lets do so,
For every minute is expectancy
Of more arriuance,

Enter Cassio. Cas. Thanks to the valiant of this worthy Isle,
That so approve the Moore, and let the heavens
Give him defense against their Elements,
For I have lost him on a dangerous sea.

Mon. Is he well shipped?

Cas. His Bark is stoutly timberd, and his Pilate
Of very expert and approved allowance,
Therefore my hope's not surfeited to death,
Stand in bold cure.

Enter a Messenger. Mess. A sail, a sail, a sail.

Cas. What noise?

Mess. The Town is empty, on the brow o'th sea,
otand ranckes of people, and they cry a sail.

Cas. My hopes do shape him for the guernement.

2 Genesis They do discharge the shot of courtesy,
Our friend at least.

A shot. Cas. I pray you sir go forth,
And give us truth, who it is that is arrived.

2 Gent. I shall.
Exit.
Mon. But good Leiutenant, is your General wiu'd?

Cas. Most fortunately, he has atchieu'd a maid,
That parragons description, and wild fame:
One that excells the blasoning pens,
And in the essential vesture of creation,
Does bear all excellency: -- now, who has put in?

Enter 2. Gentleman. 2 Gent. It Is one Iago, ancient to the General,
He has had most favorable and happy speed,
Tempests themselves, by seas, and hou^ing winds,
The guttered rocks, and congregated sands,
Traitors enscerped; to clog the guiltless Keele,
As having sense of beauty, do omit
Their common natures, letting go safely by
The divine Desdemona.

Mon. What is she?

Cas. She that I spoke of, our great Captains Captain,
Lest in the conduct of the bold Iago.
Whose footing here anticipates our thoughts
A sennights speed -- great Jove Othello guard,
And swell his sail with thine own powerful breath,
That he may bless this Bay with his tall ship,
And swiftly come to Desdemona's arms.
Enter Desdemona, Iago, Emillia, and Roderigo. Give renewd fire,
To our extincted spirits.
And bring all Cypress comfort, -- O behold
The riches of the ship is come ashore.
Ye men of Cypres, let her have your knees:
Hail to thee Lady: and the grace of heaven,
Before, behind thee, and on every hand,
Enwheele thee round.

Desd. I thank you valiant Cassio:
What tidings can you tell me of my Lord?

Cas. He is not yet arrived, nor know I ought,
But that he is well, and will be shortly here.

Desd. O but I fear: -- how lost you company?

[within.] A sail, a sail. Cas. The great contention of the sea and skies
Parted our fellowship: but hark, A sail.

2 Gent. They give their greeting to the Cittadell,
This likewise is a friend.

Cas. So speaks this voice:
Good Ancient, you are welcome, welcome Mistress,
Let it not gall your patience, good Iago,
That I extend my manners, it is my breeding,
That gives me this bold show of courtesy.

Iag. For would she give you so much of her lips,
As of her tongue, she has bestowed on me,
You Would have enough.

Des. Alas! she has no speech.

Iag. I know too much.
I find it, I; for when I ha list to sleep,
Mary, before your Ladyship I grant,
She puts her tongue a little in her heart,
And chides with thinking.

Em. You ha little cause to say so.

Iag. Come on, Come on, you are Pictures out adores:
Bells in your Parlors: Wildcats in your Kitchins:
Saints in your injuries: Devils being offended:
Players in your houswifery; and houswiues in your beds.
O fie upon thee slanderer.

Iag. Nay, it is true, or else I am a Turk,
You rise to play, and go to bed to work.

Em. You shall not write my praise.

Iag. No, let me not.

Desd. What would thou write of me,
If thou should praise me?

Iag. O gentle Lady, do not put me to it,
For I am nothing* if not Critical.

Desd. Come on, assay -- there is one gone to the Harbor?

Iag. I Madam.

Desd. I am not merry, but I do beguile
The thing I am, by seeming otherwise:
Come, how would thou praise me?

Iag. I am about it, but indeed my invention
Comes from my pate, as birdlime does from freeze,
It plucks out brain and all: but my Muse labors,
And thus she is delivered:
If she be fair and wise, fairness and wit;
The one's for use, the other using it.

Desd. Well praisde: how if she be black and witty?

Iag. If she be black, and thereto have a wit,
She (...) find a white, that shall her blackness hit.

Desd. Worse and worse.

Em. How if fair and foolish?

Iag. She never yet was foolish, that was fair,
For even her folly helped her, to a hair.

Des. These are old paradoxes, to make fools laugh in the Alehouse,
What miserable praise have thou for her,
That Is foule^ and foolish?

Iag. There Is none so foul, and foolish thereunto,
But does foul prankes, which fair and wise ones do.

Desd. O heavy ignorance, that praises the worst best: but what praise could
thou bestow on a deserving woman indeed? one, that in the authority of her
merrits, did justly put on the vouch of very malice it self?


Iag. She that was s^euer fair, and never proud,
Had tongue at will, and yet was never loud,
Never lackt gold, and yet went never gay,
Fled from her wish, and yet said, now I may:
She that being angered, her revenge being nigh,
Bad her wrong stay, and her displeasure fly;
She that in wisdom, never was so frail,
To change the Codshead for the Salmons tail.
She that could think, and never disclose her mind,
She was a wight, if ever such wight were.

Des. To do what?

Iag. To suckle fools, and chronicle small Beer.

Des. O most lame and impotent conclusion:
Do not learn of him Emillia, tho he be thy husband;
How say you Cassio, is he not a most profane and liberal
Counselor?

Cas. He speaks home Madam, you may relish him
More in the Soldier then in the Scholar.

Iag. He takes her by the palm; I well sed, whisper: as little a web as this
will ensnare as great a Flee as Cassio. I smile upon her, do: I will catch you
in your own courtesies: you say true, it is so indeed. If such tricks as these*
strip you out of your Leiutenantry, it had been better you had not rist your
three fingers so often, which now again, you are most apt to play the sir in:
good, well kissed, an excellent courtesy; it is so indeed: yet again, your
fingers at your lips? Would they were Clisterpipes for your sake. -- The Moore,
I know his Trumpet.


Tr^mpets within* Enter Oth^llo, and Attendants. Cas. It Is truly so.

Des. Lets meet him, and receive him.

Cas. Lo, where he comes.

Oath. O my fair Warriou^.

Des My dear Othello.

Oath. It gives me wonder great as my content,
To see you here before me: O my souls joy,
If after every tempest, come such calmness,
May the winds blow, till they have wakened death,
And let the laboring Bark clime hills of seas,
Olympus high, and duck again as low,
As hell's from Heaven: If it were now to dye,
It Were now to be most happy, for I fear
My soul has her content so absolute,
That not another comfort, like to this
Succeeds in unknown Fate,

Des. The Heavens forbid,
But that our loves and comforts should increase,
Even as our days do grow.

Oath. Amen to that sweet power,
I cannot speak enough of this content,
It stops me here, it is too much of joy:
And this, and this, the greatest discord be,
they kiss. That ere our hearts shall make.

Iag. O, you are well tuned now,
But I Will set down the pegs, that make this music,
As honest as I am.

Oath. Come, let us to the Castle:
News friends, our wars are done, the Turks are drowned:
How do our old acquaintance of the Isle;
Honny, you shall be well desired in Cypres;
I have found great love amongst them: O my sweet,
I prattle out of fashion, and I dote,
In mine one comforts: I preethee good Iago,
Go to the Bay, and disimbarke my Coffers;
Bring thou the Master to the Cittadell;
He is a good one, and his worthiness,
Does challenge much respect: come D^sdemona,
Once more well met at Cypres.
Exit.
Iag. Do thou meet me presently at the Harbor: come hither, If thou be
valiant, as they say, base men being in love, have then a Nobility in their
natures, more then is native to them -- list me, the Leiutenant to night
watches on the Court of Guard: first I will tell thee, this Desdemona is
directly in love with him.


Rod. With him? why it is not possible.


Iag. Lay thy finger thus, and let thy soul be instructed: mark me, with what
violence she first loved the Moore, but for bragging, and telling her
fantastical lies; and will she love him still for prating? let not the
discreet heart think so. Her eye must be fed, and what delight shall she have
to look on the Devil? When the blood is made dull with the act of sport, there
should be again to inflame it, and give saciety a fresh appetite. Love lines
in favor, sympathy in years, manners and beauties; all which the Moore is
defective in: now for want of these required conueniences, her delicate
tenderness will find it self abused, begin to heave the gorge, disrellish
and abhor the Moore, very nature will instruct her to it, and compel her to
some second choice: now sir, this granted, as it is a most pregnant and
unforced posi^ion, who stands so eminently in the degree of this fortune, as
Cassio does? a knave v^ry voluble, no farther conscionable, then in putting on
the mere form of civil and hand-seeming, for the better compassing of his
salt and hidden affections: A subtle slippery knave, a finder out of occasions;
that has an eye, can stamp and counterfeit the true aduant^ges never present
themselves. Besides, the knave is handsome, young, and has all those requisites
in him that fol^y and green minds look after; a pestil^nt complete knave, and
the woman has found him already.


Rod. I cannot believe that in her, she is full of most blessed condition.


Iag. Blessed figs end: the wine she drinks is made of grapes: if she had been
blessed, she would never have loved the Moore. D^^st thou not see her paddle with
the palm of his hand?


Rod. Yes, but that was but cour^esie.


Iag, Lechery, by this hand: an Index and p^o^ogue to the history of lust and
foul thoughts: they met so near with their lips, that their breathes embraced
together. When these mutualities so marshall the way, hand at hand, comes the
maine exercise, the incorporate conclusion. But sir, be you ruled by me, I
have brought you from Venice: watch you to night, for your command I Will lay't
upon you, Cassio knows you not, I Will not be far from you, do you find some
occasion to anger Cassio, either by speaking too loud, or tainting his
discipline, or from what other cause you please; which the time shall more
favorably minister.


Rod. Well,


Iag. Sir he is rash, and very sudden in choler, and happily with his Trunchen
may strike at you; provoke him that he may, for even out of that, will I cause
these of Cypres to mutiny, whose quallification shall come into no true trust
again't, but by the displanting of Cassio: So shall you have a shorter journey
to your desires by the means I shall then have to prefer them, and the
impediment, most profitably removed, without which there were no expectation of
our prosperity.


Rod. I will do this, if I can bring it to any opportunity.


Iag. I warrant thee, meet me by and by at the Cittadell; I must fetch his
necessaries ashore. -- Farewell.


Rod. Adue.

Exit.
Iag. That Cassio loves her, I do well believe it;
That she loves him, it is apt and of great credit;
The Moore howbe't, that I endure him not,
Is of a constant, noble, loving nature;
And I dare think, he will prove to Desdemona,
A most dear husband: now I do love her too,
Not out of absolute lust, tho peradventure.
I stand accountant for as great a sin,
But partly lead to diet my revenge,
For that I do suspect the lustful Moore,
Has leaped into my seat, the thought whereof
Does like a poisonous mineral gnaw my inwards,
And nothing can, nor shall content my soul,
Till I am even with him, wife, for wife:
Or failing so, yet that I put the Moore,
At least, into a Jealousy so strong,
That Judgment cannot cure; which thing to do,
If this poor trash of Venice, whom I crush,
For his quick hunting, stand the putting on,
I Will have our Michael Cassio on the hip*
Abuse him to the Moore, in the rank garb,
(For I fear Cassio, with my nightcap to)
Make the Moore thank me, love me, and reward me,
For making him ^gregiously an Ass,
And practicing upon his peace and quiet,
Even to madness: it is here, but yet confused,
K^aueries plain face is never seen, till used.
Exit.
Enter a Gentleman reading a Proclamation. It is Othell^'s pleasure; our noble
and valiant General, that upon certain tidings now arrived, importing the
mere perdition of the Turkish Fleet; that every man put himself into
triumph: Some to dance, some make bonefires; each man to what sport and Reuel^
his mind leads him; for besides these beneficial news, it is the
celebration of his Nuptials: So much was his pleasur^ should be proclaimed.
All Offices are open, and there is full liberty, from this present hour of
five, till the bell has told eleven. Heaven bless the Isle of Cypres, and our
noble General Othello.

Enter Othello, Cassio, and Desdemona. Oath. Good Michael, look you to the
guard to night,
Lets teach our selves the honorable stop,
Not to out sport discretion.

Cas. Iago has directed what to do:
But notwithstanding with my personal eye
Will I look to it.

Oath. Iago is most honest,
Michael good night, to morrow with your earliest,
Let me have speech with you, come my dear love,
The purchase made, the fruits are to e^sue,
The profits yet to come twixt me and you,
Good night.

Exit Othello and Desdemona. Enter Iago. (...). Welcome Iago, we must to the
watch.

Iag. Not this hour Leiutenant, it is not yet ten aclock: our General cast us
thus early for the love of his Desdemena. who let us not therefore blame, he
has not yet made wanton the night with her; and she is sport for love.


Cas. She is a most exquisite Lady.

Iag. And I Will warrant her full of game.

Cas. Indeed she is a most fresh and delicate creature.

Iag. What an eye she has?
Me thinks it sounds a parley of provocation.

Cas. An inuiting eye, and yet me thinks right moddest.

Iag. And when she speaks, it is an alarm to love.

Cas. It is indeed perfection.

Iag. Well, happiness to their sheets -- come Leiutenant, I have a stope of
Wine, and here without are a brace of Cypres Gallants, that would feign have a
measure to the health of the black Othello.


Cas. Not to night, good Iago; I have very poor and unhappy brains for
drinking: I could well wish courtesy would invent some other custom of
entertainment.


Iag. O they are our friends, -- but one cup: I Will drink for you.


Cas. I ha drunk but one cup to night, and that was craftily qualified to, and
behold what innovation it makes here: I am unfortunate in the infirmity, and
dare not task my weakness with any more.


Iag. What man, it is a night of Reuells, the Gallants desire it.

Cas. Where are they?

Iag. H^re at the door, I pray you call them in.

Cas. I Will do it, but it dislikes me.
Exit.
Iag. If I can fasten but one cup upon him,
With that which he has drunk to night already,
He Will be as full of quarrel and offense,
A^ my young mistress dog: -- Now my sick fool Rod^^igo,
Whom love has turned almost the wrong side outward,
To Desdemona, has to night caroust
Potations pottle deep, and he is to watch
Three lads of Cypres, noble swelling spirits,
That hold their honor, in a wary distance,
The very Elements of this warlike Isle,
Have I to night flustred with flowing cups,
And the watch too: now among this flock of drunkards,
I am to put our Cassio in some action,
That may offend the Isle;
Enter Montanio, Cassio, and others. But here they come:
If consequence do but approve my dream,
My boat sails freely, both with wind and stream.

Cas. Fore God they have given me a rouse already.

Mon. Good faith a little one, not past a pint,
As I am a soldier.

Iag. Some wine ho:
And let me the Cannikin clinke, clinke,
And let me the Cannikin clinke, clinke:
A Soldier's a man, a life's but a span,
Why then let a soldier drink. -- Some wine boys,

Cas. Fore God an excellent song.

Iag. I learned it in England, where indeed they are most potent in potting:
your Dane, your German, and your swag-bellied Hollander; drink ho, are
nothing to your English.


Cas. Is your English man so expert in his drinking?


Iag. Why he drinks you with facillity, your Dane dead drunk: he sweats not
to overthrow your Almaine; he gives your Hollander a vomit, ^re the next pottle
can be filled.


Cas. To the health of our General.

Mon. I am for it Leiutenant, and I will do you justice.

Iag. O swee^e England, -- King Stephen was a worthy peer,
His breeches cost him but a crown,
He held'em sixpence all too dear,
With that he called the Tailor lowne,
He was a wight of high renown,
And thou art but of low degree,
It Is pride that pulls the Country down,
Then take thine ^wd cloak about thee. -- Some wine ho.

Cas. Fore God this is a more exquisite song then the other.

Iag. Will you hear't again?

Cas. No, for I hold him unworthy of his place, that does those things: well,
God's above all, and there be souls that must be saved.


Iag. It is true good Leiutenant.


Cas. For mine own part, no offense to the General, nor any man of quality, I
hope to be saved.


Iag. And so do I Leiutenant.


Cas. I, but by your leave, not before me; the Leiutenant is to be saved before
the Ancient. Let Us ha no more of this, let us to our affairs: God forgive us
our sins: Gentlemen, let us look to our business; Do not think Gentlemen I
am drunk, this is my Ancient, this is my right hand, and this is my left hand:
I am not drunk now, I can stand well enough, and speak well enough.


All. Excellent well.

Cas. Very well then: you must not think, that I am drunk.
Ex.
Mon. To the plotforme masters. Come, let us set the watch.

Iag. You see this fellow that is gone before,
He is a Soldier fit to stand by Caesar,
And give direction: and do but see his vice,
It Is to his virtue, a just equinox,
The one as long as the other: it is pity of him,
I fear the trust O^hello put him in,
On some odd time of his infirmity,
Will shake this Island.

Mon. But is he often thus.

Iag. It Is evermore the Prologue to his sleep:
He Will watch the horolodge a double set,
If drink rock not his cradle.

Mon. Twere well (...) General we^e put in mind of i^,
Perhaps he sees it not, or his good nature,
Praises the virtues that appears in Cassio,
And look not on his evils: is not this true?

Iag. How now Roderig^,
Enter Roderigo. I^pray you after the Leiutenant, go.

Exit R^d. Mon. And it is great pity that the noble Moore
Should hazard such a place, as his own second,
With one of an ingraft infirmity:
It were an honest action to say so to the Moore.

Iag. Nor I, for this fair Island:
I do love Cassio well, and would do much,
Help, help, within* To cure him of this evil: but hark, what noise.

Enter Cassio, driving in Roderigo. Cas. Zouns, you ro^ue, you rascal.

Mon. what is the matter Leiutenant?

Cas. A k^aue, teach me my duty: but I Will beat the knave into a wicker bottle.


Rod. Bea^e me?

Cas. Do thou prate rogue?

Mon. Good Leiutenant; pray sir hold your hand.

Cas. Let me go sir, or i will knock you ore the mazzard.

Mon. Come, come, you are drunk.

Cas. Drunk?

they fight. Iag. Away I say, go out and cry a muteny.
A bell rung. Nay good Leiutenant: god will Gentlemen,
Help h^, Leiutenant: Sir Montanio, sir,
Help masters, here is a goodly watch indeed,
Who Is that that rings the bell? D^ablo -- ho,
The ^owne will rise, godswill Leiutenant, hold,
You will be shamed for ever.

Enter Othello, and Gentlemen with weapons. Oath, What is the matter here?

Mon. Zouns, I bleed still, I am hurt, to the death:

Oath. Hold, for your lives.

Iag. Hold, hold Leiutenant, sir Montanio, Gentlemen,
Have you forgot all place of sense, and duty:
Hold, the General speaks to you; hold, hold, for shame.

Oath. Why how now ho, from whence arises this?
Are we turned Turks, and to our selves do that,
Which Heaven has forbid the ^ttamites:
For Christian shame, put by this barbarous brawle;
He that stirs nex^, to carue forth his own rage,
Holds his soul light, he dies upon his motion;
Silence that dreadful bell, it frights the Isle
From her propriety: what is the matter masters?
Honest Iago, that looks dead with grieuing,
Speak, who began this, on thy love I charge thee.

Iag. I do not know, friends all but now, even now,
In quarter, and in terms, like bride and groom,
Deuesting them to bed, and then but now,
As if some plannet had vnwitted men,
Swords out, and tilting one at others breast,
In opposition bloody. I cannot speak
Any beginnin^ to this peevish odds;
And would in action glorious, I had lost
These legs, that brought me to a part of it.

Oath. How came it Michael, you were thus forgot?

Cas. I pray you pardon me, I cannot speak.

Oath. Worthy Montanio, you were wont be civil,
The gravity and stillness of your youth,
The world has noted, and your name is great,
In men of wisest censure: what is the matter
That you unlace your reputation thus,
And spend your rich opinion, for the name
Of a night brawler? give me answer to it?

Mon. Worthy Othello, I am hurt to danger,
Your Officer Iago can inform you,
While I spare speech, which something now offends me,
Of all that I do know, nor know I ought
By me, that is sed or done amiss this night,
Unless selfe-charity be sometime a vice,
And to defend our selves it be a sin,
When violence assayles us.

Oath. Now by heaven
My blood begins my safer guides to rule*
And passion having my best judgment coold,
Assayes to lead the way. Zouns, if I stir,
Or do but lift this arm, the best of you
Shall sink in my rebuke: give me to know
How this foul rout began, who set it on,
And he that is approou'd in this offense,
Tho he had twined with me, both at a birth,
Shall loose me; what, in a Town of war,
Yet wild, the peoples hearts brim full of fear,
To manage private and domesticke quarrels,
In night, and on the Court and guard of safety?
It Is monstrous. Iago, who began?

Mon. If partiality affin'd, or league in office,
Thou do deliver, more or less then truth,
Thou art no soldier.

Iag. Touch me not so near,
I had rather ha this tongue out from my mouth,
Then it should do offense to Michael Cassio:
Yet I persuade my self to speak the truth,
Shall nothing wrong him. Thus it is General:
Montanio and my self being in speech,
There come^ a fellow, crying out for help,
And Cassio following him with determined sword,
To execute upon him: Sir this Gentleman
Steps in to Cassio, and intreates his pause;
My self the crying fellow did pursue,
Lest by his clamor, as it so fell out,
The Town might fall in fright: he swift of foot,
Out ran my purpose: and I returned the rather,
For that I heard the clinke and fall of swords:
And Cassio high in oaths, which till to night,
I never might see before: when I came back,
For this was brief, I found them close together,
At blow and thrust, even as again they were,
When you your self did part them.
More of this matter can I not report,
But men are men, the b^st sometimes forget;
Tho Cassio did some little wrong to him,
As men in ra^ge strike those that wish them best,
Yet surely Cassio, I believe received
From him that fled, some strange indignity,
Which patience could not pass.

Oath. I know Iago,
Thy honesty and love does mince this matter,
Making it light to Cassio: Cassio, I love thee,
But never more be Officer of mi^e.
Enter Desdemona, with others. Look if my Gentle love be not raisde up:
I Will make thee an example.

Desd. What is the matter?

Oath. All Is well now sweeting:
Come away to bed: sir, for your hurts,
My self will be your surgeon; lead him off;
Iago, look with care about the Town,
And silence those, whom this vile brawle distracted.
Come Desdemona: it is the Soldiers life,
To have their balmy ^^umbers waked with strife,

Iag, What are you hurt Leiutenant?

Exit Moore, Desdemona, and attendants. Cas. I, past all surgery.

Iag. Mary God forbid.

Cas. Reputation, reputation, I ha lost my reputation:
I ha lost the immortal part sir of my self,
And what remains is beastiall, my reputation,
Iago, my reputation.

Iag. As I am an honest man, I thought you had received some bodily wound,
there is more offense in that, then in Reputation: reputation is an idle and
most false imposition, often got without merit, and lost without deserving, You
have lost no reputation at all, unless you repute your self such a loser;
what man, there are ways to recover the General again: you are but now cast in
his mood, a punishment more in policy, then in malice, even so, as one would
beat his offencelesse dog, to affright an imperious Lion: sue to him again,
and^hees yours.


Cas. I will rather sue to be despised, then to deceive so good a Commander,
with so light, so drunken, and indiscreete an Officer: O thou invisible spirit
of wine, if thou have no name to be known by, let us call thee Devil.


Iag. What was he, that you followed with your sword?
What had he done to you?

Cas. I know not.

Iag. I^t possible?

Cas. I remember a mass of things, but nothing distinctly; a quarrel, but
nothing wherefore. O God, that men should put an enemy in there mouths, to
steal away there brains; that we should with joy, Revel, pleasure, and
applause, transform our selves into beasts.


Iag. Why, but you are now well enough: how came you thus recovered?


Cas. It has pleased the Devil drunkenness, to give place to the Devil
wrath; one vnpe^fectnesse, shows me another, to make me frankely despise my
self.


Iag. Come, you are too severe a morraler; as the time, the place, the
condition of this Country stands, I (...) heartily wish, this had not so
befalne; but since it is as it is, mend it, for your own good.


Cas. I will ask him for my place again, he shall tell me I am a drunkard:
had I as many mouths as Hydra, such an answer would stop em all: to be now a
sen^ible man, by and by a fool, and presently a beast. Every inordinate cup is
unblessed, and the ingredience is a devil.


Iag. Come, come, good wine is a good familiar creature, if it be well used;
exclaim no more against it; and good Leiutenant, I think you think I love
you.


Cas. I have well approou'd it sir, -- I drunk?


Iag. You, or any man living may be drunk at some time: I Will tell you what
you shall (...), -- our Generals wi^e is now the General; I may say so in this
respect, for that he has devoted and given up himself to the contemplation,
mark and deuotement of her parts and graces. Confess your self freely to
her, importune her, she will help to put you in you^ place again: she is so
free, so kind, so apt, so blessed a disposition, that she holds it a vice in
her goodness, not to do more then she is requested. This braule between you
and her husband, entreat her to splinter, and my fortune; against any lay,
worth naming, this crack of your (...) shall grow stronger then it was before.


Cas. You advise me well.

Iag. I protest in the sincerity of love and honest kindness.

Cas. I think it freely, and betimes in the morning, will I beseech the
virtuous Desdemona, to undertake for me; I am desperate of my fortunes, if they
check me here.


Iag. You are in the right:
Good night Leiutenant, I must to the watch.

Cas. Good night honest Iago.
Exit.
Iag. And what is he then, that saye^ I play the villain,
When this advice is free I give, and honest,
Proball to thinking, and indeed the course,
To win the Moore again? For it is most easy
The inclining Desdemona to subdue,
In any honest suite, she is framed as fruitful,
As the free Elements: and then for her
To win the Moore* were to renounce his baptism,
All s^ales and symbols of redeemed sin,
His soul is so infetter'd to her love,
That she may make, unmake, do what she list,
Even as her appetite shall play the god
With his weak function: how am I then a villain?
To counsel Cassio to this parrallell course.
Directly to his good: divinity of hell,
When devils will their blackest sins put on,
They do suggest at first with heavenly shows,
As I do now: for while this honest fool
Plyes Desdemona to repair his fortunes,
And she for him, pleades strongly to the Moore:
I Will pour this pestilence into his ^are,
That she repeales him for her bodies lust;
And by how much she strives to do him good,
She shall undo her credit with the Moore,
So will I turn her virtue into pitch,
And out of her own goodness make the net
That shall enmesh em all:
Enter Roderigo. How now Roderigo?

Rod. I do follow here in the chase, not like a hound that hunts, but one that
filles up the cry: my money is almost spent, I ha bin to night exceedingly well
cudgeld: I think the issue will be, I shall have so much experience for my
pains, as th^^ comes to, and no money at all, and with that wit return to
Venice.


Iag. How poor are they, that ha not patience?
What wound did ever heal, but by degrees?
Thou know we work by wit, and not by wichcraft,
And wit depends on dilatory time.
Do not go well? Cassio has beaten thee.
And thou, by that small hurt, have casheird Cassio,
Tho other things grow fair against the sun,
But fruits that blosome first, will first (...) ripe
Content thy self awhile; bi'the mass it is morning;
Pleasure, and action, make the hours seem short:
Retire thee, go where thou art bill ted,
Away I say, thou shall know more hereafter:
Nay get thee gone. Some things are to be done,
My wife must move for Cassi^ to her mistress,
I Will set her on.
My self awhile, to draw the Moore apart,
And bring him iumpe, when he may Cassio find,
Soliciting his wife: I, that is the way*
Dull not devise by coldness and delay.

Exeunt. Enter Cassio, with Musicians and the Cl^wn^. Cas. MAsters, play here,
I will content your pains.
Something that is brief, and bid good mo^^ow General.

Clo. Why masters, ha your instruments bin at Naples, that they speak in the
nose thus?

Boy. How sir, how?

Clo. Are these I pray, c^ld wind Instruments?

Boy. I marry are they sir.

Clo. O, thereby hangs a tail.

Boy. Whereby hangs a tail sir?

Clo. Marry sir, by many a wind (...) I know* But masters here is money for
you, and the General so likes your music, that he desires you of all loves,
to make no more noise with it.


Boy, Well si^ we will not.


Clo. If you have any music that may not be heard, to it again, but as they
saay, to hear music, the General does not greatly care.


Boy. We ha none such sir.


Clo. Then put your pipes in your bag, for I Will away; go, vanish away.


Cas. Do thou hear my honest friend?


Clo. No, I hear not your honest friend, I hear you.


Cas. Preethee keep up thy quillets, there is a poor piece of gold for thee:
if the Gentlewoman that attends the ^enerals wi^e be stirring, tell her there is
one Cassio, entreates her alittle favor of speech -- will thou do this?


Clo. She is stirring sir, if she will stir hither, I shall seem to notify
unto her.


Enter Iago. Cas. Do g^od my friend: In happy time Iago.

Iag. You ha not bin a bed then.

Cas. Why no, the day had broke before we parted:
I ha made bold Iago, to send in to your wife, -- my suite to her,
Is, that she will to virtuous Desdemona,
Procure me some access.

Iag. I Will send her to you presently,
And I Will devise a ^eane to draw the Moore
Out of the way, that your converse and business,
May be more free.
Exit.
Cas. I humbly thank you for it: I never knew
A Florentine more kind and honest:

Enter Emilla. Em. Good morrow good Leiutenant, I am sor^y
For your displeasure, but all will soon be well,
The General and his wife are talking of it,
And she speaks for you stoutly: the Moore replies,
That he you hurt is of great fame in Cypres,
And great affinity, and that in whole some wisdom,
He might not but refuse you: but he protests he loves you,
And needs no other suitor but his liki^gs,
To take the safest occasion by the front,
To bring you in again.

Cas. Yet I beseech you,
If you think fit, or that it may be done,
Give me advantage of some brief discourse
With Desdemona alone.

Em. Pray you come in,
I will bestow you where you shall have time,
To speak your bosom freely.

Exeunt. Enter Othello, Iago, and other ^^ntl^men. Oath. These letters give
Iago, to the Pilate,
And by him, do my duties to the State;
That done, I will be walking on the works,
R^paire there to me.

Iag. Well my good Lord, I Will do it.

Oath. This fortification Gentlemen, shall we see it?

Ge^t. We wait upon your Lordship.

Exeunt. Enter Desdemona, Cassio and Emillia. Des. Be thou assured good Cassio,
I will do
All my abil^ties in thy behalf.

Em. Good Madam do, I know it grieves my husband,
As if the case were his.

Desd. O that is an honest fellow:-do not doubt Cassio,
But I will have my Lord and you again,
As friendly as you were.

Cas. Boun^ious Madame,
What ever shall become of Michael Cassio,
He Is never any thing but your true servant.

Desd. O sir, I thank you, you do love my Lord:
You have known him long, and be you well assured,
He shall in strangest, stand no farther off,
Then in a politic distance.

Cas. I but Lady,
The policy may either last so long,
Or feed upon such nice, and watrish diet,
Or breed it self, so out of circumstance,
That I being absent, and my place supplied,
My General will forget my love and service*

Desd. Do not doubt that, before Emillia here,
I give thee warraut of thy place; assure thee
If I do vow a friendship, I Will perform it
To the last Article; my Lord shall never rest,
I Will watch him tame, and talk him out of patience;
His bed shall seem a school, his board a shrift,
I Will intermingle every thing he does,
With Cassio's suite; therefore be merry Cassio,
For thy soiliciter shall rather die,
Theu give thee cause: away.

Enter Othello, Iago, and Gentlemen. Em. Madam, here comes my Lord.

Cas. Madam, I Will take my leave.

Desd. Why stay and hear me speak.

Cas. Madam not now, I am very ill at ease,
Unfit for mine own purpose.

Desd. Well, do your discretion.

Exit Cassio. Iag. Ha, I like not that.

Oath. Wh^t do thou say?

Iag. Nothing my Lord, or if, I know not what.

Oath. Was not that Cassio parted from my wife?

Iag. Cassio my Lord? -- no sure, I cannot think it,
Tha^ he would sneake away so guilty-like,
Seeing you coming.

Oath. I do believe it was he.

Desd. How now my Lord,
I have been talking with a suitor here,
A man that languishes in your displeasure.

Oath. Who is it you mean?

Desd. Why your Leiutenant Cassio, good my Lord,
If I have any grace or power to move you,
His present reconsiliation take:
For if he be not one that truly loves you,
That erres in ignorance, and not in cunning,
I have no judgment in an honest face,
I preethee call him back.

Oath. Went he hence now?

Desd. Yes faith, so humbled,
That he has left part of his griefs with me,
I suffer with him; good love call him back.

Oath. Not now sweet Desdemona some other time.

Desd. But shal't be shortly?

Oath. The sooner sweet for you.

Desd. Shal't be to night at supper?

Oath. No, not to night.

Desd. To morrow dinner then?

Oath. I shall not dine at home,
I meet the Captains, at the Cittadell.

Desd. Why then to morrow night, or Tuesday morn,
On Tuesday morn, or night, or Wensday morn,
I preethee name the time, but let it not
Exceed three days: I faith he is penitent,
And yet his trespass, in our common reason,
(Save that they say, the wars must make examples,
Out of her best) is not almost a fault,
To incur a private check: when shall he come?
Tell me Othello: I wonder in my soul,
What you could ask me, that I should deny?
Or stand so muttering on? What Michael Cas^io?
That came a wooing with you, and so many a time
When I have spoke of you dispraisingly,
Has taken your part, to have so much to do
To bring him in? Birlady I could do much.

Oath. Preethee no more, let him come when he will,
I will deny thee nothing.

Desd. Why this is not a boon,
It Is as I should entreat you wear your gloves:
Or feed on nourishing dishes, or keep you warm,
Or sue to you, to do a peculiar profit
To your own person: nay, when I have a suite,
Wherein I mean to touch your love indeed,
It shall be full of poise and difficulty,
And fearful to be granted.

Oath. I will deny thee nothing,
Whereon I do beseech thee grant me this,
To leave me but a little to my self.

Desd. Shall I deny you? no, farewell my Lord,

Oath. Farewell my Desdomona, I Will come to thee straight.

Desd. Emillia, come, be it as your fancies teach you,
What ere you be I am obedient.

Exit Desd. and Em. Oath. Excellent wretch, perdition catch my soul,
But I do love thee, and when I love thee not,
Chaos is come again.

Iag. My noble Lord.

Oath. What do thou say Iago?

Iag. Did Michael Cassio when you wooed my Lady,
Know of your love?

Oath. He did from first to last: -- Why do thou a^ke?

Iag. But for a satisfaction of my thoughts.
No further harm.

Oath. Why of thy thought Iago?

Iag. I did not think he had been acquainted with her.

Oath. O yes, and went between us very often.

Iag. Indeed?

Oath. Indeed? Indeed disern'^t thou ought in that?
Is he not honest?

Iag. Honest my Lord?

Oath. Honest? I honest.

Iag. My Lord, for ought I know.

Oath. What do thou think?

Iag. Think my Lord?

Oath. Think my Lord? By heaven he echoes me.
As if there were some monster in his thought:
Too hideous to be shown: thou did mean something;
I heard thoe say but now, thou lik'^t ^not that,
When Cassio left my wife: what did not like?
And when I told thee, he was of my counsel,
In my whole course of wooing, thou cridst indeed?
And did contract, and purse thy brow together,
As if thou then had shut up in thy brain,
Some horrible counsel: if thou do love me,
Show me thy thought.

Iag. My Lord, you know I love you.

Oath. I think thou do,
And for I know, thou art full of love and honesty,
And weighest thy words, before thou give em breath,
Therefore these stops of t^ine affright me the more:
For such things in a false disloyal knave,
Are tricks of custom; but in a man that is just,
They are close denotements, working from the heart,
That passion cannot rule.

Iag. For Michael Cassio,
I dare presume, I think that he is hone^^,

Oath. I think so to.

Iag. Men should be that they seem,
Or those that be not, would they might seem none.

Oath. Certain, men should be what they seem.

Iag. Why then I think Cassio's an honest man.

Oath. Nay yet there is more in this,
I pre^thee speak to me to thy thinkings:
As thou do ruminate, and give the worst of thought,
The worst of word.

Iag. Good my Lord pardon me;
Though I am bound to ^uery act of duty,
I am not bound to that all slaves are free to,
Utter my thoughts? Why, say they are vil^ and false:
As where is that palace, whereinto foul things
Sometimes intrude not? who has a breast so pure,
But some uncleanly apprehensions,
Keep l^^tes and law-dayes, and in Session fit
With meditations lawful?

Oath. Thou do conspire against thy friend Iago,
If thou but think him wronged, and make his ear
A stranger to thy thoughts.

Iag. I do be^eech you,
Though I perchance am vicious in my guess,
As I confess it is my natures plague,
To spy into abuses, and often my i^alousie
Shapes faults that are not, I entreat you then;
From one that so imperfectly coniects,
You Would take no notice, nor build your self a troubl^,
Out of my scattering, and unsure observance;
It were not for your quiet, nor your good,
Nor for my manhood* honesty, or wisdom,
To ^et you know my thoughts,

Oath. Zouns.

Iag. Good name in man and woman's d^^r^ my Lord;
Is the immediate Jewel of our souls:
Who steals my purse, steals trash it is something, nothing,
It Was mine, it is his, and has bin slane to thousands:
But he that filches from me my good name,
Robs me of that, which not i^riches him,
And makes me poor indeed.

Oath. By heaven I Will know thy thought.

Iag. You cannot, if my heart were in your hand,
Nor shall not, whilst it is in my custody:
O be ware i^alousi^.
It is the green eyd monster, which does mock
That meat it feeds on. That Cuckold l^ues in bliss,
Who certain of his fate, loves not his wronger:
But oh, what d^mned minutes tel^s he ore,
Who dot^^, yet doubts, suspects, yet strongly loves.

Oath. O ^isery.

Iag. Poor^ and content is rich, and rich enough,
But ^ches, finel^sse, is as poor as winter,
To him that eu^r fears he shall be poor:
Good God, the souls of all my tribe defend
From jealousy,

Oath. Why, why is this?
Think thou I Would make a life of i^alousie?
To follow still the changes of the Moon
With fresh suspicions? No, to be once in doubt,
Is once to be resolud: exchange me for a Goat,
When I shall turn the business of my soul
To such exufflicate, and blown surmises,
Matching thy inference: it is not to make me jealous,
To say my wife is fair, feeds well, loves company,
Is free of speech, sings, plays, and dances well;
Where virtue is, these are more virtuous:
Nor from mine own weak merrits will I draw
The smallest f^are, or doubt of her revolt,
For she had ei^s, and chose me: no Iago,
I Will see before I doubt, when I doubt, prove,
And on the proof, there is no more but this:
Away at once with love or jealousy.

Iag. I am glad of it, for now I shall have reason,
To show the love and duty that I bear you,
With franker spirit: therefore as I am bound
Receive it from me: I speak not yet of proof,
Look to your wife, obs^rue her well with Cassio;
We^^e your eye thus, not jealous, nor secure,
I would not have your free and noble nature,
Out of selfe-bounty be abused, look to it:
I know our Country disp^sition well*
In Venice they do let God ^ee the prankes
They dare show their husbands: their best conscience,
Is not to leave undone, but keep unknown.

Oath. Do thou say ^o.

Iag. She did deceive her father marrying you;
And when she seemed to sh^ke and fear your looks,
She loved them most.

Oath. And so she did.

Iag. Why go too then,
She that so young, could give our such a s^eming,
To seal her fathers eyes ^p, close as Oak,
He thought it was witch^raft: but I am much too blame,
I humbly do beseech you of your pardon,
For too much loving you.

Oath. I am bound to thee for ever.

Iag. I see this has a little das^t your spirits.

Oath. Not a jot, not a ^ot.

Iag. I faith I fear it has.
I hope you will consider what is spoke,
Comes from my love: But I do see you are moved,
I am to pray you, not to strain my speech,
To groser issues, nor to larger reach,
Then to suspicion.

Oath. I will not.

Iag. Should you do so my Lord,
My speech should fall into such vile success,
As my thoughts aim not at: Cassio's my trusty friend:
My Lord, I see you are moved.

Oath. No, not much moved,
I do not think but Desdemona's honest.

Iag. Long live she so, and long live you to think so.

Oath. And yet how nature erring from it self.

Iag. I, there is the point: as to be bold with you,
Not to affect many proposed matches,
Of her own Clime, complexion, and degree,
Whereto we see in all things, nature tends;
Fie we may smell in such a will, most rank
Foul disproportion: thoughts unnatural.
But pardon me: I do not in position.
Destinctly speak of her, tho I may fear
Her will recoyling to her better judgment,
May fall to match you with her country forms,
And happily repent^

Oath. Farewell, if more
Thou do perceive, let me know more, set on
Thy wife ^o observe: leave me Iago.

Iag. My Lord I take my leave.

Oath. Why did I marry? This honest creature doubtless
Sees and know^s more, much more then he vnfoulds.
My Lord, I would I might entreat your ho^our,

Iag. To scan this thing no further, leave it to time,
Tho it be fit, that Cassio have his place,
For sure he fills it up with great ability:
Yet if you please to hold him off awhile,
Yo^^ shall by that perceive him and his means;
Note if your Lady ^traine her entertainment,
With any strong or vehement importunity,
Much will be ^^ene in that, in the mean time,
Let me be thought too busy in my fears,
As worthy cause I have, to fear I am;
And hold her free, I do beseech your honor.

Oath. Fear not my government.

Iag. I once more take my leave.
Exit
Oath. This fellowe's of exceeding honesty,
And knows all qualities, with a learned spirit
Of human dealing: if I do prove her haggard,
Tho that her lesses were my dear heart strings,
I Would whistle her off, and let her down the wind,
To prey at fortune. Happily, for I am black,
And have not those soft parts of conversation,
That Chamb^rers have, or for I am de^lind
Into the valt of years; yet that is not much,
She Is gone, I am abused, and my releife
Must be to loathe her: O curse of marriage,
That we can call these delicate creatures ours,
And not their appetites: I had rather be a Toade,
And live upon the vapor in a dungeon,
Then keep a corner in a thing I love,
For others uses: yet it is the plague of great ones,
Prerogatiu'd are they less then the base,
It Is desteny, vn^^unnable, like death:
Even then this forked plague is fated to us,
When we do quicken: Desdemona comes,
If she be false, O then heaven mocks it self,
I Will not bele^ue it.

Enter Desdemona and Emillia. Desd. How now my dear Othell^?
Your dinner, and the generous Ilander
By you inuit^ed, do attend your presence,

Oath. I am to blame.

Des. Why is your speech so faint? are you not well?

Oath. I have a pain upon my forehead, here.

Des. Faith that is with watching, it will away again;
Let me but bind your head, within this hour
It will be well ag^ine.

Oath. Your napkin is too little:
Let it alone, come I Will go in with you.

Des. I am very sorry that you are not well.

Em. I am glad I have found this napkin,
Ex. Oath. and Desd. This was her fi^^t remembrance from the Moore,
My way ward husband, has a hundred times
Wooed me to ^teale it, but she so loves the token,
For he coniu^'d her, she should ever keep it,
That she re^e^ues it ever more about her,
To kiss, and talk to; I Will ha the work taine out,
And giu't Iago: what hee'l^ do with it,
Enter Iago. Heaven knows, not I,
I nothing know, but for his fantasy.

Iag. How now, what do you here alone?

Em. Do not you chide, I have a thing for you.

Iag. A thing for me, it is a common thing.

Em. Ha?

Iag. To have a foolish thing.

Em. O, is that all? what at will you gine me now,
For that sa^e han^kercher?

Iag. What handkercher?

Em. What handkercher?
Why that the Moore first gave to Desdemona,
That which so often you did bid me steal.

Iag. Have stole it from her?

Em. No faith, she let ^t drop by negligence,
And to the advantage, I being here, took't up:
Look here it is.

Iag. A good wench, give it me.

Em. What will you do with it, that you have bin
So earnest to have me filch it?

Iag. Why, what is that to you?

Em. If it be not for some purpose of import,
Give mee't again, poor Lady, she will run mad,
When she shall lack it.

Iag. Be not you known on it, I have use for it: -- go leave me;
I will (...) Cassio's Lodging lose this napkin,
Exit Em. And let him find it: tri^les light as ayr^,
Are to the jealous, confirmations strong
As proofs of holy writ, this may do something,
Dangerous conceits are in their natures poisons,
Which at the first are scarce found to distaste.
But with a little art, upon the blood.
Ent. Othello. Burn like the minds of sulphur: I did say so:
look where he comes, not Poppy, ^or Mandragora,
Nor all the drousie sirrops of the world,
Shall ^uer medicine thee to that sweet sleep,
Which thou owedst yesterday.

Oath. Ha, ha, false to me, to me?

Iag. Why how now General? no more of that.

Oath. Auant, be gone, thou have set me on the rack,
I swear, it is better to be much abused,
Then but to know a little.

Iag. How now my Lord?

Oath. What sense had I of her stolen hours of lust:
I saw't not, thought it not, it harmed not me,
I slept the next night well, was free, and merry;
I found not Cassio's kisses on her lips,
He that is robbed, not wanting what is stolen,
Let him not know'r, and he is not robbed at all.

Iag. I am sorry to hear this.

Oath. I had bin happy if the general Camp,
Pyoners, and all, had tasted her sw^ete body,
So I had nothing known: O now for ever
Farewell the ^^anquile mind, farewell content:
Farewell the plumed troop, and the big wars.
That makes ambition virtue: O farewell,
Farewell the neighing Steed, and the shri^l Trumpe,
The spirit-stirring Drum, the eare-peircing Fife;
The royal Banner, and all quality,
Pride, pomp, and circumstance of glorious war.
And O ye mortal Engines, whose wide throats,
The immortal Jove's great clamor counterfeit;
Farewell, Othello's Occupation's gone.

Iag. Is It possible my Lord?

Oath. Villain, be sure thou prove my Love a whore,
Be sure of it, give me the oculer proof,
Or by the worth of man's eternal soul,
Thou had bin better have been borne a dog,
Then answer my waked wrath.

Iag. Is It come to this?

Oath. Make me to see it, or at the least so prove it,
That the probation, bear no hinge, nor loope,
To hang a doubt on: or woe upon thy life.

Iag. My noble Lord.

Oath. If thou do slander her, and torture me,
Never pray more, abandon all remorce.
On horrors head, horrors accumilate:
Do deeds, to make heaven weep, all earth amazed,
For nothing can thou to damnation ad greater then that.

Iag. O grace, O heaven defend me,
Are you a man, have you a soul or sense?
God buy you, take mine office, -- O wretched fool,
That live to make thine honesty a vice,
O monstrous world, take note, take note, O world,
To be direct and honest, is not safe,
I thank you for this profit, and from hence,
I Will love no friend, since love breeds such offense.

Oath. Nay stay, thou should be honest.

Iag. I should be wise, for honestie's a fool,
And looses that it works for:
I see sir, you are eaten up with passion,
I do repent me that I put it to you,
You would be satisfied.

Oath. Would, nay, I will.

Iag. And many, but how, how satisfied my Lord?
Would you, the superuisor grossly gape on,
Behold her topt?

Oath. Death and damnation -- oh.

Iag. It were a tedious difficulty I think,
To bring em to that prospect, dam'em then,
If ever mortal eyes did see them boulster
More then their own; what then, how then?
What shall I say? where is satisfaction?
It is impossible you should see this.
Were they as prime as Goats, as hot as Monkies,
As salt as Wolves, in pride; and fools as gro^^e,
As ignorance made drunk: But yet I say,
If imputation and ^trong circumstan^^s,
Which lead directly to the door of truth,
Will give you satis^action, you may have it.

Oath. ^iue me a living reason, that she is disloyal.

Iag. I do not like the office,
But ^^th I am entered into this cause so far,
Pricked to it by foolish honesty and love,
I will go on: I lay with Cassio lately,
And being troubled with a raging tooth, I could not sleep.
There are a kind of men so loose of soul,
That in their sleeps will mutter their affairs,
One of this kind is Cassio:
In sleep I heard him say. Sweet Desdemona,
Let us be merry, let us hide our loves;
And then sir, would he gripe and wring my hand,
Cry out, sweet creature, and then kiss me hard,
As if he plucked up kisses by the roots,
That grew upon my lips, then laid his leg
Over my thigh, and sighed, and kissed, and then
Cried, cursed fate, that gave thee to the Moore.

Oath. O Monstro^s, monstrous.

Iag. Nay, this was but his dream.

Oath. But this devoted a fore-gone conclusion,

Iag. It Is a shrewd doubt, tho it be but a dream,
And this may help to thicken other proofs,
That do demonstrate thinly.

Oath. I Will tear her all to pieces.

Iag. Nay, but be wise, yet we see nothing done,
She may be honest yet, tell me but this,
Have you not sometimes seen a handkercher,
Spotted with strawberries in your wives hand.

Oath. I gave her such a one, it was my first gift.

Iag. I know not that, but such a handkercher,
I am ^ure it was your wives, did I to day
See Cassio wipe his beard with.

Oath. I^'t be that.

Iag. If it be that, or any, it was hers,
It speaks against her, with the other proofs.

Oath. O that the slave had forty thousand lives,
One is too poor, too weak for my r^uenge:
Now do I see it is time, look here Iago,
All my fond love, thus do I blow to heaven, -- it is gone.
Arise black vengeance, from thy hollow Cell,
Yield up O love thy crown, and hearted Throne,
To tirranous hate, swell bosom with thy fraught,
For it is of Aspecks tongues.

Iag. Pray be content.

he k^eeles. Oath. O blood, Iago, blood.

Iag. Patience I say, your mind perhaps may change.

Oath. Never:
In the due reverence of a ^acred vow,
I here engage my words.

Iag. D^e notrise yet:
Witness you euer-burning lights above,
You Elements that clip us round about,
Iago k^eeles. Witness that here, Iago does give up
The excellency of his wit, hand, heart,
To wronged Othello's se^uice: let him command,
And to obey, shall be re^orce,
What bloody work so ever.

Oath. I greet thy love:
Not with vain thanks, but with accep^^nce bounteous,
And will upon the instant put thee ^o'^,
Within these three days, let me hear thee say,
That Cassi^'s not alive,

Iag. My friend is dead:
It Is ^one as you request, but let her live.

Oath. Dam her lewd minks O d^^^her,
Come, go with me apart, I will withdraw
To furnish me with some swift means of death,
For the fair devil: now art thou my Leiutenant.

Iag. I am your own for ever.

Exeunt. Enter Desdemonia Emilla and the Clown. Des. Do you know (...), where
the Leiutenant Cassi^ lies?

Cl^. I dare not say he lies any where.

Des. Why man?
He is a Soldier, and for one to say a Soldier lies, is s^abbing.

Des. Go to, where Iodges he?

Cl^. I know not where he lodges, and for me to devise a lodging, and say he
lies there, were to lie in my th^oate.


Desd. Can you inquire him out, and be edified by report?

Clo, I will cathechize the world for him, that is, make questions
And by them answer.

Desd. Seek him, bid him come hither, ^ell him I have moved my
Lord in his beha^fe, and hope all will be well.

Clo. To do this is within the compa^^e of a man, and therefore
I Will attempt the doing of it.
Exit.
Desd. Where should I loose that ^andkercher Emillia?

Em. I know not Madam.

Des. Believe me, I had rather loose my purse
Full of C^usa does: and but my noble Moore
Is true of mind, and made of no such baseness,
As jealous creatures are, it were enough,
To put him to ill thinki^g.

Em. Is he not jealous.

Desd. Who he? I think the Sun where he was borne,
Drew all such humors from him.

Enter Othello. Em. Look where he comes.

Des. I will not leave him now,
Let C^ssio be called to him: how is it with you my Lord?

Oath. Well my good Lady: O hardness to dissemble:
How do you Desdomona?

Des. Well, my good Lord.

Oath. Give me your hand, this hand is moist my Lady.

Des. It yet has felt no age, nor known no sorrow.

Oath. This argues fruitfulness and liberal heart,
Not hot and moi^t, this hand of yours requires
A sequester from liberty: fasting and praying,
Much castigation, exercise devout;
For ^eere's a young and swetting devil here,
That commonly rebels: it is a good hand,
A frank one.

Des. You may indeed say so,
For it was that hand that gave away my heart.

Oath. A liberal hand, the hearts of old gave hands,
But our new herral dry is hands, not hearts.

Des. I cannot speak of this, come, come, your promise.

Oath. What promise chucke?

Des. I have sent to bid Cassio come speak with you.

Oath. I have a salt and sullen rhume offends me,
Lend me thy handkercher,

Des. Here my Lord.

Oath. That which I gave you.

Des. I have it not about me.

Oath. Not.

Des. No faith my Lord.

Oath. That's a fauit: that handkercher
Did an Egyptian to my mother give,
She was a charmer, and could almost read
The thoughts of people; she told her while she kept it,
It Would make her amiable, and sub due my father
Entirely to her love: But if she lost it,
Entirely to her love: But if she lost it,
Or made a gift of it: my fathers eye
Should hold her lothely, and his spirits should hu^t
After new fancies: she dying, gave it me,
And bid me when my fate would have me wi^e,
To give it her; I did so, and take heed on^t,
Make it a darling, like your precious eye,
To loose, or giue't away, were such perdition,
As nothing else could match.

Desd. I'^^ possible?

Oath. It Is true, there is magic in the web of it,
A Sybell that had numbered in the world,
The Sun to make two hundred compasses,
In her prophetique fury, sowed the work;
The worms were ^allowed that did breed the ^ilke,
And it was died in Mummy, with the skillful
Con^erues of maidens hearts.

Des. I faith i'^t true?

Oath. Most veritable, therefore look to it well.

Des. Then would to God, that I had never s^ene it.

Oath. Ha, wherefore?

Des. Why do you speak so startingly and rashly.

Oath. Is It lost? is it gone? speak, is it out of the way?

Des. Heaven bless us.

Oath. Say you?

Des. It is not lost, but what and if it were?

Oath. Ha.

Des. I say it is not lo^t.

Oath. Fetched, let m^ see it,

Des. Why so I can sir, but I will not now,
This is a trick, to put me from my suite,
I pray let Cas^^o, be received again.

Oath. Fetch me that handkercher, my (...).

Des. Come, come, you will never me^te a more (...) man.

Oath. The handkercher.

Des. I pray talk me of Cassio.

Oath. The handkercher.

Des. A man that all his time,
Has founded his good fortunes on your love,
Shared dangers with you.

Oath. The handkercher.

Des. I faith you are too blame.

Oath. Zouns.
Exit.
Em. Is not this man jealous?

Des. I never saw this before:
Sure there is some wonder in this handkercher,
I am most unhappy in the loss.

Enter Iago and Cassio. Em. It Is not a year or two shows us a man,
^hey are all but stomachs, and we all but food;
They eat us hungerly, and when they are full,
They belch us; look you, Cassio and my husband.

Iag. There is no other way, it is she must do it,
And lo the happiness, go, and importune her.

Des. How now good Cassio, what is the news with you?

Cas. Madam, my former suite: I do beseech you,
That by your virtuous means, I may again
Exist, and be a member of his love,
Whom I, with all the duty of my heart,
Entirely honor, I would not be delayed:
If my offense be of such mortal kind,
That neither service past, nor present sorrows,
Nor purposed m^rrit, in futurity
Can ransom me, into his love again
But to know so, must be my benefit,
So shall I cloth me in a forced content,
And shoot my self up in some other course,
To fortunes alms.

Des. Alas thrice gentle Cassio,
My aduocation is not now in tune;
My Lord is not my Lord, nor should I know him,
Were he in favor, as in humor al^red.
So help me, every spirit sanct^fied,
As I have spoken for you, all my best,
And stood within the bl^nke of his displeasure,
For my free speech: you must a while be patient,
What I can do I will, and more I will
Then for my self I dare, let that suffice you.

Iag. Is my Lord angry?

Em He went hence but now,
And c^rtainely in strange unquietness.

Iag. Can he be angry? I have seen the Cannon,
When it has blown his ranks into the air;
And (like the Devil) from his very arm,
Puffed his own brother, and can he be angry?
Something of moment then: I will go meet him,
There Is matter in it indeed, if he be angry.

Desd. I preethee do so: something sure of State,
Either from Veni^e, or some vnhatcht practice,
Made demon^trable here in Cypres to him,
Has pudled his clear spirit, and in such cases
Men's natures wrangle with inferior things,
Tho great ones are the object,
It Is even so: for let our finger ache,
And it endues our other heathfull members,
Even to that sense of pain; nay, we must think,
Men are not go^,
Nor of them look for such obseruances
As fits the Bridal: beshrew me much E^illia,
I was (unhandsome, warrior as I am)
Arraigning his unkindness with my soul;
But now I find, I had subbornd the witness,
And he is indicted falsely.

Em. Pray heaven it be State matters, as you think,
And no conc^ption, nor no ^^alous toy
Concerning you.

Desd. Alas the day, I never gave him cause.

Em. Butiealous souls will not be answered so,
They are not ever jealous for the cause,
But jealous for the (...) jealous: it is a mon^ter,
Begot upon it self, borne on it self.

Desd. Heaven keep that monster from Othello's mind.

Em. Lady, Amen.

Des. I will go^ seek him, Cassio, walk here about,
If I do find him fit, I Will move your suite,
Exeunt Desd. and Emillia. And seek to effect it to my uttermost.

Cas. I humbly thank your Ladyship.

Bi^n. Save you friend Cassio.

Enter Bianca. Cas. What make you from home?
How is it with you my most fair Bianca?
I faith sweet love I was coming to your house.

Bian. And I was going to your Lodging Cassio;
What, keep a week away? seu^n days and nights;
Eightscore eight hours, and lovers absent hours,
More tedious then the dial, eight score times,
No weary reckoning.

Cas. Pardon me Bianca,
I have this while with laden thoughts bin pressed,
But I shall in a more conu^ni^nt time,
Strike off this score of absence: sweet Bianca,
Take me this work out.

Bian. Oh Cassio, whence came this?
This is some token from a newer friend,
To the felt ^bsence, now I feel a cause,
(...) come t^ this?

Cas. Go to woman,
Throw your vile ghesses in the diu^^ls teeth,
From whence you have t^em, you are jealous now,
That this is from some: m^strisse, some remembrance*
No by my faith Bianca,

Bian. Why who is is it?

Cas. I know not sweet, I found it in my chamber,
I like the work well, ere it be demanded,
As like enough it will, I Would have it coppied,
Take it, and do it, and leave me for this time.

Bian. Leave you, whe^efore?

Cas. I do attend here on the General,
And think it no addition, nor my wish,
To have him see me woman'd.

Bian. But that you do not love me:
I pray you bring me on the way alittle,
And say, if I shall see you soon at night.

Cas. It Is but a little way, that I can ^^^ng you,
For I ^ttend here, but I Will see you soon.

Bian. It Is very good, I must be circumstanc'd.

Ex^^nt. Actus. 4.
Enter Iago and Othello. Iag. Will you think so?

Oath. Think so Iago.

Iag. What, to kisle in private?

Oath. An vnauthoriz'd kiss.

Iag. Or to be naked with her friend abed,
An hour, or more, not meaning any harm.

Oath. Naked abed Iago, and not mean harm?
It is hypocrisy against the devil:
They that mean virtuously, and yet do so,
The devil their virtue tempts, and they tempt heaven*

Iag. So they do nothing, it is a venial ^lip;
But if I give my wife a handkercher.

Oath. What then?

Iag. Why then it is hers my Lord, and being hers,
She may, I think, bestow't on any man.

Oath. She is protectres of her honor to,
May she give that?

Iag. Her honor is an effence that is not s^^ne,
They have it very often, that have it not:
But for the handkercher.

Oath. By heaven, I would most gladly have forgot it:
Thou ^^idst (O it comes over my memory,
As does the Raven over the infected house,
Boding to all.) He had my hankercher.

Iag. I, what of that?

Oath. That Is not so good now.

Iag. What if I had said I had seen him do you wrong?
Or heard him say (as knaves be such abroad)
Who ^^uing by their own importunate suite,
Or by the voluntaty dotage of some mistress,
Convinced, or supplied them, cannot choose,
But they must blab.

Oath. Has he said any thing?

Iag. He has my Lord, but be you well assured,
No more then he will vnswerare.

Oath. What has he said?

Iag. Faith that he did -- I know not what he did.

Oath. But what?

Iag. Lie.

Oath. With her?

Iag. With her, on her, what you will.

Oath. Lie with her, lie on her? We say lie on her, when they belly her; lie with
her, Zouns, that is fulsome, handkerchers, Confession, hankerchers.


He falls down. Iag. Work on my medicine, work: thus credulous fools are
caught, and many worthy and ch^ste dames, even thus all guiltless, meet
reproach; What ho my Lord, my Lord I say, Othello, -- how now Cassio.


Enter Cassio. Cas. What Is the matter?

Iag. My Lord is fallen into an Epilepsy,
This is his second fit, he had one yesterday.

Cas. Rub him about the Temples.

Iag. No, forbear,
The Lethergie, must have his quiet course,
If not he foames at mouth, and by and by
Breaks out to savage madness: look he stirs:
Do you withdraw your self a little while,
He will recover straight, when he is gone,
I would on great occasion speak with you.
How is it General, have you not hurt your head?

Oath. Do thou mock me?

Iag. I mock you? no by Heaven,
Would you would bear your fortunes like a man.

Oath. A horned man's a monster, and a beast.

Iag. There Is many a beast then in a populous City,
And many a civil monster.

Oath. Did he confes^e?

Iag. Good sir be a man,
Think every bearded fellow, that is but yoked,
May draw with you, there is millions now alive,
That nightly lies in those improper beds,
Which they dare swear peculiar: your case is better:
O it is the spite of hell, the fiends arch mock,
To (...) a wanton in a secure Coach,
And to suppose her chaste: No, let me know,
And knowing what I am, I know what she shall be.

Oath. O thou art wise, it is certain.

Iag. Stand you a while apart,
Con^ine your self but in a patient list:
Whilst you were here ere while, mad with your grief,
A passion most vnsuting such a man,
Cassio came hither, I shifted him away,
And laid good scuse, upon your extacy,
Bid him anon retire, and here speak with me,
The which he promisde: but incaue your self,
And mark the Ieeres, the libes, and notable scorns,
That dwell in every region of his face;
For I will make him tell the tale anew,
Where, how, how often, how long ago, and when,
He has, and is again to cope your wife:
I say, but mark his ieasture, mary patience,
Or I shall say, you are all in all, in spleen,
And nothing of a man.

Oath. Do thou hear Iago,
I will be found most cunning in my patience;
But do thou hear, most bloody.

Iag. That Is not amiss:
But yet keep time in all; will you withdraw?
Now will I question Cassio of Bianca;
A huswife that by selling her desires,
Buys her self bread and clothes: it is a Creature,
That dotes on Cassio: as it is the ^trumpets plague
To beguile many, and be beguild by one,
Ent. Cassio. He, when he hears of her, cannot refrain
From the ^x^esse of laughter: here he com^s:
As he ^^all smile, Othello shall go mad,
And his vnbookish jealousy must conster
Poor Cassio's smiles, gestures, and light behavior,
Quite in the wrong: How do you now Leiutenant?

Cas. The worser, that you give me the addition,
Whose want even kills me*

Iag. Ply Desdemona well, and you are sure on it.
Now if this suite lay in Bianca's power,
How quickly should you speed.

Cas. Alas poor Catiue.

Oath. Look how he laughes already.

Iag. I never knew a woman love man so.

Cas. Alas poor rogue, I think in faith she loves me.

Oath. Now he denies it faintly, and laughes it out.

Iag. Do you hear Cassio?

Oath. Now he importunes him to tell it on,
Go to, well said.

Iag. She gives it out that you shall marry her,
Do you intend it?

Cas. Ha, ha, ha.

Oath. Do you triumph Roman, do you tri^^p^?

Cas. I marry her? I pre^hee bear some charity to my wit,
Do not think it so vnwho^esome: ha, ha, ha.

Oath. So, so, so, so, laugh that wins.

Iag. Faith the cry goes, you shall marry her.

Cas. Preethee say true.

Iag. I am a very villain else,

Oath. Ha you stored me well.

Cas. This is the (...) own giving out; she is persuaded I (...) marry her, out
of her own l^ue and flattery, not out of my promise.


Oath. Iago beckons me, now he begins the story.


Cas. She was hee^e even now, she haunts me in every place, I was the other day,
talking on the sea bank, with certain Ven^tians, and thi^her comes this
bauble, by this hand she falls thus about my neck.


Oath. Crying, O dear Cassio, as it were: his i^^ture imports it.


Cas. So hangs, and lolls, and weeps upon me; so hales, and pulls me, ha, ha,
ha.


Oath. Now he tells how she plucked him to my Chamber,
I see that nose of yours, but not that dog I shall throw't to.

Cas. Well, I must leave her company.

Enter Bianca. Iag. Before me, look where she comes,
It Is such another ficho; marry a perfumed one, what do you mean by this
hanting of me.


Bian. Let the devil and his dam haunt you, what did you mean by that same
handkercher, you gave me even now? I was a fine fool to take it; I must take
out ^he whole work, a likely piece of work, that you should find it in your
chamber, and not know who left it there: this is some minxes token, and I must
take out the work; there, give it the hobby horse, whereso^uer you had it,
I Will take out no work on it.


Cas. How now my sweet Bianca, how now, how now?

Oath. By heaven that should be my handkercher.

Bian. An you will come to supper to night, you may, an you will not, come when
you are next prepared for.

Exit.
Iag. After her, after her.


Cas. Faith I must, she will rail ^'the ^^reete else.


Iag. Will you sup there?


Cas. Faith I intend so.


Iag. Well, I may chance to see you, for I would very feign speak with you.


Cas. Preethee come, will you?


Iag. Go to, say no more.


Exit Ca^sio. Oath. How shall I murder him Iago?


Iag. Did you perceive, how he laughed at his vice?


Oath. O Iago,


Iag. And did you see the handkercher?


Oath. Was that mine?


Oath. I would have him nine years a killing; a fine woman, a fair woman, a
sweet woman.


Iag. Nay you must forget.


Oath. And let her rot and perish, and be damb'd to night, for she shall not
live: no, my heart is turned to stone; I strike it, and it hurts my hand: O the
world has not a sweeter creature, she might lie by an Emperors side, and
command him taskes.


Iag. Nay that is not your way.


Oath. Hang her, I do but say what she is: So delicate with her n^edle, an
admirable musition, O she will sing the savageness out of a Bear; of so hye
and plentious wit and inu^^tion.


Iag. She Is the worse for all this.


Oath. A thousand thousand times: and then of so gentle a condition.


Iag. I, too gentle.


Oath. I that is certain, but yet the pi^ty of it Iago, the pity.


Ia. If you be so fond over her iniquity, give her patent to offend, for if it
touches not you, it comes near no body.


Oath. I will chop her into messes -- cuckold me!


Iag. O it is foul in her.


Oath. With mine Officer.


Iag. That Is fouler.


Oath. Get me some poison Iago, this night I Will not expostulate with her, lest
her body and beauty vnprouide my mind again, this night Iago.


Iag. Do it not with poison, strangle her in her bed, eu^n the bed she has
contaminated.


Oath. Good, good, the justice of ^t pleases very good.


Iag. And for Cassio, let me be his vnde^taker: you shall hear more by
midnight.


A Trumpet. Enter Lodouico, Desdemona, and Attenda^^s. Oath. Excellent good:
What Trumpet is that same?

Iag. Something from Venice sure, it is Lodouice,
Come from the Duke, and see your wife is with (...).

Lod. God save the worthy General.

Oath. With all my heart sir.

Lod. The Duke and Senators of Venice greet you.

Oath. I kiss the instrument of their pleasures.

Des. And what is the news good cosen Lodouico?

Iag. I am very glad to see you Seignior: -- welcome to Cypres.

Lod. I thank you, how does Leiutenant Cassio?

Iag. Lives sir.

Des. Cosen, there is fallen between him and my Lord,
An unkind breach, but you shall make all well.

Oath. Are you sure of that?

Des. My Lord.

Oath. This fail you not to do, as you will.

Lod. He did not call, he is busy in the paper:
Is there division between thy Lord and Cassio?

Des. A most unhappy one, I would do much
To atone them, for the love I bea^^ to Cassio.

Oath. Fire and Brimstone.

Des. My Lord.

Oath. Are you wise?

Desd. What, is he angry?

Lod. May be the letter moved him;
For as I think, they do command him home,
Deputing Cassio in his government.

Desd. By my troth, I am glad on it.

Oath. Indeed.

Des. My Lord.

Oath. I am glad to see you mad.

Des. How sweet Othello?

Oath. Devil.

Des. I have not deserved this.

Lod. My Lord, this would not be b^leeu'd in Venice,
Tho I sh^u^d swear I saw't: it is very much,
Make her ame^^ ^s, she weeps.

Oath. O Devil, Devil,
If that the earth could teeme with women's tears
Each drop she falls, would prove a Croca^^le:
Out of my sight.

Des. I will not stay to offend you.

Lod. Truly an obedient Lady:
I do beseech your Lordship, call her back.

Oath. Mistri^se.

Des My Lord.

Oath. What would you with her sir?

Lod. Who, I my Lord?

Oath. I, you did wish that I would make her turn:
Sir she can turn, and turn, and yet go on,
And turn again, and she can weep sir, weep;
And she is obedient, as you say, obedient;
Very obedient, proceed you in your tears,
Concerning this sir: O well painted passion:
I am commanded here: -- get you away,
I Will send for you anon: -- Sir, I ob^y the mandat,
And will return to Venice: -- hence, auant,
Cassio shall have my place; and sir to night
I do entreat that we may sup together,
You are welcome sir to Cypres, -- goats and monkies.
Exit.
Lod. Is this the noble Moore, whom our full Senate
Call all in all sufficient? This the noble nature,
Whom passion c^uld not shake? Whose solid virtue,
The shot of accident, nor dart of chance
Could neither graz^, nor pierce?

Iag. He is much changed.

Lod. Are his wits safe? is he not light of brain?

Iag. He Is that he is, I may not breathe my censure,
What he might be, if as he might, he is not,
I would to heaven he were.

Lod. What, strike his wife.

Iag. Faith that was not so wel^; yet would I knew
That stroke would prove the worst.

Lod. Is it his use?
Or did the letters work upon his blood.
And new create this fault?

Iag. Alas, alas.
It is not honesty in me to speak,
What I have seen and known^, you shall observe him,
And his own courses will denote him so,
That I may save my speech: do but go after,
And mark how he continues.

Lod. I am sorry that I am deceived in him.

Exeunt. Enter Othello and Emillia. Oath. You have seen nothing then.

Em. Nor ever heard, nor ever did suspect.

Oath. Yes, and you have seen Cassio and she together.

Em. But then I saw no harm, and then I heard
Each syllable that breath made up between 'em.

Oath. What, did they never whisper?

Em. Never, my Lord.

Oath. Nor send you out of the way?

Em. Never.

Oath. To fetch her fan, her mask, her gloves, nor nothing?

Em. Never, my Lord.

Oath. That Is strange.

Em. I durst my Lord, to wager she is honest,
Lay down my soul at stake: if you think other,
Remove your thought, it does abuse your bosom,
If any wretch ha put this in your head,
Let heavens requite it with the Serpents curse,
For if she be not honest, chaste, and true,
There Is no man happy, the purest of her Sex
Is foul as slander.
Exit Emillia.
Oath. Bid her come hither, go,
She says enough, yet she is a simple bawd,
That cannot say as much; this is a subtle whore,
A closet, lock and key, of villainous secrets,
And yet she will kneel and pray, I ha seen her do it.

Enter Desdemona and Emillia. Des. My Lord, what is your will?

Oath. Pray chucke come hither.

Des. What is your pleasure?

Oath. Let me see your eyes -- look in my face.

Des. What horrible fancy's this?

Oath. Some of your function mistris^e,
Leave procre^nts alone, and shut the door,
Coffe, or cry hem, if any body come,
Your mystery, your mist^ry: nay dispatch.

Exit Em. Des. Upon my knees, what does your speech import?
I understand a fury in your words,
But not the words.

O^h. Why, what art thou?

Des. Your wife my Lord, your true and loyal wife.

Oath. Come, swea^e it, dam thy self,
Least being like one of heaven, the devils themselves
Should fear to cease thee, therefore be double dambd.
Swear thou art honest.

Des. Heaven does truly know it.

Oath. Heaven truly knows, that thou art false as hell.

Des. To whom, my Lord, with whom? how am I false?

Oath. O Desdemona, away, away, away.

Des. Alas the heavy day, why do you weep?
Am I the occasion of those tears my Lord?
If happily you my father do suspect.
An Instrument of this your calling back,
Lay not your blame on me; if you have left him,
Why I have left him too.

Oath. Had it pleased heaven
To try me with affliction, had he ram'd
All kinds of sores, and shames on my bare head.
S^eep'd me in pou^rty, to the very lips,
Giu^n to captiui^y, me and my hopes,
I should have found in some part of my soul
A d^op of patience; but alas, to make me
A fixed figure, for the time of scorn,
To point his slow vnmouing fingers at -- oh, oh,
Yet could I bear that too, well, very well.
But there: where I have garner'd up my heart,
Where either I must live, or bear no life,
The fountain, from the which my current ^^^nes,
Or else dryes up, to be discarded thence,
Or keep it as a Cesterne, for foul Toades
To knot and gender in: tume thy complexion there,
Patience thy young and rose-lip'd Cherubin,
I here look grim as Hell.

Des. I hope my noble Lord esteems me honest.

Oath. O ^, as summers flies, are in the shambles,
That quicken even with blowing:
O thou black w^ede, why art so lovely fair?
Thou smell'st so sweet, that the sense aches at thee,
Would thou had never bin borne.

Des. Alas, what ignorant sin have ^ committed?

Oath. Was this fair paper, this most goodly book,
Made to write whore on? -- What, committed?
Heaven stops the nose at it, and the Moon w^nkes,
The bawdy wind, that kisses all it meets,
Is hushed within the hallow mine of earth,
And will not hear'^: -- what committed,-impudent strumpet.

Des. By heaven you do me wrong.

Oath. Are not you a strumpet?

Des. No, as I am a Christian:
If to preserve this vessel for my Lord,
From any hated foul unlawful touch,
Be not to be a strumpet, I am none.

Oath. What, not a whore?

Des. No, as I shall be saved.

Enter Emillia. Oath. Is It possible?

Des. O heaven forgiuen^sse.

Oath. I cry you mercy,
I took you for that cunning whore of Venic^,
That married with Othello: you mistri^se,
That have the office opposite to S. Peter,
And keeps the gates in hell, I, you, you, you;
We ha done our course; there is money for your pains,
I pray you turn the key, and keep our counsel.
Exit.
Em. Alas, what does this Gentl^man conceive?
How do you Madam how do you my good Lady?

Des. Faith half asleep.

Em. Good Madam, what is the matter with my Lord?

Des. With who?

Em. Why with my Lord Madam.

Des. I ha none, do not talk to me Emillia,
I cannot weep, nor answer have I none,
But what should go by water: preethee to night
Lay on my bed our wedding sheets, remember,
And call thy husband hither.

Em. Here is a charge indeed.
Exit.
Des. It Is meet I should be used so, very well;
^^ow have I bin behau'd, that he might stick
The smallest opinion, on my greatest abuse.

Lag. What is your pleasure Madam,
How i^^ with you?

Enter lago. and Emillia. Des. I cannot tell: those that do teach young babes
Do it with gentle means, and easy taskes,
He might ha chid me so, for in good faith,
I am a child at chiding.

lag. What is the matter Lady?

Em. Alas lago, my Lord has so bewhor'd her,
Thrown such despite, and heavy terms upon her,
As true hearts cannot bear.

Des. Am I that name lago?

lag. What name fair Lady?

Des. Such as she says my Lord did say I was?

Em. He called her whore: A beggar in his drink,
Could not have laid such terms upon his Callet.

lag. Why did he so?

Des. I do not know, I am sure I am none such.

lag. Do not weep, do not weep: alas the day.

Em. Has she forsook so many noble matches,
Her Father, and her Country, all her friends,
To be called whore? would it not make one weep?

Des. It is my wretched fortune.

Iag. Beshrew him for it; how comes this trick upon him?

Des. Nay, heaven does know.

Em. I will be hanged, if some eternal villain,
Some busy and insinuating rogue,
Some cogging, cousening slave, to get some office,
Have not deuisde this slander, I Will be hanged else.

Iag. Fie, there is no such man, it is impossible.

Des. If any such there be, heaven pardon him.

Em. A halter pardon him, and hell gnaw his bones:
Why should he call her whore? who keeps her company?
What place, what time, what for me, what likelihood?
The Moore's abused by some outrageous knave:
Some base notorious knave, some scuruy fellow,
O heaven, that such companions thoudst unfold,
And put in every honest hand a whip,
To lash the rascal naked through the world,
Even from the East to the West.

Iag. Speak within doors.

Em. O fie upon him; some such squire he was,
That turned your wit, the seamy side without,
And made you to suspect me with the Moore.

Iag. You are a fool, go to.

Des. O Good Iago,
What shall I do to win my Lord again?
Good friend go to him, for by this light of heaven,
I know not how I lost him.

Iag. I pray you be content, it is but his humor,
The business of the State does him offense,
And he does chide with you.

Des. If it were no other.

Iag. It Is but so, I warrant you;
Hark how these Instruments summon you to supper,
And the great Messengers of Venice stay,
Go in, and weep not, all things shall be well.
Exit women. How now Roderigo?

Enter Roderigo. Rod. I do not find that thou dealst justly with me.

Iag. What in the contrary?

Rod. Every day, thou dof^^st me, with some devise Iago;
And rather, as it seems to me, thou keep from me,
All conueniency, then suppliest me, with the least
Advantage of hope: I will indeed no longer endure it,
Nor am I yet persuaded to put up in peace, what already
I have foolishly sufferd.

Iag. Will you hear me Roderigo?

Rod. Faith I have heard too much, for your words,
And performance are no kin together.

Iag. You charge me most unjustly.

Rod. I have wasted my self out of means: the Jewels you have had from me, to
deliver to Desdemona, would half have corrupted a Votarist: you have told me
she has received em, and returned me expectation, and comforts, of sudden
respect, and acquittance, but I find none.


Iag. Well, go to, very good.


Rod. Very well, go to, I cannot go to man, it is not very well, by this
hand, I say it is very s^uruy, and begin to find my self fopt in it.


Iag. Very well.


Rod. I say it is not very well: I will make my self known to Desdemona, if
she will return me my Jewels, I will give over my suite, and r^pent my
unlawful solicitation, if not, assure your self I Will seek satisfaction of
you.


Iag. You have said now.


Rod. I, and I have said nothing, but what I protest entendment of doing.


Iag. Why now I see there is mettle in thee, and even from this time do build
on thee, a better opinion then ever before, give me thy hand Roderigo: Thou
have taken against me a most just conception, but yet I protest, I have dealt
most directly in thy affairs.


Rod. It has not appeared.


Iag. I grant indeed it has not appeared, and your suspicion is not without
wit and judgment: But Roderigo, if thou have that within thee indeed, which I
have greater reason to believe now, then ever, I mean purpose, courage, and
valor, this night show it, if thou the next night following enioyest not
Desdemona, take me from this world with treachery, and devise engines for my
life.


Rod. Well, is it within reason and compass?

Iag. Sir, there is especial command come from Venice,
To depute Cassio in Othello's place.

Rod. Is that true? why then Othello and Desdemona
Return again to Venice.

Iag. O no, he goes into Mauritania, and takes away with him
The fair Desdemona, unless his abode be lingered
Here by some accident, wherein none can be so determinate, as the removing of
Cassio.


Rod. How do you mean removing of him?

Iag. Why, by making him incapable of Othello's place,
Knocking out his brains.

Rod. And that you would have me to do.

Iag. I, and if you dare do your self a profit, and right, he sups to night
with a harlot, and thither will I go to him; -- he knows not yet of his
honorable fortune: if you will watch his going thence, which I will fashion to
fall out between twelve and one, you may take him at your pleasure: I will be
near to second your attempt, and he shall fall between us: come, stand not
amazed at it, but go along with me, I will show you such a necessity in his
death, that you shall think your self bound to put it on him. It is now high
supper time, and the night grows to wast: about it.


Enter Othello, Desdemona, L^donico, Emillia, and Attendants. Rod. I will hear
further reason for this.

Iag. And you shall be satisfied.

Ex. Iag. and Rod. Lod. I do beseech you sir, trouble your self no further.

Oath. O pardon me, it shall do me good to walk.

Lod. Madame, good night, I humbly thank your Ladyship.

Des. Your honor is most welcome.

Oath. Will you walk sir: -- O Desdemona.

Des. My Lord.

Oath. Get you to bed, of the instant I will be returned, forthwith, dispatch
your Attendant there, -- look it be done.


Ex^unt. Des. I will my Lord.

Em. How goes it now? he looks gen^er then he did.

Des. He ^aies he will return incontinent:
He has commanded me to go to bed,
And bad me to dismiss you.

Em. Dismiss me?

Des. It was his bidding, therefore good Emillia,
Give me my nightly wearing, and adiue,
We must not now displease him.

Em. I would you had never seen him.

Des. So would not I, my love does so approve him,
That even his stubbornene^se, his checks and frowns.
Prithee vnpin me; have grace and favor in them.

Em. I have laid these sheets you ^ade me, on the bed.

Des. All Is one good faith: how foolish are our minds?
If I do die before thee, prithee shroud me
In one of those same sh^e^es.

Em. Come, come, you talk.

Des. My mother had a maid called Barbary,
She was in love, and he she loved, proved mad,
And did forsake her, she has a song of willow,
An old thing 'twas, but it expre^t her fortune,
And she died singing it, that Song to night,
Will not go from my mind -- hark, who is that knocks?

Em. It is the wind.

Des. Now get thee gone, good night:
Mine eyes do itch, does that bode weeping?

Em. It Is neither here nor there.

Des. Would thou do such a deed, for all the world?

Em. Why would not you.

Des. No, by this heavenly light.

Em. Nor I neither, by this heavenly light,
I might do it as well in the dark.

Des. Would thou do such a thing for all the world?

Em. The world is a huge thing, it is a great price,
For a small vice.

Des. Good troth I think thou would not.

Em. By my tro^h I think I should, and vndo't when I had done it, mary I would
not do such a thing for a joint ring; or for measures of Lawne, nor for
Gowns, or Petticotes, nor Caps, nor any such exhibition; but for the whole
world? vds pity, who would not make her husband a Cuckole, to make him a
Monarch? I should venture ^^^gatory for it.


Des. Bes^ rue me, if I would do such a wrong,
For the whole world.

Em. Why, the wrong is but a wrong in the world; and having the world for your
labor, it is a wrong in your own world, and you might quickly make it right.


Des. I do not think there is any such woman.


Em. Yes, a dozen, and as many to the vantage, as would store the world they
played for.


Des. Good night, good night: God me such usage send,
Not to pick bad from bad, but by bad mend.

Exeunt. Actus. 5.
Enter Iago and Roderigo, Iag. Here stand behind this Bulk, strait will he
come,
Wear thy good Rapier bare, and put it home*
Quick, quick, fear nothing, I Will be at thy elboe;
It makes us or it marres us, think of that,
And fix most firm thy resolution.

Rod. Be near at hand, I may miscarry in it.

Iag. Here at thy hand, be bold, and take thy sword.

Rod. I have no great devotion to the dead;
And yet he has given me satisfying reasons,
It Is but ^ man gone: forth my sword, he dies.

Iag. I have rubd this young gnat almost to the sense,
And he grows angry now: whether he kill Cassio,
Or Cassio him, or each do kill the other,
Every way makes my game; live Roderigo.
He calls me to a restitution large,
For Gold and Jewels, that I bobd from him,
As gifts to Desdemona:
It must not be, if Cassio do remain,
He has a daily beauty in his life,
That makes me ugly: and besides, the Moore
May unfold me to him; there stand I in perrill:
No, he must die, be it so, I hear him coming.

Ent. Cas. Rod. I know his gate, it is he, villain thou die.

Cas. That thrust had bin my enemy indeed,
But that my coat is better then thou think,
I will make proof of thine.

Rod. O I am slain.

Cas. I am maind for ever, light ho, murder, murder.

Enter Othello. Oath. The voice of Cassio, Iago keeps his word.

Rod. O villain that I am

Oath. Hark it is even so.

Cas. O help ho, light, a Surgeon.

Oath. It Is he, O brave Iago, honest and Iu^t,
That have such noble sense of thy friends wrong,
Thou teach me; -- mino^, your dear lies dead,
And your fate hies apa^e; strumpet I come;
Forth of my heart, those charms thine eyes are blotted,
Thy bed lu^t-staind, shall with lusts blood be spotted.
Ex.
Enter Lodouico and Gratiano. Cas. What ho, no watch, no passage, murder, murder

Great. It Is some mischance, the cry^ very direful.

Cas. O help.

Lod. Hark.

Rod. O wretched villain.

Lod. Two or three groans, it is a heavy night,
These may be counterfeits, let us think it unsafe
To come into the cry without more help.

Rod. No body come, then ^^all I bleed to death.

Enter lago with a light. Lod. Hark.

Great. Here Is one comes in his shirt, with lights and weapons,

Iag. Who Is there? whose noise is this, that cries on murder.

Lod. I do not know.

Iag. Did not you hear a cry?

Cas. Here, here, for heavens sake help me.

Iag. What Is the matter.

Great. This is Othello's Ancient, as I take it.

Lod. The same indeed, a very valiant fellow.

Iag. What are you here, that cry so gre^uou^ly?

Cas. Iago, O I am spoiled, undone by villains,
Give me some help.

Iag. O my Leiutenant: what villains have done this?

Cas. I think the one of them is here about,
And cannot make away.

Iag. O treacherous villains:
What are you there? come in and give some help.

Rod. O help me here.

Cas. That Is one of em.

Iag. O murderous slave, O villain.

Rod. O dambd Iago, O in human dog, -- o, o, o.

Ia. Kill him in the dark? where be those bloody thieves?
How silent is this Town? Ho, murder, murder:
What may you be, are you of good or evil?

Lod. As you shall prove us, praise us.

Iag. Seignior Lodouico.

Lod. He sir.

Iag. I cry you mercy: here is Cassio hurt by villains.

Great. Cassio.

Iag. How is it brother?

Cas. My leg is cut in two.

Iag. Mary heaven forbid:
Light Gentlemen, I Will bind it with my shirt.

Enter Bianca. Bian. What is the matter ho, who is it that cried?

Iag. Who is it that cried.

Bian. O my dear Cassio, O my sweet Cassio, Cassio, Cassio.

Iag. O notable strumpet: Cassio may you suspect
Who they should be, that thus have mangled you?

Cas. No.

Gra. I am sorry to find you thus, I have bin to seek you.

Bian. Alas he faints, O Cassio, Cassio, Cassio.

Iag. Gentlemen all, I do suspect this trash
To bear a part in this: patience a while good Cass^^:
Lend me a ligh^; know we this face, or no?
Alas my friend, and my dear country man:
Roderig^? no, yes sure: O heaven Roderig^.

Gra. What of V^nice?

Iag. Even he sir, did you know him?

Gra. Know him? I.

Iag. Seignior Grati^^^, I cry you gentle pardon:
These bloody accidents must excuse my manners,
That so neglected you.

Gra. I am glad to see you.

Iag. How do you Cassio? O a chair, a chair.

Gra. Roderigo.

Iag. He, it is he: O that is well said, a chair:
Some good man bear him carefully from hence,
I Will fetch the Generals Surgeon: for you mistrisse,
Save you your labor, he that lies slain here Cassio,
Was my dear friend, what malice was betwixt you?

Cas. None in the world, nor do I know the man.

Iag. What, look you pale? O bear him out o'th air.
Stay you good Gentlewoman, look you pale mistrisse?
Do you perceive the ieastures of her eye,
Nay, an you stir, we shall have more anon:
Behold her well I pray you, look upon her,
Do you see Gentlemen? Nay guiltiness
Will speak, though tongues were out of use.

Enter Em. Em. Alas what is the matter? what is the matter husband?

Iag. Cassio has here bin set on in the dark,
By Roderigo, and fellows that are escaped,
He Is almost slain, and Roderigo dead.

Em. Alas good gentleman, alas good Cassio.

Iag. This is the fruit of whoring, pray Emillia,
Go know of Cassio, where he supt to night:
What, do you shake at that?

Bian. He supt at my house, but I therefore shake not.

Iag. O did he so, I charge you go with me.

Em. Fie, fie upon thee strumpet.

Bian. I am no strumpet, but of life as honest,
As you, that thus abuse me.

Em. As I ^^ough, fie upon thee.

Iag. Kind Gentlemen, let us go see poor Cassio drest^
Com^ mistress, you must tell's another tale.
Emillia, run you to the Cittadell,
And tell my Lord and Lady what has hapt:
Will you go on, I pray, this is the night,
That either marks me, or foredoes me quite.

Ex^^nt. Enter Othello with a light. Oath. It is the cause, it is the cause, my
soul,
Let me not name it to you, you chaste stars:
It is the cause yet I Will not shed her blood,
Nor scarre that whiter skin of hers, then snow,
And smooth, as monumentall Alablaster;
Yet she must die, else she will betray more men,
Put out the light, and then put out the light:
If I quench thee, thou flaming minister,
I can again, thy former light restore,
Should I repent me; but once put out thine,
Thou cunning pattern of excelling nature,
I know not where is that promethian heat,
That can thy light return: when I have plucked the rose,
I cannot give it vital growth again,
It must needs wither; I Will smell it on the tree,
A balmy breath, that does almost persuade
Justice her self to break her sword once more,
Be thus, when thou art dead, and I will kill thee,
And love thee after: once more, and this the last,
He kisses her. So sweet was never so fatal: I must weep,
But they are cruel tears; this so^^owes heavenly,
It strikes when it does love: she wakes.

Des. Who Is there, Oth^llo?

Oath. I, Desdemona.

Des. Will you come to bed my Lord?

Oath. Have you prayed to night, Desdemona?

Des. I my Lord:

Oath. If you bethink your self of any crime,
Vnreconcil'd as yet to heaven and grace,
Solicit for it strait.

Des. Alas my Lord, what may you mean by that?

Oath. Well do it, and be brief, I will walk by,
I would not kill thy unprepared spi^^^,
No, ^eauen fore-fend, I would not kill thy soul.

Des. Talk you of killing?

Oath. I, I do.

Des. Then heaven have mercy on me.

Oath. Amen, with all my heart.

Des. If you say so, I hope you will not kill me.

Oath. Hum.

Des. And yet I fear you, for you are fatal then,
When your eyes roll so: why I should fear, I know not,
Since guiltiness I know not, but yet I feel I fear.

Oath. Think on thy sins.

Des. They are loves I bear to you.

Oath. And for that thou die.

Des. That death's vnnatur^ll, that kills for loving,
Alas, why gn^w you so your nether lip?
Some bloody passion shakes your very frame,
These are portents: but yet I hope
They do not point on me.

Oath. Peace, and be still.

Des. I will, so, what is the ma^ter?

Oath. That handkercher which I so loved, and gave thee,
Thou gave to Cassio.

Des. No, by my life and soul,
Send for the man and ask him.

Oath. Sweet soul take heed, take heed of p^^iury,
Thou art on thy deathbed.

Des. I, but not yet to die.

Oath. Yes, presently:
Therefore confess thee freely of thy sin,
For to deny each article with oath,
Cannot remove, nor choke the strong conc^^t,
That I do groan withal: thou art to die.

Des. Then Lord have mercy on me.

Oath. I say Amen.

Des. And have you mercy too:
I never did offend you in my life, -- never loved Cassio,
But with such general warranty of heaven,
As I might love: I never gave him token.

Oath. By heaven I saw my handkercher in his hand,
O perjured woman, thou do stone thy heart,
And make me call, what I intend to do,
A murder, which I thought a sacrifice,
I saw the handkercher.

Des. He found it then,
I never gave it him, se^d for him hither,
And let him confess a truth.

Oath. He has confessed.

Des. What, my Lord?

Oath. Tha^ he has -- vds death.

Des. How, unlawfully?

Oath. I.

Des. He will not say so.

Oath. No, his mouth is stopped,
Honest Iago has taken order for it.

Des. My fear interprets then, -- what is he dead?

Oath. Had all his hairs bin lives,
My great revenge had stomach for 'em all.

Des. Alas he is betrayed, and I undone.

Oath. O strumpet, -- weepest thou for him to my face?

Des. O bannish me, my Lord, but kill me not.

Oath. Down strump^t.

Des. Kill me to morrow, let me live to night.

Oath. Nay, an you strive.

Des. But half an hour, but while I say one prayer.

Oath. It Is too late.

he stif^^es her. Des. O Lord, Lord, Lord.

Emillia calls within. Em. My Lord, my Lord, what ho, my Lord, my Lord.

Oath. What voyc^ is this? not dead? not yet quite dead?
I that am cruel, am yet merciful,
I would not have thee linger in thy pain, -- so, so.

Em. What ho, my Lord, my Lord.

Oath. Who Is there?

Em. O good my Lord, I Would speak a word with you.

Oath. Yes, it is Emillia, by and by: she is dead:
It Is like she comes to speak of Cassios death;
The noise was here; ha, no more moving,
Still as the grave: shall she come in? were it good?
I think she stirs again; no, what is the best?
If she come in, she will sure speak to my wife.
My wife, my wife, my wife; I ha no wife;
O insupportable: O heavy hour.
Me thinks it should be now a huge Ecclips
Of Sun and Moon, and that the affrighted Globe,
Should yawne at alteration.

Em. I do beseech you I may speak with you,-good my Lord.

Oath. I had forgot thee: O come in Emillia.
Soft, by and by; let me the Curtains draw,
Ent. Emil. Where art thou? what is the matter with thee now?

Em. O ^y good Lord, yonder is foul murders done.

Oath. What, now?

Em. But now my Lord.

Oath. It is the very error of the Moon,
She comes more near the earth, then she was wont,
And makes men mad.

Em. Cassio my Lord has killed a young Venetian,
Called Roderigo.

Oath. Roderigo killed, and Cassio killed?

Em. No, Cassio is not killed.

Oath. Not Cassio killed, then murders out of tune,
And sweet revenge grows harsh.

Des. O falsely, falsely murdered.

Em. O Lord, what cry is that?

Oath. That? what?

Em. Out and alas, it is my Ladies voy^^*
Help, help, ho help, O Lady speak again,
Sweet Desdemona, O sweet Mistress speak.

Des. A guiltless death I die.

Em. O who has done this deed?

Des. No body, I my self, farewell:
Commend me to my kind Lord, O farewell.

she dies. Oath. Why, how should she be murdered?

Em. Alas, who knows?

Oath. You heard her say, her self, it was not I.

Em. She said so, I must needs report a truth.

Oath. She Is like a liar, gone to burning Hell,
^T was I that killed her.

Em. O, the more Angel she,
And you the blacker devil.

Oath. She turned to folly, and she was a whore.

Em. Thou do belly her, and thou art a devil.

Oath. She was false as water.

Em. Thou as rash as fire,
To say that she was false: O she was heavenly true.

Oath. Cassio did top her, ask thy husband else,
O I were damned beneath all depth in hell,
But that I did proceed, upon just grounds,
To this extremity, thy husband knew it all.

Em. My husband?

Oath. Thy husband.

Em. That she was false to wedlock?

Oath. I, with Cassio: nay, had she bin true,
If heaven would make me such another world,
Of one entire and perfect Crisolite,
I Would not have sold her for it.

Em. My husband?

Oath. I, it was he that told me first,
An honest man he is, and hates the slime,
That sticks on filthy deeds.

Em. My husband?

Oath. What needs this i^eration? woman, I say thy husband.

Em. If he say so, may his pernicious soul.
Rot half a grain a day: he lies to the heart,
She was too fond of her most filthy bargain.

Oath. Ha?

Em. Do thy worst,
This deed of thine is no more worthy heaven,
Then thou wast worthy her.

Oath. Peace, you were best.

Em. Thou have not half the power to do me harm,
As I have to be hurt: O gull, O dolt,
As ignorant as dirtt; thou have done a deed --
I care not for thy sword, I Will make thee know,
Tho I lost twenty lives: help, help, O help;
The Moore has killed my Mistress, murder, murder.

Enter Montano, Gratiano, Iago, and others. Mon. What is the matter? how now
General?

Em. O, are you come Iago? you have done well,
That men must lay their murder on your neck.

All. What is the matter?

Em. Disprove this villa me, if thou be a man;
He says thou toldst him that his wife was false,
I know thou did not, thou art not such a villain:
Speak, for my heart is full.

Iag. I told him what I thought, and told no more,
Then what he found himself was apt and true.

Em. But did you ever tell him she was false?

Iag. I did.

Em. You told a lie, an odious damned lie;
Upon my soul, a lie, a wicked lie:
She false with Cassio; did you say with Cassio?

Iag. With Cassio mistrefle; go to, charm you tongue.

Em. I will not charm my tongue, I am bound to speak.

Iag. What are you mad, I charge you get you home.

Em. Good Gentlemen let me have leave to speak,
It Is proper I obey him, but not now:
Perchance Iago, I will never go home.

Oath. Oh, oh, oh.

Oath. falls on the bed. Em. Nay, lay thee down, and rore,
For thou have killed the sweetest innocent,
That ere did lift up eye.

Oath. O she was foul:
I scarce did know you Uncle, there lies your Niece,
Whose breath indeed, these hands have newly ^topt,
I know this act shows terrible and grim.

Gra. Poor Desdemona, I am glad thy father's dead,
Thy match was mortal to him, and pure grief,
Shore his old thread at wane: did he live now,
This sight would make him do a desperate turn,
Yea curse his better Angel from his side,
And fall to reprobation.

Oath. It Is pitiful, but yet Iago knows,
That she with Cassio, has the act of shame
A thousand times committed; Cassio confessed it,
And she did gratify his amorous works,
With the recognisance and pledge of love,
Which I first gave her; I saw it in his hand,
It was a handkercher; an Antique token
My father gave my mother.

Em. O God, O heavenly God.

Iag. Zouns, hold your peace.

Em. 'Twill out, 'twill: I hold my peace sir, no,
I Will be in speaking, liberal as the air,
Let heaven, and men, and devils, let em all.
All, all cry shame against me, yet I Will speak.

Iag. Be wise, and get you home.

Em. I will not.

Gra. Fie, your sword upon a woman?

Em. O thou dull Moore, that handkercher thou speak^^^ on,
I found by fortune, and did give my husband:
For often with a solemn earnestness,
More then indeed belonged to such a trifle,
He begged of me to steal it.

Iag. Villainous whore.

Em. She gave it Cassio? no alas I found it,
And I did giu't my husband.

Iag. Filth thou lie.

Em. By heaven I do not, I do not Gentlemen,
O murderous Coxcombe! what should such a fool
Do with so good a woman?

The Moore runs at Iago. Iago kills his wife. Oath. Are there no stones in
heaven,
But what serves for the thunder? precious villain.

Gra. The woman falls, sure he has killed his wife.

Em. I, I, O lay me by my mistress side.

Exit Iago. Gra. He Is gone, but his wife's killed.

Mon. It Is a notorious villain, take your weapon,
Which I have here recovered from the Moore:
Come, guard the door without, let him not pass,
But kill him rather, I Will after that same villain,
For it is a damned slave.

Exit Mont. and Gratiano. Oath. I am not valiant neither,
But every puny whipster gets my sword,
But why should honor out live honesty?
Let it go all.

Em. Moore, she was chaste, she loved thoe cruel Moore,
So come my soul to bliss, as I speak true;
So speaking as I think, I die, I die.

she dies. Oath. I have another weapon in this chamber,
It is a sword of Spain, the Ise brooks temper;
O here it is; Uncle I must come forth.

Gra, within. Gra. If thou attempt it, it will cost thee decre,
Thou have no weapon, and perforce must suffer.

Oath. Look in upon me then, and speak to me,
Or naked as I am, I will assault thee.

Gra. What is the matter?

Oath. Behold, I have a weapon,
A better never did it self sustain
Upon a Soldiers thigh: I have seen the day,
That with this little arm, and this good sword,
I have made my way through more impediments,
Then twenty times you stop: but O vain boast,
Who can control his Fate? it is not so now,
Pale as thy smo^ke, when we shall meet at count,
This look of thine, will hurl my soul from heaven,
And ^iends will snatch at it: cold, cold my girl,
Even like thy chastity; O cursed slave:
Whippe me you Devils,
From the possession of this heavenly sight,
Blow me about in winds, roast me in sulphur^,
Wash me in s^eepe down gulphes of liquid fire:
O Des^emona, Desdemoua, dead, O, o, o.

Enter Lodouico, Montano, Iago, and Officers, Cassio in a Chair. Lod. Where is
this rash and most unfortunate man.

Oath. Tha^'s he that was Othello, here I am.

Lod. Where is this Viper, bring the villain forth.

Oath. I l^^ke down toward his feet, but that is a fable
If thou bees^ a devil, I cannot kill thee.

Lod. Wring his sword from him.

Iag. I bl^ed sir, but not killed.

Oath. I am not sorry neither, I Would have thee live,
For in my sense it is happiness to die.

Lod. O thou Othello, that were once so good,
Fallen in the practice of a damned slave,
What should be said to thee?

Oath. Why any thing,
An honorable murderer if you will:
For naught did I in hate, but all in honor.

Lod. This wretch has part confessed his villainy:
Did you and he con^ent in Cassio's death?

Oath. I.

Cas. Dear General, I did never give you cause.

Oath. I do believe it, and I ask you pardon,
Will you ^^ay, d^^^and that demi devil,
Why he has thus in^^ar'd my soul and body?

Iag. D^mand me nothing, what you know you know,
From this time forth I never will speak word.

Lod. What not to pray?

Great. Torments will op'e your lips.

Oath. Well, thou do best.

Lod. Sir, you shall understand what has befalue,
Which, as I think you know not: here is a letter,
Found in the pocket of the slain Roderigo;
And here another; the one of them imports
The death of Cassio; to be undertook -- by Roderigo.

Oath. O villain.

Cas. Most h^athenish, and most gross.

Lod. Now here is another discontented paper,
Found in his pocket too, and this it seems,
Roderigo meant to have sent this damned villain,
But that belike, Iago, in the nicke
Came in, and satisfied him.

Oath. O the pernicious catieffe!
How came you Cassio by a handkercher,
That was my wifes?

Cas. I found it in my chamber,
And he himself confessed it even now,
That there he dropped it, for a special purpose;
Which wrought to his desire.

Oath. O fool, fool, fool.

Cas. There is besides in Roderigoes letter
How he vpbraides Iago, that he made him,
B^^ue me upon the watch, whereon it came,
That I was cast; and even but now he spoke,
After long s^eming dead, Iago, hurt him,
Iago set him on.

Lod. You must forsake this room, and go with us,
Your power and your command is taken off,
And Cassio rules in Cypres: for this slave,
If there be any cunning cruelty,
That can torment him much, and hold him long,
It shall be his: you shall close prisoner rest,
Till that the nature of your fault be known
To the Venetian State; come, bring him away.

Oath. Soft you, a word or two,
I have done the State some service, and they know it;
No more of that: I pray you in your letters,
When you shall these unlucky deeds relate,
Speak of them as they are; nothing extenuate,
Nor set down ought in malice, then must you speak,
Of one that loved not wisely, but too well:
Of one not easily jealous, but being wrought,
Perplexed in the extreme; of one whose hand,
Like the base Indian, threw a pearl away.
Richer then all his Tribe: of one whose subdued eyes,
Albeit unused to the melting mood,
Drops tears as fast as the Arabian trees,
Their medicinal gum; set you down this,
And say besides, that in Al^ppo once,
Where a Malignant and a Turband Turk,
Beat a Venetian, and traduced the State;
I took b^'ch throat the circumcised dog,
And smote him thus.

He stabs himself. Lod. O bloody period.

Gra. All that is spoke is mard.

Oath. I kissed thee ere I killed thee, no way but this,
Killing my self, to die upon a kiss.

He dies. Cas. This did I fear, but thought he had no weapon,
For he was great of heart.

Lod. O Spartane dog,
More fell then anguish, hunger, or the Sea,
Look on the trag^cke lodging of this bed:
This is thy work, the object poisons sight,
Let it be hid: Gratiano, keep the house,
And ceaze upon the fortunes of the Moore:
For they succeed to you, to you Lord Governor,
Remains the censure of this hellish villain,
The time, the place, the torture: O enforce it,
My self will strait aboard, and to the State,
This heavy act with heavy heart relate.

Exeunt omnes. FINIS.

