A true report of the last voyage into the West and Northwest regions, etc.
1577. worthily achieved by Captain Frobisher of the said voyage the first
finder and General.

With a description of the people there inhabiting, and other circumstances
notable.

Written by Dionyse Settle, one of the company in the said voyage, and
servant to the Right Honorable the Earl of Cumberland.

Nil mortalibus arduum est. Imprinted at London by Henry Middleton. Anno. 1577.

A RYTHME DECASYLLABIcall, upon this last luckie voyage of worthy Captain
Frobisher. 1577.
THrough sundry foming fretes, and storming streightes,
That ventrous knight of Ithac' soil did sail:
Against the force of Sirens baulmed beightes,
His noble skill and courage did prevail.
His hap was hard, his hope yet nothing frail.
Not ragged Rocks, not sinking Syrtes or sands
His stoutnesse staide, from viewing foreign lands.
That Poets pen and pains was well employed,
His brains bedeawd with dropps of Parnasse spring:
Whereby renown deserved he enjoyed.
Yea, now (though dead) the Muses sweetly sing,
Melodiously by note, and tuned string,
They sound in the ears of people far and near,
Th'exceeding praise of that approved Peer.
A right Heroical heart of Britanne blood,
Ulysses match in skill and Martial might:
For Princes fame, and countries special good,
Through brackish seas (where Neptune reigns by right)
Has safely saild, in perils great despite:
The Golden fleece (like Jason) has he got,
And rich returned, saunce loss or lucklesse lot.
O that I had old Homers worthy wit,
O that I had, this present hour, his head:
With pen in hand, then musing would I sit,
And our Ulysses valiant venture spread
In vaunting verse, that when his corpse is dead,
(Which long may live) his true renown may rest,
As one whom God abundantly has blessed.
Abraham Fleming.

To the Right honorable and my singular good Lord, George Earl of Cumberland,
Baron Clifford, Lord of Skipton and Vesscie: his humble servant Dionyse
Settle, wishes the fullness of all perfect felicity.
IT both is, and has been, (Right Honorable) the bounty of a noble mind,
not to expect remuneration or satisfaction for liberality frankly bestowed. It
both is, and also has been accounted a great vice, to seem unthankful, or
at the least not something careful, of whom, when, and how, we should receive
liberality. I am not obliuious, neither careless, when, and how, your Honor
(above my expectation) nobly satisfied the request of me your humble servant. I
am most assured, that the virtue of your noble heart expects nothing of me,
but that your goodness might abound to my profit: upon which occasion, and
because I would not be accounted ungrateful, I have both boldly passed the
limittes of my duty, and also unlearnedly taken upon me to set forth some
thing worthy notice, in this last voyage of our Captain and General, Master
Martine Frobisher, your Honors worthy Country man: under whom (as your
Honors unworthy servant) I was one in the said voyage. By his great
diligence, the voyage is worthily finished: whereby I am persuaded, that he
will refell the rehearsal of those opprobrious words, namely, that, All evil
comes from or has original in the North: not only he, but many worthy
subjects more.

I have published this scantling, under the noble title of your Honor, to whom
I offer the same in dedication: which, though it be not decorated with good
learning, apt for the setting forth of so notable a matter: yet, the same is
beautified with good will and truth. Wherein your Honor, (if it shall so
please you) for recreation sake, may understand, what people, countries, and
other commodities we have found out, since our departure from England, which
have not ben known before. Thus, presuming upon hope and assurance of your
Honors pardon for my bold attempt herein, I rest humbly at your Lordships
commandment: wishing your time so spent in this world, that you may enjoy the
felicity in the world to come. Amen.

Your Lordships most humble servant to command, Dionyse Settle.

To the Christian Reader.
SVch countries and people, (good Christian Reader) which almost from the
deluge, or at the least, so long as any humane creature has had habitation on
the earth, have of late years, by ye industry of diligent searchers ben
explored: it has likewise pleased God, yt they should be found out by those
people, which for the temperature of their habitatio^, are most apt to atchiue
the same. As for example, the Spaniards, the West Indies. Spain is situated
much more near ye Tropike of Cancer, then other Christian countries be:
whereby, the Spaniards are better able to tolerate Phoebus burning beams, then
others which are more Septentrional the^ they. Wherefore, I suppose them the
most apt men for the inioying of the habitation of the West Indies: and
especially so much, as is vexed with continual heat, or that is agreeable to
their temperature, God has been pleased that they, as the most apt people,
should both explore and enjoy ye same. Semblably, ye Portugals, whose
temperature is correspondent to ye Spaniards, God is also contented, that they
have explored Africa, even through the burning Zone, both the West and South
coast, with all ye coast of Asia, unto the Oriental cape thereof, and the Islands
adjacent to them both wherefore, both for their habitation, and temperature, I
account them ye most apt people to atchiue ye same, and to reap the benefit,
where about they have taken no small pains and labor. In like manner, the
French men, where ye Spaniards thought ye place not apt for their temperature,
discovered Noua Francia, and other places in America: wherefore, I judge them
worthy the commodity thereof, as people most apt to enjoy and possess the
same. Lastly, it has plesed God, at this present, by the great diligence and
care of our worthy Countrieman, Master Martine Frobisher, in the 18. and 19.
year of our Queens Majesty's reign, to discover, for the utility of his
Prince and Country, other regions more Septentrional, then those before
rehearsed: which, from the beginning, as unknown till now, have been
concealed and hidden. Which discovery, I judge most apt for us English men,
and more agreeing to our temperature, then others above rehearsed. I leave the
famous discovery of Moscouie, and other countries on those parts, (which of
late years have been explored by the industry of other our worthy
countrymen) to the diligent Reader: whereby he may consider, that this our
country, has fostered up men of no less value and excellency, then those,
which are entitled, The second, third, and fourth Neptune. And doubtless,
he, by whose endeavor this last discovery of the world is explored, may be
celebrated as well with the title of Aeolus, as also of Neptune. By whose
singular knowledge and cunning, God has preserved us in this voyage, from
both their cruel dangers.

Thus (Christian Reader) thou may perceive, that the world, of late years,
has been discovered by sundry regions of this our Europe: which God has so
divided in the exploring of the same, that it seems apt and agreeable to the
discouerer, more then to any other, to enjoy all such commodities as they
yealde and affoorde. Consider also, that Christians have discovered these
countries and people, which so long have lain unknown, and they not us: which
plainly may argue, that it is Gods good will and pleasure, that they should be
instructed in his divine service and religion, which from the beginning, have
been nouzeled and nourished in Atheism, gross ignorance, and barbarous
behavior. Wherefore, this is my judgment, (in conclusion) that who so ever
can win them from their infidelity, to the perfect knowledge of his divine
institutions and service, he or they are worthy to receive the greatest
reward at Gods hands, and the greater benefits from those countries, which he
has discovered. Fare well.

A true report of Captain Frobisher his last voyage into the West and
Northwest regions, this present year 1577. With a description of the people
there inhabiting.
ON Whitsunday last past, being the 26. of May, in this present year of our
Lord God 1577. Captain Frobisher departed from Black Wall* with one of the
Queens Majesty's ships, called The Aid, of nine score tun, or there
aboutes: and two other little Barks likewise, the one called The Gabriel,
whereof Master Fenton a Gentleman of my Lord of Warwicks was Captain: and the
other, The Michael, whereof Master York a Gentleman of my Lord Admerals was
Captein, accompanied with seven score gentlemen, soldiers and sailors, well
furnished with victuals, and other provision necessary for one half year, on
this his second voyage, for the further discovering of the passage to Cata^a,
and other countries thereunto adjacent, by West and Northwest Nauigations:
which passage, or way, is supposed to be on the North and Northwest parts of
America: and the said America to be an Islande environed with the sea,
wherethrough our Merchaunts might have course and recourse with their
merchandise, from these our Northernmost parts of Europe, to those oriental
coasts of Asia, in much shorter time, and with greater benefit then any others,
to their no little commodity and profit that do traffic the same. Our
said Captain and General of this present voyage and company, having the
year before, with two little Pinnisies, to his great danger and no small
commendations, given a worthy attempt toward the performaunce thereof, is
also pressed (when occasion shall be ministered, to the benefit of his Prince and
native country) to adventure him self further therein. As for this second
voyage, it seems sufficient, that he has better explored and searched the
commodities of those people and countries, with sufficient commodity unto the
adventurers, which in his first voyage the year before he had found out.

Upon which considerations, the day and year before expressed, we departed
from Black Wall to Harwiche, where making an accomplishment of things
necessary, the last of May we hoysed up sails, and with a merry wind the 7.
thereof we arrived at the Islands called Orchades, or vulgarly Orkney, The
Islandes Orchades, or Orkney.
being in number 30. subject and adjacent to Scotland, where we made provision
of fresh water: in the doing whereof, our General licenced the Gentlemen and
Soldiers, for their recreation, to go on shore. At our landing, The
Orchadians upon small occasion flee their home.
the people fled from their poor cotages, with shrikes and alarums, to warn
their neighbors of enemies: but by gentle persuasions we reclaimed them to
their houses. It seems they are often frighted with Pirates, or some other
enemies, that moves them to such souden fear. Their houses are very simply
builded with pibble stone, Simple houses in Orkney.
without any chimneys, the fire being made in the midst thereof. The good
man, wife, children, and other of their family, eat and sleep on the one
side of the house, and their cattle on the other, very beastly and rudely, in
respect of civility. They are destitute of wood, No wood in Orkney.
their fire is turffes and Cow shardes. They have corn, big, and oats,
with which they pay their Kings rent, to the maintenance of his house. They
take great quantity of fish, which they dry in the wind and Sun. They
dress their meat very filthily, and eat it without salt. Their apparel is
after the rudest sort of Scotland. Their money is all base. Their church and
religion is reformed according to the Scots. The fisher men of England, Fisher
men of England have daily trafique to Orkney.
can better declare the dispositions of those people than I: wherefore, I remit
other their vsages to their reports, as yearly repairers thither, in their
course to and from Island for fish.

We departed herehence, the 8. of June, In June and Iulie, no night in those
West and Northwest regions.
and followed our course between West and Northwest, until the 4. of Iulie:
all which time, we had no night, but that easily, and without any impediment,
we had when we were so disposed, the fruition of our books, and other
pleasures to pass away the time: a thing of no small moment, to such as
wander in unknown seas and long Nauigations, especially, when both the winds,
and raging surges, do pass their common and wonted course. This benefit
endures in those parts not six weeks, whilst the Sun is near the
Tropike of Cancer: but where the Pole is raised to 70. or 80. degrees, it
continues the longer.

All along these seas, after we were 6. days sailing from Orkney, we met
floting in the sea, great Fur trees, which as we judged, were with the fury
of great floudes rooted up, and so driven into the sea. Island has almost no
other wood nor fuel, but such as they take up upon their coasts. It seems,
that these trees are driven from some part of the New found land, with the
Current that sets from the West to the East.

The 4. of Iulie, we came within the making of Freeseland. Freesland.
From this shore 10. or 12. leagues, we met great Islands of ice, Islandes of
ice.
of half a mile, some more, some less in compass, showing above the sea 30.
or 40. fathomes, and as we supposed, fast on ground, where, with our lead we
could scarce sound the bottom for deapth.

Here, in place of odoriferous and fragrant smelles of sweet gummes, and
pleasant notes of musical birds, which other Countries in more temperate Zone
do yield, we tasted the most boisterous Boreall blasts, mixed with snow and
hail, Ice, snow, and hail in June and Iulie.
in the month of June and Iulie, nothing inferior to our intemperate Winter:
a soudeine alteration, and especially in a place or Paralele, where the Pole is
not eleuate above 61. degrees: at which height other countries more to the
North, yea, unto 70. degrees, show themselves more temperat than this does.

All along this coast ice lies, Ice defends Freesland.
as a continual bullworke, and so defends the country, that those which
would land there incur great danger. Our General three days together,
attempted with the shippboate to have gone on shore, which, for that without
great danger he could not accomplish, he deferred it until a more convenient
time. All along the coast lie very high mounteines covered with snow, The
shore of Freesland high mounteines.
except in such places, where, through the steepness of the mounteines, of
force it must needs fall.

Four days coastinge along this Land, we found no sign of habitation. Little
birds, Freesland subject to foggs.
which we judged to have lost ye shore, by reason of thick fogges, which
that country is much subject unto, came fleeing to our ships, Little birds
a sign and token of habitation.
which causes us to suppose, that the country is both more tolerable, and
also habitable within, then the outward shore makes show or signification.

From hence we departed the eight of Iulie: and the 16. of the same, we came
within the making of land, which land our General, the year before, had
named The Queens foreland, The Queens Foreland.
being an Island, as we judge, lying near the supposed continent with
America: and on the other side, opposite to ye same, one other Island called
Halles Isle, after the name of the Master of our ship, Halles Isle.
near adjacent to the firm land, supposed continent with Asia. Between the
which two Islandes, there is a large entrance or straight, Frobishers straight.
called Frobishers straight, after the name of our General, the first finder
thereof. This said straight, is supposed to have passage into the Sea of Sur,
which I leave unknown as yet.

It seems, that either here, or not far hence, the Sea should have more
large entrance, than in other parts, within the frosen or intemperate Zone:
and that some contrary tide, either from the East or West, with maine force
casts out that great quantity of ice, which comes floating from this
coast, even unto Freesland, causing that country to seem more intemperate
than others, much more Northerly than they are.

I cannot judge, that any temperature under the Pole, being the time of the
Suns Northern declination, half a year together and one whole day,
(considering, that the Suns elevation surmounteth not 23. degrees and 30.
minutes,) can have power to dissolve such monstrous and huge ice, Islands of
ice comparable to mounteines.
comparable to great mounteines, except by some other force, as by swift
Currents and tides, with the help of the said day of half a year.

Before we came within the making of these Lands, we tasted cold storms,
insomuch that it seemed, we had changed Summer with winter, if the length of
the days had not removed us from that opinion.

At our first coming, the streightes seemed to be shutt up with a long mure of
ice, which gave no little cause of discomfort unto us all: but our General,
(to whose diligence, imminent dangers, Captain Frobisher his special care an^
and difficult attemptes seemed nothing, in respect of his willing mind, for
the commodity of his Prince and country,) with two little Pinnises prepared
of purpose, passed twice thoroughe them to the East shore, and the Islands
thereunto adjacent: and the ship, with the two barks, lay off and on
something further into the sea, from the danger of the ice.

Whilst he was searching the country near the shore, The order of the
people appearing on shore.
some of the people of the country showed themselves, leaping and dancing,
with strange shrikes and cries, which gave no little admiration to our men.
Our General desirous to allure them unto him by fair means, caused knives,
and other things, to be proferred unto them, which they would not take at our
hands: but being laid on the ground, and the party going away, they came and
took up, leaving something of theirs to counteruaile ye same. At the length,
two of them leaving their weapons, came down to our General and Master, who
did the like to them, commanding the company to stay, and went unto them:
who, after certain dumb signs and mute congratulations, began to lay hands
upon them, but they deliuerly escaped, and ran to their bows and arrows,
Fierce and bold people.
and came fiercely upon them, (not respecting the rest of our company, which
were ready for their defense) but with their arrows hurt diverse of them: we
took the one, and the other escaped. One taken.


Whilst our General was busied in searching the country and those Islands
adjacent on the East shore, the ship and barckes having great care, not to put
far into the sea from him, for that he had small store of victuals, were
forced to abide in a cruel tempest, chancing in the night, amongst and in the
thickest of the ice, which was so monstrous, that even the least of a thousand
had been of force sufficient, to have shiuered our ship and barks into
small portions, if God (who in all necessities, has care upon the infirmity
of man) had not provided for this our extremity a sufficient remedy, through
the light of the night, whereby we might well discern to flee from such
imminent dangers, which we avoided with 14. Bourdes in one watch the space
of 4. hours. If we had not incurred this danger amongst these monstrous
Islandes of ice, we should have lost our General and Master, and the most of
our best sailers, which were on the shore destitute of victuals: but by the
valor of our Master Gunner, Richard Coxe Master Gunner.
being expert both in Navigations and other good qualities, we were all content
to incur the dangers before rehearsed, before we would, with our own
safety, run into the Seas, to the destruction of our said General and his
company.

The day following, being the 19. of Iulie, our Captain returned to the
ship, with good news of great riches, which showed it self in the bowelles
of those barren mounteines, wherewith we were all satisfied. A souden mutation.
The one part of us being almost swallowed up the night before, with cruel
Neptunes force, and the rest on shore, taking thought for their greedy
paunches, how to find the way to New found land: New found land.
at one moment we were all rapt with joy, forgetting, both where we were, and
what we had suffered. Behold the glory of man, to night contemning riches, and
rather looking for death than otherwise: and to morrow devising how to
satisfy his greedy appetite with Gold.

Within four days after we had been at the entrance of the Streightes, the
Northwest and West winds dispersed the ice into the Sea, and made us a large
entrance into the Streights, that without any impediment, on the 19. of Iulie,
we entered them, and the 20. thereof our General and Master, with great
diligence, sought out and sounded the West shore, and found out a fair
Harborough for the ship and barks to ride in, and named it after our Masters
mate, Iackmans sound, Iackmans sound.
and brought the ship, barks, and all their company to safe anchor, except
one man, which dyed by Gods visitation.

Who so makes Nauigations to these contries, has not only extreme winds, and
furious Seas, Ice needful to be regarded of seafaring men.
to encounter withal, but also many monstrous and great Islandes of ice: a
thing both rare, wonderful, and greatly to be regarded.

We were forced, sundry times, while the ship did ride here at anchor, to have
continual watch, Great watch with men and boats for ice indaungering the
ship at anchor.
with boats and men ready with Halsers, to knit fast unto such ice, which
with the ebb and flood were tossed to and fro in the Harboroughe, and with
force of oars to hale them away, for indaungering the ship.

Our General, certain days searched this supposed continent with America,
and not finding the commodity to answer his expectation, after he had made
trial thereof, he departed thence with two little barks, and men sufficient,
to the East shore, being the supposed continent of Asia, and left the ship
with most of the Gentlemen, Soldiers, and Sailors, until such time as he,
either thought good to send, or come for them.

The stones of this supposed continent with America, Stones glister with
sparckles like Gold.
be altogether sparkled, and glister in the Sun like Gold: so likewise does
the sand in the bright water, A common Proverb.
yet they verify the old Proverb: All is not gold that glistereth^.

On this West shore we found a dead fish floating, which had in his nose a
horn straight and torquet, of length two yardes lacking two inches, being
broken in the top, where we might perceive it hollow, into which some of our
Sailors putting Spiders, they presently dyed. I saw not the trial hereof, but
it was reported unto me of a truth: by the virtue whereof, The Sea Unicorn.
we supposed it to be the sea Unicorne.

After our General had found out good harborough for the Ship and Barks to
anchor in: and also such store of Gold oar as he thought him self satisfied
withal, he sent back our Master with one of the Barks, to conducte the
great Ship unto him, who coasting along the West shore, perceived a fair
harborough, and willing to sound the same, at the entrance thereof they espied
two tents of Seal skins.

At the sight of our men, the people fled into the mounteines: nevertheless,
our said Master went to their tents, and left some of our trifles, as Knives,
Bells, and Glasses, and departed, not taking any thing of theirs, except one
Dog to our Ship.

On the same day, after consultation had, we determined to see, if by fair
means we could either allure them to familiarity, or otherwise take some of
them, and so atteine to some knowledge of those men, whom our General lost the
year before.

At our coming back again, to the place where their tents were before, A
crafty people.
they had removed their tents further into the said Bay or Sound, where they
might, if they were driven from the land, flee with their boats into the sea.
We parting our selves into two companies, and compassing a mounteine, came
soudeinly upon them by land, who espying us, without any tarying fled to their
boats, leaving the most part of their oars behind them for have, and rowed
down the Bay, where our two Pinisses met them, and drove them to shore: but,
if they had had all their oars, so swift are they in rowing, it had been lost
time to have chased them.

When they were landed, A fierce assault of a few.
they fiercely assaulted our men with their bows and arrows, who wounded
three of them with our arrows: and perceiving them selves thus hurt, Desperate
people.
they desperately leapt off the Rocks into the Sea, and drowned them selves:
which if they had not done, but had submitted them selves: or if by any means
we could have taken them alive, (being their enemies as they judged) we would
both have saved them, and also have sought remedy to cure their wounds
received at our hands. But they, altogether void of humanity, Ignorant what
mercy means.
and ignorant what mercy means, in extremities look for no other then death:
and perceiving they should fall into our hands, thus miserably by drowning
rather desired death, then otherwise to be saved by us: the rest, perceiving
their fellows in this distress, fled into the high mounteines. Two women
taken and a child.
Two women, not being so apt to escape as the men were, the one for her age,
and the other being incombred with a young child, An old woman a supposed
Devil or, Witch.
we took. The old wretch, whom diverse of our Sailors supposed to be either
a Devil, or a Witch, plucked off her buskins, to see, if she were cloven
footed, and for her ougly hew and deformity, we let her go: the young woman
and the child, we brought away. We named the place where they were slain,
Bloody point: and the Bay or Harborough, Bloody Point. Yorks sound.
Yorkes sound, after the name of one of the Capteines of the two Barks.

Having this knowledge, both of their fierceness and cruelty, and perceiving
that fair means, Fair means not able to allure them to familiarity.
as yet, is not able to allure them to familiarity, we disposed our selves,
contrary to our inclination, something to be cruel, returned to their tents,
and made a spoil of the same. Their riches are neither Gold, Silver, or
precious Draperie, but their said tents and boats, Boats of skins.
made of the skins of red Dear and Seal skins: also, Dogs like unto
Woolues, but for the most part black, with other trifles, more to be wondered at
for their strangeness, then for any other commodity needeful for our vs^.

Thus returning to our Ship, Our departure from the West shore.
the 3, of August, we departed from the West shore, supposed firm with
America, after we had anchored there 13. days: and so, the 4. thereof, we came
to our General on the East shore, and anchored in a fair Harborough named
Anne Warrwickes sound, unto which is annexed an Islande both named after the
Countess of Warrwicke, The countess of Warwicks sound and Isle.
Anne Warrwickes sound and Isle.

In this Isle, our General thought good, for this voyage, Our freight
surmounteth the charges o^ the first and second voyage, with sufficient
interest to the ve^^turers.
to frayght both the Ship and Barks, with such Stone or Gold mineral, as he
judged to counteruaile the charges of his first, and this his second Navigations
to these contries, with sufficient interest to ye venturers, whereby they might
both be satisfied for this time, and also in time to come, (if it please God
and our Prince, Riches long concealed presently discovered by captain
Frobisher.
) to exspect a much more large benefit, out of the bowels of those
Septentrionall Paralels, which long time has concealed it self, til at this
present, through the wonderful diligence, and great danger of our General and
others, God is contented with the revealing thereof. It rises so abundantly,
that from the beginning of August, to the 22. thereof, (every man following the
diligence of our General) we raised above ground 200. tun, By Captain
Frobishers diligence other men encouraged to labor.
which we judged a reasonable freight for the Ship and two Barks, in the
said Anne Warrwicks Isle.

In the time of our abode here, some of the country people, The country
people show them selves unto us.
came to show them selves unto us, sundry times on ye maine shore, near
adjacent to the said Isle. Our General, desirous to have some news of his
men, The care which our General had to hear of his men that were lost.
whom he lost the year before, with some company with him repaired with the
Ship boat, to common, or sign with them for familiarity, whereunto he is
persuaded to bring them. They, at the first show, made tokens, Signs for
pen, yncke, and paper.
that three of his five men were alive, and desired pen, ynck, and paper, and
that within three or four days, they would return, and (as we judged) bring
those of our men, which were living, with them.

They also made signs or tokens of their King, whom they called Cacough,
Cacough their King.
and how he was carried on men's shoulders, and a man far surmounting any of
our company, in bigness and stature.

With these tokens and signs of writing, pen, yncke, and paper was delivered
them, which they would not take at our hands: but being laid upon the
shore, and the party gone away, they took up: which likewise they do, when
they desire any thing for change of theirs, Their usage in traffic or
exchange.
laying for that which is left, so much as they think will cou^teruaile the
same, and not coming near together. It seems they have been used to this
trade or traffic, with some other people adjoining, or not far distant from
their Country.

The people show them selves again on firm land.
After 4. days, some of them showed themselves upon the firm land, but not
where they were before. Our General, very glad thereof, supposing to hear of
our men, went from the Islande, with the boat, and sufficient company with
him. They seemed very glad, and allured him, Their craft to betray some of us.
about a certain point of the land: behind which they might perceive a
company of the crafty villains to lie lurking, whom our General would not
deal withal, for that he knew not what company they were, and so with few
signs dismissed them, and returned to his company.

The people sh^we them selves the third time.
An other time, as our said General was coasting the contrie, with two little
Pinisses, whereby at our return he might make the better relation thereof,
three of the crafty villains, with a white skin allured us to them. Once
again, our General, for yt he hoped to hear of his men, went toward them:
at our coming near the shore, whereon they were, A number of t^em hidden
behind stones to betray us.
we might perceive a number of them lie hidden behind great stones, and those
three in sight laboring by all means possible, that some would come on land:
and perceiving we made no have by words nor friendly signs, which they used
by clapping of their hands, Their first means to allure us to shore.
and being without weapon, and but three in sight, they sought further means
to provoke us thereunto. One alone laid flesh on the shore, Their second
means.
which we took up with the Boat hook, as necessary victuals for the
relieuing of the man, woman, and child, whom we had taken: for yt as yet, they
could not digest our meat: whereby they perceived themselves deceived of
their expectation, for all their crafty allurements. Yet once again, to make
(as it were) a full show of their crafty natures, and subtle sleightes,
Their third and craftiest allurement.
to the intent thereby to have intrapped and taken some of our men, one of them
counterfeyted himself impotent and lame of his legs, who seemed to descend
to the water side, with great difficulty: and to cover his craft the more,
one of his fellows came down with him, and in such places, where he seemed
unable to pass, he took him on his shoulders, set him by the water side* and
departed from him, leaving him (as it should seem) all alone, A crafty
counterfeit villain.
who playing his counterfeite pageant very well, thought thereby to provoke
some of us to come on shore, not fearing, but that any one of us might make
our party good with a lame man.

Our General, having compassion of his impotencie, Compassion to cure a
crafty lame man.
thought good (if it were possible) to cure him thereof: wherefore, he caused a
soldier to shoot at him with his Caleeuer, which grased before his face. The
counterfeite villeine deliuerly fled, without any impediment at all, and got
him to his bow and arrows, and the rest from their lurking holes, with their
weapons, bows, arrows, slings, and darts. Our General caused some Caleeuers
to be shot off at them, Some hurt with our shot.
whereby some being hurt, they might hereafter stand in more fear of us.

This was all the answer, for this time, we could have of our men, or of our
Generals letter. By these crafty tricks the rest of their life is easy to be
judged.
Their crafty dealing, at these three several times, being thus manifest unto
us, may plainly show, their disposition in other things to be
correspondent. We judged, that they used these stratagemmes, thereby to have
caught some of us, for the delivering of the man, woman, and child whom we
have taken.

They are men of a large corporature, and good proportion: Their stature and
making.
their color is not much unlike the Sun burnte Country man, who labors
daily in the Sun for his living.

They wear their hair something long, and cut before, Their apparel as well
women as men.
either with stone or knife, very disorderly. Their women wear their hair
long, and knit up with two loupes, showing forth on either side of their faces,
and the rest foltred up on a knot. Also, some of their women race their faces
proportionally, as chinne, cheeks, and forehead, and the wristes of their
hands, whereupon they lay a color, which continues dark azurine.

They eat their meat all raw, both flesh, Their meat, drink, and other
necessaries.
fish, and foul, or something perboyled with blood and a little water, which
they drink. For lack of water, they will eat ice, that is hard frosen, as
pleasantly as we will do Sugar Candy, or other Sugar.

If they, for necessities sake, stand in need of the premises, They eat the
grass which grows in that country.
such grass as the country yields they pluck up, and eat, not deintily,
or salletwise, to allure their stomaches to appetite: but for necessities sake,
without either salt, oils, or washing, like brutish beasts devour the same.
Barbarous behavior.
They neither use table, stool, or table cloth for comeliness: but when they
are imbrued with blood, knuckle deep, and their knives in like sort, they use
their tongues as apt instruments to lick them clean: in doing whereof, they
are assured to loose none of their victuals.

They franck or keep certain dogs, not much unlike Wolves, Dogs like unto
wolves,
which they yoke together, as we do oxen and horses, to a sled or traile: and
so carry their necessaries over the ice and snow, from place to place: as the
captive, whom we have, made perfect signs. And when those Dogs are not apt
for the same use: They eat dogs flesh.
or when with hunger they are constreyned, for lack of other victuals, they
eat them: so that they are as needful for them, in respect of their
bigness, as our oxen are for us.

They apparel themselves in the skins of such beasts as they kill, sewed
together with the sinews of them. Sinews of beasts serving them in place of
thread.
All the foul which they kill, they skin, and make thereof one kind of
garment or other, to defend them from the cold.

They make their apparel with hoods and tails, which tails they give, Hoodes
and tails to their apparel.
when they think to gratify any friendship showed unto them: a great sign
of friendship with them. The men have them not so side as the women.

The men and women wear their hose close to their legs, Their hose, and how
they are worn.
from the wast to the knee, without any open before, as well the one kind as
the other. Upon their legs, they wear hose of lether, with the furre side
inward, two or three pair on at once, and especially the women. In those hose,
they put their knives, needles, and other things needful to bear about.
Their gartering.
They put a bone within their hose, which reaches from the foot to the knee,
whereupon they draw their said hose, and so in place of garters, they are
holden from falling down about their feet.

They dress their skins very soft and souple with the hair on. In cold
weather or Winter, they wear ye furre side inward: and in Summer outward.
Other apparel they have none, but the said skins.

Those beasts, flesh, fishes, and fowls, Their chief riches.
which they kill, they are both meat, drink, apparel, houses, bedding, hose,
shoes, thread, sail for their boats, with many other necessaries, whereof
they stand in need, and almost all their riches.

Their houses are tents, made of Seal skinns, Their houses of Seal skins
and Fur.
pitched with four Fur quarters, four square, meeting at the top, and the
skins sewed together with sinowes, and laid therevppon: so pitched they are,
that the entrance into them, is always South, or against the Sun.

They have other sorts of houses, which we found, not to be inhabited, which
are raised with stones and What bones, and a skin laid over them, to
withstand the rain, or other weather: the entrance of them being not much
unlike an Quens mouth, whereto, I think, they resort for a time, to fish,
hunt, and foul, and so leave them for the next time they come thither again.

Their weapons are Bows, Their weapons of defense.
Arrows, Darts, and Slinges. Their Bows are of a yard long of wood, sinewed
on the back with strong veins, not glued too, but fast girded and tied on.
Their Bow stringes are likewise sinews. Their arrows are three pieces,
nocked with bone, and ended with bone, with those two ends, and the wood in the
middst, they pass not in length half a yard or little more. They are
f^thered with two feathers, the pen end being cut away, and the feathers laid
upon the arrowe with the broad side to the wood: in so much that they seem,
when they are tied on, to have four feathers. Three sorts of heads to their
arrows.
They have likewise three sorts of heads to those arrows: one sort of stone
or iron, proportioned like to a heart: the second sort of bone, much like unto
a stopte head, with a hook on the same: the third sort of bone likewise, made
sharp at both sides, and sharp pointed. They are not made very fast, but
lightly tied to, or else set in a nocke, that upon small occasion, the arrowe
leaves these heads behind them: and they are of small force, except they be
very near, when they shoot.

Two sorts of darts.
Their Darts are made of two sorts: the one with many forkes of bone in the fore
end, and likewise in the midst: their proportions are not much unlike our
toasting yrons, but longer: these they cast out of an instrument of wood, very
readily. The other sort is greater then the first aforesaid, with a long bone
made sharp on both sides, not much unlike a Rapier, which I take to be their
most hurtful weapon.

They have two sorts of boats, Two sorts of Boats made of Leather.
made of Lether, set out on the inner side with quarters of wood, artificially
tied together with thongs of the same: the greater sort are not much unlike our
Wherries, wherein sixteen or twenty men may fit: they have for a sail,
dressed the guts of such beasts as they kill, very fine and thin, which they
sewe together: the other boat is but for one man to sit and row in, with
one oar.

Their order of fishing, hunting, and fowling, are with these said weapons:
They use to foul, fish, and hunt.
but in what sort, or how they use them, we have no perfect knowledge as yet.

I can not suppose their abode or habitation to be here, It is to be supposed
that their inhabiting is elsewhere.
for that neither their houses, or apparel, are of no such force to withstand
the extremity of cold, that the country seems to be infected with all:
neither do I see any sign likely to perform the same.

Those houses, or rather dens, which stand there, have no sign of footway,
or any thing else trodden, which is one of the chiefest tokens of habitation.
And those tents, which they bring with them, Their tents are moveable from
place to place.
when they have sufficiently hunted and fished, they remove to other places:
and when they have sufficiently stored them of such victuals, as the country
yeldeth, or brings forth, they return to their Winter stations or
habitations. This conjecture do I make, for the infertilitie, which I perceive
to be in that country.

They have some iron, whereof they make arrowe heads, Their use of iron.
knives, and other little instruments, to work their boats, bows, arrows,
and darts withal, which are very unapt to do any thing withal, but with
great labor.

It seems, that they have conversation with some other people, of whom, for
exchange, they should receive the same. They are greatly delighted with any
thing that is brighte, VVherin they delight.
or gives a sound.

What knowledge they have of God, or what Idol they adore, we have no perfect
intelligence. I think them rather Anthropophagi, Anthropophagi.
or deuourers of man's flesh, then otherwise: for that there is no flesh or
fish, which they find dead, A filthy feeding.
(smell it never so filthily) but they will eat it, as they find it, without
any other dressing. A loathsome spectacle, either to the beholders, or hearers.
A loathsome spectacle.


There is no manner of creeping beast hurtful, except some Spiders (which, as
many affirm, Signs of gold aure.
are signs of great store of Gold:) and also certain stinging Gnattes, which
bite so fiercely, that the place where they bite, Stinging Gnattes.
shortly after swells, and itcheth very sore.

They make signs of certain people, Signs of gold from other people.
that wear bright plates of Gold in their forheads, and other places of their
bodies.

The Countries, Description of the countries.
on both sides the streightes, lie very high with roughe stony mounteynes,
and great quantity of snow thereon. There is very little plain ground, and
no grass, No grass, bu^ like moss.
except a little, which is much like unto moss that grows on soft ground,
such as we get Turfes in. A Country that yields nothing with root, fit
for the use of Man.
There is no wood at all. To be brief, there is nothing fit, or profitable
for ye use of man, which that Country with root yields, or brings forth:
Howbeit, there is great quantity of Dear, whose skins are like unto Asses,
Dear with skins like Asses*
their heads or horns do far exceed, as well in length as also in breadth,
any in these our parts or Country: their feet likewise, are as great as
our oxens, which we measured to be seven or eight inches in breadth. There
are also Hares, Hares, Wolves, and fishing Bears.
Wolves, fishing Bears, and Sea foul of sundry sorts.

As the Country is barren and vnfertile, so are they rude and of no capacity
to culture the same, to any perfection: but are contented by their hunting,
fishing, and fowling, with raw flesh and warm blood, to satisfy their
greedy panches, which is their only glory.

There is great likelihood of Earthquakes, A sign of Earthquakes or thunder.
or thunder: for that huge and monstrous mounteynes, whose greatest substance
are stones, and those stones so shaken with some extraordinary means, that
one is separated from another, which is discordant from all other Quarries.

There are no rivers, No rivers, but such as the Sun does cause to come of
snow.
or running springes, but such, as through the heat of the Sun, with such
water as descends from the mounteines and hills, whereon great driftes of
snow do lie, are engendered.

It argues also, that there should be none: for that the earth, A
probability, that there should be neither spring or rivers in the ground.
which with the extremity of the Winter, is so frosen within, that that water,
which should have recourse within the same, to maintain Springes, has not
his motion, whereof great waters have their original, Springes the original of
great waters.
as by experience is seen otherwhere. Such valleies, as are capable to receive
the water, that in the Summer time, by the operation of the Sun, descends
from great abundance of snow, which continually lies on the mounteines, and
has no passage, sinketh into the earth, and so vanishes away, without any
runnell above the earth, by which occasion, or continual standing of the said
water, the earth is opened, and the great frost yeldeth to the force thereof,
which in other places, four or five fathoms within the ground, The stones
frosen within the earth 4. or 5. fathoms.
for lack of the said moisture, (the earth, even in the very Summer time,) is
frosen, and so combineth the stones together, that scarcely instruments, with
great force, can vnknitte them.

Also, where the water in those valleys can have no such passage away, by the
continuance of time, in such order as is before rehearsed, the yearly descent
from the mounteines, fills them full, that at the lowest banck of the same,
they fall into the next vallie, and so continue, as fishing Pondes or Stagnes
in the Summer time full of water, and in the Winter hard frosen: as by skarres
that remain thereof in Summer, The heat in Summer not comparable to the cold
in Winter.
may easily be perceived: so that, the heat of Summer, is nothing comparable,
or of force, to dissolve the extremity of cold, that comes in Winter.

Nevertheless, I am assured, Springes under the force of the frost within the
earth.
that below the force of the frost, within the earth, the waters have
recourse, and empty themselves out of sight into the sea, which through the
extremity of the frost, are constreyned to do the same, The earth by occasion
of frost kept the warmer.
by which occasion, the earth within is kept the warmer, and springes have
their recourse, which is the only nutriment of Gold and Minerals within the
same. Springs nourish gold.


There is much to be said of the commodities of these Countries, which are
couched within the bowels of the earth, which I let pass till more perfect
trial be made thereof.

Thus coniecturing, till time, An end of co^iecturing till further truth and
trial.
with the earnest industry of our General and others (who by all diligence
remain pressed to explore. the truth of that which is vnexplored, as he has to
his everlasting praise found out that which is like to yield an innumerable
benefit to his Prince and country:) offer further trial, I conclude.

The 23. of August, Ships satisfied with burden, but men's minds not
contented.
after we had satisfied our minds with frayght sufficient, for our vessels,
though not our covetous desires, with such knowledge of the country people and
other commodities as are before rehearsed, the 24. thereof we departed
therehence: Our departure from these Countries.
the 17. of September we fell with ye lands end of England, and so to Milford
haven, from whence our General rode to the Court, for order, to what port or
haven to conduct the ship.

We lost our two Barks in the way homeward, How, and when, we lost our 2.
Barks, which God nevertheless ^estored.
the one, the 29. of August, the other, the 31. of the same month, by occasion
of great tempest and fogge. Howbeit, God restored the one to Bristowe, and ye
other making his course by Scotland to Yermouth. In this voyage we lost two
men, one in the way by Gods visitation, and the other homewarde cast over
board with a surge of the sea.

J Could declare unto your Honor, the Latitude and Longitude of such places
and regions, The conclusion.
as we have been at, but not altogether so perfect as our masters and
others, with many circumstances of tempests and other accidents incident to sea
faring men, which seem not altogether strange, I let pass to their reports
as men most apt to set forth and declare the same. I have also left the names
of the countries on both the shoares untouched, for lack of understanding the
Peoples language: as also for sundry respects, not needful as yet to be
declared.

Countries new explored, where commodity is to be looked for, do better accord
with a new name given by the explorers, then an uncertain name by a doubtful
Author.

Our General named sundry Islands, Mounteines, Capes, and Harboroughs after
the names of diverse Noble men, and other gentlemen his friends, as well on the
one shore, as also on the other: not forgetting amongst the rest your
Lordship: which hereafter (when occasion serves) are to be declared in his
own Mapps or Charts.

FINIS.

