M. William Shak-speare:

HIS True Chronicle History of the life and death of King LEAR and his three
Daughters.

With the unfortunate life of Edgar, son and heir to the Earl of Gloucester,
and his sullen and assumed humor of TOM of Bedlam:

As it was played before the Kings Majesty at Whitehall upon S. Stephans night
in Christmas Hollidayes.

By his Majesty's servants playing usually at the Gloabe on the Bancke-side.

LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Butter, and are to be sold at his shop in Paul's
Churchyard at the sign of the Pide Bull near St. Austins Gate. 1608.

M. William Shak-speare HIS History, of King Lear.
Enter Kent, Gloucester, and Bastard.
Kent. I Thought the King had more affected the Duke of Albany then Cornwell.


Glost. It did allwaies seem so to us, but now in the division of the
kingdoms, it appears not which of the Dukes he values most, for equalities
are so weighed, that curiosity in neither, can make choice of eithers moytie.


Kent. Is not this your son my Lord?


Glost. His breeding sir has been at my charge, I have so often blushed to
acknowledge him, that now I am braz'd to it.


Kent. I cannot conceive you.


Glost. Sir, this young fellows mother Could, whereupon she grew round wombed,
and had indeed Sir a son for her cradle, ere she had a husband for her bed,
do you smell a fault?


Kent. I cannot wish the fault undone, the issue of it being so proper.


Glost. But I have sir a son by order of Law, some year elder then this, who
yet is no deerer in my account, though this knave came something sawcely into
the world before he was sent for, yet was his mother fair, there was good
sport at his making and the whoreson must be acknowledged, do you know this
noble gentleman Edmund?


Bast. No my Lord.


Glost. My Lord of Kent, remember him hereafter as my honorable friend..


Bast. My services to your Lordship.


Kent. I must love you, and sue to know you better.


Bast. Sir I shall study deserving.


Glost. He has been out nine years, and away he shall again, the King is
coming.

Sound a Sennet, Enter one bearing a Coronet, then Lear, then the Dukes of
Albany, and Cornwell, next Gonorill, Regan, Cordelia, with followers.
Lear. Attend my Lords of France and Burgundy, Gloucester.


Glost. I shall my Liege.


Lear. Mean time we will express our darker purposes,
The map there; know we have divided
In three, our kingdom; and it is our first intent,
To shake all cares and business of our state,
Confirming them on younger years,
The two great Princes France and Burgundy,
Great ryuals in our youngest daughters love,
Long in our Court have made their amorous soiourne,
And here are to be answered, tell me my daughters,
Which of you shall we say does love us most,
That we our largest bounty may extend,
Where merit does most challenge it,
Gonorill our eldest borne, speak first?

Gone. Sir I do love you more then words can weild the matter,
Dearer then eyesight, space or liberty,
Beyond what can be valued rich or rare,
No less then life; with grace, health, beauty, honor,
As much a child ere loved, or father friend,
A love that makes breath poor, and speech unable,
Beyond all manner of so much I love you.

Cor. What shall Cordelia do, love and be filent.

Lear. Of al these bounds, even from this sine to this,
With shady forests, and wide skirted meades,
We make thee Lady, to thine and Albaines issue,
Be this perpetual, what says our second daughter?
Our dearest Regan, wife to Cornwell, speak?

Reg. Sir I am made of the self same metal that my sister is,
And prize me at her worth in my true heart,
I find she names my very deed of love, only she came short,
That I profess my self an enemy to all other joys,
Which the most precious square of sense possesses,
And find I am alone felicitate, in your dear highness love.

Cord. Then poor Cord. and yet not so, since I am sure
My loves more richer then my tongue.

Lear. To thee and thine hereditarie ever
Remain this ample third of our fair kingdom,
No less in space, validity, and pleasure,
Then that confirmed on Gonorill, but now our joy,
Although the last, not least in our dear love,
What can you say to win a third, more opulent
Then your sisters.

Cord. Nothing my Lord.

Lear. How, nothing can come of nothing, speak again.

Cord. Unhappy that I am, I cannot heave my heart into my mouth, I love your
Majesty according to my bond, nor more nor less.


Lear. Go to, go to, mend your speech a little,
Least it may mar your fortunes.

Cord. Good my Lord,
You have begot me, bred me, loved me,
I return those duties back as are right fit,
Obey you, love you, and most honor you,
Why have my sisters husbands if they say they love you all,
Happily when I shall wed, that Lord whose hand
Must take my plight, shall carry half my love with him,
Half my care and duty, sure I shall never
Mary like my sisters, to love my father all.

Lear. But goes this with thy heart?

Cord. I good my Lord.

Lear. So young and so vntender.

Cord. So young my Lord and true.

Lear. Well let it be so, thy truth then be thy dower,
For by the sacred radience of the Sun,
The mistress of Heccat, and the might,
By all the operation of the orbs,
From whom we do exsist and cease to be
Hecre I disclaim all my paternall care,
Propinquitie and property of blood,
And as a stranger to my heart and me
Hold thee from this for ever, the barbarous Scythyan,
Or he that makes his generation
Messes to gorge his appetite
Shall be as well neighbored, pittyed and relieved
As thou my sometime daughter.

Kent. Good my Liege.

Lear. Peace Kent, come not between the Dragon andhis wrath,
I loved her most, and thought to set my rest
On her kind nurcery, hence and avoid my sight?
So be my grave my peace as here I give,
Her fathers heart from her, call France, who stirs?
Call Burgundy, Cornwell, and Albany,
With my two daughters dower digest this third,
Let pride, which she calls plainnes, marry her*
I do inuest you jointly in my power,
Pre-eminence, and all the large effects
That troop with Majesty, our self by monthly course
With reservation of an hundred knights,
By you to be sustayn'd, shall our abode
Make with you by due turns, only we still retain
The name and all the additions to a King,
The sway, revenue, execution of the rest,
Beloved sons be yours, which to confirm,
This Coronet part betwixt you.

Kent. Royal Lear,
Whom I have ever honored as my King,
Loved as my Father, as my master followed,
As my great patron thought on in my prayers.

Lear. The bow is bent and drawn make from the shaft,

Kent. Let it fall rather,
Though the forke invade the region of my heart,
Be Kent unmannerly when Lear is man,
What will thou do old man, think thou that duty
Shall have dread to speak, when power to flattery bows,
To plainnes honors bound when Majesty stoops to folly,
Reuerse thy doom, and in thy best consideration
Check this hideous rashness, answer my life
My judgment, thy youngest daughter does not love thee least,
Nor are those empty hearted whose low, sound
Reuerbs no hollownes.

Lear. Kent on thy life no more.

Kent. My life I never held but as a pawn
To wage against thy enemies, nor fear to lose it
Thy safty being the motive.

Lear. Out of my sight.

Kent. See better Lear and let me still remain,
The true blanke of thine eye.

Lear. Now by Appollo,

Kent. Now by Appollo King thou swearest thy Gods in vain.

Lear. Vassal, recreant.

Kent. Do, kill thy Physicion.
And the fee bestow upon the foul disease,
Revoke thy doom, or whilst I can vent clamor
From my throat, i will tell thee thou do evil.

Lear. Hear me, on thy allegiance hear me?
Since thou have sought to make us break our vow,
Which we durst never yet; and with straied pride,
To come between our sentence and our power,
Which nor our nature nor our place can bear,
Our potency made good, take thy reward,
Four days we do allot thee for provision,
To shield thee from diseases of the world,
And on the fifth to turn thy hated back
Upon our kingdom, if on the tenth day following,
Thy banished truncke be found in our dominions,
The moment is thy death, away, by Jupiter
This shall not be reuokt.

Kent. Why fare thee well king, since thus thou will appear,
Friendship lives hence, and banishment is here,
The Gods to their protection take the maid,
That rightly thinks, and have most justly said,
And your large speeches may your deeds approve,
That good effects may spring from words of love:
Thus Kent O Princes, bids you all adieu,
Heel shape his old course in a country new.
Enter France and Burgundy with Gloucester.
Glost. Heers France and Burgundy my noble Lord.

Lear. My L. of Burgu^die, we first addres toward you,
Who with a King has riuald for our daughter,
What in the least will you require in present
Dower with her, or cease your quest of love?

Burg. Royal majesty, I crave no more then what
Your highness offered, nor will you tender less?

Lear. Right noble Burgundy, when she was dear to us
We did hold her so, but now her prise is fallen,
Sir there she stands, if ought within that little
Seeming substance, or al of it with our displeasure peec'st,
And nothing else may fitly like your grace,
She Is there, and she is yours.

Burg. I know no answer.

Lear. Sir will you with those infirmities she owes,
Vnfriended, new adopted to our hate,
Covered with our curse, and stranger'd with our oath,
Take her or leave her.

Burg. Pardon me royal sir, election makes not up
On such conditions.

Lear. Then leave her sir, for by the power that made me
I tell you all her wealth, for you great King,
I would not from your love make such a stray,
To match you where I hate, therefore beseech you,
To auert your liking a more worthier way,
Then on a wretch whom nature is ashamed
Almost to acknowledge hers.

Fra. This is most strange, that she, that even but now
Was your best object, the argument of your praise,
Balm of your age, most best, most dearest,
Should in this trice of time commit a thing,
So monstrous to dismantell so many foulds of favor,
Sure her offense must be of such unnatural degree,
That monsters it, or you for voucht affections
Fallen into taint, which to believe of her
Must be a says that reason without miracle
Could never plant in me.

Cord. I yet beseech your Majesty,
If for I want that glib and oily Art,
To speak and purpose not, since what I well entend
I Will do it before I speak, that you may know
It is no vicious blot, murder or foulnes,
No unclean action or dishonord step
That has deprived me of your grace and favor,
But even for want of that, for which I am rich,
A still soliciting eye, and such a tongue,
As I am glad I have not, though not to have it,
Has lost me in your liking.

Leir. Go to, go to, better thou had not bin borne,
Then not to have pleased me better.

Fran. Is it no more but this, a tardines in nature,
That often leaves the history vnspoke that it intends to do,
My Lord of Burgundy, what say you to the Lady?
Love is not love when it is mingled with respects that sta^ds
Aloof from the entire point will you have her?
She is her self and dowre.

Burg. Royal Leir, give but that portion
Which your self proposd, and here I take Cordelia
By the hand, Duchess of Burgundy,

Leir. Nothing, I have sworn.

Burg. I am sorry then you have so lost a father,
That you must loose a husband.

Cord. Peace be with Burgundy, since that respects
Of fortune are his love, I shall not be his wife.

Fran. Fairest Cordelia that art most rich being poor,
Most choice forsaken, and most loved despisd,
Thee and thy virtues here I ceaze upon,
Be it lawful I take up what is cast away,
Gods, Gods! it is strange, that from their could neglect,
My love should kindle to inflamed respect,
Thy dowreles daughter King thrown to thy chance,
Is Queen of us, of ours, and our fair France:
Not all the Dukes in watrish Burgundy,
Shall buy this vnprizd precious maid of me,
Bid them farewell Cordelia, though unkind
Thou loosest here, a better where to find.

Lear. Thou have her France, let her be thine,
For we have no such daughter, nor shall ever see
That face of hers again, therefore be gone,
Without our grace, our love, our benizon? come noble Burgu^dy.
Exit Lear and Burgundy.
Fran. Bid farewell to your sisters?

Cord. The jewels of our father,
With washed eyes Cordelia leaves you, I know you what you are,
And like a sister am most loath to call your faults
As they are named, use well our Father,
To your professed bosoms I commit him,
But yet alas stood I within his grace,
I would prefer him to a better place:
So farewell to you both?

Gonorill. Prescribe not us our duties?

Regan. Let your study be to content your Lord,
Who has received you at Fortunes alms,
You have obedience scanted,
And well are worth the worth that you have wanted.

Cord. Time shall unfold what pleated cunning hides,
Who couers faults, at last shame them derides:
Well may you prosper.

Fran. Come fair Cordelia?
Exit France and Cord.
Gonor. Sister, it is not a little I have to say,
Of what most nearly appertains to us both,
I think our father will hence to night.

Reg. That's most certain, and with you, next month with us.

Gone. You see how full of changes his age is the observation we have made of it
has not bin little; he always loved our sister most, and with what poor
judgment he has now cast her off, appears too gross.


Reg. It Is the infirmity of his age, yet he has ever but slenderly known
himself.


Gono. The best and soundest of his time has bin but rash, then must we look
to receive from his age not alone the imperfection of long ingrafted condition,
but therwithal unruly waywardnes, that infirm and choleric years bring with
them.


Rag. Such unconstant starts are we like to have from him, as this of Kents
banishment.


Gono. There is further complement of leave taking between France and him,
pray lets hit together, if our Father carry authority with such dispositions as
he bears, this last surrender of his, will but offend us,


Ragan. We shall further think on it.


Gone. We must do something, and in the heat.

Exeunt. Enter Bastard Solus.
Bast. Thou Nature art my Goddess, to thy law my services are bound, wherefore
should I stand in the plague of custom, and permit the curiosity of nations
to deprive me, for that I am some twelve or 14. mooneshines lag of a brother,
why bastard? wherefore base, when my dementions are as well compact, my mind as
generous, and my shape as true as honest madams issue, why brand they us with
base, base bastardie? who in the lusty stealth of nature, take more composition
and feirce quality, then does within a stale dull lied bed, go to the creating
of a whole tribe of fops got tweene a sleep and wake; well the legitimate
Edgar, I must have your land, our Fathers love is to the bastard Edmund, as to
the legitimate, well my legitimate, if this letter speed, and my invention
thrive, Edmund the base shall tooth'legitimate: I grow, I prosper, now Gods
stand up for Bastards.

Enter Gloucester.
Glost. Kent banished thus, and France in choler parted, and the King gone to
night, subscribd his power, confined to exhibition, all this done upon the
gadde; Edmund how now what news?


Bast. So please your Lordship, none.


Glost. Why so earnestly seek you to put up that letter?


Bast. I know no news my Lord.


Glost. What paper were you reading?


Bast. Nothing my Lord,


Glost. No, what needs then that terribe dispatch of it into your pocket, the
quality of nothing has not such need to hide it self, lets see, come if it
be nothing I shall not need spectacles.


Ba. I beseech you Sir pardon me, it is a letter from my brother, that I have
not all ore read, for so much as I have perused, I find it not fit for your
liking.


Glost. Give me the letter sir.


Bast. I shall offend either to detain or give it, the contents as in part I
understand them, are too blame.


Glost. Lets see, lets see?


Bast. I hope for my brothers justification, he wrote this but as an essay, or
taste of my virtue.

A Letter.
Glost. This policy of age makes the world bitter to the best of our times,
keeps our fortunes from us till our oldnes cannot relish them, I begin to find
an idle and fond bondage in the oppression of aged tyranny, who swaies not as
it has power, but as it is suffered, come to me, that of this I may speak
more, if our father would sleep till I wakt him, you should enjoy half his
reuenew for ever, and live the beloved of your brother Edgar.

Hum, conspiracy, slept till I wakt him, you should enjoy half his reuenew,
my son Edgar, had he a hand to write this, a heart, and brain to breed it
in, when came this to you, who brought it?


Bast. It was not brought me my Lord, there is the cunning of it, I found it
thrown in at the casement of my closet.


Glost. You know the Caractar to be your brothers?


Bast. If the matter were good, my Lord I durst swear it were his but in
respect, of that I would feign think it were not,


Glost. It is his?


Bast. It is his hand my Lord, but I hope his heart is not in the contents.


Glost. Has he never heretofore sou^ded you in this business?


Bast. Never my Lord, but I have often heard him maintain it to be fit, that
sons at perfect age, and fathers declining, his father should be as ward to the
son, and the son manage the reuenew.


Glost. O villain, villain, his very opinion in the letter, abhorred
villain, unnatural detested brutish villain, worse then brutish, go sir
seek him, I apprehend him, abominable villain where is he?


Bast. I do not well know my Lord, if it shall please you to suspend your
indignation against my brother, til you can derive from him better testimony of
this intent: you should run a certain course, where if you violently proceed
against him, mistaking his purpose, it would make a great gap in your own
honor, and shake in pieces the heart of his obedience, I dare pawn down my
life for him, he has wrote this to feel my affection to your honor, and to
no further pretense of danger.


Glost. Think you so?


Bast. If your honor judge it meet, I will place you where you shall hear us
confer of this, and by an aurigular assurance have your satisfaction, and
that without any further delay then this very evening.


Glost. He cannot be such a monster.


Bast. Nor is not sure.


Glost. To his father, that so tenderly and entirely loves him, heaven and
earth! Edmund seek him out, wind me into him, I pray you frame your business
after your own wisdom, I would vnstate my self to be in a due resolution.


Bast. I shall seek him sir presently, convey the business as I shall see
means, and acquaint you withal.


Glost. These late eclipses in the Sun and Moon portend no good to us,
though the wisdom of nature can reason thus and thus, yet nature finds it
self scourged by the sequent effects, love cooles, friendship falls off,
brothers divide, in Cities mutinies, in Countries discords, Palaces treason,
the bond cracked between son and father; find out this villain Edmund, it
shall loose thee nothing, do it carefully, and the noble and true hearted Kent
banished, his offense honest, strange strange!


Bast. This is the excellent foppery of the world, that when we are sick in
Fortune, often the surfeit of our own behavior, we make guilty of our
disasters, the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars, as if we were Villains by
necessity, Fools by heavenly compulsion, Knaves, Thieves, and Trecherers by
spiritual predominance, Drunkards, Liars and Adulterers by an enforst
obedience of planitary influence, and all that we are evil in, by a divine
thrusting on, an admirable evasion of whoremaster man, to lay his gotish
disposition to the charge of Stars: my Father compounded with my Mother under
the Dragons tail, and my nativity was under Vrsa mayor, so that it follows,
I am rough and lecherous, Fut, I should have been that I am, had the
maidenlest star of the Firmament twinckled on my bastardy Edgar; and out he
comes like the Catastrophe of the old Comedy, mine is villainous melancholy,
with a since like them of Bedlam; O these eclipses do portend these divisions.

Enter Edgar
Edgar. How now brother Edmund, what serious contemplation are you in?


Bast. I am thinking brother of a prediction I read this other day, what should
follow these Eclipses.


Edg. Do you busy your self about that?


Bast. I promise you the effects he writ of, succeed unhappily, as of
unnaturalness between the child and the parent, death, dearth, dissolutions
of ancient amities, divisions in state, menaces and maledictions against King
and nobles, needles diffidences, banishment of friends, dissipation of Cohorts,
nuptial breaches, and I know not what.


Edg. How long have you been a sectary Astronomicall?


Bast. Come, come, when saw you my father last?


Edg. Why, the night gone by.


Bast. Spoke you with him?


Edg. Two hours together.


Bast. Parted you in good terms? found you no displeasure in him by word or
countenance?


Edg. None at all.


Bast. Bethink your self wherein you may have offended him, and at my
entreaty, forbear his presence, till some little time has qualified the heat
of his displeasure, which at this instant so rages in him, that with the
mischief, of your parson it would scarce allay.


Edg. Some villain has done me wrong.


Bast. That's my fear brother, I advise you to the best, go armed, I am no
honest man if there be any good meaning toward you, I have told you what I
have seen and heard, but faintly, nothing like the image and horror of it,
pray you away?


Edg. Shall I hear from you anon?


Bast. I do serve you in this business:
Exit Edgar A credulous Father, and a brother noble,
Whose nature is so far from doing harms,
That he suspects none, on whose foolish honesty
My practices ride easy, I see the business,
Let me if not by birth, have lands by wit,
All with me's meet, that I can fashion fit.
Exit. Enter Gonorill and Gentleman.
Gone. Did my Father strike my gentleman for chiding of his fool?


Gent. Yes Madam.


Gone. By day and night he wrongs me,
Every hour he flashes into one gross crime or other
That sets us all at ods, i will not endure it,
His Knights grow ryotous, and him self obrayds us,
On every trifell when he returns from hunting,
I will not speak with him, say I am sick,
If you come slack of former services,
You shall do well, the fault of it i will answer.

Gent. He Is coming Madam I hear him.


Gone. Put on what weary negligence you please, you and your fellow servants,
i would have it come in question, if he dislike it, let him to our sister, whose
mind and mine I know in that are one, not to be ouerruld; idle old man that
still would manage those authorities that he has given away, now by my life
old fools are babes again, and must be used with checkes as flatteries, when
they are seen abusd, remember what I tell you.


Gent. Very well Madam.


Gone. And let his Knights have colder looks among you, what grows of it no
matter, advise your fellows so. I would breed from hence occasions, and I
shall, that I may speak, i will write straight to my sister to hold my very
course, go prepare for dinner.

Exit. Enter Kent.
Kent. If but as well I other accents borrow, that can my speech defuse, my
good intent may carry through it self to that full issue for which I razed my
likeness, now banished Kent, if thou can serve where thou do stand condemned,
thy master whom thou love shall find the full of labor.

Enter Lear.
Lear. Let me not stay a jot for dinner, go get it ready, how now, what art
thou?


Kent. A man Sir.


Lear. What do thou profess? what would thou with us?


Kent. I do profess to be no less then I seem, to serve him truly that will
put me in trust, to love him that is honest, to converse with him that is wise,
and says little, to fear judgment, to fight when I cannot choose, and to eat
no fish.


Lear. What art thou?


Kent. A very honest hearted fellow, and as poor as the king.


Lear. If thou be as poor for a subject, as he is for a King, thar't poor
enough, what would thou?


Kent. Service.


Lear. Who would thou serve?


Kent. You.


Lear. Do thou know me fellow?


Kent. No sir, but you have that in your countenance, which I would feign call
Master.


Lear. What Is that?


Kent. Authority.


Lear. What services can do?


Kent. I can keep honest counsel, ride, run, mar a curious tale in telling
it, and deliver a plain message bluntly, that which ordinary men are fit for,
I am qualified in, and the best of me, is diligence.


Lear, How old art thou?


Kent. Not so young to love a woman for singing, nor so old to dote on her for
any thing, I have years on my back forty eight.


Lear. Follow me, thou shall serve me, if I like thee no worse after dinner,
I will not part from thee yet, dinner, ho dinner, where is my knave, my fool,
go you and call my fool hither, you sir, whers my daughter?

Enter Steward.
Steward. So please you,


Lear. What says the fellow there, call the clat-pole back, whers my fool,
ho I think the world's asleep, how now, where is that mungrel?


Kent. He says my Lord, your daughter is not well.


Lear. Why came not the slave back to me when I called him?


servant. Sir, he answered me in the roundest manner, he would not.


Lear. A would not?


servant. My Lord, I know not what the matter is, but to my judgment, your
highness is not e^tertained with that ceremonious affection as you were wont,
there is a great abatement, apeer's as well in the general dependants, as in the
Duke himself also, and your daughter.


Lear. Ha, say thou so?


servant. I beseech you pardon me my Lord, if I be mistaken, for my duty
cannot be silent, when I think your highness wronged.


Lear. Thou but remember'st me of mine own conception, I have perceived a most
faint neglect of late, which I have rather blamed as mine own ielous
curiosity, then as a very pretense and purport of unkindness, I will look
further into it, but where is this fool? I have not seen him this two days.


servant. Since my young Ladies going into France sir, the fool has much pined
away.


Lear. No more of that, I have noted it, go you and tell my daughter, I would
speak with her, go you call hither my fool, O you sir, you sir, come you
hither, who am I sir?


Steward. My Ladies Father.


Lear. My Ladies father, my Lords knave, you horeson dog, you slave, you cur.


Stew. I am none of this my Lord, I beseech you pardon me.


Lear. Do you bandie looks with me you rascal?


Stew. I Will not be struck my Lord,


Kent. Nor tript neither, you base football player.


Lear. I thank thee fellow, thou seru'st me, and i will love thee.


Kent. Come sir i will teach you differences, away, away, if you will measure your
lubbers length again, tarry, but away, you have wisdom.


Lear. Now friendly knave I thank thee, their's earnest of thy service.

Enter Fool.
Fool. Let me hire him too, here is my coxcombe.


Lear. How now my pretty knave, how do thou?


Fool. Sir, you were best take my coxcombe.


Kent. Why Fool?


Fool. Why for taking on's part, that is out of favor, nay and thou can not
smile as the wind sits, thou't catch cold shortly, there take my coxcombe; why
this fellow has banished two on's daughters, and done the third a blessing
against his will, if thou follow him, thou must needs wear my coxcombe, how
now nuncle, would I had two coxcombes, and two daughters.


Lear. Why my boy?


Fool. If I gave them any living, id'e keep my coxcombs my self, there is
mine, beg another of thy daughters.


Lear. Take heed sir, the whip.


Fool. Truth is a dog that must to kenell, he must be whipped out, when Lady
oth'e brach may stand by the fire and stincke.


Lear. A pestilent gull to me.


Fool. Sir i will teach thee a speech.


Lear. Do.


Fool. Mark it uncle, have more then thou show, speak less then thou
know, lend less then thou owe, ride more then thou go, learn more
then thou trowest, set less then thou throwest, leave thy drink and thy
whore, and keep in a door, and thou shall have more, then two tens to a score.


Lear. This is nothing fool.


Fool. Then like the breath of an vnfeed Lawyer, you gave me nothing for it,
can you make no use of nothing uncle?


Lear. Why no boy, nothing can be made out of nothing.


Fool. Preethe tell him so much the rent of his land comes to, he will not
believe a fool.


Lear. A bitter fool.


Fool. Doo'st know the difference my boy, between a bitter fool, and a
swecte fool.


Lear. No lad, teach me.


Fool. That Lord that counsail'd thee to give away thy land,
Come place him here by me, do thou for him stand,
The sweet and bitter fool will presently appear,
The one in motley here, the other found out there.

Lear. Do thou call me fool boy?


Fool. All thy other Titles thou have given away, that thou wast borne with.


Kent. This is not altogether fool my Lord.


Fool. No faith, Lords and great men will not let me, if I had a monopoly
out, they would have part an't, and lodes too, they will not let me have all
the fool to my self, they will be snatching; give me an egg Nuncle, and i will
give thee two crowns.


Lear. What two crowns shall they be?


Fool. Why, after I have cut the egg in the middle and eat up the meat, the
two crowns of the egg; when thou clouest thy crown in the middle, and gave
away both parts, thou borest thy ass at'h back over the dirt, thou had
little wit in thy bald crown, when thou gave thy golden one away, if I
speak like my self in this, let him be whipped that first finds it so.

Fools had nere less wit in a year,

For wise men are grown foppish,

They know not how their wits do wear,

Their manners are so apish.


Lear. When were you wont to be so full of songs sir?


Fool. I have used it nuncle, ever since thou made thy daughters thy mother,
for when thou gave them the rod, and put'st down thine own breeches, then
they for sudden joy did weep, and I for sorrow sung, that such a King should
play bo-peepe, and go the fools among, prithee Nunckle keep a schoolmaster
that can teach thy fool to lie, I would feign learn lie.


Lear. And you lie, we will have you whipped.


Fool. I marvel what kin thou and thy daughters are, they will have me whipped for
speaking true, thou will have me whipped for ^^ing, and sometime I am whipped for
holding my peace, I had rather be any kind of thing then a fool, and yet I
would not be thee Nuncle, thou have pared thy wit a both sides, and left
nothing in the middle, here comes one of the parings.

Enter Gonorill.
Lear. How now daughter, what makes that Frontlet on, Me thinks you are too
much alate in the frown.


Fool. Thou wast a pretty fellow when thou had no need to care for her
frown, thou, thou art an O without a figure, I am better then thou art now, I
am a fool, thou art nothing, yes forsooth I will hold my tongue, so your face
bids me, though you say nothing.

Mum, mum, he that keeps neither crust nor crum,

Weary of all, shall want some. That Is a sheald pescod.


Gone. Not only sir this, your all-licenc'd fool, but other of your insolent
retinue do hourly carpe and quarrel, breaking forth in rank and (not to be
endured riots,) Sir I had thought by making this well known unto you, to have
found a safe redres, but now grow fearful by what your self too late have
spoke and done, that you protect this course, and put on by your allowance,
which if you should, the fault would not escape censure, nor the redress,
sleep, which in the tender of a wholesome weal, might in their working do you
that offense, that else were shame, that then necessity must call discreet
proceedings.


Fool. For you trow nuncle, the hedge sparrow fed the Cookow so long, that it
had it head bit off beit young, so out went the candle, and we were left
darkling.


Lear. Are you our daughter?


Gone. Come sir, I would you would make use of that good wisdom whereof I know
you are fraught, and put away these dispositions, that of late transform you
from what you rightly are.


Fool. May not an Ass know when the cart draws the horse, whoop Iug I love
thee.


Lear. Does any here know me? why this is not Lear, does Lear walk thus?
speak thus? where are his eyes, either his notion, weakness, or his discernings
are lethergie, sleeping, or wakeing; ha! sure it is not so, who is it that can
tell me who I am? Lears shadow I would learn that, for by the marks of
soueraintie, knowledge, and reason, I should be false persuaded I had
daughters.


Fool. Which they, will make an obedient father.


Lear. Your name fair gentlewoman?


Gone. Come sir, this admiration is much of the savor of other your new
prankes, I do beseech you understand my purposes aright, as you are old and
reverend, should be wise, here do you keep a 100. Knights and Squires, men so
disordred, so deboyst and bold, that this our court infected with their
manners, shows like a riotous Inn, epicurisme, and lust make more like a
tavern or brothell, then a great palace, the shame it self does speak for
instant remedy, be thou desired by her, that else will take the thing she
begs, a little to disquantitie your train, and the remainder that shall still
depend, to be such men as may besort your age, that know themselves and you.


Lear. Darkness, and Devils! saddle my horses, call my train together,
degenerate bastard, i will not trouble thee, yet have I left a daughter.


Gone. You strike my people, and your disordred rabble, make servants of their
betters.

Enter Duke.
Lear. We that too late repent's, O sir, are you come? is it your will that we
prepare any horses, ingratitude! thou marble hearted fiend, more hideous when
thou show thee in a child, then the Sea Monster, detested kite, thou list my
train, and men of choice and rarest parts, that all particulars of duty
know, and in the most exact regard, support the worships of their name, O most
small fault, how ugly did thou in Cordelia show, that like an engine
wrencht my frame of nature from the fixed place, drew from my heart all love and
added to the gall, O Lear. Lear! beat at this gate that let thy folly in, and
thy dear judgment out, go go, my people?


Duke, My Lord, I am giltles as I am ignorant.


Leir. It may be so my Lord, hark Nature, hear dear Goddess, suspend thy
purpose, if thou did intend to make this creature fruitful into her womb,
convey sterility, dry up in her the organs of increase, and from her derogate
body never spring a babe to honor her, if she must teeme, create her child
of spleen, that it may live and be a thourt disuetur'd torment to her, let it
stamp wrinckles in her brow of youth, with accent tears, fret channels in her
cheeks, turn all her mothers pains and benefits to laughter and contempt,
that she may feel, that she may feel, how sharper then a serpents tooth it
is, to have a thanklesse child, go, go, my people?


Duke. Now Gods that we adore, whereof comes this!


Gone. Never afflict your self to know the cause, but let his disposition have
that scope that dotage gives it.


Lear. What, fifty of my followers at a clap, within a fortnight?


Duke. What is the matter sir?


Lear. I Will tell thee, life and death! I am ashamed that thou have power to
shake my manhood thus, that these hot tears that break from me perforce,
should make the worst blasts and fogs upon the vntender woundings of a
fatherscursse, peruse every sense about the old fond eyes, beweepe this cause
again, i will pluck you out, and you cast with the waters that you make to temper
clay, yea, is it come to this? yet have I left a daughter, whom I am sure is kind
and comfortable, when she shall hear this of thee, with her nails she will
flea thy woluish visage, thou shall find that i will resume the shape, which thou
do think I have cast off for ever, thou shall I warrant thee.


Gone. Do you mark that my Lord?


Duke. I cannot be so partial Gonorill to the great love I bear you,


Gone. Come sir no more, you, more knave then fool, after your master?


Fool. Nunckle Lear, Nunckle Lear, tarry and take the fool with a fox when one
has caught her, and such a daughter should sure to the slaughter, if my cap
would buy a halter, so the fool follows after.


Gone. What Oswald, ho.


Oswald. Here Madam.


Gone. What have you writ this letter to my sister;


Osw. Yes Madam.


Gone. Take you some company, and away to horse, inform her full of my
particular fears, and thereto add such reasons of your own, as may compact it
more, get you gone, and after your return now my Lord, this mildie gentleness
and course of yours though I dislike not, yet under pardon you are much more
alapt want of wisdom, then praise for harmfull mildnes.


Duke. How far your eyes may pearce I cannot tell, striving to better ought,
we mar what is well.


Gone. Nay then.


Duke. Well, well, the event,

Exeunt Enter Lear.
Lear. Go you before to Gloucester with these letters, acquaint my daughter no
further with any thing you know, then comes from her demand out of the letter,
if your diligence be not speedy, I shall be there before you.


Kent. I will not sleep my Lord, till I have delivered your letter.

Exit
Fool. If a man's brains where in his heels, were not in danger of kibes;


Lear. I boy.


Fool. Then I prithee be merry, thy wit shall nere go slipshod.


Lear. Ha ha ha.


Fool. Shall see thy other daughter will use thee kindly, for though she is as
like this, as a crab is like an apple, yet I con, what I can tell.


Lear. Why what can thou tell my boy?


Fool. She Will taste as like this, as a crab does to a crab, thou can not tell
why ones nose stand in the middle of his face?


Lear. No.


Fool. Why, to keep his eyes on either side's nose, that what a man cannot
smell out, a may spy into.


Lear. I did her wrong.


Fool. Can tell how an Oyster makes his shell.


Lear. No.


Fool. Nor I neither, but I can tell why a snayle has a house.


Lear. Why?


Fool. Why, to put his head in, not to give it away to his daughter, and leave
his horns without a case.


Lear. I will forget my nature, so kind a father; be my horses ready;


Fool. Thy Asses are gone about them, the reason why the seven stars are no
more then seven, is a pretty reason.


Lear. Because they are not eight.


Fool. Yes thou would make a good fool.


Lear. To take it again perforce, Monster, ingratitude!


Fool. If thou were my fool Nunckle, id'e have thee beaten for being old
before thy time.


Lear. Hows that;


Fool. Thou should not have been old, before thou had been wise.


Lear. O let me not be mad sweet heaven! I would not be mad, keep me in
temper, I would not be mad, are the horses ready;


Servant. Ready my Lord.


Lear. Come boy.

Exit.
Fool. She that is maid now, and laughs at my departure, Shall not be a
maid long, except things be cut shorter.

Exit Enter Bast. and Curan meeting.
Bast. Save thee Curan.


Curan. And you Sir, I have been with your father, and given him notice, that
the Duke of Cornwall and his Duchess will be here with him to night.


Bast. How comes that;


Curan. Nay, I know not, you have heard of the news abroad, I mean the
whisperd ones, for there are yet but eare-bussing arguments.


Bast. Not, I pray you what are they;


Curan. Have you heard of no likely wars toward, twixt the two Dukes of
Cornwall and Albany?


Bast. Not a word.


Curan. You may then in time, fare you well sir.


Bast. The Duke be here to night! the better best, this weaues Enter Edgar it
self perforce into my business, my father has set guard to take my brother, and
I have one thing of a quesie question, which must ask breefnes and fortune
help; brother, a word, descend brother I say, my father watches, O fly this
place, intelligence is given where you are hid, you have now the good advantage
of the night, have you not spoken against the Duke of Cornwall ought, he is
coming hither now in the night, in the have, and Regan with him, have you nothing
said upon his party against the Duke of Albany, advise your --


Edg. I am sure on it not a word.


Bast. I hear my father coming, pardon me in craving, I must draw my sword
upon you, seem to defend your self, now quit you well, yield, come before my
father, light here, here, fly brother fly, torches, torches, so farewell; some
blood drawn on me would beget opinion of my more fierce endeavor, I have
seen drunckards do more then this in sport, father, father, stop, stop, no,
help;

Enter Glost.
Glost. Now Edmund where is the villain;


Bast. Here stood he in the dark, his sharp sword out, warbling of wicked
charms, coniuring the Moon to stand's auspicious Mistress.


Glost. But where is he?


Bast. Look sir, I bleed.


Glost. Where is the villain Edmund?


Bast. Fled this way sir, when by no means he could --


Glost. Pursue him, go after by no means, what?


Bast. Persuade me to the murder of your Lordship, but that I told him the
reuengiue Gods, against Paracides did all their thunders bend, spoke with how
many fould and strong a bond the child was bound to the father, sir in a fine,
seeing how loathly opposite I stood, to his unnatural purpose, with fell
motion with his prepared sword he charges home my unprovided body, lancht mine
arm, but when he saw my best alarumd spirits, bold in the quarrels, rights,
rousd to the encounter, or whether gasted by the noise I made, but suddenly he
fled.


Glost. Let him fly far not in this land shall he remain vncaught and
found, dispatch, the noble Duke my master, my worthy Arch and Patron, comes to
night, by his authority I will proclaim it, that he which finds him shall
deserve our thanks, bringing the murderous caytife to the stake, he that
conceals him, death.


Bast. When I dissuaded him from his intent, and found him pight to do it,
with cursed speech I threatened to discover him, he replied, thou vnpossessing
Bastard, do thou think, if I would stand against thee, could the reposure of
any trust, virtue, or worth in thee make thy words fayth'd? no. what I should
deny, as this I would, I, though thou did produce my very character, id'e
turn it all to thy suggestion, plot, and damned pretense, and thou must make a
dullard of the world, if they not thought the profits of my death, were very
pregnant and potentiall spurs to make thee seek it.


Glost. Strong and fastened villain, would he deny his letter, I never got
him, hark the Dukes trumpets, I know not why he comes, all Ports i will bar,
the villain shall not escape, the Duke must grant me that, besides, his
picture I will send far and near, that all the kingdom may have note of
him, and of my land loyal and natural boy, i will work the means to make thee
capable.

Enter the Duke of Cornwall.
Corn. How now my noble friend, since I came hither, which I can call but now,
I have heard strange news.


Reg. If it be true, all vengeance comes too short which can pursue the
offender, how do my Lord?


Glost. Madam my old heart is cracked, is cracked.


Reg. What, did my fathers godson seek your life? he whom my father named your
Edgar?


Glost. I Lady, Lady, shame would have it hid.


Reg. Was he not companion with the ryotous knights, that tends upon my father?


Glost. I know not Madam, it is too bad, too bad.


Bast. Yes Madam, he was.


Reg. No marvel then though he were ill affected,
It Is they have put him on the old man's death,
To have these -- and wast of this his revenues:
I have this present evening from my sister,
Been well informed of them, and with such cautions,
That if they come to soiourne at my house, i will not be there.

Duke. Nor I, assure thee Regan;


Edmund, I heard that you have shown your father a child-like office.


Bast. It Was my duty Sir.


Glost. He did betray his practice, and received
This hurt you see, striving to apprehend him.

Duke. Is he pursued?


Glost. I my good Lord.


Duke. If he be taken, he shall never more be feared of doing harm, make your
own purpose how in my strength you please, for you Edmund, whose virtue and
obedience, does this instant so much commend it self, you shall be ours,
natures of such deep trust, we shall much need you, we first seize on.


Bast. I shall serve you truly, how ever else.


Glost. For him I thank your grace.


Duke. You know not why we came to visit you?


Regan. Thus out of season, threatening dark eyed night,
Ocasions noble Gloucester of some prise,
Wherein we must have use of your advise,
Our Father he has writ, so has our sister,
Of desences, which I best thought it fit,
To answer from our hand, the several messengers
From hence attend dispatch* our good old friend,
Lay comforts to your bosom, and bestow your needful council
To our business, which craves the instant use.
(Exeunt.
Glost. I serve you Madam, your Graces are right welcome.

Enter Kent, and Steward.
Steward. Good even to thee friend, art of the house?


Kent. I.


Stew. Where may we set our horses?


Kent. In The mire.


Stew. Prithee if thou love me, tell me.


Kent. I love thee not.


Stew. Why then I care not for thee.


Kent. If I had thee in Lipsburie pinfold, I would make thee care for me.


Stew. Why do thou use me thus? I know thee not.


Kent. Fellow I know thee.


Stew, What do thou know me for?


Kent. A knave, a rascal, an eater of broken meats, a base, proud, shallow,
beggarly, three shewted hundred pound, filthy worsted-stocken knave, a lilly
lyuer'd action taking knave, a whoreson glassegazing superfinicall rogue, one
truncke inheriting slave, one that would be a baud in way of good service,
and art nothing but the composition of a knave, beggar, coward, pander, and the
son and heir of a mungrell bitch, whom I will beat into clamorous whyning,
if thou deny the least syllable of the addition.


Stew. What a monstrous fellow art thou, thus to rail on one, that is neither
known of thee, nor knows thee.


Kent. What a brazen faced varlet art thou, to deny thou know me, is it two
days ago since I beat thee, and tript up thy heels before the King? draw you
rogue, for though it be night the Moon shines, i will make a sop of the
moone-shine a you, draw you whoreson cullyonly barber-munger, draw?


Stew. Away, I have nothing to do with thee.


Kent. Draw you rascal, you bring letters against the King, and take Vanity
the puppets part, against the royalty of her father, draw you rogue or i will so
carbonado your shankes, draw you rascal, come your ways.


Stew. Help, ho, murder, help.


Kent. Strike you slave, stand rogue, stand you neat slave, strike?


Stew. Help, ho, murder, help.

Enter Edmund with his rapter drawn, Gloucester the Duke and Duchess.
Bast. How now, what is the matter?


Kent. With you goodman boy, and you please come, i will fleash you, come on young
master.


Glost. Weapons, arms, what is the matter here?


Duke. Keep peace upon your lives, he dies that strikes again, what is the
matter?


Reg. The messengers from our sister, and the King.


Duke. What Is your difference, speak?


Stew. I am scarce in breath my Lord.


Kent. No marvel you have so bestir'd your valor, you cowardly rascal,
nature disclaimes in thee, a Tailor made thee.


Duke. Thou art a strange fellow, a Tailor make a man.


Kent. I, a Tailor sir; a Stone-cutter, or a Painter could not have made him so
ill, though he had been but two hours at the trade.


Glost. Speak yet, how grew your quarrel?


Stew. This ancient ruffen sir, whose life I have spared at suit of his
gray-beard.


Kent. Thou whoreson Zedd, thou unnecessary letter, my Lord if you will give me
leave, I will tread this vnboulted villain into mortar, and daube the walls
of a jacques with him, spare my gray beard you wagtayle.


Duke. Peace sir, you beastly Knave you have no reverence.


Kent. Yes sir, but anger has a privilege.


Duke. Why art thou angry?


Kent. That such a slave as this should wear a sword,
That wears no honesty, such smiling roges as these,
Like Rats often bite those cords in twain,
Which are to entrench, to inloose smooth every passion
That in the natures of their Lords rebel,
Bring oil to stir, snow to their colder-moods,
Reneag affirm, and turn their halcion beakes
With every gale and vary of their masters,
Knowing naught like days but following, a plague upon your epeliptick
Visage, smoyle you my speeches, as I were a fool?
Goose and I had you upon Sarum plain,
Id'e send you cackling home to Camulet.,

Duke. What art thou mad old fellow?


Glost. How fell you out, say that?


Kent. No contraries hold more, antipathy,
Then I and such a knave.

Duke. Why do thou call him knave, what is his offense.

Kent. His countenance likes me not.

Duke. No more perchance does mine, or his, or hers.

Kent. Sir it is my occupation to be plain,
I have seen better faces in my time
That stands on any shoulder that I see
Before me at this instant.

Duke. This is a fellow who having been praysd
For bluntnes does affect a saucy ruffines,
And constraines the garb quite from his nature,
He cannot flatter he, he must be plain,
He must speak truth, and they will take it so,
If not he is plain, these kind of knaves I know
Which in this plainnes harbor more craft,
And more corrupter ends, then twenty silly ducking
Obseruants, that stretch their duties nisely.

Kent. Sir in good sooth, or in sincere verity,
Under the allowance of your graund aspect.
Whose influence like the wreath of radient fire
In flitkering Phoebus front.

Duke. What mean thou by this?

Kent. To go out of my dialogue which you discommend so much, I know sir, I am
no flatterer, he that beguild you in a plain accent, was a plain knave, which
for my part I will not be, though I should win your displeasure, to entreat
me to it.


Duke. What Is the offense you gave him?

Stew. I never gave him any, it pleased the King his master
Very late to strike at me upon his misconstruction,
When he coniunct and flattering his displeasure
Tript me behind, being down, insulted, rayld,
And put upon him such a deal of man, that,
That worthied him, got praises of the King,
For him attempting who was self subdued,
And in the flechuent of this dread exploit,
Drew on me here again.

Kent. None of these roges and cowards but A'Iax is their fool.

Duke. Bring sorth the stocks ho?
You stubburne miscreant knave, you reverent bragart,
We Will teach you.

Kent. I am too old to learn, call not your stocks for me,
I serve the King, on whose employments I was sent to you,
You should do small respect, show too bold malice
Against the Grace and person of my master,
Stopping his messenger.

Duke. Fetch forth the stocks? as I have life and honor,
There shall he sit till noone.

Reg. Till noone, till night my Lord, and all night too.

Kent. Why Madam, if I were your fathers dog, you could not use me so.

Reg. Sir being his knave, I will.

Duke. This is a fellow of the self same nature,
Our sister speak of, come bring away the stocks?

Glost. Let me beseech your Grace not to do so,
His fault is much, and the good King his master
Will check him for it, your purpost low correction
Is such, as basest and temnest wretches for pilfrings
And most common trespasses are punished with,
The King must take it ill, that he is so slightly valued
In his messenger, should have him thus restrained.

Duke. I Will answer that.

Reg. My sister may receive it much more worse,
To have her Gentlemen abused, assalted
For following her affairs, put in his legs,
Come my good Lord away?

Glost. I am sorry for thee friend, it is the Dukes pleasure,
Whose disposition all the world well knows
Will not be rubd nor stopped, i will entreat for thee.

Kent. Pray you do not sir, I have watched and trauaild hard,
Sometime I shall sleep out, the rest i will whistle,
A good man's fortune may grow out at heels,
Give you good morrow.

Glost. The Dukes to blame in this, twill be ill took.

Kent. Good King that must approve the common saw,
Thou out of heavens benediction come
To the warm Sun.
Approach thou beacon to this under gloabe,
That by thy comfortable beams I may
Peruse this letter, nothing almost sees my wrack
But misery, I know it is from Cordelia,
Who has most fortunately bin informed
Of my obscured course, and shall find time
From this enormious state, seeking to give
Losles their remedies, all weary and ouerwatch
Take vantage heavy eyes not to behold
This shameful lodging, Fortune goodnight,
Smile, once more turn thy wheel.
sleeps. Enter Edgar.
Edg. I hear my self proclaimed,
And by the happy hollow of a tree
Escapt the hunt, no Port is free, no place
That guard, and most unusual vigilence
Do not attend my taking while I may escape,
I will preserve my self, and am bethought
To take the basest and most poorest shape,
That ever penury in contempt of man,
Brought near to beast, my face i will grime with filth,
Blanket my loins, else all my hair with knots,
And with presented nakedness outface,
The wind, and persecution of the sky,
The Country gives me proof and president
Of Bedlam beggars, who with roaring voices,
Strike in their numbed and mortified bare arms,
Pins, wodden pricks, nails, sprigs of rosemary,
And with this horrible object from low service,
Poor pelting villages, sheep-coates, and milles,
Sometime with lunaticke bans, sometime with prayers
Enforce their charity, poor Turlygod, poor Tom,
That Is something yet, Edgar I nothing am.
Exit Enter King.
Lear. It Is strange that they should so depart from hence,
And not send back my messenger.

Knight. As I learned, the night before there was
No purpose of his remove.

Kent. Hayle to thee noble master.

Lear. How, make thou this shame thy pastime?

Fool. Ha ha, look he wears crewell garters,
Horses are tide by the heels, dogs and bears
Byt'h neck, munkies bit'h loins, and men
Byt'h legs, when a man's over lusty at legs,
Then he wears wooden neatherstockes.

Lear. What Is he, that has so much thy place mistook to set thee here?

Kent. It is both he and she, your son and daugter.

Lear. No.

Kent. Yes.

Lear. No I say,

Kent. I say yea.

Lear. No no, they would not.

Kent. Yes they have.

Lear. By Jupiter I swear no, they durst not do it,
They would not, could not do it, it is worse then murder,
To do upon respect such violent outrage,
Resolve me with all modest have, which way
Thou may deserve, or they purpose this usage,
Coming from us.

Kent. My Lord, when at their home
I did commend your highness letters to them,
Ere I was risen from the place that showed
My duty kneeling, came there a reeking Post,
Stewd in his have, half breathles, panting forth
From Gonorill his mistress, salutations,
Delivered letters spite of intermission,
Which presently they read, on whose contents
They summond up their men, straight took horse,
Commanded me to follow, and attend the leisure
Of their answer, gave me cold looks,
And meeting here the other messenger,
Whose welcome I perceau'd had poisoned mine,
Being the very fellow that of late
Displayed so sawcily against your Highness,
Having more man then wit about me drew,
He raised the house with loud and coward cries,
Your son and daughter found this trespass worth
This shame which here it suffers.

Lear. O how this mother swells up toward my heart,
Historica passio down thou climing sorrow,
Thy element's below, where is this daughter?

Kent. With the Earl sir within,

Lear. Follow me not, stay there?

Knight. Made you no more offense then what you speak of?

Kent. No, how chance the King comes with so small a train?

Fool. And thou had been set in the stocks for that question, thou ha'dst
well deserved it.


Kent. Why fool?

Fool. We Will set thee to school to an Ant, to teach thee there is no laboring
in the winter, all that follow their noses, are led by their eyes, but blind
men, and there is not a nose among a 100. but can smell him that's stinking, let
go thy hold when a great wheel runs down a hill, least it break thy neck
with following it, but the great one that goes up the hill, let him draw thee
after, when a wise man gives thee better council, give me mine again, I
would have none but knaves follow it, since a fool gives it.

That Sir that serves for gain,

And follows but for form:

Will pack when it begin to rain,

And leave thee in the storm.

But I will tarry, the fool will stay,

And let the wise man fly:

The knave turns fool that runs away,

The fool no knave perdy.

Kent. Where learnt you this fool?

Fool. Not in the stocks.

Enter Lear and Gloucester.
Lear. Deny to speak with me, they are sick, they are weary,
They traueled hard to night, meare Justice,
I the Images of revolt and flying off,
Fetch me a better answer.

Glost. My dear Lord, you know the fiery quality of the Duke, now
unremovable and fixed he is in his own Course.


Lear. Veng eance, death, plague, confusion, what fiery quality, why Gloucester,
Gloucester, id'e speak with the Duke of Cornewali, and his wife.


Glost. I my good Lord.

Lear. The King would speak with Cornewal, the dear father
Would with his daughter speak, commands her service,
Fiery Duke, tell the hot Duke that Lear,
No but not yet may be he is not well,
Infirmity does still neglect all office, where to our health
Is bound, we are not our selves, when nature being oprest
Command the mind to suffer with the body i will forbear,
And am fallen out with my more hedier will,
To take the indisposed and sickly fit, for the sound man,
Death on my state, wherefore should he sit here?
This act persuades me, that this remotion of the Duke,
Is practice, only give me my servant forth,
Tell the Duke and's wife, I Will speak with them and her
Now presently, bid them come forth and hear me,
Or at their chamber door i will beat the drum,
Till it cry sleep to death.

Glost. I would have all well betwixt you.

Lear. O my heart, my heart.

Fool. Cry to it Nunckle, as the Cokney did to the eeles, when she put vm ith
past alive, she rapt vm ath coxcombs with a stick, and cried down wantons
down, it was her brother, that in pure kindness to his horse buttered his hay.

Enter Duke and Regan.
Lear. Good morrow to you both.

Duke. Hayle to your Grace.

Reg. I am glad to see your highness.

Lear. Regan I think you are, I know what reason
I have to think so, if thou should not be glad,
I would divorce me from thy mothers tomb
Sepulchring an adultresse* yea are you free?
Some other time for that. Beloved Regan,
Thy sister is naught, oh Regan she has tied,
Sharp toothed unkindness, like a vulture hear,
I can scarce speak to thee, thout not believe,
Of how deprived a quality, O Regan.

Reg. I pray sir take patience, I have hope
You less know how to value her desert,
Then she to slack her duty.

Lear. My cursses on her.

Reg. O Sir you are old,
Nature on you stands on the very verge of her con-fine,
You should be ruled and led by some discretion,
That discernes your state better the^ you your self,
Therefore I pray that to our sister, you do make return,
Say you have wronged her Sir?

Lear. Ask her forgiveness,
Do you mark how this becomes the house,
Dear daughter, I confess that I am old,
Age is unnecessary, on my knees I beg,
That you will vouchsafe me raiment, bed and food.

Reg. Good sir no more, these are unsightly tricks,
Return you to my sister.

Lear. No Regan,
She has abated me of half my train,
Looked black upon me, struck me with her tongue
Most Serpent-like upon the very heart,
All the stored vengeances of heaven fall on her ingratful top,
Strike her young bones, you taking ayrs with lamenes.

Duke. Fie fie sir.
You nimble lightnings dart your blinding flames,
Into her scornful eyes, infect her beauty,
You Fen sucked fogs, drawn by the powrefull Sun,
To fall and blast her pride.

Reg. O the blessed Gods, so will you wish on me,
When the rash mood --

Lear. No Regan, thou shall never have my curse,
The tender hested nature shall not give the over
To harshnes, her eyes are fierce, but thine do comfort and not burn
It Is not in thee to grudge my pleasures, to cut off my train,
To bandy hasty words, to scant my sizes,
And in conclusion, to oppose the bolt
Against my coming in, thou better know,
The offices of nature, bond of childhood,
Effects of courtesy, dues of gratitude,
Thy half of the kingdom, have thou not forgot
Wherein I thee endowed.

Reg. Good sir too'th purpose.

Lear. Who put my man in the stocks?

Duke. What trumpets that?
Enter Steward.
Reg. I know it my sisters, this approues her letters,
That she would soon be here, is your Lady come?

Lear. This is a slave, whose easy borrowed pride
Dwells in the fickle grace of her a follows,
Out varlet, from my sight.

Duke. What means your Grace?
Enter Gone.
Gone. Who struck my servant, Regan I have good hope
Thou did not know ant.

Lear. Who comes here? O heavens!
If you do love old men, if you sweet sway allow
Obedience, if your selves are old, make it your cause,
Send down and take my part,
Art not ashamed to look upon this beard?
O Regan will thou take her by the hand?

Gone. Why not by the hand sir, how have I offended?
Als not offense that indiscretion finds,
And dotage terms so.

Lear. O sides you are too tough,
Will you yet hold? how came my man in the stocks?

Duke. I set him there sir, but his own disorders
Deserved much less advancement,

Lear. You, did you?

Reg. I pray you father being weak seem so,
If till the expiration of your month,
You will return and soiorne with my sister,
Dismissing half your train, come then to me,
I am now from home, and out of that provision,
Which shall be needful for your entertainment.

Lear. Return to her, and fifty men dismissed,
No rather I abjure all roofes, and choose
To wage against the enmity of the Air,
To be a Comrade with the Woolfe and owl,
Necessities sharp pinch, return with her,
Why the hot blood in France, that dowerles
Took our youngest borne, I could as well be brought
To knee his throne, and Squire-like pension bag,
To keep base life afoot, return with her,
Persuade me rather to be slave and sumter
To this detested groom.

Gone. At your choice sir.

Lear. Now I prithee daughter do not make me mad,
I will not trouble thee my child, farewell,
We Will no more meet, no more see one another.
But yet thou art my flesh, my blood, my daughter,
Or rather a disease that lies within my flesh,
Which I must needs call mine, thou art a bile,
A plague sore, an imbossed carbuncle in my
Corrupted blood, but I Will not chide thee,
Let shame come when it will, I do not callit,
I do not bid the thunder bearer shoot,
Nor tell tails of thee to high Judging Jove,
Mend when thou can, be better at thy leisure,
I can be patient, I can stay with Regan,
I and my hundred Knights.

Reg. Not altogether so sir, I look not for you yet,
Nor am provided for your fit welcome,
Give ear sir to my sister, for those
That mingle reason with your passion,
Must be content to think you are old, and so,
But she knows what she does.

Lear. Is this well spoken now?

Reg. I dare avouch it sir, what fifty followers,
Is it not well, what should you need of more,
Yea or so many, since that both charge and danger
Speaks against so great a number, how in a house
Should many people under two commands
Hold amytie, it is hard, almost impossible.

Gone. Why might not you my Lord receive attenda^ce
From those that she calls servants, or from mine?

Reg. Why not my Lord? if then they chanc'st to slack you,
We could controwle them, if you will come to me,
For now I spy a danger, I entreat you,
To bring but five and twenty, to no more
Will I give place or notice.

Lear. I gave you all.

Reg. And in good time you gave it.

Lear. Made you my guardians, my depositaries,
But kept a reservation to be followed
With such a number, what, must I come to you
With five and twenty, Regan said you so?

Reg. And speak't again my Lord, no more with me.

Lea. Those wicked creatures yet do seem wel-fauor'd
When others are more wicked, not being the worst
Stands in some rank of praise, I Will go with thee,
Thy fifty yet does double five and twenty,
And thou art twice her love.

Gone. He are me my Lord,
What need you five and twenty, ten, or five,
To follow in a house, where twice so many
Have a command to tend you.

Regan. What needs one?

Lear. O reason not the deed, our basest beggars,
Are in the poorest thing superfluous,
Allow not nature more then nature needs,
Man's life as cheap as beasts, thou art a Lady,
If only to go warm were gorgeous,
Why nature needs not, what thou gorgeous wearest
Which scarcely keeps thee warm, but for true need,
You heavens give me that patience, patience I need,
You see me here (you Gods) a poor old fellow,
As full of grief as age, wretched in both,
If it be you that stirs these daughters hearts
Against their Father, fool me not to much,
To bear it lamely, touch me with noble anger,
O let not women's weapons, water drops
Stayne my man's cheeks, no you unnatural hags,
I will have such reuenges on you both,
That all the world shall, I will do such things,
What they are yet I know not, but they shall be
The terrors of the earth, you think i will weep,
No i will not weep, I have full cause of weeping,
But this heart shall break, in a 100. thousand flows
Or ere i will weep, O fool I shall go mad.
Exeunt Lear, Leister, Kent, and Fool.
Duke. Let us withdraw, twill be a storm.

Reg. This house is little the old man and his people,
Cannot be well bestowed.

Gone. It Is his own blame has put himself from rest,
And must needs taste his folly.

Reg. For his particular, i will receive him gladly,
But not one follower.

Duke. So am I puspos'd, where is my Lord of Gloucester?
Enter Glo
Reg. Followed the old man forth, he is returned.

Glo. The King is in high rage, and will I know not whe-ther.

Re. It Is good to give him way, he leads himself.

Gone. My Lord, entreat him by no means to stay.

Glo. Alack the night comes on, and the bleak winds
Do sorely russel, for many miles about there is not a bush.

Reg. O sir, to wilful men
The injuries that they themselves procure,
Must be their schoolemasters, shut up your doors,
He is attended with a desperate train,
And what they may incense him to, being apt,
To have his ear abusd, wisdom bids fear.

Duke. Shut up your doors my Lord, it is a wild night,
My Reg counsails well, come out at'h storm.
Exeu^t Enter Kent and a Gentleman at several doors.
Kent. What Is here beside foul weather?

Gent. One minded like the weather most unquietly.

Kent. I know you, whers the King?

Gent. Contending with the fretfull element,
Bids the wind blow the earth into the sea,
Or swell the curled waters boue the maine
That things might change or cease, tears his white hair,
Which the impetuous blasts with eyles rage
Catch in their fury, and make nothing of,
Strives in his little world of man to outscorne,
The too and fro conflicting wind and rain,
This night wherein the cub-drawne Bear would couch,
The Lion, and the belly pinched Wolf
Keep their surre dry, vnbonneted he runs,
And bids what will take all.

Kent. But who is with him?

Gent. None but the fool, who labors to out-iest
His heart struck injuries.

Kent. Sir I do know you,
And dare upon the warrant of my Art,
Commend a dear thing to you, there is division,
Although as yet the face of it be covered,
With mutual cunning, twixt Albany and Cornwall
But true it is, from France there comes a power
Into this scattered kingdom, who already wise in our negligence,
Have secret feet in some of our best Ports,
And are at point to show their open banner
Now to you, if on my credit you dare build so far,
To make your speed to Dover, you shall find
Some that will thank you, making just report
Ofhow unnatural and bemadding sorrow
The King has cause to plain,
I am a Gentleman of blood and breeding,
And from some knowledge and assurance,
Offer this office to you.

Gent. I will talk farther with you.

Kent. No do not,
For confirmation that I much more
Then my outwall, open this purse and take
What it contains, if you shall see Cordelia,
As fear not but you shall, show her this ring,
And she will tell you who your fellow is,
That yet you do not know, fie on this storm,
I will go seek the King.

Gent. Give mey our hand, have you no more to say?

Kent. Few words but to effect more then all yet:
That when we have found the King.
I Will this way, you that, he that first lights
On him, hollow the other.
Exeunt. Enter Lear and Fool.
Lear. Blow wind and crack your cheeks, rage, blow
You caterickes, and Hircanios spout til you have drencht,
The steeples drowned the cocks, you sulpherous and
Thought executing fires, vaunt-currers to
Oke-cleauing thunderboults, singe my white head,
And thou all shaking thunder, smite flat
The thick Rotunditie of the world, crack natures
Mold, all Gennains spill at once that make
Ungrateful man.

Fool. O Nunckle, Court holly water in a dry house
Is better then this rain water out a door,
Good Nunckle in, and ask thy daughters blessing,
Heers a night pities nether wise man nor fool.

Lear. Rumble thy belly full, spit fire, spout rain,
Nor rain, wind, thunder, fire, are my daughters,
I task not you you elements with unkindness,
I never gave you kingdom, called you children,
You owe me no subscription, why thenlet fall your horrible pleasure
Here I stand your slave, a poor infirm weak and
Despised old man, but yet I call you servile
Ministers, that have with 2. pernicious daughters ioin'd
Your high engendered battle against a head so old and white
As this, O'tis foul.

Fool. He that has a house to put his head in, has a good headpeece, the
Codpeece that will house before the head, has any the head and he shall lowse,
so beggars mary many, the man that makes his toe, what he his heart should
make, shall have a corn cry woe, and turn his sleep to wake, for there was
never yet fair woman hut she made mouths in a glass.


Lear. No I will be the pattern of all patience
Enter Kent. I will say nothing.

Kent. Whose there?

Fool. Marry heers Grace, and a codpis, that is a wiseman and a fool.


Kent. Alas sir, sit you here?
Things that love night, love not such nights as these,
The wrathful Skies gallow, the very wanderer of the
Dark, and makes them keep their caves,
Since I was man, such sheets of fire,
Such bursts of horred thunder, such groans of
Roaring wind, and rain, I never remember
To have heard, man's nature cannot carry
The affliction, nor the force.

Lear. Let the great Gods that keep this dreadful
Powther ore our heads, find out their enemies now,
Tremble thou wretch that have within thee
Vndivulged crimes, vnwhipt of Justice,
Hide thee thou bloody hand, thou perjured, and
Thou simular man of virtue that art incestious,
Caytise in pieces shake, that under covert
And convenient seeming, have practiced on man's life,
Close pent up guilts, riue your concealed centers,
And cry these dreadful summoners grace,
I am a man more sind against their sinning.

Kent. Alack bare headed, gracious my Lord, hard by here is a houell, some
friendship will it lend you against the tempest, repose you there, whilst I to
this hard house, more hard then is the stone whereof it is raised, which even but
now demanding after me, denide me to come in, return and force their scanted
courtesy.


Lear. My wit begins to turn,
Come on my boy, how do my boy, art cold?
I am cold my self, where is this straw my fellow,
The art of our necessities is strange that can,
Make vild things precious, come you houell poor,
Fool and knave, I have one part of my heart
That sorrows yet for thee.

Fool. He that has a little tine wit, with hey ho the wind and the rain,
must make content with his fortunes fit, for the rain, it raineth every day.


Lear. True my good boy, come bring us to this houell?
Enter Gloucester and the Bastard with lights.
Glost. Alack alack Edmund I like not this,
Unnatural dealing when I desired their leave
That I might pity him, they took me from me
The use of mine own house, charged me on pain
Of their displeasure, neither to speak of him,
Entreat for him, nor any way sustain him.

Bast. Most savage and unnatural.

Glost. Go toe say you nothing, there is a division betwixt the Dukes,
And a worse matter then that, I have received
A letter this night, it is dangerous to be spoken,
I have locked the letter in my closet, these injuries
The King now bears, will be revenged home
There Is part of a power already landed,
We must incline to the King, I will seek him, and
Privily relieve him, go you and maintain talk
With the Duke, that my charity be not of him
Perceived, if he ask for me, I am ill, and gone
To bed, though I die for it, as no less is threatened me,
The King my old master must be relieved, there is
Some strange thing toward, Edmund pray you be careful.
Exit.
Bast. This courtesy forbid thee, shall the Duke insta^ly know
And of that letter to, this seems a fair deserving
And must draw me that which my father looses, no less
Then all, then younger rises when the old do fall.
Exit. Enter Lear, Kent, and fool.
Kent. Here is the place my Lord, good my Lord enter, the tyranny of the open
nights too ruff for nature to endure.


Lear. Let me alone.

Kent. Good my Lord enter.

Lear. Wilt break my heart?

Kent. I had rather break mine own, good my Lord enter.

Lear. Thou think it is much, that this tempestious storm
Inuades us to the skin, so it is to thee,
But where the greater malady is fixed
The lesser is scarce felt, thoud'st shun a Bear,
But if thy flight lay toward the roaring sea,
Thoud'st meet the bear in the mouth, when the mind's free
The bodies delicate, this tempest in my mind
Does from my senses take all feeling else
Save what beats their filial ingratitude,
Is it not as this mouth should tear this hand
For lifting food to it, but I will punish sure,
No I will weep no more, in such a night as this!
O Regan, Gonorill, your old kind father
Whose frank heart gave you all, O that way madness lies,
Let me shun that, no more of that.

Kent. Good my Lord enter.

Lear. Prithee go in thy self, seek thy one ease
This tempest will not give me leave to ponder
On things would hurt me more, but i will go in,
Poor naked wretches, where so ere you are
That bide the pelting of this pittiles night,
How shall your house-lesse heads, and unfed sides,
Your loopt and windowed raggednes defend you
From seasons such as these, O I have taken
Too little care of this, take physic pomp,
Expose thy self to feel what wretches feel,
That thou may shake the superflux to them,
And show the heavens more just.

Fool. Come not in here Nunckle, here is a spirit, help me, help me.

Kent. Give me thy hand, whose there.

Fool. A spirit, he says, his nam's poor Tom.

Kent. What art thou that do grumble there in the straw, come forth?


Edg. Away, the foul fiend follows me, thorough the sharp hathorne blows
the cold wind, go to thy cold bed and warm thee.


Lear. Have thou given all to thy two daughters, and art thou come to this?


Edg. Who gives any thing to poor Tom, whom the foul Fiende has led,
through fire, and through foord, and whirli-poole, ore bog and quagmire, that
has laid knives under his pillow, and halters in his pue, set ratsbane ^y his
pottage, made him proud of heart, to ride on a bay trotting horse over four
incht bridges, to course his own shadow for a traitor, bless thy five wits,
Toms a cold, bless thee from whirle-winds, starre-blusting, and taking, do
poor Tom some charity, whom the soul fiend vexes, there could I have him
now, and there, and and there again.


Lear. What, his daughters brought him to this pass, Could thou save
nothing, did thou give them all?


Fool. Nay he reserved a blanket, else we had been all shamed.

Lear. Now all the plagues that in the pendulous air
Hang fated ore men's faults, fall on thy daughters.

Kent. He has no daughters sir.

Lear. Death traitor, nothing could have subdued nature
To such a lownes, but his unkind daughters,
Is it the fashion that discarded fathers,
Should have thus little mercy on their flesh,
Judicious punishment it was this flesh
Begot those Pelicane daughters.

Edg. Pilicock sat on pelicocks hill, a lo lo lo.

Fool. This cold night will turn us all to fools and madmen.

Edg. Take heed at'h foul fiend, obey thy parents, keep thy words justly,
swear not, commit not with man's sworn spouse, set not thy sweet heart on
proud array, Toms a cold,


Lear. What have thou been?

Edg. A Seruingman, proud in heart and mind, that curld my hair, wore gloves
in my cap, served the lust of my mistress heart, and did the act of darkness
with her, swore as many oaths as I spoke words, and broke them in the sweet
face of heaven, one that slept in the contriuing of lust, and wakt to do it,
wine loved I deeply, dice dearly, and in woman out paromord the Turk, false
of heart, light of ear, bloody of hand, Hog in sloth, Fox in stealth, Wolf
in greedines,, Dog in madness, Lion in pray, let not the creeking of shoes, nor
the ruslngs of silks betray thy poor heart to women keep thy foot out of
brothell, thy hand out of placket, thy pen from lenders book, and defy the
soul fiend, still through the hathorne blows the cold wind, hay no on ny,
Dolphin my boy, my boy, caese let him trot by.


Lear. Why thou were better in thy grave, then to answer with thy uncovered
body this extremity of the skies, is man no more, but this consider him well,
thou owe the worm no silk, the beast no hide, the sheep no wool, the cat
no perfume, here is three ons are so phisticated, thou art the thing it self,
vnaccomodated man, is no more but such a poor bare forked Animal as thou art,
off off you lendings, come on


Fool. Prithe Nunckle be content, this is a naughty night to swim in, now a
little fire in a wild field, were like an old leachers heart, a small spark,
all the rest in body cold, look here comes a walking fire.

Enter Gloucester.
Edg. This is the foul fiend fliber degibek, he begins at curphew, and walks
till the first cock, he gives the web, and the pin, squemes the eye, and makes
the hare lip, mildewes the white wheat, and hurts the poor creature of earth,
swithald footed thrice the old, he met the night mare and her nine fold bid
her, O light and her troth plight and arint thee, witch arint thee.


Kent. How fares your Grace?


Lear. What Is he?


Kent. Whose there, what is it you seek?


Glost. What are you there? your names?


Edg. Poor Tom, that eats the swimming frog, the tode, the tod pole, the
wall-newt, and the water, that in the fury of his heart, when the foul fiend
rages, eats cow dung for sallets, swallows the old ratt, and the ditch dog,
drinks the green mantle of the standing poole, who is whipped from tithing to
tithing, and stock-punisht and imprisoned, who has had three suits to his
back, six shirts to his body, horse to ride, and weapon to wear.

But mise and rats, and such small Dear,

Has been Toms food for seven long year.

Beware my follower, peace snulbug, peace thou fiend.


Glost. What has your Grace no better company?


Edg. The Prince of darkness is a Gentleman, modo he is caled and ma hu --


Glost. Our flesh and blood is grown so vild my Lord, that it does hate what
gets it*


Edg. Poor Toms a cold.


Glost. Go in with me, my duty cannot suffer to obey in all your daughters
hard commands, though their iniunction be to bar my doors, and let this
tyranous night take hold upon you, yet have I venter'd to come seek you out,
and bring you where both food and fire is ready.


Lear. First let me talk with this Philosopher,
What is the cause of thunder?

Kent. My good Lord take his offer, go into the house.

Lear. I Will talk a word with this most learned Theban, what is your study?

Edg. How to prevent the fiend and to kill vermin.

Lear. Let me ask you one word in private.

Kent. Importune him to go my Lord, his wits begin to unsettle.

Glost. Can thou blame him,
His daughters seek his death, O that good Kent,
He said it would be thus, poor banished man,
Thou say the King grows mad, i will tell thee friend
I am almost mad my self, I had a son
Now outlawed from my blood, a sought my life
But lately, very late, I loved him friend
No father his son deerer, true to tell thee,
The grief has crazed my wits,
What a nights this? I do be seech your Grace.

Lear. O cry you mercy noble Philosopher, your com-pany.

Edg. Toms a cold.

Glost. In fellow there, in it houell keep thee warm.

Lear. Come lets in all.

Kent. This way my Lord.

Lear. With him I will keep still, with my Philosopher.

Ken. Good my Lord sooth him, let him take the fellow.

Glost. Take him you on.

Kent. Sirah come on, go along with us?

Lear. Come good Athenian.

Glost. No words, no words, hush.

Edg. Child Rowland, to the dark town come,
His word was still fie fo and fum,
I smell the blood of a British man.
Enter Cornewell and Bastard.
Corn. I will have my revenge ere I depart the house.

Bast. How my Lord I may be censured, that nature thus gives way to loyalty,
some thing fears me to think of.


Corn. I now perceive it was not altogether your brothers evil disposition
made him seek his death, but a provoking merit, set a work by a reproueable
badnes in himself.


Bast. How malicious is my fortune, that I must repent to be just? this is the
letter he spoke of, which approues him an intelligent party to the advantages
of France, O heavens that his treason were, or not I the detecter.


Corn. Go with me to the Duchess.


Bast. If the matter of this paper be certain, you have mighty business in hand.


Corn. True or false, it has made thee Earl of Gloucester, seek out where thy
father is, that he may be ready for our apprehension.


Bast. If I find him comforting the King, it will stuff his suspicion more
fully, I will persevere in my course of loyalty, though the conflict be sore
between that and my blood.


Corn. I will lay trust upon thee, and thou shall find a dearer father in my
love.

Exit. Enter Gloucester and Lear, Kent, Fool, and Tom.
Glost. Here is better then the open air, take it thankfully, I will piece out
the comfort with what addition I can, I will not be long from you.


Ken. All the power of his wits have given way to impatience, the Gods deserve
your kindness.


Edg. Fretereto calls me, and tells me Nero is an angler in the lake of darkness,
pray innocent beware the foul fiend.


Fool. Prithe Nunckle tell me, whether a mad man be a Gentleman or a Yeoman.


Lear. A King a King, to have a thousand with red burning spits come hiszing in
upon them.


Edg. The foul fiend bites my back,


Fool. He Is mad, that trusts in the tamenes of a Wolf, a horses health, a
boys love, or a whores oath.


Lear. It shall be done, I will arraigne them straight,
Come sit thou here most learned Justice
Thou sapient sir sit here, no you she Foxes --

Edg. Look where he stands and glars, wanst thou eyes, at tral madam come ore
the broom Bessy to me.


Fool. Her boat has a leake, and she must not speak,
Why she dares not come, over to thee.

Edg. The foul fiend hau^ts poor Tom in the voice of a nigh-tingale,
Hoppedance cries in Toms belly for two white herring,
Croke not black Angel, I have no food for thee.

Kent. How do you sir? stand you not so amazd, will you lie down and rest
upon the cushings?


Lear. I Will see their trial first, bring in their evidence, thou robbed man of
Justice take thy place, and thou his yokefellow of equity, bench by his side,
you are ot'h commission, sit you too.


Ed. Let us deal justly sleep or wakest thou jolly shepherd, Thy sheep
be in the corn, and for one blast of thy minik in mouth, thy sheep shall
take no harm, Pur the cat is gray.


Lear. Arraigne her first it is Gonoril, I here take my oath before this
honorable assembly kicked the poor king her father.


Fool. Come hither mistrisse is your name Gonorill.

Lear. She cannot deny it.

Fool. Cry you mercy I took you for a join stool.

Lear. And here is another whose warpt looks proclaim,
What store her heart is made an, stop her there,
Arms, arms, sword fire, corruption in the place,
False Iusticer why have thou lether escape.

Edg. Bless thy five wits.

Kent. O pity sir, where is the patience now,
That you so often have boasted to retain.

Edg. My tears begin to take his part so much,
They Will maire my counterfeiting.

Lear. The little dogs and all
Trey, Blanch, and Sweet heart, see they bark at me.

Edg. Tom will throw his head at them, auant you curs, Be thy mouth, or black,
or white, tooth that poisons if it bite, Mastife, gray hou^d, mungril,
grim-hou^d or spaniel, brach or him, Bobtaile tike, or tru^dletaile, Tom will
make them weep and wail, For with throwing thus my head, dogs leap the hatch
and all are fled, loudla doodla come march to wakes, and faires, and market
towns, poor Tom thy horn is dry.


Lear. Then let them anotomize Regan, see what breeds about her
Heart is there any cause in nature that makes this hardness,
You sir, I entertain you for one of my hundred,
Only I do not like the fashion of your garments you will say,
They are Persian attire, but let them be changed.

Kent. Now good my Lord lie here awhile.

Lear. Make no noise, make no noise, draw the curtains, so, so, so,
We Will go to supper in the morning, so, so, so,
Enter Gloucester.
Glost. Come hither friend, where is the King my master.

Kent. Here sir, but trouble him not his wits are gone.

Glost. Good friend I prithy take him in thy arms,
I have over heard a plot of death upon him,
There is a Litter ready lay him in it, and drive toward Dover friend,
Where thou shall meet both welcome and protection, take up thy master,
If thou should dally half an hour, his life with thine
And all that offer to defend him stand in assured loss,
Take up the King and follow me, that will to some provision
Give thee quick conduct.

Kent. Oppressed nature sleeps,
This rest might yet have balmed thy broken sinews,
Which if conuenience will not allow stand in hard cure,
Come help to bear thy master, thou must not stay behind.

Glost. Come, come away.
Exit.
Edg. When we our betters see bearing our woes: we scarcely think, our
miseries, our foes.
Who alone suffers suffers, most in the mind,
Leaving free things and happy shows behind,
But then the mind much sufferance does over scip,
When grief has mates, and bearing fellowship:
How light and portable my pain seems now,
When that which makes me bend, makes the King bow.
He childed as I fathered, Tom away,
Mark the high noyses and thy self bewray,
When false opinion whose wrong thoughts defile thee,
In thy just proof repeals and reconciles thee,
What will hap more to night, safe escape the King,
Lurk, lurk.
Enter Cornwall, and Regan, and Gonorill, and Bastard.
Corn. Post speedily to my Lord your husband show him this letter
The army of France is landed, seek out the vilaine Gloucester.

Regan. Hang him instantly.

Gone. Pluck out his eyes.

Corn. Leave him to my displeasure, Edmu^d keep you our sister company.
The revenge we are bound to take upon your traiterous father,
Are not fit for your beholding, advise the Duke where you are going
To a most festuant preparation we are bound to the like,
Our post shall be swift and intelligence betwixt us,
Farewell dear sister, farewell my Lord of Gloucester,
How now whers the King?
Enter Steward.
Stew. My Lord of Gloucester has conveyed him hence,

Some five or six and thirty of his Knights hot questrits after him, met him
at gate, who with some other of the Lords dependants are gone with him toward
Dover, where they boast to have well armed friends.


Corn. Get horses for your mistress.

Gone. Farewell sweet Lord and sister.
Exit Gone. and Bast.
Corn. Edmund farewell, go seek the traitor Gloucester.
Pinion him like a thief, bring him before us,
Though we may not pass upon his life
Without the form of Justice, yet our power
Shall do a courtesy to our wrath, which men may blame
But not control, whose there, the traitor?
Enter Gloucester brought in by two or three,
Reg. Ingratfull Fox it is he.

Corn. Bind fast his corkie arms.

Glost. What means your Graces, good my friends consider,
You are my gests, do me no foul play friends.

Corn. Bind him I say,

Reg. Hard hard, O filthy traitor!

Glost. Unmerciful Lady as you are, I am true.

Corn. To this chair bind him, villain thou shall find --

Glost. By the kind Gods it is most ignobly done, to pluck me by the beard.

Reg. So white and such a Traitor.

Glost. Naughty Lady, these hairs which thou do ravish from my chin
Will quicken and accuse thee, I am your host.
With robbers hands, my hospitable favors
You should not ruffell thus, what will you do.

Corn. Come sir, what letters had you late from France?

Reg. Be simple answerer, for we know the truth.

Corn. And what confederacy have you with the tratours late sooted in the
kingdom?

Reg. To whose hands you have sent the lunatic King speak?

Glost. I have a letter gessingly set down
Which came from one, that is of a neutrall heart,
And not from one opposed.

Corn. Cunning.

Reg. And false.

Corn. Where have thou sent the King?

Glost. To Dover.

Reg. Wherefore to Dover? wast thou not charged at peril --

Corn. Wherefore to Dover? let him first answer that.

Glost. I am tide tot'h stake, and I must stand the course.

Reg. Wherefore to Dover sir?

Glost. Because I would not see thy cruel nails
Pluck out his poor old eyes, nor thy fierce sister
In his aurynted flesh rash borish phangs,
The Sea with such a storm of his loved head
In hell black night endured, would have laid up
And quenched the steeled fires, yet poor old heart,
He holpt the heavens to rage,
If wolves had at thy gate heard that dearne time
Thou should have said, good Porter turn the key,
All cruels else subscribed but I shall see
The winged vengeance overtake such children.

Corn. Seet shall thou never, fellows hold the chair,
Upon those eyes of thine, I Will set my foot.

Glost. He that will think to live till he be old
Give me some help, O cruel, O ye Gods!

Reg. One side will mock another, the other to.

Corn. If you see vengeance --

Servant. Hold your hand my Lord
I have served ever since I was a child
But better service have I never done you, the^ now to bid you hold.

Reg. How now you dog.

Seru. If you did wear a beard upon your chin id'e shake it on this quarrel,
what do you mean?

Corn. My villain.
draw and fight.
Seru. Why then come on, and take the chance of anger.

Reg. Give me thy sword, a pesant stand up thus.
She takes a sword and runs at him behind.
Servant. Oh I am slain my Lord, yet have you one eye left to see some
mischief on him, oh!


Corn. Least it see more prevent it, out vild Ielly
Where is thy luster now?

Glost. All dark and comfortles, where is my son Edmund? Edmund unbridle all
the sparks of nature, to quit this horred act.


Reg. Out villain, thou calst on him that hates thee, it was he that made the
ouerture of thy treasons to us, who is too good to pity thee.


Glost. O my follies, then Edgar was abused,
Kind Gods forgive me that, and prosper him.

Reg. Go thrust him out at gates, and let him smell his way to Dover, how is it
my Lord? how look you?.


Corn. I have received a hurt, follow me Lady,
Turn out that eyles villain, throw this slave upon
The dungell Regan, I bleed apace, untimely
Comes this hurt, give me your arm.
Exit.
Servant. I Will never care what wickedness I do,
If this man come to good.

2 Servant. If she live long, and in the end meet the old course of death,
women will all turn monsters.


1 Ser. Lets follow the old Earl, and get the bedlom
To lead him where he would, his rogish madness
Allows it self to any thing.

2 Ser. Go thou, i will fetch some flax and whites of eggs to apply to his
bleeding face, now heaven help him.

Exit. Enter Edgar.
Edg. Yet better thus, and known to be contemnd,
Then still contemned and flattered to be worst,
The lowest and most dejected thing of Fortune
Stands still in experience, lives not in fear,
The lamentable change is from the best,
The worst returns to laughter,
Who Is here, my father poorlie, leed, world, world, O world!
But that thy strange mutations make us hate thee,
Life would not yield to age.
Enter Glost. led by an old man.
Old man O my good Lord, I have been your tenant, and your fathers tenant this
forescore --


Glost. Away, get thee away, good friend be gone,
Thy comforts can do me no good at all,
Thee they may hurt.

Old man. Alack sir, you cannot see your way.

Glost. I have no way, and therefore want no eyes,
I stumbled when I saw, full often it is seen
Our means secure us, and our meare defects
Prove our commodities, ah dear son Edgar,
The food of thy abused fathers wrath,
Might I but live to see thee in my tuch,
Id'e say I had eyes again.

Old man. How now whose there?

Edg. O Gods, who is it can say I am at the worst,
I am worse then ere I was.

Old man. It Is poor mad Tom.

Edg. And worse I may be yet, the worst is not.
As long as we can say, this is the worst.

Old man. Fellow where go?

Glost. Is it a beggar man?

Old man. Mad man, and beggar to.

Glost. A has some reason, else he could not beg,
In the last nights storm I such a fellow saw,
Which made me think a man a worm, my son
Came then into my mind, and yet my mind
Was then scarce friends with him, I have heard more since,
As flies are toth' wanton boys, are we toth' Gods,
They bitt us for their sport.

Edg. How should this be, bad is the trade that must play the fool to sorrow
angring it self and others, bless thee master.


Glost. Is that the naked fellow?

Old man. I my Lord.

Glost. Then prithee get thee gone, if for my sake
Thou will oretake us here a mile or twain
In The way toward Dover, do it for ancient love
And bring some covering for this naked soul
Who I Will entreat to lead me.

Old man. Alack sir he is mad.

Glost. It Is the times plague, when madmen lead the blind,
Do as I bid thee, or rather do thy pleasure,
Above the rest, be gone.

Old man. I Will bring him the best parrell that I have Come on it what will.

Glost. Sirrah naked fellow.

Edg. Poor Toms a cold, I cannot dance it farther.

Glost. Come hither fellow.

Edg. Bless thy sweet eyes, they bleed.

Glost. Know thou the way to Dover?

Edg. Both style and gate, horse-way, and foot-path,
Poor Tom has been scard out of his good wits,
Bless the good man from the foul fiend,
Five fiends have been in poor Tom at once,
Of lust, as Obidicut, Hobbididence Prince of dumbnes,
Mahu of stealing, Modo of murder, Stiber digebit of
Mobing, and Mobing who since possesses chambermaids
And waiting women, so, bless thee master

Glost. Here take this purse, thou whom the heavens plagues.
Have humbled to all strokes, that I am wretched, makes thee
The happier, heavens deal so still,
Let the superfluous and lust-dieted man
That stands your ordinance, that will not see
Because he does not feel, feel your power quickly,
So distribution should under excess,
And each man have enough, do thou know Dover?

Edg. I master.

Glost. There is a cliffe whose high and bending head
Looks firmly in the confined deep,
Bring me but to the very brimme of it
And i will repair the misery thou do bear
With something rich about me,
From that place I shall no leading need.

Edg. Give me thy arm poor Tom shall lead thee.
Enter Gonorill and Bastard.
Gone. Welcome my Lord I marvel our mild husband
Not met us on the way, now where is your master?
Enter Steward.
Stew. Madame within, but never man so changed, I told him of the army that was
landed, he smild at it, I told him you werecoming, his answer was the worse,
of Glosters treachery, and of the loyal service of his son when I enform'd
him, then he called me sott, and told me I had turned the wrong side out, what
he should most desire seems pleasant to him, what like offensive.


Gone. Then shall you go no further,
It is the cowish curre of his spirit
That dares not undertake, hele not feel wrongs
Which tie him to an answer, our wishes on the way
May prove effects, back Edgar to my brother,
Hasten his musters, and conduct his powers
I must change arms at home, and give the distaffe
Into my husbands hands, this trusty servant
Shall pass between us, ere long you are like to hear
If you dare venture in your own behalf
A mistresses coward, wear this spare speech,
Decline your head: this kiss if it durst speak
Would stretch thy spirits up into the air,
Conceive and far you well.

Bast. Yours in the ranks of death.

Gone. My most dear Gloucester, to thee woman's services are dew
My foot vsurps my body.

Stew. Madam here comes my Lord.
Exit Stew.
Gone. I have been worth the whistle.

Alb. O Gonoril, you are not worth the dust which the rude wind
Blows in your face, I fear your disposition
That nature which contemnes it origin
Cannot be bordered certain in it self,
She that her self will sliuer and disbranch
From her material sap, perforce must wither,
And come to deadly use.

Gone. No more, the text is foolish.

Alb. Wisdom and goodness, to the vild seem vild,
Filths savor but themselves, what have you done?
Tigers, not daughters, what have you performed?
A father, and a gracious aged man
Whose reverence even the head-lugd bear would lick.
Most barbarous, most degenerate have you madded,
Could my good brother suffer you to do it?
A man, a Prince, by him so beniflicted,
If that the heavens do not their visible spirits
Send quickly down to tame the vild offenses, it will come
Humanly must perforce pray on it self like monsters of the deep.

Gone. Milk liuerd man
That bear a cheek for blocs, a head for wrongs,
Who have not in thy brows an eye deserving thine honor,
From thy suffering, that not know fools, do those vilains pity
Who are punished ere they have done their mischief,
Where Is thy drum? France spreds his banners in our noystles land,
With plumed helm, thy slayer begin threats
Whil's thou a moral fool sits still and cries
Alack why does he so?

Alb. See thy self devil, proper deformity seems not in the fiend, so horid
as in woman.

Gone. O vain fool!

Alb. Thou changed, and selfe-couerd thing for shame
Be-monster not thy feature, were my fitnes
To let these hands obey my blood,
They are apt enough to dislecate and tear
Thy flesh and bones, how ere thou art a fiend,
A woman's shape does shield thee.

Gone. Marry your manhood now --

Alb. What news.
Enter a Gentleman.
Gent. O my good Lord the Duke of Cornwals dead, slain by his servant, going
to put out the other eye of Gloucester.


Alb. Glosters eyes?

Genesis A servant that he bred, thrald with remorse,
Opposed against the act, bending his sword
To his great master, who thereat enraged
Flew on him, and amongst them, feld him dead,
But not without that harmefull stroke, which since
Has plucked him after.

Alb. This shows you are above your Justices,
That these our nether crimes so speedely can venge.
But O poor Gloucester lost he his other eye.

Gent. Both, both my Lord, this letter Madam craves a speedy answer,
It Is from your sister.

Gone. One way I like this well,
But being widow and my Gloucester with her,
May all the building on my fancy pluck,
Upon my hateful life, another way the news is not so took,
I Will read and answer.
Exit.
Alb. Where was his son when they did take his eyes.

Gent. Come with my Lady hither.

Alb. He is not here.

Gent. No my good Lord I met him back again.

Alb. Knows he the wickedness.

Gent. I my good Lord it was he informd against him,
And quit the house on purpose that there punishment
Might have the freer course.

Alb. Gloucester I live to thank thee for the love thou shewedst the King,
And to revenge thy eyes, come hither friend,
Tell me what more thou know.
Exit. Enter Kent and a Gentleman.
Kent. Why the King of France is so suddenly gone back, know you no reason.


Gent. Something he left imperfect in the state, which since his coming forth
is thought of, which imports to the Kingdom, So much fear and danger that his
personal return was most required and necessary.


Kent. Who has he left behind him, General.

Gent. The Marshall of France Monsier la Far.

Kent. Did your letters pierce the queen to any demonstration of grief.

Gent. I say she took them, read them in my presence,
And now and then an ample tear trild down
Her delicate cheek, it seemed she was a queen over her passion,
Who most rebell-like, sought to be King ore her.

Kent. O then it moved her.

Gent. Not to a rage, patience and sorrow streme,
Who should express her goodliest you have seen,
Sun shine and rain at once, her smiles and tears,
Were like a better way those happy smilets,
That played on her ripe lip seem not to know,
What guests were in her eyes which parted thence,
As pearls from diamonds dropped in brief,
Sorrow would be a raritie most beloved,
If all could so become it.

Kent. Made she no verbal question.

Gent. Faith once or twice she heau'd the name of father,
Pantingly forth as if it pressed her heart,
Cried sisters, sisters, shame of Ladies sisters:
Kent, father, sisters, what ith storm ith night,
Let pity not be beleeft there she shook,
The holy water from her heavenly eyes,
And clamor moystened her, then away she started,
To deal with grief alone.

Kent. It is the stars, the stars above us govern our conditions,
Else one self mate and make could not beget,
Such different issues, you spoke not with her since.

Gent. No.

Kent. Was this before the King returned.

Gent. No, since.

Kent. Well sir, the poor distressed Lear's ith town,
Who some time in his better tune remembers,
What we are come about, and by no means will yield to see his daughter.

Gent. Why good sir?

Kent. A sovereign shame so elbows him his own unkindness
That stripped her from his benediction turned her,
To for rain casualties gave her dear rights,
To his dog-harted daughters, these things sting his mind,
So venomously that burning shame detaines him from Cordelia.

Gent. Alack poor Gentleman.

Kent. Of Albanies and Cornewals powers you heard not.

Gent. It Is so they are a foot.

Kent. Well sir, i will bring you to our master Lear,
And leave you to attend him some dear cause,
Will in concealment wrap me up awhile,
When I am known aright you shall not grieve,
Lending me this acquaintance, I pray you go along with me.
Enter Cordelia, Doctor and others. Exit.
Cor. Alack it is he, why he was met even now,
As mad as the vent sea singing aloud,
Crowned with rank femiter and furrow weeds,
With hor-docks, hemlocke, netles, cookow flowers,
Darnell and all the idle weeds that grow,
In our sustayning, corn, a centurie is sent forth,
Search every acre in the hie grown field,
And bring him to our eye, what can man's wisdom
In the restoring his bereued sense, he that can help him
Take all my outward worth.

Doct. There is means Madame.
Our foster nurse of nature is repose,
The which he lackes that to provoke in him,
Are many simples operative whose power,
Will close the eye of anguish.

Cord. All blessed secrets all you vnpublisht virtues of the earth,
Spring with my tears beaydant and remediat,
In the good man's distress, seek, seek, for him,
Lest his vngouernd rage dissolve the life.
That wants the means to lead it.
Enter messenger.
Mes. News Madam, the British powers are marching hither-ward.

Cord. It Is known before, our preparation stands,
In expectation of them, o dear father
It is thy business that I go about, therefore great France
My mourning and important tears has pitied,
No blown ambition does our arms in sight
But love, dear love, and our aged fathers right,
Soon may I hear and see him.
Exit. Enter Regan and Steward.
Reg. But are my brothers powers set forth?

Stew. I Madam.

Reg. Himself in person?

Stew. Madam with much ado, your sister is the better soldier.

Reg. Lord Edmund spoke not with your Lady at home.

Stew. No Madam.

Reg. What might import my sisters letters to him?

Stew. I know not Lady.

Reg. Faith he is posted hence on serious matter,
It was great ignorance, Glosters eyes being out
To let him live, where he ariues he moves
All hearts against us, and now I think is gone
In pity of his misery to dispatch his nighted life,
Moreover to discrie the strength at'h army.

Stew. I must needs after him with my letters

Reg. Our troop sets forth to morrow stay with us,
The ways are dangerous.

Stew. I may not Madame, my Lady charged my duty in this business.

Reg. Why should she write to Edmund? might not you
Transport her purposes by word, belike
Some thing, I know not what, i will love thee much,
Let me unseal the letter.

Stew. Madam I Would e rather --

Reg. I know your Lady does not love her husband
I am sure of that, and at her late being here
She gave strange aliads, and most speaking looks
To noble Edmund, I know you are of her bosom.

Stew. I Madam.

Reg. I speak in understanding, for I know it,
Therefore I do advise you take this note,
My Lord is dead, Edmund and I have talked,
And more convenient is he for my hand
Then for your Ladies, you may gather more
If you do find him, pray you give him this,
And when your mistress hears thus much from you
I pray desire her call her wisdom to her, so farewell,
If you do chance to hear of that blind traitor,
Preferment falls on him that cuts him off.

Ste. Would I could meet him Madam, I would show
What Lady I do follow.

Reg. Fare thee well.
Exit. Enter Gloucester and Edmund.
Glost. When shall we come toth' top of that same hill?

Edg. You do climb it vpnow, look how we labor?

Glost. Me thinks the ground is even.

Edg. Horrible steep, hark do you hear the sea?

Glost. No truly.

Edg. Why then your other senses grow imperfect
By your eyes anguish.

Glost. So may it be indeed,
Me thinks thy voice is altered, and thou speak
With better phrase and matter then thou did.

Edg. You Are much deceived, in nothing am I changed
But in my garments.

Glost. Me thinks you are better spoken.

Edg. Come on sir, here is the place, stand still, how fearful
And dizi it is to cast ones eyes so low
The crows and choghes that wing the midway air
Show scarce so gross as beetles, half way down
Hangs one that gathers sampire, dreadful trade,
Me thinks he seems no bigger then his head,
The fishermen that walk upon the beach
Appear like mise, and you tall anchoring bark
Diminisht to her cock, her cock a boui
Almost too small for sight, the murmuring surge
That on the unnumbered idle peeble chaffes
Cannot be heard, its so hie i will look no more,
Least my brain turn, and the deficient sight
Topple down headlong.

Glost. Set me where you stand?

Edg. Give me your hand, you are now within a foot
Of the extreme verge, for all beneath the Moon
Would I not leap upright.

Glost. Let go my hand,
Here friend's another pursse, in it a jewel,
Well worth a poor man's taking, Fairies and Gods
Prosper it with thee, go thou farther off,
Bid me farewell, and let me hear thee going.

Edg. Now fare you well good sir.

Glost. With all my heart.

Edg. Why I do trifell thus with his despair is done to cure it.

Glost. O you mighty Gods,
He kneeles. This world I do renounce and in your sights
Shake patiently my great affliction off,
If I could bear it longer and not fall
To quarrel with your great opposles wills
My snursf and loathed part of nature should
Burn it self out, if Edgar live, O bless,
Now fellow fare thee well.
He falls.
Edg. Gone sir, farewell, and yet I know not how conceit my rob the treasury
of life, when life it self yealds to the theft, had he been where he thought
by this had thought been past, alive or dead, ho you sir, hear you sir,
speak, thus might he pass indeed, yet he reuiues, what are you sir?


Glost. Away and let me die.

Edg. Had thou been ought but gosmore feathers air,
So many fadome down precipitating
Thou had shiuerd like an egg, but thou do breath
Have heavy substance, bleedst not, speak, art sound,
Ten masts at each, make not the altitude,
Which thou have perpendicularly fell,
Thy life's a miracle, speak yet again.

Glost. But have I fallen or no I

Edg. From the dread sommons of this chalkie borne,
Look up a hight, the shrill gorged lark so far
Cannot be seen or heard, do but look up?

Glost. Alack I have no eyes
Is wretchedness deprived, that benefit
To end it self by death it was yet some comfort
When misery could beguile the tyrants rage
And frustrate his proud will.

Edg. Give me your arm?
Up, so, how feel you your legs, you stand.

Glost. Too well, too well.

Edg. This is above all strangenes
Upon the crown of the cliffe what thing was that
Which parted from you.

Glost. A poor unfortunate bagger.

Edg. As I stood here below me thoughts his eyes
Were two full Moons, a had a thousand noses
Horns, welk't and waued like the enridged sea,
It was some fiend, therefore thou happy father
Think that the cleerest Gods, who made their honors
Of men's impossibilities, have preserved thee.

Glost. I do remember now henceforth i will bear
Affliction till it do cry out it self
Enough, enough and die that thing you speak of,
I took it for a man, often would it say
The fiend the fiend, he led me to that place

Edg. Bare free and patient thoughts, but who comes here
The safer sense will near acco^modate his master thus.
Enter Lear mad.
Lear. No they cannot touch me for coining, I am the king himself.

Edg. O thou side pearcing sight.

Lear. Nature is above Art in that respect, there is your press money, that
fellow handles his bow like a crow-keeper, draw me a clothiers yard, look,
look a mowse, peace, peace, this tosted cheese will do it there is my gauntlet,
i will prove it on a giant, bring up the browne-billes, O well flowne bird in the
air, hagh, give the word?


Edg. Sweet Margerum.


Lear. Pass.


Glost. I know that voice.


Lear. Ha Gonorill, ha Regan, they flattered me like a dog, and told me I
had white hairs in my beard, ere the black ones were there, to say I and no,
to every thing I said, I and no toe, was no good divinity, when the rain
came to wet me once, and the wind to make me chatter, when the thunder would
not peace at my bidding, there I found them, there I smelt them out, go toe,
they are not men of their words, they told me I was every thing, it is a lie, I
am not argue-proofe.


Glost. The trick of that voice I do well remember, is it not the King?


Lear. I ever inch a King when I do stare* see how the subject quakes, I pardon
that man's life, what was thy cause, adultery? thou shall not die for adultery,
no the wren goes toot, and the small gilded fly do letcher in my sight, let
copulation thrive, for Glosters bastard son was kinder to his father then my
daughters got tweene the lawful sheets, toot luxury, pell, mell, for I lack
soldiers, behold yon simpring dame whose face between her forkes presageth
snow, that minces virtue, and do shake the head hear of pleasures name to
fichew nor the soyled horse goes toot with a more riotous appetite, down from
the wast tha're centaures, though women all above, but to the girdle do the
gods inherit, beneath is all the fiends, there is hell, there is darkness, there is
the sulphury pit, burning, scalding, stench, consumation, fie, fie, fie, pah,
pah, Give me an ounce of Ciuet, good Apothocarie, to sweeten my imagination,
there is money for thee.


Glost. O let me kiss that hand.


Lear. Here wipe it first, it smells of mortality.


Glost. O ruind piece of nature, this great world should so ^^are out to
naught, do you know me?


Lear. I remember thy eyes well enough, do thou squiny on me, no do thy worst
blind Cupid, i will not love, read thou that challenge, mark the penning often.


Glost. Were all the letters suns I could not see one.


Edg. I would not take this from report, it is, and my heart breaks at it.


Lear. Read.


Glost. What! with the case of eyes


Lear. O ho, are you there with me, no eyes in your head, nor no money in your
purse, your eyes are in a heavy case, your purse in a light, yet you see how
this world goes.


Glost. I see it feelingly.


Lear. What art mad, a man may see how the world goes with no eyes, look with
thy ears, see how you Justice railes upon you simple thief, hark in thy ear
handy, dandy, which is the thief, which is the Justice, thou have seen a
farmers dog bark at a beggar.


Glost. I sir.


Lear. And the creature run from the cur, there thou might behold the great
image of authority, a dog, so bade in office, thou rascal beadle hold thy
bloody hand, why do thou lash that whore, strip thine own back, thy blood
hotly lusts to use her in that kind for which thou whipst her, the usurer hangs
the cosioner, through tottered rags, small vices do appear, robes and
furd-gownes hides all, get thee glass eyes, and like a scuruy politician seem
to see the things thou do not, no now pull off my boots, harder, harder, so.


Edg. O matter and impertinencie mixed reason in madness.


Lear. If thou will weep my fortune take my eyes, I know thee well enough thy
name is Gloucester, thou must be patient, we came crying hither, thou know the
first time that we smell the air, we wayland cry I will preach to thee mark
me.


Ghost. Alack alack the day.


Lear. When we are borne, we cry that we are come to this great stage of
fools, this a good block. It were a delicate stratagem to shoot a troop of
horse with fell, and when I have stole upon these son in laws, then kill,
kill, kill, kill, kill, kill.

Enter three Gentlemen.
Gent. O here he is, lay hands upon him sirs, your most dear


Lear. No reskue, what a prisoner, I am eene the natural fool of Fortune, use
me well you shall have ransom, let me have a churgion I am cut to the brains.


Gent. You shall have any thing.


Lear. No seconds, all my self, why this would make a man of salt to use his
eyes for garden waterpots, I and laying Autums dust.


Lear. I will die bravely like a bridegroom, what? I will be Iouiall, come,
come, I am a King my masters, know you that.


Gent. You are a royal one, and we obey you.


Lear. Then there is life int, nay and you get it you shall get it with running.

Exit King running.
Gent. A sight most pitiful in the meanest wretch, past speaking of in a king:
thou have one daughter who redeemes nature from the general curse which twain
has brought her to.


Edg. Hail gentle sir.


Gent. Sir speed you, what is your will.


Edg. Do you hear ought of a battle toward.


Gent. Most sure and vulgar every one here is that
That can distinguish sense.

Edg. But by your favor how neers the other army.

Gent. Near and on speed fort the maine descryes,
Standst on the howerly thoughts.

Edg. I thank you sir that's all.

Gent. Though that the Queen on special cause is here,
Her army is moved on.

Edg. I thank you sir.
Exit.
Glost. You ever gentle gods take my breath from me,
Let not my worser spirit tempt me again,
To dye before you please.

Edg. Well, pray you father.

Glost. Now good sir what are you.

Edg. A most poor man made lame by Fortunes blows,
Who by the Art of known and feeling sorrows
Am pregnant to good pity, give me your hand
I Will lead you to some biding.

Glost. Hearty thanks, the bornet and beniz of heaven to save thee.
Enter Steward.
Stew. A proclaimed prize, most happy, that eyles head of thine was framed flesh
to raise my fortunes, thou most unhappy traitor, briefly thy self remember,
the sword is out that must destroy thee.


Glost. Now let thy friendly hand put strength enough to it.


Stew. Wherefore bold pesant durst thou support a published traitor, hence
least the infection of his fortune take like hold on thee, let go his arm?


Edg. Chill not let go fir without cagion.


Stew. Let go slave, or thou die.


Edg. Good Gentleman go your gate, let poor voke pass, and chud have been
swaggar'd out of my life, it would not have been so long by a fortnight, nay
come not near the old man, keep out, cheuore ye, or i will try whether your
coster or my battero be the harder, i will be plain with you.


Stew. Out dunghill.

they fight.
Edg. Chill pick your teeth sir, come, no matter for your foyns.


Stew. Slave thou have slain me, villain take my pursse,
If ever thou will thrive, bury my body,
And give the letters which thou find'st about me
To Edmund Earl of Gloucester, seek him out upon
The British party, o untimely death! death.
He dies.
Edg. I know thee well, a serviceable villain,
As dutious to the vices of thy mistres, as badnes would desire.

Glost. What is he dead?

Edg. Sit you down father, rest you lets see his pockets

These letters that he speaks of may be my friends,

He Is dead, I am only sorrow he had no other deathsma^

Let us see, leave gentle wax, and manners blame us not

To know our enemies minds we would rip their hearts,

Their papers is more lawful.

Let your reciprocal vows be remembered, you have many opportunities to cut
him off, if your will want not, time and place will be fruitfully offered,
there is nothing done, If he return the conqueror, then am I the prisoner,
and his bed my gayle, from the lothed warmth whereof deliver me, and supply the
place for your labor, your wife (so I would say) your affectionate servant and
for you her own for Venture, Gonorill.


Edg. O Indistinguisht space of woman's wit,
A plot upon her virtuous husbands life.
And the exchange my brother here in the sands,
Thee i will rake up, the post unsanctified
Of murtherous leachers, and in the mature time,
With this ungracious paper strike the sight
Of the death practiced Duke, for him it is well,
That of thy death and business I can tell.

Glost. The King is mad, how stiff is my vild sense,
That I stand up and have ingenious feeling
Of my huge sorrows, better I were distract,
So should my thoughts be fenced from my griefs,
And woes by wrong imaginations loose
The knowledge of themselves.
A drum a far off.
Edg. Give me your hand far off me thinks I hear the beaten drum,
Come father i will bestow you with a friend. Exit.
Enter Cordelia, Kent and Doctor.
Cord. O thou good Kent how shall I live and work to match thy goodness,
My life will be too short and every measure fail me.

Kent. To be acknowlegd madame is ore paid,
All my reports go with the modest truth,
Nor more, nor clipped, but so.

Cor. Be better suited these weeds are memories of those
Worser hours, I prithe put them off.

Kent. Pardon me dear madame,
Yet to be known shortens my made intent,
My boon I make it that you know me not,
Till time and I think meet.

Cord. Then beet so, my good Lord how does the king.

Doct. Madame sleeps still.

Cord. O you kind Gods cure this great breach in his abused nature,
The vntund and hurrying senses, O wind up
Of this child changed father.

Doct. So please your Majesty that we may wake the king,
He has slept long.

Cord. Be gouernd by your knowledge and proceed,
Ith sway of your own will is he arayd,

Doct. I madam, in the heaviness of his sleep,
We put fresh garments on him,

Gent. Good madam be by, when we do awake him
I doubt not of his temperance.

Cord. Very well.

Doct. Please you draw near, louder the music there,

Cor. O my deer father restoratio^ hang thy medicin on my lips,
And let this kis repair those violent harms that my two sisters
Have in thy reverence made.

Kent. Klnd and dear Princess,

Cord. Had you not been their father these white flakes,
Had challengd pity of them, was this a face
To be exposd against the warring winds,
To stand against the deep dread bolted thunder,
In the most terrible and nimble stroke
Of quick cross lightning to watch poor Perdu,
With this thin helm mine injurious dog,
Though he had bit me, should have stood that night
Against my fire, and wast thou feign poor father,
To houill thee with swine and rogues forlorn,
In short and mustie straw, alack, alack,
It Is wonder that thy life and wits at once
Had not concluded all, he wakes speak to him.

Doct. Madam do you, it is fittest.

Cord. How does my royal Lord, how fares your majesty.

Lear. You do me wrong to take me out ath grave,
Thou art a soul in bliss, but I am bound
Upon a wheel of fire, that mine own tears
Do scald like molten lead.

Cord. Sir know me.

Lear. Yar a spirit I know, where did you dye.

Cord. Still, still, far wide.

Doct. He Is scarce awake, let him alone a while.

Lear. Where have I been, where am I fair day light,
I am mightily abusd, I should ene dye with pity,
To see another thus, I know not what to say,
I will not swear these are my hands, lets see,
I feel this pin prick, would I were assured of my condition.

Cord. O look upon me sir, and hold your hands in benediction over me, no sir
you must not kneel.

Lear. Pray do not mock,
I am a very foolish fond old man,
Fourscore and upward, and to deal plainly
I fear I am not in my perfect mind,
Me thinks I should know you, and know this man;
Yet I am doubtful, for I am mainly ignorant
What place this is, and all the skill I have
Remembers not these garments, nor I know not
Where I did lodge last night, do not laugh at me,
For as I am a man, I think this Lady
To be my child Cordelia.

Cord. And so I am.

Lear. Be your tears wet, yes faith, I pray weep not,
If you have poison for me I will drink it,
I know you do not love me, for your sisters
Have as I do remember, done me wrong,
You have some cause, they have not.

Cord. No cause, no cause.

Lear. Am I in France?

Kent. In your own kingdom sir.

Lear. Do not abuse me?

Doct. Be comforted good Madame, the great rage you see is cured in him, and
yet it is danger to make him even ore the time he has lost, desire him to go
in, trouble him no more till further settling:


Cord. Wilt please your highness walk?

Lear. You must bear with me, pray now forget and forgive,
I am old and foolish.
Fxeunt. Manet Kent and Gent.
Gent. Holds it true sir that the Duke of Cornwall was so slain?

Kent. Most certain sir.

Gent. Who is conductor of his people?

Kent. As it is said, the bastard son of Gloucester.

Gent. They say Edgar his banished son is with the Earl of Kent in Germany.

Kent. Report is changeable, it is time to look about,
The powers of the kingdom approach apace.

Gent. The arbiterment is like to be bloody, fare you well sir.

Kent. My point and period will be thoroughly wrought,
Or well, or ill, as this days battles fought.
Exit. Enter Edmund, Regan, and their powers.
Bast. Know of the Duke if his last purpose hold,
Or whether since he is advised by ought
To change the course, he is full of abdication
And self reproving, bring his constant pleasure.

Reg. Our sisters man is certainly miscarried,

Bast. It Is to be doubted Madam,

Reg. Now sweet Lord,
You know the goodness I intend upon you,
Tell me but truly, but then speak the truth,
Do you not love my sister?

Bast. I, honored love.

Reg. But have you never found my brothers way,
To the forfended place?

Bast. That thought abuses you.

Reg. I am doubtful that you have been coniunct and bosomed with her, as far
as we call hirs.

Bast. No by mine honor Madam.

Reg. I never shall endure her, dear my Lord be not familiar with her.

Bast. Fear me not, she and the Duke her husband.
Enter Albany and Gonorill with troops.
Gono. I had rather loose the battle, then that sister should loosen him and
me.


Alb. Our very loving sister well be-met
For this I hear the King is come to his daughter
With others, whom the rigor of our state
Forced to cry out, where I could not be honest
I never yet was valiant, for this business
It touches us, as France inuades our land
Not bolds the King, with others whom I fear,
Most just and heavy causes make oppose.

Bast. Sir you speak nobly.

Reg. Why is this reasoned!

Gono. Combine together against the enemy,
For these domestique door particulars
Are not to question here.

Alb. Let us then determine with the ancient of war on our proceedings.

Bast. I shall attend you presently at your tent.

Reg. Sister you will go with us?

Gone. No.

Reg. It Is most convenient, pray you go with us.

Gone. O ho, I know the riddle, I will go.
Enter Edgar
Edg. If ere your Grace had speech with man so poor,
Hear me one word.
Exeunt.
Alb. I Will overtake you, speak.

Edg. Before you fight the battle open this letter,
If you have victory let the trumpet sound
For him that brought it, wretched though I seem,
I can produce a champion that will prove
What is auowched there, if you miscary,
Your business of the world has so an end,
Fortune love you,

Alb. Stay till I have read the letter.

Edg. I was forbid it, when time shall serve let but the Herald cry and i will
appear again.
Exit.
Alb. Why fare thee well, I will ore-looke the paper.
Enter Edmund.
Bast. The enemies in view, draw up your powers
Hard is the quesse of their great strength and forces
By diligent discovery, but your have is now urged on you.

Alb. We will greet the time.
Exit.
Bast. To both these sister have I sworn my love,
Each jealous of the other as the sting are of the Adder,
Which of them shall I take, both one or neither, neither can be inioy'd
If both remain alive, to take the widow
Exasperates, makes mad her sister Gonorill,
And hardly shall I carry out my side
Her husband being alive, now then we will use
His countenadce for the battle, which being done
Let her that would be rid of him devise
His speedy taking off, as for his mercy
Which he entends to Lear and to Cordelia:
The battle done, and they within our power
Shall never see his pardon, for my state
Stands on me to defend, not to debate.
Exit. Alarm. Enter the powers of France over the stage, Cordelia with her
father in her hand. Enter Edgar and Gloucester.
Edg. Here father, take the shadow of this bush
For your good host, pray that the right may thrive
If ever I return to you again i will bring you comfort.
Exit.
Glost. Grace go with you sir.
Alarm and retreat.
Edg. Away old man, give me thy hand, away,
King Lear has lost, he and his daughter taine,
Give me thy hand, come on.

Glost. No farther sir, a man may rot even here.

Edg. What in ill thoughts again men must endure,
Their going hence, even as their coming hither,
Ripenes is all come on.
Enter Edmund, with Lear and Cordelia prisoners.
Bast, Some officers take them away, good guard
Until their greater pleasures best be known
That are to censure them.

Cor. We are not the first who with best meaning have incurd
The worst, for thee oppressed King am I cast down,
My self could else outfrowne false Fortunes frown,
Shall we not see these daughters, and these sisters?

Lear. No, no, come lets away to prison
We two alone will sing like birds in the cage,
When thou do ask me blessing, i will kneel down
And ask of thee forgiveness, so we will live
And pray, and sing and tell old tales and laugh
At gilded butterflies, and hear poor rogues
Talk of Court news, and we will talk with them to,
Who looses, and who wins, whose in, whose out,
And take vpon's the mystery of things
As if we were Gods spies, and we will wear out
In a wal'd prison, packs and sects of great ones
That ebb and flow bith' Moon.

Bast. Take them away.

Lear. Upon such sacrifices my Cordelia,
The Gods themselves throw incense, have I caught thee?
He that parts us shall bring a brand from heaven,
And fire us hence like Foxes, wipe thine eyes,
The good shall devour em, fleach and fell
Ere they shall make us weep? well see vm starve first, come.

Bast. Come hither Captain, hark.
Take thou this note, go follow them to prison,
And step, I have aduanct thee, if thou do
As this instructs thee, thou do make thy way
To noble fortunes, know thou this that men
Are as the time is, to be tender minded
Does not become a sword, thy great employment
Will not bear question, either say thout do it,
Or thrive by other means.

Cap. I Will do it my Lord.

Bast. About it, and write happy when thou have don,
Mark I say instantly, and carry it so
As I have set it down.

Cap. I cannot draw a cart, nor eat dride oats,
If it be man's work i will do it.
Enter Duke, the two Ladies, and others.
Alb. Sir you have showed to day your valiant strain,
And Fortune led you well you have the captives
That were the opposites of this days strife,
We do require then of you, so to use them,
As we shall find their merits, and our safty
May equally determine.

Bast. Sir I thought it fit,
To save the old and miserable King to some retention,
Whose age has charms in it, whose title more
To pluck the coren bossom of his fide,
And turn our impressed lances in our eyes
Which do command them, with him I sent the queen
My reason, all the same and they are ready to morrow,
Or at further space, to appear where you shall hold
Your session at this time, me sweat and bleed,
The friend has lost his friend and the best quarrels
In the heat are cursed, by those that feel their sharpes,
The question of Cordelia and her father
Requires a fitter place.

Alb. Sir by your patience,
I hold you but a subject of this war, not as a brother.

Reg. That Is as we list to grace him,
Me thinks our pleasure should have been demanded
Ere you had spoke so far, he led our powers,
Bore the commission of my place and person,
The which imediate may well stand up,
And call it self your brother.

Gono. Not so hot, in his own grace he does exalt himself more then in your
advancement.

Reg. In my right by me invested he com-peers the best.

Gone. That were the most, if he should husband you.

Reg. Iesters do often prove Prophets.

Gone. Hola, hola, that eye that told you so, looked but a squint.

Reg. Lady I am not well, else I should answer
From a full flowing stomach, General
Take thou my soldiers, prisoners, patrimony,
Witness the world that I create thee here
My Lord and master.

Gone. Mean you to enjoy him then?

Alb. The let alone lies not in your good will.

Bast. Nor in thine Lord.

Alb. Half blouded fellow, yes.

Bast. Let the drum strike, and prove my title good.

Alb. Stay yet, hear reason, Edmund I arrest thee
On capital treason, and in thine attaint,
This gilded Serpent, for your claim fair sister
I bare it in the interest of my wife,
It Is she is subcontracted to this Lord
And I her husband contradict the banes,
If you will mary, make your love to me,
My Lady is bespoke, thou art armed Gloucester,
If none appear to prove upon thy head,
Thy heinous, manifest, and many treasons,
There is my pledge, i will prove it on thy heart
Ere I taste bread, thou art in nothing less
Then I have here proclaimd thee.

Reg. Sick, o sick.

Gone. If not, i will never trust poison.

Bast. There Is my exchange, what in the world he is,
That names me traitor, villain-like he lies,
Call by thy trumpet, he that dares approach,
On him, on you, who not, I will maintain
My truth and honor firmly.

Alb. A Herald ho.

Bast. A Herald ho, a Herald.

Alb. Trust to thy single virtue, for thy soldiers
All levied in my name, have in my name took their discharge.

Reg. This sickness grows upon me.

Alb. She is not well, convey her to my tent,
Come hither Herald, let the trumpet sound,
And read out this.

Cap. Sound trumpet?

Her. If any man of quality or degree, in the host of the army, will
maintain upon Edmund supposed Earl of Gloucester, that he is a manifold traitor,
let him appear at the third sound of the trumpet, he is bold in his defense.


Bast. Sound? Again?
Enter Edgar at the third sound, a trumpet before him.
Alb. Ask him his purposes why he appears
Upon this call oth' trumpet.

Her. What are you? your name and quality?
And why you answer this present summons.

Edg. O know my name is lost by treasons tooth.
Bare-gnawne and canker-bitte; yet are I mou't
Where is the adversary I come to cope with all.

Alb. Which is that adversary?

Edg. What Is he that speaks for Edmund Earl of Gloucester,

Bast. Him self, what say thou to him?

Edg. Draw thy sword.
That if my speech offend a noble heart, thy arm
May do thee Justice, here is mine.
Behold it is the privilege of my tongue,
My oath and my profession, I protest,
Maugure thy strength, youth, place and eminence,
Despite thy victor, sword and fire new fortuned,
Thy valor and thy heart thou art a traitor.
False to thy Gods thy brother and thy Father,
Conspicuate against this high illustrious prince,
And from the'xtreamest upward of thy head,
To the descent and dust beneath thy feet,
A most toad-spotted traitor say thou no
This sword, this arm, and my best spirits,
As bent to prove upon thy heart whereto I speak thou lie,

Bast. In wisdom I sholud ask thy name,
But since thy outside looks so fair and warlike,
And that thy being some say of breeding breathes,
By right of knighthood, I disdain and spurn
Here do I toss those treasons to thy head.
With the hell hatedly, oreturnd thy heart,
Which for they yet glance by and scarcely bruise,
This sword of mine shall give them instant way
Where they shall rest for ever, trumpets speak.

Alb. Save him, save him,

Gone. This is mere practice Gloucester by the law of arms
Thou art not bound to answer an unknown opposite,
Thou art not vanquished, but cousned and beguild,

Alb. Stop your mouth dame, or with this paper shall I stople it, thou worse
then any thing, read thine own evil, nay no tearing Lady, I perceive you
know it.


Gone. Say if I do, the laws are mine not thine, who shall arraine me for it.

Alb. Most monstrous know thou this paper?

Gone. Ask me not what I know.
Exit. Gonorill.
Alb. Go after her, she is desperate, govern her.

Bast. What you have chargd me with, that have I don
And more, much more, the time will bring it out.
It Is past, and so am I, but what art thou
That have this fortune on me? if thou be noble
I do forgive thee.

Edg. Let Us exchange charity,
I am no less in blood then thou art Edmund,
If more, the more thou have wronged me.
My name is Edgar, and thy fathers son,
The Gods are just, and of our pleasant virtues.
Make instruments to scourge us the dark and vicious
Place where thee he got, cost him his eyes.

Bast. Thou have spoken truth, the wheel is come full circled I am here.

Alb. Me thought thy very gate did prophecy,
A royal nobleness I must embrace thee.
Let sorrow split my heart if I did ever hate thee or thy father.

Edg. Worthy Prince I know it.

Alb. Where have you hid your self?
How have you known the miseries of your father?

Edg. By nursing them my Lord,
List a brief tale, and when it is told
O that my heart would burst the bloody proclamation
To escape that followed me so near,
O our lives sweetness, that with the pain of death,
Would hourly die, rather then die at once.
Taught me to shift into a mad-mans rags
To assume a semblance that very dogs disdained
And in this habit met I my father with his bleeding rings,
The precious stones new lost became his guide,
Led him, begged for him, saved him from despair,
Never (O Father) reueald my self unto him.
Until some half hour past, when I was armed,
Not sure, though hoping of this good success,
I asked his blessing, and from first to last,
Told him my pilgrimage, but his flawd heart,
Alack too weak, the conflict to support,
Twixt two extremes of passion, joy and grief,
Burst smillingly.

Bast. This speech of yours has moved me,
And shall perchance do good, but speak you on,
You look as you had something more to say,

Alb. If there be more, more woeful, hold it in,
For I am almost ready to dissolve, hearing of this,

Edg. This would have seemd a periode to such
As love not sorrow, but another to amplify too much,
Would make much more, and top extreamitie
Whilst I was big in clamor, came there in a man,
Who having seen me in my worst estate,
Shund my abhord society, but then finding
Who it was that so endured with his strong arms
He fastened on my neck and bellowed out,
As he would burst heaven, threw me on my father,
Told the most pitious tale of Lear and him,
That ever ear received, which in recounting
His grief grew puissant and the strings of life,
Began to crack twice* then the trumpets sounded.
And there I left him traunst.

Alb. But who was this.

Ed. Kent sir, the banished Kent, who in diguise,
Followed his enemy king and did him service
Improper for a slave.
Enter one with a bloody knife,
Gent. Help, help,

Alb. What kind of help, what means that bloody knife?

Gent. Its hot it smokes, it came even from the heart of*

Alb. Who man, speak?

Gent. Your Lady sir, your Lady, and her sister
By her is poisoned, she has confessed it.

Bast. I was contracted to them both, all three
Now marie in an instant.

Alb. Produce their bodies, be they alive or dead,
This Justice of the heavens that makes us tremble,
Touches us not with pity.

Edg. Here comes Kent sir.

Alb. O it is he, the time will not allow
Enter Kent The complement that very manners vrges.

Kent. I am come to bid my King and master ay good night,
Is he not here?

Duke. Great thing of us forgot,
Speak Edmund, whers the king, and whers Cordelia
See thou this object Kent.
The bodies of Gonorill and Regan are brought in.
Kent. Alack why thus.

Bast. Yet Edmund was beloved,
The one the other poisoned for my sake,
And after slew her self.

Duke. Even so, cover their faces.

Bast. I pant for life, some good I mean to do,
Despite of my own nature, quickly send,
Be brief, int toth' castle for my writ,
Is on the life of Lear and on Cordelia,
Nay send in time.

Duke. Run, run, O run.

Edg. To who my Lord, who has the office, send
Thy token of repreeue.

Bast. Well thought on, take my sword the Captain,
Give it the Captain?

Duke. Have thee for thy life.

Bast. He has Commission from thy wife and me,
To hang Cordelia in the prison, and to lay
The blame upon her own despair,
That she fordid her self.

Duke. The Gods defend her, bear him hence a while.
Enter Lear with Cordelia in his arms.
Lear. Howl, howl, howl, howl, O you are men of stones,
Had I your tongues and eyes, I would use them so,
That heavens vault should crack, she is gone for ever,
I know when one is dead, and when one lives,
She Is dead as earth, lend me a looking glass,
If that her breath will mist or stain the stone,
Why then she lives.

Kent. Is this the promised end.

Edg. Or image of that horror.

Duke. Fall and cease.

Lear. This feather stirs she lives, if it be so,
It is a chance which does redeem all sorrows
That ever I have felt.

Kent. A my good master.

Lear. Prithee away?

Edg. It Is noble Kent your friend.

Lear. A plague upon your murderous traitors all,
I might have saved her, now she is gone for ever,
Cordelia, Cordelia, stay a little, ha,
What is it thou say, her voice was ever soft,
Gentle and low, an excellent thing in women,
I killed the slave that was a hanging thee.

Cap. It Is true my Lords, he did.

Lear. Did I not fellow? I have seen the day,
With my good biting Fauchon I would
Have made them skippe, I am old now,
And these same crosses spoil me, who are you?
Mine eyes are not oath best, i will tell you straight.

Kent. If Fortune bragd of two she loved or hated,
One of them we behold.

Lear. Are not you Kent?

Kent. The same your servant Kent, where is your servant Caius,

Lear. He Is a good fellow, I can tell that,
Heel strike and quickly too, he is dead and rotten.

Kent. No my good Lord, I am the very man.

Lear. I Will see that straight.

Kent. That from your life of difference and decay,
Have followed your sad steps.

Lear. You Are welcome hither.

Kent. Nor no man else, als chearles, dark and deadly,
Your eldest daughters have foredoome themselves.
And desperately are dead.

Lear. So think I to.

Duke. He knows not what he sees, and vain it is,
That we present us to him.

Edg. Very bootlesse.
Enter Captain.
Capt. Edmund is dead my Lord.

Duke. That's but a trifle here, you Lords and noble friends, Know our intent,
what comfort to this decay may come, shall be applied: for us we will resign
during the life of this old majesty, to him our absolute power, you to your
rights with boot, and such addition as your honor have more then merited, all
friends shall taste the wages of their virtue, and al foes the cup of their
deseruings, O see, see.


Lear. And my poor fool is hanged, no, no life, why should a dog, a horse, a
rat of life and thou no breath at all, O thou will come no more, never, never,
never, pray you undo this button, thank you sir, O, o, o, o.


Edg. He faints my Lord, my Lord.

Lear. Break heart, I prithee break.

Edgar. Look up my Lord.

Kent. Vex not his ghost, O let him pass,
He hates him that would upon the wrack,
Of this tough world stretch him out longer.

Edg. O he is gone indeed.

Kent. The wonder is, he has endured so long,
He but usurped his life.

Duke. Bear them from hence, our present business
Is to general woe, friends of my soul, you twain
Rule in this kingdom, and the goard state sustain.

Kent. I have a journey sir, shortly to go,
My master calls, and I must not say no.

Duke. The weight of this sad time we must obey,
Speak what we feel, not what we ought to say,
The oldest have borne most, we that are young,
Shall never see so much, nor live so long.

FINIS.

