THE HISTORY OF HENRY THE FOVRTH; With the battle at Shrewsburie, between
the King and Lord Henry Percy, surnamed Henry Hotspur of the North.

With the humorous conceits of Sir John Falstalffe.

AT LONDON, Printed by P. S. for Andrew Wise, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard, at
the sign of the Angel. 1598.

THE HISTORY OF Henry the fourth.
Enter the King, Lord John of Lancaster, Earl of Westmerland, with others.
King. SO shaken as we are, so wan with care,
Find we a time for frighted peace to pant,
And breath short winded accents of new broiles
To be commencte in stronds a far remote:
No more the thirsty entrance of this soil
Shall dawbe her lips with her own childrens blood,
No more shall trenching war channel her fields,
Nor bruise her flourets with the armed hoofes
Of hostile paces: those opposed eyes,
Which like the m^teors of a troubled heaven,
Al of one nature, of one substance bred,
Did lately meet in the intestine shocke
And furious close of civil butcherie,
Shall now in mutual welbeseeming ranks,
March all one way, and be no more opposed
Against acquaintance, kindred and allies.
The edge of war, like an ill sheathed knife,
No more shall cut his master: therefore friends,
As far as to the sepulcher of Christ,
Whose soldiour now, under whose blessed cross
We are impressed and engaged to fight,
Forthwith a power of English shall we leauy,
Whose arms were molded in their mothers womb,
To chase these pagans in those holy fields,
Over whose acres walked those blessed feet,
Which 1400. years ago were naild,
For our advantage on the bitter cross.
But this our purpose now is twelve month old,
And bootelesse it is to tell you we will go.
Therefore we meet not now: then let me hear
Of you my gentle Cosen Westmerland,
What yesternight our counsel did decree
In forwarding this dear expedience.

West. My liege, this haste was hot in question,
And many limits of the charge set down
But yesternight, when all athwart there came
A post from Wales, laden with heavy news,
Whose worst was that the noble Mortimer,
Leading the men of Herdforshire to fight
Against the irregular, and wild Glendower,
Was by the rude hands of that Welchman taken,
A thousand of his people butchered,
Upon whose dead corpse there was such misuse,
Such beastly shameless transformation
By those Welch-women done, as may not be
Without much shame, retould, or spoken of.

King. It seems then that the tidings of this broile,
Brake off our business for the holy land.

West. This matched with other did, my gracious L.
For more uneven and unwelcome news
Came from the North, and thus it did import,
On holly rode day the gallant Hotspur there,
Young Harry Percy, and brave Archibold,
That ever valiant and approved Scot,
At Holm^don met, where they did spend
A sad and bloody hour:
As by discharge of their artillery,
And sh^pe of likelihood the news was told:
For he that brought them in the very heat
And pride of their contention, did take horse
Uncertain of the issue any way.

King. Here is dear, a true industrious friend,
Sir Walter Blunt new lighted from his horse,
Staind with the variation of each soil,
Betwixt that Holmedon and this seat of ours:
And he has brought us smothe and welcome news,
The Earl of Douglas is discomfited,
Ten thousand bold Scots, two and twenty knights
Balkt in their own blood. Did sir Walter see
On Holmedons plains, of prisoners Hotspur took
Mordake Earl of Fife, and eldest son
To beaten Douglas, and the Earl of Athol,
Of Murrey, Angus, and Menteith:
And is not this an honorable spoil?
A gallant priz? Ha coosen, is it not? In faith it is.

West. A conquest for a Prince to boast of.

King. Yea, there thou makst me sad, and makst me sin
In envy, that my Lord Northumberland
Should be the father to so blessed a son:
A son, who is the theme of honors tongue,
Amongst a grove, the very straightest plant,
Who is sweet fortunes minion and her pride,
Whilst I by looking on the praise of him
See riot and dishonor stain the brow
Of my young Harry. O that it could be proved
That some night tripping fairy had exchanged,
In cradle clothes our children where they lay,
And called mine Percy, his Plantagenet,
Then would I have his Harry, and he mine:
But let him from my thoughts. What think you coose
Of this young Percies pride? The prisoners
Which he in this adventure has surprizd
To his own use, he keeps and sends me word
I shall have none but Mordake Earl of Fife.

West. This is his uncles teaching. This is Worcester,
Maleuolent to you in all aspects,
Which makes him prune himself, and bristle up
The crest of youth against your dignity.

King. But I have sent for him to answer this:
And for this cause a while we must neglect
Out holy purpose to Jerusalem.
Coosen on wednesday next our council we will hold
At Windsore, so inform the Lords:
But come your self with speed to us again,
For more is to be said and to be done,
Then out of anger can be uttered.

West. I will my liege. Exeunt.

Enter prince of Wales, and Sir John Falstaff. Falst. Now Hal, what time of
day is it lad?


Prince. Thou art so fat-witted with drinking of old sack, and vnbuttoning
thee after supper, and sleeping upon benches afternoon; that thou have
forgotten to demand that truly which thou would truly know. What a
devil have thou to do with the time of the day? unless hours were cups of
sack, and minutes capons, and clockes the tongues of Baudes, and Dialles the
signs of leaping houses, and the blessed sun himself a fair hot wench in
flame-couloured taffata; I see no reason why thou should be so superfluous to
demand the time of the day.


Falst. Indeed you come near me now Hal, for we that take purses go by the
moon and the seven stars, and not by Phoebus, he, that wandering knight so
fair: and I prithee sweet wag when thou art a king as God save thy grace:
majesty I should say, for grace thou will have none.


Prince. What none?


Falst. No by my troth, not so much as will serve to be prologue to an egg
and butter.


Prin. Well, how then? come roundly, roundly.


Falst. Marry then sweet wag, when thou art king let not us that are squiers of
the nights body, be called thieves of the days beauty: let us be Dianaes
forresters, gentlemen of the shade, minions of the moon, and let men say we
be men of good government, being governed as the sea is, by our noble and
chaste mistress the moon, under whose countenance we steal.


Prince. Thou say well, and it holds well to, for the fortune of us that are
the moons men, does ebb and flow like the sea, being governed as the sea is
by the moon, as for proof. Now a purse of gold most resolutely snatched on
Monday night and most dissolutely spent on tuesday morning, got with swearing,
lay by, and spent with crying, bring in, now in as low an ebb as the foot of
the ladder, and by and by in as high a flow as the ridge of the gallows.


Falst. By the Lord thou say true lad, and is not my hostess of the tavern
a most sweet wench?


Prin. As the honey of Hibla my old lad of the castle, and is not a buffe Jerkin
a most sweet robe of durance?


Falst. How now, how now mad wag, what in thy quips and thy quiddities? what a
plague have I to do with a buffe Ierkin?


Prince. Why what a pox have I to do with my hostess of the tavern?


Falst. Well, thou have called her to a reckoning many a time and often.


Prince. Did I ever call for thee to pay thy part?


Falst. No, i will give thee thy due, thou have paid all there.


Prin. Yea and else where, so far as my coin would stretch, and where it would
not, I have used my credit.


Falst. Yea, and so used it that were it not here apparent that thou art heir
apparent. But I prithee sweet wag, shall there be gallows standing in England
when thou art king? and resolution thus subd as it is with the rusty curb of
old father Anticke the law, do not thou when thou art king hang a thief.


Prince. No, thou shall.


Falst. Shall I? O rare! by the Lord i will be a brave judge.


Prin. Thou iudgest false already, I mean thou shall have the hanging of the
thieves, and so become a rare hangman.


Falst. Well Hall well, and in some sort it iumpes with my humor, as well as
waighting in the Court I can tell you.


Prince. For obtaining of suites?


Falst. Yea, for obtaining of suites, whereof the hangman has no lean
wardrob. Zbloud I am as melancholy as a gyb Cat, or a lugd bear.


Prin. Or an old lion, or a lovers Lute.


Falst. Yea, or the drone of a Lincolnshire bagpipe.


Prince. What say thou to a Hare* or the malancholy of Mooreditch?


Falst. Thou have the most unsavory smiles, and art indeed the most comparatiue
rascalliest swee^ young Prince. But Hal, I prithee trouble me no more with
vanity, I would to God thou and I knew where a commodity of good names were
to be bought: an old Lord of the council rated me the other day in the
street about you sir, but I marked him not, and yet he talked very wisely, but I
regarded him not, and yet he talked wi^ely and in the street to.


Prin. Thou did well, for wisdom cries out in the streets and no man
regards it.


Falst. O thou have damnable iteration, and art indeed able to corrupt a saint:
thou have done much harm upon me Hal, God forgive thee for it: before I knew
thee Hal I knew nothing, and now am I, if a man should speak truly, little
better then one of the wicked: I must give over this life, and I will give it
over: by the Lord and I do not, I am a villain, i will be damnd for never a
kings son in Christendom.


Prin. Where shall we take a purse to morrow Jack?


Falst. Zounds where thou will lad, i will make one, an I do not call me villain
and baff^ll me.


Prin. I see a good amendment of life in thee, from praying to purse-taking.


Fall. Why Hall, it is my vocation Hall, it is no sin for a man to labor in his
vocation. Enter Poines.

Poynes now shall we know if Gadshill have set a match. O if men were to be
saved by merit, what hole in hell were hot enough for him? this is the most
omnipotent villain that ever cried, stand, to a true man.


Prin. Good morrow Ned.


Poines. Good morrow sweet Hal. What says Monsieur remorse? what says sir
John Sack, and Sugar Jack? how agrees the Devil and thee about thy soul
that thou souldest him on good friday last, for a cup of Medera and a cold
capons leg.


Prince. Sir John stands to his word, the devil shall have his bargain, for
he was never yet a breaker of proverbs: he will give the devil his due.


Poynes. Then art thou damnd for keeping thy word with the devil.


Prince. Else he had bin damnd for coosening the devil.


Poy. But my lads, my lads, to morrow morning, by four a clock early at
Gadshill, there are pilgrims going to Canturburie with rich offerings, and
traders riding to London with fat purses. I have vizards for you al you have
horses for your selves, Gadshill lies to night in Rochester, I have bespoke
supper to morrow night in Fastcheape: we may do it as secure as sleep, if you
will go I will stuff your purses full of crowns: if you will not tarry at
home and be hanged.


Falst. Hear ye Yedward, if I tarry at home and go not, i will hang you for going.


Po. You will chops.


Falst. Hal will thou make one?


Prince. Who I rob, I a thief? not I by my faith.


Falst. There Is neither honesty, manhood, nor good fellowship in thee, nor thou
camst not of the blood royal, if thou dare not stand for ten shillings.


Prince. Well then, once in my days i will be a madcap.


Falst. Why that's well said.


Prince. Well, come what will, i will tarry at home.


Falst. By the lord, i will be a traitor then, when thou art king.


Prince. I care not.


Po Sir John, I preethe leave the prince and me alone, I will lay him down
such reasons for this adventure that he shall go.


Falst. Well God give thee the spirit of persuasion, and him the ears of
profiting, that what thou speak, may move, and wh^t he hears, may be
believed, that the true prince may for recreation sake) prove a false thief,
for the poor abuses of the time want countenance: farewell* you shall find me in
Eastcheap


Prin Farewell the latter spring, farewell Alhallowne summer.


Poin Now my good sweet honey Lord, ride with us to morrow. I have a jest to
execute, that I cannot manage alone. Falstalffe Haruey, Rossill, and Gadshil,
shall rob those men that we have already waylaid, yourselfe and I will not be
there* and when they have the booty, if you and I do not rob them, cut this
head off from my shoulders.


Prin. How shall we part with them in setting forth*


Po. Why, we will set forth before or after them, and appoin^ them a place of
meeting, wherein it is at our pleasure to fail; and then will they adventure
upon the exploit themselves, which they shall have no sooner achieved but we will
set upon them.


Prin. Yea but it is like that they will know us by our horses, by our habits, and
by every other appointment to be our selves.


Po. Tut, our horses they shall not see, i will tie them in the wood, our vizards
we will change after we leave them: and sirrah, I have cases of Buckrom for
the nonce, to immaske our noted outward garments.


Prin. Yea, but I doubt they will be too hard for us.


Po. Well, for two of them, I know them to be as true bred cowards as ever
turned back: and for the third, if he sight longer then he sees reason, i will
forswear arms. The virtue of this jest will be the incomprehensible lies,
that this same fat rogue will tell us when we meet at supper, how thirty at
least he fought with, what wards, what blows, what extremities he endured,
and in the reproof of this lives the jest.


Prin. Well, i will go with thee, provide us all things necessary, and meet me
to morrow night in Eastcheape, there i will sup: farewell.


Po. Farewell my Lord. Exit Poines.


Prin. I know you all, and will a while uphold
The vnyokt humor of your idleness,
Yet herein will I imitate the sun,
Who does permit the base contagious clouds
To smother up his beauty from the world,
That when he please again to be himself,
Being wanted he may be more wondered at
By breaking through the soul and ougly mists
Of vapors that did seem to strangle him.
If all the year were playing holly-dayes,
To sport would be as tedious as to work;
But when they seldom come, they wished for come,
And nothing pleases but rare accidents:
So when this loose beh^uiour I throw off,
And pay the debt I never promised,
By how much better then my word I am,
By so much shall I falsify men's hopes,
And like bright metal on a sullein ground,
My reformation glittring ore my fault,
Shall show more goodly, and attract more eyes
Then that which has no foil to set it off.
I Will so offend, to make offense a skill,
Redeeming time when men think least I will. Exit.

Enter the King, Northumberland, Worcester, Hotspur, sir Walterblu^t, with
others. King. My blood has bin too cold and temperate,
Unapt to stir at these indignities,
And you have found me, for accordingly
You tread upon my patience, but be sure
I will from henceforth rather be my self
Mighty, and to be fearde, then my condition
Which has bin smooth as oil soft as young down,
And therefore lost that title of respect,
Which the proud soul near pays but to the proud.

Worcester. Our house (my sovereign liege) little deserves
The scourge of greatness to be vsd on it,
And that same greatnes^e to, which our own hands
Have help to make so portly.

Nor. My Lord.

King. Worcester get thee gone for I do see
Danger, and di^obedience in thine eye:
O sir, your presence is too bold and peremptory,
And Majesty might never yet endure
The moodie frontier of a servant browe,
You have good leave to leave us, when we need
Your use and counsel we shall send for you. Exit. Worcester.
You were about to speak.

North. Yea my good Lord.
Those prisoners in your highness name demanded.
Which Harry Percy here at Holmedon took,
Were as he says, nor with such strength denied
As is delivered to your majesty.
Either envy therefore, or misprision,
Is guilty of this fault, and not my son.

Hotsp. My liege, I did deny no prisoners,
But I remember when the fight was done,
When I was dry with rage, and extreme toil,
Breathles and faint, leaning upon my sword,
Came there a certain Lord, neat and trimly dressed,
Fresh as a bridegroom, and his chin new rept,
Showed like a stubble land as harvest home,
He was perfumed like a Milliner,
And twixt his finger and his thumb he held
A pouncet box, which ever and anon
He gave his nose, and tookt away again,
Who therewith angry, when it next came there
Took it in snuff, and still he smild and talked:
And as the soldiers bore dead bodies by,
He called them untaught knaves, vnmanerlie,
To bring a slouenly unhandsome coarse
Betwixt the wind and his nobility:
With many holly-day and lady terms
He questioned me, amongst the rest demanded
My prisoners in your Majesty's behalf.
I then, all smarting with my wounds being cold,
To be so pestred with a Popingay,
Out of my grief and my impacience
Answered neglectingly, I know not what
He should or he should not, for he made me mad
To see him shine so brisk, and smell so sweet,
And talk so like a waiting gentlewoman,
Of guns, and drums, and wounds, God save the mark:
And telling me the soueraignest thing on earth
Was Parmacitie, for an inward bruise,
And that it was great pity, so it was,
This villainous saltpeeter, should be digd
Out of the bowels of the harmeles earth,
Which many a good tall fellow had destroyed
So cowardly, and but for these vile guns
He would himself have been a souldior.
This bald unjointed that of h^s (my Lord)
I answered indirectly (as I said)
And I beseech you, let not his report
Come current for an accusation
Betwixt my love and your high majesty.

Blunt. The circumstance considered, good my lord,
What ere Lord Harry Percie then had said
To such a person, and in such a place,
At such a time, with all the rest retold,
May reasonably die, and never rise
To do him wrong, or any way impeach
What then he said, so he unsay it now.

King. Why yet he does deny his prisoners,
But with prouiso and exception,
That we at our own charge shall ransom straight
His brother in law, the foolish Mortimer,
Who on my soul, has wilfully betrayed
The lives of those, that he did lead to fight
Against that great Magitian, damnd Glendower,
Whose daughter as we hear, that Earl of March
Has lately married: shall our coffers then
Be emptied, to redeem a traitor home?
Shall we buy treason? and indent with fears
When they have lost and forfeited themselves?
No, on the barren mountains let him starve;
For I shall never hold that man my friend,
Whose tongue shall ask me for one penny cost
To ransom home revolted Mortimer,

Hot. Revolted Mortimer:
He never did fall off, my sovereign liege
But by the chance of war, to prove that true
Needs no more but one tongue: for all those wounds,
Those mouthed wounds which valiantly he took,
When on the gentle Seuerns siedgie bank,
In single opposition hand to hand,
He did confound the best part of an hour,
In changing hardiment with great Glendower,
Three times they breathd, and three times did they drink
Upon agreement of swift Seuerns flood,
Who then aff^ighted with their bloody looks,
Ran fearfully among the trembling reeds.
And hid his crispe-head in the hollow bank,
Bloud-stained with these valiant combatants,
Never did bare and rotten policy
Color her working with such deadly wounds,
Nor never could the noble Mortimer
Receive so many, and all willingly,
Then let not him be slandered with revolt.

King. Thou do belly him Percy, thou do belly him,
He never did encounter with Clendower:
I tell thee, he durst as well have met the devil alone,
As Owen Glendower for an enemy.
Art thou not ashamed? but sirrah, hence forth
Let me not hear you speak of Mortimer:
Send me your prisoners with the speediest means,
Or you shall hear in such a kind from me
As will displease you. My Lord Northumberland:
We license your departure with your son,
Send us your prisoners, or you will hear of it. Exit King

Hot. And if the devil come and rore for them
I will not send them: I will after straight
And tell him so, for I will ease my heart,
Albeit I make a hazard of my head.

Nor. What? dronk with choler, stay, and pause a while,
Here comes your uncle. Enter Worcester.

Hot. Speak of Mortimer?
Zounds I will speak of him, and let my soul
Want mercy if I do not join with him:
Yea on his part i will empty all these veins,
And shed my dear blood, drop by drop in the dust,
But I will lift the down-trod Mortimer
As high in the air as this unthankful king,
As this ingrate and cankred Bullingbrooke.

Nor. Brother, the king has made your nephew mad.

Worcester. Who struck this heat up after I was gone?

Hot. He will forsooth have all my prisoners,
And when I urged the ransom once again
Of my wives brother, then his cheek looked pale,
And on my face he turned an eye of death,
Trembling even at the name of Mortimer.

Worst. I cannot blame him, was not he proclaimed
By Richard that dead is, the next of blood?

North He was, I heard the proclamation:
And then it was, when the unhappy king,
(Whose wrongs in us God pardon) did set forth
Upon his Irish expedition;
From whence he intercepted, did return
To be deposed, and shortly murdered.

Worst. And for whose death, we in the worlds wide mouth
Live scandalized and fo^ly spo^en of.

Hot. But soft, I pray you did king Richard then
Proclaim my brother Edmund Mortimer
H^ire to the crown?

North. He did, my self did hear it.

Hot. Nay then I cannot bl^me his coosen king,
That wished him on the barren mountains starve,
But shall it be that you that set the crown
Upon the head of this forgetfulman,
And for his sake wear the detested blot
Of murthe^ous subornation? shall it be
That you a world of curses undergo,
Being the agents, or base second means,
The cords, the ladder, or the hangman rather,
O pardon me, that I descend so low,
To show the line and the predicament,
Wherein you range under this subtle king!
Shall it for shame be spoken in these days,
Orfil up Chronicles in time to come,
That men of your nobility and power
Did gage them both in an unjust behalf,
(As both of you, God pardon it, have done)
To put down Richard, that sweet lovely Rose,
And plant this thorn, this canker Bullingbrooke?
And shall it in more shame be further spoken,
That you are foold, di^carded, and sh^oke off
By him, for whom these shames ye underwent?
No, yet time serves, wherein you may redeem
Your banished honors, and restore your selves
Into the g^^d thoughts of the world again:
Revenge the ieering and disdaind contempt
Of this proud king, who studies day and night
To answer all the debt he owes to you,
Even with the bloody payment of your deaths:
Therefore I say.

Worcester. Peace coosen, say no more
And now I will unclasp a secret book,
And to your quick conceiving discontents
I Will read you matter deep and dangerous,
As full of peril and aduenterous spirit,
As to ore walk a Current roaring loud,
On the unsteadfast footing of a spear.

Hot. If he fall in, god-night, or sink, or swim,
Send danger from the East unto the West.
So honor cross it, from the North to South,
And let them grapple: O the blood more stirs
To rou'e a lion than to start a hare.

North. Imagination of some great exploit
Drives him beyond the bounds of patience.
By heaven me thinks it were an easy leap,
To pluck bright honor from the palefac'd moon,
Or diue into the bottom of the deep,
Where fadome line could never touch the ground,
And pluck up drowned honor by the locks,
So he that does redeem her thence might wear
Without cor^iuall a^l her dignities,
But out upon this half faced fellowship.

Worcester He apprehends a world of figures here,
But not the form of what he should attend,
Good coosen give me audience for a while.

Hot. I cry you mercy.

Worcester Those same noble Scots that are your prisoners

Hot. I Will keep them all;
By God he shall not have a Scot of them,
No, if a Scot would save his soul he shall not.
I Will keep them by this hand.

Worcester. You start away,
And lend no care unto my purposes:
Those prisoners you shall keep.

Hot. Nay I will: that's flat:
He said he would not ransom Mortimer,
Forbad my tongue to speak of Mortimer,
But I will find him when he lies asleep,
And in his care i will hollow Mortimer:
Nay, i will have a starling shall be taught to speak
Nothing but Mortimer, and give it him
To keep his anger still in motion.

Worcester. Hear you cosen a word.

Hot. All studies here I solemnly defy,
Save how to gall and pinch this Bullenbrooke,
And that same sword and buckler Prince of Wales,
But that I think his father loves him not,
And would be glad he met with some mischance:
I would have him poisoned with a pot of ale.

Worcester. Farewell kinsman, i will talk to you
When you are better temperd to attend.

Nor. Why what a waspe-stung and impatient fool
Art thou? to break into this woman's mood,
Tying thine care to no tongue but thine own?

Hot. Why look you, I am whipped and scourged with rods,
Netled, and stung with pismires, when I hear
Of this vile politician Bullingbrooke,
In Richards time, what do you call the place?
A plague upon it, it is in Glocestershire;
It Was where the mad-cap duke his uncle kept
His uncle York, where I first bowed my knee
Unto this king of smiles, this Bullenbrooke:
Zbloud, when you and he came back from Rauenspurgh.

North. At Barkly castle.

Hot. You say true.
Why what a candy deal of courtesy,
This fawning greyhound then did profer me,
Look when his infant fortune came to age,
And gentle Harry Percy, and kind coosen:
O the diuill take such coosoners, god forgive me,
Good uncle tell your tale, I have done.

Worcester. Nay, if you have not, to it again,
We will stay your leisure.

Hot. I have done In Faith.

Worcester. Then once more to your Scottish prisoners,
Deliver them up without their ransom straight,
And make the Douglas son your only mean
For Powers in Scotland, which for diverse reasons
Which I shall send you written, be assured
Will easily be granted you my Lord.
Your son in Scotland being thus employed,
Shall secretly into the bosom creep
Of that same noble prelat welbelou'd,
The Archbishop.

Hot. Of York, is it not?

Worcester. True, who bears hard
His brothers death at Bristow the lord Scroop,
I speak not this in estimation,
As what I think might be, but what I know
Is ruminated, plotted, and set down,
And only stays but to behold the face
Of that occasion that shall bring it on.

Hot. I smell it. Upon my life it will do well.

Nort. Before the game is afoote thou still letst slip.

Hot. Why, it cannot choose but be a noble plot,
And then the power of Scotland, and of York,
To join with Mortimer, ha.

Worcester. And so they shall.

Hot. In faith it is exceedingly well aimd.

Worcester. And it is no little reason bids us speed,
To save our heads by raising of a head,
For bear our selves as even as we can,
The king will always think him in our debt,
And think we think our selves unsatisfied,
Till he has found a time to pay us home.
And see already how he does begin
To make us strangers to his looks of love.

Hot. He does, he does, we will be revenged on him.

Worst. Coosen farewell. No further go in this,
Then I by letters shall direct your course
When time is ripe, which will be suddenly,
I Will steal to Glendower, and Lo: Mortimer,
Where you and Douglas, and our powers at once,
As I will fashion it shall happily meet,
To bear our fortunes in our own strong arms,
Which now we hold at much uncertainty.

Nor. Farewell good brother, we shall thrive I trust.

Hot. Uncle adieu: O let the hours be short,
Till fields, and blows, and groans applaud our sport. Exeunt

Enter a Carrier with a lantern in his hand 1 Car. Heigh ho. An it be not
four by the day i will be hanged, Charles waine is over the new Chimney, and yet
our horse not packt. What Ostler.


Ost. Anon, anon.


1 Car. I preethe Tom beat Cuts saddle, put a few flocks in the point poor
jade is wroong in the withers, out of all cesse.


Enter another Carier. 2 Car. Pease and beans are as danke here as a dog, and
that is the next way to give poor iades the bots: this house is turned vpside
down since Robin Ostler died.


1 Car Poor fellow never ioied since the prise of Oats rose, it was the death
of him.


2 Car. I think this be the most villainons house in all London road for fleas,
I am stung like a Tench.


1 Car. Like a Tench, by the Mass there is nere a King christen could be
better bit then I have bin since the first coc^e.


2 Car. Why they will allow us nere a Iordane, and then we leake in your
chimney, and your chamber-lie breeds fl^as like a loach.


1 Car. What Ostler, come a way and be hanged, come a way.


2 Car. I have a gammon of bacon, and two razes of Ginger, to be delivered as
far as Charing cros^e.


1 Car Gods body, the Turkies in my Panier are quite starued: what Ostler? a
plague on thee, have thou never an ere in thy head? can not hear, and twere
not as good deed as drink to break the pate on thee, I am a very villain,
come and be hanged, have no faith in thee?


Enter Gadshill. Gadshill. Good morrow Cariers, what is a clock?


Car. I think it be two a clock.


Gad I prithee lend me thy lantern, to see my gelding in the stable.


1 Car. Nay by God soft, I know a trick worth two of that I faith.


Gad. I pray thee lend me thine.


2 Car. I when can tell? lend me thy lantern (quoth he) marry i will see thee
hanged first.


Gad. Sirrah Carrier, what time do you mean to come to London?


2 Car. Time enough to go to bed with a candle, I warrant thee, come neighbor
Mugs, we will call up the Gentlemen, they will along with company* for they have
great charge.


Enter Chamberlain. Exeunt. Gad. What ho: Chamberlain.


Cham. At hand quoth pick purse.


Gad* That's even as fair as at hand quoth the Chamberlain: for thou variest
no more from picking of purses, then giving direction does from laboring: thou
laiest the plot how.


Cham. Good morrow master Gadshill, it holds current that I told you
yesternight, there is a Frankelin in the wild of Kent has brought three hundred
Marks with him in gold, I heard him tell it to one of his company last night
at supper, a kind of Auditor, one that has abundance of charge too, God
knows what, they are up already, and call for Eggs and butter, they will away
presently.


Gad. Sirrah, if they meet not with Saint Nicholas clearkes, i will give thee
this neck.


Cham. No, i will none of it, I pray thee keep that for the hangman, for I know
thou worshippest Saint Nicholas, as truly as a man of falsehood may.


Ga. What talkest thou to me of the ha^gman? if I hang, i will make a fat pair of
Gallows: for if I hang, old sir John hangs with me, and thou know he is
no starueling tut, there are other Trojans that thou dreamst not of, the which
for sport sake are content to do the profession, some grace, that would (if
matters should be looked into) for their own credit sake make all whole. I am
joined with no footlande rakers, no long-staffe ^ixpennie strikers, none of
these mad mustachio purplehewd maltworms, but with nobility, and tranquillity,
Burgomasters and great Oneyres, such as can ho^d in such as will strike sooner
then speak, and speak sooner then drink, and drink sooner then pray, and yet
(zoundes) I lie, for they pray continually to their Saint the Commonwealth,
or rather not pray to her, but pray on her, for they ride up and down on her,
and make her their boots


Cham. What, the Commonwealth their boots? will she hold out water in foul
way?


Gad. She will, she will, Justice has liquord her: we steal as in a Castle
cocksure: we have the receyte of Ferneseede, we walk invisible.


Cham. Nay by my faith, I think you are more beholding to the night then to
Ferneseed, for your walking invisible.


Gad. Give me thy hand, thou shall have a share in our purchase, as I am a
true man.


Cham Nay rather let me have it, as you are a false these.


Gad. Go to, homo is a common name to al men: bid the Ostler bring my gelding
out of the stable, farewell you muddy knave.


Enter Prince, Poines, and Peto etc. Po. Come shelter, shelter, I have remoude
Falstalffes horse, and he frets like a gumd Velvet.


Prin Stand close. Enter Falstalffe.


Falst. Poynes, Poynes* and be hanged Poynes.


Prin* Peace ye fat-kidneyd rascal, what a brawling do thou keep?


Falst. Where Is Poynes Hall?


Prin. He is walked up to the top of the h^ll, I Will go seek him.


Falst. I am accursed to rob in that thieves company* the rascal has removed
my horse, and tied him I know not where, if I travel but four foot by the
squire further a foot, I shall break my wind. Well, I doubt not but to die a
fair death for all this, if I escape hanging for killing that rogue. I have
forsworn his company hourly any time this xxii. years, and yet I am bewitched
with the rogues company. If the rascal have not given me medicines to make
me love him, i will be hanged. It could not be else, I have drunk medicines,
Poynes, Hall, a plague upon you both. Bardoll, Peto, i will starve ere i will rob a
foot further, and twere not as good a deed as drink to turn true-man, and
to leave these rogues, I am the veriest varlet that ever chewed with a tooth:
eight yeardes of uneven ground is threescore and ten miles a foot with me,
and the stony hearted villains know it well enough, a plague upon it when
thieves can not be true one to another: They whistle, Whew, a plague upon you
all, give me my horse you rogues, give me my horse and be hanged:


Prin. Peace ye fat guts, lie down, lay thine care close to the ground, and
list if thou can hear the tread of travelers.


Falst. Have you any leauers to lift me up again being down, zbloud i will not
bear mine own flesh so far a foot again for all the coin in thy fathers
Exchequer: What a plague mean ye to colt me thus?


Prin. Thou lie, thou art not colted, thou art vncolted.


Falst. I preethe good prince, Hal, help me to my horse, good kings son.


Prin. Out ye rogue shall I be your Ostler?


Falst. Hang thy self in thine own heir apparent garters, if I be taken, i will
peach for this: and I have not Ballads made on you all, and sung to filthy
tunes, let a cup of sack be my poison, when a jest is so forward and a
foot too I hate it.


Enter Gadshill. Gad. Stand.


Falst. So I do against my will.


Po. O it is our setter, I know his voice, Bardoll, what news.


Bar. Case ye, case ye on with your vizards, there is money of the kings
coming down the hill, it is going to the Kings Exchequer.


Fal^t. You lie ye rougue* it is going to the kings Tavern.


Gad. There Is enough to make us all:


Falst. To be hanged.


Prin. Sirs you four shall front them in the narrow lane: Ned Poines, and I
will walk lower, if they escape from your encounter, then they light on us.


Peto. How many be there of them?


Gad. Some eight or ten.


Fall Zounds will they not rob us?


Prin. What, a coward sir John paunch.


Fat. In deed I am not John of Gaunt your grandfather, but yet no coward, Hall.


Prin. Well, we leave that to the proof.


Po. Sirrah Jack, thy horse stands behind the hedge, when thou needst him,
there thou shall find him: farewell and stand fast.


Fall. Now can not I strike him if I should be hanged.


Prin. Ned, where are our disguises?


Po. Here, hard by, stand close.


Fall. Now my masters, happy man be his dole, say I, every man to his
business. Enter the trauailers.


Travel. Come neighbor, the boy shall lead our horses down the hill, we will
walk a foot a while and ease our legs.


Thieves. Stand.


Travel. Jesus bless us.


Falst. Strike, down with them, cut the villains throats, a horeson
Caterpillars, bacon-sed knaves, they hate us youth, down with them, fleece
them.


Tra. O we are undone, both we and ours for ever.


Fall. Hang ye gorbellied knaves, are ye undone, no ye fat chuffes, I would
your store were here: on bacons on, what ye knaves young men must live, you are
grand iurers, are ye, we will iure ye faith.


Here they rob them and blind them. Exeunt. Enter the prince and Poynes. Prin.
The thieves have bound the true men, now could thou and I rob the thieves,
and go merrily to London, it would be argument for a week, laughter for a
month, and a good jest for ever.


Po. Stand close, I hear them coming.


Enter the thieves again. Fall. Come my masters, let us share and then to
horse before day, and the Prince and Poines be not two arrant cowardes there is
no equity stirring, there is no more valor in that Poynes, then in a wild
ducke.


Prin. Your money. As they are sharing the Prince and Po^^^ set upon them, they
all run away, and Falstalffe after a blow or two runs away too leaving the
booty behind them.


Poin. Villains.


Prin. Got with much ease* Now merrily to horse: the thieves are all scattered,
and possessed with fear so strongly, that they dare not meet each other, each
takes his fellow for an officer, away good Ned, Falstalffe sweates to death,
and lands the lean earth as he walks along, went not for laughing I should
pity him.


Poynes. How the rogue roard. Exeunt.

Enter Hotspur so^^^ reading a letter. But for mine own part my Lord I could be
well cont^^ted to be^ there, in respe^t of the love ^ bear your house.

He could be contented, why is ^ee not then? in the respect of the love he
bears our house* he shows in this, he loves his own barn better then he
loves our house. Let me see some more.

The purpose you vnderta^e is dangerous, Why that's certain, it is dangerous to
take a cold, to sleep, to drink, but I tell you (my Lord fool) out of this
nettle danger, we pluck this flower safety.

The purpose you undertake is dangerous, the friends you have named uncertain,
the time ^t self vnsorted, and your whole plot too light, for the counterpoyse
of so great an opposition.

Say you so, say you so, I say unto you again, you are a shallow cowardly
hind, and you lie: what a lack brain is this? by the Lord our plot is a good
plot, as ever was laid, our friends true and constant: a good plot, good
friends, and full of expectation: an excellent plot, very good friends; what a
frosty spirited rogue is this? why my Lord of York commends the plot, and the
general course of the Action. Zoundes and I were now by this rascal I could
brain him with his Ladies fan. Is there not my father, my uncle, and my
self; Lord Edmond Mortimer, my Lord of York, and Owen Glendower is there not
besides the Douglas, have I not all their letters to meet me in arms by the
ninth of the next month, and are they not some of them set forward already?
What a pagan rascal is this, an infidel? Ha you shall see now in very
sincerity of fear and cold heart, will he to the King, and lay open all our
proceedings? O I could d^uide my self, and go to buffets, for moving such a
dish of skim milk with so honorable an action. Hang him* let him tell the
king, we are prepared: I will set forward to night. Enter his Lady. How now
Kate, I must leave you within these two hours.


Lady. O my good Lord, why are you thus alone?
For what offense have I this fortnight bin
A banished woman from my Harries bed?
Tell me sweet Lord, what is it that takes from thee
Thy stomach, pleasure, and thy goulden sleep?
Why do thou bend thine eyes upon the earth?
And start so often when thou ^i^st alone?
Why have thou lost the fresh blood in thy cheeks?
And given my treasures and my rights of thee
To thick eyde musing, and cursed melancholy?
In thy faint slumbers I by thee have watched,
And heard the murmur, tales of iron wars,
Speak terms of manage to thy bounding steed,
Cry courage to the field. And thou have talked
Of sallies, and retyres of trenches tents,
Of pal^izadoes, frontiers, parapets,
Of basilisks, of canon, culuerin,
Of prisoners ransom, and of soldiors slain,
And all the currents of a heddy figh^*
Thy spirit within thee has bin so at war,
And thus has so bestird thee in thy sleeepe,
That beads of sweat have stood upon thy brow
Like bubbles in a late disturbed stream
And in thy face strange motions have appeard,
Such as we see when men restrain their breath,
On some great sudden hest. O what portents are these?
Some heavy business has my Lord in hand,
And I must know it else he loves me not.

Hot. What ho, is Gilliams with the packet gone?

Ser. He is my Lord, an hour ago.

Hot Has Butler brought those horses from the Sher^^fe

Ser. One horse my Lord he brought even now.

Hot. What horse Roane? a cropeate is it not?

Ser. It is my Lord.

Hot. That roane shall be my throne. Well, I will back him straight: O
Esperance, bid Butler lead him forth into the park.


La. But hear you my Lord.


Hot. What say thou my Lady?


La. What is it carries you away?


Hot. Why, my horse (my love) my horse.


La. Out you madhedded ape, a weazel has not such a deal of spleen as you
are tossed with. In faith i will know your business Harry that I will, I fear my
brother Mortimer does stir about his title, and has sent for you to line his
enterprise, but if you go.


Hot. So far a foot I shall be weary love.


La. Come, come you Paraquito, answer me directly unto this question that I
ask, in faith i will break thy little finger Harry and if thou will not tell me
all things true.


Hot. Away, away you trifler, love, I love thee not,
I care not for thee Kate, this is no world
To play with mammets, and to tilt with lips,
We must have bloody noses, and cracked crowns.
And pass them current too: gods me my horse:
What say thou Kate? what would thou have with me?

La. Do you not love me? do you not indeed?
Well, do not then, for since you love me not
I will not love my self. Do you not love me?
Nay tell me if you speak in jest or no?

Hot. Come, will thou see me ride?
And when I am a horseback I will swear
I love thee infinitely. But hark you Kate,
I must not have you henceforth question me
Whither I go, nor reason where about,
Whither I must, I must, and to conclude
This evening must I leave you gentle Kate,
I know you wise, but yet no farther wise
Then Harry Percies wife, constant you are,
But yet a woman, and for secrecy
No Lady closer, for I well believe
Thou will not utter what thou do not know,
And so far will I trust thee gentle Kate.

La. How, so far.

Hot. Not an inch further, but hark you Kate,
Whither I go, thither shall you go too:
To day will I set forth, to morrow you,
Will this content you Kate?

L^. It must of force. Exeunt

Enter Prince and Poines. Prin. Ned, preethe come out of that fat room, and
lend me thy hand to laugh a little.


Poi Where have bin Hal?


Prin. With three or four loggerheades, amongst three or fourscore
hogsheades. I have sounded the very base string of humility. Sirrah, I am
sworn brother to a leash of drawers, and can call them all by their christen
names, as Tom, Dicke, and Francis, they take it already upon their salvation,
that though I be but prince of Wales, yet I am the king of Courtesy, and tell me
fla^ly I am no proud Jack like Falstalffe, but a Corinthian, a lad of metal,
a good boy (by the Lord so they call me) and when I am king of England I shall
command all the good lads in East-cheape. They call drinking deep, dying
scarlet, and when you breath in your watering they cry hem, and bid you play it
off. To conclude, I am so good a proficie^t in one quarter of an hour that I
can drink with any Tinker in his own language, during my life. I tell thee
Ned thou have lost much honor, that thou w^rt not with me in this action; but
sweet Ned* to sweeten which name of Ned, I give thee this peniworth of sugar,
clapped even now into my hand by an vnderskinker, one that never spoke other
English in his life then eight shillings and six pence, and you are welcome,
with this shrill addition, anon, anon sir; skore a pint of bastard in the half
m^^ne, or so. But Ned, to drive away the time till Falstalffe come: I preethe
do thou stand in some by-roome, while I question my puny drawer to what end
he gave me the sugar, and do thou never leave calling Frances, that his tale to
me may be nothing but anon, step aside and i will show thee a present.


Po. Frances.


Prin. Thou art perfect.


Prin. Frances. Enter Drawer.


Fran. Anon, anon sir. Look down into the Pomgarnet, Ralphe.


Prin. Come hither Frances.


Fran. My Lord.


Prin. How long have thou to serve Frances?


Fran. Fors^oth five years, and as much as to*


Poi. Frances.


Fran. Anon, anon sir.


Prin. Five year, berlady a long lease for the clinking of pewter; but
Frances, dare^t thou be so valiant, as to play the cowarde with thy Indenture,
and show it a fair pair of heels, and run from it?


Fran. O Lord sir, i will be sworn upon all the books in England, I could find
in my heart.


Poin. Frances.


Fran. Anon sir.


Prin. How old art thou Frances?


Fran. Let me see, about Michelmas next I shalb^.


Poin. Frances.


Fran. Anon sir, pray stay a little my Lord.


Prin. Nay but hark you Frances, for the sugar thou gave me, it was a
peniworth, wast not?


Fran. O Lord, I would it had bin two.


Prince. I will give thee for it a thousand pound, ask me when thou will, and
thou shall have it,


Poin. Frances.


Fran. Anon, anon.


Prin. Anon Frances, no Frances, but to morrow Frances: or Frances a Thursday;
or indeed Fraunces when thou will. But Fraunces.


Fran. My Lord.


Prin. Will thou rob this leathern Ierkin, cristall button, no^pated, agat
ring, puke stocking, Caddice garter, smothe tongue, spanish pouch?


Fran. O Lord sir, who do you mean?


Prin. Why then your brown bastard is your only drink? for look you Fraunces,
your white canuas doublet will fulley. In Barbary sir, it cannot come to so
much.


Fran. What sir?


Poin Frances.


Prin. Away you rogue, do thou not hear them call.


Here they both call him, the Drawer stands amazed not kn^^ing which way to go.
Enter Vint^er. Vint. What standst thou s^il and hearst such a calling: (...) to
the guests within. My Lord, old sir John with half a douzen more are at the
door, shall I let them in?


Pri Let them alone a while, and then open the door: Poines.


Poi. Anon, anon sir. Enter Poines.


Prince. Sirrah, Falstalffe and the rest of the thieves are at the door, shall
we be merry?


Po. As merry as Crickets my lad, but hark ye, what cunning match have you
made with this jest of the Drawer: come what is the issue?


Prin. I am now of all humors, that have showed themselves humors since the
oulde days of good man Adam, to the pupil age of this present twelve a clock
at midnight. What Is a clock Frances?


Fran. Anon, anon sir.


Pr. That ever this fellow should have fewer words then a Parrat, and yet the
son of a woman. His industry is up stairs and down stairs, his eloquence
the parcel of a reckoning. I am not yet of Percyes mind, the Hotspur of the
North, he that kills me some six or seven douzen of Scots at a breakfast:
washes his hands, and says to his wife, fie upon this quiet life, I want
work. O my sweet Harry says she how many have thou killed to day? Give my
roane horse a drench (says he) and aunsweres some fourteen an hour after:
a trifle, a trifle. I preethe call in Falstalffe, i will play Percy, and that
damnde brawne shall play dame Mortimer his wife. Riuo says the drunkarde: call
in Ribs, call in Tallow.


Enter Falstaff. Poin. Welcome Jack, where have thou bin?


Falst. A plague of al cowards I say, and a vengeance too, marry and Amen: give
me a cup of sack boy. Ear Head this life long i will sow neatherstocks and mend
them, and foot them too. A plague of all cowards. Give me a cup of sache
rogue, is there no virtue extant? he drinks.


Prin. Did thou never see Titan kiss a dish of butter, pitiful hearted
Titan that melted at the sweet tale of the sons, if thou did, then behold
that compound.


Falst. You rogue, heeres lime in this sack too: there is nothing but rogery
to be found in villainous man, yet a cowarde is worse then a cup of sack with
lime in it. A villainous cowarde. Go thy ways old Jack, die when thou will, if
manhood, good manhood be not forgot upon the face of the earth, then am I a
shotten herring: there lives not three good men vnhangde in England, and one of
them is fat, and grows old, God help the while, a bad world I say, I would I
were a weauer. I could sing psalms* or any thing. A plague of all cowards I
say still.


Prin How now Wolsacke, what mutter you?


Falst. A kings son, if I do not beat thee out of thy kingdom with a dagger
of lath, and drive all thy subjects before thee like a flock of wild geese, i will
never wear hair on my face more, you prince of Wales.


Prin. Why you horeson round-man, what is the matter?


Falst. Are not you a cowarde? answer me to that, and Poines there.


Poin. Zoundes ye fat paunch, and ye call me cowarde by the Lord i will stab thee.


Falst. I call thee cowarde, ^le see thee damnde ere I call thee coward, but I
would give a thousand pound I could run as fast as thou can. You are
straight enough in the shoulders, you care not who sees your back: call you
that backing of your friends, a plague upon such backing, give me them that
will face me give me a cup of sack. I am a rogue if I drunk to day.


Prin. O v^llain, thy lips are scarce wipt since thou drunkst last.


Falst. All is one for that. He drinks.
A plague of all cowards still say I.

Prin, What Is the matter?


Falst. What Is the matter, there be four of us here have taken a thousand pound
this day morning


Prin. Where is it Jack, where is it?


Fall. Where is it? taken from us it is: a hundred upon poor four of us.


Prin. What, a hundred, man?


Falst. I am a rogue if I were not at half sword with a douzen of them two
hours together. I have escaped by miracle. I am eight times thrust through the
doublet, four through the hose, my buckler cut through and through, my sword
hackt like a handsaw, ecce signum. I never dealt better since I was a man* al
would not do. A plague of all cowards, let them speak, if they speak more or
less then truth, they are villains, and the sons of darkness.


Gad Speak sirs, how was it?


Ross. We four set upon some douzen.


Falst. Sixteen at least my Lord.


Ross. And bound them.


Peto No, no, they were not bound.


Falst. You rogue they were bound every man of them, or I am a Jew else: an
Ebrew Jew.


Ross. As we were sharing, some six or seven fresh men set upon us.


Falst. And unbound the rest, and then come in the other.


Prin. What, fought you with them all?


Falst. Al, I know not what you call al, but if I fought not with fifty of them
I am a bunch of radish: if there were not two or three and fifty upon poor
old Jack, then am I no two legd Creature.


Prin. Pray God you have not murdered some of them.


Falst. Nay, that's past praying for, I have pepperd two of them. Two I am sure
I have paid, two rogues in buckrom suits: I tell thee what Hall, if I tell thee
a lie, spit in my face; call me horse, thou know my old ward: here I lay,
and thus I bore my point, four rogues in B^ckrom let drive at me.


Prin What four? thou said but two even now.


Falst. Four Hal, I told thee four.


Poin. I, I, he said four.


F^l. These four came all a front, and mainely thrust at me, I made me no more
ado, but took all their seven points in my target, thus.


Prin. Seven, why there were but four even now.


Falst. In Buckrom.


Po. I four in Buckrom suites.


Falst. Seven by these hilts, or I am a villain else.


Pr. Preethe let him alone we shall have more anon.


Falst. Do thou hear me Hal?


Prince. I, and mark thee to jack.


Falst. Do so for it is worth the listening to, these nine in Buckrom that I
told thee of.


Prince. So, two more already.


Falst. Their points being broken.


Poy Down fell their hose.


Falst. Began to give me ground: but I followed me close, came in, foot, and
hand, and with a thought, seven of the eleven I paid.


Prin. O monstrous! eleven Buck^om men grown out of two.


Fall. But as the devil would have it, three misbegotten knaves in Kendall
green came at my back, and let drive at me, for it was so dark Hal, that
thou could not see thy hand.


Prin. These lies are like their father that begets them, gross as a
mountain, open, palpable. Why thou clay braind guts, thou knotty-pated fool,
thou horeson obscene greasy tallow-catch.


Falst. What art thou mad? art thou mad? is not the truth the truth?


Pr. Why, how could thou know these men in Kendal green when it was so dark
thou could not see thy hand, come tell us your reason. What say thou to
this?


Po. Come your reason, Jack your reason.


Falst. What, upon compulsion: Zoundes, and I were at the strappado, or all
the rackes in the world, I would not tell you on compulsion. Give you a reason
on compulsion? if reasons were as plentiful as blackberries, I would give no
man a reason upon compulsion, I.


Prin. I Will be no longer guilty of this sin. This sanguine coward this bed
pres^er, this horse-backe-breaker, this huge hill of flesh.


Fa. Zbloud you starueling, you elsskin you dried neats^ong, you bulspizzle,
you stockfish: O for breath to utter what is like thee, you tailers yard* you
sheath, you bowcase, you vile standing tuck.


Prin. Well, breath a while, and then to it again, and when thou have tired thy
self in base comparisons hear me speak but this.


Po. Mark ^acke.


Prin. We two saw you four set on four and bound them and were masters of
their wealth: mark now how a plain tale shall put you down, then did we two
set on you four, and wit^^^ word, outfac't you from your prize, and have it,
yea and can show it you here in the house: and Falstalffe you carried your guts
away as nimbly, with as quick dexterity, and roard for mercy, and still run
and roard, as eue^ I heard bul-calf. What a slave art thou to hacke thy sword
as thou have done? and then say it was in fight. What trick? what device? what
starting hole can thou now find out, to hide thee from this open and apparent
shame?


Po. Come, lets hear jack, what trick have thou now?


Falst. By the Lord, I knew ye as well as he that made ye. Why hear you my
masters, was it for me to kill the heir apparent? should I turn upon the
true prince? why thou know I am as valiaut as Hercules: but beware instinct,
the lion will not touch the true prince, instinct is a great matter. I was now
a cowarde on instinct, I shall think the better of my self, and thee during
my life; I for a valiant lion, and thou for a true prince: but by the Lord,
lads, I am glad you have the money, Hostess clap to the doors, watch to
night, pray to morrow, gallants, lads, boys, hearts of gold, all the titles
of good fellowship come to you. What shall we be merry, shall we have a
play extempore?


Prin. Content, and the argument shall be thy running away.


Falst. A, no more of that Hal and thou love me. Enter hostess


Ho. O Jesus, my Lord the prince!


Prin. How now my lady the hostess, what say thou to me?


Ho. Marry my Lo there is a noble man of the court at door would speak with
you: he says he commes from your father.


Prin. Give him as much as will make him a royal man, and send him back
again to my mother.


Fall. What manner of man is he?


Host. An old man.


Falst. What does gravity out of his bed at midnight? Shall I give him his
answer?


Prin. Preethe do jack.


Fa. Faith and i will send him packing.


Exit. Prin. Now sirs birlady you fought fair, so did you Peto, so did you
Bardol, you are lions to, you ran away upon instinct, you will not touch the
true prince, no fie.


Bar. Faith I ran when I saw others run.


Prin. Faith tell me now in earnest, how came Falstalffs sword so hackt?


Pet^. Why, he hackt it with his dagger, and said he would swear truth out
of England, but he would make you believe it was done in fight, and persuaded
us to do the like.


Bar. Yea, and to tickle our noses with spearegrasse, to make them bleed, and
then to beslubber our garments with it, and swear it was the blood of true
men. I did that I did not this seven year before, I blushed to hear his
monstrous devices.


Prin. O villain, thou stolest a cup of Sack eighteen years ago and were
taken with the manner, and ever since thou have blushed extempore, thou had
fire and sword on thy side, and yet thou ranst away, what instinct had thou
for it?


Bar. My Lord do you see these meteors? do you behold these exhalations?


Prin. I do.


Bar. What think you they portend?


Prin. Hot livers, and cold purses.


Bar. Choler, my Lord, if rightly taken.


Enter Falstalffe. Prin. No if rightly taken halter. Here commes lean jack,
here commes bare bone: how now my sweet creature of bumbast, how long is it ago
jack since thou saw thine own knee?


Fall. My own knee, when I was about thy years (Hal.) I was not an Eagles
talent in the waste, I could have crept into a^ie Aldermans thumb ring: a
plague of sighing and grief it blows a man up like a bladder. There Is villainous
news abroad, here was sir John Bracy from your father: you must to the court
in the morning. That same mad fellow of the North Percie, and he of Wales that
gave Amamon the bastinado and make Lucifer cuckold, and swore the devil his
true liegeman upon the cross of a Welsh hook: what a plague call you him?


Poynes. O Glendower.


Falst. Owen, Owen, the same, and his son in law Mortimer, and old
Northumberland, and that sprightly Scot of Scotts, Douglas, that runs a
horseback up a hill perpendicular.


Prin. He that rides at high speed, and with his pistol killes a sparrow
flying.


Falst. You have hit it.


Prin. So did he never the sparrow.


Fall. Well, that rascal has good metal in him, he will not run.


Prin. Why, what a rascal art thou then, to praise him so for running?


Fall. A horseback (ye cuckoe) but a foot he will not budge a foot.


Prin. Yes Jack, upon instinct.


Falst. I grant ye upon instinct: well he is thereto, and one Mordacke, and a
thousand blew caps more. Worcester is stolen away tonight, thy fathers beard is
turned white with the news, you may buy land now as cheap as stinking Mackrel.


Prin. Why then, it is like if there come a hot June, and this civil
buffeting hold, we shall buy maidenheads as they buy hob nails, by the
hundreds.


Falst. By the mass lad thou say true, it is like we shall have good
trading that way: but tell me Hall, art not thou horrible afearde? thou being
heir apparent, could the world pick thee out three such enemies again? as
that fiend Douglas, that spirit Percy, and that devil Glendower, art thou not
horribly afraid? does not thy blood thril at it?


Prin. Not a whit faith, I lack some of thy instinct.


Falst. Well thou will be horrible chidde to morrow when thou come to thy
father, if thou love me practice an answer.


Prin. Do thou stand for my father and examine me upon the particulars of my
life.


Falst. Shall I* content. This chair shall be my state, this dagger my
scepter, and this cushion my crown.


Prin. Thy state is taken for a joined stool, thy golden scepter for a leaden
dagger, and thy precious rich crown for a pitiful bald crown.


Falst. Well, and the fire of grace be not quite out of thee now shall thou
be moved. Give me a cup of Sack to make my eyes look read, that it may be
thought I have wept, for I must speak in passion, and I will do it in king
Cambises vain.


Prince. Well, here is my leg.


Falst. And here is my speech; stand aside Nobility.


Host. O Jesus, this is excellent sport in faith.


Falst. Weep not sweet Queen, for trickling tears are vain.


Host. O the father, how he holds his countenance?


Fall. For Gods sake Lords, convey my trustfull Queen,
For tears do stop the floudgates of her eyes.

Host. O Jesus, he does it as like one of these harlotrie plaiers as ever I see.


Falst. Peace good pint-pot, peace good tickle-braine.

Harrie, I do not only marvel where thou spendest thy time, but also how
thou art accompanied. For though the cammomill, the more it is trodden on, the
faster it grows: so youth the more it is wasted, the sooner it wears: that
thou art my son I have partly thy mothers word, partly my own opinion, but
chiefly a villainous trick of thine eye, and a foolish hanging of thy nether
lip, that does warrant me. If then thou be son to me, here lies the
point, why being son to me, art thou so pointed at? shall the blessed sun
of heaven prove a micher, and eat black-berries? a question not to be asked.
Shall the son of England prove a thief, and take purses? a question to be
asked. There is a thing Harry, which thou have often heard of, and it is known
to many in our land by the name of pitch. This pitch (as ancient writers do
report) does defile, so does the company thou keep: for Harrie, now I do
not speak to thee in drink, but in tears; not in pleasure but in passion:
not in words only, but in woes also: and yet there is a virtuous man, whom I
have often noted in thy company, but I know not his name.


Prin. What manner of man and it like your Majesty?


Fall. A goodly portly man ifayth, and a corpulent of a cheerful look* a
pleasing eye, and a most noble carriage, and as I think his age some fifty, or
birladie inclining to threescore, and now I remember me, his name is
Falstalffe, if that man should be lewdly given, he deceives me. For Harry,
I see virtue in his looks: if then the tree may be known by the fruit, as
the fruit by the tree, then peremptorily I speak it, there is virtue in that
Falstalffe, him keep with the rest banish, and tell me now thou naughty
varlet, tell me where have thou been this month?


Prin. Do thou speak like a king, do thou stand for me, and i will play my
father.


Fall. Depose me, if thou do it half so gravely, so maiestically, both in
word and matter, hang me up by the heels for a rabbet sucker, or a poulters
Hare


Prin. Well, here I am set.


Fall. And here I stand, judge my masters.


Prin. Now Harry, whence come you?


Fall. My noble Lord from Eastcheape.


Prin. The complaints I hear of thee are grievous.


Fall. Zbloud my Lord they are false: nay i will tickle ye for a young prince I
faith.


Prin. Swearest thou ungracious boy, hence forth nere look on me, thou art
violently carried away from grace, there is a devil haunts thee in the
likeness of an old fat man, a tun of man is thy companion: why do thou
converse with that trunk of humors, that boulting hutch of beastliness, that
swollen parcel of dropsies, that huge bombard of sack, that stuffed cloakebag of
guts, that roasted Manningtre Ox with the pudding in his belly, that reverent
vice, that gray iniquity, that father ruffian, that vanity in years, wherein
is he good, but to taste sack and drink it? wherein neat and clenly, but to
carue a capon and eat it? wherein cunning, but in craft? wherein cra^ty, but in
villainy? wherein villainous, but in all things? where in worthy, but in nothing?


Fall. I would your grace would take me with you, whom means your grace?


Prin. That villainous abominable misleader of youth, Falstalffe, that old
white bearded Satan.


Fall. My Lord, the man I know.


Prin. I know thou do.


Fall. But to say I know more harm in him then in my self, were to say more
then I know: that he is old the more the pity, his ^hite hairs do witness
it, but that he is saving your reverence, a whoremaster, that I utterly deny:
if sack and sugar be a fault, God help the wicked; if to be old and merry be
a sin, then many an old host that I know is damnd: if to be fat be to be hated,
then Pharaos lane kine are to be loved. No my good lord banish Peto, banish
Bardoll, banish Poines, but for sweet Jack Falstalffe, kind Jack Falstalffe,
true Jack Falstalffe, valiant Jack Falstalffe and therefore more valiant being
as he is old Jack Falstalffe, banish not him thy Harries company, banish not
him thy Harries company, banish plumpe Jack, and banish all the world.


Prin. I do, I will. Enter Bardoll running.


Bar. O my Lord, my Lord, the Sheriff with a most monstrous watch is at the
door.


Falst. Our ye rogue, play out the play, I have much to say in the behalf of
that Falstalffe.


Enter the hostess. Host. O Jesus, my Lord, my Lord!


Prin. Heigh, heigh, the Devil rides upon a fiddle stick, what is the matter?


Host. The Sheriff and all the watch are at the door, they are come to search
the house, shall I let them in?


Falst. Do thou hear Ha^? never call a true piece of gold a counterset,
thou art essen^ially made without seeming so.


Prin. And thou a natural coward without instinct.


Falst. I deny your Mayor, if you will deny the Sheriff so, if not, let him
enter. If I become not a Cart as well as another man a plague on my bringing
up, I hope I shall as soon be strangled with a halter as another.


Prin. Go hide thee behind the Arras, the rest walk up above, now my masters
for a true face, and good conscience.


Falst. Both which I have had, but their date is out, and therefore i will hide me.


Prin. Call in the Sheriff.


Enter Sheriff and the Carrier. Prin. Now master Sheriff, what is your will
with me?


Sher. First pardon me my Lord. A hue and cry has followed certain men unto
this house.


Prin. What men?


Sher. One of them is well known my gracious Lord, a gross fat man.


Car. As fat as butter.


Prin. The man I do assure you is not here,
For I my self at this time have emploid him^.
And Sheriff, I will engage my word to thee,
That I will by to morrow dinner time
Send him to answer thee or any man,
For any thing he shall be charged withal,
And so let me entreat you leave the house.

Sher. I will my Lord: there are two gentlemen
Have in this robbery lost 300. marks.

Prin. It may be so: if he have robbed these men
He shall be answerable* and so fare well.

She. God night my noble Lord.

Prin. I think it is god morrow is it not?

She. Indeed my Lord I think it be two a clock. Exit

Prin. This oy^ie rascal is known as well as Poules: go call him forth.


Peto. Falstalffe: fast asleep behind the Arras, and snorting like a horse.


Prin. Hark how hard he fetches breath, search his pockets.


He searches his pocket, and finds certain papers. Pr. What have thou found?

Pet. Nothing but papers my Lord.

Prin. Lets see what they be, read them. Item a capon. 2. s, ii, d. Item sauce.
iiij, d. Item sack two gallons. v. s, viij, d. Item anchaues and sack after
supper. 2, s, vj, d. Item bread. ob.


O monstrous! but one half peniworth of bread to this intolerable deal of
sack? what there is else keep close, weel read it at more aduan^age; there let
him sleep till day, i will to the court in the morning. We must all to the wars,
and thy place shall be honorable. I Will procure this fat rogue a charge of foot,
and I know his death will be a march of twelve skore, the money shall be paid
back again with advantage; be with me betimes in the morning, and so good
morrow Peto.


Peto Good morrow good my Lord. Exeunt


Enter Hotspur, Worcester, Lord Mortimer, Owen Glendower. Mor. These promises
are fair, the parties sure,
^

Hot. Lord Mortimer, and coosen Glendower will you sit down? and Uncle
Worcester; a plague upon it I have forgot the map.

Glendow. No here it is; sit Coosen Percy, sit good Coosen Hotspur, for by that
name as often as Lancaster does speak of you, his cheek looks pale, and with a
rising sigh he wishes you in heaven.

Hot. And you in hell, as often as he hears Owen Glendower spoke of.


Glen. I cannot blame him; at my nativity
The front of heaven was full of fiery shapes
Of burning cressets, and at my birth
The fram^ and huge foundation of the earth
Shaked like a coward.

Hot. Why (...) it would have done at the same season if your mothers cat ha^
but kittend, though your self had never been borne.

Glen, I say (...) ^arth did shake when I was borne.

Hot. And I say the earth was not of my mind,
If you suppose as fearing you it shook.

Glen. The heavens were all on fire, the earth did tremble,

Hot. Oh then the earth shook to see the heavens on fire,
And not in fear of your nativity,
Diseased nature oftentimes breaks forth,
In strange eruptions, often the teeming earth
Is with a kind of collicke pincht and vexed,
By the imprisoning of unruly wind
Within hervvombe, which for enlargement striving
Shakes the old Beldame earth, and topples down
Steeples and mossegrovvn towers. At your birth
Our Grandam earth, having this distemprature
^n passion shook.

Glen. Coosen of many men
I do not bear these crossings, give me leave
To tell you once again that at my birth
The front of heaven was full of fiery shapes,
The goats ran from the mountains, and the herds
Were strangely clamorous to the frighted fields.
These signs have marked me extraordinary,
And all the courses of my life do show
I am not in the roll of common men:
Where is he living clipped in with the sea,
That chides the bancks of England, Scotland, Wales,
Which calls me pupil or has read to me?
And bring him out that is but woman's son?
Can trace me in the tedious ways of Art,
And hold me pace in deep experiments.

Hot. I think there is no man speaks better Welsh:
I Will to dinner.

Mor. Peace coosen Percy, you will make him mad.

Glen. I can call spirits from the va^ly deep.

Hot. Why so can I, or so can any man,
But will they come when you do call for them

Glen. Why I can teach you coosen to command the Devil*

Hot. And I can teach thee coose to shame the devil,
By telling truth. Tell truth and shame the devil:
If thou have power to raise him bring him hither,
And i will be sworn I have power to shame him hence:
Oh while you live tell truth and shame the devil.

Mor. Come, come, no more of this unprofitable chat.

Glen. Three times has Henry Bullenbrooke made head
Against my power, thrice from the banks of Wye,
And sandy bottomd Seuerne have I sent him
Booteles home, and weather beaten back.

Hot. Home without b^^tes, and in foul weather too,
How scapes she agues in the devils name?

Glen. Come here is the map, shall we divide our right?
According to our three fold order taken.

Mor. The Archdeacon has divided it
Into three limits very equally:
England from Trent, and S^uerne hitherto,
By South and East is to my part assignd:
Al westward, Wales beyond the Seuerne shore,
And all the fertile land within that bound
To Owen Glendower: and dear coose to you
The remnant Northward lying off from Trent,
And our indentures tripartite are drawn,
Which being s^aled enterchangeably,
(A business that this night may execute:)
To morrow coosen Percy you and I
And my good Lord of Worcester will set forth
To meet your father and the Scottish power,
As is appointed us at Shrewsbury.
My father Glendower is not ready yet,
Nor shall we need his help these fourteen days,
Within that space you may have drawn together
Your tenants, friends, and neighboring gentlemen.

Glen. A shorter time shall send me to you Lords,
And in my conduct shall your Ladies come,
From whom you now must steal and take no leave,
For there will be a world of water shed,
Upon the parting of your wives and you.

Hot. Me thinks my moity North from Burton here,
In quantit^ equals not one of yours,
See how this river comes me cranking in,
And cuts me from the best of all my land,
A huge half moon, a monstrous scantle out,
I Will have the current in this place damnd up,
And here the smug and silver Trent shall run
In a new ch^nnell fair and euenly,
It shall not wind with such a deep indent,
To ^ob m^ of so rich a bottom here.

Glen. Not wind it shall, it must, you see it does.

Mor Yea, but mark bow he bears his course, and runs me up with like
advantage on the other side, gelding the opposed continent as much as on the
other side it takes from you.

Worcester Yea but a little charge will trench him here,
And on this Northside win this cape of land,
And the^ he ru^s straight and even.

Hot. I Will have it so a little charge will do it.

Glen. I Will not have it altered.

Hot Will not you?

Glen. No nor you shall not.

Hot. Who shall ^ay me nay?

Glen. Why that will I.

Hot. Let me not understand you then, speak it in Welsh.

Glen. I can speak English Lord as well as you,
For I was traind up in the English court,
Where being but young I framed to the harp
Many an English ditty lovely well,
And gave the tongue a helpeful ornament,
A virtue that was never seen in you.

Hot. Marry and I am glad of it with all my heart,
I had rather be a kitten and cry mew,
Then one of these same miter ballet mongers,
I had rather hear a brazen can stick turned,
Or a dry wheel grate on the exle tree,
And that would set my teeth nothing an edge.
Nothing so much as mi^sing poetry,
It Is like the forced gate of a shuffling nag.

Glen. Come, you shall have Trent turned.

Hot. I do not care, i will give thrice so much land
To any well deserving friend:
But in the way of bargain mark ye me,
I Will cavil on the ninth part of a hair,
Are the Indentures drawn, shall we be gone?

Glen. The moon shines fair, you may away by night
I Will haste the writer, and withal
Break with your, wives of your departure hence,
I am afraid my daughter will run mad,
So much she doteth on her Mortimer. Exit

Mor. Fie coosen Percy, how you cross my father.

Hot. I cannot choose, sometime he angers me
With telling me of the Mold warp and the Ant,
Of the dreamer Merlin and his prophecies,
And of a Dragon and a finles fish,
A clipwingd Griffin and a molten raven,
A couching Leon and a ramping Cat,
And such a deal of skimble scamble stuff,
As puts me from my faith. I tell you what,
He held me last night at least nine hours
In reckoning up the several Devils names
That were his lackies, I cried hum, and well go to,
But marked him not a word O he is as tedious
As a tired horse, a railing wife,
Worse then a smoky house. I had rather live
With cheese and garlike in a Windmil far,
Then feed on cates and have him talk to me,
In any summer house in Christendom.

Mor. In says he is a worthy gentleman,
Exceedingly well read and profited
In strange concealements, valiant as a lion,
And wondrous affable; and as bountiful
As mines of India; shall I tell you coosen,
He holds your temper in a high respect
And curbs himself even of his natural scope,
When you come cross his humor, faith he does,
I warrant you that man is not alive
Might so have tempted him as you have done,
Without the taste of danger and reproof,
But do not use it often, let me entreat you.

Worcester. In faith my Lord you are too wilful blame,
And since your coming hither have done enough
To put him quite besides his patience,
You must needs learn Lord to amend this fault,
Though sometimes it show greatness, courage, blood,
And that's the dearest grace it renders you,
Yet oftentimes it does present harsh rage,
Defect of manners, want of government,
Pride, hautinesse, opinion, and disdain,
The least of which hanting a noble man,
Loses men's hearts and leaves behind a stain
Upon the beauty of all parts besides,
Beguiling them of commendation.

Hot. Well I am schoold good manners be your speed,
Here come our wives, and let us take our leave.

Enter Glendower with the Ladies. Mor. This is the deadly spite that angers me,
My wife can speak no English, I no Welsh.

Glen My daughter weeps, she will not part with you,
She Will be a souldior to, she will to the wars.

Mor. Good father tell her, that she and my Aunt Percy
Shall follow in your conduct speed^ly.

Glondower speaks to her in Welsh, and she answers him in the same. Glen. She
is desperate here,
A peevish self wild harlotrie, one that no persuasion can do good upon.

The Lady speaks in Welsh. Mor. I understand thy looks, that pretty Welsh,
Which thou powrest down from these swelling heavens,
I am too perfect in, and but for shame
In such a parley should I answer thee.

The Lady aga^ne in welsh Mor. I understand thy kisses, and thou mine,
And that's a feeling disputation,
But I will never be a truant love,
Till I have learnt thy language, for thy tongue
Makes Welsh as sweet as ditties highly pend,
Sung by a fair Queen in a summers bower,
With rauishing division to her Lute.

Glen. Nay, if you melt, then will she run mad.

The Lad^e speaks again in Welsh. Mor. O I am ignorance it self in this.

Glen. She bids you on the wanton rushes lay you down,
And rest your gentle head upon her lap,
And she will sing the song that pleases you,
And on your eyelids crown the God of sleep,
Charming your blood with pleasing heaviness,
Making such difference twixt wake and sleep,
As is the difference betwixt day and night,
The hour before the heavenly harnest teeme
Begins his golden progress in the east.

M^r. With all my heartile sit and hear her sing,
By that time will our book I think be drawn.

Glen. Do so, and those musitions that shall play to you,
Hang in the air a thousand leagues from hence,
And straight they shall be here, sit and attend.

Hot. Come Kate, thou art perfect in lying down,
Come quick, quick, that I may lay my head in thy lap.

La. Go ye giddy goose.

The music plays. Hot. Now I perceive the devil understands Welsh,
And it is no marvel he is so humorous,
Bi^^ady he is a good musition.

La. Then should you be nothing but musical,
For you are altogether gouernd by humors,
Lie still ye thief, and hear the Lady sing in Welsh.

Hot. I had rather hear lady my brache howl in Irish.

La. Would thou have thy head broken?

Hotsp No.

La. Then be still.

Hotsp. Neither, it is a woman's fault.

La. Now God help thee.

Hot. To the Welsh Ladies bed.

La. What Is that?

Hot. Peace, she sings.

Here the Lady sings a welsh song. Hot. Come Kate, i will have your song too.

La Not mine in good sooth.

Hot. Not yours in good sooth. Heart, you swear like a comfit-makers wife, not
you in good sooth, and as true as I live, and as
God shall mend me, and as sure as day:
And give such sarcenet surety for thy oaths,
As if thou never walkst further then Finsbury.
Swear me Kate like a lady as thou art,
A good mouthfilling oath, and leave in sooth,
And such protest of pepper ginger bread
To velvet gards, and Sunday Citizens.
Come sing.

La. I will not sing.

Hot. It Is the next way to turn tailor, or be redbrest teacher, and the
indentures be drawn i will away within these two hours, and so come in when ye
will. Exit.

Glen. Come come, Lord Mortimer, you are as slow,
As Hot. Lord Percy is on fire to go:
By this our book is drawn, we will but seal,
And then to horse immediately.

Mor. With all my heart. Exeunt.

Enter the King, Prince of Wales, and others. King. Lords give us leave, the
Prince of Wales and I,
Must have some private conference, but be near at hand,
For we shall presently have need of you. Exeunt Lords.
I know not whether God will have it so
For some displeasing service I have done,
That in his secret doom out of my blood,
Heel breed reuengement and a scourge for me:
But thou do in thy passages of life,
Make me believe that thou art only marked
For the hot vengeance, and the rod of heaven,
To punish my mistreadings. Tell me else
Could such inordinate and low desires,
Such poor, such bare, such lewd, such mean attempts,
Such barten pleasures, rude society
As thou art matched withal, and grafted to,
Accompany the greatness of thy blood,
And hold their leu^ll with thy princely heart?

Prin. So please your Majesty, I would I could
Quit all offenses with as clear excuse,
As well as I am doubtless I can purge
My self of many I am chargd withal,
Yet such extenuation let me beg,
As in reproof of many tales deuisde,
Which often the ear of greatness needs must hear
By smiling pickthanks, and base news mongers,
I may for some things true, wherein my youth
Has faulty wandered, and irregular,
Find pardon on my true submission.

Kin. God pardon thee yet let me wonder, Harry,
At thy affections, which do hold a wing
Quite from the flight of all thy ancestors,
Thy place in counsel thou have rudely lost
Which by thy younger brother is supplide,
And art almost an allien to the hearts
Of all the Court and princes of my blood,
The hope and expectation of thy time
Is ruind, and the soul of every man
Prophetically do for^thinke thy fall:
Had I so lavish of my presence been,
So common hackneid in the eyes of men,
So stale and cheap to vulgar company.
Opinion that did help me to the crown,
Had still kept loyal to possession,
And left me in reputelesse banishment,
A fellow of no mark nor likelihoode.
By being seldom seen, I could not stir
But like a Comet I was wondered at
That men would tell their children this is he:
Others would say, where, which is Bullingbrooke?
And then I stole all courtesy from heaven,
And dressed my self in such humility
That I did pluck allegiance from men's hearts,
Loud shouts, and salutations from their mouths,
Even in the presence of the crowned king.
Thus did I keep my person fresh and new,
My presence like a roabe pontifical,
Nere seen but wondered at, and so my state
Seldom, but sumptuous showed like a feast,
And wan by rareness such solemnity.
The skipping king, he ambled up and down,
With shallow iesters, and rash bauin wits,
Soon kindled, and ^oone burnt, ca^ded his state,
Mingled his royalty with cap^ing ^ooles,
Had his great name profaned with their scorns,
And gave his countenance against his name
To laugh at gibing boys, and stand the push
Of every beardlesse vain comparatiue,
Grew a companion to the common stree^es,
Enfe often himself to popularitie,
That being daily swallowed by men's eyes,
They surfetted with honey, and began to loath
The taste of sweetness, whereof a little
More then a little, is by much too much.
So when he had occasion to be seen,
He was but as the Cuckoe is in June,
Heard, not regarded: Scene, but with such eyes
As sick and blunted with community,
Afford no extraordinary gaze.
Such as is bent on sun-like majesty,
When it shines seldom in admirring eyes,
But rather drowzd, and hung their eie-lids down,
Slept in his face, and rendered such aspect
As cloudy men use to their adversaries,
Being with his presence glutted, gordge, and full.
And in that very line Harry stand thou,
For thou have lost thy princely privilege
With vile participation. Not an eye
But is a weary of thy common sight,
Save mine, which has desired to see thee more,
Which now does that I would not have it do,
Make blind it self with foolish tenderness.

Prin. I shall hereafter my thrice gracious Lord,
Be more my self.

King. For all the world,
As thou art to this hour was Richard then,
When I from France set foot at Rauenspurgh,
And even as I was than, is Percy now,
Now by my scepter, and my soul to boot,
He has more worthy interest to the state
Then thou the shadow of succession.
For of no right, nor color like to right,
He does fill fields with harness in the realm,
Turns head against the lions armed jaws,
And being no more in debt to years, then thou
Leads ancient Lords, and reverend Bishops on
To bloody battles, and to bruising arms.
What never dying honor has he got
Against renowned Douglas? Whose high deeds,
Whose hot incursions, and great name in arms,
Holds from al soldiers chief maioritie
And military title capital.
Through all the kingdom that acknowledge Christ*
Thrice has this Hotspur Mar^ in swathling clothes,
This infant warrier in his enterprises,
Discomfited great Douglas, taken him once,
Enlargd him, and made a friend of him,
To fill the mouth of deep defiance up,
And shake the peace and safety of our throne,
And what say you to this? Percy Northumberland,
The Archbishops grace of York, Douglas, Mortimer,
Capitulate against us, and are up.
But wherefore do I tell these news to thee?
Why Harry do I tell thee of my foes,
Which art my nearest and dearest enemy?
Thou that art like enough through vassal fear,
Base inclination, and the start of spleen,
To fight against me under Percies pay,
To dog his heels, and curtsie at his frowns,
To show how much thou art degenerate.

Prin. Do not think so, you shall not find it so,
And God forgive them that so much have swaide
Your majesty's good thoughts away from me.
I will redeem all this on Percies head,
And in the closing of some glorious day
Be bold to tell you that I am your son,
When I will wear a garment all of blood,
And stain my favors in a bloody mask,
Which washed away shall scou^e my shame with it,
And that shall be the day when ere it lights,
That this same child of honor and renown,
This gallant Hotspur, this all praised knight,
And your unthought of Harry chance to meet,
For every honor sitting on his helm
Would they were multitudes, and on my head
My shames redoubled. For the time will com
That I shall make this Northren youth exchange
His glorious deeds for my indignities.
Percy is but my factor, good my Lord,
To engrosse up glorious deeds on my behalf.
And I will call him to so strickt account,
That he shall render every glory up,
Yea, even the sleightest worship of his time,
Or I will tear the reckoning from his heart.
This in the name of God I promise here,
The which if he be pleased I shall perform:
I do beseech your majesty may salve
The long grown wounds of my intemperance,
If not, the end of life cancels all bands,
And I will die a hundred thousand deaths
Ere break the smallest parcel of this vow.

King. A hundred thousand rebels die in this,
Thou shall have charge and sovereign trust herein.
How now good blunt thy looks are full of speed.

Enter Blunt. Blunt. So has the business that I come to speak of.
Lord Mortimer of Scotland has sent word,
That Douglas and the English Rebels met
The eleventh of this month at Shrewsbury,
A mighty and a fearful head they are,
If promises be kept on every hand,
As ever offered foul play in a state.

King. The Earl of Westmerland set forth to day,
With him my son Lord John of Lancaster,
For this advertisement is five days old.
On Wednesday next, Harry you shall set forward,
On thursday we our selves will march. Our meeting
Is Bridgenorth, and Harry, you shall march
Through Glocestershire, by which account
Our business valued some twelve days hence,
Our general forces at Bridgenorth shall meet:
Our hands are full of business, lets away,
Advantage feeds him fat while men delay. Exeunt.

Enter Falstalffe and Bardol. Fall. Bardoll, am I not fallen away vilely since
this last action? do I not bate? do I not dwindle? Why, my skin hangs about
me like an old Ladies loose gown. I am withered like an oulde apple John.
Well, i will repent and that suddenly, while I am in some liking, I shall be* out
of heart shortly, and then I shall have no strength to repent. And I have not
forgotten what the inside of a Church is made of, I am a Pepper come, a brewers
Horse, the inside of a Church Company, villainous company, has been the spoil
of me.


Bar. Sir John, you are so fretfull you cannot live long.


Fall. Why, there is it; come sing me a bawdie song, make me merry. I was as
virtuously given as a gentleman need to be, virtuous enough, swore little,
dic't not above seven times a week, went to a baudy house not above once in a
quarter of an hour, paid money that I borrowed three or four times, lived
well, and in good compass, and now I live out of all order, out of all
compass.


Bar. Why, you are so fat sir John, that you must needs be out of all
compass: out of all reasonable compass, sir John.


Fall. Do thou amend thy face, and i will amend my life: thou art our Admiral, thou
bear the lantern in the poope, but it is in the nose of thee: thou art the
knight of the burning lamp.


Bar. Why, sir John, my face does you no harm.


Fall. No i will be sworn, I make as good use of it as many a man does of a deaths
head, or a momento mori. I never see thy face, but I think upon hell fire, and
Dives that lived in Purple: for there he is in his robes burning burning. If
thou were any way given to ver^ue, I would swear by thy face: my oath should
be by this fire that Gods Angel. But thou art altogether given over: and went
indeed but for the light in thy face, the son of utter darkness. When thou
must up God s^^ll in the night to catch my horse, if I did not think thou
had been an ignis fatuus, or a ball of wildfire, there is no purchase in
money. O thou art a perpetual triumph, an everlasting bonefire light, thou
have saved me a thousand Marks in Linkes, and Torches, walking with thee in
the night betwixt taueme and taueme; but the sack that thou ha^^ drunk me,
would have bought me lights as good cheap, at the dearest Chandlers in Europe.
I have maintained that Sallamander of yours with fire any time this two and
thirty years, God reward me for it.


Bar. Zbloud, I would my face were in your belly.


Fall. God a mercy, so should I be sure to be har^burn^. How now dame Partlet
the hen, have you enquird Enter host. yet who picked my pocket?


Hostess. Why sir John, what do you think sir John, do you think I keep
thieves in my house, I have searched, I have enquired, so has my husband, man by
man, boy by boy, servant by servant, the tight of a hair, was never lost in my
house before.


Fall. Ye lie Hostess, Bardoll was shau'd, and lost many a hair, and i will be
sworn my pocket was picked: go to, you are a woman, go.


Ho. Who I No, I defy thee: Gods light I was never called so in mine own house
before.


Fall. Go to. I know you well enough.


Ho. No, sir John you do not know me, sir John, I know you sir John, you owe
me money sir John, and now you pick a quarrel to beguile me of it, I bought
you a douzen of shirts to your back.


Falst. Doulas, filthy Doulas. I have given them away to Bakers wives, they
have made boulters of them.


Host. Now as I am a true woman, holland of viii s. an ell, you owe money here,
besides sir John, for your diet, and by drinkings, and money lent you xxiiii.
pound.


Falst. He had his part of it, let him pay.


Host. He, alas he is poor, he has nothing.


Fall. How? poor? look upon his face. What call you rich? let them coin his
nose, let them coin his cheeks, i will not pay a denyer: what will you make a
yonker of me? shall I not take mine ease in mine Inn, but I shall have my
pocket picked? I have lost a seal ring of my grandfathers worth forty mark.


Ho. O Jesus, I have heard the Prince tell him I know not how often, that that
ring was copper.


Falst. How? the prince is a jack, a sneakeup, Zbloud and he were here, I
would cudgel him like a dog if he would say so.


Enter the prince marching, and Falstalffe meets him playing upon his
trunchion like a fife. Falst. How now lad, is the wind in that door in faith,
must we all march?


Bar. Yea, two, and two, Newgate fashion.


Host. My Lord, I pray you hear me.


Pr. What say thou mistress quickly, how does thy husband? I love him well, he
is an honest man.


Host. Good my Lord hear me?


Falst. Preethe let her alone, and list to me.


Prin. What say thou jack.


Falst. The other night I fell a sleep here, behind the Arras, and had my
pocket picked, this house is turned baudy house, they pick pockets.


Prin. What did thou loose jack?


Fall. Will thou believe me Hall, three or four bonds of forty pound a piece,
and a seal ring of my grandfathers.


Prin. A trifle, some eight penie matter.


Host. So I told him my Lord, and I said I heard your grace say so: and my lord
he speaks most vilely of you, like a foul mouthd man as he is, and said he
would cudgel you.


Prin. What he did not?


Ho. There Is neither faith, truth, not womanhood in me else.


Fall. There Is no more faith in thee then in a stued prune, nor no more truth in
thee then in a drawn fox, and for womandood maid marion may be the deputies
wife of the ward to thee. Go you thing, go.


Host. Say what thing, what thing?


Fall. What thing? why a thing to thank God on.


Ho. I am nothing to thank God on, I would thou should know it, I am an
honest man's wife, and setting thy knighthood aside, thou art a knave to call me
so.


Fall. Setting thy womanhood aside, thou art a beast to say otherwise.


Host. Say, what beast, thou knave thou?


Falst. What beast? why an Otter.


Prin. An Otter sir John, why an Otter?


Falst. Why? she is neither fish nor flesh, a man knows not where to have her.


Host. Thou art an unjust man in saying so, thou or any man knows where to
have me, thou knave thou.


Prin. Thou say true hostess, and he slanders thee most grossly.


Host. So he does you my Lord, and said this other day you ought him a
thousand pound.


Prin. Sirrah, do I owe you a thousand pound?


Falst. A thousand pound Hall? a million, thy love is worth a million, thou
owe me thy love.


Host. Nay my Lord, he called you jack, and said he would cudgel you.


Falst. Did I Bardol?


Bar. Indeed sir John you said so.


Fall. Yea, if he said my ring was copper.


Prin. I say it is copper, dare thou be as good as thy word now?


Falst. Why Hall? Thou know as thou art but man I dare, but as thou art
prince, I fear thee as I fear the roaring of the Lions whelpe.


Prin. And why not as the Lion?


Fall. The king himself is to be feared as the Lion, do thou think i will
fear thee as I fear thy father? nay and I do, I pray God my girdle break.


Prin. O, if it should, how would thy guts fall about thy knees? but sirrah,
there is no room for faith, truth, nor honesty, in this bosom of thine. It is
all filled up with guts* and midriffe. Charge an honest woman with picking thy
pocket, why thou horeson impudent imbost rascal, if there were any thing in
thy pocket but tavern reckonings, memorandums of ba^die houses, and one poor
peniworth of sugar-candie to make thee long winded, if thy pocket were inricht
with any other injuries but these; I am a villain, and yet you will stand to
it, you will not pocket up wrong, art thou not ashamed?


Fall. Do thou hear Hall, thou know in the state of innocence Adam fell,
and what should poor jack Falstalfe do in the days of villainy? thou see I
have more flesh then another man, and therefore more frailty. You confess then
you picked my pocket.


Prin. It appears so by the story.


Fall. Hostess, I forgive thee, go make ready breakfast, love thy husband,
look to thy servant, cherish thy guess, thou shall find me tractable to any
honest reason, thou see I am pacified still, nay preethe be gone. Exit
Hostess Now Hal, to the news at court for the robbery lad, how is that
answered?


Prin. O my sweet beoffe, I must still be good angel to thee, the money is paid
back again.


Fall. O I do not like that paying back, it is a double labor.


Prin. I am good friends with my father and may do any thing


Fall. Rob me the exchequer the first thing thou do, and do it with unwashed
hands too.


Bar. Do my Lord.


Prin I have procured thee Jack a charge of foot.


Fall. I would it had been of horse. Where shall I find one that can steal
well. O for a fine thief of the age of xxii. or thereabouts: I am hainously
unprovided. Well, God be thanked for these rebels, they offend none but the
virtuous; I laud them, I praise them.


Prin. Bardoll.


Bar. My Lord.


Prin. Go bear this letter to Lord John of Lancaster,
To my brother John, this to my lord of Westmerland.
Go Peto to horse, to horse, for thou and I
Have thirty miles to ride yet ere dinner time,
Jack, ^eete me to morrow in the temple haule
At two of clock in the afternoon,
There shall thou know thy charge, and there receive
Money and order for their furniture,
The land is burning, Percy stands on high,
And either we or they must lower lie.

Fall. Rare words, brave world hostess, my breakfast come,
Oh I could wish this tavern were my drum.

Per. Well said my noble Scot, if speaking truth
In this fine age were not thought flattery,
Such attribution should the Douglas have,
As not a souldior of this seasons stamp,
Should go so general current through the world
By God, I cannot flatter, I do defy
The tongues of soothers, but a brauer place
In my hearts love has no man then your self,
Nay task me to my word, approve me Lord.

Doug. Thou art the King of honor,
No man so potent breaths upon the ground,
But I will beard him. Enter one with letters.

Per. Do so, and it is well. What letters have thou there?
I can but thank you.

Mes. These letters come from your father.

Per. Letters from him, why comes he not himself?

Mes. He cannot come my lord, he is grievous sick.

Per. Zounds, how has he the leisure to be sick
In such a iustling time, who leads his power?
Under whose government come they along?

Mes. His letters bears his mind, not I my mind.

Worcester. I preethe tell me, does he keep his bed?

Mes. He did my Lord, four days ere I set forth,
And at the time of my departure thence,
He was much fear^^ by his Physicians.

Worcester. I would the state of time had first been whole,
Ear he by sickness had bin visited,
His health was never better worth then now.

Per. Sick now, droupe now, this sickness does infect
The very life blood of our enterprise,
It Is catching hither even to our camp,
He writes me here that inward sickness,
And that his friends by deputation
Could not so soon be drawn, nor did he think it meet
To lay so dangerous and dear a trust
On any soul remoou'd but on his own,
Yet does he give us bold advertisement,
That with our small conjunction we should on,
To see how fortune is disposd to us,
For as he writes there is no quailing now,
Because the king is certainly possessed
Of al our purposes, what say you to it?

Worcester. You^ fathers sickness is a maime to us.

Per. A perilous gash, a very limb lopt off,
And yet in faith it is not, his present want
Seems more then we shall find it: were it good
To set the exact wealth of al our states
Al at one cast? to set so rich a maine
On the nice hazard of one doubtful hour?
It were not good for therein should we read
The very bottom and the soul of hope,
The very list, the very utmost bound
Of all our fortunes.

Doug. Faith, and so we should,
Where now remains a sweet reuersion,
We may boldly spend upon the hope of what it is to come in,
A comfort of retirement lives in this.

Per. A randeuous, a home to fly unto
If that the Devil and mischance look big
Upon the maidenhead of our affairs.

Worcester. But yet I would your father had bin here:
The quality and hair of our attempt
Brooks no division, it will be thought
By some that know not why he is away,
That wisdom, loialty, and mere dislike
Of our proceedings kept the Earl from hence,
And think how such an apprehension
May turn the tide of fearful faction,
And breed a kind of question in our cause^
For well you know we of the offering side
Must keep aloof from strict arbitrament,
And stop al sight-holes every loope from whence
The eye of reason may pry in upon us,
This absence of your fathers draws a curtain
That shows the ignorant a kind of fear
Before not dreamt of.

Per. You strain too far.
I rather of his absence make this use,
It lends a luster and more great opinion,
A larger dare to our great enterprise
Then if the Earl were here, for men must think
If we without his help can make a head
To push against a kingdom, with his help
We shall oreturne it top^ie tur^y down,
Yet all goes well, yet all our ioints are whole.

Doug. As heart can think, there is not such a word
Spoke of in Scotland as this term of fear,

Enter sir Ri: Vernon. Per. My coosen Vernon, welcome by my soul.

Ver. Pray God my news be worth a welcome lord,
The Earl of Westmerland seven thousand strong
Is marching hetherwards, with him prince John.

Per. No harm, what more?

Ver. And further I have learnd,
The King himself in person is set forth,
Or hetherwards intended speedily
With strong and mighty preparation.

Hot. He shall be welcome too: where is his son?
The nimble footed madcap prince of Wales,
And his Cumrades that da^t the world aside
And bid it pass?

Ver. All furnished al in Arms:
All plumde like Estridges that with the wind
Baited like Eagles having lately bathd,
Glittering in golden coats like images,
As full of spirit as the month of May,
And gorgeous as the sun at Midsomer:
Wanton as youthful goats, wild as young bulls,
I saw young Harry with his beuer on,
His cushes on his thighs gallantly armde,
Rise from the ground like feathered Mercury,
And vaulted with such ease into his seat,
As if an Angel drop down from the clouds,
To turn and wind a fiery Pegasus,
And witch the world with noble horsemanship.

Hot. No more, no more, worse then the sun in March,
This praise does nourish agues, let them come,
They come like sacrifices in their trim,
And to the fire-eyd maid of smoky war,
Al hot and bleeding will we offer them,
The mailed Mars shall on his altars sit
Up to the ears in blood. I am on fire
To hear this rich reprizal is so nigh,
And yet not ours: Come let me taste my horse,
Who is to bear me like a thunderbolt,
Against the bosom of the Prince of Wales,
Harry to Harry shall hot horse to horse,
Meet and near part til one drop down a coarse,
Oh that Glendower were come.

Ver. There is more news,
I learnd in Worcester as I rode along,
He can draw his power this fourteen days.

Doug. That's the worst tidings that I hear of it.

Worcester. I by my faith, that bears a frosty sound.

Hot. What may the kings whole battle reach unto?

Ver. To thirty thousand.

Hot. Forty let it be,
My father and Glendower being both away,
The powers of us may serve so great a day,
Come let us take a muster speedily,
Doomes day is near, die all, die merely.

Doug. Talk not of dying, I am out of fear
Of death or deaths hand for this one half year. Exeunt.

Enter Falstalffe, Bardoll. Falst. Bardol get thee before to Couentry, fill me
a bottle of Sack, our soldiers shall march through. We Will to Sutton cophill
to night.


Bar. Will you give me money captain?


Fall. Lay out, lay out.


Bar. This bottell makes an angel.


Fall. And if it do, take it for thy labor, and if it make twenty take them
all, i will answer the coynage, bid my Liuetenant Peto meet me at towns end*


Bar. I will captain, farewell. Exit


Fall. If I be not ashamed of my soldiers, I am a souct gurnet, I have misused
the kings press damnablie. I have got in exchange of 150. soldiers 300. and
odd pounds. I press me none but good houshoulders, Yeomans sons, inquire
me out contracted batchelers, such as had been asked twice on the banes, such a
commodity of warm slaves, as bad as lieue hear the Devil as a drum, such
as fear the report of a Caliuer, worse then a struck foul, or a hurt wild
ducke: I pressed me none but such tostes and butter with hearts in their bellies
no bigger then pinnes heads, and they have bought out their services, and now
my whole charge consists of Ancients, Corporals, Lieutenants, gentlemen of
companies: slaves as ragged as Lazarus in the painted cloth, where the gluttons
dogs licked his sores, and such as indeed were never soldiers, but discarded,
unjust seruingmen, younger sons to younger brothers, revolted tapsters, and
Ostlers, tradefalne, the cankers of a calm world, and a long peace, ten times
more dishonorable ragged then an old fazd ancient, and such have I to fill up
the rooms of them as have bought out their services, that you would think
that I had a hundred and fifty tottered prodigals, lately come from swine
keeping, from eating draffe and husks. A mad fellow met me on the way, and
told me I had unloaded all the Gibbets, and pressed the dead bodies. No eye
has seen such skarcrowes. I Will not march through Couentry with them, that's
flat: nay, and the villains march wide betwixt the legs as if they had gives
on, for indeed I had the most of them out of prison, there is not a shert and a
half in all my company, and the half shert is two napkins tackt together,
and thrown over the shoulders like a Heralds coat without sleeves, and the
shert to say the truth stolen from my host at S. Albones, or the red-nose
Inkeeper of Dauintry, but that's all one, they will find linen enough on every
hedge.


Enter the Prince, Lord of Westmerland. Prin. How now blown rack? how now
quilt?


Fall. What Hal, how now mad wag? what a devil do thou in Warwickshire? My
good Lo. of Westmerland, I cry you mercy, I thought your honor had already
bin at shrewesburie.


West. Faith sir John it is more then time that I were there, and you too, but my
powers are there already, the king I can tell you looks for us all, we must
away all night.


Falst. Tut never fear me, I am as vigilant as a Cat to steal Cream.


Prin. I think to steal Cream indeed, for thy theft has already made thee
butter, but tell me jack, whose fellows are these that come after?


Falst. Mine Hall, mine.


Prince. I did never see such pitiful rascals.


Falst. Tut, tut, good inongh to toss, food for powder, food for powder,
they will fill a pit as well as better; rush man, mortal men, mortal men.


W^st. I but sir John, me thinks they are exceeding poor and bare, too
beggarly.


Falst. Faith for their poverty I know not where they had that, and for their
bareness I am sure they never learnd that of me.


Prin. No i will be sworn, unless you call three fingers in the ribs bare, but
sirrah make haste, Percy is already in the field. Exit.


Fall. What is the king incampt?


West. He is sir John, I fear we shall stay too long.


Fall. Well, to the latter end of a fray, and the beginning of a feast fits a dull
fighter and a kene guest. Exeunt.


Enter Hotspur, Worcester, Doug: Vernon. Hot. We Will fight with him to night.

Worcester. It may not be.

Doug. You give him then advantage.

Ver. Not a whit.

Hot. Why say you so, looks he not for supply?

Ver. So do we.

Hot. His is certain, ours is doubtful.

Worcester. Good coosen be aduisd, stir not to night.

Ver. Do not my Lord.

Doug. You do not counsel well,
You speak it out of fear, and cold heart.

Ver. Do me no slander Douglas, by my life,
And I dare well maintain it with my life,
If well respected honor bid me on,
I hold as little counsel with weak fear,
As you my Lord, or any Scot that this day lives,
Let it be seen to morrow in the battle which of us fears:

Doug. Yea or to night.

Ver. Content.

Hot. To night say I.

Ver. Come, come, it may not be.
I wonder much being men of such great leading as you are,
That you foresee not what impediments
Drag back our expedition, certain horse
Of my coosen Vernons are not yet come up,
Your Uncle Worcesters horses came but to day,
And now their pride and metal is a sleep,
Their courage with hard labor tame and dull,
That not a horse is half the half of himself.

Hot. So are the horses of the enemy
In general journey bated and brought low,
The better part of ours are full of rest.

Worcester. The number of the King exceeds our,
For Gods sake coosen stay till all come in.

The trumpet sounds a parley. Enter sir Walter Blunt. Blunt. I come with
gracious offers from the king,
If you vouchsafe me hearing, and respect.

Hot. Welcome sir Walter Blunt: and would to God
You were of our determination,
Some of us love you well, and even those some
Envy your great deseruings and good name,
Because you are not of our quality,
But stand against us like an enemy.

Blunt. And God defend but still I should stand so,
So long as out of limit and true rule
You stand against anointed Majesty.
But to my charge. The king has sent to know
The nature of your griefs and whereupon
You conjure from the breast of civil peace
Such bold hostility: teaching his dutious land
Audacious cruelty. If that the king
Have any way your good deserts forgot
Which he confesses to be manifold,
He bids you name your griefs, and with all speed,
You shall have your desires with interest
And pardon absolute for your self, and these
Herein misled by your suggestion.

Hot. The king is kind, and well we know the king
Knows at what time to promise, when to pay:
My father, and my uncle and my self,
Did give him that same royalty he wears,
And when he was not six and twenty strong,
Sick in the worlds regard: wretched and low
A poor (...) outlaw ^^eaking home,
My father gave him welcome to the shore:
And when he heard him swear and vow to God,
He came but to be Duke of Lancaster,
To sue his livery, and beg his peace
With tears of innocence, and terms of zeal,
My father in kind heart and pity moved,
Swore him assistance, and performd it too.
Now when the Lords and Barons of the realm,
Perceived Northumberland did lean to him,
The more and less came in with cap and knee,
Met him in Borroughs, Cities, Villages,
Attended him on bridges, stood in lanes,
Laid gifts before him, profferd him their oaths,
Gave him their heirs, as Pages followed him,
Even at the heels, in golden multitudes,
He presently, as greatness knows it self,
Steps me a little higher then his vow
Made to my father while his blood was poor
Upon the naked shore at Rauenspurgh,
And now forsooth takes on him to reform
Some certain edicts, and some straight decrees,
That lie too heavy on the Commonwealth,
Cries out upon abuses, seems to weep
Over his Country wrongs, and by this face
This seeming brow of justice did he win
The hearts of all that he did angle for:
Proceeded further, cut me off the heads
Of all the fauourits that the absent king
In deputation left behind him here,
When he was personal in the Irish war.

Blunt. Tut, I came not to hear this.

Hot. Then to the point.
In short time after he deposd the king,
Soon after that deprived him of his life,
And in the neck of that taskt the whole state,
To make that worse, suffered his kinsman March
(Who is if every owner were well placed
Indeed his king) to be ingagde in Wales,
There without raunsom^ to lie forfeited,
Disgraced me in my happy victories,
Sought to entrap me by intelligence,
Rated mine uncle from the counsel board,
In rage dismisd my father from the Court,
Broke oath on oath, committed wrong on wrong,
And in conclusion drove us to seek out
This head of safety, and withal to pry
Into his title, the which we find
Too indirect for long continuance.

Blunt. Shall I return this answer to the king?

H^t. Not so sit Walter. We Will withdraw a while.
Go to the king, and let there be impawnde
Some surety for a safe return again,
And in the morning early shall mine uncle
Bring him our purposes, and so farewell.

Blunt. I would y^u would accept of grace and love.

Hot. And may be so we shall.

Blunt. Pray God you do.

Enter Archbishop of York sir Mighell. Arch. Hie good sir Mighell, bear this
sealed brief
With winged haste to the Lord Marshall,
This to my coosen Scroope, and all the rest
To whom they are directed. If you knew
How much they do import you would make hafte.

Sir M. My good Lord I guess their tenor.

Arch. Like enough you do.
To morrow good sir Mighell is a day,
Wherein the fortune of ten thousand men
Must bide the touch. For sir at Shrewsbury
As I am truly given to understand,
The king with mighty and quick raised power
Meets with Lord Harry And I fear sir Mighell
What with the sickness of Northumberland,
Whose power was in the first proportion,
And what with Owen Glendowers absence thence,
Who with them was a rated sinew too.
And comes not in ouerrulde by prophecies,
I fear the power of Percy is too weak
To wage an instant trial with the king.

Sir M. Why my go^d Lord, you need not fear,
There is Douglas, and Lord Mortimer.

Arch. No, Mortimer is not there.

Sir M. But there is Mordake, Vernon, Lord Harry Percy.
And there is my Lord of Worcester and a head
Of gallant warriors, noble gentlemen.

Arch And so there is: but yet the king has drawn
The special head of all the land together,
The Prince of Wales, Lord John of Lancaster,
The noble Westmerland, and warlike Blunt,
And many mo coriuals and dear men
Of est^mation and command in arms.

Sir M. Doubt not my Lo: they shall be well opposed.

Arch. I hope no less; yet needful it is to fear,
And to prevent the worst, sir Mighell speed:
For if Lord Percy thrive not ere the king
Dismiss his power, he means to visit us,
For he has heard of our confederacy,
And it is but wisdom to make strong against him,
Therefore make haste, I must go write again
To other friends and so farewell sir Mighel. Exeunt

Enter the King, Prince of Wales, Lord John of Lancaster, Earl of Westmerland
sir Walter Blunt, Falstalffe. King How bloudily the sun begins to pear
Above you bu^ky hill, the day looks pale
At his distemprature.

Prin. The Southren wind
Does play the trumpet to his purposes,
And by his hollow whistling in the leaves
Foretells a tempest and a blustering day.

Kin. Then with the loosers let it simpathize,
For nothing can seem foul to those that win.

The trumpet sounds. Enter Worcester King. How now my Lord of Worcester, it is
not well,
That you and I should meet upon such terms
As now we meet. You have deceived our trust,
And made us doffe our easy roabes of peace,
To crush our old limbs in ungentle steel,
This is not well my Lord, this is not well.
What say you to it? will you again unknit
This churlish knot of all abhorred war?
And move in that obedient orb again,
Where you did give a fair and natural light,
And be no more an exhalde meteor,
A prodigy of fear, and a portent
Of broched mischief to the unborn times.

Worst. Hear me my liege:
For mine own part I could be well content,
To entertain the lag end of my life
With quiet hours. For I protest
I have not sought the day of this dislike.

King. You have not sought it, how comes it then?

Fall. Rebellion lay in his way, and he found it.

Prin. Peace chewet, peace.

Worcester. It pleased your majesty to turn your looks
Of favor from my self, and all our house,
And yet I must remember you my Lord,
We were the first and dearest of your friends,
For you my staff of office did I break
In Richards time, and posted day and night
To meet you on the way, and kiss your hand,
When yet you were in place, and in account
Nothing so strong and fortunate as I.
It was my self, my brother and his son,
That brought you home and boldly did outdare
The dangers of the time. You swore to us,
And you did swear that oath at Dancaster,
That you did nothing purpose against the state,
Nor clame no further then your new fallen right,
The seat of Gaunt, Dukedom of Lancaster:
To this we swore our aid: but in short space
It rainde down fortune showring on your head,
And such a flood of greatness fell on you,
What with our help, what with the absent king,
What with the injuries of a wanton time,
The seeming sufferances that you had borne,
And the contrarious winds that held the king
So long in his unlucky Irish wars,
That all in England did repute him dead:
And from this swarm of fair advantages,
You took occasion to be quickly wooed
To gripe the general sway into your hand,
Forgot your oath to us at Dancaster,
And being fed by us, you vsd us so
As that ungentle gull the Cuckoes bird
Uses the sparrow, did oppress our neast,
Grew by our feeding to so great a bulk,
That even our love durst not come near your sight,
For fear of swallowing: but with nimble wing
We were inforst for safety sake to fly
Out of your sight, and raise this present head,
Whereby we stand opposed by such means,
As you your self have forgde against your self
By unkind usage, dangerous countenance,
And violation of all faith and troth,
Sworn to us in your younger enterprise.

King. These things indeed you have articulate,
Proclaimd at market Crosses, read in Churches,
To face the garment of rebellion
With some fine color that may please the eye
Of fickle changlings and poor discontents,
Which gape and rub the elbow at the news
Of hurly burly innovation,
And never yet did insurrection want
Such water colors to impaint his cause
Nor moody beggars staruing for a time,
Of pell mell h^uocke and c^nfusion.

Prin. In both your armies there is many a soul,
Shall pay full dearly for this encounter
If once they join in trial, tell your nephew
The prince of Wales does join with all the world
In praise of Henry Percy, by my hopes
This present enterprise set of his head,
I do not think a brauer Gentleman,
More active, valiant, or more valiant young,
More daring, or more bold is now alive
To grace this latter age with noble deeds,
For my part I may speak it to my shame,
I have a truant been to Chivalry,
And so I hear he does account me too;
Yet this before my fathers majesty,
I am content that he shall take the odds
Of his great name and estimation,
And will to save the blood on either side
Try fortune with him in a single fight.

King. And prince of Wales, so dare we venture thee,
Albeit, considerations infinite
Do make against it: no good Worcester no,
We love our people well, even those we love
That are misled upon your coosens part,
And will they take the offer of our grace,
Both he, and they, and you, yea every man
Shall be my friend again, and i will be his,
So tell your coosen, and bring me word
What he will do. But if he will not yield,
Rebuke and dread correction weight on us,
And they shall do their office. So be gone:
We will not now be troubled with reply,
We offer fair, take it advisedly. Exit Worcester.

Prin. It will not be accepted on my life,
The Douglas and the Hotspur both together,
Are confident against the world in arms.

King. Hence therefore, every leader to his charge,
For on their a^swere will we set on them,
And God befriend us as our cause is just. Exeunt: manent.

Falst Hal, if thou see me down in the battle Prince, Falst.
And bestride me, so, it is a point of friendship.

Prin Nothing but a Colossus can do thee that friendship,
Say thy prayers, and farewell.

^a^. I would twere bed time Hal, and all well.

Prin. Why, thou owe God a death.

Falst. It Is not due yet, I would be loath to pay him before his day, what need
I be so forward with him that calls not on me? Well, it is no matter, honor
pricks me on yea, but how if honor prick me off when I come on? how then can
honor set to a leg? no, or an arm? no, or take away the grief of a wound? no,
honor has no skill in surgerie then? no, what is honor? a word, what is in that
word honor? what is that honor? air, a trim reckoning. Who has it? he that
died a Wednesday, does he feel it? no, does he hear it? no, it is insensible
the^? yea, to the dead, but will not live with the living; no, why? detraction
will not suffer it, therefore i will none of it, honor is a mere skutchion, and
so ends my Catechism. Exit.


Enter Worcester, sir Richard Vernon. Worcester. O no, my nephew must not know sir
Richard,
The liberal and kind offer of the king.

Ver. Twere best he did.

Worcester. Then are we all under one.
It is not possible, it cannot be
The king should keep his word in loving us,
He will suspect us still, and find a time
To punish this offense in other faults,
Supposition al our lives shall be stuck full of eyes,
For treason is but trusted like the Fox,
Who never so tame, so cherisht and locked up,
Will have a wild trick of his ancesters,
Look how we can, or sad or merely,
Interpretation will misquote our looks,
And we shall feed like oxen at a stall,
The better cherisht still the nearer death,
My nephews trespass may be well forgot,
It has the excuse of youth and heat of blood,
And an adopted name of privilege,
A hair-braind Hotspur gouernd by a spleen,
All his offenses live upon my head
And o^ his fathers. We did train him on,
And his corruption being taken from us,
We as the spring of all shall pay for all:
Therefore good coosen, let not Harry know
In any case the offer of the King. Enter Percy.

Ver. Deliver what you will, i will say it is so. Here com^ your coosen.

Hot. My uncle is returned,
Deliver up my Lord of Westmerland,
Uncle, what news?

Worcester. The king will bid you battle presently.

Doug Defy him by the Lord of Westmerland.

Hot. Lord Douglas go you and tell him so.

Doug. Marry and shall, and very willingly. Exit. Dou.

Worcester. There is no seeming mercy in the king.

Hot. Did you beg any? God forbid.

Worcester. I told him gently of our greeuances,
Of his oath breaking, which he mended thus,
By now forsweari^g that he is forsworn,
He calls us rebels traitors, and will scourge
With haughty arms this hateful name in us. Enter Douglas.

Doug. Arm gentlemen, to arms, for I have thrown
A brave defiance in king Henry's teeth,
And Westme^land that was engaged did bear it,
Which cannot choose but bring him quickly on.

Worcester. The Prince of Wales stepped forth before the king,
And nephew, chalengd you to single fight.

Hot* O would the quarrel lay upon our heads,
And that no man might draw short breath to day
But I and Harry Monmouth; tell me tell me,
How showed his tasking? seemd it in contempt?

Ver. No, by my soul I never in my life
Did hear a challenge vrgde more modestly,
Unless a brother should a brother dare,
To gentle exercise and proof of arms.
He gave you all the duties of a man,
Trimd up your praises with a Princely tongue,
Spoke your deseruings like a Chronicle,
Making you ever better then his praise,
By still dispraising praise valued with you,
And which became him like a prince indeed,
He made a blushing citall of himself,
And chid his truant youth with such a grace
As if he mastred there a double spirit
Of teaching and of learning instantly,
There did he pause, but let me tell the world
If he outliue the envy of this day,
England did never owe so sweet a hope
So much misconstrued in his wantonness.

Hotsp Co^sen I think thou art enamored
On his follies, never did I hear
Of any prince so wild a liberty,
But be he as he will, yet once ere night
I will embrace him wi^h a soldiers arm,
That he shall shrink under my courtesy,
Arm, arm with speed, and fellows, soldiors, friends,
Better consider what you have to do
Then I that have not well the gift of tongue
Can lift your blood up with persuasion. Enter a Messenger.

Mes. My Lord, here are letters for you.

Hot. I cannot read them now,
O Gentlemen the time of life is short,
To spend that shortness basely were too long
If life did ride upon a dials point,
Still ending at the arrival of an hour,
And if we live we live to tread on kings,
If die, brave death when princes die with us,
Now for our consciences, the arms are fair
When the intent of bearing them is just. Enter another.

Mes. My Lord prepare, the king comes on a pace.

Hot. I thank him that he cuts me from my tale,
For I profess not talking only this,
Let each man do his best, and here draw I a sword,
Whose temper I intend to stain
With the best blood that I can meet withal.
In the adventure of this perilous day,
Now esperance Percy and set on,
Sound all the lofty instruments of war,
And by that Music let us all embrace*
For heaven to earth some of us never shall
A second time do such a courtesy.

Here they embrace, the trumpets sound, the king enters with his power, alarm
to the battle, then enter Douglas, and sir Walter Blunt. Blunt. What is thy
name that in battle thus thou crossest me,
What honor do thou seek upon my head?

Doug. Know then my name is Douglas,
And I do haunt thee in the battle thus
Because some tell me that thou art a king.

Blunt. They tell thee true.

Doug. The Lord of Stafford dear to day has bought
Thy likeness, for in steed of thee king Harry
This sword has ended him, so shall it thee
Unless thou yield thee as my prisoner.

Blunt. I was not borne a yeelder thou proud Scot,
And thou shall find a king that will revenge
Lord Staffords death.

They fight, Douglas kills Blunt, then enter Hotspur. Hot O Douglas had thou
fought at Holmedon thus
I never had triumphed upon a Scot.

Doug. Als done, als won here, breathles lies the king.

Hot. Where?

Doug. Here.

Hot. This Douglas? no, I know this face full well,
A gallant knight he was, his name was Blunt,
Semblably furnished like the king himself.

Doug. Ah fool, go with thy soul whither it goes,
A borrowed title have thou bought too dear.
Why did thou tell me that thou were a king?

Hot. The king has many marching in his coats.

Doug. Now by my sword I will kill al his coats.
I Will murder all his wardrop, piece by piece
Until I meet the king.

Hot. Up and away,
Our soldiers stand full fairly for the day.

Alarm, Enter Falstalffe solus. Falst. Though I could escape shot-free at
London, I fear the shot here, here is no skoring but upon the pate. Soft, who
are you? sir Walter Blunt, there is honor for you, here is no vanity, I am as hot
as molten lead, and as heavy too: God keep lead out of me, I need no more
weight then mine own bowels. I have led my rag of Muffins where they are
pepperd, there is not three of my 150. left alive, and they are for the towns
end, to beg during life: but who comes here? Enter the Prince.


Prin. What, stands thou idle here? lend me thy sword,
Many a noble man lies stark and stiff,
Under the hoofes of vaunting enemies,
whose deaths are yet vnreuengd, I preethe lend me thy sword.

Falst. O Hal, I preethe give me leave to breath a while, Turk Gregory never
did such deeds in arms as I have don this day, I have paid Percy, I have made
him sure.


Prin. He is indeed, and living to kill thee:
I preethe lend me thy sword.

Fall. Nay before God Hal, if Percy be alive thou gets not my
sword, but take my pistol if thou will.

Prin. Give it me, what? is it in the case?

Falst. I Hal, it is hot, it is hot, there is that will sack a City.

The Prince draws it out, and finds it to be a b^ttle of Sack. Prin. What is
it a time to jest and dally now?

He throws the bottle at him. Exit. Falst. Well if Percy be alive, i will pierce
him; if he do come in my way so, if he do not, if I come in his willingly,
let him make a Carbonado of me. I like not such grinning honor as sir Walter
has* give me life, which if I can save, so: if not, honor comes unlooked for,
and there is an end.


Alarm excursions. Enter the King, the Prince, Lord John of Lancaster, Earl
of Westmerland. King. I preethe Harry withdraw thy self, thou bleedest too
much,
Lord John of Lancaster go you with him.

P. John. Not I my Lord, unless I did bleed too.

Prin. I beseech your majesty make up,
Least your retirement do amaze your friends.

King. I will do so. My Lord of Westmerland lead him to his tent.

West. Come my Lord, i will lead you to your tent.

Prin. Lead me my Lord? I do not need your help,
And God forbid a shallow scratch should drive
The Prince of Wales from such a field as this,
Where staind nobility lies trodden on,
And rebels arms triumph in massacres.

Ioh. We breath too long, come coosen Westmerland
Our duty this way lies: For Gods sake come.

Prin. By God thou have deceived me Lancaster,
I did not think thee Lord of such a spirit,
Before I loved thee as a brother John,
But now I do respect thee as my soul.

King. I saw him hold Lord Percy at the point,
With lustier maintenance then I did look for
Of such an vngrowne warrior.

Prin. O this boy lends metal to us all. Exit.

Doug. Another king they grow like Hydraes heads,
I am the Douglas fatal to all those
That wear those colors on them. What art thou
That counterfetst the person of a King?

King. The king himself, who Douglas grieves at heart,
So many of his shadows thou have met
And not the very king, I have two boys
Seek Percy and thy self about the field,
But seeing thou falst on me so luckily
I will assay thee and defend thy self.

Doug. I fear thou art another counterfeit,
And yet in faith thou bear thee like a king,
But mine I am sure thou art who ere thou be,
And thus I win thee.

They sight, the king being in danger, Enter Prince of Wales. Prin. Hold up thy
head vile Scot, or thou art like
Never to hold it up again, the spirits
Of Valiant Sherly, Stafford, Blunt are in my arms,
It is the Prince of Wales that threatens thee,
Who never promises but he means to pay.
They fight, Douglas fli^th. Cheerly my Lord, how fares your grace?
Sir Nicholas Gawsey has for succor sent,
And so has Clifton, i will to Clifton straight.

King. Stay and breath a while,
Thou have redeemed thy lost opinion,
And shewde thou makst some tender of my life,
In this fair rescue thou have brought to me.

Prin. O God they did me too much injury,
That ever said I harkned for your death,
If it were so, I might have let alone
The insulting hand of Douglas over you,
Which would have been as speedy in your end
As all the poisonous potions in the world,
And saved the treacherous labor of your son.

King. Make up to Clifton, i will to S. Nicholas Gawsey. Exit Ki:

Enter Hotspur. Hot. If I mistake not, thou art Harry Monmouth:

Prin. Thou speakst as if I would deny my name.

Hot. My name is Harry Percy.

Pr. Why then I see a very valiant rebel of the name;
I am the Prince of Wales, and think not Percy
To share with me in glory any more:
Two stars keep not their motion in one sphere,
Nor can one England brook a double reign
Of Harry Percy and the Prince of Wales.

Hot. Now shall it Harry, for the hour is come
To end the one of us, and would to God
Thy name in arms were now as great as mine.

Prin. I Will make it greater ere I part from thee,
And all the budding honors on thy crest
I Will crop to make a garland for my head.

Hot. I can no longer brook thy vanities.

They fight: Enter Falstalffe. Falst. Well said Hall, to it Hall. Nay you shall
find no boys play here I can tell you.

Enter Douglas, he fights with Falstalffe, he falls down as if he were dead,
the Prince kills Percy. Hot. Oh Harry thou have ^obd me of my youth,
I better brook the loss of brittle life
Then those proud titles thou have won of me,
They wound my though^s worse then thy sword my flesh,
But thoughts the slaves of life, and life times fool,
And time that takes surucy of all the world
Must have a stop. O I could prophecy,
But that the earthy and cold hand of death
Lies on my tongue: no Percy thou art dust
And food for.

Pr. For worms, brave Percy. Fare thee well great heart
Ill weaud ambition, how much art thou shrunk,
When that this body did contain a spirit,
A kingdom for it was too small a bound,
But now two paces of the vilest earth
Is room enough, this earth that bears the dead
Bears not alive so stout a gentleman,
If thou were sensible of courtesy
I should not make so dear a show of zeal,
But let my favors hide thy mangled face,
And even in thy behalf i will thank my self,
For doing these fair rights of tenderness,
Adieu and take thy praise with thee to heaven,
Thy ignominy sleep with thee in the grave,
But not remembered in thy Epitaph.
He spieth Falstalffe on the ground. What old acquaintance, could not all this
flesh
Keep in a little life? poor Jack farewell,
I could have better sparde a better man:
O I should have a heavy miss of thee,
If I were much in love with vanity:
Death has not struck so fat a Dear to day,
Though many dearer in this bloody fray,
Inboweld will I see thee by and by,
Til then in blood by noble Percy lie. Exit.

Falstal^^e rises up. Fall. Inboweld, if thou inbowel me to day, i will give you
leave to powder me and eat me too to morrow. Zbloud it was time to counterfeit,
or that hot termagant Scot had paid me scot and lot too. Counterfeit? I lie, I
am no counterfeit, to die is to be a counterfeit, for he is but the counterfeit
of a man, who has not the life of a man: but to cou^terfet dying when a man
thereby lives, is to be no counterfeit, but the true and perfect image of life
indeed. The better part of valor is discretion, in the which better part I
have saved my life. Zounds I am afraid of this gunpowder Percy, though he be
dead, how if he should counterfeit too and rise? by my faith I am afraid he
would prove the better counterfeit, therefore i will make him sure, yea, and i will
swear I killed him. Why may not he rise as well as I? nothing confutes me but
eyes, and no body sees me: therefore sirrah, with a new wound in your thigh,
come you along with me.


He takes up Hotspur on his back. Enter Prince John of Lancaster. Prin. Come
brother John, full bravely have thou flesht
Thy maiden sword.

John of Lan But soft, whom have we here?
Did you not tell me this fat man was dead?

Prin. I did, I saw him dead,
Breathless and bleeding on the ground. Art thou alive?
Or is it fantasy that plays upon our eiesight?
I preethe speak, we will not trust our eyes
Without our ears, thou art not what thou seemst.

Fall. No that's certain, I am not a double man: but if I be not Jack
Falstalffe, then am I a Jack: there is Percy, if your father will do me any
honor, so: if not, let him kill the next Percie himself: I look to be
either Earl or Duke, I can assure you.


Prin. Why Percy, I killed my self, and saw thee dead.


Falst. Did thou? Lord, Lord, how this world is given to lying, I grant you
I was down, and out of breath, and so was he, but we rose both at an instant,
and fought a long hour by Shrewesburie clock, if I may be beleeude so: if
not, let them that should reward valor, bear the sin upon their own
heads. I Will take it upon my death, I gave him this wound in the thigh, if the
man were alive, and would deny it, zounds I would make him eat a piece of my
sword.


John. This is the strangest tale that ever I heard.


Prin. This is the strangest fellow, brother John,
Come bring your luggage nobly on your back.
For my part, if a lie may do thee grace,
I Will guild it with the happiest terms I have.

A retraite is sounded. Prin. The Trumpet sounds retrait, the day is our,
Come brother let us to the highest of the field,
To see what friends are living, who are dead. Exeunt.

Fall. I Will follow as they say for reward. He that rewards me God reward him.
If I do grow great, i will grow less, for i will purge and leave Sack, and live
cleanly as a noble man should do. Exit.


The Trumpets sound. Enter the King, Prince of Wales, Lord John of Lancaster,
Earl of Westmerland, with Worcester, and Vernon prisoners. King. Thus ever did
rebellion find rebuke,
Ill spirited Worcester, did not we send grace,
Pardon, and terms of love to all of you?
And would thou turn our offers contrary?
Misuse the tenor of thy kinsmans trust.
Three knights upon our party slain to day,
A noble Earl and many a creature else,
Had been alive this hour,
If like a Christian thou had truly borne
Betwixt our armies true intelligence.

Worcester. What I have done my safety urged me to*
And I embrace this fortune patiently,
Since not to be avoided it falls on me.

King. Bear Worcester to the death and Vernon too:
Other Offenders we will pause upon.
How goes the field?

Prin. The noble Scot Lord Douglas, when he saw
The fortune of the day quite turned from him,
The noble Percy slain and all his men
Upon the foot of fear, fled with the rest
And falling from a hill, he was so bruisd,
That the pursuers took him. At my tent
The Douglas is: and I beseech your grace
I may dispose of him.

King. With all my heart*

Prin. Then brother John of Lancaster,
To you this honorable bounty shall belong,
Go to the Douglas and deliver him
Up to his pleasure, ransomlesse and free,
His valors shown upon our Crests to day
Have taught us how to cherish such high deeds,
Even in the bosom of our adversaries.

John. I thank your grace for this high courtesy,
Which I shall give away immediately.

King Then this remains that we, divide our power,
You son John, and my coosen Westmerland
Toward York shall bend, you with your de^rest speed
To meet Northumberland and the Prelate Scroope,
Who as we hea^e are busily in arms:
My self and you son Hatry will toward Wales,
To fight with Glendower and the Earl of March,
Rebellion in this land shall loose his sway,
Meeting the check of such another day,
And since this business so fair is done,
Let us not leave till all our own be won. Exeunt

FINIS.

