A Most pleasant and excellent conceited Comedy, of Sir John Falstaff, and
the merry Wives of Windsor. Entermixed with sundry variable and pleasing
humors, of Sir Hugh the Welsh Knight, Justice Shallow, and his wise Cousin M.
Slender. With the swaggering vain of Ancient Pistol, and Corporal Nym. By
William Shakespeare. As it has been diverse times Acted by the right Honorable
my Lord Chamberlaines servants. Both before her Majesty, and elsewhere.

LONDON Printed by T. C. for Arthur Johnson, and are to be sold at his shop in
Powles Churchyard, at the sign of the Flower de Leuse and the Crown. 1602.

A pleasant conceited Comedy, of Sir John Falstaff, and the merry Wives of
Windsor.
Enter Justice Shallow; Sir Hugh, Master Page, and Slender.
Shall. NEre talk to me, I Will make a star chamber matter of it.
The Council shall know it.

Page Nay good master Shallow be persuaded by me.

Slen. Nay surely my uncle shall not put it up so.

Sir Hu. Will you not hear reasons M. Slenders?
You should hear reasons.

Shall. Tho he be a knight, he shall not think to carry it so away.
M. Page I will not be wronged. For you
Sir, I love you, and for my cosen
He comes to look upon your daughter.

Pa. And here is my hand, and if my daughter
Like him so well as I, we will quickly have it a match:
In the mean time let me entreat you to soiourne
Here a while. And on my life I Will undertake
To make you friends.

Sir Hu. I pray you M. Shallowes let it be so.
The matter is pud to arbitarments.
The first man is M. Page, videlicet M. Page.
The second is my self, videlicet my self.
And the third and last man, is mine host of the gartyr.
Enter Sir John Falstaff, Pistol, Bardolfe, and Nim. Here is sir John
himself now, look you.

Fall. Now M. Shallow, you will complain of me to the Council, I hear?

Shall. Sir John, sir John, you have hurt my keeper,
Killed my dogs, stolen my dear.

Fall. But not kissed your keepers daughter.

Shall. Well this shall be answered.

Fall. I Will answer it strait. I have done all this.
This is now answred.

Shall. Well, the Council shall know it.

Fall. Twere better for you twere known in counsel,
You Will be laughed at.

Sir Hu. Good vrdes sir John, good vrdes.

Fall. Good vrdes, good Cabidge.
Slender I brake your head,
What matter have you against me?

Slen. I have matter in my head against you and your cogging companions,
Pistol and Nym. They carried me to the Tavern and made me drunk, and
afterward picked my pocket.


Fall. What say you to this Pistol, did you pick Master Slenders purse
Pistol?


Slen. I by this handkercher did he. Two fair shouell board shillings, besides
seven groats in mill sixpences.


Fall. What say you to this Pistol?

Pist. Sir John, and Master mine, I combat crave
Of this same laten bilbo. I do retort the lie
Even in thy gorge, thy gorge, thy gorge.

Slen. By this light it was he then.

Nym. Sir my honor is not for many words,
But if you run bace humors of me,
I will say mary trap. And there is the humor of it.

Fall. You hear these matters denide gentlemen,
You hear it.
Enter Mistress Foord, Mistress Page, and her daughter Anne.
Pa. No more now,
I think it be almost dinner time,
For my wife is come to meet us.

Fall. Mistress Foord, I think your name is,
If I mistake not.
Sir John kisses her.
Mis. Ford. Your mistake sir is nothing but in the Mistress. But my husbands
name is Foord sir.


Fall. I shall desire your more aequaintance.
The like of you good misteris Page.

Mis. Pa. With all my heart sir John.
Come husband will you go?
Dinner stays for us.

Pa. With all my heart, come along Gentlemen.
Exit all, but Slender and mistress Anne.
Anne. Now forsooth why do you stay me?
What would you with me?

Slen. Nay for my own part, I would little or nothing with you. I love you
well, and my uncle can tell you how my living stands. And if you can love me
why so. If not, why then happy man be his dole.


An. You say well M. Slender.
But first you must give me leave to
Be acquainted with your humor,
And afterward to love you if I can.

Slen. Why by God, there is never a man in christendom can desire more. What
have you Bears in your Town mistress Anne, your dogs bark so?


An. I cannot tell M. Slender, I think there be.


Slen. Ha how say you? I warrant your afeard of a Bear let loose, are you not?


An. Yes trust me.


Slen. Now that is meat and drink to me,
I Will run yon to a Bear, and take her by the mussell,
You never saw the like.
But indeed I cannot blame you,
For they are marvelous rough things.

An. Will you go in to dinner M. Slendor?
The meat stays for you.

Slen. No faith not I. I thank you,
I cannot abide the smell of hot meat
Nere since I broke my shin. I Will tell you how it came
By my troth. A Fencer and I played three venies
For a dish of stewd prunes, and I with my ward
Defending my head, he hot my shin. Yes faith.
Enter Master Page.
Pa. Come, come Master Slender, dinner stays for you.

Slen. I can eat no meat, I thank you.

Pa. You shall not choose I say.

Slen. I Will follow you sir, pray lead the way.
Nay be God misteris Anne, you shall go first,
I have more manners then so, I hope.

An. Well sir, I will not be troublesome.
Exit omnes. Enter sir Hugh and Simple, from dinner.
Sir Hu. Hark you Simple, pray you bear this letter to Doctor Cayus house, the
French Doctor. He is twell up along the street, and enquire of his house for
one mistress Quickly, his woman, or his try nurse, and deliver this Letter to
her, it it is about Master Slender. Look you, will you do it now?


Sim. I warrant you Sir.

Sir Hu. Pray you do, I must not be absent at the grace.
I will go make an end of my dinner,
There is pepions and cheese behind.
Exit omnes. Enter sir John Falstaffes Host of the Garter, Nym, Bardolfe,
Pistol, and the boy.
Fall. Mine Host of the Garter.

Host. What ses my bully Rooke?
Speak schollerly and wisely.

Fall. Mine Host, I must turn away some of my followers.

Host. Discard bully, Hercules cassire.
Let them wag, trot, trot.

Fall. I sit at ten pound a week.

Host. Thou art an Emperor Caesar, Phesser and Kesar bully.
I Will entertain Bardolfe. He shall tap, he shall draw.
Said I well, bully Hector?

Fall. Do good mine Host.

Host. I have spoke. Let him follow. Bardolfe
Let me see thee froth, and lyme. I am at
A word. Follow, follow.
Exit Host.
Fall. Do Bardolfe, a Tapster is a good trade,
An old cloak will make a new Ierkin,
A withered seruingman, a fresh Tapster:
Follow him Bardolfe.

Bar. I will sir, I Will warrant you I Will make a good shift to live.
Exit Bardolfe.
Pis. O bace gongarian wight, will thou the spicket willd?

Nym. His mind is not heroic. And there is the humor of it.

Fall. Well my Laddes, I am almost out at the heels.

Pis. Why then let cybes ensue.

Nym. I thank thee for that humor.

Fall. Well I am glad I am so rid of this tinder Boy.
His stealth was too open, his filching was like
An unskillful singer, he kept not time.

Nym. The good humor is to steal at a minutes rest.

Pis. It Is so indeed Nym, thou have hit it right.

Fall. Well, before God, I must cheat, I must conycatch.
Which of you knows Foord of this Town?

Pis. I ken the wight, he is of substance good.

Fall. Well my honest Lads, I Will tell you what
I am about.

Pis. Two yards and more.

Fall. No gibes now Pistol: indeed I am two yards
In the wast, but now I am about no wast:
Briefly, I am about thrift you rogues you,
I do intend to make love to Foords wife,
I epsy entertainment in her. She carues, she
Discourses. She gives the lyre of inuitation,
And every part to be constured rightly is, I am
Sir John Falstaffes.

Pis. He has studied her well, out of honesty
Into English.

Fall. Now the report goes, she has all the rule
Of her husbands purse. She has legians of angels.

Pis. As many devils attend her.
And to her boy say I.

Fall. Heree's a Letter to her. Heeres another to misteris Page.

Who even now gave me good eyes too, examined my exteriors with such a greedy
intention, with the beams of her beauty, that it seemed as she would a
scorged me up like a burning glass. Here is another Letter to her, she bears
the purse too. They shall be Excheckers to me, and I Will be cheaters to them
both. They shall be my East and West Indies, and I Will trade to them both. Here
bear thou this Letter to mistress Foord. And thou this to mistress Page.
We Will thrive Lads, we will thrive.


Pist. Shall I sir Panderowes of Troy become?
And by my sword were steel.
Then Lucifer take all.

Nym. Here take your humor Letter again,
For my part, I will keep the hauior
Of reputation. And there is the humor of it.

Fall. Here sirrah bear me these Letters titely,
Sail like my pinnice to the golden shores:
Hence slaves, avaunt. Vanish like hailstones, go.
Falstaff will learn the humor of this age,
French thrift you rogue, my self and scirted Page.
Exit Falstaff, and the Boy.
Pis. And art thou gone? Teaster I Will have in pouch
When thou shall want, bace Phrygian Turk.

Nym. I have operations in my head, which are humors of revenge.

Pis. Will thou revenge?

Nym. By Welkin and her Fairies.

Pis. By wit, or sword?

Nym. With both the humors I will disclose this love to Page. I Will poses him
with Iallowes,

And there is the humor of it.


Pis. And I to Foord will likewise tell
How Falstaff varlot vilde,
Would have her love, his dove would prove,
And eke his bed defile.

Nym. Let us about it then.

Pis. I Will second thee: sir Corporal Nym troop on.
Exit omnes. Enter Mistress Quickly, and Simple.
Quic. M. Slender is your Masters name say you?

Sim. I indeed that is his name.

Quic. How say you? I take it he is somewhat a weakly man:
And he has as it were a whay colored beard.

Sim. Indeed my masters beard is kane colored.

Quic. Kane color, you say well.
And is this Letter from sir Yon, about Misteris An,
Is it not?

Sim. I indeed is it.

Quic. So: and your Master would have me as it twere to speak to misteris Anne
concerning him: I promise you my M. has a great affectioned mind to mistress
Anne himself. And if he should know that I should as they say, give my verdit
for any one but himself, I should hear of it thoroughly: For I tell you
friend, he puts all his priuities in me.


Sim. I by my faith you are a good stay to him.

Quic. Am I? I and you knew all yowd say so:
Washing, brewing, baking, all goes through my hands,
Or else it would be but a woe house.

Sim. I be shrow me, one woman to do all this,
Is very painful.

Quic. Are you auised of that? I, I warrant you,
Take all, and pay all, all go through my hands,
And he is such a honest man, and he should chance
To come home and find a man here, we should
Have no who with him. He is a parlowes man.

Sim. Is he indeed?

Quic. Is he quoth you? God keep him abroad:
Lord bless me, who knocks there?
For Gods sake step into the Counting house,
While I go see whose at door.
He steps into the Counting House. What John Rugby, John,
Are you come home sir already?
And she opens the door.
Doct. I begar I be forget my ointment,
Where be John Rugby?
Enter John.
Rug. Here sir, do you call?

Doc. I you be John Rugbie, and you be lack Rugby
Go run up met your heels, and bring away
De ointment in de vindoe present:
Make have John Rugbie. O I am almost forget
My simples in a box in de Counting House:
O Ieshu vat be here, a deuella, a deuella?
My Rapier John Rugby, Vat be you, vat make
You in my Counting House?
I tinck you be a teefe.

Quic. Ieshu bless me, we are all undone.

Sim. O Lord sir no: I am no thief,
I am a Seruingman:
My name is John Simple, I brought a Letter sir
From my M. Slender, about misteris Anne Page
Sir: Indeed that is my coming.

Doc. I begar is dat all? John Rugby give a ma pen
An Inck: tarche un pettit tarche a little.
The Doctor writes.
Sim. O God what a furious man is this?

Quic. Nay it is well he is no worse:
I am glad he is so quiet.

Doc. Here give dat same to sir Hu, it ber ve challenge
Begar tell him I will cut his nase, will you?

Sim. I sir, I Will tell him so.

Doc. Dat be vell, my Rapier John Rugby, follow may,
Exit Doctor.
Quic. Well my friend, I cannot tarry, tell your
Master I Will do what I can for him,
And so farewell.

Sim. Mary will I, I am glad I am got hence.

Exit omnes. Enter Mistress Page, reading of a Letter. Mis. Pa. Mistress Page
I love you. Ask me no reason,
Because their impossible to allege. Your fair,
And I am fat. You love sack, so do I:
As I am sure I have no mind but to love,
So I know you have no heart but to grant
A soldier does not use many words, where a knows
A letter may serve for a sentence. I love you,
And so I leave you.
Yours Sir John Falstaff. Now Ieshu bless me, am I methomorphised?

I think I know not my self. Why what a Gods name does this man see in me,
that thus he shootes at my honesty? Well but that I know my own heart, I
should scarcely persuade my self I were hand. Why what an unreasonable
woolsack is this. He was never twice in my company, and if then I thought I
gave such assurance with my eyes, I Would pull them out, they should never see more
holy days. Well, I shall trust fat men the worse while I live for his sake. O
God that I knew how to be revenged of him. But in good time, heeres mistress
Foord.

Enter Mistress Foord.
Mis. For. How now Mistress Page, are you reading
Love Letters? How do you woman?

Mis. Pa. O woman I am I know not what:
In love up to the hard ears. I was never in such a case in my life.

Mis. Ford. In love, now in the name of God with whom?

Mis. Pa. With one that swears he loves me,
And I must not choose but do the like again:
I prethie look on that Letter.

Mis. For. I Will match your letter just with the like,
Line for line, word for word. Only the name
Of misteris Page, and misteris Foord disagrees:
Do me the kindness to look upon this.

Mis. Pa. Why this is right my letter.
O most notorious villain!
Why what a bladder of iniquity is this?
Lets be revenged what so ere we do.

Mis. For. Revenged, if we live weel be revenged.
O Lord if my husband should see this Letter,
I faith this would even give edge to his Jealousy.
Enter Ford, Page, Pistol and Nym.
Mis. Pa. See where our husbands are,
Mine Is as far from Jealousy,
As I am from wronging him.

Pis. Ford the words I speak are forced:
Beware, take heed, for Falstaff loves thy wife:
When Pistol lies do this.

Ford. Why sir my wife is not young.

Pis. He wooes both young and old, both rich and poor
None comes amiss. I say he loves thy wife:
Fair warning did I give, take heed,
For summer comes, and Cuckoo birds appear:
Page believe him what he ses. Away sir Corporal Nym.
Exit Pistol:
Nym. Sir the humor of it is, he loves your wife,
I should ha borne the humor Letter to her:
I speak and I avouch it is true: My name is Nym.
Farewell, I love not the humor of bread and cheese:
And there is the humor of it.
Exit Nym.
Pa. The humor of it, quoth you:
Here Is a fellow frites humor out of his wits.

Mis. Pa. How now sweet heart, how do thou?
Enter Mistress Quickly.
Pa. How now man? How do you mistress Ford?

Mis. For. Well I thank you good M. Page.
How now husband, how chance thou art so melancholy?

Ford. Melancholy, I am not melancholy.
Go get you in, go.

Mis. For. God save me, see who yonder is:
We Will set her a work in this business.

Mis. Pa. O she will serve excellent.
Now you come to see my daughter An I am sure.

Quic. I forsooth that is my coming.

Mis. Pa. Come go in with me. Come Mis. Ford.

Mis. For. I follow you Mistress Page.
Exit Mistress Ford, Mis. Page, and Quickly.
For. M. Page did you hear what these fellows said?

Pa. Yes M. Ford, what of that sir?

For. Do you think it is true that they told us?

Pa. No by my troth do I not,
I rather take them to be paltry lying knaves,
Such as rather speaks of envy,
Then of any certain they have
Of any thing. And for the knight, perhaps
He has spoke merrily, as the fashion of fat men
Are: But should he love my wife,
I faith I Would turn her loose to him:
And what he got more of her,
Then ill looks, and shroud words,
Why let me bear the penalty of it.

For. Nay I do not mistrust my wife,
Yet I Would be loath to turn them together,
A man may be too confident.
Enter Host and Shallow.
Pa. Here comes my ramping host of the garter,
There Is either licker in his head, or money in his purse,
That he looks so merrily. Now mine Host?

Host. God bless you my bully rookes, God bless you.
Cauelera Justice I say.

Shall. At hand mine host, at hand. M. Ford god den to you.
God den an twenty good M. Page.
I tell you sir we have sport in hand.

Host. Tell him cauelira Justice: tell him bully rooke.

Ford. Mine Host a the garter:

Host. What ses my bully rooke?

Ford. A word with you sir.
Ford and the Host talks.
Shall. Hark you sir, I Will tell you what the sport shall be,
Doctor Cayus and sir Hu are to fight,
My merry Host has had the measuring
Of their weapons, and has
Appointed them contrary places. Hark in your ear:

Host: Have thou no shute against my knight,
My guest, my cauellira:

For. None I protest: But tell him my name
Is Brook, only for a Jest.

Host: My hand bully: Thou shall
Have egres and regres, and thy
Name shall be Brook: Sed I well bully Hector?

Shall. I tell you what M. Page, I believe
The Doctor is no Iester, heel lay it on:
For tho we be Justices and Doctors,
And Church men, yet we are
The sons of women M. Page:

Pa: True master Shallow:

Shall: It will be found so master Page:

Pa. Master Shallow you your self
Have been a great fighter,
Tho now a man of peace:

Shall: M. Page I have seen the day that young
Tall fellows with their stroke and their passado,
I have made them trudge Master Page,
A it is the heart, the heart does all: I
Have seen the day, with my two hand sword
I would a made you four tall Fencers
Scipped like Rattes.

Host. Here boys, shall we wag, shall we wag?

Shall. Ha with you mine host.
Exit Host and Shallow.
Pa. Come M. Ford, shall we to dinner?
I know these fellows sticks in your mind.

For. No in good sadness not in mine:
Yet for all this I Will try it further,
I will not leave it so:
Come M. Page, shall we to dinner?

Pa. With all my heart sir, I Will follow you.
Exit omnes. Enter Sir John, and Pistol.
Fall. I Will not lend thee a penny.

Pis. I will retort the sum in equipage.

Fall. Not a penny: I have been content you should lay my countenance to pawn:
I have grated upon my good friends for 3. repriues, for you and your
Coach-fellow Nym, else you might a looked through a grate like a geminy of
babones. I am damned in hell for swearing to Gentlemen your good soldiers and
tall fellows: And when mistrisse Briget lost the handle of her Fan, I tooked
on my hothou had it not.


Pis. Did thou not share? had thou not fifteen pence?

Fall. Reason you rogue, reason. Do thou think I Will endanger my soul gratis?
In brief, hang no more about me, I am no gybit for you. A short knife and a
throng to your manner of picked hatch, go. You Will not bear a Letter for me you
rogue you: you stand upon your honor. Why thou vnconfinable baseness thou, it is
as much as I can do to keep the terms of my honor precise. I, I my self
sometimes, leaving the fear of God on the left hand, am feign to shuffel, to
filch and to lurch. And yet you stand upon your honor, you rogue. You, you.


Pis. I do recant: what woulst thou more of man?

Fall. Well, gotoo, away, no more.
Enter Mistress Quickly.
Quic. Good you god den sir.

Fall. Good den fair wife.

Quic. Not so ant like your worship.

Fall. Fair maid then.

Quic. That I am I Will be sworn, as my mother was
The first hour I was borne.
Sir I would speak with you in private.

Fall. Say on I prethy, heeres none but my own household.

Quic. Are they so? Now God bless them, and make them his servants.
Sir I come from Mistress Foord.

Fall. So from Mistress Foord. Goeon.

Quic. I sir, she has sent me to you to let you
Understand she has received your Letter,
And let me tell you, she is one stands upon her credit.

Fall. Well, come Misteris Ford, Misteris Ford.

Quic. I sir, and as they say, she is not the first
Has been led in a fools paradise.

Fall. Nay prethy be brief my good she Mercury.

Quic. Mary sir, sheed have you meet her between eight and nine.

Fall. So between eight and nine:

Quic. I forsooth, for then her husband goes a birding,

Fall. Well commend me to thy mistress, tell her
I will not fail her: Boy give her my purse.

Quic. Nay sir I have another arant to do to you
From misteris Page:

Fall. From misteris Page? I prethy what of her?

Quic. By my troth I think you work by Enchantments,
Else they could never love you as they do:

Fall. Not I, I assure thee: setting the atraction of my
Good parts aside, I use no other enchantments:

Quic. Well sir, she loves you extreemly:
And let me tell you, she is one that fears God,
And her husband gives her leave to do all:
For he is not half so jealousy as M. Ford is.

Fall. But hark thee, has misteris Page and mistress Ford,
Acquainted each other how dearly they love me?

Quic. O God no sir: there were a jest indeed.

Fall. Well farwell, commend me to misteris Ford,
I will not fail her say.

Quic. God be with your worship.
Exit Mistress Quickly. Enter Bardolfe.
Bar. Sir here is a Gentleman,
One M. Brook, would speak with you,
He has sent you a cup of sack.

Fall. M. Brook, he is welcome: Bid him come up,
Such Brooks are always welcome to me:
A Jack, will thy old body yet hold out?
Will thou after the expense of so much money
Be now a gainer? Good body I thank thee,
And I Will make more of thee then I ha done:
Ha, ha, misteris Ford, and misteris Page, have
I caught you a the hip? go too.
Enter Foord disguised like Brook.
For. God save you sir.

Fall. And you too, would you speak with me?

Fall. Mary would I sir, I am somewhat bold to trouble you,
My name is Brook.

Fall. Good M. Brook your very welcome.

For. I faith sir I am a gentleman and a traveler,
That have seen somewhat. And I have often heard
That if money goes before, all ways lie open.

Fall. Money is a good soldier sir, and will on.

For. I faith sir, and I have a bag here,
Would you wood help me to bear it.

Fall. O Lord, would I could tell how to deserve
To be your porter.

For. That may you easily sir John: I have an earnest
Suit to you. But good sir John when I have
Told you my grief, cast one eye of your own
Estate, since your self knew what it is to be
Such an offender.

Fall. Very well sir, proceed.

For. Sir I am deeply in love with one Fords wife
Of this Town. Now sir John you are a gentleman
Of good discoursing, well beloved among Ladies,
A man of such parts that might win 20. such as she.

Fall. O good sir.

For. Nay believe it sir John, for it is time. Now my love
Is so grounded upon her, that without her love
I shall hardly live.

Fall. Have you importuned her by any means?

Ford. No never Sir.

Fall. Of what quality is your love then?

Ford. I faith sir, like a fair house set upon
Another man's foundation.

Fall. And to what end have you unfolded this to me?

For. O sir, when I have told you that, I told you all:
For she sir stands so pure in the firm state
Of her honesty, that she is too bright to be looked
Against: Now could I come against her
With some detectio^, I should sooner persuade her
From her marriage vow, and a hundred such nice
Terms that she will stand upon.

Fall. Why would it apply well to the veruensie of your affection,
That another should possess what you would enjoy?
Meethinks you prescribe very proposterously
To your self.

For. No sir, for by that means should I be certain of that which I now
misdoubt.


Fall. Well M. Brook, I Will first make bold with your money,
Next, give me your hand. Lastly, you shall
And you will, enjoy Fords wife.

For. O good sir.

Fall. M. Brook, I say you shall.

Ford. Want no money Sir John, you shall want none.

Fall. Want no Misteris Ford M. Brook,
You shall want none. Even as you came to me,
Her spokes mate, her go between parted from me:
I may tell you M. Brook, I am to meet her
Between 8. and 9. for at that time the Jealous
Cuckally knave her husband will be from home,
Come to me soon at night, you shall know how
I speed M. Brook.

Ford. Sir do you know Ford?

Fall. Hang him poor cuckally knave, I know him not,
And yet I wrong him to call him poor. For they
Say the cuckally knave has legions of angels,
For the which his wife seems to me well favored,
And I Will use her as the key of the cuckally knaves
Coffer, and there is my randeuowes.

Ford. Meethinkes sir it were very good that you knew
Ford, that you might shun him.

Fall. Hang him cuckally knave, I Will stare him
Out of his wits, I Will keep him in awe
With this my cudgel: It shall hang like a meator
Ore the wittolly knaves head, M. Brook thou shall
See I will predominate ore the peasant,
And thou shall lie with his wife. M. Brook
Thou shall know him for knave and cuckold,
Come to me soon at night.
Exit Falstaff.
Ford. What a damned epicurian is this?
My wife has sent for him, the plot is laid:
Page is an Ass, a fool. A secure Ass,
I Will sooner trust an Irishman with my
Aquauita bottle, Sir Hu our parson with my cheese,
A thief to walk my ambling gelding, the^ my wife
With her self: then she plots, then she ruminates,
And what she thinks in her heart she may effect,
She Will break her heart but she will effect it.
God be praised, God be praised for my jealousy:
Well I Will go prevent him, the time draws on,
Better an hour too soon, then a minit too late,
Gods my lise cuckold, cuckold.
Exit Ford. Enter the Doctor and his man.
Doc. John Rugbie go look met your eyes ore de stall,
And spy and you can see de parson.

Rug. Sir I cannot tell whether he be there or no,
But I see a great many coming.

Doc. Bully moy, mon rapier John Rugabie, begar
Hearing be not so dead as I shall make him. de
Enter Shallow, Page, my Host, and Slender.
Pa. God save you M. Doctor Cayus.

Shall. How do you M. Doctor?

Host. God bless thee my bully doctor, God bless thee,

Doc. Vat be all you, Van to tree com for, a?

Host. Bully to see thee fight, to see thee foine, to see thee trauerse, to see
thee here, to see thee there, to see thee pass the punto. The stock, the
reuerse, the distance: the montnce is a dead my francoyes? Is a dead my
Ethiopian? Ha what ses my gallon? my escuolapis? Is a dead bullies tail, is a
dead?


Doc. Begar de priest be a coward Jack knave,
He dare not show his face.

Host. Thou art a castallian king vrinall.
Hector of Greece my boy.

Shall. He has shown himself the wiser man M. Doctor:
Sir Hugh is a Parson, and you a Physician. You must
Go with me M. Doctor.

Host. Pardon bully Justice. A word monsire mockwater.

Doc. Mockwater, vat me dat?

Host. That is in our English tongue, Vallorbully, valor.

Doc. Begar den I have as mockuater as de Inglish
Jack dog, knave.

Host. He will claperclaw thee titely bully.

Doc. Claperclawe, vat be dat?

Host. That is, he will make thee amends.

Doc. Begar I do look he shall claperclaw me de^,
And I Will provoke him to do it, or let him wag:
And moreover bully, but M. Page and M. Shallow,
And eke cauellira Slender, go you all over the fields to Frogmore?

Pa. Sir Hugh is there, is he?

Host. He is there: go see what humor he is in,
I Will bring the Doctor about by the fields:
Will it do well?

Shall. We will do it my host. Farwell M. Doctor.
Exit all but the Host and Doctor.
Doc. Begar I will kill de cowardly Jack priest,
He is make a fool of moy.

Host. Let him die, but first fheth your impatience,
Throw cold water on your collor, com go with me
Through the fields to Frogmore, and I Will bring thee
Where mistress An Page is a feasting at a farm house,
And thou shall wear her cried game: sed I well bully

Doc. Begar excellent vel: and if you speak pour moy, I shall procure you de
guess of all de gentelme^ mon patinces. I begar I sall.


Host. For the which I Will be thy adversary
To misteris An Page: Sed I well?

Doc. I begar excellent.

Host. Let us wag then.

Doc. Alon, alon, alon.
Exit omnes. Enter Sir Hugh and Simple.
Sir Hu. I pray you do so much as see if you can epsy
Doctor Cayus coming, and give me intelligence,
Or bring me vrde if you please now.

Sim. I will Sir.

Sir Hu. Ieshu ples me, how my heart trobes, and trobes,
And then she made him bedes of Roses,
And a thousand fragrant poses,
To shallow riueres. Now so kad vdge me, my heart
Swelles more and more. Me thinks I can cry
Very well. There dwelt a man in Babylon,
To shallow rivers and to falls,
Melodious birds sing Madrigalles.

Sim. Sir here is M. Page, and M. Shallow,
Coming hither as fast as they can.

Sir Hu. Then it is very necessary I put up my sword,
Pray give me my cowne too, mark you.
Enter Page, shallow, and Slender.
Pa. God save you Sir Hugh.

Shall. God save you M. parson.

Sir Hu. God please you all from his mercies sake now.

Pa. What the word and the sword, does that agree well?

Sir Hu. There is reasons and causes in all things,
I warrant you now.

Pa. Well Sir Hugh, we are come to crave
Your help and furtherance in a matter.

Sir Hu. What is I pray you?

Pa. I faith it is this sir Hugh. There is an anncient friend of ours, a man of
very good sort, so at odds with one patience, that I am sure you would
heartily grieve to see him. Now Sir Hugh, you are a scholar well red, and very
perswasiue, we would entreat you to see if you could entreat him to patience.


Sir Hu. I pray you who is it? Let us know that.

Pa. I am shure you know him, it is Doctor Cayus.

Sir Hu. I had as leeue you should tell me of a mess of poredge,
He is an arant lousy beggarly knave:
And he is a coward beside.

Pa. Why I Will lay my life it is the man
That he should fight withal.
Enter Doctor and the Host, they offer to fight.
Shall. Keep them asunder, take away their weapons.

Host. Disarme, let them question.

Shall. Let them keep their limbs hole, and hack our English.

Doc. Hark van vrd in your ear. You be un daga
And de Jack, coward priest.

Sir Hu. Hark you, let us not be laughing stocks to other men's humors. By
Ieshu I will knock your vrinalls about your knaves cockcomes, for missing your
meetings and appointments.


Doc. O Ieshu mine host of de garter, John Rogoby,
Have I not met him at de place he make apoint,
Have I not?

Sir Hu. So kad vdge me, this is the pointment place,
Witness by my Host of the garter.

Host. Peace I say gawle and gawlia, French and Wealch,
Soul curer, and body curer.

Doc. This is very brave, excellent.

Host. Peace I say, hear mine host of the garter,
Am I wise? am I polliticke? am I Matchauil?
Shall I lose my doctor? No, he gives me the motions
And the potions. Shall I lose my parson, my sir Hu?
No, he gives me the proverbs, and ^^e nouerbes:
Give me thy hand terestiall,
So give me thy hand celestial:
So boys of art I have deceived you both,
I have directed you to wrong places,
Your hearts are mighty, you skins are whole,
Bardolfe lay their swords to pawn. Follow me lads
Of peace, follow me. Ha, ra, la. Follow.
Exit Host.
Shall. Before God a mad host, come let us go.

Doc. I begar have you mocka may thus?
I will be even met you my Jack Host.

Sir Hu. Give me your hand Doctor Cayus,
We be all friends:
But for mine hosts foolish knavery, let me alone.

Doc. I dat be vell begar I be friends.
Exit omnes Enter M. Foord.
For. The time draws on he should come to my house,
Well wife, you had best work closely,
Or I am like to go beyond your cunning:
I now will seek my guess that comes to dinner,
And in good time see where they all are come.
Enter Shallow, Page, host, Slender, Doctor, and sir Hugh. By my faith a knot
well met: your welcome all.

Pa. I thank you good M. Ford.

For. Welcome good M. Page,
I would your daughter were here.

Pa. I thank you sir, she is very well at home.

Slen. Father Page I hope I have your consent
For Misteris Anne?

Pa. You have son Slender, but my wife here,
Is altogether for master Doctor.

Doc. Begar I tanck her heartily:

Host. But what say you to young Master Fenton?
He capers, he daunces, he writes verses, he smelles
All April and May: he will carry it, he will carit,
It Is in his betmes he will carite.

Pa. My host not with my consent: the gentleman is
Wild, he knows too much: If he take her,
Let him take her simply: for my goods goes
With my liking, and my liking goes not that way.

For. Well I pray go home with me to dinner:
Besides your cheer I Will show you wonders: I Will
Show you a monster. You shall go with me.
M. Page, and so shall you sir Hugh, and you Master
Doctor.

S Hu. If there be one in the company, I shall make two:

Doc. And dear be ven to, I sall make de tird:
Sir Hu, In your teeth for shame,

Shall: well, well, God be with you, we shall have the fairer
Wooing at Master Pages:
Exit Shallow and Slender, Host I Will to my honest knight sir John Falstaff,
And drink Canary with him.
Exit host.
Ford. I may chance to make him drink in pipe wine,
First come gentlemen.
Exit omnes. Enter Mistress Ford, with two of her men, and a great buck
busket.
Mis. For. Sirrah, if your M. ask you whither
You carry this basket, say to the Launderers,
I hope you know how to bestow it?

Ser. I warrant you misteris.
Exit servant.
Mis. For. Go get you in. Well sir John,
I believe I shall serve you such a trick,
You shall have little mind to come again.
Enter Sir John.
Fall. Have I caught my heavenly Jewel?
Why now let me die. I have lived long enough,
This is the happy hour I have desired to see,
Now shall I sin in my wish,
I would thy husband were dead.

Mis. For. Why how then sir John?

Fall. By the Lord, I Would make thee my Lady.

Mis. For. Alas sir John, I should be a very simple Lady.

Fall. Go too, I see how thy eye does emulate the Diamond.
And how the arched bent of thy brow
Would become the ship tire, the tire vellet,
Oranie Venetian attire, I see it.

Mis. For. A plain kercher sir John, would fit me better.

Fall. By the Lord thou art a traitor to say so:
What made me love thee? Let that persuade thee
There Is somewhat extraordinary in thee: Go too I love thee:
Mistress Ford, I cannot cog, I cannot prate, like one
Of these fellows that smells like Bucklers-berie,
In simple time, but I love thee,
And none but thee.

Mis. For. Sir John, I am afraid you love misteris Page.

Fall. I thou might as well say
I love to walk by the Counter gate,
Which is as hateful to me
As the reake of a lime kill.
Enter Mistress Page.
Mis. Pa. Mistress Ford, Mis. Ford, where are you?

Mis. For. O Lord step aside good sir John.
Falstaff stands behind the aras. How now Misteris Page what is the matter?

Mis. Pa. Why your husband woman is coming,
With half Windsor at his heels,
To look for a gentleman that he ses
Is hid in his house: his wifes sweet heart.

Mis. For. Speak louder. But I hope it is not true Misteris Page.

Mis. Pa. It Is too true woman. Therefore if you Have any here, away with him, or
your undone for ever.


Mis. For. Alas mistress Page, what shall I do?
Here is a gentleman my friend, how shall I do?

Mis. Pa. Good body woman, do not stand what shall I do, and what shall I do.
Better any shift, rather then you shamed. Look here, here is a buck-basket, if
he be a man of any reasonable sise, heel in here.


Mis. For. Alas I fear he is too big.

Fall. Let me see, let me see, I Will in, I Will in,
Follow your friends counsel.
A side.
Mis. Pa. Fie sir John is this your love? Go too.

Fall. I love thee, and none but thee:
Help me to convey me hence,
I Will never come here more.
Sir John goes into the basket, they put clothes over him, the two men carries
it away: Foord meets it, and all the rest, Page, Doctor, Priest, Slender,
Shallow.
Ford. Come pray along, you shall see all.
How now who goes hear? whither goes this?
Whither goes it? set it down.

Mis. For. Now let it go, you had best meddle with buck-washing.

Ford. Buck, good buck, pray come along,
Master Page take my keys: help to search. Good
Sir Hugh pray come along, help a little, a little,
I Will show you all.

Sir Hu. By Ieshu these are iealosies and distemperes.
Exit omnes.
Mis. Pa. He is in a pitiful taking.

Mis. I wonder what he thought
When my husband bad them set down the basket.

Mis. Pa. Hang him dishonest slave, we cannot use
Him bad enough. This is excellent for your
Husbands jealousy.

Mi. For. Alas poor soul it grieves me at the heart,
But this will be a means to make him cease
His jealous fits, if Falstaffes love increase.

Mis. Pa. Nay we will send to Falstaff once again,
It Is great pity we should leave him:
What wives may be merry, and yet honest too.

Mi. For. Shall we be co^demnd because we laugh?
It Is old, but true: still sowes eat all the draffe.
Enter all.
Mis. Pa. Here comes your husband, stand aside.

For. I can find no body within, it may be he lied.

Mis. Pa. Did you hear that?

Mis. For. I, I, peace.

For. Well I Will not let it go so, yet I Will try further.

S. Hu. By Ieshu if there be any body in the kitchen
Or the cuberts, or the press, or the buttery,
I am an arrant Jew: Now God please me:
You serve me well, do you not?

Pa. Fie M. Ford you are too blame:

Mis. Pa. I faith it is not well M. Ford to suspect
Her thus without cause.

Doc. No by my trot it be no vell:

For. Well I pray bear with me, M. Page pardon me.
I suffer for it, I suffer for it:

Sir Hu: You suffer for a bad conscience look you now:

Ford: Well I pray no more, another time I Will tell you all:
The mean time go dine with me, pardon me wife,
I am sorry. M. Page pray go in to dinner,
Another time I Will tell you all.

Pa: Well let it be so, and to morrow I inuit you all
To my house to dinner: and in the morning we will
A birding, I have an excellent Hawk for the bush.

Ford: Let it be so: Come M. Page, come wife:
I pray you come in all, your welcome, pray come in.

Sir Hu: By so kad vdgme, M. Fordes is
Not in his right wits:
Exit omnes: Enter Sir John Falstaff.
Fall: Bardolfe brew me a pottle sack presently:

Bar: With Eggs sir?

Fall: Simply of it self, I Will none of these pullets sperme

In my drink: go make haste.

Have I lived to be carried in a basket

and thrown into the Thames like a barow of Butchers offoll. Well, and I be
served such another trick, I Will give them leave to take out my brains and
butter them, and give them to a dog for a new years gift. Sblood, the rogues
slided me in with as little remorse as if they had gone to drown a blind
bitches puppies in the litter: and they might know by my sise I have a kind of
alacrity in sinking: and the bottom had bin as deep as hell I should down. I
had been drowned, but that the shore was sheluie and somewhat shallowe: a death
that I abhor. For you know the water swelles a man: and what a thing should I
have been when I had been swelled: By the Lord a mountain of money. Now is the
Sack brewed?


Bar. I sir, there is a woman below would speak with you.


Fall. Bid her come up. Let me put some Sack among this cold water, for my
belly is as cold as if I had swallowed snow-balles for pills.

Enter Mistress Quickly. Now what is the news with you?


Quic. I come from misteris Ford forsooth.

Fall. Misteris Ford, I have had Ford enough,
I have been thrown into the Ford, my belly is full
Of Ford: she has tickled me.

Quic. O Lord sir, she is the sorrowfullest woman that her servants mistook,
that ever lived. And sir, she would desire you of all loves you will meet her
once again, to morrow sir, between ten and eleven, and she hopes to make
amends for all.


Fall. Ten, and eleven, say thou?

Quic. I forsooth.

Fall. Well, tell her I Will meet her. Let her but think
Of man's frailty: Let her judge what man is,
And then think of me. And so farewell.

Quic You Will not fail sir?
Exit mistress Quickly.
Fall. I will not fail. Commend me to her.
I wonder I hear not of M. Brook, I like his
Money well. By the mass here he is.
Enter Brook.
For. God save you sir.

Fall. Welcome good M. Brook. You come to know how matters goes.

Ford. That's my coming indeed sir John.

Fall. M. Brook I will not lie to you sir,
I was there at my appointed time.

For. And how sped you sir?

Fall. Very il fauouredly sir.

For. Why sir, did she change her determination?

Fall. No M. Brook, but you shall hear. After we had kissed and embraced, and
as it were even amid the prologue of our encounter, who should come, but the
jealous knave her husband, and a rabble of his companions at his heels,
thither provoked and instigated by his distemper. And what to do think you? to
search for his wives love. Even so, plainly so.


For. While ye were there?

Fall. Whilst I was there.

For. And did he search and could not find you?

Fall. You shall hear sir, as God would have it,
A little before comes me one Pages wife,
Gives her intelligence of her husbands
Approach: and by her invention, and Fords wives
Distraction, conveyed me into a buck-basket.

Ford. A buck basket!

Fall. By the Lord a buck-basket, rammed me in
With foul shirts, stokins, greasy napkins,
That M. Brook, there was a compound of the most
Villainous smell, that ever offended nostrill.
I Will tell you M. Brook, by the Lord for your sake
I suffered three egregious deaths: First to be
Crammed like a good bilbo, in the circomference
Of a pack, Hilt to point, heel to head: and then to
Be stewed in my own grease like a Dutch dish:
A man of my kidney; by the Lord it was marvel I
Escaped suffication; and in the heat of all this,
To be thrown into Thames like a horshoo hot:
Master Brook, think of that hissing heat, Master
Brook.

Ford. Well sir then my shute is void?
You Will undertake it no more?

Fall. M. Brook, I Will be thrown into Etna
As I have been in the Thames,
Ere I thus leave her: I have received
Another appointment of meeting,
Between ten and eleven is the hour.

Ford: Why sir, it is almost ten already:

Fall: Is it? why then will I address my self
For my appointment: M. Brook come to me soon
At night, and you shall know how I speed,
And the end shall be, you shall enjoy her love:
You shall cuckold Foord: Come to me soon at at night.
Exit Falstaff.
For. Is this a dream? Is it a vision?
Master Ford, master Ford, awake master Ford,
There is a hole made in your best coat M. Ford,
And a man shall not only endure this wrong,
But shall stand under the taunt of names,
Lucifer is a good name, Barbason good: good
Devils names: But cuckold, wittold, godeso
The devil himself has not such a name:
And they may hang hats here, and napkins here
Upon my horns: Well I Will home, I ferit him,
And unless the devil himself should aid him,
I Will search impossible places: I Will about it,
Least I repent too late:
Exit omnes. Enter M. Fenton, Page, and mistress Quickly.
Fen: Tell me sweet Nan, how do thou yet resolve,
Shall foolish Slender have thee to his wife?
Or one as wise as he, the learned Doctor?
Shall such as they enjoy thy maiden heart?
Thou know that I have always loved thee dear,
And thou have often times swore the like to me.

An: Good M. Fenton, you may assure your self
My heart is settled upon none but you,
It Is as my father and mother please:
Get their consent, you quickly shall have mine.

Fen: Thy father thinks I love thee for his wealth,
Tho I must needs confess at first that drew me,
But since thy virtues wiped that trash away,
I love thee Nan, and so dear is it set,
That whilst I live, I nere shall thee forget.
Gods pity here comes her father.
Enter M. Page his wife, M. Shallow, and Slender.
Pa. M. Fenton I pray what make you here?
You know my answer sir, she is not for you:
Knowing my vow, to blame to use me thus.

Fen. But hear me speak sir.

Pa. Pray sir get you gone: Come hither daughter,
Son Slender let me speak with you.
(they whisper.
Quic. Speak to Misteris Page.

Fen. Pray misteris Page let me have your consent.

Mis. Pa. I faith M. Fento^ it is as my husband please.
For my part I Will neither hinder you, nor further you.

Quic. How say you this was my doings?
I bid you speak to misteris Page.

Fen. Here nurse, there is a brace of angels to drink,
Work what thou can for me, farewell.
(Exit Fen.
Quic. By my troth so I will, good heart.

Pa. Come wife, you an I will in, we will leave M. Sle^der
And my daughter to talk together. M. Shallow,
You may stay sir if you please.
Exit Page and his wife.
Shall. Mary I thank you for that:
To her cousin, to her.

Slen. I faith I know not what to say.

An. Now M. Slender, what is your will?

Slen. Godeso there is a Jest indeed: why misteris An,
I never made will yet: I tha^k God I am wise enough for that.

Shall. Fie cusse fie, thou art not right,
O thou had a father.

Slen. I had a father misteris Anne, good uncle
Tell the Jest how my father stole the goose out of
The henloft. All this is naught, hark you mistress Anne.

Shall. He will make you ioynter of three hundred pound a year, he shall make
you a Gentlewoman.


Slend. I be God that I will, come cut and long tail, as good as any is in
Glostershire, under the degree of a Squire.


An. O God how many gross faults are hid,
And covered in three hundred pound a year?
Well M. Slender, within a day or two I Will tell you more.

Slend. I thank you good misteris Anne, uncle I shall have her.


Quic. M. Shallow, M. Page would pray you to come you, and you M. Slender, and
you mistress An.


Slend. Well Nurse, if you will speak for me,
I Will give you more then I Will talk of.
Exit omnes but Quickly.
Quic. Indeed I will, I Will speak what I can for you,
But specially for M. Fenton:
But specially of all for my Master.
And indeed I will do what I can for them all three.
Exit. Enter misteris Ford and her two men.
Mis. For. Do you hear? when your M. comes take up this basket as you did
before, and if your M. bid you set it down, obey him.


Ser. I will forsooth.
Enter Sir John.
Mis. For. Sir John welcome.

Fall. What are you sure of your husband now?

Mis. For. He is gone a birding sir John, and I hope will not come home yet.

Enter mistress Page. Gods body here is misteris Page,

Step behind the arras good sir John.

He steps behind the arras.
Mis. Pa. Misteris Ford, why woman your husband is in his old vain again,
he is coming to search for your sweet heart, but I am glad he is not here.


Mis. For. O God misteris Page the knight is here,
What shall I do?

Mis. Pa. Why then you are undone woman, unless you make some means to shift him
away.


Mis. For. Alas I know no means, unless we put him in the basket again.


Fall. No I Will come no more in the basket,
I Will creep up into the chimney.

Mis. For. There they use to discharge their Fowling pieces.

Fall. Why then I Will go out of doors.

Mi. Pa. Then your undone, your but a dead man.

Fall. For Gods sake devise any extremity,
Rather then a mischief.

Mis. Pa. Alas I know not what means to make,
If there were any woman's apparel would fit him,
He might put on a gown and a mufler,
And so escape.

Mi. For. That's well remembered, my maids Aunt
Gillian of Brainford, has a gown above.

Mis. Pa. And she is altogether as fat as he.

Mis. For. I that will serve him of my word.

Mis. Pa. Come go with me sir John, I Will help to dress you.

Fall. Come for God sake, any thing.
Exit Mis. Page, and Six John. Enter M. Ford, Page, Priest, Shallow, the two
men carries the basket, and Ford meets it.
For. Come along I pray, you shall know the cause,
How now whither go you? Ha whither go you?
Set down the basket you ssaue,
You panderly rogue set it down.

Mis. For. What is the reason that you use me thus?

For. Come hither set down the basket,
Misteris Ford the modest woman,
Misteris Ford the virtuous woman,
She that has the jealous fool to her husband,
I mistrust you without cause do I not?

Mis. For. I Gods my record do you. And if you mistrust me in any ill sort.


Ford. Well sed brazen face, hold it out,
You youth in a basket, come out here,
Pull out the clothes, search.

Hu. Ieshu please me, will you pull up your wives clothes?

Pa. Fie M. Ford you are not to go abroad if you be in these fits.


Sir Hu. By so kad vdge me, it is very necessary
He were put in pethlem.

For. M. Page, as I am an honest man M. Page, There was one conveyed out of my
house here yesterday out of this basket, why may he not be here now?


Mi. For. Come mistress Page, bring the old woman down.

For. Old woman, what old woman?

Mi. For. Why my maidens Ant, Gillia^ of Brainford.
A witch, have I not forewarned her my house,
Alas we are simple we, we know not what
Is brought to pass under the color of fortune*
Telling. Come down you witch, come down.
Enter Falstaff disguised like an old woman, and misteris Page with him, Ford
beats him, and he runs away. Away you witch get you gone.

Sir Hu. By Ieshu I verily think she is a witch indeed,
I espied under her muster a great beard.

Ford. Pray come help me to search, pray now.

Pa. Come we will go for his minds sake.
Exit omnes.
Mi. For. By my troth he beat him most extremely.

Mi. Pa. I am glad of it, what shall we proceed any further?


Mi. For. No faith, now if you will let us tell our husbands of it. For mine I
am sure has almost fretted himself to death.


Mi. Pa. Content, come we will go tell them all,
And as they agree, so will we proceed.
Exit both. Enter Host and Bardolfe.
Bar. Sir here be three Gentlemen come from the Duke the Stanger sir, would
have your horse.


Host. The Duke, what Duke? let me speak with the Gentlemen, do they speak
English?


Bar: I Will call them to you sir.

Host. No Bardolfe, let them alone, I Will sauce them:
They have had my house a week at command,
I have turned away my other guess,
They shall have my horses Bardolfe,
They must come off, I Will sauce them.
Exit omnes. Enter Ford, Page, their wives, Shallow, and Slender. Sir Hu.
Ford. Well wife, here take my hand, upon my soul I love thee dearer then I
do my life, and joy I hnue so true and constant wife, my jealousy shall never
more offend thee.


Mi. For. Sir I am glad, and that which I have done,
Was nothing else but mirth and modesty.

Pa. I misteris Ford, Falstaff has all the grief,
And in this knauerie my wife was the chief.

Mi. Pa. No knavery husband, it was honest mirth.

Hu. Indeed it was good pastimes and merriments.

Mis. For. But sweet heart shall we leave old Falstaff so?

Mis. Pa. O by no means, send to him again.

Pa. I do not think heel come being so much deceived.


For. Let me alone, I Will to him once again like Brook, and know his mind
whether heel come or not.


Pa. There must be some plot laid, or heel not come.

Mis. Pa. Let us alone for that. Hear my device.
Often have you heard since Horn the hunter dyed,
That women to affright their little children,
Ses that he walks in shape of a great stagge.
Now for that Falstaff has been so deceived,
As that he dares not venture to the house,
We Will send him word to meet us in the field,
Disguised like Horn, with huge horns on his head,
The hour shall be just between twelve and one,
And at that time we will meet him both:
Then would I have you present there at hand,
With little boys disguised and dressed like Fayries,
For to affright fat Falstaff in the woods.
And then to make a period to the Jest,
Tell Falstaff all, I think this will do best.

Pa. It Is excellent, and my daughter Anne,
Shall like a little Fayrie be disguised.

Mis. Pa. And in that Mask I Will make the Doctor steal my daughter An, and ere
my husband knows it, to carry her to Church, and marry her.


Mis. For. But who will buy the silks to tire the boys?

Pa. That will I do, and in a robe of white
I Will cloth my daughter, and advertise Slender
To know her by that sign, and steal her thence,
And unknown to my wife, shall marry her.

Hu. So kad vdge me the devises is excellent.
I will also be there, and be like a Iackanapes,
And pinch him most cruelly for his lecheries.

Mis. Pa. Why then we are revenged sufficiently.
First he was carried and thrown in the Thames,
Next beaten well, I am sure you will witness that.

Mi. For. I Will lay my life this makes him nothing fat.

Pa. Well lets about this stratagem, I long
To see deceit deceived, and wrong have wrong.

For, Well send to Falstaff, and if he come thither,
Twill make us smile and laugh one month together.
Exit omnes. Enter Host and Simple.
Host. What would thou have boore, what thick-skin?
Speak, breath, discus, short, quick, brief, snap.

Sim. Sir, I am sent from my M. to sir John Falstaff.

Host. Sir John, there is his Castle, his standing bed, his trundle bed, his
chamber is painted about with the story of the prodigal, fresh and new, go
knock, heel speak like an Antripophiginian to thee: Knock I say.


Sim. Sir I should speak with an old woman that went up into his chamber.


Host. An old woman, the knight may be robbed,
I Will call bully knight, bully sir John. Speak from thy
Lungs military: it is thine host, thy Ephesian calls.

Fall. Now mine Host.

Host: Here is a Bohemian tarter bully, tarries the coming down of the fat
woman: Let her desce^d bully, let her descend, my chambers are honorable, pah
priuasie, fie.


Fall. Indeed mine host there was afat woman with me,
But she is gone.
Enter Sir John.
Sim. Pray sir was it not the wise woman of Brainford?

Fall. Marry was it Musselshell, what would you?

Sim. Marry sir my master Slender sent me to her,
To know whether one Nim that has his chain,
Cousoned him of it, or no.

Fall. I talked with the woman about it.

Sim. And I pray sir what ses she?

Fall. Marry she ses the very same man that
Beguiled master Slender of his chain,
Cousoned him of it.

Sim. May I be bold to tell my master so sir?

Fall. I tike, who more bold.

Sim. I thank you sir, I shall make my master a glad man at these tidings,
God be with you sir.


Host. Thou art clarkly sir John, thou art clarkly,
Was there a wise woman with thee?

Fall. Marry was there mine host, one that taught
Me more wit then I learned this 7. year,
And I paid nothing for it,
But was paid for my learning.
Enter Bardolfe.
Bar. O Lord sir cousonage, plain cousonage.

Host. Why man, where be my horses? where be the Germans?


Bar. Rid away with your horses:
After I came beyond Maidenhead,
They flung me in a slow of mire, and away they ran.
Enter Doctor.
Doc. Where be my Host de gartyre?

Host. O here sir in perplexity.

Doc. I cannot tell vad be dad,
But begar I will tell you van ting,
Dear be a Garmaine Duke come to de Court,
Has cosened all de host of Branford,
And Redding: begar I tell you for good will,
Ha, ha, mine Host, am I even met you?
Exit. Enter Sir Hugh.
Sir Hu. Where is mine Host of the gartyr?
Now my Host, I would desire you look you now,
To have a care of your entertainments,
For there is three sorts of cosen garmombles,
Is cosen all the Host of Maidenhead and Readings,
Now you are an honest man, and a scuruy beggarly lousy knave beside:
And can point wrong places,
I tell you for good will, grate why mine Host.
Exit.
Host. I am cosened Hugh, and coy Bardolfe,
Sweet knight assist me, I am cosened.
Exit.
Fall. Would all the worell were cosened for me,
For I am cousoned and beaten too.
Well, I never prospered since I forswore
My self at Primero: and my wind
Were but long enough to say my prayers,
I Would repent, now from whence come you?
Enter Mistress Quickly.
Quic. From the two parties forsooth.

Fall. The devil take the one party,
And his dam the other,
And they will be both bestowed.
I have endured more for their sakes,
Then man is able to endure.

Quic. O Lord sir, they are the sorowfulst creatures
That ever lived: specially mistress Ford,
Her husband has beaten her that she is all
Black and blew poor soul.

Fall. What tellest me of black and blew,
I have been beaten all the colors in the Rainbow,
And in my escape like to a been apprehended
For a witch of Brainford, and set in the stocks.

Quic. Well sir, she is a sorrowful woman,
And I hope when you hear my errant,
You Will be persuaded to the contrary.

Fall. Come go with me into my chamber, I Will hear thee.
Exit omnes. Enter Host and Fenton.
Host. Speak not to me sir, my mind is heavy,
I have had a great loss.

Fen. Yet hear me, and as I am a gentleman,
I Will give you a hundred pound toward your loss.

Host. Well sir I Will hear you, and at least keep your counsel.

Fen. The^ thus my host. It Is not unknown to you,
The fervent love I bear to young Anne Page,
And mutally her love again to me:
But her father still against her choice,
Does seek to marry her to foolish Slender,
And in a robe of white this night disguised,
Wherein fat Falstaff had a mighty scare,
Must Slender take her and carry her to Catlen,
And there unknown to any, marry her.
Now her mother still against that match,
And firm for Doctor Cayus, in a robe of red
By her device, the Doctor must steal her thence,
And she has given consent to go with him.

Host. Now which means she to deceive, father or mother?

Fen. Both my good Host, to go along with me.
Now here it rests, that you would procure a priest,
And tarry ready at the appointment place,
To give our hearts united matrimony.

Host. But how will you come to steal her from among the^?

Fen. That has sweet Nan and I agreed upon,
And by a robe of white, the which she wears,
With ribones pendant flaring bout her head,
I shall be sure to know her, and convey her thence,
And bring her where the priest abides our coming,
And by thy furtherance there be married.

Host. Well, husband your device, I Will to the Vicar,
Bring you the maid, you shall not lack a Priest.

Fen. So shall I evermore be bound unto thee.
Besides I Will always be thy faithful friend.
Exit omnes. Enter sir John with a Bucks head upon him.
Fall. This is the third time, well I Will venture,
They say there is good luck in old numbers,
Jove transformed himself into a bull,
And I am here a Stag, and I think the fattest
In all Windsor forest: well I stand here
For Horn the hunter, waiting my Does coming.
Enter mistress Page, and mistress Ford.
Mis. Pa. Sir John, where are you?

Fall. Art thou come my do? what and thou too?
Welcome Ladies.

Mi. For. I I sir John, I see you will not fail,
Therefore you deserve far better then our loves,
But it grieves me for your late crosses.

Fall. This makes amends for all.
Come divide me between you, each a hanch,
For my horns I Will bequeath the^ to your husbands,
Do I speak like Horn the hunter, ha?

Mis. Pa. God forgive me, what noise is this?
There is a noise of horns, the two women run away. Enter sir Hugh like a
Satyr, and boys dressed like Fayries, mistress Quickly, like the Queen of
Fayries: they sing a song about him, and afterward speak.
Quic: You Fayries that do haunt these shady groves,
Look round about the wood if you can epsy
A mortal that does haunt our sacred round:
If such a one you can epsy, give him his due,
And leave not till you pinch him black and blew:
Give them their charge Puck ere they part away.

Sir Hu. Come hither Peane, go to the country houses,
And when you find a slut that lies a sleep,
And all her dishes foul, and room unswept,
With your long nails pinch her till she cry,
And swear to mend her sluttish huswiferie.

Fai. I warrant you I will perform your will.

Hu. Where is Pead? go you and see where Brokers sleep,
And Foxe-eyed Seriants with their mase,
Go lay the Proctors in the street,
And pinch the lousy Seriants face:
Spare none of these when they are a bed,
But such whose nose looks plew and red.

Quic. Away begone, his mind fulfill,
And look that none of you stand still.
Some do that thing, some do this,
All do something, none amiss.

Her Hu. I smell a man of middle earth.

Fall. God bless me from that wealch Fairie.

Quic. Look every one about this round,
And if that any here be found,
For his presumption in this place,
Spare neither leg, arm, head, nor face.

Sir Hu. See I have spied one by good luck,
His body man, his head a buck.

Fall. God send me good fortune now, and I care not.

Quic. Go strait, and do as I command,
And take a Taper in your hand,
And set it to his fingers ends,
And if you see it him offends,
And that he starteth at the flame,
Then is he mortal, know his name:
If with an F. it does begin,
Why then be shure he is full of sin.
About it then, and know the truth,
Of this same metamorphised youth.

Her Hu. Give me the Tapers, I will try
And if that he love venery.
They put the Tapers to his fingers, and he starts.
Sir Hu. It is right indeed, he is full of lecheries and iniquity.

Quic. A little distant from him stand,
And every one take hand in hand,
And compass him within a ring,
First pinch him well, and after sing.
Here they pinch him, and sing about him, and the Doctor comes one way and
steals away a boy in red. And Slender another way he takes a boy in green:
And Fenton steals misteris Anne, being in white. And a noise of hunting is
made within: and all the Fairies run away. Falstaff pulles of his bucks
head, and rises up. And enters M. Page, M. Ford, and their wives, M. Shallow,
Sir Hugh.
Fall. Horn the hunter quoth you: am I a ghost?
Sblood the Fairies has made a ghost of me:
What hunting at this time at night?
I Will lay my life the mad Prince of Wales
Is stealing his fathers Dear. How now who have
we here, what is all Windsor stirring? Are you there?

Shall. God save you sir John Falstaff.

Sir Hu. God please you sir John, God please you.

Pa. Why how now sir John, what a pair of horns in your hand?

Ford. Those horns he meant to place upon my head,
And M. Brook and he should be the men:
Why how now sir John, why are you thus amazed?
We know the Fairies man that pinched you so,
Your throwing in the Thames, your beating well,
And what is to come sir John, that can we tell.

Mi. Pa. Sir John it is thus, your dishonest means
To call our credits into question,
Did make us undertake to our best,
To turn your leaud lust to a merry Jest.

Fall. Jest, it is well, have I lived to these years
To be gulled now, now to be ridden?
Why then these were not Fairies?

Mis. Pa. No sir John but boys.

Fall. By the Lord I was twice or thrice in the mind
They were not, and yet the grosnesse
Of the fopperie persuaded me they were.
Well, and the fine wits of the Court hear this,
Thayle so whip me with their keen Jests,
That thayle melt me out like tallow,
Drop by drop out of my grease. Boys!

Sir Hu. I trust me boys Sir John: and I was
Also a Fairie that did help to pinch you.

Fall. I, it is well I am your May Pole,
You have the start of me,
Am I ridden too with a wealch goat?
With a piece of toasted cheese?

Sir Hu. Butter is better then cheese sir John,
You are all butter, butter.

For. There is a further matter yet sir John,
There Is 20. pound you borrowed of M. Brook Sir John,
And it must be paid to M. Ford Sir John.

Mi. For. Nay husband let that go to make ame^ds,
Forgive that sum, and so we will all be friends.

For. Well here is my hand, all is forgiven at last.

Fall. It has cost me well,
I have been well pinched and washed.
Enter the Doctor.
Mi. Pa. Now M. Doctor, son I hope you are.

Doct. Son begar you be de ville voman,
Begar I tinck to marry metres An, and begar
It Is a whoreson garson Jack boy.

Mis. Pa. How a boy?

Doct. I begar a boy.

Pa. Nay be not angry wife, I Will tell thee true,
It was my plot to deceive thee so:
And by this time your daughter's married
To M. Slender, and see where he comes.
Enter Slender. Now son Slender,
Where Is your bride?

Slen. Bride, by Gods lyd I think there is never a man in the worell has that
cross fortune that I have: begod I could cry for very anger.


Pa. Why what is the matter son Slender?

Slen. Son, nay by God I am none of your son.

Pa. No, why so?

Slen. Why so God save me, it is a boy that I have married.

Pa. How a boy? why did you mistake the word?

Slen. No neither, for I came to her in red as you bad me, and I cried mum, and
he cried budget, so well as ever you heard, and I have married him.


Sir Hu. Ieshu M. Slender, cannot you see but marry boys?

Pa. O I am vexed at heart, what shall I do?
Enter Fenton and Anne.
Mis. Pa. Here comes the man that has deceived us all:
How now daughter, where have you bin?

An. At Curch forsooth.

Pa. At Church, what have you done there?

Fen. Married to me, nay sir never storm,
It Is done sir now, and cannot be undone.

Ford: I faith M. Page never chafe your self,
She has made her choice whereas her heart was fixed,
Then it is in vain for you to storm or fret.

Fall. I am glad yet that your arrow has glanced

Mi. For. Come mistress Page, I Will be bold with you,
It Is pity to part love that is so true.

Mis. Pa. Although that I have missed in my intent,
Yet I am glad my husbands match was crossed,
Here M. Fenton, take her, and God give thee joy.

Sir Hu: Come M. Page, you must needs agree.

Fo. I in faith sir come, you see your wife is well pleased:

Pa. I cannot tell, and yet my hart's well eased,
And yet it does me good the Doctor missed.
Come hither Fenton, and come hither daughter,
Go too you might have stayed for my good will,
But since your choice is made of one you love,
Here take her Fenton, and both happy prove.

Sir Hu. I will also dance and eat plums at your weddings.

Ford. All parties pleased, now let us in to feast,
And laugh at Slender, and the Doctors jest.
He has got the maiden, each of you a boy
To wait upon you, so God give you joy,
And sir John Falstaff now shall you keep your word,
For Brook this night shall lie with mistress Ford.
Exit omnes.
FINIS.

