The first Book of Architecture, made by Sebastian Serly, entreating of
Geometry.

Translated out of Jtalian into Dutch, and out of Dutch into English.

LONDON Printed for Robert Peake, and are to be sold at his shop near Holborne
conduit, next to the Sun Tavern. ANNO DOM. 1611.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE, HENRY, Prince of Wales*
SJR,
NO vain ambition of mine own Desire, much less presumption of my none
Desert, incited me to present this Volume to your Princely view; but rather,
the gracious Countenance, which (even from your Childehood) you have ever
daigned to all good endeauours, invited Me also (after so many others) to
offer at the high-Altar of your Highness favor, this new-Naturalized Work
of a learned Stranger: Not with pretense of Profit to your Highness (who want
not more exquisite Tutors in all excellent Sciences) but, under the Patronage
of your powerful Name, to benefit the Public; and convey unto my Countrymen
(especially Architects and Artificers of all sorts) these Necessary, Certain,
and most ready Helps of Geometry: The ignorance and want whereof, in times
past (in most parts of this Kingdom) has left us many lame Works, with
shame of many Workmen; which, for the future, the Knowledge and use of these
Instructions shall happily prevent, if the event but answer (in any measure)
to that Hope of mine, which alone both induced this Desire and produced this
Design: Wherein I must confess my part but small, saving my great adventure
in the Charge, and my great Good Will to do Good. All which, together with my
best Services, I humbly prostrate at your Princely feet, as beseemes

Your Highness most humble Servant Robert Peake.

To the Lovers of Architecture.
Our learned Author Sebastian Serly, having great foresight to show and
explain the common rules of Architecture, did first publish his Fo^r^h Book,
entreating of Architecture, and after his Third Book, declaring excellent
Antiquities. Fearing that if he had begun with Geometry and Perspectiue,
common workmen would have thought (that the two sornter although small) had not
been so needful to study and practice as the other: Which friendly Reader,
considered, hindered me long either from Translating or Publishing the two
former, being persuaded by sundry friends and workmen, to have desisted my
purpose, both from translating or publishing. The which J had surely effected,
if I had been ouer-ruled by their requests and persuasions; alleging strong
reasons, that the common Workmen of our time little regarded or esteemed to
Work with right Simmetrie: the which is confused and erroneous, in the
judgment of the Learned Architect, if they will follow the Order of
Antiquities hereafter ensuing Wherefore least my good meaning, together with my
Labor in Translating and Publishing, should not be regarded and esteemed (as
worthy) considering it not only tends to the great profit of the Architect
or Workman, but also generally to all other Artificers of our Nation: I advise
all generally, not to deceive themselves, nor to be selfe-conceited in their
own works, but well understand this my labor (tending to common good) and be
persuaded that who so shall follow these rules hereafter set down, shall not
only have his Work well esteemed of the common people, but also generally
commended and applauded of all workmen, and men of judgment. Vale.

The first Book of Architecture, made by Sebastian Serly, entreating of
Geometry.
The first Chapter.
HOw needful and necessary the most secret Art of Geometry is for every
Artificer and Workman, as those that for a long time have studied and wrought
without the same can sufficiently witness, who since that time have attained
unto any knowledge of the said Art, do not only laugh and smile at their
own former simplicities, but in truth may very well acknowledge that all
whatsoever had been formerly done by them, was not worth the looking on.

Seeing then the learning of Architecture comprehends in it many notable
Arts, it is necessary that the Architector or workman, should first, or at
the least (if he cannot attain unto any more) know so much thereof, as that
he may understand the principles of Geometry, that he may not be accounted
amongst the number of stone-spoilers, who bear the name of workmen, and scarce
know how to make an answer what a Point, Line, Plain, or Body is, and much
less can tell what harmony or correspondencie means, but following after
their own mind, or other blind conductors that have used to work without
rule or reason, they make bad work, which is the cause of much uncut or uneven
workmanship which is found in many places.

Therefore seeing that Geometry is the first degree of all good Art, to the end
I may show the Architector so much thereof, as that he may thereby be able with
good skill, to give some reason of his work. Touching the speculations of
Euclides and other Authors, that have written of Geometry, I will leave them,
and only take some flowers out of their Garden, that therewith by the shortest
way that I can, I may entreat of diverse cutting through of Lines, with some
demonstrations, meaning so plainly and openly to set down and declare the
same, both in writing and in figures, that every man may both conceive and
understand them, aduertizing the Reader not to proceed to know the second
figure, before he has well understood and found out the first, and so still
proceeding, he shall at last attain unto his desire.

A Point. point FIRST, you must understand that a point is a priche made with a
Pen or Compass, which can not be divided into any parts, because it
contains neither length nor breadth in it. A Line. line A Line is a right
consecutiue imagination in length, beginning at a point, and ends also at a
point, but it has no breadth. Parable. parallel lines When two Lines are set or
placed of a little wydenesse one from the other, those two lines, according to
the Latin phrase, are called Parable, and by some men they are named
Equidistances. Superficies. surface When those two Equidistances aforesaid are
at each end closed together by another Line, it is then called a Superficies:
and in like sort all spaces in what manner soever they are closed, and shut up,
are called Superficies or plainnes. Perpendicular. right angles Straight
corners. right angles When there is a straight upright Line placed in the
middle of a cross straight line, then it is called a Perpendicular or Catheta
Line: and the ends of the cross or straight Line on both sides of the
Perpendicular, are called Straight corners. Obtusus. Acutus. acute and obtuse
angles When a leaning or straight Line is placed upon a straight Line without
Compass or equality, as much as the same Line bends, so much shall the
corner of the straight Line be narrower below, and the other so much broader
then a right or even corner: and the straight corner in Latin is called
Acutus, which signifies sharp, and the wider corner Obtusus, which signifies
dull. Piramidal. acute angle A corner or point called Piramidal, and also
Acutus in Latin, is, when two even long straight lines meet or join together
at the upper end, as the figure right against this declares. Triangle.
triangle And when such a figure is closed together at the foot thereof, with a
long straight line, it is then called a Triangle, because it has (...) sharp
corners. Triangle. right triangle When a Triangle with two even straight lines,
is closed together with a longer line then these two are, it shall have such a
form as here you see. Triangle. scalene triangle But a Triangle which is made
of three unlike lines, it shall also have three unlike corners. Quadrangle.
quadrangle When two long and two direct down right lines are joined together
at the four corners, it is called Quadrangle with even sides or corners, but
when the four lines are all of unlike or contrary lengths, then it is a
Quadrangle of uneven sides, as this figure shows.

You must note that although all four cornerd figures may be called
Quadrangles: nevertheless, for that the direct four cornerd figures are called
Quadratus: for difference from them, I will name all figures which are like
unto a table, (that is longer then broad) Quadrangles.

Rombus. rhombus WHen four even long straight lines are joined together at the
corners, they are called Quadratus, which are four cornerd: when you make the
two corners thereof sharp, and the other two corners somewhat blunter, then it
is called a Rombus. Figures with diverse corners. polygons ALthough you may
turn and make all the figures aforesaid right four square: Yet the workman
may find other figures with diverse corners. The which (as I will hereafter
show) he may make four square.
WHen a man with his Compass draws a bow, and after that draws an other
how right against it, that is called a Superfitie of crooked Lines, with two
like corners: and then draws a straight Line from the one corner to the
other, and from one point or center where the Compass stood to the other,
another straight Line. Thereby you shall find the right four parts thereof.
Superficitie of a crooked Line.



BUT if a man draw a whole round Line with his Compass, that is called a full
Circle, or round Superficities, and the point in the middle is called the
Center. The utmost line is called Circumferentie: and if you draw a straight
line through the Center, it is called a Diameter: because it deuideth the
Circle in two even parts. Circumferentie. Center. Diameter.



WHen the half Circumference is cut through the Center of the Diameter, then
it is called half a Circle: and if you make a straight ^^ne upright in the
half Circle, then that line makes two even quarters of a Circle, and deuideth
the Diameter also into two half Diameters. The half Circle.

The plom line. right corner.



When a man draws four even long lines, and joins them together, they
make a perfect cornerd Quadratus: then if you draw a straight line from the one
corner to the other, it is called Diagonus: because it deuideth the four
corners into two even parts. perfect four square.



NOw when a workman has seen a form of some of the most necessary
Superficies, he must proceed further, and learn to augment or diminish the
same, and to turn them into other forms: but yet in such sort, that they may
have even parts in them.

AND first, if out of the length of the Diagonus aforesaid, by the adding of
three other even long lines, he makes another four square: that four square
shall be once as great again as the first, which is to be understood in this
sort: That ye four square of A. B. C. D. by the Diagonus is divided into two
Triangles, and the greater four square A. D. F. E. contains four such
Triangles: but for that the two first four squares hang one within the other,
therefore for the better showing thereof, they are here once again set down
severally: whereby you may see that the Quadrate G. (as I said before)
contains two Triangles, and the Quadrate H. contains four such Triangles,
so that the proof thereof is clearly to he scene.

IF within a four square you make a Circle which touches the four sides of
the said four square, and without the said four square an other Circle which
touches the corners marked A.B.C.D. Then the outmost Circle must be once as
great again as the innermost: and then if about the greatest Circle you make
another four square as C. D. E. F. then the two four squares must in like
sort be once as great again as the other. The proof whereof stands hereby
marked with the leters K.I.. for clearer understanding of the same.

BY this also, the proiecture or the foot of the Bases of the Thuscane
Columns or Pillars, and also the breadth of the fundation of them underneath by
Vertrunius declared, is set forth.

THE workman must yet proceed further, and learn to know how to change a
Triangle into a Quadrangle, and also at last bring it to a right Quadrate, to
the which I will set down diverse forms. First, take a Triangle with even
corners, as A. B. C. and divide the Base (which is the name of all lower lines)
B. C. in two even parts, and there place the letter E. Then from the point E.
to A. draw a line, which will divide the Triangle into two even parts. Then if
you take that part which is marked A. E. C. and join it to the other part,
marked A. E. B. it will make a Quadrangle, as A. D. B. E. made of a Triangle.

YOu may also change this Triangle in other manner, dividing the lines A. B.
and A. C. each in two like parts as F. and G. Then draw a line through D. E.
as long as the Base B. C. Then shut up the two Equidistances, corner wise: and
then the Quadrangle B. C. D. E. contains so much in it as the Triangle A. B.
C. and the proof thereof is, that the two Triangles B. C. F. and G. E. C.
contain so much in them, as the two other Triangles A. F. H. and A. I. G.

A Triangle with even points, may be divided thrice into two equal parts,
dividing each side in two parts, as in the figure P. Q. R. it is seen through
the three lines, which on either side make two great Triangles.



THE same Triangle P. Q. R. may thus be changed into a Quadrangle: divide the
side P. Q. and the side P. R. each in two equal parts, then draw a line S. T.
as long as Q. and R. and then draw a line direct downward from T. R. to close
it up: and then that Quadrangle containe^ as much space within it as the
Triangle aforesaid, because that the Triangle which is cut off P. S. V. is of
the like greatness with the other Triangle marked V. R. T.

ANd although there is a Triangle of unequal sides, yet a man may make it a
Quadrangle, in such sort as I said before of the right Triangle: for although
the two Triangles that are cut off, and those two that are added unto it, are
not of one greatness, yet the Triangles A. F. I. and B. D. F. are one as great
as the other, and again, the Triangles A. G. K. and G. C. E. are also of one
greatness: so that those that are cut off, and those that are added thereunto,
are of one quantity. By these alterations aforesaid, a man may easily measure
how many feet, else or roodes fouresquare, are contained in a three cornerd
Superficies.

BUT it falls out, that a Triangle (which is three cornerd) superficie or
plain, must be parted cross wise in two equal parts: then out of one of the
sides that you will cut through, you must make a right four square, as from
the side A. B. and draw therein two Diagonus from corner to corner, which will
show you the Center C. and draw one Circle through that three cornerd part
which you will divide, and so you shall find the two points, where you shall
draw your dividing line. He that desires any proof hereof, may take each
piece and alter it into a Quadrangle, and after into a Quadrate, as hereafter
shall be showed, and he shall find it true.

AN Architector must also undergo other burdens, for that he must know how
to divide a piece of ground, that no man may be hindered thereby. As for
example, if there were a piece of ground that lay three cornerd wise, with
unequal parts, having on the one side thereof a Well, but not in the middle:
and this ground, or three cornerd piece of Land is to be divided into two
equal parts, in such sort, that each of them may have the use of the Well: it
must be done in this manner. I make a Triangle marked A. B. C. and the Well is
marked with G. Now divide the line B. C. with a dark line in the two equal
parts as the letter D. shows, and then drawing a line from D. to A. then the
Triangle is divided into two equal parts: but both of them can not yet come to
the Well: then draw another line from the Well G. to A. and from the point D
you must set an Equidistancie against G. A. marked with E. and drawing from G.
which is the Well: the black line to the letter E. it will divide the ground
in two even several parts, and each of them shall have the Well at the end of
his ground, for that part A. B. G. E. contains in it just as many feet is
roods, as that part which is marked G. E. C.

I Showed before, how a man should make a four square Superficies once as great
again as it is, but it may fall out, that a man is to make it but half as
great again, or more or less, as he thinks good, or as occasion serves,
which the Architector is also to learn of necessity. Which to show, I set
down a right fouresquare thing marked A. B. C. D. which I will have three
quarters greater: the same three quarters I set by the side thereof, so that
the same with the Quadrate together make a Quadrangle A. E. C. G. To bring this
Quadrangle into a right Quadrate, you must lengthen the line A. E. yet a
quarter longer, or from the side of the Quadrangle E. G. and place F. there:
then upon the line A. F. make half a Circle: which line will show you the one
side of the Quadrate which you seek for: which Quadrate being made, will
contain as much in it, as the Quadrangle already made. And in this manner you
may change all Quadrangles which are long four cornerd pieces of work, into a
just and true Quadrate.

NOw to prove that, which I said before, you must join the Quadrangle with
the Quadrate together, in one four square superficie as Q. R. S. T. and from
the corner R. to the corner S. draw a Diagonus, and it is certain that that
Diagonus will make two even parts. Now Euclides says, that when a man takes
any even parts from even parts, the rest of the parts also remain alike: then
take the Triangle K. L. and the Triangle M. N. which are both alike: the right
four cornerd superficie P. is of the same greatness, that the longer
superficie O is.

A Gain, you may easily change a Quadrate into a Quadrangle, as long or as
narrow as you desire to have it, doing thus: Make your Quadrate A. B. C. D. and
lengthen your line A. B. and the live B. C. Which do^e then set the length of
the Quadrangle, which you desire to have upon the line A. G. Then from the
point G. draw a line along by the corner of the Quadrate D. to the line C. F.
and there you find the shortest line of the Quadrangle: and so to the contrary
you shall by the least side of the Quadrangle find the longest also, as you
may also prove by the foresaid Figure: for when you take away the Triangles M.
N. and O. P. which are both alike, then the two parts which are K. L. are also
alike.

AN Architector may by chance have a piece of work of diverse unequal sides
come to his hands, which he is to put into a Quadranguler or Quadrate form, to
know what it contains, and specially when it belongs to more then one man,
whether it be Land or any other thing. For although the Architector or
Surueyor of Land could not skill of Arithmaticke or Ciphering: yet this rule
cannot fail him, nor any other man that desires to find out the deceit of a
Tailor. Thus, I say then, let it be what form soever it will, I set down
this hereafter following. First then, seek the greatest Quadrate or
Quadrangle, that you can take out of it: that done, seek yet another Quadrate
or Quadrangle, as big as you can take out of it, out of the rest of the said
work: and if you can after that make more Quadrates or Quadrangles out of it,
I mean all with right corners, take them out also: but if you can find no more
in it, then make Triangles also as big as you can, of which Triangles (as you
are taught before) you may make Quadrangles, and let every piece severally be
marked with Caracters, as in the figure following may be seen. architectural
drawing

LEt by example your many cornerd figures first be marked with the great
Quadrangle with these letters A. B. C. D. and then with a less Quadrangle, as
E. F. G. H. the rest are all Tryangles. Now set the greatest Quadrangle L. in a
place by it self, and then the other marked with M. which set upon it, that
the two corners or sides may be alike: which done, lengthen the line E. F. and
the line E. G. and where they stay or touch under the great Quadrangle L. there
set an I. from this I. a Diagonall line, being drawn through the corners B. H.
the same line shall be drawn to the point: that, by the shutting of the
Caracters B. M. L. D. will show you another Quadrangle, of the like quantity
that the Quadrangle M. is: so that the whole Quadrangle D. C. L. M. contains
the two aforesaid Quadrangles. Touching the Triangles, when you have changed
the same (accorting to your former instruction) in to Quadrangles, as you may
see by the Triangle N. so may you put that Quadrangle also in the greatest
Quadrongles (for less trouble.) The great Quadrangle A. L. M. C. is once
again placed above with the small Quadrangle O. P. Q. R. set upon it, and the
Diagonall line is placed behind the greater (which is L. M. T. S. both marked
with N. so that the Quadrangle A. C. S. T. contains three Quadrangles L. M.
N. end as many more as there are: you may in this sort bring them all in one
Quadrangle: if there falls out any crocked lines, the skillful Architector or
workman may almost bring them into a square, and those Quadrangles, if need
be, may also be reduced into perfect four squares, as aforesaid.

architectural drawing

architectural drawing

architectural drawing

WHen a man has a line or other things of unequal parts, and there is also
another longer line, or some other thing, which a man would also divide into
unequal parts, according to the proportion of the shorter line, then let the
shortest line be A. B. and the gre^test (...) A* C. new^t is necessary that
from the uppermost point A. you should make a corner as A. B. and A. A. Then
ta^e your longer line, and set it with the end C. upon B. and let the other and
rest at the hanging line A. A. then from every point of the uppermost line A.
B. let a hanging line fall upon the line A. C. so that they may be equidistant
with the line A. A. and where y^ said lines cut through each other, there is
the right division proportioned, according to the smaller. This rule shall not
only serve the Architector for many things, as I will partly show: but will
also serve many Artificers to reduce their small works into greater.

architectural drawing

FOr example of the figure aforesaid, I suppose, Houses or pieces of Land to be
of diverse wideness, which should be narrower before then behind. Which
Houses, by fire or war are so decayed, that in the forepart between C. D.
there were but some signs of division to be seen of the houses, and behind
the houses between A. and B. no signs at all to be seen. Now as the
misfortune was past, and that every man desired so have his part of his
inheritance, then the Architector, as an vmpire, according to the rule
aforesaid, should divide she longest line according to the proportion of the
shortest, to give every man his own: as you may see by this Figure following.
architectural drawing

THE Architector must have a well proportioned Cornice, which if he would make
greater, keeping the same proportion, he may do it as he is formerly taught,
as in this Figure following is showed by the short line marked A. B. and the
longer line marked A. C.

architectural drawing

AN Architector or workman, must likewise learn to augment and make greater a
holowed colu^ne, which he may also do by the two lines aforesaid, and
although the Column should be a Dorica (yet it is to be understood of all
kinds of Columns. This rule will also serve (not only for the three figures set
down) but also for as many, as if I should show them, it would contain a
whole book of them alone, and therefore this shall suffice at this time for
the workman. architectural drawing

THe further that any material thing stands from our sight, so much it
seems to l^ssen, and diminish by means of the air, which consumes our
sight: therefore when a man will make or place one thing above another, against
any place or wall, and would have the same thing to show above in the middle,
and beneath, as great in one part as in the other, it is convenient for him to
follow this rule, which is, for that our sight runs in circumference:
therefore a man must first choose the place, from whence he will see the same:
there placing a Center, and then draw a quarter of a Circle from your eye
upwards. Which dividing in even parts, you shall, by the lines that go out of
the Center through the Circle against the wall, find the unequal parts: the
which although upwards against the wall, they shall seem greater: yet in your
sight they will show al of one greatness. By this rule you may also measure
heights, ayding your self with the numbers.

architectural drawing

MAny men are of opinion, that straight lines, in what manner soever they are
closed, contain as many spaces one ^ay as another, (that is to say) if a man
had a cord of forty foot long, and should lay it diversely in a round, long,
three cornerd, four square, or five cornerd form: but the superficies are not
of one self same space, which may be seen by these four square figures
following; for the first line holds on either side ten, which is forty: and
the space contaynes ten times ten, which is an hundred. The other line upon the
two longest sides contaynes fifteen spaces, and on the shortest sides five,
making forty also: but five times fifteen make but seventy and five.

architectural drawing

architectural drawing

IF the Quadrate stretches further out, so that the two longer sides were
eyghteene a piece, then the shortest sides must each have th^o to have forty
upon the line, but the space should contain but six and thirty. And hereby
you see what a perfect form may do against an imperfect. And this rule the
workman shall use, that he may not be deceived when he will change one form
(...) to another.

architectural drawing

architectural drawing

architectural drawing

If a man should make three pointo (which should not stand upon a right live)
and desiring to have a circumference made, the compass must pass along upon
each of these points. To do it from the point one, to the point two, h^e must
draw a line, and from the pornt two, to the point three another: which two
lives shall each of them be denided into two equal parts, and setting the
squiers half way in them, as you so it in the figure, by that cross it will
show you the Center, wherein you must se^ one foot of the Compass, and with
the other draw the Circle through all the said three points.

YOu may find the Center of three points another way, without your Compass,
moking a two cornerd superficie from the our point to the other, through the
which Corners two straight lines being drawn long enough downwards where they
cross one over the other, they will show you the Center of the three points.

architectural drawing

architectural drawing

BUt for ye a workman holds this to be a superfluens speech, and a thing of no
moment, it may be that a workman may have a piece of a round work to do,
which he is to perfect and make full round, by this rule he may find the
Center, Circumfere^ce, and Diameter thereof, as the figure shows.

WE find in Antiquities, and also in modern works, many Pillars or Colomnes,
which beneath in the ioynto at the Bases are broken asaude^, which is, because
their Bases were not well made according to their corners: or cise, because
they are not rightly placed: so that they have more weights upon them on the
one side, then on the other, whereby the Cantons break, which the lines, and
help of Geometry, may prevent in this manner: That is. He must make the Pillar
round underneath, and his Base hollow inward: so that when you place the Pillar
by the Lead, it may presently settle it self without any hurt. To find this
roundnes, you must set the one point of the Compass upon the highest part of
the Pillar that is under the A. and the other point thereof upon B. and then
draw, or wind it about to C. and that shall be the roundnesse, making the
hollowing of the Base, according to the same measure: you may do the like with
the Capital, as you see in the Pillar by it.

architectural drawing

IF a frokeman will make a Bridge, Bow, or any other round Arched piece of
work, which is wyder then a half Circle, although Masons practice this with
their lines, whereby they make such kind of works, which show will to mine
sight, yet if the workman will follow the right Theoricke and reason thereof,
he must observe the order heretofore showed. When he has the wydenesse of the
height, then he must make half a Circle out of the middle: after that, upon
the same Center, he must make another lesser Circle, which must be no greater
then he will make the height of the Bow or Arche: then he must divide the
greatest Circle in equal parts, which must al be drawn with lines to the
Center: then you must hang out other Perpendiculars upon your Lead: and where
the lines that go to the Center ^ut through the lesser Circle, from thence you
must draw the cross lines toward the Perpendicular, and where they close
together, there the Bow or Arche which is made, shall be closed: as by the
points or pricks hereunder is showed.

architectural drawing

BUT if you destre to make the Bow or Arche lower, then you must follow the
rule aforesaid, and make the innermost Circle so much less, which is to be
understood, that the wore parts that you make of the greater Circle, so much
the easher you shall draw the crooked lines which you would have: from this
rule there are many others observed, as herealter you shall see.

architectural drawing

Calling the former rule to mind, I devised the manner how to form and
fashion diverse kinds of vessels by the same, and I think it not amiss to set
down some of them: This only is to be marked, that as wide as you will make
the vessels within, so great you must make the innermost Circle. The rest, the
suilfull workman may mark by the figures, that is, how the lines are drawn
to the Center, and the Parables, and out of the small Circle. The
Perpendiculars hanging, the vessels are formed: the foot and the neck may be
made as the workman will.

architectural drawing

BUT if you will make the body of the vessel thicker, then you must make the
half Circle so much the greater, and make the belly hanging down under it, to
touch the great Circle, by the falling of the Perpendiculars upon the cross
line, as by these Figures 3.4.5. it is showed: whereby a man by this means may
make diverse vessels, differing from mine. The necks and couers of these vessels
are within the small Circles: the other members and Ornaments are always to
be made, according to the will of the ingenious workman.

architectural drawing

IT is an ercellent thing for a man to study or practice to do any thing with
the Compass, whereby in time men may find out that which they never imagined:
as this night it happened unto me, for that seeking to find a nearer rule* to
make ye form of an Egg, then Albertus Durens has set down: I found this way
to make an Anticke vessel, placing the foot beneath at the foul of an Egg,
and the neck with the handles above upon the thickest part of the Egg. But
first, you must frame the Egg in this manner: Make a straight cross of two
lines, and divide your cross line in ten equal parts: that is, on each side
five. Then, set the Compass upon the Center A. and with the other foot
thereof, draw in two parts, that is, to C. making half a Circle upwards. That
done, set one foot of the Compass upon ye point marked B. and with the other
draw in the uttermost point C. drawing a piece of a Circle down-wards toward ye
Perpendicular, other side, you must make a point below. Then take the half of
the half Circle above that two parts, and place it at the undermost point of
the Perpendicular upwards above O. where the Center to close the Egg, shall
stand: the rest under shalke for ye foot: the neck, without doubt, may be
made two parts high, and the rest according to the workemans pleasure, or
according to the figure herevnder set down.

architectural drawing

YOu may also make another form of a Cup or vessel, after the rule aforesaid.
But from the poyst A. (which does show the breadth of the foot, and the
wideness of the mouth) you must make your Circle upwards, from C. unto the two
Perpendiculars, where the body shall be closed up. The neck standing above it,
shall ^e two parts high: but the rest of the workmanship shall be made
according to the will and device of the workman.

architectural drawing

By this means you may make other different kinds of Cups or vessels: but
these that follow, you must make in this sort: you must divide your cross line
in twelve parts through the point A. making two Perpendiculars to show the
foot and the neck: then setting one foot of the Compass upon B. and the
other foot upon I. drawing a piece of a Circle downe-wards, toward the
Perpendicular: and the like being done on the other side to the Figure of 2.
then place your Compass upon the point C. and teaching the sides 3. and 4.
then the bottom of the vessel will be closed up: then place the Compass upon
the point between I. and A. and it will be the roundnesse of the vessel
above: the other four parts serve for the neck of the vessel, with the rest
of the work.

architectural drawing

A Man may make a vessel only by a Circuler form, making therein a Circuler
cross, and dividing every line into six parts: the half circle shall be the
belly of the vessel, and a sixth part upward for a Freese, that there may be
more place to beautify it: an other part shall be the height of the neck, and
another part the cover: and for the foot, although it be but a half part
high, it may well go a sixth part without the round: and although I have set
down but six manner of cups or vessels, yet according to the rule aforesaid, a
man may make an infinite number of vessels, and a man may alter them by their
Ornaments, whereof I say nothing, that you may see the line the better.

architectural drawing

A Man may make Ouale forms in diverse fashions, but I will only set down
four. To make this first figure, you must set two perfect Triangles one above
the other, like a Rombus, and at the joining of them together, you must draw
the lines through to 1.2.3.4. and the corners A B. C. D. shall be the four
Centers, then set one foot of the Compass upon B. and the other upon I. and
draw a line from thence to the figure 2. After that, from the point A. and 3.
to 4. you must also draw a line: which being done, set the one end of the
Compass in the point C. and then draw a piece of a Circle from 1. to 3. and
again, the Compass being in the Center D. draw a piece of a Circle from 2. to
4. and then the form is made. You must also understand, that the nearer that
the figures come to their Centers, so much the longer they are: and to the
contrary* the further that they are from their Centers, the rounder they are:
yet they are no perfect Circles, because they have more then one Center.

architectural drawing

architectural drawing

FOR the making of the second Ouale, you must first make three Circles, as you
see here drawing, where ye four straight lines stand: the four Centers
shall be I.K.L.M. Then placing one point of the Compass in K. you must draw a
line with the other point from the figure of 1. to 2. Again, without altering
the Compass, you shall set the one foot of the Compass in I. and so draw a
piece of a Circle from the figure 3. to the figure 4. and that makes the
Compass of the Circle. This Figure is very like the form of an Egg.

architectural drawing

THE third form is made by two four cornerd squares, drawing Diagonen lines
in them, which shall show the two Centers G. H. and the other two the corners E.
and F. Then draw a piece of a Circle from F. to the figure 1. and so to 2. Do
the like from E. to 3. and 4. which done, from the points G. and H. make the
two sides from 1. to 3. and from 2. to 4. and so shut up the Ouale.

IF you will make this fourth Ouale, then make two Circles that may cut through
each others Center, and the other two Centers for the closing of the Circle be
N.O. after that, whether you draw the right lines or not from the points O. N.
you shall shut up the sides from 1. and 2. and from 3. to 4.

And although our Author says, there are four forms of Ouales: yet this
last figure is of the same form as the first, only this is easter to make.

architectural drawing

TOuching the Circles, there are many figures which are round, and yet some
have 5.6.7.8.9. and 10. corners, etc. But at this time, I will speak only of
these three principally: because they are most common.

THis Octogonus, or eight points, is drawn out of a right four cornerd
square, drawing the Diagonus which will show you the Center: then set one
foot of your Compass upon the corners of the Quadrate, and leading the other
foot through the Center, directing your Circle toward the side of the
Quadrate, there your right points shall stand to make it eight cornerd: and
although a man might only do it by the Circle, making a cross therein, and
dividing each quarter in two, yet it (...) not be so well, and therefore this
is a surer and more perfect way.

architectural drawing

THE Hexagonus, that is, the sixth cornerd Circle, is easiest made in a Circle:
for when the Circle is made, you may divide the Circumference in six parts
equally, without stirring the Compass, and drawing the line from one point to
another, the six corners are made.

architectural drawing

architectural drawing

BUT the Pentagonus that is five cornerd, is not so easily to be made as the
others are, because it is of an uneven number of corners, notwithstanding you
may make it in this manner: when the Circle is made, then make a straight
cross therein: then divide the one half of the cross line in two parts, which
is marked with the figure 3. then place the one foot of the Compass upon 3
and with the other, placing it under the cross, draw downe-ward to the cross
line marked 2. from thence also from under the cross, you shall find the
length of every side of the Pentagonus. In this figure also you shall find the
Decagonus, that is, ten corners: for, from the Center to the figure 2. that
shall be one side thereof, you may also make a sixteen cornerd figure out of
this wideness 1.2. and place a Particular line upon the point 3. And Albertus
Durens says, that the same also will serve to make a seven cornerd figure.

THis figure will serve such men as are to part a Circumference into unequal
parts, how many soever they be: but not to bring the Reader into confusednesse,
with making of many forms, I will only set down this divided into nine
corners, which shall serve for an example of all the rest, which is thus: Take
the quarter of the Circle, and divide it into nine parts, and four of these
parts will be the ninth part of the whole Circumference: you must also
understand the same so, if you divide a Quadrate into eleven, twelve, or
thirteen parts, etc. for that always four of these parts be the just
wydenesse of your parts required.

architectural drawing

architectural drawing

THere are many Quadrangle proportions, but I will here set down but seven of
the principallest of them, which shall best serve for the use of the workman.

FIrst, this form is called a right four cornerd Quadrate.

THe second form or figure in Latin, is called Sexquiquarta, that is, which
is made of a four cornerd Quadrate, and an eight part thereof joined unto it.

THe third figure in Latin, is called a Sexquitertia, that is, made of a four
squared Quadrate, and a third part thereof joined unto it.

THe fourth, is called Diagonea, of the line Diagonus: which line deuideth the
four square Quadrate cross through the middle, which Diagonall line being
touched from under to the end thereof upwards with the Compass, and so drawn,
will show you the length of the Diagonall Quadrangle: but from this proportion
there can be no rule in number well set down.

THE fifth figure is called a Sexquialtera, that is, a four square, and half
of one of the four squares added unto it.

architectural drawing

THe sixth is called Superbitienstercias, that is, a four square, and two third
parts of one of the four squares added thereunto.

architectural drawing

THE seventh and last figure, is called Dupla, that is, double: for it is made
of two four square forms joined together: and we find not in any
Antiquities, any form that passes the two four squares, unless it be in
Galleries, Entries and other to walk in: and some gates, doors, and windows
have stood in their heights: but such as are wise will not pass such lengths
in Chambers or Halles.

architectural drawing

architectural drawing

MAny accidents like unto this, may fall into ye workmans hand, which is, that
a man should lay a steling of a house in a place which is fifteen foot long,
and as many foot broad, and the rafters should be but fourteen foot long,
and no more wood to be had: then in such case, the binding thereof must be made
in such sort as you see it here set down, that the rafters may serve, and
this will also be strong enough.

IT may also fall out, shat a man should find a Table of ten foot long, and
three foot broad: with this Table a man would make a door of seven foot
high, and four foot wide. Now to do it, a man would saw the Table long wise
in two parts, and setting them one under another, and so they would be but six
foot high, and it should be seven: and again, if they would cut it three
foot shorter, and so make it four foot broad, then the one side shall be
too much peeced. Therefore he must do it in this sort: Take the Table of ten
foot long, and three foot broad, and mark it with A. B. C. D. then saw it
Diagonall wise, that is, from the corner C. to B. with two equal parts, then
draw the one piece thereof three foot backwards toward the corner B. then the
line A. F. shall be four foot broad, and so shall the line E. D. also hold
four foot broad: by this means you shall have your door A. E. F. D. seven
foot long, and four foot broad, and you shall yet have the three cornerd
pieces marked E. B. G. and C. F. and C. left for some other use.

architectural drawing

IT happens many times, that a workman has an eye or round window to make in
a Church, as in ancient times they used to make them, and he doubted of the
greatness thereof, which if he will make after the rules of Geometry, he must
first measure the breadth of the place where he will set it, and therein he must
make a half Circle: which half Circle being enclosed in a Quadrangle, then he
shall find the Center by two Diagonall lines: then he must draw two lines
more, which shall reach from the two lowermost corners above the Center, and
touch the just half of the Circle above: and where the said lines cut through
the Diagonall lines, there you must make two Perpendicular lines, which
Perpendicular lines shall show the wideness of the desired window: the list
about it, may be made the sixth part of the Diameter, being round in breadth.

architectural drawing

IF a workman will make a Gate or a Door in a Temple or a Church, which is to
be proportioned according to the place, then he must take the wideness within
the Church, or else the breadth of the wall without: if the Church be small,
and have Pilasters of Pillars within it: then he may take the wideness
between them, and set the same breadth in a four square, that is, as high as
broad, in which four square, the Diagonall lines, and the other two cross
cutting lines will not only show you the widenes of the door, but also the
places and points of the ornaments of the same Door, as you see here in this
Figure. And although it should fall out, that you have three doors to make in
a Church, and to that end cut three holes, yet you may observe this proportion
for the smallest of them. And although (gentle Reader) the cross cutting
through or dividing is innumerable, yet for this time, lest I should be too
tedious, I here end my Geometry.

architectural drawing

Here ends the first Book of Architecture, treating of Geometry, translated
out of Italian into Dutch: And now out of Dutch, into English, for the benefit
of our English Nation, at the charges of Robert Peake. 1611.

The second Book of Architecture, made by Sebastian Serly, entreating of
Perspectiue, which is, Inspection, or looking into, by shortening of the sight.

Translated out of Jtalian into Dutch, and out of Dutch into English.

LONDON Printed for Robert Peake, and are to be sold at his shop near Holborne
conduit, next to the Sun Tavern. ANNO DOM. 1611.

The second Book. A Treatise of Perspectiues, touching the Superficies.
The second Chapter.
ALthough the subtle and ingenious Art of Perspectiue is very difficult and
troublesome to set down in writing, and specially the body, or model of
things, which are drawn out of the ground: for it is an Art which cannot be
so well expressed by figures or writings, as by an vndershewing, which is done
severally: Notwithstanding, seeing that in my first Book I have spoken of
Geometry, without the which Perspectiue Art is nothing: I will labor in the
briefest manner that I can in this my second Book, to show the workman so
much thereof, that he shall be able to aid and help himself therewith.

In this work I will not trouble my self to dispute Philosophically what
Perspectiue is, or from whence it has the original: for learned Euclides
writes darkely of the speculation thereof.

But to proceed to the matter, touching that the workman shall have cause to
use, you must understand, that Perspectiue is that, which Vitruuius calls
Scenographie, that is, the upright part and sides of any building or of any
Superficies or bodies.

This Perspectiue then, consists principally in three lines: The first line
is the Base below, from whence all things have their beginning. The second line
is that, which goes or reaches to the point, which some call sight, others,
the horison: But the horison is the right name thereof, for the horison is in
every place wheresoever sight ends. The third line, is the line of the
distances, which ought always to stand so high as the horison is far or
near, according to the situation, as when time serves, I will declare.

This Horison is to be understood to stand at the corners of our sight, as if
the workman would show a piece of work against a flat wall, taking his
beginning from the ground, where the feet of the beholders should stand. In
such case it is requisite, that the Horison should be as high as our eye, and
the distance to see or behold that work, shall be set or placed in the fittest
place thereabouts, as if it were in a Hall, or a Chamber, then the distance
shall be taken at the entry thereof: but if it be within, or at the end of a
Gallery or Court, then the distance shall be set at the entry of the same
place, and if it be in a Street against a wall or an house, then you must set
your distance on the other side, right over against it. But if in such a case
the street is very narrow, then it were good to imagine a broad distance, lest
the shortening fall out to be ouer-tedious or unpleasant unto you: for the
longer or the wyder the distance is, the work will show so much the better and
pleasanter.

But if you will begin a piece of work of five or six foot high from the
ground whereon you stand, then it is requisite that the Horison should stand
even with your eyes (as I said before) but if a man should see no ground of the
work, whereon the uppermost part does stand (and a man would work very high)
it would not be correspondent with the eyes: In such a case a man must take
upon him to place the Horison somewhat higher, by the advice of some skillful
workman, which makes histories or other things upon Houses, thirty or forty
foot high above a man's sight, which is vnfittingly. But cunning workmen fall
into no such errors; for where they have made any thing above our sight, there
you could see no ground of the same work, for that the notable Perspectiue Art
has bridled them: and therefore (as I said before) Perspectiue Art is very
necessary for a workman: And no Perspectiue workman can make any work
without Architecture, nor the Architecture without Perspectiue.

To prove this, it appears by the Architectures in our days, wherein good
Architecture has begun to appear and show it self: For, was not Bramant an
excellent Architector, and was he not first a Painter, and had great skill in
Perspectiue Art, before he applied himself to the Art of Architecture? and
Raphael Durbin, was not he a most cunning Paynter, and an excellent Perspectiue
Artist, before he became an Architector? And Balthazar Perruzzie of Sienna, was
also a Paynter, and so well seen in Perspectiue Art, that he seeking to place
certain Pillars and other Antike works perspectiuely, took such a pleasure in
the proportions and measures thereof, that he also became an Architector:
wherein he so much ex^elled, that his like was almost not to be found. Was not
learned Ieronimus Genga also an excellent Paynter and most cunning in
Perspectiue Art, as the fair works, which he made for the pleasure of his
Lord Francisco Maria, Duke of Vrbin, can testify; under whom he became a most
excellent Architector? Julius Romanus, a scholar of Raphael Durbin; who, by
Perspectiue Art and Paynting, became an excellent Architector, witnesses the
same. Then to come to my purpose; I say, that a man must be diligent and
vigilant in this Art, wherein I will begin with small things, and then proceed
to greater; until I have showed you the full Art and manner thereof, as I
desire.

TO the end that men by small matters may attain to greater, therefore I will
begin to show how to shorten a four cornerd thing, from whence all the rest
shall be derived. Then the Base of this four square thing, shall be A. G. and
the height of the Horison (as I said before) shall be imagined according to
the fight, and that shall be P. whereunto all the lines do run, as the lines
of the sides A. P. and G. P. then at the one end of the Quadrante you must set
a Perpendicular line, which is G.H. which done, then draw the Base A. G. K.
long though, and then out of the Horison draw a Parallel or an Equidistant sine
from the Base, as far as you will that the eye or sight shall stand from that
which you will look on; for how much the more you will have the four square
thing to seem shorter, so much further you must go with yoin sight I. from H.
to behold the four square thing. And then, taking H. I. for the distance from
the point I. to the corner A. draw a line, and where the line cutteth through
the Perpendicular line H. G^th it is on B. there the termination of the
shortening of the four square thing shall be, as you may see in the figure
following. But if you will make more four squares one above the other, upon
the same Horison or point: then you must draw another line from the shortening
point of the four square or Quadrant, to the letter I. and where it cutteth
through the Perpendicular line aforesaid, that is at C, there the second
Quadrant shall be rut off, and in like sort you must draw another line to the
point of the distance: and where it touches the Lead, or Perpendicular line
that is on D. you shall make the third Quadrante, the same may be done with E.
and so you must go, until you come just under the Horison.

architectural drawing

THe rule aforesaid is the perfectest, and you may prove it by the line G. H.
which is called the line of the Quadrante: but because it is cumbred with a
greater number of lines, and so more tedious: therefore the rule ensuing shall
be shorter, and easilyer to be done then the other: for when the Base A. G. is
drawn, and the two side lines make a Triangle A. P. G. then you must draw the
Paralels of the Base and of the Horison long enough; and as far as you will
stand from the work to see it, so far you must set the Perpendiculars I. K.
from the point G. then you must draw a line from the point I. to the point A.
and where it cutteth through the line G. P. there shall be the termination of
the first shortened Quadrant: and if you will place more Quadrants upwards from
that Quadrant, you must do as I said before: and although there are other
ways to shorten a Quadrant, yet will I follow this order, as being the
shortest and easiest to be set down in writing.

architectural drawing

A Man must also use himself unto diverse distances and grounds, and therefore
you must make the ground following, which is of three Quadrantes high, in this
manner. First, you must draw the line A. B. as long as the breadth of the work
shall be: which line or Base, must be divided into so many equal parts as are
needful, which being all drawn to the Horison or point, then you must place
the distances as far as you desire, according to the rule aforesaid; for here
is no place to set it in, although it is a length and a half from the Base, as
you see it marked with 1. Which Base, because it is of four parts, therefore
the first Quadrant contains sixteen small Quadrantes, which are found by the
line B. D. for where that line cutteth through the four lines, which go to
the point; there you must draw the Parallel over, that thereby the sixteen
Quadrantes may be formed: But if you will set other Quadrantes upon it, then
(as aforesaid) you must draw another line to the distance D. and where that
cutteth through the other lines that reach to the point, that shall be the
termination of the second Quadrant, containing in it also four times four
Quadrantes: The like must be understood of the third Quadrant, (and more
besides if need be.) But you must also understand, that the lines marked D.
run all the distances, as it is taught before.

architectural drawing

IF you will make a pauement with great Quadrantes to be cut or Compassed with
fascion, fasen or lists, as you will term them, then upon A. B. you must
divide the fasen or Quadrantes, and draw them all to the Horison; then you must
imagine the distances as you are taught before: and the line D B. being drawn
from the point B. to the point of the distances; then by cutting through of the
Horisentall lines, it will show the terminations of the Quadrants, Fasen, or
Borders. To draw the Pacalels, then if you will make the like Quadrantes
somewhat higher, then you must draw another line to the distances: and where it
touches the Horisentall or Radiall lines, there also you must draw the
Paralels through; so you must also do with the third, and the point of the
distances of these figures stand as far from A. as the line or Base A. B. is
long: If you will make diverse forms in these Quadrants, as Roots, Crosses,
six points, or right points, I will show the manner of them particularly,
because I will be as brief here in as I may.

architectural drawing

THis figure is a Quadrant, containing in it a Rote or an other Quadrant, which
with the points thereof touches the sides of the uttermost Quadrant; whereby
it is but half so great as the uttermost Quadrant, as I have taught you in the
first Book of Geometry, and the manner to make this, is thus. First, you must
make a Quadrant (as you are taught before) with his distances; and in this
Quadrant you must draw two Diagonall lines, and also the right cross lines,
whereby you may easily find the Root, as you see it in the figure directly
against this* In it is sort you may make the Roots in the other Quadrantes
before set down, that is, to draw Diagonall and cross lines in them without
seeking other distances.

architectural drawing

IN this figure there is a cross showed (to make it) you must divide the
lowest line or Base of the Quadrant in five parts; of the which five parts, one
part is the breadth of the cross: which breadth being dr^w^n to the points, the
Di^g^nall lines will show you the Parallel lines of the cross, to use where
^eede is.

architectural drawing

THE eight poynted figure you may see in Perspectiue works in diverse forms,
which forms are all difficult enough: but that I may seek the easiest way so
near as I can in this my writing: Therefore I have set down the manner
thereof hereunto annexed, which is very easily; and that is thus. The Quadrant
being mede in shortening, you must divide the Base into ten equal parts, and
on either side you shall leave three parts, and in the middle four parts, then
the two lines being drawn to the Horison, you shall find the terminations of
the Parallel lines, by the Diagonal lines, whereby you may close up the eight
corners, as you may see it in the Figure.

architectural drawing

architectural drawing

THE shortest way to place this six cornerd Quadrant, in Perspectiue works,
is thus; When the Quadrant according to the rule aforesaid, is placed in
shortening, then you must make four equal parts of the Bases, whereof two
shall be in the middle, and on each side you must leave one, and then draw the
lines upwards to the Horison or points: then you must draw the Diagonall lines,
and in the middle where they meet together, you must draw a Parallel line cleave
through, by the which you shall find all the points to make this six cornerd
Figure.

architectural drawing

NOw I have showed how you shall make simple or plain Perspectiue works of
four corners, of six corners, and eight square corners: Now I will show, how
you shall make them double, that is, that every simple figure shall have his
band. When you have made a plain Superficies of six points, according to the
rule aforesaid; then as much as you will have the band or fase to be in breadth,
that you must draw upon the Base, and draw that also up to the Horison: and
where the Diagonall lines cut through it, there you must draw Parallel lines
both under and above: and then draw two Diagonal lines more, out of the four
innermost points or corners of the six cornerd Superficies; and so you shall
find your terminations to shut or close up your smalest six points or cornerd
Superficies. Which second Diagonal, Parallel, and Horisontall lines are all
drawn with pricks, for a difference from the first lines; that you may know
them one from another.

architectural drawing

THE like must be done with the eight cornerd Superficies or Perspectiue work,
for when the same is made within a fouresquare, making the Compass of what
breadth you will, according to the rule aforesaid: then out of every point or
corner of the eight sqare, a small line being drawn to the Center, you shall
fin^e the termination to shut up the innermost eight squares and then, when
from point to point the lines are drawn, then one square or Compass is full
made. This eight squa^e form may be changed into a round, fou^^ng the middle
on either side, or else without. over the points or corners; a good workman
may easily draw a Circuler shortening round line with his hand.

ALthough I have said before that a man may make a round Circle about an eight
square, yet for more security you may by this way attain to a more persection
therein; for that the more points or sides the Circuler form has, the round
Compass or Circle will be the fuller. But to make this Figure, it is necessary
to make half a Circle under the Bases, and to divide the Circumference into as
many parts as you will, so that they be even; in this form the half Circle is
divided into eight parts, so that the whole Circle must be sixteen parts:
which being done, you must set Perpendicular lines in all the parts of the
Circumference, as far as to the Bases of the shortened Quadrant, these parts
being elevated to the Horison, and two Diagonall lines drawn in the Quadrante,
they by cutting through the Horisentall or Radiall lines, will show you the
Parallel lines. Then if you will draw a little Diagonall line, beginning at the
middle point of the Base, from the ^ne side unto the other, and so from the one
point unto the other upwards going ever the points: then the forms will be
closed, as you see them here; whereby it will be easy for you to draw around
form with your hand, for it is impossible to be done with the Compass to
make it short^n well. This figure you must be expert in, and you must also
understand it well, and so you must those that I have before set down, before
you proceed further: for they will serve you for many pieces of work hereafter
ensuing, as you shall both see and find to be true.

architectural drawing

WHen you understand the Figure aforesaid perfectly, then you must proceed
further, and shut the cound Circle also with an edge or border, according to
the breadth that you will have; you must also make the uttermost half Circle,
and the aforesaid parts of the great Circle drawn toward the Center, will
come into the small Circle: the which parts of the small Circle being also set
down in Perpendicular lines with pricks not to darken the other lines, and
those likewise that are drawn to the Horison. Then by cutting through of the
Diagonall lines, you shall find the Parallel lines. To make the innermost
shortening a round or Circle according to the first example set down, as you
may see; the first round with perfect lines, and the second with pricks, as
you see in this Figure.

But, friendly Reader, you must not be weary to be long in learning this
Figure, or in making it often times, until you can do it perfectly and
understand it well: for I am sure and certain, that it will he very hard unto
many men, yet without this, you cannot do much; and he that can do it well,
shall easily understand and make all the things hereafter ensuing.

architectural drawing

IT salleth out many times shat a workman will show a House b^th without and
within, which to do, he must place the ground in Perspectiue form, that he
may the surer and better draw that up which he will have seen, and to lean
the rest on the ground: if then you will place a soundation in Perspectiue
manner, to make it well, you must first set it on a flat form, that out of
that you may draw it into a Perspectiue form.

To do this, I have set down a kind of open Building, that a man may the
easelier conceive it for a beginuing, for when a man can do this well, he may
after that place many other and harder things in Perspectiue form. I need not
to take any great pains to write or show how this shortening should be done,
because it is so easily and so openly placed in a figure that a man may
presently centeaue it: for that leading all the lines that go from the corners
and outsides of the flat ground to the Base, which you will make in the
shortening; and the same being drawn up to the Horison, together with the
imagination of the distances: then you may shut or close up the shortening
four square. Then you must draw the Diagonall lines therein, through drawing
the Parallel lines, presently you shall find the way how to form the Columns
and pilasters, so that it is impossible to fail therein; and especially for
those that do well conceive and understand that, which I have set down before.

architectural drawing

THis Figure following is somewhat harder then that before, but when you go
from the smalest to the greatest, you conceive things the easier, and specially
he that will learn this Art; he must not leave nor refuse to exercise any of
the Figures before set down, but must use all the diligence he can to be
persect in them all, and he must also take a pleasure to do them all,
otherwise he that will omit now one, and then another, because he can hardly
understand or conceive them (although I labor and strive at all times in
setting down these rules to show all difficulties) shall little profit
himself in this Art. The manner how to place this ground in Perspectiue
form, is easily conceived, without any other demonstration: for you must
follow the manner or opperation of the figure before set down, with this
advertisement; that the two Diagonal lines evermore direct the work, together
with the Horisentall lines: and although a man may show many forms of grounds
that are to be placed in shortening, yet these two shall suffice for this
time, because I have other things to entreat off: for a skillful workman, by
the help of these, may form others for his purpose, and such as he shall have
occasion to use. And if he will erect any piece of work for a show, he must
necessarily first measure the Ortographie with the same measure that he
measures the ground withal, and then place it in a shortening manner, as when
time serves, shall be she wed.

architectural drawing

Of Perspectiue works, touching Bodies or Massiue things.
The third Chapter.
TOuching the grounds and other Superficies of diverse forms, I think I have
sufficiently spoken. Now I will speak of Bodies which are drowme up out of the
ground: and first, you know that I have taught before, how you should frame an
eight square form plainly in it self; and then, I have showed how you should
compass this Figure about, with a border or edge: but if a workman will show
an eight square Figure in Perspectiue wist, as a Well; then he must first make
the ground, as he is taught before, as high as he will, that the said Well
shall stand elevated above the ground or foot thereof: there he must make the
same form once again, drawing it to the same Horison; then from all the
uppermost corners or points to the lowest; you must draw Perpendicular lines
as well from the innermost figures, as from the uttermost, whereby the through
cutting eight square bodies will be formed, as you may see in the Figure
hereunto annexed.

architectural drawing

I Have spoken before of the open frame of a Well with eight pornis or corners,
which is necessary to be learned, how to make it, before you make the solid
body thereof, as this figure shows, which is the same that is before showed,
both form and measure, but all the lines which cannot outwardly be seen, are
hidden; and there is as much difference between an open body and a solid, as
there is between the model of a man's body, that is nothing but bones without
flesh and skin: and a lining body of a man covered over with flesh (although
it is hidden under it.) And as those Paynters are much perfecter that have
seen, and perfectly beheld right Anatomies, then others that only content
themselves with the outward bare show of the Superficies, so it is with
Perspectiue works; for they that well understand and perfectly bear in mind
the hidden lines, they shall better understand the At to then others, that
content themselves only with yt show of outward Superficies. It is very true
that when a man has sufficiently experimented, practiced and bears in his
mind these inward hidden lines, then helping himselfs with the principal, he
may mak^ many perfect things, without using all this labor.

architectural drawing

FOr these three figures following, every one is drawn out of the fouresquare,
in such manner as I have taught befores and they go all three to eve Horison
or paynt as they should do, or as need ^^quireth; by the which figures any man
may help himself in many things, as I have further declared: and he that is
perfect in these, may make all kind of round forms, and without knowing of
these, he can do little in round for^^es. For out of these figures you may
draw a round Solude or Piramidall Building with Pillars, or without Pillars;
and also a round winding pair of Stayers: for this Figure will show you how to
make the Stayers round, with other things more, and yet not without your own
industry: for the things that by these may be made are wonderful and infinite,
so that you ware not weary, and spare no pains till you are perfect in them,
because that the bowing or Arches of gates and other things will seem hard
unto you, as I will hereafter show you; notwithstanding that they take their
beginning altogether from these.

But if any man that desires to learn this Art, will at the first understand
these figures, as some bluntly will take upon him to do it. I believe
certainly, he will be put to an non plus, and deceive himself; but if by
learning all the former things, he proceeds unto these as well in Geometry
as in Perspectiue Art: Then, I say, he is of a very gross understanding, if
he cannot understand or conceive these figures, or the figures that hereafter
follow.

These three figures, to speak truth, are but Superficies; nevertheless, if
you draw Perpendicular lines from all the terminations, as well within as
without: then you shall have a through cutting or open body, and the innermost
lines covered, then they will be a Massy body: And wonder not, gentle Reader,
nor let it be strange unto you, though I do sometimes make a long discourse of
some things, for (as I said before) they are not only learned by many words and
great pains, but it is also necessary that they were showed unto some men
playnety by drawing them before them, that they may the better conceive them.

architectural drawing

THE most pare of great Rivers or water-falles that fall down from high Hills
or Mountains, by means of tempests with great force and power, when they enter
into a Valley, then sometimes they ^yn out of their Channel, and so much ground
as they then usurp upon on the en^ side, so much they lose again on the other
side; and so does Perspectiue work in cornerd things, for that no much as a
man loses of the point or corner whereon he looks, so much greater the other
point or coruer shows that stands out, which is showed to in the Figures
hereunto auered.

architectural drawing

The Reader must then mark that the square in the middle signifies the
thickenesse of a fouresquare Column or Pillar, and the bordee that is without
and goes about it, signifies the thickness or bearing out of the Bases and
the Capital. The Figure under this platform is the Base, and the uppermost
Figure is the Capital; the manner how to shor^^n them I will show you: You
must make the Pillar ^^at before without thicknes, and upon it you shall form
the Bases and Capital, making the Proiecture or bearing out thereof on either
side alike, but you must draw them lightly as the pricks here^n set town ode
show you: then draw the side of the Pillar which you will have seen toward
the Horisen; and having found how thick the decreasing or shortening side must
be, by the ruled that are showed in the first part of Perspectiue work, so you
shall have the shortening ground of the Pillar, wherein you must lightly draw
the two Diagonall lines long enough through, and from the Bases below, which is
same in the shortening; you must draw a line toward the Horison, which you
shall also let go down or sincke so far, till it reaches benesath the
Diagonall lines, and there shall be the terminations of the shortening Bases:
and thus you see that the Perspectiuenes takes somewhat often from them, that
is, the space between the points and the full black line; then from the
terminations to the other uttermost point of the Bases, you must draw a
Parallel line under the ground of the Pillars, so long that it may touch the
Diagonal lines, and there you shall find that which is taken of from the Bases
on the one side, and given to them on the other side, and the Proiecture of the
Bases shows, that the one point is drown inwards, and the other comes
further out, then the uppermost line of the Bases being also to the Horison:
then upon the shortening fide by a line you find the third part of the Bases
below, and that which is h^re spoken of the Bases, you must understand the same
also of the Capitals.

architectural drawing

architectural drawing

architectural drawing

THE other three Figures are the same which are showed before; the first were
hollow, but these are perfect and solid with all their members, and although
that in the Figures before I have not showed how you should form and frame
these members, which in truth would be a very confused and troublesome thing
to set dewne in writing; therefore I have only showed the first terminations,
that a man may keep them well in his memory, and in these present Figures I
have showed how they show in a man's sight, that you may see the effect that
they work: but from henceforward because (as I said before) it is a
troublesome thing, I will make another form of them with all their members by
dark lines: and then (according to my ability) I will set down the manner
how to find the terminations of the members oen after another, for all of them
grow a little one oner, or more then the other.

architectural drawing

architectural drawing

But you must consider that these Bases and Capitals on the one side give
inward, and on the other side bears out, which you must well remember, that
you may first be well instructed herein touching that which you will make. For
it is true that the Theoricke consists in the understanding; but experience
is gotten by practice and right use or handling: Therefore the most notable
Paynter Leonardus Vinci, was never pleased nor satisfied with any thing that he
made, bringing but little work to perfection, saying, the cause thereof was
that his hand could not effect the understanding of his mind: And for me part,
(...) I should do as he did, I should not, neither would I suffer any of my
works to come forth: for (to say the truth) whatsoever I make or write, it
pleases me not: but (as I said in the beginning of my work) that I had rather
exercise in work that small talent, which it has pleased God to bestow upon
me, then suffer it to lie and rot under the earth without any fruit; and
although I shall not please thereby such as are curious, to set down the
ground and perfection of al things, yet at least I shall help young beginners
that know little or nothing thereof, which has always been my intent.

architectural drawing

FOr that (as I said before) of Proiecture in Prospectiue work, it would be
great labor and much work to find all the terminations of ye parts or
members, and specially because they do always wax greater as they come
further outward, as well those which we behold from beneath upwards, as those
that we behold from above downwards; yet I have not spared to make this
Figure, and to form and proportion it with all the members and parts thereof,
that you may the better understand it. In the first Figure but one, next to
this, I have showed how you shall find the terminations of ye points of the
Proiecture which are made plain without any members; the easilyer to conceive
how things wax bigger when they come further outward. But now I think that
men understand it well, I will show the means and manner how to find the
inlardging of all the members particularly by themselves, every one according
to their greatness or smalnes of their Proiecture. And first, you must frame
this Base with all the members, and with the right Proiecture thereof, to be
without any shorte^ing before, yet you must draw it lightly with a piece of
Lead, or some other thing, as it is showed unto you here with pricks; then in
the ground or foot of the Pillar you must draw the two Diagonall lines long
enough out, and thereby (as I said before) you shall find the diminishing and
the increasing of the particular parts of the crests of the said Base, whereas
the undermost line or foot of the crests of the Base, bear much more broader
and longer then those that are marked with the pricks; then at each corner of
the Creast of the Base you must draw an upright line almost as high as the
first creast of the Base (although I have done it) but upon the uttermost point
not to comber the work within: then you must draw the uppermost corners of the
first Creast with pricks also, toward the Horison, which downwards will touch
against the two upright lines; and there shall be the terminations to close or
shut up the second great Creast with a full black line: then draw another
black line from the innermost point of the Creast upwards to the Horison, and
there the shortening Creast shall be closed.

And as this Creast or Plinthus is closed and drawn on all sides with black
lines, so you must do with all the other lines of the Base, for when from the
uppermost corner of the first marked Base you draw a helding line to the
innermost corner of the greatest Creast with the black lines, by it you shall
lightly find the terminations of all the parts or members, drawing the corners
of the first Base toward the Horison. And when you have formed all the
innermost corners of the Bases, by the Horisentall line you may easily do the
second, and by the Parallel lines the uttermost of all; although by the lines of
the distances, you may bring the said corners somewhat nearer as you may so by
the Diagonall lines. But at this time I will not speak of that difficult or
hard work, for he that has any understanding herein, may herewith help
himself.

That which is here said of the Bases, you must also understand of the
Cornices, only that every thing is contrary, and where you set Perpendicular
lines below, which cut through the Horisentall or Radiall lines, so you must
also fall above the Lead lines or Catheten upon the Horisentall lines, as you
may better see it and learn it in the Figure, then it can be expressed by
words: and you must not be afraid or abashed, although at first you cannot
conceive it, for that by practicing you shall in time find it; for it is not
said that a man shall or can learn all things at once in one day: by this
Cornice you may make all Cornices, be they higher or lower, harder or easier,
always drawing every member and part toward the Horison as it should be done.

ALthough there are diverse manners and ways to place Columns one behind the
other, standing upon one ground in Perspectiue wise, thereby to make Portals,
Galleries and other things, yet this hereunto annexed is the easiest. First,
you must make a Pauement with a quantity of four cornerd Quadrants, as it is
also showed in the beginning of this Book; which may be of such breadth, as you
will: Say that these four square stones are two foot broad, which shall be
the thickenesse of a Pillar: between the two first Pillars beneath in the
breadth, there shall be eight square stones, and the height of the Pillars made
of what quantity you will; and they being raised toward the Horison, then you
must draw two several lines over both the Pillars, and then out of the middle
of the first line you must make two half Circles above upon the flat side
before, and divide them in as many parts as you will; which parts shall be
drawn to the Center of the half Circle, standing in the uppermost line: then
out of the middle of the two several lines you must draw the less half
Circle, and all terminations of the flat Arch being drawn to the Horison, then
the first Arch or Gate is made: the other two Pillars upwards drawn to the
Horison, then the first Arch or Gate is made: the other two Pillars upwards
shall also stand eight Quadrants distant from the first Pillars, which will
make a four corned place on all sides: containing 64. square stones: and you
must do with this gate as you did with the first, only (when they are all of
one wydenesse as these are) you need not denide the Arches again, for the
Horisentall lines of the stones of the first Arch will show you the
terminations of all the other Arches, and also how long the Gallery must be,
and how many Arches it must contain. I have placed no Arches here in the
sides, because I would not cumber you too much at this time; but I will speak
thereof hereafter perticularly.

The two Doors on each side are both partly covered with the Pillars, but the
wydenesse of them is four Quadrentes, besides that from the corner of the
doors to the Pillars on each side there is two Quadrantes, as you see the
half thereof; and the other half you must suppose to be behind the Pillars.
The beams above the Arches which bear up the Chamber above, you may well
guess, although I write not particularly thereof: I have not likewise set the
Bases nor the Capitals upon these Pillars, because they should not darken them
too much; but in another place I will also entreat thereof.

architectural drawing

TH^se two Bows or Arches are only made to know how to join their Bases and
Capitals to them, whereof in two several places I have spoken before, and
showed how they rise on the one side, and fall or decrease in sight on the
other side; that a man may the better learn how to do them: for in truth if
a man could show it unto you in effect, you would the easlyer understand it;
but to set it down in writing or Figures as I do, that men hereafter might
know and learn them: it is requisite to entreat of them more at large, and
that you may the better discern and perceive the points of the thin lines from
the other points or corners of the black lines; therefore here I have placed
the point of the distances and the Horison downward; and have placed the
Pillars in other manner upon this ground without Quadrant stones: In this
manner set the breadth of the two first Pillars upon the Base of such
thickenesse as you will, and draw them inwards, toward the Horison, then you
must imagine the distances, as I have already taught you: and these distances
are set on both sides, and on either point of the distances you must draw a
line both toward the right and left point or corner of each Pillar.

These Diagonall lines will not only show you the thickenesse of the first or
foremost Pillars when they shorten, but also the thickenesse of the two other
Pillars which stand inward, which are all marked with pricks (and as I have
likewise said before) that which is here said of the Bases of the Pillars, the
same also must be understood upward of the Capitals: touching the thickenesse
of the bows or Arches underneath, I have showed in the Figure before, how you
must place the Center in the middle of the four cross point lines, to draw
the half Circumference: The four square or Quadrant above, is as great as
that below on the ground; I need not show how you shall make it, for you see it
plain enough in the Figure.

architectural drawing

THis Figure is like the former, only that the members of the Bases and
Capitals are added thereunto; thereby to make it more perfect unto you, and to
show you how a thing will stand when it is full made and finished, although I
have showed it before; nevertheless, when a man is perfect herein, then he may
by practice help himself well enough without all this labor, using
discretion and bearing in memory that, which he has imprinted in his mind:
For in truth, by this means (I mean the ground) a man may by practice make
many things; which if they be made with discretion, and by a workman, will
always beautify the work, as these bows or Arches do, which under are
divided with Quadrantes as you may see them. There are, as you know, first two
Centers to form the Arche underneath; now a wise workman must not always
seek for the perfection of the edge of these Quadrants; but for example, Say
that the Arche underneath is divided into eight parts, whereof six shall be
for the Quadrant, and two parts for the edge or border that runs about it:
now you must divide the space between the one Center and the other, also in
eight parts, but they must shorten or lessen a little, that is, the nether
part against the upper; and then the compass being set somewhat lower, and
made narrower: then you must draw the uppermost border, and then the compass
being set a little below the neathermost Center; you must in like sort draw
the other edge or border: after, you must square or divide the Quadrants,
leaving the space between both, once so broad again as the other, which must
be drawn up tow^rds the Horison; and as much as you will make the Quadrant
sink: you must also draw out of the last Center with the Compass. And in this
manner a man may make diverse forms and compartements (but as I have said) you
must make them all with judgment, and therefore it is very conuement that a
man should be well instructed therein; for that using only the princicall
terminations, you must make the rest by practice: But I am of opinion, that
some rigorous Perspectiue men will take hold of these my words, (to whom I
answer) that if they mean I have failed or done amiss, let them prove what
difference there is between saying and doing.

architectural drawing

THe manner how to make a cross roof of a Gallery or House in Perspectiue
work, is always very troublesome to show it unto any man; and therefore also,
it is much more troublesome to declare it in writing for men hereafter to
understand it. Nevertheless, because it is very necessary to be known, I will
do the best I can to show it.

First, you must choose the breadth and height of the greatest Arch or Bow that
you desire to make, and then by the distances you must make a perfect
shortening Quadrant, and also a less Bow or Arch. The greatest Arch before
shall be divided into eight equal parts, and those parts must be drawn toward
the Horison to the small Arch, which being done, then you must set those parts
of the great^st Arche below upon the Base; and with the help of the
Horisentall and Diagonall lines, you may make a shortening Circle within the
Quadrant, as in the other places before you have been taught. The terminations
hereof shall be 1.2.3.4.5. which shall be set upwards beside the great Arche,
as you see it there also marked with 1.2.3.4.5. Without this round below I have
drawn the Paralels with pricks to the wall, and where they end, there you
must set all your Perpendicular lines upright, which are come out of the
Parallel lines of this Circle.

Then you must draw the terminations aforesaid, which are placed above, along
by the Perpendicular lines with lines to the Horison; end where the said
Horisentall lines cut through the Perpendicular lines, which are drawn up from
below; there you must make half a short^n^ng Circle: and that which is marked
on this side with Ciphers, must also be understood to stand on the other, as
you see it in the Figure.

These two half shortening Circles being made, then you must draw a right
black line above out of each of the middles, which are marked 5. and where
that cutteth through the middlemost line, which goes from the greatest Arch to
the Horison, there shall be the terminations and also the middle of the cross
work; and then out of all the terminations of the two half Circles; you must
draw cross lines on the sides, and where every one of them following an
Horisentall, touches the Arch marked with 2.3.4. there the terminations shall
stand to form the half Circles in the cross, through the which a man with a
steadfast hand from termination to termination shall make a shortening half
round cross with pricks, as both on the right and left hand you may plainly
see in the Figure. In this manner the work should go, although it stood
somewhat out at the sides; but it is better first to print it well in your
memory, before (...) seek an other form where the Horison stands on the one
side, that then you may the easilyer make that whi^^ (...) seen on that side.

architectural drawing

Having showed in crosseworke on both sides, how you should place the Arches on
the sides in shortening manner and drawn them up out of the ground, although
that they be single: now will I show you a hollow Arche, and the manner how to
shorten it: But before I proceed thereunto (for it is very combersome and
difficult) first I will show you the Pilaisters that should carry the said
Arches: which Pilaisters stand so plainly in the Figure that I shall not need
to take much pains to write of them. In this Figure I have not made the first
Arch, that I might not darken the sight of the Arches on the sides, which
Arches on the sides, I have also but marked how they shall stand, and are
always drawn out of the fouresquare Quadrant, as you see by the order of the
four square Quadrant, but the hindermost Arch which stands not in the way, I
have drawn fully, and placed it also in his four square.

Above in the top or roof, I have made the round form, whereof you may make a
Kettel or Tribunal; and you may also make it thus, when it is somewhat soncke.
Touching the four Pilaisters, they (as I have taught before) are found by the
Diagonall lines coming from the point of the distances, and also that each
Pilaister is three cornerd: standing like a three cornerd hook, and on each
end (the Arch rests whereof there shall be four) two Arches before, and two
on the sides, so that the roof will be right fouresquare, wherein you may make
cross work or other manner of Roose work. And if you will make other kinds
of works by the same; you must always follow this rule: Item, where you can
not well understand my writing, you must help your self with the figures,
which figure also stands open, so that with a little labor; a man may easily
conceive it altogether, although there were nothing spoken of it.

architectural drawing

NOw you see what way you must follow to place Arches on the sides in
shortening manner: And first, you must think upon the third former manner
Superficies, wherein I have sufficiently showed you the manner how to frame a
round body; but in this Figure I will show it more perfectly. Wherefore a man
must imagine that the round Body lying below in his fouresquare is made, and
shall serve for the two Bows on the sides. This Body then being made (as I
have showed before) and as you see it better now, you must first set it, where
the Arches begin about the Horison. And the same Perpendicular lines which
stand corner wise from the middle of the four cornerd body, must be set like
Parallel lines on the right and left sides upwards from the two Arches, there
(at it is aforesaid) to direct the Horisentall lines, as you may see it
plainly in the Figure. But you must understand, that the two crosses below in
this Body, are the two Centers to draw the stones of the Arches both above and
below, they also signify the Centers of the Bows upon the Horisentall lines
within the Arches.

You must also understand, that the black lines do form the Circumference
without, and the pricks or this lines betoken the form within; which is
covered in the Arches: so that the Arches do show through to be made of pieces,
of the which pieces a man may learn to make diverse Compartements underneath in
the Arch. Now when a man can make this Arch well, then he shall not need
still to take all this labor, but by two principal lines helping himself
with pricks, he may frame the Arch; and specially, because that the Arch which
should come before, covers or hides a great part of the Arches on both
sides: which Arch I have not made here, that I might not darken or shadow the
other shortening Arch. Neither need I write any thing of the Circumferences
above in the top or Roof, (nor the eight corners within) for that in the next
Figure you shall see them; neither will I speak any thing of the
Circumferences in the ground, for they are made (as I have taught you
heretofore of all others) and of the round body below (of the which there has
been more said) a man may make many other things which are not here to be
spoken of.

architectural drawing

TO place Pillars with their Arches upon grounds or platformes, I think there
is sufficient spoken before; and whatsoever I have spoken of four square
Pillars, is also to be understood of round Columns, for that a man must take
all round things, out of four square things as well the Spira of the Base, as
the round of the Capital. He that can make all the Figures aforesaid perfectly,
and particularly this last body, shall help himself well, and not only to
do the like things, but also to do many more. If I should in this small
Treatise show all that I could set down, it would make a most great Volumne;
and peradventure I should want time to set forth the rest of my Book, which I
have already promised: for there are many things that belong to Building, which
need not to be set down in Perspectiue work.

Let us now begin to raise the Building here set down out of the ground, which
before, and at the one side is seen, as I promised before to show you.

The shortest and surest way is, to make a ground with many Quadrants; and
imagine that it is mete with the Foot, with the Elle, or other measure: But ^et
us now take every Quadrant for two foot, and as before there are four
Quadrants from one Pillar to the other; and the Pillar also contains a
Quadran, there shall also be four Quadrants upward in the length from one
Pillar to the other, as you may see it altogether in the Figure.

The Pillars then being set of such height as you desire, then the Arches upon
them most be made; and the manner how to make them, you may expressly see in the
Figure. And although you cannot see the Arches that are behind them, yet I have
made them here that you may see their terminations: they are in some places
drawn with full black lines, and in some places with pricks.

Above the Arches you must make the Architraue, Frise and Cornice; the
Proiecture whereof, you must make as I have said and taught heretofore, that
is, how they make their corners against the two Diagonall lines, and by the
like rule you shall also make the uppermost Cornice, as you may see in the
uppermost part, where the small Quadrant with the Diagonall lines stand. The
doors that stand under in the Gallery, are each of them two Quadrants broad,
and four Quadrants high: below in the ground there are certain tokens which
show like Nails, which signify the wydenesse of the windows above the
Cornice: which windows if they stood whole there, then they would be twice as
high as they are broad. The other Nails upwards between the shortening
Pillars, are also the breadth of the shortening Pillars, which (as I said
before) are all four Quadrants high, but they are partly covered with the
Cornices. The part of the Arch which stands at the end, is separated from
this Gallery, as the ground also shows it.

I have here made no Bases nor Capitals, that the other things might not be
confounded: but you must understand that they must be placed in the work, as
is sufficiently before showed. And by this rule you may draw diverse Buildings
out of the ground, as in the Figure following shall be showed in diverse forms.
The Centers of the Arches you see them marked, standing all upon one
Horisentall line.

architectural drawing

NOw I have showed the manner how to make a Gallery with Arches and Pillars,
with other things thereunto belonging; now by an easier way I will show some
form of Houses that are to be built out of the ground. You must make a ground
or foot work with Quadrants reatching long enough upwards, which Quadrants
must each of them be reckoned at two foot square.

And first, at the entry of the House there shall be a door of five foot
broad, for that it contains two Quadrants and a half in the shortening: end
the height thereof shall be of ten foot, because it is five Quadrants high:
Her Pilaisters or Antipagmentum shall be a foot broad, because they contain
a half shortening Quadrant; the Frise shall also contain as much: and the
Cornice shall contain so much less, as the under part thereof hearing over
contains, and shall be made according to the rule before showed. Touching the
part yetting over the door, the Megdiliones or Mutiles, shall stand right above
the Pilaisters or Antipagmentum of the door. And that little door upon the
yetting, shall stand right in the middle above the lowest door, and shall be
two foot broad. In the other corner of this first House, there shall be
another door, the wideness thereof shall be six foot; you may make it round
or square above as you will. But why do I spend my time to set down all these
measures, which you may so plainly see in the Figure; only it is necessary to
warn such as are studious herein, that what work soever a man rayseth out of
the ground, consists in three principal things, that is, in length, breadth
and height. The length is of certain Houses or Rooms, containing a certain
number of feet. The breadth consists of Windows, Doors, Gates, Shoppes, and
such like things. The height consists of Ports, Windows, Iettings,
Cornices, Columns, Rooffes, and such like things. But there is yet another,
that is of the thickenesse of the Walls, Pillars, Columns and Pilaisters: The
length is taken from the shortening Quadrants, and from thence also you take
the breadth. But the height is taken out of the breadth in the Quadrants, which
breadth must be taken from the Quadran or half Quadran, which touches it on
the hithermost fide as it stands: as also from the hithermost door, which is
ten foot high, there you must take the measure from the Quadrans, which come
to the Paralels on the nethermost corner or point of the door; for if there
you take five Quadrans in breadth, it shall be height within the Antipagementum.
And that which I have said of these doors, you must also understand of all the
other things: The thickenesse of the Wall is two foot, for you see it
contains a Quadrant. The bearing ever of the second House is of six foot,
measured upon the ground: the like also the bearing oner or setting of the
first House contains. To conclude all things, as I have said, rising out of
the ground on all sides, I have set no Cornices, nor any other ornaments in
this Figure, that you may the easier understand it; but a man of ripe judgment
and understanding knowing the terminations, can by his own invention help
himself to make fair Buildings. And for that I may not spend too much time
herein, I will make others to give you more light therein.

architectural drawing

THE Stayres, degrees or goings up, are very necessary in Buildings, and
therefore I will show diverse kinds thereof, and first I will begin with the
easiest. According to common custom a Stayre or step is about half a foot
high, and about a foot broad upon the step; then let the square stones of this
ground be a foot square, therewith we will make a pair of stairs of five
foot high, and three foot broad: at the foot of the ground we will take the
measure of the breadth, which both on the right and left sides shall be set in
Perpendicular lines on the Corners of the Stayres, which shall be divided into
ten, as the lines A. B. show you. Then all the parts of A. B. shall be raised
to the Horison, and then you shall take nine Quadrantes upwards in length: and
where as two lines are set up cutting through the Horisental lines of A. B.
there the corners D. C. of the uppermost steps shall be, containing a four
square of three Quadrants on each side. From the hithermost points of the same
vppersteps, you shall draw two helding lines to the lowest steps; against the
which the Horisentall and the Perpendicular lines of the Quadran shall come
together and shut up the Stayres.

These Stayres are shortened on the one side, and the other is plain or
profil, and contains a step less in the height, which makes four foot and
a half; it is also three foot broad, as it is marked under it on the ground.
By this rule you may make Stayres or degrees as high as you will, and make some
resting places in the way: always taking the measure from the foot of the
ground, as well of the shortening, as of those that are upright.

architectural drawing

THE going up being plain or profil makes a great show, and yet are very
easy to set in all places, I mean in the turning, and may serve for many
things, specially in Buildings, where a man going up softly and with ease,
gives the beholders a kind of pleasure to view them, principally in common
places, for that there is a going up on either side, so that upon the one side
men may go up, and on the other side they may go down; and although there
are only but two goings up, yet by this a man by his own invention may devise
others. How these Stayres are made, and with what reason, you may by the Figure
perceive them, although I should say nothing thereof: for as it is said before,
the Quadrants are of a foot broad, and the steps half a foot high, and so the
breadth of the step is one foot. The breadth of the Stayres is five foot, both
the first and second: The resting gate contains in wideness three foot, and
is six foot high; which although it seems to be shut, and a small door
opening in it: yet it may be made whole open and otherwise closed. The two
sides above the three steps are five foot broad, although here it is but one
foot, because of the narrowness of the Paper. The Perpendicular lines on the
sides, signify leaning places, and they should serve well also to the steps,
but lest they should comber the work, I have lest them out.

architectural drawing

AMongst other things which show well in Perspectiue work, I find that goings
up or steps are very see mely, and the ottner that they turn, the better they
show; therefore I have made these two goings up turning, which stand in profil,
yet you see the ground and the steps. This first going up is six foot high
and three foot broad, as you may see it marked in the ground with pricks: the
resting place between the first and second going up, is two four squares
long, which is necessary, because of the turning. At the end thereof you find
a Portale, the door thereof is two foot wide, the Antipagmentum is half a
foot on either side, so that the place is three footefull. The Perpendicular
lines on the right side of the plain, signify certain leanings, which may
be made of Iron, Wood, or Stone; the like may be made along the Stayres both
upward and downward, setting a Baluster upon every Stayre: The height of this
rail or leaning, shall be two foot and an half; for so it is casie to lay a
man's hand upon. How these Stayres are made upwards out of the ground, although
it may well be seen by the Figure without declaring it: yet I will say some
thing thereof, to ease them that are short of memory. The resting gate or round
door under the plainness between the second and the third going up, is no
deeper then to the wall: Above the same door there stands another going up,
of four steps, which to make, I have sufficiently showed; otherwise a man
should continue the ground at the resting door, to draw them up from it.

architectural drawing

TOuching the several kinds of Stayres, I am assured that they may partly be
understood without describing them in wrytingg, and specially the middlemost
which goes up on both sides; and so shall the uppermost also, because it is
raised up from the ground as well as the other, and is six foot broad, as you
may see and tell it on the ground upon the plain stones. The two Arches under
the two goings up are each a foot in thickenesse, whereby a going down is
four foot within, and is also drawn out of the ground as the rest are. The
other goings up, which you see through the Arches; you may sufficiently
perceive by them how they are made: and so it is with the two pair of Stayres
on the left hand, for from the first steps at the resting door, you may easily
see how they are raised up out of the ground, and above at the end of them they
have a piece of plain ground to come to the other Stayres, which also is
drawn up out of the pauement as the rest are, that is, each step half a foot
high, and a foot broad. But it is hard to measure in so small things, but it
suffiseth that hereby you may see the manner thereof: and when you make them
great you shall find that they will come well enough to pass. Under the
Stayres last named, there stands also a round door which is five foot wide:
upon this ground, and on these Stayres a cunning Paynter might place diverse
Figures in several forms, either standing or sitting upon the Stayres; and
lying upon the ground in shortening manner, and that in this wise: You may
place the Figures where you will with feet, and then take six feet or
squares whereon they stand, and that shall be their height, for that it is the
height of a common or ordinary man: this you must observe both before and
behind, and in every place. If the Figure be upon a step, then take the measure
of that step whereon it stands, and make it twelve steps high, which shall be
fire foot: And is the Figure lying, do the like; but if it lies in
shortening manner upon the ground, then you must take the length by the
shortening Quadrant.

architectural drawing

I Have showed many kinds of goings up, but there are other kinds, and he that
is not well instructed in the former will hardly understand these two which I
have here set down. The first shall be winding Stayres in four square, and he
that can make these four square Stayres, may well make the round Stayres, for
it is all one thing, specially if he uses the rule before set down of the
round bodies.

The Figure P. is the ground of this winding Stayre, but it is much less then
the uppermost to get ground. This four square ground in shortening you must
make half a foot high, which shall be for the first step. Then before at either
end, you must make a Perpendicular line upright, and in it make as many half
feet as you desire to make the Stayres high; you must also place the like
Perpendicular lines between the middle, and the corners: then you must draw
the terminations both on the right and the left sides upwards to the Horison,
which must cut through the Perpendicular lines, which are drawn out of the
terminations of the steps; and of the same height that the two cornerd
Perpendicular lines are: and of the same measure you must make the other two
Perpendicular lines between the corners and the middle. Then in the middlemost
termination of the ground you must place an other Perpendicular line, and
divide it also in half feet, as the other Perpendicular line on the side is:
So out of this Perpendicular line of the Centers against the nearest
Perpendicular line beneath on the left hand, you must frame the first step with
two lines: The second step you shall also frame and shut up out of the
Perpendicular line of the Centers in the corner following. Then from that point
or corner you must draw a line to the Horison, which against the second
Perpendicular line will make the termination of the third step, which shall
also be shut about, according to the aforesaid rule: from that point or corner
of the step you must also make an Hor^sental line, which will touch the
termination of the fourth step; which being closed, then you must raise that
corner also to the Horison, and that will show you the termination of the fist
step. And when that step is also closed with lines: then you must draw the
point toward the Horison, which line will show you the terminations of the
sirt step against the hindermost Perpendicular line: and that being also closed
up with lives, then out of the same corner you must draw a Pararel line to the
termination of the seventh step, and no^ toward the Horison, because it is
another side of the four square. Thus you must work round about from step to
step, always fellowing this rule by the which you cannot fail.

architectural drawing

THat I may not forget to set down all kinds of Stayres, and specially such as
often times fall out to be made; therefore I have made these Stayres, whereon a
man may go up on all sides, whereof the ground stands above on the right
hand, but yet very small. These Stayres must thus be made. First, you must
make a four square shortening body of half a foot high, upon this you must
draw two Diagonall lines, and from the corner inwards there shall be a foot
broad left on either side, and the terminations thereof drawn to the Horison,
and so from the Diagonall lines you shall see the corners of the second step.
Now I need not set down unto you how you shall find the lessening corner of
the second step, the which is round about shut up with Parallel and Horisentall
lines: then upon the second plain you must draw two Diagenall lines, which
doing (as I said before) will show you the third step; which also being closed
up with lines, you shall also find the fourth and fifth, with the like rules:
This Piramides is fantastically framed upon them to fill up the place. Also I
need not set down to what uses these Stayres may serve, for that the half of
them is commonly found in diverse pieces of work, as the gates of Palaces,
Churches, and other dwelling Houses, and the ascending up to Altars: By this
way also you may make round Stayres; and also Stayres of six or eight corners,
as by their forms I have showed.

architectural drawing

I Have promised the studious Reader by this my labor to show as much touching
Perspectiue work, as I can; that he might show his conceit touching Houses or
Buildings in Perspectiue wise, meaning to set down some simple manners
thereof, as if he should form a single or double ground, thereupon to raise a
body, and therewith mean to make an end. But falling from one work to
another, I am entered into a Laborinth; which peradventure is too far above my
reach: which comes to pass by means of some men that have entreated me
thereunto. And therefore, as I thought at this time to make an end of my second
Book, I begin to handle a harder matter, which rule is only called an outward
four square: nevertheless, it is as well drawn by the Horison as by the
distances, as you may see in the Figure following; which shows aright
shortening four square, containing in it another four square, the which also
may be formed by the distances without Horison: some men place the sides of
the four square upon the Base, once so wide again as before. And as you see
two like sides of the four square over the corner, so are the distances alike
marked D. And as much more as you will have this four square to shorten, so
much you must draw the distances from the Horison; and as much as you will that
the edges of the four square shall be broad, so many bredths must you draw
upon the Base, between A C. twice drawn. All the terminations of this four
square standing above the corners go all to the distances, and none to the
Horison, but only the four square that is set therein.

architectural drawing

NOw I have showed, how you should shorten a Superficies, ouerpoynt or outward
four square: here I will show how to imbosse or bear out the body thereof
with the same Horison and distances also, which body within is hollow, and you
may heave it up as high as you: but I have purposely left it somewhat low, that
you might see the ground thereof. And by this Figure you may conceive to how
many things this may serve; and also how you may increase or diminish it,
according to skill and judgment This shall suffice for these fouresquare models
or hollow things: but I will show how you shall make them wc Crests or Cornices

architectural drawing

THis Figure is also formed by the aforesaid Horison, and the like distances as
the other before, only that they stand a little nearer: Now to creast this
body both above and beneath, you must imagine the greatness of the creast, and
draw the same greatness both above and beneath the body; then give the Crests
above their due Proiecture, and from those points you must let Perpendicular
lines fall to the points or corners below, whereby you shall have the
Proiectiues of the Base and top thereof, which must be drawn toward the
Distances, and not toward the Horison. Now you see how the Cornices stand
without the four square body: but this is only for Cornices that are made
without members, not to comber you with the shadowing of them, for I will
speak of them hereafter particulerly.

architectural drawing

I Spoke before of Cornices without members, which might serve this hollow
Quadran, and how you shall make the terminations thereof. Now in this Figure I
show you the said Cornices with their members, which you may also make in other
manner as it pleases the workman, that is, to make them bigger or lesser, as I
have spoken of other Cornices, always using good discretion and judgment to
choose and make such members therein, as may show well in men's sight. There are
some Cornices which reach so far over, that men can not see the members
thereof under them; therefore in that case the members are so to be made, that
they may be seemly and pleasant in men's sight.

architectural drawing

THe four Figures aforesaid have their distances equally broad from the
Horison, that is, as much on the one side as the other; but the Figure
following is of an other manner: so that the Horisental lines serve both for
distances. To understand it, begin thus: First, the Base A.B. is made and is
placed in four equal parts, as C.D.E. the lines C.D. are drawn on the right
hand toward the Horison, and the lines A.C. are drawn toward the Horison on
the left side, which form a perfect shortening four square; which four
square you see more on the one side, then on the other. The four points or
corners of these four square things, are F.G.H.C. If you divide these four
square things in two parts, then you must divide the Base D.E. in two parts,
and the terminations thereof being drawn to the right side, there you shall
find the half of your four square marked with two Stars. But if you will
lengthen it an other half four square, then draw a termination E. to the
right Horison, the lines at I.K. the other half four square, so that these
Superficies shall be of two perfect four corners: And this will serve the
ingenious workman for many things, which I will not here set down for
brevity sake.

architectural drawing

THis body hereafter following is raised up out of the former Figure before set
down, and is made with the same Horison; which body contains two Quadrants
in length, and one Quadrant in height, for the line C.D. is set in
Perpendicular manner upon the nethermost corner, whereon the other Superficies
are set: thus then this body is of two fouresquares, I mean two four squares
in length, and one four square broad and high. And this body (as I said
before) shall serve for many things: But if you will have more cubits in the
length, then lengthen the Base in so many parts more, and you shall always
find the truth hereof. And if you will make a border or creast about this
body, then you must follow this rule aforesaid.

architectural drawing

BUT will you make diverse things upon one ground, then it is convenient that
first you make a pauement, as you see it here set down, and thereupon frame
what you think good upon the Quadrans, and the less the Quadrans are, and the
more in number, you may the easter frame things upon them. The cross made upon
this ground is only to show you the way and entry thereunto; but for such a
form, you may make a form of a Christian Church as they are now built. The
other form by it, shows a piece of a foundation of a House, but all these
things you may make in a greater form, and set them forth as you will;
sometime placing the Horisentall lines in such manner that you may see more of
the out sides, but yet the Horisons must stand all of one height.

architectural drawing

OVT of this Superficial Figure aforesaid, I have raised these bodies, to show
how the Horisons of them d^^ stand in the work as well above as below, as you
shall find by experience, and in truth these works which you see over the
points or corners, contain a Book alone by themselves: but (as I said before)
my meaning was to show but three or four Figures of them, yet I will show ten
of them; intending to leave the student some work, whereof I am well assured:
For that he has more eyes, and more patience then my self, he shall find
many things which I write not of, nor yet set down.

architectural drawing

Upon this Pauement (as I said) you may form or frame what you will, but in
this Pauement here ensuing, you see a column lying, being eight square, which
is three Quadrans in thickenesse, and fourteen in length. This eight square
column may be made out of a column of four square, as before in an other
place is showed: which four square you may see drawn herein with pricks, and
the terminations of the eight square with black lines. But because that this
eight square column is too much seen on the sides, the readier to make it out
of the four square: I have therefore made an other piece by it, the which,
because it draws nearer to this Horison, is seen more before, then the
other, although not so long; for it is but half so long as the other, as you
may see and tell it in the ground or foot thereof. And if it were so that this
eight square Figure reached nearer to the Horison, it would then be better
seen, yet it would not be wholly seen before, because it stands without the
four square and corner.

architectural drawing

THese Columns are the same which are before set down, but the other well
hollow, and these massy, whereby an expert workman may find out many things
exercising this way, although there are other means to be used, as Albert
Duter has showed, to look through holes with a thread: Thereis also another
way, which is drawn out of flat forms which is the surest way, but very
troublesome and hard to describe in writing; wherefore I have chosen this as
the easiest way to be showed. And if I had not undertaken to show other things
of more importance, I would have drawn diverse bodies and houses after this
manner. But for that I mean to entreat of Scenes, and the preparing of places
for to show Comedies and Tragedies, which is now used in this age, and
specially in Italy, therefore I will make an end of these four cornerd things,
leaving it to another (as I said before) to set forth more thereof.

architectural drawing

BEcause I mean hereafter to entreat of Theaters, and Scenes belonging unto
them, as we use them in these days. In the which Scenes it will be very hard
for a man to show how, and where a man should place the Horison herein, because
it is an other thing then the rule before declared: Therefore I thought it good
first to make this profil, that the ground by the profill may both together be
the better understood; yet it were convenient first to study the ground, and
if it so falls out that a man cannot attain to all within the ground, then
he must proceed to the profill to be the better instructed therein. First
therefore, I will begin with the Scaffold before, which as the eyes shall stand
elevated from the earth, and shall be flat, made by the water compass, marked
with C. And the Scaffold from B. to A. shall stand heaued up under the same A.
a ninth part of the length thereof, and that standing by behind the seat
marked with an M. above it, is the wall of the Hall or other place, against
which, or where this Scene shall be made. That which stands a little distant
from the Wall Perpendilar wise, is marked P. shall be the back or upholding
behind of the Scene, that a man may go between it and the other wall. The
termination O. is the Horison. The lines with pricks coming cross upon the
water compass from L. to O. where it touches the back P. there you shall
place the Horison only to serve for the said back. And coming forwards to L*
this live shall always be the Horison, for all the Ortograpie of the Houses
which shall stand forwards or outward: But the Seenographies or shortening
sides of the Houses, they must have their Horisons standing further to O. And
it is reason, which in effect have two sides (as these must be built that men
may see out of them on both sides) should happen two Horison lines, this is
touching the profill of the Scene. But the place which is called Procenie is
that which is marked with P. and the part marked with E. is called O^^hestra,
which is raised half a foot from the earth, where you see F. marked, are the
places for Noblemen an^ ^^^ghts to sit on. And the first seat or step, mark^^
G. are for the Noblewomen and Ladye^ to sit on: an^ ^^ing up higher, there must
the meaner sort of Nobles sit. The broader place, marked H. is a way, and so is
the place marked E. Between H. and E. must sit Gentlemen of quality. And from
L. upwards meaner Gentlemen shall sit. But the great space, marked K. shall be
for common Officers and other people: which place may be greater or less,
according to the length of the Hall, or any other place. And the Theator, with
the Scene or Scaffold, which I made in Vincente, was almost in this sort: and
from the one corner of the Theater to the other, was eight and twenty foot;
for it was made in a place where I had room enough, but the Scene or Scaffold
was not so broad, because it was placed in a lodge. The frame of the seats was
all made in one, as you may see in this Figure. And because the Theater stood
in an open place which had no wall, whereunto it might be made fast, therefore
in the circumference I have mode it sticking out, for the more strength and
fastness thereof.

architectural drawing

A Treatise of Scenes, or places to play in.
AMong all the things that may be made by men's hands, thereby to yield
admiration, pleasure to sight, and to content the santasies of men; I think it
is placing of a Scene, as it is showed to your sight, where a man in a small
place m^^ see built by Carpenters or Masons, skillful in Perspectiue work,
great Palaces, large Temples, and diverse Houses, both near and far off;
broad places filled with Houses, long streets crossed with other ways:
tryumphant Arches, high Pillars or Columns, Piramides, Obeliscens, and a
thousand fair things and buildings, adorned with innumerable lights, great,
middle sort, and small, as you may see it placed in the Figure, which are so
cunningly set out, that they show forth and represent a number of the
brightest stones; as Diamonds, Rubins, Saphirs, Smaragdes, Iacinthes, and such
like. There you may see the bright shining Moon ascending only with her
horns, and already risen up, before the spectators are ware of, or once saw it
ascend. In some other Scenes you may see the rising of the Sun with his
course about the world: and at the ending of the Comedy, you may see it go
down most artificially, where at many beholders have been abasht. And when
occasion serves, you shall by Art see a God descending down from Heaven; you
also see some Comets and Stars shoot in the skies: then you see diverse
personages come upon the Stage, richly adorned with diverse strange forms and
manners of Apparel both to dance Moriscoes and play Music. Sometimes you
see strange beasts, wherein are men and children, leaping, running, and
Tumbling, as those kind of beasts use to do, not without admiration of the
beholders: which things, as occasion serves, are so pleasant to men's eyes,
that a man could not see fairer made with men's hands. But for that we are
entered into another manner of Perspectiue work, therefore I will speak more at
large thereof. This Perspectiue work whereof I will speak, although it be
contrary to those rules which are showed before, because these aforesaid are
imagined to be upon a slat wall: and this other rule because it is material
and imbossed or raised outward, therefore it is reason we observe another rule
therein, according to common custom. First, you must make a Scaffold, which
must be as high as a man's eye will reach, looking directly for ward; for the
first part thereof which is marked C. But the other part behind it, whereon the
Houses stand, you must raise up behind against the wall at least a ninth part
thereof, that is, you must divide the plain Stage or Scaffold in nine parts;
and then you must make the Scaffold higher by a ninth part behind: then before
at B. which must be very even and strong because of the Morised dancers. This
hanging downward of the Scaffold, I have found by experience to be very
pleasing, for in Vincente which is as sumptuous and rich a Town as any in all
Italy; there I made a Theater and a Stage of wood, then the which, I think,
there was never a greater made in our time, in regard of the wonderful sights
that there were scene, as of Wagons, Elephants and other Moriscoes. There I
ordained, that before the hanging Scene there should be a Scaffold made by
water compass, which Scaffold was 12. foot broad, and 60. foot long, according
to the place wherein it stood; which I found to be very pleasing and fit for
show. This first Scaffold, because it was right, therefore the pauement thereof
must not obey the Horison, but the Quadrants, whereof on every side were four
square, from whence at the beginning of the rising Scaffold B. all the Quadrans
went to the outtermost Horison O. which with their due distances do shorten
very well. And for th^^ some men have placed the Horison of this Sciographies
against the wall right above the Scaffold, whereby it seems the Houses run
all in one; therefore I determined to place the Horison before the door, which
pleased me so well, that I used the same kind of order in all these kind of
works: and so I counsel those that take pleasure in such Arts, to use and
esteem this way for the best, as I will show in this Figure following, and
have also declared in the profill of the Theater and Scene.

And because the preparation for Comedies are done in three sorts, that is,
Comical, Tragical and Satiricall; I will first entreat of the Comicall, whereof
the Houses must be made as if they were for common or ordinary people, which
for the most part must be made under roofes in a Hall, which at the end thereof
has a chamber for the pleasure or ease of ye personages: and there it is that
the ground of the Scaffold is made (as I said and showed before) in the profil.
Therefore C. is the first part being the flat Scaffold; and suppose that each
Quadran contains two foot on either side, so shall they upon the hanging
Scaffold before on the Base be also two foot broad, which is marked B. And (as
I said before) my meaning is not to place the Horison hereof against the back
behind in the Scaffold, but as far as it is from the beginning of the
pauement B. to the wall, so far I would also that men shall pass behind
through the wall, and so shall all the houses and other things show better in
the shortening: and when by convenient distances you have drawn all the
Quadrans toward the Horison, and shortened them, then you must shorten the
houses right with the four square stones; which houses are the great lines
marked upon the ground, as well for those that stand upright, as those that
shorten. All such houses I always made of spars, or rafter or laths, covered
with linnin cloth; making doors and windows, both before and in the
shortening, as occasion fell out. I have also made some things of half planks
of wood, which were great help to the Paynters to set out things at life. All
the spaces from the back to the wall marked A. shall be for the personages, to
the which end the hindermost back in the middle shall stand at the least two
foot from the wall, that the personages may go from the one side to the other,
and not be seen. Then you must raise a termination at the beginning of the
pauement B. which shall be the point L. and from thence to the Horison there
shall be a line drawn, as it is marked in the profil with pricks, which shall
be of like height; and where that touches the hindermost back of the Scene or
Scaffold, there the Horison of that back shall stand: and that Horison shall
serve only for that back. But if you stretch a cord or any other thing to
the termination L. then you may fasten a thread to it, to thrust backward or
forward, to use it out of the steadfast Horison, and all the Ortographie of the
houses before. But the Horison which goes through the wall, shall serve for
all the shortening sides of the houses: and for that men should break the
wall, if they would use all this Horison in gross, which may not be done,
therefore I have always made a small model of wood and Paper just of the same
bigness, and by the same model set it down in gross, from piece to piece. But
this way will fall out hard for some men to understand, nevertheless, it will
be necessary to work by models and experiments, and by study a man shall sind
the way: and for that a man can hardly find any Halls how great soever,
wherein he can place a Theater without imperfection and impediment; therefore
to follow Antiquities, according to my power and ability, I have made all such
parts of these Theaters, as may stand in a Hall. Therefore the part marked D.
shall be the post scene, and the circular place marked E. shall be the
Orchestra: round about this Orchestra shall be the places for the noblest
personages to sit, marked F. The first steps marked G. for the noblest women to
sit upon. The place H. is a way, so is the part marked I. In the middle
between these degrees are s^eps the easier to go up. The places marked K.
must be made so great backward as the Hall will afford, which is made somewhat
slooping, that the people may see out ou^^ (...) others head.

architectural drawing

TOuching the dispositon of Theaters and other Scenes, concerning the grounds
thereof, I have spoken sufficiently; now I will speak of the Scene in
Perspectiue work: and for that Scenes are made of three sorts, that is,
Comical, to play Comedies on, Tragical, for Tragedies, and Satiricall for
Satirs. This first shall be Comicall, whereas the houses must be flight for
Citizens, but specially there must not want a brawthell or bawdy house, and a
great Inn, and a Church; such things are of necesstie to be therein. How to
raise these houses from the ground is sufficiently expressed, and how you shall
place the Horison: nevertheless, that you may be the better instructed
(touching the former of these houses) I have here set down a Figure, for
satisfaction of those that take pleasure therein; but because this Figure is so
small, therein I could not observe all the measures, but refer them to
invention, that thereby you may choose or make houses which show well, as an
open Gallery, or lodge through the which you may see an other house. The
hangings over or shooting out, show well in shortening work, and some Cornices
cut out at the ends; accompanied with some others that are painted, show well
in work: so do the houses which have great bearing out, like lodgings or
Ch^^nbers for men, and especially above all things, you must set the smalest
houses before, that you may see other houses over or above them, as you see it
here above the bawdy house: for if you place the greatest before, and the rest
behind still lessen, th^n the place of the Scene would not be so well filled,
and although these things upon the one side be made all upon one floor:
Nevertheless, for that you place great part of the lights in the middle,
hanging over the Scene or Scaffold, therefore it would stand better if the
floor in the midst were taken away, and all the roundels and Quadrans which
you see in the Buildings, they are artificial lights cutting through, of
diverse colors; which to make, I will show the manner in the last of this Book.
The windows which stand before, were good to be made of Glass or Paper, with
light behind them. But if I should here write all that I know to serve for this
work, it would be ouerlong to rehearse; therefore I refer that to the wit
and discretion of those that exercise and practice themselue^ herein.

architectural drawing

HOuses for Tragedies, must be made for great personages, for that actions of
love, strange adventures, and cruel murders, (as you read in ancient and
modern Tragedies) happen always in the houses of great Lords, Dukes, Princes,
and Kings. Therefore in such cases you must make none but stately houses, as
you see it hoar in this Figure; wherein (for that it is so small) I could make
no Princely Palaces: but it is sufficient for the workman to see the manner
thereof, whereby he may help himself as time and place serves: and (as I
said in the Comicall) he must always study to please the eyes of the
beholders, and forget not himself so much as to set a small building in stead
of a great, for the reasons aforesaid. And for that I have made all my Scenes
of laths, covered with linen, yet sometime it is necessary to make some things
rising or bossing out; which are to be made of wood, like the houses on the
left side, whereof the Pillars, although they shorten, stand all upon one Base,
with some stayres, all covered over with cloth, the Cornices bearing out, which
you must observe to the middle part: But to give place to the Galleries, you
must set the other shortening Cloth somewhat backwards, and make a cornice
above it, as you see: and that which I speak of these Buildings, you must
understand of all the rest, but in the Buildings which stand far backward the
Painting work, must supply the place by shadows without any bearing out:
touching the artificial lights, I have spoken thereof in the Comicall works.
All that you make above the Roof sticking out, as Chimneyes, Towers,
Piramides, Oblisces, and other such like things or Images; you must make them
all of thin bords, cut out round, and well colloured: But if you make any flat
Buildings, they must stand somewhat far inward, that you may not see them on
the sides. In these Scenes, although some have painted personages therein like
supporters, as in a Gallery, or door, as a Dog, Cat, or any other beasts: I am
not of that opinion, for that stands too long without stirring or moving;
but if you make such a thing to lie sleeping, that I hold withal. You may also
make Images, Histories, or Fables of Marble, or other matter against a wall;
but to represent the life, they ought to stir. In the latter end of this
Book I will show you how to make them.

architectural drawing

THe Satiricall Scenes are to represent Satirs, wherein you must place all
those things that be rude and rusticall, as in ancient Satire they were made
plain without any respect, whereby men might understand, that such things were
referred to Rush call people, which set all things out rudely and plainly: for
which cause Vitruuius speaking of Scenes, says, they should be made with
Trees, Roots, Herbs, Hills and Flowers, and with some country houses, as you
see them here set down. And for that in our days these things were made in
Winter, when there were but few green Trees. Herbs and Flowers to be found;
then you must make these things of Silk, which will be more commendable then
the natural things themselves: and as in other Scenes for Comedies or
Tragedies, the houses or other artificial things are painted, so you must make
Trees, Herbs, and other things in these; and the more such things cost, the
more they are esteemed, for they are things which stately and great persons
do, which are enemies to nigardlinesse. This have I seen in some Scenes made
by Ieronimo Genga, for the pleasure and delight of his lord and patron
Francisco Maria, Duke of Vrbin: wherein I saw so great liberality used by the
Prince, and so good a conceit in the workman, and so good Art and proportion
in things therein represented, as ever I saw in all my life before. Oh good
Lord, what magnificence was there to be seen, for the great number of Trees
and Fruits, with sundry Herbs and Flowers, all made of fine Silk of diverse
collors. The water courses being adorned with Frogs, Snailes, Tortuses, Toads,
Adders, Snakes, and other beasts: Roots of Corrale, mother of Pearl, and
other shells laid and thrust through between the stones, with so many several
and fair things, that if I should declare them all, I should not have time
enough. I speak not of Satirs, Nymphs, Mer-maids, diverse monsters, and other
strange beasts, made so cunningly, that they seemed in show as if they went
and stirred, according to their manner. And if I were not desirous to be
briefs, I would speak of the costly apparel of some Shepherds made of cloth
of gold, and of Silk, cunningly mingled with Imbrothery: I would also speak
of some Fishermen, which were no less richly apparelled then the others,
having Nets and Angling-rods, all gilr: I should speak of some Country mayds
and Nymphs carelessly apparelled without pride, but I leave all these things to
the discretion and consideration of the indicious workman; which shall make
all such things as their paitcons serve them, which they must work after their
own devises, and never take care what it shall cost.

architectural drawing

Of Artificial lights of the Scenes.
I Promised in the Treatise of Scenes to set down the manner how to make these
lights shining through, of diverse colors, and first I will speak of a sure
color which is like to a Zaphir, and yet somewhat fayrer. Take a piece of
Salamoniacke, and put it into a Barbers Basen, or such like thing, and put
water into it: then bruise and crush the Salamoniacke softly therein, till it be
all molten, always putting more water unto it, as you desire to have it light
or sad color; which done, if you will have it fair and clear, then strain
it through a fine cloth into an other vessel, and then it will be a clear
Celestial blew, whereof you may make diverse kinds of blew with water. Will you
make an Emerauld color, then put some Saffron as you will have it pale or
high colloured; for here it is not necessary to prescribe you any weight or
measure, for that experience will teach you bow to do it. If you will make a
Rubbie color, if you be in a place where you may have red Wine. then you
need not use any other thing; but to make it pall with water, us need
requires: but if you can get no wine, then take Brazill beaten to powder, and
put it into a Kettell of water with Alum, let it seethe, and skum it well;
then strain it, and use it with water and Vinneger. If you will counterfeit a
Ballayes, you must make it of red and white Wine mingled together; but white
Wine alone will show like a Topas or a Crisolite? The Conduit or common water
being strayned, will be like a Diamond, and to do this well, you must upon a
glassie ground frame certain points or tablets, and fill them with water. The
manner to set these shining colors in their places, in thus, Behind the
painted house wherein these painted colors shall stand, you must set a thin
board, cut out in the same manner that these lights shall be placed, whether it
be round or square, cornerd or o^^le, like an Egg; and behind the same board
there shall be another stronger board laid flat behind them, for the bottels
and other manner of glasses with these waters to stand in, must be placed
against the holes, as it shall necessarily fall out, but they must be set fast,
lest they fall with leaping and dancing of the Moriscoes. And behind the
glasses you must set great Lamps, that the light may also be steadfast: and if
the bottels or other vessels of glass on the side where the light stands were
flat, or rather hollow, it would show the clearer, and the colors most
excellent and fair; the like must be done with the holes on the shortening
side: But if you need a great light to show more then the rest, then set a
torch behind, and behind the torch a bright Basin; the brightness whereof will
show like the beams of the Sun. You may also make glass of all colors and
forms, some four square, some with crosses, and any other form with their
light behind them. Now all the lights serving for the colors, shall not be ye
same which must light the Scene, for you must have a great number of torches
before the Scene. You may also place certain candlestickes above the Scene
with great candles therein, and above the candlesticks you may place some
vessels with water, wherein you may put a piece of Camphir, which burning, will
show a very good light, and smell well. Sometime it may chance that you must
make some thing or other which should seem to burn, which you must wet
thoroughly with excellent good Aquauite; and setting it on fire with a candle it
will burn all over: and although I could speak more of these fires, yet this
shall suffice for this time; and I will speak of some things that are pleasing
to the beholders. The while that the Scene is empty of personages, then the
workman must have certain Figures or forms ready of such greatness as the
place where they must stand, will afford them to be, which must be made of
pass board, cut out round and painted, signifiing such things as you will,
which Figures must lean against a rule or lath of wood, cross over the Scene
where any gate, door, or way is made, and there some one or other behind the
door must make the. Figures pass along, sometime in form of Musitions with
instruments, and some like singers; and behind the Scene some must play on,
upon certain instruments and sing also: sometime you must make a number of
foot men and horsemen going about with Trumpets, Phifes and Drums, at which
time you must play with Drumbes, Trumpets and Phifes, etc. very softly behind,
which will keep the peoples eyes occupied, and content them well. If it be
requisite to make a Planet or any other thing to pass along in the Air, it
must be framed and cut out of paste-board; then in the hindermost and back
part of the houses of the Scene, there must be a piece of wire drawn above in
the roof of the house and made fast with certain rings behind to the
paste-board painted with a Planet or any other thing that shall be drawn softly
by a man with a black thread from one end to the other, but it must be far
from men's sight, that neither of the threeds may be seen. Sometime you shall
have occasion to show thunder and lightning as the play requires; then you
must make thunder in this manner: commonly all Scenes are made at the end of a
great Hall, whereas usually there is a Chamber above it, wherein you must roll
a great Bullet of a Cannon or of some other great Ordinance, and then
counterfeit Thunder. Lightning must be made in this manner, there must be a man
placed behind the Scene or Scaffold in a high place with a box in his hand,
the cover whereof must be full with holes, and in the middle of that place
there shall be a burning candle placed, the box must be filled with powder of
vernis or sulphire, and casting his hand with the box upwards the powder
flying in the candle, will show as if it were lightning. But touching the
beams of the lightning, you must draw a piece of wyre over the Scene, which
must hang downwards, whereon you must put a squib conered over with pure gold
or shining lattin which you will: and while the Bullet is rouling, you must
shoot of some piece of Ordinance, and with the same giving fire to the squibs,
it will work the effect which is desired. It would be ouerlong if I should
speak of all things which are to be used in these affairs, therefore I will
leave speaking of Perspectiue things.

FINIS.
Here ends the second Book of Architecture, entreating of Perspectiue Art;
translated out of Italian into Dutch, and out of Dutch into English, at the
charges of Robert Peake, for the benefit of the English Nation; and are to be
sold at his house near Holborne Conduit, under the Sun Tavern. 1611.

architectural drawing The third Book, Entreating of all kind of excellent
Antiquities, of buildings of Houses, Temples, Amphitheaters, Palaces, Thermes,
Obelisces, Bridges, Arches triumphant, etc. set down in Figures, with their
grounds and measures: as also the places where they stand, and who made them.

ROMA QVANTA FVIT IPSA RVINA DOCET

To the Reader.
ALthough diverse Authors write many strange things touching Architecture, as
the Egyptians, the people of Asia and Grecia, with diverse other nations, and
have left them for our example, so that reading them, we may sufficiently
satisfy our cares, and fill them with the greatness thereof, that is,
touching the length, breadth and depth, that certain places have contained; yet
we can not satisfy our eyes, nor the desire we have to see such incredible
works, unless it had been our hap to have the contemplation thereof, for that
the relics of such works are almost, or for the most part utterly defaced; or
unless we might have seen them drawn in propertion unto our eyes, as in this
Book we may not only read, what the Romans at the last, after other nations
had built, but also the same Authors have set down unto us in Figure (as you
may see them here) piece by piece not only how many rods, else feet and palms,
but also the minutes thereof, and what compass they contained, all perfectly
described. And although it was no part of my intent, to translate this Book of
Antiquities of Rome into our mother tongue, regarding the barrenness of our
language; or peradventure such as study or favor the same, are all too few to
defray my charges therein: yet I have not refrained to do it, being thereunto
compelled by the great works of the forification of the City of Andwerp, and
other great places; and for this cause specially, that every man that wondreth
at the greatness thereof, which was made with most great cost and charges, may
hereby see and consider, yea how much greater, and needles charges (to be
compared unto this) the Romans (not speaking of other nation) have in time
past bestowed, in making of Obelisces, Piramides, Thermes, Theaters,
Amphitheaters, tryumphant Arches, and many more such like things, which served
only for pleasure and triumph: whereby it is to be presumed, that they would
have made the fortifications of such Cities or Towns, made for the safety of
the Land, far better then they now are. Now it is to be noted, that all,
whatsoever the Romans have made, does not wholly agree with Vitruuius rules,
so that many which have counterfeyted these, and such like pieces of work,
have thereby been abused and deceived: for some would hardly believe, that in
those days (as well as at this time) all manner of workmen were one better
then another, which many, unawares and unskillfully do many things, which good
Antiquities would willingly not suffer, hereof they shall find good
instructions in this Book (and they may learn, if they will read it) how to
discern good from bad; whereunto the former printed fourth Book is specially
made: for in it the whole quantity of the measures is contained, as in the
Epistle of the said Book it is promised. So in this third Book, you shall not
only find, first the Ichnographia, and then after the Orthographyes, with part
of the Sciographies of the most famous Antiquityes of Rome, Italy, and some of
other places, but also of the most excellent buyldings in our days, specially
those that are made by Bramant. So that the Reader being well instructed in the
aforesaid fourth Book, where all the Orders are well set forth and declared,
he may of himself judge what is well or ill made, that at one time a man may,
without any further labor, make a good and incorrigible piece of work.

The third Book of Antiquity.
The fourth Chapter.
AMong all the ancient building to be seen in Rome, I am of opinion, that the
Pantheon (for one piece of work alone) is the fairest, wholest, and best to be
understood; and is so much the more wonderful then the rest, because it has
so many members, which are all so correspondent one to the other, that
whosoever beholds it, takes great pleasure therein, which proceeds from
this, that the excellent workman, which invented it, chose the perfitest
form, that is, the round form, whereby it is usually called, Our Lady of the
Round: for within, it is as high as it is broad. And it may be, that the said
workman, considering, that all things proceeding orderly, have a principal
and only head, whereon the nether parts depend, was of opinion, that this
piece of work should have only but one light, and that, in the highest part
thereof, that it might spread abroad in all places alike, as in effect you see
it does: for besides other things which have their perfect light, there are
six Chapels, which (for that they stand within the thickness of the wall)
should be dark, yet they have their due light, by the means of some drawing
windows, above in the top of the said Chapels, which give them second light,
taken from the uppermost hole, so that there is not any small thing in them,
but it receives a part of the light, (and this is not made without great
judgment:) for this Temple, in old time, being dedicated to all the gods, by
which means there stood many Images in it, (which the diverse Tabernacles,
Seats, and small windows show) it was necessary that every one had his due
light. Wherefore such as take pleasure to make Images, and other imbossed or
graven work, must consider, that such a Cabinet should have his light from
above, that every one, standing in his place, need not look for light to see,
but that they may be seen altogether at one time. But to come to my first
speech: For that the Pantheon seems unto me to be the perfectest piece of
work that ever I saw, therefore I thought it good to set it first in the
beginning of this Book, and for a principal head of all other pieces of
work. The founder of this Temple (as Pliny writes in more then one place)
was Marcus Agrippa, to accomplish Augustus Caesar's last will, who being
intercepted by death, could not finish it: and so it was built about fourteen
years after the birth of our Lord, which is about 5203. years from the
beginning of the world.

In this Temple (as Pliny writes) the Capitals were of Copper; and he writes
also, that Diogenes, the Image-maker of Athens, made the excellent Caracters in
the Pillars, and that the Images placed above the Frontespicium were much
commended, although by the highness of the place they could not be so well
discerned. This Temple was consumed with lightening, and burnt, about the 12.
year of the reign of the Emperor Traian, which was about 113. years after
the birth of Christ, and in the 5311. year of the creation of the world: and
Lucius Septimus Seuerus, and Marcus Aurelius Antonius, repaired it again, with
all the Ornaments thereto belonging, as it appears in the Architraue of the
said frame: which Ornaments, you must presume, were all new made, otherwise the
Caracters of Diogenes would still have been seen there. But in truth, the
workman that made it, was very judicious and constant; for that he proportioned
the members thereof very iudiciously to the body, and would not suppress the
work with many cuttings: but as I will show, when time serves, how to place
and divide them excellent well. Also, in all the work, he has observed the
work of Corinth, and would mix no other with it: and withal, the measures of
all the members are as well observed as ever I saw or measured in any other
piece of work, whereby we may call this Temple an example of workmanship. But
leaving this matter (for that it gives the workman little, or no instruction
to the purpose) I will proceed to the particular measures: and that I may go
forward orderly in these Antiquities, the first Figure shall be the
Ichnography. The second, the Orthography. The third, the Sciography.

architectural drawing

This Figure following is the Ichnography, that is, the ground of the Temple
aforesaid, which is measured by the ancient, or old Romish Palms placed along
by the side hereof. And first, speaking of the Portall, whereof the Columns
are 6. Palms and 29. minutes thick. The Intercolumnes (which are the spaces
from one Column to another) are 8. Palms and 9. minutes: the breadth of the
Portall is 40. Palms: the breadth of the flat Pillars of the Portall, is like
the Diameter of the Columns: the breadth of the Seats between the Pillars,
is 10. Palms: and the Pilasters on the sides are 2. Palms: the wideness of
the Gates is 26. Palms and a half: the wideness of the whole Temple (that
is, of the Floor within, from one wall to another) is 194. Palms: and just so
much is the height from the Floor to the undermost stone of the window above.
The said round hole is 36. Palms and a half broad: each of the six Chapels
that are made within the thickness of the wall, are 26. Palms, and 30.
minutes; and go half as deep into the wall as the thickness of the four
square Pillars on each side. But the principal Chapel is thirty Palms
broad, and also is an half Circle, besides the Pillars aforesaid. The
thickness of the Columns of all the Chapels, is 5. Palms, 3. minutes less:
the four square corner Pillars also of the said Chapels, containing as much.
The Columns of the Tabernacle between the Chapels are two Palms thick: the
thickness of the wall that goes round about the whole body of the Temple, is
31. Palms. And although that the Chapels make the walls hollow, yet between
them there are hollow places made within the walls, which some say, were left
for places to receive wind, because of earthquakes. But I am of opinion, that
they were left so vnfilled, to spare stuff, because they are made circlewise,
and are strong enough. The going up, which you see here on the left side, was
also on the right side, to go up the Portall: men also went from thence round
about the Temple, over the Chapels, through a secret way, which is yet there:
through the which also, they went without on the steps, to clime up into the
highest parts of the buildings, with many goings up which are round about it.
It is thought, that this foundation was all one mass or lump, and without,
many places hollow, so that some neighbors marking it, and seeking to build,
have found such a foundation when they dug.

This is the old Romish Palm, which is divided into twelve fingers, and each
finger is divided into four parts, which are called Minutes, by the which
measure this present Figure, with all the parts following, was measured.

architectural drawing The ground of the Pantheon called Rotonde.



The form of the Pantheon without.
THE Figure hereunder, shows the whole form of the Pantheon right before,
and although at this time men go down into it by certain steps; yet as it was
made at the first it was seven steps above the ground. It is no wonder that
such and so old a piece of work is yet whole and standing still, for that the
foundation was not sparingly made; for it is thought that it was once as broad
again under as it is above, as it had been found by the neighbor workmen:
but let us proceed to the particular measure thereof from the earth upwards. I
said before, that the Diater of the Columens of the Portal is six Palms and
nine and twenty minutes, but the height is four and fifty Palms and nine and
twenty minutes, without the Bases and Capitals: the Bases are three Palms and
nineteen minutes high, and the Capitals seven Palms and seven and thirty
minutes high; the height of the Architrane is five Palms, the Freese is five
Palms and thirteen minutes high; the Cornice is four Palms and nine minutes
high, above from the top or Scina of the Cornice, to the point of the Geuell,
are four and thirty Palms, and nine and thirty minutes. The Timpanum, that
is, the flat part of the Gewell, is thought to have been adorned with silver
images, althought it is not set down in writing; but considering the great
power of such Emperors, I am persuaded that it was so, for if the Goathes,
Wandals, or other nations (which spoiled Rome more then once) had been
desirous or covetous of Copper, they might have taken it from the Architraues
and other Ornamento in Portals in great abundance: but let it be as it will,
there are Figures and tokens seen, which show that there were Figures and
tokens of Metal standing thereon.

architectural drawing

The inner part of the Temple or Pantheon.
THis Figure following shows the Pantheon within, which form (as I said) is
taken from Sphera, because it is so wide from one wall unto the other, as it is
high from the Pauement to the open place upon the top thereof; which wideness
and height are both a hundred ninety and four Palms upwards, from the
Pauement to the highest; and from the Cornice to the highest part of the roof
is also the same measure, that is, each the half of one hundred ninety and
four Palms. The Quadrants in the roof are all like that in the middle; and
it is thought that they were also beautified over with Silver plate by certain
remnants thereof yet remaining to be seen: for if they had been of Copper,
they would yet be seen there, or else those over the Portals would also have
been taken away.

Let no man wonder that in these things (requiring Perspectiue Art) that there
is no Pauement or other shortening seen, but I make it only out of the ground
to show the measure of the height thereof, that you might not miss it by
shortening: But in the Book of Perspectiue Art these things are showed in
their right shortening manner (and that in diverse ways) that is to say, in
Superficies, and many bodies, and diverse sorts of houses, serving thereunto: I
will not now set down the measure of Cornices downwards, for hereafter I will
show the Figures piece by piece, and thereof set down a several measure.

The Chapel in the middle, although here it shows well with the other
work, yet many men are of opinion that it is not ancient, because the Arch
thereof wants the five pillars, which is a thing never used by good
Antiquities; but it is thought that it was made greater in the Christians time,
as the Christians Temples always have one principal Altar which is greater
then the rest.

architectural drawing

architectural drawing

THis Ornament is yet standing above the Portall of the Pantheon, which is made
in this manner, all of Copper plates, the half Circle is not there; but there
was a crooked Superficies finely made of Copper: and many men are of opinion
that the beautifying thereof was of Silver, for the reasons aforesaid: but
whereof it was, it is not well known; but it is true, it was excellent fair
work, considering that which is yet to be seen.

THis Figure here under set down, shows the manner of the Portall within,
the which both on the sides and before is well set out with Marble, and also
without, although by continuance of time is much defaced. The four Pillars are
caneled with such a number of Canels, as you see it here under set down; and
because this round Column is thinner above then the Diameter, where the edge
or border of the Architrabe is as thick as the Column: If a man would make
the Architrabe equal with the four cornerd Pillars, which lessen not above,
then the edge would have had no Perpendicular, for it world have wanted as much
as the lessening of the round Columns. Thus the skillful workman has placed
the Architrabe so much right above the the four Pillars, because such things
show well. Touching the doors, they are twenty Palms, and two minutes wide,
and forty Palms and four minutes high. Of the other several measures I will
hereafter speak at large.

architectural drawing The Gate and Face within the Portall.



architectural drawing

This Base is one of those which stands fast to the flat Pillars, in the
second order, which for that they stand far from men's sight, have one
Astragelus for two, not to shorten the work.

architectural drawing THe proportion of this Door is already set down
touching breadth and height, but the Pilaisters thereof is the eight part of the
breadth of the wideness of the light: and although Vitruuius makes ye
Pilaister of Doriea and Ionica about the six part, yet this is not unseemly,
because it is Corinthe; for the Corinthian Columns are more fightly then
others, yet it seems to be so much thicker then the sides are of a good
deepenesse, so that a man's fight beholding them all at one time, it seems not
to be so small as in effect it is; the Pilaisters on the sides and the
Superficies or Architraue upon them is said to be all of one piece, and I for
my part have seen no division or parting therein: the particular measures
stand here on the sides.



architectural drawing

The Cornice, Freese, and Architraue stands above the Door of the Pantheon,
touching the measure thereof, the Architraue or Superficie is the eight part of
the light; the Freese, because it is uncut, is a third part less then the
Superficies, the Cornice is as high as the Superficie; the other members are
proportioned according to the greatness, whereby a man may find the rest with
the Compass;

TO show all the parts of this most excellent and beautiful piece of work it
is convenient to turn it on enery side, and therefore having showed the
outside thereof maiestically as it stands, with all the things which you see
before: now will I show the lodge, she Portall and the entering into the Temple,
side ways as it stands. Touching the mensure, the thickness, and the height
of the Columns and the Pillars, it is before set down, and therefore
needelesse to be rehearsed, it suffices only to see the disposition of the
things within, which, although they be small, they are drawn and proportioned
in their measure according to the greatness. The small Pillars at the going
into the Temple are fouresquare, in manner of Pillaisters, the measure thereof
I will hereafter set down, for they are also at the Corners of the Chapels
within round about the Temple, and as much as the space of these three inter
Columns holds, so far reaches the Copper roof, whereof I spoke before.

architectural drawing The side of the Portall

The entering into the inner part of the Temple.



I Will not take upon me to write of every several cutting or hollowing of the
Columns whereof there are many in the Pantheon, but only of the Columns
before the great Chapel, because they are very fair and excellent work, I
will show something, to the which end the Figures marked with A. and B. show
the outward work of the grauing of the Columns of the great Chapel, that
is, in the flat end in the uprightness and standing up: touching the form and
the fashion it is sufficiently showed in these two Figures; and thus will I
show you the measures thereof. The Canaels are four and twenty in number,
every Canall being nine minutes and a half bread, the Thorus with the two
Quadrats or lists are both together four minutes and a half, for the Thorus
is three minutes, and then there rests a minute and a half, which divided
into two parts, every Quadrate on either side is three quarters of a minute.
This hollowing pleases the beholders passing well, and such work is upon the
Basitica de foro transitorio, for the beautifying of a Gate, as it is showed in
the fourth Book. The Base marked with C. is the Base of the said Columns of
the great Chapel in the Pantheon, whereof the height is two Palines and
eleven minutes and a half, which is in this manner divided, The Plinthus under
is nineteen minutes high, the undermost Thorus is seventeen minutes, and the
Quadrate above it is three minutes and a half: The first Scotie or Trachile is
eight minutes and a third part, the Quadrate under the Astragal is half a
minute, so is the other above the Astragall, the two Astragals are six minutes
and a half, and so each Astragall is three minutes and a quarter. The second
Scotie or Trochile above the Astragals is six minutes, the Supercilie (so
named by Vitruuius) or the Quadrate under the second Thorus is one minute: That
Thorus is seven minutes and two third parts high, the Cincte, that is the band
of the Column above the Thorus, although the Base be not one, is three
minutes; the Proiecture of this Base is three and twenty minutes proportioned
in manner as it is here under showed.

architectural drawing

THis Figure following represents a part of the Pantheon within, that is,
from the Pauement till you come up to the second Cornice, which bears up the
Tribune or the round roof; and also above the Cornice you see the beginning of
the four square hollowing of the said Tribune: This Figure also in the nether
part shows the wideness of one of the sire Chapels, whereof two are in
form of the half Circles, and the other four in form of a Quadrangle; yet
in show they seem all to be of one form: each of these Chapels have two
round Columns, and the corners have their four square Pillars, as you may see
in the ground of the Pantheon aforesaid, and in this Figure following. And
although it be not set in Perspectiue manner, whereby a man might see whether
it were a round or four square Chapel, that is omittted because of the
measure thereof; notwithstanding this is made for a four square, which you may
see by the form of the blind windows which are within the Chapel, for the
other should run more about. The thickenesse of these Columns is five Palms
three minutes less, the height of the Bases is two Palms and one and twenty
minutes, the height of the Columns without the Capitals is forty Palms, the
height of the Capitals is five Palms and thirty minutes; and so the whole
Column with the Bases and Capitals: is forty and eight Palms high. The
height of the Architraue, Freese and Cornice, are altogether thirteen Palms
and a half, and this height in all is divided into ten parts, whereof three
parts are for the Architraue; the other three are for the Sophero or the
Freese, and the other four parts are for the Cornice: Touching the rest of the
other members, I set down no measures, because this is proportionably declared
touching the principallest of them that stand on the side theereof marked with
P. And in truth, a man in this Cornice may perceive the judicious skill of the
workman, who therein touching the mutiles, would not cut any deatiles therein,
thereby not to fall into that common error, wherein so many ancient workmen
have fallen, and at this day more modern workmen. The error I mean is this,
that all the corners wherein mutiles stand, and under have dentiles cut in them
are vicious, and by Vitruuius are rejected in the second Chapter in his fourth
Book: and although that in this Cornice the form of denticles are,
notwithstanding, because it is uncut, it is not to be condemned in this
respect. Above this Cornice there is a Podium, or a manner of bearing out,
whereof the height is seven palms and six minutes, which comes not far
out, for the Pillars stand not far out from the Wall: the height whereof,
together with the Architraue, Freese and Cornice, is forty Palms and six
and thirty minutes, which height being divided into five parts, the one part
shall be for the Architraue. Freese and Cornice, the which Architraue, Freese
and Cornice proportioned according to the greatness, stands marked with the
letter M. In this Cornice, and also in the Architraue, the members are so well
divided, part cut, and part uncut, that it darkeneth not the form thereof, but
rather the more, because uncut members are mixed with the cut members, and so
you see a wonderful grace in them: the window above the Chapel is to give
light to the same Chapel, which light, although it be not principal,
nevertheless, because it is radially drawn up from the uppermost open place,
it gives the Chapel the dew light: between the Pillars, and also above the
windows, there are many fine stones intermixed, and the Freese of the first
Cornice is fine profill stone.

architectural drawing

THis Figure shows one of the Tabernacles which stand between the Chapels,
and the Pillars on the sides represent the four square corneed Pillars of the
Chapples, here again you may see the notable judgment of this workman, who
seeking to join the Architraue, Freese and Cornice close to the wall, and
marking that the four square Pillars standing on the sides, were not so far
distant from architectural drawingthe Wall, that a man might make the whole
Proiecture of the Cornices therein: therefore he made the Scine thereon, and
the rest of the other members he turned into a Fastie, whereby the work was
more seemly and accompanied with order. The two blind windows are thought to
have been placed for idols. The foot of the Tabernacle is 9. Pal^^ and 11.
minutes high, the thicknes of the Columns are two Palms, the height sixt^ne
Palms without Bases or Capitals, the Bases are one Palm high, the height of
the Capitals are two Palms and a half; the Architraue is a Palm, ye Freese
also is as much, which is also of fine pros^^, but the height of the Cornice is
a Palm (...) a half, the frontispice is 5. Palms high, ye Architraue above ye
two greatest Pillars, is a Palm and three quarters, the other measures shall
hereafter be showed; and of these Tabernacles there are three with sharp
geuels, and three with round geuels, that is the fourth part of a Circle.

THese four Figures hereunto annexed, are members of the Tabernacles in great;
as the letters A. B. C. D. shield them. Touching their measures in height, it
is showed before, and for the rest it is sufficient for the workman that all
things from member to member are set out in great, and proportionably with
great diligence brought into this form, although it may be that such as study
Vitruuius will, think this Cornice to be too high for the proportion of the
Architraue and Freese; and I for my part would not make it so high, but to see
the same in a place that has great distances, and which stands not very
high, it shows to be in good proportion. The Capital is far from
Vitruuius order of writing, for it is higher without the Abacus, then Vitruuius
makes it with the Abacus: notwithstanding, according to common opinion, they
are the fairest Capitals that are in Rome, (and not only the Capitals of the
Tabernacles) but they also of the Chapels are of the like form, and those of
the Portall also in such sort, that I judge (as I said at the beginning) that I
have not found a building of greater observation of order then this: but if I
should write all that are in it, both within and without, I should peradventure
be over tedious, therefore I will make an end of this wonderful Building, and
speak of other Antiquities.

architectural drawing

THis Temple of Bacchus is very ancient, and also whole enough, and also for
work, fayrenesse of stones, Plaster, both in the Panement and in walls, also
in the Tribunes or round toofes in the middle, and in the roof of the round
walk, made altogether after the order of Composita: the whole Diameter within
from Wall to Wall, is 100. Palms long, whereof the middlemost body set about
with Pillars, contains 50. Palms: in the intercolumnes I find great
difference to liken ye one to the other, because that the middle most
intercolumnes or spaces between the Columns where you come in, and out of the
Portall are 9. Palms and 30. minutes; and the other right over against them
are but 9. Palms and 9. minutes: those that are over against the greatest
Chappelare 8. Palms and 31. minutes, and the other four Columns resting hold
7. Palms 8. minutes, and some 7. Palms 12. minutes. The wideness of the
entry within and of the four cornerd Chapel over against it, follow the
intercolumnes, and so does the widinesse of the two great places or round
Chapels their intercolumnes. The other places or Chapels are 7. Palms and 5.
minutes broad. The measure of the Portall before, may be taken by the measure
of the Temple, which Portall is round Re^sed: without before the Portall, there
walking place made in form of an Egg, which was 588. Palms leng, and in the
middle it was 140. Palms broad; and as it appears by the decayed monuments,
it was sull of Pillars, as it may be seen in the Figure.

architectural drawing The ground of the Temple of Bacchus



H Here before I showed the ground of the Temple with the measure thereof, now
in this Figure I will show the Ortographie thereof within, for without it is
wholly defaced; the height from the Pauement to the uppermost part of the roof
is 86. Palms, the thickness of the Columns is two Palms and 14. minutes;
the height of them is 22. Palms and 11. minutes. The height of the Base is one
Palm and 7. minutes. The height of the Capital is 2. Palms and a quarter.
The height of the Architraue is one Palm and a quarter, so much also the
Freese holds. But the height of the Cornices are two Palms and a half. The
particular members, as of the Bases, Cornices and Capitals, you see here under
proportioned, according to their greatness, and marked in their several
places. This Temple stands without Rome, and is dedicated to S. Annc.

architectural drawing

THE Ichnographie hereunder placed is the aforesaid walking place before the
Temple of Bacchus, with a lodge round about it, as you may perceive by some
very ruinous places thereof, and all about between each intercolumne there was
a place or seat beautified with small Pillars, where it is thought a certains
Idol stond, (and as it is said) this walking place was made Quale wife, yet
very long as of 588. Palms and 140. Palms broad.

architectural drawing

The Temple of Bacchus (as I said) is full of many Ornaments, and of diverse
Compartements, whereof I have showed some part, but not all. The three
inventions hereunder placed are in the same Temple, some of fair stone and the
other of Pilaister.

architectural drawing

THis Temple of peace the Emperor Vespatian caused to be made by the Market in
Rome, which Temple is come mended of Pliny, for it was much beautified with
graven work and Pilaister of Stucco; and besides these Ornaments of the said
Temple, after the death of Nero, Vespatian caused all the Images both of Copper
and Marble to be placed therein, which Ring Nero had gathered together out of
diverse places, which were no small number. Vespatian also placed in it both his
own and his childrens Images made of a new kind of Marble brought out of
Ethiopia, called Bassalto, being of an Iron color, a kind of stuff much
commended in those times. In the said Temple and the principal Chapel
thereof, there stood an Image of white Marble very great, made of many pieces;
of which relics there are many pieces yet to be seen in Campidoglo; eassly
upon it, whereby a man may guess and among other pieces there is a foot,
whereof the greatness of the Image, and it was the nail of the great Toe is
so great that I sat made by an excellent workman.

architectural drawing

THis Temple is measured with Else, and the Elle is divided into 12. parts,
called ounces, the measure which stands in the middle of the ground of the
Temple is half an Elle: First, the length of the ladges about is 122. Else,
the breadth is 15. Else, the wideness of the places before in the lodgis
contain 10. Else, the thickenesse of the Pillars at the entry is fine Else,
and between the one Pillar and the other is 10. Else, the goings in on both
sides, both of the Portall and of the Temple are 16. Else wide, the length of
the whole Temple is about 170. Else, the breadth contains 125. Else; the
principal place in the middle of the Temple is 35. Else. The sides of the
Pilasters against the which the round Columns stand are 9 Else and a half,
and the thickenesse of these Columns are 4. Else, 4. ounces and a half, and
they are canelert, every one having 24. Canels: the cave or hollowing of each
Canell is 5. ounces broad, and the list thereof one ounce and a half; the
breadth of the principal Chapel is about 32. Else, and is half a Circle.
Those on the sides marked A. B. are 37. Else broad land go 16. Else into the
Wall, which is less then half a Circle: the thickenesse of the Wall round
about the Temple is 12. Else, altough in many places, because of the Bows, it
is much thinner. The Circumferences of the Chapels are 6. Else thick,
between the one Pilaster and the other, if is 45. Else; you may conceane the
quantity of the measure of many places and windows with other particular
things, by the measures aforesaid, for the Figure is proportioned. Touching the
Ortographie, which is the Figure heceafter following, because the ground is all
ce^^^red over with the ruins thereof; I could not measure it from the ground
to the top, but as much as I conceived by that part of the ground, and also of
the raines which are there to be seen; I make this piece standing upright. I
am not certain whether the Columns have this pedestall under them or not,
because that men cannot see the foot of the Columns. And although that Plini
much commends this Building, yet there are many unhandsome things in it,
specially the Cornices above the Columns, which are not accompanted with any
thing, but stand hare and naked alone.

architectural drawing

THis Building is called Templum pietatis, it is made altogether of a kind of
rough stone, which is there called Tiburtium, after the River of Tiber; but for
that the stone is spongie and full of holes, it was covered all over with a kind
of Plaster called Stucco, it is very ruinous, for therein you see no
proportion of windows: neuerthesse, I have placed them in the ground where I
thought them fittest to stand. This Building is measured with an other Elle,
which is divided into 60. minutes; and the line through the middle of the
ground of the Temple is the third part of the said Elle: First, the Columes are
an Elle and 18. minutes thick; the intercolumnes 3. Else and 14. minutes, the
breadth of the gates is 4. Else and 14. minutes and a half, the thicknes of the
wall is one Elle and 20. minutes, the length of ye Temple is 18. Else and 20.
minutes, the breadth of the Temple is 8. Else and 30. minutes: the Gallery round
about the Temple was flat roofed with four square pearches: but how the broad
place before the Temple was roofed I cannot conceive, because it is so ruinous.
The columns of this Temple have no Bases nor any Cinthie, or Proiecture, but
stand bare upon their ground, and well made of Tiburtium, and covered over with
Stuces. This Temple had the fro^tespiee both behind and before.

architectural drawing

The height of the Columns with the Capital is 3. minutes less then 10.
Else, the thickness below (as I said before) is 1. Elle and 18. minutes; and
the thicknes above is 1. Elle and 15. minutes. The height of the Capital is 47.
minutes, but the bozel and the rinetic of the Columns are also reckoned with
it; the height of the Architraue is 36. minutes, the height of the Freeses is
1. Elle 165. minutes. The Cornice is 1. Elle and 8. minutes high, and from
thence upwards, the Timpanum is two Else and two minutes high. The other
particular members marked with ye caracters are in greater form, and
accordingly propertioned.

architectural drawing

At Tinoue this Temple stands upon a River, and is called the Temple of
Vesta, the most part thereof is ruinated; it was well wrought after ye
Corinthia manner: before it is raised by from the earth as the Base thereof
stands, but behind is more then 7. Else of Wall under the Base.

architectural drawing

THis last Temple is measured with the last Elle of 60. minutes, and first, the
Columns are one Elle and 17. minutes thick, the intercolumnes 2 Else and 34.
minutes; between the Columns and the Wall is 2. Else and a half: the
Pedestall marked A. with the Columns and their ornaments serve for the whole
order of the Temple. The height of the Base of the Pedestall is 45. minutes,
and the field of the Pedestall is 2. Else and 48. minutes. The Cornice is 37.
minutes and a half high, the height of the Base of the Columns is 38 minutes
and a half; the Tronke of the Columns is 10 Else high: the Capital is an
Elle and 24. minutes high. The Architraue, Freese and Cornice all togetherare
about two Else and a half high. The Door marked with S. Y. is 9. Else in
height, the breadth of the light under is 4. Else 4. minutes, but the widenes
above is 3. Else 54. minutes, the which is lessened above, according to
Vitruuius doctrine. The Antepagmentum is 52. minutes and a half broad, but the
Supercilie (because of the lessening) is but 51. minutes; the Freese is 30.
minutes high, and the Cornice 24. The Window marked with T. X. is one Elle 46.
minutes and a half broad, the height contains 5. Else 3. minutes, and is
lessened above, as the Door is. The Antepagmentum is 31. minutes and a half
broad, and the Cornices containesh as much, but the other particular members,
are in greater form marked with the same letters set by them, and well
proportioned: This Window is wrought both within and without.

architectural drawing This is the third part of the common Else of 60.
minutes, wherewith the Temple aforesaid, and this also is measured.



architectural drawing

architectural drawing The old Roman Palm of 12. flugers, and 48. minutes.



WIthout Rome this ruinous Temple stands, and for the most part is made of
Brick; you see none of these ornaments therein which I have here placed in
Figure; but as it may be conceived by the ground thereof, and also considering
the proportioned height, it was made of that fashion as the pieces marked A. B.
standing by the ground do show. Thus we have the measure of the Ichnographie
of the ground of the Temple, by the which measure a man may conceive the work
of the Ortographie: This Ichnographie or platform, is measured by the old
Roman Palm: and first, the door of the Temple is 24. Palms wide, the
Diameter of this Temple is 69. Palms and a half: the two places on the sides
are as wide as the Deore; the Door of the lesser Temple is also of the same
breadth, so are the four Chapels also where men go in, of the same wideness,
but backward they arae wider, because the walls of the side run to the
Center of the Temple, and those four Chapels (as it may be conceived) receive
their lights from the sides: the Diameter of the small Temple is 63. Palms
long; the little Chapels, both they that are hollowed out, and those that are
elevated, are 15. Palms broad: but of those two elevated or raised Chapels, I
cannot tell how they ended above, for there stands not so much upright as a
man may conceive any thing thereof certainly, but only a beginning above the
earth; and (as I have said) although a man cannot see in what manner this
Building stood above the ground, yet according to my conceit, I have made this
Ortographie. And therefore on the one side marked B. represents a piece of
the great Temple, and the other marked with A. shows a part of the lesser
Temple.

architectural drawing

THis Temple placed under this is without Rome, and is very much ruinated, and
for she most part is made of Brick, it is not very great, it cannot also be
discerned, that it had any light in it but at the doors, and from the windows
above the Cornices. And all the rest of the holes were placed for Idols or such
like things; the measure of this Temple was lost by the way, but yet I remember
well that the Temple was a full Quadrant and a half, as well on the ground as
above, therefore I set down no other measure, but a skillful workman may
help himself therewith by invention.

architectural drawing

THis small Tempel is of no great compass, and all made of Brick; it is
measured by the old Roman Palm, the length of the lodge or Gallery is 40.
Palms, the breadth thereof is 16. Palms, the Door is 10. Palms, the places in
the walls within, are all of one widenes, that is, 14. Palms; the space
between them is 6. Palms, the rest may be guessed by sight; for I guest the
height from the Pauement to the Architraue to be 40. Palms, and the
Architraue, Freese and Cornice to be 9. Palms: and touching the rest, I made
account that if I allowed a Palm upright for the round roof, then the whole
Tempel should be about 70. Palms.

architectural drawing The ancient Roman Palm.



architectural drawing

THis Temple is without Rome, made part of Marble, and the rest of Brick, it is
much decayed, it is thought that it was a Sepulcher, and on all sides it is
right four square; from the one Wall to the other is 30. Palms broad, the
thickness of the walls is 2. Palms and a half, the wideness of the Chapel
is ten Palms, the Door is five Palms broad, the height of the Pillars with
Bases and Capitals is 22. Palms and a half; the thickenesse of the Pillars is
not much above two Palms: The Architrane, Freese and Cornice are 4. Palms
high, from the Cornice to the height of the roof is 11. Palms: the height of
the Bows of the Chapel is 20. Palms.

THis Temple hereunder set down is A Tiuoli by the River, much decayed, which
had the frontispice before and behind the Columns, on the sides are more then
half without the wall; the wideness of the Temple from the one wall to the
other, is 11. Else measure by the same measure that Templum pietatis is
measured withal, the length of the Temple is 8. Else, the thickenesse of the
wall is one Elle and 11. minutes, the thicknes of the Columns of the Portall
is an Ell and a third part, the height of them with Bases and Capitals is about
12. Else, the height of the Architraue, Freese and Cornice is three Else, the
Frontispice from above the Cornice to the height is 3. Else, the height of the
basement is 3. Else and a half. In the Fascie before, there is no show of a
Door, nor of any places in the Walls, by reason of the ruinousnesse thereof,
but I have drawn it out thus, to make the more show, because I judge it had
been so; neither can you see any windows in the wales nor sides nor yet
behind, although I have placed them here in the ground, where I thought best.
The measure of the members both of the Basement and the Cornices above, I will
not name particularly, for they are proportioned according to Antiquity,
whereof you may see some parts.

architectural drawing The third part of the Ell aforesaid.



architectural drawing

ALthough at the beginning of this Book, I said I would speak only of
Antiquities, yet I will not omit withal to entreat of some modern things made
in our time, and specially, because our age has flourished with so many good
wits for invention of Architecture. There was in the time of Pope Iulio the
second, a workman called Bramant of Casteldurante in the Dukedom of Vrbin,
who was a man of so great understanding in Architecture, that it might be said
(by means of the aid and performents which the Pope gone him) that he raised
by good Architecture again, which from ancient time till then had bone hidden
and kept secret: which Bramant in his time laid the foundation or beginning of
the wonderful work of S. Peter's Tempel in Rome, but being prevented by death,
did not only lean it unfinished, but the model thereof also was left
imperfect, wherein diverse ingenious workmen sought to busy themselves both to
perfect and finish it; and amongst many others Raphael Durbin, Paynter, a man
also very skillful in Architecture, following Bramants steps, made perfect this
draught, the which in my opinion is one of the fairest draughts that are to be
found, out of the which the ingenious workman may help himself in many
things. I will not set down all the measures of this Tempel (because that it
is well proportioned) and a man may by part of the measure find out the rest.
This Tempel is measured with the old Roman Palm, and the broadest walks
therein is 92. Palms broad, those of the sides are but half as much: by
these two measures you may guess the rest.

architectural drawing

IN the time of Julius the second, there was in Rome one Balthazar Petrucio of
Sienne, not only an excellent Paynter, but also very skillful in Architecture,
who following the doctrine of Bramant, made a model in form hereunder set
down: whose meaning was, that the Temple should have four gates to go into
it, and that the high Altar should stand in the middle thereof: at the four
Corners he made four Sacristes, upon the top whereof men might place the
Clocketowers for an ornament thereunto; and the first part or Facie thereof
looked into the City. This Temple is measured with the old Roman Palm, and
first, it is in the middle from one Pilaster to another 204. Palms, the
Diameter of the Circle in the middle is 184. Palms long. The Diameter of the
four small Circles is 65. Palms. The Sacristes are 100. Palms wide. The
four Pilasters in the middle make four Bows or Arches which bear up the
Lantern, and these four Bows or Arches are all full made, which are in
height 220. Palms, and above these Arches a Tribune excellently set forth
with Columns, with a round Roof upon it, which Bramant ordained before he
died, whereof the ground is here set down.

architectural drawing

THe Figure hereunder set down, is the ground of the Tribune that should have
gone above over the four Bows or Arches (as I said before) whereby a man may
perceive, that Bramant in such case was bolder to draw a piece of work, then
circumspect therein; because so great and massy a piece of work should have
an excellent foundation to stand very fast, and not to be made upon four Bows
or Arches of such an height. And for confirmation of my speech, the four
Pilasters, and also the Arches without any other weight upon them, are already
settled and suncke, yea, and rent in some places: Nevertheless, because the
invention is fair and costly, and a thing a give good instruction to a
workman: I thought it good to place it here in a model: but not to be tedious
in setting down the measures, I will show some of the principallest; the rest
you may find with the small Palm which stands here within the ground, which
length contains 50. Palms: the thickenesse of the first Column without, is
5. Palms, the thickenesse of the second Column within, is 4. Palms, and the
thickness of the third Column is 3. Palms and three quarters. The wideness
of the Tribune within, is 188. Palms, the Diameter of the small Lantern
within the middle, is 36. Palms, the rest you may guess by the small Palms.

architectural drawing

THis is the Orthographie both within and without, drawn out of the
Ichnographie before set down, whereby you may conceive the great mass and
weight which should heue stood upon the four Archee; which weight may give any
wise workman matter to consider, that it had bane futer to set it upon the
ground, and not in the air upon such a height; and therefore I counsel all
workmen rather to be doubtful them too rash: for if he be doubtful, he
will make his work surer, and not despise another man's counsel; which doing,
he shall seldom fail: but if he be rash and stout, he will not take any
other mous advise, but will trust only to his own invention, whereby oftentimes
his work does him more shame then honesty: therefore I conclude, that
stoutnes prooceedeth from presumption, and presumption from small
understanding; and I say, that doubtfulnesse or bashfulnesse is a virtue,
making a man to think hea knows little, although his understanding be great:
the measute of this work is to be found by the aforesaid small Palm.

architectural drawing

THis ground set under this, is also an invention of Bramant, thought it was
never made, which agreed with the old work: that part which is marked with B.
is S. Peter's Church in Montorio without Rome; and that part marked with A. is
an old Cloister, but that part in the nuddle, Bramant ordained, thereby to
help himself with the old work: the place marked C. signifies a Gallery
with four Chapels in the corners. The place B. stands under the air: the
part marked E. is a little Temple, which the said Bramant made: the measures
whereof shall be showed in much greater form in the leaf ensuing. I have said
nothing touching the measure of the ground, but I have set this here only
forth invention.

architectural drawing

IN the last side I promised to show Bramants Temple in greater form, which is
not very great, but was only made an remembrance of S. Peter the Apostle, for
it to said that he was crucified in that place: the said Temple is to be
measured by the old Roman scote, which foot is sixteen sh^g^^s, and every
finger is four minutes: whereof also you shall find the measure by the Roman
Palm, augmenting the said ^oure fingers. The Diameter of this Temple is of
flue and twenty foot, and two and twenty minutes. The wideness o^ the walk
round about the Temple is seven foot, the thickenesse of the Columns are one
foot and 25 minutes. The wideness of the Door is three foot and a half:
The Quadrants with the roundels within. which go round about the Temple, show
the Laturary of the Temple above the Columns: the thickness of the wall is
five foot; the rest of the other measures you may conceive by the first.

architectural drawing

architectural drawing The helfe of the Roman foot.



THis is the said Temple standing up, which shows the one half without, and
the other half within, and is made altogether after the Dorica, as you see by
the Figure. I will not speak of the particular measures: for by the ground you
may conceive this which stoods upright, for that this (though it be small) is
set down by the measures thereof, and from the great reouced into the small.

architectural drawing

NOw I have showed the outside of S. Peter's Temple, in this I will show the
innermost part, which is made with such proportion, that the workman by the
wideness of the ground, may find all the measures: and although that this
Temple shows too high for the breadth, for that it is thought and showed to be
as high as it is broad: Notwithstanding, by the opennesse of the windows, and
the Nichens or Chapels that are in it, the height thereof is not amiss, and
especially by means of the double Cornices, which go round about, and cover
much of the height together with the Proiecture, the Temple shows much more
as it is.

architectural drawing

architectural drawing The half of the Roman foot, wherewith this foresaid
Temple was measured.



THis Building is w thout Rome. at S. Sebastians, and is all fallen down to
the ground, especially the walks about, but the Building in the middle (because
it is very sure work) is yet whole, and is made of Brick: you see no
ornaments in it at all, and it is dark, because it has no light but at the
Door; and above the four hollow places in the wall, some small Windows. The
ground of this work is measured with the old Romish Palm, and the lengths
with the bredths are measured with coodes, and every roode is ten Palms.
First, the walk or Gallery marked A. is 49. roodes and 3. Palms, the other
two longer, are 56. roodes and 3. Palms: the breadth of the walks is 32.
Palms: the thickness of the corner Pillars, with all their members, is 12.
Palms: by the which measures you may conceive the rest. Touching the Building
in the middle, the place B. is uncovered, and is in length 7. roodes and 6.
Palms: the breadth is 3. roodes and 4. Palms: the part marked C. is covered,
and contains 4. roodes in four square. The four Pilasters are ten Palms
thick: the thickenesse of the wall round about the round Building, is 24.
Palms: the place marked E. is roost: and that part in the middle is a mass,
which bears the roof; in the middle whereof, there is an opening: and this
mass is beautified with many hollow seats in it, which stand right, and
accompany those that stand in the wall: touching the heights (because of the
brokennesse) I measured it not; and especially, because there was no
beautifulness of Building.

architectural drawing

THis Theater Augustus made in the name of Marcellus his Nephew, and therefore
it was called Marcellus Theater, it stands within Rome, you may at this day
see part of it standing upright, that is part of the Galleries without: it is
only of two rules, that is, Dorica and Ionica, a work, in truth, that is much
commended, although the Doricall Columns have no Bases, nor any Cinete or
Proiecture under them, but stand plainly without any thing under, upon the
slat ground of the Gallery. Touching the ground of this Theater, men could not
well conceive it: but not long since, the great Patrician of Rome, going to
make a house, the situation whereof was to be set upon part of the Theater
(this house was made by one Balthazar of Sienna, an excellent workman) and as
he caused the foundation to be dug, there were found many relics of diverse
Cornices of this Theater, and a great part of the same Theater was discovered,
whereby Balthazar concerted the whole form thereof, and measured it with great
circumspection, placing it in the form following: my self being at that time
in Rome, saw many of the Cornices, and found friendship to measure them, and in
truth, there I found as excellent forms as ever I saw in any old Ruins, and
most in the Capitals of Dorica, and also in the imposts of the Arches, which,
me thinks, agree well with the doctrine of Vitruuius. Likewise the Freese,
Trigliphen, and Methopen, agree well enough: but the Dorica Cornice, although
it be very full of members, and well wrought, yet I found it to differ much
from Vitruuius instructions: for being licencious enough of members, was of
such a height, that the two third parts of such height should have been enough
to the Architraue and the Freese. But I am of opinion therefore, (by the
license of these, or other Antiquities) that a workman in these days should
not err, (which error, I mean, is to do contrary to Vitruuius precepts) nor
to be peremptory that he will make a Cornice, or other thing just of the same
proportion as he has seen and measured, and then set it in work; because it
is not sufficient for him to say, I may do it: for ancient workmen have done
it, without consideration whether it be proportioned according to the rest of
the building. Besides, although an old workman was so bold, yet we must
therefore not be so, (but as reason teaches us) we should observe Vitruuius
rules as our guide, and most certain and insallible directions: for that from
that time of great Antiquity, till now, there is no man found to have written
better, nor more learnedly of Architecture then he: and as in every Art there
is one more learned then another, to whom such authority is given, that his
words are fully, and without doubt believed. Who then will deny (if he be not
ignorant) that Vitruuius, for Architecture, is worthy of the highest degree?
and that his writings where no other notable reason or cause is to move us)
ou^ht for the worthiness thereof to be inuiolably observed, and to be better
credited, then any works of the Romans? which Romans, although they learned
the upright manner of building of the Greciens, nevertheless, afterward when
they became Rulers over the Grecians, it may be that some of them thereby
became licencious: but certaynely, if a man might see the wonderful works
which the Grecians then did make, (which are now almost all spoiled and cast
down in time of war) he would assuredly judge the Grecians work to
surpass that of the Latins far.

Therefore all those workmen that shall condemn Vitruuius writing, and
specially in such cases as are clearly understood, as in the order of Dorica,
whereof I spoke, should err much in the Art of Architecture, to gainesay such
an Author, as for so many years has been, and yet is approved by wise men,
learned. Now having made this digression, which was necessary for the good of
those that would not have considered so much, turning again to the purpose, I
say, that this ground was measured by the old Roman foot; and first, the
place in the middle, marked A. which is called Orchestra, is in the Diameter
194. foot, and is half a Circle from one corner to the other: of the stages or
seats, marked H. it is 417. foot: the place marked B. called Proscenium, is
very spacious; and where C. stands, is the Gallery, which they call Porticus
of the Scene, in the middle whereof stood the Pulpit: that part marked with D.
was a Portall, with Stayres on both sides, which went up to the places marked
E. called Hospitalia: the two Galleries on the sides marked G. they used to
walk in: Of which things men can see no more above the ground, for that they
are covered with other houses. Touching the several measures, as well of the
Scene as of the Theater, and of the degrees, I will say no more: for that in
the Amphitheatre called Coliseo, I will declare it more at large, whereby a man
may conceive how this stood: but that part without, which went about the
Theater, I will show in the second Figure, which was measured (before this)
with a common Ell, which is divided into twelve parts, which parts are called
ounces: and every ounce has five minutes; of which Ell, this is a third part.

architectural drawing The third part of the Ell.



architectural drawing

THis Figure following represents that part without, of the foresaid Theater,
and is measured with the Ell aforesaid: and first, the thickenesse of the
Columns beneath in the nether part of the first order, is an Ell and 43.
minutes in Diameter: and the thickness of the Diameter above under the
Capital, is an Ell and 16. minutes: the height of the Capital, is half the
thickenesse of the Columns beneath, the which Capital is more perfecter
marked in the fourth Book, in the order of Dorica, in Folio E. 3. And the same
Capital is marked with B. Likewise also the impost, whereon the Arch r^steth,
is as high also as the Capital, and stands also in the same leaf E. 3. The
Pilasters, beside the Columns, are 19. minutes: the wideness of one Arch, is
7. Else and 9. minutes: and the height is eleven Else and sixeteene minutes;
the height of the Architraue, is 49. minutes: the height of the Freese is one
Ell and eight minutes. The height of the whole Cornice, is an Ell, and forty
minutes: the wideness of the second Arch of the second order, is as wide as
that below; but the height is ten Else and forty and eight minutes: the
height of the Pedestall under the Columns of this second order, is an Ell and
forty and eight minutes: the thickenesse of the Columns, is an Ell and
twenty and four minutes: the height of the said Columns without Bases or
Capitals, is 11. Else, 27. minutes: the height of the Bases is 44. minutes:
the height of the Capital, that is within the Volutes, from the list of the
Columns, to above the Capital, is 36. minutes: but the Volute hangs over the
Astragall or Bozell 20. minutes and a half, which in all, from beneath the
Volutes, to above the Abacus, is 47. minutes and a half: the breadth of the
Abacus of the said Capital is one Ell and a half: but the breadth of the
Volutes is two else: the height of the Architraue is 59. minutes: the height
of the Freese is 58. minutes: the height of the Cornice is an Ell, and 48.
minutes: which Cornice, in truth, is half so much more as it should be (if we
will credit Vitruuius precepts.) But I pray you, gentle Reader, esteem me not
presumptuous, neither yet account me for a corrector of the works of
Antiquity, from whence men learn so much: for my meaning is only, willingly
to let you understand and know that which is well made from that which is ill
made: and that I will not do after my own conceit, as if you were taught by
me, but by the authority of Vitruuius: and also of good Antiquities, which are
those which best agree with the doctrine of that Author. The Base of this
second order, and the Pedestall under it, the Impost of the Arches, and
withal, the Architraue, Freese and Cornice, you shall altogether find in the
fourth Book of the order of Ionica in Folio K. the second, and are all marked
with T. Likewise you shall find the Capital in the same fourth book, behind
in the leaf I. the 4. marked with M.

architectural drawing The third part of the foresaid Ell, of 60. minutes.



architectural drawing

IN Dalmatia there is an ancient town called Pola, lying by the Sea side,
wherein you may see a great part of a Theater; in the making whereof, the expert
workman did help himself with the hill whereon it stands, using the hill
for part of the degrees or steps to go up, and in the plain below, he made
the Orchestra, Scene, and other buildings belonging to such a piece of work.
And in truth, the tuines and the pieces which are yet at this day found, do
show that it was a most beautiful and sumptuous piece of work of stone and
workmanship; besides this, there you may see a great number of Columns, some
standing alone, others with Pilasters, and some Corners with four square
Pillars, and some half round, all bound together, and well wrought, after the
Corinthia; for the whole work, both without and within, was made after the
Corinthia manner. This Building was measured with a modern or usual s^^te;
which foot is divided into twelve parts, named ounces, whereof the one half
hereafter follows. The Figure hereafter following, shows the Ichnographie,
and also the Profill of the Theater, whereof this is the measure: the wideness
of the Orche ^ra which is half a Circle, is in Diameter about 130. foot* the
degrees or steps round about, with the two ways or streets, are of 70. foot:
the way marked T. comes even with the plain of the Pulpit of the Scene to the
foureteenth step. The wideness of the Porticus round about the Theater, is 15.
foot, and the sides of the Pillars inward, is of 17. foot and a half, but the
fore-rancke of the Pillars round about the Gallery, together with the Columns,
holds about five foot in breadth, and from the one Pilaster to the other, it
is about 10. foot wide: and this is touching the ground of this Theater. The
two greatest Quadrans marked O. are the Hospitalia, from the which places men
went into the entry or passing through, marked T. which comes by to the street,
half way to the steps, as you may perceive by the Profill marked T. and under
the going through, is part of the going in. The Hospitalia is flue and forty
foot, the breadth of the Scene, is 21* foot, the breadth of the Porticus or
Gallery before, is 27 foot, and the length is like the house, the Building
which stands above the ground of the Theater, signifies the Profill, which
is cut through the sides of the Theater. The Arch marked with A. signifies the
going in, the second Arch C. and B. are under the steps, the Cornice besides
marked, with D. is the impost of the Arches: there neded no going up to this
Theater, for the hill aforesaid eased the workman therein, and men might also
got up to the Theater from the Scene, because it was joined to the said
Theater: but the Theater of Marcellus is separated from the Scene, and therefore
the goings up were necessary.

architectural drawing This is the half foot of measure, whereby this Theater
was measured with all the ornaments.



architectural drawing

THis Theater (as I have said) was very rich of ornaments, all of stone, and
made of Corinthia work, very well and richly wrought, and by as much as is
seen by the ruins which lie scattering about the Scene, was very beautiful
of Columns upon Columns, both double and single, and also in the innermost
and outtermost parts, with diverse ornaments of Doors and Windows. The
innermost part of the Building is much ruinated: and touching the measures, I
can say little; but of the outtermost parts, I will say somewhat of their
measures. The first, a rusticall or clounish order, wherein there is no
Columns, is elevated from the earth, together with the whole Cornice, marked
E. about 16. foot: the height of the first Pedestall, is flue foot, the
height of the Columns with the Bases and Capitals, is 22. foot; the
thickenesse of the Pillars, with the Columns, is 5. foot: the thickness of
the Columns alone, is two foot and a half: the wideness of the Arches, is
about ten foot: and their height twenty foots: the height of the Architraue,
Freese and Cornice, is about flue foot; the second Pedestall marked X. is of
four foot and a half: the height of those Columns are about sixteen foot,
the Architraue, Freese and Cornice, is four foot high. I set not down the
measures of the particular members, but in the Figure you may conceive them;
for they are just of the same proportion: I set not down the measure of the
Scene, nor of the other parts within: only I have here set forth a part of
the Porticus of the Scene, which is marked P. And also the Cornice, Freese and
Architraue marked F. was in the highest thereof. the Capitals marked S. stood
within, with some half round Columns, raised out of some Pilasters, things
that were very well wrought: all which things (as I said before) are so
sumptuous, both for stone and workmanship, as they may well be compared with
those of Rome: the Cornice, Freese and Architraue, marked A. was in the highest
part of the Theater: the Cornice marked B. is the impost of the second Arch:
the Architraue, Freese and Cornice, marked C. is the Cornice above the first
Arch, the Cornice marked D. is the impost of the Arch: the Cornice marked with
E. goes above the rusticall basement round about the Building: this line
hereunder is half a foot, ^f the whole foot wherewith this Building was
measured. And wonder not, gentle Reader, that I set not down all the measures
more precisely; for these things of Pola, were measured by one that had more
understanding in casting, then in measuring.

The half foot, whereby this is measured.

architectural drawing

architectural drawing

AT Ferenten, an old Town lying by Veterben, there is yet to be seen the
form of a Theater, much decayed, being of no great workmanship, and less
ornaments, for any thing a man may perceive by the same; for there are no
pieces to be seen whereby a man may conceyt any matter of importance. But you
may yet see in the Porticus going from the Theater, there were four square
Pillars, also the Stayres thereof were very simple and plain: and because it
is so much decayed, you can hardly discern how they stood. The Scene of this
Theater is much different from others, as you may see in the ground thereof:
neither is there so much standing above ground, that a man may perceive how the
Scene and the Pulpit thereof stood. This ground was measured by the ancient
foot, and first, speaking of the Orchestra A. which is half a Circle, the
Diameter thereof is 141. foot and a half long. The body of the Theater, that
is, from the Orchestra, to the outtermost of the Corner Pillars of the
Porticus, is 35. foot: the Pillars of the corner on either side, is 5. foot
broad: the entry of the Porticus on the side of the Scene, is 8. foot: the
vault under the Stayres, is 22. foot: the thickenesse of the Wall about the
Orchestra, is 3. foot and a half: the Hospitalia, marked X. is in length 40.
foot and a half; and in breadth 30. foot: the wideness of the Porticus about
the Theater, is 11. foot: the Pillars are thick and broad, 3. foot and 3.
quarters: the wideness of the Arch, is 9. foot: the just breadth of the
Orchestra marked B. is 20. foot: the place of the Pulpit C. is in length 40.
foot and a half; but the breadth is 12. foot: the going through, is 9. foot.
The place marked D. should be the Porticus behind the Scene: yet there is no
show of any Columns; but it shows that there was a wall standing by the
water side. The breadth of this place, is 19. foot and a half. Without this
Theater there stands the foundation of two Buildings, but they are so much
decayed, that you can find no end of them: nevertheless, the Building marked
F. for as much as you see of it, shows that it was joined to other things.
The wideness wherein the F. stands, is 31. foot. The 2. small places or
stancies holding up the one side, are eight foot and a half; and on the other
side, ten foot and a half. The Arches where the four Columns stand (which I
take be made in that manner) are in length 27. foot and a half, and in breadth
ten foot and a half. The breadth of the Building marked E. is twenty foot: the
hollow places in the sides, are 17. foot: the length of all together, is 60.
foot, and is distant from the Theater one hundred and one and forty foot: and
from the other Building, seventy foot and a half.

The half of the old foot.

architectural drawing

architectural drawing

THE Figure under this, marked A. I think to have been the Scene of a Theater,
it stands between Fondi and Torracina; but there is so little to be seen of
the Theater, that I measured it not: neither did I measure this part of the
Scene, which is more decayed then it shows here: but as I foot on horseback,
I made a slight draught thereof. The Door marked B. stands at Spolet^, and
is very old, made after the Dorica manner, which likewise I did not measure,
but made only the invention and form thereof. The Gate marked C. is between
Foligus and Rome, out in the street: and although it seem a licentious and
unseemly thing, that the Arch should break the passage of the Architraue,
Freese and Cornice; yet nevertheless, the invention disliked me not. I
measured only the breadth and the l^n^th, the which I found to be eighteen
foot, and one and twenty foot and a half. I think it had been a small
Temple, or a Sepulcher; but be what it will, it shows well to a man's sight.

architectural drawing architectural drawing architectural drawing

IT is said, that this building was called, Porticus, of Pompeo: others say,
that it was the house of Mario: but it is called by the Common people,
Cacabario: which building, as far as I can learn, was only made for men to
ease themselves in: for there is no dwelling in it at all: and although this
building at this day is almost decayed, yet it was very great, and contained
many places, as you see by many houses of this building which are found in the
earth. Where the Line stands, is now the way to go from Campo Floro, to the
Jews place: and where the Cross is now, the houses of Sancta Crose stand:
where G. sta^ds, is the Jews place: where the M. stands, be the
Marcellarii: where the C. stands, is the Church^yard of S. Saluatorie: and
where the E. ie cut through, is the Forefront of the houses of Celsis: so that
thereby you may see the great compass thereof. The three round things were
Stayres to go up to the two empty Roundles. And for that there is no show of
Stayres to be seen in those two, it is to be conceived, that they were open
places to make water in, (for such things are necessary.) The ground of this
work is measured by the same Ell that the Theater of Marcellus was measured
withal: which measure you you shall find here, after the Obiliscen, and
(half an Ell shall be thirty minutes.) And first, the thickness of the
Pilasters is three Else and a half: the thickness of the Columns is two
Else: the Intercolumnes, are on all sides, nine Else and a half: the
Pilasters of the four Corners, are so much more the^ the outermost Corners
stand over them: which Corners were made with good judgment, for they uphold
the Corner by strength, and with beauty of work. Hereby workmen may learn
how to make Corners with Columns, and with Pilasters bound together, that the
Corner may also be four square, as the Column is, which gives the Corner
more fastness, then if the same Corner were drawn along the Pilaster: and for
the Corners which are drawn in, if you see them over the side in Diagonall
manner, where the two round Columns cover the Corner, then they will seem
imperfect Corners, and specially, because they are seen on all sides.

architectural drawing

TOuching the Ichnographie, I have said enough; now I must speak something of
the form above the ground, although there is not much thereof to be seen:
nevertheless, there is yet so much standing upright (although it be hidden)
that thereby the back part thereof without, is to be conceived, which, in
truth* is an ingenious invention, for a fast work, and especially in the
first order, which you call Dorica, although it has neither Architraue,
Trigliph, nor Cornice: But yet there is the form, and that very subtly made,
with great strength and fair Building (as well of hard stone as of Bricks) as
you may see in the Figure following. The thickenesse and breadth are showed
before: the height of the Columns with Bases and Capitals, seventeen Else:
and the height of the Arches, fifteen Else. The height of the Cunco that is,
the shutting stone above the Arch, is 2. Else: the height of the binding,
which is in stead of an Architraue, is 2. Else, and so much is the Facie above
it. The second order seems unsupportable, for that there is a weight of
Pilasters standing above an open hole: a thing which in truth is false and
erroneous to speak in reason. Nevertheless, for that the first Order is so
fast and strong, by means of the shutting stone above in the Arch; as also
with the cross stone upon it, with the fast Facie upon that, and by reason of
the good shoulders of the Arch, which altogether show to be such a strength (as
in effect it is) that the Pilasters that rest upon it, seem not to oppress
the work, as they would, if it were a simple Arch, with an Architraue, Freese
and Cornice: for which cause I blame not this invention therein. The wideness
of this Arch is 4. Else: the height is nine Else: the breadth of the
Pilasters, is two Else and an half: the thickness of the Columns, is an Ell
and a sixth part in Diameter: the height of the Columns is eleven Else and an
eight part with Bases and Capitals, and are made after the Corinthia manner.
The height of the Architraue, Freese and Cornice, is two Else and three
quarters. Although I can give no particular measures of this Cornice, Freese
and Architraue, because such things are not to be seen, yet there is only so
much wall, that thereby a man may conceive the Freeses, Cornices and Architraue.

The third part of the Ell, wherewith this is measured.

architectural drawing

architectural drawing

AMong other fair Antiquities in Rome, there are two Columns of Marble, all
cut full of Histories, very good imbust work. The one is called Antonianas
Column, the other Traians Column: and for that Traians Column is the
wholest, I will speak somewhat thereof. This Column, as men say, the Emperor
Traian caused to be made, which is all of Marble, and made of many pieces; but
so closely iorned together, that they seem to be all one piece: and to give
the particular measure thereof, I will begin at the foots of the Basement
thereof: And first, the degree or step in the first rest, is three Palms high,
the Plinthus of the Base, is a Palm and eight minutes high; the carved or
graven Base is as much: the flat of the Basement is 12. Palms and six minutes
high: the graven Cornice is a Palm and an half high. The place where the
Feston hangs in, is two Palms and ten minutes high: the whole Base of the
Columns, is six Palms and 28. minutes, and is divided in this manner: the
Plinthus where the Eagle stands upon one corner (but you must imagine that
there is one at every corner) is three Palms and ten minutes high: the Thorus
above it, is three Palms and eight minutes high: the Cincte is ten minutes
high. The height of the Column, that is, the body, is 18. Palms and 9.
minutes: the Astragall with the Quadrants or lists under the Echine, is 10.
minutes. The height of the Echine, is 2. Palms and 2. minutes: the height of
the Abacus, is 2. Palms and 11. minutes: about upon this Column, there is a
Pedestal of a round form, through the which men crept from the winding
Stayres, and may go easily round about, because the plain ground thereof, is
2. Palms and a half broad: the height of this Pedestall is 11. Palms; but
the Base is two Palms, and the Cornice above, is a Palm high. The Crown
above the Pedestall, is three Palms and a half high: the thickenesse of this
Pedestall, is 12. Palms and ten minutes: the thickenesse of the Column above,
is 14. Palms, and the thickness below, is 16. Palms: the roundnesse marked
A. in flat form, shows the thickness above: and the Circle marked B. is the
thickness below. The vndenesse of the winding Stayres, is 3. Palms, and the
Spill four Palms. The breadth of the Basement, is 24. Palms and 6. minutes;
in the which space are cut two Compartements, wherein is contained an Epitaph,
under which many Trophies are cut: and in the Epitaph are these letters
hereunder written.

S. P. Q. R.
IMP. CAESARI DIVINERVAE. F. NERVAE.
TRAIANO AVG. GERMANIC. DACICO
PONT. MAX. TRIB. POT. XVII. COS. VI. PP.
AD DECLARANDVM QVANTAE ALTITVDINIS
MONS ET LOCVS SIT EGESIVS.
This Column is histographied with excellent good cut work, and drawn along
with Berries; it is also flinted in Doricall manner: in the flintings the
Figures are made in such sort, that rising up or bearing out of the Figure, the
form of the Columns and flinting, is nothing disparaged; between which
Figures there stand some Windows, which give light to the winding Stayres: and
although the said Windows are placed orderly, yet they hinder not the History
at all, and yet they are 44. in number, and I will show the whole Column in
the Figure following: but these are the members thereof, openly written and set
down. All these members are measured with the old Roman Palm, as you find
it before upon the round.

architectural drawing

I Have before sufficiently spoken of the breadth of Traians Column, and of the
particular manner thereof, now I will show the whole Column proportioned as it
is: So then, the Column marked with T. represents Traians Column: but from
whence the Obelisces spring or proceed, and how they were brought to Rome, and
to what end they serve, I will not speak of, for that Pliny declares it at
large: only I will set the measure here, and show the form of some things
which I have seen and measured within Rome: And first, the Obelisce, marked O.
is without the Capena, and is all graven and cut with Egyptian letters: the
thickness thereof in the foot, is ten Palms and a half: the height is 80.
Palms: and this only was measured with the ancient Palm: but the other three
by it were measured by a modern or usual Ell of 60. minutes, whereof the line
that is between the Obelisces, is the half, and is divided into 30 parts. The
Obelisce marked P. stands in Vaticano (that is) at S. Peter's, and is of
Egyptian stone: in the top whereof (they say) the Ashes of the Emperor Gaius
Caesar stand: the thickness thereof below, is 4. Else and 42. minutes: the
height is 42. Else and a half: the part above, is three Else and four
minutes thick: and under at the foot stands these letters.

DIVI CAESARI. DIVI IVLII. F. AVGVSTO. TI.
CAESARI DIVI AVGVSTI. F. AVGVSTO SACRVM.
The Obelisce marked Q. lies at S. Rochus, broken in the middle of the street
in three pieces, and (...) say likewise, there lies buried in the earth a
Lady called A l^ Augusta: the thickenesse beneath of the said Obelisce on each
Facie, is two Else and 24. minutes: the height is 26. Else and 24. minutes:
the thickenesse above, holds an Ell and 35. minutes: the Basement was all of
one piece, and the Obelisce marked R. is in circo Antonino Caracalla, and is
broken, as you see in the form. The thickenes of the Obelisce, is two Else
and 25. minutes below, and above one Ell and 33. minutes: the height is 28.
Else, and 16. minutes: and all the Pedestals are proportioned thereafter. And
although (paraduenture) there are more of them in Rome, which I have not seen,
yet these which I have seen, are here set down to your sight, as being have
known.

architectural drawing

THIS Amphitheater of Rome, called Colisced, Vespasionus the Emperor caused to
be made in the middle of the City, as Augustus had appointed it before: the
Ichnographie I have divided into 4. parts (as the building is of 4. Orders)
that you may understand it the better, because of the great artificialnesse
thereof. This ground is measured by the ancient Palm: and first, beginning at
the outtermost parts: The Pilasters before are 10. Palms and 6. minutes broad:
the thicknes of the Column is four Palms; but the Pilaster on either side is
three Palms and 2. minutes: the widenes between ye Pilasters is 10. Palms;
but the 4. principal goings through hold 22. Palms: the thickness of the
Pilasters in the sides are 12. Palms. The wideness of the first Porticus is
22. Palms. The 2. Porticus inwards, is 20. Palms broad, and both of them
roofed. The other measures toward the Center, because they lessen themselves,
and will not set down, but by these outward you may conceive it, because they
are all proportioned according to the some: the outtermost part of the 2.
Ichnography is like the 1. but the G^ll^ries are a Palm broader: for the
Pilasters are architectural drawing The Degrees joined thus.

The third Ground.

The second Ground.

not so thick on the sides as the undermost: the inwardest Gallery is cross
r^sed. And in this P^^ticus there are some small Tribunes marked X. in the
middle whereof, there stand four square holes, and I think also they are made
t^ give light to those places. The 3. ground without is also like the 2. but
the walking places are so much wider, as the Pilasters are thinner: and the
outtermost walking place is cross roofed, and the innermost round. All ye
doors marked V. came to the Stayres, that thereby every one might go into his
place, according to his degree. The 4. ground is like (...). also without, but
there are (...) nor Arches, ye Colfines are (...) spaces between both, there
(...) ^^^es, as you shall see in ye Or^^^^. This 4. and last ground, ma^^^^
(...); ^^^bt whether the whole space (...); ^h^ 2. walking places was co^^^
^^^t, only for ye it is so much de^^^^ a man can see no signs of Pila^^^
^^thin; but in the outward part (...) some beginnings of Arches (...) and short
joined to the wall, (...) and shows; and men did clime (...) ^^e^s, yt were
fast to ye wall, as (...) ^^derstand, to the outtermost architectural drawing
This Space, from the ^^e Shaft to the other, were Degrees where the people sat
easily.

Steps between the Degrees.

The fourth Ground.

The first Ground.

windows, as you may better cenc^iue of it in ye Profill, on ye side of ye
stayres in ye figure following. The spaces, as well are ye 2. shafts, contain
ye steps or degrees for men to sit on; and every degree was so bread ye a man
(sitting easily) might go upon the same without troubling another: within these
degrees there were less steps, for ease* ye every man might go into his place,
as in ye figure G. and H. is showed: in which degrees, there are some hollow
Cha^nels, from the top to ye bottom, to avoid the water downwarde; as also for
men's water, as you may see in the figure H. These degrees to sit on, hung
downward a good singer, that no water should stay upon them: which degrees were
excellently well joined together, as in the figure I. shows.

I Have showed the Ichnographie of the Romish Colisco, in four sorts, even
like as the building is of four sorts or orders: now I must show the Profill
thereof, by the which a man may conceive a great part of the inward things:
therefore the Figure following shows the whole building above ye earth, as if
it were cut through in the middle. In which Figure, first you see all the
degrees whereon the Spectators sat: there also you may perceive how many ways
the goings up were, which (in truth) were very east to go up and down, so
that in short time the Amphitheater was filled with a great number of men,
without hindrance one of another. You may also see in the outward part, how the
thicknes of the Pilasters, and the walls upwards lessened, which on the inside
are drawn in, and being so drawn in, gives the building great strength: and
to show it to be true, you may see there, at this day, some part of the Facies
without, yet whole, from the top to the bottom, and yet the inward parts are
decayed, and that has the drawing inward of the Centree dens, which made the
work slighter, taking, as it were, a form of a Piramides. But this is not
observed in the common building in Venice, but rather the contrary, because the
walls without are in Perpendicular manner, and lessen inwards: and this they
do (for want of ground) to get the more space upwards, but that which helps
such buildings, is, that there are no Arches in it, nor Roofes, of any manner,
that force the walls to give out, but the number of Bea^^ and which are laid
and fastened in the walls, bind the walls and the rooms of the house
together, and so such buildings stand fast so long as the Beams endure, which
men from time to time renew: nevertheless, these kinds of buildings last not
so long as the ancient buildings did, made in such order as you see in the
Colisco, whereof I will speak again. And withal, (as I said) the innermost
part being so ruinous, that men see no part of the innermost work, which is
cut off by the line that has Shafts or Arrowheads at the ends: and for that
you see no parts thereof at all, whether that the uppermost parts of the
highest steps, upwards to the top, were all covered with double Galleries, or
that the Porticus was alone, and the other left open: therefore I have made it
in two manner of ways: the one is (as you see in the same Profill) joined with
all the work: and the other manner is, which stands without the degrees or
steps, which order also agrees with the other, if you set it so, that the two
Lists in the Pedestals meet each with the other: but for that you see some
remaynders of the crossed Roofes, which yet hang within on the walls, as the
fourth ground shows, the which, I judge, was only a Porticus, and that the
other part was uncovered to receive the people, and being so, must receive them
better then if the Galleries had been double: Now to turn to the beginning of
the degrees or steps, that I leave nothing untouched, as near as I can, I say,
by means of the ruins, and filling up with matter fallen, the plain, or the
place in the middle is so filled up, that a man cannot mark how high the first
degrees of the plain were elevated: but by the instructions of those that have
seen the end, the first degree was so high, that the wild and untamed Beasts
could not hurt the beholders: and there was also a Borstwering, and other
streets, of a reasonable breadth to go round about, as it is showed where it is
marked with C. The two open places, the least and the greatest Arch, were to
bring in light. The places standing up about the degrees or steps which are
covered and marked A. are D^^res, whereby men went without, up the Stayres to
the Theater.

architectural drawing The Profill of the Amphitheater of Rome.



THE outward part, that is, the Orthographie of the Romish Coliscco, is made of
four stories: and the first story next above the ground, is made after the
manner of Dorica: and although there are in the Freese neither Tr^gliphes nor
Metophes, nor yet guts in the Epistolie or Architraue; neither Fulmines and
guts under the crown, yet it may be called Dorica. The second Order, is after
the manner of Ionica: and although the Columns be not fluited, yet in effect
they may be called Ionica. The third Story, is after the manner of Corinthia,
but firm work without cutting, unless it be the Capitals, the which with
their height are not exquisitely made. The fourth Story, is Composita; other
call it Latina, because it was invented by the Romans: some others call it
Italica. But it may well be called Composita, were it but for the mutiles which
stand in the Freese, for that no other Story have their mutiles in the Freese,
but that. Many men ask why the Romans made this Building of four Orders, and
made it not all of one form or order as many others are, as that of Verona,
which is all of rusticall work, and that of Pola also. A man may answer
thereunto, that the old Romans, as rulers over al, and especially of those
people, from whence the three former Orders had their beginning, would set
those 3. generations one above another: and above all those orders, the
Composita, as found by themselves; thereby signifying, that they as tryumphers
over those people, would also triumph with their works, placing and mingling
them at their pleasures. But omitting these reasons, we will proceed to the
measures of the outtermost parts and Orthographie. This Building was elevated
from the earth two degrees: the second degree was five Palms broad, and the
first two Palms; the height was little less then a Palm: the Base of the
Column was not two Palms, no more is the Dorica: the Column is four Palms
thick and two minutes: the height is 38. Palms and 5. minutes, with Base and
Capital: the height of the Capital is about two Palms: the Pilasters on
either side of the Columns, are three Palms and three minutes: the wideness
of the Arch is twenty Palms, and the height is 33. Palms: from under the
Arch, to the Architraue, is five Palms and six minutes: the height of the
Architraue is two Palms and eight minutes: the height of the Freese is three
Palms and two minutes: the Cornice as much. The Pedestall of the second Order,
is eight Palms and ten minutes high: the height of the Columns, with Bases
and Capitals, is five and thirty Palms, the thickness is four Palms: the
Pilasters and Arches are like those beneath: but the height of the Arch is
thirty Palms: from under the Arch, to under the Architraue, is five Palms and
six minutes: the height of the Architraue is three Palms: the height of the
Freese, is two Palms and nine minutes: the height of the Cornice, is three
Palms and nine minutes. The Pedestall of the fourth Order, called, Composita,
(here our Author has forgotten the third Order, but howsoever, it differs
not much from the Ionica) the Pedestall of the Composita, is twelve Palms
high: the vnder-Base thereof, is four Palms: the height of the Pillars, with
Bases and Capitals, is thirty eight Palms and six minutes: the height of the
Architraue, Freese, and Cornice, is about ten Palms, divided in three, one
part for the Cornice, the second for the Freese, wherein the Mutiles stand, and
the third for the Architraue. But for what cause, or reason, the workman set
the Mutiles in the Freese, (things, which, peradventure, before that time were
never made) I have delivered my opinion thereof in my fourth Book, in the
beginning of the Order of Composita. The Pillars of the fourth Order are flat,
and rise but a little: all therest are round Columns, (that is to say) three
fourth parts, rising out of the Pilasters: the Mutiles above the windows
vpheld some beams, the which are boared through with holes for men to draw
cords to cover the hole Amphitheater, as well against the Sun as the rain:
for what cause the Columns are all of one thickness, and lessen not one more
then the other (as it seems they should; and as Vitruuius would) as the
second Order are lessened a fourth part, I have also declared my opinion in the
fourth Book, and the ninth Chapter. In the treatise of making Columns, longer
or shorter; and that the particular members may also be noted, I have marked
them also by the Orthographie of the Colisceo, which are proportioned according
to the principal, together with their Caracters whereunto they are likened.

architectural drawing

IN ^^pello, a very old Town in Italy, there is a very old P^rtor Gate, the
work whereof is Dorica, althou^^^ has neither Trigliphes, Methopes nor Guts:
the two Towers on the sides thereof may be called Modern work, (...) regard
of the Ornaments above: which Towers are both of one fashion, although I have
lest one of them out. The Ichnographie is underneath the Figure, and was
measured with the ancient foot: and from one Tower to the other, are 60. and
10. foot: the middle Gate is 20. foot wide: each Posterne Gate is 10. foot
wide: the Pilasters between the 2. Ports or Gates, are 10. foot broad: the
height I set not down, but only the iunention, because it pleased me well.
The Stayres under the Towers, with the ground, E. are by our Author made on
both sides: but according to his ground, the Stayres must come as they stand
above the ground C. or ^lse not, then the ground must be made like D. This,
and other things more (although there consists no great matter therein) (...)
thought good to note, that you may know that I have set the^ down piece by
piece as I found them.

architectural drawing

THese Cornices, Basements and Bases, are relics of Antiquity: and that
which is marked A. a piece of the Columns with Architraues, Freeses and
Cornices; and also with the Basement above, which was all of one stone: the
height thereof was 11. ancient foot, proportioned in that manner, it was found
without Rome by the River of Tiber. The order marked B. was found in the
foundation of S. Peter's, and Bramant caused it to be buried again in the
ground, in the same place: all the members also were of one piece; it was 6.
ancient foot high, and proportioned thereafter. The Base marked C. is at S.
Marks, very well wrought, of Corinthia work, but not very great, it is a foot
and an half high, and proportioned accordingly. The Basement marked D. was
found in a place called Capranica, very well wrought: the height of ye Base,
without Plinthus, is 2. Palms, and also proportioned thereafter. The Base
marked E. was not very great: it was found among certain rumes, and by reason
of the Astragalu^ which it had above the Thorns, therefore I esteem it to be
Composita: and although I set down no other proportion of all the particular
measures, yet they are collected and set down out of the great, into the small
measure orderly.

architectural drawing

architectural drawing AMong many fair Antiquities that a^^^^ called La arena,
whereof this is the (...) thereof, and also how the seats or steps sto^^^ from
without, went up upon the inward (...) to sit in, every one according to his
estate (...) stood in the said steps: the Figure B. she^^^^ or seats: you see
also, how ye steps were pl^^^^ the water and piss that fell down with^^^
slope, that water might fall off, and not (...) these two here below, and also
of other s^^^^ was measured with the foot where with ye (...) ward parts) the
thicknes of the Pilaster, (...) then each Pilaster that bears up the ^rch^^
is 11. foot and an half: but the 4 princ^^^^ the Porticus, going round about,
is 13. (...) 9 foot and a half broad; and also round (...) broad, and roofed
also. But at the two pr^^^^ lasters* as it appears in the ground: (...) the
measures, you may conceive.

^^^a, there is an Amphitheater of rustical work, (...) shows also a part
standing upright in the side ^^es upon the steps were little doors, whereby
men (...) the seats, and from thence went to the places for men ^^e. The Figure
marked A. shows how the doors ^he goings down and steps were made, in the
degrees the gutters on the sides of ye stayres were to avoid ^ing any man: the
steps also were made somewhat them. In the inner part are many little doors,
like ^^ical and rude work. The greatness of this Building ^f Pola is measured:
and first, (speaking of the out^^^ and a 3. part: the flat Pillars, are 3. foot
and a 3. part: ^^^ot and a half broad: the widenes of the Arches, (...). The
Pilasters on the sides, are 6. foot thick: (...) and roofed round: this
Porticus in the middle, is (...) Porticus in the lowest part, is 8. foot and an
half ^ings in, there are 5. broad roofes upon the Pi^^^^^^ ^^dlemost is
broader then the other. The rest of the measures, you may conceive.



TOuching the Ichnographie of the said Amphitheater, I have set down the
principal measures, and partly spoken of that part which stands upright: now
I will speak of the outward part, which work can no otherwise be called,
then rude and rusticall, and have likewise spoken of the thickness and
breadth, therefore I will rehearse it no more: only of the height I will say
some thing: And first, the height of the first Arch is 23. foot: the height of
the Pillars 27 foot: the Form of the Architraue, Freese and Cornice, is 6.
foot high: the Place breast high above the Corince, is 2. foot and a half
high: the height of the second Arch is 24. foot, and his wideness 12. foot:
the height of the Pillars is 24. foot and a half: the height of the Cornice,
Freese and Form of the Architraue, is 5. foot and a half: the Borstwering or
Place breast high of the third Order or Story, is 4. foot and a half high: the
widenes of the Arch is 9. foot and 3. quarters: the height of the Arch is 17.
foot and a half: the height of the broad Pillars is 20. foot and a half:
against these Pillars, as far as a man may perceive, there were Images, of
good bigness, set: the third and last Cornice is 5. foot high. But I will not
set down the particular measures of the Cornices, for that I have set them
down with great diligence, according to the greatness in this small Form,
which shall be the first Figures in the side following, and there below, the
Profill or cutting of the outermost part of the Amphitheater shall stand. And
thirdly, there follows the Orthographie of a piece of the said Amphitheater
without, which is all wrought after the rusticall manner, with stones of
Verona, being very hard: but the Cornices are somewhat better made: which
Cornices have diverse and several Forms of the Romans, and are very like unto
the Cornices of the Amphitheater of Pola. Touching the playnenesse of this
Amphitheater, which by the Common people is called, La arena, (taken from
arena) which is sand, which was therein strowed for certain Plays or sports,
which were there presented or Acted: and therefore I could not see the ground
thereof: but as it was told me by some old men of Verona, when the Plays were
there made upon the sand, then presently there came water, in the sight of all
the beholders, which past through some Conduits, and in short space filled all
the place full, so that there they might make battles, and thrust one at
another with Scutes and Boats, in the water, and the place dried up again, as
at the first. This, and many other things, men may believe, if we consider the
great magnificence of the Romans, in the Antiquities of Verona. There are yet
upon the great River of Adixe two fair ancient Bridges, between the which two
Bridges, there was a most fair and notable Spectaele, whereon there might
stand a great number of people, to behold the Plays and sports there made in
Boats, upon the water: which Spectacle was made along by the water side,
against a hill: and higher upwards, above this Spectacle, there was a Theater,
the Scene whereof, and the Spectacle joined together: (and for that, as I said
before, the Theater was made very artificially in the hill, so is it above the
Theater in the height of the hill) there was a great building, which surpassed
all the other: but the ruins of these buildings are so many, and so cast down
in process of time, that it would be great charges and loss of tune to find
them out: but for that in many places of the hill I have seen some parts
thereof, therefore it makes me wonder thereat. It was also, with good reason,
that the Romans made such things at Verona (for that, in my opinion, it is the
best scit^ated place of all Italy) as well for playnes as hills, and also for
waters; and specially, the men of that Town are very familiar and friendly
people.

architectural drawing

GReat things, and in diverse forms, were made by the famous Romans; but by
the ^uines thereof men can not judge whereunto they served, and principally
this Building which was named Lesette Zone di Seuero: of which Building you see
a corner of the House yet standing, which is of 3. roofes, all Corinthia work.
But it may be seen, that from the roof it was made of another manner of
Buildings, because some Pillars were hollowed and crefted, and some smooth;
besides, the Capitals and other forms are not all of one work. I have not
measured the height of this Building, but only the ground and thickness of
things: and for as much as I can conceive, the roofes above lessen one more
then another, the fourth part, as Vitruuius writes in his description of
Theaters. This Figure hereunder, shows the ground of the Building, and also
the sky or roof of the Lacunary above the Columns: it was measured with the
foot that measured the Theater of Pola. ^^rst, the thickenesse of the Wall, is
3. foot and an half: between the one Wall and the other, it to 4. foot and an
half: between the Wall and the Columns, is 5. foot and 3. quarters: and so
is the space between the Columns: the thickness of a Column is 2. foot and
4. quarters. In this Building you see no Chambers at all, nor any show or
signs of Stayres, or goings up into the lodgings: but men may conceive, that
it was much greater, and that in other places both Stayres and Chambers might
have stood; and to speak truth, this Building, when it was whole, was a
notable piece of work, in regard of the great number of Columns and Pillars
that were in it, together with the costly work thereof.

architectural drawing

architectural drawing The ground of the Amphitheater in Pola.
AT Pola, a town in Dalmatia, this Amphitheater is in the middle of the Town,
and yet very whole: which building has nothing but ye first wings without,
with the 4. counterforts, ache made of 3. Pilasters, which, I believe, were
made for ye strengthening thereof, because this wall stood thus alone: so that
nothing at all was made of the Building within, but the outtermost wall, with
the Arches marked A. But by the show of some holes which are within the wall,
men may judge, that there they made ye stayres and seats of wood, when they
made their sports, and held their feasts: nevertheless, for a beautifying of
the Figures, I have set down the part within, as in my opinion, it should be
made. This Amphitheater was measured with a modern foot, which is showed here
under the ground: the widenes of the Arches is 9. foot, and 2. ounces, but he
4. principal Arches are 15. foot wide, ye forefront of the Pilasters is 4.
foot and 2. ounces: the flat Pillar, is 2. foot and 2. ounces broad: so the
Pilasters on each side, are one foot broad: the Pilasters in the sides, are 5.
foot and 3. ounces: between the Pilasters of the counterforts, and the other
Pilasters, it is 3. foot and 4. ounces.



TOuching the Orthographie, or the ground of the Amphitheater of Pola, I have
sufficiently spoken: but now I must show the Orthographie of the part standing
up, beginning at the n^ther part: as touching the Basement, it has no
terminations of measures, (the cause why, is,) for that the Hill is not even:
for in the Hill the Pedestall is not only lost, but also the whole first order
of the Arches, with all their Cornices upon them, and the Hill is the height of
the plain of the second Story; therefore I will set down no height of the
measure of the Basements: but will brain from thence upwards. The height of the
Pedestall under the Pillar, is 2. foot and an half: the height of the Pillar,
of flat Column with the Capital, is about 16. foot: the height of the Arch,
is 17. foot and an half: the Architraue is a foot and 9. ounces high: the
height of the Freese, is 9. ounces: the height the Cornice, is one foot and 10.
ounces: the height of the borst-wering or place brest-high (if there be any
other) above the Cornice, is ae high as ye Cornice: the height of the Pillar is
21. foot and 9. ounces, with the Capital: the height of the Arch, is 18. foot
and one ounce: the thickness of the Arch, is 1. foot and 9. ounces: the
Architraue, Freese and Cornice, are of the same height that the undermost is:
the Basement marked X. is 4. foot and 4 ounces. From the Basement to under the
Cornice, is 19 foot: the height of the Cornice is one foot and an half. And
this is touching the Orthographie of the Amphitheater, the which Orthographie
is on the next side, marked P. and for that (as in the Treaty of ye
Ichnographia I have said) the Amphitheater has some Pilasters on four sides,
which were made for strengthening and counterforting of the walls: the which
wall stood within, without any thing else; and therefore I mean to show how it
stood: the Figure marked Q. shows the sides of this counterfort: and that
part marked H. represents a Pilaster: that part marked I. shows the Profill
of ye wall of the Amphitheater: between the Pilaster H. and the wall or
Pilaster marked I. is a going through of three foot and an half wide: so that
two men may go through together. These counterforts have their ground in every
order or story, whereon the people might stand; but there are no stayres nor
signs of stayres, but were made of wood, as may be seen by some holes before
the windows. And that the Cornices of this present Building may be the better
understood, therefore I have set them there besides in greater form, that a
man may know their members, by their Caracters or Letters which they are marked
withal. The manner of this Cornicement is much different from the Romish, as
men may see: and I, for my part, would not make such Cornices in my work; but
with the Theater of this Town, I would serve my turn, because they are of a
better manner of work. I am of opinion, that this was an other workman,
different from the other, and it may be that this workman was a high Almaine,
because the Cornices are made much after the Dutch manner.

The half common foot, wherewith the Amphitheater is measured.

architectural drawing

architectural drawing

AT Mount Cavallo within Rome, where now the stone horses Praritiles and Phidia
stand, is the ruins of a most costly Palace, whereof one part stood upon the
hill, but the part of the goings up was made right against the descending of
the third part whereof stands hereunder. And first in the Niches or hollow
places, marked T. and N. were found the figures of Tiberius and Nilus which are
now set in Beldeuerie: the place marked A. is a street or way of 10 Else
broad: the part marked B. is 12. Else four square: the part marked C. is 36.
Else in length, and 18. Else brood: the place D. is 36. Else four square:
the walks round about are 4. Else each of them: the places E. are Courts,
whereof each of them are 114. Else long, and in breadth 62. Else and a half.
The Galleries F. are 13. Else broad: the greatest Stayres, to go up to the
plain of the Pal^ace, are 11. Else wide: that part by the Corners marked K.
is 12. Else and a half broad, and long 16. Else and a half: the parts H.
are Cornterforts to hold up the Stayres. The place G. is a Court, which gave
light to the place within: the two goings in marked l. were to go up the
Stayres, and the building began where the Stayres stand. The great stately
Frontispice in the middle of the building, was of such breadth, as the
middlemost part held without the Courts or Gallerities. The two Figures, K.
and. which stand without the building, the one shows the Corner K. in greater
and persiter form, and the other is a Corner of the Court D.

architectural drawing

architectural drawing

THese 3. Figures are members of ye aforesaid Palace: the part underneath in
suiall form, signifies the Profill of the first part of the Palace, that is,
the stayres whereby men went up to the plain of the Bailding, because it was
upon the hill: and they were magnificent and stately. That part upon the hill,
where the Column F. is marked, is the side of the saw building. This great
Pillar marked F. is ye corner Pill^r of the frontispice, which is 4. square;
but all the rest are round; for that round Pillars are not fit for corners:
this Pillar is three Else broad in the lowest part, and above, it is 2. Else
and 2. third parts: the height, with Base and Capital, is 39. Else, and is
fluited from the top to the bottom. The height of the Architrauce, is two
Else and an half: as also the Freese, which is sinely cut, and the height of
the Cornice is three Else and an eight part, and all proportioned according to
the greatness. The Freese on the sides was an hundred Else long: the
Cornicement with the Frontispice, as much as three Mutiles contains, is of
one piece of Marble; and the Frontispice rose up in the middle one sixth part.

AMong the ruins of Rome, there are many things found out, the which a man
cannot mark nor imagine what they have been: a man also seeeth there many
ruins, which are now cast down and overthrown; whereby a man may conceive
the high minds of the Ancient Romans: amongst which Antiquities, this
hereafter following, is one, as you may perceive by that which yet stands.
This Building is called the Basilica del foro transitorio: and a man may
imagine the greatness thereof by the height of this Pillar, although you see
not the ending thereof upwards; for the uppermost Cornice is not there in the
work, neither is there any pieces thereof among the ruins to be sound,
whereby a man should conceive what stood above such a Building. This ruin was
measured with a common or modern Ell, which is divided into 60. minutes: the
half whereof stands between the Obelisces: this Column stood 7. degrees
elevated from the earth, of indifferent height: the thickness of the Column
marked C. is 3. Else in Diameter: beneath at the Base and in the upper most
part, under the Capital, the Diameter is 2. Else and 40. minutes: the height
of the trunk or bare Column, without Base or Capital, is 24. Else and 55.
minutes: the height of the Base below, is one Ell and an half: the height of
the Capital, is 3. Else and 26. minutes: the height of the Architraue, is two
Else, and 23. minutes: the Cornice between the Column and the
counter-pillar, which Cornice is marked D. is 1. Ell and 48. minutes: the
Cornice above (as I have said) is not found there: the counter-columne is flat,
and is of the same proportion like the round Column, and lesseneth also above,
as the round does. The Capital is formed like the Capitals of the Pantheon of
the Rotund: the Base marked C. is placed there besides in better form, and is
proportioned in measure like the greater: likewise, there also you see the
Cornice D. in greater form. I have set down the measure of the greatest
Column C. now will I speak of the lesser, marked B. which Column under it,
has a very fair Basement: the height whereof, is 6. Else: the this kenesse
of the said Column in Diameter beneath, is one Ell and a third part; and it is
lessened above accordingly, as the greatest is: the height thereof with the
Base and Capital is 13. Else and 2. third parts: the height of the Base, is
half the thicknes of the Column beneath, and is fashioned like the greater:
the height of the Capital is one Ell and an half: which Capital is very well
made, and the form thereof in great, is seen in my other 4. Book, in the
beg^^^^ng of ye Composita. This Column is sluited, as the Figure thereof
shows, and has also a flat Column of the same form: the Architrane, Freese
and Cornice above this Column, are about 4. Else: which Cornice has the
Mutiles without Dentiles, and is very like the work of the Pantheon; and by as
much as I could perceive, this less Column ser^^d for an ornament of a Gate
or Door of the said Ba^lica.

The third part of the common Ell, wherewith this is measured.

architectural drawing

architectural drawing

THe Romans (because of their great proud minds) always sought to build
things of great majesty, which might show their great power both by Water and
Land: and to that end they made the wonderful Haven of Ostia, for the ease of
the City of Rome: which, in truth, (in regard of the commodity and
greatness of the Building thereof, and specially the great strength thereof)
may well be called wonderful. It is of form Hexagoniick, that is, 6.
cornerd: and each Facie is 116. roodes long, and each tood is 10. Palms: by
these principal measures, you may understand the greatness thereof, every
Facie had a large walking place, with Galleries round about, and 4.
Appertiments also, compassed with Galleries, and a walking place in the middle.
Along the water side there were trunckes of Columns orderly placed, whereunto
the ships were fastened; and at the mouth of the Haven, there were towers to
defend it from the enemy in time of need. And for that you can hardly perceive
the Appertiments in so small a form, therefore I have placed them beneath in
greater form, and marked them with A. and B.

architectural drawing The Haven of Ostia.



THe Thermes of Titus are less then the other; and therefore by the people
they were called Thermi minori: nevertheless, (after my opinion) they are well
made: the Ichnographie of these Thermes is measured with the ancient Palm.
First, the Diameter of the round form marked A. is about 150. Palms: the part
B. is in length 80 Palms, and in breadth 51. Palms: the part C. is 80. Palms
in length, and in breadth 60 Palms. The form D. is about 100. Palms in
Diameter: and the Portall E. is 50. Palms: the part F. is 120. Palms long,
and 70. broad: the eight ranked part marked G. is about 100. Palms: the round
part H. is 150. Palms in Diameter. The part 1. is 100. Palms, and is almost
two four squares: the two parts, each marked with K. is 30. Palms on either
side. The part L. is 125. Palms, in length, the breadth 30 Palms. The
roundnesse marked M. is about 120. Palms in Diameter. That part marked N. is
148. Palms long, and 57. broad. The part O. is the same: the preservation of
the water follows after.

architectural drawing

THe preserving, or the place where the water of the Thermes of Titus, the
son of Vespatianus was kept, is wonderfully made, and very Artificial, and
that is, for that the Arches of these preservatives are placed in such good
order, that a man, standing in the going through of the one, seeeth them all
ouerthwarts: and this is the place which the people commonly call, The seven
Halles, and it was for this cause, because the spaces are seven in number: and
in them you see ouerthwarts, backwards and forewards, always 7. in number: the
thickness of the walls, is four foot and an half: the wideness of the
Arches is six foot: from one Arch to the other, are 27. foot: the wideness
from one wall to the other, is 15. foots, and they are round roofed, of an
indifferent height. The walls and roofes are playstered with most hard
plaster.

The old Roman Palm.

architectural drawing

IN Rome and elsewhere there are many Bridges made by the Romans, but I will
here show the invention of ^oare only, that you may see their manner of making
of Bridges.

This Bridge is called Ponte S. Angelos, because it stands upon Tiber, by the
Town of Inghelenborch: by the ancient Romans, it was called Ponte Elio, of
Elio Adrianus.

architectural drawing This Bridge was went to be called Ponte Tarpeio: others
call it, Ponte Fabricie: and in our time it is called, Ponte de quatro capi.



architectural drawing This Bridge is called Pontus Miluius, but commonly it is
called Ponte Molle.



architectural drawing

architectural drawing This Bridge in former times, was called the Senates
Bridge: others call it Ponte palatino: but now it is called Ponto S. Maria, and
also Ponte Sisto.



AMong other Thermes which are in Rome, I find this of Antoniano to be^ better
to be noted then the rest; and although yt the Thermes of Dioclesian are
greater, yet in this I find much fayrer correspondencie and knitting together
in every part, then in the others: for that in the place C. they might make all
kind of Plays or sports without any hinderance. And for that ye Thermes were
specially made for men to bathe in, as they were used for diverse sports to be
made in them, so was the preservation of the water made behind ye building,
marked A. where, by means of the Pipes, they were always filled to serve for
such uses.

architectural drawing

architectural drawing

This ground is measured with the common Ell, the third part whereof is
hereunder set down by the side of the Building. The line in the middle of the
place, is 100. Else, by the which you shall almost find all the measures,
whereof, for brevity, I will not speak directly, but only of the principal
things. First, one of the places for the keeping of the water, is thirty Else
long: and 16. Else broad. The part X. is 81. Else long, and the breadth 44.
Else: the round Building D. is in Diameter 86. Else. The place marked B. C.
is 700. Else long. The part in the middle. marked G. is in length about 105.
Else, and in breadth 60. Else.

FOr that in the ground before set down, by reason of the smalnesse of the
figures, which could not be made greater in this Book, a man can not so well
know the particular parts, therefore I have in these two sides set down some
parts more plainly, as the ingenious workman, by the letters wherewith they
are marked, may see and find them, when he compares them with the whole ground.

architectural drawing

AL though these Figures stand thus without order, and in many pieces; yet the
wife workman shall know, that they are members of the Thermes before showed,
beholding the letters which stand in them (which comparing with the others) he
shall find what parts they are. Also, he must know, that the parts H. and X.
belong not to the part F. for the Figures hereunder are three several parts;
although, for necessity sake, they are set one by another. I have also not set
down the particular measures: for the workman shall bester help himself with
the invention, then with the measure.

architectural drawing

ABout seven miles from Alcaire there is a Piramides, whereof I will show the
form, and also set down the measure, as I had it from a Gentleman of Venice,
who measured the same himself, and was hoth upon it, and within it. This
Piramides was measured by Paces, and every Pace is more then three ancient
Palms: the Base, on every side is 270. Paces, and is right four square: it is
all of hard stone, and you may clime upon it without, (but not easily) unto the
top: for every Pace is three Palms and a half high: but there are not so many
Playnes, that a man may easily set his foot upon them: the number of the Paces
or steps, from the Bases to the top, or the highest part, is 210. and they are
all of one height; so that the height of the whole Piramides is as much as the
Base. Many believe that this Piramides was a Sepulcher: for that within it,
there is a place in the middle, whereon lies a great stone: thereupon men
presume, that some great person has there been buried: but going in, upon the
left hand, you find a going up of stone, which turns about the Piramides
within, through the which you go up the Station, in the top within. About the
middle of this Piramides there is another going in, but it is fast shut: on the
top of this Piramides, there is a fair flat or plain, about 8. Paces broad on
every side, whereby workmen know, that it was the same plain that was made at
the finishing of the Piramides. Not far from thence, there is a head of hard
stone, with part of the breast all of one stone; the face whereof is 10 Paces
long: and in this Figure there are some Egyptian letters: of this Piramides and
head, Peter Martyr writes, and has also seen and measured them, which differ
not much.

architectural drawing

ALthough the Greeks were the principal founders and inuentors of good
Architecture (as our Master Vitruuius, and many other Authors witness)
nevertheless, by reason of their great wars, and their Land so often ouerrun
and spoiled by the enemies, a man can hardly stade any good work standing
whole in all Grecia: but as some men have told me, there are yet the ruins of
a Bailding, which, as men conceive, was of one hundred Columns; whereof no man
c^n by casting know the height. But (with our Authors license) for that he
makes this by report, and has no measure thereof, I have only set the fourth
part of the ground by the half of the Building (which he has thereto plated)
whereby the workman may conceive the whole ground, and the whole Figure
thereof.

architectural drawing

BYS. G^orge Belabro, you may see this building hereunder, which was made by
the Bankiers and Oxensellers, in the tune of Lucius Septimus Seuerus, and
Marcus Aurelius Antonius: which Building is of Composita work, wellset forth
on every side with grauing. Let no man wonder, that the Freese and the
Architraue are covered with this table, for that there being much writing to
be set into it, the Freese was not great enough to contain so many letters:
therefore the workman made it so, and brake not the order of Architecture at
all, ^^^^ang th^^n^ proportion thereo. in the corners.

architectural drawing I Will not set the measure of this Building at large,
because it was lost after it was measured^ but as I remember, the wideness
between the one and the other Pilaster was 12. old foot. The height of that
wideness was 20. foot: the thickenes of the Pilasters, with all the Columns
which are flat, is 4. foot and an half: and so much the Architraue, Freese and
Cornice contains.

This is the ground of the said Building, in the roof there are 15. Quadrans,
well wrenght.



THe works hereunder are the ornaments of the foresaid building, the which, in
truth, is as bravely set forth, as any other work in Rome, for there is no
space without grauing; and also well made: all things very correspondent, only
the uppermost Cornice; the which, in regard of the richness of the grauing, is
much confused: it is also vicious from the Echine down-wards, for 2. causes;
the one is, that between the Echine with ye Duale, and the Duale, and the
Dentiles, there is no parting of list or cimatie: for it is very necessary to
divide the one from the other, and especially when they are all architectural
drawing cut. The other is of greater importance, ye under the Dentiles there
are two works of one fashion and cutting, which I should not have made so: but
I say expressy it is not to be done, nor such things men ought not to do.

The innermost part whereupon the roof or seeling dosh rest.

architectural drawing

The bottom of the Architraue.

architectural drawing

In the furthest part of the roof, are 27. Quadrans.

architectural drawing

THE Thermes of Dioclesian, in truth, is a most rich Building, by that which
is seen in the ruins, which are yet standing about ground: besides, the
Appertements of diverse forms, with rich ornaments, and the great number of
Pillars that were there, are witnesses of their magnificence: by the dividing
this ground, and by the diverse forms therein, the ingenidus workem^n may be
well helped. But a man can not deny, but that there is much discordance in it,
which in our time would not be borne withal: this I speak, not to correct
such puissant Emperonts, nor so many good workmen as were in those days:
although they as then were not so skillful, as a great number were at other
times: but I say this only, for the good of them that will not think scorn
to read this my writing. It is true, that the fairest part of a Building is the
correspondencie thereof, and the appendances of the same, not troubled with
things which trouble men's sight: therefore I said, if the way A. B. were like
the way C. D. then the whole Building would stand better behind, in such sort,
that all the ways would be free, and not cumbred with any thing. Also the part
of the Building in the middle marked A. which stands without architectural
drawing the wall to ye Theater word, would not hinder ye way, but there would
test the space between it and the Theater, which in other Theaters is called
Prosenium: and by this means all the ways would be wide, whereby the building
would be much more correspondent. I will not speak of the other A. C. and B.
D. which disagree in form: but in the parts without, a discreet workman of
himself may well perceive, how much discordance is found therein,
nevertheless (as I said before) there are so many, and so fair inventions in
the divisions, that they will be no small help to an ingenious workman, and
such as are vpholders and warranters of Antiquities, shall, if it please them,
excuse me, for being too plain with them; for I refer my self always to the
judgment of the learned.

This Ichnograhyie is measured by the ancient Palm: but, for that in this
ground I have been more curious of the invention, then of any other thing,
therefore I set not down the particular measures, which, in truth, would be
euerlong to rehearse: but I have with great diligence set this smell form in
so good proportion in sorts, that the cunning Architector may in a manner find
the measures, using the same small Palm, which stands in the half Circle,
divided in 10 parts, and each part is 10. Palms: so the whole line is 100.
Palines: thus with a Compass to your hand, you may partly conceive the measure
of this Building. Touching the Orthographie. I have not let it down at all,
for 3. causes: First, because of the great ruins, there is little sight to be
had thereof: the 2. because of the difficulty to measure the same: the 3. for
that, in tru^to, a man seeeth this building was not made in that fortunate time
of good workmen; for in it are many discordances and unfit things, but yet
great and costly ornaments. But for that men in so small a form of
Ichnographie can not perfectly show the form of every part and member,
therefore hereafter I will show the part in the middle more plainly.

The ancient Palm.

architectural drawing

FOr that (as I said) the ground of Dioclesians Therme, being placed in so
small a form, can hardly be measured from part to part; therefore I have made
a part thereof in greater form, which stands hereunder, and is like the
middle thereof, as the letter A. shows: and the live in the middle thereof,
is also 100. Palms, like the other, whereby a diligent workman ^ay al^ost
find all the measures thereof with a pair of Compasses.

architectural drawing

THe Therme made by Dioclesian, was used for diverse comman and open sports, and
specially to bathe in; whereunto it behooves to have great quantity of water,
which was brought by Pipes a great way off; and it was kept in certain
Cesternes, which stood in the Thermes of Dioclesian, in this manner as is
hereunder set down: it was made with Pilasters, and above it was cross
roofed, with walls about them, of very good stuff; which was so firm, ^^at
at this day it is yet to be seen: the thickenesse of the Pilasters is of each
side four foot: between each two Pilasters is 12. foot of the old Roman
foot, although the said Therme is measured with Palms: and this line hereunder
is half an old foot.

The half ancient foot.

architectural drawing

IN Rome there are many ancient Tryumphant Arches, among the which, this
Building, by the greatest number, is accounted for a Tryumphant Arch: yet by
the knowledge that men have of it, it is thought to be a Porticus, or a
Gallery, like unto a Burse or Erchange for Merchants: it may be it was made by
some one nation alone; as yet to this day in great Towns and Cities, every
nation has a several place, although they are not by that means divided.
This Porticus or Gallery stood in Nel foro Boario, and in ancient time was
called, The Temple of Ianus: which is measured with the ancient Palm. This
Building has four gates, as the ground hereunder does show: between the one
and the other Pilaster, there are 22. Palms: round about this Porticus, there
are 48. niches or hollow places: but there are no more then 16. to set Images
therein; all the rest are but for shows, as being not deep enough cut into
the wall: which places were beautified with small Pillars somewhat bearing out
from the wall, as you see them, and were Corinthia work, but now it is spoiled
of all such ornaments.

architectural drawing The ground of the Figure following.



THe height of the Arch is 44. Palms: the height of the Bases beneath, marked
E. is 1. Palm and an half. The Facie D. within the corners, is turned into a
Cornice, and is the like height. The judgment of the workman pleased me well
in ye piece, which is, that he made no Cornice in the inuermost part, that
might trouble the people that should be therein: the height of the other
Cornices are not measured, but the forms of them diligently counterforted,
follow hereafter.

architectural drawing

THe five places of Cornices hereunder set down, are the ornaments of the
Porticus aforesaid. The Base E. and the Facie D. were measured, and in this
form, the great measure set down; but the other were counterfeited by sight,
with these heights where they stand: and there is little difference between
the one and the other, for parts, and also in height. The Figure C. is the
Facie under the first Niche or hollow place.

architectural drawing

THe Arch Tryumphant, next following, is called Titus Arch Tryumphant; whereof
this Figure hereunder, is the ground, and is measured with the ancient foot.
The wideness of the Arch is 18. foot and 17. minutes. The thickness of the
Column, is a foot and 26. minutes and an half. The foot wherewith this is
measured, is of 64. minutes, whereof the half is here set down.

architectural drawing

I Have spoken of the wideness and thickness, now I will set down the
height: And first, the height of the Bow of Arch is as much again as the
breadth. The Base of the Pedestall is 2. foot 4. minutes less in height. The
Cornice of the Pedestall is 35. minutes high. The height of the Bases of the
Columns is about one foot: all these parts, and also the Capital of the
Column, well proportioned in measure, stand in the beginning of the Composita
Order, in my fourth Book. The flat of the Pedestall is four foot and a half
high. The height of the Column without Base and Capital 17. foot and 13
minutes. The height of the Capital is 1. foot and 27. minutes. The height of
the Architraue is one foot and 19. minutes. The Freese is one foot and 17.
minutes. The Cornice is 2. foot and 6. minutes high. The Basement of the
Epitaph is of the same with the Freese. The height of the Epitaph is 9. foot
and 12. minutes: the breadth is 23. foot: which members shall hereafter be set
down, and figured more at large.

architectural drawing SENATVS

IT would be troublesome both to the writer and to the Reader, if I should set
down all the parts of these Ornaments, from member to member, as they are
diligently measured; and that not only with foot, but also with parts of
minutes: but I have taken the pains only to set the same down out of the
great into the small form, in such sort, that he that is discreet, may with
his Compass find the proportion thereof. It is true, that the Ornaments of the
most part of the Tryumphant Arches in Rome are much contrary to Vitruuius
writing; and this, I think, is the cause, that the said Arches are, for the
most part, made by the Roofes of other buildings, (that is, of as many sorts of
pieces as they could get:) and it may be, that the workmen in those days were
self willed, and stood not much upon observation, because they were things
serving for Tryumphs, and it may be (as it happens oftentimes) made in haste.
That part here on the side set down, marked A. is the Base of the Epitaph. B.
is the highest Cornice, Freese, and Architraue: which Cornice, in my opin^on,
is very licencious for diverse reasons: The first, it is proportioned too high:
from the nether Architraue, and above it, there are too many members, and
especially Mutiles and Dentiles, which standing alike in one Cornice, are
dislilted by Vitruuius, notwithstanding it is very well wrought, and specially
the Scima above: but had I such a Cornice to make (observing the right order) I
would make the Scima less, and the Cornice more: I would leave the Mutiles as
they be, and I would not cut the Denticules, but the Cimated. The Architraue
hereof pleases me well enough. The two members marked C. show the Facie and
the Profill of the Mensola, which is the closing stone of the Arch. The members
marked with E. are, in truth, rich for work, but yet so rich, that the one
darkeneth the other: but if the parts were so divided, that the one were
graven, and the other plain, I would commend it more. And herein the workman
that made the Pantheon, was very judicious, for that you see no such confusion
in his Ornaments. The work under this Arch is very well made and divided; it
is also a fair Compartment, and rich of work. But it may be, that such as are
too much conceited to commend Antiquities of Rome, will (peradventure) think
that I am too bold to censure upon that which has been made by such skillful
ancient Romans; but in this respect. I would have them take my speeches in
good part, for that all my intent is, to show it them that know it not, and
such as will subject themselves to hear my opinion: for it is not sufficient
to make ancient things as they stand, but it is another thing with Vitruuius
advice to choose out the best and fairest, and to reject the worse. It is true,
that the chiefest part of an Architector is, that he mistaketh not himself in
giving his censure, as many do, who being obstinate in their opinions, make
all things as they have seen them, and hereby cover their unskillfulness,
without giving any other reasons of things: and there are some that say,
Vitruuius was but a man, and that they also are men sufficient, to make and
invent new things, without regarding, that Vitruuius confesses to have learned
it from so many skillful men, partly in his own time, as also by means of the
writing of other work men.

architectural drawing

BEneath the Campi^oglio there is a Tryumphant Arch, which by the inscription
may be conceived to be made in the tune of Lucius Septimus Seuerus, and under
his name, and by that which men mark and sufficiently find, it is made with
Roofes of other buildings: it is also well adorned with good cutting and
grauing: it is richly wrought both on the sides, and also before and behind: it
was measured by the old Roman Palm of 12. fingers, every finger of 4.
minutes, which in to tall makes 48. minutes. The wideness of the Arch in the
middle is 22. Palms, 15. minutes and a half. The widenes of the Arches on the
sides is 9. Palms, 30. minutes. The thickness of the Arch in the ^^es is 23.
Palms, 25. minutes. The little Gates within the Arches are 7. Palms and 30.
minutes wide. The breadth of the Pilasters with the Columns is 8. Palms and
7. minutes. The thickness of the Columns is 2. Palms, 30. minutes. The
thickness of the flat Columns is 28. minutes. This Arch is now under the
earth as far as about the Pedestall, (for so high the earth is there raised
with the ruins) but there was a part left uncovered to unasure it, but they
could not come to the Base to take the measure thereof, because it was
troublesome to remove the ruins.

architectural drawing The ground of the Arch Tryumphant of Lucius Septimus.



BEfore I have set down all the measures of this Arch, touching the
Ichnographie, that is the thickness and br^dth, now I will speak of the
height. The height of the middlemost Arch, is 45. Palms and 3. minutes. The
height of the Arches besides, are 25. Palms. The height of the Pedestall, is
about 10. Palms. The thickenesse of the Columns is 2. Palms and 30. minutes
in Diameter beneath: but above under the Capital, they are 2. Palms and 16.
minutes. The height of them, is 23. Palms and 25 minutes. The height of the
Architraue, in one Palm and 30. minutes. The height of the Freese, is one
Palm, and 3. minutes. The height of the Cornice, is two Palms and 14.
minutes. The height of the Plinthus, above the Cornice, marked. is 29. minutes.
The Base above the Plinthus, is half a Palm. The uppermost Cornice, is one
Palm and 2. minutes, and proportioned in a greater form.

IMP. CAES. LVCIO SEPTIMO. M. FILL. SEVERO. PIO. PERTINACI AVG.
PATRI PATRIAE PARTHICO ARABICO, ET PARTHICO ADIA BENICO
PONTIF. MAX. TRIBVNIC. POTEST. XI. IMP. X^^OS. 3. PRO.
COS. ET. IMP. CAES. M. AVRELIO. L. FILL. ANTONINO. AV^.
PIO FEDICI TRIBVNIC. POTEST. VI. COS. PRO^^^. P.
OPTIMIS, FORTISSIMISQVE PRINCIPIB^^
OB REMPVBLICAM RESTIIVTAM IMPER ^O POPVLI ROMANI PRO.
PAGATVM INSIGNIBVS VIRTVTIBVS ^O^WM DO^^ ^ORIS Q. S. P. Q. R.
architectural drawing

IN the side before, I have set down all the heights and bredths of the Arch
Triumphant, of Lucius Septimus Seuerus: now I will show the particular, and
several parts thereof, as I said before. There is no measure of the Base of
the Pedestals; but it may be thought, that they contain as much at the least,
as the Cornice of the Pedestals: which Cornice is a Palm, and so much the Base
may hold: of which part, the form stands here in the middle, marked G. The
Base of the Column stands thereby marked F. the which Base has a stone or
counter-Base under the Plinthus: and this may peradventure be done, because the
Columns could not reach to such a height as they should. The Capital is here
not set down, because you shall see the like in the beginning of the Order,
called Composita, in my fourth Book, for this is Composita work. The height
of the Architraue, is one Palm and 30. minutes: the Freese is 9. Palms and 3.
minutes: which Freese, for that it is full of grauing, shows of a small
height where it stands: and by Vitruuius writing, it ought to stand the
fourth part higher then the Architraue; and this is less. The height of the
Cornice, is two Palms and 14. minutes: which in truth is much too high,
according to the proportions of the other members; and it shows so much the
greate^ because it has more proiceture of height: and this makes me specially
believe, that this Arch is made of diverse pieces o^^ the^ buildings, because of
the shrinking of the members. The form of the Architraue, Freese and Cornice,
is marked ^^th B. The height of the Base, above the said Cornice, is half a
Palm: the height of the last Cornice, is a Palm and two minutes, and has
such a great proiecture, and hanging over, as you see in the Figure: and in
such place, I blame not the Cornice; but affirm that it was made with great
judgment: for that the great proiecture makes the Cornice show great^^ because
it is seen from under upwards, and for that there is like matter, it is not in
vain for the building. This (...) here is marked with A. The Cornice which
bears up the greatest Arch is marked with C. whereof the Prose^^re is much
too great: and for my part, in such a subject, I would rather give judgment
that it should be high (...) it with the bearing out, it should not hinder the
sight of the Arch. That work marked D. comes right on the Facie, which goes
from Column to Column, above the two little Arches; and this accompanies the
Cornice C. The Cornice marke^ with E. is that which vpholdeth the small Arch,
the which Cornice has a Scima, wh^^^^ should not make fi^^^ch a piece of
work: for that all Cornices, whose crowns have not their just Proiecture, are
(...) for the (...) of a Cornice, is, that the crown be of a good height, and
of a good proiecture: wherefore (...) for a co^^^^-rule, that the crowns that
are higher then their Scima, and those at least, that shall have as (...)
Proiecture (...) height, shall always be commended by men of understanding.
This I thought good to set down (...) ruse (...) thereof that know it not.

architectural drawing

IN the kingdom of Naples, viz. between Rome and Naples there are many
Antiquities; for that the Romans had great pleasure in those places: among the
which, this Tryumphant Arch is seen, being yet all whole and fair to sight:
and therefore I thought it good to set it among the number of the rest of the
Arches (which were made by the Romans.) This Arch is at Beneuente, on this
side of Naples, and was measured with a modern Ell, whereof the third part is
hereunder set down. The Figure here below, is the Ichnographie of the same
Arch; and to show by whom this Arch was made, is needless, because it may be
understood by the writing that stands thereon. The wideness of the Arch, is
right Else: the thickness of the Columns is an Ell: the Pilaster under the
Arch, is also as broad: the inter-columne holds three Else: the height of the
Arch, is almost as much again as the breadth: the height of the Base of the
Pedestall, with the vnder-Base, is one Ell, ten ounces and six minutes: the
flat of the Pedestall, is two Else, ten ounces and six minutes: the height of
his Cornice, is nine ounces: the height of the Bases of the Columns, is seven
ounces: the height of the Columns, without Bases or Capitals, is nine Else
and four ounces. The thickness of the Columns beneath, is an Ell in
Diameter, and above is lessened a sixth part: the height of the Capital, is an
Ell, five ounces and an half: the height of the Architraue, is 15. ounces: the
Freese is seventeen ounces high: the height of the Cornice, is oue Ell, three
ounces and an half: the Plinthus, which stands as counter-Base above the
Cornice, is 19. ounces and a quarter high: the Base standing upon it, is 11.
ounces high: the height of the Epitaph, is four Else and two ounces: the
height of the outtermost Cornice, is one Ell and three minutes: the height of
the impost of the Arch, is half an Ell.

This Ell wherewith the ^^ch (...) ^^^ed, is divided into 12. ounces, and each
ounce into 5. minutes, which comes from 1^ (...) to 60. minutes: and this is
the third part of the said Ell.

architectural drawing

architectural drawing IMP. CAESARI. DIVI NERVAE FILIO,



THe Ornaments of the Arch of Beneuenten, which I have shown in the leaf
before, are here, according to the measure set down, with the Original. The
Base of the Pedestall, and the Cornice thereof, marked F. are, in truth, two
pieces of goed proportion, and fair pieces for Cornicements. The Base of the
Pedestall, together with the Counterbase under it, is one Ell, 10. Ounces and
6. minutes high: the Cornice of the said Pede^tall is 9. Ounces high: the Base
of the Column is 7. Ounces high, and is of Corinthia work, very well
proportioned according to the Column, and stands here marked with F. I have
not set the Capital here: for that men (as I said before) shall find such a
one in the beginning of the Compesita, in my fourth Book, because this Arch is
Composita work. The Arch, Freese, and Cornice, which stand above this Column,
are here marked with C. which pieces are also well proportioned on the remnant
of this building: and although that the Cornice is somewhat higher then
Vitruuius would have it, nevertheless it is well proportioned of members, and
the same flat is not in it that is found in other Cornices, which have the
Mutiles and the Dentiles standing together: but this workman, being
circumspect therein, would not cut the teth in the Dentiles, although he has
set the torme thereof in the Cornice, to stanne such a slander. The same
consideration the workman that made the Panth^on had, in the first Cornice
above the Chapels, round about the Temple within: and therefore I counsel a
workman, to avoid such a scandal, and not to repose himself upon the doing
of licencions and wilful workmen, and excuse themselves, saying, Ancient
workmen made it, and therefore I may make it as well as they. And although
some will argue and say, Why, so many workmen, and in so many places of the
world, (not only in Italy) but also in diverse other places, have made
Cornices, with Mutiles, and engraven Dentiles, and that such a custom is now
turned into a Law, yet I would not observe the same in my works nor counsel
others thereunto. The Countr^ base, under the Epitaph, above the Cornice,
marked B. is 19. Ounces and a half high: the height of the Base thereupon is
11. Ounce^: the height of the Epitaph is 4. Else 4. Ounces: the height of the
Cornice is one Ell and 3. Ounces. I much commend the Base of this Epitaph. I
commend the Base of this Epitaph, with so little proiecture, for the seeing up
under it, but the Cornice whereof I will speak, is much too high, according to
the proportien of the Epitaph: but were it of less height, and the Crown
more, and of more proiecture, I judge, it would stand better, and I should
commend it more: also, if there were not so much caruing or grauing in it: for
the members ought so to be divided, that the one were plain, and the other
graven. But there are many workmen, and most at this day, that, to make men
take pleasure in their had workmanship, make so many cuttings in it, that
thereby they confound workmanship, and take away the beauty of form from it:
and if ever, in times past, that fast and single things, uncut, were by
skillful workmen commended, at this time they are not so. This Figure, marked
D. is the Impost of the Arch, and is well known for such a member; the same
Cornice changes it self in a Facie, which goes round, as you see, and is
half an Ell high: and although this Impost of the Arch shows no Sculpture,
yet is it graven where it stands; but I forgot to draw it is.

architectural drawing

BY the Amphitheater of Rome, which by the people is called Colisceo, there
stands a very fair Tryumphant Arch, which is wonderful rich of Ornaments,
Images, and diverse Histories, it was dedicated to Constantine, and is usually
called, Larco de Trafill. This fair Arch, although it is now buried a great
part within the earth, by means of the ruins, and rising of the earth, is
nevertheless of great height, and the Gates and passages through it, are yet
higher then two four squares. This Arch (as is before said) is passing fair
to the eye, and wonderful rich of Ornaments and grauing. It is very true, that
the Cornices are not of the best manner, although they be exceeding richly
graven, whereof I will speak hereafter. This ground hereunder, shows the
Ichnography of the said Arch Triumphant, and was measured with the old Romish
Palm: the breadth of the greatest Arch is 22. Palms and 24. minutes: the
wideness of the lesser Arches on the sides is 11. Palms, 11. minutes and a
half. The thickness of the Pilasters are 9. Palms and 4. minutes: the
thickness of the Arches in the sides, is 21. Palms and a half: thus the
place within the Arch is almost four square: the thickness of the Pedestals
is 3. Palms and 29. minutes: the thickness of the Columns is 2. Palms and
26. minutes; which Columns are stricked or hollowed, by some called chaneld,
and are whole round with their Pillars behind them.

architectural drawing The ground of the Arch Tryumphant of the Emperor
Constantius.



THe wideness and thickness of this Arch, is sufficiently set down; now I
will speak of the height thereof: and first, the Base of the Pedestall, with
the Plinto, is one Palm and 30. minutes high. The height of the flat, is 7.
Palms and 5. minutes: the height of the Cornices of the Pedestals, is 42.
minutes: the height of the counter-Base, under the Base, or the Plinthus of the
Column, is fifty and two minutes: the height of the Base is 60. minutes: the
height of the body of the Columns, without Base or Capital, is 26. Palms and
25. minutes: the height of the Capital, is 2. Palms and 35. minutes, and is
Composits. The height of the Architraue, is one Palm and 11. minutes but the
Freese is much less, and yet graven; which, as I have said, at other times is
contrary to the doctrine of Vitruuius. The height of the Cornice is a Palm and
21. minutes. The height of the counter-base, under the second story, is 3.
Palms and 9. minutes: from thence to the highest part of the Cornices, is 21.
Palms: but the height of that Cornice is 33. minutes. The Pedestals above the
same Cornices were not measured, and thereon stood Images, and above the
Cornices marked B. were Images placed against the 4. Pillasters, which
represented the prisoners with whom he went in triumph. The letters which
stand here, are above the Arch, in the place maked A. besides many others,
which stand in diverse places of the Arch.

IMP. CAES. FL. CONSTANTINO MAX. P. F. AVGVSTO. S. P. Q. R.

architectural drawing

I Have spoken of the proportion of the measures of the Tryumphant Arch of the
Emperor Constantine: now I will speak of the several parts and Cornicements,
and set their measures down. And first, the Base marked F. is of the Pedestall
of the said Arch: the height whereof, is a Palm and 30. minutes. The height of
the Plinthus under the Base is 28. minutes: the rest of the parts are
measurably divided, and proportioned accordingly. The height of the Cornices of
the Pedestall, which stand marked under the Base E. is 42. minutes, and is also
proportioned according to the principal. The counter-Base, under the Base of
the Columns (which I think were placed there accidentally) to heighten the
Columns, is 32. minutes high: the whole height of this Base of the Columns,
is 53. minutes: touching the height of the Columns, I spoke before, and also
of the Capitals; of which Capitals, the form stands not here, for that the
like does stand in my fourth Book, of the Order of Composita: the height of
the Architraues, Freeses and Cornices, is also spoken of before: and this
Cornice is very seemly, for that there is no licenciousnesse in it, which is
in some other Bases of this Arch; as it is in the impost of the middlemost
Arch, marked C. the which impost is greater and of more members and parts, then
the great and principal Cornice, and is altogether confused in members, and
that which is most intolerable, the Dentiles and Mutiles are one above the
other: and although the Dentiles were not there, yet there needed not such a
Cornice to bear up an Arch. Herein the workman of the Theater of Marcellus
was more circumspect then this: for the imposts of the Arches of the said
Theater, are the fairest and best of show for imposts that ever I saw, and
such, as from the which a man may learn to make the like. The impost of the
lesser Arches marked D. is one Palm and 23. minutes and an half high: the
which impost would stand much better, if the two flats between the Astragall
above, and the Echine under, were turned into playnnesse only; which then would
serve for an Abacus, or also for a crown, having the due Proiecture. The Base
under the second story marked A. is 16. minutes high: the height of the
uppermost Cornice, is 43. minutes, which height should be too little in so
great a distance, if it were not that the great Proiecture or Gallery, or
ouerhanging help it not; because they are seeing upwards, from underneath,
which shows it to be much greater then it is: therefore I much commend this
Cornice in this respect. And truly, all the Cornices, whereof the crown has
more proiecture then height, answer always better, and may be made thinner of
stone, so that the members of the building endure less wayght: nevertheless,
you must not make them of too many licencious proiectures: but you shall read
hereof in Vitruuius, where he entreats of the Order of crowns, after the
manner of Ionica and Dorica: for he does there teach you clearly enough.

architectural drawing

This Figure should ^and in Folio 52. and the Figure in Folio 52. should stand
in this place.

WIthout Ancouen upon the haven, there is an head which reaches it self a
good way into the Sea, which we^ not made without great cost and charges: it
was to defend the ships from the Leuant sea. Upon the end of the height
thereof, stands an Arch tryumphant, all of Marble and Corinthia work; and
there is nothing in it but the Capitals, which are done in very good work: and
in truth, this building is so handsome, and of so good correspondencie, the
members also agr^^ing with the whole body, that a man, although he understand
no Art, would nevertheless take pleasure in the beauty thereof. And those
that understand somewhat, seeing such congruitie, are not ouely well contented,
but also thank the good workman, that has given us somewhat in these days
to learn out of this fair and well made building: in the ornaments whereof,
there is the order of Corinthia as well observed and kept, as in any other Arch
that is to be found, and by reason of the strength thereof, it is all whole;
only it is unfurnished of many ornaments. This fair Arch, as it is conceived,
Nerua Traianus caused to be builded: whereupon, in the highest part of the Arch
(as it is said) his Image was erected, sitting on horse back, seeming to
threaten she clouds and people, over whom he looked and governed, lest they
should rebel again: which Image was of Copper excellently well made. There
were also between the Columns, above the Cornices, certain Images of Copper,
as the letters in those places written, do show: there are also tokens of
holes, which shows that there were Kings of Copper, or other such like things
hanging in them, which might be taken from the Eothes, Vandals, or other
enemies. This building was measured by the ancient foot, the ground whereof
stands hereunder. The wideness of the Arch is ten foot: the thickenesse
inwards is nine foot and two minutes: the thickness of the Columns is two
foot, 11. minutes: the Intercolumnes, for spaces between the Columns, is 7.
foot, 5. minutes: the Columns stand without the wall, 1. foot and 11.
minutes: the height of the Arch is 25. foot and 1. third part: and this height,
although it holds more then two four squares, is not therefore misshapen,
when you behold the whole mass together: the height of the Pedestals with all
their Cornices, is 5. foot: the breadth is three foot, 15. minutes and a
half: the height of the Bases of the Columns, together with the Vnderbases
are 1. foot and 36. minutes: the height of the Columns to the Capitals, is
19. foot, 22. minutes and a half: the thickness under the Capital is one
foot and 56. minutes: the height of the Capital is 2. foot, 24. minutes,
with the Abacus; and the Abacus is 10. minutes: the said Capital you shall
find in my fourth Book, in the beginning of the order of Corinthia: the height
of the Architraue is one foot and 12. minutes: the height of the Freefe is one
foot and 18. minutes: the height of the Cornice is 1. foot and 22. minutes:
the height of the Plinthus above the Cornice, is one foot, 6. minutes and a
half: the height of the Base above the said Plinthus, is 30. minutes: the
height of the Epitaph under the Cornice, is 6. foot and 22. minutes; but the
Cornice above it was not measured.

architectural drawing The half of the old Romish foot.



architectural drawing The ground of the Arch tryumphant of Ancouen.



PLOTINAE AVG. CONIVGI AVG. DIVAE MARTIANAE AVG. SORORI AVG. architectural
drawing Imp. Caesari Diui Neruae. F. Neruae Traiano

IN my opinion, I have said enough of the measure of the Arch of Ancona, yet
that the parts of the Cornices may be the better understood, I will show them
here greater: and first, I will set down the lowest parts, as they stand above
the ground of the work. The height of the Pedestall, marked G. is said to be
of 5. foot, with all the Cornices thereof: but the height of the Plinthus of
the Base, is 18. minutes: the Base above the Plinthus, is 19. minutes, and a
third part high: the Cornice of the Pedestall, is 20. minutes, and a third part
high; so much does the stone also hold, standing thereby, marked F. which, by
my advice, is placed there, to heighten the Columns, and shows not badly,
but more, because it is set forth with a list round about it; whereby the Base
differs from the Plinthus: and so, in my opinion, stands well. The Base,
which is Corinthia, together with the Cincte of the Column, is 43. minutes
high: and the Proiecture, is 16. minutes and an half in breadth: the thickness
of the Pedestall, is 3. foot, 15. minutes and an half: the thickness of the
Column, is 2. foot, 11. minutes: and there stand 13. hollowings, or channels,
without the Pilaster: the wideness of one channel, is 7. minutes and a half:
and the List which parts them, is 2. minutes and a half. The height of the
Capitals are the thickness of the Columns below, without the Abacus: which
Capital has a very fair form, whereby we may be persuaded and believe, that
Vitruuius doctrine is false, and that Vitruuius understood the height of the
Capital without Abacus: (and for this cause) for that the most part of the
Capitals that I have seen and measured, are most of such height, and higher,
and specially the Capitals that stand in the Rotund: whereof, in the beginning
of this Book you may see one. The height of the Architraue above the Column,
is one foot and twelve minutes. The height of the Freese, is one foot and
eyghteene minutes. The height of the Cornice, is one foot and two and twenty
minutes. These three are marked together with an A. The Plinthus above the
Cornice is one foot, six minutes and an half high: The Base upon it, is
thirty minutes: the space wherein the letters are written, is sire foot and
two and twenty minutes, and is marked with. The Impost of the Arch is marked D.
the height whereof is 1. foot and fifteen minutes: but the uppermost Cornice,
as I have said, was not measured. The height of the Mensole in place of the
closing stone, marked B. above the Arch, is three foot and 30. minutes: and
has a foot and 14. minutes without the wall, in the uppermost part; and in
the parts below, it comes out a foot. The four tables with the Cornices upon
them, which stand between the Columns, are thought to be placed there, for
holding up of half Images: the form whereof, stands here marked E. and is
there also by the Profill on the side, whereby a man may see how they are
wrought: for they are full of work, even to the Center. The height of the
Cornices, standing above them, is 32. minutes: and although I have not showed
all the Proiectures and heights from part to part, yet I have with great
diligence reduced them from the great, into a small form, and were (as I said
before of the rest) measured with the old Roman foot.

architectural drawing

THe Town of Pola in Dalmatia, is adorned with many Antiquities: besides the
Theater and Amphitheater, whereof I spoke before, there are other Buildings,
whereof now I will speak. There is an Arch Tryumphant, of Corinthia work,
rich of ornaments, for Figures, works, and strange devices; so that from the
Pedestal upwards, there is no work nor space lest vngrauen, not only before,
but also on the sides, and within, and under in the Arch, wherein are many and
diverse works, so that it would require long time to declare them particularly:
therefore I will show such parts thereof as are necessary for a workman, for
invention and Art. The ground of the Arch following stands hereunder,
measured with a Modern or common foot, whereof the half is here set down.
The Arch is 12. foot and a half wide: the height is about 21. foot. The
Pilasters in the sides inward are 4. foot thick. The thicknes of a Column is
one foot, 9. ounces and a half. The Intercolumne is 2. foot, 3. ounces and a
half. The Pilaster of the Arch is one foot, 2. ounces broad. The height of the
Plinthus under the Base of the Pedestall, is one foot. The Base is 4. ounces
high. The flat of the Pedestall is 3. foot: the Cornice 4. ounces. The Plinthus
marked D. under the Columns is 4. ounces. The height of the Base with the
Plinthus is 10. ounces and one quarter. The height of the Column is 16. foot,
one ounce and 3. quarters. The height of the Capital is 2. foot and one ounce.
The height of the Architraue is one foot and one ounce. The height of the
Freese is one foot and 2. ounces. The height of the Cornice is one foot and
10 ounces. The height of the Plinthus above the Cornice is one foot and 2.
ounces. The height of the Base of the Pedestall, and also of the Plinthus upon
it, is one foot and 2. ounces: but the height of the Base alone is 10. ounces.
The height of the flat of the Pedestall is 2. foot and one ounce. The Cornice
is 6. ounces. The Cauet above the Cornice, (which Vitruuius, as I think,
calls Corona lisis) is 5. ounces: and this is the measure of the ground
following.

architectural drawing The half common foot.



architectural drawing This is the ground of the Arch triumphant of Pola.



The measure of this present Arch is set down before: in this side following,
the particular parts shall be showed. These great letters hereunder, stand in
the Freese, marked Y. SALVIA. POSTVMA. SERGI, DE SVA PECVNIA. These under
marked, stand in three Pedestals, marked X. H. A. L. SERGIVS. C. F. AED. II.
VIR. L. SERGIVS. L. F. LEPIDVS. AED. TRI. MIL. LEG. XXIX. C. SERGIVS. C. F.
AED. II. VIR. QVINQ.


architectural drawing

IN the side before, I have spoken of the universal measure of the Arch
triumphant of Pola, and have also showed the Figure thereof, and partly set
down some of the richest and fairest ornaments of the same: Now I will set
down the particular measures of the parts thereof: and first, I will begin
with ye nether parts, as that was placed first above the ground. The height of
the Plinthus under the Base of the Pedestall, is one foot; although that under
it there lies another of much more height, but it is under the earth: the
height of the Cimatie turned about above it, with the Astragalus, is 4. ounces:
the flat of the Pedestall, is 3. foot high: the Cimatie above, it is 4. ounces,
and so much also is the vnder-Base, above the Cimatie: the height of the Base
of the Columns, is 10. ounces, and is very well cut and graven: and although
the form is Dorica, yet the delicate works thereof show that it is Corinthia:
the Columns are fluited or chaneled from the top to the bottom; and there are
also many hollowings without the Pilaster, as the Figure hereafter does show.
The height of the Capital with the Abacus, is two foot and one ounce: the
which Capital is higher then the thickness of the Column beneath.
Nevertheless, it is very well, and shows pleasing to sight; it is also
richly wrought, as it is here showed in the Figure thereof: and always, as the
Capital of Corinthia is in such proportion against the Column, I would think
it better to the view of workmen; then if with the Abacus it had but the
height of the Diameter of the Column: and although Vitruuius writes thus (as
is before said) yet may his text be falsified. The height of the Architraue, is
one foot and one ounce: the height of the Freese, is one foot and two ounces:
the height of the Cornice, is a foot and ten ounces: which Cornice is very
licencions, although it be rich of work, because such richness of work
confounds it: but that which is most unseemly in it, is the Echine with the
Ouale above the Seima, a thing, in truth, much unsightly: and that, which is
more worthy laughter, is, that the said Echine in the upper part, is cut
through, without being covered with any list, that it might not be consumed
with the water. But there has always been licencious workmen, as there are
yet in our days, who, to please the people, make much grauing in their works,
without respecting the qualities of the orders, and will also in Dorica work,
which should be fast and strong, use much grauing and cutting, as in Corinthia
work, which, by their folly, asks many ornaments. But wise and judicious
workmen will always observe Decorum: and if they make work after Dorica
manner, they will follow good Antiquities: which, for the most part, agree with
Vitruuius precepts. If they make any work after the Corinthia manner, then they
cover them with Ornaments, as that kind of work requires. This I have set
down, to advertise those thereof that know it not; for they that know it,
need not my advice. Now to come to the purpose again: Above this Cornice
there is a Basement, which makes out three Pedestals; the Plinthus under the
Basement, which is there set against the proiecture of the Cornices, (for
otherwise, in looking up, it would darken the Base) is a foot high; above it
stands the Base, whereof the height is 10. ounces: the flat of the Basement,
is 2. foot and 1. ounce high: the Cornice above it, is half a foot high;
which Cornice is very seemly, and the parts thereof divide themselves very
well from each other, for that between the two carved members there stands
one plain above: the Cornice is that member or part, called Corona lisis, as I
understand Vitruuius, whereof the height is 5. ounces. Above these there are
some stones that show to no end at all, but it may be thought, that some things
stood upon them: the height of these stones is 10. ounces: the height of the
Impost of this Arch is 10. ounces; the which Impost is very licenciously made:
and although those 3. members one above the other, are diverse, yet they are
like each other in proiecture: and therefore in the work they stand to no good
effect: the other parts you shall know by the Caracters in the great Arch.

architectural drawing

IN Verona, there are many tryumphant Arches; among the rest, there is one
Gate, called Castle Vecchio: the which, truly, is of good proportion: this
Arch, as men conceive, was wrought both before and behind, and also on the
sides: it had two goings in, as you may perceive by the ground which is yet
seen, although I showed but one side only. This building was measured by the
same foot, wherewith the Arch of Pola aforesaid was measured. The widenes of
this Arch is ten foot and an half: the thickness of the Columns, is two
foot and two ounces: the intercolumnes, are 4. foot and 3. ounces: the Pilaster
or Pillar of the Arch, is 2. foot and 2. ounces broad. The thickenesse of the
Arch in the sides inward, is 4. foot and an half: the wideness of the
Tabernacle between the Columns, is two foot and ten ounces: and thus much for
the wideness and thickenesse: but coming to the height, the Base of the
Pedestall of the Columns, together with the Plinthus, is one foot and three
ounces high: the flat of the Pedestall, is four foot, three ounces and an
half: the Cornice is ten ounces and an half: the height of the Base of the
Columns, is one foot: the height of the body of the Column, without Base or
Capital, is 17. foot and three ounces: the height of the Capital, is two
foot, four ounces and an half. The height of the Architraue, is one foot and
an half: the height of the Freese is one foot, 7. ounces and an half: the
height of the Cornice, is one foot and ten ounces: and although that in this
Figure there is the Frontispice, yet you see it not in the Arch; for from the
first Cornice upwards there is nothing at all: nevertheless, although the wall
is this year consumed* yet you may see there some signs, whereby a man may
conceive that the Frontispice has been there. The uppermost Cornice is not
there, and therefore I set no measures, according to all Antiquities: but I
have made one, with such measure and forms, as my self would have made it,
having for a common rule, that the uppermost things stand the fourth part
less, then the nethermost: this Cornice therefore, shall be the fourth part
less then that which stands under it, and is thus divided, that the whole
height should be set in four parts and an half: the half part shall be for
the Astragal with the list, and the fourth part shall be for the Scima. The
Proiecture must be like the height, and so shall this uppermost Cornice be made
in manner aforesaid. Between the Columns stand Tabernacles, wherein there were
Images, whereof the wideness is two foot and ten ounces: the height is seven
foot, and the depth thereof in the wall, is one foot and ten ounces: the
height of their Basement, is 4. foot, with the Base and Scima: the little
Pillars on either side, are half a foot thick: the Architraue is 7. ounces
and an half: the Freese is 6. ounces high: the height of the Cornice without
the Scima is 4. ounces: the height of the Timpanum of the Frontispice, is 8.
ounces. Above these Tabernacles are small tablets with other Cornices: the
which tablets are two foot broad, and hold one foot in height: the height of
each Cornice is 11. ounces: the height of the opennesse of the Arch, although
it be somewhat dig^^d below, is yet twice higher then broad: for the wideness
thereof, is 10. foot and a quarter: and the height is 25. foot and an half.
The Capital under the Arch, is as high as broad: the work of this Arch is
Composita, and bravely set out with Images of Marble and Copper, as you may
perceive in the void places.

This is the ground of the Arch following.

architectural drawing

THis form of the Arch Tryumphant of Castle Vecchio in Verona, is made as it
is here set down: and although from the Freeses upwards, there are no signs
of ornaments; nevertheless, it did stand so. And for that the parts hereof are
o^mall that you can hardly understand them, in the next side they shall be for
down in a greater and playner form. This Arch tryumphant (by that which is
found written within the inner parts thereof) by some is said, that Vitruuius
caused it to be made: but I believe it not, and that for two reasons or causes.
First, that I see not in the Inscription, that it says, Vitruuius Polio: but
it is possible that it was another Vitruuius that caused it to be made. The
second reason is this, that Vitruuius Polio, in his writing of Architecture,
does utterly condemn and reject Mutiles and Dentiles, standing together in
one Cornice, and such a Cornice is found in this Arch. And therefore I
conclude, that Vitruuius, the great and learned Architector, made it not: but
be it as it will, this Arch has a good form and proportion.

These letters are under the Tabernacle in the Pedestall. C. GAVIO. C. F.
STRABONI.

These letters are cut in she inward side of the Arch. L. VITRVVIVS. LL. CERDO
ARCHITECTVS.

These letters are also in the Pedestall of the Tabernacle. M. GAVIO. C. F.
MACRO.

architectural drawing

BEcause I have not fully written the particular measures of the members of the
aforesaid Arch, neither have I showed it in such form that a man may conceive
the particular measures: therefore you may see them here set out in greater
form, and in such sort as they are: and first, the height of the Plinthus,
under the Base of the Pedestall, marked G. is a foot and three ounces. The
height of the Base abous upon it, is 6. ounces. The flat of the Pedestall,
marked F. is 4. foot, 3. ounces and an half high. The Cornice upon it, is 10.
ounces and an half high. The Base of the Column, is one foot high. The
Plinthus of this Base turns into a Corona lisis; which me thinks, is very
pleasant: for that I have two some Greek Pedestals so. The Column is
strycked, chanelled or hollowed, from the toy to the bottom. The height of the
Capital of this Column, is one foot, 4. ounces and an half: but the form is
not here, because it is showed in the beginning of the Order of Composita:
which Capital, in effect, is Composita, although the Arch may be wholly
accounted to be Corinthia: and this Capital stands in that place, maked C.
Also, in the same place you see the Capital of the impost of the Arch, which
is marked with D. But the little Capital of the Tabernacle between the
Columns, is here marked H. And the Cornice also, with the Ease, marked E. is
that which is under the Tabernacle. The Figure C. is the table above the said
Tabernacles, and the Figure marked D. is the Architraue, Freese and Cornice, of
the Frontispicium of the Tabernacle. The Figure marked with B. is the work
which goes about the Arch: the Cornice marked A. is the principal Cornice
above the Arch; the which, in effect, is very comely, and well wrought: yet it
is vicious, as I have often said; that is, the Mutiles and the Dentiles therein
are by Vitruuius rejected, with many strong reasons. But in this, many men
affirm, that fithence Vitruuius time, many workmen have made Mutiles with
Dentiles, in most places of Italy, and there round about, so that now there is
no question made thereof; but every man has liberty to make that in his work
which he finds and sees in Antiquities: whereunto I answer, that disprouing
the same, they have proved their cause to be good. But if they will
acknowledge Vitruuius for a learned Architector, as most workmen affirm, then
(reading Vitruuius with good judgment) they must confess and acknowledge,
that they have done amiss therein.

The half of the foot, wherewith the Ichnographie, and the Orthographie,
together with the ornaments of this Building, are measured.

architectural drawing

architectural drawing

IN Verena, at the Gate Dei Leoni, there is a Tryumphant Arch, with two like
goings through, which I never saw in any other place besides, but many with 3.
Arches: which building, although it has the figure of 6. windows, yet go they
not through, neither yet very deep in the wall: whereby you may judge, that
some round Images stood in them. Above the first Cornice this building is
hollow, in manner of a Nich or seat, but not very deep in the wall, but yet
with help of the proiecture, or striking out of the Cornice, men might stand
there to do some thing or other, while the Triumph lasted: but for that this
concerns the workman very little, I will speak of the measures. And first,
the opening of the 1. Arch is 11. foot wide, and 18. foot high: the Block
under the Pedestall, is one foot high: the Base of the Pedestall is 3. Ounces:
the flat of the Pedestall is 2. foot and one Ounce high: and the Cornice is 3.
Ounces: the height of the Bases of the Columns is 8. Ounces and a half: the
height of the Columns, without Bases or Capitals is 12. foot and 1. third
part: their thicknes is 1. foot, 4. Ounces: the height of the Capital is 1.
foot, 8. Ounces: the height of the Architraue is one foot, 5. Ounces: the
height of the Freese is one foot, 8. Ounces; and so much is the height of the
Cornices: from the Cornices to the second Roof is 3. foot and a half,
whereon there are certain Mutiles, whereupon Images had stood, made fast to
the 7. Pilasters, between which, little windows, beautified with small
pillars, stand, but not much bearing out: the widenes of a window is 2. foot,
2. Ounces: their height is 4. foot, 3 Ounces: the height of the greatest
Columns is 5. foot, 4. Ounces, with Bases and Capitals which are flat, not
not much raised up. The height of the second Architraue is 6. Ounces and a
half: the height of the Freese is one foot and a half: the height of the
Cornice is 10. Ounces and a half: the Corona licis above the same Cornice, is
10. Ounces high. The Base of the second Pedestall is one foot, the flat o^ it
self is 3. foot, 7. Ounces and a half high: the Base of the second Column
is 8. Ounces: the height of the Columns is 8. foot. 3. Ounces and a half.
The thickness of the said Columns is 10. Ounces and a half: the height of
the Capital is one foot, one Ounce and a half: the height of the Architraue
is one foot and one Ounce: the height of the Freese is 1. foot, 2. ounces:
the height of the Cornice is one foot, whereon there stands some part of the
wall, but a man cannot perceive what it might be. This Arch is not very thick,
neither beautified on the sides; for that behind this Arch there is another,
standing so near together, that a man can hardly go between them both, as I
will show hereafter when I speak of the other figure: the windows stand not
in any good order, but somewhat unseemly: for the 2. windows are not right in
Perpendicular upon the sharp point of the Frontispice, but some part aside,
which shows not well: and for that I could not endure such disorder, I have
placed them orderly. The Capitals of these Arches are part Composita, and part
Corinthia, as hereafter I will set down in Figure.

Loving Reader, Corottus, a Paynter in Verona, has counterfeited this Arch:
the Cornice under the Timpanum is not there: for he places there certain
order of figures resting upon the Architraue: the which Architraue, you must
understand, is between the 2. Columns over each Arch, and is somewhat flat,
because of the writing following.

Over this Arch, on the right haud, these letters following stand. T. FLAVIVS
P. F. NORICVS, IIII. VIR. ID. V. F. BAVIA. Q. L.

architectural drawing

HEre before, I spoke of the universal measure of the said Arch, and thereunto
set down the form, according to the proportion of the same, but cannot give
perfectly the particular parts in so small a form. Of which members, for that
there are diverse ornaments in them, I will in this lease declare them: touching
the height and thickness, I will speak no more; for I have done it already:
but I will only show which they are. The Figure marked G. is the first
Pedestall, with the Bases, and the beginning of the Columns, the which is
hollowed: all the members are proportioned according to their greatness. The
Capital marked E. having the Architraue upon it, follows upon the first
Column, as the hollowing shows. The Figure marked D. is the Architraue,
Freese and Cornice together, which stand above the first Column: which
Cornice, by the authority and example, which is by me in many places alleged,
the judicious Reader may know, whether they be erroneous or good. The Capital
marked F. is that, which vpholdeth the Arch upon the fouresquare Pillars; these
two Capitals are called, Latin work, and very fair. I will not, as I have
said, speak of the measures, for that this Figure is proportioned after the
principal, and with great diligence transported from the great into the small.

The half of the common foot, wherewith the aforesaid double Arch, with the
following ornaments, is measured.

architectural drawing

architectural drawing

AS I said before, the Arch is very rich of ornaments, and among them, some
very fair and perfect; some also very vicious and ill made: and in truth, I
find nothing that more misliketh me, then the Cornice marked D. in the other
lease, for the reasons before showed: but all the rest before set down are of
good proportion, as well the works as the Cornices. And as the parts of the
first story are, so are these following of the second story. The Mutiles marked
H. are in the beginning of the second story above the Frontispicie: upon which
Images (as I have declared) there were Images fastened against the flat
Pilasters. The window marked I. is the form of one of the Windows with the
Cornice upon it and therefore just of his measure. That Capital and the Base
marked K. is of the same windows, showed in greatest form, that the members
may be the better understood. That Base and Capital marked L. is the little
Pillar between the Pilasters and the window: and in truth, in these two
Bases, that is, that of the greatest of the small Pillars joined with the
lesser, the workman was very judicious to accord or agree the one with the
other, that the greatest Pillar should have his due Base, and the lesser should
also have a less Base, according to proportion, which I commend much. The
Architraue, Freese and Cornice, marked C. shows that of the second story,
above the small Pillars: this Cornice is very seemly, and not confused with
cutting. The Pedestall marked B. shows that of the last story, whereof the
Base marked M. does rest: also the Capital which stands above, is his
companion, and is truly Corinthia, the which is confirmed to the principal,
for work and fashion, and in my opinion, very seemly. That Architraue,
Freese, and Cornice, marked A. shows the last Cornice: the Architraue is not
vicious, because it has only two Facies; for if it had three, it would, by
the far distance, stand cumbred: the Cornice with the Mutiles, likes me
well, because it has no Dentiles; and is also well divided with members:
neither is it confused with much grauing, but has a seemly Proiecture, which
heaueth up the height thereof a little.

The half of the common foot.

architectural drawing

architectural drawing

THis Arch tryumphant was made before the Arch aforesaid, which the table
shows, wherein there stands P. VALERIVS. Q. CECILIVS. Q. SERVILIVS: P.
CORNELIUS. it is thought it was set up in the time of Hanibal. This is measured
with the same measure that the other is: the widenes of each Arch is 11. foot
the height is 17. foot the Pilasters of the Arch are one foot, 8. ounces
broad: between the 2. Pilasters are 5. foot, 4. ounces: the sides, each
holds 3. foot. The Cimatie under the C. in place of an Architraue, is 6.
ounces and an half: the height of the Freese, is one foot. 7. ounces and an
half: the list above the Freese is 2. ounces: the Cimatie under the Dentiles,
is 4. ounces and a quarter: and the Cimatie above it, is one ounce and an
half. That Astragall is one ounce. The Cimatie under the crown, is one ounce
and a third part: the crown is 3. ounces and an half high: the Cimatie
thereof, is 2. ounces and a quarter. The Scime is 3. ounces and an half high:
but the list is 2. ounces: the Proiecture of all, is as much as the height. The
Basement above this Cornice, is one foot, one ounce and an half in height:
the thickness of the hollowed Columns, is 1. foot, 3. ounces: the height
without Capitals, is 7. foot, one ounce and an half. The Capital is 10.
ounces high. This Column has no Base nor Cinthe. Carettus, who also
counterfeited this Arch, seeeth but four places where Histories are graven,
and 5. Columns in this third story: in the second story but 4. windows, and
5. Pilasters: and above them, 5. Columns: the third Cornice you cannot come
unto.

architectural drawing

THis figure architectural drawing B. is the Architraue, Freese and Cornice
above the windows, and the height of the first Facie is 8. ounces, and a 3.
part. The second Facie, is 9. ounces and an half. The Tenia is three ounces.
The Freese is 1. foot and 4. ounces high: ye breath of ye triglyphs is one
foot: the list thereabout is a 3. part of an ounce. The other above that, is 1.
ounce and a 4. part. The Cimatie under ye Dentil, is 2. ounces and a 4. part.
The height of the Dentile is 4. ounces and a 3. part. The Covet above it, is 1.
ounce. The Astragals art 3. quarters of an ounce: the Cimatie above it, is 1.
ounce and a quarter: the height of ye Corona is 4. ounces: the Cimaty is 2.
ounces: the height of the Scime is 4. ounces: the list is 2. ounces and an
half: the Proiecture of all, is like the height ye whole height may be called
Dorica. only the graue^ Astragall: but it was a toy of the workemans brauie.
Many other things are in Verona, whereof I will not speak, because they are very
licencious; and specially the Arch triumphant, called De. Bursari, because it
is barbarous worke^

architectural drawing

Having spoken of many Antiquities, and placed them in Figure; it is requisite
that I also show some of those that were made in these days, and specially, of
Bramants work, although I have not altogether omitted it, having showed the
wonderful work of S. Peter's Church, and other things belonging to holy
Temples. And in truth, a man may well say, that he restored good and perfert
Architecture, as yet, by the means of Iulio P. M. many fair pieces of work
were made by him in Rome, do witness; of the which, this set here, is one:
this is a Gallery made in Beluedere, in the Popes Court, wherein are two fair
things to be seen: the one is, the strength thereof; the which, for that the
Pilasters are of so great breadth and thickness, will last, while the world
endures: the other, for that there are so many accompagments so well set out,
with good invention, and excellent proportion: this work is measured with the
ancient Palm. The breadth of the Arches, is 18. Palms: and so much are the
Pilasters: the breadth of the Pilasters is divided into 11. parts: one part on
either side of the Pilaster, which bears the Arch shall have, which is two
parts: other two parts shall be given unto one Column, that is 4. parts: 2.
parts shall be given to the little Pilasters of the Niches, or hollow seats,
and 3. parts to the Niches themselves: so are the 11. parts distributed. The
height of the Pedestals shall be half the wideness of the Pilasters. The
height of the Base of the Pedestals, shall have one part of the before said 11
parts. The Cornice is the 9. part less then the Base. The height of the
Columns, with Bases and Capitals, are of 9. Diameters, and thereunto also the
seventh part. The Base is half the thickenesse of the Columns. The Capital
is of the same thickenesse: and the seventh part for the Abacus. The height of
the Architraue, Freese and Cornice, is as much as the Pedestall without his
Base. And this height is divided into 11. parts, four for the Architraue, 3.
for the Freese, because it is vngrauen, and 4. for the Cornice, as the half
Circle of the Arch is drawn; then the heights of the lights will be double:
after that, the imposts being drawn in their places, the which are of half a
Column thick, and so the Niches or seats, and the Quadrans above them, have
their certain proportion.

architectural drawing

BEcause I could not (by reason of the smalnesse of the Figure) perfectly show
the parts of the Gallery aforesaid, therefore I have showed them hereunder in
greater form: the part C. is the Pedestall of this Gallery, and upon it the
Base of the Column slandeth, proportioned according to the great: the part B.
shows the impost of the Arch, with a part thereof. The Figure marked A.
shows the Architraue, Freese and Cornice above the Columns. The general
measures, touching the height, are already sh^wne, therefore not to be
mentioned again: for they are proportioned after the great. In this Cornice
the workman was very judicious, that he suffered the Corona to go through
unbroken; and suffered the other parts of the Corona to bear outward, which
is very seemly, and the crown the stronger, and keeps the whole work from
water: with which invention, the workman may help himself in diverse
accidents; for the reaching out of Cornices stand not always well, but in some
places well, and in some places ill; and the bearings out intolerable, where
the Columns on the sides have no Pilasters: of these bearings out, I will say
more in the fourth Book, in the handling of four manner of Simmetrie of
Columns.

architectural drawing

IN the leaf before, I showed a piece of work of Bramants making: and now I
will show another of his works, from whence a wise workman may help himself
much, by means of the diverse and sundry ornaments that are in it. In this
Gallery, the workman would show three stories or orders one above another,
viz. Dorica, Ionica, and Corinthia: and in truth, the orders were fair, well
set out, and placed: notwithstanding, that the Pilasters of the first story or
order being Dorica, were somewhat too weak, and the Arches too wide, to the
proportion of the Pilasters; and therewith the weight of the wall of the Ionica
order standing upon it, was an occasion that it was broken, ruinated and
decayed in short time. But Balthazar of Sciene, a skillful workman, repaired
the decayed ruins, making counter Pilasters, with vnder-Arches: therefore I
have said, wise workmen may learn of this building; not only to imitate
fair and well made things, but also to beware of errors, and always to
consider what wright the nethermost story is to sustain: therefore I counsel
a workman rather to be timorous, then ouer-bold; for if he be timorous, he
will always choose the surest way, and make his work with consideration, and
will use counsel, yea of such as are less skillful then himself, of whom
sometime men often learn: but if he be high-minded, and trusts too much to
his own skill and knowledge, then he will scorn another man's counsel, whereby
oftentimes he deceyueth and ouer-shooteth himself; so that oftentimes his
work falls out badly. Now I will turn to speak of this Gallery, and set
down some notes of the proportion thereof. The wideness of the Arch shall be
divided into eight parts, whereof three parts shall be for the breadth of the
Pilasters, and the height of the Arch shall contain 16. of such parts. The
forepart of the Pilasters shall be divided into four parts, whereof two parts
shall be for the Pilasters of the Arches, and the other two shall be for the
thickness of the Columns: the height of the Pedestals shall contain half
the wideness of the lights: the height of the Columns shall be eight parts
of their thickness, with the Bases and Capitals. The height of the Architraue,
Freese and Cornice, is a fourth part of the length of the Column. The second
story shall be less then the first by a fourth part, viz. That from the
Pauement of the Dorica story, to the highest of the Cornice, shall be divided
into 4. parts, and 3. of them shall be for the whole story of the Ionica work,
and so shall all the parts particularly be lessened in themselves a fourth
part. The like also shall be done with the third story, which is Corinthia, in
regard of the second order, although it stands not here, because the Figure
is drawn too great: but not to put the Reader in a maze or doubt at the
Columns which stand here in the middle, as desirous to know how they end at
the top; you must understand, that you shall find such invention in the fourth
Book, in the Order of Dorica in the side H 2. that although that those
Columns are Ionica in the said Book, notwithstanding, you may make them
Corinthia. And that the workman might the better understand the members and
Cornicements of this work, I have showed them in greater form, and
proportioned them according to the principal: I speak of the members of the
first story: for a man could not easily come to measure the other.

architectural drawing

AT Beluedere, at the entry of the Popes Court, through the Callery, which I
have set down before, for the places always go upwards, there is a going up
which is very fair: at the head whereof, you come to a plain, which has the
form of a Theater; the ground whereof is showed under this: and thereto I have
set the Profill, that you may understand it. Here I have kept no account of the
measures, destring only to show the invention of the stayres, and the half
Circle as it stands. This half Circle is very much elevated from the Court
of the Popes house to the Palace-ward: and behind the half Circle, you (...) a
great plain with fair appertements; at which place, you go through the two
Gates, which you see in the sides of this ha^^^ Circ^^; in which places there
are many fair Images, and among the rest Laocoon, Apollo, Tyber, Venus,
Cleopatra, and Hercules.

architectural drawing

T^^^^ the Orthography of the ground showed Folio 69. and as I have said, I
will not speak of the measure ^^^^eof, but only of the invention: and
although that here on either side, only one Pilaster, with his Columns, ^s
showed, yet is it not unlike some Galleries, whereof I have spoken before, and
that appears by the double Co^^mnes, together with the Niches or hollow
seats, with the Quadrans above them. In Beluedere there are many other things,
which I have shown, and among other things, there are wonderful winding
Stayres, in the ground whereof, there stands a Fountain, flowing exceedingly
with water, the which going up is all full of Columns in the innermost part:
which Columns are of four Orders: viz. Dorica, Ionica, Corinthia, and
Composita: but that which is most wonderful and ingenious, is that between
one and the other Order, there is no difference or distance, but men go from
the Dorica to the Ionica, and from the Ionica to the Corinthia, and from the
Corinthia to the Composita, with such cunning, that a man cannot perceive where
one Order ends and goes into the other: so that I am of opinion, that
Bramant never made a fairer nor costlier piece of work then this.

architectural drawing

Will out Reme, at Mente Mario, there is a very fair place, with all things
belonging to a place of pleasure, of which particular parts I will rather
refrain to speak, then not show them sufficiently, only I will speak of a
Gallery, with the Facies thereof, made by an excellent workman Raphael Durbin,
who has made diverse appertements and beginnings to other works, as the
Courtill, although that it is fouresquare, yet he had fashioned it round, as
the foundation partly shows. That Vestibul^^n marked A. and the two places,
B. and C. stand not in such form, but I have placed them there to fill up the
ground: for the part C. ends in an hill, as also the part E. but in the other
side of the Gallery m^^ked F. there is no half Circle, and that was left out,
not to pinch some of the appertements, but to accompany other members by it.
The order of this Gallery is very fair: the roof whereof is concordickly,
altered: for that the andole part is with a round tribune; and those two on the
sides are crosse-wise. In which roof, and also in the walls, ^anvan Vdenon
has made wonderful great pieces of painted work: so that regarding the fair
and excellent workmanship of Architecture, with the beautifying of paynting,
together with diverse ancient Images, this Gallery may well be called, one of
the fairest that ever was made. And whereas it is spoken of an half Circle
which does not answer the rest, neither the workman not willing to leave it
vndecked or unfurnished, his Disciple Iulio Romano, in the Facie thereof,
painted the great Giant Poliphemus, with many Satyrs round about: which work,
Cardinal de Medicis, that after was Pope, by the name of Clement, caused to be
made. The measure of this Gallery I will not set down, but the invention shall
suffice the workman, for that all things are proportioned according to the
great; and hereafter you shall see it made upright, together with the Facie of
the Gallery, but the Niches or hollow seats on the sides are not there.

architectural drawing

B^^ thee part following, marked B. A. you may conceive the roof of the
aforesaid Gallery, the sayrenesse whereof consis^eth march in the corner marked
(the which gives to understand also the three others, being well placed) and
s^ew well in the heading up of the tribune in the middle, going always binding
with the duplication of Pillars, to each Facie of the Pilasters: which Pillars
(in regard the Coronas remain whole) make not the Pilaster show b^^e, but
rather ^^ch bre k^^^ o^ Pilasters into two Pillars, makes a large seeing
upwards, and stands (nevertheless) in manner and place (...) a fra^e Pillar:
for the Base of the said Pilasters follow also. And for that in the Figure
following in the Pilaster, there is but one Pillar with a piece showed, yet to
make it better to be understood, is, that each Facie of the Pilasters within
the Gallery is to be divided into three, of the which a man may make two flat
Pillars, and at the corners one Intercolumne: so that (as it is said) although
there are two flat Pillars with one Intercolumne, yet, altogether, it is but
one Pilaster.

architectural drawing

AMong other Cities of Italy, Naples is called, La Gentile, and that not only
in respect of the great Barons, Lords, Earls, Dukes, and great numbers of
Gentlemen therein, but also, because it is so well furnished with stately
Houses and Palaces, as any other parts of Italy. And among other pleasant
places that are without the City, there is a place called Poggio Reale, which
King Alphonsus caused to be made for his pleasure, in that time (then most
fortunate) when Italy was in peace, and now unfortunate, by reason of the
discords therein. This Palace has a very fair situation, and is well divided
for Rooms, for that in each corner thereof might be lodged a strong company
of men: in the middle there are six great Chambers, besides the Rooms under
the ground, together with some secret Chambers. The form of this fair
building in the ground, as also, the building that stands upright, is here
set down in the next leaf: the measure thereof I set not down unto you,
only, because I will show you the invention: for a workman may imagine of
what greatness he will have a Chamber, being all of one greatness; and then
from those Chambers he may imagine all the measures of the rest of the
building: which building the Noble King used for his pleasure, because men
accustomed to dwell in the Country in the Summer time. The Court of this
Palace is compassed with double Galleries: and in the middlemost place, marked
E. men go down a pair of Stayres into a fair eating place, in which place,
the King and his Lords used to banquet and eat at pleasure; in which place he
caused certain secret places to be opened, whereby in the twinkling of an
eye, the place was full of water, so that they sat all in water: likewise at
this Kings pleasure, all ye water voyded out of the room again, but there
wanted no shifts of clothes to put on, nor yet rich and costly beds for them to
lie in, that would rest themselves. O voluptuous Italians, how are you
impouerished by your discords! I will not speak of the most beautiful
Gardens, filled with all kind of flowers, with diverse compartements of the
Orchards and Trees of all kind of Fruits, with great abundance of Fish Ponds
and Fishes, of places and cages of diverse Birds both great and small, of fair
stables, filled with all sorts of Horses; and of many other fair things, which
I will not speak of, for that Marcus Antonius Michaell, a Gentleman of that
Town, very learned in Architecture, has seen it, and has written of it at
large in a Latin Epistle, which he sent to a friend of his. But to turn
again to the parts of the said Palace, which is right four square, it is
within, Galleried round about, one above the other: in the four Corners,
within the thickness of the walls, stand the winding stayres to go up into
the building. The four Galleries without, marked B. are not there, but for the
commodity and beautifying of the house, they would stand well there.

IN this Figure hereunder, I have showed the Orthographie both within and
without: the part marked A. shows the part without: the part marked B.
represents the Galleries within: the part C. shows the ruins within. I
have not set down the covering or roof of this house: for according to my
opinion, I would have playstered such a building, that it might only be used
for a walking place, to behold the country about.

architectural drawing The ground of the Poggio Real of Naples.



COnsidering the fair Building of Poggio Real, I have thought good to set
down such an other here in this place; but in other form for appertements,
and peradventure with more ease, for that the places are all of one greatness,
which is not so good a form: but it is necessary that the first should be
greater then the second. In this place I make you no place for lights within,
for that it is a place in the country, being not cumbred on the sides; it has
light enough on all the four corners: but some men may say, that the Hall with
the four Chambers, because they have no light but through the galleries, are
dark, for it is no perfect cover: to which I answer, that the house being
made to be used in the time of great heat, having no place in the middle, the
Hall and the Chambers will always be cold, by reason the Sun cannot come
unto them. These places will be very pleasant at none time, for that the said
places have not so great lights as the other dwellings; yet have they so much
light as they need: such like may be seen in Bolonia, which are made in this
manner with Galleries, and daily inhabited. This Building is so dispused, that
the corner places being of great thickenesse, the rest shall be strong enough,
yea, although the walls had no great thickness, in regard they are all
counterforts one to the other, yet shall they be of sufficient strength. I will
not speak of the measures, for that this being proportioned, the skilful
workman may imagine (according to his pleasure that caused it to be built)
first the greatness of the room, then divide it into so many feet or other
measures, thereby to measure all the rest of the building, as the situation of
the place may bear it. Then this building, above all things, shall be placed,
that the Sun may rise upon one of the corners, and so shine upon all the
sides thereof: for if it stands with one side to the East, and the other to the
West, then it will follow, that the North side shall never enjoy the
Sunshine upon it, which were rumaticke and un wholesome.

architectural drawing

MEn may build in diverse and sundry sorts upon the ground aforesaid: but for
that this is a place of pleasure, I thought good, for the braveness thereof,
to make it after the Corinthia manner. I will not trouble my self to speak of
the measures nor heights; for in my fourth Book, in the Order of Corinthia, O
2. you shall find a Treatise, which, together with the judgment of ye wise
workman, will serve to set down this measure. And, for that in this Facie there
is no shortening at all, whereby you may know the Galleries, the flat and
closed places each from other; therefore I will set down the two highest sides
at each end: you must conceive it to have flat Pillars from beneath upwards;
that part between both, which is lower, you must suppose has two Galleries,
one above the other, the Columns whereof would be round: the same is to be
understood to be both behind, and on both sides. Men may also make above the
Galleries a Tarrace or Pauement, to defend the rain, the Gallery being made
with a Leane-to, or Rail, out of the Cornices of the first order of the
Figures aforesaid: and so also the Hall in the middle, together with the 4.
Chambers of ye second story, would have more light. For 2. causes I have made
the small windows above the great, in the first story. The 1. is, if you will
make the windows so low, that a man sitting, may easily see out of them, then
(if you should make the windows no higher then the door) there would be too
much space between the windows and the roof of the house, which would
greatly darken the house: and otherwise the windows bring much more light into
the Hall. The 2. is, that the Chambers by the Hall need not be of such height,
but you may make hanging Chambers therein, whereto those windows will serve. I
might speak of many other things, which I referce to the judgment of the
workman.

architectural drawing

AT first, I was not minded to set this ground, nor yet the building of the
100. Columns, placed in M. 1. in this Book; for that they are things which
the Author has made by reports and hearsay, which I esteem not worthy to be
set by things that are counterfeyted and measured: yet that it should not be
said, that I have published this Bo ke lame and imperfect, and not full as the
Author made it, which might have given slanderous and envious persons occasion
to scorn and scandalize this Book; therefore I have not only set this here,
but also added this other Figure following by him set down in the leaf R. 3.
And now to turn to this ground, our Author says, that in Jerusalem (as it was
told him) on a hill, there is a building cut out of a reasonable greatness, in
manner hereunder set down: and for that by means of the wideness of the
middlemost part, the roof should not fall in, therefore the two Pilasters were
left in the middle, and withal, two of a middle sort by them, with two less
also before, vnderholding the roof, which altogether were cut out of the rock
with instruments. In the first entry are four little Chapels. In the middle
there are 18. and behind there stand 2. and a door locked, which shows, that
men went further: the greatest Chapel is wide the length of a man, whereby you
may judge the greatness of the building. This place has no light, nor can be
perceived that it had any light. The Chapels are taken out, as the Figures A.
and B.

architectural drawing

FOr that our Author before, speaks of an Arch triumphant in Verona, called
Dei Bursari, which he terms to be barbarous and confused of parts and
members, as (according to the writing of Vitruuius of good Antiquities) in
effect it is: Nevertheless, for that Johannes Carottus (which our Author
alleges) has set it down for an ornament of Verona, in his book of
Antiquities, much better, and with more deliberation then all ye rest of the
Figures by him made (for in truth, ye rest are very gross: Therefore I
thought it good to show it here to the curious Reader that he may see and also
note (by Vitruuius rule aforesaid) what is good or ill in it, which may
peradventure please some of this country better then another, because they use
to seek for much work in their Architecture. And for yt this Figure was too
great in form, therefore I have here set down but the half; and you must
conceive the other side, that is, an Arch with windows and other ornaments,
like these: the foot of Verona, wherewith this building is measured, stands
here on the sides in half proportion: of which foot, one small stands in the
Pedestal, under ye great Column; whereby the measure is to be conceyted: for
the said Carottus gives no other warrant of all his Figures (but only of the
Figure of the wonderful spectacle, as he terms it) with the Theater above
it: but above all, with the goings up to the hill, where a Temple of Ianus
stands, as our Author shows afterward in Folio l. 3. in this present Book.
Of this building, Carottus says more then of all the rest: and for that I may
satisfy the Reader at full, of all that is said in this Book, therefore I
have caused this figure to be printed alone, because it was too great, and (in
my opinion) too gross, to set hereby. Vale.

architectural drawing

The end of the third Book. Translated out of Italian into Dutch, and out of
Dutch into English, at the charges of Robert Peake: and are to be sold at his
house near Holborne Conduit, next to the Sun Tavern. 1611.

The fourth Book. Rules for Masontry, or Building with Stone or Brick, made
after the five manners or orders of Building, viz. Thuscana, Dorica, Ionica,
Corinthia and Composita: and thereunto are added examples of Antiquities;
which, for the most part, agree with the instructions of Vitruuius: with some
Figures more, added unto them, which were not in the first, and some devices of
the Author, which are corrected, and hereunto annexed.

Translated out of Jtalian into Dutch, and out of Dutch into English.

LONDON Printed for Robert Peake, and are to be sold at his shop near Holborne
conduit, next to the Sun Tavern.

ANNO DOM. 1611.

To the wel-willers of Architecture.
VItruuius says, that such as have built without learning or instruction
(although workmen) could never make any famous or commendable pieces of work:
no more can others, being no workmen, such as have followed the letter or
writing only, and made no proof: of which, some have presumed to father their
doings upon Vitruuius: yet in diverse places of their writings, which are found,
they could not close up their rules orderly, but have left many things
doubtful, and (more) have esteemed that to be good and commendable, which in
work is not to be endured. The cause of this error, is, that the last Book
of the said Vitruuius, wherein the Figures are, was lost: whereby men might
have known and sound out his meanings: so that hereby it appears, that some
Antiquities have been very bare in their works, and especially, in their
Orders of Dorica, because Vitruuius names no Dorica Bases: but in stead
thereof, speaks of an Attica. Now it may be, regarding that he there speaks
not of any Order of Attica, therefore they durst not make any Dorica Bases or
Columns: on the contrary, others possibly contemning the darkness of the
writer, (or for want of knowledge) have so far exceeded their Author in many
things, that they have not only forsaken and left the examples and reasons of
good Antiquities, but also (more then that) have made their works unseemly,
and ridiculous to men's eyes, as may be seen in diverse ancient works: whereby,
gentle Reader, many workmen, well seen in both, have been cumbred therein,
and especially in this our time. Bramant of Castle Durant, Balthazar of
Scienne, and many others, for that (not only by means of Julius the 2. Pope,
but) also by others good Architecture was bettered in their times: who, after
long disputation and searching of many, as well Authors and Commentaries,
together with the examples of good Antiquities, have with authority (to make an
end of all doubts) not only added this Spira Attica, of the Dorica, but also as
many orders as now are used, beginning at the Thuscan, as the grossest and
slenderest of all the rest, and have reduced the same into a certain and
common form, together with their ornaments and measures: which unless Sebastian
Serlius, a workman and scholar of the said Balthazar, has written, and set
out in figures; so that, leaving the obscurities of Vitruuius, we may make an
incorrigible work. And for that all those that love workmanship, understand
not the Italians, therefore (in my opinion) I have translated the most certain
and best rules out of Italian into Dutch, and out of Dutch into English; only
the names of all Procels, Bases, Capitals, Cornices, etc. which are not named
in Dutch nor English, for that Bastian, by Vitruuius terms, uses the common
and modern Italian words, which by some should be as hardly understood as the
Latin. But I would commend him, that seeing we take upon us to follow
Vitruuius writings, that we give him the name of Vitruuius, that the learned
might be understood of the workman, and the workman also understood of the
learned. And for that the workman might the better read it, I have printed it
in our ordinary Dutch letter. And although this fourth Book of seven was first
set out, because it is the best, yet the other also are no less fit and
convenient to further Architecture or Art of Building, as in the ensuing
Epistle you shall see.

Sebastian Serlius to the Reader.
Loving and friendly Reader, after I had collected certain rules of
Architecture, thinking that not only* those of deep conceyt would understand
them, but that also each indifferent man of wit might conceive them, as he is
more or less addicted to such an Art; which rules are divided into seven
Books, as hereunder shall be set down: but for that this Art requires it,
therefore I thought it requisite to begin with this fourth Book, and to set it
out, first, which is more to the purpose, and more necessary then the rest, for
the knowledge of many sorts of Building and ornaments thereof, to the end that
every one may have some knowledge of this Art, the which is no less pleasing
to the mind of those workmen that think upon things that are to make, then
also to men's eyes when they are made. Which Art, by the wisdom of the famous
and excellent spirits that are now in the world, does flourish in these days,
as the Latin tongue did in the time of Julius Caesar, and Cicero. Then with
glad and joyful heart receive at least my good will, (though the effect
ensues not) which, in truth, I have (to pleasure and satisfy your minds) in
this respect.

In the first Book, I will entreat of the beginning of Geometry, and of diverse
cuttings through of lines, in such sort, that the workman may yield reason for
that he works.

In the second Book, I will show in Figure, and by reason, as much of
Perspectiue Art, that if the workman will, he may declare his conceyt or
purpose, by reasons and figure.

In the third Book, workmen shall see the Ichnographie, that is, the ground:
the Orthographie, that is, the raising up of a Building before. The
Scenographie or Sciographie, that is, the insight, by shortening of the most
part of the Buildings that are in Rome, Italy, etc. diligently measured, and
set by them in writing, with the places where they are, and their names.

In the fourth, which is this, I will speak of five manner of Buildings, and of
their ornaments, as Thusscana, Dorica, Ionica, Corinthia and Composita, that is
to say, mingled. And by these, the whole Art is learned.

In the fifth, I will speak of diverse kinds of Temples, set down in diverse
forms, that is, round, fouresquare, six-cornerd, eyght-cornerd, Ouall-wise,
and crosse-wise, with their ground, heights and shortenings, diligently
measured.

In the sixth, I will speak of all dwellings, which, at this day, may be used,
beginning at the meanest house or cotrage, and so from degree to degree,
proceeding to the most rich, fair and princely Palaces, as well in Country
villages, as in great Cities or Towns.

In the seventh and last, shall be set down many accidents, which may happen
to workmen in diverse places, strange manner of situation, repayring of decayed
houses, and how we should help our selves with pieces of other buildings, with
such things as are to be used, and at other times have stood in work.

Now then, to proceed readily herein, I will begin with the greatest and
rusticke order of Building, that is, the Thuscan, being the playnest, rudest,
and strongest, and of least grace and seemelinesse.

The Author to the Reader.
THe ancient workmen in times past (as Vitruvius affirms) dedicated their
works and Buildings to the gods, according to their natures, strength or
weakness; so is the form called Dorica ascribed to the gods, Jupiter, Mars,
and valiant Hercules, taking such forms from strong men. The form called
Ionica, is ascribed to the goddess Diana, Apollo and Bacchus, as of the nature
of Matrons, that is, of wise and sensible women, which are both tender and
strong: for Diana, by her femurine nature is tender, but by using to hunt, she
is strong: Apollo, by reason of his beauty, is tender; but being a man, he is
strong: the like of Bacchus. But the Corinthia is taken of ma^ds, and they
ascribe all to the goddess Vesta, and her chaste mayds: yet at this time I
think it good to proceed in another sort, nothing differing from the ancients
before said. My meaning is, to follow the manner and customs of the Christians,
that I (as far as I may) will ascribe holy Buildings to God and to his Saints:
and profane buildings, as well public as priuote, I will ascribe to men
according to their professions. So say I then, that the Thuscan manner (after my
opinion) is fit for strengths, for Gates of Cities, Towns and Castles, places
for treasure, munition and Artillery to keep them in* for prisons, havens of
the Sea, and such like things, serving for the wars. It is true, that
rusticke and playns work, that is, such Buildings as are made of rough stones,
and others that are made somewhat smoother, according to the pleasure which the
Stone-cutters take therein, are sometimes mixed with Dorica, and sometimes with
Dorica and Corinthia. Nevertheless, for that the Thuscan order is the roughest
set forth, far more then the other are, I am of opinion, that the Country
Bulding is more like unto the Thuscan, then any of the rest: which you may
plainly see to have been observed by the Thuscans, as well in their chief
Cities and Towns of Florence, as without in their Country Villages, in so many
rich and fair Buildings, made after the rusticall manner, as may be seen in
all Christendom, mixed with such a slight manner of work, as the workman
thought good. Therefore I conclude, that such Buildings are more agreeable to
Thuscan order, then any other. Therefore, altering somewhat from Antiquities,
and some others of ours, I will in diverse sorts show of such works, viz. how
to make Gates of Cities, Towns, or Forts; as also, in public and private
places, Houses, Galleries, Windows, Niches or seats, hollowed in work,
Bridges, Watercourse, and such like several Ornaments, as may happen into a
workemans hands to do. Men may also (not differing from the ancient rules)
mix this rusticall manner with the Dorica, and also with Ionica; and sometimes
with Corinthia, at the pleasure of those that se^ke to please their own
fantasies, which a man may affirm to be more for pleasure then profit:
therefore the workman ought to proceed with good advice, especially in
public buildings, wherein comeliness is commendable.

In the beginning of this Book, I observed the Comedians order, who (when they
intend to play any Comedy) first send out a Prologue, who in few words gives
the audience to understand what they intend to entreat of, in their Comedy. So
I, meaning in this Book to entreat of five manner of Buildings, viz. Thuscan,
Dorica, Ionica, Corinthia and Composita, have thought good, that in the
beginning thereof, men should see the Figures of all the several kinds whereof
I purpose to entreat of. And although that in the Columns and their ornaments,
all the measures and proportions are not set down, but only the principal,
by general rules; yet will I not fail, as occasion shall serve, to set them
down in particularities: but this is done, as I said, to show in general
rules for an Introduction only, the better to be understood of every workman,
and in the beginning will observe Vitruuius order and terms, marked on the
sides with A. B. C. that every workman may name them according to his country
speech. And first, the Stilo bato, or Thuscan Pedestall, I mean the flat,
without Crown or Base, shall be a perfect fouresquare. The perfect Dorica
shall be as much more as the drawing of a live from corner to corner, of the
perfect fouresquare, placing it upright. The Pedestall Ionica, shall be of one
fouresquare and an half: the Pedestall Corinthia, shall be a fouresquare and
two third parts thereof. The Pedestall Composita shall be of two perfect
fouresquares. Also, wonder not, that the Chapter next ensuing is the fist,
which others would esteem the first; for that the first Book does contayn^ a
Chapter of Geometry: the second of Perspectiue, shall be of two Chapters: the
third of Antiquities, shall be of one Chapter, which makes four Chapters: so
that, this considered, the next shall be the fist.

architectural drawing

Of the order and manner of Thuscan works, and the Ornaments thereof.
The fist Chapter.
IN Vitruuius fourth Book and seventh Chapter, we find, that a man should make
a Thuscan Column of seven parts high, with Capital and Base, which measure
should be taken from the thickness of the Column below. The height of the
Bases or Basement, should be the half of the thickness of the Column, which
shall be divided into two equal parts, whereof one shall be the Plinthus, the
other divided in three, two parts thereof shall be the Thorus, the third the
Circle, The Proiecture you shall make in this manner: First, make a Circle as
great as the Column is thick below, placing it (...) a fouresquare: without
the fouresquare drew another Circle, close about the corners of the
fouresquare, which shall be the Proiecture. And although all other Bases have
their Plinthus fouresquare, yet this of Thus, can must beround, as Vitruuius
teaches. The height of the Capital must be like the Base: that divide into
three parts: one part shall be the Abacus: the other shall bedeuided in four
parts, three for the Echino, the fourth for the Annulo or Cintho, which may be
called a Girdle, Band, or List in English. The third part resting; shall be
for the Hypotrachalium, or Freese. The Astragal with the Cincta, is half the
Freese; but that divided in three, two shall be for the Round, the third his
List, the hearing out must be as the height: and although this List is there
named with the Capital, yet it is a part of the Column, which Column ought
to be made thinner above a fourth part; also the Capital in the uppermost part
shall not be greater then the Column below. The manner to lessen the Column is
thus: Let the body of the Column be divided in three parts: the third part
below shall hang at the lead, and the other two third parts you shall divide
into as many equal parts as you will: then at the third part of the column
draw half a Circle, and from the lives that hang there, from the outtermost
corners of the Capital inwards, measure the eight part, which in all shall be
a fourth part: from under the corner (where the Column is thinnest) you shall
draw two lines by a lead, to the half circle, and those parts of the circle
outward, you shall set below, in as many even parts as the two third parts of
the Column holds: which being done on both sides, then there shall be as
many Paralels or cross lines, drawn from the one point of the half circle to
the other, each line being marked with number, from the top downwards, and the
like upon the lines that divide the Columns; which numbers being orderly
placed, then it is certain, that the first line shall agree with the thinnest
part of the Column above: after, take the second line of the half circle, and
set it upon the second line of the Column, then the third upon the third, and
the fourth upon the fourth: when that is done, there must be a line drawn from
the Base of the half circle, to the line 4. and from the line 4. to the line
3. and from the line 3. to the line 2. and from the line 2. to the line 1. also
a line: and so from the second side of the column: and although that the lines
in themselves are right, yet they make a crooked line, which the judicious
workman knows how to regeire and moderate at his will on all sides in the
gathering of the lines. And although this rule is made for the Thuscan Column,
which is lessned above a fourth part, yet it may serve for all sorts of
Columns; and the more the dividing of the Columns and the half Circle are in
number, so much the lessening will dimynish.

architectural drawing

A. Abacus or tailloer. B. Echinus. C. Annulus or Cincta. D. Hipotrachelium or
Freese. E. Astrogalos. F. Annulus or Cincta. G. The thickenesse of the Columns
above. H. The thickness of the Column below. I. Cincta. K. Torus. L.
Plinthus. M. Proiecture or bearing ou^ of the Base. N. The thickness of the
Columns below. O. The thickness of the Columns above.
THe Column being finished with the Capital and Base, then the Architraue,
Freese and Cornice are to be set thereon. That Episiolum or Architraue must be
as high as the Capitals, and the Tenia or List, the sixth part thereof. That
Sophorus or Freese of the some height. The Cornice also, with her members, must
be the like: and the same being divided in four parts, one part shall be for
the Cimatie, two parts for the Corona, and the last for the Facie under the
same. The Proiecture or bearing out of them all, must be at least so much as
their height. And under in the Corona you may cut channels or hollowings, great
or small, as the work is, at the pleasure of the workman. But, for that this
work is gross, and plain of members, a man (in my opinion) may take upon him
to add some parts unto it, which may seem to belong unto the same; which must
be done when men desire to moke the work show batter, as you see in this
herevnder set down. I commend also those crowns that have most Proiecture or
bearing out, without their fouresquares; especially, when the stones are fit to
bear it: Which Proiectures are both commodious, and beautify the work:
commodious in this, that the walking place upon them will be broader, and it
will also keep the work from water: beautifying in this, that when men behold
the work with convenient distance from it, it will show the greater; and where
the stones be scanted, by reason of their smalnesse, the Proiecture will
supply that want, by showing greater.

architectural drawing Cimatiuus,

Corond,

Cimatiuus,

Zophorus,

Fenid,

Epistilius



architectural drawing ALthough I said before, that the Thuscan Column
(according to Vitruuius rule) ought to be of seven Diameters high, with Bases
and Capitals, which proportion is approved good; nevertheless, for that the
first Columns (as you have heard in my small Book) were made in six parts,
taking the measure from man's feet, which is the sixth part of the same: And
also, for that ye Columns called Dorica, are now of seven parts, the ancient
workmen having another part unto them, to heighten them, therefore, in my
opinion, by the same authority, for that the Thuscan Column is stronger then
the other, I judge, it might be made lower then the Dorica; and, by my advice,
be made but of six parts, with Bases and Capitals, this you may hold for a
common rule. And, for that neither Vitruuius, nor any other workman that I
have seen, have set down no rule for the Stilobato or Pedestal, and in
Antiquities, as far as I can see, were by workmen made, as necessity
required; whether it were for raising of Columns, or to a going up with
stayres, to Galleries, or by any other occasions: Therefore, not being
compelled thereunto, I am of opinion, that every workman should to each hind
of Column set a convenient and seemly Pedestall, as reason requires, and as
he seeeth cause. It is certain and well known, that the Pedestall at least
must be fouresquare, that is, the body thereof, without Base or Cime, therefore
the Thuscan Column being the best of all, the Pedestall thereof ought to be a
perfect fouresquare: the forepart thereof ought to be as broad as the Plinthus
of the Base of the Column: the height should be divided into four parts, one
part whereof shall be set under, for the Plinthus, and one for the Cime, which
members shall be uncut: so then, if the Column be of six parts, the
Stil^bato or Pedestall shall be of six parts also in it self, according to
the proportion of the Column.



I Have promised in this Book, only to entreat of the ornaments and different
manner of Buildings: therefore I will not at this time, show how men should
place the Gates of Towns and Forts, with their sides, places to lay out
Cannons, with other circumstances of defense, leaving such care to the workmen
belonging to wars, according to the situation and accidents of time and
place. But I will show you, that when the Gates of the City, Town or
Fortress are placed, how men, in my opinion, should set them forth, setting
down some Figures thereof. You must understand, that each Gate or Port is to
be after the Italian manner, and ought, of necessity, to have a Posterne Gate,
which are called Porten van Secourse, which are the small Ports on the sides.
But to observe the Semetry, that is, a due measure, they ought to be made in
this manner. The measure of the Gate is thus, as much as the breadth of the
light shall be, the half whereof shall serve for the height. The breadth of the
light is divided into six parts, whereof one part shall be for the breadth of
the Pilasters on either side of the Gate: the flat of the Pillars thereof shall
be as broad as the third part of the light, and the height, with Capitals and
Bases. The height of the Bases shall be a third part of the breadth of the
Pillars, and so much also the Capitals, observing the rule set down in the
first Column. That Epistolum, Zophorus, and Corona shall be altogether of such
height, as the breadth of the Pillars, by the rule aforesaid. Between the one
Pillar and the other, the Posternes or small Gates shall be, and the wideness
shall be as broad as the flat Pillars. The height shall be twice as much as
the breadth: the Pilasters shall be the third part of the said Posterne. The
elevation or raising up above the gate, shall be at the workemans will. But
the proportion of the Fastigies or Frontispicie (which is called with us, the
spanning, cover, or roof) I will show in two sorts in the order of Dorica.

architectural drawing A Pilaster.



ANd for that he workman ought to be copious of inventions, to please himself
and others, the Gate of the City, Town, or Fortress, may be set out in this
manner, observing this rule: that so broad as the going through of the Gate is,
the height shall be as much, and half as much again, that is, 2. parts in
breadth, and 3. parts in height. The Pilasters shall be the 8. part of the
wideness of the Gate: and the Columns stand for the round Columns and flat
Pillars, bring the fourth part of the Gate. But for that the Column is a third
part set into the wall, and is bound fast with other stones, more for show then
bearing, it is to be made 7. parts high, and also of 8. at the workemans will,
which will set forth the Gate with more show. The wideness of the Posterne
shall be the half of the middle Gate, the Pilasters also (as the greater) that
is the half. The height thereof shall be such as the Facie that bears the
Arch, and it shall be the Supercilie, or Architraue thereof, as we call it: and
if you find not a stone all of one piece fit for it, then you shall make the
Cunei or Pennants as you see them here in the Figure. And thus the proportion
of the Posterne shall be, that is, 3. parts in breadth, and 5. of the like
parts in height. The Cunei or Pennants of the Arch, shall be 15. In the Bases,
Capitals, Architraue, Freese, and Cornice, you must observe the rule aforesaid,
and the elevation in the middle shall be at the workemans will, as I said of
the other: and all such works, the groser they be made, and bost out, the
stronger they are for fortification.

architectural drawing

A Man may make Gates of Towns and Forts in another manner, both playner and
stronger, following the order hereunder set down: and the proportion or the
wideness of the Gate shall be as much as the height is under the Facie, which
bears up the roof: and from the Facie upwards, as much higher as the half
Circle; yet always at the workemans will to be increased or diminished, and
especially, as he is by accident restrained. The two Posternes are to be made,
as I have before showed: Their wideness must be the half of the middle Gate,
and so much of the wall shall be left between the great Gate and the two
small: which height shall be doubled with the breadth, and the Facie, which
vpholdeth the Arch, shall also hold up the Cunei of the small Gates. Yet must
we take such order, that the Facie shooting through, should be the
Supercilie, which, as I said, may be altered at the will of the workman,
without altering them from the Figure.

architectural drawing fascia



Diverse kinds of ornaments, many times, put the workman in mind of things
which he peradventure would not have thought of: Therefore the Figure ensuing
will serve the workman to good end in building, as occasion shall serve: as in
the wall of a fortress, where the wall being of a good thickness, this work
within it would first serve for a place to stand dry in, making the walking
place above broader; and easily for defense in time of war: and for more
security, it might within be filled up with earth. It might also be the
workemans chance, to build about an Hill: and to free himself thereof from the
waters, that always with the rain fall from it, and make the earth to ^^nke,
it is therefore necessary for the workman to set the like buildings against
such an Hill, whereby he shall be assured from such suspicion, and it will also
be a great strengthening to the work. The like invention Raphael Durbin used
at Monte Mario, a little above Rome, in the Vineyard of Clement the seventh, by
him begun in the time of the Cardinal Ieronimi Genga: and without Pisera, for
the defense of water against a Hill, was made the like.

architectural drawing

ANcient workmen, in this kind of rusticall work, have used many and several
kinds of Buildings, as you may see hereunder, wherewith a workman may help
himself in many things, as necessity requires: the measure shall be, that
the light shall be a perfect fouresquare, and the wall between both, shall be
a fourth part less. That Supercilie or Architraue, shall have the fourth part
of the light, and shall be made of Pennants which run upon the Center in
unequal numbers: and above the Supercilie shall be laid an half Circle,
divided in nine equal parts, the lines being also drawn upon the Center. The
Cunei or Arch-stone being formed, and the three pieces laid between it, with
the Facie above it, will in this sort be an everlasting work. But for that the
Cunei of the Architraue must lie fast, it shall be needful to fill the half
Circle with Brickes. And for the more beautifying, you may use Roots, as the
ancients used to do, as you may, at this day, see in Rome at S. Cosmians and
Damian; which, although the stones be old, yet it is very strong.

architectural drawing

AS in the beginning I said, the workman may use this Gate in diverse places,
but not for Fortresses, for the passage through serves not for Artillery, or
other great preparation for wars; nevertheless, this part may well serve for
the outtermost Port or Gate: The proportion shall be, that the light or opening
shall be twice so high as the breadth. The Arch-stones of the half Circle shall
be nine; drawing upon the Center of the Circles. The Facie under the Arch shall
be the seventh part of the Gates; from the Facie downwards to the Pauement,
shall be divided into seven parts and an half, and shall be six stones broad:
three whereof, shall be each a part and an half, the other three of one part:
and thus the seven parts and an half are divided. The height of the middlemost
Arch-stone, or the closing stone, which you will, shall be half as broad as
the Gate. The Facie above the Arch-stone, must be as broad as a foot, that is,
the thinnest part of the said Stone: but the middlemost Arch-stone, and also
the foot under, shall be a fourth part broad.

architectural drawing

THe proportion of this Gate, viz. the opening is twice as high as broad: the
Pilaster and the Arch are a fifth part of the breadth of the light: the great
Pillar shall be once so broad again, and the height of six bredths. The
height of the Base shall be a fourth part, and the Capital a third part, and
so great the Capital or impost under the Arch shall be. The Facie in the
place of the Architraue shall be as high as the Capitals: the Freese also as
much, and also the Cornice, following the rule aforesaid: the rest may be
found with the Compass.

architectural drawing a imposte.



ALthough the Gate hereunder set down is much different from the fashion of
the rest, yet, for that it is Thuscan work, and ancient, I thought good to set
it here, the which, in former time, was in Rome, En Capo de la militia Traiana,
although by the decays thereof, now not to be seen: the two Niches or seats
that stand by it on the sides, are out of their places, with which the
ingenious workman may serve his turn withal, if he place them where they
should stand. The proportion of them (by the rule aforesaid), may easily be
found: touching the gate it self, I will set down no measure, for it is very
easy to be found.

architectural drawing

THis manner of Gate is covered by the sixth part of the Circle, and is very
strong work, yet the Peunants will not agree with other Buildings of Stone:
therefore it a man will make such work, it would stand well in a wall of
Brick. Touching the proportion, I will not speak, for that it is easy with a
Compass to find the measure thereof. But the Niches or seats, placed by it to
fill up the place, the workman may, at his pleasure, set where he thinks
best, and they may not only serve for Niches, but also for windows: if they
should be used for Niches to place Images therein, it is necessary, that the
height should exceed the double proportion of the breadth or somewhat more, that
they may be more fit and correspondent for Images to stand in, which is always
referred to the workman.

architectural drawing

IN times past, the Romans used to mingle Dorica, Ionica, and sometime
Corinthia, among their rustical buildings; but it is no error, if a man mix
one of them in a piece of rude work, showing in the same, nature and Art, for
that the Columns mixed with rough stones, as also the Architraue and Freese,
being corrupted by the Pennants, show the work of nature: but the Capitals,
and part of the Columns, as also the Cornice, with the Frontispicie or Geuell,
show works of Art. Which mixture, in my conceyt, is a good sight, and in it
self shows good strength, therefore sitter for a Fortress then for any
other Building: nevertheless, in what place soever the rusticall work is
placed, it will not do amiss. In such mixtures Julius Romanus took more
delight, then any other man, as Rome witnesses the same in sundry places, as
also Mantua, and without Rome, the fair Palace called vulgariter El. Te.
Which, in truth, is an example in these days, both of good Architecture and
paynting. The proportion of this Gat^ is to be made thus: the wideness must
be of double proportion, that is, twice so broad as high, just under the Arch.
The Pilaster shall be the seventh part of the wideness, and the Columns twice
as thick as the Pilasters: the height with the Capital shall be eight par^s.
The Capital, Freese, Achitraue and Cornice, shall be made as i^ said before:
also, the Fastigium, Frontispicium or the Geuell shall also be showed in
Dorica order. The half Circle of the Arch, shall be divided in eleven parts,
for the stones of the Arch; but the closing-stone shall be greater: the which
stone the workman may, at his will, hang somewhat out. The Facie which do^th
uphold the Arch, shall be half the thickness of the Columns: from thence
downwards, you shall divide it into nine parts, whereof two parts shall be
for the nether part of the Columns, the other seven divided in^o equal parts,
shall be the stones which bind the Columns, drawing cross over them. And the
rudelyer this work^ is bosse^ out (yet artificially) it would, in that case,
show more workemanlike, especially the stones that bind the Columns and also
the Pennants.

architectural drawing

IT is not sufficient that the work should be strong, but it must also be made
artificially, to please men's sight. Wherefore this building of stone is not
only very strong, but also ingenious and pleasing: with which invention, the
workman may serve his turn in many things. The proportion shall be, that the
opennesse in the breadth, shall be once, and half as much as in height: the
half Circle is divided into 9. parts and an half, because the middlemost
stone is one fourth part broader then the rest. The height of the closing
stone, is half the opennesse of the light. The flat Facie upholding the Arch,
is the sixth part of the light: from the Facie downwards are 7. parts made: the
Facie above the Pennants, shall be as broad as the closing stone under it is,
which may be made hanging out underneath the eight part of his breadth. Touching
the binding of the other stones with the Pennants, you see it plainly in the
Figure.

architectural drawing

FOr that pleasure is sometimes turned into beautifying, and sometimes to
ornaments surpassing necessity, to show ^rt, according to the wealth of the
builder: This invention is made for pleasure, strength and beauty: for
pleasure, in regard of the opennesse thereof: strength, for that betwixt both,
there is good store of wall, well bound together: and for beauty, because it
is rich of ornaments; with which invention a workman may help himself much,
in diverse things, as I have said. The proportion thereof shall be, that the
closed or massy work shall be as broad as the opening: which opening shall be
of twice so much height. The Pilasters shall be the eight part of the
wideness, and the Columns the fourth part. The inter-Columnes, that is, the
widenes between the two Columns, shall be the thickenesse of one Column. The
height of the Columns, with Bases and Capitals, shall be of eight parts. In
the Architraue, Freese, Cornice, Base and Capital, the rule aforesaid shall be
observed. The Pennants and other bindings are seen in the Figure: and although
the Columns surpass the rule two parts; yet, because they stand near
together, and are made fast in the work, more for beauty then strength, it
may pass well enough, by the authority of ancient workmen.

architectural drawing

IT is an excellent thing in a workman to be full of invention, in regard of
the diversity of accidents which belong unto building: for sometimes a man
shall find store of Columns, but so low or short, that they serve not for that
purpose, for which men would use them unto, unless the workman devise some
means to help them. Therefore, if the Column be not so high as it will reach
to the Facie, that lies like ye roof of this Gallery, then with those manner
of Pennants a man may raise it higher, if on both sides it has good strong
shoulders: touching the wayght above, it will be very chargeable, therefore to
make it without binding of iron bars, it would not be sure: but it is less
to be feared, if the Gallery were not so broad, but that it might be covered
with stones that were all of one piece, or else to make strong beams therein.
The proportion hereof shall be, that the wideness of the Arches shall be the
thickness of 4. Columns, and the height twice as much. The least space
between the Columns, shall be of the thickness of 3. Columns, and the
height, of the thickness of 6. Columns, and each wideness shall be once
again as high as broad. The Columns, if they be ouer-burdened with wayght,
should be of the measure before set down; the rest are clearly to be seen in
the Figure: but touching Bases and Capitals, I have said sufficient at the
first, in the treaty of the first Column.

architectural drawing

AS this Arch is very strong, considering the concordence of the binding, so
also it is ingenious and pleasing to view. Which invention shall not only
serve for Galleries of such work, but for Bridges over Riuets; Conduits to
carry water from one Hill up to another, and so to a Conduit. The proportion
is, that the wideness from one Pilaster to another, and also the height, shall
be to the Facie that bears the Arch. The Facie shall be the seventh part of
that wideness or height: from the Facie downwards is divided into six parts:
the half Circle into nine parts and a quarter; for the closing stone is the
fourth part more then the other: the rest may be found with the Compass.

architectural drawing

IT may sometimes fall out, that a workman should need many holes in great
walls, for the building of his House, whereunto this work belongs, to carry
the wayght for strengthening thereof: and were there not so much need of light,
some of them might be filled up with Brick. The proportion shall be this;
that the space of the lights and the massy wall, shall be both of like breadth,
and twice so high as broad, although all such things are to be increased and
diminished at the workemans pleasure. The like work is yet to be seen in
Rome, being not very old made, but such as are in these days made, and
stronger. The example whereof is at S. Cosmas and Damianus.

architectural drawing

IT is said, that sight preserues memory, whereby oftentimes that is made,
which workmen would not have made, it it had not been made before in some
other place, and so, at some times, you shall see in a Court or elsewhere a
side of a Wall, that shall have neither Door nor Windows in it, and yet it is
well set out in this rude manner and boo^ish kind of work: by which invention,
a workman may help himself: In which places a workman may set Images, or
other relics of Antiquity. Touching the measures and proportion thereof, I
will not set it down, for I leave it to the workman for to heighten or make
broad, as occasion serves.

architectural drawing

FOr that the most part of the Supercilies or Architraues, as we call them,
that are set over Gates or other things, by reason of the widenes (if ye stones
be not of a good bigness) may yield to the weight, whereby in time, they
break and decay, as you may see in many places: Therefore you shall, although
it be in great distance (so that the shoulders on the sides be strong) make
such work of pieces, as hereunder are in diverse ways set down: which,
without doubt, will be very strong: and the heavier the weight is above, the
longer it will last.

architectural drawing

ALthough that in Vitruuius writings there is no mention made in what manner men
in ancient times made places in Palaces and common houses to make fire in, yet
men find in old buildings some show of Chimneyes, to give a way to void smoke,
neither can I find by any workman the truth of any such matters:
nevertheless, for that men many years since have used, not only to make
fires in Halles and Chambers, for their ease, but are also wont to make diverse
ornaments in, and over such places; and for that I intend in this Book to
speak of all the Ornaments that a workman may have cause to use in building,
therefore I will show some forms of Chimneyes or fire places, after the
Thuscan manner, as shall be needful in such buildings: the one delicately made
without the wall, the other rusticall work, made within the wall.

architectural drawing

The first (...) wor^es were made in this manner, that is, pieces of stone
roughly hewn out, but the (...) were ^^it (...) m^de.

architectural drawing

After, they divided the stones in more proportion and show, with flat lists,
and for more beauty, and for ornaments sake made ^^^se crosses in them.

Other workmen brought in wrought Diamonds, and made them decently in this
manner.

architectural drawing

And in process of time, things altered: workmen for slat Diamonds, set slat
^ables, and r^^sed them somewhat h^^^^^r, as in this Figure is to be seen.

architectural drawing

Some other workmen used more differences and seemelyer work, nevertheless,
all such works have their original from r^s^i^^ll work, which is yet
commonly called, Works with points of Diamonds.

architectural drawing

Here ends the manner of Thuscan work, and now follows the order of Dorica.

The manner of Dorica, and the Ornaments thereof. The sixth Chapter.
THe Ancients (as we have heard) considering the state of their gods, ordained
Dorica work, and dedicated the same to Jupiter, Mars, and Hercules: but we
build Temples, and dedicate them to Christ, Paul, Gregory, and such holy
personages, that were not only professed Soldiers, but also valiantly and
boldly lost their lives, and shed their blood for the faith of CHRIST. All such
belong to Dorica, and not to their gods only, but to men of arms, and strong
personages, being of quality more or less: for whom, if a workman make or
build houses or palaces, they must be Dorica: and the nobler the man is for
whom such work is done, the stronger and statelyer they ought to be; and the
more effeminate that they are, the more slenderer and pleasanter the building
shall be, as I will show when time serves. But now we will come to the manner
of the work. Vitruuius speaks of this Dorica work, in his fourth Book and
third Chapter: but touching Bases of Columns, he speaks thereof in his
third Book; although some are of opinion, that he speaks and means of the
Bases of Corinthia, for that they have been much used on the Corinthia
Columns, and Ionica. And some also think, that Dorica Columns had no Bases,
having respect to many ancient buildings; as the Theater of Marcellus, one of
the fairest works in Italy, being the middle downwards Dorica: which Columns
had no Bases, the body of the Columns resting upon a step, without any other
support. There is at Carcer Tulliano the signs of a Doricall Temple, the
Columns whereof are without Bases. You may also see in Verona an Arch
tryumphant, of Dorica work, where the Columns are without Bases.
Nevertheless, for that workmen have in former times made the Corinthia Bases
in another manner, as I will show hereafter: Therefore I affirm, that the Bases
Atticurga, which Vitruuius, in his third Book, so names, are the Dorica
Bases: and this we see, Bramant has observed in his Buildings which he made
in Rome: which Bramant, being the light and Inuentor of good and true
Architecture, which from Antiquity to his time (being under Pope Julius the
second) had been hidden, we ought to believe. Then this Base of Dorica shall
be the height of half the thickness of a Column: the Plinthus the third part
of his height: of the rest there shall be four parts made; one shall be for the
Thorus above: the other three shall be set in 3. even parts: the one for the
Thorus above, the second for the Trochile or Scotia: but the same being divided
in seven parts, one part shall be the uppermost list, and another the
undermost. The Proiecture or bearing out of the Base, shall be of half the
height, and so shall the Plinthus of each Facie hold a thickness and a half
of the Column. And if the Base stands below our sight, the corner under the
uppermost Thorus, (being of it self darkened) ought to be somewhat lower then
the other. But if the Base stands above our sight, the corner above the
nethermost Thorus (also of it self darkened) shall be greater then the other.
Thereto also the Scotia, darkened by the Thorus, in such case shall be made more
then the measure appointed. And in such cases the workman must be judicious
and wary, as Vitruuius would have him to be learned in the Mathematical
science, that does study his Book.

architectural drawing Torus superior,

Supercilium,

Scotia

sieve trochilus,

astragali,

Scotia

Plinthus.



architectural drawing Abacus,

Cimatiuus

Olinthus,

Echiuus,

Annuli.

Hipotiacheliu,



ANd for that Vitruuius has divided this order of Dorica by models, making the
Column of two models in thickness, and the height with Capitals and Bases of
14. Models; so then, the height of the Base is a Model: the body of the
Column is 12. models: and the Capital one model, which is 14. models in all:
The height of the Capital shall be divided in 3. parts, whereof one shall be
for the Plinthus, or Abacus, wherein also the Cimatie is to be understood: the
second, the Echino with the Annulo: the third, the Hypotrachilo or Freese,
which Hypotrachilo shall be in thickenesse the sixth part less then the
Column below. The breadth of the Capital in the uppermost part shall be in
each Facie 2. Models and a sixth part and this is according to Vitruuius
writing. Although I am of opinion, that this place is falsified touching the
Proiecture, which, in effect, is very lame, in respect of that we see in
Antiquities; therefore, after this Capital, I will make another after my
fantasy, with the particular measures thereof, better described, for that
Vitruuius does it too briefly.

The Capital being divided into 3. parts* as I said before, I say also, that
the Plinthus or Abacus should also be divided in 3. parts, one part for the
Cimatie with her Rule, List, or Fillet: but the same thickness divided in 3.
shall be the List, and the other two the Cimatie. The Echinus shall also be
divided in 3. parts, and 2. third parts being for the Echinus, and the rest for
the Annulo, which shall also be divided in 3. parts, giving each of them one.
The Freese shall be as the others. The Proiecture of each part shall be like the
height: and so doing, it shall be made by more certain rules, better, and
more easily for show.

architectural drawing

Upon the Capital you place the Epistilia or Architraue, the height whereof
shall be one Model, and divided in 7. parts, one shall be the Tenia or List:
the Guts or small Lists under the Tenia (which Vitruuius names Sub tenia)
are in all, the sixth part of a model: which height being divided into 4.
parts, the 3. parts shall be the Guts, and the other the List. The Guts
shall be six in number, hanging under the Trigliphes. The height of the
Trigliphes or Trigliffe shall be one Model and an half, and the breadth one
Model: which breadth divided in 12. on either side there shall be one left for
the half Channels or hollowings, and of the 10. parts resting, 6. shall be
for the flat of the Trigliphes, and 4. for the Channels or hollowing in the
middle. And from the one Trigliph to the other, there shall be the space of a
Model and a half: which space shall be right 4. square (by Vitruuius named,
Methopha.) In which spaces, us you please, you may set, cut, or grave, Ox
heads, with Dishes; and that, not without secret signification. For in ancient
time, when the unbelieving folk sacrificed Oxen, they also used Dishes, and
Platters thereunto, placing such things round about their Temples for
ornaments. Upon the Trigliphs, you must place their Capitals: the height
whereof shall be one sixth part of a Model. Above the Trigliphs or their
Capitals, the Corona must be placed with 2. Cimaties, the one above, the other
below: and they both together divided into 5. parts, 3. for the Corona, and two
for the Cimaties. But the height of them all, shall be of half a Model: upon
the Corona, you must place the Scima: the height whereof is half a Model, and
to it you must add one eight part for the List thereof above. The Protecture
of the Corona shall be of 3. parts: two be in one Model: in the ground of the
Corona, right above the Trigliphes, the Guts were orderly set, as you see
them in the Figure hanging beside. Also, between the Trigliphes are cut
Fulmines, that is, winged lightning: or you may leave the spacies bare. The
Proiecture or bearing out of the Scuna must be like the height thereof: even
so, each part of the bearing out of the Corona shall have their Proiecture like
their height. But the more Proiecture the Corona has, if the stone may bear
it, the more statelyer it shows. This, we see, that the ancient Romans did
observe, as shall be showed when time serves, both in Figure and measure.

architectural drawing Cinatius

Cinatius

Scimd,

Corona,

Capitellum

feuia

Gurte

Episfilus



architectural drawing

IF you will stricke or channel the Columns, you must make 20. in number, in
manner hollowed, and from the one side to the other: in the spaces of the
strikes there must a straight line be drawn, which shall be the side of one
4. square: which 4. square being made, placing the one foot of the Compass in
the Center, and with the other touching both the one and the other end of the
line, drawing it about, it will make the right hollowing, which shall be the
fourth part of a Circle, as it is heereunder showed. And if, for the raising up
of Columns, or for other occasions, it were necessary to have the Stilobatum
or Pedestall being not high enough, to be made higher, then the flat of the
Stilobatum shall be like the Plintho of the Base of the Column: and the
height, that is, the even or flat shall be thus: of the breadth shall be made a
perfect 4. square; and from the one corner to the other, a line drawn for
Diagonus, and the length of the Diagonus shall be the height of the flat, as
you may see it here beneath, which being divided into 5. parts, there shall be
one part set above for the Cimatie, with that belongs thereunto, and one other
part shall be given to the Base; and so this Pedestall shall be of 7. parts, as the
Column is. And although this Proiecture of the Capital is contrary to
Vitruuius rule, because it is Perpendicular with the Plintho of the Base: yet
for that I have seen the like in some Antiquities, and have also placed some
of the like sort in pieces of work, I thought i^ not amiss to set this here,
for the use of ^^ose, that will make ye like, although some of Vitruuius
scholars, not having seen the like in any Antiquities, will contradict it:
but if they mark the Abacus of the Corinthia, whose Proiecture also hangs on
the Plinthus of the Base, they will not so hastily reject this Proiecture.

FOr that I find great difference between the wrytings of Vitruuius, and the
things of Rome, and other places of Italy; therefore I have here set down
some, which are yet extant in work to be seen: which, although they be of
small form, without numbers or measures, yet they are proportioned according
to the great, and with great diligence reduced into small form. The Capital
R. was found without Rome upon a Bridge, standing over Tiber. That Capital V.
is in Verona, in an Arch tryumphant. That Capital T. is in Rome, in a Dorical
Temple, called Al career Tulliano. That Capital P. was found in Pesaro, with
diverse other commendable Antiquities: the bearing out whereof, although it be
great, yet it shows well to the eye. The Basements, or Bases, and Capital A.
are at Rome, in All foro Boario. The Cornice, Capital, and Imposta of an Arch
marked B. are in the Theater of Marcellus. The Cornice, Freese, and Architraue,
are also in Rome, in All foro Boario: which I have showed, that workmen may
choose that, which likes them best. Hereafter I will set down some particular
measures necessary for the workman.

architectural drawing

architectural drawing

THe parts of the Trigliphes and Methophes being in this order unprepared, and
yet very necessary, I will take pains to declare so well as I can. First,
although Vitruuius affirms, that the Models of the work Herastilos, viz. of
six Columns, may be distributed and divided into 35. parts: yet I find not,
that the parts may stand so, for this cause, that giving the middlemost
inter-Columne 4. Methophes, and the other spaces 3. the said number will not
make the whole: but, as I conceive, if you set 42. as you may see and reckon in
this Figure following, as also in the work Thetrustilos, that is, of 4.
Columns: the Book says, that the Forefront of the whole work should be
divided into 23. parts, which, I assure you, cannot stand so, if you will give
the middle space 4. Methophes, and the other two each of them 3. But, by my
advice, there should be 27. as you may see in the Figure following. Then, if
the principal of the Temples be divided into 27. parts, the Columns shall be
2. Models thick, the middlemost inter, Columns shall be of 8. Models, that
is, the thickness of 4. Columns, and the inter-Columnes besides, shall be each
of 5. Models and an half, that is, two and a quarter, and a quarter and half:
and so shall the 27. be distributed. And above each Column his Trigliph being
set, and the Trigliphes divided with Methophes, according to the rule
aforesaid: then the middlemost space shall have 4. Methophes, and those on the
sides shall have 3. The height of the Column, Capital and Architraue, etc.
shall be also made according to the rule: but the height of the Fastigium or
Geuell shall be the ninth part of the length of the Cimatie, that is above the
Corona, setting the measures under the A. upwards to the undermost Cimatie of
the Corona B. The Acroteria or Pedestall marked A. upon the Fastigium shall be
half the height of the Fastigium or Geuell, that is, of the even or flat,
which Vitruuius calls Timpanum, and they shall be as broad as the Column is
above, and the middlemost must be an 8. part higher then the other. And for
that this Door or Gate is of Dorica, and is hard to be understood, therefore I
will show in the best sort I can, both in writing and Figure. Vitruuius says,
that from the Pauement to the Lacunary, that is, from the ground of the
Gallery, to the roof of the same under A. must be divided into three parts and
an half, and two parts shall be for the height of the lights: so says my
Author, in my opinion. But for that a man cannot so well in a small Figure
explain the particular measures, I will make it more greater and perfecter in
the next leaf.

architectural drawing

Having made (as is before said) three parts and an half from below upwards,
2. parts shall be for the height of the light, which height being divided in
12. one part shall be the breadth of the Antipagmentum or Pilaster, and the
light shall be 5. parts and an half broad: but if the light under be of 16.
foot, the Pilaster shall be lessened a 3. part in the uppermost part: and the
same Pilaster shall also be made thinner a 14. part above. That Supercilie or
Architraue shall be of the same height, in the which the Cimatium Lesbium with
the Astragall is to be made: which Cimatie shall be the 16. part of the
Supercilie, I mean the Astralogus Lesbium, as it is showed in the Figure A. It
seems, that the Author means only the Cimatie above the Supercilium: but
as it is seen in some Antiquities, therefore it is so made, in regard of the
Antipagmentum. Upon the Supercilium, in stead of a Freese, you shall set the
Hyperthyrium ac high; in the which, the text says, men cut the Cimatium
Doricum, and that Astragalum Lesbium in the Scima Sculptura, which is confused.
But here I let my self to understand, that the meaning of the Author is
broken, where he says, Sima Sculptura: he would have said, Sine Sculptura,
that is, without cutting or grauing; and that is, Cimatium Doricum, together,
with the Astragalum Lesbium: the proportion whereof stands in the Figure
marked A. D. Now, for that the text says, that the Cimatie of the Corona
shall be of like height of the uppermost of the Capitals, which being so, then
the Corona will be very great: to which (according to the Authors meaning) I
have given as much Proiecture as the height of the Supercilie is. Although such
Crowns will never be handsome or seemly in work, nevertheless, to entreat
of the Ornaments, I thought good to set down my opinion herein, and to show it
in Figure.

Corrections of the aforesaid text, by S. Serlie.
I Have perused Vitruuius writing nearer, and with more deliberation, where he
speaks of the Cimatie Dorica, and the Astragalo Lesbium, in the Sima
Sculptura: and I find, that Sima Sculptura is meant of flat cutting, rising
very little: now, for that I have found many such like in Antiquities, viz.
where the Astragals, Leaves, and Eggs, etc. have but small or little
Proiecture or rising up, therefore I set this for instruction of Translators,
to be corrected touching Doors.

ANd for that our Author has set this correction of the Cimatie and Astragall
here, wherein, in my opinion, there consists no great matter, I think it not
amiss to help him a little in this matter touching doors, wherein consists
much. For where Vitruuius says, that you must divide the part from the
Pauement to the Lacunary in 3. parts and an half, it must be understood, above
toward the Timpanum marked B. and then the door would be well, and the
Corona would be like the Plinthus of the Capital. Now, for that the text is so
different in other places, as in the middle of the Models, whereof Caesarianus
says, that he has found 3. or 4. sorts; so it is to be feared, that this
also is not well understood. Thus much I have (with your license) thought good
to set down here, that the building should not be left imperfect, as our Athor
does. For although he sets down the Figures of more doors, yet he shows
not how they shall stand in the Building aforesaid.

architectural drawing

A. Antipagment or Pilaster. B. Supercilie. C. Hiperthire. D. Corona.
FOr that men in our time do not use Doors lessened above, as they did in
ancient time; which I, for some reason, do not discommend, yet some skillful
workman have many, which most part of common workmen like not. If then the
workman will make a Thiromatum or Door simply, with little beautifying, after
the Dorica order, then he may observe this order and measure hereafter
following, whereof the light or that which is open, shall be twice as high as
broad. The Antipagmentum or Pilaster shall be the sixth part of the breadth of
the light: without the Antipagmentum you must make an Echine with two Lists,
which shall be the fifth part of the Pilasters or Antipagmentum, although in the
Gate, spoken of before, it is the sixth part: nevertheless, for that I have
seeue in Antiquities, in a mean Gate of 12. parts, I have done it here also,
as I promised: you must not make the Echim^s of the 4. part of the Circle, but
it must be flatter and lower, which Vitruuius calls, Cimatium Lesbium. The
rest of the Pilaster shall be divided into 9. parts, whereof 5. shall be for
the greatest Facie, and 4. for the lesser Facie. Above the Antipagmentum, that
is, the Supercilium, the Cornice shall be set of the same height that the
Supercilium is, and shall be divided in 3. even parts: the first, for the
Cimatie with the Astragall: the second, for the Corona, with her Cimatie: and
the third, for the Scima: But there is also the eight part added thereunto, and
the Proiecture bearing out or shooting over, shall be according to the rule
aforesaid, set down in the beginning of this Book.

architectural drawing

A. Great Fascie. B. Lesser Fascie. C. Astragall.
ALthough that in the Order of Dorica Vitruuius makes mention of one Door or
Gate only, and darkly enough (in my opinion) as I showed before, I think it
requisite, that men shall not only use one sort of Doors or Gates, but also
of diverse sorts and fashions, to beautify a piece of work, and to please
diverse minds: Therefore, when a man will make a handsome Gate, he may follow
this Figure: that is, to set the breadth of the Door twice in the height: and
the Pilaster must be made of an eight part of the light, and the Columns of
the third part of the breadth; which shall be set 9. times in the height: and
although it be more then the measure set down, yet it is not false, because
same part is made up in the wall: also some Antiquities use it, which in such
cases are not one reurious. Upon the Columns you must set the Architraue as
high as the Pilasters or Supercilie. The Freese shall be 3. parts of the
thickness of the Columns, upon every Column there shall be Trigliphes set, and
from the one Trigliph to the other, there shall be three Trigliphes and five
spaces divided. The other particular members, as Base, Capital, Freese,
Trigliph and Cornice, follow the rule aforesaid. Now, for that some Fastigies,
Frontispicies, Couerings and Geuels, are higher then Vitruuius sets them down,
their common rule shall be, that you divide the Cornice from one corner to the
other, as from A. to B. in 2. parts, and the half shall hang downwards,
straight by the Lead to C. and then the one foot of the Compass set upon the
C. and the other foot of the Compass on the corner A. drawing it about to the
corner of the Cornice B. that upper part of the Circular line, shall be the due
height of the Fastigium or Geuell.

architectural drawing The fourth part of the Circle.


architectural drawing

A. Supercilie. B. Epistilie or Architraue. C. Zophorus or Freese.
ALteration oftentimes is better and more esteemed, then perfect simple form
in her own nature: therefore it is the more pleasing, when a piece of work is
made of diverse members and parts, although of like nature, as you may perceive
in the Figure following, wherein there are Trigliphs and Mutiles, all in one
order: which, in effect, I never saw in any Antiquities or writings. But
Balthazar of Sienne, one that read and sought out all Antiquities, may,
peradventure, have seen some, or at least himself was the Inuentor thereof,
placing Trigliphes above the Door, where they bear least stresse, and the
Mutiles above the firm part of the Pilasters, which bear all the wayght of
the Fastigium, and in my conceyt, seemly, and was much commended by Clement
the seventh, who, assuredly, was a man excellently seen in all Arts. This
part shall have the light double proportioned; but the Pilaster shall be the 7.
part of the height, and the Supercilies the half thereof. The breadth of the
Trigliphes and Mutiles, is the half of the Supercilies, and the height a
double breadth, making 2. Mutiles over one Pilaster, and 4. Trigliphs over the
Door: the spaces shall be all 4. square. Above the Mutiles and Trigliphes, you
must set the Capital or Abacus: the height or thickness whereof, shall be a 4.
part less then the breadth of the Trigliph, and the Cimatie the 3. part of the
Abacus: The height of the Corona with her Cimatie, shall be as broad as the
Trigliph is, and the Scima also as much: the bearing of the Corona before,
shall be as much as the space from one Abacus to another, that in the ground
there may be perfect four squares: But the Proiecture or ouer-bearing both on
the right hand and on the left, shall be half so great as before. The Proiecture
of the Scima and the Cimatie, shall be each according to their height. That
Fastigium in the highest part, shall be a fifth part of the wideness, from the
one corner of the Scima in the right line, to the other.

architectural drawing

ALthough a man may make diverse kinds of Gates in Dorica work, yet for that at
this day men covet after novelties, especially, when they are made by rule and
reason, although the Column, Freese and other members are mixed with rusticall
Building, yet herein you may see form and fashion: and whereas I have said,
that a man should use rustical and boorish works in Forts and Fortresses; now
this may serve for a change, but not without, for receiving of shot in them,
etc. The light thereof is also double in height: the Columns two times so
broad as the Pilasters, being 14. Models high, with Capitals, Trigliphes,
Fastigium, etc. Let the Reader do his pleasure further herein, for me thinks
there consists little herein, and there is enough said as before.

architectural drawing

MY meaning was, in the beginning of this Book, to speak only of the
ornaments of the five Orders of Buildings, as of Columns, Pedestals,
Epistiliums, Zophorus, Cornices, Gates, Windows, Niches, and such like things.
But, after that I determined to augment and enrich this Volumne, in showing
diverse Facies or foreparts of Edificies, Temples, Palaces and Houses, etc. And
for that, when as the Column stands upon the ground, they are commendable;
yet oftentimes it falls out, that men have not their Columns thick enough,
nor long enough, as they desire, so that it is necessary to place Pedestals
under them: therefore I have made this order following, the proportion whereof
shall be as follows: that the wideness shall be double in the height: the
Pilaster with the Arch, shall be a 12. part of the wideness: the Column as
thick again: the inter-Columne half the wideness of the light or Door: the
wideness of the Niches, 2. Columns thick, and 4. in height: the Pedestals,
4. Columns thick in height: his breadth, and the rest, as is before said. The
Column, with the Base and Capital, shall be 9. parts high: the Epistilium is
half a Column thick: the Trigliph of the same breadth, and twice so high with
the Capital. The Trigliphes placed as you see them, the Corona and the rest of
the members shall be made as is before shown. The height of these Geuels
somewhat exceed Vitruuius writings: but I have seen such an other, somewhat
higher, in Antiquities, being made of the sixth part of the Corona in length.
The Acroteria shall be of height and breadth like the Column above, without
Cornice: and the middlemost a sixth part higher, as also the Column a 9. part,
being made fast in the wall.

architectural drawing A. A. A. Acroteria.



THis Figure following, may be used by the learned workman for diverse things,
and may be altered according to the accidents that shall happen: it will also
serve for a Painter to beautify an Pillar withal as men at this day do in
Italy: it may also s^rue for an Arch tryumphant, if you take away the Basement
in the middle. Likewise, you may beautify a Gate withal, leaving out the wings
on the sides: sometimes, for setting forth a Window, a Niche, a Tabernacle, or
such like things: which proportion shall be made thus, The opennesse or
wideness shall be divided in 5. parts, and one of them shall be the
thickenesse of the Columns: the Facies or List round about shall be half a
Column thick. The height of the light shall be the thickness of 7. Columns
and the Base and Capital together of the thickenesse of a Column, and in all,
shall be eight parts high. That Pedestall shall be 3. Columns thick in height,
the breadth or forepart like the Plinthus under the Column. The inter-Columnes
on the sides shall be one Column thick, and in the Corners shall stand the
fourth part of a Column: the wings on the sides, wherein the Niches are, shall
be of the thickness of a Column and a half, but the Niches a Column broad,
and 3. in height. The Architraue shall have the half thickness, and the
Trigliph also as broad, but the height without the Capital shall be a 4.
square, and two 3. parts; whereby, placing the Trigliphes on the right side,
and on the left, right above the Columns, and between both 3. Trigliphes, and
5. Methophes more: the divisions shall rightly come to be 4. square in the
spaces. The Corona and the Frontispicie, and all the other parts, as well below
as above, shall be made as is taught in the beginning. And for that the
Trigliphes on the sides differ from Vitruuius doctrine; yet, notwithstanding, I
have seen them in Antiquities stand upon the corners, the workmen may, at
their good pleasures, make them in work, or bear them out, as occasion shall
serve. Further, I had no meaning to set any grounds or platformes in this
fourth Book, for that it is intended to be entreated of elsewhere; yet such
forefronts as are hard to be understood, I will set the Ichnographie or ground,
for more light to the Reader.

architectural drawing

architectural drawing

ALthough in Antiquities, as far as is found, when workmen had placed the
Epistilia upon the round Column, they set nothing else but the Fastigium upon
that, using the some order in Churches and Temples, and not in any other
buildings: Nevertheless, I will not omit to set down some manner of Houses
without Arches: for if you will make Arches with their fouresquare Pillars and
round Columns before them for beautifying of the work, seeking to make much
light in your Callerie, the Pillars with the Arches will hinder a great deal
of light: Then if you will set the Arches only upon the round Columns, that
were altogether false, for that the four corners of the Arch would surpass
the roundnesse or body of the Columns: therefore I intend, to make some Houses
and other Buildings without Arches, both of this order, and also of the other.
This shall therefore be made in this manner, that the greatest inter Column
shall be the thickness of four Columns, and the smallest of one and an
half. The height of the Columns shall be of nine parts, with Bases and
Capitals: the Architraue, Freese, and Cornice, etc. shall be made according to
the former rule: the wideness of the windows are of two Columns thicknes:
the height a fouresquare and two third parts: and their Pilasters one sixth part
of the light, having the Cornice above, like the Capital. The door shall be
of the breadth of three Columns, and seven in height: and so shall the lights
of the windows, and of the doors, be all one height. The Trigliphes and
Methophes shall be divided, as you may perceive. The second story shall be
less or shorter by a fourth part, according as Vitruuius gives counsel: so
also, shall the Architraue, Freese, and Cornice be a fourth part lessened: the
windows thereof, with the Pilasters, should be as broad as the lowest. The
ornaments in the Niches shall stand in Perpendicular, with the Columns: and
the hollowings of the Niches, shall be as broad as the inter-Columnes: their
heights shall be of two four squares and an half: the third story shall be
shorter a fourth part then the second: The Architraue, Feese and Cornice
accordingly: but being together divided in three parts, one shall be for the
Architraue, the second, for the Freese and Mutiles or Mogdilions, and the
third, for the Cornice: You shall find the particular measures hereof after the
Composita: the windows shall also be as broad as the lowest, but the Niches
shall be a fourth part less: the rest you shall lightly ^^nd.

architectural drawing

architectural drawing

ALthough in the Thuscan Order, in the Facie 13. I have showed the like
invention, this, notwithstanding, differs: for that this Gallery would be
round roofed, and where the Arches are, the crossings would be made as you see
in the ground. And for that the Columns cannot uphold the sides, always
giving out, therefore above the Columns, you shall lay or fasten Iron
bindings, in the sides, as you see it in the platform, but they will last
longer, if they be made of brass. The proportion of this Facie shall be made
thus: The greatest Intercolumnes shall be 4. Columns thick, and the least
two. The height of the Columns, with Bases and Capitals, shall hold 7. times
their thickenesse. The Epistilium shall be three four parts of a Column
thick: above the which, there shall be a half Circle made, the br^adth
thereof shall be half a Columns thickness: upon the Arch you shall set the
Cornice of the height of the Epistilium. Between both the Arches there shall
be the manner of a window made, the wideness whereof shall be like the
Intercolumnes under it: and the List or edge, as broad as the Arch. That C^^^t
as Trochile, and the Echine above the windows, and part of the Cornices,
shall, nevertheless, bear out somewhat above the windows, for to beautify
the same. The wideness of the Doors shall be two Columns, and one fourth
part. The Pilaster or Antipagmentum, shall be a sixth part of the light: the
height of the light shall reach to the Supercilie, just under the Capital of
the Column: which form of Capitals shall follow above the doors and
windows. The light of the windows shall be in breadth two Columns in
thickness: but these thicknesses aforesaid, in these cases, are to be
understood as the Columns fall out. The length of the light shall be a four
square and a half: The Niches shall also be of the same height. The Roof
above, or the second Stage, as you will term it, shall be less or shorter a
fourth part, divided in this sort: The Podium or part breast high, of one
Column and a half in thickness. The rest shall be divided in five; one of them
shall be Architraue, Freese and Cornice. The Niches with the Ornaments shall
stand in Perpendicular above the windows, between the Arches, but shall be in
breadth five parts: two parts shall be the Columns, the rest the Niches with
the Pilasters. The Cornice above the Niches shall be the breadth of one of these
Columns: and the Bases, the half breadth thereof. The windows between the
Niches, shall in the light contain one fourth part less then the door, and
of double height: but of the rest of the Ornaments (for that this work is
somewhat mixed) you shall find further satisfaction in the Ionica and
Corinthia. The Trigliphes in this comp^^^tion, betwixt the one and the other,
will not make their Methopes right four square, because I have set three
Trigliphes above each window, and as many over every of the Niches, as you may
see in the figure: wherein, if there be any thing wanting in the measure, or
else what, I always refer my self to the rule set down in the beginning.

architectural drawing

architectural drawing

FOr that sometimes, some men will have altogether Arches and Galleries, and
for that it is confused work, to place Arches upon round Columns, yet a man
may make fouresquare Pillars under them with Bases and Capitals, like the
other. And although this house is whole, which is but little for a man that
has a great living, yet you may set it forth in 5. Arches, also in 7. Arches.
The Division whereof may be, that each Intercolumne may be of the thickness of
four Columns. The height of the Columns with Bases and Capitals of six
parts: and above them the Arches to be set of the breadth before, of half a
Column: the opennesse shall be of double proportion. Above the Arches you
must place the Architraue, Freese, and Cornice: the height of them all shall be
of 2. Columns thickness: and being divided in 3. parts and a half, one part
shall be the Architraue, half a part for the Frese, and one part for the
Cornice: for the other part, you shall follow the rule aforesaid. The door
shall be two Columns outward: the Pilaster, the sixth part of the light: but the
Cornices of the door, and the windows, shall have the height of the Capitals.
The windows shall be a Column and a half bearing out: and their length or
height, shall be taken in Diagonall manner. The corner Columns shall be as broad
as the other: but they shall be of 8. parts and a half high. The second story
above this, shall be a fourth part less: the corner Columns, with Architraue,
Freese and Cornice, lessened accordingly: The windows above the Arches, with
the Pilasters, stalbe as wide as those below: but the height of the 2.
fouresquares, and the Freese above them, shall be as broad as the Supercilium:
the Cornice also as much: The small windows abone them, are made for two
purposes: The first, the Romes being high, as they show outwardly, will make
the chambers and other rooms much lighter. Secondly, for necessity a man map
make hanging chambers in them, and then those lights will serve to good
purpose. The third story shall be less then the second a fourth part: and the
same being divided in 5. parts, one part shall be for the Architraue, Freese and
Cornice: and that part divided in 3. one part shall be for the Architraue and
Freese, and the third for the Cornice: and in the Freese, the Mutiles and
Mogdilions shall be divided, as you see them. The lights of the windows shall be
as the others, but they shall be a twelfth part higher, because they are
further from the sight: the Pilasters, Freese and Cornice, shall be like the
other. The Frontispice and Arches shall be made, as I have said, in the doors
and gates of the Order of the Dorica: for beautifying, or to place another row
of Arches in it, you may set Acroteries or Pilasters upon them, which will
pass well in the making of their fire places, or chimneyes for anoyding of
smoke. The spaces between the windows, that remain white, are left to be
painted, as the workman will, or at the pleasure of the owner of the house.
But for more security of this building, it shall be necessary to place these Iron
bands in it, or at least, over the ^allary, as is taught before.

architectural drawing

architectural drawing

IN the famous Town of Venice, because houses stand near together, they are
forced to make their lights as they may, to that then Building differs much
from that Building of Italy: notwithstanding, the workman may give them light
mough, observing Antiquities, which shall be thus mads and divided: You shall
divide the wideness of an Arch in 2. parts and an half: whereof one shall be
for the breadth of the whole Pillar: the thickenesse whereof shall be the half,
the round Columns also as much: the height of the Arch shall be of one 4.
square, and two 3. parts: you may also make them of two 4. squares, heightning
the rest accordingly. The Impost or Capital under the Arch, shall have the
half thickenesse of the Column, according to that which is showed before, of
the Theater of Marcellus. The Door shall be of three Columns thick in
wideness, the height of a fouresquare and two 3. parts: the Pilaster or
Anti^ag ment^m shall be of the 8. part of the light: the Corona shall be like the
Capital: but the Scima being set upon it, you shall make the Fastigium as is
before said, and above it give more or less light, as the house requires. If
the building stand in a fleld or an open place, you make shops, which shall
well fall out with the building: above the Columns, the Epistili^m must be set
of half a Column thickenesse: the breadth of the Trigliphes also as much: the
height shall be made more or less, at the workemans will, that the spaces may
be 4. square; whereupon you must set the Cornice of a 6. part higher then the
Epistilium: the particular parts and measures, you shall make according to the
rule before set down. The story above shall be a 4. part less making a
Plinthus under the Column, of such a height, as the Proiceture of the Cornice
bears: the rest must be divided in 5. parts, one part shall be the Archtraue,
Freese, and Cornice, (which as before is taught) shall also be divided in
three parts. The Columns which uphold the Architraue, shall be nine parts
high, the lesser Columns which uphold the Arch, are thinner then the rest a
third part: the spaces in the middle, under the Arches shall be twice so, wide
as the sides: so then, the Cornices being placed upon the Columns which beace
the Arch, and the half Cirde made up to the Architraue, also, the eyes or
h^^les besides the Arch, then it will be exceeding light and where there
wants a Chamber, you may shu^ the mid^lemost lights, and the shes shall serve
for windows. Never thelesse, this order being observed both without and
within, it will not stand much amiss; for the place shut up, shall be for a
Fire place or Chimney, which ought always to be made between two windows,
like to a man's face, where the windows are the eyes, and the Chimney the nose,
which always orawes the smoke.

architectural drawing

architectural drawing

TO divide this present Facie, says the Author (for otherwise he makes no
preface) you shall divide the breadth in 14. parts, and one of these parts shall
be for a Column: the middlemost inter-Columne shall be of 6. parts, and the
other each of 3. parts: the windows shall be of a Column and an half: the
height of them, two 4. seuares and an half. The Pilasters shall be of the sixth
part of this light: the windows in the first story are of the same breadth: the
nethermost, shall be a perfect 4. square, and the other of a 4. square and an
half. The port or Gate shall be 5. Columns wide, that the Columns may have a
fast foundation: the height of this Gate is a 4. square, and of two 3. parts:
the Arch-stones, and the rest, you shall see sufliciently in the Figure: from
below under the Arch, until you be above the Facie, shall he 2. Colummes
thick. And although that all other stories or buildings, being one story above
another, would always be shortened a fourth part: yet in this case, (by my
advice) for that the compartition of the Columns, being above this rusticke
work, and that the rough work should not take too much place when it is of
sufficient strength, it is requisite that it should be of the same height.
Above the first order, as you shall make a Podium of a Column and an half
high, whereon you must set the Columns in order (as it is taught) the height
without the Podium shall be divided in 5. parts, whereof 4. shall be for the
Columns, the other for their ornaments, whereof the Trigliphes shall be divided,
as you see, observing the rule aforsayd. The middlemost shall be dealt thus, that
the small Columues shall be the half of the greater, and the middlemost
inter-Columne shall be as broad again as those that stand on the sides, which
shall be like eyes of the windows. Above the windows, to make more light, you
shall make the eyes, and above the smallest spaces in the middle, you shall make
that you see here in the Figure, for to accompany the same eyes. And although
there rest particular parts, you shall always seek them forward, where you
shall be assured to find them. The third order or story and that which
belongs thereunto, shall also be made less a 4. part; but the windows as
broad as the lowest, as also their heights, and all other things, you may
easily find with the Compass. The raising up in the middle without the
Frontispicium, shall be half the third order in height: for the rest, a
workman may add and diminish at his pleasure.

architectural drawing

BEfore, I hane showed in two figures, how to make the Facies or forefronts of
Houses after the Venetians manner: but for that in such works men would
willingly have some places bearing out, which are, for the most part, made over
the water, for fresh air of the water, whereon the most part of buildings have
their fairest forefronts or Facies; as also, to see the tryumphes oftentimes
made there in Boats and Ships: to which purpose, the said bearings or
iuttyings out serve well, and yet nevertheless, are unseemly things, and have
no other supporters but the Mogdilions: Now, such things as have not their
foundation strongly laid and made, hurt the walls of the house or building,
whereof ancient workmen were very careful, and made no such bearing out, but
only Cornices: therefore I say, if a man will make any such things in any
building with good advice, it is necessary that the first wall should be so
thick, that it may stand so far out as the flat of the bearing out
requires, as may be perceived in the round: and for that the middlamost wall
stands out more then the sides, if you will not make it so thicks, then you
may make a strong Arch within, to uphold the middlemost, although it be hollow
and of small weight. This bearing out, is to be understood above the Facies of
the rusticall work: which being made, then the compartement of the Facies
shall be above this, so that the middlemost part shall be of three portions,
and the sides of three and an half, I mean within the walls, as the ground
shows. The height of this second order or story, shall be like the undermost,
according to the rules aforesaid: and first, you shall make the Podium of an
indifferent height, to lean upon: then that which rests shall be divided in
five parts, one of those shall be the Epistilium, with the rest of his parts.
The wideness of the middle most part, must be thus: the opennesse with the
Arch must be as great agains as the sides, and the height doubled; so the
Architraues being set upon the Columns, for the upholding of the Arch, all the
Wind^^^^s shall be upon a rome: likewise also, for more commodity of light
and ornament, the eyes of the Wind^^^^^ shall be made. These ornaments,
together with many other things, if a man, in regard of cost, will not make
them of Marble, or of other stones, they may be set forth with painting. The
third order or story shall also be a ^^^^th partlesse then the second: and so
every other part thereof accordingly, following the rule aforesaid: and
although the Ionica be set before the Dorica, which ancient worknen some time
have done, you shall find the proportio^^ (...) roof (...) in his place.

architectural drawing

architectural drawing

ALthough the workman has seen so many inventions in this Dorica work, yet
they will not further him for ornaments of Chimneyes: but I will set two sorts
thereof here in Figure, one indifferent whole, and in the thickenesse of the
wall, for a small round Chamber or House: the other, for a greater place
without the wall, drawn with Mogdilions: for if a small Chamber should be
cumbred with a Chimney, it is requisite to make it wholly within the thickness
of the wall, and the height of the opening being made, according to the
situation of the place, shall be divided into four parts and an half, and
shall be the breadth of the Pilaster, but the Architraue shall contain the
half: the Tenia or List, going round about, shall be a seventh part, and all
his other Lists of the same breadth: the Trigliphes and Mogdilions, shall be
half the breadth of the Architraue, but their height you shall take in this
manner, that the Mutiles stand above the Pilasters, and the Trigliphes divided
between both, the Methopes may have their fouresquare of the breadth of the
Architraue, but yet the Methopes or spaces betwixt the Mogdilions, shall not
be fouresquare. The Capitals of the Mutiles and Trigliphes, shall be so high
as half the breadth of the Trigliphes. The Corona, with the Scimatie and Scima,
shall be so high as the Architraue; and being deuides in two parts, one part
shall be for the Corona; of the other you must make three parts, one for the
Cimatie with the List, the other shall be for the Scima with his List. The
bearing out of the Corona shall be so great or little, that the spaces between
the Capitals of the Trigliphes in the ground of the Corona, may be fouresquare,
for that, if men will sit round about it, they may have their place of sight.
The Prdiecture of the Scima with the Cimatie, shall be made like that height
which stands above, at the discretion of the workman. But if the Chimney be
very small for a little room or Chamber, then a man shall make the Pilaster of
the seventh part of the height of the opening.

architectural drawing

THis other Chimney without the wall, shall be made thus, when the height and
wideness of the place, according to the situation, is appointed, the same
height, from the ground up to the Architraue, shall be divided in 4. parts, one
part for the Architcaue, Freese, and Cornice, their parts being made according
to the rule aforesaid: and whereas they show greater, that is, because men see
them underneath, the breadth of the Modiglions shall be the 7. part of their
height: the Capitals the half of that breadth, and shall be divided as it is said
of the Doricall Capitals: some lessen the bredths of these Modiglions
underneath the fourth part, that the foot of them may give out a fourth part,
so that the Plinthus under the foot, is as broad as the uppermost part. But if
you will make such Modiglions all of one breadth, I would commend it in a great
work, for that the undermost drawing to the wall, and going from our sight,
lessen themselves: for that the part which receaueth the smoke, is
Piramides-wise, which will not stand well in a great height. You may set it upon
the first Cornice higher or lower, as you will, or according to the situation
of the place. This building of Chimneyes may be made in great form: but if you
will make them small, then you shall divide the height from the Pauement to the
Architraue in 5. parts, whereof one shall be for the Cornice: the breadth of the
Modiglions shall be the ninth part of that height, the Capital of half the
breadth: and thus it will be more seemly in amndifferent mean form. This I
speak by experience, for that I have observed this greatest measure in small
forms in making of Chimneyes, but they prove too great.

The end of the Dorica order: and here follows the Ionica.
architectural drawing

Of the order of Ionica, and the Ornaments thereof. The seventh Chapter.
VItruuius speaks of Ionica, in his fourth Book and 1. Chapter: and as I
also said, the ancient Pagans took this kind of work from women, and ascribed
it to Diana, Apollo, and Bacchus, etc. But we that are Christians, having a
Temple to make of this work, we will dedicate it to such Saints as are of
nature, either weak or strong: so likewise, common works are fit for
peaceable people, men, neither great workmen, nor all too simple in
workmanship: and such workmen are fittest for such work. Now let us come to
the measures: the Ionica Column, by a common rule, must be of 8. parts, with
Capital and Base: although that Vitruuius says, it must be of 8. parts and an
half; so may men sometimes make it of 9. parts and more, as some indifferent
workmen have affirmed. But this, I say, shall be made of 8. parts, which must
hold his thickness below, and so shall their Bases be of half the same
thickenes, which Vitruuius sets down diligently, in the 3. Book, and in
the third Chapter of the same Book, in this manner, that the Base aforesaid,
must be of half the Columns thickenesse, but the Plinthus must be of the
third part thereof: which Plinthus taken of, you shall make seven parts of the
rest; whereof three shall be for the Thorus, and four shall be for the two
Scoties or Trochiles, with their Astragals and Lists, so that each Trochile
must have his Astragall. The Astragall shall be the eight part of the Trochile,
the Lists half the Astragals. Although each Scotie with the Appendances are
all of one height, yet the undermost shall be greater; for it shall shoot out
underneath, to the outtermost part of the Plinthus. The Proiecture on either
side, shall be one eight part, and one fixed part: so that the Plinthus on
either side shall be one fourth part, and one eight part more then the
thickenesse of the Columns. Now, for that the Cincte or List is suppressed by
the greatness of the Thorus, I am persuaded that it ought to be made the half
greater then the other. Observe in all the members and parts with discretion,
as should be used in the Dorica.

architectural drawing

FOR that the Base of the Ionica Pillar, written of by Vitruuius, contenteth
not the greatest workmen, because the Thorus is very great, and the Astragall
small, under so great a member, according to the judgment of expert workmen,
that have oftentimes disputed the same, with reverence, and much respect of
such an Author; I will frame one here according to my opinion. The Plinthus
being made, as I said before, the rest shall be divided in three parts, whereof
one part shall be for the Thorus: the other under that Thorus divide in six
parts; one of them for an Astragall, the Cinthe the half thereof. The Cinthe
or Supercilie under the Thorus, must be as broad as the Astragall. The rest is
for the Scotie or Trochile: the other three parts that rest, shall also be
divided into sire parts: one for the Astragall, one half for the Cinthe, and
the undermost also the like: the rest is for the Scotio coming at underneath,
as is before alleged.

architectural drawing

THe Ionica Capital shall be made in this manner: the height shall be the
third part of a Column, and the former part of ye Abacus the breadth of a
Column in thicknes: to it also must be added the 18. part, which in the whole,
shall be nineteen parts, but inwards a part and a half: at either end the
line Catheta must be drawn, which shall contain 9. parts and an half, which
is the half breadth of the Capital: one part and a half shall be for the
Abacus, which Corners you must make like the right or left side, for both are
ancient: the 8. parts that are hanging under the Abacus, shall be for the
Volutes. And for that it would be troublesome in this small Figure, especially
to set down before your eyes the numbers, therefore in the Lease following, I
will show it better in great, and therewithal the manner how to make the
strickes in the Columns, with the Figure of the side of the Volutes, and of
the Capitals. But if the Column be of 15. foot downwards, then it shall be
lessened a sixth part above, as it is written of the Thuscan order: but if it
be of 15. foot upwards, then I refer you to Vitruuius, touching the same,
in his third Book and second Chapter.

architectural drawing

WHEN the Capital of this Ionica is made, you must make the Volutes, which
shall be made by the line, called Catheta, which we here call, The right
Lead: and when you leave the Abacus underneath four parts, then the first part
shall be for the eye, and so there yet rests three parts from the eye down
wards; and so in all, they make eight, as is before said: the eye shall be
divided in six parts, and the numbers set therein, as it is here set down;
then place one foot of the Compass upon the point 1. and the other foot under
the Abacus, drawing nether ward, up to the Catheta, to the eight part; then
letting the same foot of the Compass stand, bring the other foot of the
Compass to 2. and draw it upwards again to the Catheta. Then hold the foot of
the Compass there, bringing the other foot to 3. drawing it then down wards
again to the Catheta: keeping that foot there also, bring the other upon the
point 4. then drawing it again to the Catheta, holding the Compass there, the
foot will come upon 5. so drawing about, do likewise to 6. and then it comes
to shut with the eye; there you may make a roof, it you please. The rest of
the particular members you shall easily find with the Compass. The strickes of
the Columns, which we call Channels or hollowings, shall be 24. in number, and
one of them shall be 5. parts: whereof 4. shall be for the Guts or Channels,
and the 5. for the List, by Vitruuius called Strix: and so from one side of the
flat of the List to the other, you shall draw a straight line, the middle
whereof shall be the Center of the hollowing out. But if the workman please
sometimes to make a thin Column to show thick, then there must be 28.
strickes: the Abacus of this Capital is as broad on the sides, as before:
which sides are proportioned according to that, which is said before. Friendly
Reader, I have laid this Volute, according to my simple understanding, because
Vitruuius writing is hard to understand, and which is more, promised the same
Figure in the last Book, together, with diverse other ornaments, which Book is
not to be found.

S. Serlii upon the speech aforesaid.
Loving Reader, there are many things which cannot fully, from point to point,
be showed in Figure, unless the workman must help himself by practice,
like as the Cincte or band of these Volutes: which (if the Capital be very
great) will stand well: if the breadth contains the fourth part of the eye,
and if the Capital be of indifferent greatness, then it must be made of a
third part of the eye: but if the Capital be small, then it must be the half
of the eye, always at the workemans discretion: for I have seen it so in
Antiquities, although they differ. The thickness being marked above, under the
Abacus, then you must place the Compass a little below the figure 1. from
above the Catheta down wards: then again, you must place the Compass a
little above the figure 2. drawing your line from beneath upwards to the
Catheta.

Now, whereas I have said, that the last Book promised by Vitruuius, is not
found, by means whereof, diverse opinions are spread abroad touching the same,
some affirming, that in Vitruuius time, there were many unskillful workmen (as
there are now also) having better fortune, then good understanding: (others)
that presumption, sister to unskillfulness, bears such sway among common
workmen, that understand not themselves, it is thought, that Vitruuius
refused, or at least, would not publish it, in regard of the unthankfulness of
such as neglect good learning. Some also affirm, that it was too hard a matter
for him to place them in figures; which I can hardly judge to be the mind of
such an Author. But whereas some affirm, that this last Book was so pleasing
and acceptable, in regard of the figures there at large set out, and he being
ouer-carefull in looking unto it, was robbed thereof, among other riches and
treasures, by unskillful persons: this I believe best, is as war, which is
enemy to all good Arts, which yet, at this day, is especially to be lamented,
for that men by the figures, might have made diversities of work in the right
manner.

architectural drawing

a. Catheta. b. Eye. c. Canels, or Fluitings d. Stricks or lines drawn.
I Have declared hereafter, according to Vitruuius writing, how to make Ionica
work, as far as my learning shall serve. Now, I will show how some
Antiquities in Rome, of that work, are made, yet standing. The Capital M.
stands yet in the Theater of Marcellus, whereof I will set down some general
measures: the forehead of this Abacus is like unto the Column below. The
Volutes give out a sixth part of the Abacus, and so far out as the half of
the Abacus: the height of the Capital is a third part of the Column below;
but for that some workmen thought that Capital to be but barely set forth,
they have added the Freese which you see in the Capital, unto it, making the
height of the Capital of 2. third parts, of the Columns thickenesse below,
which Capital is at this day to be seen in Rome, with others of the like.

architectural drawing

ANd for that it may sometimes happen to the workman, to make a fouresquare
shutting with Ionica Capitals, so that some workmen have erred in placing of
the Volutes; to help or case you of that error, it shall be needful to make
the corner Capitals, as you see them in this ground: of such Capitals, there
was the like found in Rome, which caused many to study, where it was made, in
such manner, for it was called, The confused Capital: but at last, after long
disputation, it was concluded, that it had stood in an open corner, shutting up
the order of the Columns marked A. But if the workman have flat Columns to
place against the wall, in this Corner, that the Volutes may come alike on both
sides, the workman may place them, as in the ground B. is set down.

architectural drawing

THe Epistilium or Architraue is made thus: If the Column be of 12. to 15.
foot high, the Architraue shall be the half of the Column beneath: if it be of
15. to 20. foot high, then it shall be divided in 13. parts: one shall be the
height of the Architraue; and from 20. to 25. foot, the Column shall be
divided in 12. parts and a half: one part shall be given to the Architraue: If
the Column be of 25. to 30. foot high, then the Epistilium shall be the
twelfth part of that height: It the Column be higher, you must increase the
Architraue more: for the further it goes from a man's sight, so much ^^^re it
loses of the greatness. The Architraue being made of his due light, and
divided in 7. one shall be the Cimatie: the Proiecture thereof, also as great.
That which is over, is divided in 12. three shall be given to the first Facies,
four to the second, and five to the third. The thickness of the Architraue
under, shall be like the Column above, in the thinnest part: but the thickness
of the Architraue above, shall be like the thickness of the Column below. The
Zophorus or Freese shall have the measure according to the length of the work:
but if there be somewhat to cut or grave in it, then it must be made a fourth
part higher then the Architraue: but if it be made plain, without cutting or
grauing, then it must be a fourth part less. The Cimatie must be set upon the
Freese, which must be the seventh part of the same Freese: and the proiecture
also as much. Above the Cimatie must the Denticules be placed, in height, like
the middlemost Facie: and the Proiecture like the height. The breadth of their
teeth must be double in height. The intercutting or hollowing between the
teeth, shall be a third part less. The Cimatie is the sixth part of the Dentile.
The Corona, with the Cimatie thereof, is the greatness of the middlemost
Facie. The Proiecture of the Corona, with the Denticules, is as much as the
height of the Freese, with the Cimatie. The Scima is an eight part higher then
the Corona. The rule or list thereof shall be a sixth part, and the Proiecture
like the height. Also our Author affirms, that all Ecphores or corners will
stand well, when their Proiecture is like the height.

architectural drawing Scima

Cimatium,

Denticuh,

Cimatium,

Zophorus,

Cimatium,

iij. fascia Episti.

ii. fascia li.

i. fascia um,



architectural drawing

FOr that the works of Rome differ from the writing of Vitruuius, I will frame
another Column, whereof the Architraue, Freese and Cornice, shall be the
fourth part of the height of the Column: which 4. part divided in 10. parts,
three shall be for the Architraue, divided after the rule aforesaid: 3. for the
Freese, and 4. for the Cornices: which 4. shall be divided in 6. whereof one
shall be given to the Denticules, one to the Cimatie which vpholdeth the
Mutiles, and two to the Mutiles and the Corona; the rest to the Scima. The
Proiecture of all, shall beat least as much as the height: upon such a Cornice
was four written, A Sante Sabina, at Rome, in a building of the order of Ionica.

ANd if sometimes it be necessary to raise up Columns, being not compelled or
pinched by any thing thereabout, then the proportion of ye Pedestal shall be
thus; it shall be as broad before as the Plinthus of the Column: but the
height of the flat of the Pedestall shall be a fouresquare, and a fourth part:
which divided in six parts, one shall be for the Base, and one for the
Cornice, which in all is eight parts: so shall the Pedestal be of eight parts
like the Column. This must always be understood, in common, that it is left
at the discretion of the workman.

architectural drawing

BY reason of the great difference, which I find in things of Rome, from those
which Vitruuius writes of; therefore I have here showed some of them, that are
best known at this day, extant in Rome to be seen in work. The Cornice,
Freese, and Architraue marked T. is in the Theater of Marcellus, in the Ionica
order, above the Dorica; the Pilaster with the Base thereupon, also marked T.
is in the same order, under the Ionica Column. The Cornice for the impost of
an Arch, also marked T. is of the same order, and vpholdeth the Arch. The
Cornice with the Mutiles marked A. was found at S. Adrians, and S. Laurence, in
Rome. That Architraue marked F. was found in Nel Friulle: which Architraue, for
that it had three Facies without Astragals, I judge to be Ionica. Here is
nothing said of the measures hereof, for I have diligently reduced them from
the great into the small: which measures are easy to be found with the
Compass.

architectural drawing

ALthough that the Thiromatum ^onleum, that is, the door by Vitruuius
deserived, in my opinion, not proportioned to answer the building (as it ought
to do:) therefore I will speak thereof, according to my knowledge: I say then,
that Vitruuius writing is not right, touching the height of the light of ye
Thiromatum Doricu^, viz. from the Pauement to the Lacunary, there were 3. parts
and an half made, and two parts thereof were for the height of the light,
whereby the Coroun was very high, as also of the Dorica. But there follows
yet another error, viz. making the Gate or door 5. parts high, setting three
parts thereof below, as Vitruuius says; also lessened in the upper part, like
the Dorica: then I find, that the wideness thereof comes to be broader then
the inter-Columme in the middle, making a Temple of 4. Columns, with the
measure which Vitruuius has set down in his 3. Book, as I have set it down
here in Figure, that workmen may see the correspondencie of this Gate or
Door, with the Temple thereof; which, in my opinion, is not just, for this
cause, for, if the door of the Dorica, which order of Columns is lower then
that of Ionica, has the height of 2. fouresquares, and a little more, I say,
the Ionica doors, whose Columns are higher, ought to be higher also for
light, then the Dorica. But it is not so much, according to Vitruuius Book,
which says, 5. parts in height, and 3. parts in breadth: but let all this he
spoken with reverence of so great an Author. Nevertheless, taking the parts in
Vitruuius Book, which may be to some purpose, I will make another Figure
thereof, without lessening it above: but he that for his pleasure will lessen
it above, observes the Dorica order.

The Translator.

WHat Vitruuius says, touching the height of the light of the Door or Gate of
this Dorica building, there is sufficiently spoken: but touching the widenes of
this Gate or Door, where he says, that the height or opennesse thereof should
be divided into two parts and a half, and the wideness thereof, to have one
part and a half: It may be (as it is in other places) that the place is
falsified; and it may also be, that it is a quarter too much: for if it be made
of 10. in height, and 5. in breadth, the light then being of 2. fouresquares,
would be reasonable, so the Intercolumnes were as wide as from the Dorica: for
it is of four Diameters, and this but of three Columns wide, and the
Antipagmentum would not be darkened; so that leaning out but a quarter, this
building would thereby be made perfect.

architectural drawing

I Say, that the light of this door ought at least to be of 2. fouresquares
high, the Antipagmentu^ or Pilaster shall be the 1^. part of that height, made in
such manner as is said of the Epistilume Ionicum, and thereto the Astragals
shall be added, as it is showed in the Figure E. If a workman will cut any thing
in the Freese above the Supercilium, then it must be a 4. part higher then the
Supercilium: but if you leave it plain, it must be a fourth part less. The
Corona, with the other members, shall be as high as the Supercilium, divided as
you see it in the Figure F. The Ancones or Prothirides, shall be broad above,
like the Pilaster, but in the nether part, like the height of the hanging
light, shall be lessened a fourth part, from the which the leaves hang, us you
see in the Figure F. That part of the Circle, in stead of the Fastigium, shall
have his height made in this manner; with a Compass you must reach the two
corners of the Scima in the uppermost part, and one foot of the Compass
sinking to the point of the cross, with the other foot, the part of the Circle
being drawn, shall be the height, which will be the third part of a Circle:
which manner of making or not making of a Fastigium, shall be always referred to
the pleasure of the workman; it may also serve for windows.

architectural drawing Aneenes, or P^ol^^^^^des.



THe light of the Gate following, is more then of double proportion, viz. of
two fouresquares and a quarter: the flat of the Pilasters shall be the 8. part
of the breadth of the light, and the Columns shall be twice as thick: the same
Column shall be lessened above a sixth part: the height shall be of 9. parts,
with Bases and Capitals, according to the measure aforesaid. And although these
Columns hold a part more then the rule aforesaid, yet it is not therefore
truth, for that the 2. third parts stand only without the wall, bearing no
other weight then the Frontispicium: further, if by any accident these Columns
should exceed 9. parts, yet were it not to be blamed: for they are only set
for an ornament, being made fast in the wall. The height of the Architraue
shall be like the Supercilies over the door: the Freese shall be cut, and
shall be made higher, as is before: if it be not cut, you may lessen it so much
lower: the Cornice shall be higher, like the Epistilium or Architraue: with the
other parts you must handle, as it is said in the beginning of this order. The
Frontispicie shall be referred to the will of the workman, either to make it
higher or lower, by any of the aforesaid rules. By this invention, a workman
may help himself in many things, making the light high or low, as need shall
require; as sometimes of a fouresquare, or of two third parts: but if the
workman be not otherwise compelled, I should best commend the double
proportion, that is, of two fouresquares.

architectural drawing

ALthough I have set this rusticall Gate in the order of Thuscana, and not
only in many places applied it to the Thuscana, but also mixed it with the
Dorica, yet I have placed it here with the Ionica: although it is not therefore
to be set in all buildings that are made after the Dorica, nevertheless, to
good intent and purpose, as without in the country, in such a case also, it is
not to be discommended in a City or Town, for a Merchants or Lawyers house;
in which places it is tolerable. But in what place soever a man will make it in
a manner of bearing over, then the proportion of this work shall be thus: the
light up to the Arch shall be two fouresquares, and the Pilaster the 8. part of
the breadth of the light: the Column shall hold the fourth part thereof, but
the height shall be 9. parts with Bases and Capitals. The Arch of the half
shall be divided in 13. parts and a quarter, because the middlemost stone shall
hol^ a quarter more then the rest. The Architraue, Freese and Cornice, are
together the fifth part of the Columns: of which three pieces, the workman
shall make 11. parts: 4. for the Architraue, 3. for the Freese, and 4. for the
Cornice. The height of the Podium shall be the breadth of the light. The Cornice
and the Base, may be taken out of the aforesaid Stilobato: but the other Base,
Capital, Architraue, and Cornice, shall be made as it is said in the beginning.
The Archstones and the other that bind the Columns, you may see in the Figure.

architectural drawing

architectural drawing

ALthough the height of this Arch is not of double proportion, as the most part
of those which I have showed, yet it is not false, but is made by good
discretion, for that it may sometime fall out, that in the compartition of a
Facies, upon occasion of any necessary height, and to make the Arches unequal,
which should be so to place the principal gate in the middle, which in such
case should not attain to such height: but if we be not constrained by any
necessity, I more commend the double height, then any other proportion. The
wideness then between one Pilaster and the other shall be 3. parts, and the
height 5. but afterward the wideness being divided in 5. then the whole
Pillars which stand before the 2. Pilasters, have 2. parts, and the thickness
of the Columns shall be of one part: the Pilasters shall each of them be of
half a Column in thickness: likewise the Arch, and the Impost which
vpholdeth the Arch, are of the same height made, as it is showed in the Theater
of Marcellus marked T. The Columns shall be 9. parts high, with Bases and
Capitals, made according to the rule, in the beginning of this Chapter set
down: the door in the middle shall be half the wideness between the
Pilasters: the height shall be found in this manner: The Pilaster being made of
the sixth part of the light, the Cornice like the eyes of the Impost, placed
above it, and the Scima upon that, making afterward the Freese the fourth part
less then the Antipagmentum, then the height will find it self, which will be
little less then two fouresquares. The Frontispice shall be made according to a
rule set down in the Dorica: the Architraue, Freese and Cornice shall be made in
height, of the fourth part of the heights of the Columns, by the rule
aforesaid. The Story above shall be lower by one fourth part: so shall the
Architraue, Freese and Cornice be of the fifth part of that height, which
shall be the fourth part of the height of the Columns: but touching the division
of the particular members, you shall find them in full measure in the Order of
Composita. The windows being made with Arches, shall be in breadth like the
door: likewise the Pilasters and the Arches, but their height shall be two
fouresquares and a half, which is to give more light in the chambers. The
Columns shall be flat, and one fourth part shorter th^n the lower. The breadth of
the Niches between the Columns and the windows, is one Column and a half,
the height of four Columns thickness. Thus of any parts or members that be
resting, you shall find means to make them by the prescription of the
aforesaid rules of that order: for of this Corinthia, you shall find the
measure in the beginning of that order. Above this story, he that will, may
make a walking place, well defended from water: and that the height of this
Podium were of reasonable height to lean upon, or to rest upon with a man's
arms, these Facies would be a great beautifying to the building, and much
ease to the inhabitants.

architectural drawing

architectural drawing

SOmetime, as is said, a workman shall find a great number of Columns, but so
low, that they will not reach high enough for his work, if he cannot help
himself therewith, and apply such members, to serve the building which he has
in hand: therefore if the height of the Gallery rises higher then the
Columns, then in the middle of the Facie you may make an Arch, being vpholden
by the Architraue, which shall be above the Columns, which Architraue shall be
the Impost or upholding of a round roof. But where the Arch shall be, there
shall be a Crociere, as the workman may see in this ground: and for
strengthening thereof, let there be Iron or metal bars laid over, as it is
taught in the Dorica Order. But the dividing of this Facie shall be such, that
the middlemost Intercolumne shall be of 6. Columns thickness: and the height of
the Column, with Bases and Capitals shall be of 8. parts: the Architraue holds
as much as the Column is in thickness above: likewise the Arch: above the
which the workman shall make a Cornice, which height shall hold a fourth part
more then the Architraue, without the Thorus under, with the List: which
Cornice shall also serve for a Capital upon the Pillars, above the Columns,
and shall be of the same breadth that the Column is above. The Intercolumnes on
the sides shall be of 3. Columns in thickness: the height of the door shall be
so, that the Architraue under the Arch shall serve for the Cornice above the
door, changing partly her members, as it is figured. Under the Cornice there
shall be a Freese set, which shall be a fourth part less then the Architraue, the
Supercilies with the Pilaster of the same height. But as much as shall be under
the Supercilies, to the stayres, of that half, the breadth of the light shall be
made; and so the light shall be of two fouresquares. The windows shall stand as
the eyes of the door stand, and their wideness shall be of two Columns
thickness, but the height shall be taken in Diagonall manner: the second Order or
Story shall be a fourth part less then the first; the Podium being taken of a
reasonable height, that which rests shall be divided in 5. parts, four whereof
shall be for the height of the Columns, the other for the Architraue, Freese
and Cornice, observing the given measures of such a Story. The breadth of the
window in the middle, is with the Antipagmentum as wide as the light of the
door, but the light shall be double in height: in the Ornaments above, workmen
may follow and observe the rule set down. The windows on the sides shall be
like those that stand below, and their height like the greater: the raising up
in the middle above the second story, shall also be a fourth part less then
the other, and every part thereof lessened accordingly: for the light thereof,
the order of the lowe^ story is observed: but the making of this third story,
or the not making thereof, is at the pleasure of the workman.

architectural drawing

architectural drawing

AS it is said in the beginning of this Book, the manner and order of the
Ionica being made after the Feminine kind, it is so likewise a material thing,
that having a Chimney to make of that order, we must, as near as we can, make
some show of that sex therein: the proportion whereof shall be thus, that ye
height of the opennesse, being placed, it shall be from the ground of the Chamber
or Hall, to the Architraue, eight parts high, and that shall be according to
the placing of the Columns, which shall be such like, monsters or strange
forms (as we call them) made in this manner, which shall serve for Mogdilions.
The Architraue, Freese and Cornice, shall be the fourth part of the height, as
it is before said. The table upon the Capitals, which covers the Architraue
and the Freese, I judge, that ancient workmen have used to find more space to
write in, and also, for that they were desirous of novelties: which table,
whether it be made or not made, is referred to the will of the workman. The
second order, with the Dolphins, is made for two causes, the one is, to make
the mouth of the Chimney, which does receive the smoke wider: the other is, to
make a Piramicall form, making the neck of the Chimney in a Chamber, but it
is still at the will of the workman, to make them more or less, or not at all.

architectural drawing

THis other manner of Chimney is very easy for small rooms, and they are used
to be made lower then a man's sight, that the fire, which is enemy tom^^s eyes,
may warm the rest of a man's body. The wideness of this Chimney is a full
fouresquare: the Pilaster shall have a sixth part of the wideness: the Cimatie
the seventh part of the Pilaster. Of the rest you may make 12. parts, 3. shall be
given to the first Facie, 4. the second, and 5. the third Facie: and for more
beautifying, a man may also make the Astragals, as you see them here in the
sides. The height of the Volutes shall be like the 3. Facies without the Cimatie,
and of them must be made 3. equal parts, one part for the Freese, with the
chanelature or hollowing, and the other for the Echine, with the Astragall and
List, the third shall be given to the Volutes, which shall hang on the sides
like the Cimatie, but the leaves shall hang down as low as the Architraue. The
height of the Corona, with the two Cimaties, and the Scima, are like the second
and third Facie, together with the Cimatie: but the Proiecture of Corona,
Cimatie, and Scima, each of them hold as much as the height. This like form I
have made in work, very well liked of: but, as is said of the other, if by
occasion of work it takes overmuch place, then you may make the Pilasters of
the 8. part of the wideness, so will they be much more seemly of themselves.
That part made over for an Ornament, is also at the workemans will, for this
Chimney is to stand in the thickness of a wall, so that this Ornament, of this
Order, would serve for a window or door.

Here ends the Ionica Order of building: and there follows the Corinthia.
architectural drawing

Of the order of Corinthia work, and the Ornaments thereof. The eight Chapter.
OF Corinthia work, Vitruuius speaks only in his fourth Book, and the
first Chapter, in a manner as if he would say, that the same, which is said of
the Ionica Column, is in Corinthia work: and in his second Chapter he
speaks of Mogdilions among the Coronas, therefore not giving any other rules
or measures of the other parts: but the ancient Romans using this order of
Corinthia much, (as also the rest) made the Bases of these Columns, with a
great number of members or parts full of work: of which Bases to set down
some rules, I will speak of one of the fairest buildings in Rome, that is, the
Pantheon, called by the name of, Our Lady de Rotonde, setting down all the
measures thereof. The Column of Corinthia work is made by a common rule,
consisting of 9. parts in height, with Capitals and Bases: the Capital
whereof, shall be as high as the Column is thick below, but the Base shall be
of half the thickenesse of the Column. Of this half, or height of the Base,
there shall be four even parts made, whereof the one is for the Plinthus, the
other three shall be divided in five equal parts, whereof one part shall be
for the Thorus above, but the Thorus under shall be a fourth part thicker: so
that which rests shall be divided into 2. even parts, whereof one part is for
the Scotie below, with the Astragall, and two Lists or borders: that Astragall
shall be the sixth part, and each list or border the half thereof: but the list
or border under the nethermost Thorus, shall be a third part more then the
other. The Proiecture of the Plinthus shall stand above in another order of
Columns, making them like the Ionica order; but if the place be beneath upon
the ground, then the Proiecture shall be like the Dorica order. Also, according
to the place where the Bases shall be placed, so the workman must add or
diminish, as is before said: for as these Bases stand beneath the sight, it
will stand well; but if it be placed above the sight, then all the places that
are used by the other members, with their several distances, shall be made
greater, then by this rule is prescribed. And the higher they be set, so much
the less and fayrer seem the members therein the workman of the Rotonde was
well advised, for that he made the Bases above the first story within, with
two Scoties, but yet with one Astragall alone, in stead of two.

architectural drawing torus superior,

Socita,

astragali,

Scotia, sive Trochilus

Torus inferior,

Plinthus,



THe deriuation of the Capital Corinthia, was from a Maid of Corinthia: but
for that Vitruuius in his fourth Book and first Chapter describes his
petygree; whereof I will not trouble my self to speak of, thus much I will
say: If a workman had a Temple to make for the Virgin Mary, or any other
Saints that were Virgins, or Houses or Sepulchers for persons of honest life
and conversation, then a man might use this manner of work. The height of this
Capital shall be like the thickness of the Column below: the Abacus the
seventh part of that height. Of the rest there shall be three parts made: one for
the leaves below; the other for the leaves in the middle; and the last for the
Volutes, as we may call them. But between the Volutes and the middlemost
leaves, there is a space left to the lesser leaves, from the which the Volutes
grew. The Capital marked B. shall be underneath like the Column above: under
the Abacus, there is a Cintha made, the height whereof shall be half the
Abacus: of which Abacus, three parts being made, one shall be for the Cimatie
with the Lists, and the rest for the Plinthus. Under the four corners of the
Abacus, the greatest Volutes are made; and in the middle of the Abacus, there
is a flower as great as the Abacus is thick, under the which the least Volutes
shall be made; under the greatest, and also under the smallest Volutes, the
middle leaves shall be set, between the which the least leaves shall grow out,
and out of them the Volutes spring. The middlemost, and also the undermost
leaves, shall each be 8. in number, standing between each other, as the figure
C. shows. The wideness of the Abacus, from point to point, shall be two
Diameters of the Columns below: which Diameter shall be placed in a 4. square,
and a Circle drawn without the fouresquare, which shall touch the four
corners: then, without this great Circle, another fouresquare being made, and
divided in Diagonall, that is, crosse-wise, those lines will show to be two
Diameters in length (as Vitruuius teaches.) But from the line B. C. you shall
make a perfect Triangle: and upon the corner X. shall be to make hollow the
Abacus: from the spaces, between the great Circle and the small, there shall be
four parts made, one part shall rest above A. and three shall be thus taken away:
the one foot of the Compass being set upon X. the other upon A. drawing about
from B. to C. where the crooked line shall reach on the two sides of the
Triangle, there shall be the termination of the corners of the Capitals. The
example is in the figure D. in this manner. The Abacus shall come in
Perpendicular, with the Plinthus of the Base.

architectural drawing D. The Colu^nes thickness below.

g. Leaves. Cimatie. Abacus.

Ca^licul. Lessening leaves. Middle leaves.

Undermost leaves.

C. The Columns thickness above.



TOuching the Architraue, Freese and Cornice of the Corinthia, as I have said
in the beginning of this Chapter, Vitruuius sets down no measure thereof,
although he sets down the original of the Mutiles, which may be made in
all manner of Cornices, as we see in Antiquities: but to proceed orderly, and
not to leave Vitruuius writing too much, I will set the ornaments of Ionica in
this Chapter, adding thereto the Astragall in the Architraue, and an Echinus
under the Crown, as some Arch-Architects in Rome have done. So I say, when the
Architraue is made as it stands by the Ionica, under the middlemost Facie,
there shall be an Astragall made of the eight part of the same Facie, and under
the uppermost Facie also, one of ye eight parts of the said Facie wrought with
Lead, as you see: after that, when the Freese is set with the Cimatie, and
thereto the Denticules with the Cimatie, then you must place the Echine above
it, of such height as the first Facie is, the which with the Proiectures and
cuttings, shall show more then the middlemost Facie: above the Echine, you must
set the Corona, Cimatie, and Sima, as it is said in the Ionica Order.

SOme Romish workmen, proceeding with more boldness, have not only placed
Echines above the Denticules, but also made Mutiles and Dentiles together, in
one Cornice, which is much condemned by Vitruuius in his fourth Book, and
second Chapter: for that the Dentiles represent certain teeth, by Vitruuius
called Asseri, and the Mogdilions are for the supporting of other ends of wood,
by the said Author called Cantery: which two kind of beams may not stand
together in one place; and I, for my part, could never endure Dentiles and
Mutiles in one Cornice, although Rome abounds therein, and diverse places of
Italy also: but proceeding orderly in this work, I find a general rule, that
is, that the height of the Columns with Bases and Capitals, shall be divided in
4. parts, whereof one is given to the Architraue, Freese and Cornice, and such
a height agrees with the Dorica: the fourth part shall be divided in 10. parts:
3. shall be for the Architraue, as aforesaid, 3. for the Freese, and 4. for the
Cornice. But of those 4. there are 9. parts made, one shall be for the Cimatie
above the Freese, 2. for the Echine with the List, 2. for the Mutiles with
their Cimatie, 2. for the Corona, and the 2. last parts for the Sima, with her
Cimatie, which shall be the fourth part of the Sima. The Project of all shall
be as aforesaid: you may also make this Architraue, Freese and Cornice, of the
first part of the height of the Column, as Vitruuius says in his fifth Book,
and seventh Chapter of the Theater.

architectural drawing

architectural drawing

THe lessening of the Coriathia Column shall be made, as it is said of the
other: and also thereafter as the height is, but of 16. foot downwards: it
shall be lessened above the sixth part, by the rule aforesaid: and if it be
striked or chaneled, then you shall make it like the Ionica; but from the third
part netherwards the caruing or hollowing shall be full, as you see it in the
Figure on the sides. The Corona is without Mutiles, whereof the Architraue is
half the Columns thickenesse: the Freese, for that it is cut, is the fourth
part more then ye Architraue: and the Cornice without the Cimatie of the
Freese; is as high as the Architraue: the height of all together is somewhat
less then the fifth part of the Column: nevertheless, if the Proiecture of
the Corona be well made, then it will show to be higher then it is, and shall
be less wayght upon the building: wherefore, that the skilful workman may
choose out those parts, that best serve his turn, that he may not exceed
Vitruuius doctrine, and the good Antiquities, which men, by his writing,
acknowledge, if by any accident this Column had need of a proportioned
Pedestal, being not let by any occasion, then ye proportion thereof shall be
thus: the breadth shall be divided in 3. parts, whereof 2. parts shall be for the
height, that is, one fourth parts, and 2. third parts, (I mean the flat) which
height shall be divided in 7. parts: one for the Bases, one for the Cornice
above, which shall in all be 9. parts, proportioned according to the Column:
but of the particular members of the Bases and Cornices, I will hereafter show
more, with some Antiquities, whereof men may take such measure as shall best
serve their turns.

architectural drawing

AMong other Antiquities of the Corinthia, which are seen in Italy, I think
the Pantheon of Rome, and the Arch tryumphant, at the Haven of Ancona, are the
fairest and best to be seen: of which Arch; the Capital hereunder marked A.
is with great care proportioned after the great: which height is contrary to
the writing of Vitruuius: nevertheless, it had good correspondencie; and it
may be, that Vitruuius meant, that the height of the Capital should be one
Columns thickenesse without the Abacus: but the text herein is falsified, for
that I have not only found this Capital, but others more of such proportion.
The Columns hereof are chaneled, as it is showed here: the Pedestall with the
Base upon it, is a member of the same Arch, also proportioned in the small: the
Cornice hereunto added, was found at Al foro transitorio in Rome: that marked
with A. is very handsome, for a Corinthian Cornice without Mogdilions: that
marked with B. is a little fayrer; but that with C. is the vnhandsomest,
because of the double parts, which have no good grace from the Corona
downwards: and also, for that the Corona, upon so much Cornice, has so small
Proiecture. The Base of the Pedestall marked D. in my opinion, is very fair,
and also the Basement with E. I think has been a thing that has continued
in some building: which things, altogether, men may apply to the order of
Corinthia; and in the Ionica I have seen the like. The Architraue V. is in
Verona, in an Arch tryumphant, which Facies stands contrary to Vitruuius
writing: yet I have set them here to show such difference.

architectural drawing

architectural drawing

OF the doors of Corinthia work, Vitruuius speaks nothing at all; but I
will speak of the Antiquities which are yet to be seen. The Gate or door
marked S. Y. is at Tiuoh, upon the River of Auiene, in a round Temple, made
after the Counthia manner, which door is lessened above the eyghteenth part.
The height is above, 2.4. squares: the rest of the members are proportioned
after the great. The window T. and X. is in the same Temple, and lessened above
like the door: the Pilasters or Antipagmentum are all proportioned, which a
man may find with the Compass. The door following, marked P. Z. is that of
the Pantheon in Rome, also Corinthia work; which is 20. ancient Palms broad:
the height 40. And it is said, that the Antipagmentum is all of one piece, and
I also have seen no other. The Antipagmentum of this door is the breadth (...)
the 8. parts of the light thereof, and in the sides it is of a good thickenes.
But for that you cannot see the first, without seeing a part of the sides,
therefore it seems to such as look on it, to be broader then in effect it
is. And this door, because it is so high, comes in Perpendicular, and is not
lessened as the other aforesaid: all the other members are proportioned
according to the greatness. The Base above the Gate, is like that of flat
Columns above the first order, which I have set down by the Corinthia.

architectural drawing

architectural drawing

THe door hereunder set down, is at Palestina, and is Corinthia: the
wideness is 2. fouresquares: the Antepagmentum or the Pilaster is broad the
sixth part of the widenes, divided in manner aforesaid. The Sophore or Freese is
the fourth part more then the Supercilie. The Corona and the rest, are like the
Supercilie, divided as you see in the Figure. The Prothyrides or Ancones, with
that which is upon them, hang so slightly or loosely, as you see. The
Frontispicie is made, as in the order of Dorica, in the second Facie, is said.

architectural drawing

ALthough this Door disscreth from all the other, that ever I saw in any
Antiquity, nevertheless, it is very pleas^^^ to the sight, and shows well:
which Door is without Spoleta, about half a mile without the way, in an
ancient Temple, made of the Corinthia manner; of the proportion and particular
members, I will say nothing; for he that seeks near, may find it with a
Compass.

architectural drawing

OF this Order of Corinthia, which is pleasing unto all men, I will make more
sorts of busidings, setting down some general rules, to satisfy those that
take pleasure to read this work: and for that ancient workmen, in times past,
that desired to make their things strong and everlasting, made Pillars (wherein
the Pilasters are closed) which bear up the Arches of a great thickness; for
that cause, the Forefront or Facie ensuing has the Pillar (that is, the whole
body) as broad before as the wideness of the Arch is; but the thickness is 1.
fourth part less. The thickenesse of the Columns shall be a sixth part of the
Pillar. The Niches between the Columns are 2. Columns thickenesse in breadth:
their height is somewhat less then 2. fouresquares. The height of the
Pedestals of 3. Columns thickness. The height of the Arch shall be made of 2.
fouresquares. The height of the Columns with Bases and Capitals, shall be 9.
parts and a half. The breadth of the Arch with the Pilasters, shall be of half a
Column. The Impost which bears the Arch, shall be of the same height, made, in
manner, like that of the Theater of Marcellus, in the Order of Ionica: which
Impost shall serve for a Cornice above the door: but the height of the door
shall be made thus: Under the said Cornice, the Supercilie shall be also made of
the like height; and from thence downwards there shall be 2. equal parts made
to the Stayres; whereof, one shall be the breadth of the light, and likewise the
Cornice of the door, as the eyes, shall come with the windows, and the
Cimatie of the Pedestall shall also come in like sort under the windows. The
light of the windows shall be taken Diagonall wise: and the Antepagmentum a sixth
part of the light. The particular members of the Pedestall, Base and Capitals,
shall be made, as in the first part of this Order it is said. Above the Columns,
the Architraue, Freese and Cornice shall be set, divided in such manner as is
showed in the beginning. The height of the second Story shall be a fourth part
less then the first, and all the members lessened accordingly, as you may see
and measure it in the figure: she elevation above this I esteem not for a
whole Story, but much lower: the height thereof is as much as the wideness of
the Arch below; and the Cornice which serves for Architraue, and Freese,
shall be the fifth part of the height of that Story; which measures you may take
from the Capital Dorica: and for more Ornament, a man may set a Fastigies
above: but setting it in the middle, it would hardly agree with the two small
above the Niches, unless it ran round, whereby the work should be changed,
and show better to the sight.

architectural drawing

architectural drawing

WHen a workman will build a Temple, the higher the ground or Pauement is
elevated, so much statelyer the building will show, for so right ancient
workmen have done, although they used other forms of Temples, much different
from this here set down: for they made a body alone, but we, that are
Christians, make our Temples in three parts, setting one part in the middle,
and 2. parts on the sides: and sometimes the Chapels are made without the
sides, as you see in the ground. The wideness of this Facie shall be of 32.
parts: one whereof shall be ye thicknes of a Column: the middlemost
inter-Columnes shall contain 7. parts: the greatest inter-Columnes on the
sides shall be 4. parts and an half. The inter-Columne with the Niche shall
be 2. parts: and so the 32. parts shall be distributed. The Arches with the
Pilasters shall be half a Column broad: the wideness of the Door shall be of
3. parts and an half: the height of 7. parts: the Impost under the Arch is as
broad as the Arch. The height of the Pedestall is 3. parts: the height of the
Column, with Capital and Bases, is 9. parts and a half. The Architraue,
Freese and Cornice shall be the fourth part of the height of the Columns: and so
for the particular members and parts resting, the first rule shall be observed.
The windows, Niches and other ornaments, a man may conceive in the figure and
measure. The second story shall be a fourth part shorter then the first, and all
the members lessened accordingly: but the Architraue, Freese and Cornice,
shall be placed in 3. equal parts, as I said of the other. The Fastigies shall be
made, as Vitruuius has showed in the order of Dorica. The 2. sides that stand
for beautifying and upholding, shall be the fourth part of a Circle, whereof
A. and B. is the Center; and above each Arch that parts the Chapels, a man
may set such things, which will be a great upholding to the middlemost work,
and also along upon them, the water may fall from the uppermost toofe to the
nethermost.

architectural drawing

architectural drawing

THe dividing of this work ensuing shall be thus, that the Pillar shall be the
third part of the wideness of the Arch, but the thickenesse of the sixth part:
the thickenesse of the Column also as much. The height with Base and Capital
of ten parts and an half: the Arch, Pilaster, and impost of the half Column:
the measure of the Impost a man may take from the Dorica Chapter, altering the
members: the same shall also serve for a Cornice above the door, and for
supporting of the windows above the shops: the height of the Arch (for
sometimes upon occasion, a man shall be forced to have it so low as you see)
shall be of 3. parts in the breadth, and 5. in height: and the door also shall
have the same proportion. The Antepagmentum shall be the sixth part of the
light; and if the workman will make the height of the Arch of double
proportion, the door also will be of such proportion: but the Columns should
need a great stone vnderth Bases, with which things ancient workmen help
themselves. The height of the Architraue, Freese, and Cornice are of 2.
Columns thickenesse, as it is said in the first part of the rules, or in manner
of some Antiquities aforeshewed. And for that the space under the Arch to the
soller, which is even with the flat of the Cornice, should be too great to make
crossewise, in such case my advice should be, to make an Arch right behind the
Column, and to make each space kettlewise, as you see in the ground. The
height of the second story shall be one 4. part less then the first, divided in
this manner: the Podium shall be as high as the thickenesse of two of the
lowest Columns, and from thence up wards shall be made 5. parts, one for the
Architraue, Freese and Chrnice, and 4. for the Columns: the Arches with the
Pilasters shall be of half a Column; and for the rest, you shall observe the
general rule: and if the Facie stands in any place or market, as it is
showed by the winkels or shops, it will be easy and comely to make a leaning
above the uppermost Cornice: but for safety from rain, snow, and frost, above
all other things, it shall be requisite to make a roof or pauement well
closed and leaning forward, because of the water: but it will be surer, if it
be covered with lead. And although good workmen condemn and shun the setting
of a Column in an empty place, which I also commend not, nevertheless, for
that I have seem the like matter upon the Porticus of Po^pcy in Rome, but made
after the Dorica manner, therefore I have presumed to set the like, if it may
serve any man's turn.

architectural drawing

architectural drawing

FOr that the Venetians, in their buildings, use much Corinthia work, and also
many windows and Podiums, therefore I have made one here, which is full of
windows and Podiums, and have also made Story upon Story, which is more
commodious then bearings out and leanings over are, and the building will have
a better show; for that all the things which a man may see within, will be
seemly. The Compertition of this Facie shall be thus: The breadth shall be
divided in 30. parts, and one of those parts shall be the thickness of a
Column: the middlemost Intercolumnes shalke of 4. but all the rest of 3. and
so the 30. parts shall be distributed. The height of the Columns shall be of 10.
parts and a half, with Bases and Capitals. The Architraue, Freese and Cornice
shall, together, be the fifth part of the height of the Columns. The members
shall be divided, as aforesaid. The light of the Windows are a Column and a
half wide, all in Perpendicular from the top to the bottom: but the height of
the first windows are of 3. parts broad, and 4. high: and those that shall
stand upon them, have their height in Diagonall manner. The wideness of the
Door shall be of 2. Columns: and the height 4. The Antepagmentum, with the
Supercilie, Freese, and Cornice, shall be divided, as it is said of the other
before: and so shall the Cornice also of the Door be, as the windows below
are. The second Story shall be lower then the first the fourth part: but the
leanings with the Balusters being made, as high as a window is broad, the rest
of the height shall be divided in 5. parts: one for the Architraue, Freese and
Cornice, and the other 4. for the Columns, with Bases and Capitals. The height
of the windows shall be of 2. fouresquares: with the rest of the Ornaments, you
must do as I have said of the like: and also the Door of the Gallery shall be
like that below. The third Story shall be lessened more then the second one
fourth part, and every member proportionably; only, the height of the
windows, they shall be of 2. fouresquares, and rather higher then lower, because
the height of it self lesseneth: The elevation also in the middle, shall be the
fourth part lessened, as it is said of the other. The Architraue, Freese and
Cornice are the fourth part of that height. The Fastigium shall be made, as it is
said of the Dozion Temple: and if there remains other measures, you must
always turn to the first rule. Hereunder I will set no flat ground: for the
Perspectiues of the Galleries show all clearly.

architectural drawing

AS I have at other times said, that the workman shall have Columns inow, but
yet so short, that sometimes they will not serve his turn, unless the
industry and cunning of the workman be such, that he can help himself
there with. The composition of this Facie shall be thus, that the wydenesse of
an Arch shall be of double height in breadth: the Pillar shall be half the same
wideness before: but that Pillar being made in three parts and an half, one
part thereof shall be the thickenesse of one Column: The inter-Columne of a
half Column: and so much also the Pilasters and the Arch hold. The height of
the Pedestals, without the Plinthus under them; shall be as much as the whole
breadth of the Pilaster, the members being divided, as I have said of the
Pedestals of Corinthia. The height of the Column, with Bases and Capitals
shall be of 11. parts, and that shall not therefore be false, for it is set fast
on a stone, more for ornament, then for upholding of any weight. The height of
the Architraue, Freese, and Cornice shall be made of the fourth part of the
Columns, and in Perpendicular the Columns shall bear out all the members
without the Corona or Cima, which will go right through without crookening;
for good Antiquities used to do so: and Bramant also, the light of
Architecture in our age, made such a house in Rome, called Beluedore. The
wideness of the door, shall be of four Columns thickenesse, and twice as
high. The Antepagmentum, Supercilie, and Freese, shall be made so, that the
Cornices, which uphold the Columns, shall serve also above the door, and also
over the windows. The wideness whereof shall be of three Columns
thickenesse, and the height of five. The second Story shall be less then the
first, the fourth part: but the whole height being divided in 6. one shall be
for the Podium, four for the spaces of the windows, and the other for the
Architraue, Freese and Cornice, divided in such manner, as you shall see it in
the order of Composita. The wideness of the windows are in Perpendicular to
the nethermost; and the breadth twice in the height: the rest of the ornaments,
as windows and Niches, shall be done as in this Ionica Gate is showed, which
being wrought with more liuelynesse and flourishings, will be a Corinthian
work. The breadth of the Niches with the Pilasters, shall be in Perpendicular
above the Columns, but the wideness thereof, being divided in 7. five shall be
for one Niche, and 2. for the Pilasters. The height shall be of 3. bredths,
because they stand far from sight, whereby they show shorter. The Pillars
above the Cornice are made for ornament, and also for commodity, to make
Chimneyes of some of them.

architectural drawing

architectural drawing

THings that are made for common use (although they are placed in all
proportion and measure) are much commended; but not admired. But things that
are not used, if they were made for some causes, and well proportioned, shall
not only be commended of most men, but also wondered at. Therefore this
building following, which represents a Temple, shall first be made of strong
rusticall manner, as you see, and of such height as the place and situation
requires; but it must not be higher then 2. men's length: On which flat or
Pauement, a man shall go upon, beginning at the step A. standing within the
entry, and going up to B. then it shall be flat where the Temple shall have a
broad walk, with a leaning round about. The which Temple shall be elevated
from the walking or Pauement, till you come above the height of the Podium, or
leaning, 3. steps more: and to come to that, you must go upon the step C. to
the flat D. which shall be the height of the Podium, with another leaning, which
shall be higher then the lowest. And from this flat, to the Pauement of the
Temple, the said three steps shall be: the wideness of this Facie shall be
divided in 24. parts, and one of these parts shall be the thickenesse of the
Column. The middlemost inter-Columne shall have 4. parts: those that stand on
the sides, where the windows are, shall be 3. parts: and where the Niches shall
be, they shall each of them have a part and an half, so shall the 24. parts
be distributed. The same Stilobato, as is without at the Podium, shall also
be made under the Column; of which Pedestall, the height without the
Plinthus, the Base shall be 3. parts. The height of the Columns, with Bases and
Capitals, shall be of 3. parts and an half. The Architraue, Freese, and Cornice,
shall be a fourth part of the Column, as it is said of others: and the members
also divided in 4. sorts, the wideness of the Gate shall be 3. parts, and the
height 7. parts and an half, which is about 2. four squares and an half: and
this is done, for that by reason of the distance, they seemed shorter to a man's
sight, then these that are below. The widenes of the windows shall be one part
and an half; but the height shall be more then 2. fouresquares, because of the
said shortening. The breadth of the Niches shall be one part, and the height of 3.
bredths, for the same reason: the order that the Fastigium holds, shall be like
the Pedestal in height, and the Cornice the fourth part of the said height: and
the other, where the kettell or Lantern rises up, is also of the same
height, which shall be so much more then half round, as the Proiecture shall
cover the Cornice. On the 4. corners of the Temple, for the more beautifying,
you may make 4. Piramides: the height whereof (without the Stimen) shall be as
the eyes are at the beginning of the Fastigium: and the Scima like the
Fastigium: which Fastigium shall be made by the like rules, as are spoken of
before, of the Temple of Dorica. The parts under the Temple, shall be for
certain Oratories, called Confessionals, whereof I have seen many under the
high Altar.

architectural drawing

architectural drawing

ALthough in these our days, men make no Arches Tryumphant of Marble or of
other stones, nevertheless, when any great personage enters into a Town,
they use to make Arches tryumphant for to welcome him in, which they set in the
fairest places of the Town, adorned and painted in most curious manner.
Therefore, if you will make an Arch after the Corinthia manner, the proportion
and measure shall be, that the light shall be of two fouresquares, and one sixth
part: the thickenesse of the Columns shall be the 5. part of the wideness of
the door or light: The height of the Pedestals shall be of three Columns
thick: and the height of the Column shall be of ten parts and an half. The
Epistilie, Sophore, and Cornice, are together the fourth part of the height of
the Column: and so from under the Arch, to under the Architraue, there shall
hang a role of two Columns thickenesse in height, and the lessening thereof
under, shall be drawn up to the Center of the Arch. Touching the particular
members, as the Pedestal, Base, Capital, Architraue, Freese, and Cornice, you
shall observe the rule before set down: the breadth of the Arch, with the
Pilaster, shall be half a Column. The inter-Columne must be of a Column and an
half. The Niches are a Column broad, and the height three, for a standing
Image to be placed in them. The height of the second order shall be made thus:
the Column without Pedestal, shall be set in the upper part in the Cornice in
three parts, and one of those parts shall be the height: but of that height there
shall be four parts made: one shall be the Cornice above; the dividing whereof,
may be drawn out of the Chapter of Dorica, altering the members. The height of
the Bases stand elevated above the Cornice the thickenesse of a Column below;
and that is, for that the Proiecture of the Corona darkeneth the rest of the
Bases netherward. The Cornices shall give out, as you see them in the Figure.
The height of the Fastigium shall be made by one of the rules set down in the
Dorica. This present Figure does partly resemble the A^ch at Ancona: but with
great reverence, in regard of such a workman, I have brought the measures into
one general rule, that every man may easily put such measure in use.

architectural drawing

architectural drawing

AS much as need required, I have spoken of Corinthia; although a man might
speak of diverse kinds of ornaments: but it is needful to speak of the
ornament of a Chimney, because of the daily use thereof, so that a man cannot
be without it: for not only in great, but also in small Chambers men use to
make fire, where, in such straight places, they set such Chimneyes within the
wall, whereon a man may make diverse ornaments after the Corinthia manner. But if
you make them in this form, then the wideness must be taken, according to the
situation of the place: and the Pilaster shall be made of the sixth part of the
wideness; but of the eight part the work will be seemelyer: the which
Pilaster or Antepagmentum, together with the Supercilium, shall be divided
like the Architraue of the Corinthia. This Freese above, because it is graven,
shall be made a fourth part greater then the Supercilium. The Cornice, together
with the Capitals of the Mutiles, shall hold as much as the Supercilium, and
the same divided in three, as it is said of the Cornice, in the Corinthia. The
breadth of the Mutiles, or Ancones (as we say) above, shall be like the Pilaster,
but beneath, which reaches down to the opening, they shall be one fourth part
smalle^^ and under them there hang out two leaves, as you see in the Figure:
which Proiecture shall be referred to the pleasure of the workman. To make or
leave the ornament above, there consists not much therein: and this invention
shall serve not only for a Chimney to beautify it withal, but also for a
door, or other things, and the Frontispicie thereon will agree well with it,
when you use it for a door.

architectural drawing

IN a Hall or a great Chamber there is a great Chimney required, proportioned
according to the distance, the which needs a great conueyance; therefore, if
a man will make the Modiglions sufficient for such a bearing out, he must make
two places on the sides: but in such a case (I mean) he should make two flat
Columns, and before them round Pillars, not close to the other, in such manner,
that between them both the place for the Column must be, and in this manner
you shall adorn them. As I said in the beginning of this Chapter, the
Corinthian manner had her beginning from a maid, of the Town of Corinthia:
therefore I have placed a maid here, in stead of a Column: the height and
breadth of the opening, being made according to the place, the height shall be
divided in nine parts, and one of those parts shall be for the heads of the
mayds, and the whole Figure being formed and swaddled, as you see: then the
flat Column or the Pillar shall be of the same proportion, observing the
measure before set down. Upon the Column, the Architraue, Freese and Cornice
shall beset: which height, together, shall be the fourth part of a Column
lying, measured after the rule aforesaid, from the Cornice upwards, to the
place; and the height thereof a man may adorn in this manner, as in the Figure:
and who doubts that this invention might not serve for a Door, making such a
Column against the wall, and specially before the Gate or Door of a Court, or
place of triumph, and such like?

The end of the Corinthia manner of building.
architectural drawing

The manner of Composita Building, with the Ornaments thereof, The ninth Chapter.
ALthough Vitruuius speaks of four manner of Columns, as Dorica, Ionica,
Corinthia and Thuscana, giving hereby unto us almost the first and simple manner
of ornaments of Architecture: nevertheless, I have added one to the said
four, as (almost) a fifth manner of Pillar, composed of the others aforesaid,
moved thereunto by the authority of Roman work, which we may see with our
eyes. And, in truth, the workemans foresight ought to be such, that as
occasion serves, he may make many things by the said simple and compound
work, respecting both the nature and the subject. And therewithal the
workman sometimes (to whose judgment many subjects may be referred) shall be
abandoned and left by Vitruuius counsel, that could not conceive all; whereby
he should be brought into a straight, and compelled to do, as he sees case: (I
mean) for that Vitruuius, in my opinion, speaks not at all of this
Composita, by some called, Latina, and by others, Italica; which the old
Romans, peradventure, being not able to go beyond the invention of the
Greeks, finders of the Dorica, after the example of men, and of the Ionica,
resembled to women, and the Coriothia, after the form of maids, of the Ionica
and Corinthia made a composition, piecing the Volute of the Ionica, with the
Echino in the Capital Corinthia; and these they used more in Arches
tryumphant, then in any other things: which they did with good foresight, for
that they tryumphed over all those countries, from whence the said work had
their beginnings: and so they might well at their pleasures, as commanders over
them, set these orders together, as they have done in the great building of the
Romish Coliseo. And having therein placed the 3. orders one upon the other,
viz. Dorica, Ionica and Corinthia, they placed Composita above them all, which,
by every one, is called so: although, as men may perceive, the Capitals are
almost Corinthia. But it was an excellent judgment, in my opinion, of them,
that having placed this order in the highest part of the Coliseo, which being
far off from men's sight, men should have seen, if they had set the
Architraue, Freese and Cornice of the Ionica and Corinthia above the Columns,
that such work, by long distance of time, would have proved bad: but placing
the Mutiles in the Freese, they made the work rich, and it help the
Proiecture of the Corona; and withal, it wrought another effect, which was,
that the Architraue, Freese, and Cornice, seemed to be one Cornice alone, by
means of the Modiglions that were set in the Freese, for that they seemed
great, observing their proportion.

THE height of this Column, Composita, shall, with Base and Capital, be of
10. parts: the Base shall be of half the ^^lumne thickenesse; and it shall be
made Corinthia, with the measure set down by the Corinthia: ar^^^ts is yet
seen in the Gate of the Arch tryumphant of Ti^us, and Vespasian, in Rome. You
may make the Columns chaneled, as you do the Ionica, and sometime like the
Corinthia, make the Volutes somewhat greater then the Caulicoli of Corinthia:
which Capital you see in the Arch aforesaid, and is set down here in Figure:
for the Architraue, Freese and Corona, if it stand far from men's sight, then
the Architraue shall be as high as the Column is thick above: the Freese,
wherein the Mutiles are, shall be of the same height, The Cimatie of the
Mutiles shall be of a sixth part: the Proiecture of the Mutiles shall be like the
height. The height of the Corona, with her Cimatie, holds as much as the
Architraue, and that divided in 2. parts, one shall be the Corona, the other
the Cimatie; the Proiecture thereof, shall be like the height: and this is a
common rule, although that in the Figure ensuing, marked C. you may see the
members and measures of that, which is in the Coliseo aforesaid: and for that
this Column is the slenderest of all others, therefore the Pedestall ought to
lice seemelier then the rest, following the common rule: the height thereof
shall be a double breadth, that is, slat, and of that height there shall be ^yght
parts made, one for the Base, and one for the Scima: but of the particular
members you may take the example here on the side, in the Figure; which,
altogether, are proportioned according to the Pedestals of the aforesaid Arch
tryumphant: and so, being a Column of ten parts, the Pedestall shall also be
ten parts in it self, proportioned after the Column. And although men make
all Pedestals in Perpendicular, yet in Athens, a most ancient Town, there are
some, that are somewhat lessened in the upper part, which I discommend not.

architectural drawing

FOr that ancient workmen have used diverse mixings of work, therefore I will
not set down those that are best known and composed, for that the workman
may choose out of them such as he thinks will serve his turn best. The
Capital hereunder set, marked T. is composed of Dorica, Ionica, and Corinthia:
the Abacus and Cimatie is Dorica: the Echine and Strike, is Ionica: the
Astragal and Leaves, are Corinthia, as also the Base with the two Thorus, is
Dorica: but by the 2. Scoties, and the Astragals, as also, because of the
beautifulness thereof, it shew^th to be Corinthia; which things are in
Tresteuere in Rome: the Capital X. and also the Base, are of 2. kinds, Dorica
and Corinthia. The Abacus of the Capital, and also the Base, is Dorica; but
the Base, by means of the liveliness of the work, may be named Corinthia,
and so are the Leaves of the Capital of Corinthia: but for that the Abacus is
fouresquare, and all the other members round: therefore you shall cut the Rose
under the Abacus in the 4. corners, as you see it in the Figure. The Capital
A. with the monstrous horse, in place of Caulicules, may be called Composit^,
and is in the Basilico del foro transitorio. The strikes of the Column are
different from others, as you may see them beside the A. The Base X. is
Composita, and is in Rome: the Capital is mere Corinthia, and is at the 3.
Columns, beside the Colises. The Capital C. is composed of Ionica and
Corinthia; and is in an Arch tryumphant in Verona. The Capital D. is in the
same Arch, on some flat Columns. The Base Y. is Composita, with the
Astragalus, which stands upon the uppermost Thorus, and is of Antiquity in
Rome.

architectural drawing

architectural drawing

YOu see not many Arches tryumphant made of Composita, and the most part are
made of pieces, taken ont of other buildings: nevertheless, having showed a
general rule for them; therefore I will not set down any other invention of
Edifices of that kind: for the provident workman, as necessity requires,
may help himself with the inventions aforesaid, changing them into Composita.
But I will show two orders of Chimneys of each sort of work, the one within
the wall, and the other without. This Chimney, which should stand cleans within
the ^^all, if you will make it in a small place, the height shall be no higher
then to a man's shoulders, that is man's eye and sight may not be hurt by the
fires and the widenests;e shall be according to the bigness of the place wherein
it should be set. The height by to the Architraue, shall be divided in 4. parts,
one shall be the breadth of the Antepagmentum or the Pilaster, wrought in such
manner as you see it here set down. And in this Composita, (because it is
free^^ ^en the other) I have made this Pilaster very much differing from the
rest, nevertheless, taking a part of this invention from an ancient stool,
which is at S. John de La^era^e^s in Rome. The Architraue shall be of half the
breadth of the Pilasters: the Cimatie of the sixth part: the rest shall be divided
in 7. whereof 3. parts shall be for the first Facie, and 4. for the second. The
Asteagalus shall be made of a half part, taken between both the Facies. The
Freess, because it is cut, shall be made the fourth part higher then the
Architraue: the Cornice is the height of the Architraue, and there shall be 7.
parts made of it* 2. for the Cimatie under the Corona: other 2. for the
Cor^^^a: and one for the Eimatie thereof. The 2. that re^^ine, are for the
Scima; and the Proiecture of all shall be like the height. But if you make the
Pilaster of the Art part of his height, and the other members duni^ished
accordingly, it will be much more seeruely and specially, if the work be of
small form. For the ornaments above the Cori^ce, you may choose whether you
will maks them or not that i^ referred to the workman.

architectural drawing

AMan may make other drnaments of Chimneyes of this Composita work, and in
diverse forms as this, because it is more licentious then the other manner of
building: and for a changing of the other form, you may also make this by this
rule. The height of the Architraue being of a reasonable man's stature, you
shall divide the same in 8. parts, whereof one shall be for the breadth of the
Modiglions or Rolls: Vitruuius calls them Prothyrides. The height of the
Pedestals shall be as high as if they were to sit upon. The order above the
Modiglions, which holds no rule at all, shall be two parts and an half of the
breadth of the Modiglions. And for that also I have said, this manner is without
rule, therefore the leaves and other parts, shall be referred to the workman.
Men may also sometimes set the Dorica and the Ionica, and sometimes the
Corinthia above the Modiglions: and for that the funnell, which receives the
smoke, is wide, therefore you may make the small order above it, which will
give it a fayrer form then the usual, which goes like a Piramides, or sharp
up.

architectural drawing

Of four manner of Simmetries.
THe Workenan is to have a great judgment, because of the diversity of
composition in Ornaments of buildings, for that there are some places in
Architecture, of the which there may, almost, certain rules be given, for they
are no accidents that happen contrary to our opinions, for every day we see
some Columns, that with their different positions, show different measures in
themselves, according to the places where they stand. These alterations are so
made in buildings in 4. ways, that is, setting the Columns almost in an
Insule, without any companion to help it either on the sides or behind. These
certaynely bear a great weight, and in their height they go not above the
aforesaid rule: the example hereof is in the first Column marked A. but if you
place them against the wall (though they be round) by the which being
vnderholden and helped, a man may make another thickness higher above the
same: the example thereof is in the Column B. Or also drawing alone two third
parts from the wall, there may yet a thickness or wall go higher then the
other, for that you see the like in some buildings, that rise to nine thicker
and a half, and most in the Coliseo of Rome, in the Order of Dorica, as it is
showed in the 3. Column C. but they are more helped when they have Pilasters
on the sides, which bearing all the weight, give the workman means to make
the Columns more seemly, and so slender, that they may be said rather to be
placed there to fill a room for beautifying, then for strength. You may also
draw a Column two third parts out of the wall, and on each side set half a
Pillar, which will help the Columns so well, that you may make another
thickness above: and in this case, the Architraue, Freese and Cornice may
bear out upon the round Column, yea although it were flat, because the half
Pillars would hold the Architrane, etc. on the sides: but upon one Column
alone, it is vicious to make such work bearing out, for the other parts
besides should be abandoned without any help. This example you see in the
Column D. But when the Columns have any weight to bear up, without the help
of another, and shall have fit Intercolumnes, it shall not be thought meet to
exceed order, yea, although they have Story upon Story to bear up: it is
reason that they should be made b^tter, that the work may be more durable: and
although the Pedestall be a great help to raise up Columns, nevertheless, if
the Columns be high enough, I would think it better if the Columns had them
not, specially in the lowest Story, but in the third and fourth Story with
reason. Podiums and Pedestals also serve to raise up Columns, which the (...)
Romans observed in Theaters and Amphitheaters.

But touching the setting of Column upon Column, there are diverse reasons:
The first is, that the Proiecture of the Pedestals of the Columns placed
above, should go no further out, then the thickness of the undermost Column;
and this should be a most certain reason: but for that the second Story should
lessen much from the first, and would serve no more for any other Story,
considering the great lessening ensuing, another reason, and more to the
purpose, is this: That the flat of the Pedestall ought, at least, to be in
Perpendicular with the Column below, and to set the Column above this
Pedestall, lessened a fourth part from that which stands under, as well in
thickness as in height: so this rule agrees with that of Vitruuius in
Theatrum: which figure is above the Column A. and if you will not lessen the
Column so much, then you must make the uppermost Column as thick as the
nethermost is in the uppermost part: but in this case, the flat or massy part
of the Pedestall would be broader then the nethermost Column is thick below:
nevertheless, those of the Theater of Marcellus work that effect. The example
hereof is in the Column B. and these three reasons are probable enough. But
the ancient Romans, in the great Edifice of the Coliseo, made the Column
Ionica, Corinthia and Composita all of one thickness; and the Dorica, under
all the other, they made thicker, about the twentieth part. And this (in my
opinion) they did by good advice: for if they had lessened all the Columns the
fourth part, one above the other, the last, in so great a building, by reason
of the great distance, would have showed very small, which we now see to be of
good correspondence, by reason of the height. The showing of this is in the
Column C. And as the Column above the Column D. is less then that which
stands lowest one fourth part: for that, if a man has a reasonable house to
make of 3. Stories, so I would not think it amiss, that a man should lessen
every Story the fourth part, according to Vitruuius advice: but if the
building be high, then you were better observe the Order of the Coliseo, that
the Stories Dorica, Ionica and Corinthia, may each be about one height, but
the Story above increases in height about the fifth part: and this is so (as I
have said) because of the great distances which part, by means of the great
distance, seems to be of the height that the rest are: and although that the
showing of these Columns is Doricall, yet it is so in all sorts of Columns.

architectural drawing

Of Brick.
Having spoken of so many and diverse Ornaments of stones, it is requisite, that
I should also show how they are to be placed in work; and specially, when a
man is to mix hard stones and bricks together, which requires great diligence
and Art: for that bricks are like flesh in a piece of work, and hard stones
like the bones to knit and hold them together: which two things, if they be not
well and fastly bound together, they will, in time, decay: and therefore the
foundation being made in such manner as the place affords, it is requisite,
that the provident workman should make ready, all the hard stones, and also
the bricks, with the rest of the stuff belonging thereunto, and so should come
to lay and join the hard stones and the bricks together, all at one time: and
it is requisite, that the hard stones should be set so far within the wall,
that although there were no mortar to hold them together, yet they should, of
themselves, stand fast in the wall: which doing, the work will be strong and
continue hard. The example hereof is seen in the other side, by the figure A.
where it is also showed, how a man may make places breast high, without fear.
And if you have Pedestals with Columns to set upon them, where hard and soft
stones are mixed together, if the hard stones be not well joined with the soft,
as you see in the figure B. the work will not continue long. And if the
Columns be of diverse pieces, some of them (that is the least) shall go deep
into the wall, to hold the other the faster. But if the Columns be of one
piece, them they would stand, at least, a third part within the wall; but the
Bases and Capitals must enter much more into the wall, and above all the Corona
and other Cornices, which bear far out from the wall. The innermost part
that is unwrought, must counteruayle that which is without, that it may bear
it self: but if at the same time a man will make any work or Facie upon the
stones, then it is requisite, that the workman, before he begins to lay any
work above the ground, should make ready all his stones, together with the
other stuff belonging thereunto: and so laying and knitting the stones with
the bricks together, I say, that he shall do well to set some of the stones so
deep into the wall, that they may hold the other pieces together by force,
joining well in, as you see it in the figure C. that in time they may not ryue
and break asunder one from the other. But that the wall, made of brick,
should not sink, and sinking, should break the thinnest parts, by reason of
the weight above, it is necessary to have brick well burnt, and mortar well
tempered, and between the stones little mortar, and well laid and joined one
upon the other: And above all, such work would not be made by any force, nor
weight upon weight, to be packt in haste, but you must let it rest somewhat
from lay to lay: for if a man will work in haste, and set great weight upon it,
it is most certain, the wall will sink, and the stones being not able to
bear she weight, will break; but if it be made with leyser, then the stuff
will be as it should be: nevertheless, I would always more commend the work
that is wholly bound in the wall, then that which is joined together or covered;
and specially, in my opinion, men should not make them in walls that stand
outward, for that the houses which have been made so in former time, by
ancient workmen, and were covered over with Marble and other fine stones, are
now seen all without stones before, and nothing but the wall of brick, that
stood behind them, stands still: but those buildings, where the hard stones
are bound and joined into, and with the bricks, are yet standing:
nevertheless, if you will make such work simple, I think this the surest
way, although some workmen, in diverse places of Italy, have made some
building, with simple walls, leaving places in them for hard stones to be put
in, and after, at another time, have put in such Ornaments: nevertheless, for
that such things are not well fastened in the wall, but in a manner hackt, you
may in many places see the pieces fallen, and every day more and more decay.

architectural drawing

Of Doors of Wood, and of Metal. The tenth Chapter.
AS I think, I have sufficiently spoken of the Ornaments belonging to building
of Stone, now I will speak of Doors that shut the houses: whether they be of
Wood or Metal, I will set down some Figures thereof: of the hooks I will say
nothing, for all the world knows them well enough: nevertheless, those that
were used in ancient time, as you see them in the Figure A. were easilyer to be
opened and shut, then those which are now used in all Countries, as in the
Figure B. But whether these Doors are of Wood or Metal, their Ornaments
shall be made in such manner, that the fayrer the Ornaments of Stone are, the
Ornament of the Gate also shall be correspondent, that they may be one like
the other; and to the contrary, if the Ornament be slender, then you shall
make the Door of Wood or Metal thereafter, which is to be referred to the
workman: and to give you a show of such Ornaments, you shall here see five
manners of Ornaments, which, for the most part, are taken out of Antiquities.

architectural drawing

architectural drawing

Of the Frames of Doors
IF men make Doors, Gates, or Leaves (as we term them) all of one piece, so
that there needs in that case neither wood nor iron unto them, they make the
hooks of the same piece or Metal. But those that are made of wood, and then
covered over with Copper of reasonable thickenes, which, if it be of flat
plates, you must fasten one upon the other, and yet, although they be well
joined and pind, or payled together, nevertheless, the nature of wood is such,
that it will ^^^^ke or swell, as the time of the year is brie or moist: if
therefore you will make such a door, that w^^l be couer^d over with Copper,
Iron, or any Metal, you see the surest way here in the side, in the figures A.
and B. for wood neu^r waxes longer, but remains still in the same form;
which is referred to the workman, to make them thick or ^hinne, as he will,
according to the weight that they shall bear, and you may also fill the spaces
of the same wood. And for that all the ancient doors or goings through, are
commonly fourth^^are, only those of gates of Tow^es, or tryumphant Arches,
which are roost: nevertheless, in our days many do^^^ are made round above,
peradventure for more strength; and also, for that in some cases they become
the houses well, whereof I have showed a figure, and (...) that, in truth, a
man cannot conceive all things: for many accidents happen to a workman at such
time when he is to devise sou^ new work.

architectural drawing

Of Ornaments of Pictures within and without the houses. The eleventh Chapter.
THat I may not leave out any kinds of Ornaments, whereof I give not some rule
for instruction, as well in Pictures as other things, I say, that the workman
ought not only to take care of the Ornaments of stone or marble, but also of
the Paynters work, to let out the walls withal: and it is requisite, that he
should prescribe an order therein, as Surueyor of all the work: for this
cause, that some Paynters have been workmen good enough, touching the
handling of their work, but for the rest, of so little understanding, that
desiring to show their skill in the placing of the colors, have disgraced, and
sometime spoiled a Story of a house, for want of consideration how to place the
Pictures in the same. Therefore if they have a Forefront or Facie of a house to
paynt, it is certain, there is no opennesse to be left, where air or lantshap
is to be made, for those break the building; and of a thing that is massy and
close, they transform it into an open weak form, like a ruinous and imperfect
building. Also there should be no personages nor beasts colored, unless it
were to trim and deck doors, wherein there are men's personages: but if the
owner of the house, or the Paynter, desire colors, that the work may not be
broken nor spoiled, a man may cover a hackled wall over with cloth, and therein
paynt what he will: and also, after the manner of tryumphs, a man may hang on
the wall Garlands, and strings of Leaves, and Fruits, Flowers, etc. and also
Shields, Trophies, and such things as are to be stirred: but if you will paynt
the walls with firm matter, then you may feign things of marble or other
stones, cutting therein what you will: you may also beautify some figures in
Niches, with metal, and so the work will remain firm, and worthy
commendation of all those that know good work from bad. And the Author
rehearses diverse excellent workmen, whom (for brevity sake) I will omit,
that only used to paynt nothing else but white and black in houses, and yet
so excellently well, that it made men wonder to behold them. A man may also,
with good reason, make and set forth certain openings in walls of lodgings,
round about the Courts, and make air, lantshaps, houses, figures, beasts, and
such like things, as he will in colors. Also, if a man has Chambers, Halles,
or other places, about the ground within, to paynt and set forth, then a
Paynter, in manner of Architecture, may make openings to see through them, as
the place is: for above the sight a man must make nothing but air or skies,
roofes, high hills, and the upper part of houses: and if you place figures
also above the sight, a man must see under them, and not the ground whereon
they stand. And if the Paynter will make a Hall or any other, or further room
perspectiuely, he may, over the going in, with order of Architecture, make it
to show further then in effect it is. And this, Balthazar (a man excellently
well learned in Architecture) did, in beautifying the Hall of Augustine Guyse, a
Merchant of Rome, where, in that fort he set out some Columns, and other
Architecture to that purpose: so that Peter Aretin, a man also skillful in
Paynting and in Poesy, said, that there had not been a perfiter Paynter then
he in that house, although there is work also in it of Raphaels own doing.
And when the walls are painted, and if you will have the roof also done, then
follow the steps of Antiquity, making things that are called Grootes, which,
for that you may make them as you will, show well therein, as Leaves, Flowers,
Beasts, Birds, and other mixed matter. If a man makes any clothes or apparel
of figures, or which are made fast on them, therein a man may do as he will.
But if a Paynter will make any figures according to the life, in a roof of a
house, then he must be very skillful, and much exercised in Perspectiue work,
and very judicious to choose such things as are fittest for the place, and
rather heavenly flying things, then carthly things, with such Art, that he
must shorten the figures so (although they be monstrous) that when men stand a
convenient distance off from them, they may resemble the life. Which thing is
excellently well made in L^rette Mantua, and other places in Italy, by diverse
workmen: yet skillful workmen in our time have shunned such shortening, for
that (in truth) it is not so pleasing to the eyes of the common sort of people.
Therefore Raphael Durbi^, whom I will always name Divine, for that he never
had his fellow, (I say no more) in this thing, as men judged of him when he was
to paynt the roof of Augustine Guyse his Gallery, shunned shortening as much as
he could: for when he came to the highest part of the roof, and there meant to
make the banquet of the gods, heavenly things, and such as served to the
purpose for a roof, taking away the harshnesse of shortenings, set forth a
cloth of azure color, made fast to the strings or Garlands, as if it had been
a thing to be stird, and therein made the banquet so seemly and so
workemanlike, that the Gallery was rather esteemed for a preparation to a
triumph, then a plain paynting made upon a wall. Therefore the workman, that
ought not to be unskillful in Perspectiue work, should not endure, as being
Surueyor over all the workmen in the building, that any thing should be made
therein, without his counsel and advice.

Of flat Roofes, and the Ornaments thereof. The twelfth Chapter.
ALthough in the Netherlands they use not to deck the Chambers in the Roofes
with wooden work, nevertheless, when a house without is made wholly after the
old manner, it were unfit that the Roof should not be agreeable, as also the
Bedsteeds, Banks, etc. And which is more, I would say, that each place should
be stuffed and suited within, with things sitting to that which it shows
outward. I say then, If the Roof be high, then the deuisions to be wide of
space, and rising or bearing out well: and if a man will beautify it with
Paynting, it must be well done, and conformably painted, according to the
greatness and distance thereof. It ought also to be made of light and brown
colors: and in the middle of the field you must set a gylt Rose: but if a man
will color it, then the field must be blue, as piercing, but the Roses must be
bound with some works or branches, that they may not seem to hang in the air:
and the Cornices which close up the fouresquare or other fields, must be well
gylt, or beautifyed with the same color: but if so be the Roof is not high
enough, then you must make the work thinner and smaller, as also the paynting:
and that you may understand it, I have set two figures to show you, which,
notwithstanding, are all one: the one of bare wood, the other painted, as I
said before. And this Order I observed in the Roof of the great Library in
the Palace of Venice, in the time of the Prince Andreagriti, because the Roof
was lower then it should be, in respect of the wideness and length of the
Hall, and I made it of thin work, for the reason aforesaid.

architectural drawing The Timber work of the seeling aforesaid.


architectural drawing The Ornaments and Garnishing of the same work.


architectural drawing Another manner of Sieling.


architectural drawing

architectural drawing The Garden, being an Ornament to the Building, therefore
these Mazes and Knots, are set in Figure.


architectural drawing

architectural drawing

LAstly, our Author speaks of Armor, to show how a man shall make colon^, and
place them, according to state, workmanship, or nature; that thereby a man may
perceive of what stock, or from whence it is derived (...) for, says (...)
we see that in former times men m^^^ and figured Prince^ in their majesty,
Bishops in Pontifical Robes, Ca^^^^nes armed, and every ma^^^ such h^^^^e, as
b^^^tted his calling and cond^^^^. And ^^^e will h^^^ men to make and color
arms* that ar^ to be so (...) upon, or before houses, with beast^ ^^^^ds etc.
(...), sil^er, blue, red, green and bla^^ colors (...) no ^^^tall upon metal,
no^ color upon (...). But for that workmen here in this Country make no Arms
after their own pleasures, we will let them pass, and in place thereof set
down a figure of Letters, the which the workman has occasion many times to
cut, or place above Gates, Doors, in Freeses, and other tables, therein to set
names, titles, devices, or other superscriptious, at the pleasure of the
owners, or to know a (...) any other common places o^^^ice or otherwise.
Nevertheless, for that here there are roofing works (...) to f^ll the place,
I will set the Figures of the Arms* which he has made after ye Letters, that
the Book^ may be complete* The workman, having n^^ knowledge of learning,
should be much troubled, to seek far and near for one that should write
them for him: and although that he has them in writing, nevertheless for want
of knowing the pr oportions, they may be spoiled in working, and to bring his
work in contempt; as also those that drew them for him: Therefore, although
they are drawn by Lucas Patiolus, Geotry Tory, and Albertus Durer, who,
nevertheless, agree not all together, therefore I will set these hereafter
down for a common rule, following our Author, who (letting pass all
superstition) has brought the Columns and Pedestals into a due (...) whose
authority, I should almost say, that a man may make the^e letters greater or
smaller, according to the orders of Columns; but to write the ^imetry, or not,
yt I may not digress too far out of the way, I will follow Vitruuius, where
he says, that a Ionica Column is 9. parts high, and (...) showing of diverse
Authors, this form of Letters is also found in Ionica, and so I leave them of
9. parts: and whether a man would make them by Corinthia or Composita order of
10. parts, it would not be amiss, for as the Corinthia is most used for the
slenderness, so these Letters for the most part, are made of 10. parts: by the
Dorica and Thuscana, they are made of eight. By that reason thereof, it were
not much to be contemned, considering the grossness of the work; also,
according to Vitruuius writing, a man may alter the Simetries, as it is
sufficiently showed in other places: for upon some occasions, they are greater
and smaller, yea, and show altogether false to that they are. To learn easily
to make these letters, first, you must make a perfect fouresquare, and set it
in as many parts as you will give unto ye letters: but if they be of 6.7.8.9. or
10. parts, more or less, the smallest draught shall be the third part of the
thickenesse, and the cross draught the half. The corners shall, at least,
have as much Proiecture as the thickness of she letter taken with the
Compass. But although one letter is within the fouresquare, and the ot^^^
without, you may see in the figure, where you may set the Compass to draw the
round: you may set the O. of the same measure that you set the Q. The tail of
the Q. is a quarter and a half of a fouresquare, and sinckes a half
fouresquare; some make it shorter. I will not uphold these letters to be the
best, but every man take them he likes best: it is also no need to take so
much pains with every small letter: but it falls out oftentimes, that a man
is to make them a foot, or six, more or less, high: which a man shall never
bring to good pass, without following a sure proportion.

monumental alphabet III A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P Q R S T V X Y Z



architectural drawing



The end of the fourth Book.
The fifth Book of Architecture, made by Sebastian Serly, wherein there are set
down certain forms of Temples, according to the Ancient manner; and also
serving for Christians.

Translated out of Jtalian into Dutch, and out of Dutch into English.

LONDON. Printed for Robert Peake, and are to be sold at his Shop, near
Holborne Conduit, next to the Sun Tavern. 1611.

THE FIFTH BOOK: Of diverse manners of Temples.
The foureteenth Chapter.
ALthough we see and find diverse forms of Temples and Churches in
Christendom, as well ancient as modern, yet for that I have formerly promised
to show some Orders thereof, to accomplish the number of my Books, therefore I
will entreat of them, and set down twelve several manner of Temples, with
their grounds and measures: and for that the round form is the perfitest of
all others, therefore I will begin with it: but though in our time, whether it
be by reason of small devotion, or cruelty of men, there are no more great
Churches begun to be made, and that men finish not them which in former time
have been begun, therefore I will make mine so small, as they may pass in
reasonable manner, for that with small cost, they might in short time be made.
The Diameter of this ground shall be as long as high, according to the Figure
of the Circle, that is, of 60. foot. The thickness of the wall shall be the
fourth part of the Diameter, that is, 15. foot, that a man may easily make the
Chapels within it: which Chapels shall be 12. footbroad. The Niches between
the Pillars shall be four foot broad: the other in the Entry, and of the
three Chapels, shall be six foot and a half broad: and to spare charges of
stone and lime, the great Niches shall be made without the Chapel: the breadth
whereof shall be 15. foot. This Chapel is elevated from the earth at least
five steps; and if it were higher, it were not amiss: for the earth in time
rises, so that men go downward into many old Temples and Churches,
whereunto, in former time they ascended upwards: but this Stayre would always
be uneven, according to Vitrunius writing, speaking of Temples, where he says:
that as a man with his right foot begins to clyme up, he may, with the said
right foot, step upon the pauement of the Temple. Touching the foundation, a
man cannot sail, if he makes it deep and broad enough: but the least breadth
that a man can lay, is this: that a man should from the Diameter of the
thickenesse of the wall, make a perfect fouresquare, and the Diagonus of this
fouresquare shall be the breadth of the foundation under the wall. And so, I
think, Vitrunius writes, where he speaks of foundations. But touching the
Stofes of foundations, in fast or hard ground, and also in watery ground, I
need not show it here, because every man knows it.

architectural drawing

Of diverse forms of Temples
Having showed the ground of this round Temple, this Figure shows the body of
the Temple, both without and within, for that it is purposely made broken, to
see both. The inner part of the Temple is made after the manner of Corinthia.
The whole height from the Pauement below, to the Roof above, is 60. foot;
whereof 30. foot are for the ^ettle or round roof: the rest netherwards,
shall be divided in 5. parts and an half; whereof one part shall be for Cornice.
Freese and Architraue. The four parts and an half resting, shall be the height
of the Columns, with Bases and Capitals, whereof altogether, you shall find
the particular measures in my fourth Book, in the Corinthia. The Niches
between the flat Pillars, shall be 10. foot high the other shall be of 15. foot
high. The hole above the Roof, shall be the seventh part of the wideness of the
Diameter of the Temple: above, upon that hole, there may be a Lantern made,
stopped with glass, or it may be left open, whereat there will come in light
enough to the middle of the Temple, for that the Chapels have light enough at
their windows: the top of this Temple will best be covered with Lead: the
Cornice without, shall stand like that within, but much greater of members,
because it stands in the weather. Touching the Doors, you find them
sufficiently set volume in my fourth Book.

architectural drawing

ALthough the ground of this Temple following is round also, yet it has an
alteration by the four bearings out, which are three Chapels, and also the
going in of the same fashion. The Diameter of this Temple is 48. foot: the
thickenesse of the wall is a seventh part of the Diameter. The Chapels are 14.
foot in fouresquare, without the Niches. The other 4. Niches or small Chapels
shall be 9. foot broad: the fouresquare* Chapels have their light on the sides;
but the light of the Temple above in the Roof, shall be wide the fifth part of
the Diameter, with a Lantern upon it, as it is said of the other: you shall
go up to this Temple also with five stayres, and for that the corners without
the Temple lie always foul, I think it were not amiss to make a fouresquare
wall about it, as high as the going up, that people may not so easily come to
it.

architectural drawing

HEre you see the Chapel standing upright (whereof the ground is on the other
side) which shows as well within as without, because it seems as if it were
broken. The height within, is like the Diameter, that is, 48. foot. The half
shall be for the half round roof, and the hole above for the light, as I said
before, shall be wide the fifth part of the Diameter; whereon there shall be a
Lantern, made with glass, as the Figure shows, and the Roof without,
covered with Lead or other stuff. From the Roof netherwards, the Cornicement
shall be made of two foot and an half high, formed like Impost of the Arch of
the Theater of Marcellus, in the fourth Book and the seventh Chapter, Folio
37. and shall serve for Capitals, unless it be the Plinthus with the Cimatie,
which shall serve for Corona. The Pilasters are broad 4. foot can half. The
great Chapels are 21. foot high. The smalest Chapels shall be 13. foot and an
half high, half round above. Above those 3. fouresquare Chapels, and over
the going in, there may be flat couers, somewhat falling down, to void the
water: a man may also make steps within the thickenesse of the wall, to go up,
and an iron or stone rail, to rest or lean upon. The Temple may be covered
with such stuff, as may best be provided: but Lead would be the surest.

architectural drawing

AFter the round Figure, which is the perfectest, the best are the Quale, that
is, like an Egg; therefore I have made a Temple of that fashion: which Temple
shall be 46. foot broad, and 66. foot long. The thickenesse of the wall shall be
8. foot, and within it the Chapels shall stand: and although they be not too
large, yet a man needs not cut them off. The widenes of the 2. greatest
Chapels, holds 20. foot and an half; within the which are two Niches* each 4.
foot bread. The Columns shall be a foot and an half thick, and the half
Columns accordingly. The spaces between the middlemost Columns shall be 7.
foot and an half: the other shall contain 4. foot and one fourth part. These
two Chapels shall each of them have 3. windows: the middlemost shall be 6. foot
wide, and the other on the sides each three foot. The Chapel with the high
Altar, shall be 10. foot broad, and 6. foot far in the wall, with Niches, like
the great, and a window above the Altar, of 6. foot wide. The 4. other
Chapels shall be a half Circle, 10. foot wide, having the like Niches also, and
a window of 4. foot wide, above the Altar. And for that this Chapel has
light enough of it self, it might suffice for the whole Temple: but to make it
lighter, there may be windows made above the Chapels. This Temple shall also
go up five steps: the door shall be six foot wide, and shall be beautified with
4. Pillars, after the Corinthia manner: the going in shall be like the Chapel
with the high Altar.

architectural drawing

THis Figure ensuing, shows the Quale Temple within, which from the Pauement
to the Roof, shall be as high as broad, that is, of 36. foot: from the
Pauement, till you come above the Cornice, it shall be 23. foot: which height
divided in five, one part shall be for Architraue, Freese and Cornice: the other
4. parts shall be for the height of the Pillars, which separate the Chapels.
The particular measures hereof you find in my fourth Book, in the order of
Corinthia; for that this Temple is made of such work. The height of the round
Columns shall be 12. foot. The Architraue, that holds up the Arch, is 2. foot.
The Gate (as it is said in the ground) shall be be^^tified with four flat
Pillars, of such form and measure, as those that stand within the Temple; and
also with such Cornicements: the Gate or Door shall have an Arch standing upon
two Pillars, between the flat Pillars: the Roof of this Temple may be
beautified, as you see it in the Figure; and richlyer also, making the Windows
above the Cornice, hanging downwards, as you see, and cover the Temple with
Lead, which is best: and so the windows shall be preserved well enough.

architectural drawing

ALthough this form is five cornerd, which in Building is not so handsome,
therefore within I have made it of ten corners. The Diameter of this Temple is
62. foot long: the Diameter of the Lantern is 12. foot: the five great
Chapels are 15. foot in fouresquare, without the three Niches, which are
tenfoote wide. The small Chapels are 15. foot broad, and go 4. foot into the
wall, to the half Circle, which is, 13. foot wide. The great Chapels shall
have two windows, and the small one: the wideness of the doors is 7. foot
and an half. The Gallery without, shall be 10. foot broad, and 24. foot long.
The 4. Pillars thereof, shall be 2. foot fouresquare. The middlemost space
between the Pillars, shall be 10. foot, and the other 2. spaces shall be 4.
foot. The sides of the Gallery shall have a leaning place made with Balusters:
In the sides of the Gates, there shall stand 2. pair of winding stayres, to
go up upon the Portall, and also round about the Temple. This Temple is 9.
foot elevated from the ground, and it may be made hollow underneath.

architectural drawing

ALthough this Temple is shut, yet I will show the measure within; it is as
high as broad within, that is, 62. foot. The Lantern is also as high as broad
to the Cornice: the Roose is of half a Circle. The roof of the Temple is also
half a Circle, high 31. foot, the rest netherwards. The Cornice shall have two
foot and an half, formed like the Impost of the Theater of Marcellus, in the
fourth Book, in the order of Ionica, marked T. Folio 37. This Cornice shall be
set without, like the innermost, but greater. The fouresquare Pillars of the
Portall, are 14. foot high, with Bases and Capital, Dorica. The Architraue is
half the thickenesse of the height of the Pillar: about the Arch, the Cornice
is the fourth part less then the great, but of the same form, and shall serve
for Capital upon the Pillars. Above this Cornice, there shall be a place
brest-high, made with Iron Balusters. The two pieces above this Temple, show
the Chapels within: and that with the cross, she weth the greatest Chapel,
whereof the light is 25. foot. The other piece marked L. she weth the less
Chapel, which is also 25. foot high: the Pilasters that separate the
Chapels, are three foot broad: the height is 19. foot: and there shall be a
Cornice made, which shall go round about the Temple, serving for Capitals upon
the said Pilasters; which form shall be made after the Dorica Temple, but a
little altered: the Cornicement, upon the Lantern, may be made with
Architraue, Freese and Cornice.

architectural drawing

THe ground of the Temple following shall be six cornerd, being in Diameter 25.
foot: and the wall 5. foot thick. The wideness of the Chapels are 10.
foot, and stand 4. foot within the wall. The wideness of the Niches is 2.
foot. The Door of the Temple is 5. foot wide, adorned with double Pillars,
which are a foot and a quarter thick. The going up is 5. steps, or more if
you will, yet uneven. Each Chapel has a Window, of four foot and a half
broad, which will bring in light enough, although there be no Lantern. On the
6. corners without the Temple, there shall be flat Pillars made, of 2. foot and
a quarter broad, coming out a little. And if you would make the Temple
greater, and for want of stones you could make it no thicker Columns: then you
might make it Corinthia, or Ionica, or Dorica, if you will: and then you may
help your self with Pedestals.

architectural drawing

NOw I have showed the ground of the 6 cornerd Temple, (...) must show it
standing upright, and also describe it as well within as without: for although
the Temple be wholly closed up, yet I have set a Chapel above ever it, to see
it within, for that they are all five or one form; and the going in also is of
the same form. But ouching the outermost part, I say, that the height from the
pauement below, till you come above the Cornice, shall be 18. f^ote. The Cornice
round about the Temple, shall be made of a foot and a half: but the members
of the said Cornice shall be made according to the Chapter of Dorica, for that
it shall also serve for Capital upon the Pilasters, at the 6. corners.
Touching the Plinthus with the Cimatie, for that it shall serve for a Corona,
it shall go but right through above the Pilasters, as you may see in the
Figure. The Portall before shall be beautifyed with round Columns, and with
flat Counterpillars: whereof the middlemost Intercolumnes (or spaces between
the Columns) shall be 7. foot and a half. The Columns shall be a foot and a
half thick: but the space between each 2. Columns, and Pillars, shall be
half a foot: these said Columns shall be 8. foot and three fourth parts high.
The Capitals shall be Dorica: but the Bases, because they stand below at the
foot, in the rain and the wind, and also for that they should be the Bases
for the flat Pillare, and the great Pilasters, going about the Temple on all
sides, therefore they shall be made Tuscana. The height of the Architraue shall
be a foot, whereon the Arch shall stand: and the Door shall be adorned as you
see it in the Figure. The going in shall be 5. steps at the least. The Roefe
shall be covered with a thing, which in those Countries lasts long, and is
easy to be had, otherwise it were best to be of Lead: and this is touching the
work without. To speak of the in^^ard part, it is said, that 1. Chapel
serves for all: the breadth of these Chappele hold each of them 10. foot: and
in height 13. foot and a half, and enter 4. foot into the wal^: on ^ach side
they have a Niche, which to 2. foot broad: above the Altar there is a window,
which is 4. foot and a half broad: and 7. foot high. The Cornice within the
Temple shall stand of the same height that the outermost does, and shall also
be of the same figures: for the Plinthus with the Cimatie, shall also go right
through, round about the Temple, without bearing out above the Pilasters:
otherwise a man may make them much slenderer then they that stand in the rain
and the wind. You may also make the Bases after Dorica: and although all the
other Temples showed before, have their heights within, like the breadth or the
Diameter, so shall this, nevertheless, though it be so small, be half a
Diameter more higher, that is a Diameter and a half, which is seven and thirty
foot and a half.

architectural drawing

ALthough those aforesaid, and some Temples following, have no Steeple for Bells
to hang in, as the Christians use to have; nor any Vestries, nor other places
for men to withdraw themselves in: yet they must, nevertheless, be handsomely
made without, but so, that men may go through the Temple into them: all which
subjects and inventions shall not want in my other Book. The ground of this
Temple is 8. square: whereof the Diameter within shall be 43. foot: and the wall
8. foot. The Chapels are 12. foot wide, and stand 6. foot within the wall.
Three Chapels are of half a Circle, and the other 3. with the going in are 4.
square. Each Chapel has 2. Nithes, which are 4. foot broad. The 3. windows
in the half Circles are 4. foot broad: the other 3. with the Columns are 11.
foot wide. The Door is 5. foot wide. In the middle of the Temple a man may
set an Altar, covered with a Tribune, upon 8. Pilasters. The Diameter hereof
shall be 12. foot long: and if you will make this Temple greater, you may make
it more feet.

architectural drawing

THe Figure hereunder serves for the 8. square ground, before set down, and is
the said Temple as it is without. From the highest step to the uppermost part
of the Cornice, it is 21. foot and a half, which is the half of the
innermost height. The Cornice shall contain 2. foot, divided as in the
Chapter Dorica; and shall also bear out over the Pilasters, without the
Plinthus, as in the Figure. You shall also set a simple Base underneath three
fourth parts of a foot high. The breadth of the Pilasters at the corners,
shall be of 3. foot: and those that stand inwards shall be but 2. foot broad. The
Door is 5. foot wide, and shall be 13. foot and a half high. The Ornaments of
this Door you find in the fourth Book, by the Ionica, Folio 38. The manner of
the wideness is sufficiently seen in the Figure: if you will have more light
in the Temple, then you may make a hole above, and that to be covered with
glass, poynt-wise, against the rain.

architectural drawing

ACcording to this innermost Orthographie, the Cornices and Pillars are of
form and height like the innermost: from the Cornices upwards, the roof is a
half Circle: the 3. greatest Chapels are roost with Arches, and are 18. foot
high. The round Columns shall be three quarters of a foot thick, and the half
accordingly, and shall be six foot and an half high: the Architraue, whereon
the Arch comes, shall also be three quarters of a foot: the inter-Columnes in
the middle, shall be four foot and an half, and on either side two foot and
an half. The Chapels of half a Circle, shall also be 18. foot high: the
Niches of all the Chapels shall be ten foot high: the Tribune that should stand
in the middle with the Altar, is figured above: and from the ground to above
the Cornice, it is 18. foot high: the Cornicement thereof is three foot: the
rest is for the Pillars, where, on the sides, you may make Pilasters with
Arches, and all Dorica work, as well within as without. The Tribune is of a
half Circle.

architectural drawing

ALthough this ground without is fouresquare, yet within it is 8. cornerd,
whereof the Diameter within is 65. foot, and the wall 16. foot. The going in of
all the Chapels, is 12. foot, and the wall there, is 3. foot and an half
thick. The corner Chapels shall be 16. foot fouresquare within: the Niches with
Altars, shall be 12. foot broad: the 4. open, and two blind windows, shall be 3.
foot and an half: the two lesser Chapels shall be 22. foot long within, without
the Niches. The Niches shall be 10. foot broad: the windows shall be 6. foot wide:
the Portall without, is 27. foot long, and flue foot wide: right over against
the flat Pillars stand round Columns, which are one foot and 3. quarters
thick. The door is 6. foot wide: the Portall within, is almost like one of
the small Chapels. You may also set a high Altar in the middle, with a
Tribune, whereof the Diameter is 20. foot: the Pilasters are three foot and an
half thick: the flat Pillars at the corners are three foot broad.

architectural drawing

THis is the Orthographie of the aforesaid ground, of the eight cornerd and
fouresquare Temple, which is the Figure as it is without, whereof I will
describe the height: and first, from the Pauement, to the highest part of the
Cornice, it is 22. foot and an half: the height thereof divided in six parts,
one shall be for the Architraue, Freese and Cornice, the other five parts are
for the Pillars, which being two foot and an half broad, yet they are not too
long, because they stand two together, and little raised up. The measure of all
together, you may find in the order of Ionica, in the fourth Book. A^oue this
Cornice stands the Tribune, whereon there shall stand a Lantern, to give
light into the middle of the Temple, whereof you may easily find the measure,
with the small foot that stands in the ground. The round Columns before the
Portall, shall be 13. foot high: the Architraue is a foot: above the Arch, the
Cornice shall be the thickenesse of a Column below, divided as in the Capital
of Dorica. The Frontispicie rises to the Architraue of the Temple: the going
up is of five steps: the final figure marked with A. is one of the Chapels
without, which comes three foot out of the wall: the window whereof is 10.
foot high, beside the light above the Cornice, and above it is half round,
covered as you see.

architectural drawing

NOw I have showed the ground and Orthography without of the Temple in
fouresquare, I will also describe the 8. cornerd Temple within, and set it here
beneath in Figure. And here you see how men going up the Stayres which are
figured in the entry of the ground, go up to ye fair walk. The height of this
Temple within is almost like all the Temples before set down, and also which
are found in Antiquities, that is, as high as broad, which form is taken out
of the Circle. The round Roof, as for the half Circle, occupies the one
half, and of the other half downwards there shall be 6. parts made, whereof
one part shall be for the Architraue, Freese and Cornice, which shall be made
after the Dorica: the other 5. parts are for the wall with the Pillars, which
also are 2. foot and a half broad, like the outermost, but for Capital and
Base, like the Dorica. The measures both of Capitals, Bases, Architraue, Freese
and Cornice, you shall also find in the aforesaid fourth Book, in the Order of
Dorica. The breadth of the going in of all the Chapels is 12. foot: but the
height of the said Chapels is 24. foot. The 4. greatest Chapels which stand
in the corners are 14. foot within, fouresquare, with their Pilasters, with
Arches upon them. The height of all the Niches* as well of those that are 10.
foot broad, as those of 12. foot, shall all be 15. foot high. The Lantern
shall hold 13. foot in Diameter: and the rest the Architector shall easily
find with the small foot.

architectural drawing

THis ground standing hereunder may be named crosse-wise, whereof the
principal place in the middle contains 48. foot in Diameter. The 4. Niches,
with the 4. goings through, are each 10. foot broad; but the goings through are
15. foot long. The four small Temples hold in Diameter 36. foot; and their
Niches, and Windows, (wherein you may place Altars) and the Doors are each
sire foot wide. The 4. places within the 4. corners, may be dwellings for
Priests, and other Church Officers, and are 16. foot fouresquare: above them,
you may place four Towers, and go up into them through the stayres. The four
round forms may be Vestries, and other places for men to withdraw themselves.
This whole fouresquare, without enclosing the innermost round Temple,
contains on all sides 88. foot. The principal going in shall have 9. steps,
and the Door may also be greater thou the other two in the sides.

architectural drawing

FRom the ground before showed, here stands the Orthography of the said
Temple with one of the sides that is before, although a man should set them out
all four, at least three, in this manner. The height of the first Story,
beginning at the highest step of the going up to the uppermost part of the
Cornice, shall be 38. foot; which height, divided in 6. parts, one shall be for
the Architraue, Freese and Cornice, and this shall enclose the whole Temple
round about. From this first Cornice, to the second of the middle Temple, it
shall be 13. foot: of this height you shall make 5. parts: whereof one shall be
for the Freese, Cornice, and Architraue. The same great part of the Cornices
shall also serve for the Lanthornes of the 4. least Chapels: which Lanthornes
within shall contain 8. foot in Diameter. The 3. Order against the 4. Towers
shall have but a flat Facie, right like the foot of the greatest Lantern
which stands upon the round roof. The said Lantern within shall hold 10.
foot in Diameter; and the height without the Kettle stone shall be 16. foot:
this height divided in 5. the one part shall be for the Cornicement of this
Lantern, and the other shall be Corinthian Pillars. The fourth Order of the
Towers shall also be of the same height, and beautifyed with the same
Cornicement: and although that from this Cornicement netherwards, the Order of
the Towers stands not very handsomely, because they are forced to yield to the
Cornicement of the Temple; yet according to Antiquity, it is a fault to be
borne withal. The uppermost parts, which in no sort are tied to any thing,
shall be as high as the thickenesse of the said Towers. The 5. part of that
height shall be for the Cornicement, and the rest, for the Columns, made after
the Ionica. Above the Cornice the leaning place shall be made, with the round
roofes, as you see.

architectural drawing

HEereunder follows the Orthographie of the aforesaid Temple within, that is,
the half of the 3. Temples. And for that the middlemost Temple should receive
more light then from the Lantern, as the other also do by the windows
below, it is requisite to make the Cornice without higher then the innermost,
that a man may, almost, receive the light perpendicular-wise, as you may
consider it in the Figure. From the Pauement, to the highest part of the
Cornice, it shall be 44. foot. The Cornice (because there are neither Columns
nor Pillars about) a man may make bastard, and at his pleasure, so it have not
much bearing out, that it may not take away the sight of the roof. The Cornice
shall be a foot and a half high, and may be made according to the Capital of
Dorica. The height of all the Niches are all 15. foot: above the Niches, there
shall a Facie go round about the whole part of the Temple, as well the small
Temples as the great. Above the Facie the half round roofes of the 4. Chapels
shall stand. Above these 4. Chapels there shall be a plain, made a little
hanging, to cut off the water, with a place bresthigh round about, where, by
the Stayres, a man may go through to the Towers: and if that this Temple
stands in any open place, then there will be a fair walk above it; you must
be careful that you let no snow lie upon it, for it soketh in and hurts the
roof. The Doors on the sides have also 9. steps, although they stand not
marked in the ground: and as these and the like houses stand so high, or not so
high, from the earth, a man may well make them places of devotion, or
otherwise. We see commonly, that round about the Churches all corners lie full,
which is uncivil for sanctified places: therefore I would think good, that it
should be walled round about as high as the steps, that it might not be so
ready for people to go in, and that it were hallowed for a Churchyard. The
Towers that should stand behind in this half, because they stand not upon this
Diameter, and also for less cumber, for that men may conceive how they are
placed: therefore they are not set down in this Figure: and what there wants
more, it is referred to the discretion of the workman* who, in building
thereof, shall find many accidents which a man cannot write nor remember all at
once*

architectural drawing

ALthough the aforesaid Temple is showed to be crosse-wise, nevertheless,
this that is here set down is much liker: and first, I will speak of the
first going in, which shall serve for all the rest, for that they are all of
one form. The wideness is 30. foot, and the length 37. foot. The wall is
seven foot thick: in the middle, on either side, there are two Niches, which
shall each of them be tanne foot broad. The Door is eight foot wide: the going
through, to go into the Circle, is 22. foot wide. The Pilasters there, are
seven foot thick: the Niches, four foot. Within the Pilasters the stayres
shall stand to go up, and that the Pilasters should be the faster to bear
the Tribune, in the four corners, behind against the Pilasters, you shall make
these eight cornerd Chapels, of 18. foot in Diameter, and the wall is four
foot thick. The Niches. Doors, Windows and blind windows, shall be five
foot wide. The corners of the Temple without, have their flat Pillars of three
foot broad: the going up is of five steps.

architectural drawing

THe Orthographie without of the four cornerd cross Temple, is hereunder set
down, and is 44. foot broad at the going in; and the height from the ground to
the Cornice is 30. foot: the Cornicement is five foot: the rest rests for the
Pillars, which should be Ianica. The second story is 22. foot high; which
height shall be divided in six parts, one shall be for the Cornicement, and the
other five for the Cornthia Columns. These two stories the Temple shall have,
whereof you shall have the measure in the fourth Book. The roof shall be 10.
foot ^igh but here in the Land where it blows, rayneth, and snoweth much, it
may stand much higher. Above the upper part of this Frontispicie or Roof;
there shall be a Cornice of two foot, whereon the Kettle or the round Roof
shall stand having a Lantern upon it, which is 10. foot high without his
cover. The part marked C. she^^eth the cover or roof within, and the other
marked L. shows one of the 4. cornerd Chapels: and although these 5. steps,
for a going up stand only to this Door, they should also be made to the other
two doors on the sides: and the ornament of the doors, you shall find in the
aforesaid Book, in the order of Ionica.

architectural drawing

Having showed this fouresquare cross Temple without, now here follows the
part within, as if it were Diameter like, cut even in 2. parts. And first,
speaking of the middle whereon the Tribune stands, there is from one of the
Corners of the Pilasters, to the other, 30. foot. From the pauement below, to
the highest part of the Cornice, it is also 30. foot. The height of this
Freese, Architraue, and Cornice, is 5. foot, and this shall go round about
the Temple within. Upon this Cornice the Arches rest which bear up the
Tribune. Above the Arches there is a great Facie; and from thence upwards it is
15. foot high. The Cornice shall be 2. foot: but shall not bear much over or
out, not is let the roof. From this Cornice netherwards, to the Facie, there
shall be 8. drawing windows made, of 7. foot, fouresquare, as you see it in the
Figure. The Lantern shall be 5. foot wide. From the pauement, to the hole of
the Lantern, it shall be 77. foot high. The place where the high Altar
stands, is right over against the principal going in. In the great
fouresquare there may be an Altar Table set: and above it there shall be a
great round window; as also above all the 4. Doors. I need not write any
thing of the second side: for by the ground and this Figure you may easily
conceive it. And although I say nothing here of Towers, yet there may 2. at the
least, be set above the Chapels in the corners: also, as in many other places
it is showed, the workman, upon good occasion, may alter some things: for
although that in Italy, and here in these Countries (where the sun shines
much) men desire small windows for coldness: nevertheless, those that dwell
Northward, where it is rumatike, and many times close weather, may, according
to the situation, make the windows great, and give more light to the Temples,
without breaking Order, as it is said in the fourth Book of the Venetian
houses.

architectural drawing

AS I promised in my fourth Book, so I have showed diverse fashions of Temples,
viz. round, Quale, or Egg wise, fouresquare, five cornerd, six cornerd, eight
cornerd, and crosse-wise, not only after the manner of the Ancients, but also
serving for Christians, in such forms as are at this day made in Italy, and
elsewhere, whereby I thought I had sufficently performed my promise: but for
that Temples or Churches are made here in these countries crosse-wise also,
like Raphaels ground (of S. Peter's Church in Rome) in my third Book, therefore
I will set two or three more of that form here, therein following the manner of
the Ancients. The greatest going through, or walk in the middle of the Church,
is 30. foot wide: the three Chapels of half Circles, besides the 2. smallest
walks, are 25. foot wide, and shall stand somewhat without the wall. The
Diameter of the Tribune is 36. foot: the four small Tribunes, or round Roofes,
are in Diameter 21. foot, but they shall not come out of the roof. The
crosse-worke has a door on either side, and the 3. half Circles are each of
them 25. foot wide. The hindermost half Circle, where the high Altar stands,
is 31. foot wide. Besides the Quier, there are two eyght-cornerd Vestries,
being 21. foot in Diameter. Before, at the greatest going into the Temple, is
the middlemost door, 12. foot wide, and the 2. small doors 6. foot. On the
sides, the Towers are 27. foot wide: within the stayres, there stands a wide
gate to draw up the Bells. And although this Temple has many steps or stayres,
you may make less.

architectural drawing

THis is the Orthographie of the ground aforesaid, whereof the first Cornice
stands 62. foot high: which height divided in six parts, one part shall be for
Cornice, Freese, and Architraue, and the rest shall be for the flat Pillars,
which shall be five foot broad, and of Dorica work. The middlemost door is 24.
foot high: the two smaller on the sides shall be 12. foot high. The great and the
small doors also shall be beautified with some works, as you see in this
Figure, taking the particular measures out of the Dorica order, in my fourth
Book. The elevation or rising up in the middle, shall to the upper part of the
Cornice be 25. foot; and the Cornice thereof shall be the fourth part less
then the other Cornice under it, made after the form of the Dorica Chapter.
The Frontispicie is fifteen foot high, above it stands the cover or the
Kettle, with this Lantern upon it, the measure whereof, a man may take out of
that before. Below, upon the first Cornice, besides the middlemost bearing up,
you shall make a Basement of five foot high; above that Basement, you must
place the two Towers, which are 42. foot and an half high, making the Cornice
the fourth part less then the other, formed after the Dorica Chapter. The
third order shall be the fourth part less then the second, and the Cornice
thereafter: the fourth order shall also be a fourth part less then the third,
and the Cornice thereafter. The places brest-high, above these Cornices, shall be
four foot high: and from the List, to the point of the Piramides, there are
36. foot. You may double the windows out of my fourth Books.

architectural drawing

THe Figure following shows the aforesaid Temple within, whereof the length
and breadth is set down in the ground: but here I will speak of the height.
The Cornice shall stand high, and be as great as the uttermost, that is, the
sixth part of 62. foot, but shall be made after the Ionica manner. The flat Pillars
shall also be Ionica: the Impost which bears the Arches, shall also be Ionica;
whose form, touching the measures, you shall find them all together orderly in
my fourth Book: all the Chapels shall have their light of themselves, as you
see. Above the Chapels, the Roof shall be broken like a Moon, therein to make
an ouall round hole, that it may yield more light: and that the Tribune may
have more light then from the Lantern, you shall, from the cover upwards,
make a Freese with a List, and therein also make round holes for light. This
small closed figure, standing alone, above the Temple, shows one of the side
doors of the Temple, in the crosse-worke, whereof the door is 10. foot wide,
and 20. high. The Architraue, Freese and Cornice, under the cover or Roof,
although the Pillars are broken after another manner, with the List of the
Portall, shall nevertheless agree with the Cornicement that goes round about
the Temple. And although it is not here showed how the wydest space of the
walk between the Pilasters and the roof is, and how that the smallest walk
is not so high roofed, nor the form of the small Kettles and Vestries are not
showed, yet the workman may imagine it by the ground: for he that undertakes
such a piece of work, must not be unskillful.

architectural drawing

THis Temple following is 30. foot wide in the middle. The cross work, and
also the Tribune, together with the high Quier, shall each of them contain 30.
foot. The Arches which bear the Tribune, shall be 24. foot wide. The Pillars on
the sides, where the Niches stand, shall be 5. foot broad. Each side of the
Cross work is 38. foot long, and shall each of them have a Door. The part
before the high Quier, toward the Altar, is 4. square. The Pilasters with the
Niches, before the half Circle of the high Altar, are 5. foot broad, and
stand from other 24. foot. The Niche or half Circle is 23. foot wide. In the
2. corners on the sides of the high Quier, there are 2. Vestries, which shall be
17. foot wide in 4. square. From the Tribune to the principal going in, there
shall stand 5. Chapels on either side, which shall be 15. foot within 4.
square. The walls between both shall be 4. foot thick. The windows shall be
6. foot wide, and there Altars shall stand. The wall at the Doors shall be
4. foot thick, and on the sides where the Niches stand, 5. foot. Here before
there shall come a Gallery of 14. foot broad, and of 68. foot long. The
Niches shall be 8. foot broad. On the sides of this Portall the Towers shall
stand, and shall stand as broad out at the sides, as the cross work. The
Diameter within the Towers is 18. foot: and although they be 8. square, they
may also be made 4. square. The winding Stayres stand in the thickenesse of the
wall.

Touching the raising upright of the said Temple, first I will speak of the
Portall, which with the help of the fourth Book, and through the ground, you
may find the particular measure of this Order. The Portall above shall be flat
without roof, to take no light away in the Temple. From the Pauement, to the
top of the Cornice which goes round about the Temple, it shall be 47. foot
high. The Architraue, Freese and Cornice, are 5. foot. The 2. Order contains
37. foot: and their Cornicements shall be a fourth part less then the other:
the same heights and Cornices shall also serve for the second Order of the
Towers, and shall be a fourth part less then the second Order; and the Cornice
shall also lessen the fourth part: above there shall stand a small rising or
elevation, whereon the Kettle shall rest.

The Figure above the closed Temple, marked with A. shows the inner part of
the 5. Chapels. The height from the pauement to the upper part of the Cornice
is 27. foot: the Cornice shall be 4. foot thereof, made like a Capital Dorica.
The other uppermost Cornices shall be as high as the outtermost; and between
this first and the second Cornices, there shall Ionica flat Pillars stand;
between them the windows shall be made. The other figure above that
aforesaid, marked B. shows the Tribune, the Quier and the sides of the cross
work, with the open and the blind Doors. Through the one side (which was
purposely broken) you may see the Vestryes within. The Cornice under the
Arches, which bear the Kettle, is like the other Cornice which goes round
about the Temple. The Cornice which is above the Arch, and comes under the
Kettle, shall be bastard. The Lantern must be made according to the other
Lanthornes before showed. The other part marked C. is one of the Doors on the
sides, and is in that manner covered round. The Door is 9. foot wide, and 18.
foot high.

architectural drawing

ALthough that in the Netherlands there are very fair Temples made, as the
manner in these days is, not only with three Isles or walks in the body, but
also five: my meaning is not to write of such great Temples, for that each
Town has her chief Church: but these are only to make such Churches in
places, where, by chance, the Churches are decayed, because in these days, men
could hardly make them up again in great form; and to this end I set this
last figure here, which is playner then the other. It shall be 36. foot wide, and
54. foot long. At each end before and behind, there shall stand half a Circle
of 24. foot in Diameter. This half Circle where the high Altar stands, has
two windows, each 6. foot wide. The door to enter into the Temple, shall be 8.
foot wide. In the cross of the Temple there shall stand two Chapels, being
18. foot long, and 12. foot broad. The windows behind the Altar shall be six
foot wide: all the great Niches are also stre foot wide, and the small three
foot. The Columns are two foot thick: the inter-Columnes in the middle, are
6. foot, and the other on the sides are 3. foot. The 4. Niches within the body,
are beautified with round Columns standing in the wall. Without the Temple
there is a Portall of 10. foot broad, and 52. foot long. The high Pilasters
shall be 6. foot broad, as counterforts,; and the other shall be three foot broad.
Within the thickenesse of the wall there shall stand two pair of winding
stayres: and although this Church has no Towers, yet you may make them on it,
as the other were.

architectural drawing

THis Figure within is good to understand, and from the Pauement to the first
Cornice, it is 21. foot high, whereof the Cornicement is a fixed part: the other
is for the Ionica Columns. The Pedestall of the Niches shall be the fifth part,
whereon there stand Columns of Corinthia. The Frontispicies are three foot
above the Cornice: the blind windows above may also be opened. The walks,
with the place brest-high above the Portall, must be made leaning forward for
the water. The Chapels of the high Altar, marked A. have small Niches of 7.
foot and an half high. The fouresquare above the Altar, is for a table, broad
10. foot, and high 12. foot. The Temple without has a Doricall Cornice, as
high as the innermost. The part of the second order has Pillars, and Cornices
upon them of two foot, which Cornices shall be made according to the Impost of
the Theater of Marcellus, in the fourth Book: and for that above on the fide,
in the roose or cover, there is 3. foot of room to space, there may be a
leaning place made, both for an ornament, and also for ease: the cover may be
covered over with Lead.

architectural drawing

Here end^th the fifth Book: And this also is the end of the whole work of
Sebastian Se^li^^; Translated out of Italian into Dutch, and out of Dutch into
English, at the charges of Robert ^eake.
Printed at LONDON, by Simon Stafford. 1611. B. W.


