THE EXCELLENT History of the Merchant of Venice. With the extreme cruelty of
Shylocke the Jew toward the said Merchant, in cutting a just pound of his
flesh. And the obtaining of Portia, by the choice of three Caskets.

Written by W. SHAKESPEARE.

Printed by J. Roberts, 1600.

The Comical History of the Merchant of Venice.
Enter Anthonio, Salaryno, and Salanio. ANthonio. Insooth I know not why I am
so sad,
It wearies me, you say it wearies you;
But how I caught it, found it, or came by it,
What stuff it is made off, whereof it is borne,
I am to learn: and such a want-wit sadness makes of me,
That I have much ado to know my self.

Salarino. Your mind is tossing on the Ocean,
There where your Argosies with portly sail,
Like Signiors and rich Burgars on the flood,
Or as it were the Pageants of the sea,
Do ouer-peere the petty traffiquers
That cursie to them, do them reverence
As they fly by them with their wouen wings.

Salanio. Believe me sir, had I such venture forth,
The better part of my affections would
Be with my hopes abroad, I should be still
Plucking the grass, to know where sits the wind,
Piering in Maps, for Ports, for Peers and Rodes;
And every object that might make me fear.
Misfortune to my ventures, out of doubt
Would make me sad.

Salar. My wind cooling my broth,
Would blow me to an Ague, when I thought
What harm a wind too great at sea, might do.
I should not see the sandy howre-glasse run,
But I should think of shallowes, and of flats,
And see my wealthy Andrew dockes in sand,
Veyling her high top lower then her ribs,
To kiss her burial. Should I go to Church,
And see the holy edifice of stone,
And not bethink me straight of dangerous rocks,
Which touching but my gentle vessels side,
Would scatter all the spices on the stream,
Enrobe the roaring waters with my silks;
And in a word, but even now worth this,
And now worth nothing? Shall I have the thought
To think on this, and shall I lack the thought,
That such a thing be-chanc'd would make me sad it
But tell not me, I know Anthony
Is sad to think upon his merchandise.

Anth. Believe me no: I thank my fortune for it,
My ventures are not in one bottom trusted,
Nor to one place; nor is my whole estate
Upon the fortune of this present year:
Therefore my merchandise makes me not sad.

Salar. Then you are in love.

Anth. Fie, fie.

Salar. Not in love neither? Then let us say you are sad,
Because you are not merry: and 'twere as easy
For you to laugh and leap, and say you are merry,
Because you are not sad. Now by two-headed Ianus,
Nature has framed strange fellows in her time:
Some that will evermore peep through their eyes,
And laugh like Parrats at a bag-piper.
And other of such vinegar aspect,
That they will not show their teeth in way of smile,
Though Nestor swear the lest be laughable.

Enter Bassanio, Lorouse, and Gratiano. Salan. Here comes Bassanio your most
noble kinsman,
Gratiano and Lorenso: Faryewell,
We leave you now with better company.

Salar. I would have staide till I had made you merry,
If worthier friends had not prevented me.

Anth. Your worth is very dear in my regard.
I take it your own business calls on you,
And you embrace the occasion to depart.

Salar. Good morrow my good Lords.

Bass. Good signiors both, when shall we laugh? say, when?
You grow exceeding strange: must it be so?

Salar. We Will make our leysures to attend on yours.

Exeunt Salarino and Salania. Lor. My Lord Bassanio, since you have found
Anthonio,
we two will leave you; but at dinner time
I pray you have in mind where we must meet.

Bass. I will not fail you.

Exit Great. You look not well signior Anthonio,
You have too much respect upon the world:
They loose it that do buy it with much care,
Believe me you are meruailously changed.

Ant. I hold the world but as the world Gratiano,
A stage, where every one must play a part,
And mine a sad one.

Gra. Let me play the fool,
With mirth and laughter let old wrinkles come;
And let my Liver rather heat with wine,
Then my heart cool with mortifying groans.
Why should a man whose blood is warm within,
Sit like his Grandsire cut in Alablaster?
Sleep when he wakes? and creep into the Iaundies.
By being peevish? I tell thee what Anthonio,
I love thee, and it is my love that speaks.
There are a sort of men, whose visages
Do dream and mantle like a standing pond,
And do a wilful stillness entertain,
With purpose to be dressed in an opinion
Of wisdom, gravity, profound conceit,
As who should say, I am sir Oracle,
And when I open my lips, let no dog bark.
O my Anthonio, I do know of those
That therefore only are reputed wise
For saying nothing; when I am very sure
If they should speak, would almost dam those ears,
Which hearing them would call their brothers fools,
I Will tell thee more of this another time.
But fish not with this melancholy bait,
For this fool gudgin, this opinion:
Come good Lorenzo, farewell a while,
I Will end my exhortation after dinner.

Loren. Well, we will leave you then till dinner time.
I must be one of these same dumb wise men,
For Gratiano never lets me speak.

Gra. Well, keep me company but two years more,
Thou shall not know the sound of thine own tongue.

An. Farewell, I Will grow a talker for this gear.

Gra. Thanks in faith, for silence is only commendable
In a neats tongue dried, and a maid not vendable.

Exeunt. An. It is that any thing now.

Bass. Gratiano speaks an infinite deal of nothing, more then any man in all
Venice, his reasons are as two grains of wheat hid in two bushels of chafe:
you shall seek all day ere you find them, and when you have them, they are
not worth the search.


Ant. Well, tell me now what Lady is the same
To whom you swore a secret pilgrimage,
That you to day promisd to tell me of.

Bass. It Is not unknown to you Anthonio,
How much I have disabled mine estate,
By something showing a more swelling port,
Then my faint means would grant continuance*
Nor do I now make moan to be abridg'd
From such a noble rate, but my chief care
Is to come fairly off from the great debts
Wherein my time something too prodigal
Has left me gagged: to you Anthonio,
I owe the most in money and in love,
And from your love I have a warranty
To unburden all my plots and purposes
How to get clear of all the debts I owe.

Antho. I pray you good Bassanio, let me know it,
And if it stand as you your self still do,
Within the eye of honor, be assured
My purse, my person, my extremest means
Lie all unlocked to your occasions.

Bass. In my school days* when I had lost one shaft,
I shot his fellow of the selfsame flight
The selfsame way, with more advised watch
To find the other forth, and by aduentring both,
I often found both: I urge this childhood proof,
Because what follows, is pure innocence.
I owe you much, and like a wilful youth,
That which I owe is lost, but if you please
To shoot another arrow that self way
Which you did shoot the first, I do not doubt,
As I will watch the aim or to find both,
Or bring your latter hazard back again,
And thankfully rest debtor for the first.

Ant. You know me well, and herein spend but time.
To wind about my love with circumstance,
And out of doubt you do me now more wrong,
In making question of my uttermost,
Then if you had made waste of all I have:
Then do but say to me, what I should do,
That in your knowledge may by me be done,
And I am pressed unto it, therefore speak.

Bass. In Belmont is a Lady richly left,
And she is fair, and fairer then that word,
Of wondrous virtues. Sometimes from her eyes
I did receive fair speechless messages:
Her name is Portia; nothing vnder-valew'd
To Catos daughter, Brutus Portia.
Nor is the wide world ignorant of her worth,
For the four winds blow in from every coast
Renowned suitors, and her sunny locks
Hang on her temples like a golden fleece,
which makes her seat of Belmont, Colchoe strond,
And many Iasons comes in quest of her.
O my Anthonio, had I but the means
To hold a rival place with one of them,
I have a mind presages me such thrift,
That I should questionless be fortunate.

Ant. Thou know that all my fortunes are atica,
Neither have I money, nor commodity,
To raise a present sum. Therefore go forth,
Try what my credit can in Venice do,
That shall be rackt even to the uttermost,
To furnish thee to Belmont to fair Portia.
Go presently enquire, and so will I
where money is, and I no question make,
To have it of my trust, or for my sake.

Exeunt Enter Portia with her waiting Woman Nerrissa. Portia. By my troth
Nerrissa, my little body is a weary of this great world.


Ner. You would be sweet Madam, if your miseries were in the same abundance as
your good fortunes are: and yet for ought I see, they are as sick that surfeit
with too much, as they that statue with nothing; it is no mean happiness
therefore to be seated in the mean, superfluity comes sooner by white hairs,
but competency lives, longer.


Portia. Good sentences, and well pronounced.


Ner. They would be better, if well followed.


Por. If to do, were as easy as to know what were good to do, Chapels had
been Churches, and poor men's cottages, Princes Palaces; it is a good divine
that follows his own instructions: I can easier teach twenty what were good
to be done, then to be one of the twenty to follow mine own teaching: the
brain may devise laws for the blood, but a hot temper leapes ore a cold
decree, such a hare is madness the youth, to skip ore the meshes of good
counsel the cripple; but this reasoning is not in the fashion to choose me a
husband; O me, the word choose, I may neither choose who I would, nor refuse
who I dislike, so is the will of a living daughter curbd by the will of a dead
father: is it not hard Nerissa, that I cannot choose one, nor refuse none.


Ner. Your father was ever virtuous, and holy men at their death have good
inspirations, therefore the lottry that he has devised in these three chests
of gold, silver, and lead, whereof who chooses his meaning chooses you, no
doubt you will never be chosen by any rightly, but one who shall rightly love:
But what warmth is there in your affection toward any of these Princely suitors
that are already come?


Por. I prithee ouer-name them, and as thou namest them, I will describe them,
and according to my description, level at my affection.


Ner. First, there is the Neapolitane Prince.


Por. I that is a colt indeed, for he does nothing but talk of his horse, and
he makes it a great appropriation unto his own good parts, that he can shoo
himself: I am much afeard my Lady his Mother played false with a smith.


Ner. Then there is the County Palatine.


Por. He does nothing but frown (as who should say, if you will not have me,
choose; he hears merry tales and smiles not, I fear he will prove the
weeping Philosopher when he grows old, being so full of unmannerly sadness in
his youth.) I had rather be married to a deaths head with a bone in his mouth,
then to either of these: God defend me from these two.


Ner. How say you by the French Lord, Mounsier le Boune?


Por. God made him, and therefore let him pass for a man, in truth I know it
is a sin to be a mocker, but he, why he has a horse better then the
Neapolitans, a better bad habit of frowning then the Count Palatine, he is
every man in no man, if a Trassell sing, he falls straight a capting, he will
fence with his own shadow. If I should marry him, I should marry twenty
husbands: if he would despise me, I would forgive him, for if he love me to
madness, I shall never requite him.


Ner. What say you then to Fauconbridge, the young Baron of England?


Por. You know I say nothing to him, for he understands not me, nor I him: he
has neither Latin, French, nor Italian, and you will come into the Court and
swear that I have a poor penniworth in the English: he is a proper man's
picture, but alas who can converse with a dumb show? how odly he is suited, I
think he bought his doublet in Italy, his round hose in France, his bonnet in
Germany, and his behavior every where.


Nerissa. What think you of the Scottish Lord his Neighbor?


Por. That he has a neighbourly charity in him, for he borrowed a box of the
ear of the Englishman, and swore he would pay him again when he was able: I
think the Frenchman became his surety, and scald under for another.


Ner. How like you the young German, the Duke of Saxouies nephew?


Por. Very vildely in the morning when he is sober, and most vilely in the
afternoon when he is drunk: when he is best, he is a little worse then a
man, and when he is worst he is little better then a beast; and the worst fall
that ever fell, I hope I shall make shift to go without him.


Ner. If he should offer to choose, and choose the right Casket, you should
refuse to perform your fathers will, if you should refuse to accept him.


Por. Therefore for fear of the worst, I prithee set a deep glass of Reynish
Wine on the contrary Casket, for if the devil be within, and that temptation
without, I know he will choose it. I will do any thing Nerissa, ere i will be
married to a sponge.


Ner. You need not fear Lady, the having any of these Lords, they have
acquainted me with their determinations, which is indeed to return to their
home, and to trouble you with no more suit, unless you may be won by some
other sort then your fathers imposition, depending on the Caskets.


Por. If I live to be as old as Sibilla, I will die as chaste as Diana,
unless I be obtained by the manner of my fathers will: I am glad this parcel
of wooers are so reasonable, for there is not one among them but I dote on his
very absence; and I pray God grant them a fair departure.


Ner. Do you not remember Lady in your fathers time, a Venetian Scholar and a
Souldior that came hitherin company of the Marquess of Mountferrat?


Portia. Yes, yes, it was Bassanio, as I think he was so called.


Ner. True Maddam, he of all the men that ever my foolish eyes looked upon, was
the best deserving a fair Lady.


Por. I remember him well, and I remember him worthy of thy praise.

How now, what news?


Enter a seruingman. Ser. The four strangers seek for you Madame, to take
their leave; and there is a forerunner come from a fifth, the Prince of Moroco,
who brings word the Prince his Master will be here to night.


Por. If I could bid the fifth welcome, with so good a heart as I can bid the
other four farewell, I should be glad of his approach: if he have the condition
of a Saint, and the complexion of a devil, I had rather he should shriue me
then wiue me. Come Nerrissa, sir go before: whiles we shut the gates upon one
wooer, another knocks at the door.


Exeunt. Enter Bassanio, with Shylocke the lew. Shy. Three thousand ducats,
well.


Bass. I sir, for three months.


Shy. For three months, well.


Bass. For the which as I told you, Anthonio shall be bound.


Shy. Anthonio shall become bound, well.


Bass. May you stead me? Will you pleasure me!
Shall I know your answer?

Shy. Three thousand ducats for three months, and Anthonio bound.


Bass. Your answer to that.


Shy. Anthonio is a good man.


Bass. Have you heard any imputation to the contrary?


Shy. Ho no, no, no, no: my meaning in saying he is a good man, is to have you
understand me, that he is sufficient, yet his means are in supposition: he
has an Argosie bound to Tripolis, another to the Indies, I understand moreover
upon the Ryalta, he has a third at Mexico, a fourth for England, and other
ventures he has squandred abroad, but ships are but boards, Sailors but men;
there be land rats, and water rats, water thieves, and land thieves, I mean
Pirates, and then there is the peril of waters, winds, and rocks: the man is
notwithstanding sufficient, three thousand ducats, I think I may take his bond.


Bass. Be assured you may.


Shy. I will be assured I may: and that I may be assured, I will bethink me,
may I speak with Anthonio?


Bass. If it please you to dine with us.


Shy. Yes, to smell porke, to eat of the habitation which your Prophet the
Nazarite coniured the devil into: I will buy with you, sell with you, talk
with you, walk with you, and so following: but I will not eat with you,
drink with you, nor pray with you. What news on the Ryalto, who is he comes
here?


Enter Anthonio. Bass. This is signiour Anthonio.


Shy. How like a fawning Publican he looks.
I hate him for he is a Christian:
But more, for that in low simplicity
He lends out money gratis, and brings down
The rate of vsance here with us in Venice.
If I can catch him once upon the hip,
I will feed fat the ancient grudge I bear him.
He hates our sacred Nation, and he rayles
Even there where Merchants most do congregate,
On me, my bargains, and my well-won thrift,
Which he calls interest: Cursed be my Tribe
If I forgive him.

Bass. Shylocke, do you hear.

Shy. I am debating of my present store,
And by the near guess of my memory,
I cannot instantly raise up the gross
Of full three thousand ducats: what of that?
Tuball, a wealthy Hebrew of my Tribe,
Will furnish me; but soft, how many months
Do you desire? Rest you fair good Signior,
Your worship was the last man in our mouths.

Ant. Shylocke, although I neither lend nor borrow,
By taking nor by giving of excess,
Yet to supply the ripe wants of my friend,
I Will break a custom: are you resolved,
How much he would have?

Shy. I, I, three thousand ducats.

Ant. And for three months.

Shy. I had forgot, three months, you told me so.
Well then, your bond: and let me see, but hear you,
Me-thought you said, you neither lend nor borrow
Upon advantage.

Ant. I do never use it.

Shy. When Jacob grazed his Uncle Labans sheep,
This Jacob from our holy Abram was
(As his wise Mother wrought in his behalf)
The third possesser; I, he was the third.

Ant. And what of him, did he take interest?

Shy. No, not take interest, not as you would say
Directly interest, mark what Jacob did,
When Laban and himself were compremyzd,
That all the canelings which were streakt and pied,
Should fall as Jacobs hier, the Ewes being rank,
In the end of Autumn turned to the Rams,
And when the work of generation was
Between these woolly breeders in the act,
The skillful shepherd pyld me certain wands,
And in the doing of the deed of kind,
He stuck them up before the fulsome Ewes,
Who then conceiving, did in eaning time
Fall party-colored lambs, and those were Jacobs.
This was a way to thrive, and he was blessed:
And thrift is blessing if men steal it not.

Ant. This was a venture sir, that Jacob ser'ud for,
A thing not in his power to bring to pass,
But swavd and fashioned by the hand of heaven.
Was this inserted to make interest good?
Or is your gold and silver, Ewes and Rams?

Shy. I cannot tell, I make it breed as fast,
But note me signior.

Ant. Mark you this Bassanio,
The devil can cite Scripture for his purpose,
An evil soul producing holy witness,
Is like a villain with a smiling cheek,
A goodly apple rotten at the heart.
O what a goodly outside falsehood has.

Shy. Three thousand ducats, it is a good round sum.
Three months from twelve, then let me see the rate.

Ant. Well Shylocke, shall we be beholding to you?

Shy. Signior Anthonio, many a time and often
In the Ryalto you have rated me
About my moneys and my vsances:
Still have I borne it with a patient shrug,
(For sufferance is the badge of all our Tribe)
You call me misbeleeuer, cut-throate dog,
And spet upon my Jewish gaberdine,
And all for use of that which is mine own.
Well then, it now appears you need my help:
Go to then, you come to me, and you say,
Shylocke, we would have moneys, you say so:
You that did void your rume upon my beard,
And foot me as you spurn a stranger curre
Over your threshold, money is your suit,
What should I say to you? Should I not say,
Has a dog money? is it possible
A curre can lend three thousand ducats? or
Shall I bend low, and in a bond-mans key,
With bated breath, and whispring humbleness
Say this: Fair sir, you spet on me on wendsday last,
You spurned me such a day another time,
You called me dog: and for these courtesies
I Will lend you thus much moneys.

Ant. I am as like to call thee so again,
To spet on thee again, to spurn thee to.
If thou will lend this money, lend it not
As to thy friends, for when did friendship take
A breed for barren metal of his friend?
But lend it rather to thine enemy,
Who if he break, thou may with better face
Exact the penalty.

Shy. Why look you how you storm,
I would be friends with you, and have your love,
Forget the shames that you have stained me with,
Supply your present wants, and take no doyte
Of vsance for my moneys, and you will not hear me,
This is kind I offer.

Bass. This were kindness.

Shy. This kindness will I show,
Go with me to a Notarie, seal me there
Your single bond, and in a merry sport,
If you repay me not on such a day
In such a place, such sum or sums as are
Expressed in the condition, let the forfeit
Be nominated for an equal pound
Of your fair flesh, to be cut off and taken
In what part of your body pleases me.

Ant. Content in faith, i will seal to such a bond,
And say there is much kindness in the Jew.

Bass. You shall not seal to such a bond for me,
I Will rather dwell in my necessity.

An. Why fear not man, I will not forfet it,
Within these two months, that is a month before
This bond expires, I do expect return
Of thrice three times the value of this bond.

Shy. O father Abram, what these Christians are,
Whose own hard dealings teaches them suspect
The thoughts of others: pray you tell me this,
If he should break his day, what should I gain
By the exaction of the forfeiture?
A pound of man's flesh taken from a man,
Is not so estimable, profitable neither
As flesh of Muttons, Beefes, or Goats, I say,
To buy his favor, I extend this friendship,
If he will take it so, if not adieu,
And for my love, I pray you wrong me not.

Ant. Yes Shylocke, I will seal unto this bond.

Shy. Then meet me forthwith at the Noteries,
Give him direction for this merry bond,
And I will go and purse the ducats straight,
See to my house, left in the fearful guard
Of an unthrifty knave; and presently
I Will be with you.

Exit. Ant. Hie thee gentle Jew: the Hebrew will turn Christian, he grows so
kind.


Bass. I like not fair terms, and a villains mind.

Ant. Come on, in this there can be no dismay.
My ships come home a month before the day.

Exeunt Enter Morochus a tawny Moore all in white, and three or four followers
accordingly, with Portia, Nerrissa, and their train. Moroc. Mislike me not for
my complexion,
The shadowed livery of the burnisht sun,
To whom I am a neighbor, and near bred.
Bring the fairest creature Northward borne,
Where Phoebus fire scarce thawes the ysicles,
And let us make incision for your love,
To prove whose blood is reddest, his or mine.
I tell thee Lady, this aspect of mine
Has feared the valiant (by my Love I swear)
The best regarded virgins of our clime
Has loved it too: I would not change this hue,
Except to steal your thoughts my gentle Queen.

Por. In terms of choice I am not soly led
By nice direction of a maidens eyes.
Besides, the Lottry of my destiny
Bars me the right of voluntary choosing:
But if my father had not scanted me,
And hedged me by his wit, to yield my self
His wife, who winnes me by that means I told you,
Your self (renowned Prince) than stood as fair
As any commer I have looked on yet,
For my affection.

Mor. Even for that I thank you,
Therefore I pray you lead me to the Caskets
To try my fortune. By this Semitaur
That slew the Sophy, and a Persian Prince,
That won three fields of Sultan Solomon,
I would out-stare the sternest eyes that look:
Out-braue the heart most daring on the earth:
Pluck the young sucking Cubs from the shee-Beare,
Yea, mock the Lion when he tores for prey,
To win the Lady. But alas, the while
If Hercules and Lychas play at dice
Which is the better man, the greater throw
May turn by fortune from the weaker hand:
So is Alcides beaten by his rage,
And so may I, blind fortune leading me,
Miss that which one vnworthier may attain,
And dye with greeuing.

Portia. You must take your chance,
And either not attempt to choose at all,
Or swear before you choose, if you choose wrong,
Never to speak to Lady afterward
In way of marriage, therefore be aduisde.

Mor. Nor will not, come bring me to my chance

Por. First forward to the Temple, after dinner
Your hazard shall be made.

Mor. Good fortune then,
To make me blessed, or cursedst among men.

Exeunt. Enter the Clown alone. Clown. Certainly, my conscience will serve me
to run from this Jew my master. The fiend is at mine elbow, and tempts me
saying to me, Gobbo, Lancelet Gobbo, good Lancelet, or good Gobbo, or good
Lancelet Gobbo, use your legs, take the starte, run away: My Conscience
says no; take heed honest Lancelet, take heed honest Gobbo, or as aforesaid,
honest Launcelet Gobbo, do not run, scorn running with thy heels. Well, the
most courageous fiend bids me pack fia says the fiend, away says the fiend,
for the heavens rouse up a brave mind says the fiend, and run. Well, my
conscience hanging about the neck of my heart, says very wisely to me; My
honest friend Lancelet, being an honest man's son, or rather an honest woman's
son, for indeed my Father did something smack, something grow too, he had a
kind of taste: well, my conscience says bouge not; bouge says the fiend;
bouge not says my Conscience. Conscience say I you counsel well; Fiend say I
you counsel ill. To be ruled by my Conscience, I should stay with the Jew my
master, who (God bless the mark) is a kind of devil; and to run away from
the Jew, I should be rul'de by the fiend, who (saving your reverence) is the
Devil himself. Certainly the Jew is the very devil incarnall, and in my
conscience, my conscience is but a kind of hard conscience, to offer to
counsel me to stay with the Jew. The fiende gives the more friendly counsel,
I will run fiend, my heels are at your command, I will run.


Enter old Gobbo with a Basket. Gobbo. Master young man, you I pray you, which
is the way to Master Jews?


Lance. O heavens, this is my true begotten Father, who being more then sand
blind, high gravel blind, knows me not, I will try conclusions with him.


Gobbo. Master young Gentleman, I pray you which is the way to master Jews?


Lance. Turn up on your right hand at the next turning, but at the next
turning of all on your left; marry at the very next turning turn of no hand,
but turn down indirectly unto the Jews house.


Gobbo. Be Gods sonties twill be a hard way to hit, can you tell me whither
one Lancelet that dwells with him, dwell with him, or no?


Lancelet. Talk you of young master Lancelet? Mark me now, now will I raise
the waters:

Talk you of young M. Lancelet?


Gobbo. No master sir, but a poor man's son.
His Father (though I say it)
Is an honest exceeding poor man,
And God be thanked, well to live.

Lancelet. Well, let his Father be what a will, we talk of young Master
Launcelet.


Gob. Your worships friend, and Lancelet sir.


Lan. But I pray you ergo old man, ergo I beseech you, talk you of young M.
Lancelet.


Gob, Of Lancelet an't please your mastership.


Lan. Ergo master Lancelet, talk not of master Lancelet Father; for the young
Gentleman according to fates and destinies, and such odd sayings, the sisters
three, and such branches of learning, is indeed deceased, or as you would say
in plain terms, gone to heaven.


Gob. Marry God forbid, the boy was the very staff of my age, my very prop.


Lance. Do I look like a cudgel or a houell post, a staff, or a prop: do
you know me Father.


Gob. A lack the day, I know you not young Gentleman, but I pray you tell me,
is my boy (GOD rest his soul) alive or dead.


Lance. Do you not know me Father?


Gob. Alack sir, I am sand blind, I know you not.


Lan. Nay, in deed if you had your eyes you might fail of the knowing me: it
is a wise Father that knows his own child. Well, old man, I will tell you
news of your son, give me your blessing; Truth will come to light, Murder
cannot be hid long, a man's son may, but at the length truth will out.


Gobbo. Pray you sir stand up, I am sure you are not Launcelet my boy.


Lance. Pray you let us have no more fooling about it, but give me your
blessing; I am Lancelot your boy that was, your son that is, your child that
shall be.


Gob. I cannot think you are my son.


Lance. I know not what I shall think of that, but I am Lancelet the Jews man,
and I am sure Margery your wife is my mother.


Gob. Her name is Margery indeed, i will be sworn if thou be Lancelet, thou art
mine own flesh and blood: Lord worshipped might he be, what a beard have thou
got? thou have got more hair on thy chin, then Dobbin my pilhorse has on his
tale.


Lan. It should seem then that Dobbins tail grows backward. I am sure he had
more hair of his tail then I have of my face, when I last saw him.


Gob. Lord how art thou changed: how do thou and thy Master agree? I have
brought him a present; how agree you now?


Lance. Well, well, but for mine own part, as I have set up my rest to run
away, so I will not rest till I have run some ground; My master's a very Jew,
give him a present, give him a halter, I am famisht in his service. You may
tell every finger I have with my ribs: Father I am glad you are come, give me
your present to one Master Bassanio, who indeed gives rare new liueries, if I
serve not him, I will run as far as God has any ground. O rare fortune,
here comes the man, to him Father, for I am a Jew if I serve the Jew any longer.


Enter Bassanio with a follower or two. Bass. You may do so, but let it be so
hasted that supper be ready at the farthest by five of the clock: see these
Letters delivered, put the Liveries to making, and desire Gratiano to come anon
to my lodging.


Exit one of his men. Lance. To him Father.


Gob. God bless your Worship.


Bass. Gramercy, would thou ought with me?


Gob. Here Is my son sir, a poor boy.


Lance. Not a poor boy sir, but the rich Jews man that would sir, as my father
shall specify.


Gob. He has a great infection sir, as one would say to serve.


Lance. Indeed the short and the long is, I serve the Jew, and have a desire as
my Father shall specify.


Gob. His Master and he (saving your worships reverence) are scarce catercosins.


Lan. To be brief, the very truth is, that the Jew having don me wrong, does
cause me as my Father, being I hope, an old man, shall frutifie unto you.


Gob. I have here a dish of Doves that I would bestow upon your worship: and
my suit is --


Lan. In very brief, the suit is impertinent to my self, as your worship shall
know by this honest old man, and though I say it, though old man, yet poor man
my father.


Bass. One speak for both, what would you?


Lan. Serve you sir.


Gob. That is the very defect of the matter sir.


Bass. I know thee well, thou have obtained thy suit,
Shylocke thy master spoke with me this day,
And has preferred thee, if it be preferment
To leave a rich Jews service, to become
The follower of so poor a Gentleman.

Lan. The old Proverb is very well parted between my master Shylock and you
sir, You have the grace of God sir, and he has enough.


Bass. Thou speakst it well. Go Father with thy son,
Take leave of thy old master, and enquire
My Lodging out. Give him a Livery
More guarded then his fellows, see it done.

Lan. Father in, I cannot get a service, no, I ha nere a tongue in my head.
Well, if any man in Italy have a fairer table which does offer to swear upon
a book, I shall have good fortune. Go too, here is a simple line of life,
here is a small trifle of wives: Alas, fifteen wives is nothing, eleven
Widows and nine maids, is a simple coming in for one man, and then to
escape drowning thrice, and to be in peril of my life with the edge of a
feather-bed, here are simple scapes: well, if Fortune be a woman, she is a
good wench for this geere. Father, come, i will take my leave of the Jew in the
twinkling of an eye.


Exit Clown. Bass. I pray thee good Leonardo think on this,
These things being bought, and orderly bestowed,
Return in have, for I do feast to night,
My best esteemed acquaintance, hie thee, go.

Leon. My best endeavors shall be done herein.

Exit Enter Gratiano. Gra. Where Is your Master.


Leon. Yonder sir he walks.


Gra. Signior Bassanio.


Bass. Gratiano?


Gra. I have a suit to you.


Bass. You have obtained it.


Gra. You must not deny me, I must go with you to Belmont.


Bass. Why then you must. But hear thee Gratiano,
Thou art too wild, too rude, and bold of voice,
Parts that become thee happily enough,
And in such eyes as ours appear not faults,
But where thou art not known. Why there they show
Something too lib'rall: prithee take pain
To allay with some cold drops of modesty
Thy skipping spirit, lest through thy wild behavior
I be misconstred in the place I go to,
And lose my hopes.

Gra. Signior Bassanio, hear me:
If I do not put on a sober habit,
Talk with respect, and swear but now and than;
Wear prayer books in my pocket, look demurely,
Nay more, while Grace is saying, hood mine eyes
Thus with my hat, and sigh, and say Amen:
Use all the observance of ciuility,
Like one well studied in a sad ostent
To please his Grandam, never trust me more.

Bass. Well, we shall see your bearing.

Gra. Nay but I bar to night, you shall not gage me
By what we do to night.

Bass. No that were pity,
I would entreat you rather to put on
Your boldest suit of mirth, for we have friends
That purpose merriment: but faryewell,
I have some business.

Gra. And I must to Lorenzo and the rest,
But we will visit you at supper time.

Exeunt. Enter Iessica and the Clown. Iessica. I am sorry thou will leave my
Father so,
Our house is hell, and thou a merry devil
Did rob it of some taste of tediousness,
But fare thee well, there is a ducat for thee,
And Lancelet, soon at supper shall thou see
Lorenzo, who is thy new Masters guest,
Give him this Letter, do it secretly,
And so farewell: I would not have my Father
See me in talk with thee.

Lance. Adieu, tears exhibit my tongue, most beautiful Pagan, most sweet
Jew, if a Christian do not play the knave and get thee, I am much deceived;
but adieu, these foolish drops do something drown my manly spirit: adieu.


Exit. Iessica. Farewell good Lancelet.
Alack, what heinous sin is it in me,
To be ashamed to be my fathers child,
But though I am a daughter to his blood,
I am not to his manners: O Lorenzo,
If thou keep promise, I shall end this strife,
Become a Christian, and thy loving wife.

Exit. Enter Gratiano, Lorenzo, Salarino, and Salanio. Loren. Nay, we will
slinke away in supper time,
Disguise us at my lodging and return all in an hour.

Gra. We have not made good preparation.

Salar. We have not spoke us yet of Torch-bearers,

Salanio. It Is vile, unless it may be quaintly ordered,
And better in my mind not undertook.

Loren. It Is now but four a clock, we have two hours
Enter Lancelet. To furnish us; friend Lancelet, what is the news?

Lan. If it please you to break up this, it shall seem to signify,

Loren. I know the hand, in faith it is a fair hand,
And whiter then the paper it writ on,
Is the fair hand that writ.

Great. Love news, in faith.

Lance. By your leave sir.

Loren. Whither go thou?

Lance. Marry sir, to bid my old Master the Jew to sup to night with my new
Master the Christian.


Loren. Hold here take this, tell gentle Iessica,
I will not fail her, speak it privately.
Go Gentlemen, will you prepare for this mask to night,
I am provided of a Torch-bearer.

Exit Clown. Salar. I marry, i will be gone about it straight.

Salan. And so will I.

Loren. Meet me and Gratiano at Gratianos lodging,
Some hour hence.

Salar. It Is good we do so.

Exit. Great. Was not that Letter from fair Iessica?

Loren. I must needs tell thee all, she has directed
How I shall take her from her Fathers house,
What gold and jewels she is furnished with,
What Pages suit she has in readiness,
If ere the Jew her father come to heaven,
It will be for his gentle daughters sake,
And never dare misfortune cross her foot,
Unless she do it under this excuse,
That she is issue to a faithless Jew:
Come go with me, peruse this as thou go,
Fair Iessica shall be my Torch-bearer.

Exits Enter the Jew and Lancelet. Shy. Well, thou shall see, thy eyes shall be
thy judge,
The diffrence of old Shylocke and Bassanio;
What Iessica, thou shall not gourmandize
As thou have done with me: what Iessica?
And sleep, and snore, and rend apparel out.
Why Iessica I say.

Clown. Why Iessica.

Shy. Who bids thee call? I do not bid thee call.

Clo. Your worship was wont to tell me, that I could do nothing without bidding.


Enter Iessica. Ies. Call you? what is your will?

Shy. I am bid forth to supper Iessica,
There are my keys; but wherefore should I go?
I am not bid for love, they flatter me,
But yet i will go in hate, to feed upon
The prodigal Christian. Iessica my gyrle,
Look to my house. I am right loath to go,
There is some ill a bruing toward my rest,
For I did dream of money bags to night.

Clown. I beseech you sir go,
My young Master does expect your reproach.

Shy. So do I his.

Clown. And they have conspired together, I will not say you shall see a Mask;
but if you do, then it was not for nothing that my nose fell a bleeding on
black monday last, at six a clock in the morning, falling out that year on
Ashwensday was four year in the afternoon.


Shy. What, are there maskes? Hear me Iessica:
Lock up my doors, and when you hear the drum,
And the vile squeaking of the wry-neckt Fife,
Clamber not you up to the Casements then,
Nor thrust your head into the public street,
To gaze on Christian fools with varnisht faces:
But stop my houses ears, I mean my Casements,
Let not the sound of shallow foppery enter
My sober house. By Jacobs staff I swear,
I have no mind of feasting forth to night:
But I will go. Go you before me sir,
Say I will come.

Clown. I will go before sir.
Mistress look out at a window for all this,
There will come a Christian by,
Will be worth a Jews eye.

Shy. What says that fool of Hagars offspring? ha.

Ies. His words were, Farewell mistress, nothing else.

Shy. The patch is kind enough, but a huge feeder,
Snaile-slow in profit, and he sleeps by day
More then the wild Cat: Drones hiue not with me,
Therefore I part with him, and part with him
To one, that I would have him help to waste
His borrowed purse. Well Iessica go in,
Perhaps I will return immediately,
Do as I bid you, shut doors after you,
Fast bind, fast find,
A Proverb never stale in thrifty mind.

Exit Ies. Farewell, and if my fortune be not crossed,
I have a Father, you a daughter lost.

Exit. Enter the maskers, Gratiano and Salarino. Gra. This is the pent-house
under which
Lorenzo desired us to make stand.

Sal. His hour is almost past.

Gra. And it is marvel he out-dwels his hour,
For lovers ever run before the clock.

Sal. O ten times faster Venus pigeons fly
To seal loves bonds new made, then they are wont
To keep obliged faith vnforfaited.

Gra. That ever holds: who rises from a feast
With that keen appetite that he sits down?
Where is the horse that does vntreade again
His tedious measures, with the vnbated fire
That he did pace them first? All things that are,
Are with more spirit chased then enjoyed.
How like a younger or a prodigal,
The skarfed Bark puts from her native bay,
Hugd and embraced by the strumpet wind,
How like the prodigal does she return
With ouer-wetherd ribs and ragged sails,
Lean, rent, and beggerd by the strumpet wind?

Enter Lorenzo. Sal. Here comes Lorenzo, more of this hereafter.

Lo. Sweet friends, your patience for my long abode
Not I, but my affairs have made you wait:
When you shall please to play the thieves for wives
I Will watch as long for you then: approach,
Here dwells my father Jew. Ho, whose within?

Iessica above. Iess. Who are you? tell me for more certainty,
Albeit I Will swear that I do know your tongue.

Lor. Lorenzo and thy love.

Iess. Lorenzo certain, and my love indeed,
For who love I so much? and now who knows
But you Lorenzo, whether I am yours?

Lo. Heaven and thy thoghts are witness that thou art

Iess. Here, catch this Casket, it is worth the pains,
I am glad it is night you do not look on me,
For I am much ashamed of my exchange:
But love is blind, and lovers cannot see
The pretty follies that themselves commit,
For if they could, Cupid himself would blush
To see me thus transformed to a boy.

Lor. Descend, for you must be my torch-bearer.

Iess. What, must I hold a Candle to my shames,
They in themselves goodsooth are too too light.
Why it is an office of discovery, Love,
And I should be obscured.

Lor. So are you sweet,
Even in the lovely garnish of a boy,
But come at once, for the close night
Does play the runaway,
And we are staid for at Bassanios feast.

Iess. I will make fast the doors, and guild my self
With some mo ducats, and be with you straight.

Great. Now by my hood, a Gentile and no Jew.

Lor. Beshrew me but I love her heartily,
For she is wise, if I can judge of her,
And fair she is, if that mine eyes be true,
And true she is, as she has proo'ud herself,
And therefore like herself, wise, fair and true,
Shall she be placed in my constant soul.

Enter Iessica. What, art thou come? on gentlemen, away,
Our masking mates by this time for us stay.
Exit. Enter Anthonio. Ant. Who Is there?

Gra. Signior Anthonio.

Ant. Fie, fie Gratiano, where are all the rest?
It Is nine a clock, our friends all stay for you,
No mask to night, the wind is come about,
Bassanio presently will go aboard,
I am glad on it, I desire no more delight
Then to be under sail, and gone to night.

Exeunt. Enter Portia with Morrocho, and both their trains. Por. Go, draw
aside the Curtains, and discover
The several Caskets to this noble Prince:
Now make your choice.

Mor. The first of gold, who this inscription bears,
Who chooses me, shall gain what many men desire.
The second silver, which this promise carries,
Who chooses me, shall get as much as he deserves.
This third dull lead, with warning all as blunt,
Who chooses me, must give and hazard all he has.
How shall I know if I do choose the right?

Por. The one of them contains my picture Prince*
If you choose that, then I am yours withal.

Mor. Some God direct my judgment, let me see,
I will suruay th'inscriptions back again,
What says this leaden Casket?
Who chooses me, must give and hazard all he has,
Must give, for what? for lead, hazard for lead?
This Casket threatens men that hazard all,
Do it in hope of fair advantages:
A golden mind stoopes not to shows of dross,
I Will then nor give nor hazard ought for lead.
What says the silver with her virgin hue?
Who chooses me, shall get as much as he deserves.
As much as he deserves, pause there Morocho,
And weigh thy value with an eeuen hand,
If thou be rated by thy estimation,
Thou do deserve enough, and yet enough
May not extend so far as to the Lady;
And yet to be afeard of my deserving,
Were but a weak disabling of my self.
As much as I deserve, why that is the Lady,
I do in birth deserve her, and in fortunes,
In graces, and in qualities of breeding:
But more then these, in love I do deserve.
What if I straid no farther, but chose here?
Let Us see once more this saying grau'd in gold:
Who chooses me, shall gain what many men desire:
Why that is the Lady, all the world desires her.
From the four corners of the earth they come
To kiss this shrine, this mortal breathing Saint.
The Hircanion deserts, and the vasty wilds
Of wide Arabia, are as through-fares now
For Princes to come view fair Portia.
The watery Kingdom, whose ambitious head
Spets in the face of heaven, is no bar
To stop the foreign spirits, but they come
As ore a brook to see fair Portia.
One of these three contains her heavenly picture.
It Is like that lead contains her, it were damnation
To think so base a thought, it were too gross
To rib her sere-cloth in the obscure grave,
Or shall I think in silver she is immured,
Being ten times vnder-valewed to tried gold,
O sinful thought, never so rich a Iem
Was set in worse then gold. They have in England
A coin that bears the figure of an Angel
Stamped in gold, but that is insculpt upon:
But here an Angel in a golden bed
Lies all within. Deliver me the key:
Here do I choose, and thrive I as I may.

Por. There take it Prince, and if my form lie there,
Then I am yours.

Mor. O hell! what have we here, a carrion death?
Within whose empty eye there is a written scroule,
I Will read the writing.
All that glisters is not gold,
Often have you heard that told,
Many a man his life has sold,
But my out side to behold,
Gilded timber do worms infold:
Had you been as wise as bold,
Young in limbs, in judgment old,
Your answer had not been inscrolde,
Fare you well, your suit is cold.

Mor. Cold indeed, and labor lost,
Then farewell heat, and welcome frost:
Portia adieu, I have too grieved a heart
To take a tedious leave; thus losers part.

Exit. Por. A gentle riddance, draw the curtains, go,
Let all of his complexion choose me so.

Exeunt. Enter Enter Salarino and Salanio. Salar. Why man, I saw Bassanio under
sail,
With him is Gratiano gone along;
And in their ship lme sure Lorenzo is not.

Salan. The villain Jew with outcries raisde the Duke,
Who went with him to search Bassanios ship.

Salar. He came too late, the ship was under sail,
But there the Duke was given to understand,
That in a Gondylo were seen together
Lorenza and his armorous Iessica.
Besides Anthonio certified the Duke,
They were not with Bassanio in his ship.

Salan. I never heard a passion so confused,
So strange, outrageous, and so variable,
As the Dog Jew did utter in the streets,
My daughter, O my ducats, O my daughter,
Fled with a Christian, O my christian ducats.
Justice, the law, my ducats, and my daughter.
A sealed bag, two sealed bags of ducats,
Of double ducats, stolen from me by my daughter,
And jewels, two stones, two rich and precious stones,
Stolen by my daughter: justice, find the gyrle,
She has the stones upon her, and the ducats.

Salar. Why all the boys in Venice follow him,
Crying his stones, his daughter, and his ducats.

Salan. Let good Anthonio look he keep his day,
Or he shall pay for this.

Salar. Marry well remembered,
I reasoned with a Frenchman yesterday,
Who told me, in the narrow seas that part
The French and English, there miscarried
A vessel of our country richly fraught:
I thought upon Anthonio when he told me,
And wished in silence that it were not his.

Salan. You were best to tell Anthonio what you hear,
Yet do not suddenly, for it may grieve him.

Salar. A kinder Gentleman treades not the earth,
I saw Bassanio and Anthonio part:
Bassanio told him he would make some speed
Of his return: he answered, do not so,
Slubber not business for my sake Bassanio,
But stay the very riping of the time,
And for the Jews bond which he has of me,
Let it not enter in your mind of love:
Be merry, and employ your cheifest thoughts
To Courtship, and such fair ostents of love,
As shall conveniently become you there.
And even there his eye being big with tears,
Turning his face, he put his hand behind him;
And with affection wondrous sensible,
He wrung Bassanios hand, and so they parted.

Salan. I think he only loves the world for him:
I prithee let us go and find him out,
And quicken his embraced heaviness,
With some delight or other.

Salar. Do we so.

Exeunt Enter Nerrissa and a Seruitor. Ner. Quick, quick, I pray thee, draw
the Curtain strait,
The Prince of Arragon has taken his oath,
And comes to his election presently.

Enter Arragon, his train, and Portia. Por. Behold, there stand the Caskets
Noble Prince,
If you choose that wherein I am contained,
Straight shall our nuptial rights be solemnized:
But if you fail, without more speech my Lord,
You must be gone from hence immediately.

Arra. I am enioyn'd by oath to observe three things.
First, never to unfold to any one
Which Casket it was I chose. Next, if I fail
Of the right Casket, never in my life
To woe a maid in way of marriage:
Lastly, if I do fail in fortune of my choice,
Immediately to leave you, and be gone.

Por. To these injunctions every one does swear,
That comes to hazard for my worthless self.

Arr. And so have I addressed me, fortune now
To my hearts hope: Gold, Silver, and base Lead.
Who chooses me, must give and hazard all he has.
You shall look fairer ere I give or hazard.
What says the golden Chest? ha, let me see,
Who chooses me, shall gain what many men desire.
What many men desire, that many may be meant
By the foole-multitude, that choose by show:
Not learning more then the fond eye does teach,
Which pries not to th'interiour; but like the Martlet,
Builds in the weather on the outward wall,
Even in the force and rode of casualty.
I will not choose what many men desire,
Because I will not iumpe with common spirits,
And rank me with the barbarous multitudes.
Why then to thee thou Silver treasure house,
Tell me once more what title thou do bear:
Who chooses me shall get as much as he deserves.
And well said too, for who shall go about
To cosen Fortune, and be honorable
Without the stamp of merit, let none presume
To wear an undeserved dignity:
O that estates, degrees, and offices,
Were not derived corruptly, and that clear honor
Were purchac'd by the merit of the wearer,
How many then should cover, that stand bare?
How many be commanded, that command?
How much low pezantry would then be gleaned
From the true seed of honor? And how much honor,
Picked from the chafe and ruin of the times
To be new vernish'd? well, but to my choice,
Who chooses me shall get as much as he deserves.
I will assume desert. Give me a key for this,
And instantly unlock my fortunes here.

Por. Too long a pause for that which you find there.

Arrag. What Is here, the portrait of a blinking Idiot,
Presenting me a sedule? I will read it.
How much unlike art thou to Portia?
How much unlike my hopes, and my deseruings.
Who chooses me shall have as much as he deserves.
Did I deserve no more then a fools head?
Is that my prize? Are my deserts no better?

Por. To offend and judge are distinct offices,
And of opposed Natures.

Arrag. What here?
He reads. The fire seven times tried this:
Seven times tried that judgment is,
That did never choose amiss.
Some there be that shadows kis,
Such have but a shadows blis:
There be fools alive I wis,
Siluer'd over, and so was this.
Take what wife you will to bed,
I will ever be your head:
So be gone, you are sped.
Still more fool I shall appear,
By the time I linger here,
With one fools head I came to woe,
But I go away with two.
Sweet adieu, I Will keep my oath,
Patiently to bear my vvroath.

Portia. Thus has the candle singed the Moth.
O these deliberate fools, when they do choose,
They have their wisdom, by their wit to loose.

Ner. The ancient saying is no heresy,
Hanging and wiuing goes by destiny.

Por. Come draw the Curtain Nerrissa.

Enter a Messenger. Mess. Where is my Lady?

Por. Here, what would my Lord?

Mess. Madam, there is a-lighted at your gate
A young Venetian, one that comes before
To signify th'approching of his Lord,
From whom he brings sensible regreets;
To wit (besides commends and courteous breath)
Gifts of rich value; yet I have not seen
So likely an Ambassador of love.
A day in April never came so sweet,
To show how costly Summer was at hand,
As this fore-spurrer comes before his Lord.

Por. No more I pray thee, I am half a-fear'd
Thou will say anon he is some kin to thee,
Thou spendst such high day wit in praising him:
Come, come Nerrissa, for I long to see
Quick Cupids post that comes so mannerly.

Ner. Bassanio Lord, love if thy will it be.

Exit. Enter Salanio and Salarino. Salan. Now, what news on the Ryalto?


Salar. Why yet it lives there unchecked, that Anthonio has a ship of rich
lading wrackt on the narrow seas; the Goodwins I think they call the place, a
very dangerous flat, and fatal, where the carcasses of many a tall ship lie
buried, as they say, if my gossips report be an honest woman of her word.


Salan. I would she were as a lying gossippe in that, as ever knapt Ginger, or
made her neighbors believe she wept for the death of a third husband: but it is
true, without any slippes of prolixity, or crossing the plain highway of talk,
that the good Anthonio, the honest Anthonio, O that I had a title good enough
to keep his name company.


Salar. Come, the full stop.


Sal. Ha, what say thou? why the end is, he has lost a ship.


Salar. I would it might prove the end of his losses.


Salan. Let me say Amen betimes, least the devil cross my prayer, for here
he comes in the likeness of a lew.

Enter Shylocke. How now Shylocke, what news among the Merchants?


Shy. You know, none so well, none so well as you,
Of my daughters flight.

Salar. That Is certain, I for my part knew the Tailor
That made the wings she flew withal.

Salan. And Shylocke for his own part knew the Bird was fledged, and then it
is the complexion of them all to leave the Dam.


Shy. She is damned for it.


Salar. That Is certain, if the devil may be her judge.


Shy. My own flesh and blood to rebel.


Salan. Out upon it old carrion, rebels it at these years.


Shy. I say my daughter is my flesh and blood.


Salar. There is more difference between thy flesh and hirs, then between Iet
and Iuory: more between your bloods, then there is between red wine and
rennish: but tell us, do you hear, whether Anthonio have had at loss a sea or
no?


Shy. There I have another bad match, a bankrout, a prodigal, who dare scarce
show his head on the Ryalto, a beggar that was vsd to come so smug upon the
Mart: let him look to his bond: he was wont to call me usurer, let him look
to his bond; he was wont to lend money for a Christian curtsie, let him look
to his bond.


Salar. Why I am sure if he forfet, thou will not take his flesh, what is that
good for?


Shyl. To bait fish withal; if it will feed nothing else it will feed my
revenge: he has disgraced me, and hindered me half a million, laughed at my
losses, mocked at my gains, scorned my nation, thwarted my bargains, cooled my
friends, heated mine enemies, and what is his reason, I am a Jew. Has nos a
Jew eyes? has not a Jew hands? organs, dimensions, senses, affections,
passions? fed with the same food? hurt with the same weapons? subject to the
same diseases? healed by the same means? warmed and cooled by the same winter
and summer, as a Christian is? If you prick us, do we not bleed? If you
tickle us, do we not laugh? If you poison us, do we not dye? And if you wrong
us, shall we not revenge? If we are like you in the rest, we will resemble you
in that. If a Jew wrong a Christian, what is his humility, Revenge? If a
Christian wrong a Jew, what should his sufferance be by Christian example, why
Revenge? The villainy you teach me I will execute, and it shall go hard, but I
will better the instruction.

Enter a man from Anthonio. Gentlemen, my master Anthonio is at his house, and
desires to speak with you both.


Salar. We have been up and down to seek him.


Enter Tuball. Salan. Here comes another of the Tribe, a third cannot be
matched, unless the devil himself turn Jew.


Exeunt Gentlemen. Shy. How now Tuball, what news from Genowa? have thou found
my daughter?


Tuball. I often came where I did hear of her, but cannot find her.


Shy. Why there, there, there, there, a Diamond gone cost me two thousand
ducats in Frankford. The curse never fell upon our Nation till now, I never
felt it till now: two thousand ducats in that, and other precious precious
jewels. I would my daughter were dead at my foot, and the jewels in her ear:
O would she were hearst at my foot, and the ducats in her coffin. No news of
them, why so: and I know not what is spent in the search: why thou loss upon
loss, the thief gone with so much, and so much to find the Thief, and no
satisfaction, no revenge, nor no ill luck stirring but what lights on my
shoulders, no sighs but of my breathing, no tears but of my shedding.


Tuball. Yes, other men have ill luck too, Anthonio as I heard in Genoway.


Shy. What, what, what ill luck, ill luck?


Tuball. Has an Argosie cast away coming from Tripolis.


Shy. I thank God, I thank God, is it true? is it true?


Tuball. I spoke with some of the Sailors that escaped the wrack.


Shy. I thank the good Tuball, good news, good news: ha ha, here in Genoway.


Tuball. Your daughter spent in Genoway, as I heard, in one night, fourscore
ducats.


Shy. Thou stick'st a dagger in me, I shall never see my gold again;
fourscore ducates at a sitting! Fourscore ducats!


Tuball. There came diverse of Anthonios Creditours in my company unto Venice,
that swear that he cannot choose but break.


Shy. I am very glad of it, i will plague him, i will torture him, I am glad on it.


Tuball. One of them showed me a ring that he had of your daughter for a
Monkey.


Shy. Out upon her: thou tortur'st me Tuball, it was my Turkies, I had it of
Leah when I was a Batchellor. I would not have given it for a wilderness of
Monkies.


Tuball. But Anthonio is certainly undone.


Shy. Nay, that is true, that is very true: go Tuball, fee me an Officer,
bespeake him a fortnight before, I will have the heart of him if he forfeit.
For were he out of Venice I can make what merchandise I will go: go Tuball, and
meet me at our Synagogue, go good Tuball, at our Synagogue Tuball.


Exeunt Enter Bassanio, Portia, Gratiano, and all their Trains. Por. I pray
you tarry, pause a day or two
Before you hazard: for in choosing wrong
I loose your company, therefore forbear a while,
There Is something tells me (but it is not love)
I would not lose you, and you know your self,
Hate counsels not in such a quality.
But least you should not understand me well,
And yet a maiden has no tongue, but thought,
I would detain you here some month or two
Before you venture for me. I could teach you
How to choose right, but I am then forsworn,
So will I never be, so may you miss me,
But if you do, you will make me wish a sin,
That I had been forsworn. Beshrew your eyes,
They have ore looked me, and divided me,
One half of me is yours, the other half yours,
Mine own I would say; but if mine then yours,
And so all yours. O these naughty times
Puts bars between the owners and their rights.
And so though yours, not yours (prove it so)
Let fortune go to hell for it, not I.
I speak too long, but it is to peize the time,
To eck it, and to dravv out in length,
To stay you from election.

Bass. Let me choose,
For as I am, I live upon the rack.

Por. Upon the rack Bassanio, then confess
What treason there is mingled with your love.

Bass. None but that ugly treason of mistrust,
Which makes me fear th'inioying of my love,
There may as well be amity and life
Tweene snow and fire, as treason and my love.

Por. I but I fear you speak upon the rack,
Where men enforced do speak any thing.

Bass. Promise me life, and i will confess the truth,

Por. Well then, confess and live.

Bass. Confess and love,
Had been the very sum of my confession:
O happy torment, when my torturer
Does teach me answers for deliverance:
But let me to my fortune and the Caskets.

Portia. Away then, I am locked in one of them,
If you do love me, you will find me out.
Nerrissa and the rest, stand all aloof,
Let music sound while he does make his choice,
Then if he lose, he makes a Swan-like end,
Fading in music. That the comparison
May stand more proper, my eye shall be the stream
And watery deathbed for him: he may win,
And what is music then? Then music is
Even as the flourish, when true subjects bow
To a new crowned Monarch: Such it is,
As are those dulcet sounds in break of day,
That creep into the dreaming Bridegroomes ear,
And summon him to marriage. Now he goes
With no less presence, but with much more love
Then young Alcides, when he did redeem
The virgin tribute, paid by howling Troy,
To the sea monster: I stand for sacrifice,
The rest aloof are the Dardanian wives,
With bleared visages come forth to view
The issue of th'exploit: Go Hercules,
Live thou, I live with much more dismay
To view the fight, then thou that make the fray.

A song, the whilst Bassanio comments on the Caskets to himself.
Tell me where is fancy bred,
Or in the heart, or in the head?
How begot, how nourished?
Replis, reply. It is engendered in the eye,
With gazing fed, and Fancy dies:
In the cradle where it lies,
Let us all ring Pancies knell.
I Will begin it.
Ding, dong, bell.
All. Ding, dong, bell.
Bass. So may the outward shows be least themselves
The world is still deceived with ornament.
In Law, what plea so tainted and corrupt,
But being seasoned with a gracious voice,
Obscures the show of evil. In religion
What damned error but some sober brow
Will bless it, and approve it with a text,
Hiding the grosenes with fair ornament:
There is no voice so simple, but assumes
Some of virtue on his outward parts;
How many cowards whose hearts are all as false
As staiers of sand, wear yet upon their chins
The beards of Hercules, and frowning Mars,
Who inward searched, have lyuers white as milk,
And these assume but valors excrement,
To render them redoubted. Look on beauty,
And you shall see it is purchased by the weight,
Which therein works a miracle in nature,
Making them lightest that wear most of it:
So are those crisped snaky golden locks
Which makes such wanton gambals with the wind,
Upon supposed fairness, often known
To be the dowry of a second head,
The skull that bred them in the Sepulcher.
Thus ornament is but the guiled shore
To a most dangerous sea: the beauteous scarce
Vailing an Indian beauty; In a word,
The seeming truth which cunning times put on
To entrap the wisest. Therefore thou gaudy gold,
Hard fool for Midas, I will none of thee,
Nor none of thee, thou pale and common drudge
Tweene man and man: but thou, thou meager lead,
Which rather threatnest then do promise ought,
Thy palenesse moves me more then eloquence,
And here choose I, joy be the consequence.

Por. How all the other passions fleet to air,
As doubtful thoughts, and rash embraced despair:
And shyddring fear, and greene-eyed jealousy.
O love be moderate, allay thy ecstasy,
In measure range thy joy, scant this excess,
I feel too much thy blessing, make it less,
For fear I surfeit.

Bass. What find I here?
Fair Portias counterfeit. What demi God
Has come so near creation? move these eyes?
Or whither riding on the ball's of mine
Seem they in motion? Here are seuerd lips
Parted with sugar breath, so sweet a bar
Should sunder such sweet friends: here in her hairs
The painter plays the Spider, and has wouen
A golden mesh t'intrap the hearts of men
Faster then gnats in cobwebs, but her eyes,
How could he see to do them? having made one,
Methinks it should have power to steal both his,
And leave it self unfurnished: yet look how far
The substance of my praise does wrong this shadow
In vnderprizing it, so far this shadow
Does limpe behind the substance. Here Is the scroule,
The continent and summary of my fortune.
You that choose not by the view,
Chance as fair, and choose as true:
Since this fortune falls to you,
Be content, and seek no new.
If you be well pleased with this,
And hold your fortune for your bliss,
Turn you where your Lady is,
And claim her with a loving kiss.
A gentle scroule: Fair Lady, by your leave,
I come by note to give, and to receive;
Like one of two contending in a prize,
That thinks he has done well in peoples eyes;
Hearing applause and universal shout,
Giddy in spirit, still gazing in a doubt,
Whether those pearls of praise be his or no.
So thrice fair Lady, stand I even so,
As doubtful whether what I see be true,
Until confirmed, signed, ratified by you.

Por. You see me Lord Bassanio where I stand,
Such as I am; though for my self alone
I would not be ambitious in my wish,
To wish my self much better, yet for you,
I would be trebled twenty times my self,
A thousand times more fair, ten thousand times
More rich, that only to stand high in your account,
I might in virtues, beauties, livings, friends,
Exceed account: but the full sum of me
Is sum of something; which to term in gross,
Is an vnlesson'd gyrle, vnschool'd, unpracticed,
Happy in this, she is not yet so old
But she may learn: happier then this,
She is not bred so dull, but she can learn;
Happiest of all, is that her gentle spirit
Commits it self to yours, to be directed
As from her Lord, her Governor, her King.
My self, and what is mine, to you and yours
Is now converted. But now I was the Lord
Of this fair mansion, master of my servants,
Queen ore my self; and even now, but now,
This house, these servants, and this same my self
Are yours, my Lord, I give them with this ring,
Which when you part from, lose, or give away,
Let it presage the ruin of your love,
And be my vantage to exclaim on you.

Bass. Madame, you have bereft me of all words,
Only my blood speaks to you in my veins,
And there is such confusion in my powers,
As after some Oration fairly spoke
By a beloved Prince, there does appear
Among the buzzing pleased multitude.
Where every something being blent together,
Turns to a wild of nothing, save of joy
Expressed, and not expressed: but when this ring
Parts from this finger, then parts life from hence,
O then be bold to say Bassanio is dead.

Ner. My Lord and Lady, it is now our time
That have stood by and seen our wishes prosper,
To cry good joy, good joy my Lord and Lady.

Gra. My Lord Bassanio, and my gentle Lady,
I wish you all the joy that you can wish:
For I am sure you can wish none from me:
And when your honors mean to solemnize
The bargain of your faith: I do beseech you
Even at that time I may be married to.

Bass. With all my heart, so thou can get a wife.

Gra. I thank your Lordship, you have got me one,
My eyes my Lord, can look as swift as yours;
You saw the Mistress, I beheld the Maid;
You loved, I loved for intermission,
No more pertaines to me my Lord then you,
Your fortune flood upon the Casket there,
And so did mine too, as the matter falls:
For wooing here until I swet again,
And sweating till my very roof was dry,
With oaths of Jove, at last, it promise last
I got a promise of this fair one here,
To have her love: provided that your fortune
Atchieu'd her Mistress.

Por. Is this true, Nerrissa?

Ner. Maddam it is, so you stand pleased withal.

Bass. And do you Gratiano mean good faith?

Gra. Yes faith my Lord.

Bass. Our feast shall be much honored in your marriage.

Gra. Weel' play with them the first boy for a thousand ducats

Ner. What, and stake down?

Gra. No, we shall nere win at that sport and stake down.
But who comes here, Lorenzo and his infidel?
What, and my old venetian friend, Salerio?

Enter Lorenzo, Iessica, and Salerio a messenger from Venice. Bass Lorenzo and
Salerio, welcome hither,
If that the youth of my new intrest here
Have power to bid you welcome: by your leave
I bid my very friends and countrymen
Sweet Portia welcome.

Por. So do I my Lord, they are entirely welcome.

Lor. I thank your Honor, for my part my Lord,
My purpose was not to have seen you here,
But meeting with Salerio by the way,
He did entreat me past all saying nay,
To come with him along.

Sal. I did my Lord,
And I have reason for it. Signior Anthonio
Commends him to you.

Bass. Ere Iope his Letter,
I pray you tell me how my good friend does.

Sal. Not sick my Lord, unless it be in mind,
Nor well, unless in mind: his Letter there
Will show you his estate.

He opens the Letter. Gra. Nerrissa, cheer you stranger, bid her welcome,
Your hand Salerio, what is the news from Venice?
How does that royal Merchant, good Anthonio?
I know he will be glad of our success,
We are the Iasons, we have won the fleece.

Sal. I would you had won the fleece that he has lost.

Por. There are some shrewd contents in yon same paper,
That steals the color from Bassanios cheek,
Some dear friend dead, else nothing in the world
Could turn so much the constitution
Of any constant man: what worse and worse?
With leave Bassanio, I am half your self,
And I must freely have the half of any thing
That this same paper brings you.

Bass. O sweet Portia,
Here are a few of the vnpleasantst words
That ever blotted paper. Gentle Lady,
When I did first impart my love to you,
I freely told you all the wealth I had
Ran in my veins, I was a Gentleman,
And then I told you true: and yet dear Lady,
Rating my self at nothing, you shall see
How much I was a Braggart, when I told you
My state was nothing, I should then have told you
That I was worse then nothing; for indeed
I have engaged my self to a dear friend,
Engaged my friend to his mere enemy
To feed my means. Here Is a Letter Lady,
The paper as the body of my friend,
And every word in it a gaping wound,
Issuing life blood. But is it true Salerio?
Has all his ventures faild? what, not one hit,
From Tripolis, from Mexico, and England,
From Lisbon, Barbary, and India,
And not one vessel escape the dreadful touch
Of Merchant-marring rocks?

Sal. Not one my Lord.
Besides, it should appear, that if he had
The present money to discharge the Jew,
He would not take it: never did I know
A creature that did bear the shape of man,
So keen and greedy to confound a man.
He plies the Duke at morning and at night,
And does impeach the freedom of the state
If they deny him justice. Twenty Merchants,
The Duke himself, and the Magnificoes
Of greatest port have all persuaded with him,
But none can drive him from the envious plea
Of forfeyture, of justice, and his bond.

Iessica. When I was with him, I have heard him swear
To Tuball and to Chus, his Countrymen,
That he would rather have Anthonios flesh,
Then twenty times the value of the sum
That he did owe him: and I know my Lord,
If law, authority, and power deny not,
It will go hard with poor Anthonio.

Por. Is it your dear friend that is thus in trouble?

Bass. The dearest friend to me, the kindest man,
The best conditioned and unwearied spirit
In doing courtesies: and one in whom
The ancient Roman honor more appears,
Then any that draws breath in Italy.

Por. What sum owes he the Jew?

Bass. For me three thousand Ducats.

Por. What no more, pay him six thousand and deface the bond,
Double six thousand, and then treble that,
Before a friend of this description
Shall lose a hair through Bassanios fault.
First go with me to Church, and call me wife,
And then away to Venice to your friend;
For never shall you lie by Portias side
With an unquiet soul. You shall have gold
To pay the petty debt twenty times over.
When it is paid, bring your true friend along;
My maid Nerrissa, and my self mean time
Will live as maids and widows; come away,
For you shall hence upon your wedding day.
Bid your friends welcome, show a merry cheer,
Since you are dear bought, I will love you dear.
But let me hear the letter of your friend.
Sweet Bassanio, My ships have all miscarried, my Creditors grow cruel, my
estate is very low: my bond to the Jew is forfet, and since in paying it, it is
impossible I should live, all debts are cleared between you and I if I might
but see you at my death. Notwithstanding, use your pleasure; if your love do
not persuade you to come, let not my Letter.

O Love! dispatch all business, and be gone.

Bass. Since I have your good leave to go away,
I will make have. But till I come again,
No bed shall ere be guilty of my stay,
No rest be interposer twixt us twain.

Exeunt. Enter the Jew, and Salarino, and Anthonio, and the Iaylor. Jew Iaylor,
look to him, tell not me of mercy,
This is the fool that lent out money gratis.
Iaylor, look to him.

An. Hear me yet good Shylocke.

Jew. I Will have my bond, speak not against my bond:
I have sworn an oath, that I will have my bond.
Thou cald'st me dog before thou had a cause,
But since I am a dog, beware my fangs.
The Duke shall grant me justice: I do wonder
Thou naughty Iaylor that thou art so fond
To come abroad with him at his request.

An. I prithee hear me speak.

Jew. I Will have my bond; I will not hear thee speak;
I Will have my bond, and therefore speak no more.
I Will not be made a soft and dull eyed fool,
To shake the head, relent, and sigh, and yield
To Christian intercessors: follow not,
I Will have no speaking, I will have my bond.

Exit Jew. Sol. It is the most impenetrable curre
That ever kept with men.

Ant. Let him alone,
I Will follow him no more with bootlesse prayers.
He seeks my life, his reason well I know:
I often delivered from his forfeitures
Many that have at times made moan to me,
Therefore he hates me.

Sal. I am sure the Duke will never grant
This forfeyture to hold.

An. The Duke cannot deny the course of Law:
For the commodity that strangers have
With us in Venice, if it be denied,
Will much impeach the justice of his state,
Since that the trade and profit of the City
Consists of all Nations. Therefore go,
These greefes and losses have so bated me,
That I shall hardly spare a pound of flesh
To morrow, to my bloody Creditor.
Well Iaylor on, pray God Bassanio come
To see me pay his debt, and then I care not.

Exeunt. Enter Portia, Nerrissa, Lorenzo, Iessica, and a man of Portias. Lor.
Madam, although I speak it in your presence,
You have a noble and a true conceit
Of God-like amity, which appears most strongly,
In bearing thus the absence of your Lord.
But if you knew to whom you show this honor,
How true a Gentleman you send relief,
How dear a lover of my Lord your husband,
I know you would be prouder of the work,
Then customary bounty can enforce you.

Por. I never did repent for doing good,
Nor shall not now: for in companions
That do converse and waste the time together,
Whose souls do bear an equal yoke of love,
There must be needs a like proportion
Of lineaments, of manners, and of spirit:
Which makes me think, that this Anthonio
(Being the bosome-louer of my Lord) ^t
Must needs be like my Lord, If it be so,
How little is the cost I have bestowed
In purchasing the semblance of my soul,
From out the state of hellish misery.
This comes too near the praising of my self,
Therefore no more of it: here other things
Lorenzo I commit into your hands,
The husbandry and manage of my house,
Until my Lords return. For mine own part,
I have toward heaven breathed a secret vow,
To live in prayer and contemplation,
Only attended by Nerrissa here,
Until her husband, and my Lords return.
There is a Monastery two miles off,
And there will we abide. I do desire you,
Not to deny this imposition,
The which my love, and some necessity
Now lays upon you.

Lor. Madame, with all my heart,
I shall obey you in all fair commands.

Por. My people do already know my mind,
And will acknowledge you and Iessica,
In place of Lord Bassanio and my self.
And so farewell till we shall meet again.

Lor. Fair thoughts and happy hours attend on you.

Ies. I wish your Lady-ship all hearts content.

Por. I thank you for your wish, and am well pleased
To wish it back on you: farewell Iessica.
Exeunt. Now Balthaser, as I have ever found thee honest true,
So let me find thee still: Take this same Letter,
And use thou all th'indeuour of a man
In speed to Mantua; see thou render this
Into my Cosins hands, Doctor Belario,
And look what notes and garments he does give thee,
Bring them I pray thee with imagined speed
Unto the Tranect, to the common Ferry
Which trades to Venice: waste no time in words,
But get thee gone, I shall be there before thee.

Bai. Madam, I go with all convenient speed.

Exit. Por. Come on Nerrissa, I have work in hand
That you yet know not of. We Will see our husbands
Before they think of us.

Ner. Shall they see us?

Por. They shall Nerrissa: but in such a habit,
That they shall think we are accomplished
With that we lack. I Will hold thee any wager,
When we are both apparreld like young men,
I Will prove the prettier fellow of the two,
And wear my dagger with the brauer grace,
And speak between the change of man and boy,
With a reed voice, and turn two mincing steps
Into a manly stride; and speak of frayes
Like a fine bragging youth; and tell quaint lies,
How honorable Ladies sought my love,
Which I denying, they fell sick and dyed:
I could not do withal. Then i will repent,
And wish for all that, that I had not killed them;
And twenty of these punie lies i will tell,
That men shall swear I have discontinued school
Above a twelue-month. I have within my mind
A thousand raw tricks of these bragging iackes,
Which I will practice.

Ner. Why, shall we turn to men?

Por. Fie, what a question's that,
If thou were nere a lewd interpreter:
But come, i will tell thee all my whole device
When I am in my Coach, which stays for us
At the Park gate; and therefore have away,
For we must measure twenty miles to day.

Exeunt Enter Clown and Iessica. Clo. Yes truly, for look you, the sins of
the Father are to be laid upon the children, therefore I promise ye I sear
you, I was always plain with you, and so now I speak my agitation of the
matter: therefore be a good cheer, for truly I think you are damned, there is
but one hope in it that can do you any good, and that is but a kind of bastard
hope neither.


Ies. And what hope is that I pray thee?


Clo. Marry you may partly hope that your Father got you not, that you are not
the Jews daughter.


Iessi. That were a kind of bastard hope indeed, so the sins of my mother
should be visited upon me.


Clo. Truly then I fear you are damned both by Father and Mother: thus when I
shun Scilla your father, I fall into Charibdie your mother; well, you are gone
both ways.


Ies. I shall be saved by my husband, he has made me a christian.


Clo. Truly the more to blame he; we were Christians enough before, e'ne as many
as could well live one by another: this making of Christians will raise the
price of hogs, if we grow all to be Porke-eaters, we shall not shortly have a
rasher on the coals for money.


Enter Lorenzo. Ies. I Will tell my husband Lancelet what you say, here he comes.


Lor. I shall grow jealous of you shortly Lancelet, if you thus get my wife
into corners.


Ies. Nay, you need not fear us Lorenzo, Launcelet and I are out; he tells me
flatly, there is no mercy for me in heaven, because I am a jews daughter: and
he says you are no good member of the Commonwealth, for in converting Jews
to Christians, you raise the price of Porke.


Lor. I shall answer that better to the Commonwealth than you can the getting
up of the Negros belly; the Moore's with child by you Lancelet?


Clown. It is much that the Moore should be more then reason: but if she be
less then an honest woman, she is indeed more then I took her for.


Lor. How every fool can play upon the word, I think the best grace of wit
will shortly turn into silence, and discourse grow commendable in none only
but Parrats. Go in sir, bid them prepare for dinner?


Clow. That is done sir, they have all stomachs.


Lor. Goodly Lord what a wit-snapper are you: then bid the^ prepare dinner.


Clo. That Is done to sir, only cover is the word.


Lor. Will you cover than sir?


Clo. Not so sir neither, I know my duty.


Lor. Yet more quarrelling with occasion, will thou show the whole wealth of
thy wit in an instant? I pray thee understand a plain man in his plain
meaning: Go to thy Fellows, bid them cover the table, serve in the meat, and
we will come in to dinner.


Clo. For the table sir, it shall be served in, for the meat sir it shall be
covered, for your coming in to dinner sir, why let it be as humors and
conceits shall govern.


Exit Clown. Lor. O dear discretion, how his words are suited,
The fool has planted in his memory
An army of good words, and I do know
A many fools that stand in better place,
Garnished like him, that for a trickfie word
Defy the matter: how far'st thou Iessica?
And now good sweet say thy opinion,
How do thou like the Lord Bassanios wife?

Ies. Past all expressing, it is very meet
The Lord Bassanio live an upright life,
For having such a blessing in his Lady.
He finds the joys of heaven here on earth,
And if on earth he do not mean it, then
In reason he should never come to heaven.
Why, if two Gods should play some heavenly match,
And on the wager lay two earthly women,
And Portia one: there must be something else
Pawned with the other; for the poor rude world
Has not her fellow.

Lor. Even such a husband have thou of me,
As she if for wife.

Ies. Nay, but ask my opinion to of that.

Lor. I will anon, first let us go to dinner.

Ies. Nay, let me praise you while I have a stomach.

Lor. No prithee, let it serve for table talk,
Then howsoere thou speakst mong other things,
I shall digest it.

Ies. Well, i will set you forth.

Exit. Enter the Duke, the Magnificos, Anthonio, Bassanio, and Gratiano. Duke.
What, is Anthonio here?

An. Ready, so please your Grace.

Duke. I am sorry for thee, thou art come to answer
A stony adversary, an inhumane wretch,
Incapable of pity, void and empty
From any dram of mercy.

An. I have heard,
Your Grace has taken great pains
To qualify his rigorous course:
But since he stands obdurate,
And that no lawful means can carry me
Out of his enuies reach, I do oppose
My patience to his fury, and am armed
To suffer with a quietness of spirit,
The very tyranny and rage of his.

Duke. Go one and call the Jew into the Court.

Sal. He is ready at the door, he comes my Lord.

Enter Shylocke. Du. Make room, and let him stand before our face.
Shylocke the world thinks, and I think so to,
That thou but leadest this fashion of thy malice
To the last hour of act, and then it is thought
Thou Wilt show thy mercy and remorse more strange,
Then is thy strange apparent cruelty:
And where thou now exacts the penalty,
(Which is a pound of this poor Merchants flesh)
Thou will not only loose the forfeiture,
But touched with humane gentleness and love,
Forgive a moity of the principal;
Glancing an eye of pity on his losses,
That have of late so hudled on his back,
Enough to press a royal Merchant down,
And pluck commisseration of his state
From brassie bosoms, and rough hearts of flint,
From stubborn Turks, and Tartars never trained
To offices of tender courtesy;
We all expect a gentle answer Jew.

Jew. I have possessed your Grace of what I purpose,
And by our holy Sabbath have I sworn
To have the due and forfet of my bond.
If you deny it, let the danger light
Upon your Charter, and your Cities freedom.
You Will ask me why I rather choose to have
A weight of carrion flesh, then to receive
Three thousand Ducats? I Will not answer that,
But say it is my humor, is it answered?
What if my house be troubled with a Rat,
And I be pleased to give ten thousand ducats
To have it baind? what, are you answered yet?
Some men there are love not a gaping pig:
Some that are mad if they behold a Cat:
And others when the Bagpipe sings in the nose,
Cannot contain their urine for affection.
Masters of passion swayes it to the mood
Of what it likes or loathes: now for your answer.
As there is no firm reason to be rendered,
Why he cannot abide a gaping pig?
Why he a harmless necessary Cat?
Why he a woollen Bagpipe; but of force
Must yield to such inevitable shame,
As to offend, himself being offended:
So can I give no reason, nor I will not,
More then a lodged hate* and a certain loathing
I bear Anthonio, that I follow thus
A losing suit against him are you answered?

Bass. This is no answer, thou unfeeling man,
To excuse the current of thy cruelty.

Shy. I am not bound to please thee with my answer.

Bass. Do all men kill the things they do not love?

Shy. Hates any man the thing he would not kill?

Bass. Every offense is not a hate at first.

Shy. What would thou have a serpent sting thee twice?

Ant. I pray you think you question with the Jew,
You may as well go stand upon the Beach,
And bid the maine flood bate his usual height,
You may as well use question with the Wolf,
Why he has made the Ewe bleake for the Lamb:
You may as well forbid the mountain of Pines
To wag their high tops, and to make no noise
When they are fretten with the gusts of heaven:
You may as well do any thing most hard,
As seek to soften that, then which what is harder:
His Jewish heart? therefore I do beseech you
Make no more offers, use no farther means,
But with all brief and plain conueniency
Let me have judgment, and the Jew his will.

Bass. For thy three thousand ducats here is six.

Jew. If every ducat in six thousand ducats
Were in six parts, and every part a ducat,
I would not draw them, I would have my bond.

Du. How shall thou hope for mercy, tendering none?

Jew. What judgment shall I dread, doing no wrong?
You have among you many a purchased slave,
Which like your Asses, and your Dogs and Mules,
You use in abject and in slavish parts,
Because you bought them, shall I say to you,
Let them be free, marry them to your heirs?
Why sweat they under burdens, let their beds
Be made as soft as yours, and let their pallats
Be seasoned with such viands; you will answer,
The slaves are ours, so do I answer you;
The pound of flesh which I demand of him,
Is dearly bought, it is mine and I will have it:
If you deny me, fie upon your Law,
There is no force in the decrees of Venice:
I stand for judgment, answer, shall I have it?

Duke. Upon my power I may dismiss this Court,
Unless Bellario a learned Doctor,
Whom I have sent for to determine this,
Come here to day.

Saler. My Lord, here stays without,
A messenger with letters from the Doctor,
New come from Padua.

Duke. Bring us the Letters, call the Messenger.

Bass. Good cheer Anthonio, what man, courage yet:
The Jew shall have my flesh, blood, bones and all,
Ere thou shall lose for me one drop of blood.

Antho. I am a tainted weather of the flock,
Meetest for death, the weakest kind of fruit
Drops earliest to the ground, and so let me;
You cannot better be imployd Bassanio,
Then to live still and write mine Epitaph.

Enter Nerrissa. Duke. Came you from Padua from Bellario?

Ner. From both, my L. Bellario greetes your grace.

Bass. Why do thou whet thy knife so earnestly?

Jew. To cut the forfeiture from that bankrout there

Gra. Not on thy soul: but on thy soul harsh Jew
Thou make thy knife keen: but no metal can,
No, not the hangmans axe bear half the keenenesse
Of thy sharp envy: can no prayers pierce thee?

Jew. No, none that thou have wit enough to make.

Gra. O be thou damned, inexecrable dog,
And for thy life let justice be accusde;
Thou almost make me waver in my faith,
To hold opinion with Pythagoras,
That souls of Animals infuse themselves
Into the trunks of men: Thy currish spirit
Governed a Wolf, who hanged for humane slaughter,
Even from the gallows did his fell soul fleet,
And whilst thou layest in thy unhallowed dam,
Infusde it self in thee: for thy desires
Are woluish, bloody, starved and ravenous.

Jew. Till thou can rail the seal from off my bond,
Thou but offendst thy lungs to speak so loud:
Repair thy wit, good youth, or it will fall
To curelesse ruin. I stand here for law.

Duke. This letter from Bellario does commend
A young and learned Doctor to our Court:
Where is he?

Ner. He attends here hard by,
To know your answer, whether you will admit him.

Duke. With all my heart; some three or four of you
Go give him courteous conduct to this place,
Mean time the Court shall hear Bellarios Letter.
Your Grace shall understand, that at the receite of your Letter I am very
sick; but in the instant that your Messenger came, in loving visitation was
with me a young Doctor of Rome, his name is Balthazer: I acquainted him with
the cause in controversy between the Jew and Anthonio the Merchant; we turned
ore many Books together, he is furnished with my opinion, which bettred with
his own learning, the greatness whereof I cannot enough commend, comes with
him at my importunity, to fill up your Graces request in my stead. I beseech
you, let his lack of years be no impediment to let him lack a reverend
estimation, for I never knew so young a body with so old ahead: I leave him to
your gracious acceptance, whose trial shall better publish his commendation.


Enter Portia for Balthazer. Duke. You hear the learned Bellario what he
writes,
And here I take it is the Doctor come.
Give me your hand, come you from old Bellario?

Por. I did my Lord.

Duke. You are welcome, take your place:
Are you acquainted with the difference
That holds this present question in the Court.

Por. I am informed thoroughly of the cause:
Which is the Merchant here? and which the Jew?

Duke. Anthonio and old Shylocke, both stand forth.

Por. Is your name Shylocke?

Jew. Shylocke is my name.

Por. Of a strange nature is the suit you follow,
Yet in such rule, that the Venetian law
Cannot impunge you as you do proceed.
You stand within his danger, do ye not?

Ant. I so he says.

Por. Do you confess the bond?

Ant. I do.

Por. Then must the Jew be merciful.

Shy. On what compulsion must I, tell me that.

Por. The quality of mercy is not strained,
It droppeth as the gentle rain from heaven
Upon the place beneath: it is twice blessed,
It blesses him that gives, and him that takes,
It Is mightiest in the mightiest, it becomes
The throned Monarch better then his crown.
His scepter shows the force of temporal power,
The attribute to awe and majesty,
Wherein does sit the dread and fear of Kings
But mercy is above this sceptred sway,
It is enthroned in the hearts of Kings,
It is an attribute to God himself;
And earthly power does then show like Gods,
When mercy seasons justice: therefore Jew,
Though justice be thy plea, consider this,
That in the course of justice, none of us
Should see salvation: we do pray for mercy,
And that same prayer, does teach us all to render
The deeds of mercy. I have spoke thus much
To mitigate the justice of thy plea,
Which if thou follow, this strict Court of Venice
Must needs give sentence against the Merchant there,

Shy. My deeds upon my head, I crave the law,
The penalty and forfeit of my bond.

Por. Is he not able to discharge the money?

Bass. Yes, here I tender it for him in the Court,
Yea twice the sum, if that will not suffice,
I will be bound to pay it ten times ore,
On forfeit of my hands, my head, my heart:
If this will not suffize, it must appear
That malice bears down truth. And I beseech you
Wrest once the Law to your authority,
To do a great tight, do a little wrong,
And curbs this cruel devil of his will.

Por. It must not be, there is no power in Venice
Can alter a Decree established:
Twill be recorded for a precedent,
And many an error by the same example,
Will rush into the state, it cannot be.

Shy. A Daniel come to judgment: yea a Daniel.
O wise young Judge, how I do honor thee.

Por. I pray you let me look upon the bond.

Shy. Here it is most reverend Doctor, here it is.

Por. Shylocke, there is thrice thy money offered thee.

Shy. And oath, an oath, I have an oath in heaven,
Shall I lay perjury upon my soul?
No, not for Venice.

Por. Why this bond is forfeit,
And lawfully by this the Jew may claim
A pound of flesh, to be by him cut off
Nearest the Merchants heart; be merciful,
Take thrice thy money, bid me tear the bond.

Shy. When it is paid, according to the tenor,
It does appear you are a worthy Judge,
You know the Law, your exposition
Has been most sound: I charge you by the Law,
Whereof you are a well deserving Pillar,
Proceed to judgment: by my soul I swear,
There is no power in the tongue of man
To alter me, I stay here on my bond.

Ant. Most heartily I do beseech the Court
To give the judgment.

Por. Why then thus it is,
You must prepare your bosom for his knife.

Shy. O noble judge, O excellent young man.

Por. For the intent and purpose of the Law,
Has full relation to the penalty.
Which here appears due upon the bond.

Shy. It Is very true: O wise and upright judge,
How much more elder art thou then thy looks.

Por. Therefore lay bare your bosom.

Shy. I, his breast,
So says the bond, does it not noble Judge?
Nearest his heart, those are the very words.

Por. It is so, are there balance here to weigh the flesh?

Shy. I have them ready.

Por. Have by some Surgeon Shylocke on your charge,
To stop his wounds, least he do bleed to death.

Shy. Is it so nominated in the bond?

Por. It is not so expressed, but what of that?
Twere good you do so much for charity.

Shy. I cannot find it, it is not in the bond.

Por. You Merchant, have you any thing to say?

Ant. But little; I am armed and well prepared,
Give me your hand Bassanio, far you well,
Grieve not that I am fallen to this for you:
For herein Fortune shows her self more kind
Then is her custom: it is still her use
To let the wretched man out-liue his wealth,
To view with hollow eye and wrinckled brow,
An age of poverty: from which lingering penance
Of such misery does she cut me off.
Commend me to your honorable wife,
Tell her the process of Anthonios end,
Say how I loved you, speak me fair in death*
And when the tale is told, bid her be judge,
Whether Bassanio had not once a love:
Repent but you that you shall lose your friend,
And he repents not that he pays your debt.
For if the Jew do cut but deep enough,
I Will pay it presently with all my heart.

Bass. Anthonio, I am married to a wife,
Which is as dear to me as life it self,
But life it self, my wife, and all the world,
Are not with me esteemed above thy life.
I would lose all, I sacrifize them all
Here to this devil, to deliver you.

Por. Your wife would give you little thanks for that
If she were by to hear you make the offer.

Gra. I have a wife, who I protest I love,
I would she were in heaven, so she could
Entreat some power to change this currish Jew,

Ner. It Is well you offer it behind her back,
The wish would make else an unquiet house.

Jew. These be the christian husbands, I have a daughter,
Would any of the stock of Barrabas
Had been her husband, rather then a Christian.
We trifle time, I pray thee pursue sentence.

Por. A pound of that same Merchants flesh is thine,
The Court awards it, and the law does give it.

Jew. Most rightful Judge.

Por. And you must cut this flesh from off his breast,
The Law allows it, and the Court awards it.

Jew. Most learned Judge, a sentence, come prepare.

Por. Tarry a little, there is something else,
This bond does give thee here no jot of blood,
The words expressly are a pound of flesh:
Take then thy bond, take thou thy pound of flesh,
But in the cutting it, if thou do shed
One drop of Christian blood, thy lands and goods
Are by the laws of Venice, confiscate
Unto the State of Venice.

Gra. O upright Judge,
Mark Jew* O learned Judge.

Shy. Is that the Law?

Por. Thy self shall see the Act:
For as the^ vrgest justice, be assured
Thou shall have justice, more then thou desire.

Gra. O learned Judge, mark Jew, a learned Judge.

Jew. I take this offer then, pay the bond thrice,
And let the Christian go.

Bass. Here is the money.

Por. Soft, the Jew shall have all justice, soft no have
He shall have nothing but the penalty.

Gra. O Jew, an upright judge, a learned judge.

Por. Therefore prepare thee to cut off the flesh,
Shed thou no blood, nor cut thou less nor more,
But just a pound of flesh: if thou cutst more
Or less then a just pound, be it but so much
As makes it light or heavy in the substance,
Or the division of the twentieth part
Of one poor scruple; nay, if the scale do turn
But in the estimation of a hair,
Thou dyest, and all thy goods are confiscate.

Gra. A second Daniel, a Daniel Jew,
Now infidel I have you on the hip.

Por. Why does the Jew pause, take thy forfeyture.

Shy. Give me my principal, and let me go.

Bass. I have it ready for thee, here it is.

Por. He has refusd it in the open Court,
And shall have merely justice and his bond.

Gra. A Daniel still say I, a second Daniel,
I thank thee Jew for teaching me that word.

Shy. Shall I not have barely my principal?

Por. Thou shall have nothing but the forfeyture,
To be so taken at thy peril Jew.

Shy. Why then the devil give him good of it:
I Will stay no longer here in question.

Por. Tarry Jew,
The Law has yet another hold on you.
It is enacted in the laws of Venice,
If it be proved against any alien,
That by direct, or indirect attempts,
He seek the life of any Citizen,
The party against the which he does contriue,
Shall seize on half his goods; the other half
Comes to the privy coster of the State,
And the offenders life lies in the mercy
Of the Duke only, against all other voice,
In which predicament I say, thou standst:
For it appears by manifest proceeding.
That indirectly, and directly to
Thou have contrived against the very life
Of the defendant: and thou have incurd
The danger formerly by me rehearst.
Down therefore, and beg mercy of the Duke.

Gra. Beg that thou may have leave to hang thy self,
And yet thy wealth being forfeit to the state,
Thou have not left the value of a cord,
Therefore thou must be hanged at the States charge.

Duke. That thou shall see the diffrence of our spirits,
I pardon thee thy life before thou ask it:
For half thy wealth, it is Anthonios,
The other half comes to the general State,
Which humbleness may drive unto a fine.

Por. I for the state, not for Anthonio.

Shy. Nay, take my life and all, pardon not that,
You take my house, when you do take the prop
That does sustain my house: you take my life
When you do take the means whereby I live.

Por. What mercy can you render him, Anthonio?

Gra. A halter gratis, nothing else for Gods sake.

An. So please my Lord the Duke, and all the Court,
To quit the fine for one half of his goods,
I am content; so he will let me have
The other half in use, to render it
Upon his death unto the Gentleman
That lately stole his daughter.
Two things provided more, that for this favor
He presently become a Christian:
To other, that he do record a gift
Here in the Court, of all he dies possessed
Unto his son Lorenzo and his daughter.

Duke. He shall do this, or else I do recant
The pardon that I late pronounced here.

Por. Art thou contented Jew? what do thou say?

Shy. I am content.

Por. Clearke, draw a deed of gift.

Shy. I pray you give me leave to go from hence,
I am not well, send the deed after me,
And I will sign it.

Duke. Get thee gone, but do it.

Gra. In christning shall thou have two Godfathers,
Had I been judge, thou should have had ten more,
To bring thee to the gallows, not the Font.

Exit. Duke. Sir, I entreat you home with me dinner.

Por. I humbly desire your Grace of pardon,
I must away this night toward Padua,
And it is meet I presently set forth.

Duke. I am sorry that your leisure serves you not.
Anthonio, gratify this gentleman,
For in my mind you are much bound to him.

Exit Duke and his train. Bass. Most worthy gentleman, I and my friend
Have by your wisdom been this day acquitted
Of grievous penalties, in lieu whereof,
Three thousand ducats due unto the Jew,
We freely cope your courteous pains withal.

Ant. And stand indebted over and above
In love and service to you evermore.

Por. He is well paid, that is well satisfied,
And I delivering you, am satisfied,
And therein do account my self well paid,
My mind was never yet more mercinary.
I pray you know me when we meet again,
I wish you well, and so I take my leave.

Bass. Dear sir, of force I must attempt you further,
Take some remembrance of us as a tribute,
Not as a fee: grant me two things I pray you,
Not to deny me, and to pardon me.

Por. You press me far, and therefore I will yield,
Give me your gloves, i will wear them for your sake,
And for your love, i will take this ring from you.
Do not draw back your hand, i will take no more,
And you in love shall not deny me this.

Bass. This Ring good sir, alas it is a trifle,
I will not shame my self to give you this.

Por. I will have nothing else but only this,
And now methinkes I have a mind to it.

Bass. There Is more then this depends upon the value:
The dearest Ring in Venice I will give you,
And find it out by Proclamation,
Only for this I pray you pardon me?

Por. I see sir you are liberal in offers,
You taught me first to beg, and now me thinks
You teach me how a beggar should be answered.

Bass. Good sir, this Ring was given me by my wife,
And when she put it on, she made me vow,
That I should neither sell, nor give, nor loose it.

Por. That scuse serves many men to save their gifts,
And if your wife be not a mad woman,
And know how well I have deserved the Ring,
She would not hold out enemy for ever,
For giving it to me: well, peace be with you.

Exeunt An. My Lord Bassanio, let him have the Ring,
Let his deseruings and my love withal,
Be valew'd against your wives commandment.

Bass. Go Gratiano, tun and overtake him,
Give him the Ring, and bring him if thou can
Unto Anthonios house, away, make have.

Exeunt Gratiano. Come you and I will thither presently,
And in the morning early will we both
Fly toward Belmont, come Anthonio.
Exeunt. Enter Nerrissa. Por. Enquire the Jews house out, give him this deed,
And let him sign it, we will away to night,
And be a day before our husbands home:
This deed will be well welcome to Lorenzo.

Enter Gratiano. Gra. Fair sir, you are well ore-tane,
My Lord Bassanio upon more advice,
Has sent you here this Ring, and does entreat
Your company at dinner.

Por. That cannot be,
This Ring I do accept most thankefully,
And so I pray you tell him. Furthermore,
I pray you show my youth old Shylockes house.

Gra. That will I do.

Ner. Sir, I would speak with you.
I Will see if I can get my husbands Ring,
Which I did make him swear to keep for ever.

Por. Thou may I warrant, we shall have old swearing
That they did give the Rings away to men,
But we will outface them, and out-sweare them too,
Away, make have, thou know where I will tarry.

Ner. Come good sir, will you show me to this house?

Enter Lorenzo and Iessica. Lor. The Moon shines bright.
In such a night as this,
When the sweet wind did gently kiss the Trees,
And they did make no noise, in such a night,
Troylus methinks mounted the Troyan walls,
And sighed his soul toward the Grecian Tents
Where Cressada lay that night.

Iessica. In such a night
Did Thisbie fearfully ore-trip the dew*
And saw the Lions shadow ere himself,
And ran dismayed away.

Loren. In such a night.
Stood Dido with a willow in her hand
Upon the wild sea banks, and waft her Love
To come again to Carthage.

Iessica. In such a night,
Medea gathered the enchanted herbs
That did renew old Fson.

Loren. In such a night
Did Iessica steal from the wealthy Jew,
And with an unthrift love did run from Venice,
As far as Belmont.

Iessica. In such a night
Did young Lorenzo swear he loved her well,
Stealing her soul with many vows of faith,
And nere a true one.

Loren. In such a night
Did pretty Iessica (like a little shrew)
Slander her Love, and he forgave it her.

Iessica. I would out-night you did nobody come:
But hark, I hear the footing of a man.

Enter a Messenger. Loren. Who comes so fast in silence of the night?

Messen. A friend.

Loren. A friend, what friend, your name I pray you friend.

Messen. Stephano is my name, and I bring word My mistress will before the
break of day
Be here at Belmont, she does stray about
By holy crosses where she kneeles and prays
For happy wedlockes hours.

Loren. Who comes with her?

Messen. None but a holy Hermit and her maid:
I pray you is my Master yet returned?

Loren. He is not, nor we have not heard from him,
But go we in I pray thee Iessica,
And ceremoniously let us prepare
Some welcome for the Mistress of the house.

Enter Clown. Clown. Sola, sola: woe ha, ho sola, sola.

Loren. Who calls?

Clown. Sola, did you see M. Lorenzo, M. Lorenzo, sola, sola.

Loren. Leave hollowing man, here.

Clown. Sola, where, where?

Loren. Here.

Clown. Tell him there is a Post come from my Master, with his horn full of
good news, my Master will be here ere morning, sweet soul.

Loren. Let Us in, and there expect their coming,
And yet no matter; why should we go in?
My friend Stephano, signify I pray you*
Within the house, your mistress is at hand,
And bring your music forth into the air.
How sweet the Moone-light sleeps upon this bank,
Here will we sit, and let the sounds of music
Creep in our ears soft stillness, and the night
Become the tutches of sweet harmony:
Sit Iessica, look how the floor of heaven
Is thick inlayed with pattents of bright gold,
There Is not the smallest orb which thou beholdst,
But in his motion like an Angel sings,
Still quiring to the young eide Cherubins;
Such harmony is in immortal souls,
But whilst this muddy vesture of decay
Does grossly close in it, we cannot hear it.
Come hoe, and wake Diana with him a hymn,
With sweetest touches pierce your mistress ear,
And draw her home with Music.

Music plays. Ies. I am never merry, when I hear sweet Music.

Lor. The reason is, your spirits are attentive:
For, do but note a wild and wanton heard,
Or race of youthful and unhandled Colts,
Fetching mad bounds, bellowing and neighing loud,
Which is the hot condition of their blood,
If they perchance but hear a Trumpet sound,
Or any air of music touch their ears,
You shall perceive them make a mutual stand,
Their savage eyes turned to a modest gaze,
By the sweet power of music. Therefore the Poet
Did feign that Orpheus drew trees, stones, and floods.
Since naught so stockish hard and full of rage,
But music for the time does change his nature:
The man that has no music in himself,
Nor is not moved with concord of sweet sounds,
Is fit for treasons, stratagems, and spoils,
The motions of his spirit are dull as night,
and his affections dark as Terebus:
Let no such man be trusted. Mark the Music.

Enter Nerrissa and Portia. Por. That light we see is burning in my hall:
How far that little candle throws his beams,
So shines a good deed in a naughty world.

Ner. When the Moon shone we did not see the candle.

Por. So does the greater glory dim the less.
A substitute shines brightly as a King.
Until a King be by, and then his state
Empties it self, as does an inland brook
Into the maine of waters: Music, hark.

Ner. It is your music Madam of the house.

Por. Nothing is good I see without respect,
Methinkes it sounds much sweeter then by day.

Ner. Silence bestows that virtue on it Madam.

Por. The Crow does sing as sweetly as the Lark,
When neither is attended: and I think
The Nightingale if she should sing by day
When every Goose is cackling, would be thought
No better a Musician then the Wren.
How many things by season, seasoned are
To their right praise, and true perfection.
Peace, how the Moon sleeps with Endimion,
And would not be awaked.

Lor. That is the voice,
Or I am much deceived of Portia.

Por. He knows me as the blind man knows
The Cucko, by the bad voice.

Lor. Dear Lady, welcome home.

Por. We have bin praying for our husband health,
Which speed we hope the better for our words.
Are they returned?

Loren. Madam, they are not yet:
But there is come a Messenger before,
To signify their coming.

Por. Go in Nerrissa,
Give order to my servants, that they take
No note at all of our being absent hence,
Nor you Lorenzo, Iessica nor you.

Lor. Your husband is at hand, I hear his Trumpet,
We are no tell-tales Madame, fear you not.

Por. This night me thinks is but the day light sick,
It looks a little paler, it is a day,
Such as the day is when the Sun is hid.

Enter Bassanio, Anthonio, Gratiano, and their followers. Bass. We should hold
day with the Antipodes,
If you would walk in absence of the sun.

Por. Let me give light, but let me not be light,
For a light wife does make a heavy husband,
And never be Bassanio so for me,
But God sort all: you are welcome home my Lord.

Bass. I thank you Madame, give welcome to my friend,
This is the man, this is Anthonio,
To whom I am so infinitely bound.

Por. You should in all sense be much bound to him,
For as I hear, he was much bound for you.

Ant. No more then I am well acquitted of.

Por. Sir, you are very welcome to our house,
It must appear in other ways then words,
Therefore I scant this breathing courtesy.

Gra. By yonder Moon I swear you do me wrong,
Infaith I gave it to the Judges Clarke,
Would he were gelt that had it for my part,
Since you do take it (Love) so much at heart.

Por. A quarrel hoe already, what is the matter?

Gra. About a hoope of gold, a paltry ring
That she did give me, whose poesy was
For all the world like Cutlers poetry
Upon a knife, Love me, and leave me not.

Ner. What talk you of the poesy or the value;
You swore to me when I did give it you,
That you would wear it till your hour of death,
And that it should lie with you in your grave,
Though not for me, yet for your vehement oaths,
You should have been respective, and have kept it.
Gave it a Judges Clarke; no God's my Judge,
The Clarke will nere wear hair on's face that had it.

Gra. He will, and if he live to be a man.

Ner. I, if a woman live to be a man.

Gra. Now by this hand I gave it to a youth,
A kind of boy, a little scrubbed boy,
No higher then thy self, the Judges Clarke,
A prating boy that begd it as a fee,
I could not for my heart deny it him.

Por. You were too blame, I must be plain with you,
To part so slightly with your wives first gift,
A thing stuck on with oaths upon your finger,
And so riueted with faith unto your flesh.
I gave my Love a ring, and made him swear
Never to part with it, and here he stands;
I dare be sworn for him he would not leave it,
Nor pluck it from his finger, for the wealth
That the world masters. Now in faith Gratiano,
You give your wife too unkind a cause of grief,
And twere to me I should be mad at it.

Bass. Why I were best to cut my left hand off,
And swear I lost the Ring defending it.

Gra. My Lord Bassanio gave his ring away
Unto the Judge that begd it, and indeed
Deserved it to: and then the boy his Clarke
That took some pains in writing, he begd mine,
And neither man nor master would take ought
But the two rings.

Por. What ring gave you my Lord?
Not that I hope which you rceiu'd of me.

Bass. If I could add a lie unto a fault,
I would deny it: but you see my finger
Has not the ring upon it, it is gone.

Por. Even so void is your false heart of truth.
By heaven I will nere come in your bed,
Until I see the ring.

Ner. Nor I in yours,
Till I again see mine.

Bass. Sweet Portia,
If you did know to whom I gave the Ring,
If you did know for whom I gave the Ring,
And would conceive for what I gave the Ring,
And how unwillingly I left the Ring,
When naught would be accepted but the Ring,
You would abate the strength of your displeasure.

Por. If you had known the virtue of the Ring,
Of half her worthiness that gave the Ring,
Or your own honor to contain the Ring,
You would not then have parted with the Ring.
What man is there so much unreasonable,
If you had pleased to have defended it
With any terms of zeal, wanted the modesty
To urge the thing held as a ceremony?
Nerrissa teaches me what to believe,
I Will die for it, but some woman had the Ring.

Bass. No by my honor Madam, by my soul
No woman had it, but a civil Doctor,
Which did refuse three thousand Ducates of me,
And begd the Ring, the which I did deny him,
And suffered him to go away displeasd,
Even he that did uphold the very life
Of my dear friend. What should I say sweet Lady?
I was enforced to send it after him:
I was beset with shame and courtesy,
My honor would not let ingratitude
So much besmeare it. Pardon me good Lady,
For by these blessed Candles of the night,
Had you been there, I think you would have begd
The Ring of me, to give the worthy Doctor.

Por. Let not that Doctor ere come near my house,
Since he has got the jewel that I loved,
And that which you did swear to keep for me,
I will become as liberal as you,
I Will not deny him any thing I have,
No, not my body, nor my husbands bed:
Know him I shall, I am well sure of it.
Lie not a night from home: watch me like Argos,
If you do not, if I be left alone,
Now by mine honor, which is yet mine own,
I Will have that Doctor for my bedfellow.

Ner. And I his Clarke: therefore be well aduisd
How you do leave me to mine own protection.

Gra. Well do you so: let not me take him then,
For if I do, I Will mar the young Clerks pen.

An. I am the unhappy subject of these quarrels.

Por. Sir, grieve not you, you are welcome notwithstanding.

Bass. Portia, forgive me this enforced wrong,
And in the hearing of these many friends
I swear to thee, even by thine own fair eyes,
Wherein I see my self.

Por. Mark you but that.
In both my eyes he doubly sees himself:
In each eye one, swear by your double self,
And there is an oath of credit.

Bas. Nay, but hear me,
Pardon this fault, and by my soul I swear,
I never more will break an oath with thee.

An. I once did lend my body for his wealth,
Which but for him that had your husband Ring,
Had quite miscarried. I dare be bound again,
My soul upon the forfet, that your Lord
Will never more break faith advisedly.

Por. Then you shall be his surety; give him this,
And bid him keep it better then the other.

An. Here Lord Bassanio, swear to keep this Ring.

Bas. By heaven it is the same I gave the Doctor.

Por. I had it of him; pardon me Bassanio,
For by this ring the Doctor lay with me.

Ner. And pardon me my gentle Gratiano,
For that same scrubbed boy the Doctors Clarke,
In lieu of this, last night did lie with me.

Gra. Why this is like the mending of high ways
In summer, where the ways are fair enough.
What, are we Cuckolds ere we have deserved it?

Por. Speak not so grossly, you are all amazed;
Here is a Letter, read it at your leisure,
It comes from Padua from Bellario,
There you shall find that Portia was the Doctor,
Nerrissa there her Clarke, Lorenzo here
Shall witness I set forth as soon as you,
And even but now returned; I have not yet
Entered my house. Anthonio, you are welcome,
And I have better news in store for you
Then you expect; unseal this letter soon,
There you shall find three of your Argosies
Are richly come to harbor suddenly.
You shall not know by what strange accident
I chanced on this Letter.

Ant. I am dumb.

Bass. Were you the Doctor, and I knew you not?

Gra. Were you the Clarke that is to make me Cuckold?

Ner. I, but the Clarke that never means to do it,
Unless he live until he be a man.

Bass. (Sweet Doctor) you shall be my bedfellow,
When I am absent, then lie with my wife.

An. Sweet Lady, you have given me life and living;
For here I read for certain, that my Ships
Are safely come to Rode.

Por. How now Lorenzo,
My Clarke has some good comforts too for you.

Ner. I, and i will give them him without a fee,
There do I give to you and Iessica
From the rich Jew, a special deed of gift
After his death, of all he dies possessed off.

Loren. Fair Ladies, you drop Manna in the way
Of starued people.

Por. It is almost morning,
And yet I Am sure you are not satisfied
Of these events at full. Let Us go in,
And charge us there upon intergotories,
And we will answer all things faithfully.

Gra. Let it be so, the first intergotory
That my Nerrissa shall be sworn on, is,
Whether till the next night she had rather stay,
Or go to bed now, being two hours to day:
But were the day come, I should wish it dark,
That I were couching with the Clarke.
Well, while I live, i will fear no other thing
So sore, as keeping safe Nerrissas Ring.

Exeunt. FINIS.

