The ninth Tragedy of Lucius Anneus Seneca called Octauia.

Translated out of Latin into English, by T. N. Student in Cambridge.

Imprinted at London, by Henry Denham.

TO THE RIGHT HOnorable, the Lord Robert Dudley, Earl of Lecester, Baron of
Dinghby, of the most royal order of the Garter Knight, one of the Queens
Majesty's most honorable privy Counsel, and Master of her Majesty's Horse.
T. N. wishes health, with increase of honor and virtue.
AFTER THAT I had waded, right honorable, in the translating of this Tragedy
called Octauia, written first in Latin by that notable and sententious Poet
Seneca, and desired, as the common custom is, some Patron, that might both
bring aucthoritye to this my little Book, and also, if need should be, defend
it from the bitter taunts of envious tongs, I have not espied right honorable,
any one, either for his bountiful goodness toward my friends (which commonly
men respect) or else for his favorable, and gracious humanity toward
scholars (in whose number I am) unto whom I might so justly give this small
combroustrifle, and especial token of good will, as to your Lordship: whose
honorable goodness or rather magnificence, both your honors nurcerie of
learning, and, as I can boldly say, the university of Cambridge, with my pore
friends, have most abundantly tasted of: which your Lordships most honorable
curteousnesse, not to recompense in any one jot or tittle thereof (which is not
in our small and slender power) but with a well meaning heart, in some part to
gratefie your honor, I have among al other most unmeet, presumed, both to
employ my travail on this trim Tragedy, before others much better able, and
also to salute your courteous Lordship, with these rude and unsavory first
fruits of my young study: most humbly beseching your honor to accept my good
will and travail.

Your honors to commmaund.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE


To the Reader.
IF thou (gentle Reader) have any thing in this small Uolume which may commend
unto thee, the travail and pains of the Aucthor of this English Tragedy,
surely I am much the gladder: but if all do not answer thine expectation (as
it must needs so be because, there is nothing harder than to please all men)
since that thou art not privy to all things, disclose not rashly thy foolish
judgment. If the translating of Latin, or other Books of other languages,
into our mother tongue, does either profit the common wealth, or the writer at
all, do not then condemn the young sprung writers, if that in all points they
please not thee which may by the grace of God, through thy gentle and courteous
accepting of a little toye, hereafter employ their labor to more serious and
weyghty matters, both to their own commodity and thy learning, and
especially, to the profit of our native country. Wey therefore wisely, what
thy friendly good will may do, not unto me only, which am like to do very
little, but unto others, whose hearts with favor thou may easly win, to the
undertaking of greater matters: and then willingly embrace both my good will,
and travail.

Farewell.
The Argument of the Tragedy
OCtauia daughter to prince Claudius grace,
To Nero espousde, whom Claudius did adopt
(Although Syllanus first in husbands place
She had receyu'd, whom she for Nero chopped)
Her parents both, her Make that should have been,
Her husbands present tirannie much more,
Her own estate, her case that she was in,
Her brothers death, poor wretch lamenteth sore.
Him Seneca does persuade his latter Love,
Dame Poppie, Crispynes wife that sometime was,
And eke Octauias maid, for to remove.
For Senecks counsel he does lightly pass:
But Poppie ioynes to him in marriage rytes.
The people wood into his palace run,
Her golden fourmed shapes which them sore spytes,
They pull to ground: this uproar now begun,
To quench, he some to griesly death does send.
But her close cased up in dreadful barge,
With her unto Campania coast to wend,
A band of armed men, he gave in charge.
The speakers in this Tragedy.
Octauia Nutrix. Chorus Romanorum. Seneca Nuntius. Agrippina Poppea Nero.
Praefectus.
The first Scene.
Octauia. NOw that Aurore with glittering streams,
The glading stars from sky does chase,
Sir Phoebus pert, with spouting beams,
From dewye neast does mount a pace:
And with his cheerful looks does yield,
Unto the world a gladsome day.
Go to, O wretch, with ample field
Of heavy cares, oppressed aye,
Thy grievous wonted playntes recount:
Do not alone with syghes and howles,
The seaysh Alcyones surmount,
But also pass the Pandyon fowls:
More irksome is thy state than theirs.
O mother dear, whose death by fittes
I nyl lament, but still shed tears,
My ground of grief in thee it sittes.
If that in shades of darksome den,
Perceiving sense at all remain,
Hear out at large, O Mother, then,
My great complayntes, and grievous pain.
O that immortal Clothos wrist,
Had torn in twain my vital thredde:
Ere I, unto my grief, had wist
Thy wounds, and face of sanguine read.
O day, which aye does me anoy:
Since that time, did I more desire,
The fearful darkness to enjoy,
Than Phoebus fresh with fair attire.
I have abode the bitter hest
Of stepdame dire, in Mothers place,
I have abode her cruel breast,
Her stomach stout, and fighting face.
She, she for spyte unto my case,
A doleful, and a grave Eryn,
To Bridegromes chamber spousall space,
The Stygian flashing flames brought in.
And thee, alas, most pitious sire,
With traytrous traynes has she bereft
Of breathing soul with poisoned mire:
To whom ere while, the world all left
Unvanquisht from the Ocean Seas,
By martial feats did freely yield:
And did subdue with wondrous ease,
The Britain brutes that fled the field:
Whom living at their propre swaye,
No Roman power did erst invade.
Now lo (full well lament I may)
Thy spouse deceyt thy prowes has lade:
And now thy court, and child of yore,
With homage serve a Tyrants lore.
The second Scene.
Nutrix. WHom so the glistering pomp of royal place,
With soden sight ynumd does quite disgrace,
Who so at courtly fleeting ebbing blase,
Astonished sore, himself does much amase:
Lo see of late the great, and mighty stock,
By lurking fortunes sudden forced knock,
Of Claudius quyte subvert and clean extinct:
Tofore, who held the world in his precinct:
The Britain Ocean coaste that long was free,
He ruled at will, and made it to agree
Their Roman Galleys great for to embrace.
Lo he that Tanais people first did chase,
And Seas unknown to any Roman wight,
With lusty sheering ships did ouerdight,
And safe amyd the savage freakes did fight,
And rufling surging Seas has nothing dread,
By cruel spouses gylt does lie all dead.
Her son likewise more fiende than Tygre fierce,
Of natural Mother makes a funeral hearse.
Whose Brother drenched deep, with poisoned cup
Poor Britannick, his senseless soul gave up.
Octauia sister, and unhappy make,
Does sore lament her case for Britanus sake:
Ne can her ruthful pyteous sorrow slake,
Though Neros wrath do sore constrain her grace.
She nill esteems the secret closset place:
But boiling still with equal peysde disdain,
With mutual hate against him does burn again.
My true and trustye love, that I do bear,
In vain I see does strive to comfort her.
Revenging greedy grief does straight repriue,
To Appease her smarte, the counsel that I give.
Nor flame of worthy breast does once relent:
But heaps of grief, her courage do augment.
Alas, what griefly deeds for to ensue
My fear foreseeth: God grant it be not true.
The third Scene.
Octauia. Nutrix. O Staggering state, O peerless ill:
With ease Electra I repeat,
And call to mind thy mourning will.
With watered eyes, like smartiug sweat,
Thou might lament thy father slain,
Still hoping that thy brother might,
That deadly deed revenge again.
Whom thou O tender loving wight,
Did safely shield from bloody foe,
And natural love did closely keep:
But Neroes dreaded visage lo,
Does fear me that I dare not weep,
Nor wayle my parents ruthful case,
By cruel lot to slaughter cought:
Ne suffers me this geniall face,
To dash with tears, too dearly bought
With brothers blood: who only was
Mine only hope in all my grief,
And of so many mischieues, as
My comfort great, and sole relief.
Now lo reserude for greater care,
And to abide more lingering pain,
Of noble famous lynage bare,
A drouping shade I do remain.
Nutrix. My Ladies heavy voice me thought,
Within my listening ears began sound.
And snaylish age in going soft,
Unto her thews is not ybounde.

Octauia. O Nurse our dolours witness sure,
By curroll cheeks dystilling rain,
And heavy hearts complaynt, endure.

Nut. Alas what day shall rid of pain,
With care your well nie wasted heart?

Oct. That sends this giltlesse ghost to grave.

Nut. This talk good Madame set apart.

Oct. In rule my state the destnies have,
And not thy prayers, O Matrone just.

Nut. The down soft easy God shall give,
Your troubled mind, a time, I trust,
More sweet than ever you did live.
With feuell fair, as one content,
And glosed face, but only please
Your man, and make, he will relent.

Oct. The Lion fierce I shall appease,
And sooner tame the Tygre stout,
Than mankind tyrants brutish breast.
He spites the noble raced route,
Contemnes high powers, dysdaynes the least:
Ne can well use that princely weed,
Which venomous parent wrapped him in
By huge unspeakable griesly deed.
Although that wight unthankful, grin
In Kingly throne, that he does reign,
Through cruel curssed mothers aid:
Although he pay with death again
So great a gift, it shall be said,
And after fates in long spent age,
That woman wight shall have always,
This eloge yet, and saying sage,
That he by her does bear the sway.

Nut. Let not your ragious mind so walk,
But do compresse your moodie talk.

The fourth Scene.
Octauia. Nutrix. THough much I bear ye boiling breast do beat,
And tollerably take deuorcements threate,
Deaths only deadly dart, I see an end,
Of all my broyle and pinching pain can send.
What pleasant light to me, O wretch is left,
My natural Mother slain, and Sire bereft,
Of breathing life, by treason, and by gilt:
Of Brother eke depriude: with miseries spilt:
And wayling overcome: kept down with care,
Envied of Make, which I dare not declare.
To maiden subject now, and now defied:
What pleasant light can me, O wretch, abide
With fearful heart suspecting always ought:
Because I would, no wicked deed were wrought:
Not that I fear Deaths griesly girning face,
God grant I do not so revenge my case?
A better deed to dye: for, to behold
The Tyrants visage grimme, with brows vprolde,
And with soft tender lips, my foe to kiss,
And stand in awe of becks, and noddes of his,
Whose will to please, my grief with cares yfirde,
Since brothers death by wicked wyle conspirde,
Could never once vouchsafe for to sustain,
Less grief to die, than thus to live in pain.
His Empire Nero rules, and joys in blood:
The cause and ground of death that tirant wood.
How often alas, does fancy fondly feign,
When slumber sweet in pensive parts does raygne,
And sleep in eyes, all tyrde, with tears does rest,
I apprehende dear Brittans lively breast?
Ere while me thinks, his feeble shiuering hands
He fenseth sure, with deadly blasing brands,
And fiercely on his brother Neros face,
With sturdy stinging strokes, he flies apace.
Ere while thilke wretch recoyleth back again,
And to my thews for aid retyres amain:
Him foming foe pursues with have to have:
And while my brother I desire to save,
And in my clasped arms to shield him free,
His goarie bloudyed faucheon keen, I see
The boisterous raumping fiende to tugge, and hale
Through out my shiuering limbs, as ashes pale.
Forthwith a mighty trembling chattering quake,
From weary limbs, all souple sleep does shake,
And makes me, woeful wretch, for to recount,
My wailing sobbing sorrows that surmount.
Hereto, put to that gorgeous stately mouse,
All glistring bright, with spoils of Claudius house.
His parent dear in bubbling boat did douse.
That wicked son, this fisking dame to please.
Whom yet escaping dangers great of Seas,
He fiercer freake than waves that scantly rest,
With bloody blade her bowels did vnbrest.
What hope of health, can me, O wretch, abide,
That after them thilke way I should not ride?
My special foe, triumphant wise does weight,
With naked nates to press, by lovers sleyght,
Our spousall, pure, and clean unspotted bed:
Against whom, she burns, with deadly food blood red.
And, for a meede of filthy strumpets sport,
She causes Make from spouse for to diuort.
O ancient Sire, step forth from Limbo lake,
Thy daughters heavy troublous cares to slake:
Or your twygated hellysh porche unfold,
That down through gaping ground I may be rolde.
Nutrix. O pitious wretch, in vain, alas in vain
Thou calst upon thy fathers senseless sprite:
In whom, God wotte, there does no care remain
Of mortal brood, that here does take delight.
Shall he, think you, assuage your sorry cheer,
Or shape you forth some slight, t'appall your pain,
That could prefer, before his Brittan dear,
T'imperiall throne, a strange begotten swain?
And with incestiall love benumbed quyte
His brother Germanicks daughter that could plyght,
And join to him in solemn marriage rites,
With woeful, and unlucky lovers lights?
Here sprang the roale of hurly burly great,
Here beastly venomous slaughter began to sweat,
Here wily treasons trains appeared first,
Here rules desire, and brutyshe bloody thirst.
Sillanus first Prince Claudius son in law,
A bloudye mangled offering fall we saw,
That in your graces Hymaeneal bed,
Y matched with you, he might not couche his hedde.
O monstrous slaughter, worthy endless blame:
In stead of gift unto that wanton dame,
A Carcass cold poor soul, and curelesse corse,
Sillane was given against his will perforce.
And falsely then attacht of traitors crime
As one conspyring death in Claudius time,
With loathsome streakes spewde out upon the wall,
He all bedasht your fathers princely hall.
Eft stepped into servile Palace stroke,
To filthy vices lore, one easlye broke.
Of Diuelishe wicked wit this Princocks proud:
By stepdames wyle prince Claudius Son auoude.
Whom deadely damme did bloody match ylight:
And thee, against thy will, for fear did plyght.
Through which success this Dame of courage fine,
Durst venture, mighty Jove to undermine.
Who can so many cursed kinds report
Of wicked hopes, and acts, in any sort,
Or such a woman's glosed guyles can name,
That raumpes at rule, by all degrees of shame?
Then holy sacred zeal put out of grace,
Her stagring steps, directed forth apace.
And stern Erinnis in with deadly steps,
To Claudius Court, all desert left yleps.
And with her dririe drakes of Stygian fort,
Has quite distainde the sacred princely port.
And raging riuen in twain both natures lore,
And right to wrongs misseshapen form has tore.
That hautie minded dame first gave her make,
A deadely poisoned cup, his thyrst to slake.
Straight ways again through vile unkindly touch,
Her Nero causde with him in hell to couch.
And thee, unhappy Britt, in all that broyle,
Till that of breath, and life he did dispoyle,
Thilk greedy bloody tyrant never stent:
Whose doleful death, for aye we may lament.
Ere while, unto the world the star that shone,
And was the stay of princely court alone,
Now lo, light ashes easly pufte aforne,
And griesly goast to grave with Torche yborne.
Whom blessed Babe, thy stepdame did lament:
Nor from her gusshing tears, did scarce relent,
When as she gave each trim appointed part,
And goodly portraide limbs with natures art,
Of flaming stacke to be devoured quite,
And saw the scortching fervent fire in sight
Thy naked joints to rauyne up a pace
And like the flittering God thy comely face.

Oct. Dispatch he me least with this hand he fall.

Nut. That power you, nature granted not at all.

Oct. But wondrous dolor, great and wrathful ire,
And miseries will it grant without desire.

Nut. Nay rather cause your angry moody make,
With souple cheer his fury for to slake.

Oct. What, that he will by guylte once slain before,
Alive again my brother me restore?

Nut. Nay, safe that you may live and issue bear:
Your fathers ancient court for to repair.

Oct. That court does wait another brood they say.
And poor Britts death tugges me another way.

Nut. Yet let the cities love unto your grace,
Your troubled mind confirm but for a space.

Oct. Their minds so pressed to pleasure me, I know
Great comfort bring: but do not slake my woe.

Nut. Of mighty power the people have been aye.

Oct. But princes force does bear the greater sway.

Nut. He will respect his lawful wedded wife.

Oct. His minion brave can not so lead her life.

Nut. Of no man she esteemde.

Oct. But dear to make.

Nut. She can not truly yet of wyfehoode crake.

Oct. Ere long she shall a mother eke be made.
So far therein I dare most boldly wade.

Nut. His youthful heat at first in filthy love,
With lusty, crusty pangs does boil above:
Thylke courage quickly coolde in lust apace
As vapor sone extinct in flame, gives place.
But holy, loving, chaste vnspot^^^ spouse,
Her love endures aye with s^^^d vows.
That wanton first that there durst couch her head,
And tumbling stained quite your spousall bed,
And being but your maid has ruled long,
Her sovereign Lord, with beauties grace bestong,
That pranked Paramour pert shall croutch with pain,
When she your grace shall see preferred again.
For Poppie subject is, and meek of spright,
And now begins her goastly tombs to dight:
Whereby she closely granting does bewray,
Her secret hidden fear each other day.
That swift, unconstant, double wynged lad,
With cloute, before his blinded eyes, yclad,
That fickle brayned God, the unhappy boy,
Shall leave her in the midst of all her joy:
Although for beauty bright the bell she bear,
And goodly glistring garments new she wear,
And now do vaunt her self in gorgeous geere,
She shall not long enjoy this gladsome cheer.
Be not dismayde, Madame, for such like pain,
The queen of Gods was forced to sustain,
When to each pleasant shape the heavenly guide,
And sire of Gods yturnde, from skies did glyde.
The swannes white wings, to se how they could fadge
He did on him, and cuckoldes bullysh badge.
That God shone bright in golden raynie shower,
To Danaes breast through top of fortred tower.
The twinkling stars, the twins of Laeda bright,
Whom Pollux some, and Castor call aright,
In large and ample space of starry scope,
With cristall glimmering faces shine wide open.
An Semeles son, whom Bacchus we do call,
In heavenly byrthright does himself ystall.
And, Hercules that puissant champion stout,
His sturdy brawnes his Hebe wyndes about.
Nor once regardes how goddess Juno fare:
Whose lowering stepdame now she is yframde,
That while on earth his prowes he did declare,
Against that marriage, aye, was sore inflamde.
Yet lo her wise, and closely couched grief,
Debonaire face, obeysaunce to her leefe,
Causde him, at length his mind for to remove,
Through mortal feeres estraungde from Iunos love.
And now that mighty heavenly goddess great,
No more adred of mortal strumpets feat,
Aloft alone in clowdy bower contents
The thundering Lord which now to her relents.
Nor now with earthly ladies beawtie bright
Y fired, leaves his starry specked right.
Now Madame, since on earth your power is pight,
And have on earth queen Iunos princely place,
And sister are, and wife to Neros grace,
Your wondrous restless dolours great appease.

Oct. Nay, sooner shall the roaring frothy seas,
And mounting, flashing flawes ymatch the sky,
And smoking, stiffling parching fire dry,
With danckish pooles agree, and watrie fenne.
And griefly Plutos filthy feltred den,
With starbright heaven shall sooner coupled be,
And shining light, with glomie shades agree,
And with the clear dry day, the dewy night,
Than unto servile lore of husband wight,
That brutishwise in blood takes his delight,
My heavy woeful mind can I address,
While brothers death my heart does still possess.
O that of heavenly powers the prince, and sire,
That shogges and shakes the earth, with thundering fire
And, with his wondrous fearful, curssed crackes,
And strange misseshapen monsters which he makes,
Our fearful musing minds does sore amase,
Would coin some curelesse burning wyldefyre blase,
To pelt, and pashe with thumpping fire bright,
That devilish pate, that cruel curssed wight.
We saw from heaven, with beams forthshooting far,
Doubtless a dreadful hearie, blasing star:
That spouted forth a mortal fyerie flake,
Whose force a princes blood can only slake:
Even where that hayting carman sloe Boot
With chilling cold all starck, of frosen pole,
Does guide aright Charles whirling running rote,
In stead of night that never away does role.
Lo, now the open air in every streate,
With doggish tyrants breath, is poisoned quite,
And dreadful stars soon sudden death does threate.
To people, ruled by wicked Neros sprite.
So stern a freake, or mankind tyrant stout,
Not Tellus with the Gods displeasde brought out,
When mighty Jove neglected, she up horlde,
Huge, ugly, monstrous Typhon to the world.
A sorer plague, a cleaner scouring scourge,
With bloudye paws that cities bounds does purge,
Is Nero dyre, this cruel, curssed wight,
That does him self against God, and man ydyght:
And thrusts from sacred shrynes, their quiet port,
And goodly temples gaye, the sancted sort:
That cities dwellers puts from countries fort:
That has hereft his brother of his life,
And launcht his mothers sides with goarie knyfe:
Yet does this present lightsome day enjoy,
And leads his life, that does us sore anoy.
O father of heaven, in vain why do thou throw
Thy great vnvanquisht rattling thunder blow
Upon the whistling woods, and ample seas,
With force of princely power thy wrath to appease?
On such an hurtful, and pernicious freake,
Thy due and just conceived ire to wreake.
Why stay thy mighty puissaunt braunes so long,
Ere thou fling down, thy rattling cracking throng?
O Lord that Nero once might pay the price,
Of all his devilish deeds, and every vice,
The Whole wide worlds tirant stern, where he a stroke
Does bear: which he over lades with burdnous yoke:
Of princely sire yborne, but does defame,
With beastely manners vile his princely name:

Oct. Unworth he is, your spousall chamber place:
But yet your destnies force, you must embrace:
And well, abide your fortunes crooked race:
Nor move unkindly Neros gauly ire.
One day perchance, there will, as I desire,
Some God revenge your lamentable case:
And once, I trust, a gladsome day shall be,
When you shall joy a fresh in wonted place.

Oct. Ah, no, now, long this court alas, we see
With heavy wrath of Gods displeased ire
Has ouercharged been: which Venus dyre
With Messalinas monstrous, ramping lust,
She first has brought adown into the dust.
Who madly married to prince Claudius grace,
But little myndefull then of that same case,
And not regarding much the appointed pain,
With curssed cressets married once again.
To which unlucky 'incestuall bridal bed,
That drosell dyre that furious slut Erin,
With hanging hair about her hellish head,
And gyrt with snakes with deadly step went in.
And flaming broandes from spousall chamber cought,
In both their bloods ybathde, has quentched clean:
And has incenst prince Claudius burning thought,
In bloody thratling stroke to pass all mean.
My mother first of wretches all the most,
With strype of deadly sword gave up her ghost.
And now extinguished quite left me forlorn,
With dolours pyning pangs and mourning worn.
And after her in hellishe teame does hayle,
Unto the senseless souls of Plutos iayle
Her make, and Britannick her son that way:
And first this ruinous court did she betray.

Nut. Let be, Madame, with tears your face to dight:
Ne so renew your bitter wayling just:
Cease troubling now, your parents pyteous spright,
That paid has the price of raging lust.

The fifth Scene.
Chorus. GOd grant the talk we heard of late,
To rashly trusted every where,
And blown abroad through each estate,
No badge of truth, that it may bear.
And that no fresh espoused dame,
Our princes thews do enter in,
But that Octauia keep the same.
And that the seed of Claudius kin,
May once bring forth some pledge of peace:
That to the world rest may redowne,
And wrangling strife may easly cease,
And Rome retain her great renown.
The peerlesse princess Juno hight,
Her brothers wedlock yoke retaynes:
Why is Augustus sister bright,
Where like betrouthed league remaynes,
From stately pomp of court reject?
What does deuoutnesse her avail?
To saincted sire, who has respect?
What does her Virgins life prevail?
And, Claudius now in ground ylayed,
Even we to much unmindful be:
Whose worthy stem we have betrayed
Through fear, that made us to agree.
In breast our elders did embrace,
The perfect Roman puissaunce,
The true unstained worthy race,
And blood of Mars they did advance.
The proud, and lofty stomackt train
Of lusty hautie minded kings,
They could not suffer to remain
Within this noble Cities wyngs.
And justly they reuengde thy death,
O virgin chaste, Virginia pure,
Depryude by sire of vital breath,
That bondage thou might not endure.
And that his shameless brutishe lust,
So good a meede might not enjoy:
Although by filthy force unjust
Thy chastity he would anoy.
Thee likewise whom thine own right hand,
With sword did pearce Lucretia true,
Who tyrants rape could not withstand,
Did bloody broils and wars ensue.
And with thy proud disdainefull make
Lord Tarquin ympe of curssed seed,
Correction due does Tullia take
For her unkindly shameless deed.
Who on her fathers mangled corse,
To mischief bent, and wicked bane,
The carman she to drive did force,
His cruel brusing wombling wane.
And quyte against all natures law,
Even from her own dismembered sire,
The sacred rytes she did withdraw,
Denaying wonted burial fire.
This grief or woeful age does feel,
Through monstrous act against all kind,
When as in deadly craftye keele,
To Tyrrhen seas, and wrestling wind,
The proud presuming prince did put,
His mother trapt in subtle sort.
The maryners appointed cut,
The swelling seas from pleasant port.
The clash resoundes with stroke of ores,
The ship, out launcht, a pace does spin,
In surging froth aloof from shores,
And ample course of seas does win.
Which glyding forth with leusned planks,
In pressed streams with peised weight,
The riftes do open closed cranks,
That hidden were, with secret slight:
And gulpeth up the leaking wane:
The woeful, roaring noise, and cry,
With woman's shryks themselves to save,
Do reach, and beat the starrie sky.
Then griesly present death does dance
Before their eyes with pyning cheeks:
Whose deadly stroke and heavy chance
For to auyde, then each man seeks:
On ryuened rybs some naked lie,
And cut the beating waves in twain:
And some their skillful swymming try,
To get unto the shore again.
The greatest part that sailed there,
By destnies dyre to men prefixed,
In whirling swallows drowned were,
The brinks of seas and ground betwixt.
Queen Agryppine her garments rendes,
She tears her ruffled locks of hear,
Abundant blubbring tears she spendes,
Through deep distress of fainting fear.
Who, when no hope of health she spies,
Enflamde with wrath, which woes appeasde,
O son, for so great gifts, she cries,
Have thou with such reward me pleased?
This keele I have deserved sure,
That bare and brought thee first to light:
Who empire witless did procure,
And Cesars title for thy right.
Show forth thy fearful spritish face,
O Claudius now from Limbo lake,
And of thy wife in wretched case,
Revenge and due correction take.
Thy death I causeless did conspyre,
Which now I rue with woeful heart:
I dressed eke a funeral fire,
Into thy son by deadly smart.
Lo, now as I deserved have,
Untomde go to thy guiltless goast,
Enclosde in seas in stead of grave,
And wrestling waves of Roman coast.
The flasshing flawes do flap her face,
And on her speaking mouth do beat,
Anon she synkes a certain space,
Depressed down with surges great:
Anon she fleetes on weltring brim,
And pattes them off with tender hands:
Through fainting fear then taught to swim,
Approaching death, and fates withstandes.
At length on troubled seas displayde,
She giving over working vain,
And tyrde with streams is weary laid,
Not able toyling strength to strain.
In close, and secret silent breasts
Of mates with hirto sea that yode,
In whom no fear of death there restes,
True faith unto their queen abode.
Their ladies weather heaten lyms
To help some freely venture dare,
Some in the coombrous waters swyms,
And desperate danger do not spare.
With cheerful voice they comfort her,
Though drawlyng draggling lims she drew,
To lift her up with help they stir,
And nummed corpse to strength renew.
What boots it thee the death to shonne
Of roaring raging ravening waves,
From deadly sword of wicked son,
Alas poor wretch thee nothing saues?
Whose huge and heinous curssed rage,
Against all course of natures lore,
Our after slow believing age,
Will scarce believe it done before.
The devilish man repynde with grief
When he his mother saved saw,
From swallowing seas have safe relief
And that she vital breath did draw,
He grudgde with grief: and in his heat,
He huger mischief heaps to this:
He does not once delay his feate,
But hedlong rashly carried is
Upon her death. A soldier sent,
Dispatchesh that he had in charge,
His ladies breast his blade does rent:
She yielding up her soul at large,
From wretched corpse for to entomb
Her slaughter man, she then besought,
That bloody blade within her womb,
That first this woe to her had brought,
This, this accurssed breast (quod she)
Which this unkindly monster bare,
From pinching pain may not be free:
Dig, slash the same, no mischief spare.
When this with foultring tongue was said,
At last her sad and trembling goast,
With latter sobbing sighs, vnstayde,
Through goryd wounds leaves vital coast.
The second Act.
The first Scene.
Seneca. IN me with like consent, why did thou smyle,
With glosed looks deluding me a while,
O fortune much of might and princely power?
To lift alofte to noble royal bower?
To the end that I to honors court extolde
From stately seat might have the greater fall,
And rownde about in every place behold,
Such dreadful, threating dangers to us all?
I safer lay aloof from enuies knockes,
Removed among the craggy corsick rocks:
Where as my mind there free at propre swaye,
With leisure did repeat my studies aye.
A gladsome joy alone it was to view,
And earnestly to mark the heuens so blewe:
And sacred Phoebus double wheeled wayne:
And eke the worlds swift whyrling motion main.
The Sun so even his second course to keep:
And Phebes glyding globe so swiftly sweep:
Whom wondrous starting stars encompasse round.
And to behold, that shines in every stound,
The glystring beawtie bright of welkin wide:
Than which in all the world, nothing beside,
Of all this huge and endless work, the guide,
More wondrous, nature, framde that I espyde.
For all the bumping bygnesse it does bear,
Yet waxing old is like again to wear,
And to be chaungde to an vnwyldie lump.
Now pressed at hand this worlds last day does iumpe,
With boystrous fall, and tumbling rush of sky,
To squease, and make this curssed kind abie.
That springing once again, it may yield out,
An other strange renewed virtuous route.
As once before, it did, new sprung again,
What time Saturnus held his golden reign.
That blameless, chaste, unspotted virgin clear,
A goddess much of might, clept Justice here,
With sacred sooth sent down from heavenly space,
At ease on earth did rule the mortal race.
That people plain knew not of warlick feats,
Nor trembling trumpets tune, that rends, and beats,
The soldiers ears: nor chasshing armor bright,
That warring wyghts defend in field, and fight.
Nor wonted was with walls to raumpire round,
Their open Cities set in any stounde.
To each man passage free lay opened than:
Nothing there private was to any man.
And then the ground it self, and fertile soil,
Her fruitful bosom baarde all void of toil,
Into such bounden barus, a Matron good,
And peaceable unto so just a brood.
But then, an other second race arose,
Perceived not to be so meek as those.
A third more wise, and witty sort up starts,
Of nature forged fit t'inuent new arts:
As yet unspotted quite with filthy vice.
Soon after tho, they raundge with new device,
That boldly venture dare in scudding race,
Unwieldy beasts for to pursue apace.
And mighty weying, struggling fisshes great,
With watrie coats yclad, with fisshers feat,
With net in window wise draw forth: and streeke
With craft of quill, the nibbling fysshes cheek.
And silly byrdee begylde with pyning train:
And light foot dear, for life that fling amain
In tangling gins entrapt, that safely hold.
And sturdy scouling visagde bulls controlde,
On flesshie fillet necks, make wear the yoke:
And earth ere that vngrubbed up that broake:
Which the^ turnde up, with plowmans shining share,
In sacred bosom deep, her fruits kept their.
But now this age much worse than all the rest,
Has lept into her mothers broken breast:
And rustye lumpishe iron, and massy gold,
Has dug out, that was quite hid with molde.
And fighting fists have armde without delay:
And drawing forth their bonds for rule to stay,
Have certain several ioyly kingdoms made,
And cities new have raside now ruled with blade,
And fenseth, either with their propre force
Strange stounds, or them assaults, the which is worse.
The starrie specked virgin flower of skies,
Which Justice hight, that guilty folk dis^^ies,
Now lightly estee(...)e of mortal people here,
Each erthly stound is fled, and comes not near
The savage manuerd rout, and beastly rude,
With dabbed wrists in goarie blood embrued.
The great desire of grieflie war is sprung:
And raping thurst of gold, it is not young.
Throughout the world, a mighty monstrous vice,
Foul, filthy, monstrous just has got the price,
A pleasant tickling plague: whom longer space,
And error deep have fostred up a pace.
The heaps of vice, ^akte up in years long past,
Abounding flow in these out days at last.
And this same troublous time, and combrous age,
Oppresses all m^^ sore, both young and sage.
Wherein those wicked ways that be, do reign,
And cruel, raumping woodnesse boyles again.
Lust strong in filthy touch, does bear a swaye:
And princes, riot, now does catch away
With greedy paws, to bring it to decay,
The Whole worlds incredible wealth, without delay,
But lo, which staggring steps where Nero flings,
And visage grim, I fear what news he brings.
The second Scene, of the second Act.
Nero. Prefectus. Seneca. DIspatch with speed, that we commanded have:
Go, send forthwith some one, or other slave,
That Plautius cropped scalp, and Sillas eke,
May bring before our face: go some man seek.
Prefectus. I nill protract your noble graces hest:
But to their camps to go am ready pressed.

Seneca. Against lynage, naught should rashly pointed be.

Nero. A light thing it is for to be just, I see
For him, whose heart is void of shrinking fear.

Se. A sovereign salve for fear, is for to bear,
Your self debonair to your subjects all.

Ne. Our foes to slay, a chefetaines virtue call.

Se. A worthier virtue it is, in countries sire,
His people to defend with sword, and fire.

Ne. It well beseems such aged wights, to teach,
Unbrideled springolls young, and not to preach,
Both to a man, and prince of ryper years.

Se. Nay rather frolic youthful blood appears,
To have more need of counsel wise, and grave.

Ne. (This age sufficient reason ought to have.)

Se. That heavenly powers your doings may allow.

Ne. A madnesse't were to Gods for me to bow,
When I my self can make such Gods to be:
As Claudius now ycounted is we se.

Se. So much the more, because so much you may.

Nc. Our power permits us all without denay.

Se. Give slender trust to fortunes flattering face:
She topste turuie turns her wheel a pace.

Ne. A patch he is that knows not what he may.

Se. A princes praise I counted have always,
To do that same which with his honor stood,
Not that which frantike fancy counts good.

Ne. If that I were a mecock, or a slouch,
Each stubborn, clubbish daw would make me couch.

Se. And whom they hate with force they ouerquell.

Ne. Then, dynt of sword the prince defends well.

Se. But faith more sure defense does seem to me.

Ne. Full meet it is that Caesar dreaded be.

Se. More meet of subjects for to be beloved.

Ne. From subjects minds fear must not be removed.

Se. What so by force of arms you do wring out,
A grievous work it is to bring about.

Ne. Well hardly then our will let them obey.

Se. Will nothing then but that which well you may.

Ne. We will decree what we shall best suppose.

Se. What peoples voice does jointly bind or lose,
Let that confirmed stand. Ne. Swords bloody dynt
Shall cause them else at me to take their hynt.

Se. God sheeld, and far that fact from you remove.

Ne. What then, why Seneck do you that approve,
That we contemnde, despysde, and set at naught,
With finger put in hole (full wisely wrought)
Our bodies blood to seek should them abide,
That they might us sometime destroy vnspide?
Their native country bounds to bannisht be,
Nor Plautius breast nor Syllas eke we see
Has broke, or tamde: whose cankred churlish ire,
Shapes bloody freakes to quench our bodies fire.
And chiefly when these traiterous absent clownes,
Such wondrous favor find in cities bownes,
Which those same exiles lingering hope does feed:
Suspected foes with sword we will out weed.
And so Octauia shall that ioyly dame,
Continue after them their bloody game.
And wend that way her nowne white brother went,
Such hye mistrusted things must needs be bent.

Se. It is, O prince, a worthy famous thing,
Amyds redoubted Lords alone to ring:
And wisely work your countries praise to save:
And well your self to captive folk behave:
From cruel brutish slaughter to abstain:
And void of mood to wreake your angry pain:
And, to the world a quiet calm to give,
That all your age in peace their lives may live.
This is a Princes praise without all crime:
This is the path to heaven whereby we clyme.
So is Augustus prince and father called
Of country first, in starbright throne ystald.
Whom as a God in minsters we adorn,
Yet troublous fortune tossed him beforne,
A great while long on lands, and ruffling seas,
Until his fathers foes he could appease,
And through wars diverse course could quel the^ quite.
To you did fortune yield her power, and might,
And raynes of rule without all blood, and fight.
And to your beck both land, and seas has bent.
Grim deadly envy daunted does relent.
The Senate Lords gave place with free consent:
The battaylous route of knights with willing hearts
(That same decre from sager syres departes)
Unto the lay men's choice do well agree.
Your grace the spring of peace they count to be.
And chosen Judge, and guide of mortal stock.
Your grace, your countries sacred sire, does rock,
And rule with princely gorgeous title bright,
The cyrcled world in rundell wisely ydight.
Which mighty mounting name to keep so great,
This noble city Rome, does you entreat:
And does commend unto your royal grace,
Her lively lyms in charge for your lives space.

Ne. The gift of Gods it is, as we discus,
That Rome with Senate sort does honor us.
And that the fear of our displeasure great,
From cankred envious stomaks makes sweat
Both humble talk, and supplications meek.
And were not fear all these would be to seek.
Unwieldy, combrous cities members ill,
That prince, and cuntrie both do seek to spill,
To leave alive (which swell, and puffed be,
Because of lynage great, and hye degree)
What madness mere is it when as we may,
Even with a word, such freakes dispatch away?
Sir Brutus stern, his brawns and arms did dight.
His sovereign liege to slain by force and might,
That erst had helped him, and given him health,
And had endued him with princely wealth.
In brunt of raging war, undaunted out,
That vanquished many people strong, and stout,
Prince Caesar, mateht, by great degrees of power.
To Jove, in stately chair of starrie bower,
By diu'lish citizens wicked wyle, was slain.
What store of bloody, stiffling streams on molde
Did tattred Rome, of her own lims, behold?
He by his noble virtues worthy praise,
Whom peoples common brute to heaven does raise,
August, among the Gods ysaincted well,
How many noble breasts did he compel,
How many springolds young, and hoarie heds,
Each where dispersed, to ligge in molded beds?
How many men did he bereave of breath,
Tofore proscript, that were condemnd to death?
When for the griesly fear of deadly dart,
From propre home they were constraind to part,
And fly Octauius force, and Lepidus might,
And not abide stern Mark Antonius sight,
Which then the ample world at once did guide,
That into kingdoms three they did divide.
To dumpish sadded syres, with heavy cheer,
Their childerns griesly cropped pates appear,
Hong out beforne the Senates judgment seat,
For each man to behold in open streat:
Ne durst they once lament their piteous case,
Nor inward seem to morn to Claudius face.
The market stead, with blood from bodies spued,
And loathsome mattrie streams, is all embrued:
And, quite throughout, their faces foul arayde
The pitcous gubs of blood drop down, vnstayde.
Nor here did this same slaughterous bloodshed stay:
Phyllips, Pharsalia ghastly fields each day
The cromming ravening fowls, and cruel beasts,
Long fed, with gobbets big of manly breasts.
Beside all this, the coast he scoured quyte
Of Sicill sea, and ships to war yoyght
With force of arms did win: and hauock made
Of propre subjects, slain with his own blade.
The rundle round of lands with mighty maine
Of noble chieftaines stroke, reboyles again.
Antonius overcome in nauale fight,
To Egypt poasts in ships preparde to flight:
Not looking long to live, nor hoping life.
Incestuous Egypt (through Antonius wife)
That worthy Roman princes blood, did suck:
And couerd lie their goasts with durtie mucke.
Long wicked, waged civil war, there stayed,
In Mark Antonius grave, with him ylayed.
Augustus at the last, of conquest great
His dulled swords, that wounded souls did beat
In peaceable sheaths reposde, has laid at rest:
And fear does rule, and guide his kingdom best.
By ready force of arms at all assayes,
And Captains says he sheeldes himself always:
Whom now his sons most worthy virtues praise,
To heaven a consecrated God does raise,
And causes all, in Churches for to place
The sacred Picture of prince Claudius grace.
And us, the starrie reign of Gods shall bide
If first, with dreadful sword about us wide,
We wype away, what so our person stain:
And found our court with worthy stem again.

Se. Your noble spouse, sprung forth of saincted peer,
Of Claudius stock, the starbright Diamond clear,
That goddess Juno wise her brothers bed
Partaking, pressed down with buttocks red,
Your graces princely court shall garnish gay,
With wondrous heavenly fair descended stay.

Ne. Incestuous married dames, from stock, and stem,
Detract all hope, that we should have of them.
Nor us, could she once love, that we could see,
Nor with our person once at all agree.

Se. In tender budding years, when love suppressed
With blusshing, hydes the flames of burning breast,
Scant plain appears the love they bear in deed.

Ne. Thus we our self with hope in vain did feed:
Although undoubted signs, as body wryed,
And frowning looks, which we have often espied,
Her spiteful, hating stomach did bewray
Which she does bear, whom duty byndes to obey.
Which yet at last, big, boiling, grievous pain
With death determinde has t'auenge again.
We have found out, for birth, and beauties grace
A worthy make, for such an Empress place:
To whom, that lovely goddess, Venus bright,
And mighty Jove his spouse that Juno hight,
And goddess fierce in boisterous warlike arts,
Gives place for bodies seemly portraid parts.

Se. Faith, meekness, manners mylde, and hashfull shame
Of spouse, those ought an husband to reclame.
The perls of judging mind, alone remain,
Not subject once to any rulers reign.
The passing pride of beawties numming grace
Each day appalls, and bleamisheth a pace.

Ne. What praises woman wights have in the^ closde?
All those, in her alone has God reposde.
And such a peerless peer, the guides of life,
The destnies would have borne to be our wife.

Se. O noble prince such blind, unlawful love,
(Do rashly credit naught) from you remove.

Ne. Whom Jove can not repel that rules the clouds,
And pearcing raging floods, therein him shrouds,
And raungeth through the reign of Plutos pit,
And pulls down in welkin hie that sit
The mighty powers of heaven, the God of love?
And can I then his force from me remove?

Se. Swift winged love, men's fanste fond, in vain
A mercy wanting God to be, does fame:
And arms his hands with wounding weapons keen
And bows with burning bronds, for lovers green:
Of Venus to be sprung, they all accord,
And blyndly forgde, of thunders limping Lord.
Bland love the minds great torment sore, appears,
And buddeth first, in frollick youthful years.
Who, while we drink of fortunes pleasant cup,
With laysie pampring riot, is nestled up:
Whom if to foster up, you leave at length
It fleting, falls away with broken strength.
This is, in all our life, as I suppose
The greatest cause, how pleasure, first arose.
Which since mankind by brooding, bydeth ayt,
Through gladsome love, that fierce wild beasts does sway
It never can, from manly breast depart.

Ne. This self same God, I wish with all my heart
The wedlock lights to bear before our grace,
And fasten Poppie, sure, in our bed place.

Se. The peoples grief might never yield to it:
Nor virtue can, the same at all, permit.

Ne. Shall I alone to do, forbidden be,
That every patch may do? that greeueth me.

Se. No tryfling toys, the people looks to have
Of him, that ought to rule with wisdom grave.

Ne. It pleases us, with daunted power, to try,
If peoples rash conceived rage, will fly.

Se. Seek rather for to please, and calm their mood.

Ne. Ill ruled is that reign where people wood,
Their subject prince does weld, as they think good.

Se. When naught that they require they can obtain,
They justly then agrieued are again.

Ne. That gentle prayers can not win with ease,
By force to wring it out, it does us please.

Se. An hard thing it is the people not to have
That of their Prince, which they do justly crave.

Ne. And horrible it is a Prince to be constraind.

Se. Let not your subjects then so sore be raind.

Ne. Why then the common brute abroad will be.
How that the people have subdued me.

Se. That no man trusts, that is of credit light.

Ne. Be it so, yet many it marks with deadly spite.

Se. With country peers to meddle, it is afraid.

Nc. To quippe and frump, it is nothing less dismayed.

Se. Your grace may easly couch that budding brute.
Let saincted syres deserts with pliant suit,
Your graces mind, remove: let spouses age,
And courteous bashful shame disrump your rage.

Ne. Leave off, I say, that we entend, to grutch.
For now your talk, our patience moves much:
I pray you let it lawful be to do,
That Seneck gives not advise unto.
And we, our peoples wishes do defer,
While Poppie feel in wombling womb to ster,
The pledge of faithful love to me, and her.
Why do we not appoint the morrow next,
When as our marriage pomp may be context?

The third Act.
The first Scene.
Agrippina. THrough paunch of riuened earth, from Plutos rain
With goastly steps, I am returned again.
In writhled wrists that blood do most desire,
Forguiding wedlock vile, with Stygian fire.
Let Poppie (...) these (...) coupled sure,
Unto my soune be ioynde in marriage pure:
Whom mothers grief, and hand revenging wracks,
Shall send with heave and hoe, to funeral stacks.
I always do remember well beneath,
Where piteous, ghostly, crauling souls do breath,
The unkindly, slaughterous deed, which to our spright
Yet vnreuengde, is grievous, and of right.
And, for the good I did, a cruel pryse,
That deadly framed ship in crafty wise:
And due reward, that he gave me again,
For helping him to rule of Empyres reign:
And eke that night, when as I did bewail,
Both less of ship, wherein we then did sail,
And mates unhappy beath: and while I thought,
For this accuessed d^ede, to have besought
The Gods, to trickling tears he gave scant time,
But twice increased has his devilish crime.
Quyte slain with sword, thrust through my bodies bosids
And (...) laid through goa^^e mat(...)ing wounds,
Delivered safe, from seas (...)ing sup,
In antique court, my goast I yielded up.
Nor yet his cancred, and vnfatiate hate,
For all this blood, does Nero once abate.
That tyrant dyre does rage at mothers name,
And seeks ways, my deeds for to defame.
Who threating death to them that do withstand,
My shapes he dingeth down, in every land:
My princely tyties large he scrapeth out
In every place, the whole wide world about,
Which my (...) parents love did give,
To much unto my (...), while I did live,
^^th a boy to g^yde, which now Irue.
My poisoned Make, my ghost does often pursue:
And in my face, with burning bronds, does fly.
He stays a space with earnest talk hard by,
And threatens sore, and does impute his death
And tomb he should have had, to me beneath.
And now desires to have some factious wight,
That dare dispoyle my son of breathing spright.
Let be, you shall have one to work this crime,
I do require no long delaied time.
Revenging sprit Erin, a death does coin,
Of life, that wicked tyrant, to purloyne.
Sore smarting leaden strypes, and shameful flight,
And pyning panges, with thurst and hunger dyght:
That Tantalus spungelyke thurstie mouth befurd,
And Sisyphus toil shall pass, and Tityus hurd,
And Ixions painful, wombling wheel about,
That teareth all his bodies parts throughout.
Although that tyrant proud and scornful wight,
His court with marble stone do strongly dyght,
And princelike garnish it with glistring gold:
Though troops of soldiers shielded sure, uphold
Their chieftaines princely porch: and though yet still
The world drawn dry with taskes even to his will,
Great heaps of riches yield them selves to save,
Although his bloody help, the Parthians crave,
And kingdoms bring, and goods all that they have,
The time, and day shall come, when as he shall
Forlorn, and quite undone, and wanting all,
Unto his curssed deeds, his life, and more,
Unto his foes, his baared throat restore.
Alas, unto what end is all my pain,
Or in what case, do now my vows remain?
Whereto does now thy rage, and destnies spyte
Draw thee, O son, with brain benumbed quyte?
That to such monstrous heaps of ylls thy dame
(Who^ thou, with curssed mischief overcame)
Her wrath should yield? O that, ere to the light
A sucking babe I brought thee forth in sight,
And fed thee fine with pappe, as princely borne,
The fierce, wild, savage beasts had rent and torn
My womb, and bloody entrells all beforne.
Without all crime, and wanting reasons pride,
Mine own dear dandling child you should have did.
And fastened sure to me shuldst aye behold,
The quiet place, where ghostly souls be rolde:
And see thy graund syres great of worthy same,
And sire Domitius eke of princely name,
Whom now, both shame, and wayling does abide,
That while they dure, from them shall never slide.
For which, both thee, O curssed barn, they may,
And me, that thee have borne give thanks for aye.
But why cease I, with Hell to hide my face,
Wife, stepdame, mother dire, in my life space?
The second Scene of the third Act.
Octauia. Chorus. DO not, alas, thus sore lament,
But rather yet your mourning stay,
Since that the city whole is bent
To celebrate this joyful day:
Least your great love, and favor both,
Which I do count to be most sure,
The more cause Nero me to loath,
And eke his bitter wrath procure:
And I fall out to be the ground
To you of many mischieues vile,
This same is not the first deep wound,
That I have felt now this good while:
Far worsse than this have I abode:
But of these troublous cares, this day
Shall make an end, I trust in God,
Although with death he do me pay.
No man to see shall me constrain
His bended brows knit furrowise,
Nor step within the chamber reign
Of maid dressed up in brydall guyse.
Augustus sister I will be,
And not his wife, as wont I was:
But only pains remove from me,
And fear of death, I will not pass.
Yet can thou, piteous wretch, once trust,
Thy cruel husbands father law,
Or these few things to have so just
While mischiefs yet in mind are raw?
Now long reserved, until this day,
And these same marriage rytes be past,
Thou shall poor wretch, without delay,
A bloody offering dye at last.
Why thus with tears disfigured sore
Thy wonted home do thou behold?
Make haste, to shun this deadly shore,
And leave this straughtrous Princes fold.
Chorus. Lo se that day suspected long,
And whispered fame in all men's ears,
With glistring pomp of brydall throng,
To us poor wretches, now appears.
And Claudius brood, Octauias grace,
From Neros wedlock place expeld,
Departed is, whose spousall space,
Has Poppie conqueror long time held.
The while, our piety couched lies
Kept down with heavy, combrous fear,
And slow revenging grief likewise:
Where does the peoples power appear,
That brake the force of princes great,
That conquerous city laws has framde,
That worthy men to honors seat
Preferred, that war and peace proclaimde,
That savage people strange did tame
That kings and princes caught in fight,
Shut surely up in prison frame,
To keep them close from all men's sight?
Lo, which we can not once abide,
To see, where Poppies image trim,
Conjoined unto Neros side
All glistring bright, shines very brim.
Let force of arms pull down that frame
And match with ground that ladies face
Too likely carved to his name,
And snatch her down from bedding place,
And let it forthwith fly with brandes
With Darts and Iauelins fiercely flong,
From pythie brawnes and sturdy hands,
Unto the princes courtly throng.

The fourth Act.
The first Scene.
Nutrix. Poppea. FRom out of spousall bower dismayed with fear,
Whither go you? what secrets daughter dear
Unknowen, maks you to look so drouselye?
Why spungelike lokes your face with tears from eye
That fell? of truth, the time desired long,
And wisshed for by prayers, and vows among
Has shined bright. Caesar's wedlock are you:
Your golden grace, whereof he took the view.
Him prisoner caught, and did him surely bind,
So much the more, how much Seneck his mind
Did seek to change, and wild from love to weeld.
And Venus chief in love has made him yield.
O in beauty passing all, what beds than down
More soft, have borne thy weght: when you with crown
Did sit in mids of court, the Senate all
At thy great beauty aghast, thou did appall:
Whylst thou the Gods with perfume sensedst fine,
And sacred altars drencht with thankful wine,
Thy head attyrde with veyle of yellowe hiewe.
By Cesars side thou wentst as princess new:
When he aloft extolde above the reast,
With hautie courage meryly went to feast.
Like as King Peleus went some times to take
Queen Tethis, whom salt seas some bredde, his make
Whose briding chambers, banquetwise ydrest,
The Gods vouchsaaft to hallow with their hest,
Both they that rule in skies, and eke in seas.
But tell, O Lady, tell, if it you please,
What sudden chance does shade your beauties light?
What means your color change from red to white?
What moves those trickling tears, how stands your plighte?
Poppea. With dreams, and griesly sights, this last night nurse,
My mind was troubled sore, but frayd much worse.
For when sir Phoeb his werie course had rid,
While quiet resting night each thing shadid,
My senses weary fell in slumber deep,
While Nero me within his arms did cleepe.
Resolving lims, at length began sleep discharge,
And long I rest not under quiets targe.
For lo, I saw a rout, that brought me fear,
Come to my chamber with disheueled hear:
The Matrons sage of Latin land did mourn,
And sounded shrycking syghes as though forlorn
They were, the dolefulst wights that live on ground.
And often among the warlike trumpets sound,
I saw my husbands mother terribly stand,
With threatening look berayed with blood, in hand,
A light fire brand she bare which often she shook,
And made me go with her, through fearful look.
When down we came through opened earth, she led
The way, I after went with bowing head,
And musing much thereat, mark what I say,
My bed, me thought I saw, wherein I lay,
When first espousde I was to Rufe Cryspine:
And he me thought, with first son of his line,
With many following them, against me fast
Did come, and me to cleepe did swift his have,
And as he wouted was, he kiss me often.
Then rusht into my house, with pace not soft
Amassed Nero sore, in Crispines breast
That hid his fauchion kene: fear shakte of rest
From me: I trembling stood with quiuering fear,
And breast dismaide to speak made me forbear.
Till now O ^^rse I met with thee, whose trust,
And faith into these words have made me brust.
Alas what threatens me each griesty sprite?
What means of husbands blood that doleful sight?

Nutrix. The hidden sacred vain that moves swift,
Which fantasy we call by secret drift,
When we do take our rest, does show again,
The things both good and bad that broyle in brain.
You marvel that you saw your make, and bower,
His goastly funeral stacks, at that same hour,
Round clasped close in arms of husband new:
Hereto, the beaten breasts with hands moved you,
And maidens hear, on marriage day displayed:
Octauias friends with heavy hearts, bewrayed,
Amids her brothers booth, and fathers hall
Their heavy cheer, for her unlucky fall.
That dreadful blasing flame of fire foreborne
In Agryppinas hands, your grace beforne,
Which you did follow straight, declares renown
To you, though envy strive to keep it down:
The seat you saw beneath, does promise you
Your state to stand full sure, not changing new:
That Nero prince in Crispins throat did hyde
His swerd, it tells that he in peace shall bide,
Unknowen to bloody ruthful war for aye.
Therefore, madame, pluck up your heart, I pray:
Receive both mirth, and glee, cast fear aside,
With joy, and ease you may in bower abide.

Pop. To temples hie, where mighty Gods do dwell,
I will repair, and offerings to them fell
In humble wise, their heavy wrath to appease,
And me of mighty sight, and dreams to ease,
My second with shall be, that this fear all,
Upon my foes as sudden chance may fall.
O nurse, pray thou for me, some vows do make
Toth' Gods, that gostly fear his flight may take.

The second Scene of the fourth Act.
Chorus. IF stelth disclosde by blabbing fame,
And lusty, pleasant, thankful love,
Of Jove be true: who fou^^ne did frame
Of Swan, to come from skies above,
And did enjoy the sweet consent,
Of Lady Laedas loves delight:
Who like a Bull his labor spent,
Through flowing fluds to carry quite.
Europa sliely stolen away:
He will no doubt, leave reign of sky
And Poppies love disguisde, assaye.
If he her sovereign beauty spy.
Which he might well prefer before
Fair Laedas sugared sweet delight:
And Danae whom he won of yore
Amasde with golden shower so bright:
Let Sparte now for Helens sake
Of beauty, bragging fame vpraise:
Admit the Trojan heardman make
Of gained spoil triumphant praise:
Fair Helen here is stained quite:
Whose beauty bredde such boiling ire,
That earth was matched even in sight
With Trojan towers consumde with fire.
But who is this that runs with fear oppressed?
Or else what news brings he in panting breast?
The third Scene of the fourth Act.
Nuntius. Chorus. WHat sturdie champion stout does joy with glee
Our chieftaines royal bower safe to see,
Then to his court, I counsel him to wend,
Against which the populus rout their force does bend.
The rulers run amasde to fetch the guard,
And armed troops of men, their town to ward.
Nor woodnesse rashly cought through fear, does cease,
But more and more, their power does increase.
Cho. What sudden rage does beat their broyling brain?

Nunt. The garrisons great with fury astonde again,
And sturred up for Queen Octauias sake
With monstrous myschiefe vile, their rage to slake,
They rumbling rushe into the Palace far.

Chor. What dare they do, their counsailers who are?

Nunt. Advance their Empress old, subvert the new:
And grant her, brothers beds, as is her due.

Chor. Which Poppie now, with hole consent does hold?

Nunt. Yea that unbridled rage in breast vprold,
Sets them agog, and maks them wondrous wood.
What ever image graven in marble stood,
If Poppies badge it bare, or if in sight,
It tended for to show her beauty bright,
Though it on heavenly altares brave did stand,
They break, or pull it down, with sword or hand.
Some parts with ropes sure tide, they trayle the^ forth,
Which spurnd with durtie f^ete, as though naught worth
With filthy stinking mire, they it all beray.
And with their deeds their talk does iumpe agree,
Which mine amassed mind, thinks true to be.
For fiery flames they threat for to prepare,
Wherewith to waste, the princes Palace fair,
Unless, unto their furious mood he give
His second wife, and with Octauia live,
But he by me shall know in what hard stay
The City stands: the rulers I Will obaie.

Chor. Alack, what made you cruel wars, in vain
To move, since prisoner love you can not gain?
You can not him overcome, your fiery flame
He recketh not: his syrs ouercomes the same.
He darkened has those thundering things that shake
Heaven, Earth, Hell, Sea, al things yt makes to quake.
Yea mighty Jove, in heaven that wears chief crown
His flames from welkin hie has brought adowne.
And you, not victors now, but vanquisshed,
Shall ransom pay, the price of hearts blood red.
Love, pacient can not be, but hot in rage,
No easy thing it is, his wrath t'asswage.
Achilles worthy wight, that was so stout,
To twang the Harp he made in Ladies rout,
Prince Agamemnon stern that boy benumd,
And rabble rude of Greeks with love bronds bumd.
King Priams reign he topsie turuis tossed,
And goodly Cities great he chiefly lost.
And now my mind sore frighted stands aghast,
What Cupides furious force brings us at last,

The fourth Scene of the fourth Act.
Nero. AH, ah, our captains sloe dispatching coil,
And our long suffering ire in such a broyle,
That streams of blood yet do not quench their rage
Which they against our propre person wage.
And that all Rome, with corses strewed about,
Those cruel villains blood, does not sweat out.
But deeds already done, with death to pay
A small thing it is, a greater slaughtrous day
The peoples curssed crime, and eke that dame,
Whom I did aye suspect, deserves the same.
To whom, to yield those peasaunts would me make:
At last she shall, with life our sorrow slake,
And with her bodies blood shall quench our ire.
Then, shall their houses fall by force of fire:
What burning both, and buildings fair decay,
What beggarly want, and wayling hunger may,
Those villains shall be sure, to have each day.
Ah Prouender pricks that vile rebellious race,
Ne can they once our favor well embrace,
Nor be content, with peace in quiet state,
But broyling raumpe about with troubled gate.
Hereon with boldness straight hereon they fly,
With harebraind rashness hedling by and by.
Well, they must tamed be with heavy stroke,
And down be kept with peise of weighty yoke:
That they, with like attempt, do not arise,
Nor once cast up their deadly peasaunts eyes,
Against our loving spouses golden looks:
First punish them sure, then fear shall be their books,
To teach them, at their Princes beck t'obaye.
But see at hand, whom faith, and virtue rare,
Lieutenant chief of camps, appointed their.
The fyft Scene of the fourth Act.
Praefectus. Nero. THe vulgar peoples rash unruly rage,
The slaughter of a few did sone assuage,
Which long wtstode our valiant force in vain,
To tell your grace this news, I come again.
Nero. And is this then enough, do thou so well,
O soldier mark what does thy captain tell?
Have thou with held thy hand from bloody ire?
Is this the due revenge that we require?

Prae. The captain guides of treason paid their hyre,
By desperate death of bloody sword in fight.
The rout which sought with flaming fire to light,
Our royal Palace great, who would assign
Their Prince what he should do: and pull in fine
Our mate from us dissoluing wedlock bands:
Whose hardy slanderous tongs, and wicked hands,
Her princely grace reprochfully withstandes,
From due revenge, are they dysmissed free?

Praef. Shall subjects pain, by grief assigned be?

Ner. It shall assign which time shall never wear.
Which neither wrath may end, nor yet our fear?
She shall appease our hie displeased mind,
Who first, our wrath deserved due to find.

Praef. Declare whose death your mood does most require
Let not my hand be stayde from your desire.

Ner. It seeks our sisters death, and traiterous head.

Praef. Those words through all my lims, has stiffness spread,
Oppressed with griesly fear:

Ner. Us to obey
Stands thou in doubt?

Praef. On faith why do you lay
So great a fault?

Ner. Because thou sparedst our foe.

Praef. Deserves a woman to be termed so?

Ner. If treason she begin.

Praef. Is any man
So sure, that her accuse of treason can?

Ner. The peoples rage:

Praef. Those mad unwieldy wights
Who order could?

Ner. Who could stir up their sprits?

Praef. No creature as I think.

Ner. A woman could,
In whom a mind Dame nature has vpfould,
To mischief prone: she armed has her heart,
To hurt by miles: yet strength she set a part,
Least she undaunted force with her should bear:
But now her slender power with doubting fear,
Is quickly quaylde, or else with punishment,
Which her condemned state to mischief bent,
To late does end: away with grave advise,
Us with entreating seek not to entyse.
Dispatch that we command on shipboorde borne,
Far off to shore aloof with dashing worn,
Command she be: that tunlike swelling breast
At length in storming stomach may take rest.

The sixth Scene of the fourth Act.
Chorus. Octauia. A Lack the peoples bitter love,
And dyre good will to many one,
Which, when they hoysted sails above,
With pleasant blastes it made to groan,
And carried them far from quiet shore,
That faynting, leaves them in the deep,
And tombling, raging waters rore.
Cornelia piteous wretch, did weep,
And sore bewail her sons estate:
The peoples love did undo them,
And wondrous favor, bred them hate:
Great worthy peers of noble stem:
Of high renown for virtues praise:
In faith and eloquence both did pas
Their stomachs stout their fame did raise:
Ith laws each one most excellent was.
And Scipio, thee did fortune yield
Unto like death, and curssed wrack,
Whom neither honors pomp could sheelde,
Nor fenced house thy foes keep back.
More to repeat, although I could,
Pure present grief forbids sore:
Ere while to whom the people would,
Her Fathers antique court restore,
And Brothers wedlock once again,
Now weeping, wringing hands poor wretch,
Unto her cruel, deadly pain,
The armed soldiers do her fetch.
How safe does poverty lie content,
In thetched house safe shrouded theare?
Hie raised towers with blasts are bent,
Which often times them over bear.
Oct. Where pull you me poor wretch? alas,
Into what bannisht exiles place,
Would Nero have me for to pas,
Or fortune bids, with frowning face?
If now with fainting strength quite coolde,
And with my broils all weried cease,
And longer life she grant me woolde,
If that she work for to increase,
My sorrows great with deadly dart,
Why is she then so much my foe,
In country that I may not part,
And leave my life before I go?
But now no help of health I feel,
Alas I see my Brothers boat:
This is the same, whose vaulted keele,
His Mother once did set a floate.
And now his piteous Sister I,
Excluded clean from spousall place,
Shall be so carried by and by:
No force has virtue in this case,
No Gods there be my woes to wrecke.
The griesly, dreadful drabbe Erin,
Does weld the world at nod and beck,
Who can lament my state, wherein
I am, alas, sufficiently?
How can Aedon duly plain,
My smarting streams of tears that I
Do shed? whose wings I would be feign,
If destnies would them grant, to wear.
Then would I leave my mourning mates,
As swiftly fled, as wings could bear,
And so avoid these bloody pates.
Then sitting sole in shirwood shirle,
And hanging sure, by dandling twigge
With plaintiue pype I might out twirle
My heavy tuned note so big.

Chor. The mortal brood the destnies guide:
Them selves they nothing can assure,
That certainly does steadfast bide:
Which our last day of life, procure,
(Whereof we always should beware,)
Much dangerous chances for to try:
Unto your troubled mind with care,
Now many saumples do apply,
Which your accursed court has brought,
To bolden you in all your broyle:
For what has more your troubles wrought,
What does against you sorer toil,
Than fortune does? thee first of all,
Agrippas child brought forth to life,
Whom we Tyberius daughter call,
By law, and eke Prince Cesars wife,
Of many sons a careful dame,
I cannot choose but now recount,
Whose worthy, glorious, ample name,
Throughout the world does much surmount.
So often with belly bolne that bare
Desired fruits, and peaces pledge,
Ere long thou suffredst exiles care,
Strypes, chains, and bolts of iron wedge,
And mourning much, which so did frame,
That death they causde thee to abide.
So Liuia, Drusus luckie dame
In male kind babes, did hedling slide,
Into a cruel monstrous deed,
And death sore pearcing deadly dart.
Her Mothers fates does Iulia speed,
To follow straight with all her heart,
Who after longer wasted time
With bloody fauchion kene, was slain,
Although for no just cause, or crime.
Your Mother eke that once did reign,
Who then esteemd of Claudius well,
Did wisely weld his court at will,
And fruitful was, as you can tell,
What could not her desire fulfill?
She sometime subject to her slave,
To death was put with soldiers blade.
What she, that casly hope might have,
Toth skies, her reign to rise have made,
Prince Neros lusty parent great?
First tossed with shipmans boisterous force,
Then torn with sword in Princes heat,
Did she not lie a senseles corse?

Oct. Lo me the tyrant stern will send
To yrcksome shades, and hellish sprits.
Why wretch do I the time thus spend?
Draw me to death you to whose myghts,
False fortune has bequeathed me.
I witness now the heavenly power.
What do thou bedlame? leave to flee,
With prayer to Gods, who on thee lowre.
I call to witness Tartar deep,
And sprytes of Hell revenging freaks
Of heinous facts, in dongeon steep,
And Sire whom death deserved wreakes.
I do not now repyne to dye,
Deck up your ship, and hoyse your sail,
On frothing seas to winds on hie:
Let him that guydes the helm not fail,
To seek the shore of Pharian land.

Cho. O pippling puff of western wind,
Which sacrifice did once withstand,
Of Iphigen to death assignde:
And close in cloud congealed clad,
Did carry her from smoking ares,
Which angry, cruel Uirgine had:
This prince also oppressed with cares,
Save from this painful punishment,
To Dians temple safely borne:
The barbarous Mores to rudeness bent,
Then Princes courts in Rome forlorn,
Have far more civil courtesy:
For there does strangers death appease
The angry Gods in heavens on hie,
But Roman blood, our Rome must please

FINIS.
Imprinted at London, by Henry Denham, dwelling in Pater noster row, at the
sign of the Star.

Faults escaped.
In C. ij. page. 2. line. 32. for soon read some, and in the same line, for
does read do

In the last leaf of C. page. 2. line. 15. for thy read her

In D. i. page. 2. line. 10. for Into read Unto

In E. j. page. 2. line. 8. for wisely read wise

In G. j. page. 2. line. 1. for things read thumps

In G. ij. page. 2. line. 11. for Which read Praef. Which

In ye next line of ye same page, for She read Ner. She


