FOUR SERMONS PREACHED AT THE COURT UPON several occasions, BY THE LATE
REVEREND AND LEARNED DIVINE, DOCTOR SENHOVSE, L. Bishop of Carlisle.

AVSPICANTE DEO


LONDON, Printed for R. Dawlman, at the Sign of the Bible near the great
Conduit in Fleetstreete. 1627.

A just defense of the late L. Bish. of Carliles honor, sent to the judicious
Reader.
THose ancient Fathers, on whom came daily 2. Cor. ^1.28.
the care of all the Churches, seem no way better to perfect, no way so well to
perpetuate that universal care, as by wakening men's consciences with their
quills, Vid. T. Live. l. 5. c. 47.
whose watchings saved the Capitol, and (...). Clem. Alex. l. 1. strom.
Euangelizo manu and scriptione, etc. 1. Rainold. l. de Romans eccles. idol.
Antipater cala mo vociferans Cael. l. 19. c. ^5.
speaking with their pens unto the whole Church; by causing their sanctified
Labors, travel, like so many holy pilgrims, to the living after their death,
and in obedience to our Saviors command, Mark. 16.1^.
Go, even thus upon their very hands, into all the world to preach the Gospel;
that so by a strange kind of midwifrie, they may assist at the new birth of
many thousand souls they never knew, give a spiritual deliverance to many
members of the Church they never saw, after their own bodies are gone down
with hope into the chambers of the grave, and those tabernacles of flesh
resolved into sacred dust; dust that lies expecting glory. Now that this
religious intention of spreading himself into a Catholic good, and
communicating the diffusiue blessings of God, and great measures of his Grace
unto posterity, lived in the late Lord Bishop of Carlisle, Doctor Senhouse that
was -- I am unto you an unworthy witness, and yet a witness; who presume not
to give any other attribute to that never sufficiently honored Name, all
attributes that can fall from my dwarft expression, falling beneath those
transcendent parts, those unparalleled gifts, those accumulated heaps of worth,
which lodged in Doctor Senhouse; to whose Vir calamo potens and virilis
eloquentiae Hieronymus. Verul. hist. vit. and mort. l. 1.
masculine and soule-begetting discourses, I had the happiness of many years
accesses; and in his later times heard him often to my comfort profess, and I
never heard him but to my comfort, that his Lectures on King David's first and
second Psalms, were by himself (for who else could do it?) perfected for the
press; that so what was his Majesty's in the duty of his original service,
(...). Clem. Alex. l. 1. Strom.
those children of his souls best strength, might now, when it cease to be
with him after the manner of men, inherit the favor of kissing that great
Masters sacred hand, and living in his Royal heart too, and in the hearts of
other Christians. And therefore being casually informed by a friend, that some
Sermons of his Lordships, had more than seen the Press, were ready to be
preached again to as many as would Prou. 23.23.
buy the truth; Cyprianus quotidie Tertullianum legeret, notario Paulo dicens,
da magistrum. Hieron. cat. vir. illust.
Saint Cyprian called not oftener for his learned-strong-phras'd Tertullianus
homo doctissimus -- haereticorum errores fortiter contriuit. Trith. l. de
script. ecclesiast.
Tertullian, than I enquired with diligence, for this my judicious Christian
Gamaliel; at whose reverent feet I often sat, and learned to speak by
silence; and now began to comfort that loss with this fresh hope, that as
Dixit Chrysostomus se concionare nosse, quod D. Paulum quotidie manu versaret.
Keck. eccles. rhet. l. 2. c. 3.
S. Chrysostom attained to an admired excellency of preaching, by having the
great Doctor of the Gentiles, blessed Paul, always in his hand; so I might
improve that gift to a conscionable discharge of my duty, by laying the
laborious works of this Saluianus totius orbis Christiani magister.
Rittershus. vit. Saluian.
Master-Preacher, a Preacher that had (...). Greg. Nazianz. ep. 140 Romani
vocabant Proaresium (...). Cressol. theat. rhet. l. 1. c 9.
a royalty of speech, and commanded all men's attentions, ever before mine
eyes. But when I opened this book with that reverence which belonged unto his
name, and read with greediness a line, a leaf, or two, and more; I found the
order of his work so inuerted, the periods in some places so unperfected, the
sense by those periods so disioynted, the Greek here and there where the sense
was good, so negligently, that I do not say ignorantly, corrupted, and the
entire frame so stripped of those accessions upon the by, which would have given
much satisfaction to this learned age, the more learned, because he once was in
it; that whereas Basil. Mag, ep. 1.
Saint Basil knew Nazianzenes Epistles, as men know the children of their
friends, by their likeness to their fathers; these seemed in many things so
unlike that Reverend Father, whose name they bear, that at the first sight I
hardly knew them to be his. But when I viewed once, and again (...). Basil.
Mag. ep. 41.
these images of his soul, though in some places too much shadowed, in some
places much defaced, in many places set to a false light; yet my memory
persuaded mine eyes, that they were copies drawn from his originals. And
least, induced by the like reasons, you might suspect them to be some spurious
supposititious pieces christened with his Name, to give them a fairer
entertainment in the world and your good opinion; I craved so much leave from
Authority, as to prefixe this Epistle, and to let you know they are indeed
his; but so his, as a man that is robbed and wounded, and has his tongue taken
out, is himself: For first, they want that which could best speak them his,
that which next the efficacious cooperating of GODS Spirit with his own, was
the soul of every Sermon, the strong and powerful elocution of his diuiner
Tongue; and this they must for ever want. Next, they are wounded many ways;
wounded gramatically in the words, wounded logically in the method, and
wounded intellectually in the sense; wounds which might easily have been cured
by his own prescripts. Lastly, they are robbed of those many rich apparellings,
with which they might have been compleately furnished too, out of his own
Wardrope, and shall be supplied in the next Impression, and those wounds some
way healed by him, who having, with much difficulty, obtained his own
Originals of these four Sermons, will study nothing more in them, than the
glory of his merciful GOD, the service of his Catholic Church, the honor of
his Reverend friend, and the satisfaction of his judicious Reader.

Thomas Blechynden.

Revel. 2. verse. 10. the last words. And J will give thee a Crown of life.


OF all other things a gift the sweetest, of all gifts a Crown the greatest,
of all Crowns the Crown of life the dearest: So as this Text coming thus with
a Gift, and that gift a Crown, and that Crown a Crown of life, without any
curiosities of form, the very bare materials here, may well now make it
welcome, yea thrice welcome, as pregnant here with so many choice particulars,
of Gift, of Crown, of Life: And I will give thee a Crown of life.

To make it yet more welcome to you, the Text (if you please) might be
christened (...), and accordingly be reduced unto these three heads: 1. The
royal excellency of the gift, A Crown of life. 2. The singular supremacy of
the giver, I; I will give it. 3. The requisite quality of the receiver, Thee:
Thou that art faithful unto death, to thee will I give the Crown of life. But
as beside the laden Waines, we see the single ears of corn to be also
gleaned; and in broken meat, the very fragments are also to be gathered up,
that nothing be lost: as in pure gold the very fylings off are weighed, and in
a chain every little link, every particular pearl is precious; So every
the least word herein, being dogmatically full, as Basil elsewhere speaks, so
laden here with spiritual grain, and food, and treasure, that (as Austin
says of the 87. Psalm, Paucitie in words, and ponderosity in sentences)
every word herein has it weight in the balance of the Sanctuary, and so, so
many words so many worthy considerations, like those sheep in the
Canticles, none being barren amongst them. We Will fancy now no other order of
the words, but only follow on the words in this their own order; and first of
the first here, And: And I will give thee a Crown of life.

And. As St. Bartholmew is by Dionysius quoted to have said of Divinity, (...),
and magnam esse and minimam, that it was both great and little; so this same
And here, though little in the sentence, yet great in sense: me thinks, like
that (...) in St. James, the Helm, which though it be small, yet turns
about the whole ship: as a drop, a pearl indeed, and yet a chain of pearl
too, connecting here together man's duty, Be faithful, and Gods bounty, I will
give thee. As if on these two, officium and beneficium, hung all the Law and
the Prophets, as Gregory spoke elegantly of Christ, (...), that he joined
heaven and earth together as with a bridge; this And here being a conjunction
of both, standing here like Jacobs ladder upon the earth, Be ye faithful; and
the top of it reaching up to heaven, The Crown of life. Or as he wittily
called the circle of the Moon Isthmus, an Island twixt eternity and generation:
this little And here, like a little Island, on the one hand bordering upon the
Church militant, on the other upon the Church triumphant, conioyning here to
man's Christian practice of being faithful, Christ's gracious And of promise,
And I will give thee a Crown of life.

That as vain is their presumption, who putting asunder these whom God has
thus joined together, thus handfast, as I may speak; as if this here were an
entire proposition, and not in composition: that which here is true in
compounded sense, they catch hold of in sense divided; and so as when Severian
once said to Serapion, If Serapion dye a Christian, Christ was not made man;
Serapion thereupon accused him for saying absolutely, Christ was not made man.
That which here is propounded conditionally, they presume upon absolutely, and
so make reckoning to go up to heaven in some whirlwind; or as passengers at
Sea, be brought to the haven even sleeping: to win heaven without working,
to be crowned without striving, laying claim to this obligation, without
looking ever to its condition; not so well advised as the tempting Lawyer,
Master, what shall I do to inherit eternal life? But as the Lillies clothed
without spinning, and the fowls fed without sowing, they will be saved without
doing, crowned without caring; as if this And here like Dagons hand, might be
cut off upon the threshold, omitted in the entrance: so desperate is their
deiection, who murmr as in Malachy, It is in vain to serve God, and what
profit is it that we have kept his Commandments? Why yes, as Paul spoke in
another case, much every way: Ye shall not serve God for naught; not a cup of
cold water given shall lose his reward: God is not unfaithful, that your
works of faith and labor, of love and patience, of hope should be frustrate.
Then be not weary of well doing, seeing in due season ye shall reap if ye
faint not, but be abounding always in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as you
know, your labor is not in vain in the Lord: As God said to Cain, If thou do
well, shall thou not be accepted? Do well and have well, do this and live,
believe and be saved, be religious and reign, be faithful and be crowned: And
I will give thee a Crown of life.

A gracious covenant sure; but as when the Prophet told Ahab of victory, By
whom, said he, by whom is this to be made good unto us? Why (...), as they
wont to say. As the Tragedians in their arduent issues, were feine to fetch a
god out of the engine, and to present him non in scaena sed in sublimi: and it is
natural, ye know, for men in misery and extremity to look up, not to Court
or Capitol, but to Heaven and call God to witness; and familiar was it with
the Ancients, and so with Christ to pray in mountains and high places, as
having their help from on high. And if I list insert the Friars narration of
Miters like Bishops heads coming down with hail and rain, how-ever the
relation were ridiculous, his application were religious, Non est potestas nisi
a Deo: Non est cujus vis, This is not every man's, not any man's part to act; not
Popes for all his keys, or picklocks rather: but his that has the keys of
David, opening and no man shutting; his, who is Prince of the Kings of the
earth, by whom Kings reign; I that am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last;
I, I will give it: Emphatically, I, ay, and exclusively I too, I and I only
will give it. As those lillies for Arms of the Christian King, and oil for
his Coronation, are voyced to have come down from Heaven; and our Kings titles
in spite of Bartholdus, run graciously Dei gratia; and of all other Kings,
good Kings, are by the very Heathen Homer, styled as coming down from
Jupiter; every good gift and every perfect, having being from above, and
coming down from the Father of lights, as S. James says. Christ, says
Jerome, who as father of lights, called his Disciples the light of the world, and
is there called Father of lights, says Fulgentius, and in Esaias everlasting
Father, He, he it is shall give it. Worldly men (as Luther said well) a tempore
habent quae habent, nihil ab aeternitate vultus Dei, as their affections are
set all on temporal things, so make they account to have all their turns
served; not from any light of Gods countenance, but countenance of the time:
and so Time-servers as they are, as Tertullian of old taxed the Gentiles, majori
formidine Caesarem observatis quam Iovem, that they were more observant of
Caesar than Jupiter; not divisum imperium, they do not so much as divide with
God, but are Caesar's by whole sale, in religion, in reverence, in sense, in
soul; soul and body and all Caesar's: and so say as he of his Patron, Ille
mihi semper Deus; or as she in Hosea, ascribe all to lovers and friends,
making flesh their arm; or as it is the Philosophers character, to expect all
from themselves: they boast themselves, as in Amos, of getting by their own
strength, and with their own arm, of cunning to carve for themselves, and to
deal themselves a good game, to hammer out their own happiness; like the
Spider, climbing by thread of her own weaving, with Motto accordingly, Mihi soli
debeo; in their audit standing only indebted to themselves, sacrificing to
their own nets, and burning incense to their own yarne; Idolaters ^o all of
secondary causes, and do not say in their hearts, It is the Lord. Yea but this
is the Lords doing: as David spoke, Whom have we in heaven but him? and none
in the earth to be desired with him. And what tenure so happy as this of a
good Christian? which how-ever it enter per virgam, yet it holds in capite;
holds of him who gives more abundantly than other Lords take. That, as
Ecclesiastes says, unto the place from whence the rivers come, thither they
return again; unto him from whom this Crown comes ought it always to reflect
again; like the Doves, who at every grain they pick, look upward, as giving
thanks: And as Tertullian notes, that when we pray, Thy Kingdom come, Illi
deputamus, quod ab illo expectamus, we express that of him, which we expect
from him; a Kingdom, a Crown. For if, as Bernard said, Totum me debeo pro me
facto, man owes God his whole self for creating him; what does he owe him then
for this his crowning? If as P. Martyr wrote once to Queen Elizabeth, Kings be
doubly bound to serve God; both as they are men, and as they are Kings: If the
obligation so be doubled in regard of the livelihood of earthly kingdoms, how
is it then multiplied in reference to this Crown of life? Then what will ye
render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward you, but take the cup of
salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord? In solemnities under the Law,
they wont to take the cup and drink, in token of thanksgiving; other cups (no
doubt) will anon be stirring enough, even flagons of wine in this day of our
King, as Hosea spoke; but take ye the cup of thanksgiving unto him, who gives
this Crown of life, And I will give thee a Crown of life.

Yea but soft and fair, lest our gratitude fore-run the gift; this may seem
to smell of Court indeed, to give thanks for that we yet have not: Is there
any such haste of performing thankfulness present, for that benefit which is
only promised in the future, I will give thee? Every promise that is made is
not kept de facto, ay, and de jure too; Licet plura polliceri, quam praestare
possis, is the Politiques rule: promise does not ever beget performance; as
Livie said of Hanniball, that he never stood to his promise, but when it was
for his profit. Pollicitis dives quilibet esse potest; even the poorest may
promise; or if you will, it wants not authority to say, Great men make
promises, and mean men keep them: promises being things which tie the
multitude, which great Ones, as lightly, as Sampson did the withes, can knap
asunder; Words of good breeding, say they, promises in complement, as they call
it, being no obligations. And as Antigonus was called Doson, in the future, as
being ever about to give, never giving: how many Dosons know we to feed their
prisoners of promise with future promises, as Ephraim with wind? Alchymists,
whose promises are gold, payment but dross; putting off, as the trick is,
either with improbable reversions, or promises of promises, or as their
promises are most of them resembled to the Devils omnia dabo, the most of them
imaginary and delusory; whilst their patients, like that man of many years
infirmity in the Gospel, fainting by the poole and none to put him in, lie
languishing at hopes Hospital; like a hungry man dreaming of meat, and when
he awaketh his soul is empty; like men in a swoune, cheered with some holy
water, they revive only to be-weary their eyes with further expectation, and
to witness the fallibility of promise. As that, me thinks, he may pass for
a wise man in his generation, who said, Were the world indebted to him for
praise, he would quit it for the moyty, on condition it might be paid him
aforehand; and ye say, A bird in the hand is worth two in the bush: Nihil
putant utile nisi quod manibus teneri potest, as Lactantius spoke; counting
nothing profitable that is not present: Blanda praesentia, as Hilary spoke,
(...), as Nyssen, (...), as Philo; Men set the garland all on things present,
listening more to sense about things present, than to faith about things to
come; so accustomed to the common fallacy of putting more into premises, than
is commonly found in the conclusion: as that we will hardly take even Gods
word without a pawn; as he well exclaimed, O caecos animos, Christo diffidimus
omnes,
Cum tamen inveniat praedo vel ipse fidem.


How-ever it fare so in men's promises, of little trust farther than sight,
their decrees upon new importunities cancelled, their determinations upon new
resanctions inconstant, their promises upon new considerations ebbing into
emptiness, as easily changed as when a tune is changed upon an instrument of
music; changing oftener than Laban changed Jacobs wages; as Tertullian spoke
of the Peacock, all in changeable colors, as often changed as moved: Italians
all, as Aeneas Sylvius said of Italy, Novitate quadam nihil habet stabile, so
mutable, they have nothing stable, promise nor other. Besides, as he well
observed, we can hardly without offense, put great Ones in mind of their
promises; yet it is a boldness God likes well enough, to press him with his
promises; that has God said it, and shall he not do it? has he spoken it,
and has he not accomplished it? Many devices, says Solomon, are in a man's
heart, but the counsel of the Lord shall stand: the things exhibited to us by
God, as wealth, health, honor, may fade and fail; but the things thus
promised us by him shall never fail. As Joshua reasoned, Nothing has failed
of all the good things which the Lord your God promised you; nothing has
failed, neither shall fail. So this is no vain word concerning you. As old
Sarah laughed at hearing of childe-bearing, no doubt, the carnal infidelity of
such as never tasted of any powers of the world to come, laugh now in their
sleeves, to hear talk thus of Crowns to be given to silly men. But as Paul
speaks, we know whom we have believed; and future here if it be, so certain it
is, a man may lay his life on it, that he who said it, will do it, will give
it: And I will give thee a Crown of life.

Will give thee. Why then if there be any thing freer than gift, let the
impudent Papist here stand up with his debitum ut donum: Eternal life (says
their Andradius) not so much a gratuitie of liberality from God, as a due to
good works; heaven being as due to good works, as hell to ill, as sillily
says Andradius, Coster, and the Rhemists: or if yet they want some, fetch they
in Bellarmines tower, his Babell of merits, Paradisum ex merito, etc. says he,
even Paradise being to be purchased by merit. Opera bona mercatura regni
coelestis, are his own words; as if by good works a man might chaffer for
heaven, and buy this Crown: who as they dare trade and barter about sale of
worldly kingdoms, so venture they to truck and traffic about sale of heavenly
Crowns too, having coined a money of merit to buy it with. Non solum ex merito
Christi, sed etiam ex merito suo; so Bellarmine. As when musk is mingled with
amber-grease, as Gomezius thinks, he subtly compoundeth them: So far from
counting it thus a gift, as that Vega, a Clerk of theirs, durst insolently
say, Gratis non accipiam, That this Crown which cost the Martyrs so much, he
would not take it of free gift, not be beholding to God for bestowing it, not
accept of it if it cost him naught. And so Coster, Noluit Christus, etc. that
Christ would not have this Crown given us gratis, sed meritis nostris: as he
in Xenophon said, (...), they counting so this Crown rather for a booty than
a gift. Yea but says Hesychius, (...), Heaven is not so the wage of servants
works, but the bounty of their Masters gift; who is no Merchant, said
Philonius well; Donator non venditor, as Philo: Beneficia dedit non vendidit,
says Bernard, Gods good turns they are given not sold, and this kingdom not
partum, but paratum, a kingdom not purchased by us, but prepared for us,
Matthew. 25. And all that shall thus be crowned, filii divini beneficii, as
Austin calls them, children of the divine kindness: by grace saved through
faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God, as Paul evidently
speaks. The worth of this Crown being so infinitely above all price of
humane performance, that says Anselmus, Si homo mill annis serviret, etc.
Suppose a man should serve God zealously a thousand years here, yet should he
not thereby deservedly merit to be one half day in heaven: And; Et si millies
moriamur, etc. says Chrysostom, Though we should dye a thousand deaths, and
do all virtuous exploits, all would be of no condignity to this Crown: those
being only ways to the Kingdom, not causes of reigning; means by, but not
causes why: though secundum opera, yet not propter opera; So Gregory: though
propter promissum, yet not propter commissum; So Anstin: not factum, but
pactum. And if the excellency of Jacob was not worthy the least of Gods mercies
showed him, Genes. 32. well may the house of Jacob now confess, Non dignitate
nostra, sed dignitate tua. And not to dwell longer in the plain, take the
adversaries that cold comfort from Austin for conclusion; Never shall they come
in the heavenly Jerusalem, who do not from their hearts profess, that the
coming thither is not proprij operis, but Domini muneris; not by their own
behavior, but Gods favor: Non meritis operantis, but miseratione donantis,
Not by the merits of the worker, but by the mercy of the giver, crowning his
own gift, not our works; saving us, not out of merit, but with mercy and
compassions, as David speaks. That whatsoever base spirits of delusion,
creeping into houses, and leading captive silly women, whisper unto others; say
ye of this Crown, as Rahel did of children, Give me it, or else I die:
Without this Crown be given us, we are but dead men; that, as spoke the
woman John 4. Sir, give me this water, Lord, give us this Crown of life.

In spite of insolency and error both, give it then he will; but to whom trow
ye? The covenant here runs not with a Noverint universi, to All, All; but
Omnibus Christi fidelibus, To thee, thou faithful soul, to thee will I give
it: not (...), as Aristotle well handles giving, not hand over head, at random,
at all adventures; like those men, who, as he spoke, projiciunt magis quam
dant, rather throw away than give; and, Perdere sciunt, donare nesciunt, They
know how to lose, but not how to give; as he said of Alexander, that he would
have given away Cyprus for a song, Phoenicia for a verse; like Herod's half
kingdom: nay that head which was worth more than his whole kingdom, given
away for a gig, a dance; and so their gifts, so ill placed, procure more
hatred than love. And as the Jews wittily use to say, look what is so given,
it is written in the Hearts horn, so mewed, cast every year, as that ever and
anon ye may go seek it; and so nothing that brands many men with more
indiscretion, than the ill disposing of their gifts. God here gives not so, by
chance but choice; and this Crown of life the Lord has promised to them that
love him, says St. James, them that love his appearing, says S. Paul, to be
given them for whom it is prepared, Matthew. 20. Not as they spoke of Gedeons
brethren, Every one like the children of a King; Not every one, but some choice
ones, heirs of that kingdom, as St. James calls them; Heads destinated to the
Diadem, as Tertullian. It Is true, God makes his Sun to rise on the evil too,
and sends rain on the unjust also, so that by these outward things, who
knows whether he be worthy love or hatred? But as Abraham, though he gave
gifts to the sons of his concubines, Genesis 25. yet all his goods (reads one
translation, all he had read we now) the heritage gave he to his Isaac, in
whom the covenant was established, the son of promise; So if God often, even
unto those bastard children gives secular things, common gifts; yet the
Inheritance, this Crown gives he only to them, who after the manner of Isaac
are children of promise, as Paul speaks: to you his Isaacs, his Laughters, in
whom he takes pleasure. We fools (say they in the fifth of Wisdom) we
fools thought his life madness, and his end without honor; but how is he
counted among the children of God, and his portion among the Saints? Thou that
not only (as Ecclesiasticus said) being just, art one better than a thousand
others; not only as the people said of David, worth ten thousands of us; but
as Philo spoke, (...), equivalent not only to a number, but a whole nation of
us. Thou not only a Professor, but a Protector of religion; Thou not only
faithful, but a Defender of the Faith; Thou that art valiant for the truth, as
was written upon the sword of Charles the Great, December praeceptorum custos
Carolus, Charles keeper of the ten Commandments: Thou man of his desires, to
thee will he give this Crown of life.

Give thee? What? some great gift sure: for though the hide-bound world neither
does, nor can give things without her own circle, and so pent within the
sphere of her own scant activity, is feign to give here a crab, and there a
crum, and when she drops a pearl, a golden apple, or so, that is precious:
Consider but well the hard opening of the shell, weigh all circumstances, and
they will be found but as the Physicians drugges, which they call (...) gifts,
and yet we pay dear for them. Well, if they be penni-worths, sure they are not
gifts; yet this giver Habet quod det, and dat nemo largius: as the Scripture
speaks of Araunah, as a King gave he unto the King; this gives like a King,
not under a Crown, gives here to a King, a Crown; (...) indeed. Not that
every crown is straightway commendable; there being voluptuous crowns of
Roses, as in Wisdom; a crown of pride, to which a woe belongs, Esaias 28. So
Dragons and Beasts crowns in the Revelation; and so Corona vitiosa, ruinosa,
and the rest, as the Poets Crowns of Laurel and Ivy, Crowns little better
than the weeds which wrapped about Ionahs head, trash of no value. Yea Crowns
not only so by resemblance, but real; and of that rank, than which this world
below has nothing higher; yet such as that some, even the owners, who might
be bold with their own, themselves have said, They that knew but the troubles
of their cares, would not stoop to take up their Crowns: as Canutus set his
Crown upon the Crucifix, Crowns having their crosses, thistles in their
arms, and thorns in their sides; even Christ's royal title (note some) having
been set upon the Cross, as much as to say, Kings have their crosses, yea and
losses too; and if Popes, worst Comets to Kings, may prevail, their hard
deaths too, that being a principle of their detestable doctrine, Cruelty to
Crowns. Yea but as Jesus said, that his Kingdom was not of this world, this
is none of these Crowns, but a Crown where death has no claim, A Crown of
life. As he that bearing three crowns, added well the word, Quarta perennis
erit, that the fourth would be for ever; whatever become either of those
criminal, or counterfeit, or kingly crowns, Quarta perennis, this Crown will
last for ever, A Crown, or as the other Translation not amiss, The Crown of
life. Whither at last being now come, as Nyssen once, being to speak of those
words, Our Father which art in heaven, wished himself wings, wherewith to mount
and fly a pitch proportionable to the height of the matter in hand; how could
I wish now some winged speech, to soar according to the sublimitie of the
matter? And yet even then too, as Chrysostom spoke, Sermo non valet exprimere,
experimento opus est, Speech would not reach that excellency of it, which
cannot be expressed but by experience; fitter to be believed, than possible to
be discoursed, says Prosper: So exceeding an eternal weight of glory, as
neither Rhetorician can discourse, nor Geometrician measure, nor Arithmetician
number. The beauty of Absolon, to it but deformity; the strength of Sampson,
to it but infirmity; the age of Methusalem, to it but mortality: All the
mirth here, to that but pensiveness; all pleasure here, to that but
heaviness; all sweetness here, to that but bitterness: The very Crown of
rejoicing, the Crown of life. All the splendors here, and they are many: not
as that cluster which the spies brought, but only as husks as it were of those
grapes of Canaan: as Joseph cast chafe down the river, to let the Nations
know of their abundance of grain; only as chafe to that abundant harvest
growing in the land of promise, the Crown of life. Then not to trespass
further upon your patience, I only tender unto your consideration this your
own Day, as some short comment upon this lasting Crown: That as it has ever
been the guise of godly men, from the beholding of worldly things to beget
heavenly thoughts; to turn the sight of every solemnity into a School of
Divinity; and from things they see here downward, to make a prospect upward:
As when Fulgentius saw the Nobility assembled at Rome, the sight of the
glittering of that Court mounted his meditation to the thought of a higher
Court, the heavenly Jerusalem. From the hearing of music, he is now with
God, who is said to have entered upon the meditation of the holy harmony in
heaven: And upon sight of soft clothing in Kings houses, me thinks we should
be led to think of that white clothing in the Revelation, and robe of
righteousness: And from your own Crowning, think of this Crown of life;
there will be much learned, especially that which is the principal drift of
the Text here, to fortify against tribulations and oppositions for Christ's
cause. As David tells of crowning with favor as with a shield; this very
Crown may serve you as a shield against all assaults, the assurance of this
Crown a Supersedeas against all fear. Cum voles omnium rerum oblivisci,
cogita Caesarem, could Seneca say, Would thou forget all other things, think
then of Caesar; but as a Christian would thou forget all worldly combrances,
Cogita Coronam, think on this Crown: and whatsoever the duresse be, it will
be but light, if you balance it with this weight of glory. Exultans regno,
insultans mundo: Ascend but now into consideration of this Crown, and from
thence, as from some high mountain, you will soon behold all these things
here below, as little things, of little value, petty things, not worth your
care, much less your fear. Whilst as the shepherd crowned with flowers and
herbs, fighting with the basiliske, could not be hurt by reason of the
preservative in his garland; You shall tread upon the basilisk and the aspe,
and they shall have no power to hurt you, if you make use of the preservatives
in this Crown: For, man, have thou loss here? thou shall have a gift there.
Have thou contempt here? thou shall have a Crown there. Have thou death here?
thou shall have life there; And I will give thee a Crown of life.

Which Crown of life, after your good fight fought in this life, the Lord
Jesus give you for his mercies sake: To whom with the Father and the holy Ghost
be ascribed, etc.

Laus Deo.
GALAT. 4.16. Am J therefore become your enemy, because I tell you the truth?


AN Argument unadvisedly chosen, (will some wise one at first hearing say) to
undertake to treat of Truth, the telling whereof, your very Text aforehand
tells you, procures enmity; as if wittingly you meant to run upon some rock of
distaste and displeasure. But as Paul spoke, persuaded better things of you,
according to the Preachers counsel, without observing those winds, come I now
to sow, and without those clouds to reap; and so I may prove true to the
Text: shun not though the Text prove true to me, for telling truth to
undergo enmity, Am I therefore become your enemy? etc.

As if holy Paul according to the tenor of the context here, had zealously
thus expostulated with that people: I have bestowed labor upon you, as in the
11. verse. I have preached the Gospel unto you, as in the 13. verse. I have
heretofore been welcome unto you for my Ministeries sake, received of you as
an Angel of God, in the 14. verse. Your very eyes not more precious unto you,
as in the 15. verse. And having given no cause (I wot of) why your good wills
should now be alienated from me, unless it be for seeking to reclaim you
from erroneous doctrines of weak and beggarly rudiments, and freely and truly
putting you in mind of the things that belong to your salvation; if that be
the cause, what an unworthy part is it to malign him that has been so
mindful of you, to trouble him that has been so true to you, to repay truth
with enmity, to render enmity for telling truth?

Am I therefore your enemy? etc. From out which woufe, of Scripture, (...),
some expert workman would quickly draw many curious threads, like to the Spouses
lips in the Canticles, dropping as the honey comb, from every word distilling
pearls of precious observation. As first from the person here maligned, I
Paul, an Apostle, not of men, neither by man, but by Jesus Christ, and God the
Father: Apostolus per Antonomasiam, I that labored more abundantly than they
all; Paul, whom to have seen in the Pulpit, was one of Austins three wishes,
Constantissimus gratiae Praedicator, as he styles him: yet he thus become to
be held an enemy, inferres the accustomed lot of best deserving men, enmity.
Next from the quarrel, here, Therefore, for telling truth to be hated,
irrationabiliter malignati, as he spoke, the unreasonable dealings of malignant
men: as in the second of Wisdom, He is not for our turn, he checketh us for
offending, professing to have the knowledge of God, etc. Therefore let us lie
in wait for the righteous: Therefore let us examine him with rebukes:
Therefore. Then from the change here come to pass, of formerly such a friend,
thus to become, and held an enemy. The giddy inconstancy of the people, what a
tickle tenure he holds by that hold of the multitude, Neutrum modo, mas modo
vulgus: Hating here, whom heretofore they affected. As ere-while in the 14. of
the Acts, prone to sacrifice to him, and by and by persuaded to stone him. But
dismissing those Minims upon the by, and aiming only at the maine truth here,
to clear that, choose I hence now to present before you, only these three
essentially material meditations: The dignity of truth in it self: The
indignity offered truth by others enmity: The enduring of that enmity by the
tellers of truth: The high excellency of truth: The harsh entertainment of that
excellency: The hearty enduring of that entertainment. For to naturalize these
parts to the Text: As it is an increpation against their bad dealing with truth,
so de jure it magnifies verity. As it is an interrogation, the keenest form of
assertion, so de facto it certifies their enmity. As it is an expostulation
pregnant with firm resolution, so de debito it ratifies his constancy: De jure
truth deserves better; de facto it receives worse: De debito, for all that
worse, we ought not to abandon that better, within these lists limiting what
now is intended to be uttered. The spies that can try the whole land by one
cluster, measure whole Hercules by a foot, discern the whole web by the list,
may save a labor, ease themselves and others by departing, as Pilate when he
had asked what is truth, went out: to the honest hearts remaining, remain these
in order to be served in: A true valuation of truth in it self, and so what
good entertainment it deserves. The undervaluing of truth amongst men, and so
what bad entertainment, enmity, it finds. The due practice of the professors
of truth, whom no such enmity discourageth from telling truth, Am I therefore
become your enemy? etc.

For the first then, the excellency of truth in it self, as we use to speak
of the end, last in execution, first in intention; Truth here in the Text,
though last in situation, yet first in sense and substance: accordingly as
Plato again and again gives truth the leading, (...), etc. And he, says he,
that will be happy in the end, ought to lay hold on truth in the beginning: The
beginning of thy Word is truth, says David. As it is said, (...), that of any
work beginning, the forefront ought to be fair, like to that beautiful gate
of the Temple. Enter we first here upon the beautiful excellency of Truth, in
Thesi for truth in general, whether ye list conceive truth an adequation, a
conformity of the thing and the understanding as some define; or rather (for it
is here a telling of truth) an adequation of speech to the thing: Truth being
in the mind as in subjecto cognitivo, in speech as in signo repraesentativo,
in the mind as knowing, in the mouth as manifesting, each way glorious things
are spoken of Truth. Truth the meat of the mind, says the Platonist, Animi
cibus: Truth the sustenance of the soul, says Lactantius, Animae pabulum:
Truth the spouse of the understanding, say others, Sponsa intellectus: Verity
the virginity of the soul, as falsehood the adultery. As he ignorantly, but
luckily said, they were called Mechanic Arts, because the understanding
quodammodo in ijs moechatur, said he, because the understanding principally
created for spiritual apprehensions, in those arts, leaving Truth, the Spouse
of the understanding, adulterates, pollutes it self with corporal
employments: not only Mechanical Arts are such digressions besides truth; but
even the most liberal sciences and knowledges in the world, are but as pages,
torch-bearers to truth, quae etsi non ducunt, conducunt; the scope and
conclusion of all true knowledge being Truth; and the inquisition after that
conclusion, keeping the candle burning, and the eyes waking. And this is the
unvaluable advantage, how-ever shallow men slight it, which a Philosopher, a
Student, a man conversing with his understanding, has above other empty men of
the world, that whilst those sensualists fondly stand courting other vain
beauties, some of them it may be natural, many of them artificial, most of
them naught: the Intellectualist the whilst has frequent and familiar
addresses, approaches, acquaintance with beautiful Truth. So that of Truth we
may say as did the Queen of Sheba of Solomon, Happy are thy men, happy are thy
servants that stand continually before thee, and hear thy wisdom, learn thy
Truth. But in Hypothesi, for this particular truth here about ceremonies,
wrigled in again among the Galatians, and whereunto they needs again would
be in bondage, a carriage concentrique with relapses at this day into
Papisticall superstitions, said Gualter of his time then, to bring it no
nearer. Verily as Mirandula spoke, Veritatem Philosophia quaerit, Theologia
invenit, Religio possidet, that Truth was a thing which Philosophy sought,
Divinity found, Religion possessed. Other truths there be, as Philosophical
truths, which may so be glittering, but they are these divine Truths that are
the glorious. Truths there be not worth the wetting of a man's finger for, much
less the shedding of his blood for them, as sundry rules in sciences, and
curious arts, and mathematical principles: Truth, the toughest maintaining
whereof will never make a true Martyr, though ordinarily shall ye find more
obstinacy in maintaining those petty truths, than constancy in upholding
weightier truths; and here and there some Heliodor, yielding rather to be cast
out of his Bishopric, than to call in his books, though but Aethiopicks,
having not so much as color of truth. And other sorts of truth there be
published, yet ought not to be practiced, veritates audiendae, non imitandae,
as he speaks; as politic Theorems, he that will speedily thrive in such and
such places, he must lie, flatter, dissemble, and do worse: truths which it may
be some good man will trust, but never try; and such like other truths, whereof
a man may safely be ignorant, but not safely practicant; that as Christ bid the
Minstrels, Get you hence, hence with such truths: As Samuel said of Ishai's
seven sons, The Lord has chosen none of these truths; no, but as he defines
Theologick truth to be the truth necessary in the voyage to salvation, divine
truth, saving truth, truth respectively to Religion; yea this is that truth of
Christians, incomparably fairer than Helen of the Grecians, as Austin spoke,
whilst as God himself is truth and every man a liar, so are all those other
but as trash to his truth, who (as one heroically spoke) if he were to be
corporeal, would sure have Light for his body, and Truth for his soul; and so
as he is, has he Truth as his Usher going before his face, as in the Psalmist.
And whereas of other divine attributes, some are especially ascribed to the
Father, as omnipotency; some to the Son, as wisdom; some to the holy
Ghost, as goodness: Truth by the holy Spirit is peculiarly attributed to them
all, Lord God of Truth, Jesus that Truth, the Spirit of Truth. Christ says the
cause of his coming, his errand into the world, was to bear witness unto the
truth; and the Spirit of truth, not only so essentialiter, but doctrinaliter,
leading into all truth; his ways truth, his works truth, his word truth, all
truth: who as fountain of truth himself, favors also truth in others too,
giving his placet to them that study truth, Qui student veritati, placent ei:
The Lords eyes are upon the truth, says Jeremy; no tune more pleasing to God
than truth. Then come on ye that say, Who will show us any good? Cui bono? what
good shall we get by this your painted pearl of truth, this treasure in a
trance, for all your letter of commendations of Truth, Quid mihi prodest
cognoscere Veritatem, as in Austin? Good? Why say what is the good you would
have? Is it liberty? O bona libertas; why know the Truth, and the Truth shall
make you free, John 8. the Truth there not only Veritas Christus, but Veritas
Christi; a Truth truly to be termed liberalis, not only as liberal
sciences, because they are worthy homine libero, but this also hominem liberat;
for where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty; and this is our liberty,
that we are subject to that Verity, as Austin speaks. Or is it safety you
seek? The world's wrong, the surest safety is not in subtilty; no, Truth is
the Kings Guard, (...), says Solomon, Truth that which helps to keep and
preserve the King, Prove. 20. yea his Truth shall be your shield and buckler, as
David speaks. Is it comfort upon all occurrences you care for? Why, it was
Hezekiah's cordial lying sick, that he had walked before God in Truth; Truth
there not opposite only falso but fucato; when hypocrisy, policy, fraud,
falsehood, error can minister no comfortable ingredient, in extremity, then
fair fall Truth. Beyond the comforts here, is it heaven hereafter you would
have hold of? Why, remember who it is shall dwell in Gods Tabernacle, rest in
his holy Mountain, he that speaks the Truth in his heart: yea the blessed
life it self is nothing else but gaudium de Veritate, says Austin, a
rejoicing over Truth: liberty, safety, comfort, heaven, if all things be worth
any thing, Truth is worth them all: Truth it is (...), as in Plato, fair; nor
painter, nor statuary that can express like beauty to Truths, said Philemon:
Truth it is (...), as in Esdras, strong; strong above wine, women, king,
stronger than all: Truth it is (...), as Clinias, lasting; Truth abides, and is
strong for ever, said Zerobabel; the lip of Truth shall be established for
ever, said Solomon. That hence may even Nobles attend, how the Roman Praetor
wont always to wear upon his breast the image of Truth, as if the truest
ensign of Nobility were Truth. Hence may even Senators attend, how the
Egyptian Judges wore always in a chain about their neck, the picture of
Truth; and 'twas Iethro's counsel to Moses, for Judges over the people, to
choose viros veraces, men of Truth, in quibus sit veritas; nor could the high
Priest give sentence without the blest-plate of judgment on, wherein they put
Veritatem, as if Truth were the very form of judgment, what ever the matter
be. Hence may even the valiant attend, how in that whole armor of God, Ephesians.
6. Truth is there put the first piece of the Panoply, as if the principal
object of valor were Truth, and that the prime care to have the loins girt
about with Truth. O then, according to that excellent commendation Quintilian
gives Vespasian, patientissimus very, that he was most enduring, most suffering
of Truth: Suffer ye now the word of exhortation unto Truth, ye shall have it
tendered now in no meaner terms than Solomon's, Buy the Truth ('it is no Symonie)
and sell it not; buy it of God by prayer, buy it of Books by reading, buy it
of Orthodoxe men by hearing, buy it over and over, ye cannot over-buy it, Non
Priamus tanti, etc. Truth being as wisdom, to be preferred before scepters
and thrones, to be loved above health and beauty, precious stones not to be
compared unto it, gold but as gravel in respect of it, and silver to be
counted but as clay before it, and he to be reckoned a wise Merchant that
sells all that he has to buy it. I dare use Salomons phrase, (...), the
price is now in your hand, buy it: Sell it not neither for love, nor money, nor
policy, nor for no worldly payments, much less for promises: they sell the
Truth (said Lavater well) who for worldly respects live in such places where
there is no public profession of the Truth. As Esau sold his birthright for a
mess of pottage; and says Solomon, Pro buccella panis deserit veritatem, for
handfulls of barley and pieces of bread, for secular considerations they sell
the Truth; and by their leave, so do they too, who living in places where the
Truth is publicly professed, do Iudas-like yet stand ready pressed for pence,
as much as in them lies to betray the Truth, or out of politic ends, to sell
the Truth, selling under the mark of the Beast, as in the Revelation; and for
all their wisdom in their generation, selling, as unthrifts do their lands,
that which they never knew the worth of, Truth: and as the Satyrist spoke,
Vende animam lucro, selling their souls too in the bargain and sale of truth.
Having sold his Bible, which only he had then left: Now (said Serapion) have
I sold that which taught me to sell all; and he that sells truth, sells that
which teaches to sell all to buy it; and if a man could sell truth for all the
gold of India, what would it profit to win the world and lose the truth? Sell
it not, nay, but be ye established in the present truth, as St. Peter spoke.
And again I say, be ye established in the present truth; it is the present
truth, and 'twas the primitive Truth, when Purgatory was yet unkindled, and
Indulgences yet unhatched, when Mass was yet unmoulded, and Transubstantiation
yet unbaked, when Merits were yet unminted, and Sins venial uninvented; when
Laycks of the cup were yet uncousened, and Ecclesiastiques unexempted: when
Popes transcendent power was uncreated, and deposing of Kings yet undreamed of,
before this Lerna lake of errors yet was congregated, before ever these fancies
of Rome were rocked in their cradles, was the present truth: And be ye
established in it, not tottering and wavering to and fro, (...), as they that
are carried about with every wind of doctrine, but (...), speaks S. Peter
there, firmly settled, established in the present truth: Truth being, as God
spoke of his commandment, not in heaven, that thou should say, Who shall go
up for us to heaven, and bring it us, and cause us to hear it? Neither is it
beyond the sea, that thou should say, Who shall go over the sea for us, and
bring it us, and cause us to hear it, that we may do it? No, but the truth is
very near us: As Solomon of the Turtle, so of truth; The voice of truth is
heard in our land. Set that truth as a seal upon your heart, and as a signet
upon your arm, bind it for a sign upon your hand, and let it be as
frontlets between your eyes; be as tender over truth as the apple of your eye;
sooner let the Sun wander from his course, than ye from truth. In our Letany
we pray the Magistrates may have grace given them to maintain truth. It was
Christ's prayer for his, Ioh. 17. Sanctify them with thy truth: and the God of
truth confirm and keep you in his so excellent truth; Truths excellency. So
have you the first part.

And can it then be, a thing so highly excellent as truth, should find so
harsh entertainment as enmity? Can so bright beams beget so black clouds?
Yes, as Solomon tells of the price to get wisdom in the hand of a fool that
has no heart to it; for all that true price of Truth, come we now to view how
fools misprise it, entertayning it with enmity, Enemy for telling truth,
That Is now the second part. Ergo inimicus; an Ergo so incongruous, so
inconsequent, as may well drive the hearer with Austin into admiration and
amazement, why men endued with understanding, should be so sollicitously
studious about courses of stars, flowings of sea, and more frothy things, and
yet the whilst so retchlesse of Truth, neerlier concerning them; and make him
likewise passionately expostulate as Austin, Shall other vain men vaunt
themselves happy in imbracement of other beauties, and Christians slight the
embracing of beautiful Truth? Shall they boast a happiness in sitting down
to eat and drink, and we not apprehend a blessedness, in being fed and
feasted with truth? Shall they coenare fabulis, and we not veritate? Shall
they crake of beds of roses and sweet odours, and Christians take no pleasure
in the fragrant inspiration of truth? Shall they tripudiate in music, and
Christians not triumph in the melody of truth? Shall they delight in the light
of the Sun, and we not delight in the light of Truth? Shall so many love
lightness, and any set so light by lovely truth, as thus to entertain it with
enmity? Ergo inimicus; A strange Ergo, yet not more strange than true, truth
being so frequently haunted with hatred, as Calvin wrote to the Christian King,
Evangelij genius, as opposition, the bad genius, as it were waiting upon the
Gospel; so enmity a familiar as it were, every where dogging truth. The
saying, Veritas odium parit, not more familiar than the thing, though not a
general truth as in the Poet; and yet Lactantius thinks he spoke it, qua si
divino spiritu instinctus; not so true of all, says Jerome, yet too too true
of too too many. Whilst as the beautiful Nymphs are said to have brought
forth the ill favored Fawnes and Satyrs; so truth bringing forth hatred, or
rather enmity; like the Dragon in the Revelation, standing before the woman
traveling, ready to devour what she should bring forth. As in Genesis, The
Lord said, is by and by encountered with The Serpent said, so is telling truth
encountered thus with enmity. When Eliah told Ahab truth, Have thou found me, O
mine enemy? said he; the like was Micaiah's case with Ahab, the man of Gods
case with Jeroboam, John Baptists with Herod, St. Stevens with the Jews; so
persecuted they the Prophets, thus entertaind they truth with enmity: And as
Ecclesiastes spoke, (...), That which has been, is that which shall be; it
has been so, and 'twill be so, be it never so unreasonable that it should be
so: there is demonstrative reason upon reason, why it will be so: There being
three things (says Aristotle) (...), three things that breed enmity, (...),
ira, incommodatio, criminatio, displeasure, disprofit, discredit; why in all
these, truth being not for most men's turn, corrupt nature makes them thus
turn enemies to the tellers of truth. First, Ira: as they write of some
creatures to have the gall in the ear, fell in aure, the hearing of truth galls
them; as Peter told Simon Magus, Thou art in the gall of bitterness: telling
of truth puts them into the gall of bitterness, angers them, nettles them. And
as ulcerous men use to shrink at the lightest touch, yea sometimes shreeke
even at the very suspicion, the imagination of touching; truth told touching,
or seeming but to touch their sores, makes them take on like waspes, like the
mad man, pricked to cure his sore, they fly upon the Surgeon: Tange montes
and fumigabunt; the least touch of truth makes them fume and fret like the
vapors of the thunderbolt, which never linne working till they have vented
themselves with terror; they never leave brauling till they have exhaled their
anger, vented their enmity: Because truth telling will not let them wallow so
securely as otherwise they would, not suffer them to curd and settle on their
lees, as the Prophet Zephany speaks, as they would: a quare impedit therefore
so quarrels the truth, as that the tellers thereof are driven often to that
Dilemma of Agathon, (...), etc. If I please thee, I shall not tell the truth;
and if I tell the truth, I shall not please thee, but procure enmity.
Secondly, Incommodatio, truth telling is against their profit, prejudicial to
their gainful practice of lying and falsehood: therefore say they of the truth
teller, as they in the second of Wisdom spoke of the righteous, He is not for
our profit, he is contrary to our doing, therefore rebuke him; Dunghill men,
like Aesops Cock, setting more by the Barley corn of profit, than the pearl
of truth; of the swinish race, Gergesens, willing rather to lack Christ, than
lose the least commodity. Thirdly, Criminatio, truth telling accuses them,
endites them, arraigns them, condemns them, brands them and their courses. As
David couples Light and Truth together, Truth, like Light, being of a
discovering nature, making things manifest. Therefore (as S. John spoke) men
love darkness more than light, because their deeds are evil; a dark shop
being best for badde wares: therefore as thieves seek to put out the candle,
they would have the light Truth put out. A Scorner (as Solomon says) loving
not one that reproves him; Truth reproving them, therefore reprove they the
Truth. Tell one of your Politicians Papinian's truth, That that is the best
reason which makes most for Religion, that the best policy which makes most for
Piety; why, this truth crossing his proiects and purposes, the teller may take
his bill, and sit down quickly, and write Enmity. Tell a covetous man St.
Paul's truth, That the love of money is the root of all evil, ye offer him
loss, ye touch his freehold, ye are a trespasser to his trade, an enemy.
Tell the luxurious man that theorem of Truth, That temperance is the razor of
superfluities, and the rule of necessaries; and that this whole life ought to
be a kind of Lent; Away with your threadbare Scholars posies; ye bring us into
the wilderness to starve us, ye are an enemy. I will not procure more enemies
by more instances; suffice it, Nec in caeteris contrarium est videre: That if
as Gideon once made proclamation in the audience of the people, Who so is
timorous or fainthearted, let him depart, so every one whose heart rises
against truth told, should depart, we should soon have more room, auditories
would soon be thin, Vel duo, vel nemo. Light is good, but yet to bad eyes,
offensive. Honey is sweet, but yet to wounds, smarting; truth is wholesome, but
yet to most, distasteful: like that bloody water, sweet and potable to
Hebrews, says Josephus, but sour and would not down with Egyptians. Then
be that school distinction true, that truth in the universal, sub ratione
very, cannot be hated, yet in the particular, sub ratione contrarij, so is it
usually thus hated; though no man can hate truth in universali, while it only
pleades it self, yet in particulari, when it comes thus to press upon
themselves: As the Friar wittily told the people that the truth he preached,
was like holy water, which every one call a pace for, yet when it came to be
cast on them, they would turn aside their face: even they that will call fast
for Truth, cannot yet away to have it cast in their face; even they that could
like truth if it would only show it self, mislike it, when it comes thus to
show them themselves; they that love truth lucentem, hate it thus redarguentem,
says Austin; and so says Ambrose, because no man would be reproved for
erring; therefore becomes he enemy thus to truth reprehending. Veritas ideo
semper invisa est, eo quod is qui peccat, vult habere liberum peccandi locum,
says Lactantius, Because every offender would have his full swindge without
control, therefore take they offense at truth: as he that delicately composes
himself to sleep, prohibites all louder noise, and procures some gentle
murmr; so loving to be lulled in their security, some sweet Siren sounds
they can away with, but this same shrill trumpet of Truth, away with that. So
distempered, so ill dieted, so unadvised most men are, as readily to swallow
flatteries, digest fables, concoct errors, and yet truth with them to be so
hard of digestion, as thus to stomach that, thus turn that into bitterness,
Enmity. That whereas we usually say, Bitter as gall, we might stronglier
express it (said Vega well) by saying, Bitter as Truth. That as the Turk
taunted some Christians at Constantinople, who said that they came thither to
suffer for the Truth, That they needed not have come so far for that, seeing
had they but told the Truth at home, they should not have missed suffering for
it: telling truth needs not travel far for enmity; enmity will encounter it
at home, wheresoever. That as for all Christ bid woe to the man by whom the
offense comes, offenses yet will come, so it shall surely be woe upon woe to
him, by whom enmity comes upon truth, enmity will yet come upon it; though this
laurel of Truth will be bitter to them that bite it, bite at it yet men will;
though as Ignatius speaks, (...), etc. to follow any that falls from Truth, be
forfeiture of the Kingdom of heaven; yet will men follow the foes of Truth,
bandy against it, be enemies to telling Truth; that as they use to say, Plain
dealing is a jewel, but he that uses it dies a beggar: be Truth never such a
jewel, the teller may probably account aforehand, this way to be a loser by
it; let him never feed himself with vain expectation, that the trade of truth
telling is a plausible, insinuating, welcome, winning profession: An expectas
ut Quintilianus ametur? Let him rather count himself to be borne, as Jeremy,
a contentious man, a man that striveth with the whole earth: as Luther said of
preaching, Praedicare nihil aliud est, quam derivare in se furorem, etc. That
to preach (preach home as he used) was nothing else but to stir up the fury
of Hell, Satan, World against a man; so telling of truth to be a stirrer of
rage, a sign which will be spoken against. Let never the truth teller dream
of comfits and sweet meats; reckon he thus to eat his Passover with sour
herbs, thus to be fed with bitterness, and filled as with wormwood, to have
this wild gourd Enmity shred into his pot. Never say, I had not thought it; S.
Peter has foretold it, The way of Truth shall be evil spoken of; and S.
Paul here found it, enmity for telling Truth, Am I therefore become your enemy?
etc. So have you the first and second part.

And this apprehension, this account aforehand, as Darts foreseen dint-lesse,
and forewarned fore-armed; may pass as a preparative to the following point,
The enduring of that enmity for telling truth: that is now the third and last
part. The Apostle here, while he thus increpates their enmity for his telling
them truth, intimates his own resolution, so enduring that enmity in behalf
of Truth. Non timuit vituperari, vel odio haberi, etc. said Anselme upon it;
He feared no man's ill will to him, so he might manifest his good will to
Truth: And so it is also Ieroms inference hereupon, out of the 40. of Esaias, Lift
up thy voice with strength, lift it up and be not afraid: for, as Esaias spoke
again, Who art thou, that thou should fear a mortal man, and the son of
man, which shall be made as grass, and forgettest the Lord thy maker? so what
art thou, that thou should fear this enmity, and forget the truth? for
though they shrewdly say, Qui vult dimitti a Domino, dicat illi veritatem, He
that would be put from his Master, let him tell him truth; yet is it to be
said, He that would have God his good Master, must tell the truth. As he well
compares Truth to Rebekah with her two twins: Brings truth telling thus forth
the hate of men? it brings forth withal the other twin, the love of God too;
that be it with the world, as they say, a cold occupation to tell the truth, a
blessed occupation is it yet with God: how-ever flesh and blood say, Master,
pity thy self, this enmity shall not be unto thee; and whatsoever witches
children whisper to the contrary. For, come on (says the Temporist to the
Truth-teller) you are so keen of this truth-tell, you will mar all: wot you
not what Pope Eugenius said, Hoc verum esse si ipse velit and non aliter, That
this or that was true if his Holiness, his Greatness would have it so, and
not otherwise? as if great Ones granted Warrants of Truth, as of the Peace?
Remember ye not, your own book says, Time to be truest, (...), as in
Xenophon; and Truth to be Times daughter, as in the Poet? And why will any of
you then, set the daughter at variance with the mother, and not rather handle
the matter so, as the daughter Truth may ever be consonant to the mother Time?
yea, and conformable so with place too, every place being not for telling every
truth? for be Truth (as they say) a Sergeant, yet places there be exempted
from that arrest, as well as other. Affirmatio veritatis obligat semper, sed
non ad semper, sed pro loco and tempore, Truth telling has it times and
places, and Placentia a city as well as Verona: Loquimini placentia, or if ye
cannot fall to that fawning vein, as M. Bradford said of Massing and
Preaching, that the Mass bites not men, nor makes them blush as preaching
does; cannot ye meddle only with toothlesse truths, as Balak bid, Neither
curse nor bless at all? serve in as in Job, only the white of an egg without
any taste at all? Or if needs you must be tampring with Truth, cannot ye
candy it over with a scepticall neutrality, or over-cast it with some cloudy
obscurity, Verbis coopertis, as slily the Romanist; either as the Pope plays
with two points about Christ and Marie, only problematically not positively,
between two to shift at pleasure; or as Aristotle set forth his Acroamatickes,
(...)? How-ever you meet with them that tell you, that the Prophets and
Apostles, and Christ himself propounded Truth naked, yet it is none of the
worst observations you shall meet with in Oleaster, The holy Prophets,
especially to great Ones, to have spoken most an end in Parables; and Jesus
himself frequently to have spoken in Parables: that since people are so shie
of the naked Truth, Truth might so be presented in some disguise unto them.
Take but the trivial instance; be Truth as good diet as a Partridge, yet is it
not to be served in raw, or feathers and all; but cooked and seasoned, Sale
prudentiae temperata; at least be so wise as to tarry till downright Truth
be demanded of you, and so drawn from you. No, hence Satan; often is it said,
Then Jesus answered and said, when yet none asked him, he answering then to the
Truth speaking in his conscience. And as Fulgentius truly spoke to king
Trasimund, The silence that affirms not truth, confirms error, and little
to choose between nilling to declare truth, and willing to deny it. And as
Tertullian excellently, Nihil Veritas erubescit nisi solummodo abscondi, Truth
blusheth at nothing more than to be hidden; Truth seeking no corners, nor ever
yet could temporize; nor more than the Moon stays her course in heaven, for
the barking of dogs at it here on earth, forbeares for any such Enmity. But (as
says Austin) Though men belly the Moon in her defects, and revile the Stars,
nicknaming them, Saturn, Jupiter, Mercury, and worse, Venus, the Stars yet
continue their courses; No crimination of heresy, no calumniation of schism,
no imputation of noveltie daunts the Truth, no nor disheartens the Paul's, the
true Truth-tellers neither; no virulent breath can stain such Stars; but
though the adversary write a book against them, yet will they bind it as a
Crown unto them, as in Job: though they revile them as they do, the school
of Satan, the heard of Antichrist, the reprobate congregation, loose Apostates,
turkish Huguenots, worse than Infidels, profane Hell Hounds, false Gospellers,
yea Heretics, from whose mouths even Truth it self proceeding, is not to be
entertained, said their Friar: yet shaking off those virulences, as Paul did
the Viper, After the way which they call Heresy, will they tell the Truth;
remembering that terrible speech of Austins, Quicunque metu, etc. that whosoever
for fear of any power hides Truth, provokes Gods wrath against himself, as
one that fears man more than God. It was Ieremies complaint in his time, that
people then bent their tongues like bows for lies; but had no courage for the
truth upon the earth, not valiant for the truth upon the earth, as now we read
it: nor want their just complaints in that key; The world-through, diminutae
sunt veritates a filijs hominam, complained David. And the tale goes of Truth
lying sick, and like to die without confession, because no man could be found
that would be her Confessor; too too many indeed every where slighting Truth,
setting at naught so great salvation. Yet not after the wont of way-ward men,
so to bemoane what we want, as not to bless God for what we have; choose I
rather hence to cheer up Truth, with the courage of her tellers now, and
cannot but say, much like as Christ of the woman that powered the ointment on
his head: Verily, wheresoever Truth shall be preached, the truth of many of
this meridian to the Truth, is worthy to be told for a memorial of them;
(...), as S. John speaks, how they have been fellow-helpers to the Truth; as
in Athenagoras both (...), de veritate, by speaking of the truth unto the
religious, and (...), pro veritate, for the truth against the erroneous. And
good luck have they with their glory, and ride on prosperously because of
Truth, and let it never be said that the adversaries (those pioners, whose
occupation is only to undermine the truth) like these Galatians here,
bewitched them that they should not obey the Truth. Shall any of them be
stouter for fraudulent equivocations, lying miracles, false doctrines, than we
for Gods Truth? as Tertullian spoke of Heretics then, Apostatas postatas
nostros gloria obligant, quia veritate non possunt? Shall they prevail more
over ours with tricks, than we over theirs with Truth? It has been said that
our word True, comes ab Hetrusco, and Hetruria fondly has been termed regio
veritatis: And O that this region might not only so be said, but ever be the
region of Truth; and as it was the first kingdom that universally embraced the
truth of the Gospel, so to the last it may continue constant for the Truth.
Never was there in the world title of more honor, than when God in the 8. of
Zachary, said, Jerusalem shall be called a city of truth; No nor of more
profit neither: for when Meroz shall be cursed, the inhabitants thereof
bitterly cursed, because they came not to help the Lord; blessed shall ye,
all ye be that come to the help of Truth against the malignant: for do not
ye misdeeme your selves, as though there were no other place for this telling
truth but the Pulpit, no other helpers of truth besides the Preachers, no other
partakers of truth besides Prophets and Prophets sons. As God said of
Corinth, I have much people in this city: Truth has much people, many friends
in City, Court, Country; yea even out of the mouth of babes and sucklings has
it strength to silence the enemy. Then what though you or you cannot do much
for Truth? do your best for it; and if there be a willing mind, it is
accepted according to that a man has, and not according to that he has not,
as Paul speaks. And O how learned Fulgentius praises yongue Donatus, that
being set upon by the Arrians, though he had not the skill to defend the Truth
with his tongue, had yet a will to maintain the Truth in his heart; though he
could not unloose all their cunning tricks, he could yet hold fast the
conclusion, Truth: and he that (for he could neither write nor read) could
not Clerkly subscribe his name to Truths confession, could yet manly draw blood
of himself, wherewith to set his ma^k^ do it; And she that for want of
learning could not dispute Christ's cause, could ye be content to die for it;
and Were every hair of my head a man, I would burn them all, said a third,
rather than go^ from Truth. Nor conceive I any, either more powerful
opposition against the enemy to withstand him, or probable persuasion with the
adversary to win him, than such undaunted resolution for the Truth. When Justin
Martyr, then a Platonist, heard the Christians ill spoken of, and yet saw them
so constantly bent to endure any hardship for the truth of their cause, he
concluded with himself, that sure they could be no vicious voluptuous men. And
who knows whether the constant keenness of the professors of Truth, may
gain a good report to the Truth, even of them which yet are without the Truth?
or if not, as he that was to be burned with the book of the Revelation by him,
held himself happy to suffer martyrdom with such a marrow: happiness will it
be thus to suffer enmity for such a friend as Truth: Truth which is to be
preferred even before friendship, as the very Heathen man could say, being
never to be prejudiced by any such Enmity, but to continue Truths friends, who
ever therefore become our enemies.

Am I therefore become your enemy? etc. Now the God of Truth, etc.

Laus Deo.
Acts 19. verse. 28. the latter part. And cried out, saying, Great is Diana of
the Ephesians.


SEcurus licet Aeneam Rutulumque, as he said; A man may safely speak of Aeneas
and Rutulus: Nulli gravis est percussus Achilles; To hear of wounded Achilles
galls no man now: and a tale of Troy troubles no man here. The Priest of
Bethel, though he could not abide that Amos in his Prophecy should grate upon
the house of Israel, yet if he would fly away into the land of Judah, and
prophecy there, he was not against it. Though the Jews could not endure, that
Jeremy should meddle with the burden of Judah and Jerusalem, yet if he would
prophecy against Edom, and Moab, and Ammon, and them a far off, he might
for all them; they felt no smart, no hurt done. According to which reckoning,
this Text here, may now at many hands probably promise it self a freer
passage, a friendlier welcome; as meddling not, you see, with matters present
now, or nearer home, but past and far off, matters of another Meridian, not
only strictly Geometrically, but very sensibly aloof from us, as far as
Asia; nighing not Europaeans, but Ephesians; not mentioning any our defects,
but only their Diana, how they cried out, saying, Great is Diana of the
Ephesians.

Howbeit, amidst such diversity, and indeed daintiness of hearers, lest that
rellishing so with some prove so distastefull to others, that, as dealt the
Tribes with Rehoboam, What portion have we in David? we have no inheritance,
no part in him; and so they departed: so any now say, We have no portion, no
share in that in hand; it pertaining so peculiarly to Ephesians, we have no
part in it, and so they depart. As Jonathan concluded with David, That if he
cried to the boy, Behold, the arrows are beyond thee; he was then to be gone:
the cry here being about Diana and Ephesians, Behold, the arrows here are all
beyond us, let us away; Know they also, that as Nathan, though he begun with a
tale of two men and a sheep, yet brought it about in the end to, Thou art the
man; This Text here, though about forreiners, may happily be brought to touch
even upon Domestics too: and though, as in Arrasse foulded up, little yet
appear to purpose, unfoulded it may reveal that, quod ad te pertinet obe; not
only as Daniel said, My Lord, the dream be to them that hate thee, and the
interpretation thereof to thine enemies: the Discourse and Doctrine hereof may
attach, not only them that hate us, and the interpretation thereof light all
upon our enemies, but partly reflect even upon our selves too: And as the
Sun, though it rise in the East, sets yet in the West (and some have shrewdly
ghessed as much of Religion too); by that time the Text has gone it circuit,
it may come to set far from where it rose; Ephesus come nearer England, and
Diana be brought home to our own doors, and we also in our Dialect, be many
heard crying out, saying, Great is Diana of the Ephesians.

Which words, albeit in this their own situation, not unlike some maze, which
though spreading but to little quantity of ground, would yet require an hours
treading; yet to make room for direct and distinct proceeding, we may dilate
the words, either into the manner and the matter. The manner, Crying out; The
matter, Great Diana; or in as much as the matter here of their Cry is fabulous,
into their prologue, and their fable. The prologue, They cried out: The fable,
Great is Diana. Or who so list entitle their enterprise here, the birth of the
mountains, here is the travel, They cried out; and the birth delivered, Great
Diana: Plainly, as the voice bid Esaias cry, and he said, What shall I cry?
here is the cry, and that which is cried, Great Diana. Then lend me but your
silence, whilst I speak of their Cry, and your attention, whilst I declare
their Diana. As Solomon said, that from the sight and consideration even of the
field of the slothful, and the vineyard of the man void of understanding, he
received instruction, Instruunt non solum docentes, sed and errantes: from the
consideration of the carriage, even of these superstitious Idolatrous men,
there will (God willing) instruction be derived, and their crying out then,
call upon us now, and their Diana there, discover others devices elsewhere,
concentrique with these of the Ephesians, crying out, saying, Great is Diana of
the Ephesians.

They cried out. As David questioned the sea, What ailed thee, that thou
fleddest? and his soul, Why, art thou so disquieted? Why, what ailed them,
what disquieted them, thus to cry out? Why, this was the matter, Demetrius and
his fellow craftsmen, Silver-smiths by occupation, made certain silver
Temples, as our former Translation; silver shrines, as this now calls them.
Chrysostom thinks they were a kind of little coffers, (...). Carthusian a
kind of gay little houses, with Diana's image enclosed in them. Other, Images
representing and made like unto her Temple, either to be offered in that Temple
there, Votiva Templa, as they call them; or to be borne about with them
whithersoever they went, as wont that Philosopher in Ammianus; Thecas
statuarum, certain cases with her image in them, so sundry expound them. Beza
criticking the word, thinks they were pieces of coin, such as he says
himself has seen, with the Ephesians Diana's image, and a representation of
her Temple stamped on them. Temples, or Shrines, or Coffers, or Images, or
Cases, or Coins, call them what you will, certain Gewgawes they were, such as
I would have resembled, to the Philistines coffer with the golden images of
their Mice and Emerods in it, but that the Jesuit himself full properly
resembles them to some images of their own; and withal records the praises of
Bishop Eligius for his singular skill, in making such silver cases for Saints,
which in any case are to be decked up with gold and silver, and every precious
thing, says he; Romish puppets, a kin to these Ephesian bables, with Diana's
picture in them, which they made and sold to such fond folks, such silly
people, strangers, or others that would buy them. Now holy Paul by his
powerful preaching there, alienating the minds of many people from those gods,
no gods, made with hands; the fellows foreseeing, that as their gain (of
which we shall after speak) so their goddess (on which alone, their tongues
run here in the Text) their goddess was in danger to be discountenanced by it,
her temple to be despised, and her magnificence to be destroyed, as that
their revenew, so this their religion likely thereby to be impaired and
endammaged, assembled and angry thereat, they cried out, Great is Diana.

As divine story tells of the Idol Dagon, falling down before the Ark of the Lord; and Ecclesiastical story, how at Christ's coming into Egypt, all the
Images there fell down: so at the preaching of this Gospel then, Idolatry
beginning to shake and stagger, as Epiphanius tells of Elisaeus, how at his
birth in Gilgall, the golden Calfe in Selom, bellowing out so loud, as that the
noise was heard at Jerusalem, the priest interpreted it, that a Prophet was
that day borne, who should break in pieces their carved and moulten Images: so
Paul's preaching battring thus, and crying down the Idols, they held it high
time to take on, and bellow, and cry out thus for their Diana. So as out of
this crying of theirs here, for the upholding of their Diana, as was said of
old of her self, that she had three visages, tria virginis ora Dianae, so (me
thinks) I see three heads hence appear unto us. First, their Tenderness in
apprehending so their Diana's danger and disgrace; they soon saw, yea
foresaw, and forecast it aforehand. Secondly, their Earnestness in
appearing for her; no sooner heard they of her danger, but forthwith in her
defense, they cried out. And thirdly, their Iointnesse in undertaking on her
behalf, in the whole heap of them, (...), that is the word in the whole crowd
and convocation of them. I do not find one mute among them here, but all
consonants, all crying out. Tenderness in apprehending, Earnestness in
appearing, Iointnesse in undertaking; three dispositions of these Heathen, in
regard of their goddess and idolatry: which when we shall have weighed
comparatively with their defects, in many of us Christians, respectively to our
God and Religion, this their tenderness, that way upbraiding our
insensiblenesse, their earnestness our remissness, their iointnesse our
distractions. As Demosthenes wont to grieve if handy craftsmen were earlier up
at work than he; and Pambo wept to see the naughty woman more busy and
sollicitous to please lewd men, than he himself was studious and diligent to
please God; if we have not foreheads of flint, and hearts as the nether
millstone, it may make us both blush and grieve to see these Mechanickes here,
more passionately and heartily affected toward their baggage Diana, than many
of us are to the blessed Deity; we, being now so backward and cold for Gods
true worship, and they all here so forward and keen for her idolatrous
worship, as thus to cry out for it, saying, Great is Diana of the Ephesians.

For the first then, their Tenderness here over their Idol. How-ever Lorinus
list say, Non minus affabre, etc. that Demetrius here composed his oration to
them, as artificially as ever he made shrine for her; for ought I descry in
it, with a little Rhetorique, less than many lay-Preacher puts into every
period to the people; he wrought so quickly and deeply upon them, that no
sooner understood they by his speech, of any hazard of harm to Diana, but
with a quick ear to the touch of that string, out of a feeling apprehension, a
tender resentment of it, they cried out. That though the harm (if ye mark
the context) the harm here to Diana's goodly majesty, was yet far of, (...),
say the words before, Futurum, it was yet to come to pass, destrui incipiet,
as some render it; her destruction was yet to begin, her harm, at the most,
was but a hammering, her danger yet but a breeding in Embryone, as it were, and
so might miscarry by some aborsment, or otherwise ebb into emptiness: yet see
here, as Zebul said to Gaal, Thou see the shadow of the mountains as if they
were men, thou art afraid of a shadow; the very shadow of danger to their
goddess, they were very shie and sensible of, Atque omnes metuentes expendere
casus. And as Eliah out of a little cloud arising, discerned a great rain a
coming; whilst her danger was scarce yet in the clouds, in the vapors, but
arising, they spied the storm a coming. As when Hanniball besieged Saguntum,
a confederate city with Rome, Sylius says, he then beat upon the Capitol at
Rome, Et extremis pulsat Capitolia terris; every rebuke that Paul's preaching
gave to any Idol, they thought it rapt at their Diana's door: and so not
lingering till Hanniball came to the gates indeed, not delaying till the dart
came so near, that it could not be declined, not neglecting what they thought
belonged unto their peace, till as Demades said of the Athenians, they were
driven to mourning gowns, (...), as Homer loved to say: Wary were they before
the wound. As the Bore being questioned why he stood whetting his teeth so,
whilst yet none assailed him, wisely answered, That it would be then too late
to whet them when he was to use them; and therefore whetted them so before
danger, that he might have them ready in danger. As Demosthenes advised the
Athenians, (...), that they would not expect till evil came, but prevent it;
and to deal with their dangers, as men do with serpents and vipers, of which
though happily they never have been stung or bitten, yet seeing any of them,
they tarry not till it sting or bite, but before harm done, forthwith seek to
kill it, to crush the Scorpion at the first appearance: So these here, wise in
their generation, counting providence better than repentance, not waiting and
gaping after event, the Schoolmasters of fools, as Fabius called it, not
only ante bellum auxilium, but even ante tubam tremor, affected with what was
not yet effected, apprehensive aforehand of her danger, they cried out: so
tender were they over their Diana.

Now from them look we homeward, and make the prospect upon our selves, in
parallel with this Heathenish; feel we now this Christian pulse, how it beats
in aequiparant occurrences: Are we all thus tender over the glory of our God?
are we all thus jealous for the Lord of Hosts? are we all thus apprehensive,
thus feelingly forecasting against all such passages, as may at any time seem
to threaten any detriment to Gods cause, Religion? Vtinam, mollissimum
adverbium, called Scaliger it, Too soft an adverb for a Philosopher: yet soft
as it is, Vtinam, I would Christians all had, and had had such softness on
this side, such tenderness over religion; then had not that truculent enemy of
Christianity grown to that greatness through their dullness; ignavia nostra
magni, as he avoucheth it, as having been and still being many so far from
such tenderness; that have not we rather that way, (...), as the Spirit of
God uses to call it, a kind of hoof as it were over many of our hearts? Callum
obductum, corneas fibras, brawny breasts, horny heart strings? hard and
unsensible? Pectus quoque robora fiunt. As Ducklings stoop and dive at any
little stone thrown by a man at them, yet shrink not at the heavens great
thunder: so many men are sensible enough, too sensible of any corporal danger
to their person, but too unsensible of any spiritual danger to their
profession. As Bernard complained, Patientius ferimus Christi jacturam, quam
nostram, Many of us are less sensible of Gods greatest losses, than of the
least of our own. That whereas Ambrose wont to wish, that if any troubles or
harms were to befall either Gods Church or him, they might rather of the two
light upon him, and his house; so they may save their own stakes, gain their
own ends, many reckon so little of it, that what David if he forgot, wished
his right hand might forget to play, many men forget and play it out of mind,
let it stray out of their memory: The Ark of God which she grieving for,
called the glory of Israel. Many men now are very tender over the chariots of
their own glory, but have little feeling of the Arc of Gods glory. As he
complained that Paralus, the sacred ship, was set a work about trivial
carriages; Christian men's affections which should be laid out about sacred
spiritual affairs, most men squander and trifle them away about secular
vanities. Multitudes of men, either so besotted with carnal sensuality, or so
benumbed with careless security, or so engrossed with covetous secularity, or
so deaffed with the durdam of worldly vanity; Nescio quid teneros fascinat, one
thing or other so stupefying and deading all such tenderness in us; many piping
so many eyes asleep, searing so many consciences, hardening so many through the
deceitfulness of sin, as that many men have little sense of any spiritual
hazzards, no feeling on that side; so deaf on that ear, that though not only
some Demetrius, but even a Mercury, as they of Lycaonia called Paul, should
call unto us about it, we many list not hear, but like the Smiths dog, whom
neither noise of hammers by him, nor sparks of fire flying about him, nor some
lighting on him awaked. Many men lie still, as not moved, nothing affected, as
being that way past feeling, (...), as Paul speaks; as saying with the
unsensible man in Solomon, They have stricken me and I was not sick, they
have beaten me and I felt it not: Or as Solomon tells of the simple one, who
as a fool unto the stocks, and as a bird hasting to the snare, not knowing
that he is in danger, followed the harlot till a dart stroke through his liver.
Many men love to dally and fool with dangers, even spiritual dangers, the
harlotry of sin, sensuality, schism, superstition, profaneness, till the
dart strike through the liver, the life of their Religion: whereas, as the
Gospel speaks of the affectionate father, that whilst the distressed son
was yet a great way off, he saw him and had compassion on him; were men
heartily affected to God and his cause, the optic glass of that affection,
would represent to their compassion, any distresses of religion, even a great
way off, and the spectacles of love would make any troubles at any time toward
Gods cause, seem unto them not less, but happily greater, than in themselves
they are: affection would breed circumspection, and the ear of jealousy would
make them both hear and hearken too after the state and success of it; and a
taste of the powers of the world to come, would make men discern any
spiritual poison before they drink it; and a tender respect to religion,
would cause them ever rather cast beyond than short of any danger concerning
it: having their senses exercised, as Paul speaks, to discern good and evil
about it, would make men shun not only the plague of any spiritual danger,
but to be shie even of every ragge that does but touch upon it; to have a
godly jealousy over Gods whole cause, his Worship, his Church, his Children,
and all the consequences of it. Non aliter (says Beza of Calvin) non aliter in
Ecclesias quantum vis remotas affectus, quam si illas humeris gestaret, That he
had no less tenderness, no less feeling even of remote Churches, than if he
had borne them on his own shoulders: A right Scholar of St. Paul's, who had a
tender care, even over all the Churches, (...), as Isydor spoke of him; looking
after nothing else but the good of Gods Church. Whereas now (alas) as Paul
spoke, (...), occalluerunt obtusi sensus, men's spiritual senses are oftten so
blunted, their minds are so much hardened, that as they say in nature, that the
softer touch is a sign of the better constitution; men's hardness of feeling
this way, bewraies their badnesse of constitution: Nay, as Philosophy says,
tactus fundamentum animae sensitivae. The very foundation of life to be
feeling; and so no feeling, no life, says Aristotle. Men's want of spiritual
feeling, argues their want of spiritual life; as Paul speaks of the wanton
widow, (...), that they are many that way but dead, even whilst they live; many
so unapprehensive, so unaffected many, with what may trench upon God and his
cause, that as some of the meanest creatures surpass us in the outward touch,
Praestat aranea tactu, so some of the worst of men, seem so to go beyond many
of us in inward feeling; that as Solomon sends the sluggard to the poor
Pismire, to consider her ways and be wise, we may many be sent a schooling to
these silly Idolaters here, as being many less tender, less touched with many
things that concern our glorious God, than they here were with what concerned
but their paltry Diana, when they cried thus out, saying, Great is Diana of the
Ephesians: So have ye the first particular, their Tenderness.

Yea but for all this Tenderness over their goddess, loath that any wind of
danger should blow upon her, yet as Salust said once of the Romans, Videmini
intenta mala quasi fulmen, etc. that they then seemed to deal about their
imminent harms, as men do about the thunderbolt, every man willing it may not
hit him, but no man going about to hinder it; it may be, for all they so
perceived her danger, yet went they not about to prevent it. Yes, as he
wittily said, that all vehement affections, are (as it were) of a doubtful
sex, having impotentiam muliebrem, but impetum virilem, with a womanish
feebleness, a kind of manly violence; so together with that their soft, and
as it were Feminine tenderness, here is also their stout and Masculine
eagerness on her behalf, They cried out. Their Earnestness, that is now the
second particular propounded: For having once that resentment of their Diana's
danger, they do not stand mute, no nor coldly call on, but Cry out, as if it
were not enough to say so, unless they cried so, Exclamaverunt (...), as
Phavorinus speaks of the root of this word, (...), that it is a crying with
keenness and earnestness, as the Scholiast speaks of that (...), that cry,
that great cry in the 18. of Genesis, (...), that it intimates there their
stoutnesse and boldness; so these cryers here, furiosis vociferationibus
ingeminantes, as some paraphrase, redouble it so with furious vociferations,
that whereas within less than an hour, the sound of a Sermon here usually
grows tedious; the 34. verse here says, that for about the space of two
hours, there was a shout, crying, Great is Diana. St. Chrysostom well
expresses it, Ita afficiebantur quasi vocibus cultum ejus reparaturi, That they
were so transported with affection toward her, as to go about with their very
voices to uphold her honor, to carry the cause with voices, and to blow up all
opposition against her with their very breath, They cried out. Yea out of more
keenness yet, (...), as some copies here have it, discurrentes per civitatem,
so Comestor; running and even raving as it were, They cried out; that though
such tumultuous outcries, the common resorts of rash unruly people, clamosi
murmura vulgi, be no pattern for Christian professors, amongst the things
that Paul would have put away from us, Ephesians. 4. this same (...), clamor, being
one: yet as Iehu said, Come see my zeal for the Lord, see we but herein their
zeal in their generation, and it will shame many of us in ours; as Jerome
said, Considerare pudet quantus fervor, quae cura, etc. that he was ashamed to
think how sollicitous men are in secular things, and yet how sluggish in
spiritual things; Considerare pudet, may we likewise parallel it, it will make
any spiritual minded man ashamed to think that these Heathen wretches, should
be so importunately clamorous and vocal in their cursed course, and many
Christians so infatuatly dumb and dull for their blessed profession: they so
fierce all for their cause, and many of us so faint for ours; they so stout,
and many Christians so squeamish, as scarce to dare to own Gods cause, having
no courage for the truth, as Jeremy complained. No better many than those dry
bones in Ezekiel, with sinnewes, and flesh, and skin on them, but no breath,
no life in them. But as Jerome said of spiritual things, Pigra quadam
dissimulatione negligimus, with a kind of dull dissimulation, many slighting
and lightly passing by any matter of religion, whilst these here so eagerly
earne and cry out in maintenance of their superstition. Or if we can shift, or
set light by this one instance in them, meet we may with parallels to the same
purpose in many others; not only in godly persons, who for Sions sake could not
hold their tongues, and for Ierusalems sake could not rest, as in Esaias; and as
Jerome to Heliodore, Licet parvulus ex collo pendeat nepos, etc. forbearing
neither father, nor mother, nor kindred for Christ's cause; pitying not son,
nor daughter, nor wife of their own bosom, nor friend as their own soul,
but slaying them in Gods quarrel, Deuteronomy. 13. as when Levi said unto his father
and to his mother, I have not seen him: neither did he acknowledge his own
brethren, nor knew his own children, out of observance to the Word and
Covenant; even natural affections giving place to spiritual affections, as
more predominant in them. As Nazianzene said, (...), facillimus ferventissimus,
and mansuetus pugnax, etc. the zeal of Gods cause making even the quietest of
them keen, and the mildest of them eager and hot: as when the zeal of Gods
house even eat up David; and Paul ready not to be bound only, but even to dye
also for the Name of the Lord Jesus; and Luther resolved to enter Worms in the
Name of Christ, were there as many Devils as there were tyles to cover the
houses. As Calvin said, Ne december quidem maria, etc. That it would not grieve
him to sail over ten Seas, about an uniforme draught for Religion: As Philo
said, Vbi de religione, ibi quoque de vita agitur, holding even their very
lives to hold upon religion, serving God with all their might, as is commanded;
ready to run even through fire and water for their holy profession: Not only
in such, I say, but even in their own mates and fellow Idolaters, pro aris and
focis, they wont all to say, but aris before focis. Albinus put out of his
Chariot his very wife and children, to make room there for the Vestall
Virgins. In the sacking of Troy, Aeneas is said first to have exported (...),
and then (...), to have carried forth his gods, even before his dearest father.
And about the Oracle and Temple, who has not heard of the hot wars of the
Athenians? Yea even in this their own key and tune, for the worship of the
golden Image in Daniel, the Herald cried with might and maine. The Chemarims in
their sacrifices, cried with loud voices: the Idolatrous Priests of Baal cried
aloud, as if Baal had been asleep and needed waking, as Eliah mocked them;
the Frogs in Homer that with their noise would not let the goddess Pallas
sleep, croaked no louder. Because of the Calfe of Bethaven, the inhabitants of
Samaria feared, yea the people thereof mourned over it, and the Priests for the
glory thereof, because it departed from it, Hose. 10. fearing and mourning, and
much adoo about their Idol. Festinant, says David in the 16. Psalm, They
hasten after another God, very keen and quick at that; following Baalim, they
are like a swift Dromedary, that runs by his ways, says Jeremy.
Acceleraverunt, as that 16. Psalm mentions: Nay to another God they offer and
give gifts, as others read it there. Dotant reads Tremellius there, they do
so dote upon their Idols, that they do not receive from them, but give a
dowry to them; they offer and give gifts; nothing so costly which they will not
bestow upon them, nothing so hard which they will not endure for them: be it to
burn and sacrifice their own children to them, to make son or daughter go
through the fire to Moloch; be it to pluck off from wives, and sons, and
daughters their golden earings in contribution to a Calfe. How ready of old
they have been to do it, divine Story tells you; or if modern practices may
be more moving, look upon the Turks eagerness in defending and propagating
that their Law, Non disputando, sed pugnando, as Mahomet taught them; their
strict inquisition and severity toward neglecters of prayers, especially in
time of their Lent, and their Friday services; their Largesses and bounties to
Christians converting to them, and all that other. Or if Christian instances
may be more operative, look upon the Romanists, in the judgment of some
excellent men, Similes hi plane illis, very like to these Ephesians. What cost
cast they not away upon their Images? what tedious pilgrimages do they not
trudge barefoot to them? what whippings, and watchings, and fastings endure
they not? Into what houses creep they not, thereby to lead captive silly
women? what insolent privileges challenge they not, the very Concubines of
their Priests to be of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction? what regal supremacy
undermine they not? what moving miracles coin they not? what Assasin have they
not set on work for their cause? what stone have they not moved? what earth
have they not dug, even till hell beneath was moved to meet them? If I may
so usurp such holy words, hedging, gathering, planting, building: what could
they have done more for their wild vine, that they have not done unto it? Per
mare, per terras, per saxa, per ignes, tot volvere casus, tot adire labores; as
Christ spoke of the Scribes and Pharisees compassing sea and land to make a
Proselyte, one of their own profession, Quae regio in terris tanti non plena
laboris? If there be any to whom the Sirens voice sounds sweet, hearken, their
own tongues shall testify for them herein, their Jesuits own expression
shall evidence their earnestness. Campian in his Epistle to the honorable
Counselors of that renowned Queen Elizabeth, Quamdiu vel unus quispiam e
nobis supererit, qui Tiburno vestro fruatur, etc. says he, That so long as
there was any one Jesuit of them remaining to enjoy Tiburne; Fruatur, that is
his word, to wear a Tiburne Typpet, as plain M. Latimer was wont to speak;
so long as there was one of them left for the Gallows, torment and
imprisonment, they had vowed never to desist from endeavoring to draw us to
that religion, Tantum relligio potuit suadere laborum. Their proverbiall saddle
wont to be set upon the English, were proof apparent, how much our people
wont to toil for that cause, and but sum up with Bishop Jewel, the heavy
multitude of payments and perquisites, the Pope heretofore had out of this
Land, and the Proverb will be easily believed, and their keenness for that
cause, then notoriously manifested; the very Geese for the Capitol not more
vigilant, more vocal. If we list not to look backward on others, look we but
down now upon our selves present, how careful, and crying, and keen we are
in worldly occurrences: If but a house be on fire, there is crying out, Stentor
cried no louder: if but our child, or brother, or friend miscarrie, there is
bleating, crying upon crying, Clamassent ut littus Hyla Hyla omne sonaret. As
the son of Croesus, though formerly dumb, is said yet to have cried out in
his fathers danger; we are not so dumb, but that we can find tongue enough
to cry out in many cases of our own causes: (...), as he spoke, boystrous and
swelling passions, impetuous enough, obstreperous enough, loud enough in
secular passages; And shall then only we, and we only in spiritual affairs,
the matters of our God, even languish, be feeble and flaging often?
Ferventissimi in terrenis, frigidissimi in coelestibus? Shall many of us, as in
Jeremy, have tongues bent like Bows for lies, but not be valiant for the
truth? Shall false weights set the wheels of so many other tongues a going,
and we not be ready to utter a word in due season for the truth? (...), as
Epiphanius phraseth it, free-mouth'd for the truth of the Gospel. Shall others
drive, like Iehu, earnestly, and we, like the Egyptians with their wheels off,
heavily? As it is observed of Job, and his friends, that they had an ill cause in
hand, but defended it craftily; and Job a good cause to defend, but handled it
unadvisedly. Shall Turks, shall Papists, shall Idolaters, shall Heathen
solicit their bad cause so earnestly; and we our good cause, our Gods cause
so faintly? Acrius ad perniciem, quam nos ad salutem? As in that sea-tempest
the profane Mariners cried every man unto his God, whilst Jonah, the Lords
Prophet, was gone down into the sides of the ship, and lay fast asleep. Shall
profane men, shall Papisticall men clamor so for their wooden or breaden
gods? and shall any of the household of Faith by any sluggishnesse seem to
prejudice and betray the cause of their great and glorious God? As when
Callidus once declared against Gallus with a faint and languishing voice: O,
says Tullie, Tu nisi fingeres, sic ageres? Would thou utter it so feebly if
thou werst in earnest? Men's faint appearing for Gods cause gives shrewd
suspicion that many do but feine; their coldness for religion probably
concludes they do but counterfeit; that being in tongue such mutes for the
true, they are many in heart consonants to the false; hardly would he lend
religion his blood, who list not spare it so much as his breath; hardly would
he die for it, who will not so much as cry for it. For what though there be a
time, an evil time, when the prudent man shall keep silence, as in Amos? yet
even in those worst times, that time of great and universal corruption, They
that feared the Lord, spoke then every one to his neighbor, spoke often one to
another, and the Lord hearkened and heard it, Malach. 3. And even when the
iniquity of the house of Israel and Judah was so exceeding great, that the land
was full of blood, and the city of corrupt judgment, yet even then Gods
children mourned and cried for the abominations done in the midst thereof,
Ezekiel. 9. and their sighs were then sollicitors for their affections. That what
though such turbulent crying beseem not true Christians? have they not in
secret the voice of weeping with David? Have they not cry for cry? the cry of
prayer which goes through the clouds, and cease not till it come nigh, and
will not depart until the most High have respect unto it; even wrestling with
God, and will not let him go until he bless his Church, his Cause,
Religion. That as when Hannah pouring out her soul before the Lord, spoke in
her heart, even when her voice was not heard; and when Moses spoke not a word
vocally, yet said the Lord unto him, Wherefore cryest thou unto me? We may
cry, and outcry these even without crying out; it being not with the true God,
as he said of the false, (...), that he was to be wooed and wrought upon
with noise and clamor: but even without this strong wind we may appear
before God, as God himself appeared in the soft and still voice; humbly
begging a blessing upon religion. As Bodin spoke well of obtaining, so for
retaining religion, Non disputationibus, sed rogationibus, not so much by
disputation as devotion; not by vociferation, but prayer; as I heard of a good
Bishop to spend four hours a day in prayer to that purpose. I would we were
all such cryers out; otherwise be it never so true which is commented here, and
wherewith cold professors are ready ever and anon to cloak themselves: That
great is the difference between the distempered passion of some phantastique
men, and the discreet zeal of sober men; between turbulent fancy, and true
sanctity; between the wind of giddiness, and the spirit of holiness;
between the busling and noise of those who are yet but about the door of
religion, and the moderation and stillness of those who are got within; as
Plutarch wittily spoke of Philosophy. And many of the same Cryers out like
Cyclops roaring without his eye, attempting things with great tumult and no
judgment; and many hot bloods having but cold discretion, and all that other,
for all that bosom idol of discretion; unless our earnestness equalize, nay
as Christ said, Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, except our earnestness this way exceed the earnestness
of these and those other like men; Si non praestet fides, quod exhibuit
infidelitas, as Ierom said, If faith make not us (at least) as forward and keen
for Gods cause, as infidelity here made them for theirs, Haec in sugillationem
nostri dicta sint, as he spoke, to our utter discredit and infamy be it said,
They cried out, saying: Great is Diana of the Ephesians. So have ye the second
particular, their Earnestness.

Nor was this crying out here, the monology of some one odd one, no nor the
impetuous passion, the furious salley of some few hot spurs amongst them; but
the cry of them all, none here excepted, a common crying out, as for a common
cause, that their keenness backed with consent: Their Ioyntnesse, that's now in
this first part, the third and last particular. As all of them were called
together about the danger, so all of them cried together in the defense: the
following verse seeming to second this observation of consent, where it says
(...), that for all the city was then full of confusion, yet rushed they into
the common place with one assent, Vno animo: and though in the assembly out of
order, some cried one thing, some another, (...), yet to this point about
Diana's defense, (...), says the 34. verse, Vox vna omnium, they cried all
with one voice, all in a tune; especially these companions here in the Text,
Clamaverunt vnanimiter, says Comestor, A joint cry of the whole crowd of them:
Socios artis assumit socios tumultus, so Chrysostom: As many as were fellows
of that company, were also joint fellows of that crying out. A frequent
conjunction, as in these, so in other like people (...); as David speaks in
the 83. Psalm, vnanimiter simul, With one consent to consult together and be
confederate; as in the seventh of this Book, to run upon Steven with one
assent; as in the Chapter before this, to rise against Paul with one accord; to
say as in Solomon, Come with us, cast in thy lot amongst us, we will all have
one purse; agreeing like thieves in a Fair, all sharers: the congregation of
the wicked like towe wrapped together, says Ecclesiasticus; compact and sealed
like the Leviathans scales in Job, as they are resembled. As the Prophet Micah
likens the wicked to briers; and Nahum to thorns folded one in another, they
clap and twine and enterweave themselves, as birds of a feather they frequently
fly together; and as in consort of communion jointly here cried out. And shall
such brethren in evil tune so like bells, and want but hanging (as he said?)
shall Satan's kingdom be at such agreement within it self that it may endure?
and shall Christians that profess one Lord, one Fath, one Baptism, (...), as
in Paul, a threefold cord which a man would think could not easily be broken:
we that have one word as one breath from one spirit, as Dionysius speaks; we
that have the same temples and sacrifices, as the Athenians alleged; we that
are espoused to one husband, as Paul spoke of the Corinthians; shall we be so
carnal as to have amongst us envying and strife and division, and one to say,
I am of Paul, and another, I am of Apollo; and like the divisions of Reuben,
cause great thought of heart? Shall these here have vnitatem contra vnitatem?
shall there be such conspiracy in error? and shall there not be unity in truth?
If ye eye and observe but this Book of the Acts, ye shall find the vein of
those primitive Christians to run all along (...), chap. 1. and 2. and 4. ever
and anon one accord, one assent to be specified in them; and shall we, risen up
in their stead, a worse generation, so run after the apple of discord, the ball
of contention, and so agree like the Bricklayers at Babell? that as division of
tongues hindered the building then, so division of hearts hinder the building of
Christianity now. For, confer with the Jew; one of the maine scandals the
Jews take from Protestants, is their mutual dissension; which they interpret
to proceed from want of unity of truth in their foundation; and so they
thereby are startled and scared from the Gospel. Come nearer, what says the
Papist to like purpose? hear but one for all (one of them is enough, unless
they were better): hear but their Bartholdus; What one of the Heretics
(says he) preaches in the morning, another of them denies after dinner; and
what peace, what accord in that house (says he) where the husband is a
Calvinist, the wife a Lutheran, the serving-man an Oecolampadian, the maid
Pittardicall, and the rest of the family Diabolical? So charitably their
Bartholdus Pontanus. We could pay them in their own coin, by telling them,
and that truly, that their white and black Friars differ as much in opinion
as color, and Harp and Harrow as consonant as many of them. But I shall never
hold recrimination for a remedy: this must I hold, (as they say of Bees) that
stir and strife among them is a sign their King is about to remove, to leave
the Hive, and to be gone somewhere else: so strife and schism in religion to
be a sign, God either has, or is about to leave that people. Boords joined
make a Ship, dis-ioyned they cause shipwreck; connection of stones make a
house, dissipation of them a ruin; agreement of Christians builds up the
spiritual Jerusalem, dissension of them pulls it down. The daughter of
dissension is dissolution, said divine Nazianzene: and that which is divisible
is corruptible, even Nature dictates: and every subdivision in cause of
Religion, is a strong weapon in the hand of the contrary party; as he upon
the Council of Trent wisely observed. The wisdom of Solon, when Athens was
distracted into three factions, Diacriorum, Pedeorum, Paralorum, his civil
wisdom could dictate unto him, to mingle himself with none of the sides, but
to direct all his sayings and doings toward common concord. O that there were
in Christian people such a wisdom, such a heart, as without siding to apply
all their words and works to the common good of Gods cause, Religion. As the
Scripture speaks of David, that he bowed the hearts of all the men of Judah,
even as the heart of one man; that under our David all our hearts, as of one
man, were bent and joined for Gods cause, for the Gospel: Then, as he said,
that shield joining to shield, helmet to helmet, man to man, was a sufficient
wall. For to him that demanded why Sparta had no walls, the King showed Citizens
well armed and unanimous: in such unanimitie religion would both be impregnably
walled on earth; and as the petition of a whole Corporation jointly, uses to be
more availeable, our prayer, our crying for it would be more effectual in
heaven; and when all is said and done, as the learned Papinian said, Summa
ratio est quae pro Religione facit, That that was the best reason which made
most for Religion, our sweetest harmony would be consent in Gods cause, our
truest valor courage for the truth, our best constitution tenderness over
religion: That as Master Latimer in a Sermon before King Edward, made
supplication, that they would contribute as bountifully toward the finding of
scholars, to exercise the office of salvation, as they wont to bestow in
pilgrimage, trentals, masses, pardons, purgatory matters, as he there expounds
himself; he desired no more, but that they would bestow so much godly, as they
were wont to bestow ungodly: a reasonable petition, as he then called it; so
me thinks, no reasonable man now can refuse to be entreated, to be once (at
least) as tender, as earnest, as united for the holy cause, as these here were
for the heathenish; at the cheapest, to hold God as dear as they did Diana.
Otherwise, as God in Esaias rebukes Israel even from the very ox and ass; and
in Jeremy Judah from the storke and turtle, and crane and swallow; and Christ
said, that the Queen of the South should rise in judgment with that
generation and condemn it: these very Idolaters shall rebuke and rise in
judgment with this generation, and condemn it: and as Wisdom said, That the
Echo rebounding from the mountains made the wicked to swoune; the neglecters
of the divine cause shall one day be checked and confounded with the Echo of
this cry for Diana's cause, when they cried thus out, saying: Great is Diana of
the Ephesians.

Laus Deo.
It follows ACTS 19.28. And cried out, saying, Great is Diana of the
Ephesians.


AS Pliny spoke of that visage of Diana, Intrantes tristem, exeuntes
exhilaratum putant, that to the comers in it seemed sad and pensive, but to
the goers out looked blithe and cheerful: so may I say of this Text of Diana,
Intranti sterilis, exeunti foecundus, at first entrance might it seem barren,
but upon further examination proves so fruitful, that like those sheep in the
Canticles, it brings out Twins; the one holding the other by the heel, as in
Genesis. The first that came out was the travel, They cried out: That which
now is to come forth, is the Babie (the Brat, if you will) Diana. The former
was the Prologue, They cried out; and now follows the Fable, Great is Diana.
The manner went before, They cried out; the matter now comes after, Great Diana.
The (...) was, They cried out, saying; the (...) is, Great is Diana of the
Ephesians.

In survay whereof, lest the discourse of this matter of their cry prove now as
confused as did that manner of their crying, when it filled the whole city with
confusion, as follows here, I choose again, in correspondence to Diana's
triformitie, diva triformis, as she is called, to cast these three words here
(...), (if that word be not here unacceptable) into these three inquisitions:
first, to make inquiry what this same party, for whom all this clamor and
stir here was; what she was in her self, why, Diana. Secondly, to examine
what she was here to others, why, Great; Great Diana. And thirdly, who these
here were that had this great conceit of her, why, Ephesians, Great Diana of
the Ephesians. So as Isidore spoke once of the Serpent, Tot dolores, quot
colores: so many parts here, so many prevarications: That what he Christianly
spoke, Tantus, tantum, pro tantillis, we may invert and turn it here,
Tantilla, tanta, apud tantos; that one so contemptible as Diana, in the
estimate of men so understanding as Ephesians, should mount to such valuation
as greatness, will prove proportionate to Romish parallels, matter of more
wonder than worth, more worthy of our scorning than their crying Great is
Diana of the Ephesians.

First then, Diana, for whom all this ado here was, what was she? Quid tanto
dignum hiatu? Why, to begin withal, none of the more worthy gender, but
feminine she was, (...), haec Diana, (...), as thrice in the context here for
surenesse; not god, but goddess. As if, as we use to say, that sins like
losses, come huddle, by doublets; and as Tertullian said of Venus and Bacchus,
lust and drunkenness, Duo ista Daemonia conspirata and conjurata, that them
two Devils went ever in the couples: so it were not divellish enough for
Heathenish Idolatry to multiply number of gods, unless it vary gender too; not
incongruitie enough, according to the Serpents Grammar, Deum pluraliter
declinare, as Damianus speaks, to decline God plurally, Eritis sicut Dij,
unless it thus decline him femally too, (...), Dea, Diana. That whereas they
say, Wit whither will thou? we may say of them, Wickedness whither will thou?
from evil to worse, from gods to goddesses. A frequent falsification amongst
those Heathen then: Nor is it yet altogether antiquated, nor quite worn out
amongst Romanists now, whilst howsoever Bellarmine, and so Binius, like
drowning men, that catch hold of any reed or rush to help them, set down that
as a pregnant difference between Heathenish Idols and Romish Images, That the
Heathen thus represented feminine gods, quales dij, nec sunt, nec esse possunt,
(says Bellarmine) gods of such kind as neither are, nor ever can be. As if
there could be some gods in time which be not yet. For all that their
masculine profession, look but into their feminine practice, and then see and
say, whether the shoo which Histiaeus made, Aristogaras does not wear; whether
Diana's buskin will not somewhat fit their Deities; whether as of old Aricinus
Lacus was called Speculum Dianae: so this Text of Diana may not in some sort be
called Speculum Romae; whether as their own Lorinus resembles Diana's shrines
here, to the Images of their Lauretto Chapel there, there be not some
resemblance, some affinity betwixt these and them: whether, as a great Light of
these late times calls the religion that stands in force by the Council of
Trent, the great and famous Italian Diana; Italian Rome taste not still of this
same cask of Diana: whether, as Bernard taxd the singers in his time, Muliebre,
non virile, that they sung womanish, their profession fancy not the feminin,
lean not much thus toward Diana: witness their divine Lady, she for whom the
mighty has done great things, their Queen of Heaven, the blessed Virgin, a
Heavenly Saint sure, metamorphised to a goddess; yet so, that whereas Campian
praised Wenceslaus, that he caused not Minerva, but Maria to be adored: for
all their adoring, they have often seemed rather to have turned Maria to
Minerva. To show but a piece for a pattern; look but upon the Story of their
Friar Allen, betrothed to the blessed Virgin, and thereto a Ring made of a lock
of her own hair, and much more ribaldry than modesty may mention in this
presence, and then say ingeniously, whether ye think they speak of holy
Mary, or not rather of some Heathenish Minerva: of a Minerva born of their own
brain, rather than the blessed Mary. And to that ribaldry of some of them,
annex that blasphemy of other of them that way too: When Christ saying, Esaias
63. I have trodden the winepresse alone, and of all people, there was no man
with me: True Lord, say some of them, there was then no man with thee, but
there was a woman: Not good that man should be alone, as they sport with the
Scripture, but a help with him: Maria adjutrix nostrae redemptionis, so their
Benhardinus; Advocata, so Antonius. Advocatum habemus, says S. John;
Advocatam, say they: Vnus Mediator, says S. Paul; Mediatrix, sing they:
Dominus illuminator, says Solomon; illuminatrix, say they: Deus auxiliator,
says Esaias; auxiliatrix, say they. Not without some smell of this same garlic
mortar, not without a spice, a tang this way of Diana. The Divinity of their
femall pope silly Ione, the strange, but true parallel to this feminine Deity
of Diana: Thus not to touch more of that pitch, their Ordo meritricum, founded
by Tisceranus the Minorit, their new set up Iesuitrices, etc. without raveling
of the worst, wind I it up with Erasmus, Blandientes sexui foemineo, etc.
Whether it be as they pretend in praying to the Virgin Mary, that they conceive
of Christ as a strict and severe Judge, but of the Virgin as a mild and gentle
advocat: (As if some other could be more tender over us, than he that died
for us.) Or which I rather believe, purposely to insinuat with the credulous
sex, so to devour widows houses, to lead captive simple women, or
serpent-like to vent tentations by the woman, to read many riddles by plowing
with those heiffers, or to work their sinister ends by the weaker vessel; or
whatsoever the Romish meaning be: that which Justin Martyr mislik'd in Homers
Poetry (...), being exemplified in their practice, very womanish are they,
very free and forward have they long time bin, thus to magnify, yea for a
need thus to deifie their Diana's. That as he once bid his hearers take heed of
the Zuinglians heaven, seeing there they had set Hercules with his club; a man
has reason to be shy both of the Ethnicall and Pontificiall heaven, wherein
the distaff bears such sway: That whereas their Martinus said, Se non optare
sibi coelum in quo Lutherus esset, that Martin would not wish for that Heaven
wherein Luther was: so I never wish to be of that religion here, nor go to
that heaven hereafter, wherein such Diana's, goddesses are. In the kingdom of
God I shall see Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, the glorious company of the Apostles,
the goodly fellowship of the Prophets, the noble army of Martyrs, but shall see
no goddesses, none of these Diana's there. Then let others thus wander after
their own inventions, imaginary goddesses, but, as David spoke (...), let us
adhere, hold fast unto our jealous God: for be the gods of the Heathen
good-fellowes, as he said, the true God is a jealous God, and will not share
his glory with another. In the Book of Kings the Seventy, for Dea read (...),
for goddess abomination: let that mother of harlots have in her hand a cup
full of abominations and fornication, as in the Revelation; but take we the
cup of salvation (with David) and call upon the Name of the Lord, knowing, we
cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup of Devils, as Paul speaks.
Let us tremble before the Majesty of that glorious God, that has his way in
the whirlwinde, at whose reproof the pillars of heaven tremble and quake,
whilst others trifle thus with their devised Deities: Let us say with David,
Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised, whilst others cry thus Great
Diana: Great is Diana of the Ephesians.

As a femall, so a woman, this Diana was; but what manner of woman might she
be? It were not worth the beating of the bush, to range through all the woods
and groves of the Heathen, to bolt out all their Diana's upon every high hill,
and under every green tree. Dianae plures, says Tully, Diana's diverse there
were. A man may wink and choose of them, it matters not which of them it was;
all of them were naught. He that has little to do, let him but turn
Pausanias, he shall find there a litter, a whole kennell of them; Diana the
huntresse, Diana the midwife, and the rest of that multitude there: But among
the whole beavie of their Diana's, Vna notissima, one famous, one above all the
rest: of whom Ierom, and others interpret this, (...), multimammiam they call
her, a kind of nurse of things; Ephesia mammis multis and verubus exstructa,
wrote Foelix; vberibus exstructa, as Lypsius happily helped it: Well, and what
was the same goodly one? The Sampsaei in Epiphanius worshipped two women as
goddesses, because they were of the blessed seed, (...), but was Diana so? no,
by their own records, come of a cursed race, a bastard daughter between Jupiter
the adulterer, as themselves style him, and Latona the drab, Pellex, as I find
her styled: the seed so of the adulterer and the whore, an honest genealogy
sure. At the best hand (...), as Clemens spoke of all their gods, serva
vitiorum, she was some chambermaide to vice, some light huswife, or so, or
else lighter than so: in naked truth, sine vest Diana, strip her but of fond
fables, and for all the image coming down from Jupiter, as they fable here in
the 35. verse, we shall then find her, non Iovis, sed Phydiae, as one said of
Minerva; Diana, not so of Latona, but some Lapidary, some stone or stock; as
good blocks as she, lying on the back of the fire, warming a man or roasting
meat, as in Esaias, or boiling Diagoras his turnips, inutile lignum maluit esse
deum, or else some vain stone made by the hand of antiquity, as Wisdom
mentions; happily as good stone trampled and trodden under feet, nay yet lower,
to be even nothing: Idolum nihil est, an Idol being nothing in the world, as
Paul speaks. Great Diana come down to this? a block or a blank nothing? Such
a birth of the mountains prove a mouse? Such a clamor about a Diana of
clouts? Such a deal of do about nothing? All this bruit and no fruit? All
this crying and no wool? I deny not, but (as Ignatius mentions) (...), mysteria
clamoris, mysteries there be to be cried aloud and spare not; the voice to be
lifted up like a trumpet, as in Esaias; to be preached upon the house tops, as
in the Gospel; and we that are the Lords Remembrancers not to keep silence,
for Sions sake not to hold our tongues, and for Ierusalems sake not to rest. Et
vae mihi, quia tacui, as Esaias: Woe unto me, because I have held my peace, alas,
will one day come to be the cry of many men, for not crying now; when not
crying out in sly discretion now, shall make many howl in deep damnation
then; when in bitterness of soul they shall wish (too late) they had been
borne dumb, rather than in Gods cause not to have cried out: Yet were it but
for this one instance about Diana here alone, I shall hardly ever credit
popular outcries; As soon shall I measure wisdom by the acre, as worth by
noise, or piety by passion, or holiness by eagerness, or religion by
multitude, or truth by crying: This I perceive being customary with men
conscious of defects, to betake themselves to clamor, as the lame man to his
horse: This the custom of pleasure, concupiscence, and the like, with
intensive clamours to importune their desires, as Philo says; yea, even in
religious affairs, (...), as he said: This the custom thus to make outcries
their greatest defenses, as the Margeant there well notes. Were such
exclamation demonstration, would crying so carry the cause, Protestancy might
hang her harps upon the willowes, the Romanists would quickly have the day; who
(as Christ spoke of vain and superstitious repetitions in praying) think to
be heard for their much babbling, they look to be believed for their much
bawling: so frequent in their false hallows, that as he said of Aquin, that
that dumb ox should bellow so loud, that all the world should hear it: The
world rings all of the bellowing of their bulls, the thunder of their
excommunications, the clamor of their importunities, Tot tintinnabula dicas,
tubas atque era fatigant; as having that mouth which no adversary is able to
resist, as they boast themselves. But why boast ye so of popular concurrence,
and keenness, and crying? Nostrae virgins, nostri seniculi, all nostri if
Campian may only reckon; Too too many indeed, the more is the pity, for that
cause crying out. As if we knew not this, that little matters are often thus
managed with great motions: Are there not vain trifles solicited thus with
vehement endeavors? do not the drones, though they make neither honey nor wax,
make yet more noise than the bees? do not many thus dive deep, and bring up
naught but shells? may not the greater Quire be the worse singers, as Zeno
said? may not multitude of associats demonstrate a Heretic, rather than a
Catholic, as Ierom spoke? may not the multitude perish that are borne in
vain, as said the Lord to Esdras? why, it may be but a reed shaken with the
wind, and yet many go out to see it: it may be but a calfe, and yet people
mourn over it, and kiss it, as in Hosea: it may be but iugling and
imposture, and yet the cry go Miracles, Miracles: the cry may favor not
Christ, but Barrabbas: it may be but a despicable Diana, and yet there be
crying thus out for it: Great is Diana. But as concerning them that were puffed
up, Paul cared not to know (...), but (...), not their speech, but their power
(as he said) not vociferationes, but rations, not clamorem, but vigorem.
Brethren, be we never carried away with the Adversaries importunity, or
keenness, or crying; but consider we the cause. Strong crying is but a weak
proof, and like water, often thus bears up light things, and lets the weighty
sink: Then weak is he, who (as light things upon the face of waters, non
eunt, sed feruntur) goes not of himself, but as he is carried away by others.
If one of their Mountebanks cry Balm, thou will try it, I trow, before thou
trust; and then the balm of Gilead, Religion, will thou take it up upon a rash
trust? perish upon credit? be captivated with any their quacksalvers crying?
Nay, says St Austine well, let never these words be heard amongst us; I say,
or thou say, but look what the Lord says. As God says in the 8. of Esaias,
when they shall say unto you, Enquire at the soothsayers; should not a people
enquire at their God? will you incline to their crying, or will you not enquire
at Gods saying? Yes, speak Lord, thy servant hears, as Samuel said:
otherwise, cry who they will, and what they will, To the law and to the
testimony: if they speak not according to that word, there is no light in
them. A decree may come out from them, as of old in Tertullian, None to be
consecrated god without the Senats approbation: but as the true God, though men
approve him not, is yet a proof unto himself, so these false gods, though
never so cried up, and approved of men, are not yet to be acknowledged: That
though Israel play the harlot, yet let not Judah sin; such cries of others
must not call us after, nor may we follow multitudes so to evil. Though
hundreds cry Baal, call thou upon the Lord with Eliah: though others serve the
gods of the Amorites, thou and thy house serve the Lord with Iosuah: defy thou
all strange gods, though all Ephesus deifie Diana, crying: Great is Diana of
the Ephesians.

Why, but what if Diana were never so base in her self? yet might she thus
pass for great with others, Great Diana: that is now the second part. As
Theognis to his purpose spoke once to Diana, Tibi parvum, mihi magnum, though
it be little to thee, it is great to me: though so deficient and feeble in her
self, as not able to defend her own house from firing, burnt when she was a
gossipping at Alexanders birth; a great Temple yet must she have:
Magnificentiae admiratio, said Pliny of it, One of the 7. wonders of the
world, 425. foot long, 220. foot broad, etc. no less would fit her
greatness. They never mention her here but with addition of greatness, her
magnificence, the great goddess, etc. As he spoke of Molon the dwarf, (...),
quantillus quantus? so little in her self, yet thus great to others; Great
Diana. So true is that of Tacitus, Satis clarus est apud timentem quisquis
timetur, There is none so mean, but is mighty to him that stands in awe of
him; not only the Stork, but the very stock, a king to the frogs so long as
they fear it; in no case more evidently true, than in this of Idolatry,
wherein men overawde themselves, not only with the worst of the rational
rank, deos facitis criminocissimos quosque, as Tertullian told them; making
gods of the most ungodly men, and left many honester men in hell (says he)
than those they hoysted up to Heaven, worshipping even Devils, as the
Revelation mentions. No, nor only with the meanest in the heard sensitive,
Mise as the Musorits, serpents as the Ophits, sheep as the Saits, goats as
the Mendesii, etc. volucresque ferasque posuere deos: not only deifying
Erigone, but lest the wench should be sad for lack of her dog, placing her
very dog in heaven too, as he well twitted Jupiter: nor yet only with the
vilest of the troop vegetable, (...), as in Justin Martyr, worshipping even
trees; but beneath the lowest degree of life, worshipping inferior degrees of
nature, and art, Idols of gold, silver, brass, stone, wood, as in the
Revelation: ready to say to a tree, Thou art my father, and to a stone, Thou
have begotten me, as in Jeremy: to ask counsel at their stocks, and their
staff declares unto them, as in Hosea: to hew down wood, and with some of it
to bake, and with some of it to roast, and of the residue to make a god, and bow
to it, as in Esaias: and say, Deliver me, for thou art my god, etc. as that it
made Lactantius wondering, question the madness of it, Quae amentia, etc. What
madness it was for men to feign that, which afterward they would fear, or to
fear that which formerly they had feigned, vsque adeone times quod tu facis
ipse timendum? like little children, starting at those visages, which they
themselves black'd and besmeared; magnifying thus that which themselves knew of
how mean ingredients it was made. Lapides lapidum cultores, as Rupertus spoke:
Things which had they sense, would magnify the men that made them, says
Lactantius: for men to be so senseless, as thus to magnify those things,
surely they that make them are like unto them, and so are all they that put
their trust in them. Et qui, quaeso, eorum non miserearis, as Athanasius spoke;
Lord, how pitifully miserable are they, whose eyes are thus shut up, as Esaias
speaks, as not to see that the stock is a doctrine of vanity, as Jeremy
speaks? but thus to magnify idols, to cry out thus, Great Diana. And as this
woodnesse lived thus among the heathen, would it had likewise dyed among the
heathen too; and that what Tertullian bewailed, Gentes agimus sub nomine
Christi, None under the name of Christ thus played the heathen; that Painters
and Bakers did not yet also furnish them with gods, Et Faber and Pistor mill
dedere deos: That as of old Plato gave Dionysius that for a privy token, that
look which of his Epistles he begun with Deus singular, he should take that
to be serious; but Dij pluralll, that to be but light and trifling. As the
multiplicity of idoll-mock-gods amongst the heathen, so the pontificiall
plurality of Images, call them what they will, makes me often think many of
them are not in earnest, but only in jest with religion, and have those
puppets rather as play-fellowes, than as patrons, (...), in dijs ludentes,
seipsos ludificantes, as Clemens spoke, dallying with their gods, but deluding
themselves; for let both their Leeches salve over their actual practices with
speculative plasters, let their Sophisters mince the matter into nice
differences, between Idola and Imagines, imagines and prototypa, propter
imaginem, and coram imagine, simulachrum and in simulachro, Proprie and
Improprie, Analogice and Reductive, Absolute and Respective, intention
isntrumental and final, and all that other; let them say with them in the
second of Jeremy, We are not polluted: Yet if they make not only a creature,
but even the image of a creature, partaker both of the power and worship of
God; if they worship God misconceived, and offer up and worship a breaden
Christ; if to the blessed Virgin they pray, and weep, and crave, and beg even
to the remission of sins; if they call upon their canonized Saints both in
private and public prayer; if they set images in their Churches, not only ut
conformemus, sed ut colamus, as their own Catechism dictats: let the persons
clear themselves as they may, I meddle not with their persons; all the water
in Tyber will not cleanse such principles from pollution this way, seeing a man
cannot partake, no not of the least circumstance of Idolatry, but it is (at
least) pollution unto him. And whether I plung into the depth of the sea, or
shallower near the shore, the drowning in both places is death unto me: that as
where the river is dangerous, a wise man will never walk so near the brinke as
he may; Idolatry that gulf deep as hell, he that is wise unto salvation will
not approach, no, not near the confines of it: But (as Saint Jude bids) Hate
even the garment spotted with the flesh; he will be shy even of the least rag,
the least relic of it. Ignorant is he that does not know, and ungrateful
he that does not acknowledge to the glory of God, the comfort of his Church,
and the renown of this government, that whatever by-ditches or curtian lakes
there be, the stream of our people now, the stream runs clear, not maddy'd
with any filth of this heathenish harlotry. And yet to press the detestation
of it, the discourse being both proponenda and inculcanda, as Tertullian spoke
about it, every where to be urged, the inclination to it being so natural,
the evasion out of it so inextricable, the continuing in it so intolerable.
When they chose new gods, then was war in the gates, Judges 5. and not a
spear or shield seen among forty thousand of them: they had then no heart to
resist the enemy. Offering to another god their sorrows shall be multiplied,
says the 16. Psalm. Babylon is fallen, is fallen, said the Angel; a double fall
for idolatrous Balylon. They have fallen culpably, and they shall fall penally.
If a man would know the next way to hell, why surely along by Diana's door,
Heathenish Idolatry: Idolaters not inheriting the kingdom of God, as S. Paul
witnesses: That unless thou be of his mind, who had rather have his part
in Paris than Paradise; unless of their clan in Esaias, who make covenant with
death, and with hell are at agreement; unless of their race, who run headlong
to destruction; go now a whoring thus after Idols, if thou dare: with more
safety might thou embrace a firebrand; every Idol being the Idol of
indignation, as in Ezekiell: And woe unto him that says unto the wood, Arise,
and to the dumbestone Rise up, as in Habakuk. They are cursed in Deuteronomy
that make any graven or molten Image, and put it in a secret place: And the
time will come when they too will curse their gods, as in Esaias, when the
Idolater, as one said of Julian, shall burn in hell with that same wood and
stone he adoreth here. Call then unto thy Saints, if any will answer, and to
which of thy goddesses will thou turn for help? Nay, behold all that are of
the fellowship thereof shall all of them be coufounded, as Esaias speaks. But
ye that have not so learned Christ, to whom there is none other God but one,
as Paul to the Corinthians; Anglia regnum Dei, as was said of old, not Dianae;
with Paul I charge you, before that God, and before the Lord Jesus Christ, that
ye never presume thus to provoke the Lord to jealousy, but ever persever,
persist to cast away all such heathenish trash, to say unto it, Apage,
egredere, Away, get thee hence, as in Esaias: no hearty repentance being
possible, with any affection to Idolatry, as it is there well noted. Here we
meet now frequently, and profess our selves penitents; but hear me, If thou,
whosoever thou art, be not in a rigid opposition to all Idolatry, (to say no
worse) thou art in a remote indisposition to repentance: and better thou werest
out of this place than in it; for what agreement has any Temple of God with
Idols? Into such counsel never let your souls come; let never your glory
join with such assemblies; never change we our honor for that which does not
profit: mind we the great God, and we shall not thus magnify any other; say
we with Zorobabel, Truth's great, whilst they say Great Diana; Great is Diana
of the Ephesians.

But as one well divided Idolatry, into Idolatry of opinion, and Idolatry of
manners; though these Diana's of opinion most of us (God be thanked) abandon,
yet the Diana's of manners many of us abound with: every one with bowed knee
worshipping the Idol of his own concupiscence, and adoring the Image of his
own lust, as Cyprian complained. Chrysostom says the Heathen made vicious
affections gods we make even our vices our gods, that which every man loves
most, that being his god. He that prefers Lust before God, makes lust his god,
and so of the rest. Sua cuique Deus fit dira cupido: As Tertullian discourses
well all sins to be in Idolatry, and Idolatry to be in every sin; every
man's minion sin being his Idol, every man's darling desire his Diana: For
though thou do not with the Heathen sacrifice Oxen to it, yet offerest thou to
it thine own soul for sacrifice. Excellently says Chrysostom; Though thou
do not adore it, yet do thou obey it; though thou do not carue its
image, yet do thou submit to its inticements, making it thy dear Diana, and
thy self an idolater in manners: as they say of Antipherus, Ante se idolum
sui, that whither soever he went, he thought his own image went before him:
reflecting all upon our selves; idolaters either of our own commodity,
covetousness, as S. Paul says, being idolatry, or idolaters of our own
sensuality, whose god is their belly, Philipians the 3. or idolaters of our
own pride, to the setting out of which Idol, go gold, and silver, and blew
silk and purple, as in Jeremy; or of other manifest works of the flesh,
amongst which Paul reckons idolatry; or more close idolaters of our credit, as
one spoke well, or idolaters of our discretion, or idolaters of our abilities,
idolum in nobis ipsis excitantes, as he spoke; setting up an idol in our
hearts, as in Ezekiel. Idolaters of ceremony, as one calls Courtiers: idolaters
of others greatness; hoping to be made by them, as they speak, they become
such or such a great ones creature, as they say, nec tam praesentes alibi
cognoscere divos. And in the winding up, what comes all this and that idolatry
too? why surely as it is well noted, that this same (...), plurality of gods,
first came from fluctuation of mind, the unsettled mind seeking god after god,
and finding none to rest in, but adding drunkenness to thirst, as Moses spoke.
As fluctuation of mind so bred it, so what does it breed now but fluctuation
of mind? all these vain idols of our idle vanities affoording our minds no
true content, sweet rest, no sound satisfaction; in them we laboring for that
which satisfies not, as Esaias says. He that loves silver, says Solomon; and
so with all other idols: He that loves silver, shall not be satisfied with it,
Eccles. 5. only to behold Gods face in righteousness, that satisfies: I shall
be satisfied with thine image, says David; not so with all those idols: There
is satisfaction in the pleasure of thine house, as David speaks; there is not
so in any those idols: Tu satis es nobis and sine te nihil est: that would
thou have true tranquillity and peace of mind? why then return O my soul unto
thy rest, the Lord. The very letters in Jehovah are all quiescent: thy heart
was made for the true God; nor can it quiet be, until it rest in him: he only
being centrum quietativum, the center of the soul, wherein alone it finds
rest. The heart, a little member, that will not serve a Kite for a meal, as
one spoke, and yet as much as the Kite flies over, all the world will not serve
it: as little as it is, nothing less than God can suffice it. The great God
can fill it, so can no great Diana, Great is Diana of the Ephesians.

Great? happily great in the eyes of some silly people, who if they see any
thing gay, it is straight with them great: If a man, as Saint James speaks, come
in with a gold ring or gay clothing, Great is too little for him in the mouth
of gazing men, who though he be not optimus, they will make him maximus, if they
cannot make him good, they will make him great: No but these fellows here were
not every body, but Ephesians, the infection of Idolatry being so smittle, that
as the former verse mentions, all Asia, and the world worshipping her, Diana
had got footing in most Nations; a fountain had she in Sicilie, a haven in
Sardinia, a wood in Venetia, an oracle in Apabia, temples in Eubaea, Achaia,
Archadia, and more than is meet here to name: but above all, the famous temple
at Ephesus; as that he that would see Diana in her holy day cloth, find her in
her court-dressings, her fairest equipage and caparisons, he must look for
her among Ephesians, Great Diana of Ephesians: that's the last part. Ephsians?
why what were they? why no obscure Rusticks, but of the famous City Ephesus,
that light of Asia, as it is called, the metropolis of Asia minor, whither all
those parts then frequently resorted, either for Religions sake, as having
there the Temple, or for business, as being then the Metropolis, or for study,
as being then the University, (...), says Philostratus of it, abounding with
Philosophers, Orators, and the like, Pythagoras, Parmenides, Democritus, and
the rest, renowned for choice men and much wisdom, says Philostratus:
Insomuch, that Suidas telling how the profane Graecians wont to cosen the
simple people, by either banishing or killing the statuary, and then giving
out, as herein the context, (...), that the image came down from Jupiter
(...), says Suidas there, with an Emphasis, the trick deceived the very
Ephesians: men so intelligent as not likely to be so deluded. And yet for all
that learning, skill and abilities, behold here Ephesus even a stews of
Idolatry, above all other their vitiosity, behold here how the witchcraft of
Idolatry so besots and befooles them, otherwise wise in their generation, as
all of them, as follows in the context to cry, town clark and all to say,
Great Diana. That as they in S. Prosper boasted the meliority of the wits of
those times, beyond the ancient; wherefore boast any people so of their wits,
and learning, and abilities, as if these were immunities from erring? whereas,
in truth, that position condemned at Paris, That the better naturalls must of
necessity have the greater grace, is so far from truth, as that oftentimes
men trusting and transported with those their good parts, as they call them,
undervalue grace, and so those their parts so abused, prove rather unto them as
presse-money to impiety: Auctoramentum maioris infidelitatis, as he well
phraseth it; and their wisdom Culpae suasoria, as Ambrose speaks; that
though, as Paul spoke, If any other man thinks that he has whereof he
might trust in the flesh, much more I: if any people may now boast abilities,
we more; yet let not that secure us from falling into error, but watch and
pray, that we enter not into temptation, that we be not overcome of evil, that
we never cry with Ephesians, Great Diana.

That not to wander out of the way, besides and beyond that Idolatrous
inclination of Ephesians in general, crying out in the context; these crying
Ephesians here in the Text, had a more particular interest in her, that made
her thus great to them; a certain thing called gain: for though in the sound
of their cry they mention only Diana, yet in the cause of their cry, the
verses mixes other ingredients of their trade, yea, the spirit by order of
enumeration, seems to point that out, for the prime and principal motive in
their crying. The fear of losing their commings in, caused them so to cry out,
and made them so cry Great Diana. As Logicians well canvasse the causes, the
procatarcticall cause of their cry was, forsooth, Piety, the proegumenall cause
was commodity; their portion, as themselves called it, their profit. In the cry
Diana bears all the name, but in the cryers there was a falfe aim, (...),
again and again in the context here, our wealth, and our portion; looking so
through the spectacles of self interest, this made her show so great to them,
made them cry Great Diana. Like Lap-wings crying aloof from their nest, the cry
runs upon their goddess, but the nest lay in their gain; as they made shrines
for Diana, so making skreekes of Diana too, stauking to their ends of gain,
under the shadow of their goddess; these craftsmen, were their crafts masters,
dolus in idolo, pretending godliness, intending gain, they did bestow
divinity on that which brought commodity: they gained greatly by Diana,
therefore cried they, Great is Diana. So true is that Tertullian spoke of the
heathen, Non licet deos nosse gratis, etc. they made a gain of their gods,
that though their gods were naught, they did not serve them for naught.
Idolatry being not gratuita, says he, not serving God for god a mercy, but
captatrix, says Rhenanus, lying at catch for commodity: so common is that of
Epictetus, (...), ubi utilitas, ibi pietas, it is the profit that keeps up the
piety: so well said the heathen man deos quisque sibi utiles cudit, men love to
coin themselves commodious gods; with them in the 44. of Jeremy, to incense to
the Queen of heaven for plenties sake, to measure Religion by the belly, to
magnify thus that whereby their portion is made fat and their meat plenteous,
as the Prophet speaks. That whereas besides that Tenet of the Fathers,
Idolatry to have come first from the devil, as Clemens says, (...), as
Epiphanius; (...), as Synesius call him, as rejoicing in Idols. Some hold
grief to have been the first founder of Idols, Idolum Idodynin, as Fulgentius
fetches it from Syrophanes: and others hold fear to have founded, Primus in
orb deos fecit timor: and I incline to think they first sprung from flattery.
It may probably be thought, gainefull interest was the first founder of them,
especially among the Romanists: Qui Pietatem quaestum, Religionem praedam,
existimant, as Aventinus spoke of them, They count gain Godliness, and make
Religion their prey, making thus show of Religion, when their aim is revenew;
with these silvet smiths here, forging most of their gain thus upon the anvile
of Diana. For in this have to pass by their sophistical gains by the Lady of
the lake, and the like, and worse; in passage cast but your eye upon their
doctrinall Diana's; their Diana of purgatory, do ye any think, they think it
a point of truth, or not only thus of traffic and profit? Purgatory pickpurse
having fire to no other end, save only to make their pot boil, and their
kitchins smooke: so their Diana of confession, as they abuse it, is it not
become the engine, whereby (as is well noted) they first dive into men's
consciences and counsels, and afterward into their purses and estates by
absolution? Their Diana's of indulgences, are they (trow ye) mistresses of
piety, or are they not matters of the market-house, plain penny worths rather?
I would not weary you with their foul ways, nor sully this presence with any
foul relations, howbeit foul: most foul was that blasphemy of their Caiphas
to his Cardinal, that that same fable of Christ had been very profitable to
him; much more be their own devises never so fabulous, yet so long as they are
commodious, all is well may ye think. That as Ambrose spoke of Beniamins
sack, sacco soluto apparuit argentum, that when the sack was loosed the silver
appeared, resolve much of their Theology, into that whereof it is constituted,
and silver will appear, commodity will be found to be the chief element of
constitution: and that because unless their Diana's be held up, their
commodities would down; therefore cry they thus, Great Diana.

And O that none of this Ephesian leaven were now to be found here amongst our
selves also, who as it is reprehended in Homer, that mingling gods with men,
he spoke great things of the men, but mean things of the gods, we most of us
so mingle religion with worldly ends, as that there is in us such a great deal
of the one, but so little of the other, that as it is said of the Scythians, that
they once smootherd their gods with earth, many of us seem almost to have
smootherd our godliness with our worldliness, retaining only (...), not
(...), as Paul speaks, not the power of godliness, but only the form
thereof, to further our other purposes: much like the fellow, who vowing to
Mercury half of what he found, finding almonds, presented only the shells
upon the altar; If we afford God a shell in Religion, it is to get the
kirnells to our selves, following Christ more for his bread than his doctrine;
in our thoughts putting panem nostrum, before nomen tuum; making pretense of
piety, pandar to profit, lending little to Religion but such offices as may
broke for our other ends, such passages as may be factors for our profit,
shuffling in Religion, only to deal our selves a winning game, making
professing of Religion only profits stirrup to get up by, making show of
serving God only to serve our own turns. As the wind changing, the weather
alters; upon any alteration ready to turn, and return, and overturne, as
may best serve our turn, to make our market, under some mask of devotion;
eying thus commodity, though crying thus Diana.

But be not deceived, God is not mocked. As let never interest, no not of life
make you lean to false worship, so let never end of gain, make you feign
either false or true worship: for what is the hope of the Hypocrite, though he
has gained? To cry thus Diana, Religion, and in the mean time to care only for
commodity, and commings in, will one day make all that gain, as gravel in thy
mouth, as the Prophet Micah spoke: that which is gathred of the hire of an
harlot, shall return to the wages of an harlot, that thus falsely gotten, shall
be as fowly gone: that though with Paul, ye will put on faith as a brestplate,
yet never put ye on Religion as a cloak, but say we sincerely, Great is the
mystery of godliness, whilst these sophistically cry, Great is Diana of the
Ephesians.

Yea, for conclusion, this same Ephesus of all other (as it is noted) especially
shadowing forth the Church of the Gentiles; All ye that hear me this day, at
parting now look well upon these Ephesians, and what see you them here? why
Idolatrous. Look forward into the Revelation: why religious. Look down upon
them at this day, and what see you them now? why mahumetically miserable: And
seeing it so in them, reflect the sight homeward upon our selves, who had a
time likewise of Idolatry, have a time likewise of sincerity, pray we, we never
have a time likewise of misery, that it never come to pass with England, which
was threatened and performed to Ephesus, I will come against thee shortly, and
remove thy Candlestick out of his place, except thou amend: yea, Amend your
lives for the Kingdom of God is at hand: etc.

FINIS.

