THE Tragedy of King Richard the second.

As it has been publicly acted by the right Honorable the Lord
Chamberlain his Servants.

LONDON Printed by Valentine Simmes for Androw Wise, and are to be sold at his
shop in Paul's church yard at the sign of the Angel. 1597.

ENTER KING RICHARD, JOHN OF GAVNT, WITH OTHER Nobles and attendants. King
Richard. OVld John of Gaunt time honored Lancaster,
Have thou according to thy oath and band
Brought hither Henry Herford thy bold son,
Here to make good the boistro^^^ate appeal,
Which then our leisure would not let us hear
Against the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Moubray?

Gaunt. I have my Liege.

King. Tell me moreover have thou sounded him,
If he appeal the Duke on ancient malice,
Or worth^^y as a good subject should
On some known ground of treachery in him.

Gaunt. As near as I could sift hi^ on that argument,
On some appa^ent danger seen in him,
Aimde at your highness, no inueterate malice.

King. Then call them to our presence face to face,
And frowning brow to brow our selves will hear.
The accuser and the accused freely speak:
High stomackt are they both and full of ire,
In rage, deaf as the sea, hasty as fire.

Enter Bullingbrooke and Mowbray. Bulling. Many years of happy days be fall,
My gracious sovereign my most loving liege.

Mo^^. Each day still better others happiness,
Until the heavens envying earths good hap,
Add an immortal title to your Crown.

King. We th^nke you both, yet one but flatters us,
As well appears by the cause you come;
Namely to appeal each other of high treason:
Coosin of (...), what do thou object
Against the Duke of Norffolke Thomas Mowbray?

Bull. First, heaven be the record to my speech,
In the devotion of a subjects love,
Tendering the precious safety of my Prince,
And free from other misbegotten hate,
Come I appellant to this princely presence.
Now Thomas Mowbray do I tur^^ to thee,
And mark my greeting well: for what I speak
My body shall make good upon this earth,
Or my divine so^le answer it in heaven:
Thou art a traitor and a miscreant,
Too good to be so, and too bad to live,
Since the more fair and cristall is the sky,
The vglier seem the clouds that in it fl^e:
Once more, the more to aggrauate the note,
With a foul tra^tors name stuff I thy throat,
And wish (so please my Sovereign) ere I move,
What my tongue speaks, my right drawn sword may prou^.

Mow. Let not my cold words here accuse my zeal,
It Is not the trial of a woman's war,
The bitter clamor of two eger tongues
Can arbitrate this cause betwixt us twain,
The blood is hot that must be coold for this,
Yet can I not of such tame patience boast,
As to be huisht, and naught at all to say.
First the fair reverence of your Highness curbs me,
From giving reins and spurtes to my free speech,
Which else would post until it had ^eturnd,
These terms of treason doubled down his throat:
Setting aside his high bloods royalty,
And let him be no kinsman to my Liege,
I do defy him, and I spit at him,
Call him a slanderous coward, and a villain,
Which to maintain, I would allow him ods,
And meet him were I tied to run afoote,
Even to the frozen ridges of the Alps,
Or any other ground inhabitable,
Where over Englishman durst set his foot,
Mean time, let this defend my loyalty,
By all my hopes most falsely does he lie.

Bull. Pale trembling coward there I throw my gage,
Disclaiming here the kindred of the King,
And lay aside my high bloudes royalty,
Which Fear, not Reverence makes thee to except.
If guilty dread have left thee so m^^ ^ngth,
As to take up mine honors pawn^ (...) stowpe,
By that, and all the rites of Knighthoo^e else,
W^ll I make good against thee arm to arm,
What I have spoke, or thou can worst devise.

Mow. I take it up, and by that sword I swear,
Which gently laid my Knighthood on my shoulder,
I Will answer thee in any fai^e degree,
O^ chiualrous design of knightly trial:
And when I mount, alive may I not light,
If I be traitor or unjustly fight.

King. What does our ccusin lay to Mowbraies charge?
It must be great that can inherit us,
So much as of a thought of ill in him.

Bull. Look what I speak, my life shall prove it true,
That Mowbray has receiude eight thousand nobles
In name of Lendings for your Highness soldiers,
The which he has de^aind for lewd ^mployments,
Like a false traitor, and injurious villain:
Besides I say, and will in battle prove,
Or here, or elsewhere to the fur^hest Verge
That ever was (...) by English eye,
That all the treason, for these eighteen years,
Complotted and contrived in this land:
Fetch from false Mowbray their first head and spring,
Further I say and further will mai^taine
Upon his bad life to make all this good,
That he did plotte the Duke of Glocesters death,
Suggest his soon believing adversaries,
And consequently like a taitour coward,
Slucte out his innocent soul through streams of blood,
Which blood, like sacrificing Abels cries,
Even from the tounglesse Cauernes of the earth,
To me for justice and rough chastisement:
And by the glorious worth of my descent,
This arm shall do it, or this life be spent.

King. How high a pitch his resolution soars,
Thomas of No^folk (...) saint thou to this?

Mowb. Oh let (...) reign turn away his face,
And bid his ears a (...) while be deaf,
Till I have told this slander of his blood,
How God and good men hate so foul a lier.

King. Mowbray impartial are our eyes and ears,
Were he my brother, nay, my kingdoms heir,
As he is but my fathers brothers son,
Now by scepters awe I make a vow,
Such neighbor neerenes to our sacred blood
Should nothing privilege him nor partialize
The vnstooping firmness of my upright soul,
He is our subject Mowbray so art thou,
F^ee speech and fearelesse I to thee allow.

Mowb. Then Bullingbrooke as low (...) to thy heart
Through the false passage of thy throat thou lie,
Three parts of that receipte I had for Callice,
Disburst I duly to his highness soldiers,
The other part reserude I by consent,
For that my souera^gne liege was in my debt.
Upon remainder of a dear account:
Since last I went to France to fetch his Queen:
Now swallow down that lie. For Glocesters death,
I slew him not but to my own disgrace,
Neglected my sworn duty in that case:
For you my noble Lord of Lancaster,
The honorable father to my foe,
Once did I lay an ambushe for your life,
A trespass that does vex my grieved soul:
Ah but ere I last receiude the Sacrament,
I did confess it, and exactly begd
Your graces pardon, and I hope I had it.
This is my fault, as for the rest appeald
It issues from the rancour of a villain,
A recreant and most degenerate traitor,
Which in my self I bodly will defend,
And enterchangeably hurl down my gage
Upon this over weening traitors foot,
To prove my self a loyal Gentleman*
Even in the best blood chamberd in his bosom,
In haste whereof most heartily I pray
Your highness to assign our trial day.

King. Wrath kindled gentleman be ruled by (...),
Lets purge this choler without letting blood,
This we prescribe though no Physician,
Deep malice makes too deep incision,
Forget, forgive, conclude and be agreed,
Our doctors say, this is no month to bleed*
Good Uncle let this end where it begone,
We Will calm the Duke of Norfolk, you your son.

Gaunt. To be a make-peace shall become my age,
Throw down (my soune) the Duke of Norfolkes gage.

King. And Norfolk throw down his.

Gaunt. When Harry? (...) obedience bids*
Obedience bids I should not bid again.

King. Norfolk throw down we bid, there is no boot.

Mow. My self I throw dread soue reign at thy foot,
My life thou shall command, but not my shame,
The one my duty owes, (...)
To dark dish^^ours use thou shall not have:
I am disgraste, impeacht, and b^ffuld here,
Pierst to the soul with Slanders venomd spear,
The which no balm can cure but his heart blood
Which breathde this poison.

King. Rage ^ust be withstoode,
Give me his gage; Lions make Leopards tame.

Mowb. Yea but not change his spots: take but my shame,
And I resign my gage, my dear dear Lord,
The purest treasure mortal times afford,
Is spotless Reputation that away
Men are but gilded loame, or painted clay.
A jewel in a ten times bard up chest,
Is a bold spirit in a loyal breast:
Mine honor is my life, both grow in one,
Take honor from me, and my life is done:
Then (dear my Liege) mine honor let me try.
In that I live, and for that will I die.

King. Coosin, throw up your gage, do you begin.

Bull. O God defend my soul from such deep sin,
Shall I seem Crest-fallen in my fathers sight?
Or with pale beggar-feare impeach my height,
Before this out-darde Dastard? ere my tongue
Shall wound my honor with such feeble wrong,
Or sound so base a parlee, my teeth shall tear
The slavish motive of recanting fear,
And spit it bleeding in his high disgrace,
Where Shame does harbor even in Mowbraies face.

King. We were not borne to sue, but to command,
Which since we cannot do, to make you friends*
Be ready as your lives shall answer it,
At Couentry upon saint Lamberes day,
There shall your swords and lances arbitrate
The swelling difference of your settled hate,
Since we cannot atone you, we shall see
Justice design the, Victo^^^ (...)*
Lord Marshal, command our
Be ready to direct these home allarmes.
Exit.
Enter John of Gaunt with the Duchess of Gloucester. Gaunt Alas, the part I had
in Woodstockes blood,
Does more solicit me than your exclaimes,
To stir against the butchers of his life,
But since correction lies in those hands,
Which made the fault that we cannot correct:
Put we our quarrel to the will of heaven,
Who when they see the hours ripe on earth,
Will rain hot vengeance on offenders heads.

Duchess Finds brotherhood in thee no sharper spur?
Has love in thy old blood no Iruing fire?
Edwards seven sons whereof thy self art one.
Were as seven viols of his sacred blood,
Or seven fair branches springing from one roote^
Some of those seven are dried by natures course,
Some of those branches by the Destinies cut:
But Thomas my dear Lord, my life, my Gloucester.
One violl full of Edwards sacred blood,
One flourishing branch of his most royal root
Is cracked, and all the precious liquor spilt,
Is hackt down, and his summer leaves all faded
By Enuies hand, and Murders bloody axe.
Ah Gaunt, his blood was thine, that bed, that womb*
That metal, that self mould, that fashioned thee
Made him a man: and though thou live and breathest,
Yet art thou slain in him, thou do consent
In some large measure to thy fathers death,
In that thou see thy wretched brother die,
Who was the model of thy fathers life:
Call it not patience Gaunt, it is despair,
In suffr^ng thus thy brother to be slaughtred,
Thou she west the naked path way to thy life,
Teaching stern Murder how to butcher thee:
That which in mean men we entitle Patience,
Is pale cold Coward^^e in noble breasts.
What shall I say? to safeguard thine own life,
The best way is to venge my Glocesters death.

Gaunt Gods is the quarrel for Gods substitute,
His deputy anointed in his sight,
Has causd his death, the which ^f wrongfully,
Let heaven revenge, for I may never lift
An angry arm against his minister.

Duch. Where then alas may I complain my self?

Gaunt To God the widows Champion and defense,

Duch. Why then I will; fare well old Gaunt,
Thou go to Couentry, there to behold
Our Coosen Hereford and sell Mowbray fight,
O set my husbands wrongs on Herefords spear,
That it may enter butcher Mowbraies breast:
Or if misfortune miss the (...) ca^ier,
Be Mowbra^es sins so (...) in his bosom
That they may break his (...) coursers back,
And throw the rider headlong (...) listes,
A caitiue recreant to my Co^^en He^eford,
Farewell old Gaunt, thy some times brothers wife,
With her companion Grief must end her life.

Gaunt Sister farewell, I must to Couentry,
A^ ^uch good stay with thee, as go with me.

Duch. Yet ^ne word ^ore, grie^e boundeth where is fa^^,
Not with the emp^ie hollownes, but weigh^:
I take my leave before I have begone,
For sorrow ends not when it seems done:
Commend me to thy brother Edmund York,
Lo^h^s is all: nay yet depart not so,
Though this be al, do not so quickly go:
I shall remember more: Bid him, ah what?
W^^h all good speed at Plashie visit me,
Alack and what shall good old York there see,
But empty lodgings and unfurnished walls,
Unpeopled offices, untrodden stones,
And what hear there for welcome but my groans?
Therefore commend me, let him not come there,
To seek out sorrow that dwells every where,
Desolate desolate will I hence and die:
The last leave of thee takes my weeping eye.

Exeunt. Enter Lord Marshall and the Duke Aumerle. Mar. My Lord (...) is Harry
Herford (...)?

Aum. Yea at all points, and longs to enter in*

Mar. The Duke of Norfolk sprightfully and bold,
Stays but the summons of the appellants trumpet.

Aum Why then the Champions are prepared and stay
For nothing but his majesty's approach.

The trumpets sound and the King enters with his n^bles, when they are set,
enter the Duke of Norfolk in arms defendant. King Marshall demand of yooder
Champion,
The cause of his arrival here in arms,
A^ke him his name, and orderly proceed
To swear him in the i^stice of his cause.

Mar. In Gods name and the Kings s^y who thou art*
And why thou com^st thus knigh^ly cladan arms,
Against what man thou comst and what thy quare^l,
Speak truly on thy knighthoode, and thy oath,
As so defend the heaven and thy valor.

Mow My name is Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolk,
Who hither come engaged by my oath,
(Which God defend a Knight should violate)
Both to defend my loyalty and truth,
To God, my King, and my succeeding ^s^ue*
Against the Duke of Herford that appeals me.
And by the grace of God, and this m^ne a^me,
To prove him in defending of my self,
A traitor to my God, my King, and me,
And as I truly fight, defend me heaven.

The trumpets sound. Enter Duke of Hereford appellant in armor. King Marshall
ask yonder Knight in arms,
Both who he is, and why he comes hither,
Thus plated in habiliments of war,
And formally according to our law,
Depose him in the justice of his cause.

Mar. What is thy name? and wherefore comst thou hither?
Before king Richard in his royal lists.
Against whom comes thou? and what is thy quarrel?
Speak like a true Kn^ght, so defend thee heaven.

Bull. Harry of Herford, Lancaster and Darbie
Am I, who ready here do stand in Arms
To prove by Gods grace, and my bodies valor
In lists, on Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norffolke,
That he is a traitor foul and dangerous,
To God of heaven, king Richard and to me:
And as I truly fight, defend me heaven.

Mar. On pain of death, no person be so bold,
Or daring, hardy, as to touch the listes,
Except the Martial and such officers
Appointed to direct these fair designs.

Bull. Lord Martial, let me kiss my Souereig^es hand,
And bow my knee before his Majesty,
For Mowbray and my self are like two men,
That vow a long and weary pilgrimage,
Then let us take a ceremonious leave,
And loving fare well of our several friends.

Mar. The appellant in all duty greetes your Highness*
And c^aues to kiss your hand, and take his leave.

King We will descend and fold him in our arms,
Coosin of Herford, as thy cause is right,
So be thy fortune in this royal fight:
Farewell my blood, which if to day thou shead,
Lament we may, but not revenge the dead.

Bull. O let no n^ble eye profane a tear
For me, if I be go^de with Mowbraies spear:
As confident as is the Falcons flight
Against a bird, do I with Mowbray fight.
My l^uing Lord, I take my leave of yo^:
Of you (my noble cousin) Lord Aumarle,
Not sick although I have to do with death,
But lusty, young and cheerely drawing breath:
Lo, as at English feasts so I regreet
The daintiest last, to make the end most sweet.
Oh thou the earthly Author of my blood,
Whose youthful spirit in me regenerate
Does with a twofold vigor lift me up,
To reach at Victory above my head:
Add proof unto mine armor with thy prayers,
And with thy blessings steel my lances point,
That it may enter Mowbraies w^xen cote,
And furbish new the name of John a Gaunt,
Even in the lusty hauiour of his son.

Gaunt. God in thy good cause make thee prosperous,
Be swift like lightning in the execution,
And let thy blows doubly redoubled,
Fall like amazing thunder on the caske
Of thy adue^se pernicious enemy,
Rowze up thy youthful blood, be valiant and live,

Bull. Mine innocence and saint George to thrive.

Mowb. How ever God or Fortune cast my lot,
There lives or dies true to King Richards thron^,
A loyal, just, and upright Gentleman:
Never did captive with a freer heart
Cast off his chains of bondage, and embrace
His golden uncontrolled enfranchisment,
More than my dancing soul does celebrate
This feast of battle with mine adversary,
Most mighty Liege, and my companion Peers,
Take from my mouth the wish of happy years,
As gentle, and as iocund as to jest
Go I to fight, truth has a quiet bre^t.

King Farewell (my Lord) securely I epsy,
Virtue with Val^ur couched in thine eye,
Order the trial Martial, and begin.

Mart. Harry of Herford, Lancaster and Darby,
Receive thy lance, and God defend the right.

Bull. Strong as a tower in hope I cry, Amen.

Mart. Go bear this lance to Thomas Duke of Norfolk.

Herald Harry of Herford, Lancaster, and Da^by
Stands here, for God, his sovereign, and himself,
On pain to be found false and recreant,
To prove the Duke of Norfolk Thomas M^wbray
A traitor to his God, his king, and him,
And dares him to set forward to the fight.

Herald 2 Here stands Thomas Mowbray D* of Norfolk
On pain to be found false and recreant,
Both to defend himself, and to approve
Henry of Hereford, Lancaster, and Darby,
To God, his sovereign, and to him disloyal,
Courageously, and with a free desire,
Attending but the ^ignall to begin.

Mart. Sound trumpets, and set forward Combatants:
Stay, the king has thrown his warder down.

King. Let them lay by their helmets, and their spears,
And both return back to their chaires again,
Withdraw with us, and let the trumpets sound,
While we return these dukes what we decree.
Draw near and list
What with our counsel we have done:
For that our kingdoms earth should not be soild
With that dear blood which it has ^ostered:
And for our eyes do hate the (...) aspect
Of civil wounds plowd up with neighbors sword,
And for we think the Egle-winged pride
Of skie-aspiring and ambitious thoughts,
With riuall-hating (...) set on you
To wake our peace, which in our Countries ^rad^e
Draws the sweet infant ^reath of gentle sleep
Which so ro^zde up with boistrous vntunde drums,
With harsh resounding trumpets dreadful bray,
And grating shocke of wrathfully on arms,
Might from our qu^et confines f^ight fair Peace,
And make us wade even in our kinreds blood;
Therefore we banish you our territories:
You cousin Hereford upon pain of life,
Til twice five summers have enricht our fields,
Shall not regreete our fair dominions*
But tread the stranger paths of banishment.

Bull. Your will be done; this must my comfort be,
That Sun that warmes you here, shall shine on me.
And those his golden beams to you here lent,
Shall point on me, and guilde my banishment.

King Norfolk, for thee remains a heavier doom,
Which I with some unwillingness pronounce,
The she slow hours shall not determinate
The datelesse limite of thy dear exile,
The hoplesse word of never to return,
Breathe I against thee, upon pain of life.

Mowb. A beauy sentence, my most sovereign Liege,
And all unlooked for from your Highness mouth,
A deerer merit not so deep a maime,
As to be cast fo^th in the common air
Have I deserved at your Highness hands:
The language I have learnt these forty years,
My native English now I must forgo,
And now my tongues use is to me, no more
Than an vnstringed violl or a harp,
Or like a cunning instrument casde up,
Or being open, put into his hands
That knows no touch to tu^e the harmony:
^ithin my mouth you have engaoid my tongue,
Doubly portcullist with my teeth and lips,
And dull unfeeling barren ignorance
Is made my Ga^ler to attend on me:
I am too old to fawn upon a nu^se,
Too far in years to be a pupil now,
What is thy sentence but speechless death?
Which robbes my tongue from b^eathing native breath,

King It boots thee not to be compassionate,
After our sentence playning comes too late.

Mow. Then thus I turn me from my c^untries light,
To dwell in solemn shades of endless night.

King. Return again, and take an oath with thee,
Lay on our royal sword your banished hands,
Swear by the duty that y'owe to God,
(Our part therein we banish with your selves,)
To keep the oath that we administer:
You never shall, so help you truth and God,
Embrace each others love in banishment,
Nor never look upon each others face,
Nor never write, regreete, nor reconcile
This lowering tempest of your homebred hate,
Nor never by advised purpose meet,
To plot, contriue, or complot any ill,
Against us, our state, our subjects, or our land.

Bull. I swear.

Mow. And I, to keep all this.

Bull. Norffolke, so fare as to mine enemy:
By this time, had the King permitted us,
One of our souls had wandered in the air*
Banished this frail sepulcher of our flesh.
As now our flesh is banished from this land,
Confess thy treasons ere thou fly the realm,
Since thou have far to go, bear not along
The clogging burden of a guilty soul.

Mow. No Bullingbrooke, if ever I were traitor,
My name be blotted from the book of life,
And I from heaven banished as from hence:
But what thou art, God, thou, and I, do know,
And al too soon (I fear) the King shall rue:
Farewell (my Liege) now no way can I stray,
Save back to England all the worlds my way.
Exit.
King. Uncle, even in the glasses of thine eyes,
I see thy grieved heart: thy sad aspect
Has from the number of his banished years
Plucked four away, six frozen winters spent,
Return with welcome home from banishment.

Bull. How long a time lies in one little word.
Four lagging winters and four wanton springes,
End in a word, such is the breath of Kings.

Gaunt. I thank my liege that in regard of me,
He shortens four years of my sons exile,
But little vantage shall I reap thereby:
For ear the six years that he has to spend
Can change their moons, and bring their times about,
My o^le-dried lamp, and time bewasted light
Shall be extint with age and endless nights,
My intch of taper will be burnt and done,
And blindfold Death not let me see my son.

King. Why Uncle thou have many years to live.

Gaunt. But not a minute King that thou can give,
Shorten my days thou can with sullen sorrow,
And pluck nights from me, but not lend a morrow:
Thou can help time to furrow me with age,
But stop no wrinckle in his pilgrimage:
Thy word is current with him for my death,
But dead, thy kingdom cannot buy my breath.

King. Thy son is banished upon good advise,
Whereto thy tongue a party verdict gave,
Why at our justice seemst thou then to lowre?

Gaunt. Things sweet to taste, prove in digestion sour.
You vrgde me as a judge, but I had rather,
You would have bid me argue like a father:
Oh had't been a stranger, not my child,
To smooth his fault I should have been more mild:
A partial slander sought I to avoid,
And in the sentence my own life destroyed:
Alas, I looked when some of you should say,
I was too strict to make mine own away:
But you gave leave to my unwilling tongue,
Against my will to do my self this wrong.

King. Coosen farewell, and Uncle, bid him so,
Six years we banish him and he shall go.
Exit.
Au. Cousin fare well, what presence must not know,
From where you do remain let paper show.

Mar. My Lord, no leave take I, for I will ride
As far as land will let me by your side.

Gaunt. Oh to what purpose do thou hoard thy words,
That thou returnest no greeting to thy friends?

Bull. I have too few to take my leave of you,
When the tongues office should be prodigal.
To breathe the abundant dolor of the heart.

Gaunt. Thy grief is but thy absence for a time.

Bull. Joy absent, grief is present for that time.

Gaunt. What is six winters? they are quickly gone.

Bull. To men in joy, but grief makes one hour ten.

Gaun. Call it a travail that thou takst for pleasure.

Bull. My heart will sigh when I miscall it so.
Which finds it an info^ced pilgrimage.

Gaun. The sullen passage of thy weary steps,
Esteem as foil wherein thou art to set,
The precious Jewel of thy home return.

Bull. Nay rather every tedious stride I make,
Will but remember me what a deal of world:
I wander from the Jewels that I love.
Must I not se^ue a long apprentishood,
To foreign passages, and in the end,
Having my freedom, boast of nothing else,
But that I was a iourneyman to grief.

Gaun. All places that the e^e of heaven visits,
Are to a wiseman ports and happy havens:
Teach thy necessity to reason thus,
There is no virtue like necessity,
Think not the King did banish thee,
But thou the King. Woe does the heavier sit,
Where it perceiues it is but faintly borne:
Go, say I sent thee forth to purchase honor,
And not the King exilde thee; or suppose,
Deu^uring pestilence hangs in our air,
And thou a^t flying to a fresher clime:
Look what thy soul holds dear, imagine it
To ly that way thou go, not whence thou comst:
Suppose the singing birds musitions,
The grass whereon thou treadst, the presence strowd,
The flowers, fair Ladies, and thy steps, no more
Then a delightful measure or a dance,
For gnarling sorrow has less power to bite,
The man that mocks at it, and sets it light.

Bull. Oh who can hold a fire in his hand,
By thinking on the frosty Caucasus?
Or cloy the hungry edge of appetite,
By bare imagination of a feast?
Or wallow naked in December snow,
By thinking on fantastic summers heat?
Oh no, the apprehension of the good.
Gives but the greater feeling to the worse:
Fell sorrows tooth does never ^anckle more,
Then when he bites, but launceth not the soar.

Gaun. Come come my son lie bring thee on thy way,
Had I thy youth and cause, I would not stay.

Bull. Then Englands ground fare well, sweet soil adieu.
My mother and my nurse that bears me yet,
Where care I wander boast of this I can,
Though banished, yet a true borne English man.

Exeunt. Enter the King with Bushie, etc at one door, and the Lord Aumarlc at
another. King We did observe. Coosen Aumarle.
How far brought you high Hereford, on his way?

Aum. I brought high Herford, if you call him so,
But to the next high way, and there I left him.

King And say, what store of parting tears were shed?

Aum. Faith none for me, except the North ast wind,
Which then blew bitterly against our face^,
Awak^, the sleeping rhewme, and so by chance
Did grace our hollow pa^ting with a tear.

King What said our cousin when you parted with him?

Aum. Farewell, and for my heart disdained that my tongue
Should so profane the word that taught me craft,
To counterfaite oppression of such grief,
That words seemd buried in my sorrows grave:
Marry would the word Farewell have ^^^g th^ed hours,
And added years to his short banishment,
He should have had a volume of farewels:
But since it would not, he had none of me.

King. He is our Coosens Coosin, but it is doubt,
When time shall call him home from banishment,
Whether our kinsman come to see his friends.
Our self and Bushie,
Observed his courtship to the common people,
How he did seem to diue into their hearts,
With humble and familiar courtesy,
What reverence he did throw away on slaves,
Wooing poor craftsmen with the craft of smiles.
And patient vnder-bearing of his fortune,
As twere to ba^ish their affects with him,
Off goes his bonnet to an oysterwench,
A brace of draimen bid, God speed him well,
And had the tribute of his supple knee,
With thanks my countrymen my loving friends*
As were our England in reuersion his,
And he our subjects next degree in hope.

Green. Well, he is gone, and with him go these thoughts,
Now for the rebels which stand out in Ireland,
Exped^en^ manage must be made my liege,
Ere further leisure yield them further means.
For their advantage and your highness loss.

King. We will our self in person to this war,
And for our coffers with too great a court,
And liberal larges are grown somewhat light,
We are inforst to farm our royal Realm,
The reuenew whereof shall furnish us,
For our affairs in hand if that come short,
Our substitutes at home shall have blanke charters,
Whereto, when they shall know what men are rich,
They shall subscribe them for large summe^ of gold,
And send them after to supply our wants,
For we will make for Ireland presently.

Enter Bushie with news. Bush. Old John of Gaunt is grievous sick my Lord,
Suddenly taken, and has sent post haste,
To entreat your Majesty to visit him.

King Where lies he?

Bush. At Ely house.

King Now put it (God) in the Physicians mind,
To help him to his grave immedia^ly*
The li^ing of his coffers shall make coats
To deck our soldiers for these Irish wars.
Come gentlemen, lets all go visit him,
Pray God we may make haste and come too late,

Amen Exeunt. Enter John of Gaunt sick, with the duke of York etc. Gaunt. Will
the King come that I may breathe my last?
In wholesome counsel to his unstaid youth.

York^ Vex not your self, nor strive not with your breath,
For all in vain comes counsel to his ^are.

Gaunt. Oh but they say, the tongues of dying men,
Enforce attention like deep ^^rmony:
Where words are scarce they are seldom spent in vain,
For they breathe truth that breathe their words in pain:
He that no more must say, is listened more
Than they whom youth and ease have taught to gloss*
More are men's ends marked than their lives before:
The setting Sun, and Music at the close,
As the last taste of sweetes is sweetest last,
Writ in remembrance more than things long past,
Though Richard my lives counsel would not hear,
My deaths sad tale may yet vndea^e his ea^e.

York No, it is stopped with other flattering foundes.
As praises of whose taste the wise are found
Lascivious meeter^ to whose venom sound
The open ear of youth does always listen.
Report of fashions in proud Italy,
Whose manners still our tardy apish nation
Limps after in base i^itation:
Where does the world th^ust forth a vanity.
So it be new, there is no respect how vile,
That is not quickly buzd^ into his ears?
Then all too late comes Counsel to be heard,
Where will does mutiny with wits regard:
Direct not him whose way himself will choose.
It Is breath thou lackst and that breath will thou loose.

Gaunt Me thinks I am a prophet new inspirde.
And thus expiring do foretell of him,
His rash fierce blaze of riot cannot last:
For violent fires soon burn out themselves.
Small shoures last long, but sudden storms are short:
He tires betimes that spurs too fast betimes
With eagre feeding food does choke the feeder,
Light vanity insatiate cormorant,
Consuming means soon prays upon it self:
This royal throne of Kings, this sceptred I Will,
This earth of majesty, this seat of Mars,
This other Eden, demi Paradise,
This fortress built by Nature (...) her self,
Against infection and the hand of wa^re.
This happy breed of men, this little wo^ld,
This precious stone set in the silver sea,
Which serves it in the office of a wall,
Or as moate defensive to a house,
Against the envy of less happier lands.
This blessed plot, this earth, this realm, this England,
This nurse, this teeming womb of ^oyall Kings,
Feared by their breed, and famous by their birth,
Renowned for their deeds as far from home*
For christian service, and true chiualry,
As is the sepulcher in stubburne Iewry,
Of the worlds ransom blessed Mary's son:
This land of such dear souls, this dear dear land,
Dear for her reputation through the world,
Is now leasde out; I dye pronouncing it,
Like to a tenement or pelting Farm.
England bound in with the triumphant sea,
Whose rockie shore beats back the envious siege
Of watery Neptune, is now bound in with shame,
With i^^kie blots, and rotten parchment bonds:
That Eng^and that was wont to conquer others*
Has made a shameful conq^est of it self:
Ah would the scandal vanish with my life,
How happy then were my ensuing death?

York The King is come, deal mildely with his youth,
For young hot colts being ragde, do rage the more.

Enter king and Queen, etc. Queen How fares our noble uncle Lancaster?

King What comfort man? how ^st with aged Gaunt?

Gaunt O how that (...) befits my composition!
Old (...) indeed, and gaunt in being old:
With (...) Grief has kept a tedious fast.
And who ab^taines fro^^neate that is not gaunt?
For sleeping England long time have I watched,
Watching breeds leanenesse, leanenesse is all gaunt:
The pleasure that some fathers feed upon
Is my strict fast; I mean my childrens looks,
And therein fasting have thou made me gaunt:
Gaunt am I for the grave, gaunt as a grave,
Whose hollow womb inherites naught but bones.

King Can sick men play so nicely with their names?

Gaunt No misery makes sport to mock it self,
Since thou do seek to kill my name in me.
I mock my name (great King) to flatter thee.

King Should dying men flatter with those that live?

Gaunt No no, men living flatter those that die.

King. Thou now a dying say thou flatterest me.

Gaunt. Oh no, thou die, though I the ^icker be.

King. I am in health, I breathe, and see thee ill.

Gaunt. Now he that made me knows I see thee ill,
Ill in my self to see, and in thee, seeing ill.
Thy deathbed is no lesser than thy land,
Wherein thou lie in reputation sick,
And thou too careless pacient as thou art
Commitst thy anointed body to the cure
Of those Physicians that first wounded thee,
A thousand flatterers sit within thy Crown,
Whose compass is no bigger than thy head,
And yet enraged in so small a verge,
The waste is no whit lesser than thy land:
Oh had thy grand^ire with a Prophets eye,
Seen how his sons son should destroy his sons.
From forth thy reach he would have laid thy shame.
Deposing thee before thou were possessed,
Which art possessed now to depose thy self:
Why cousin were thou regent of the world.
It were a shame to let this land by lease:
But for thy world enjoying but this land,
Is it not more than shame to shame it so?
Landlord of England art thou now, (...) not King,
Thy state of law is bondslaue to the law,
And thou

King. A lunatike leane-witted fool,
Presuming on an agues priu^ledge,
Dare with thy frozen admonition
Make pale our cheek, chasing the royal blood
With ^urie from his native residence.
Now by my seats right royal majesty,
Were thou not brother to great Edwards son,
This tongue that runs so roundly in thy head,
Should run thy head from thy vnreuerent shoulders.

Gaunt Oh spare me not my brothers Edwards son,
For that I was his father Edwards son,
That blood already like the Pelican,
Have thou tapt out and drunkenly carowst,
My brother Gloucester plain well meaning soul,
Whom fair befall in heaven among happy souls,
May be a president and witness good:
That thou respectst not spilling Edwards blood:
Join with the present sickness that I have,
And thy unkindness be like crooked age,
To crop at once a too long withered flower,
Live in thy shame, but die not shame with thee,
These words hereafter thy tormentors be,
Convay me to my bed then to my grave,
Love they to live that love and honor have.
Exit.
King And let them die that age and sullens have,
For both have thou, and both become the grave.

York I do beseech your Majesty, impute his words
To waiward sicklines and age in him,
He loves you on my life, and holds you dear,
As Harry Duke of Hereford were he here.

King Right, you say true, as Herefords love, so his
As theirs, so mine, and all be as it is.

North. My liege, old Gaunt commends him to your Majesty.

King What says he?

North. Nay nothing, all is said:
His tongue is now a stringlesse instrument,
Words, life, and al, old Lancaster has spent.

York Be York the next that must be bankrout so*
Though death be poor, it ends a mortal woe.

King The ripest fruit first falls, and so does he.
His time is spent, our pilgrimage must be;
So much for that. Now for our Irish wars,
We must supplant those rough rugheaded kerne,
Which live like venom, where no venom else,
But only they have privilege to live.
And for these great affairs do ask some charge,
Toward our assistance we do seize to us:
The plate, coin, reue^^^es, and moueables
Whereof our Uncle Gaunt did stand possessed.

York How long shall I be patient? ah how long
Shall tender duty make me suffer wrong?
Not Glocesters death, nor Herefords banishment,
Nor Gauntes robukes, not Englands private wrongs,
Nor the prevention or poor Bulling brook,
About his mariadge, nor my own disgrace,
Have ever made me sower my patient cheek,
Or bend one wrinckie on my sovereigns face:
I am the last of noble Edwards sons,
Of whom thy father Prince of Wales wa^ first
In war was never Lion ragde more fierce,
In peace was never gentle lamb more mild,
Then was that young and princely Gentleman:
His face thou have, for even so looked he,
Accomplished with a number of thy hours;
But when he frowned it was against the french,
And not against his friends: his noble hand
Did win what he did spend, and spent not that
Which (...) triumphant fathers hand had won^e:
His hands were guilty of no kin^ed blood,
But bloody with the enemies of his kin:
Oh Richard: York is too far gone with grief,
Or else he never would compare between.

King Why Uncle what is the matter?

York Oh my liege, pardone me if you please,
If not I pleased not to be pardoned, am content with all,
Seek you to seize and gripe into your hands
The roialties and rights of banished Hereford:
Is not Gaunt dead? and does not Here ford live?
Was not Gaunt just? and is not Harrie true?
Did not the one deserve to have an heir?
Is not his heir a well deserving son?
Take Herefordes rightes away, and take from time
His charters* and his cust omarie rightes;
Let not to morrow then ensue to da^e:
Be not thy self. For how a^t thou a King
But by fair sequence and succession?
Now before God God forbid I say true,
If you do wrongfully seize Herefords rightes,
Call in the letters patents that he has
By his attourneies general to sue
His livery, and deny his offered homage,
You pluck a thousand dangers on your head,
You loose a thousand well disposed hearts,
And prick my tender patience to those thoughts.
Which honor, and allegiance cannot think.

King Think what you will, we cease into our hands
His plate, his goods, his money and his lands.

York I Will not be by the while, my liege farewell,
What will ensue hereof there is none can tell:
But by bad courses may be understood
That their events can never fall out good.
Exit.
King Go Bushie to the Earl of Wiltshire straight.
Bid him repair to us to Ely house,
To see this bu^^nes: to morrow next
We will for Ireland, and it is time I trow,
And we create in absence of our self,
Our Uncle York Lord governor of England;
For he is just, and always loved us well:
Come on our Queen, to morrow must we part,
Be merry, for our time of stay is short.

Exeunt King and Queen: Manet North. North. Well Lords, the Duke of Lancaster
is dead.

Rosse And living to, for now his son is Duke.

Will. Barely in title, not in revenues.

North. Richly in both if justice had her right.

Rosse My heart is great, but it must break with silence,
Eart be disburdened with a liberal tongue.

North. Nay speak thy mind, and let him nere speak more
That speaks thy words again to do thee harm.

Will. Tends that thou would speak to the Duke of Herford
If it be so, out with it boldly man.
Quick is mine ear to hear of good toward him.

Rosse No good at all that I can do for him,
Vnless^ you call it good to pity him,
Bereft, and gelded of his patrimony.

North. Now before God it is shame such wrongs are borne,
In him a royal Prince and many mo,
Of noble blood in this declining land,
The King is not himself, but basely led
By flatterers, and what they will inform,
Merely in hate against any of us all,
That will the King severely prosecute,
Against us, our lives, our children, and our heirs.

Rosse The commons has he pild with grie^ous taxes,
And quite lost their hearts* The nobles has he find,
For ancient quarrels and quite lost their hearts.

Willo. And daily new exactions are deuisde,
As blanckes, beneuolences, and I wot not what:
But what a Gods name does become of this?

North. Wars has not wasted it, for warrde he has not,
But basely yee^ded upon compromise,
That which his noble ancestors atchiued with blows,
More has he spent in peace then they in wars.

Rosse The Earl of Wiltshire has the realm in farm.

Will. The King grown banckro^t like a broken man.

North. Reproach and dissolution hangs over him.

Rosse He has not money for these Irish wars,
His burthenous taxations notwithstanding,
But by the robbing of the banished Duke.

North. His noble kinsman most degenerate King,
But Lords we hear this fearful tempest sing,
Yet seek no shelter to avoid the storm:
We see the wind sit sore upon our fails.
And yet we strike not, but securely perish.

Rosse We see the very wrack that we must suffer,
And vnauoided is the danger now
For suffering so the causes of our wrack.

North. Not so, even through the hollow eyes of death,
I spy life peering but I dare not say,
How near the tidings of our comfort is.

Will. Nay let us share thy thoughts as thou do ours.

Rosse Be confident to speak Northumberland
We three are but thy self, and speaking so
Thy words are but as thoughts, therefore be bold.

North. Then thus, I have from le Port Blan
A Bay in Britain receiude intelligence,
That Harry duke of Her^ord, Rainold L. Cobham
That late broke from the Duke of Exeter
His brother, archbishop late of Canterbury,
Sir Thomas E^pingham, sir John Ramston,
Sir John Norbery, sir Robert Water^on, and Francis Coin^s;
All these well furnished by the Duke of Britain
With eight tall ships, three thousand men of war,
Are making hither with all due expedience,
And shortly mean to touch our Northern shore:
Perhaps they had er^ this, but that they stay
The first departing of the King for Ireland.
If then we shall shake off our slavish yoke,
Impe out our drowping countries broken wing,
Redeem from Broking pawn the blemished Crown,
Wipe off the dust that hides our Scepters guilt,
And make high Majesty look like it self,
Away with me in post to Rauenspurgh:
But if you faint, as fearing to do so,
Stay, and be secret, and my self will go.

Rosse To horse, to horse, urge doubts to them that fear.

Willo. Hold out my horse, and I will first be there.

Exeunt. Enter the Queen, Bushie, Bagot. Bush. Madam, your majesty is too
much sad,
You promised, when you parted with the King,
To lay aside life-harming heaviness,
And entertain a cheerful disposition.

Queen To please the king I did, to please my self
I cannot do it; yet I know no cause
Why I should welcome such a guest as Grief,
Save bidding farewell to so sw^^te a guest,
As my sweet Richard: yet again me thinks
Some unborn sorrow ripe in Fortunes womb.
Is comm^ng toward me and my inward soul,
With nothing trembles, at something it grieves,
More then with parting from my Lord the King.

Bushie Each substance of a grief has twenty shadows.
Which shewe^ like grief it self, but is not so:
For Sorrows eyes giazed with blinding tears,
Diuides one thing entire to many objects,
Like perspectiues, which rightly gazde upon
Show nothing but confusion; eyde awry,
Distinguish form: so your sweet majesty,
Looking awry upon your Lords departure,
Find shapes of grief more than himself to wail,
Which looked on as it is, is naught but shadows
Of what it is not; then thrice (gracious Queen)
More then your Lords departure weep not, more is not seen
Or if it be, it is with false Sorrows eye,
Which for things true, weeps things imaginary.

Queen It may be so; but yet my inward soul
Persuades me it is otherwise: how ere it be,
I cannot but be sad: so heavy sad,
As thought on thinking on no thought I think,
Makes me with heavy nothing faint and shrink.

Bush. It Is nothing but conceit my gracious Lady.

Queen It Is nothing less: conceit is still deriude,
From some forefather grief, m^ne is not so,
For nothing has begot my something grief,
Or something has the nothing that I grieve,
It Is in reuersion that I do possess,
But what it is that is not yet known what,
I cannot name, it is n^melesse woe I wot.

Green God save your majesty, and well met Gentlemen,
I hope the King is not yet shipped for Ireland.

Queen Why hopest thou so? it is better hope he is,
For his designs crave haste, his haste good hope:
Then wherefore do thou hope he is not shipped?

Green That he our hope might have retirde his power,
And driven into despair an enemies hope,
Who strong'y has set footing in this land,
The banished Bullingbrooke repeales himself,
And with vplifted arms is safe ariude at Rauenspurgh.

Queen Now God in heaven forbid.

Green Ah Madam! it is too true, and that is worse:
The lord Northumberland, his son young H. Percie,
The lords of Rosse, Beaumond, and Willoughby,
With all their powerful friends are fled to him.

Bush. Why have you not proclaimd Northumberland
And all the rest revolted faction, traitors?

Green We have, whereupon the earl of Worces^er
Has brok^n his Staff, resignd his Stewardship,
And all the household servants sled with him to Bullingbrook

Queen So Green, thou art the midwife to my woe,
An^ Bullingbrooke my sorrows dismal heir,
Now has my soul brought forth her prodigy,
And I a gasping new deliue^d mother,
Have woe to woe, sorrow to so^ow ioynde

Bushie Despair not Madam.

Queen Who (...) hinder me?
I will despair and be at enmity
With cousening Hope, he is a flatterer,
A parasite, a keeper back of Death,
Who gently would dissolve the bands of life,
Which false Hope lingers in extremity.

Green Here comes the Duke of York.

Queen With signs of war about his aged neck,
Oh full of careful business are his looks!
Uncle, for Gods sake speak comfortable words.

York Should I do so I should belly my thoughts,
Comfort's in heaven, and we are on the earth,
Where nothing lives but c^osses, cares and grief:
Your husband, he is gone to save far off,
Whilst others come to make him loose at home:
Here am I lef^ to underprop his land,
Who weak with age cannot support my self,
Now comes the sick hour that his surfeit made,
Now shall he try his friends that flatterd him.

Seruingman My Lord, your son was gone before I came.

York He was; why so go all which way it will:
The nobles they are fled, the commons they are cold,
And will (I fear) reuolton Herefords side.
S^rra, get thee to Plashie to my sister Gloucester,
Bid her send me presently a thousand pound,
Hold take my ring.

Seruingman My Lord, I had forgot to tell your Lordship:
To day as I came by I called there,
But I shall grieve you to report the rest.

York What is it knave?

Seruingman An hour before I came the Duchess died.

York God for his mercy, what a tide of woes
Comes rushing on this woeful land at once!
I know not what to do: I would to God,
(So my untruth had not prouokt him to it)
The King had cut off my head with my brothers.
Wh^t are there no Posts dispatched for Ireland?
H^w shall we do for money for these wars?
Come sister, cousin I would say, pray pardon me:
Go fellow get thee home, provide some carts,
And bring away the armor that is there.
Gentlemen, will you go muster men?
If I know how or which way to order these affairs
Thus disorderly thrust into my hands,
Never believe me: both are my kinsmen.
Tone is my sovereign, whom both my oath
And duty bids defend; the other again
Is my kinsman, whom the King has wronged,
Whom conscience, and my kindred bids to right.
Well somewhat we must do: Come cousin,
I Will dispose of you: Gentlemen, go muster up your men,
And meet me presently at Barkly:
I should to Plashie too, but time will not permit:
All is uneven, and every thing is left at six and seven.

Exeunt Duke* Qu. man* Bush. Green, Bush. The wind sits fair for news to go
for Ireland.
But none returns. For us to levy power
Proportionable to the enemy is all impossible.

Gree. Besides our neerenes to the King in love,
Is near the hate of those love not the King.

Bag. And that is the wavering commons, for their love
Lies in their purses, and who so empties them,
By so much fills their hearts with deadly hate.

Bush. Wherein the King stands generally condemnd.

Bag. If judgment lie in them, then so do we,
Because we ever have been near the King.

Gree. Well I will for refuge straight to Brist, Castle,
The Earl of Wiltshire is already there.

Bush. Thither will I with you, for little office
Will the hateful commons perform for us.
Except like curs to tear us all to pieces:
Will you go along with us?

Bag. No, I will to Ireland to his Majesty,
Farewell if hearts presages be not vain,
We three here part that nere shall meet again.

Bush. That's as York thriues to beat back Bullingbrook.

Gree. Alas poor Duke the task he undertakes,
Is numbering sands, and drinking Oceans dry,
Where one on his side fights, thousands will fly:
Farewell at once, for once, for all, and ever.

Bush. Well, we may meet again.

Bag. I fear me never.

Enter Hereford, Northumberland. Bull. How far is it my Lord to Barckly now?

North. Believe me noble Lord,
I am a stranger here in Glocestershire,
These high wild hills and rough uneven ways,
Draws out our miles and makes them wearisome,
And yet your fair discourse has been as sugar,
Making the hard way sweet and delectable,
But I bethink me what a weary way
From Rauenspurgh to Cotshall will be found,
In Rosse and Wilsoughby wanting your company,
Which I protest has very much beguild,
The tediousness and process of my travel:
But theirs is sweetened with the hope to have
The present benefit which I pessesse.
And hope to joy is little less in joy,
Then hope enjoyed: by this the weary Lords
Shall make their way seem short as mine has done,
By sight of what I have, your noble company.

Bull. Of much less value is my company,
Then your good words. But who comes here?

Enter Harry Persie. North. It is my son young Harry Persy,
Sent from my brother Worcester whence soever.
Harry, how fares your Vn^kle?

H. Per. I had thought my Lord to have learned his health of you.

North. Why is he not with the Queen?

H. Per. No my good Lord, he has for sooke the court.
Broken his staff of office and dispersed
The household of the King.

North. What was his reason, he was not so resolude,
When last we spoke together?

H. Per. Because your Lo: was proclaimed traitor,
But he my Lo: is gone to Rauenspurgh,
To offer service to the Duke of Hereford,
And sent me over by Barckly to discover,
What power the Duke of York had levied there,
Then with directions to repair to Rauenspurgh.

North. Have you forgot the Duke of Herefords boy?

H. Per. No my good Lo: for that is not forgot,
Which nere I did remember, to my knowledge
I never in my life did look on him.

North. Then learn to know him now, this is the Duke.

H. Per. My gracious Lo: I tender you my service,
Such as it is, being tender, raw, and young,
Which elder days shall ripen and confirm
To more approved service and desert.

Bull. I thank thee gentle Persy, and be sure.
I count my self in nothing else so happy,
As in a soul remembering my good friends*
And as my fortune ripens with thy love,
It shall be still thy true loves recompense,
My heart this covenant makes, my hand thus seals it.

North. How far is it to Barckly, and what s^ur
Keeps good old York there with his men of war?

H. Per. There stands the Castle by yon tuft of trees,
Mand with 300. men as I have heard,
And in it are the Lords of York Barkly and Seymer,
None else of name and noble estimate.

North. Here come the Lords of Rosse and Willoughby*
Bloody with spurring, fiery red with haste.

Bull. VVelcome my Lords, I wot your love pursues,
A banished traitor: all my treasury
Is yet but unfelt thanks, which more inricht*
Shall Be your love and labors recompense.

Rosse Your presence makes us rich, most noble Lord.

Will. And far surmounts our labor to attain it.

Bull. Evermore thanke's the exchequer of the poor.
Which till my infant fortune comes to years,
Stands for my bounty: but who comes here?

North. It is my Lord of Barkly as I guess.

Barkly My Lord of Hereford my message is to you*

Bull. My Lord my answer is to Lancaster,
And I am come to seek that name in England,
And I must find that title in your tongue,
Before I make reply to ought you say.

Bar. Mistake me not my Lord, it is not my meaning,
To race one title of your honor out:
To you my Lo: I come, what Lo: you will,
From the most gracious regent of this land
The Duke of York: to know what pricks you on,
To take advantage of the absent time,
And fright out native peace with selfeborne arms?

Bull. I shall not need transport my words by you,
Here comes his grace in person, my noble Uncle.

York Show me thy humbl^ heart, and not thy knee,
Whose duty is deceivable and false.

Bull. My gracious Uncle.

Yor. Tut tut, grace me no grace, nor uncle me no uncle,
I am no traitors Uncle, and that word Grace
In an ungracious mouth is but profane:
Why have those banished and forbidden legs,
Dard once to touch a dust of Englands ground:
Put then more why? why have they dard to march
So many miles upon her peaceful boso^e,
Frighting her pale faced villadges with war,
And ostentation of despised arms?
Comst thou because the anointed king is hence?
Why soolish boy the King is left behind,
And in my loiall bosom lies his power,
Were I but now Lord of such hot youth,
As when b^aue Gaunt thy father and my self*
Rescued the black prince that young Mars of men*
From forth the ranckes of many thousand french,
O then how quickly should this arm of mine,
Now prisoner to the Palsy chastise thee,
And minister correction to thy fault!

Bull. My gracious Uncle let me know my fault,
On what condition stands it and wherein?

York Even in condition of the worst degree,
In gross rebelli^n and detested treason,
Thou art a banished man and here art come,
Before the expiration of thy time,
In bra^^ng arms against thy sovereign.

Bull. As I was banished, I was banished Hereford,
But as I come, I come for Lancaster.
And noble Vnck^e I beseech your grace,
Look on my wrongs with an indifferent eye:
You are my father, for me thinks in you
I see old Gaunt alive. Oh then my father,
Will you permit that I shall stand condemnd
A wandering vagabond, my rights and royalties
Plucked from my arms perforce; and given away
To vpstart unthrifts? wherefore was I borne?
If that my cousin King be King in England,
It must be granted I am duke of Lancaster:
You have a son, Aumerle, my noble cousin,
Had you first died, and he bin thus trod down,
He should have found his uncle Gaunt a father,
To rowze his wrongs and chase them to the baie.
I am denied to sue my Livery here,
And yet my le^ters pa^tents give me leave.
My fathers goods are all ^^strainde and sold,
And these, and all, are all amiss employed.
What would you have me do? I am a subject*
And I challenge law, Atturnies are denied me,
And therefore personally I lay my claim
To my inheritance of free descent.

North. The noble Duke has bin too much abused.

Rosse It stands your Grace upon to do him right.

Willo. Base men by his endowments are made great.

York My Lords of England, let me tell you this:
I have had feeling of my cou^ins wrongs,
And labourd all I could to do him right:
But in this kind to come, in brauing arms
Be his own caruer, and cut out his way,
To find out right with wrong it may not be:
And you that do abette him in this kind,
Cherish rebellion, and are rebels all.

North. The noble Duke has sworn his coming is,
But for his own; and for the right of that,
We al have strongly sworn to give him aid:
And let him never see joy that breaks that oath.

York Well well* I see the issue of these arms,
I cannot mend it I must needs confess,
Because my power is weak and all ill left:
But if I could, by him that gave me life,
I would attach you all, and make you stoop
Unto the sovereign mercy of the king;
But since I cannot, be it known unto you,
I do remain as newter, so fare you well,
Unless you please to enter in the castle,
And there repose you for this night.

Bull. An offer uncle that we will accept,
But we must win your Grace to go with us,
To Bristow castle, which they say is held
By Bushie, Bagot, and their accomplices*
The caterpillars of the commonwealth,
Which I have sworn to weed and pluck away.

York It may be I will go with you, but yet I Will pawse,
For I am loath to break our countries laws*
Nor friends, nor foes to me welcome you are:
Things past redress, are now with me past care.

Exeunt. Enter earl of Salisbury and a Welsh captain. Welsh. My lord of
Salisbury, we have stayed ten days.
And hardly kept our countrymen together,
And yet we hear no tidings from the King,
Therefore we will disperse our selves, farewell.

Salis. Stay yet an other day, thou trusty Welchman,
The King reposeth all his confidence in thee.

Welsh. It Is thought the King is dead; we will not stay,
The bay trees in our country are al witherd,
And Meteors fright the fixed stars of heaven,
The pale-facde moon looks bloody on the earth,
And leane-lookt prophets whisper fearful change,
Rich men look sad, and ruffians dance and leap,
The one in fear to loo^e what they enjoy,
The other to enjoy by rage and war:
These signs forerunne the death or fall of Kings.
Farewell, our countrymen ar^gone and sled*
As well assu^ed Richard their King is dead.

Salis. Ah Richard! with the eyes of heavy mind
I see thy glory like a shooting sta^re
Fall to the base earth from the firmament,
Thy sun sets weeping in the lowly west,
Witnessing storms to come, woe, and vn^est,
Thy friends are fled to wait upon thy foes,
And crosly to thy good all fortune goes.

Enter Duke of Hereford, York, Northumberland, Bushie and Green prisoners.
Bull. Bring forth these men.
Bushie and Green, I will not vex your souls,
Since presently your souls must part your bodies
With too much urging your pernicious lives,
For twere no charity; yet to wash your blood
From off my hands, here in the view of men
I will unfold some causes of your deaths:
You have misled a Prince, a royal King,
A happy Gentleman in blood and lineaments,
By you vnhappied, and disfigured clean,
You have in manner with your sinful hours
Made a divorce betwixt his Queen and him,
Br^ke the possession of a royal bed,
And stainde the beutie of a fair Queens cheeks
With tears, drawn from her eyes by your foul wrongs,
My self a Prince, by fortune of my birth,
Near to the King in blood, and near in love,
Till you did make him misinterpret me,
Have stoopt my neck under your injuries,
And sigh't my English breath In foreign clouds,
Eating the bitter bread of banishment,
Whilst you have fed upon my seg^ories*
Disparkt my parkes, and felld my forest woods,
From my own windows torn my household coat,
Rac^t out my imp^eese, leaving me no sign,
Save men's opinions, and my living blood,
To show the world I am a gentleman.
This and much more, much more then twice all this
Condemns you to the death: see them delivered over
To execution and the hand of death.

Bush. More welcome is the stroke of death to me.
Than Bullingbrooke to England, Lords farewell.

Green My comfort is, that heaven will take our souls,
And plague injustice with the pains of hell.

Bull. My Lord Northumberland, see them dispatched:
Uncle, you say the Queen is at your house,
For Gods sake fairly let her be entreated,
Tell her I send to her my kind commends;
Take special care my greetings be delivered*

York A gentleman of mine I have dispatched,
With letters of your love to her at large.

Bull. Thanks (gentle uncle:) Come Lords, away,
To fight with Glendor and his accomplices,
A while to work, and after holiday.

Exeunt. Enter the King* Aumerle, Carleil, etc. King Barkloughly castle call
they this at hand?

Aum. Yea my Lord, How brooks your Grace the air*
After your late tossing on the breaking seas?

King Needs must I like it well, I weep for joy*
To stand upon my kingdom once again:
Dear earth I do salute thee with my hand,
Though rebels wound thee with their horses hoofes:
As a long parted mother with her child
Plays fondly with her tears and smiles in meeting;
So weeping, smiling greet I thee my earth,
And do thee favors with my royal hands;
Feed not thy Sovereigns foe, my gentle earth,
Nor with thy sweetes comfort his ravenous sense,
But let thy Spiders that suck up thy venom,
And heauy-gated toades lie in their way,
Doing annoyance to the treacherous feet,
Which with usurping steps do trample thee,
Yield stinging nettles to mine enemies:
And when they from thy bosom pluck a flower,
Guard it I pray thee with a lurking Adder,
Whose double tongue may with a mortal touch,
Throw death upon thy* (...) enemies,
Mock not my sencel^s coniuration Lords,
This earth shall have a feeling, and these stones,
Prove armed soldiers ere her native King,
Shall faulter under foul rebellions arms.

Carl. Fear not my Lord, that power that made you king*
Has power to keep you king in spite of all,
The means that heavens yield must be embraced
And not neglected. Else heaven would,
And we will not, heavens offer, we refuse,
The proffered means of succors and redress.

Aum. He means my Lo: that we are too remiss,
Whilst Bulling brook through our security,
Grows strong and great in substance and in power.

King Discomfortable Coosen know thou not,
That when the searching eye of heaven is hid,
Behind the globe that lights the lower world,
Then thieves and robbers range abroad unseen,
In murders and in outrage bouldy here,
But when from under this terrestrial ball,
He fires the proud tops of the eastern pines,
And darts his light through every guilty hole,
Then murders, treasons and detested sins,
The cloak of night being plucked from off their backs,
Stand bare and naked trembling at themselves?
So when this thief, this traitor Bulling brook,
Who all this while has reueld in the night,
Whilst we were wandering with the Antipodes*
Shall see us rising in our throne the east,
His treasons will sit blushing in his face,
Not able to endure the ^ight of day,
But self affrighted tremble at his sin,
Not all the water in the rough rude sea,
Can wash the balm off from an anointed King,
The breath of worldly men cannot depose,
The deputy elected by the Lord,
For every man that Bullingbrooke has pressed,
To lift shrewd steel against our golden crown,
God for his Ric: has in heavenly pay,
A glorious Angel; then i^ A^gels fight,
Weak men must ^all, for heaven still gardes the right.

Enter Sali^b. King W^lcome my Lo: how far off lies your power?

Salis. Nor (...) ^arther off my gracious Lo:
Than this weak (...)
And bids me speak o^ nothing but Despai^e,
One day too late I fear me noble Lo*
Has clouded all thy happy days on (...)
O call (...)
And thou shall have twelve thousand fighting men,
To day to day unhappy day too late,
Overthrows thy ioies friends, fortune and thy state*
For all the Welshmen hearing thou were dead,
Are gone to Bullingbrooke dispersed and sled.

Aum. Comfort my lieg^, why loo^^s your grace so pale.

King But now the blood of 20000. men,
Did triumph in my face, and they are fled:
And till so much blood thither come again,
Have I not reason to look pale and dead?
All souls that will be safe, (...) side,
For time has set a blot upon my ^ride.

Aum. Comfort my liege remember who you are.

King I had forgot my self, am I not King?
Awake thou coward Majesty thou sleep.
Is not the Kings name twenty thousand names?
Arm arm, my name a p^ny subiect-strikes,
At thy great glory, look not to the ground,
Ye favorites of a King, are we not high?
High be our thoughts, I know my Uncle York,
Has power e^ough to serve our turn: but who comes here?

Enter Scroope. Scro. More health and happiness betide my lieg^,
Then can my care tunde tongue deliver him.

King Mine ear is open, and my heart prepared,
The worst is worldly loss thou can unfold,
Say, is my kingdom lost? why it was my care,
And what! loss is it to be rid of care?
Strives Bullingbrooke to be as great as we,
Greater he shall not be, if he serve God,
We Will serve him to, and be his fellow so:
Revolt our subjects, that we cannot mende,
They break their faith to God as well as us:
Cry woe, destruction, ruin, and decay,
The worst is death, and death will have his day,

Scro. Glad am I, that your highness is so armde,
To bear the tidings of calamity,
Like an unseasonable stormy day,
Which makes the silver rivers drown their shores,
As if the world were all dissolude to tears:
So high above his limits swells the rage
Of Bullingbrooke covering your fearful land,
With hard bright steel, and hearts harder then steel,
White beards have armd their thin and haireles scalpes
Against thy majesty: boys with women's voices,
Strive to speak big and clap their (...) ioints,
In stiff unweildy arms against thy crown,
Thy very beadsmen learn to bend their bows,
Of double fatal ewe against thy state.
Yea dist^ffe women manage rustie bills
Against thy seat, both young and old rebel,
And all goes worse then I have power to tell.

King Too well too well thou telst a tale so ill,
Where is the Earl of Wilts^ire? where is Bagot?
What is become of Bushie? where is Green?
That they have let the dangerous enemy*
Measure our confines with such peaceful steps*
If we prevail, their heads shall pay for it:
I warrant they have made peace with Bulling.

Scro. Peace have they made with him indeed my Lord.

King Oh villains, vipers, damnd without redemption,
Dogs easily won to fawn on any man.
Snakes in my heart blood warmd, that sting my heart,
Three Iudasses, each one thrice worse then Judas,
Would they make peace? terrible hell,
Make war upon their spotted souls for this.

Scro. Sweet love I see changing his prope^ty,
Turns to the sowrest and most deadly hate,
Again, vncurse their souls, their peace is made
With heads and not with hands, those whom you curse
Have felt the worst of deaths destroying wound,
And lie full low grau'd in the hollow ground.

Aum. Is Bushie, (...) and the Earl of Wiltshire dead.

Scro. I all of them at Bristow lost their heads.

Aum. Where is the Duke my father with his power*

King No matter where^of comfort no man speak:
(...) talk of graves, of worms, and Epitaphs*
Make dust our paper, and with rainy eyes,
Write sorrow on the bosom of the earth.
Lets choose executors and talk of wills:
And yet not so* for what can we bequeath,
Save our deposed bodies to the ground?
Our lands, our lives, and all are Bullingbrookes.
And nothing can we call our own, but death:
And that small ^odle of the barren earth,
Which serves as paste, and cover to our bones,
For Gods sake let us fit upon the ground,
And tell sad sto^ies of the death of Kings,
How some have been depo^d, some slain in war,
^ome haunted by the ghosts they have deposed,
Some poisoned by their wives, some sleeping killed*
All murdered, for within the hollow crown
That roundes the mortal temples of a king,
Keeps death his court, and there the antique s^^s,
^cof^ng his state and grin^ing at his pomp,
Allowing him a b^eath, a little scene,
To monarchise be fea^d, and kill with looks,
^nfusing him with self and vain conceit,
^s if this flesh which walls about ourlife,
^ere brass impregnable: and humord thus,
Comes at the last, and with a little pi^
Boares thor^^^^ his Castle wall, and farewell King;
Cover your heads, and mock not flesh and blood,
With solemn reverence, throw a way respect,
Tradition, form, and ceremonious duty,
For you have but mistook me all this while:
I live with bread like you, feel want,
Taste grief, need friends, subjected thus,
How can you say to me, I am a King?

Carleil My lord, wisemen nere fit and wail their woes,
But presently prevent the ways to wail,
To fear the foe, since fear oppresses strength,
Gives in your weakness strength unto your foe,
And so your follies fight against your self:
Fear and be slain, no wo^se can come to fight,
And fight and die, is death destroying death,
Where fearing dying, paies death servile breath.

Aum. My father has a power, inquire of him,
And learn to make a body of a limme.

King Thou chidst me well, proud Bullingbrooke, I come
To change blows with thee for our day of doom:
This agew fit of fear i^ ouerblowne,
An easy task it is to win our own.
Say Scroope, where lies our uncle with his power?
Speak sweetly man although thy looks be sower.

Scroope Men judge by the complexion of the sky,
The state and inclination of the day;
So may you by my dull and heavy e^e:
My tongue has but a heavier tale to ^ay,
I play the tortutrer by small and small
To lengthen out the worst that must be spoken:
Your uncle York is joined with Bullingbrooke,
And all your Northern castles yielded up,
And all your Southern Gentlemen in arms
Upon his party.

King Thou have said enough:
Beshre^y thee cou^in which did lead me forth.
Of that sweet way I was in to disp^i^^*
What say you now? what comfort have we (...)
By heaven I Will hate him everlastingly;
That bids me be of comfort any more.
Go to Flint Castle, there I Will pine away,
A King woes slave shall kingly woe obey:
That power I have, discharge, and let them go
To ear the land that has some hope to grow,
For I have none, let no man speak again,
To alter this, for counsel is but vain.

Aum. My Liege, one word.

King He does me double wrong,
That wounds me with the flatteries of his tongue.
Discharge my followers, let them hence away,
From Richards night, to Bullingbrookes fair day.

Enter Bull. York, North. Bull. So that by this intelligence we learn
The Welsh men are dispersed, and Salisburie
Is gone to meet the King, who lately landed
With some few private friends upon this coast.

North. The news is very fair^ and good my lord*
Richard not far from hence has hid his head.

York It would beseem the Lord Northumberland
To say King Richard; alack the heavy day,
When such a sacred King should (...) his head.

North. Your Grace mistakes; only to be brief
Left I his title out.

York The time has bin, would you have been so brief with him,
He would have bin so brief to shorten you,
For taking so the head. your whole heads length:

Bull. Mistake not (uncle) further then you should.

York Take not (good cousin) further then you should,
Lest you mistake the heavens are over our heads.

Bull. I know^^ v^cle, and oppose not my self.
Against their will. But, who comes here?
Enter Percie. Welcome Harry; what, will not this castle yield?

H. Per. The Castle royally is mand my Lord.
Against thy entrance.

Bull. Royally, why it contains no King.

H. Per. Yes (my good Lord,)
It does contain a King, King Richard lies
Within the limits of yon lime and ston^,
And with him are the Lord Aumerle, Lord Salisbury,
Sir Stephen Sc^oope, besides a clergy man
Of holy reverence, who I cannot learn.

North. Oh belike it is the bishop of Carleil.

Bull. Noble Lords,
Go to the rude ribs of that ancient Castle,
Through brazen trumpet send the breath of parlee
Into his ruinde ears, and thus deliver.
H. Bull. on both his knees does kiss king Richards hand,
And sends allegiance and true faith of heart
To his most royal person: hither come
Even at his feet to lay my arms and power:
Provided, that my banishment repeald,
And lands restored again be freely granted;
If not, I Will use the advantage of my power,
And lay the summers dust with showers of blood,
Rainde from the wounds of (...) English men,
The which, how (...) off from the mind of Bulling.
It is, such crimson t^mpest should be drench
The fresh green lap of fair King Richards land:
My stooping duty tenderly shall show:
Go signify as much while here we march
Upon the grassie carpet of this plain;
Lets march without the noise of threatening drum,
That from this Castles tottered battlements
Our fair appointments may be well perusde.
Me thinke^ King Richard and my self should meet
With no less terror than the elements
Of fire and water, when their thundering shocke
At meeting tears the cloudie cheeks of heaven.
Be he the fire, I Will be the yielding water;
The rage be his, whilst on the earth I reign.
My water's on the earth, and not on him.
March on, and mark King Richard how he looks,

The trumpets sound, Richard appears on the walls. Bull. See see King Richard
does himself appear.
As does the blushing discontented Sun,
From out the fiery portall of the East,
When he perceiues the envious clouds are bent
To dim his glory, and to stain the tracke
Of his bright passage to the Occident.

York Yet looks he like a King, behold his eye.
As bright as is the Eagles, lightens forth
Controlling majesty; alack alack for woe,
That any harm should stain so fair a show.

King We are amazde, and thus long have we stood,
To watch the fearful bending of thy knee,
Because we'thought ou^ self thy lawful King:
And if we be, how dare thy joints forget
To pay their awefull duty to our presence?
If we be not, show us the hand of God
That has dismissed us from our Stewardship;
For well we know no hand of blood and bone
Can gripe the sacred handle of our Scep^^r*
Unless he do profane, steal, or usurp,
And though you think that all as you have done
Have torn their souls, by turning them from us.
And we are barren and berest of friends:
Yet know, my master God omnipotent.
Is mustering in his clouds on our behalf,
Armies of pestilenc^, and they shall strike
Your children yet unborn, and vnbegot,
That lift your vassaile hands against my head,
And threat the glory of my precious crown.
Tell Bullingbrooke, for yon me thinks he stands,
That every stride he makes upon my land,
Is dangerous t^eason: he is come to open
The purple testament of bl^eding war:
But ere the crown he looks for, live in peace,
Ten thousand bloody crowns of mothers sons,
Shall ill become the flower of Englands face,
Change the complexion of her maid-pale peace,
To scarlet indignation and bedew
Her pastors grass with faithful English blood.

North. The King of heaven forbid: our Lo: the king
Should so with civil and uncivil arms,
be rusht upon. Thy thrice noble Cosen,
Harry Bullingbrooke does humbly kiss thy hand,
And by the honorable tomb he swears,
That stands upon your royal grandsires bones,
And by the roialties of both your bloods,
Currents that spring from one most gracious head,
And by the buried hand of warlike Gaunt,
And by the worth and honor of himself,
Compri^ing all that may be sworn or said.
His coming hither has no further scope,
Then for his lineall roialties, and to beg
Infranchisement immediate on his knees,
Which on thy royal party granted once,
His glittering arms he will commend to rust,
His barbed steeds to stables, and his heart
To faithful service of your Majesty.
This swears he, as he is princess just,
And as I am a gentleman I credit him.

King Northumberland, say thus, the King returns,
His noble Cosen is right welcome hither,
And all the number of his fair demands,
Shall be accomplished without contradiction,
With all the gracious utterance thou have,
Speak to his gentle hearing kind commends.

King We do debase our selves, Cosen do we not,
To look so poorly, and to speak so fair?
Shall we call back Northumberland and send
Defiance to the traitor and so die?

Aum. No good my Lo: lets fight with gentle words,
Till time lend friends, and friends their helpful sword^

King Oh God oh God that ere this ^ong of mine
That said the sentence of dread banishment
On yon proud man should take it off again
With words of sooth! Oh that I were as great
As is my grief, or lesser than my name!
Or that I could forget what I have been!
Or not remember what I must be now!
Swellst thou (proud heart) I Will give thee scope to beat,
Since foes have scope to beat both thee and me.

Aum. Northumberland comes back from Bullingbrooke

King What must the King do now? must he submit?
The King shall do it: must he be deposde?
The king shall be contented: must he loose
The name of King? a Gods name let it go:
I Will give my jewels for a set of Beads:
My gorgeous palace for a hermitage:
My gay apparel for an almesmans gown:
My figurde goblets for a dish of wood:
My scepter for a Palmers walking staff:
My subjects for a pair of carved Saints,
And my large kingdom for a little grave,
A little little grave, an obscure grave,
Or I Will be buried in the Kings hie way,
Some way of common trade, where subjects feet
May hourly trample on their sovereigns head;
For on my heart they tread now whilst I live:
And buried once, why not upon my head?
Aumerle thou weepst (my tenderhearted coosin)
We Will make foul weather with despised tears;
Our sighs and they shall lodge the summer corn,
And make a dearth in this reuolting land:
Or shall we play the wantons with our woes,
And make some pretty match with sheading tears,
As thus to drop them still upon one place,
Till they have fretted us a pair of graves
Within the earth, and therein laid; there lies
Two kinsmen digd their graves with weeping eyes*
Would not this ill do well? well well I see,
I talk but idly, and you laugh at me.
Most mighty Prince my Lord Northumberland,
What says king Bullingbroke, will his majesty
Give Richard leave to live till Richard dye,
You make a leg and Bullingbroke says I.

North. My Lord, in the base count he does attend,
To speak with you, may it please you to come down.

King. Down, down I come, like glistring Phaeton:
Wanting the manage of unruly Iades.
In the base court, base court where Kings grow base,
To come at traitors calls, and do them grace,
In the base court come down: down court, down King,
For nightowles shreeke where mounting larkes should sing.

Bull. What says his majesty?

North. Sorrow and grief of heart,
Makes him speak fondly like a frantike man,
Yet he is come.

Bull. Stand all apart,
And show fair duty to his Majesty:
(he kneeles down. My gracious Lord.

King. fair coosen, you debase your princely knee,
To make the base earth proud with kissing it:
Me rather had my heart might feel your love,
Then my vnpleased eye see your courtesy:
Up coosen up, your heart is up I know,
Thus high at least, although your knee be low.

Bull. My gracious Lord, I come but for mine own*

King. Your own is yours, and I am yours and all.

Bull. So far be mine my most redoubted Lord,
As my true service shall deserve your love.

King. Well you deserve: they well deserve to have,
That know the strong'st and surest way to get*
Uncle give me your hands, ^ay dry your eyes,
Tears show their love, but want their remedies.
Coosen I am to young to be your Father*
Though you are old enough to be my heir,
What you will have, I Will give, and willing to,
For do we must, what force will have us do:
Set on toward London, Cosen is it so?

Bull. Yea my good Lord:

King. Then I must not say no.

Enter the Queen with her attendants Quee. What sport shall we deu^ie he^e in
this garden,
To drive away the heavy thought of care?

Lady Madame we will play at bowls.

Quee. It Will make me think the world is full of rubs,
And that my fortune runs against the b^as.

Lady Madame we will dance.

Quee. My legs can keep no measure in delight,
When my poor heart no measure keeps in grief:
The^fore no dancing girl, some other sport.

Lady Madame we will tell tales.

Quee. Of sorrow or of grief.

Lady Of either Madame.

Quee. Of neither girl:
For if of joy, being altogether wanting,
It does remember me the more of sorrow:
Or if of grief, being altogether had,
It adds more sorrow to my want of joy:
For what I have I need not to repeat,
And what I want it boots not to complain.

Lady Madame I Will sing.

Quee. It Is well that thou have cause,
But thou should please me better, would thou weep.

Lady I could weep; Madame would it do you good?

Quee. And I could sing would weeping do me good,
And never borrow any tear of thee.
Enter Gardeners. But stay, here come the garde^ers,
Lets step into the shadow of these trees,
My wretch^dnes unto a row of pines,
They will talk of state for every one does so,
Against a change woe is fore-runne with woe.

Guard. Go bind thou up young dangling Aphricokes,
Which like unruly children make their sire,
Stoop with oppression of their prodigal weight,
Give some supportance to the bending twigs,
Go thou, and like an executioner
Cut off the heads of two fast growing spraies,
That look too lofty in our commonwealth,
All must be even in our government.
You thus employed, I will go root away
The noisome weeds which without profit suck
The soiles fertility from wholesome flowers.

Man. Why should we in the compass of a pale,
Keep law and form, and due proportion,
Showing as in a modle our firm estate,
When our sea-walled garden the whole land
Is full of weeds, her fairest flowers choakt up,
Her fruit trees all vnpru^de, her hedges ^uinde,
Her knots disordered and her wholesome herbs
Swarming with caterpillars.

Guard. Hold thy peace.
He that htah suffered this disordered spring,
Has now himself met with the fall of leaf:
The weeds which his broad spreading leaves did shelter,
That seemde in eating him to hold him up,
Are plucked up root and all by Bullingbrooke,
I mean the Earl of Wiltshire, Bushie, Green,

Man. What are they dead?

Guard. They are.
And Bullingbrooke has ceasde the wastefull king,
Oh what pity is it that he had not so trimde,
And dressed his land a^ we this garden at time of year
Do wound the bark, the skin of our fruit trees,
Lest being ^uer proud in (...) blood,
With too much riches it (...) it self
Had he done so to great and growing men,
They might have liude to bear* and he to taste
Their fruits of duty: supe^fluous branches
We loppe away* that bearing boughs may live:
Had he done so, himself had borne the crown,
Which waste of idle hours has quite thrown down*

Man. What, think you the King shall be deposed?

Guard. Deprest he is already, and deposde
It Is doubt he will be. Letters came last night
To a dear friend of the good Duke of Yo^kes,
That tell black tidings.

Queen Oh I am pressed to death through want of speaking
Thou old Adams likeness set to dress this garden,
How dares thy harsh rude tongue sound this unpleasing news?
What Eve? what serpent has suggested thee
To make a second fall of cursed man?
Why do thou say king Richard is deposde?
Dare ^hou thou little better thing than earth
Divine his down fall? say, where, when, and how,
Can thou by this ill tidings speak thou wretch?

Guard. Pardon me Madam, little joy have I
To breathe this news, yet what I say is true:
King Richard he is in the mighty hold
Of Bullingbrooke: their fortunes both are weyde
In your Lo. scale is nothing but himself,
And some few vanities that make him light:
But in the balance of great Bullingbrooke,
Besides himself are all the English peers,
And with that odds he weighs King Richard down;
Post you to London and you will find it so,
I speak no mo^e than every one does know.

Queen Nimble Mischance that a^^e so light of foot,
Does not thy embassage belong to me,
And am I last that knows it? Oh thou think
To se^ue me last that I may longest keep
Thy sorrow in my breast: come, Ladies go
To meet at London Londons king in woe:
What, was I borne to this that my sad look
Should grace the triumph of great Bullingbrooke?
Gardner for telling me these news of woe,
Pray God the plants thou graftst may never grow.
Exit
Guard. Poor Queen, so that thy state might be no worse,
I would my Skill were subject to thy cu^se:
Here did she fall a tear, here in this place
I Will set a bank of Rue sour herb of grace,
Rue even for ruth here shortly shall be seen,
In the remembrance of a weeping Queen.

Exeunt. Enter Bullingbrooke with the Lords to parliament. Bull. Call forth
Bagot.
Enter Bagot. Now Bagot, freely speak thy mind,
What thou do know of noble Gloucesters death,
Who wrought it with the King, and who performde
The bloody office of his timeles end.

Bagot Then set before my face the Lord Aumerle.

Bull. Cousin, stand forth, and look upon that man.

Bagot My Lord Aumerle, I know your daring tongue
Scorns to unsay what once it has delivered.
In that dead time when Glocesters death was plotted
I heard you say, Is not my arm of length,
That reaches from the restful English court,
As far as Callice to mine uncles head?
Amongst much other talk that very time
I heard you say* that you had rather refuse
The offer of an hundred thousand crowns,
Then Bullingbrookes return to England, adding withal,
How blessed this land would be in this your cosins death.

Aum. Princes and noble Lords,
What answer shall I make to this base man?
Shall I so much dishonor my fair stars
On equal terms to give them chasticement?
Either I must, or have mine honor soild
With the attainder of his slanderous lips.
The^^ is my gage, the manual seal of death,
That ma^kes thee out for hell, I say thou lie,
And will maintain what thou have said is false
In thy heart blood, though being all too base
To stain the temper of my knightly sword.

Bull. Bagot, forbear, thou shall not take it up.

Aum. Excepting one, I would he were the best
In all this presence that has moude me so.

Fitz. If that thy valor stand on simpathie,
There is my gage Aumerle, in gage to thine;
By that fair Sun which shows me where thou standst,
I heard thee say, and vauntingly thou spakst it,
That thou were cause of noble Gloucesters death,
If thou deniest it twenty times, thou lie,
And I will turn thy falshoode to thy heart,
Where it was forged with my rapiers point.

Aum. Thou dare not (coward) live to see that day.

Fitz. Now by my soul, I would it were this hour.

Aum. Fitzwaters, thou art damnd to hell for this.

L. Per. Aumerle, thou lie, his honor is as true
In this appeal as thou art all unjust,
And that thou art so, there I throw my gage,
To prove it on thee to the extremest point
Of mortal breathing, ceaze it if thou dare.

Aum. And if I do not, may my hands rot off,
And never brandish more reuengefull steel
Over the glittering helmet of my foe.

Another L. I task the earth to the like (forsworn Aumerle)
And spur thee on with full as many lies
As it may be hollowed in thy treacherous ear
From sin to sin: there is my honors pawn
Engage it to the trial if thou dare.

Aum. Who sets me else? by heaven I Will throw at all,
I have a thousand spirits in one breast,
To answer twenty thousand such as you.

Sur. My lord Fitzwater, I do remember well
The very time (Aumerle) and you did talk.

Fitz. It Is very true you were in presence then,
And you can witness with me this is true.

Sur As false, by heaven, as heaven it self is true.

Fitz. Surrie thou lie.

Sur. Dishonorable boy, that lie shall lie so heavy on my sword,
That it shall render vengeance and revenge,
Till thou the lie-giuer, and that lie do lie,
In earth as quiet as thy fathers scull.
In proof whereof there is my honors pawn,
Engage it to the trial if thou dare.

Fitz. How fondly do thou spur a forward horse!
If I dare eat, or drink, or breathe, or live,
I dare meet Surry in a wilderness,
And spit upon him whilst I say, he lies,
And lies, and lies: there is bond of faith,
To tie thee to my strong correction:
As I intend to thrive in this new world,
Aumerle is guilty of my true appeal.
Besides I heard the banished Norffolke say,
That thou Aumerle did send two of thy men,
To execute the noble Duke at Callice.

Aum. Some honest Christian trust me with a gage,
That Norffolke lies, here do I throw down this,
If he may be repeald to try his honor.

Bull. These differences shall all rest under gage,
Till Norffolke be repeald, repeald he shallbe,
And though mine enemy, restord again
To all his lands and signiories: when he is returned.
Against Aumerle we will enforce his trial.

Carl. That honorable day shall never be seen,
Many a time has banished Norffolke fought,
For Jesus Christ in glorious Christian field,
Streaming the ensign of the Christian Cross,
Against black Pagans, Turks, and Saracens,
And toild with works of war, retird him self
To Italy, and there at Venice gave
His body to that pleasant Countries earth,
And his pure soul unto his Captain Christ,
Under whose colors he had fought so long.

Bull. Why B. is Norffolke dead?

Carl. As surely as I live my Lord.

Bull. Sweet peace conduct his sweet soul to the bosom,
O^ good old Abraham^ Lords Appellants*
Your differences shall all rest under gage.
Till we assign you to your days of trial.

Enter York York Great Duke of Lancaster I come to thee;
From plume-pluckt Richard, who with willing soul,
Adopts the heir, and his high scepter yeeldes,
To the possession of thy royal hand:
Ascend his throne, descending now from him,
And long live Henry fourth of that name.

Bull. In Gods name I Will ascend the regal throne.

Car. Ma^y God forbid.
Worst in this ^oyall presence may I speak.
Yet best beseeming me to speak the truth,
Would God that any in this noble presence,
Were enough noble to be upright judge
Of noble Richard. Then true noblesse would
Learn him forbearance from so foul a wrong,
What subject can give sentence on his King:
And who sits here that is not Richards subject?
Thieves are not iudgd but they are by to hear,
Although apparent gui^t be seen in them,
And shall the figure of Gods Majesty,
His Captain, steward, deputy, elect,
Anointed, crowned, planted, many years
Be iudgd by subject and inferior breath,
And he himself not present? Oh for^end it God,
That in a Christian climate souls refinde,
Should show so heinous black obsceene a deed
I speak to subjects and a subject speaks,
Stird up by God thus boldly, for his King,
My Lord of (...) here whom you call King,
Is a foul traitor to proud Herefords King,
And if you crown^ him let me prophecy,
The blood of English shall manure the ground,
And future ages groan^ for this foul act,
Peace shall go sleep with turks and infidels,
And in this seat of peace, tumultuous wars,
Shall kin with kin, and kind with kind confound:
Disorder, horror, fear, and mutiny,
Shall here inhabit, and this land be called,
The field of Golgotha and dead men's sculs.
Oh if yon raise this house against this house,
It will the wofullest division prove,
That ever fell upon this cursed earth:
Prevent it, resist it, let it not be so,
Lest child, child's children* cry against you woe.

North. Well have you argued sir, and for your pains,
Of Capital treason, we arrest you here:
My Lord of Westminster, be it your charge,
To keep him safely till his day of trial.

Bull. Let it be so, and lo on wednesday next,
We solemnly proclaim our Coronation,
Lords be ready all.

Exeunt. Manent West. Caleil, Aumerle. Abbot. A woeful Pageant have we here
behel^

Car. The woe's to come, the children yet vnborn^
Shall feel this day as sharp to them as thorn.

Aum. You holy Clergy men, is there no plot,
To rid the realm of this pernicious blot?

Abbot. My Lo. before I freely speak my mind herein,
You shall not only take the Sacrament,
To bury mine intents, but also to effect,
What ever I shall happen to devise:
I see your brows are full of discontent,
Your hearts of sorrow, and your eyes of tears:
Come home with me to supper, I Will lay a plot,
Shall show us all a merry day.

Exeunt. Enter the Queen with her attendants. Quee. This way the King will
come, this is the way,
To Julius Caesar's ill erected Tower,
To whose flint bosom, my condemned Lord,
Is doomde a prisoner by proud Bullingbrooke*
Here let us rest, if this rebellious earth,
Have any resting for her true Kings Queen.
(Enter Ric. But soft, but see, or rather do not see,
My fair Rose wither, yet look up, behold,
That you in pity may dissolve to de^w*
And wash him fresh again with true love ^eares.
Ah thou the modle where old Troy did stand!
Thou map of honor, thou King Richards tomb,
And not King Richard: thou most beauteous Inn,
Why should hard favored grief be Iodged in thee,
When triumph is become an alehouse guest?

Rich. join not with grief fair woman, do not so,
To make my end too sudden, learn good soul,
To think our former state a happy dream,
From which awakt the truth of what we are
Shows us but this: I am swo^ne brother (sweet)
To grim necessity, and he and I,
Will keep a league till death. Hie thee to France,
And cloister thee in some religious house,
Our holy lives must win a new worlds crown,
Which ou^ profane hours here have thrown down.

Quee. what is my Richard both in shape and mind
Transformd and weakened? has Bullingbrooke,
Deposde thine intellect? has he been in thy heart?
The Lion dying thrusts forth his pawe,
And wounds the ear^h if nothing else with rage,
To be ore-powr'd, and will thou pupill-like
Take the correction, mildly kiss the rod,
And fawn on Rage with base humility,
Which art a Lion and the king of beasts.

King. a King of beasts indeed, if aught but beasts,
I had been (...) a happy King of men.
Good (sometimes Queen) prepare thee hence for France,
Think I am dead, and that even here thou take
As from my death bed thy last living leave;
In winters tedious nights sit by the fire,
with good old folks, and let them tell the tales,
Of woeful ages long ago be tidde:
And ere thou bid good night to quite their griefs,
Tell thou the lamentable tale of me,
And send the hearers weeping to their beds:
For why, the senseless brands will simpathize
The heavy accent of thy moving tongue,
And in compassion weep the fire out,
And some will mourn in ashes, some cole black,
For the deposing of a rightful King.

Enter Northum. North. My Lord, the mind of Bullingbrooke is changde,
You must to Pomfret, not unto the Tower.
And Madam, there is order taken for you,
With all swift speed you must away to France.

King Northumberland, thou ladder wherewithal
The mounting Bullingbrooke ascends my throne,
The time shall not be many hours of age
More than it is, ere foul sin gathering head
Shall break into corruption, thou shall think,
Though he divide the realm and give thee half*
It is too little helping him to all.
He shall think that thou which know the way
To plant unrightful kings, wilt know again,
Being nere so little vrgde another way,
To pluck him headlong from the usurped throne^
The love of wicked men conue^ts to fear,
That fear to hate; and hate turns one or both
To worthy danger and deserved death.

North. My guilt be on my head, and there an end:
Take leave and part, for you must part forthwith.

King Doubly ^iuorst (bad men) you violate
A twofold marriage twixt my crown and me,
And then betwixt me and my married wife.
Let me vnkisse the oathe twixt thee and me:
And yet not so, for with a kiss ^was made*
Part us Northumberland, I toward the north,
Where shiuering cold and sickness pines the clime:
My wife to France, from whence set forth in pomp
She came adorned hither like sweet Ma^e,
Sent back like Hollowmas or shortst of day.

Queen And must we be divided? must we part?

King I hand from hand (my love) and heart from heart.

Queen Banish us both, and send the King with me.

King That were some love, but little policy.

Queen Then whither he goes, thither let me go.

King So two together weeping make one woe,
Weep thou for me in France, I for thee here,
Better far off than near be nere the near,
Go c^unt thy way with sighs, I mine with groans.

Queen So longest way shall have the longest moanes.

King Twice for one step I Will groan the way being short
And piece the way out with a heavy heart.
Come come in wooing sorrow lets be brief,
Since wedding it, there is such length in grief;
One kiss shall stop our mouths, and dumbly part,
Thus give I mine, and thus take I thy heart.

Queen Give me mine own again, twere no good part
To take on me to keep, and kill thy heart:
So now I have mine own again, be gone,
That I may strive to kill it with a groan.

King We make woe wanton with this fond delay,
Once more adue, the rest let sorrow say.

Exeunt. Enter Duke of York and the Duchess. Du. My Lord, you told me you
would tell the rest,
When weeping made you break the story of
Of our two co^^ins coming into London.

York Where did I leave?

Du. At that sad stop my Lord,
Where rude misgouerned hands from windows tops.
Threw dust and rubbish on king Richards head.

York. Then (as I said) the Duke great Bullingbrooke
Mounted upon a hot and fiery steed,
Which his aspiring rider seemd to know,
With slow, but stately pase kept on his course,
Whilst all tongues cried, God save the Bullingbrooke,
You would have thought the very (...)
^o many greedy looks of young and old
Through casements darted their desiring eyes
Upon his visage, and that all the wa^les
With painted imagery had said at once,
Jesus preserve the welcome Bullingbrooke,
Whilst he from the one side to the other turning
Bare-headed, lower than his proud steedes ne^ke
Bespake them thus; I thank you country men:
And thus still doing* thus he passt along.

Du. Alac poor Richard, where rode he the whilst?

York As in a Theater the eyes of men,
After a well-graced Actor leaves the stage,
Are ydly bent on him that enters next,
Thinking his prattle to be ^edious;
Even so, or with much more contempt men's eyes
Did scowle on gentle Ric. no man cried, God save him,
No joyful tongue gave him his welcome home,
But dust was thrown upon his (...)
Which with such gentle sorrow he shook off,
His face still combating with tears and smiles,
The badges of his grief and patience,
That had not God for some strong purpose steeld
The hearts of men, they must perforce have melted,
(...)
But heaven has a hand in these events,
To whose high* will we bound our calm contents,
To Bullingbrooke are we sworn subjects now,
Whose state and honor I for ay allow.

Du. Here comes my son Aumerle.

York Aumerle that was,
But that is lost, for being Richards friend:
And Madam, you must call him Rutland now:
I am in parleament pledge for his truth
And lasting fealty to the new made king.

Du. Welcome my son, who are the violets now
That (...) the green lap of the new come spring.

Au. Madam, I know not, nor I greatly care not,
God knows I had as leife be none as one.

York Well, bear you well in this new spring of time,
Lest you be cropped before you come to prime.
What news from Oxford, do these iusts and triump hs hold?

Aum. For aught I know (my Lord) they do.

York you will be there I know.

Aum. If God prevent not. I purpose so.

York What seal is that that hangs without thy bosom?
yea, lookst thou pale? let me see the writing,

Aum. My Lord, it is nothing.

York No matter then who see it,
I will be satisfied, let me see the writing.

Aum. I do beseech your grace to pardon me;
It is a matter of small consequence,
Which for some reasons I would not have seen.

York Which for some reasons sir I mean to see.
I fear I fear.

Du. What should you fear?
It Is nothing but some band that he is entered into
For gay apparel against the triumph day.

York Bound to himself; what does he with a bond
That he is bound to. Wife, thou art a fool:
Boy, let me see the writing.

Aum. I do beseech you pardon me, I may not show it.

York I will be satisfied, let me see it I say:

He pluckes it out of his bosom and reads it* York Treason, foul treason,
villain, traitor* slave,

Du. What is the matter my lord?

York Ho, who is within there? saddle my horse,
God ^or his mercy! what treachery is here?

Du. Why what is it my Lord?

York Give me my boots I say, saddle my horse*
Now by mine honor, by my life, by my troth
I will appeach the villain.

Du. What is the matter?

York Peace foolish woman.

Du. I will not peace, what is the matter Aumerle?

Au. Good mother be content, it is no more
Then my poor life must answer.

Du. Thy life answer?

yor. Bring me my boots, I will unto the King.

His man enters with his boots. Du. Strike him Aumerle, poor boy thou art
amazd,
Hence vilaine never more come in my ^ight.

Yor. Give me my boots I say.

Du. Why York what will thou do?
Will thou not hide the trespass of thine own?
Have we more sons? or are we like to have?
Is not my teeming date drunk up with time?
And will thou pluck my fair son from mine age?
And rob me of a happy mothers name,
Is he not like the? is he not thine own?

Yor. Thou fond mad woman,
Will thou conceal this dark conspiracy?
A doozen of them here have taken the sacrament:
And interchaungeably set down there hands,
To kill the king at Oxford.

Du. He shall be none, we will keep him here,
Then what is that to him?

Yor. Away fond woman, were he twenty times my son.
I would appeach him.

Du. Had thou groand for him as I have done,
Thou would be more pitiful.
But now I know rhy mind, thou do suspect
That I have been disloiall to thy bed,
And that he is a bastard, not thy son:
Sweet York, sweet husband, be not of that mind,
He is as like thee as a man may be,
Not like to me, or any of my kin,
And yet I love him.

Yor. Make way vn^ulie woman.
Exit.
Du. After Aumerle: mount thee upon his horse,
Spur, post, and get before him to the King,
And beg thy pardon ere he do accuse thee,
I Will not be long behind, though I be old,
I doubt not but to ride as fast as York.
An never will I rise up from the ground,
Till Bullingbroke have pardoned thee: away, be gone.

Enter the King with his nobles. King H. Can no man tell me of my unthrifty
sonn^?
It Is full three months since I did see him last,
If any plague h^ng over us it is he:
I wou^^ to God ^y Lords he might be found:
Inquir^ at London, among the Tauernes there,
For there (they say) he daily does frequent,
With unrestrained loose companions,
Even such (they say) as stand in narrow lanes,
And beat our watch, and ^ob our passengers,
Which he young wanton and effeminate boy,
Takes on the point of honor to support so dissolute a crew:

H. Percie My Lord, some two days since I saw the prince,
And tou^d him of those triumphs held at Oxford.

King. And what said the gallant?

Per. His answer was, he would unto the stews,
And from the commonst creature pluck a glove,
And wear it as a favor, and with that,
He would unhorse the lustiest Challenger.

King H. As dissolute as desperate, yet through both,
I see some sparks of better hope, which elder years,
May happily bring forth. But who comes here?

Enter Aumerle amazed. Aum. Where is the King?

King H. What means our cosen, that he stares and looks so wildly.

A^m. God save your grace, I do beseech your Majesty,
To have some conference with your grace alone.

King. Withdraw your selves, and leave us here alone.
What is the matter with our cosen now?

Aum. For ever may my knees grow to the earth,
My tongue, cleave to my roo^fe within my mou^h,
Unless a pardon ere I rise or speak.

King Intended, or committed, was this fault?
If on the first, how heinous ere it be
To win thy after love, I pardon thee.

Aum. Then give me leave that May turn the key,
That no man enter till my tale be done.

King. Have thy desire.

The Duke of York knokes at the door and cries. Yor. My liege beware, look
to thy self,
Thou have a Traitor in thy presence there.

King. Vilain I Will make thee safe.

Aum. Stay thy reuengefull hand, thou have no cause to fear

York. Open the door, secure fool, hardy King,
Shall I for love speak treason to thy face,
Open the door, or I will break it open.

King What is the matter uncle, speak, recover breath,
Tell us, how near is danger,
That we may arm us to encounter it?

Yor. Peruse this writtng here, and thou shall know,
The treason that my haste forbids me show.

Aum. remember as thou readst, thy promise past,
I do repent me, read not my name there,
My heart is not confederate with my hand.

Yor. It was (vilaine) ere thy hand did set it down.
I tore it from the traitors bosom (King,)
Fear, and not love, begets his penitence:
Forget to pity him, lest thy pity prove,
A Serpent that will sting thee to the heart.

King. O heinous, strong, and bold conspiracy;
O loyal Father, of a treacherous Son,
Thou sheere immaculate and filuer Fountain,
From whence this st^eame, through muddy passages*
Has held his current, and defild himself,
Thy ouerflow of good, conuerts to bad:
And thy abundant goodness, shall excuse,
This deadly blot in thy digressing son.

Yor. So shall my virtue, be his vices baude,
An he shall spend mine honor, with his shame,
As thriftles sons, their scraping Fathers gold:
Mine honor lives when his dishonor dies.
Or my shamde life in his dishonor lies,
Thou kilst me in his life giving him breath,
The traitor lives, the true man's put to death.

Du. What ho, my Liege, for Gods sake let me in.

King H. What shril voice suppliant makes this eger cry?

Du. A woman, and thy aunt (great king) it is I,
Speak with me, pity me, open the doo^e,
A beggar begs that never begd before.

King Our scene is altered from a serious thing,
And now changde to the Beggar and the King:
My dangerous cousin, let your mother in,
I know she is come to pray for your foul sin.

York If thou do pardon whosoever pray,
More sins for this forgiveness prosper may:
This festred joint cut off, the rest rest found,
This let alone will all the rest confound.

Du. Oh king, believe not this hard-hearted man,
Love loving not it self, none other can.

York Thou frantike woman, what do thou make here?
Shall thy old dugs once more a traitor rear?

Du. Sweet York be patient, hear me gentle Liege.

King H Rise up good aunt.

Du. Not yet I thee beseech,
For ever will I walk upon my knees,
And never see day that the happy sees,
Till thou give joy, until thou bid me joy,
By pardoning Rutland my transgressing boy.

Aum. Unto my mothers prayers I bend my knee.

york Against them both my true joints bended be,
Ill may thou thrive if thou grant any grace.

Du. Pleades he in earnest? look upon his face.
His eyes do drop no tears, his prayers are in jest,
His words come from his month, ours from our breast,
He prays but faintly, and would be denied,
We pray with heart and soul, and all beside,
His weary joints would gladly rise I know,
Our knees still kneel till to the ground they grow,
His prayers are full of false hypocrisy,
Ours of true (...) and deep integrity,
Our prayers do out pray his, then let them have
That mercy which true prayer ought to have.

York Good aunt stand up.

Du. Nay, do not say, stand up;
Say Pardon first, and afterward, stand up,
And if I were thy nurse thy tongue to teach,
Pardon should be the first word of thy speech:
I never longd to hear a word till now,
Say pardon King, let pity teach thee how,
The word is short, but not so short as sweet,
No word like pardon for Kings mouths so meet.

york Speak it in French, King say, Pardonne ^oy.

Du. Do thou teach pardon pardon to destroy?
Ah my sower husband, my hard-hearted Lord!
That sets the word it self against the word:
Speak pardon as it is current in our land,
The chopping French we do not understand,
Thine eye begins to speak, set thy tongue there:
Or in thy piteous heart plant thou thine ear,
That hearing how our plaints and prayers do pierce,
Pity may move thee pardon to rehearse.

King H. Good aunt stand up.

Du. I do not sue to stand.
Pardon is all the suit I have in hand.

King I pardon him as God shall pardon me.

Du. Oh happy vantage of a kneeling knee,
Yet am I sick for fear, speak it again,
Twice saying pardon does not pardon twain,
But makes one pardon strong.

King H. I pardon him with all my heart.

Du. A god on earth thou art.

King H. But for our trusty brother in law and the Abbot*
With all the rest of that consorted ^rew,
Destruction strait shall dog them at the heels,
Good uncle, help to order several powers,
To Oxford, or where ere these traitors are,
They shall not live within this world I swear,
But I will have them if I once know where.
Uncle farewell, and cousin a due,
Your mother well has prayed, and prove you true.

Du. Come my old son, I pray God make thee new.

Exeunt. Mane^ sir Pier^^ Exton, etc. Exton Did thou not ma^ke the K* what
words he spoke?
Have I no friend will rid me of this living fear?
Was it not so?

Man These were his very words.

Exton Have I no friend quoth he^he spoke it twice.
And vrgde it twice together, did he not?

Man He did.

Exton And speaking it, he wishtly looked on me,
As who should say, I would thou were the man,
That would divorce this terror from my heart,
Meaning the king at Pomfret. Come lets go,
I am the kings friend, and will rid his foe.

Enter Richard alone. Rich. I have been studying how I may compare
This prison where I live, unto the world:
And forbecause the world is populous,
And here is not a creature but my self,
I cannot do it: yet I Will hammer it out,
My brain I Will prove, the female to my soul,
My soul the father, and these two beget
A generation of still-breeding thoughts:
And these same thoughts people this little world,
In humors like the people of this world:
For no thought is contented: the better sort,
As thoughts of things divine are intermixed
With scruples, and do set the word it self
Against the word, as thus: Come little ones, and then again
It is as hard to come, as for a Cammell
To thread the posterne of a small needles eye:
Thoughts tending to ambition they do plot,
Unlikely wonders: how these vain weak nails
May tear a passage through the flinty ribs
Of this hard world my ragged prison walls:
And for they cannot die in their own pride,
Thoughts tending to content flatter themselves,
That they are not the first of fortunes slaves,
Nor shall not be the last like seely beggars,
Who ^itting in the stocks refuge their shame,
That many have, and others must set there.
And in this thought they find a kind of ease,
Bearing their own misfortunes on the back
Of such as have before indurde the like.
Thus play I in one person many people,
And none contented; sometimes am I King,
Then treasons make me wish my self a beggar,
And so I am: then crushing penury
Persuades me I was better when a king,
Then am I kingd again, and by and by,
Think that I am vnkingd, by Bullingbrooke,
And strait am nothing. But what ere I be,
Nor I, nor any man, that but man is,
With nothing shall be pleased, till he be easde,
With being nothing. Music do I hear,
the music plates Ha ha keep time, how sour sweet Music is
When time is broke, and no proportion kept,
So is it in the music of men's lives:
And here have I the daintiness of ear
To check time broke in a disordered string:
But for the concord of my state and time,
Had not an ear to hear my true time broke,
I wasted time, and now does time waste me:
For now has time made me his numbering clock;
My thoughts are minutes, and with sighs they jar,
Their watches on unto mine eyes the outward watch
Whereto my finger like a dialles point,
Is pointing still, in cleansing them ^^om tears.
Now ^^^the sound that tells what hour it is,
Are clamorous groans which strike upon my heart,
Which is the bell, so sighs, and tears, and groans,
Show minutes, times, and hours: but my time,
Runs posting on in Bullingbrokes proud joy,
While I stand fooling here his jack of the clock.
This music maddes me, let it sound no more,
For though it have holp mad men to their wits,
In me it seems it will make wise men mad:
Yet bless^ing on his heart that gives it me,
For it is asigne of love: and love to Richard,
Is a strange brooch in this al-hating world.

Enter a groom of the stable. Groom. Hail royal Prince.

Rich. Thanks noble pear:
The cheapest of us is ten grotes too dear.
What art thou, and how come thou ^ither,
Where no man never comes, but that sad dog,
That brings me food to make misfortune live.

Groom. I was a poor groom of thy stable King,
When thou were King: who trauailling toward York,
With much ado (at length) have gotten leave,
To look upon my sometimes royal masters face:
Oh how it ernd my heart when I beheld,
In London streets, that Corronation day,
When Bullingbroke rode on Roane Barbary,
That horse, that thou so often have bestride.
That horse, that I so carefully have dressed.

Rich. Rode he on Barbary, tell me gentle friend,
How went he under him?

Groom. So proudly as if he disdaind the ground.

Ric. So proud that Bullingbroke was on his back:
That Jade has eat bread from my royal hand,
This hand has made him proud with clapping him:
Would he not stumble, would he not fall down
Since pride must have a fall; and break the neck,
Of that prond man, that did usurp his back?
Forgiveness horse why do I rail on thee?
Since thou created to be awed by man,
Wast borne to bear; I was not made a horse,
And yet I bear a burden like an ass,
Spurrde, galld, and tirde by iauncing Bullingbrooke.

Enter one to Richard with mea^e. Keeper Fellow, give place, here is no longer
stay.

Rich. If thou love me, it is time thou were away.

Groom What my tongue dares not, that my heart shall say.
Exit Groom.
Keeper My Lord, wilt please you to fall to*

Rich. Taste of it first as thou art wont to do.

Keeper My Lord I dare not, fir Pierce of Exton,
Who lately came from the King commands the contrary.

Rich. The devil take Henry of Lancaster, and thee.
Patience is stale, and I am weary of it.

Keeper Help, help, help.

The murderers rush in. Rich. How now, what means Death in this rude assault?
Villain, thy own hand yields thy deaths instrument*
Go thou and fill another room in hell.

Here Exton strikes him down^. Rich. That hand shall burn in never quenching
fire.
That staggers thus my person: Exton, thy fierce hand
Has with the kings blood staind the kings own land.
Mount mount my soul, thy seat is up on high,
Whilst my gross flesh sinckes downward here to die,

Exton As full of valor as of royal blood:
Both have I spilld, Oh would the deed were good
For now the devil that told me I did well,
Says that this deed is chroni^led in hell:
This dead king to the living king I Will bear.
Take hence the rest, and give them burial (...).

Enter Bullingbrooke with the duke of York^. King Kind uncle York, the latest
news we hear^,
Is* that the rebels have consumed with fire
Our town of Ciceter in Gloucestershire,
But whether they be taken o^ slain we hear not.
Enter Northumberland. Welcome my Lord, what is the news?

N^rth. First to thy sacred state wish I all happiness,
The next news is, I have to London sent
The heads of Oxford, Salisbury, Blunt and Kent,
The manner of their taking may appear
At large discoursed in this paper here.

King We thank thee gentle P^^cie for thy pains,
And to thy worth will add right worthy gains.

Enter Lord Fitzwaters. Fitz. My Lord, I have from Oxford sent to London*
The heads of Broccas, and sir Benet Seely,
Two of the dangerous consorted trai^ors,
That fought at Oxford thy dire overthrow.

king Thy pains Fitz. shall nor be forgot,
Right noble is thy merit well I wot.

Enter H. Percie. Percie The grand conspirator Abbot of Westminster
With clog of conscience and sour melancholy
Has yielded up his body to the grave.
But here is Carleil living, to abide
Thy kingly doom, and sentence of his pride.

king Carleil, this is your doom;
Choose out some secret place, some reverent room
More than thou bast, and with it joy thy life:
So as thou live in peace, die free from strife,
For though mine enemy thou have ever been,
High sparks of honor in thee have I seen.

Enter ^xton with the coffin. Exton Great King, within this coffin I pr^sent
Thy buried fear: herein all breathless lies
The mightiest of thy greacest enemies,
Richard of Bordeaux, by me hither brought.

king Exton, I thank thee not, for thou have wrought
A deed of slander with thy fatal hand,
Upon my head and all this famous Land.

Exton. From your own mouth my Lo. did I this deed.

King. They love not poison that do poison need,
Nor do I thee; though I did wish him dead,
I hate the murderer, love him murdered:
The guilt of conscience take thou for thy labor,
But neither my good word, nor Princely favor;
With Cayne go wander through shades of night,
And never show thy head by day nor light.
Lords, I protest my soul is full of woe,
That blood should sprincle me to make me grow:
Come mourn with me, for what I do lament,
And put on sulleyn black incontinent,
I Will make a voyage to the holly land,
To wash this blood off from my guilty hand:
March sadly after, grace my mournings here,
In weeping after this untimely Beer.

FINIS.

