SENECA HIS TEN TRAGEDIES, TRANSLATED INTO Englysh.

Mercurij nutrices, horae.

IMPRINTED AT LONDON IN Fleetstreete near unto Saint Dunstans church by
Thomas Marsh. 1581

TO THE RIGHT VVORSHIPEVL, SIR THOMAS HENNEAGE KNIGHT, TREASVRER OF HER
MAJESTY'S CHAMBER: Thomas Newton wishes all abundaunce of Felicity, and
Spiritual benedictions in Christ. *
YOU may think Sir, some want of discretion in me, for thus boldly presuminge
to thrust into your hands these Tragedies of SENECA. From which boldness, the
very Conscience of mine own unworthiness, might easily have dissuaded me, had
not certain learned Gentlemen of good credit and worship thereunto persuaded
and animated me. Assuring me (where of I thought my self before assured) that
your Worship (such is your love to learning, and the generosity of your
Heroical mind) would daygne not only to dispense with my temerity, but also
take in worth my affectionate simplicity. And yet (all this notwithstanding)
well durst I not have given the adventure to approach your presence, upon trust
of any singularity, that in this Book has vnski^fully dropped out of mine
own pen, but that I hoped the perfection of others artificial workma^ship,
that have trauayled herein as well as my self should somewhat cover my
nakedness (...) purchase my pardon. And hard were the dealing, if in payment
of a good round gubbe of Gold of full wayght and poyse, one poor piece
somewhat clypped and lighter then his fellows may not be foysted in among the
rest, and pass in pay for current coigne. Theirs I know to be delivered with
singular dexterity: mine, I confess to be an vnflidge nestling, unable to
fly: an unnatural abortion, and an imperfect Embryon: neither throughlye
labored at Aristophanes and Cleanthes candle, neither yet exactly waighed in
Critolaus his precise ballau^ce. Yet this dare I say, I have delivered mine
Authors meaning with as much perspicuity, as so mean a Scholar, out of so
mean a stoare, in so small a time, and upon so short a warning was well able to
perform. And whereas it is by some squeymish Areopagites surmyzed, that the
readinge of these Tragedies, being enterlarded with many Phrases and sentences,
literally tending (at the first sight) some time to the praise of Ambition,
sometime to the mayntenau^ce of cruelty, now and then to the approbation of
incontinencie, and here and there to the ratification of tyranny, can not be
digested without great danger of infection: to omit all other reasons, if it
might please the^ with no forestalled judgment, to mark and consider the
circumstaunces, why, where, and by what manner of persons such sentences are
pronounced, they cannot in any equity otherwise choose, but find good cause
enough to lead the^ to a more favorable and mild resolution. For it may not
at any hand be thought and deemed the direct meaning of SENECA himself, whose
whole wrytinges (penned with a peerless sublimity and loftiness of Style,
are so far from countenauncing Vice, that I doubt whether there be any
among all the Catalogue of Heathen writers, that with more gravity of
Philosophical sentences, more waightynes of sappy words, or greater authority
of sound matter beats down sin, loose life, dissolute dealinge, and
unbridled sensuality: or that more sensibly, pithily, and bytingly lays down
the guerdon of filthy lust, cloaked dissimulation and odious treachery: which
is the dryft, whereunto he leueleth the whole issue of each one of his Tragedies.
Howsoever and whatsoever it be, your Worships courteous acceptau^ce shall easily
counterpoyse any of our imperfections. Unto whose learned Censure, we humbly
submit these the exercises of our blusshing Muses. The Lord God in mercy long
preserve you in health and dignity with daily increase of many his gracious
gyfts, already rychly abounding in you: to the propagation, and advancement of
his truth (whereof ye are a zealous Professor, to the honor of her Majesty,
to whom you are a most loyal seruitour, and to the general benefit of your
Country, whereof you are a rare and most worthy Ornament.

From Butley in Chesshyre the 24. of April. 1581. Your Worshippes most humble,
Thomas Newton.

THE NAMES OF THE TRAGEDIES OF SENECA, AND by whom each of them was translated.
1 Hercules Furens, 2 Thyestes, 6 Troas, By Jasper Heywood. 1560.
5 Oedipus, By Alex. Neuile.
4 Hippolytus, 7 Medea, 8 Agamemnon, 10 Hercules Octaeus By John Studley.
9 Octauia, By T. Nuce.
3 Thebais. By Thomas Newton.

The Argument of this Tragedy.
IVno the Wife and sister of Jupiter, hating his bastard bro^de, comes down
from heaven, complaining of all his injuries done to her, devising also by
what despite she may vex his base Son Hercules. And having by experience
proved, no toils to be to hard for him, finds the means to make his own
hand his own vengeance. Hercules therefore returning now from Hell (from
whence he was enjoined to fet Cerberus) and finding that the Tyrant Lycus had
invaded his country, destroieth the tyrant. For the which victory as he
sacrifices to his Goddess, vvrathfull Juno strikes him into a sudden frensy:
Wherevvith he being sore vexed, thynking to slay the Children and Wife of
Lycus, in steed of them, kills his own Wife and Children in his madness.
This done he sleapeth. Juno restores to him again his Wits. He being vvakt,
seeing his Wife and Children slain by his own hand, at last also would kill
himself.

THE SPEAKERS
Juno. Chorus. Megara. Amphitrion. Lycus. Hercules. Theseus.
THE FIRST ACT.
Juno alone. I Sister of the Thunderer,
(for now that name alone
Remaynes to me) Jove evermore
as though deuorst and gone,
And temples of the highest air
as wydowe shunned have,
And beaten out of skies above
the place to Harlots gave.
I must go dwell beneath on ground, for Whoores do hold the sky.
From hence the Bear in part above of ycy peale full hy,
A haughty star the greekish shyps by Seas does gurde about:
From this way, whence at spring time warm the day is loased out,
Euro^aes bearer through the waves of Tyria shyues full bright.
From thence, their stormy fearful flock to Ships, and seas affright,
The wandering daughters here and there of Atlas upward sway.
With staring bush of hair from hens Orion Gods does fray:
And Perseus eke his glitteryng stars of golden gloss has here.
From hence the twynnes of Tyndars stock do shine, a sign full clear:
And at whose birth first stood the ground that erst went to and fro.
Nor only Bacchus now himself, or Bacchus mother lo,
Have clymd to Gods: least any part should from rebuke be free,
The skies the Gnossian strumpets crowns do bear in spite of me.
But I of old co^temptes complain: me, one dire, fierce, and shrewde
Thebana land with wicked brood of Jove's base daughters strewde,
How often has it a stepdame made? though up to heaven should rise,
The conqueryng drabbe Alcmena now, and hold my place in skies,
And eke her son to promisd stars obtain the worthy way,
At birth of whom the staying world so long deferd the day,
And Phoebus slow from morning sea began to glister bright,
Commanded long in the Ocean waves to hyde his drowned light.
Yet shall my hates not leave them so, a wrathful kindled rage
His mind in madness shall stir up, and ire that may not swage
Shall evermore (all peace laid down) wage wars eternally.
What wars? what ever hideous thing the earth his ennemy
Begets, or what soever sea or air has brought to sight
Both dreadful, dire, and pestilent, of cruel fiercest might,
It Is tierd and tamed: he passes all, and name by ills does raise,
And all my wrath he does enjoy, and to his greater praise
He turns my hates: while tedious toils to much I him behest,
He proves what father him begot: both thence where light oppressed
Has sea, and where it showde again, where Titan day does train,
And with his brand approaching nere does dye those Aethiops twain,
His strengh vntamde is honored: and God each where is he
Now calde in world, and now more ^^ore of monsters want to me,
And labor less to Hercles is t'acomplish all my will,
Then me to bydde: at ease he does mine imperies fulfill.
What cruel hestes of tyrante now so fyerce a young man may
Prevail to hurt? for lo he bears for weapons now away
What once he fearde, and put to flight: he armed comes at side
With Lion fyerce and Hydra both: nor land suffiseth wide,
But broake he has the threshold lo of that infernal Jove.
And spoils with him of conquered king he draws to Gods above.
But that's but light, broke is the league of sprites that there do dwell.
I saw my self, I saw him lo (the night now gone, of hell
And Ditis tamde) throw out abroad before his fathers sight
His broth^^s spoils. Why draws he not oppressed and bound by might
Himself in chains that equal things to Jove by lot does hold?
And bear the rule of captive hell, and way to Styxe unfold?
Up opened is from lowest ghostes the backward way to sky,
And sacred secrets of dire death in open sight do lie.
But he (the dredful den of sprites brake up full fierce and stout
Even over me does triumph lo, and with proud hand about
The foul black dog by Grekish towns he leads from hell away.
When seen was ugly Cerberus I saw the fading day,
And fearful sun: even me likewise a trembling dread oppressed,
And looking on the fylthy necks of conquered monstrous beast,
I feared much mine own behestes: but light things I complain,
For heaven I may be frayde, lest he may get the highest rain,
That lowest won, the sceptors from his father will he take,
Nor he to stars (as Bacchus did) his way will gently make:
The way with ruin will he seek, and he in empty skies
Will reygne alone with force displayed his haughty heart does rise,
And he that heaven it self by force of his might gotted be,
It bearyng learnd: quite underneath the world his head set he.
Nor once his shoulders bowde the praise of suth a mighty ^as:
And midst of heaven on Hercles neck alone (lo) settled was.
His neck vnwryde the stars above and skies did only stay:
And me likewise oppressyng him, to Gods he seeks the way.
Go ire, go on, and beat him down that great things does invent
Match thou with him, and with thy hands now thou thy self him rent.
Such hates why do thou meditate? let all wyld beasts now go:
And weary Euristheus now be free from geeuing charges mo.
The Tytans daryng once of Jove to break the impery
Send out: let loase the den abroad of mount of Sicilye.
The Doricke land that with the turn of giant quakes afraid,
Let it bring forth the dredful necks of monster under laid.
Let yet the haughty moon about some other beasts beget,
But these he overcame. Seeks thou a match to Alcides yet?
There Is none, except himself: let him against himself rebel.
Let present be from bottom deep vpraysd of lowest hell
The Eumenides, let flaming locks of theyrs the fires out flinge,
And furious hands bestow about the strokes of vipers sting.
Go now full proud, and scale the skies to s^ates of gods make way.
Now must thy battles wages be full clear lo shynes the day.
Despise man's works think thou fierce wight y^ hell and souls allow
Thou have escapt? nay here I will another hell thee show.
In deep miste hid I will call up from bottom low of hell
Beyond the ways of gylty ghostes debateful goddess fell.
Whereas the roaring dreadful den resoundes with cries about.
From depest bond of Ditis raygne beneath I will fet out,
What so is left. Let hateful hurt now come in anger wood,
And fierce impyety imbrew himself with his own blood.
And error eke, and fury armed against it self to fight.
This mean, this mean, let wrath of mine now use to show my might.
Begin ye servants now of hell: the fervent burning tree
Of Pyne shake up: and set with snakes her dreadful flock to see.
Let now Megaera bring to sight, and with her mournful brand.
For burning rage bring out of hell a huge and direful brand.
Do this, require you vengeance due, and pains of hell his spoil,
Strike through his breast, let fyercer flame, within his bosom boil.
Then which in Aetna furnace beats, so suriously to see.
That mad of mind and witles may Alcides driven be
With fury great through pierced quight, my self must first of all
Be mad. Wherefore does Iuuo yet not into raging fall?
Me, me, ye Furyes, systers three thrown quite out of my wit
Toss first, if any thing to do, I do endeavor yet
For stepdame meet: let now my hates be turned another way,
Let him (returned) his babes behold in safety I you pray.
And strong of hand come home, I have now found the day at length.
In which may greatly me avail the hated Hercles strength.
Both me and eke him self let him subdue and wish to die
Returned from hell, yea let it here be my commodity,
That he of Jove begotten is: here present will I stand,
And that his shaftes go straight from how, I will direct his hand,
The mad man's weapons will I guide, even Hercles fyghtyng, lo,
At length I Will aid. This gylt once done then leefull is that so
His father may admit to says those gylty haades of his
Chorus. THe fading stars now shine but seelde in sight
In stipye sky, night overcome with day
Plucks in her. fyres, while spronge again is light.
The day star draws the cleresome beams their way.
They cye sign of haughtye poale again,
With seven stars marked, the Bears of Arcadye,
Do call the light with ouerturned wayne.
With marble horse now drawn, his way to hye
Does Titan top of Oetha over spread
The bushes bright that now with berryes be
Of Thebes strewde, by day do blushe full read.
And to return does Phabus sister flee.
Now labor hard begins, and every kind
Of cares it styrres, the Shepehearde does unfold:
His flocks vnpende, do grase their food to find,
And nippes the grass with hoary frost full cold.
At will does play in open meadow fair
The Calfe whose brow did damme yet never tear,
The empty Kyne their vdders do repair.
And light with course uncertain here and there,
In grass full soft the wanton kidde he flynges.
In top of boughe does sit with chaunting song,
And to the Sun new rose to spread her wings,
Bestirres her self her mourneful nestes among
The Nightingall. and does with birds about
Confuse resound mith murmr mixedryfe
To witness day; his sails to wind set out
The shypman does commit in doubt of life.
While gale oswynde the slack sails filles full strayte,
He leaning over hollow rock does lie,
And either his begiled hooks does bayte,
Or else beholdes and feels the pray from hye with paised hand.
The trembling fish he feels with line extent.
This hope to them to whom of hurtles life.
Is quiet rest, and with his own content,
And little, house, such hope in fields is ryfe
The troblous hopes with rolling whirlewynd great,
And dredful fears their ways in cities keep.
He proud repair to prince in regal seat,
And hard court gates without the rest of sleep
Esteems, and endless happynes to hold
Does gather goods, for treasure gaping more,
And is full pore amid his heaped gold.
The peoples favor him (astonished sore)
And commons more unconstant then the sea,
With blast of vain renoume liftes up full proud.
He selling at the brawling bar his plea,
Full wicked, sets his yres and scoulding loud
And words to sale, a few has known of all
The careless rest, who mindful how does flitte
Swift age away, the time that never shall
Return again do hold: while fares permit,
At quiet live: the life full quickly glydes
With hastened course, and with the winged day
The wheel is turnde of year that hedlong slides,
The sisters hard perform their taskes always,
Nor may again untwist the threede once sponne.
Yet mankind lo unsure what way to take
To meet the greedy destenyes dothronne
And willingly we seek the Stigian lake.
To much Alcides thou with stomach stout
The sorry sprites of hell do have to see.
With course prefixed the fares are brought about
To none once warnd to come may respite be
To none to pass their once appointed day,
The tomb all people calde by death does hyde
Let glory him by many lands away
Display, and fame throughout all cities wide
Full babbling praise, and even with sky to stand
Auaunce and stars: let him in chariot bright
Full haughty go: let me my native land
In safe and secret house keep close from sight.
To restful men hoare age by course does fall,
And low in place, yet safe and sure does lie,
The poor and base estate of cottage small:
The prowder pomp of mind does fall from hye.
But sad here comes with losed locks of hear
Lo Megara with little company,
And stowe by age draws Hercles father near
THE SECOND ACT.
Megara. OGuider great of heaven, and of the world O Judge full hie,
Yet now at length apoinct a mean of careful misery.
And end of our calamity. To me yet never day
Has careless shin' de: the end of one affliction past away
Beginning of an other is: an other ennemy
Is forthwith found, before that he his joyful family
Return unto an other fight he takes by behest:
Nor any respite given is to him nor quiet rest:
But while that he commanded is: straight him pursues she
The hateful Juno. Was yet once from toil and labor free
His infants age? the monsters (lo) he venquisht has and slain,
Before he knew what monsters meant. The skaled serpents twain
Their double necks drew on toward him, against the which to rise,
The infant crept to meet with them, the serpents glittring eyes
Like fire, with quiet careless breast he looking last upon,
With cou^tnance clear, hard wrested knots of them he caught anon:
And strangling then the swelling throats of them with tender hand,
To Hydra prelude made. the beast so swyfte of Maenale land.
That with much Gold bare up full bright his beautifled head,
Is caught in course. of Nemey wood likewise the greatest dread
The Lion pressed with Hercles arms has roarde with dreadful cry.
What should I speak of stables dyre, of steedes of Bystonye?
Or King cast out himself for food his horses fierce to fill?
And bristled beast in thick tops wont of Erymanthus hill?
The boar of Maenalye, the woods of Arcady to shake?
And Bull that did no little dread to hundred peoples make?
Among the flocks of Hesper land that hence far distant be,
The sheepherde of Cartesian coast of triple shape to see
Is slain, and driven is the pray from farthest part of weast,
Citheton quak't when by him past to sea the well known beast.
He being bid to make by coasts of summer sun his way,
And parched lands which sore with heat does boil the middell day,
The mountains brake on either side and rampires all undone,
Even unto swyft and raging sea has made a way to roon.
Then entering in of plenteaus wood, the pleasant gardens gay,
The waking dragons golden spoils with him he brought away.
The Lerna monsters numerous ill what need to tell have I?
Has he not him with fire at length subdewde, and taught to dye?
And which were wont with wings abroad to hyde the day from sight,
Even from the clouds he sought and brave the Stimphale birds to flight.
Not him subdewde who ever lies in bed vnmacht at night
The wyddowe queen of them that took to Thermodont their flight.
Nor hands that well durst euterprise his noble trauayles all
The filthy labor mad^ to shrynke of foul Augias hall.
What veil all these? he wants the world which often defended he.
And th earth well knows the worker of his quietness to be
Away from earth: the prosperous gilt that bears happy swey.
Is virtue callde, and now the good to wicked do obey.
The right does stand in might of arms, fear treads down the law.
Before my face with cruel hand, even presently I saw
Reuengers of their fathers reygne, the sons with sword down cast,
And of the noble Cadmus eke himself the offspring last
Then slain: I law his regal crown at once from him away
With head bereft. Who Thebes alas enough bewail now may?
The fertile land of Gods, what lord now quakes it for to know?
Out of the fields of which sometime, and fruictfull bosom low,
The youth vpsprong with swarde in band preparde to battle stood:
And walls of which Amphion one of mighty Jove his brood,
Has built with sounding melody in drawing to the stones:
To town of whom the parent chief of Gods not only ones
Heaven being left has come. this land that Gods above always
Receiu'de, and which has made them Gods, and (leefull beete to say)
Perhaps shall make, with loathsome yoke of bondage is pressed down.
O Cadmus stock, and citezens of old Amphions town,
Whereto are ye now fall'ne? dread ye a cowardly exull thus,
His coasts to dwell in, lacking, and to ours injurious?
W^o through the world pursues the gilts and wrong by sea and land,
And cruel sceptors broken has with just and ryghtfull hand,
Now absent serves, and what he eal'de in other does sustain:
And now does bannysht Lycus hold of Hercles Thebes the rain.
Yet shall he not: he shall come home, and him with vengeance quight,
And sudden rise to stars: he will soon flude the way to light,
Or make it else. return thou safe, repair to thine in haste:
And conqueror to conquer'de house yet come again at last.
Rise up my spouse, and darkness vecye repell'de of helly shade
Break up with hand, if no way may for thee kept back be made,
And passage be shut up, return with world vprent by might.
And whatsoever is the possessed byneath in darkest night,
Send dut with thee, as when the tops of haughty hills undone
A headlong passage making through for hasty floude to roon
Thou sometime stoodst, wha^ with great might of thine a sunder broake
The Tempye woods wide open lay: and beaten with thy stroke
The mount, now here, now there fell down: and rampire tente of stay,
The raging brook of Thessaly did roon a new found way.
Thy parents so, thy sons, thy land repayring home to see,
Break out, and lowest bond of things out bringing thence with thee,
And what soever greedy age in all these long years race
Has hid, show forth, and ghosts that have forgot their former case,
And people up before thee drive that fearful are of light.
Unworthy spoils for thee they are, if thou but bring to sight
What bidden is. great things, but far to much I speak for me,
Vnwotting of mine own estate. when shall I hap to see,
The day when thee, and thy right hand, I may embrace again,
And slow returns, nor yet of me once myndefull, may complain?
To thee for this O guide of Gods, untamed Bulls shall bring
Their hundred necks: to thee O Queen of fruits on earth that spring
I Will give thee secret sacrifice: to thee with much faith lo
Long fire brands at Eleusis town full silent will I throe.
Then to my brethren shall I think to be restort de again
Their souls, and eke himself alive and guiding of his reyne
My father for to flouryshe yet. If any greater might
Dor keep thee shet, we follow thee: with thy return to fight
Defend us all, or else to hell draw down us all to thee.
Thou shall us draw, no God shall raise, us up that broken be.
AMPHITRYON, MEGARA. O Faithful fellow of our blood, with chaste true
faythfullnes
The Bridebed keeping, and the son of haughty Hercules,
Conceive in mind some better things, and take good heart to thee:
He will come home, as after all his labors wounteth he,
Of more renown
ME. What wretches do most chiefly wish of all.
They soon believe.

AM. Nay what they fear to much lest it may fall,
They think it never may be shoon'de, nor rid by remedy.

ME. Belief is ready still to dread the woorser mysery.
Deep drown*de, and whellm'de, and farthermore with all ye world full low
Oppressed down, what way has he to light again to go?

AM. What way I pray you had he then when through the burning cost,
And tumbling after manner of the troubled Sea up toste
He went by sands: and freate that twyse with ebb away does slip,
And twyse vpflowe: and when alone with his forsaken ship,
Fast caught he stuck in shallowe foordes of shelfye Syrtes sand,
And (now his ship on ground) did pass throught seas a foot to land?

ME. Injurious fortune virtue most of men most stout and strong
Does seldom spa^e: no man alive himself in safety long,
To perils great and dangers may so often times out cast,
Whom chance does often ouerslip, the same it finds at last.
But cruel lo, and grievous threats even bearing in his face,
And such as he of stomach is, does come even such of pace,
Proud Lycus who the sceptors shakes in hand of other king,
The plentuous places of the town of Thebes governing,
And every thing about the which with fertile soil does go
Sloape Phocis, and what ever does Ismenus ouerfloe,
What ever thing Cithaeron sees with haughty top and hye,
And slender Isthmos I Will, the which between two seas does lie.
Lycus. Megara. Amphitrion. NOt I of native country hours possess the
ancient right
Unworthy heir, nor yet to me are noble men of might
The grandfathers, nor stock renownd with titles hie of name,
But noble virtue: who so boafles of kindred whence he come,
Of others virtue makes his vaunt, but got with fearful hand
My sceptors are obtaynd: in sword does all my safety stand.
What thee thou worst against the will of cytesyns to get,
The bright drawn sword must it defend* in forrayne country set
No stable kingdom is. But one my pomp and princely might
May ratify once joined to me with regal forche full bright,
And chambers Megara: of stock of such nobility
Let vpstart state of mine take shape. I do not think that she
Refuse it will, or in the bed with me despise to lie.
But if with proud unbridled mind she stubburn do deny,
Then quite I purpose to destroy the house of Hercules
The hate of men will then my pride, and peoples speech oppres.
Chief knacke of kingdom is to bear thy subjects hates each one.
Lets prove her then, chance given has to us a place alone.
For she her head in fold of veil full sad and woefully
Enwrapt the Gods that are her guides for succor stands fast by,
And at the side of her does lean Alcides father true.

Meg. What thing does this destroyer of our stock again anewo
Prepare? what proves he?

Ly. O Queen that name renowned hye
And title takste of regal stock full gentle and easily
A little while receive and hear my words with pacient ear,
If always men eternal hates should one to the other bear,
And rage be gone out of the heart should never fall away,
But th'happy still should armor hold, the unhappy still obey,
Then shall the battayles nothing leave: with wide fields then the land
Shall lie untilled, with vnderlayd to housen fiery brand
Then ashes deep shall ouerwhelme the buried people all.
Expedient is to conqueror to wish that peace befall:
To conquered needful partner of the kingdom come to me:
Let Us toyne our minds, take here this pledge of says and truth to thee.
My right hand touch. Why whishtest thou with cruel face and mood?

Meg. Should I abide, that I the hand sprinkt with my fathers blood,
Should ^ouch, and double death imbrewd of both my brethren? nay
First shall sun rise extinguish quitte, and West shall bring the day:
First faithful peace between the snowes and fires there shall be tryde,
And Scilla shall to Ausonius first join his Sicilian side:
And first, the fleetyng flood that with swift turns of course does flow
Euripus with Euboik wave shall stand full still and slow.
My father, the empire, brethren, house, thou. have me clear bereft,
My country to: what may be more? one thing to me is left,
Then brother, father, kingdom, house, that dearer is to me
The hate of thee, the which to me with people for to be
In commune woe I am: how great is mine alonly part?
Rule on full proud, bear up full hye thy sprites and haughty heart:
Yet God the proud behynd their backs does follow them to wreake.
I know the Thebane kingdoms: what should I the mothers speak,
Both suffering, and aduentring gyltes? what double mischief done?
And mixed name of spouse at once, of father and of son?
What brether as double tents? or what as many roages also?
The mother proud of Tantals brood congeald in mourning I^e,
And sorry stone yet flows with tears in Phrygian Sipylye.
Himself like wise erected up his sealed head awrye.
Even Cadmus measuring throughout the Illyrian lands in flight,
Behynd him left of body drawn long slymy marks in sight.
All these examples wait for thee: rule thou as likes thy will,
While thee our kingdoms wonted fates do call and often hap ill.

Ly. God to, these fierce and furious words thou woman mad refrain,
And imperyes of princes learn of Hercles to sustain.
Though I the scepters gotten by the force of war do bear,
In conquering hand and all do rule without the law his fear.
Which arms subdue, a few words yet to thee now speak I shall
For this my cause thy father did in bloody battle fall:
Thy brethren fell, the weapons keep no measurable stay.
For neither easily tempred be, nor yet repressed may
The drawn swords ire, the battles does the blood delight out shed.
But he yet for his kingdom fought, we altogether led
With wicked lust: yet the end of war is now complained, lo,
And not the cause, but now let all remembrance thereof go:
When conqueror has weapons left, the conquerds part should be
To leave his hates. Not I that thou with lowly bended knee
Me raygning worship should, require: even this does me delight.
That thou thy myseries do bear with mind so stout upright.
Thou for a king a spouse art meet, let us join our beds anon.

ME. A trembling cold does run throughout my bloudles lims each one.
What heinous thing comes to mine ears? I fear'de not then at all,
When (all peace broake) the noise of war did by the city wall
Resounde about, I bare all that vnfearefully to see,
I fear the wedding chambers: now I captive seem to me.
Let heavy chains my body grieve, and eke with hunger long
Let lingering death be slowly brought, yet shall no force full strong
My truth subdue: for even thine own Alcides will I dye.

LY. Does then thy husband droun'de in hell give thee this stomach hic?

ME. The hells allow he touched, that he the height again might get.

LY. The heavy paise oppresses him of all the earth full great.

ME. He with no burdein shall be pressed, that heaven it self sustayn'de.

LY. Thou shall be forced.

ME. He wots not how to die, that is co^strain'd.

LY. Speak, what may rather I prepare then wedding new for thee.
More royal gift?

ME. Thine own death else, or else the death of me.

LY. Thou shall mad woman die.

ME. I shall then to my husband go.

LY. More then my Sceptors is to thee a servant loved so?

ME. How many has this servant slain of kings with hendy stroke?

LY. Why does he yet a king then serve, and still sustain his yoke?

ME. Take once away the hard behests, what is virtue then at last?

LY. Do thou it virtue count, to be to beasts, and monsters cast?

ME. It Is virtues part, to tame the things, that all men quake to know.

LY. Him great things braggi^g, darkness deep of tartare press full low.

ME. There never may from ground to stars an easy passage be.

LY. Of whom begot, the housen then of Gods through pearceth he?

AM. O wretched wife of Hercles great, thy words a while now spare.
My part it is, the father of Alcides to declare.
And his true stock, yet after all of man so stout as this
So famous deebes, and after all appeas'de with hand of his
What ever Titan risen up, does see, or else at fall,
And after all these monsters tam'de, and Phlegrey sprinkled all
With wicked blood, and after Gods defended all on hye,
Is not his father yet well known? or Jove do we beelye?
Believe it yet by Iunoes hate.

LY. Why do'ste thou sclaunder Jove?
No mortal kindred ever may be mixed with heaven above.

AM. To many of the Gods in skies is this a common trade.

LY. But were they ever servants yet, before they Gods were made?

AM. Of Delos I Will the sheepherde lo the flocks of Pherey fed.

LY. But through all coasts he wandered not abroad as banished.

AM. Who^ straying mother first brought forth wa^dring loud to sight.

LY. Yet Phoebus did no monsters fear, or beasts of cruel might.

AM. First Dragon with his blood embrew'd the shalts of Phoebus lo.
How grievous ills even yet full young he bare, do you not knoe?
From mothers womb ye babe out thrown with lightning flame from hie,
Even next his lightning Father stood forthwith above in sky.
What? he him self that guides the stars, and shakes the clouds at will,
Did not that Infant lurk in Den of hollow caued hill?
The byrthes so great full troublous price to have lo always ought:
And ever to be borne a God, with cost full great is bought.

LY. Whom thou a miser see, thou mai'st know him a man to be.

AM. A miser him deny ye may, whom stout of heart ye see.

LY. Call we him stout, from shoulders hye of whom the Lion thrown
A gift for maiden made, and eke his Club from hand fell down,
And painted side with purple weed did shine that he did wear?
Or may we him call stout of heart, whose staring locks of hear
With ointme^t slowde? who hands renownde and known by praises hye
To sound unmeet for any man of timber did apply,
With barbarous mytar cloasting in his forhead round about?

AM. The tender Bacchus did not blushe abroad to have laid out
His brayded hears, nor yet with hand full soft the Thyrsus light
For to have shook, what time that he with pace vnstout in sight
His long train'de batbarous garment drew with gold full fair to see.
Still virtue after many works is wont releast to be.

LY. Of this the house of Euritus destroyde does witness bear,
And virgins flocks that brutishly by him oppressed wear.
No Juno did command him this, nor none Eurystheus lo.
But these in deed his own works are.

AM. Yet all ye do not knoe,
His work it is, with weapons of his own hand vanquished
Both Eryx, and to Eryx ioyn'de Antaeus Lybian ded:
And aulters which with slaughter of the strangers flowing fast,
Busyris well deserved blood likewise have drunk at last.
His deed it is, that he that met the wound, and sword is slain
Constrain'de to suffer death before those other Geryons twain.
Nor ene all only Geryon does with one hand conquer'de lie.
Thou shall among these be which yet with none adulterye
Have wedlock hurt.

LY. What is to Jove, to king is leefull thing:
To Jove thou gau'ste a wife, thou shall now give oue to a king.
And even of thee she shall it learn to be a thing not new,
Her husband even approving it the better man t'ensewe.
But if she stubberne to be matched with me deny it still,
Then even by force a noble child of her beget I will.

Meg. O Creons ghosts and all ye Gods of th house of Labdacus,
And wedding forches blasing bright, of wicked Oedipus.
To this my wedding give ye now our wonted destenyes.
Now, now ye bloody daughters all of Aegypts king likewise,
Be here whose hands defiled are with so much blood out spilt:
One daughter lacks of Da^aus, I will fill up the gylt.

Ly. Because that stubburnely thou do refuse my wedding so,
And fear'ste a king, thoushatt know what the Scepters now may do.
Embrace thine aulters, yet no God shall ever take away
Thee from my hands: no not although with world vpturned, may
Alcides victor yet again to Gods above return.
The woods on heaps together cast, let all their temples burn
Even thrown upon their heads: his wife, and all his flock at last
With vnderlayed fire, let one wood pyle consume and waste.

AM. This only bowne I father of Alcides ask of thee,
Which well may me beseem to crave, that I fryst slain may hes.

LY. Who all appoyncts with present death to have their punishment,
He tyrunt wats not how to be: more sundry greeues invent.
Restrain the wretched man from death, command that th'happy dye.
I, while with beams prepar'de to burn the pyle increases hye,
Will him with vowing sacrifyce that rules the seas entreat.

AM. Oh chiefest power of Gods, and oh of heavenly things so great
The guide, and parent eke, with whose thrown thunderbolts do shake
All things humane throughout the world of king so cruel slake
The wicked hand: but why do I to Gods in vain thus cry?
Where ever thou be, hear me soon. why start so sodaynely
The temples thus with moving shakte? Why roareth out the grau^d?
The noise of Hell from bottom deep byueathe has made a sound:
We herd are, lo it is the sound of Hercules his pace.

Chorus. O Fortune hating men of stoutest breast,
How ill rewards do thou to good deuyde?
Eurystheus raynes at home in easy rest,
Alcmendes son in every battle tryde,
To Monsters turns his hand that Skies did stay:
And cruel Necks cuts of, of hydous Snake,
And Apples brynges from Systers mokt away,
When once to sleep his watchefull Eyes beetake,
Did Dragon set rich fruicte to ouersee.
He past the Scythian bowres that straye abroad,
And those that in their countries straung ers be
And hardened top of frosen freate he troade,
And sylent Sea with banks full dumme about.
The Waters hard want there their floudes to sloe.
And there before the Shyps full Sails spread out
Is worn a pathe for Sarmates wild to go.
The Sea does stand to move in course again.
Now apt to bear the Ship, now horsemen bold
The Queen that there does over Wydowes rain,
That gyrds her Womb with gyrth of glittring gold,
Her noble spoil from body drawn has she
And shyelde, and bands of breast as white as snow,
Acknowledging the Conqueror with Knee.
With what hope drawn to headlong Hell allow,
So bold to pass the vnreturned ways
Saw'ste thon Proserpines rain of Sicylye?
With Southern wind, or Western there no seas
Arise with wave and swellinge Surges hye.
Not there of Tyndars stock the double brood
Two stars the fearful Shyps do aid and guide.
With gulf full black does stand the slothful floode
And when pale death with greedy teeth so wide.
Unnumbered Nations has sent down to sprightes
With one Boateman all over feryed be.
God grauut thou may of Hell subdue the rightes
And vnreuoked webs of Systers three.
There king of many people raygneth he.
Who when thou did with Nestors Pylos fight,
Pestiferous hands applide to match with thee
And weapon bare with triple mace of might:
And pricked with little wound he fled away,
And lord of death himself did fear to dye.
Break Fate by force: and let the sight of day
To sorry sprightes of Hell apparent lie
And porche vnpast show way to Gods above.
The cruel lords of sprightes with pleasant song
And humble bowne full well could Orpheus move,
While he Eurydicen them craves among.
The Art that drew Woods, Byrds, and stones at will:
Which made delay to Floudes of flitting flight
At sound whereof the savage Beasts stood still
With tunes unwont does Ghosts of hell delight
And clearer does resounde in darker place:
And weep with tears did Gods of cruel breast:
And they which faults with to severe a face
Do seek, and former gylt of Ghosts out wrest:
The Thracian Daughters wayls Eurydicen.
For her the Judges weeping sit also.
We conquer'de are, chy efe king of death said then
To Gods (but under this condition) go,
Behind thy husbands back keep thou thy way,
Look thou not back thy Wife before to see.
Than thee to sight of Gods has brought the day
And gate of Spartane Taenare present be.
Love hates delay, nor could abide so long.
His gift, he lost, while he desires the sight.
The place that could be thus subdew'de with song
That place may soon be overcome by might.

THE THIRD ACT.
Hercules. O Comfortable guide of light, and honor of the sky,
That co^pasting both Hemyspheres with flaming chariot hye
Thy radia^t head to joyful lands about y^ world do bring,
Thou Phoebus pardon give to me, if any unlawful thing
Thine eyes have seen: (commanded) I have here to light out set
The secrets of the world: and thou of heaven to guider great,
And parent eke, in flashe out thrown of lightning hide thy fight.
And thou that gouernest the seas with second sceptors sight.
To bottom synke of deepest waves: who so from hye does see,
And dreading yet with countnaunce new the earth desil'de to be,
Let him from hence turn back his sight, and face to heaven uphold,
These monstrous sights to shun: let twayn this mischief great behold,
He who it brought, and she that bad. for paynefull toils to me,
And labors long, not all the earth thought wide enough may be
For Iunoes hate: things vncome to all men I did see,
Unknown to soon, and spaces wide that dark and shadefull be
Which woorser poale geues dyrer Jove to raygne and rule therein.
And yet if third place pleased more for me to enter in,
I there could raygne. the Chaos of eternal night of hell,
And worse then night, the doleful Gods I have that there do dwell,
And Fates subdu'de, the death contemn'de I am return'de to light.
What yet remaynes? I saw and show'de the spryghts of hell to sight:
Appoint, if ought be more, do'ste thou my hands so long permit
Juno to cease? what thing byd'st thou to be subdued yet?
But why do cruel souldiars hold the holy temples wide?
And dread of armor sacred porche beset on every side?
Amphitryon, Hercules, Theseus. Do either else my great desires delude and
mock mine eyes?
Or has the tamer of the world and Greeks renown likewise,
Forsook the silent house, besette with cloud full sad to see?
Is this my son? my members lo for joy amassed be.
Oh son, the sure and sauegard late of Thebes in misery,
See I thy body true indeed? or else deceiu'de am I
Mocked with thy sprite? art thou y^ same? these brawnes of arms I know
And shoulders, and thy noble hands from body hie that grow.
Her. Whens (father) happes this vglines, and why in mourning clad
Is thus my wife? how happes it that with filth so foul bestad
My children are? what misery does thus my house appresse?

Am. The father in law is slain: the kingdom Licus does possess.
Thy sons, thy parent and thy wife to death pursues he.

Her. Ungrateful laud, does no man come that will an ayder be.
Of Hercles house? and this beheld so great and heinous wrong
Has th'ayded world? but why were, I the day in playnt so long?
Let then my dye and this renoume let strength obtain in haste,
And of Alcider enmies all let Lycus be the last.
I driven am to go to shed the blood of enmye out.
Watch Theseu that no sudden strength beset us here about:
Me wa^res require, embracing yet defer O father dear,
And wife defer them: Lycus shall to hell this message bear
That I am now returned. The, Shake of O Queen ont of thine eyes
This weping face, and thou since that thy son is safe likewise
Thy drupping tears refrain: if yet I Hercles ever knew
Then Lycus shall for Creon pay the pains to him full due.
It Is light, he shall, he does and that is to light he has it done.

Am. Now God that can them bring to pass, speed well our wishes soon,
And come to help our weary woes. O noble hearted mate
Of my stout son, of his renown declare us all the rate:
How long away does lead to place where sorry sprites does dwell,
And how the hard and heavy bonds the dog has borne of hell.

The. The deeds thou do constrayne to tell, that even to mind secure
Are dredful yet and horrible, scant yet the trust is sure
Of vital air, sore blunted is the sharpness of my sight,
And dulled eyes do scant sustain to see th'vnwoonted light.

AM. Yet Theseus thoroughly overcome what ever fear remaynes
In bosom deep, nor do thou not of best fruict of thy pains
Beguilde thy self. What thing has once to suffer been a care,
To have remembered it is sweet. those dreadful haps declare.

TH. All right of world, and thee likewise I pray y^ bearst the rayns
In kingdom wide, and thee, for whom all round about in vain
Thy mother throughout Aetna sought, that secret things allow
And hid in ground, it freely may be lawful for to show.
The Spartane land a noble top of hill aduaunceth hye,
Where Taenarus with woods full thick the Sea does ouerly.
The house of hateful Ditis here his mouth does open set,
And rock of hill above does gape, and with a den full great
A huge and gaping cleft of ground with Jaws full wide does lie,
And way full broad to people all does spread to pass thereby.
Not straight with darkness does begin the way that blindes the sight.
A little lingering brightness lo behind of late left light,
And doubtful glittring yet of son afllicted falls allow,
And mocks the sight: such light is wont undoubtedly to show
The dawne of day, or twylight else at edge of evening tide.
From hence to hollow places void are loaste the spaces wide,
To which needs peryshe must all kind of men that once are thrown.
Nor it a labor is go, the way it self leads down.
As often the ships against their wills does toss the swelling surge,
So downward does that headlong way, and greedy Chao^ urge:
And back again to draw thy pace thee never do permit
The sprits who what they catch hold fast. allow within does flit
In channel wide with silent foorde the quiet lake of lethe.
And cares does rid: and that there may to escape again from death
No mean be made, with many turns and windings every way
Foldes in his floude. in such sort as with wave unsure does play
Maeander wandering up and down, and yeldes himself unto,
And doubtful stands, if he toward bank, or back to spryng may go.
The foul and filthy poole to see of slow Cocytus lies.
On the one the Grype, on the other side the mournful Howlet cries,
And sad luck of the unhappy Strix likewi^^ ^loundeth there.
Full vglily in shady bows black Locks of loathsome hear,
Where Taxus tree does over lean, which holds slothful sleep,
And hunger sad with famisht Iawe that lies his place to keep,
And shame to late does hide his face that knows what crimes it has,
Both fear, and quaking, funeral, and fretting raging wrath,
And mourning dyre does follow on, and trembling pale disease,
And boystrous battayles set with sword: and hid beyond all thease
Does slothful age his lingering pace help forth with staff in hand.

AM. Of corn and wine in hell allow is any fertile land?

TH. No joyful Meades do there bring forth with face so green and fair,
Nor yet with gentill Zephyrus wagges ripened corn in the air.
Nor any tree has there such bows as do bring apples out.
The barrayne compass of deep soil full filthy lies about,
And withred with eternal drought the loathsome land does waste
And bond full sad of things, and of the world the places last:
The air unmoved stands, and night sits there full dark to see
In slothful world, all things by dread full horrible there be.
And even far worse then death it self, is place where death does bide.

AM. What? he that does those places dark with regal sceptor guide,
In what seat set, does he dispose and rule those peoples light?

TH. A place there is in turn obscure of Tartarus from sight?
Which mist full thick with fearful shade does hold and ouergoe.
From hence a double parted stream from one wellspring does floe:
The tone, much like a standing poole (by this the gods do swear)
The which the sacred Stygian lake with silent floude does bear:
The the other fierce with tumult great is drawn his course to go,
And Acheron with raging flood the stones dryues to and froe
Vnsaylable. with double foorde is round about beset
Against it Ditis palace dyre, and manston house full great
In shadefull wood is covered: from wide den here the posts
And thresholds of the tyrant hang, this is the walk of ghosts:
This of his kingdom is the gate: a field about it goes,
Where sitting with a countnaunce proud abroad he does dispose
New souls, a cruel majesty is in the God to know:
A frowning forehead, which yet of his brethren bears the show,
And so great stock: there is in him of Jove the very face,
But when he lightens: and great part of cruel kingdoms place,
Is he himself the lord thereof: the sight of whom does fear,
What ever thing is fear'de*

AM. Is fame in this poynet true, ye there
Such rygours are, and gilty ^hosts of men that there remain
Forgetful of their former fault, have their deserved pain?
Who is the rector there of right, and judge of equity?

TH. Not only one extorter out of faults in seat set hye
The judgments late to trembling souls does there by lot awarde:
In one appoyncted judgment place is Gnossian Minos hard,
And in an other Radamanthe: this crime does Aeac hear.
What each man once has done, he feels: and guilt to the author the are
Returns, and th'hurtfull with their own example punished be.
The bloody cruel captains I in prison she did see,
And back of tyrant impotent even with his peoples hand
All torn and cut. what man of might with favor leads his land,
And of his own life lord reserues his hurtlesse hands to good,
And gently does his empire guide without the thyrst of blood,
And spares his soul, he having long led forth the lingering days
Of happy age, at length to heaven does either find the ways,
Or joyful happy places else of fair Elysius wood.
Thou then that here must be a judge abstain from man his blood,
Who so thou be that raygnest king: our gyltes are there acquit
In greater wise.

AM. Does any place preseript of lymite shit
The gylty Ghosts, and as the fame reports, does cruel pain
The wicked men make tame that in'eternall bonds remain?

TH. Ixion roll'de on whyrling wheel is tossed and turned hye:
Upon the neck of Sisyphus the mighty stone does lie.
Amyd the lake with thyrsty Jaws old Tantalus therein
Pursues the waves, the water stream does wet and wash his chin,
And when to him now often deceyu'de it does yet promise make,
Straight flits the flood: the fruicte at mouth his famyne does forsake.
Eternal food to fleeing foul does Tytius heart give still:
And Danaus daughters do in vain their water vessels fill.
The wicked Cadmus daughters all go raging every way:
And there does greedy ravening bird the Phiney tables fray.

AM. Now of my son declare to me the noble worthy fight.
Brings he his willing uncles gift, or Plutocs spoils to sight?

TH. A dyre and dreadful stone there is the slothful foordes fast bye,
Where sluggish freat with wave aston'd full dull and slow does lie:
This lake a dreadful fellow keeps both of attire and sight,
And quaking Ghosts does over bear and aged ugly wight:
His Bearde unkempt, his bosom foul deform'de in filthy wise
A knot byndes in, full lothesome stand in head his hollow eyes:
He Feary man does steare about his Boat with his long Ore.
He driving now his lightened Ship of burden toward the Shore,
Repayres to waves: and then his way (...) does require,
The flock of Ghosts all giving place: alowde cries Charon dyre,
What way attemptest thou so bold? thy hastening pace here stay.
But Nathales Alcmenaes son abiding no delay,
Even with his own poale bet he does full tame the shipman make,
And clymes the ship: the bark that could full many peoples take,
Did yield to one: he sat, the boat more heavy like to break
Which shyuering joints on either side the lethey flood does leake.
Then tremble all the monsters huge, the Centaures fierce of might,
And Lapithes, kindled with much wine to wars and bloody fight.
The lowest Chanelles seeking out of Stygian poole a down,
His Lerney labor sore affright his fertile heads does drown.
Of greedy Ditis after this does then the house appear.
The fierce and cruel Stygian dog does fray the spirits there,
The which with great and roaring sound his heads vpshaking three,
The kingdom keeps his ugly head with filth full foul to see
The serpents lick: his hayres be foul with vypers set among,
And at his crooked wrested tail does hysse a Dragon long:
Like ire to shape, when him he wist his pace that way to take,
His bristle hayres he lifts up with fierce up bended snake:
And sound sent out he soon perceyues in his applied ear,
Who even the sprits is wont to sent as soon as stood more near
The son of love, the doubtful dog strait couched down in den,
And each of them did fear. behold with doleful barking then
The places dumme he makes a dred, the threatening serpent stout
Through all the fields about does hysse: the bawling noise sent out
Of dreadful voice from triple mouth, even sprits that happy be
Does make afraid. from left side then strayte way undoes he
The cruel Jaws, and Lions head once slain in Cleon field
Against him sets, and cover does himself with mighty shield.
And bearing in his conquering hand a sturdy club of Oak,
Now here, now there he rolleth him about with often stroke:
His stripes he doubles: he subdew'de his threats assuaged all,
And all his heads the weary dog at once full low let fall,
And quite out ot the denn he fled, full greatly feared (set
In regal throne) both king and queen, and bad him to be fet.
And me likewise they gave for gift to Hercles craving m^e.
The monsters heavy necks with hand then stroaking down all three,
In lynked chain he byndeth fast forgetting then his strength
The dog the watchefull keeper of the kingdom dark at length
Layth down his ears ^ull ^ore affray'de: and suffering to be led,
And eke acknowledging his lord, following with lowly head,
With tail that snakes thereon does bear he both his sides does smight.
But after that to Taenare mouth we came, and clearenes bright
Had struck his eyes of light vnoknwne, good stomach yet again
He takes although once overcome, and now the happy chain
He raging shakes: he had almost his leader plucked from place,
And headlong backward drawn to hell, and moved from his pace.
And even to my hands Hercles then his eyes did backward cast,
We both with double joined strength the dog out drawn at last
For anger wood, and battles yet attempting all in vain,
Brought up to world, as soon as he the clear air saw again,
And spaces pure of bright fair poale had once beheld with eye,
The night arose: his sight to ground he turned by and by,
Cast down his eyes, and hateful day forthwith he put to flight,
And backward turned away his look, and straight with all his might
To the earth he falls: and underneath the shade of Hercles then
He hyd his head. therewith there came a great resort of men
With clamor glad, that did the bay about their forheads bring:
And of the noble Hercules deserved praises sing.

Chorus. EVrystheus borne with swiftned birth in have,
Did bid to bottom of the World to go:
This only lackt of labors all at last,
To spoil the King of third estate also.
The dongeons dark to enter ventred he,
Where as the way to sprits far of does bring
Full sad, and wood so black and fear'de to be:
But full with flock full great him following.
As great a preasse as flock in cities streets,
To see the Plays of Theater new wrought:
As great as at Eleus thundrer meetcs,
When Summer fifth the sacred game has brought:
As great as when comes hour of longer night,
And willing quiet sleeps to be extent,
Holds equal Libra Phoebus Char^^^^ light,
A sort the secret Ceres do frequent,
And from their howsen left do have to comme,
The Atticke priests the night to celebrate:
Such heap is chaste beneath by fields so dumme.
With age full slow some taking forth their gate
Full sad, and fillde with life so long now led:
Some yet do run the race of better years,
The virgins yet vnioynde to Spowses bed,
And yonglings eke on whom grow yet no hears
And Infant lately taught his mothers name.
To these alone, (that they the less might fear)
Is granted night to ease with foreborne flame.
The rest full sad by dark do wander theare:
As is our mind, when once away is fled
The light, when each man sorry feels to be
Deep over whelmde with all the earth his head.
Thick Chaos stands, and darkness foul to see,
And color ill of night, and slothful state
Of silent World, and diverse Clouds about.
Let hoary age us thither bring full late.
No man comes late to that, whence never out,
When once he is come, turn again he may.
To have the hard and heavy Fate what vayles?
This wandering heap in wide lands far away,
Shall go to Ghosts: and all shall give their sails
To slow Cocytus all is to thee enclinde,
Both what the fall, and rise of son does see:
Spare us that comme, to thee we death are signde:
Though thou be slow, our selves yet haste do we.
First hour, that gave the life, it loast again.
TO Thebes is come the joyful day,
Your Aulters touch ye humbylly,
The fat fair Sacrifices slay.
Maids myxte with men in cumpany
Let them in solemn Flocks go royle:
And now with yoke laid down let c^ase
The Iillers of the fertile Soil.
Made is with hand of Hercles peace
Between the morn and Hespers Glade,
And where Son holding myddle seat,
Does make the Bodies cast no Shade.
What ever ground is ouerweate
With compass long of Seas abought,
Alcydes labor taemde full well.
He over foordes of Tartare brought
Returnde appeased beeinge Hell.
There is remaining now no fear,
Naught lies beyond the Hell to see.
O Priest thy staring Locks of hear
Wrappe in with loved Poplar tree.
THE FOVRTHE ACT.
Hercules, Theseus, Amphitryon, Megara. WIth my reue^ging right hand slain now
Lycus lo the ground
With groueling face has smit: the^ who soever fellow found
Of Tyrant was, partaker of his pains did also lie.
Now to my father sacrifice and Gods victor will I,
And aulters that deserve it, with slain offerings reverence.
Thee, thee O mate of all my toils I pray and my defense
O warrefull Pallas, in whose left hand thy clear shield Aegis shakes
Fierce threats, whead that each thing stone that look upon it makes.
Let tamer of Lycurgus now, and of red Sea be hear,
That poynct of spear with Iuye green in hand does couer'de bear:
And two Gods power, does Phoebus, and his Sister to I pray
The sister meeter for her shaftes, but he on th'harpe to play:
And what so^uer brother else of mine does dwell in sky,
Not of my stepdame brother, bring ye hither by and by
Your plentuous flocks, what ever have all the Indians fruicts brought out,
And what sweet odours the Arabickes do get in trees about,
To the aulters bring: let vapor fat and fume smoke up full hye,
Let round about the Poplar tree my hayres now beautifye
Let th'oliue bow thee hyde with branch accustom'de in our land
Theseu: for forthwith reverence the thundrer, shall my hand,
TH. O Gods the builders of the town, and which of Dragon fell,
The wild woods vens, and noble waves likewise of Dirces well,
And Tyrian house enhabite eke of stranger wandering king.

HE. Cast into fyres ye frankencense.

AM. Son first thy hands flowing
With bloody slaughter, and the death of enmy purify.

HE. Would God the blood of hateful head even unto Gods on hye
I might out shed, for lycour lo more acceptable none
Might the aulters stayne: nor sacrifice more ample any one
Nor yet more plentyfull may be to Jove above down cast,
Then king unjust.

AM. Desire that now thy father end at last
Thy labors all: let quietness at length yet gieuen be,
And rest to weary folk.

HE. I will thee prayers make, for me
And Jove full meet in this due place let stand the haughty sky,
And land, and air, and let the stars drive forth eternally
Their course vnstayde: let restful peace keep nations quietly,
Let labor of the hurtles land all iron now occupye,
And swords lie hyd: let tempest none full vyolent and dyre
Disturb the sea: let from the skies no flash of lightning fire
Fall down while Jove full angry is: nor yet with winter snow
Increased flood the ground vpturnde, and field quyte overthrow,
Let poisons cease: and from hensforth let up from ground arise
No grievous herb with hurtful sap: nor fierce and fell likewise
Let tyrants raygne but if to sight some other mischief bring
The ground yet shall, let it make have: and any monstrous thing
It it prepare let it be mine, but what means this? myd day
The darkness have incloas'd about lo Phoebus goes his way
With face obscure without a cloud who dryues the day to flight,
And turns to east? from whence does now his dusky head the night
Unknown bring forth? whence fill the poale so many rownde about
Of daytyme stars? lo here behold my labor first full stout
Not in the lowest part of heaven the Lion shyneth bright,
And fervently does rage with ire, and byttes prepares to fight.
Even now lo he some star will take, with mouth full wide to see
He threatening stands, and fires out blows and mane up rustleth he
Shaking with neck the harvest sad of shape, what ever thing,
And what soever winter cold in frosen time dothbring,
He with one rage will ouerpasse, or spring time bull he will
Both seek and break the necks at once.

Am. what is this sudden ylle?
Thy cruel count'naunce whether son do thou cast here and there?
And see with troubled daseld sight false shape of heaven appear

Her. The land is tam'de the swelling feas their surges did assuage,
The kingdoms low of hell likewise have felt and known my rage,
Yet heaven is free, a labor meet for Hercules to prove.
To spaces high I will be borne of haughty skies above
Let the air be skaeld, my father does me promise stars t'obtayne.
What if he it denyde? all the earth can Hercles not contain,
And geeues at length to gods, me calls of one accord behold
The whole assembly of the gods, and does their gates unfold,
While one forbyddes, receyu'st thou me, and openest thou the sky,
Or else the gate of stubburne heaven draw after me do I?
Do I yet doubt? I even the bonds from Saturn will undo,
And even against the kingdom proud of wicked father lo
My graundsyre loase. let Titans now prepare again their fight
With me their captain raging: stones with woods I will down smight
And hye hills tops with Centaures full in right hand will I take.
With dauble mountain now I will a stayre to Gods up make.
Let Chyron under Ossa see his Pelion mountain great:
Olympus up to heaven above in third degree then set
Shall come it self, or else be cast.

AM. Put far away frour thee
The thoughts that ought not to be spoake: of mind unsound to see,
But yet full great, the furious rage assuage and lay away.

HE. What means this? the Gyauntes do pestiferous arms assay,
And Tityus from the sprights is fled, and bearing torn to see
And empty bosom, lo how near to heaven it self stood he?
Cythaeron falls, the mountain hie Pallene shakes for fear,
And torn are Tempe. he the tops of Pindus caught has here,
And Octhen he, some dreadful thing threatening does rage about
Eryn^is bringing flames: with stripes she soundes now sharken out,
And burned brandes in funeralles, lo yet more near and near
Throws in my face: fearce Tisyphone with head and ugly hear
With serpents set, now after dog fet out with Hercles hand,
That empty gate she has shut up, with bolte of fyry brande,
But lo the stock of enmious king does hidden yet remain,
The wicked Lycus seed: but to your hateful father slain
Even now this right hand shall you send let now his arrows light
My bow out shoot: it seems the shaftes to go with such a flight
Of Hercles.

AM. Whether does the rage and fury blind yet go?
His mighty Bow he drew with horns together driven lo,
And quiver loaste: great noyese makes with violence sent out
The shaft, and quight the weapon flewe his middle neck throughout,
The wound yet left.

HE. His other brood I overthrow will quight,
And corners all. What stay I yet? to me a greater fight
Remaynes then all Mycenes lo, that rockye stones should all
Of Cyclops being ouerturn'de with hand of mine, down fall.
Let shake both here, and there the house, with all stays overthrown,
Let break the poasts: and quight let shrink the shaken pillar down:
Let all the Palace fall at once. I here yet hidden see
The son of wicked father.

AM. Lo his flattring hands to thee
Applying to thy knees does crave his life with piteous moan.
O wicked gylt, full sad, and eke abhorde to look vpone,
His humble right hand caught he has, and raging round about
Him rolled twyse, or thryse has cast. his head resoundeth out,
The sprinkled houses with the brain of him thrown out are wet.
But she poor wretch her little son in vosome hyding yet
Lo Megara, like one in rage does from the corners flee.

HE. Though runagate in bosom of the thundrer hid thou be,
This right hand shall from every where thee seek, and bring to sight.

AM. Where go thou wretch? what lurking dens, seekst thou to take, or flight?
No place of sauegarde is if once be Hercles styrde with ire:
But do thou rather him embrace, and with thy meek desire
Assay t'asswage him.

ME. Husband spare us I beseech thee now,
And know thy Megara, this son thy countenance does show,
And bodies pytche: behould'st thou how his hands up lyfteth he?

HE. I hold my stepdame: follow on due penance pay to me,
And bounden Jove from fylthy bond deliver free away:
But I before the mother will this little monster slay.

ME. Thou mad man whither go thou? wylt thou thine own blood sheade?

AM. The Infant with fathers fyry face astonnted all for bread,
Died even before the wound: his fear has took away his life.
And now likewise his heavy club is shaken toward his wife:
He broaken has the bones, her head from blocklyke body gone
Is quight, nor any where it stays, dar'ste thou this look vpone
To long lyu'de age? If mouruing do the grieve, thou have then lo
The death preparde. Do thou thy breast upon his weapons throe,
Or else this club with slaughter stayn'de of monsters slain that be,
Now hither turn. thy parent false, unfit for name of thee
Ryd hence away, least he should be to thy reuowne a let.

TH. Which way the father toward thy death do thou thy self cast yet?
Or whyther go thou mad man? flee and lie thou cloasely hid,
And yet from hands of Hercules this only myschiefe rid.

HE. It Is well, the house of shameful king is now quight overthrown.
To thee O spouse of greattest Jove I have lo beaten down
This offered flock: I gladly have fulfill'de my wyshes all
Full meet for thee, and Argos now give other offerings shall.

AM. Thou have not son yet all perform'de, fill up the sacrifise.
Lo th'offring does at th'aultars stand, it waytes thy hand likewise
With neck full prone: I give my self, I roon, I follow lo.
Me sacrifice. what means this? his eyes roll to and froe,
And heaviness does dull his sight. see I of Hercules
The trembling hands? down falls his face to sleep and quietness,
And weary neck with bowed head full fast does downward shrynke,
With bended knee: now all at once he down to ground does sink,
As in the woods wild Ash cut down, or Bulwark for to make
A Haven in Seas. Liu'ste thou? or else to death does thee betake
The self same rage, that has sent all thy famyly to death?
It is but sleep, for to and fro does go and come his breath.
Let time be had of quietness, that thus by sleep and rest
Great force of his disease subdew'de, may ease his grieved breast.
Remove his weapons servants, least he mad get them again.

Chorus. LEt the air complain, and eke the parent great
Of haughty Sky, and fertile land throughout,
And wandering wave of ever moving freat.
And thou before them all, which lands about
And trayn of Sea thy beams abroad do throe
With glittring face, and make the night to flee,
O fervent Titan: both thy lettinges lo
And rising, has Alcides seen with thee:
And known likewise he has thy howsen twain.
From so great ills release ye now his breast,
O Gods release: to better turn again
His ryghter mind, and thou O tamer best
O sleep of toils, the quietness of mind,
Of all the life of man the better part,
O of thy mother Astrey wynged kind,
Of hard and pyning death that brother art,
With truth mingling the false, of after state
The sure, but eke the worste foreteller yet:
O Father of all things, of Life the gate,
Of light the rest, of night and fellow fyt,
That come to King, and servant equally,
And gently cherysshest who weary be,
All mankind lo that dreadful is to dye,
Thou do constrayne long death to learn by thee.
Keep him fast bound with heavy sleep oppressed,
Let slomber deep his Limbs untamed bind,
Nor sooner leave his unright raginge breaste
Then former mind his course again may find.
Lo laid on ground with full fieree heart yet still
His cruel sleeps he turns: and not yet is
The plague subdude of so great raging ill
And on great club the weary head of his
He wont to lay, does secke the staff to find
With empty hands his arms out casting yet
With moving vain: nor yet all rage of mind
He has laid down, but as with Sowthwind great
The wave once v^xt yet after keeps still
His raging long, and though the wind now be
Assuaged swelles, shake of these mad and ill
Tossinges of mind, return let piety,
And virtue to the man, else let be so
His mind with moving mad toste every way:
Let error blind, where it begun has, go,
For naught elsnow but only madness may
Thee gyltles make: in next estate it stands
To hurtles hands thy mischief not to know.
Now stricken let with Hercules his hands
Thy bosom sound: thine arms the world allow
Were wont to bear, let grievous strypes now smite
With conquering hand, and loud complaying cries,
Let the air now hear, let of dark pole and night
The Queen them hear, and who fulfyercely lies
That bears his necks in mighty chains fast bound,
Low lurking Cerberus in deepest cave.
Let Chaos all with clamor sad resound,
And of broad sea wide open wafting wave.
And the air that felt thy weapons beter yet,
but felt them though.
The breasts with so great yls as these beset,
With little stroke they mnst not beaten be.
Let kingdoms three sound with one playnt and cry,
And thou necks honor and defense to see,
His arrowe strong long hanged up on hye,
And quiuers light the cruel stripes now l'myte
On his fierce back his shouldars strong and stout
Let oken club now strike and poast of might
With knots full hard his bre^^ee load all about.
Let even his weapons so great woes complain
Not you pore babes mates of your fathers praise,
With cruel wound revenging kings again:
Not you your lims in Argos barriars plays,
Are taught to turn with weapons strong to smie
And strong of hand yet even now daring lo
The weapons of the Scithian quiver light
With stedy hand to paise set out from bow.
And stags to perce that save them selves by flight
And backs not yet full maend of cruel beast.
To Stigian havens goeye of shade and night
Go hurtles souls, whom mischief has oppressed
Even in first porch of life but lately had,
And fathers fury go unhappy kind
O little children, by the way full sad
Of journey known.
Go see the angry kings.

THE FIFTHE ACT.
Hercules, Amphitry on, Theseus. WHat place is this? what region? or of the
world what coast?
Where am I? under rise of sun or bond else uttermost.
Of th'^cy bear or else does here of sea of He^pery
The fardest ground appoint a bond for the ocean sea to lie?
What air draw we? to weary wight what ground is underset?
Of truth we are returned from hell whence in my house down bet
See I these bloody bodies? has not yet my mind of cast
The Infernal shapes? but after yet returned from hell at last
Yet wander does that belly heap before mine eyes to see?
I am asham'de to grant, I quake, I know not what to me,
I cannot tell what greeuou ill my mind before does know.
Where is my parent? where is she with goodly childrens show
My noble harly stomackt spouse why does my left fyde lack
The lions spoil? which way is gone the cover of my back?
And self same bed full soft for sleep of Hercules also?
Where are my sha^tes? where is my bow? then from my living who
Could pluck away? who taken has the spoils so great as these
And who was he that feared not even sleep of Hercules?
To see my conqueror me lykes, yt lykes me him to know
Rise victor up, what new son has my father gotten now
Heaven being left? at birth of whom might ever stayed be
A longer night then, was in mine? what mischief do I see?
My children lo do lie on ground with bloody slaughter slain?
My wife is killed: what Lycus does the kingdom yet obtain?
Who durst so heinous giltes as these at Thebes take in hand
When Hercles is returned? who so Ismenus waters land,
Who so Acteons fields or who with double seas beset
The shaken Pelops kingdoms do of Dardan dwell on yet
Help me: of cruel slaughter show who may the author be.
Let rage my ire and all: my foe he is who so to me
Shows not my foe do thou yet hyde Alcides victorly?
Come forth, even whether thou revenge the cruel charyots hye
Of Bloody Thracian king or if thou Gerions catell quight
Or lords of Lybia, no delay there is with thee to fight.
Behold I naked stand, although even with my weapons lo
Thou me unarmed set upon. Wherefore flees Theseus so,
And eke my father from my ^^ght? their faces why hyde they?
Defer your weepings, and who did my wife and children sley
Thus all at once, me tell. Wherefore O father do thou whush^?
But tell thou Theseu, but Theseu with thy accustomed trust.
Each of them sylent hydes away their bashefull count^naunces,
And privily they shed their tears in so great ils as these,
Of what ought we asham'de to be? does ruler yet of might
Of Argos town, or hateful band of sowldiars apt to fight
Of Lycus dying, us oppress with such calamity?
By praise of all my noble acts I do desire of thee
O father, and of thy great name approu'de to me always
The prosperous power declare to me, who did my household flay?
Whose pray lay I?
A. Let thus thine ylles in sylens ouerpas.

He. That I should unrevenged be? Am, Revenge often hurtful was.

He Did ever man so grievous yls without revenge sustain?

A Whose ever greater fearde.

H. Then these O father yet again
May any greater thing, or else more grievous feared be?

Am. How great apart is it thou wo^st of thy calamity?

Her. Take mercy father, lo I lift to thee my humble hands.
What means this? my hand flees back, some privy gy^t their stands
Whence comes this blood? or what does mean flowing with death of child
The shaft imbrewd with slaughter once of Lerney monster kilde?
I see my weapons now, the hand I seek no more to wit.
Whose hand could bend this bow but mine? or what right at me but it*
Could string the bow that unto me even scantly does obey?
To you I turn: O father dear, is this my gylt I pray?
They held their peace: it is mine own.

Am. Thy grievous woe is ther^,
The crime thy stepdames: this mischaunce no falt of thine has here.

Her. From every part now father throw in wrath thy thunders might,
And of thy son forgetful now with cruel hand requighte
At least thy nephews, let the world that bears the stars sound out.
And let both the one and the other poale, flyng down thy flames about:
And let the banks of Caspyan sea my bounden body tear,
And gredy foul. Wherefore do of Prometheus lack hear
The rocks? with huge and haughty top let now prepared be,
Both feeding beasts and fowls, the side of Caucas turn to see,
And bare of woods, the isle that bridge of Scithe that thereby stands
Simplegas ioynes, both here and there let it my bounden hands
Stretch out abroad: and when with course return'de accustomd'ly
They shall together drive, and shall the rocks toss up to sky
With banks together being thrust, and eke the middle seay,
Let me bet ween the mountains lie unquiet restless stay
But building up with wood thrown on a heaped plie on h^e
My body thus with wicked blood ^esprinct, why but^e not I?
So, so yt mus be done: to hell I Hercles will restore.

Am. Not yet his heart astonted lackes his ragyng (...) sore,
But wrath ^hath turned: and which of rage is prop^rty and ire
Against himself he rages now

Her. The furies places dire
And dungeon deep of sprites in hell and place of tormentry
To gylty ghostes and banishment if any yet do lie
Beyond Erebus, yet unknown to Cerberus and me,
There hyde me ground to farthest bond of Tartarus to see.
To tarry there I Will go. O breast of mine to fierce and stout:
Who you my children thus dispersed through all my house about,
May worthily enough bewail? in all my evils yet
This countnaunce hard can never weep, a sword now hither set:
My shaftes reach hither, hither reach my mighty club also:
To thee my weapons break I wi^, to thee my son a two
I Will knappe my bows, and eke my clubbe, this block of heavy wayghte
Shall to thy sprites be burned lo: this self same quiver frayght
With Lerney shaftes to funeral of thine shall like wise go.
Let all my weapons penance pay and you unhappy to
Even with my weapons burn I will, O stepdames hands of mine.

Th. Who ever yet to ignorance has given name of crime?

Her. Full oftentimes did error great the place of gylt obtain.

Th. It Is need to be a Hercles now, this heap of ill sustain.

Her. Not so, has shame yet given place with fury drowned quight:
But peoples all I rather should drive from my wicked sight.
My weapons, weapons

Thesens. I quickly crave to me
Withdraw to be restoard again: if sound my mind now be,
Restore to me my weapons: if yet last my rage of mind,
Then father flee: for I the way to death my self shalfynde.

Am. By sacred holy ^ynreds rightes, by force and duty all
Of both my names; if either me thy brynger up thou call.
Or parent else, and (which of good men reverenced are)
By these hoare ^^yres, I the beseech my desert age yet spare,
And weary years of house salne down the one alonly stay,
One only light to me, with yls afflicted every way
Reserve thy self: yet never has there happ^ned once of thee
Fruit of thy toils: still either I the doubtful sea to see
Or monsters feared: who ever yet has been a cruel king
In all the world to ghostes allow, and aulters both hurtinge,
Of me is feared: the father of thee absent still to have
The feuite, the touching, and the sight of thee at length I crave.

He. Wherefore I longer should sustayn my life yet in this light,
And linger here no cause there is, all good lost have I quighte,
My mind, my weapons, my renoume, my wife, my sons, my hands,
And fury to no man may heal and lose from gylty hands
My mind defyeld: needs must with death he heald so heinous ill.

Th. Will thou thy father IIay?

He. Least I should do it die I will.

Th. Before thy fathers face?

He. I taught him mischief for to see.

Th. Thy deeds marking rather that should of al remembered be,
Of this one only crime I do a pardon of thee crave.

Her. Sall he give pardon to himself, that to none else it gave?
I being bidden praise deserved, this deed mine own does prove.
Help father now, if either else thy piety thee move,
Or else my heavy fate, or else the honor and renown.
Of stained strength, my weapons bring, let fortune be thrown down.
with my right hand.

Th. The prayers which thy father makes to thee
Are strong enough, but yet likewise with weeping lo of me
By moved yet: arise thou up, and with thy wonted might
Subdue thine yls: now such a mind ^^meete to bear upright
No evil hap, receyus again lo now with manhood great
Thou must prevail. even Hercules forbid with ire to fret.

HE. Alive, I hurt: but if I dye I take the gylt also.
I have to rid the world of crime even now before me lo
A wicked monster cruel, and untamed fierce and flout
Does wander: now with thy right hand begime to go about
A great affayre, yea more then all thy twyse six labors long.
Yet stayst thou wretch, that late against the children wast so strong,
And fearful mother now except restoard my weapons ^ee,
Of Thracian Pindus either I will fear down every tree,
And Bacchus holly woods and tops of mount Cythaeron hye
Burn with myself, and al 'at once with all their housen I
And with the Lords thereof the roofes with gods of Thebes all
The Thebane temples even upon my body will let fall:
And will be hyd in to wne vpturnd: if to my shoulders might
The wall^s themselves all cast ther^^ shall fall a burden light,
And couerd with seven gates I shall not be enough oppressed,
Then all the wayght whereon the world in middle part does rest,
And parts the Gods upon my head I Will turn and overthrow
My weapons give.

Am. This word is meet for Hercles father lo
With this same arrow slain behold thy son is tombled down,
This weapons cruel Juno lo from hands of thine has thrown,
This same will I now use, lo see how leaps with fear afright
My wretched heart, and how it does my careful body smight.
The shaft is set thereto thou shall a mischief lo do now
Both willing it and wotting: tell, what thing commaundest thou?
I nothing crave my doloure let in saf'ty stands now.
To keep my son alive to me that only do can thou
O Theseu, yet I have not scapte great'st fear that happen can
Thou can me not a miser make, thou may a happy man
So order every thing thou do, as all thy cause in hand,
And fame thou may well know in straight and doubtful ca^e to stand
Thou live, or die: this slender soul that light is hence to flee,
Weried with age and no less bet with grievous ils to see,
In mouth I hold so slowly to a father with such slaye
Does any man give life? I wilno longer bid delay,
The deadly sword throughout my breast to strike I will apply,
Here, here the gylt of Hercules even sound of mind shall lie.

Her. Forbear O father now forbear, with draw thy hand again.
My manhood yield thy fathers will, and impery sustain.
To Hercles labors now like wise, let this one labor go,
Let me yet live, lift up from ground the afflicted lims with woe
O The^eu of my parent: for from Godly touch does flee
My wicked hand.

Am? I gladly do this hand embrace to me.
By this I being slayed will go, this meuing to my breast
I Will slake my woes,

Her. what place shall I seek ronnagate for rest?
Where shall I hyde my self? or in what land my self engraue?
What Tanais, or what Nilus else, or with his Persyan wave
What Tygris violent of stream, or what fierce Rhenus flood,
Or Tagus troublesome that flows with Ibers treasures good
May my right hand now wash from gylt? although Maeotis cold
The waves of all the Northen sea on me shed out now would,
And all the water there of should now pas by my two hands,
Yet will the mischief deep remain* alas into whet lands
Will thou O wicked man resort? to East or western cost?
Each where well known, all place I have of banishment quight lost
From me the warlde does flee a back, the stars that sydelyng roue
Do back ward drive their turned course, even Cerberus the soue
With better count'naunce did behold O faithful friend I say,
O Theseu seek same lurking place, far hence out of the way
O thou a warder of men's gyltes what ever Judge thou he
That hurtful men do love, repay a worthy thank to me:
And my deserts. I thee beseech, to ghostes of hell again
Send me that once escaped them: and subject to thy rain
Restore me yet to those thy bands, that place shall me well hyde:
And yet even that place knows me well

Th. Our land for thee does bide
There Mars his hand ac^ui^e again and made from slaughter free
Restoard to armoure, l^e that land ( Alcides) (...) for thee,
Which wontes to quite the gods, and prove them Innocent to be.

HERE ENDS THE FIRST Tragedye of Seneca, called Hercules furens,
translated into English by Jasper Heywood studente in Oxenforde.
THE SECOND TRAGEDY OF SENECA ENTITVtuled Thyestes, faithfully Englished by
Jasper Heywood Fellow of Alsolne College in Oxenforde.
The Argument of this Tragedy.
MEGAERA ONE OF THE Hellish furies raising up Tantalus from Hell, incited him
to set mortal hatred between his two nephews Thiestes, and Atreus being
brothers, and raining as Kings over Mycenae by enterchangeable turns, that is
to wit Thiestes to rain the one year, and Atreus the other. Now Atreus
enraged with fury against his brother partly for defiling and deflouring his
wife Aerope by policy, and partly for taking from him a Ram with a golden
fleese, practiced with his servant how to be reue^ged of his brother. This
Atreus therefore disse^bli^g a reconciliation and inuiting Thyestes to Mycenae
secretly and unknown to him, set before hi^ at a banquet the flesh of his own
children to eat. Afterward Atreus having also given to his said brother ye
blood of his children in a goblet to drink, did lastly co^mau^d the heads also
to be brought in, at the doleful sight whereof Thiestes greatly lame^ting
knowi^g ye he had eaten his own children, was wonderfully anguished. But
Atreus for that he had thus revenged himself, took therein great pleasure and
delectation.

THIESTES OF SENECA THE FIRST ACT.
The names of the Speakers
Tantalus. Megaera. Atrcus. Servant. Thiestes. Philistencs. Messenger, Chorus.
Tantalus Megaera, WHAT furye fell enforces me
to fle, the unhappy seat,
That gaye and gasp with greedye law,
the fleeyng food to eat
What GOD to Tantalus the bowres
where breathing bodies dwell
Does show agayue? is ought found worse, then burning thyrst of hell
In lakes allow? or ^et worse plague then hunger is there one,
In vain that ever gapes for food? shall Sisyphus his stone,
That slipper restles rollyng payse upon my back be borne.
Or shall my lymmes with swifter swinge of whirling whele be torn?
Or shall my pains be Tytius panges th'encreasyng liver still,
Whose growing guts the gnawing gripes and tylthy fowls do fill?
That still by night repayres the panch that was deuourd by day,
And wondrous womb unwasted lies a new prepared pray
What ill am I appointed for? O cruel judge of sprites,
Who so thou be that torments new among the sowles delytes
Still to dispose, ad what thou can to all my deadly woe,
That keeper even of dungeon dark would fore abhor to know.
Or hell it self it quake to se: for dread whereof likewise
I tremble would, that plague seek out: lo now there does arise
My brood that shall in mischief far the grandsyers gilt out go,
And gyltles make: that first shall dare vnuentred ils to do.
What ever place remains yet of all this wicked land,
I will fill up: and never once while Pelops house does stand
Shall Minos idle be.
Meg. Go forth thou detestable sprite
And vex the Gods of wicked house with rage of furyes might.
Let them contend with all offense, by turns and one by one
Let swords be drawn: and mean of ire procure there may be none,
Nor shame: let fury blind inflame their minds and wrathful will,
Let yet the parents rage endure and longer lasting ill
Through childrens children spread: nor yet let any leisure be
The former faw^s to hate, but still more mischief new to see,
Nor one in one: but ere the gylt with vengeance be acquit,
Increase the crime: from brethren proud let rule of kingdom flyt
To runnagates: and swaruing state of all unstable things,
Let it by doubtful dome be toste, between thuncertaine kings.
Let mighty fall to misery, and myser clime to might,
Let chance turn thempyre vpsydowne both give and take the right.
The banyshed for gylt, when god restore their country shall.
Let them to mischief fall a fresh as hateful then to all,
As to themselves: let Ire think naught unlawful to be done,
Let brother dread the brothers wrath, and father fear the soon,
And eke the soon his parents power: let babes be murdered ill,
But worse begot? her spouse betrapt t^ treasons train to kill,
Let hateful wife a wait, and let them bear through seas their war,
Let bloodshed lie the lands about and every field a farr^:
And over conqueryng captains great, of countries far to see,
Let lust tryumphe: in wicked house let whoredom counted he
The light'st offene: let trust that in the breasts of brethren breeds,
And truth be gone: let not from sight of your so heinous deeds
The heavens be hyd, about the poale when shine the stars on hye,
And flames with woonted beams of light do deck the painted skyls.
Let darkest night be made, and let the day the heavens forsake.
Dysturbe the godds of wicked house, hate, slaughter, murder make.
Fill up the house of Tantalus with mischieues and debates,
Adorned be the pillars high with bay, and let the gates
Be garnysht green: and worthy there for thy return to sight.
Be kyndled fire: let mischyefe done in Thracia once, their light
More many fold, wherefore does yet the uncles hand delay?
Does yet Thyestes not bewail his childrens fatal day?
Shall he not find them where with heat of fyres that under glowe
The cawderne boyles? their limbs each one a pieces let them go
Disperste: let fathers fires, with blood of children fyled be:
Let deynties such be dressed: it is no mischief new to thee,
To banquet so: behold this day we have to thee releast,
And hunger starued womb of thine we send to such a feast.
With fowlest food thy famyne fill, let blood in wine be drowned,
And drunk in sight of thee: lo now such dishes have I found,
As thou would shonne, stay whither doste thou hedlong way now take

Tan. To pooles and floods of hell again and still declining lake,
And flight of tree full frayght with fruit that from the lips does flee,
To dungeon dark of hateful hell let leeful be for me
To go: or if to light be thought the pains that there I have,
Remove me from those lakes again: in midst of worser wave
Of Phlegethon, to stand in seas of fire beset to be.
Who so beneath thy poynted pains by destenyes decree
Do still endure who so thou be that vnderliest allow
The hollow den, or ruin who that fears and overthrow
Of falling hyl, or cruel cries that sound in caves of hell
Of greedy r^aryng Lions throats or flock of furyes fell
Who quakes to know or who the brandes of fire in dyrest pain
Half burnt throws of hark to the voice of Tantalus: again
That hastes to hell, and whom the truth has taught believe well me
Love well your pains, they are but small when shall my hap so be
To flee the light?

Meg Disturb thou first this house with dire discord
Debates and battles bring with thee, and of the unhappy sword
Ill love to kings: the cruel breast str^ke through and hateful heart,
With tumult mad.

Tan. To suffer pains it seems well my part,
Not woes to work: I am sent forth like vepoure dyre to rise,
That breaks the ground or poison like the plague in wondrouse wise
That slaughter makes, shall I to such detested crimes, apply
My nephews hearts? ^ parents great of Gods above the sky
And mine (though sham'de I be to grant) although with greater pain
My tongue be vexed, yet this to speak I may no whit refrain
Nor hold my peace: I war^e you this least sacred hand with blood
Of slaughter dyre, or frans^e fell of fran^ke fury wood
The aulters stayne, I wll resist: And guard such gylt away.
With strpes why do thou me affryght? why threatst thou me to fraye
Those crallyn g snakes? or famine fyxt in empty womb, wherefore
Do thou reuyue? now fries within with thyrst enkmdled sore
My heart: and in the bowels burnt the boiling fl^me^ do glow.

Meg. I follow thee: through all this house now rage and fury throw
Let them be driven so, and so let either thirst to see
Each others blood full well has felt the coming in of thee
This house, and all with wicked touch of the degune to quake.
Enough it is, repair again to dens and loathsome lake,
Of flood well known, the sadder soil with heavy foot of thine
Agreeued is, see thou from syringes how waters do declyne
And inward sink? or how the banks lie void by drughty heat?
And hoatter blast of fyery wind the fewer clouds does beat?
The treese be spoyld, and naked stand to sight in withred woddes,
The barayne bows whose fruits are fled: the land between the floods
With surge of seas on either side that wonted to resound,
And ^earer foordes to seperat sometime with lesser ground,
Now broader spread, it hears how aloof the waters rise.
Now Lerna turns against the stream Phoronides likewise
His poares be stopped, with custom'd course Alpheus dryues not still,
His hollie waves, the trembling tops of high Cithaeron hill,
They stand not sure: from height adowne they shake their silver snow,
And noble fields of Argos fear, their former drought to know.
Yea Tytan doubts himself to rolie the world his wonted way,
And drive by force to former course the backward drawing day.
Chorus, THis Argos town if any God be found,
And Pisey boures that famous yet remayn,
Or kingdoms else to love of Corinthes ground,
The double havens, or sundred seas in twain
If any love of Taygetus his snowes,
(By VVinter which when they on hills be cast:
By Boreas blastes that from Sarmatia blows,
With yearly breath the summer meltes as fast)
Where clear Alpheus runs with floude so cold,
By plays well known that there Olimpiks hight:
Let pleasant power of his from hense withholde
Such tunes of strife that here they may not light:
Not nephew worse then grandsier spring from us,
Or direr deeds delyght the younger age.
Let wicked stock of thirsty Tantalus
At length leave of, and weary be of rage.
Enoughe is done, and naught preuaild the just,
Or wrong: betrayed is Mirtilus and drownde,
That did betray his dame, and with like trust
Borne as he bare, himself has made renound
With changed name the sea: and better known
To mariners thereof no fable is.
On wicked sword the little infant thrown
As ran the chide to take his fathers kiss.
Unripe for thaulters offering fell down dead:
And with thy hand (O Tantalus) was rent,
With such a meat for Gods thy boordes to spread.
Eternal famine for such food is sent,
And thyrst: nor for those daynty meats vnmilde,
Might meeter pain appointed ever be
Vith empty throat stands Tantalus begylde,
Above thy wicked head their leanes to thee,
Then Phineys fowls in flight a swifter pray.
With burned bows declynd on every side,
And of his fruits all bent to bear the sway,
The tree deludes the gapes of hunger wide
Though he full greedy feed thereon would feign.
So often deceyu'de neglectes to touch them yet:
He turns his eyes, his jaws he does refrain,
And famine fixed in closed gummes does shet.
But then each branch his plenteous riches all,
Lets lower down, and apples from an hie
With lither leaves they flatter like to fall
And famine stir: in vain that bids to try
His hands: which when he has rought forth anon
To be beguyld, in higher air again
The harvest hanges and fickle fruit is gone,
Then thirst him greeues no less then hungers pain:
Wherewith when kindled is his boiling blood
Like fire, the wretch the waves to him does call,
That meet his mouth: which straight the fleeyng flood
VVithdrawes, and from the dried foorde does fall:
And him forsakes that follows them. He drinks
The dust so deep of gulf that from him shrinkes.

THE SECOND ACT.
Atreus. Servant O Dastard, cowrde, O wretch, and (which
the greatest yet of all
To Tyrants check I compte that may
in weighty things befall)
O unrevenged: after guyltes
so great and brothers guyle.
And truth trod down do thou provoke
with vain complaynts the while
Thy wrath? already now to rage all Argos town throughout
In armoure ought of thine, and all the double seas about
Thy fleet to ride: now all the fields with fervent flames of thine,
And towns to flash it well beseemde: and every where to shine,
The bright drawn sword: all vuder foot of horse let every side
Of Argos land resound: and let the wounds not serve to hyde
Our ^oes, nor yet in haughty top of hills and mountains hye,
The builded towers. The people all let them to battle cry
And clear for sake Mycenas town who so his hateful head
Hides and defendes, with slaughter dire let blood of him be shed.
This princely Pelops palace proud, and bowres of high renown,
On me so on my brother to let them be beaten down,
Go to, do that which never shall no after age allow,
Nor none it whisht: some wischese great there must be ventred now,
Both fierce and bloody: such as would my brother rather long
To have been his. Thou never do enough revenge the wrong.
Exept thou pass. And feercer fact what may be done so dyre,
That his exceedes? does ever he lay down his hateful ire?
Does ever he the modest mean in time of wealth regard
Or quiet in aduerslty? I know his nature hard
Intractable, that broke may be, but never wilit b^nd.
For which are he prepare himself, or force to fight entend,
Set first on him, least while I rest he should on me arise.
He will destroy or be destroyed in midst the mischief lies,
Prepared to him that takes it first,
Ser. Does fame of people naught
Adverse thee fear?

Atre. The greatest good of kingdom may be thought
That still the people are constraynd their princes deeds as well
To praise, as them to suffer all.

Ser. Whom fear does so compel
To praise, the same his foes to be, does fear enforce agoyne:
But who indeed the glory seckes of favor true t'obtayne
He rather would with hates of each be praysd, then tounges of all

Atre. The trewer praise full often has hapt to meaner men to fall:
The false but unto mighty man what nill they let them will.

Ser. Let first the king will honest things and none the fame dare nill.

Atre. Where leeful are to him that rules but honest things alone,
There raynes the king by others leave.

Ser. And where y^ shame is none,
Nor care of right, faith, piety, nor holiness none stays,
That kingdom swarues.

Atre. Such holiness, such piety and faith.
Are private goods: let kings run one in that that likes their will.

Ser. The brothers hurt a mischief count though he be nere so ill.

Atre. It is but right to do to him, that wrong to brother were*
What heinous hurt has his offense let pass to pr^ue? or where
Refraynd the gylt, thy spouse he sta^e away for lechery,
And raygne by stelth: the ancient note and sign of ampery,
By frawde he got: my house by fraud to vex he never ceast:
In Pelops house there fostred is a noble worthy beast
The close kept Ram: the goodly guide of rych and fairest flocks.
By whom throughout on every side depend a down the locks
Of glittering gold, with fleece of which the new kings wonted were
Of Tantals stock their sceptors gylt, and mace of might to beat.
Of this the owner raygneth he, with him of house so great
The fortune flees, this sacred Ram aloof in safety shet
In secret mead is wont to grase, which stone on every side
With rocky wall inclosethe round the fatal beast to hyde.
This beast (aduentryng mischief great) adjoining yet for pray
My spoused mate, the traitor false has hence conuayde away
From hence the wrongs of mutual hate, and mischief all vpsyreng:
In exile wandered he throughout my kingdoms all along:
No part of mine remains safe to me, from traynes of his.
My feere deflourde, and loyalty of empire broken is:
My house all vexed, my blood in doubt, and naught that trust is in,
But brother foe What stayst thou yet? at length lo now begin.
Take heart of Tantalus to thee, to Pelops cast thine eye:
To such examples well beseemes, I should my hand apply.
Tell thou which way were best to bring that cruel head to death.

Ser. Through perst with sword let him be slain and yield his hateful breath.

Atre. Thou speak of the end: but I him would opres with greter pain.
Let tyrants vex with torment more: should ever in my rain
Be gentle death?

Ser. Does piety in thee prevail no whit?

Atre. Depart thou hence all piety, if in this house as yet
Thou ever were: and now let all the flock of furies dyre,
And full of strife Erinnis come, and double brands of fire
Megaera shaking: for not yet enough with fury great
And rage does burn my boiling breast: it ought to be repleate,
With monster more.

Ser. What mischief new do'ste thou in rage pro-uide?

Atre. Not such a one as may the mean of woonted grief abide.
No guilt will I forbear, nor none may be enough despite.

Ser. What sword?

Atr. To little that.

Ser. what fire?

Atr. And y^ is yet to

Ser. What weapon then shall sorrow such find fit to work thy will?

Atr. Thy estes self.

Ser. Then ire it self yet that is a greater ill.

Atr. I grant: a tombling tumult quakes, within my bosoms lo,
And round it rolls: I moved am and wot not whereunto.
But drawn I am: from bottom deep the roryng soil does cry
The day so fair with thunder soundes, and house as all from hy
Were rent, from roof, and rafters crakes: and lares turnde abought
Have wryde their sight: so bee'te, so bee'te, let mischief such be sought,
As ye O Gods would fear.

Ser. What thing seek'st thou to bring to pas
I note what greater thing my mind, and more then wont it was

Atre. Above the reach that men are wont to work, begins to swell:
And stayth with slothful hands. What thing it is I cannot tell:
But great it is. Bee'te so, my mind now in this feate proceed,
For Atreus and Thyestes both, it were a worthy deed.
Let each of us the crime commit. The Thracian house did see
Such wicked tables once: I grant the mischief great to be,
But done ere this: some greater guilt and mischief more, let ire
Find out. The stomach of thy son O father thou enspyre,
And sister eke, like is the cause: assist me with your power,
And drive my hand: let greedy parents all his babes deuowre,
And glad to rent his children be: and on their lyms to feed.
Enough, and well it is deuis'de: this pleases me in deed.
In mean time where is he? so long and innocent wherefore
Does Atreus walk? before mine eyes already more and more
The shade of such a slaughter walks: the want of children cast,
In fathers Jaws. But why my mind, yet dreadst thou so at last,
And faiut'st before thou enterprise? it must be done, let be,
That which in all this mischief is the greatest guilt to see,
Let him commit.

Ser. but what disceit may we for him prepare,
Whereby betrapt he may be drawn, to fall into the snare?
He wotes full well we are his foes.

Atre. He could not taken be,
Except himself would take: but now my kingdoms hops he.
For hope of this he would not fear to meet the mighty Jove,
Though him he threatened to deistroy, with lightning from above.
For hope of this to pass the threats of waves he will not fail,
Nor dread no whit by doubtful shelues, of Lybike seas to sail,
For hope of this (which thing he does the woorst of all believe,)
He will his brother see.

Ser. Who shall of peace the promise geeue?
Whom will he trust?

Atre. His evil hope will soon believe it well.
Yet to my sons the charge which they shall to their vuckle tell,
We will commit: that whom he would from exile come again,
And myseries for kingdom change, and over Argos raygne
A king of half: and though to hard of heart our prayers all
Him self despise, his children yet naught woting what may fall,
With travels tier'de, and apt to be entys, de from misery,
Requests will move: on the one side his desire of Imperie,
On the other side his poverty, and labor hard to see,
Will him subd^e and make to yield, although full stout he be.

Sea. His trauayles now the time has made to seem to him but small.

Atr. Not so: for day by day the grief of ill increases all.
It Is light to suffer miseries, but heavy them to endure.

Ser. Yet other messengers to send, in such affairs procure,

Atr. The younger sort the wrose precepts do easily harken to.

Ser. What thing against their uncle now, you them enstruckt to do,
Perhaps with you to work the like, they will not be a dread.
Such mischief wrought has often return'de upon the workers head.

Atre. Though never man to the^ the ways of guile and guilt have taught,
Yet kingdom will. Fear thou they should be made by counsel naught?
They are so borne. That whith thou car, ste a cruel enterprise,
And dyrely deemest done to be, and wickedly likewise,
Perhaps is wrought against me there.

Ser. And shall your sons of this
Disceipt beware that work you will? no secretnes there is
In their so green and tender years: they will your traynes disclose,

Atre. A privy counsel cloase to keep, is learnde with many woes.

Ser. And will ye them, by whom ye would he should beguiled be,
Them selnes begull'de?

At. May let the^ both from fault and blame be free.
For what shall need in mischiefs such as I to work entende,
To mingle them? let all my hate by me alone take end.
Thou leau'ste thy purpose ill my mind: if thou thine own sorbeare,
Thou sparest him. Wherefore of this let Agamemnon hear
Be mynister: and Client eke of mine for such a deed,
Let Menelaus present be: truth of th'uncertayne seed,
By such a pracktise may be tri'de: if it refuse they shall,
Nor of debate will bearers be, if they him uncle call,
He is their father: let them go. But much the fearful face
Bewrayes it self: even him that faynes the secret wayghty case,
Does often betray: let them therefore not know, how great a guyle
They go about. And thou these things in secret keep the while.

Ser. I need not warned be, for these within my bosom deep,
Both faith, and fear, but chiefly faith, does shet and closely keep.

Chorus. THe noble house at length of high renown,
The famous stock of ancient Inachus,
Apeasd and laid the threats of brethren down
But now what fury styrs and drives you thus
Each one to thyrst the others blood again,
Or get by guylt the golden Mace in hand?
Ye little wot that so desire to raygne,
In what estate or place does kingdom stand.
Not riches makes a king or high renown,
Not garnisht weed with purple Tyrian die,
Not lofty looks, or head encloasde with cr^wne,
Not glyttring beams with gold and turrets hie.
A King he is that fear has laid aside,
And all affects that in the breast are bread:
Whom impotent ambition does not guide,
Nor fickle favor has of people led.
Nor all that west in mettalls mines has found,
Or channel clear of golden Tagus shows,
Nor all the grain that thresshed is on ground,
That with the heat of libyk harvest glowes.
Nor whom the flasshe of lightning flame shall be ate,
Nor eastern wind that smightes upon the seas,
Nor swelling surge with rage of vvynde repleate,
Or greedy Gulphe of Adria displease.
Whom not the prick of Soldiers sharpest spear,
Or poyncted pyke in hand has made to rue,
Nor whom the glympse of swoorde might cause to fear,
Or bright drawn blade of glyttring steel sub due.
Who in the seat of safty sets his feet,
Beholdes all haps how under him they lie,
And gladly runs his fat all day to meet,
Nor ought complaynes or grudgeth for to dye.
Though present were the Princes euerychone,
The scattered Dakes to chase that wonted be,
That shyning seas beset with precious stone,
And red sea coasts do hold, like blood to see:
Or they which else the Caspian mountains hye,
From Sarmats strong with all their power vvithholde:
Or he that on the floude of Danubye,
In frost a foot to travail dare be bold:
Or Seres in what ever place they lie,
Renownde with fleece that there of sylke does spring,
They never might the truth here of deny,
It is the mind that only makes a king.
There is no need of sturdie steedes in war,
No need with arms or arrows else to fight,
That Parthus woonts with bow to fling from far,
While from the field he falsely fayneth flight.
Nor yet to siege no need it is to bring
Great Guns in Carts to overthrow the wall,
That from far of their battring Pellets slyng.
A king he is that fears naught at all.
Each man him self this king dome geeues at hand.
Let who so list with mighty mace to raygne,
In tyckle top of court delight to stand
Let me the sweet and quiet rest obtain.
So set in place obscure and low degree,
Of pleasant rest I shall the sweetness knoe.
My life unknown to them that noble be,
Shall in the step of secret silence go.
Thus when my days at length are over past,
And time without all troublous tumult spent,
An aged man I shall depart at last,
In mean estate, to dye full well content.
But grievous is to him the death, that when
So far abroad the brute of him is blown,
That known he is to much to other men:
Departs yet unto him self unknown.

THE THIRD ACT.
Thyestes, Phylisthenes MY country bowres s^ long wished for, and Argos rytches
all,
Cytese good that unto banished then, and Mysers may befall,
The touch of suyle where born I was, a gods of native la^d,
(If gods they be,) a sacred towers I see of Cycolps hand:
That represeat then all man's work, a greater majesty.
Renowned stad^s to my youth, where noble sometime I
Have not so seelde as once, the palm in fathers chariot won.
All Argos now to meet with me, and people fast will roon:
But Atreus to. yet rather lead in woods again thy flight,
And bushes thick, and hid among the brutyshe beasts from sight,
Like life to theyrs: where splendent pomp of court a princely pride,
May not with flattring fulgent face, allure thine eyes aside,
With whom the kingdom given is, behold, and well regard,
Beset but late with such mishaps, as all men couate full hard,
I stout and joyful was: but now again thus int fear
I am return. my mind misdoubtes, and backward seeks to bear
My body hence: and forth I draw my pace against my will.
Phy. With slothful step (what means this?) my father stands still,
And turns his face and holds him self, in doubt what thing to do.

Thy. What thing (my mind) con^drest thou? or else so long whereto
Do thou so east counsel wrest? will thou to things unsure
Thy brother and the kingdom trust? fearst thou those ills to endure
Now overcome, and mielder made? and trauayls do thou flee
That well were plaste? it thee auayls, a myser now to be.
Turn hence thy pace while leefull is, and keep thee from his hand.

Phy. What cause thee drives (O father dear) thus ro^ thy native land,
Now seen to shrynk? what makes thee thus from things so good at last
Withdraw thy self? thy brother comes whose tres be ouerpast,
And half the kingdom geues, and of the house Dy^acerate,
Repayres the parts: and thee restores again to former state.

Thy. The cause of fear that I know not, thou do require to hear.
I see nothing that makes me dread, and yet I greatly fear.
I would go on, hut yet my limbs with weary legs do slack:
And other way then I would pass, I am withholden back.
So often the ship that driven is with wind and eke with Ore,
The swelling surge resisting both beats back upon the shore.

Phy. Yet overcome what ever stays, and thus does let your mind,
And see what are at your return, prepar'de for you to find.
You may O father raygne.

Thy. I may but then when die I might.

P. Chief thing is power.

T. naught worth at al, if thou desire it naught.

P. You shall it to your children leave.

T. the kingdom takes not twain,

Phy. Who may be happy, rather would he myfer yet remain?

Thy. Believe me well, with titles false the great things us delight:
And heavy haps in vain are fearde. while high I stood in sight,
I never stinted then to quake, and self same sword to fear,
That hanged by mine own side was. Oh how great good it were,
With none to strive, but careless food to cate and rest to know?
The greater gyltes they enter not in cotage set allow.
And safer food is fed upon, at narrow boorde always,
While drunk in gold the poison is by proof well taught I say,
That evil haps before the good to love it likes my will.
Of haughty house that siandes aloft in tickle top of hill,
And swayes aside, the cyty low need never be affright:
Nor in the top of roof above, there shynes no Iuery bright,
Nor watchman noue defendes my sleeps by night, or gardes my rest:
With fleet I fish not, nor the sees I have not backwarde pressed,
Nor turn'de to flight with builded wall: nor wicked belly I
With taxes of the people fed: nor parcel none does lie,
Of ground of mine beyond the Getes: and Parthians far about:
Nor worshipped with frankincense I am, nor ( Jove shet out)
My Aulters decked are: nor none in top of house does stand
In garden treese, nor kindled yet with help of each man's hand,
The bathes do smoke: nor yet are days in slothful siumbers led,
Nor nights past forth in watch and wine, without the rest of bed.
We nothing fear, the house is safe without the hidden knyfe,
And poor estate the sweetenes feels, of test and quiet life.
Great kindome is to be content, without the same to live.

Phy. Yet should it not refused be, if God the kingdom give.

Thy. Not yet desierd it ought to be.

Phy. your brother byds you rain.

Thy. Bids he? the more is to be fearde: there lurketh there some train.

Phy. From whence it fell, yet piety is wont to turn at length:
And love vnfaynde, repayres again his erst omitted strength.

Thy. Does Atreus then his brother love? each Vrsa first on his.
The Seas shall wash and swelling surge of Seas of Sicylye
Shall rest and all assuaged be: and corn to rypenes grow
In bottawe of Ionian seas, and barkest night shall show
And spread the light about the soil: the waters with the fire,
The life with death, the wind with seas, shall friendship first require,
And be at league.

Phy. of what deceipte are you so dreadful here?

Thy. Of euerychone: what end at length might I provide of fear?
In all he can he hates me.

Phy. to you what hurt can he?

Thy. As for my self I nothing dread you little Babes make me
Afraid of him.

Phy. dread, ye to be deguilde when caught ye are:
To late it is to shoon the traytie in middle of the snare.
But go we on this (father) is to you my last request.

Thy. I follow you. I lead you not.

Phy. God turn it to the best
That well devised is for good: pass farth with cherefull pace.

THE SECOND SCENE.
Atreus, Thyestes. ENtrapt in train the beast is caught
and in the snare does fall:
Both him, and eke of hated stock
with him the ofspryng all,
About the fathers side I see:
and now in saufety stands
And surest ground my wrathful hate:
now comes into my hands
At length Thyestes: yea he comes
and all at once to me.
I scant refrain my self, and scant may anger brydled be.
So when the Bloudhound feekes the beast, by step and quick of sent
Draws in the leame, and pace by pace to wind the ways he went,
With nose to soil does hunt, while he the Boar aloof has found
Far of by sent, he yet refraynes and wanders through the ground
With silent mouth: but when at hand he once perceiues the pray,
With all the strength he has he strives, with voice and calls away
His lingering master, and from him by force out breaks he.
When Ire does hope the present blood, it may not hydden be.
Yet let it hydden be. behold with ugly hair to sight
How yrkesomely deform'de with filthe his fowlest tace is dight,
How loathsome lies his Brarde unkempt: but let us friendship feign.
To see my brother me delights: give now to me again
Embracing long desired for: what ever strife there was
Before this time between us twain, forget and let it pas:
Fro this day forth let brothers love, let blood, and law of kind
Regarded be, let all debate be slakte in eythers mind.
Thy. I could excuse my self, except thou were as now thou art.
But ( Atreus) now I grant, the fault was mine in every part:
And I offended have in all, my cause the worse to be,
Your this days kindness makes: in deed a guilty wight is he,
That would so good a brother hurt as you, in any whit.
But now with tears I must entreat, and first I me submit.
These hands that at thy feet do lie, do thee beseech and pray,
That ire and hate be laid aside, and from thy bosom may
Be scraped out: and clear forgot. for pledges take thou these
O brother dear, these guiltles babes.

Atr. thy hands yet from my kneese
Remove, and rather me to take in arms, upon me fall
And ye O aids of elders age, ye little infants all,
Me clyp and coll about the neck: this foul attire forsake,
And spare mine eyes that pity it, and fresher vesture take
Like mine to see. and you with joy, the half of emperie
Dear brother take: the greater praise shall come to me thereby,
Our fathers seat to yield to you, and brother to rel^eue.
To have a kingdom is but chance, but virtue it to geeue.

Thy. A just reward for such deserts, the Gods (O brother dear)
Repay to thee: but on my head a regal crown to wear,
My loathsome life denies: and far does from the sceptor flee
My hand unhappy: in the mydst let leefull be for me
Of men to lurk.

Atre. this kingdom can with twain full well agree.

Thy. What ever is (O brother) yours, I count it mine to be.

Atr. Who would dame fortunes gifts refuse, if she him ^eyse to reign?

Thy. The gyfts of her each man it wotes, how soon they pass again.

Atr. Ye me depryue of glory great, except ye th'empyre take.

Thy. You have your praise in offering it, and I it to forsake.
And full persuaded to refuse the kingdom, am I still.

Atre. Except your part ye will sustain mine own forsake I will.

Thy. I take it then. and bear I will the name thereof alone:
The ryghts and arms, as well as mine they shall be yours each one.

Atre. The regal crown as you beseemes upon your head then take:
And I th'appoyncted sacrifice for Gods, will now go make.

Chorus. Would any man it ween? that cruel wight
Atreus, of mind so impotent to see
Was soon astonished with his brothers sight,
Mo greater force then pietye may be:
Where kynred is not, lasts every threat,
Whom true love holds, it holds eternally.
The wrath but late with causes kyndled great
All favor brake, and did to battle cry,
When horsemen did resouude one every side,
The swoordes each where, then glystred more and more:
Which raging Mars with often stroke did guide
The fresher blood to shed yet thyrsting sore.
But love the sword against their wills does swage,
And them to peace perswads with hand in hand.
So sodeyne rest, amid so great a rage
What God has made? throughout Mycenas land
The harness clynkt, but late of cyuill strife:
And for their babes did fearful mother quake,
Her armed spouse to leese much fearde the wife,
When sword was made the scabberde to forsake,
That now by rest with rust was ouergrowne.
Some to repair the wales that did decay,
And some to strength the towers half overthrown,
And some the gates with gyns of Yrne to stay
Full busy were, and dreadful vvatch by night
From turret high did ouerlooke the town.
VVocrse is then war it self the fear of fight.
(Now are the threats of cruel sword laid down,
And now the rumor whists of battayles sown,
The noise of crooked trumpet silent lies,
And quiet peace returns to joyful town.
So when the waxes of swelling surge arise,
While Corus wind the Brutian seas does smight,
And Scylla soundes from hollow Caves within,
And Shipmen are with wafting waves affright,
Charybdis casts that erst it had drunk in:
And Cyclpos fierce his father yet does dred,
In AEtna bank that fervent is with heates,
Least quenched be with waves that ouershed
The fire that from eternal Furnace beats:
And poor Laertes thinks his kingdoms all
May drowned be, and Ithaca does quake:
If once the force of wyndes begin to fall,
The sea lyth down more mylde then standing lake.
The deep, where Ships so vvyde full dreadful were
To pass, with sails on either side out spread
Now fallne adowne, the lesser Boat does bear:
And leisure is to vewe the fyshes ded
Even there, where late with tempest bet upon
The shaken Cyclades were with Seas aghast.
No state endures the pain and pleasure, one
To other yeldes, and joys be soonest past.
One hour sets up the things that lowest be.
He that the crowns to princes does deuyde,
Whom people please with bending of the knee.
And at whose beck their battayles lay aside
The Meades, and Indians eke to Phoebus nigh,
And Dakes that Parthyans do with horsemen threat,
Him self yet holds his Sceptors doubtfully.
And men of might he fears and chances great
(That each estate may turn) and doubtful hour.
Oyee, whom lord of land and waters wide,
Of Life and death grauntes here to have the power,
Lay ye your proud and lofty looks aside:
What your inferior fears of you amiss.
That your superior threats to you again.
To greater king, each king a subject is.
Whom dawne of day has seen in pride to raygne,
Him overthrown has seen the evening late.
Let none rejoice to much that good has got,
Let none despair of best in vvorst estate.
For Clotho myngles all, and suffers not
Fortune to stand: but Fates about does drive.
Such friendship find with Gods yet no man might,
That he the morrow might be sure to live.
The God our things all tossed and turned quight
Rolls with a whyrle wind.

THE FOVRTHE ACT.
Messenger. Chorus. WHat whirlwynde may me headlong drive
and up in air me fling,
And wrap in darkest cloud, whereby
it might so heinous thing,
Take from mine eyes? O wicked house
that even of Pelops ought
And Tantalus abhorred be.
Chapter what new thing have thou brought?

Me. What land is this? lythe Sparta here
and Argos, that has bred
So wicked brethern? and the ground of Corinth lying spread
Between the seas? or Ister else where wont to take their flight,
Are people wild? or that which woonts with snow to shine so bright
Hircana land? or else do here the wandering Seythians dwell?

Chapter What monstrous mischief is this place then guilty of? that tell,
And this declare to us at large what ever be the ill.

Me. If once my mind may stay it self, and quaking limbs I will.
But yet of such a cruel deed before mine eyes the fear.
And Image walks: ye raging storms now far from hence me bear
And to that place me drtue, to which now driven is the day
Thus drawn from hence.

Chapter Our minds ye hold yet still in doubt: full stay.
Tell what it is ye so abhor. The author thereof show.
I ask not who, but which of them that quickly let us know.

Me. In Pelops Turret high, a part there is of Pallece wide
That toward the south erected leanes, of which the utter side
With equal top to mountain stantes, and on the City lies,
And people proud against their prince if once the traitors rise
Has underneath his batiring stroke: there shynes the place in sight
Where wont the people to frequent, whose golden beams so bright
The noble spotted pillars gray, of marble do supporte,
Within this place well known to men, where they so ost resort,
To many other rooms about the noble court does go.
The privy Palaice vnderlieth in secret place alos,
With ditch full deep that does enclose the wood of priuiter,
And hidden parts of kingdom old: where never grew no tree
That chereful bows is wont to bear, with knife or lopped be,
But Tax, and Cypress, and with tree of Ho^me full black to see
Does beck and bend the wood so dark: alofte above all these
The higher oak does over look, surmounting all the treese.
From hens with luck the reign to take, accustomed are the kings,
From hens in danger aid to ask, and doom in doubtful things.
To this affixed are the gifts, the sounding Trumpets bright,
The Chariots broke, and spoils of sea that now Mirtoon hight,
There hang the wheels once won by craft of falser axel tree,
And every other conquests note, here leefullis to see
The Phrygian tire of Pelops head: the spoil of enmies here,
And of Barbarian triumph left, the painted gorgeous geere.
A loathsome spring stands under shade, and slothful course does take,
With water black: even such as is: of yrkesome Stygian lake
The ugly wave whereby art wont, to swear the gods on hye.
Here all the night the grisly ghosts and gods of death to erie
The fame reports: with clinkyng chains resou^ds the wood each where
The sprights cry out and every thing that dreadful is to hear,
May there be seen: of ugly shapes from old Sepulchers sent
A frarefull slocke does wander there, and in that place frequent
Worse things then ever yet were knowwne: ye all the wood full afce
With flame is wont to flash, and all the higher trees alofte
Without a fire do burn: and often the wood beside all this
With triple barkyng roares at once: full often the palaice is
Affright with shapes, nor light of day may on the terror quell.
Eternal night does hold the place, and darkness there of hell
In mid day reigns: from hens to them that pray out of the ground
The certain answers given are, what time with dredful sound
From secret place the fates be told, and dungeon roares within
While of the God breaks out the voice: whereto when entered in
Fierce Atreus was, that did with him his brothers children trayle,
Dekt are the aulters: wh^ (alas) may it enough bewail?
Behind the infants backs anon he knyt their noble hands,
And eke their heavy heads about he bound with purple bands:
There wanted there no Frankenfence, nor yet the holy wine,
Nor knyfe to cut the sacrifice, besprinkt with leuens fine,
Kept is in all the order due, Icast such a mischief great
Should not be ordered well.

Chapter who does his hand on sword then set?

Mc. He is him self the priest, and he himself the deadly verse
With prayer dyre from fervent mouth does sing and often rehearse.
And he at th'aulters stands himself, he them assygn'de to dye
Does handle, and in order set, and to the knyfe apply,
He lights the fyres, no rights were left of sacrifice undone.
The wood then quakt, and all at once from trembling ground anon
The Palace beckt, in doubt which way the payse thereof would fall,
And shaking as in waves it stood: from the air and therewithal
A blasing star that foulest train drew after him does go:
The wynes that in the fyres were cast, with changed licour floe,
And turn to blood: and twyse or thryse th'attyre sell from his head,
The Iuerye bright in Temples seem'de to weep and tears to shed.
The sights amas'de all other men, but steadfast yet always
Of mind, unmoved. Atreus stands, and even the Gods does fray
That threaten him and all delay forsaken by and by
To the aulters turns, and there withwall a side he looks awry.
As hungry Tygre wonts that does in gangey woods remain
With doubtful pace to range and roame between the bullocks twain,
Of either pray full-couetous and yet uncertain where
She first may byte, and roaring throat now turns the tone to tear
And then to the other straight returns, and doubtful famyne holds:
So Atreus dyre, between the babes does stand and them beholdes
On whom he poynctes to slake his ire: first staughter where to make,
He doubts: or whom he should again for second offering take,
Yet skills it naught, but yet he doubts and such a cruelty
It him delights to order well.

Chapter Whom take he syrst to die?

Me. First place, least in him think ye might no piere to remain
To graundsier dedicated is, first Tantalus is slain.

Chapter With what a mind and count'nace, could ye boy his death sustain?

Me. All careless of him self he stood, nor once he would in vain
His prayers leese. But Atreus fierce the sword in him at last
In deep and deadly wound does hide to hilts, and gryping fast
His throat in hand, he thrust him through. The sword the^ drawn away
When long the body had vphelde it self in doubtful stay.
Which way to fall, at length upon the uncle down it falls.
And then to th'aulters cruelly Philisthenes he tralles,
And on his brother throws: and straight his neck of cutteth he.
The Carcass keadlong falls to ground: a piteous thing to see.
The mourning head with murmr yet vucertayne does complain.

Chor. What after double death does he and slaughter then of twain?
Spares he the Child? or gilt on gilt again yet heayeth he?

Mess. As long maynd Lion scerce amid the wood of Armenie,
The drove pursues and conquest makes of slaughter many one,
Though now defiled be his tawes with blood and hunger gone
Yet slaketh not his yreful rage with blood of Bulls so great,
But slouthful now with weary tooth the lesser Calves does threat:
None other wise does Atreus rage, and swelles with anger straynd,
And holding now the sword in hand, with double slaughter stayud,
Regarding not where fell his rage, with cursed hand vnmild
He struck it through his body quite, at bosom of the Child
The blade goes in, and at the back again out went the same,
He falls and quenching with his blood the aulters sacred flame,
Of either wound at length he dies.

Chor. O'heynous hateful act.

Mess. Abho^re ye this? ye hear not yet the end of all the fact,
There follows more.

Cho. A fiercer thing, or worse then this to see
Could Nature bear?

Me. why think ye this of gylt the end to be?
It is but part.

Cho. what could he wore? to cruel beasts he cast
Perhaps their bodies to be torn, and kept from fyres at last.

Me. Would God he had: that never tomb the dead might over hyde,
Nor flames dissolve, though them for food to fowls in pastures wide
He had out thrown, or them for pray to cruel beasts would flinge.
That which the worst was wont to be, were here a wished thing,
That them their father saw vntowbd: but oh more cursed crime
Uncredible, the which deny will men of after time:
From bosoms yet alive out drawn the trembling bowels shake,
The veins yet breath, the scareful heart does yet both pant and quakes
But he the stringes does turn in hand, and destenies behold,
And of the guts the signs each one does vewe not fully cold.
When him the sacrifyce had pleaso, his diligence ^e^ puttes
To dress his brothers banquet now: and straight a fonder cuttes
The bodies into quarters all, and by the stoompes anon
The shoulders wide, and brawnes of arms be strikes of euerythune.
He lays abroad their naked limes, and cuts away the bones:
The only heads he kepes and hands to him committed once.
Some of the guts are broacht. and in the fyres that burn full ^oe
They drop, the boiling Itcour some does tomble to end froe
In moorning cawderne: from the flesh that ouerstandes alorft
The fire does fly, and skatter out and into chimney often
Up heat again, and there constraynd by force to tarry yet
Unwilling burns: the liver makes great nopse upon the spit,
Nor easily wot I, if the flesh, or fla^ies they be that bry,
But cry they do: the fire like pitch it fumeth by an by:
Nor yet the smake it self so sad, like flithy miste in sight
Ascends up as wont it is, nor takes his way upright,
But even the Gods and house it does with fylithy turn defise.
O pacient Phoebus though from hence thou backward flee the while,
And in the midst of heaven above do drown the broken day,
Thou fleest to late: the father eats his children, well away,
And limbs to which he once gave life, with cursed iaw does tear.
He shynes with ointment shed full sweet all round about his hear,
Replete with wine; and aftentymes so cursed kind of food
His mouth has held, that would not down. but yet this one thing good
In all thy yls ( Thyestes) is that them thou do not knoe,
And yet shall that not long andure, though Titan backward go
And chariots turn against himself, to meet the ways be went,
And heavy night so heinous deed to keep from sight be sent,
And out of time from East arise, so foul a fact to hyde,
Yet shall the whole at length be seen: thy ylles shall all be spide.

Chorus. WHich way O Prince of lands and Gods on hie,
At whose vprise eftsoon of shadowd night
All beawty flees, which way turnst thou awrye?
And drawest the day in midst of heaven to flight?
Why do thou (Phoebus) hide from us thy sight?
Not yet the watch that later hour bringes in,
Does Vesper warn the Stars to kindle light.
Not yet does turn of Hespers whele begin
To loase thy chare his well deserved way.
The trumpet third not yet has blown his blast
While toward the night begins to yield the day:
Great wonder has of sudden suppers have
The Plowman yet whose Oxen are vntierd.
From woonted course of Heaven what draws thee backs?
What causes have from certain race conspierd
To turn thy horse? do yet from dongeon black
Of hollow hell, the conquered Gyantes prove
A fresh assaut? does. Tityus yet assay
With trenched heart, and wounded womb to move
The former yres? or from the hill away
Has now Typhoeus wound his side by might?
Is up to heaven the way erected hie
Of phlegrey foes by mountains set upright?
And now does Ossa Pelion ouerlye?
The wonted turns are gone of day and night,
The rise of Sun, nor fall shall be no more,
Au^ora dowish mother of the light
That wontes to send the horses out before,
Does wonder much again return to see.
Her dawning light: she wots not how to case
The weary wheels, nor manes that smoking be
Of horse with sweat to bathe amid the seas.
Himself unwonted there to lodge likewise,
Does setting son again the morning see,
And now commaundes the darkness up to rise.
Before the night to come prepared be.
About the Poale yet glowth no fire in sight.
Nor light Moon the shades does comfort yet
What so it be, God grant it be the night.
Our hearts do quake with fear oppressed great.
And dreadful are least heaven and earth and all
With fatal ruin shaken shall decay:
And least on Gods again, and men shall fall
Disfigurde Chaos: and the land away
The Seas, and Fyres, and of the glorious Skise
The wandering lamps, least nature yet shall hide.
Now shall no more with blase of his vprise,
The Lord of stars that leads the world so wide,
Of Summer both and Winter give the marks.
Nor yet the Moon with Phoebus flames that burns,
Shall take from us by night the dreadful carkes,
With swifter course or pass her brothers turns,
While compass less she fets in crooked race:
The Gods on heaps shall out of order fall,
And each with other mingled be in place.
The wryed way of holy planets all,
With path a slope that does divide the Zones.
That bears the signs, and years in course does bring,
Shall see the stars with him fall down at ones.
And he that first not yet with gentle spring,
The temperate Gale does give to sails, the Ram
Shall headlong fall a down to Seas again,
Through which he once with fearful Hellen svvam.
Next him the Bull that does with horn sustain
The systers seven with him shall ouerturne
The twins and arms of crooked Cancer all,
The Lion hot that wontes the soil to burn
Of Hercules again from heaven shall fall.
To lands once left the Virgin shall be thrown,
And leueld payse of balance sway allow,
And draw with them the stinging Scorpion down.
So likewise he that holds in Thessale bow
His swift well fethred arrows Chiron old,
Shall break the same and eke shall lose his shot
And Capricorn that bringes the winter cold
Shall ouerturne and break the water pot
Who so thou be: and down with thee to ground,
The last of all the signs shall Pisces fall
And monsters eke in seas yet never drounde,
The water gulf shall ouerwhelme them all.
And he which does between each vrsa glyde,
Like crooked flood the slipper serpent twynde:
And lesser Bear by greater Dragons side,
Full cold with frost congealed hard by kind,
And carter dull that slowly guides his waine
Unstable shall Boots fall from hye.
We are thought meet of all men whom again
Should hugy heap of Chaos ouerly.
And world oppress with ouerturned mass
The latest age now falls us upon.
With evil hap we are begot alas
If wretches we have lost the sight of son,
Or him by fraught enforced have to fly
Let our complayntes yet go and fear be pasts
He greedy is of life, that will not die
When all the world shall end with him at last.

THE FIFTE ACT.
Atreus alone. Now equal with the Stars I go.
beyond each other wight,
With haughty head the heavens above,
and highest Poale I smite,
The kingdom now, and seat I hold,
where once my father raynd:
I now let go the gods: for all
my will I have obsaynde
^aoughe and well, ye even enough for me I am acquit
But why enough? I will proceed and fyl the father yet
With blood of his least any shame should me restrain at all,
The day is gone, go to therefore while thee the heaven does call
Would God I could against their wills yet hold the Gods that flee
And of revenging dish constrayne them witnesses to be:
But yet (which well enough is wrought) let it the father see.
In spighte of all the drowned day I will remove from thee
The darkness all, in shade whereof do lurk thy miseryes.
And guest at such a banquet now to long he careless lies,
With merry face: now eat and drunk enough he has at last
T'ys best him self should know his ylls ye servants, all in have
Undo the temple doors: and let the house be open all:
Feign would I see, when look upon his childrens heads he shall
What countenance he then would make, or in what words break out
Would first his grief, or how would quake his body round about
With spright amassed sore: of all my work the fruit were this
I would him not a miser see, but while so made he is,
Behold the temple opened now does shine with many a light:
In glitteryng gold and purple seat he sitees himself upright,
And staying up his heavy head with wine upon his hand.
He belcheth out, now chief of gods in highest place I stand,
And king of kings: I have my wish, and more then I could think.
He filled is, he now the wine in silver volle does drink
And spare it not: there yet remaynes a worser draught for thee
That sprung out of the bodies late of sacrifyces three,
Which wine shall hyde let the^ withal the hoordes be taken up.
The father (mingled with the wine,) his childrens blood shall sup.
That would have bronke of mine. Behold he now begins to strain
His voice, and synges, nor yet for joy his mind be may refrain,
THE SECOND SCENE
Thiestes alone OBeaten bosoms dullde so long with woe,
Lay down your cares, at length your greues rele^^
Let sorrow pass, and all your dread let go,
And fellow eke of fearful banishment,
Sad pouertye and ill in misery
The shame of cares, more whense thy fall thou haste,
Then whether skylles, great hap to him, from hye
That falls, it is in ferety to be plast
Beneath, and great it is to him again
That pressed with storm, or euylls feels the smart,
Of kyngedome lost the payses to sustain
With neck vnbowde: nor yet detect of heart
Nor overcome, his heavy haps always
To bear upright but now of careful carkes
Shake of the showers, and of thy wretched days
Away with all the miserable marks.
To joyful state return thy cheerful face.
Put fro thy mind the old Thyestes hence.
It is the wont of wight in woeful case,
In state of joy to have no confidence.
Though better haps to them returned be,
Thafflicted yet to joy it yrketh sore.
Why calst thou me abacke, and hyndrest me
This happy day to celebrate? wherefore
Bidst thou me (sorrow) weep without a cause.
Who does me let with flowers so fresh and gay,
To deeke my hayres? it lets and me withdrawes.
Down from my head the roses fall away:
My moysted hair with ointment over all,
With sudden mase stands up in wondrous wise,
From face that would not weep the streams do fall.
And howling cries amid my words arise.
My sorrow yet thaccustomd tears does love
And wretches still delyght to weep and cry.
Unpleasant playntes it pleases them to move:
And florisht fair it likes with Tyrian die
Their robes to rent, to wail it likes them still
For sorrow sendes (in sign that woes draw nic)
The mind that wots before of after ill.
The sturdy storms the shipmen over lie.
When void of wynd thasswaged seas do rest.
What tumult yet or countenance to see
Makste thou mad man? at length a trustful breast
To brother gene, what ever now it be,
Causeles, or else to late thou art a dred.
I wretch would not so fear, but yet me draws
A trembling terror: down mine eyes do shed
Their sudden tears and yet I know no cause,
Is it a grief, or fear? or else has tears
^ great joy it self.
THE THIRD SCENE.
Atreus. Thyestes. Let us this day with one consent
(O brother celebrate)
This day my sceptors my confyrme,
and stablish my estate.
And faithful bond of peace and love
between us ratifye.
Thy. Enough with meat and eke with wine,
now satisfied am I.
But yet of all my joys it were a great increase to me,
If now about my side I might my little children see.

Atr. Believe that here even in thine arms thy children present be.
For here they are; and shall be here, no part of them fro thee
Sal be withheld: their loved looks now give to thee I will,
And with the heap of all his babes, the father fully fill.
Thou shall be glutted fear thou not: they with my boys as yet
The joyful sacrifyces make at board where children sit.
They shall be called, the friendly cup now take of curtesy
With wine vpfylde.

Thy. of brothers feast I take full willingly
The fynal gift, shed some to gods of this our fathers land,
Then let the rest be drunk, what is this? in no wise will my hand
Obey: the payse increases sore, and down mine arm does sway.
And from my lips the wafting wine it self does fly away,
And in deceived mouth, about my jaws it runs round.
The table to, it self does shake and leap from trembling ground.
Scant burns the fire: the air it self with heavy chere to slght
Forsook of son amassed is between the day and night.
What means this? yet more and more of backward beaten sky
The compass falls, and thicker mist the world does ouerly
Then blackest darkness, and the night in night it self does hyde.
All stars be fled, what so it be my brother God provide
And soones to spare: the Gods so grant that a^l this testmpest fall
On this vile head: but now restore to me my childreu all,

Atr. I will, and never day again shall them from thee withdraw,

Thy. What tumult tumbleth so my guts, and does my bowels gnaw?
What quakes within, with heavy payse I feel my self oppressed,
And with an other voice then mine bewayses my doleful breast:
Come nere my sons, for you now does thun happy father call:
Come nere, for you once seen, this grief would soon assuage and fall
Whence murmr they? (...) fathers at (...) embrace them quickly now
For here they are lo come to thee: do thou thy children know?

Th. I know my brother: such a gylt yet can thou suffet well
O earth to bear? nor yet from hence to Stygian lake of hell
Do thou both drown thy selle and us? nor yet with broaken ground
Do thou these kingdoms and their king with Chaos rude confound?
Nor yet vprenting from the soil the bowres of wicked land.
Do thou Micenas ouerturne with Tantalus to stand,
And aunciters of ours, if there in hell be any one,
Now ought we both: now from the frames on either side anon
Of ground, all here and there rent up out of thy bosom deep:
Thy dens and dungons set abroad, and us enclosed keep,
In bottom low of Acheront above our heds aloft
Let wander all the gylty ghostes, with burning frete full often
Let fyry Phlegethon that drives his sands both to and fro
To our confusion over roon und vyolently flow
O slothful soil unshaken payse vn^^^^ yet art thou?
The Gods are sled:

Atr. but take to thee with joy thy children now,
And rather them enbrace: at length thy children all of thee
So long wished for (for no delay there stands now in me)
Enjoy and kiss embracing arms deuyde thou unto three.

Thy. Is this thy league? may this thy love and faith of brother be?
And do thou so repose thy hate? the father does not crave
His sons alive (which might have been without thy gylt) to have
And eke without thy hate, but this does brother brother pray:
That them he may entoom be restore, whom see thou shall straight way,
Be burnt: the father naught requires of thee that have he shall,
But soon forgo

Atr. what ever part r^t of thy children all
Remaynes, here shall thou have: and what remains not thou host.

Thy. Lie they in fields, a food out fleng for fleerug sowles to wast^
Or are they kept a pray, for wyld and brutish beasten to eat?

Atr. Thou have deaourd thy sons and fyld thy self with wicked meat.

Thy. Oh this is it that sham'de the Gods and day from hence did drive
Turned back to east, alas I wretch what waylinges may I give?
Or what complayntes? what woeful words may be enough for me?
Their heads cut of, and hands of torn, I from their bodres see,
And wrenched seete from broken thighs I here behold again
Tys this that greedy father could not suffer to sustain.
In belly roll my bowels round, and cloased crime so great
Without a passage stryues within and seeks away to get.
Thy sword (O brother) lewd to me much of my blood alas
It has: let us therewith make way for all my sons to pass.
Is yet the sword from me withheld? thy self thy bosoms tear,
And let thy breasts resound with strokes: yet wretch thy hand forbear
And spare the dead: who ever saw such mischief put in proof?
What rude Heniochus that dwells by ragged coast aloof,
Of Caucasus unapt for men? or fear to Athens,, who
Procustes wyld? the father I oppress my children do
And am oppressed, is any mean of gylt or mischief yet?

Atr. A mean in mischief ought to be when gylt thou do commit,
Not when thou quytst: for yet even this to little seems to me.
The blood yet warm even from the wound I should in sight of these
Even in thy laws have shed, that thou the blood of them might drink
That lived yet: but while to much to have my hate I think
My wrath beguyled is my self with sword the wounds them gave
I struck them down, the sacred fyres with slaughter vowde I have
Well pleaso, the carcass cutting then, and liueles lymmes on ground.
I have in little parcels chopped, and some of them I brounde
In boiling cauderns, some to fyres that burnte full slow I put,
And made to drop: their synewes all, and limbs a two I cut
Even yet alive and on the spitte, that thrust was through the same
I hard the liver wayle and cry, and with my hand the flame:
I otf kept in: but every whit the father might of this
Have better done, but now my wrath to lightly ended is.
He rent his sons with wicked gum, himself yet wotting naught.
Nor they thereof

Th. O ye encloas'd with bending banks abought
All seas me hear, and to this gylt ye Gods now harken well
What ever place ye fled are to here all ye sprites of hell,
And here ye lands, and night so dark that them do ouerly
With cloud so black to my complayntes do than thy self apply.
To thee now left I am, thou do alone me miser see,
And thou art left without thy stars: I will not make for me
Peticions yet, nor ought for me require may ought yet be
That me should veil? for you shall all my wishes now foresee.
Thou guyder great of skies above, and prince of highest might,
Of heavenly place now all with clouds full horrible to sight,
Enwrap the world, and let the wyndes on every side break out:
And send the dreadful thunder clap through all the world about
Nor with what hand thou gyltes house and undeserved wall
With lesser bolt are wont to beat, but with the which did fall
The three vnheaped mountains once and which to hills in height
Stood equal up, the gyantes huge: throuw out such weapons straight,
And flyng thy fires: and therwithall revenge the drowned day.
Let flee they flames, the light thus lost and hid from heaven away,
With flashes fill: the cause (lest long thou should doubt whom to hit)
Of each of us is ill: if not at least let mine be it.
Me strike with tryple edged tool thy brande of flaminge fire.
Beat through this breast: if father I my children to desire
To lay in tomb or corpses cast to fire as does behoue,
I must be burnt if nothing now the gods to wrath may move,
Nor power from skies with thunder bolt none strikes the wicked men
Let yet eternal night remain, and hyde with darkness then
The world about: I, Titan naught complain as now it stands
If still thou hyde thee thus away.

Atre. now praise I well my hands.
Now got I have the palm. I had been overcome of thee,
Except thou sorrow'dst so but now even children borne to me
I count and now of bridebed chaste the says I do repair,

Thy. In what offended have my sous:

Atr. In that, that thine they were

Thy. Setst thou the sons for fathers food?

Arr. I do and (which is best)
The certain sons,

Thy. The gods that guide all infantes I protest.

Atr. What wedlock gods?

Th. who would the gilt with gylt so quite again?

Atr. I know thy grief prevented now with wrong thou do complain:
Nor this thee yrkes, that sed thou art with food of cursed kind,
But that thou had not it prepared for so it was thy mind,
Such meats as these to set before thy brother wotting naught,
And by the mothers help to have, likewise my children caught:
And them with such like to slay: this one thing let thee,
Thou thought them thine.

Thy. the gods shall al of this reuengers be
And unto them for vengeance due my vows thee render shall

Atr. But vexed to be I thee the white, geeue to thy children all.

THE FOVRTH SCENE, Added to the Tragedy by the Translatour.
Thyestes alone. O King of Dytis dungeou dark,
and g^ysty Ghosts of hell,
That in the deep and dre adfull Den,
of blackest Tarrace dwell.
Where lean and pale dyseases lie
where fear and samyne are,
Where discord stands with bleeding brows,
where every kind of care,
Where furies fight in beds of steel, and hears of crauling snakes,
Where Gorgon grimme, where Harpyes are, and loathsome Lymbo lakes,
Where most prodigious ugly things, the hollow hell does bide.
If yet a mouster more myshapt then all that there do hyde,
That makes his brood his cursed food, ye all abhor to see,
Nor yet the deep Auerne it self, may bide to cover me,
Nor grisly gates of Putoes place, yet dare them selves to spread,
Nor gaying ground to swallowe him, whom Gods and day have sled:
Yet break ye out from cursed seats, and here remain with me,
Ye need not now to be affrayde, the Air and Heaven to see.
Nor triple headed Cerberus, thou needst not be affryght,
The day unknown to thee to see or else the loathsome light.
They both be sled: and now does dwell none other count'naunce here,
Then does beneath the fowlest face, of hateful hell appeete.
Come see a meetest match for thee, a more then monstrous womb,
That is of his unhappy brood, become a cursed tomb.
Flock here ye fowlest flendes of hell, and thou O graundsyre great,
Come see the glutted guts of mine, with such a kind of meat,
As thou did once for Gods prepare. Let torments all of hell
Now fall upon this hateful head, that has deserude them well.
Ye all be plagued wrongfully, your guiltes be small, in sight
Of mine, and meet it were your pange on me alone should light.
Now thou O graundster guiltless art, and meeter were for me,
With fleeing flood to be beguilde, and fruit of fickle tree.
Thou slewst thy son, but I my sons, alas, have made my meat.
I could thy famyne better bear, my pau^ch is now repleate
With food: and with my children three, my belly is extent.
O filthy fowls and gnawyng gripes, that Tytius be some rent
Behold a fitter pray for you, to fill your selves vppone
Then are the growing guts of him: four wombes enwrapt in one.
This pau^che at once shall stll you all: if ye abhor the food,
Nor may your selves abide to bathe, in such a cursed blood:
Yet lend to me your clinching claws, your pray a while forbear,
And with your tallons suffer me, this monstrous mawe to tear.
Or whirling wheels, with swinge of which Ixion still is rolde,
Your books upon this glutten gorge, would catch a surer hold.
Thou filthy flood of Lym bo lake, and S^ygian poole so dyre,
From chocked channel belche abroad. Thou fearful freate of fire,
Spue out thy flames O Phlegethon: and ouershed the ground.
With vomit of thy fyry stream, let me and earth be drownde,
Break up thou soil from bottom deep, and give thou room to hell,
That night, where day, y^ ghosts, where Gods were woo^t to reign, may dwell.
Why gapst thou not? Why do you not O gates of hell unfold?
Why do ye thus thinfernall stendes, so long from hence withholde?
Are you likewise affrayde to see, and know so wretched wight,
From whom the Gods have wryde their looks, and turned are to flight?
O hateful head, whom heaven and hell, have shoonde and left alone,
The Sun, the stars, the light, the day, the Gods, the ghosts be goue.
Yet turn again ye Skies a while, ere quight ye go fro me,
Take vengeance first on him, whose fault enforces you to flee.
If needs ye must your flight prepare, and may no longer bide,
But roll ye must with you forthwt, the Gods and Sun a side,
Yet slowly flee: that I at length, may you yet overtake,
While wandering ways I after you, and speedy journey make.
By seas, by lands, by woods, by rocks, in dark I wander shall:
And on your wrath, for right reward to due des^rts, will call.
Ye escape not fro me, so ye Gods, still after you I go,
And vengeance ask on wicked wight, your thunder bolte to throe.
FINIS.
THE THIRD TRAGEDY OF L. ANN AEVS Seneca: entitled Thebais, translated out of
Latin into English, by Thomas Newton. 1581.
The Argument.
LAIVS King of Thebes, had by his Wife and Queen IOCASTA, a Son named
OEDIPVS: Who being yet in his Mothers Womb, APOLLO his Oracle pronounced, that
by the hands of that child, King LAIVS the father should be murdered. The
fear whereof caused the King to commau^d him to be put to death. The Kings
heardman, who had the charge to see this done, on the one side moved with
compassion over a tender weakeling: and on the otherside, afraid to incur the
King his masters displeasure, contented himself only to boar two hoales
through the Infants two feet, and with certain pliable Twigges being thrust
through the same, hong him up on a tree by the Heels: supposing that hereby
he should commit a less crime in suffering the child to perish by famine,
then in playing the Butcher himsefe. It fortuned, that one PHORBAS heardman to
POLYBIVS King of Corynth, passing by that way and hearing a young Child cyre,
went and cut him down, and caryinge him to Corynth, it so fell out that at
length he was given for a present or gift to MEROPE, Wife to the said King
POLYBVS. This OEDIPVS afterward going to Thebes, in a certain sedicious hurly
burly in the country there, unawares and unwitting slew King LAIVS his
Father. About which time the City of Thebes, and Country there about was
meruelously infested with a monster called Sphinx: who propounding a certain
Riddle, or obscure question to such as passed that way, and deuouringe as
many, as could not assoyle the same. To him that could assoile it and so rid
the Country from that so ugly and dangerous a monster, the marriage of Queen
IOCASTA, and the kingdom of Thebes was promised as a recompense: OEDIPVS after
many others, taking the matter in hand, assoyled the Ryddle, and slew the
mo^ster. Whereupon marying the Queen, not knowing her to be his own Mother,
had by her four Children: ETHEOCLES, POLYNICES, ANTIGONE, and ISMENE. In the
end, having knowledge, how first he had killed his Father, and then
incestuously married his Mother, he forsook his kingdom being continually
infested with the plague, and (as one ashamed to look any man in theface)
pulled out his own Eyes, and hid himself in corners and solitary places. His
Sons ETHEOCLES and POLYNICES agreed to reign enterchaungeably, that is to
wit, ETHEOCLES, one year, and POLYNICES the other. ETHEOCLES having reigned
his year, refused according to the articles of agreement, to resign the Crown
to his brother for the next year. Whereupon they fell to mortal wars, and in
the end meaning by combat to end the matter, they mutually slew one the other.
And note that this Tragedy, was left by the Author imperfect, because it
neither has in it, Chorus, ne yet the fifth Act.

The names of the speakers.
OEdipus. Nuntius. Antigone. Iocasta.
THE FIRTE ACT.
OEdipus. Antigone. Dear Daughter, unto Father blind
a Staff of steady stay,
To weary Sire, a comfort great,
and Guide in all his way:
And whom to have begotten, I
may glad and joyful be:
Yet leave me now, thy hapless Sire,
thus plungde in misery.
Why seekst thou means, still to direct
my stalking steps aright?
Let me I pray thee headlong slide
in breaknecke tumbling plight.
I better shall and sooner find a way my self alone
To rid me out of all the thrall wherein I now am thrown.
Whereby both heaven shall eased be, and earth shall want the sight
Of me vile wretch, whom, guilt has made a most abhorred wight.
Alas, what little triffling trick has hitherto been wrought
By these my hands? what feate of worth or maistry have I sought?
In deed, they have me helped to pull mine eyes out of my head:
So that ne Sun, ne Moon I see, but life in darkness lead.
And though that I can nothing see, yet is my guilt and crime
Both seen and known, and poyneted at, (woe worth the cursed time.)
Leave of thy hold, let lose thy hand, good daughter, let me go:
Let foultring foot light where it will, let it (this once) be so.
I Will trudge, and run, I Will skudde, and raunge, I Will hasten to the hill
Of craggy stiepe Cytheron, there I hope to work my will.
Where erst Actaeon lost his life by strange, and uncouth death,
Whom vawling Dogs, and hunting Hounds bereft of vital breath:
Where once Agaue (bedlemlike) raungd up and down the wood
With Systers hers, enspired all with Bacchus raging mood.
And pleasing well her self in that her fact and mischief done,
Pitched on a Poale the grisly head of him that was her Son.
Where Zethus with his ruffling Crew of Gallantes young and stout
Dragd, hald, and pulled, the hateful corpse of Dirce, all about.
Where bushie bloudied brambles show which way the Bull her drew:
Nere where dame Ino from a Rock her self in Sea down threw.
So that poor mother though she meant t'auoyde one fault by flight:
Yet she thereby a worse procu^'d, while like a s^rly wight
She bother self and eke her son from Scyron hurled down
Entending both her self and him in foaming Sea to drown.
Oh happy, yea thryse happy they, that had so good an bap:
And whom such mothers pitiful carst daudled in their lap.
Yea yet there is in these same woods an other place to me
That's due by right, and rightly may me challenge as his fee.
Where I am Infant out was laid, al Fortunes to abide:
I thither will direct my course of try what may betyde.
I Will neither stop ne stay til that I be arrived there,
For guide I recke not, neither force for Stumbling any where.
Why stay I thus like dastard drudge to hasten unto it?
Since well I know it lotted is to be my grave and Pit?
Let me mine own Cytheron mount enjoy in quiet state,
It is mine old and ancient bower, appointed me by fate.
I pray thee be not discontent that I should (aged) die,
Even there, where life I should have lost in pueling infancy.
I yield me here with willing heart unto those tortures all
That erst to me were due, and which to others have befall:
To thee I speak O bloody mount, fierce, cruel, styepe and fell,
As well in that thou sparest some, as that thou some do quell.
This c^rton corpse, this sinful soul, this carcass here of mine
Long time agone by right good Law and propertye is thine.
Now yet at length perform the hest that erst enjoined was
To thee by those my parents both, now bring their doom to pass.
My heart even longs till I may s^ fully sati^^y
By this my death that their decree, that glad I am to die.
Ah Daughter, Daughter, why would thou thus keep me gaynst my mind?
In this so vile incestuous love? thou art but now to kind.
Oh stay me not I thee desire, behold, behold, I hear
My Fathers ghost to bid me come apace, and not to fear.
O Father mine I come, I come, now father cease thy rage:
I know (alas) how I abused my Fathers hoary age:
Who had to name King Laius: how he does fret and frye
To see such lewd disparagement: and none to blame but I.
Whereby the Crown usurped is, and he by murder slain.
And Bastardly incestuous brood in Kingly throne remain.
And lo^, do thou not plainly see, how he my panting Ghost
With raking paws does hale and pull, which grieves my conscience most?
Do thou not see how he my face bescratcheth tyrant wise?
Tell me (my Daughter) have thou seen Ghostes in such griefly guyse?
Antig I see and mark each thing full well. Good father leave this mind.
And take a better if you can: from this your self vnwynd.
Oed. O what a beastly cowardice is in this breast of mine?
Was I so stout and venturous in pulling out mine Eyes?
And shall all courage be employed against one only part
Of Body, and from other parts shall valor wholly start?
Let none of all these puling tricks nor any faint excuse
Thus daunt thy sprites, let no delay to baseness thee enduce:
Dispatch at once, why lingre I, as one that's loath to dye?
Why live I? is it because I can no longer mischieues try?
Yes that I can, wretch though I be: and therefore tell I thee,
Dear Daughter, that the sooner thou might hence depart from me.
Depart a maid and Virgin hence, for fear of after claps:
Since villainy to Mother shewde, its good to doubt mishaps.

Anti. No force, no power, no violence, shall make me to withdraw
My duty unto thee my Sire, to whom I vow mine awe.
I will not be disseuered, ne pulled from thy side.
I will assist thee, while that breath shall in this Breast abide.
My Brothers twain let them contend, and fight for Princelye swaye
Of wealthy Thebes: where whilom raignd King Labdacke many a day.
The greatest share and portion that I do look to have
Out of my Fathers Kingdom, is my Fathers life to save.
Him neither shall Etheocles my elder brother take
Away from me, who now by force the Thebane realm does rake.
Ne Polynices, who as now is Mustring men apace.
From Argos Land: with full intent his brother to displace.
No, though y^ world went all on wheels: though Jove should from above
Hurl flashing flakes upon the Earth, all shall not quayle my love.
No, though his thumping thunderbolt (when we together stand)
Should light between us, where as we are plighted hand in hand)
Yet will I never thee forsake, but held my handfast still:
Therefore its boateles father dear, to counter^aund my will
In this my full resolved mind. Forbid me if you please.
But surely I will be your guide in weal, woe, dole, and case.
And maugre al your sharp reprofes (though much against your mind)
I will direct your steps and gate, that you your way may find:
Through thick and thin, through rough and smoth I will be at an ynch
In hill and dale, in wood and grove, I Will serve at every pinch.
If that you go where danger lies, and seek your own annoy,
You shall well prove, that I to lead the dance will not be coy.
Advise your self therefore, of twain to which I guide shall be:
My count is cast, I am full bent with you to live and die.
Without me perish can you not: but with me, well you may,
It booteth not, in other sort to move me ought to say.
Here is an huyge Promontory that elboes into Sea
Let us from thence throw down our selves, and work our last decay,
If that ye will. Here also is a flinty Rock beside,
Which if you please shall serve our turns: Here beaten with the tide
Be craggy Cliffes, let us go to them: Here runs a gulphy stream
With force before it dryuing stones as big as mountain beam.
What say you? shall we drench our selves within this fomy Flood?
Go where you will, take which you list, do as you deem it good.
Conditionally that I may first receive the wound of death:
I recke no whit, I ready stand to yield up vital breath.
I neither draw you to nor froe: but even as best you think
So do, so deal. Would you so feign Deaths bitter cup to drink?
My lord and Father, take you death so great a boon to be?
If that you dye (this I assure) die first you shall me see.
If life in show more pleasant seem, if so you rather choose,
I am to wait upon you still and never will refuse.
But change this mind wherein you rest, take heart a grace, and show
The noble magnanimity that erst in you did flow:
Resist these panges, subdue these dumpes by valor of the mind,
Let manly courage qualify these your affections blind.
It Is great dishonor thus to yield your self to dolor thrall,
No storm of adverse hap thus ought a Princes heart t'appall.

Oedip. This gear surmounteth far the reach of my capacity:
I am astonn'd, I feel my self rapt with an ecstasy,
Is this not wonder of so lewd, and of so cursed a tree
Such fruit to grow? of graceles Sire so good a child to see?
Is it not strange that in a house distaynd in villainy
Such noble show of towardnes and virtuous gifts should lie?
Let me some speech to thee direct, dame Fortune: how haps this
That here my daughter so unlike to wretched father is?
Degenerating from his steps, and with such virtue fraught,
As in her Fathers cursed house she never yet was taught?
Is it (I pray thee) credible, that out of ^ie should s^ring
Such issue, as should given be to any honest thing?
No truly, no: it cannot be (my fates full well I know)
None such, (unless to do me scart and mischief) would be so.
T'encrease the heap of mine annoy no strange effect shall want.
Dame Nature in her Creatures will new affectes emplant.
The River shall return his course to Fountain back again,
Dan Phoebus Lamp shall bring the Night, and Night shall day remain,
So that my grievous miseryes with surplusage may grow.
But be as it is: I for a while will play my part also,
And show some spark of piety, my fault to counteruayle:
With murtdroue knife, my woeful days to end I will not fail.
The only help for Oedipus, the only safe^y is
To rid himself, and so redeem that Hellish fact of his.
Let me take vengeance on my self for wrongs to father done,
Whose Death is yet vnexp^ate, by me his cursed son.
Why do thou shake and tremble thus thou hand, not good for ought?
Why flaggrest thou to stabbe him in, who Sire to spoil has brought?
That punishment which hither ^o by pulling out mine eyes
Thou have inflicted on me, is but as a sacrifyce,
Or guerdon due for villainy which I committed have
With mother mine. Now Daughter sloute, leave of pretenses brave,
Allege no g^oses: but with speed let go thy Fathers hand:
Thou make me die a lingering death within this loathed land.
Thou think I am alive, but I am dead long while ago:
To this my hateful Corpse at length the rytes of Burial show.
Thou meanest well, (I know) but yet therein thou do offend:
Though color for thy piety I see thou do pretend.
But piety it cannot be, to dragge thus up and down
Thy Fathrs Corpse unburied through City, Field, and Town.
For be that does enforce a man against his will to dye:
And he that stays him that would feign dye, most willingly,
Are both alike in equal fault, and stand in egall plight.
To hinder one that would be dead is m^^^h bring h^n^ou^right.
Yet not so great as the other is. I would be more content
To have my death commanded me, then from me to be ^ent.
Desist from this thy purpose (Maid) my life and death both are
To dispose at my liberty, with choice to spill or spare,
I willingly res^gnd the Crown of Thebane soil: yet I
Do still retain upon my self the entyre Soueraygntye*
If I may make account of thee as of a trusty fear,
And true compagnion at assayes: deliver even here
Into thy Fathers hand a Sweard: but tell me, do thou reach
The Sword embrewd in fathers blood, wherewith my sons empeach
The course of Law, possessing it and kingdom all by force?
Where so it is doubt is there none, but clean without remorse
There be the F^^^dgates opned wide, to al licencious lust.
And thriftlesse trades: I al my claim therein do rake in dust,
And clean forsake. Let both my Sons by Legacy enjoy
The same, wherewith they surely shall contriue non small annoy.
For me pyle rather up a stacke of wood set all on fire,
That I therein may thrust my self: that is my chief desire:
And make an end at once of all this carrion Tarkasse vile.
Where is the surging wau^^s Sea? why stay I all this while?
Bring me to some stiepe breaknecke fall: bring me where Ismene flood
With swift and horned course does run^^, bring me whereas my blood.
With goaryng push of savage beasts may out be let at once.
To some Gulf bring me, where the fall and tide may crush my Bones.
If needs thou will my guide remain, as often thou do me tell)
Bring me that am disposed to dye, where Sphiox that Monster fell
With double shape apposed them that passed by the way,
Propounding Riddles intricate, and after did them slay.
There would I be, that place I seek: thy Father thither bring
Into that Monsters Cabin dire thy Monstrous Father fling.
That though that Monster be dispatched, the place may be supplyde
With one as badde or worse then be: there will I far and wide
In terms obscure report and tell my heavy lucklesse lot.
The mysteries whereof the bearers, v^derstandeth not.
Give ear to that which I shall speak, mark thou Assyrian borne,
Consider this thou Thebane, where Duke Cadmus men were torn
And slain in wood by Serpents rage: where Dirce seely trull
In humble sort at Altar lies: aduert my tale at full
Thou, that in Lacedaemon dwelles, and honorst Castors grace,
And Pollux eake, two brethren twynnes. Find out this doubtful case.
Or thou that dwelst in Elis town or by Parnassus hill,
Or thou that till'st Baeotia ground, there reaping gain at will.
Hark, listen well, and flatly say, if ever heretofore
That murdrous monster Sphinx of Thebes that men in pieces tore,
In all his riddles asked the like, or of so strange a sort?
Or whether so insolubly his terms he cold report?
The Son in Law to Graundfather, the Riual of his Sire:
The Brother of his little Babes: to Brethren, father dire:
The Graundmother at every birth to Husband (graceles Elfe)
Brought forth a Son or Daughter, which was Nephew to her self.
How say you Syrs, in Ryddle dark, who has so good insight,
That able is the sense hereof t'vnfold and tell aryght?
As for my self, although the Sphinx I whylome put to foil:
Yet mine own heavy destenie I scarcely can assoyle.
Why do thou (Daughter) labor loose in vsyng further speech?
To alter this my stony heart why do thou me beseech?
I tell thee plain. I fully mean this blood of mynt to spill.
That long with Death has struggling kept: and thereupon I will
Descend to dark infernal Lake: for this same darkness blind
Of both mine eyes is nothing such, as fact of mine should find.
It were my Bliss to be in Hell in deepest dungeon fast:
Now that which should long since have been, I will perform at last.
I cannot be debard from Death: will thou deny me glaue
Or Sword, or knife? will thou no tool for mischief let me have?
Will thou both watch and ward each way, where danger lies in wait?
Shall such a sinful Caytife wretch as I, be keep so strait?
Will thou not suffer me with Coard to break my hateful Neck?
Can thou keep me from poisonous herbs? have thou them al at beck?
What shall it thee prevail to take for me such earnest care?
Death each where is: and ways to death in thousand corners are.
Herein has God good order taken, that every felie Foe,
May take away an others life, but Death he cannot so.
I seek not any tool to have: this desprate mind of mine
Can use the service of my hand, my threede of life t'vntwine.
Now hand, thy master at a pinch assist to work his feate,
Help him with all thy power and strength, t'exployt his purpose great.
I point thee not in this my Corpse unto one place alone:
Alas, each part of me with guilt is plaunch and ouergrowne.
In which soever part thou will, thy Massacre begin,
And seek to bring me to my death which way thou may it win.
In pieces crush this body all, this heart that harbors sin
Pluck out, out all my entrails pull, proceed, and never linne
To gash and cut my wezand pype. My veins asender scratch,
And make the Blood come spowting out, or use that other match,
Which heretofore thou used haste: dig where mine eyes erst stood:
And let these wounds gush out apace much mattry filth and blood.
Hale o^t of me this loathed soul that is so hard and stout:
And thou dear father Laius stand up and look about:
Behold where ever that thou standst: I Vmpyre do the make,
And eyed Judge of all my plagues that justly here I take.
My Fact so lewd, so horrible, so loathsome to be told
I never thought with any price or torments manifold
Could have full expiation: ne thought I it enough
To die this death: or in one part to be beslasshed through.
By piecemeale I am well content to suffer torments all
And even by piecemeale for to die: for plagues to plague me call.
Exact the punishment that is due: I here most ready stand
To satis^e with any death that law and right has scand.
My former smartes, when as mine eyes I raked out with paws,
Were but as tastes of sacrifice, somewhat to help my cause.
Come therefore (Father) near to me, and thrust this hand of mine
More nearer into every wound. It sw^ru'de and did decline
For fear, when first it took th'assay mine eyes to ransacke out.
I bear it still in memory, my eyes then star'de about
And seemed to dissuade the hand from doing of the charge
Whereto it was enjoined tho, and had Commission large.
Thou shall well think that OEdipus dissembleth not a whit^
But what his word has warranted, his deed has firmly quit.
Thy stoutnes then, was not so great when eyes thou pulledst out
As was thy man a^oden, when thou threwst them from thee round about.
Now, by those Gyeholes thrust thy hand into the very brain:
That part where death attempted was, let death be sought again.

AN. Undaunted Prince, must noble Sire, with humble mind. I sue
That I your Daughter may be bold to use some s^eech to you:
And that you would with patience digest my poor ^duise:
My suite is not to draw your mind to things, that erst in price
You highly (...), me to the view of glittring Palace old*
Ne bravery of your noble Realm, scarce able to ^ee told:
But that you would these yrefull fittes, by trace of time now quaild,
With patient mind sustain and bear: this virtue never faylde
I^ any Prince of such a spright as in your noble Grace
Appears bright: it s^^th not that such should once abase
Themselves as thralles to Sorrows check (...) the conquest yield
To a^uerse (...) like (...)
It is no praise, sir, though perhaps you so your reckening cast
To make of life so small accoumpt, and thus to be aghast
At every wagging of a leaf, and combersome myschaunce:
No, no, it is virtue in such case high courage to advance.
And when things are at worst, to show true magnani^^itie:
Not like a Meycocke, cowardly at each alarm to flee.
He that has tried all fortunes spite and worldly wealth despisde,
And constantly has borne all bruntes that are to be deuisde,
Me thinks no cause has, why he needs to end his b^eething ^ayes
O^ wish himself in grave: for why, starcke crauens use such ways.
But as for him, that's drencht in dole and wrapped in carking care,
Whose pensius plight can be no worse, nor taste of sowrer fare,
That man has cause well pleas^^ to be: since he in safety stands,
And pykes has past, and now is free from fear of further bands.
Put case the Gods would wra^e the web of further woe to thee,
What more can any of them do thy grieves to amplify?
Nay, thou thy self, (although thou would) can add thereto no more,
Unless thou think thy self, to have deserved death therefore.
And yet, thou art not worthy death: my reason is, because
Through ignorance thou did a fact contrary to the laws.
And therefore Father think your self most guiltless in the case,
And (maugre Gods) stand on your guarde, my counsel sound embrace:
For doubtless you an innocent are deem'de and thought to be,
And are in deed: what makes you thus in dumpes and doleful glee?
What cause so great should so enchaunt your conscience, and your wits,
To seek your own decay and spoil? what mean faint hearted fits?
That thus in have you would so feign abandon this your life
And go to hell, where torment dwelles and grisly ghostes be ryfe.
You would not see Sun, Moon, ne Star: no more you can: your eyes
Are blind: you feign would leave your Court, and Countries miseries.
Why so you may, and so you do. These all are put to sack,
That now alive, as well as dead you feel of these the lack.
You flee from Mother, Wife, and C^ylde, you see no man ^lyue:
What more can death dispatch away but life does now deprive?
your lords, your knights, your courtly train, your kingly state and crown
Your graund Affairs, your weighty charge is gone and brought abowne.
From whom, from what, do you thus flee.

OEdi. From none but from my self
Who have a breast full fraught with guilte: who, wretched caitiffe Elte
Have all embrude my hands with blood. From these apace I flee
And from the heavens and Gods therein: and from that villainy
Which I most wicked wretch have wrought. Shall I tread on this ground?
Or am I worthy so to do, in whom such tricks abound?
Am I to have the benefit of any Element?
Of Air for breath, of water moist, or Earth for nourishment?
O Slave forlorn, O beastly wretch, O Incestmonger vile,
O Varlet most detestable, O Peysaunte full of guile.
Why do I with polluted Fyst, and bloody paws presume
To touch thy chaste and comely hand? I foame, I fret, I fume
In hearing any speak to me. Ought I hear any tell
Or once of Son or Father speak, sith I did Father quell?
Would God it were within my power my Senses all to stop,
Would God I could these Ears of mine, even by the stumps to crop.
If that might be, then (daughter) I should not have heard thy voice.
I, I thy Sire, that thee be got by most incestuous choice.
Beegetting of thee, makes my crimes more then they were before:
Remorse thereof both gnaw and grype my conscience more and more.
Ofttymes that which mine Eyes not see, with Ears that do I hear,
And of my Facts before time done the inward wound I bear.
Why is there stay made of my doom? Why am I spard so long?
Why is not this blind head of mine thrown damned ghosts among?
Why rest I on the Earth, and not among infernal Sprightes?
Why pester I the company of any mortal Wightes?
What myschiefe is there more behind? to aggrauate my care?
My Kingdom, Parents, Children, Wit and Virtue quayled are
By sturdy storms of froward Fate: nothing remaynde but tears,
And they be dryde, and Eyes be gone: my hardened heart forbeares
Such signs of grace: leave of therefore, and make no more add:
A mind so mated with despair no suytes will slowpe unto.
I practice some strange punishments agreeing to my deed:
But what proportion can be found of plagues unto my meede?
Whose Fortune ever was so bad? I was in sooner borne,
But seely Infant Iudgde I was in pieces to be torn.
My mother in whose womb I lay, forth had not me yet brought
And yet even then I feared was: and straight my death was sought.
Some Babes soon after they be borne, by stroke of death depart:
But I poor soul, before my birth adjudged was to dart
Of death: some yet in Mothers womb, ere any light they see
Do taste the dint of hasty Fate, while Innocents they be.
Apollo by his Oracle pronounced sentence dyre
Upon me being yet unborn, that I unto my Sire
Should breastly parricide commit: and thereupon was I
Condemned straight by Fathers doom. My Feet were by and by
Launcde through, and through with yro^ Pins: hangde was I by ye Heels
Upon a Tree: my swelling plants the printe thereof yet feels:
As pray to Beasts, cast out also, to cramme their greedy Jaws
In Mount Cythaeron, and to fill the griping Vulturs Mawes.
Such Sauce to taste full like was I, was others heretofore
Descended of the royal Sangue, with smart (perforce) have bore.
But see the chance: I thus condemn'de by Dan Apollos hest
And cast to beasts by Fathers doom, and every way distressed,
Could find no death: no death on me durst seyze his lordly Pawe,
But fled from me, as though I had not been within his Law.
I verified the Oracle, with wicked hand I kilde
Mine own dear Father, and unawares his guiltless blood I spilde.
Shall any satisfaction redeem so vile an Act?
May any kind of Piety purge such a shameful fact?
I rested not contented thus. For Father being slain,
I fell in linkes of lawless Love with Mother: Oh what pain
And grudge of mind sustaynde I there? in thinking on the same,
To tell our wicked wedlock Yoke, I loath, I blush, I shame.
I may not well this gear conceal, I Will tell it: out it shall:
Though to my shame it much redound, it may augment my thrall.
I will display strange villainies, and them in number many,
Most beastlike parts, most lewd attempts, to be abhorr'de of any.
So filthy, and so monstrous, that (sure I think) no Age
Will them believe to have been done: so cruel was my rage,
That even each cutthroate Partrcide thereat may be ashamde
To hear it nam'de: and with disdain straight ways will be enflamde.
My hands in Fathers blud emb^rude to Fathers Bed I brought.
And have with Mother mine, his Wife, incestuous practyse sought.
To myschiefe adding mischief more: I wis my fault to Sire,
Is slender in comparison: my graceless fond desire
Could not be staide, till solemnly the marriage Knot was knit
Twixt me and Mother mine, alas for want of grace and wit.
How plungde am I in myschiefe still? how is the measure full
Of horrors vile, which do my mind and heart asunder pull?
And least the heap of these my woes might seem to be too skant,
My Mother (she my Wife that is) young issue does not want.
Can any crime in all the World more heinous be surmisde?
If any may: by wicked Impes the same I have deuisde.
My Realm and Crown I have resignde, which I received as hyre
For murdring most vunaturally the king, my Lord, and Sire,
Which Crown now since, twixt both my sons has kindled mortal war.
And all the country by the ears remains at deadly jar.
I know full well what destenies to this same Crown belonges.
None without Blood the same shall wear, and most accursed wrongs.
This mind of mine (who Father am) presageth many ills:
And gloomy days of slaughter dyre: the plot that murder wills.
Already is co^^u's and cast: all truth of word and deed
Is quight exild, al promise broke of pactes before decreed.
Etheocles, the one of my sons who now in princely throne
Beats all the sway, means still to keep the Diadem alone.
Poor Polynices th'o other son, thus being dispessest,
And kept by force from Kingly rule his humble suit addressed
Unto the Gods this wrong to wreake, this breach of league and oath
T'auenge and plague: he Argos soil end Greekish Cttyes both
Persuades t'assist him in this wary, this quarrel to maintain:
That he in Thebes (as promise was) might have his turn to raygne.
The ruin that to wearied Thebes shall grievously befall
And bring the pompous state thereof adowne, shall not be small.
Fire, sword, glaue, wounds, and thwacki^g thu^ps, shall light unto their share,
And that ere long: and mischieues worse (it any worse there are)
And this shall hap, that all the world may know it is the rac^
And issue of a curied Sire that darraygnes such a case.
Though other causes none there were to move you (sic) to live,
Yet is this one sufficient, that you by awe may drive
Your sons my Brethren tarring thus to unity and peace:
For you their Father only may their furies cause to tease.
You and none else may turn away thoccassons of this war:
These bransicke youths from further rage you only may dibarre.
By this your means the country shall their quiet peace enjoy
And Brethren jointly reconcild shall work no more ennoy.
If you therefore this mortal life thus to your self ^eny:
You many thousands shall vndge, whose states on you rely.

Oed. What? can thou make me to believe, that any spark of greece
Or love to Sire, or honesty in them has any place,
Which thirst for one on others blood, which after kingdoms gape,
Whose whole delight is villainy, werre, wurther, guile and rape?
Such hateful ympes on mischief set, such wicked Termagosites,
As to be sons of such a Sire with shame may wake their vauntes.
At one bare word to tell thee all: thy brethren two are bent
Upon all mischief, wayghing not what loosenes they frequent.
When flingbrayne rage ensots their heads, they care not they a rush
Upon what Deuelish vile attemptes they give the desprat push.
And as they are conceau'd and borne in most abhorred sort,
So still deuoyde of Grace they think all villainy but sport.
Their Fathers shame and wretched state moves them no whit at all,
To Country they no reckning make what massacre befall.
Their minds are ravished with desire ambitiously to raygne.
I know their driftes, and what they hope at length by shifts to gain.
And therefore since the case so stands I leyser had to die
With poasting speed while in my house there is none worse then I.
Ahlas, dear Daughter what ado do thou about me make?
Why lie thou prostrate at my knees? why do thou travail take,
To conquer my resolved mind with this thy spiced phraze
Of fair entreatie? these thy words my flynty heart amaze.
Dame Fortune has none other bayte to bring me to her lure
Then this alone: til now I still vnbanquisht did endure.
No Creatures words but thine alone could pearce this heart of mine,
Ne from a purpose resolute my settled mind butwyne.
Thou conquer can thaffections fond that in my breast do boil,
Thou teach grace to fathers house, and zeal to native soil.
Each thing to me delightful is which iumpeth with thy will:
Command me (Daughter) I thy hestes am ready to fufill.
Old Oedipus if thou enjoin, will pass the Aegaean Sea:
And flashing flakes of Aetna Mount, with mouth he dare assay.
He boldly dare object himself to raumping Dragons claw
Which raged, and sweld and venime spit apace, when as he saw
Dan Hercules away to steal his golden Aples all
In Gardens of Hesperides. At thy command, he shall
His Entrails offer unto iobbe of greedy Vulturs Byll:
At thy command, content he is in life to linger still.

THE SECOND ACT.
Nuntius. OEdipus. Antigone. Iocasta. Renowned Prince, of royal Race
and Noble lygne yspronge:
The Thebans dreading much the drife
of this your childrens thronge,
And warlicke garboyle now in hand,
most humbly pray your Grace
For Countries safety, down to set some order in the case.
They be not threats and menacies that thus their minds affright:
The mischief is more near then so: the Enmy is in sight.
For Polynices he that is your younger son of twain,
Does claim the crown, and in his turn in Thebes requires to reign
According unto couenaunts made: which quarrel to decite
He purposes the dene of sword, and mar^tall force to abide.
With him he brings a mighty Troop from every part of Greece,
Sir, seven Du^^ce, hesieging Thebes are minded it to fleese.
Help noble King, else are we like to perish man and child,
These bloody broils of civil war from us protect and shyelde.
O Edi. Am I one like to stop the rage of any wicked act?
Am I one like to cause these Youths to leave their bloody fact?
Am I a master like to teach what laws of love do mean?
Should I not then from former quise digress in nature eleane?
They tread their Fathers steps aright, they play my lawless prankes:
Like Sire, like Sons, like Tree, like fruit: I con the^ hearty thanks:
By this I know them for my Sons, and praise their towardness:
I would they should by peevish parts, whose Sons they be, express.
Show forth you noble Gallante ympes, what metled minds you bear,
Show forth by deeds your valor great, let lofty sprights appear.
Surmount and dim my praises all, Eclypse my glory quight:
Attempt some enterprise in which your Sire may have delight
To have till now remaynd in life: hereof I have no doubt:
For well I know your practice is strange feats to bring about.
Your birth and ligne from whence you spronge, assures me of no less
Such noble Bloudes must needs atchiue some doughty worthiness.
Your Weapons and Artillery for war bring out with speed,
Consume with flame your native Soil, and desolation breed
In every house wirhin the Land: a hurly burly make
Confusedly of every thing. Make all the Realm to quake,
And in exile their days let end make level with the ground
Each fenced Fort and walled Town: The Gods and all confound,
And throw their Temples on their heads: Their Images deface,
And melt them all: turn vps^ down each house in every place.
Burn, spoil, make havoc, leave no jot of City free from fire,
And let the flame begin his rage within my Chamber dyre.

AN. Sir, banish these impatient panges, let plagues of Common wealth
Entreat your Grace, since upon you stayth all their hope and health.
Procure your sons to reconcile themselves, as brothers ought,
Establishe peace between them both, let means of love be sought.

OEd. Oh daughter, see and well behold how I to peace am bent?
And how to end these garboyles all I seem full well content?
My mind (I tell thee) swelles with ire: within my entralles boyles
Abundaunt stoare of Choler fell: such restless rage turmoyles
My inward Soul, that I must yet some greater matter brew:
Which may the Realm enwrap in bale, and cause them all to rue.
That which my rash and heady sons have hitherto begone
Is nothing in respect of that which must by me be don.
This civil war is nothing like to that which I devise:
These trifling broils for such a Sea of harms cannot suffice.
Let brother cut the brothers throat with murthrous knife in hand:
Yet is not this enough to purge the mischieues of this lend.
Some heinous Fact, unheard of yet, some detestable deed
Must practisde he: as is to me. and mine by Fates decreed.
Such custom haunts our cursed race: such guise our house has caught:
My vise incestuous Bed requires, such pageaunts to be wraught.
To me your Father Weapons reach, my self here ^et me shrowde
In covert of these queachy wooddes: and let me be allowde
To lurk behind this Craggy Rock, or else my self to hyde
On backside of some thickset hedge: where lying vnespide,
I hearken may what marketfolkes in passing to and froe
Do talk: and what the country Clownes speak, as by way they go.
There (sith with eyes, I cannot see) with ear ^ yet may I bear
How cruelly my Sons by war do one the other tear.

IOC. A fortunate and happy Dame Agaue may be thought,
Who (though with bloody hands) her son to fatell death she brought,
And from the shoulders chopped his head, and bore the same about
In b^oudy hand, at Bacchus feast withau th'inspired rout
Of sacrificers, quartering poor Pentheus mangled lymmes:
Though this her cruel fact, somewhat her commendation dymmes:
Yet even in these her phrantick fits she stayde her self in time
From further harm, not adding more to aggrauate her crime.
My guilt were light, if I had not some others guilty made:
And yet is this but matter light: I took a biler trade.
For, Mother I am unto those that in all vice excel,
And who in most abhorred sins condignely bear the bell.
To all my woes and myseries there wanted only this,
That I should love my Countries foe, who Polynices is.
Three snowy Wynters passed are, and Summers three be gone,
Since be an exilde wretch abroad has lead his life in moan:
And sought his bread among the fremmd: till now compell'de perforce.
He craves relief of Greekish Kings, on him to have remorse.
He married has the Daughter of Adrastus, who at beck
Rules Argiue people, swaying them with awe of Princely check:
And he to advance his son in law to his most lawful right
Has with him brought from seven Realms a warlike Crew to fight.
What doom I should in this case give, which side I wish to win,
I cannot tell: my mind amazde, yet doubtful rests therein.
The One of my Sons (as right it is) requyres the Crown as due:
I know it so accorded was: his cause is good and true.
But in such sort, by force of Arms to rely maunde the same,
Is ill and most unnatural, herein he is to blame.
What shall I do, what may I say? I mother am to both:
And thus my Sons at deadly fewde to see I am full loath.
Without the breach of mother zeal I can no way devise:
For what good had I wish to the one, thence the others harm does rise.
But though I love them both alyke, yet sure my heart enclynes
To him that has the better cause: though wronged thus, he pynes:
As one by frowning fortune thrilde from pillar unto post:
His Credit, Country, friends, and wealth, and treasure being lost.
The weaker side I will support, and further al I can,
Most mercy always should vt shewde unto the oppressed man.

NV. While (Madame) you wayme^ting here your heavy plaints declare
And waste the time, my Lords your Sons in taunged battle are:
Each Captains bright in Armor stands, the Trumpet sounds amain,
And Standard is aduanc'de, amid the thronge of either train.
In marshall ray full pressed to fight stand seven worthy Kings:
And each of them a warlicke troop of valiant Soldiers bringes.
With courage not behynd the best, the Thebanes march apace:
And like right ympes of Cadmus brood, do slash at Enmies face.
The Soldiers force and willingness on either side to fight,
Appears: in that they nothing less pretend them shameful flight.
See how their trampling to and froe, the dust to Skies does rear,
And what a Cloud of Smoke in Camp the horses make t'appeare.
And if my fear dismay me not: It all be true I see:
Me thinks I view their glittering glaues begoard with blood to be.
Me thinks I see the Voward thrill and shake their Pikes in hand:
Me thinks I see the Gydons gay, and Streamers where they stand:
Wherein is wrought by curtous skill, in Letters all of Gold
The Scotchion, Poeste, Name and Arms of every captain bold.
Make have, be gone, dispatch. (Madame) Cause Brethren to agree:
Betwyxt them stay this quarrel, least a slaughter great ye see.
So shall you to your Children love, to each side peace restoare:
The mothers mediation may heal up all the Soar.

THE THIRD ACT.
Antigone. Iocasta. Nuntius. POast, poast, be gone, and trudge for life:
Queen mother make no stay:
That twixt my Brothers, perfect league
and truce continue may.
You that be Mother to them both,
use your auctority:
Out of their hands their weapons wrest,
and make them wars defye.
Your bared Breasts which once they sucked,
hold out amid their Swords:
Bear of the brunt of all their blows, or end this war with words.
Ioc. Thy talk I like, I will be gone: I Will go with might and main:
This head of mine I ieoperd will, between them to be slain.
In thickest thronge of all the Troops I purposd am to stand,
And try what grace, or curtesy rimaynes in either Bond.
If Brothers bear malicious minds each other to subdue,
Let them first onset give on we, and me to death pursue.
If either of them be endude with any spark of grace,
Or Natures laws or Filial awe does any whit embrace,
Let him at mothers suite lay down his Pikes and glaues of war,
And weapons of hastility let him abandon far.
And he that cancard stomach bears his Brother there to quell,
Forgetting Nature, let him first with me his Mother mell.
These headdy youths from further rage I seely Trot will stay:
I wittingly will not behold such mischief carry sway.
Or if I live to see the same, it shall not be alone.

Ant. The Standards are displayed in field, the Enemies are prone
To fall to fight: the clashing noise of weapons hear you may.
Much murder, death, and dreadful dule, cannot be far away.
Their stony hearts go mollify, with sugared terms persuade
Their wilful minds O Oueene, before they f^riously invade
The one the other: yonder see how they in armor bright
Bestirre themselves from place to place: (O dire and dismal sight.)
My trickling tears, my blubbring Eyes, may put you out of doubt
That all is true which I have said: look, look, how all the route
O^ either part does slowly march as loath (belike) to try
By dent of Swerd so strange a case: But both my brothers hie
Apace, to grapple force to force, and join with handy blows:
This day will breeede the bitter smart of ever during woes.

Ioc. What whirlewynd swift might I procure to bear me through the air?
What monstrous flying Sph^^^ will help, that I were quickly there?
Of all the Birds Stimphalides (with wings so huge and large
That Phoe bur rays they shadowed quight) will any take the charge
To carry me to yonder place? what ravenous Harpye Burd
With ugly talantes all with flith, and dirty dung befurde,
(Which hungrestarud King Phineus, that had put out the Eyes
Of children his) will at this pinch a mean for me deuyse,
That I aloft may hoysed be, and with all speed be set,
Where yonder cruel armies two in open field be met?

Nune. She runs apace, like one of wit and senses all distract:
No Arrow swifter out of Bow: no Ship with Sail full thwackt
With wynd at will more way can make with motion such sh^e flies
As glyding Star whose leames do draw a Furrow long in Skies.
As much aghast she trottes apace: and now in Camp she stands:
Her presence and arrival there has parted both the Bands.
At mothers great entreaty made, the bloody broyle is hushed:
And where before with goring Glaue the one at the other pusht,
With full intent to kill and slay, appeased is now their ire
And they well pleased to bend to peace, as she does them require.
The Sword again in sheath is put, that lately out was drawn
To pash out Brains of Brothers Scull: she ceasseth not to fawn
Upon them both, their strife to stint: her gray and hoary hairs,
Her Snow white locks with tears besprent in ruthful sort she ^eates.
She Motherlike seeks how to link their hearts in one assent,
With brynish tears she wettes the cheeks of him that's malcontent.
That Child that staggryng long does stand, with mother to dispute,
May seem unwilling mind to bear to yield to Mothers suit.

THE FOVRTH ACT.
Iocasta. Polynices. Against me only turn the force
of wreckful Sword and Fire:
Let all the Youths with one accord
repay to me that hyre,
That earnde I have by due deserte:
let both the gallant Band
Of them that come from Argos soil,
and them of Thebane Land
Come run upon me all at once: let neither friend ne foe
Refrain a whit his bloody blade at this my womb to throw.
This womb, this womb, wherein I bare these wilful Brethren here
Beget by him that was my son, and eke my wedded fere.
Dismembre this my Body vile: cast all my lymmes abroad:
I am their mother: child wife throws for them I once abode.
You two, my sons, need I to speak, to will you leave your ire?
Is It not your parts, in such a case t'accomplish my desire?
Will you not plight the faithful league of true and perfect love?
Will you not royntly quarrels all at Mothers suit remove?
That this shall be as I request, come, give me both, your hands
While yet they vndystayned be, and clean from murder stands.
What crime you heretofore have done, against your will it was.
And all that spot which staynes your same, by Fortune came to pass.
This haynons Act, this frantic coil you can no wise excuse*
But wittingly and willingly sound counsel ye refuse.
It rests free within your choice: of these take which ye list:
If peace delight for mothers sake this brabling broyle untwist.
If such a lewd outrage as this more pleasant seem to be:
Behold, the same and greater too ye may commit on me.
Who being mother, here oppose my self between you twain:
Ere you do one an other kill, I needs must first be slain.
Take either therefore quight away this strange ungodly jar.
Or if you will not: me dispatch, who stay your wished war?
Ahlas in this my pensive plight to whom should I dyrect
My piteous plaint, and earnest suyte? to whom might I detect
Mine inward grief and throubed heart? which of them were I best
T'encounter first and fast embrace, to breed my surest rest?
I love them both even equally, affection like I bear
To either party: mother fond and parciall else I wear.
The one of them these three years space bath liu'de in banishment.
But it all couenaunts may be kept, as at the first was meant,
The other now as turn does fall, must trudge an otherwhile,
And learn to know what it is to live so long in like exile.
Wae worth this hapiesse heavy hap: shall I not live the day,
To see my sons together once in one self place to stay?
Shall never I behold them both to better concord bent?
Is all affection natural within them both so spent?
Then, Polynices, come thou first, embrace thy Mother dear?
Thou that have trauaild many amyle, and languisht many a year.
That many a storm abidden haste, and many a brunt sustainde,
And wearied long with sharp exile, from Mothers sight been wai^de:
Come unto me, and nearer stand, put up thy Sword again
Into thy shrath: thy shyuering Spear (that out of hand so feign
Would be dischargd at Brothers throat) within this ground stick fast.
This Shield of thine lay also down. It makes me sore aghast.
It is so big, it will not let this loving breast of mine.
To join and debonairely meet with that sweet heart of thine:
Take of thy he^met from thine head, the Thonge thereof vuty.
That I thy Vifuge may behold, and all thy face descry.
Why do thou backward turn thy head? and glauncest still thine Eye,
And take keep of brothers hand for fear of villainy?
Thy body all with these mine Arms I will defend and hyde?
If he attempt thy (...) to spill, his murthrdus blade shall glyde
First through these tender sides of mine: why standst thou so amazd?
Do thou distrust thy Mothers love? think thou her kindness razd?
Poly. I fear in deed, distrusting sore, Sire, Damme and all my kin:
And think that truthles treachery in hearts of all has bin.
Dame Natures jews are flung at heel, and naught esteemed be:
No faith in kindred planted is, ne true syncerity.
Since I by proof have seen and felt what hurly burly grows
Betwixt us Brethren: and from thence what Sea of mischief flows:
I may suspect no faster faith in Mother to remain:
Its not unlike, but she likewise will prankes as bad mayntaine.
Ioc. Thy sword in hand fast clasped keep: On head thy Basnet tie:
On Left Atme hold thy Targat sure, and on thy Guard rely.
At all points armd prepared stand: all future doubts prevent:
Be sure to see thy Brother first t'vnarme himself content.
And now to thee Etheocles some speech I am to use:
Thou first wast cause of all this war, do not therefore refuse
Down first to lay thy brawling Blade, and yield to Reasons lore:
If name of peace so hateful be, if that thou any more
Entendst this war to prosecute, in this so savage sort,
Let mother yet this curtesy from thee (her son) extort
That some small time of trusty truce thou will with willing mind
Consent unto: til I my Son thy Brother most unkind
May after flight go kiss end oel, now first or last of all.
While I for peace entreaty make, you men unarmed I call
To listen unto that I say: thy Brother fears thee:
And thou fearst him: and I fear both. But this my fear you see
Is nothing for my self at all, but for th'auayle of both.
Why seem thou thy naked sword to put in sheath so loath?
Be glad to take the benefyte of any little stay:
In matters lewd it is wisdom good to stand upon delay.
You enter into such a war, wherein he speedeth best
That vanquished is: both of you fear to be by fraud distressed
Through practisd means and subtle plois of Brothers spiteful drift,
Or ouerteacht by policy of some devised shift.
But if deceive or be deceyu'd by him that is our Friend
We needs must be: in such a case we shall the less offend
In suffering wrong then doing harm: But fear thou not a whit,
You both from ambusht treacheryes your Mother will acquit.
What say you Sons: shall this request of mine with you preuayl^.
Or shall I curse my luckelesse faie, and on my Fortune rail*
And judge your Sire an happy man, in that he lives blind
And cannot see the thing which I behold with pensive mind?
In coming unto you, did I bring with me this intent,
To end these broils? or did I come to see some dyre event?
Etheocles, some what appeasde, has pitched his Spear in ground,
And not a weapon blood to sheed, in hand of his is found.
Now Polynices, unto thee my former suite I bring,
Regard thy Mothers mournful plight, and yield unto the thing
That she with tears entreates to have. O Son, at length I see,
I hold with hands, I kiss with mouth, I touch with joyful glee
This Face of thine, the sight whereof I wanted have so long:
And have more often wished for, then can be told with tongue.
Thou have from native Soil been ch^sde to Coaste of foreign king,
And crossed been with trouncing force of frowning Fortunes sting.
Thou many a Storm, and many a brunt in many a foming Sea,
In Wandering sort and banished guise, did oftentimes assay.
Thy Mother at thy Spousal^ feast was absent far away,
And could not do such nuptial Rytes as tell for such a day.
Into thy wedding Chamber she brought thee, ne yet thy Bryde,
Ne yet in solemn sort the house with herbs and odours plide:
Ne yet did with a Ryband white the wedding Torches tie,
As use and custom wills to be at such solemynitie.
Adrastus, Father to thy Wife, and father in law to thee,
With Daughter his, has not defraide much store of gold or Fee.
No Dower has he bestowde on her, her wealth was very small,
Of Cities, Lands, and Revenues he gave her none at all.
War, War: is it thou only had, by taking her to Wife:
In lieu of other gyfts, he helps to kindle all this Strife.
Thou Son in law art unto him, that is our Countries Foe:
Thy Native soil thou leauest, and to foreign Courts do go.
Thou feedest now at Strangers boarde, and make more accoumpt
Of new acquaintance got abroad; as though it did surmount
The friendship of thy country here: thou art a banished wight,
And live in exile, for no fault, but through thy brothers spite.
In thee appears resemblaunce plain of all thy Fathers Fate,
In which there ^acketh not so much as thoyse of wedded Mate.
Whom with as ill mischaunce and hap as ever Fathers was,
Thou haste in lucklesse hour and time of marriage brought to pass.
O Son, thy mothers only hope, for whom such care I take:
Whose sight, now after many years, does me most ^oyfull make.
For whom I have full many a time to Gods devoutly praide:
Whereas in deed, thy new return to me, may well be said
To take away as great a joy, and bring as great a grief,
As it to these mine aged years is comfort and relief.
I prostrate at the Oracle, besought Apollos Grace
To tell me, when I should not need to further fear thy case.
Who flowting this my fond demand, anon did flatly tell,
And spoke these words, which yet (I trow) I do remember well.
Thou fearst thy son, least harm he take, as is a mothers guise:
But thou I say more cause shall have, to fear him otherwise.
For if this war vnraisde had been I should thy presence lack:
And if thou were not, Thebane Land might free remain from Sack.
The sight of the does cost us all a hard and nipping price,
Yet does it like thy mother well: so that her sound advice
In this one thing thou follow will. Dispatch these Armies hence:
Even presently, while yet of blood there has not been expense.
So foul a Fact to be so near, is heinous out of doubt:
I shake, I quake to think thereon, in every Joint throughout.
My hair stands upright even for fear, two brethren thus to see
Aloof, and ready one to chop at the other, cruelly.
Howneere was I (poor Mother theirs, a bloudier act to have seen.)
Then father blind yet ever saw, or ever yet would ween?
And though my fear be ouerpast and the act vnbrought to pass:
My self yet do I wretched think, that done so near it was.
By all the throws for ten months space, in womb when I thee bare,
And for thy Sisters sake both twain, which shine in veri^e rare:
And by those Eyehoales of thy Sire* for which with wrekefull Pawe
He pulld his Eyes, because (unawares) he stained Natures law,
I thee beseech from Thebane Walls sent back these armed Bands,
Which threatening all our throats to cut, against our Country stands:
Yea though you presently depart: yet are you much to blame,
And there is due unto you both, a lot of during shame:
Because this Country round about has pestred been with power,
And troops of Soldiers stout and brave, it ready to deuowre.
With pensive hearts a mourning minds, these Eyes of ours have seen
Your prau^cing couriers with their Feet, spoil Theban Meadows green.
We often have seen your houlty Peers in warlike Chariot ride:
And often our houses to have brunt with wildfier have been spide.
And last of all* An act we saw (which even to Thebes is straung.)
Two Brethren warring mortally, all Natures bonds to chaung.
Each one in The Army saw this sight, the people witness be.
Your Systers two, and Mother I this all did plainly see.
Your Father, he may thank himself: that he did not behold
This lamentable spectacle and hauockes manifold.
Call now to thy remembrance here, thy Father OEdipus,
Whose doom, did Facts (by error done) even plague, and punish thus.
With Fire, and sword subvert not clean (good Son) thy country dear,
And Thebes whereof thou would be king) surcease with force to tear.
What Bedlem pang enchaunts thy mind? what might thy meaning be?
Thou claymst a Realm, which to subvert thou geeuest license free.
In seeking thus a countries rule: a country thou destroyest:
Which thou thine own would make, thou marr'st, and (as twere none) annoyesto.
Hereby thou hindrest much thy self, in yt thou make spoil,
And burnest up does Corn and Grass, and keep'st a shameful coil,
In cha^ing men out of their homes: (O desprate witless part)
What man alive, to waste his own, can thus find in his heart?
These things that thou co^maundest thus by rage of sword and flame
To be consum'de: an other man thou think does owe the same.
If thus for princely Chair you twain by The Ears your title try:
The state of Realm and Commonwealth will totter soon awry.
Seek it, while ye^ your Country stands unblemished by decay:
It so t'enioy, and so to reign, I coumpt the better way.
Ah, can thou f^^de in heart to burn, and spoil these houses brave?
The like whereof in all the world besides, thou can not have:
Can thou destroy and ruinate the noble Thebane wall,
To whose first building stones apace at Dan Amphions call
Came dancing of their own accord, through tunes of warbling harp:
And ^oucht themselves in order right upon the Turrets sharp,
Without all help of worckmans hand, or Pully up to draw
Such pieces as most weighty were? Will thou by lawless law
Throw down these worthy Monuments? will thou from hence convey
And carry with thee all these spoils? will thou such pageaunts play?
Thy Fathers old acquainted mates, will thou by force surpryze
And lead as captive where thou go in proud triumphing wise?
Shall these thy cutthroate Soldiers dragge and ^^le (...) mothers old?
Shall they, grau^d Matrons ried in chains, from (...) unfold?
Shall Thebane Maids, and Damselles chaste of fresh and lusty Age,
Be mingled with the raskal rout, and hamperd be in Cage?
Shall they as presents, forced be in dabbling dirt to toil
Unto the mynsing Mistresses, and Trulles of Argoa Soil?
Shall I thy seely Mother trudge with Pinyond hands behind?
Shall I this triumph of my Chiled to furnish be assignde?
Can thou with grudgelesse mind, behold thy Countreyfolkes arow,
Slain, mangled, spoylde, in pieces hewn, thus to their deaths to got?
Can thou bring in a deadly Foe, thy Country to subdue?
Shall streates of Thebes run all with blood? shall all ye Country rue
Thy coming home with flame and fire? have thou an heart so hard?
A breast so tipped with flint? a mind to rage so well preparde?
If thus thou fare, and swell with ire whiles yet thou art no King:
What will thou be in Princely throne, if thou should win the Ring?
Surceasse therefore and qualify this outrage of thy mind:
In thee let all thy Country, grace and Princely myldnes find.

POL. Would you me have, my self so much to loyal duties yield,
As that I should a Pylgrims life like wandering Beast in field
Skud up and down from place to place, without both house and home,
And fleeing native soil, be forced in foreign Lands to roame?
What other plagues, could you award in justice unto me,
If I my faith or sacred Oath had broken caytifly?
Shall I bear all the punishment for that vile villains guile?
And shall he false deceiptfull wretch at my misfortunes smyle?
Shall he in wealth still flaunt it out, and keep this jolly coil?
Shall he for sins rewarded be? and I still put to foil?
Well, well, go to, be as be may: you bid me wander hence:
I am content: your hard decree t'obay is my pretense.
But tell me whyther shall I go? Assign me to some place:
Bylike, you would that brother mine should still with shameless face
Possess my stately Palaces, and revel in his ruff,
And I thereat to hold my peace, and not a whit to snuff,
But like a Country Mome to dwell in some poor thatched Cot:
Allow me poor Exyle such one: I rest content, God wot.
You know, such Noddyes as I am, are wont to make exchaung
Of Kingdoms, for poor thatched Cots, be like this is not straung.
Yea more: I, matched now to a Wife of noble ligne and race
Shall like a seely Dottipoll live there in servile case,
At beck and check of queenely Wife, and like a kitchen drudge
Shall at Adrastus lordly heels, (my Wives own Father) trudge.
From Princely Port to tumble down into poor servile state,
Is greatest grief that may betyde by doom of frouncing fate.

IOC. If that thou gape so greedely a Kingly Crown to wear:
And that thou can not rest content, till thou a Scepter bear:
Behold each quarter of the world affoordeth Kingdoms store.
No doubt thou may win some of them, if that thou seek therefore.
On one side here, lies Tmolus mount, a soil bethwact with Vines:
There runs Pactol^s noble stream with golden Send and mines.
On that side crookt Maeander glydes through midst of Phrygia fields:
On this side Hebrus swift of course much fruict to Thracia yeldes.
Nere thereunto lies Gargarus, renoumd each where for Corn,
And Trojan Xanthus swelling flood, that prick and price has borne.
There Sestos and Abidus stand in mouth of Ionian Sea,
Which now is called Hellespont: and here an other way
Are countries, which more Eastward lie. There Lycia full of Creekes
And Havens strong is situate: these kingdoms, he that seeks,
Is like to win: these would I have thee conquer with thy Sword:
These, these to win let King Adrast to thee his aid affoorde.
In some of these, let him thee make a King: in Thebes as yet,
Suppose thy father Oedipus in seat of King to sit.
Thy banishment much better is to thee, then this return,
Since all thy drift is cruelly to wast, to spoil, and burn.
Thy banishment reputed is to grow through others crime:
This thy return, in such a sort to Kingly state to clyme,
Is ill and faulty every way: with this thy warlicke crew
Thou shall do better Realms to seek, where bloody guilt ne grue.
Yea, this thy Brother, whom thou do pursue with deadly hate
Whose life, whose health, whose house thou do with curses dire rahate
Will aid thee with all p^wre he can: himself will also go
And serve in field for thine avail, gaynst him that is thy foe.
Advance thy power, march boldly forth to take this war in hand.
Wherein thy parents wish thee good, and will thy helpers stand.
A Kingdom got mischieuously, and snatched with grudge of mind,
More grievous is then exiles al, of what soever kind.
Of war, the doubtful hazardes all set down before thy sight,
And thoroughly weigh thuncertayne chance, that longes to martial ^ight.
Though all the power of Greece thou bring thy quarrel to maintain,
And though great armed multitudes of Soldiers thou re^ayne:
Yet chance of war still doubtful hanges, and hard it is to know,
Who carry shall the victory, thou or thy vowed foe.
Mars to no party tied in: what he decrees, shall be,
As chance allots, so falls it out: this dome abides free.
Sword, hope and fear makes equal those, betw ene whom otherwise
Great odds there is: blind Fortunes lot the case between them tryes.
Thy rash attempt with crime begone, gropes after doubtful gain:
And fond deuyses enterprisd often reap deserved pain.
Admit that all the God s in heaven did further thy request,
And to promote thy hot desire both willing were, and pressed:
Yet al thy friends are fled away, and al recoyled back,
And Soldiers here and there in Fields are come to deadly wrack.
Although thou joy hereat receive, although the spoils thou take
Of vanquished Brother, yet the palm of victory must slake,
And not to thee be given whole. What kind of war (alas)
Is this, think thou? is it not more strange then ever any was?
Wherein if he that victor is, joy therein any whyt,
Most execrable wickedness he (doubtless) does commit.
This Brother thine, who^ now so feign thou would bereave of breath,
I wis, if he were once dispatched, thou would bewale his death.
And therefore make no more ado, but cease from wicked bral,
Rid country out of trembling fear, and parents dole forestal.

Poly. What, shall my Brother for this vile and shameful breach of pacie
Go skotfree thus? shall he receive no guerdon for his fact?

Ioc. Fear not my Son, he shall be paid, and paid again, I trow:
He shall be King and raygne in Thebes, his pain shall even be so.
A pain in grain I warrant him. And if thou doubtful be,
Let Graundsyre Laius and thy Sire examples be to thee.
Sir Cadmus will the same display, and Cadmus offspring all
Can witness be that none in Thebes yet raygnd without a fall.
None yet the Theban Scepter swayd, that has not felt the whippe.
And promise breach made most of them from regal Crown to skippe.
Now if thou will, thou may insert within this bedroll here
Thy Brother.

POLY. Mary, that I will, in shame has he no peer.
And unto me it seems a world of bliss to be a king
And dye with Kings.

POC. Thy case does thee in rank of exiles bring.
Raygne King, but yet a loathed wight unto thy Subjects all.

POLY. For that I neither recke ne care what shall to me befall.
That Prince that fears disdaynful hate, unwilling seems to raynge.
The God that swayes the Golden Globe, together has these twain
Conioynd and coupled Hate and Rule: and him do I suppose
To be a noble King indeed, that can supplant his foes,
And Subjects cancred hate suppress. A King is often stayed
From doing many things he would, when Subjects love is wayed.
But unto them that do repyne to se him sit aloft,
He may more rigor boldly show, and pare their p^tes more often.
He that will love of Subjects win, with Elemency must raygne:
A King that is hated, cannot long in Kingly seat remain.
For Kingdoms Kings can best describe, what precepts needful are.
Mell thou in cases of Exile: for Kingdoms take no care.

Pol. To be a King, I would engage to force of flaming Fire,
Both Country, house, land, Wife, and Child, to compass my desire.
No Fee, to purchase Princely seat, ne labor coumpt I lost:
A Kingly Crown is never dear, what ever price it cost.

Thomas Newtonus, Cestreshyrius.

FINIS.
THE FOVRTH, AND MOST RVTHFVL TRAGEDY OF L. ANNAEVS SENECA, Entitled
HIPPOLYTVS; translated into English, by Ihon Studley.
The Argument.
HIPPOLYTVS, the Son of THESEUS and ANTIOPA Queen of the Amazons, renouncing
al Worldly pleasures, and carnal delights, lived a Batcheler, forbearing all
Women's company, and amorous allurements: and only vowed himself to the service
of chaste DIANA, pursuing the Gentlemanly pastime of hunting. In the absence of
THESEUS his Father, it chanced that his Stepmother PHAEDRA ardently enamored
with his beawty and lusty age, enueigled him by all means she could, to
commit with her filthy, and monstrous adultry. Which her beastly, unchaste,
and undutiful practice, he dutifully loathinge, she turned her former love
into extreme hatred, and told her husband THESEUS at his return home, that
his Son HIPPOLYTVS would have unlawfully layne with her. THESEUS believing
his Wives most untrue accusation, meant to have put his son to death.
HIPPOLYTVS understanding thereof, got up into his Chariot and fled. THESEUS
being therewith tickeled, and after some pursuit, not ouertaking him, went to
his Father AEGAEVS being a God of the Sea, desiring him to grant him three
Wishes: the last whereof was, the destruction and Death of HIPPOLYTVS:
whereupon AEGAEVS sent out certain great Sea Monsters, or Whirlepooles, which
affrighting the Horses in HIPPOLYTVS Charyot, made them to ouerturne the
Charyot, and to run through thick and thin till they had disme^bred true
HIPPOLYTVS in pieces. The remorse of which villainy so struck PHAEDRA in
Conscience, that with a Sword she stabbed herself into the Entrails, and
died upon the body of HIPPOLYTVS.

The Speakers names.
Hippolytus. Phaedra. Nuntius. Chorus, Theseus. Nutrix.
THE FIRST ACT.
HIPPOLYTVS. Go raunge about the shady Woods,
beset on every side
With Nets, with Hounds, and toils, and running
out at randon ride
About, about, the craggy crests
of high Cecropes hill,
With speedy foot about the Rocks,
with coursing wander still.
That under Carpanetus Soil,
in Dale below does lurk,
Whereas the Rivers running swift, their flapping waves do work,
And dashe against the beaten Banks of Thrias valley low,
And clamber up the slimy cliues, besmeard with hor^ Snow,
(That falls, when y^ Western wind from Riphes Mou^ts does blow.)
Here, here away, let other wend, whereas with lofty head,
The Elm displayes his braunched arms, the wood to ouerspread.
Whereas the Meadows green do lie, where Zephyrus most mild
Out brayes his baumy breath so sweet, to gernish up the field
With lusty springtide flowers fresh whereas Elysus slow
Does fleet upon the Yste flakes, and on the Pastures low.
Maeander sheds his straggling stream, and sheares the fruitless sand
With wrackfull wave: ye whom the path on Marathons left hand,
Does lead unto the leauened launds, whereas the heirde of beast
For Evening forage go to graze, and stalk unto their rest.
The rascal Dear trip after fast, you thither take your way,
Where clottered hard Acarnan forced warm Southern winds t'obay
Does slake the chilling cold, unto Hymetus Ysie cliue
To Alphids little Villages, now let some other d^^ue:
That plot where Sunion surges high do beat the sandy banks,
Whereas the marble Sea does fleet with crooked compast crankes,
Unhaunted lies too long, withoutten race of any wight.
Who set agog with hunting brave, in woods does take delyght,
Philippis him allures: her hauntes a fomy bristled Bore
That does annoy with ghastly dread the husbandmen full sore:
We know him well: for he it is foyld with so many wounds,
But ere they do begin to open, let slip* let slip your Hounds.
But in your leashes Syrs keep up your eiger Mastifs yet,
Keep on their Collers still; that do their galled neekes yfret:
The Spartayne Dogs eiget of pray and of courageous kind,
That sone can single out their game, whereto they be assygnd,
Tie shorter up within your leash: to pass time shall it bring,
That with the youlping noise of hounds the hollow rocks shall ring.
Now let the Hounds go find of it with Nosthrell good of sent,
And trace unto the vglye de^ere dawning ^ay be spent.
While in the dewish stabby ground the prick of cleaze does s^icke.
One bear the toil on cumbred neck, and some with nets full thick
Make speed: some with the arming coard by pensell painted red
By sleight, and subtle guyleful ^eare shall make the Beasts adred:
Look thou to pitch thy thirling (...) and ^hou to try thy might,
Shall cope him with broad (...) with hand both left and right.
Thou standing at receipt shall chase the (...) awayne.
With hallowing: thou with limere sharp vndee him being slain.
Grant good success unto thy mate, Virago, thou Divine,
That secret desartes chosen have for noble Empire thine:
Whose thirled Darts with leauel right do gore the Beast with Blood
That lappes the lukewarm licour of roxis fleeting Flood.
And eke the Beast that sportes it self on frosen Ist^s straud.
The ramping Lions eake of Geate are chased by thy hand.
And eke the wyndy heeled Heart in Ca^die thou do chase.
Now with more gentle lance thou strikst the Do^ that trippes apace.
To thee the Tygar fierce his diverse spotted breast does yield,
The rough shaghairy Bugle turns on thee his back in field.
Eke saluage Buffes with branch and horns: all things thy quarelles fear,
That to the needy Garamas in Affricke does appear.
Or eis the wyld Arabian enriched by his wood,
Or what the Brutish roches of Pyrene understood,
Or else what other Beasts do lurcke in wyld Hyrcanus grove,
Or else among Sarmatians in desert fields that roue:
It that the Ploughman come to field, that stands in thy grace,
Into his (...) the ^oused beast full sure he is to chase.
No feet in sunder break the (...) and home he bringes the Bore
In i^tting wayne, when as the hounds with gubs of clottered gore,
Besmeared have their g^ymed (...) and then the Country rout
To Cottages repair in ranks, with triumph all about.
Lo, Goddess grant us grace: the hounds already opened have,
I follow must the Chase: this gainer way my pains to save,
I take into the woods.
THE SECOND SCENE
PHAEDRA. NVTRIX. O Country Crete that bears the sway,
upon the Seas so vast.
Whose Ships so thick in every Shore,
the Seas do ouercast,
What ever coast as far as is
Assyria land does lie,
Where Nereus does the piked Stem
to cut his course deny,
Why force ye me that yielded am, a pledge to those I hate?
And gieuen in Bridal bed to be my enmies Spousall mate,
To languish out my time in tears, in woe to lead my life?
My husband lo, and runnagate is gone from me his Wyfea,
Yet Theseus still performs his O the alike unto his Spouse.
As erst to Ariadne, when he falsifide his Vows:
He champion stout dare enterprise the darkness deep to pass
Of loathsome Lake, whence yet found out, no way returning was.
A soldier of the Wooer bold Pros^rpin home to bring,
Out pullde perforce from grisly throne of Dire infernal King.
Accompanide with fury fierce he marches forward still,
Who^ neither dread nor shame could force forbear his wicked will.
With lawless wedlocks rauishments Hippolytus his Sire
Does in the boiling bottom deep of Acheron require,
But yet another greater grief swayes on my pensive breast,
No silent night, nor slumber deep can set my heart at rest.
My sorrow still is nourished, and still entreaseth it,
And ranklesse in my boiling breast, as out of Aetnaes pit.
The stifling vapor upward sties and Pallas Web, it stands
At rest, my dropping distaffe down does drop between my hands.
My luskish mind it has no lust my vowed gifts to pay
Unto the Temples of the Gods that live my Theseus may:
Nor rigging with Th'athenian Dames among the aulters proud
To toss the fiery brands, unto the sacrifice aloude,
Nor yet devoutly praying at the Aares with godly guise
To Pallas president in earth to offer sacrifice:
It does delight me to pursue the chased beasts in flight,
And toss my flashing Faucon fierce with nimble hand full light.
What ails thou mind this mad to take conceypte in freight and fell?
My wretched mothers fatal vice a breeding now I smell:
To cloak our crime, our lust does know, woods are the fittest place,
Alas good Mother, I lament the heavy lucklesse case:
Thou rash attaint with loathsome lust enamored is thy breast.
Even with the cruel head of all the herd of saluage beast,
That churlish angry roaring Bull no yoke can be sustain.
And he among the wild, and eke untamed Neat does raygne.
Yet was enclinde to love: what God can grant me my desire?
Or Dedalus with curious craft can ease my flaming fire?
Not if he might return, whom Ariadne has iustruct
From crooked compast Laberinth by thread that out he plucked
Among the lurcking corners close, and wily winding way,
To grope his footing back again, and did deprive of day
Our monstrous Minotaur enclosde in Maze and Dungeon blind:
Although he promise to our sore, no salve yet can he find:
Through me Apollos Progeny does Venus quite again*
The filthy shame that she and Mars together did sustain.
Whom Phoebus taking at their task all naked in the Sky,
Hung up in Nets, a laughing stock to every gasing Eye:
For this all Phoebus stock, with vile and foul reproach she staynes,
In some of Minos family still loathsome lusting raygnes:
One mischief brings another in.
NV. O Theseus wife, and Child
Of Jove, let vice be soon out of thine honest breast exilde:
And quench the raging heat: to dire despair do not up yield,
Who at the first repulseth love, is safe and winnes the field,
Who does by flattring fancy fond feed on his vicious vain,
To late does grudge against the yoke which erst he did sustain:
Nor yet do I forget how hard, and void of reason clean:
A Princes stately stomach yeeldes unto the golden mean:

PH. That end I will accept, whereto by Fortune I can lead
The neighbors weal great comfort brings unto the horie head.

NV. The first redress is to withstand, not willingly to slide,
The second is to have the fault by mean and measure tried:
O wicked wretch what will thou do? why do thou burden more
The stained stock and do excel thy mothers fault before?
More heinous is thy guilt than yet thy mothers Monster was:
For monsters may thou think are brought by destiny to pass:
But let the cause of sin, to blame of manners lewd redounde:
And if because thy husband does, not breath above the ground.
Thou think thou may defend thy fault, and make thy matter good
And free from fear? thou art beguilde, yet think the Stygian flood
In griesly gaping gulf for aye has drenched Theseus deep,
But yet thy Sire, whose kingdoms large the Seas at will do keep:
Whose dreadful doom pronounces panges, and due deserved pain,
Two hundredth wayling souls at once. Will he think thou maintain
So heinous crime to couche? the care of tender Parents breast
Full wise, and wary is to bring their children to the best.
Yet shall we think by subtle mean by craft and devilish guile,
In hugger mugger close to keep our treachery so vile.
What shall thy mothers father Phoebe, whose beams so blasing bright,
With fiery gleede o^ every thing, does shed his golden light?
Or Jove the Grandsire great of Gods that all the world does shake,
And brandisheth with flaming Fist, his fiery lightnings flake:
That Vulcane does in Furnace hoate, of dusky Aetna make
Think thou this may be brought to pass, so heinous crime to hide?
Among thy Grandsire all that have each privy thing espide?
But though the favor of the Gods conceal the second time
Thy loathsome lust (unworthy name) and to thy baudy crime,
Sure faythfulnesse annexed be, that ever barred was.
Each great offense, what will this work? a present plague, alas
Suspicionlest the guilty night bewray thy deed unjust:
And conscience burdned sore with sin that does it self mistrust.
Some have commit offense full safe from any bitter blame,
But none without the stinging pricks of conscience did the same:
Assuage the boiling flames of this thy lewd ungracious love,
Such monstrous mischief horrible from modest mind remove.
Which never did Barbarian commit unto this day.
No not the Gadding Goths that up and down the fyel^es do stray:
Nor craggy crested Taurus mount whose hoary and frosty face
With (...) cold abandons all inhabitors the place.
Nor yet the scattered Scithian, thy mother have in mind,
And fear this forrayne venery, so strange against thy kind:
The Fathers wedlock with the sons thou seckst to be defylde,
And to conceive in wicked womb a Bastard Mungrell Child:
Go too, and turn thy Nature to the flame of burning breast.
Why yet do Monsters cease? why is thy Brothers cave in reast.
That Mynotaurus hideous hole and ugly couching den
Without an other greedy fyend to mounch up flesh of men?
Misshapen, lothly monsters borne so often the world shall bear,
So often rebels against her self confused Nature dear,
As love entangles Nymphs of Crere.

Ph. I know the truth ye teach
O Nurce, but fury forces me at worser things to reach:
My mind even wittingly to vice falls forward prone and bent
To bolesome counsel back again in vain it does relente:
As when the Norman tugges and toils to bring the freighted Bark
Against the striving stream, in vain he loses al his carke
And down the shallow stream perforce the Ship does hedlong yield,
Where reason preaseth forth, there fighting fury winnes the field,
And bears the swinging sway, and cranke Cupidoes puissant might
Tryumpheth over all my breast this flighty win^ed wight
And puissant potestate throughout the world does hear the stroke,
And with unquenched flames does force Io^es kindled breast to smoke,
The Battelbeaten Mars has felt these bitter burning brandes,
And eke the God has tasted these whose fervent fierye hands,
The thumping thunder bouncing boltes three forked wise does frame,
And he that ever busted is about the furious flame,
In smoltring Furnace raging hot on dusky top so (...)
Of foggye A^tna mount: and with such slender heat does fry,
And Phoebe himself that weldes his dart upon his twanging string,
With aimed shaft directly driven the wimpled Ladde does sting.
With power he scoures along the Earth and Marble Sky awayne.
Lust favoring folly filthtly did falsely forge and (...)
L^ue for a God: and that he might his freedom (...)
Ascribes the name of feigned God to shittel bed lame rage.
Erycina about the world does send her rouing page,
Who glyding through the Azure skies with slender ioynted arm
His perlous weapons weildes at will, and working griec uous harm.
Of bones and stature being least great might he does display
Upon the Gods, compelling them to crouch and him obey.
Some Brainsicke head did attribute these things unto himself,
And Venus Godhead with the bow of Cupid little elfe.
Who cockred is, tryumphing much in fau^ing fortunes lap.
And flotes in wealth, or seeks and sues for things that seldom hap,
Lust (mighty fortunes mischeous mate) assaulteth straight his breast,
His tooth contempneth wonted fare and victuals homly dressed.
Nor hansome houses pleases him, why does this plague refuse.
The simple sort, and to annoy does stately bowers choose?
How haps it matrimony pure to bide in Cottage base?
And honest love in middle sort of men does purchase place?
And things that be of mean estate themselves restrain full well,
But they that wallow in their lust whose stately stomachs swell,
Puffed up and boistred big with trust of Kingly scepter proud
Do greater matters enterprise then may be well alowde.
He that is able much to do, of power will also be
To do these things he cannot do. Now Lady do thou see
What things do thee beseem thus stand on stately throne on hie?
Mistrust the scepter of thy spouse returning by and by.

Ph. In me I bear a violent and mighty payse of love,
And no man's coming home again to terror may me move.
He never stepped back again, the welkin sky to touch,
That swallowed once and sunk in gulf and glummy cave did couch
Shut up in shimering shade for ay.

Nu. Yet do not thou suppose,
Though dreadful Ditis lock with bars, and bolt his dongeon close:
And though the hideous hellicke hounde do watch the griesly gates.
Not Theseus alone shall have his passages stopped by fates,

Ph. Perhaps he pardon will the crime of loves procuring heat

Nu. Nay churlishly he would of old his honest wife entreat.
Antiope his bobbing bu^^ets felt and heavy cuffe:
Suppose, yet thou can qualifye thy husbands raging ruff:
Yet who can mo^e Hippoly^us most s^ony stubborn mind?
He will abhor the very name detesting woman kind,
And faring frantickly, will give himself to single life,
And shun the hated spousall bed of every marride wife,
Then shall ye plainly understand his brutish Scithian blood

Ph. To follow him even through the hills, the Forest thycke and wood,
That keeps among the clottred cliues besmeard with silver Snow,
Whose nimble heels on craggy rocks are frisking to and froe:
I wysh.

Nu. He will resist and not be dalyed with nor coyd,
Nor change his chaste estate, for life of chastity deuoyd,
And turn perhaps his cankred hate to light on thee alone,
That now he bears to all.

Ph. will not he moved be with moan?

Nu. Stark wild he is,

Ph. and I have learnd wild things by love to tame

Nu He Will run away.

Ph. if by the Seas hef^ie, I on the same
Will follow him.

Nu. Remember then thy father may thee take.

Ph. I may remember mine offense, my mother eake will slake.

Nu. Detesting womankinde, he drives and courseth them away.

Ph. No stru^pets bashful fear against my breast does hold at bay:

Nu. Thy husband will be here.

Ph. I wis he comes I warrant him
Pyrothous companion in hellicke dungeon dim.

Nu Thy Father also he will come,

Ph. A gentle hearted Sire
Forgeuing Ariadnes fault, when she did him require.

Nu For these my silver shining locks of horie drouping age,
And breast be^^ld with cloying cares restrain thy furious rage.
I humbly thee beseech even by these tender tears of mine,
Succor thy self, much health it is, if will to health incline.

Ph. Not every jot at honesty exiled is my breast,
I yield me Nurse, love that denies thus under rule to rest
In quietness, let him, let him perforce be battered down.
I will not let my fleeting fame and glorious bright renoume
With stayne to be dishonored, this only is the gap,
To shun the perlous path that leads to vices trayning trap.
My spouse let me ensue with death this strive I shall subvert.

Nu. Dear daughter slake the ramping rage of thy unruly heart.
Pluck down thy stomach stout, for this I judge thee worthy breath,
In that thou do confess thy self to have deserved death.

Ph. Condemde I am to die, what kind of death now would I know,
As either strangled with a rope shall I my life forgo?
Or run upon a bloody blade, with gory wound to dye?
Or tops^e turuy headlong hurld down Pallas turret hie,
In quarrel just of Chastity.

Nu. Now strengthen we our hand,
Alas shall not my feeble age thy despret death withstand,
Forbear the sway of furye fierce.

Ph. No reason can restrain
Him that destreth death* when death he has determind plain
And ought to die,

Nu^. Sweet Lady mine (thou comfort of my age
And feeble years) if in thy breast preuayles such mighty rage
Have not regard what sounding blast in trompe of fame be blown
Whereby thy name in stained stock of black reproach be sown,
Or graft in spotless honesty: for fame does favor small
The most upright, to better worse, to worse she is best of al,
Let us assay the froward mind of yonder stubborn Child
It is my part to set upon the clubbish youngman wild
And to compel the sturdy lad with stony heart to yield.

Chorus. O Goddess great that art the wondrous seed
Of frothie surge in stormy raging seas
Who^ flamy Cupid armd with scorching gleed,
And Shaftes, to call his Mother it does please:
This wanton Elfe forth putting sappy might
From steadfast Bow how surely does he throw
His venimd shaftes, through all thy marrow right
The foystring fire does rankle in and glovve
The secret flame that boyleth in each vain
The strype laid on shows not in open mark^:
But inward marrow he sucketh out amayne,
This boy to sound of peace does never hark.
His scattered shaftes full nimble every where
He darts about, the East that does behold
The davvning sun himself aloft to rear,
From purple bed, and whether late he rold.
With ruddy lamp, in Western wade does glyde:
If any coastlye under scorching clavves
Of burning Crab, or people do abide,
Beneath the clyme of Isy frosen pavves,
Of ougly gargle faced bigger Bear,
That vvandring still from place to place does go
The fervent Fumes, and stouing heat each where
That issues out from CVPIDS burning bow,
The flashing flames of Yongmens burning breast,
He stirs up, enkindling new the heat
Of quenched coals, that wonted was to rest
In drouping age: and virgins hearts do beat
With strange untasted brandes: and does compel
The Gods descending down from starry Sky,
With counterfeited Vysages, todwell*
Upon the Earth to blind the Lovers Eye.
Sir PHOEBVS vvhilome forced in Thessail Land
To Sheepeherds state ADMETVS Heirdes did drive,
His mourning Harp depriude of heavenly Hand
With ordered Pipe his Bullockes did revive.
Even he that trayles the dusky riding rack,
And wieldes the swaying Poles with swinging swift
How often did he faynde fourmes put on his back
And heavenly Face with baser countenance shift.
Sometime a Bird with silver shining wings,
He fluttering flusht, and languishing the death
With sweet melodious tuned voice he sings,
When silly Cygnus gave up gasping breath.
Sometime also with curled for head grim
A dallying Bull, he bent his stouping back
To maidens sport, through deepest Seas to swim
While horny houe made shift like Ore slack
Through waters wyld his brothers perlous cost
With forward glauncing breast the stream he brake,
And least he should his tender pray have lost,
Her troublus thought did cause his heart to quake
DIANA bright that swayes in circle murke,
Of darkened Sky, with frying fits did burn,
And leaving of the Evening watch her work
Her fulgent Chariot bright, eke did she turn.
To PHOEBVS charge, to weelde it otherwise
Her Evening Wayne APOLLO learnde to guide,
And take his turn in lesser compast sise:
The da^pish nights vvatcht not their wonted tide
And late it was ere that AVRORA fair
Set forth the morning Sun with gold array,
While that the Marble axell tree in the air
The shogging Carte made crake with swagging sway,
ALCMENAS boystrous Impe did lay aside
His clattering shafts, and also did refuse
To wear the ramping Lions hairy Hyde
And Emraudes for his fingers did he choose,
And brayded kept his rufled staring Locks,
Ware Garters wrought on knee with seames of Gold
And on his feet his durty dabled Socks,
And with the hand where vvhilome he did hold
His Clubbish bat, a thread he nimbly spun:
Both Persia and fertile Lidia knew
(Where golden sanded Pactolus does run)
ALCYDES bid the Lions case adieu
And thunder propping brawny shoulderd sier
That heaued and bolstred up the Welkin throne,
In slender Kirtell wrought by Web of Tire
Did iet about to please his Love alone.
This flame (believe the heart that feels the vvound)
Enspirde with holiness excels in might,
Whereas the Land by Seas embraced round,
Where twinkling Stars do start in Welkin bright
This peevish Elfe the Conntreyes all does keep,
Whose quarrels sting the Marble faced rout
Of water Nymphs, that with the Waters deep
The brand that burns in breast cannot quench out,
The flying foul does feel the foystring flames.
What cruel Skirmish do the Heyffers make?
rickt up by lust that nice Dame VENUS frames.
In furious sort for all the Cattels sake?
If fearful Hearts their Hindes do once mistrust,
In love disloyal then gladly dare they fight,
And bellowings out, they bray to witness just
Their angry mood, conceyu'de in irefull spright.
The painted coast of India then does hate
The spotty Hyded Tygar, then the Bore
Does whet his Tuskes to combat for his mate,
And fomes at mouth: the ramping Lions rore
And shake their Manes, when CVPIDS corsies move
With grunts and groans the howling frythes do murn
The Dolphin of the raging Sea does love:
The Elephants by CVPIDS blaze do burn:
Dame nature all does challeng as her own,
And nothing is that can escape her laws:
The rage of wrath is quenched and overthrown,
When as it pleases Love to bid them paws:
Black hate that rusting frets in cankred breast,
And all old grudge is dashed by burning love.
What shall I make discourse more of the rest
Stout Stepdames does this gripe to mercy move.

THE SECOND ACT.
PHAEDRA. NVTRIX. HIPPOLYTVS. DEclare what tidings bringst thou Nurce,
where is Hippolitus?
NV. To cure this puissant breach of illes
no hope there is in us:
Nor yet to quench his flashing flame:
his furies fretting ire,
Does fry in secret boiling breast,
and though the smothrering fire
Be couerte close, yet bursting forth in welked face it fryes:
The sparkling flakes do glowing flash from bloudred rolling eyes
She hanging down her pouched groyne, abhors the loathsome light,
Her skittish wits and wayward mind can fancy nothing right:
Her faltring legs do fail her now, down squatting on the ground
With sprauling lims her shittell grief does cast her in aswound:
Now scant she on her lithy neck holds up her giddy head,
Nor can commit her self to couche in rest upon her bed.
Nor harbring quietness in heart with drery dewle and plaint
She languisheth through out the night, and now her body faint
She biddes them up to lift: and now her down again to lay,
And now her crispen locks undone abroad she biddes display:
And strayt to wrap them up again. Thus fickle fanse still
Does fleet, nor is contented with his wayward wandering will.
No care she casts on her health nor eats one crum of bread,
With feeble fumbling foot upon the floor eke does she tread,
Her strength alas is quight consumde, her favor sweet does faint:
Nor ruddy sanguine purple deye her cherry checkes does paynt:
With greedy gripes of gnawing grief her pinched limbs do pyne:
Her foltring legs do stagger now: the gloss of beauty ^yne
In body Alabaster bright is shronke away and wast
Those Cristall Eyes that wonted were resemblance clear to cast
Of radiant Phoebus gold arayes, now nothing gentry shine:
Nor bear a spark of Phoebus bright her fathers beams deuyne:
The trickling tears tril down her chekes, dew dampish dropping still,
Does wet her warrye plants, as on the top of Taurus hill
The warry snowes with lukewarm shoures to moisture turned do drop
But lo the Princes palace is set open in the top:
She lying down upon her golden bed of high estate
Hurles of her wonted royal robes which wounded heart does hate:

Ph. Maids, have our purple garments hence, and vestures wrought with gold*
These crimso^ robes of scarlet red let not mine eyes behold.
And damask weeds, whereon the Seres embraudet branches brave,
Whose Silken substance gatherd of their trees aloof they have,
My bosom shall be swadled in with cuttied gaberdine,
No golden collar on my neck nor Indian jewels fine*
The precious pearls so white shall hang no more now at mine ears,
Nor sweet perfumes of Siria shall poulder more my hears.
My flaryng ruffled locks shall dagling hang my neck about
And shoulder points: then then apace t^^^attring in and out.
Let wyndes even blow it where it list, in left hand will I take
A quiver of shaftes, and in my right a Boorespere will I shake,
To cruel child Hippolitus such one his mother was,
As fleeting from the frosen Seas those country costs did pass,
And drove her hierdes that bet with trampling feet The Athenian soil
Or like the trull of Tauais, Or like her will I toil,
Of Meotis that on a knot wound up her crispen locks*
Thus will I trot with moon like targe among the wodes and rocks.

Nu. Leave of thy bitter languishing unto the sil^^ sort
(That walter thus in waves of woe) grief gives not testing port
Is any measure to be found in thy tormenting fire.
Some grace at wyld Dianae* hand with sacrifyce require.
O Goddess great of Woods, in hills that only setst thy throne,
And Gods that of the craggy clyues at worshipped alone,
Thy wrathful threatninges on us all now turn to better plight
O Goddess that in forrestes wyld and groves obtaynest might,
O shyning lamp of heaven, and thou the Diamon of the Night,
O threefold shapen Heccate that on the world his face
Do render light with torch by turns, vouchsafe to grant thy grace
To further this our enterprise and help our piteous case,
O mollify Hippolytus his stubborn hardued heart,
And let him learn the pangues of love and taste like bitter smart:
And yield his light allured ears: entreat his bru^^sh breast,
And change his mind, in Venus bounds compel him once to rest.
So froward and untoward now so crabbed cursed and mad:
So shall thou be with blandishing and smyling countnaunce clad.
Thy shimering cloud clean fading hence then brightly shall thou bear
And glisteryng horns, then while by night upon the whirling sphere,
Thy cloudy heeled steedes thou guydes, the raging witches charm
Of Thessal, shall not draw thee from the heavens nor do thy harm
No Shepherd purchase shall renoume. Thou comst at our request:
Now favor do thou grant unto the prayers of our Breast:
I do espy him worshipping the solemn Sacrifyce,
Both place and time convenient by Fortune does arise:
We must go craftily to work for fear we quaking stand,
Full hard it is the buysy charge of guylt to take in hand:
But who of Princes stands in awe, let him defye all right,
Cast of the care of honesty from mind exiled quight,
A man unfit is for the hest of King a bashful wight.

Hip. O Nurse, how chance thy limping limbs do crepe into this place?
With blubbred Cheeks, and leaden looks with sad and mourning face?
Does yet my Father Theseus with health enjoy his life?
Does Phaedra yet enjoy her health my stepdam and his wife.

Nu. Forgo these fears, and gently come thy blessed hap to take,
For care constrayneth me to mourn with sorrow for thy sake,
That hurtfully thou looudes thy self with pangues of plu^ging pain:
Let him rub on in misery whom destny does constrayne:
But if that any yield himself to waves of wilful woe,
And does torment himself, deserves his we^le for to forgo
The which he knows not how to use: tush, be not so demure,
Considering how thy years do run, take part of sport and play,
Let mirry Bacchus cause thee cast these clogging cares away,
And reap the frutte of sweet delyght belonging to thy years,
For lusty youth with speedy foot full fast away it wears.
Erst tender love, erst Venus feeds the young man's appetite,
Be blyth my Boy, why Widow like lie thou alone by night?
Shake of thy sollem sadness man that h^rty youth does spill:
Huff, royst it out courageously, take bridle at thy will
Let not the flower of plooming years all fru^tles fade away.
God poynteth every time his task, and leads in dus array
Each age by order lust, as mirth the sappy youthful years,
A forehed frayte with gravity becomes hoary hayres.
Why dust thou bridle thus thy self, and dulles thy pregnant wit?
The corn that did but lately sproute above the ground, if it
Be rank of root, yet in the luske, with enterest at large
Unto the hoping husbandman shall travel all discharge.
With braunched bough above the Wood the tree shall raise his top,
Whom rusty hand of canckred hate, did never spill nor lop.
The pregnant Wits are evermore more prone to purchase praise,
If noble hearts by freedom franckt be nourisht from decays.
Thou churlish country Clown Hodgelike not knowing Courtly life,
Delight in drousy doting youth without a loving wife.
Do thou suppose that to this end Dame Nature ^id us frame,
To suffer hardness in this world and to abide the same?
With courses and kerereyes fet the prauncing Steedes to tame?
Or bicker else with battails fierce, and broyls of bloody war?
That soueraygne Sire of heaven and earth, when fates do us detarre,
With signs and plagues prognosticate provided has with heed,
For to repair the damage done with new begotten seed.
Go to, let bedding in the world be used once no more
(That still mankind from age to age vpholdes and does restore)
The filthy world deformd would lie in yrksome ugly stay,
No flo^ing ships on wambling Seas should hoysted Sails display.
No Foul should skoare in azur Sky, ne Beast to woods repair,
And only whisking winds should whirle amid the empty air.
What diverse dreery deaths drive one mankind to dumpish grave?
The Seas, the sword and traiterous traynes whole countries wasted have:
Yet for to limit forth our league there is no destny think,
So down to blackefast Stigian dampes we of our selves do sincke.
Let youth that never felt the joys, in Venus lap which lie,
Allow the solitary life, what ever thou espy,
An hut liburly shall become for term of one man's life.
And work it one destruction by mutual hate and strife.
Now therefore follow natures course, of life the soueraygne guide,
Resort unto the town: with men delight thee to abide.

Hip. No life is more deuoyd of sin, and free from grievous thralles,
And keeping fashions old, then that which leaving Townish walls,
Does take delight in pleasant Woods, he is not set on fire,
Enraged sore with burning Byle of covetous desire.
Who has addict himself among the mountains wild to live,
Not pricked with prattling peoples brute, no credit does he give.
Toth Vulgar sort disloyal still, unto the better part
Nor cankred rancour pale does gnaw his black and fretting heart.
Nor fickle favor forces he, he bound does not obey
The payse of Scepter proud: but weildes the massy scepter sway,
At ^bbing honors gapes he not, nor moyles for fleeting mucke,
Removed far from houering hope and dread of backward luck,
Not bitter gnawing Envy rank tears him with tooth unkind,
Not quaynted with the mischief that in Cittyes and in mind
Of people presses thick: nor quakes at every blast that flies
With guilty conscience to himself, nor frames himself to lies.
Nor couets rich with thousand pillars close his head to shroude,
Nor guildes his beams with glisteryng gold for fancy fond and proud
Nor gushing streams of blood upon his innocent Alters flow.
Nor Bullockets bright their hundred heads as white as flakie Snow,
Do yield to Axe, while scattered is on thaulter sacred grain,
But all the quiet country round at will he does obtain.
And harmles walks too and froe amid the open air,
And only for the brutish Beast contriues a trapping snare.
Another while upon the swift Alpheus banckes he walks
Now up and down the breary Brakes of bushy woods he stalks
Where luke warm Lernas crystal flood with water clear does shine,
And changing course his Channel out another way does twyne:
And hear the piteous plaining Birds with chirping charms do chide.
And Branches trembling shake whereon soft windye puffes do glyde,
And spreading Beches old do stand, to fast and shake my shankes:
To stamp and dance it does me good on running Rivers banks:
Or else upon a withred clod to steal a nap of sleep,
Whereas the fountain flows amayne with gushing waters deep.
Or else among the baulmy flowers out braying savors sweet,
Whereas with pleasant humming noise the bubbling brook does fleet.
The Apples beaten of the tree do ravening hunger staunch,
And Strawberyes gathered of the bush soon fill with hungry paunch.
He shoons assaults, that does himself from regal royal hold.
Estates do quaffe their dreadful drink in Bolles of massye Gold:
How trim it is water to lap in palm of naked hand:
The sooner drowsye Morpheus byndes thy Brows with sleepy band:
The careless corpse does rest at ease upon the hardest Couch:
The Cabin base hauntes not by Nookes, to prig and filch a pouch:
In house of many corners blind his head he does not hyde,
He loves to come abroad and in the light to be espyde:
The Heavens bear witness of his life, they lived in this wise.
I think, that scattred did of Gods in (...) arise.
No doting covetous blind destre of Gold in them was found:
No stones nor s^akes set up in field did stint the parted ground:
The sailing Ship with brazen St^^ cut not the waltring wave,
But every man does know his coast and how much he should have.
No hugy (...) ta^sed were, nor Ditches delued deep,
Nor countermured Cast^e strong the walled Towns to keep.
The Soldier was not busied his blun^ed Tools to whet,
Nor rapping Pellets* Cannon shot the barred Gates down bet,
Nor soil with yoaked Ox was strainde to bea^e the eueting share,
The field even (...) of it self did feed the World with fare,
The plentiful abundant Woods great wealth by nature gave:
A house of nature take they had a dim and darksome Cave:
The covetous mind to scrape up wealth, and despret furious ire,
And greedy Lust (that ^ggeth on the mind all set on fire.)
First brake the bands, and eger thirst of bearing sway stepped in,
To be the strongers ravening pray the weaker did begin,
And might went for oppressed right: the naked Fist found out
To scratch and cuffe, to box and bum, with dealing blows about.
The knarrie Logs, and snaggie (...) were framed weapons strong,
The ga^^en Tree vngrayned was with Pikes of Iron long.
No nor the rusty Fawcho^ then did hang along the side,
Nor Helmet crest upon the head stood pe^^^ing up for pri^e,
Pale spightfull grief (...) Tools, and (...) Mars his brain
Contriu'de new sleights a thousand kind of ^eathes he did ordain:
By means hereof each Land is filled with clot^red gore yshed,
With streams of blood the Seas are did to hue of sanguine red,
Then Mischief (...) measure began through every house to pass,
No kind of vicious villainy that pra^^^se wanted was.
By Brother, Brother reft of Breath, and ^ake the Fathers Life
By hand of Child, ^ake murthred was the husband of his Wife.
And Mother lewd on mischief set destroyde their bodies seed,
I ouerpasse the Stepdame with her guilt and heinous deed,
And no where pity planted is, as in the brutish beast:
But womankinde in mischief is ringleader of the reast,
The insrument of wickedness enkindling first desire,
Whose vile vncesteous whoredom see so many Towns on fire.
So many Nations fall to war, take Kingdoms overthrown,
And raised from the ground, to crushe so many people down.
Let other pass: by Iasons Wife Medea may we find
By her alone, that Women are a plaguey crabbed kind.

NV. Why, for one woman's fault of blame shall every one have part?

HIP. I hate, detest, abhore, I loath, I curse them from my heart.
Be It reason, right, or Natures law, or vengeance fury fell,
It likes me to abhor them still: the burning fire shall dwell,
And bide with quenching water first, the dangerous quick Sand
Shall promise Ships with safetinesse upon the should to land,
And Western Thetis soonke aloof and brencht in deepest nooke,
Shall force the ruddy Morning Sun from scarlet Skies to look,
The Woolfe shall yield his fleering Chaps to suck the Tet of Do
Ere won by woman's love, to her I crouch and stoop allow.

NV. Love bridles often with snaffling bits the stubborn wayward heart,
Behold thy Mothers native land in Scythia every part,
The saluage women feel the force of Venus yoaking band.
Thou only Child thy Mother had do this welt understand.

HIP. This only comfort of my Mother must I keep behind,
That leefull unto me it is to hate all Womankinde.

NV. Even as the stiff and sturdy Rocks have waltring waves wythstoode,
And dasheth back from shore aloof the fomy flapping floode:
So lightly be contemnes my talk: but Phaedra runs mad
Because of this my long delay with crushing cares y^lad:
What will she do? Aye me alas how shall she now be spead?
Her breathless body to the ground drops suddenly down dead.
A sallow hue like ghastly death ouerstrikes her frenzy Face,
Look up and speak behold thy dear sweet heart does thee embrace.

PHAEDRA. NVTRIX. HIPPOLYTVS. ALas to flote in Waves of woe
who me reuines again?
To pinch my mind with pining pangues
and bitter drunts of nayne.
What ease to me it was, when as
I lay in trance at rest?
Why do thou thus the pleasure of
renewed life detest:
O heart be bold, assay and seek thy purpose to attain,
Be not abasht, nor faced out with churlish words again.
Who faintly craves any boo^e, gives courage to deny:
The greatest portion of my crime dispacht ere now have I:
Shame seeks to late to purchase place within our bashful brow,
Since that in foul and loathsome love we have delight ere now,
If I obtain my will, then shall our wedlock cloak the crime:
Success corrupts honesty with wickedness sometime:
HIP. Behold this secret place is void from any witness bye.

PH. My faltring tongue does in my mouth my tale begun deny.
Great force constrayneth me to speak, but greater hold my peace,
O heavenly Ghostes I you protest, it is this that does me please.

HIP. Cannot the mind that couers talk in words at will out brast?

PH. Light cares have words at will. but great do make us sore aghast.

HIP. Mother the grief y^ galls your heart come whisper in mine ear.

PH. The name of Mother is to proud a name for me to bear,
Importing puissant power too much: the fancy of my mind
It does (...), a baser name of less renown to find.
Me (if thou please) Hippolytus thy Loving Sister call.
Or waiting Maid, and rather so: no drudgry spare I shall,
If thou through thick and thin in snowes to travail me desire,
Or else command me for to run through Coals of flaming fire,
Or set my foot on Pi^dus frosen Rocks, it yrkes me not.
Or if thou will me rashly run through scorching fire hot,
Or ravening routes of saluage beasts I will not slowly rest,
With gory Lance of naked blade my bowels to vnbrest.
These Ringdomes left to me in charge weild thou of them the sway,
And take me as thy humble Mate, it fits me to ^^ay,
And thee to give commandment, it is no woman's seat,
To claim her Title to the Crown, to reign in Parents seat.
Thou flourishing amid the pride of lusty youthful race
Supply a valiant Prynees room with Fathers golden Mace,
Protect thy humble suppliant, defend thy lowly Maid
Embrast in mercies bosom, at thy Feet so meekelylayde.
Take pity on a stely Widows woe, and wretched plight.

HIP. The God that reigns aloft, forbid such lucklesse lot to light.
My Father Theseus safe in health will straight return again.

PH. The lowering Lord that deep in strong infernal Gaile do reign,
And damned up always to pass from Stygian Puddle glum,
Whereby to breathing bodies left alone the ground to cum,
Shall he let escape the Cloyner of his joys from spousall bed,
Unless that Plutos fancy fond by doting love be led:

HIP. The righteous Gods will make for him a right retourning way.
But while through fear our wavering wills in houering Balia^ce sway,
Upon my brethren will I cast a due and earnest care,
And thee defend: believe not that in Widows plight ye are:
And I my self will unto the supply my Fathers place,

PH. O Love (alas) of credit light, O Love of flickring Face,
Is this enough that he has said? entreatance will I try,
Dear child ^ue on my wretched woe, do not my suite deny,
That lurcking close does couch in secret mourning breast of me,
Feign would I speak: yet loath I am.

HIP. What mischief may this be?

P. Such mischief as ye would not think, could light in Mothers mind.

H. With mu^bling voice perplexed ye waste your words against y^ wind.

PH. A vapor hoate, and Love do glow within my bedlem breast:
It raging rank no inward juice vndried leaves in rest:
The ser sonk in skalded guts through every vain does fry,
And smothering close in seething blood as flashing flame does fly,
With egar sweeping sway along up burning beams on hie.

HIP. Enamorde thus with Love entiere of Theseus do thou rage?

PH. Even so it is: the lovely looks of Theseus former age
Which he a sweet welfauorde Boy did bear with comely grace,
When pretty dapper cutted Beard on clear complexio^de Face
Began sproute, on naked Chin, when he the kennels clottred blood
Beheld of mongrell Minotaur, and crooking Maze withstoode
By groping long untwined thredes the beams of beawty bright
That shone th^^ (...) his Face, his ^rispen locks with labels bight,
Smooth stroked lay, his scarlet Cheeks by nature paincted bright
Pouldred with spots of golden gloss, and sharp assaults of Love
Prevailed in his fleshly arms: what grace does shine above
In the Dianaes Face, or fiery crested Phoebus mine,
Or else in comely count'naunce of this lovely face of thine,
Such Theseus had when Ariadnaes Eye he did delight:
Thus portly pacing did he biare his noble head upright.
It is no counterfeyted gloss that shines in thy Face,
In thee appears thy manly Fathers sterue and lowering Grace.
Thy Mothers crabbed count'naunce cake resembled in some part
Puts in full well a seemelynesse, to please the Lookers heart.
The Scythian awful Majesty with Greekish favor sweet
Appears: if thou had with thy Sire attempt the Seas of Creete,
(One of those seven from Athens sent elect by lucklesse lot
To pay such bloody tribute, which King Minos of them got.
The ravening and bloudthirsty Minotaurus foul to feed)
My Sister Ariadne would, for thee have spunne the threede.
Therewith in crafty compast Maze to lead thee to and fro,
In ugly Laberynthus long returning from thy Fo.
Thee, thee O Sister dear whereso in all the Heaven thou are,
And shinest bright with blasing beams transform'de into a Star,
I thee beseech come succor me with like distress now cloyde:
Alas us stely Sisters twain one kindred has desroyde.
The Sire thy smart, the son has brewd the bane that me does lees.
Behold an Impe of royal race laid humbly at thy Knees,
Yet never staynde, and vndefilde, an harmless innocent,
To thee alone of all the World my crowching Knees are bent,
And for the nones my hawty heart, and Princely courage stout
I did abate, that humbly thee with tears entreat I might.

HIP. O soueraygne Sire of Gods, do thou abide so long to hear
This vile abomination? so long do thou forbear
To see this heinous villainy? if now the Skies be clear,
Will thou henceforth at any time with furious raging hand
Dart out thy cracking thunder dint, and dreadful lightnings brand?
Now battred down with bouncing bolts the rumbling Skies let fall
That foggy Clouds with dusky drouping day (...) cover all,
And force the backward starring startes to slide a slope wythall
Thou starry crested crown, and Titan prankt with beamy blase
Come out, with staring bush upon thy kindreds guilt to gase.
Dash out and drown thy leaming lamp eclisde in glummy Skies,
To shrink in shimmering shape: why does thy right hand not arise
O guide of Gods and men? how haps the world yet does not burn,
Enkindled with three forked brand? on me thy thunder turn,
Dash out on me thy bobbing bolt, and let thy fiery flake
Whirlde out with force, burnt Cinders of my wasted Carcass make:
For guilty ( Jove) I guilty am, deserved death I have,
My Stepdames Fancy I have fed: shall I most sinful slave,
Be worthy thought to blot my Fathers honorable Bed?
Can thou for mischief such through me alone be lightly sped?
O Caitiue thou of womankinde for guilt that hears the bell,
Whose enterprised heinous evil does passingly excel,
Thy Monster breeding Mothers fault with whoredom she alone
Def^^de her self, when storming sighs with sorrow began she groan,
Through beastly lust of Bull: till it the Minotaurus ster
In act of generation, had quenched her ^oule desire:
And yet the time concealed long, the grim twishaped seed
At length bewrayd with Bullike brows, thy Mothers naughty deed,
The doubted Infant did disclose: that wicked womb she bare.
With thrice, yea, four times blessed Fate of life depriu'de ye are,
Whom swollen of waltring Seas have sonck, me cankred hate of breath
Dispoyled ha^h, and traytrous traynes have quelde by daunting death.
With Stepdames banes and sorcery O Father, Father mine,
I rue thy lot, not to be slain of milder Stepdame thine.
This mischief greater, greater fair the wickedness does pass
That by Medea despret Dame of Colchis practisde was.

PH. And I do know, what uncouth luck upon our stock has light,
The thing that we should shun, we seek, it is not in my might
To rule my self: through burning fire eunne after the^ I shall,
Through raging Seas, and craggy Rocks, through fleeting Ryuers all,
Which boiling waters ruffling raise, what way so go thou will,
I bedlem Wight with frantic fits will follow, follow still.
O stately Lord before thy feet yet fall I once again.

HIP. Do not with shameless fawning Paws my spotless body stain.
What means this? with hawsing me t'imbrace she does begin:
Draw, draw my sword, with stripes deseru'de I Will pay her on the skin:
Her hair about my left hand wound, her head I backward wri^e,
No blood Diana better spent thine Altar yet has did.

PH. Hippolytus, now do thou grant to me mine own desire,
Thou cooles my ramping rage, this is much more than I require,
That saving thus mine honesty I may be given to death,
By bloody stroke received of thy band to loose my breath.

HIP. Auaunt, auaunt, preserve thy life, at my hand nothing crave,
This field Sword that thou have touched no longer will I have.
What bathing lukewarm Tanais may I defilde obtain,
Whose clensing watery Channel pure may wash me clean again?
Or what Meotis muddy m^are, with rough Barbarian wave
That boardes on Pontus roaring Sea? not Neptune graundsire grave
With all his Ocean foulding flood can purge and wash away
This dunghill foul of sin: O wood, O saluage beast I say:

NVT. Thy crime detected is: O soul, why droupes thou all aghast?
Let us appeach Hippolytus with fault upon him cast:
And let us lay unto his charge, how he by might unjust
Deflowre would his Fathers Wife with mischief, mischief must
Concealed be: the best it is, thy foe first to invade,
Since that the crime is yet unknown who can be witness made,
That either first we enterprisde, or suffered of him then?
Come, come, in have Athenians, O troops of trusty men
Help, help, Hippolytus does come, he comes, that Villain vile,
That Rauisher, and Lecher foul, perforce would us defile.
He threatens us denouncing death, and glittering Blade does shake,
At her who chastely does withstand, and does for terror quake:
Lo headlong hence for life and death he took him to his flight,
And leaves his Sword in running rash, with ghastly fear afright:
A token of his enterprise detestable we keep,
Sirs chearish her, that storming sighs with pensive breast does weep.
Her ruffled hair, and shattred Locks still let them daggle down,
This witness of his villainy so bear into the Town.
(O Lady mine be of good cheer. Pluck up your sprights again,)
Why do thou tearing thus thy self abhor all peoples sight?
Not blind Mischaunce but fancy wont to make ashamelesse Wight.

Chorus. HIPPOLYTVS even as the rageing
storm away does fly,
More swift than whirling Western wind
vptumbling clouds in Sky,
More swift then flashing flames, that catch
their course with sweeping sway,
When Stars ytost with whisking winds
long fiery Drakes display.
Fame (wondering at of aldertime our Ancestors renown)
Fare well with thee, and bear away old worship from our Town.
So much thy beauty brighter shines, as much more clear and fair,
The golden Moon with glorio^s Globe full furnished in the Air
Does shine, when as her fiery tips of wayning horns do close,
When lifting up her fulgent face in ambling Waine she goes,
Upon her nightwatch to attend, the Stars of lesser light
Their darckned Faces hide, as he the Messenger of night
That watchword geues of th'euening tide and Hesperus he hight,
That glading erst was bath'de in Seas, and he the same again
When shedes be shrunck. does then the name of Lucifer obtain.
Thou Bacchus blessed barn of Jove in warlicke India borne,
Thou Lad that evermore do wear thy hayry bush unshorn,
Whose Iaueling tuft with Iuy bunch, the Tygres makes adred,
And do with labelde Myter use to pranck thy horny head,
Hippolytus his staring Locks thou Bacchus shall not stayne,
To wonder at thy loving looks too much do thou refrain,
Whom (as the people do report) the Ariadne bright,
For beauties name preferde before Bacchus that Bromius hight.
A brittle Jewel beauty is on mortal men employde,
Thou gift that for a season short of Mankind art enioyde,
How soon alas with feathered foot hence do thou fading slide?
The partching Summers vapor hoate in Verse most pleasau^te pride
So withers not the Meadows green, (when as the scorching Su^ne)
In Tropic ligue of burning Crab full hoate at Noone does run,
And on her shorter clowdy Wheels vnhorseth soon the night.
With wanny Leaves down hang the heads of withred Lillies whight
The balmy bloomes and sprouting flo^re do leave the naked ^ed
As beauty bright whose radiant beams in corauld Cheeks is spread,
Is dashed in the twincke of Eye: no day as yet did pass,
In which not of his beauty reft some pearls person was.
For Favor is a fleetyng thing: what wight of any wit
Will unto frail and fickle joy his confidence commit?
Take pleasure of it while thou may, for Time with stealing steps
Will under mint, on hour past straight in a worser leps:
Why flyest thou to the wilderness, to seek thy succor there?
Thy beauty bydes not safer in the waylesse woods then here.
If Tytan hoyst his totteryng Cart on point of full midday,
Thee shrouded close among the brakes the Naids will assay,
A gadding troop that beautys B^yes do lock in fountaynes fair.
To frame their seat then unto thee in senseles s^eepe repair,
Shall wanton Fayries, Nymphs of Frithes, y^ on the Hills do walk,
Which Dryade mountain Goblins haunt, that use on hills to stalk:
Or when from high Starbearing poale Diana down did look
On thee that next old Arcades in heaven thy seat have took,
She could not weilde her weltring wayne, and yet no foggy cloud.
Eclipst her gleaming Globe, but we with ^incking Pans aloude,
Began make a noise, agrised at her dead and glowing light
We deemd her char^id with Magic verse of Thessant witches spright
But thou did cause her business, and made her in a maze,
While at thy pleasant lovely looks the Goddess stood in gaze,
That rules the rain of cloudy night she stopped her running race,
God grant that seldom biting frost may pinch this comely face.
Let seldom scorching Sunny beams thy Cheeks with freckles die:
The Marble blue in quarry pittes of Parius that does lie,
Bears not so brave a glimsyng gloss as pleasant se^^ues thy face
Whose brows with manly majesty support an awful grace.
And forehead fraught with gravity of Fathers countnaunce old:
His Iuory colored neck although compare to Phoebe ye would,
His locks (that never lacking knew) it self displaying wide
On shoulder points does set them out, and also does them hyde.
Thy curled forhead seems thee well, and eake thy not^ed hair,
That crumpled lies vndight in thee a manly grace does bear.
Thou Gods (though fierce and valiant) perforce do chase, and far
Do ouermatch in length of limbs, though yet but young thou arre.
Thou hears as big and boystrous brawnes as Hercules: thy breast,
Then Champion Mars more bourly bolstred out with broader chest:
On back of horn^toofed Steedes if vawting thou do ride,
With Bridle in thine arrive hand more handsome can thou guide.
The trampling Cyllar horse of Spart, then Princely Castor could,
Thy Letherne loope amid thy dart with former fingers hold,
And drive thy lance with all thy pith, the active men of Creete,
That with their pitched darts afar do learn the mark to bit.
They shall not hurl a slender Reed, but after Parthian guyse
To shoot an arrow if they list into the open Skies,
Vnsped without some Bird attaynt it shall not light on ground,
Vnbath'd with lukewarm blood of guts in gory smoking wound,
And from amid the lofty Clouds down shall thou fetch thy pray:
Few men (mark well the time) have borne beauty vnplagude away.
God send thee better luck, and grant thy noble personage
May pass unto the happy steps and stretch to dumpish age.
What mischief vnattempt escapes a Woman's witless rage?
Most heinous crimes she means to lay to guiltles youngma^s charge
And thinks to make her matter good with hair thus rent at large,
She towseth eake the pranking of her head with watered plants,
Her slye deuyse no crafty kind of woman's fetches wantes.
But who is this that in his face such princely port does bear?
Whose lofty looks with stately pace hie vauntst his head does rear?
Like lusty young Pyrithous, he looks in the face,
But that a faynting fallow pale his bleakish Cheeks disgrace,
And filthy baggage hangs on his hash hair raysde upright,
Lo Theseus, it is again restoard to earthly light:

THE THIRD ACT.
Theseus, Nutrix, AT length I escaped the glowinge glades
of grim eternal Night,
And eake the underpropping poale,
that each infernal Spright
Does muffie in, shut up in shades
lo how my dazelled eyes
Can scant abide the long dessred
light of Marble Skies.
Eleusis now four offringes of Triptolemus deuydes,
And counterpaysed Day with Night now four times Libra hydes.
I earnest in my Parlous toil in doubt what luck to have
Twixt dread of ghastly Death, and hope my feeble life to save,
Some spark of life still in my breahles limbs abiding was,
When as embarkt on erkesome Stix Alcides down did pass,
To succor me in dire distress, who when the hellicke hound
From Tartares griesly gates in Chains he dragd above the ground,
And also me he carried up into the World again
My tired limbs does fappy pith of former strength restrain,
My feeble faltring legs do quake, what lugging toil it was
From bottom deep of Phlegethon to world aloof to pass?
What dreary dole and mourning noise is this that beats mine ears?
Let some declare it unto me: who blubbred so with tears
Lamenting loud and languishing within our gates appears?
This entertaynment sit is for a guest that comes from Hell.
Nu. A stubburne heart and obstinate in Phaedras breast does dwell,
With despret mind to slay her self our tears she does despise,
And giving up the gasping Ghoast, alas my Lady dies.

Th. Why should she kill herself? why die, her spouse being come again

Nu For this (my Lord) with hasty death she would her self have slame.

Th. These troblous words some perlous thing I wot not what to tell
Speak plain: what lump of glutting grief her laded heart does quei
She does complain her case to none, but pensluely and sad
She keeps it secret to her self, determind thus she had,
To bear about with her the bane, wherewith she means to die.
Hie, hie thee fast, I pray thee now, now have we need to hye.
Our Palace locked with stately stoulpes set open by and by.

Theseus, Phaedra. O Madame Mate of Spousall bed
thus do thou entertayne
The coming of thy loving Spouse?
and welcome home again
Thy long desired Hosbandes face?
why takes thou not away
My Sword out of my hand, and do not cheer my Sprites (I say)
Nor show me what does the breath out of the body chase?
Ph. Alas my valiant Theseus even for thy royal mace,
Wherewith thy Kingdom thou do weild, and by the noble raygne
Of thy belo'ud posterity, and coming home again,
And for the worship that is due unto my fatal grave,
O let me die and suffer me, deserved death to have.

Th. What cause compels thee to die?

Ph. If I the cause of death
Disclose, then shall I not obtain the loosyng of my breath:

Th. No worldly wight (save I my self alone) the same shall hear,
Art thou affrayd to tell it in thy husbands bashful ear?
Speak out, thy secrets shroud I shall within my faithful breast.

Ph. What thou would other to conceal, keep thou it first in rest.

Th. Thou shall not suffered be to die:

Ph. From him that wishes Death,
Death never can be separate.

Th. The crime that loss of breath
Ought to revenge, show it to me.

Ph. Forsooth because I live.

Th. Alas do not my trilling tears thy stony stomach grieve?

Ph. It is the sweetest death, when one does loathsome life forsake,
Bereft of such as should for him most woeful weeping make.

Th. Still stands she mum? ye crooked, old, ilfauord, hoblinge Trotte,
Her Nurse for stripes and clogging bands shall utter every iotte,
That she forbid her has to tell: in iron chains her bynd,
Let tawing whips wring out perforce the secrets of her mind:

PH. Now I my self will speak: stay yet.

TH. Why do thou ^^ne as^i^s
From me thy weeping Countenance? thy tears why do thou hide
That gushing sudden from thine eyes stream down thy cheeks apace and
Why hidest thou thy flowing floudes with Coat before thy Face?

PH. Thee, thee, Creator of the Neauens to witness I do call,
And thee O glittering fiery glede of Crystal Sky with all,
And Phoebus thou from whom at first our royal Race has roon.
With fawning face and flattring words in suite I was not won.
For naked sword, and thundering thre^s, appauled was I not:
My bruised bones abode the blow, and stripes when sore he smote:
This blemish black of foul defame my blood shall purge again.

TH Declare what villain is he y^ our honor so does slain?

PH. Whom least ye would mistrust.

TH. To know who it is, full sore I long*

PH. This Sword will tell, which sore afright when people thick in thro^g
Resorted fast, the Leacher vile for have did leave behind,
Because the people preasing fast he dreeded in his mind:

TH. Ah out alas, O woe is me, what villainy see I?
Alas what uncouth Monster foul of mischief I espy?
Behold the royal Iuory engrau'de and purired fine,
Emboast with golden studdes, upon th'enameld Have does shine,
(The Jewel of Actea land) but whyther fled is he?

PH. With light Heel running sore dismaide these sruants did him see?

TH. O sacred holiness, O Jove between whose mighty hands
The Marble Poale with weltring sway in course directed stands,
And thou that second Scep^er weilds in fomy fighting wave,
Why does this cursed brood with such this wicked vengeance rave?
Has he been fostred up in Greece? or craggy Taurus wild
Among hard rugged Rocks, and Caves, some savage Scythian Child?
Or else in brutish Colchis I Will by Desert Phasis flood?
Cat after kind he is, and will th'unkindly Bastard blood
Return unto his kinreds course, whence first his ligne he clames.
This frantic fury up and down comes of the warlicke Dames,
To hate the loyal leagues of love, and shunning long the use
Of Cupids camp, with tag, and rag, her body to abuse,
Become as good as ever twangd: O detestable kind,
No better Soil by any means can change thy filthy mind.
The brutish beasts themselves do Ioath the abuse which Venus draws,
And simple shamefastness it self observes Natures laws:
Where is the brag of Majesty, and feigned portly grace
Of manly mind, that hates new, and old things does embrace?
O double dealing life, thou clokes deceiptful thoughts in breast,
And settestout a forhead fair where frounced mind does rest:
The saucie Jack with bashful brow does malipiertnes hide:
The rashness of the despret Dicke by stillness is vnspide.
With show of right religion knaves villainy maintain,
And guileful mealemouthd Gentlemen do hold with speaking plain:
The daynty wanton Carpet Knights of hardness boast and prate,
That Woodraunger, that brainsicke beast who lived in chaste estate
An undefiled Bachiler thou rude and homely clown,
Thus do thou watch thy time, to breed this blot in my renown?
To make me Cuckold first of all did it delyght thy mind,
First falling to thy spousall sport with mischief most unkind,
Now, now, to thee supernal Jove most hearty thanks I yield,
That with my first Antiope to dreary death I quelde,
That gone to dampish Stygian Dens I left thee not behynd
Thy Mother: go, go Vagabond rawnge, rawnge, about to find
Strange foreign soyles, and outcast lands aloof at world his end,
And Isles enclosd with the Ocean flood to hell thy soul shall send:
Beneath among the Antipodes thy self of harbring sped,
Though in the utmost lurking nooke, thou shroude thy miching head,
Above the grisly Palaces thou climb of lofty Poale,
Or may above the clottring Snow advance thy cursed Soul,
Beyond the brunt of Winter flawes and threatening rigor pass
And stormy wrath with rumbling rough of ysse Boreas,
With pengeance, vengeance violent fast hurling after thee,
With daunting plagues and pestilence thy sins shall scourged be.
For life and death, about the world in every lurking hoale.
O fugitive I shall not cease still to pursue thy soul.
But seek and search for thee I shall in lands that lie a far,
Al corners blind and caves shut up, Dens locked with bolt and bar*
A thousand ways impassable no place shall me withstand.
My cursinges black shall light on thee there where revenging hand
With weapon ca^ not work y^ harm: thou know that Neptuue great
My Sire who flotes on floudes, and waves, with forked Mace does beat
Give license freely unto me three boones to choose and crave,
Which willingly the God has grant, and sworn I shall it have
Protesting vgsome Stygian Lake, and hallowed has his vow:
O breaker of the wrestling waves, avouch thy promise now.
Let never more Hippolitus behold th'eclipsed light,
And for the Fathers wrathful rage the cursed child down smight,
To wa^le among the ghastly s^rites o Father bend thy might,
To give (alas) this loathsome aid unto thy needy Son,
I of thy Majesty deuyne exact not to be done.
This chiefest bone, til puissant payse of ylles do us oppress:
In bottom deep of boylyng Tartar pit, and sore distress^,
In grisly Lymbo Jaws nigh garglefaced Ditis dim,
Amid the crumpled threatening brows of Hellick Pluto grim,
To claim thy promise made to me, as then I did refrain,
Now Sire thy faith by promise due perform to me again.
Yet do thou stay^ why rumble not the waltring waves yet busht,
Through foggy cloud in dusky skits with stormy blastes ^utrusht.
Unfold the mantel black of Night, and roll away the Skies,
Enforce the fighting floods brast out with mounting waves to rise*
And conjure up the water hagges that in the Rocks do keep,
The Ocean surges swellyng hi^ cast up from bottom deep.

Chorus. O Nature Grandame great of Heavenly Sprites,
Eake Jove that guides Olimpus mighty sway,
That rakes the race of twinkling heavenly lights
On spinning Sphere and order do for aye
The straggling course of roaming planets hie,
And weildes about the whirling Axeltree
The weltring Poales, the eternal course of Sky
To keep in frame, what works such care in thee
That erst the cold which hoary winter makes
Vnclothes the naked wood, and now again
Thesh ades return unto the breary brakes
Now does the star of Summer Lion raygne,
Whose scalded neck with boiling heat does fry,
Perbraking flames from fiery ^oming jaws:
With scorching heat the parched corn do dry:
Each season so his kindly course in draws.
But thou that weildes these things of massy might,
By whom the hugy world with egal payse
Even Balanced does keep in compass right,
Each Sphere by measurd weight that justly swaise,
Alas why do thou bear a retc les breast
Toward mankind? not casting any care
That wicked men with mischief be oppressed,
And eake to see that goodmen well do fare
Dame Fortune topsieturuy turns at will
The world, and deals her dole with blinded hand,
And fosters vice mayntayning mischief ill.
Foul lust triumphs on good men brought in band
Deceit in stately Court the sway does weild,
In Lordinges lewd the vulgar sort delight,
With glee to such the Mace of might they yield.
Some magistrates they do both love and spite,
And pen^iue virtue brought to bitter bale,
Receyues revvard that does of right arise,
The continent to Prison need does hale,
The Leacher raygnes enhaunced by his vice.
O fruitles shame, O counterfayted port.
But what nevves may this messenger now bring,
Who with maine pace comes poasting in this sort,
And stays with mourning countnance at the King.

THE FOVRTH ACT.
Nuntius, Theseus, O Heavy hap and cruel chance
of Servants slavish state,
Why am I Poast to bring the news
of this il fa^ord fate?
Th. Be not abasht the ruthful wrack
with courage to declare:
My breast against the brunt of broils
still armed I prepare,

Nun. My foltring tongue does speech vnt^
my glutting grief deny.

Th. Our stock with sorrow shuken sore what cares do crush escrie.

Nun. Hippolytus (ay woe is me) is slain by doleful death.

Th. Now Father do I know my Son bereaved of his breath,
For why the Leacher life is lost: show in what sort he did.

Nun. In all poast have as fugitive to shun the Town he hyde
Once having caught his cutting course apace he scuddes away,
His prauncing Pelfrayes strait he does with Collers close array:
With curbed bittes their s^affled heads at will he brydles in,
Then talking much unto himself to curse he does begin*
His native soil: alas dear Father, Father still he cries:
And angry lasheth with his whip, while loose his Bridle lies:
Then suddenly a hugy swolue began swel amid the deep,
And starteth up into the stars no pipling wind does sweep
Along the Seas in Heaven so lith no noise at all there was:
The Seas full calm even as their kindly Tide does drive them, pass.
Nor yet no boisterous Southern wynd the Sycill sand turmoyles.
Nor yet with fomie ramping surge the raging gulf up boyles,
Heaude up by Western puffes: when as the rocks with flappyng flash
Do shake and drowned Lucates cliue the hoary foam does dash.
The tombling waves together tossed on hills are heaped hie,
The swelling swolue with Monster much to land alofe does fly,
Nor only shaken ships in Seas do su^^er wrack hereby:
The land in hazard lies of storms a waltring wave is ^old
In ^ot^ring wise a wallowing gulf with winding compass fold,
Drives down I know not what withal: a flat vprisyng new
An head above the water brim does raise the Stars to view.
In foggie cloud eclipsed is Apollos dusky gleede,
And Scyros Rocks whom Trumpe of Fame aduaunst by dreary deed
Corynthus eake whom double Sea on either side assail:
While greatly we agriesh* these things do languishing bewail,
The belking Seas yell out the grunting Rocks with all do rore*
The slabby Cliue does ^eke, fro whence the water ebde before,
It frothes, and keeping course by course it sp^wes the waters out,
As does Physeter fish (that flittes the Ocean Coast about)
And gulping does from yawning throat his floods of water spo^te.
The shaken surge did tottre strayte and brake it self in twain:
With wrack (more violent then we did fear) it rusht awayne
Against the shore, beyond the banks it breaks into the land:
And hideous Monster follows: these for fear did quaking stand

Th. What shape that uncouth Monster had and body vast declare.

Nu. A boasting Bull, his marble neck advanced hye that bare,
Vpraysd his lofty bristled Mayn on curled forhead green
With shaggy ears pricked up his diverse speckled horns were seen.
(Whom Bacchus erst possessed had, who tames the Cattle wyld,
And eake the God that horn in floods was bred a water Child)
Now puffing he perbraketh flames, and now as leaming light
With sparckling beams his goggle eyes do glare and glister bright.
His greasy larded neck (a mark for to be noted well)
With rough and knobby curnels hie out bumping big do swell.
His snorting Nostrilles wide do grunt and yawning gulphes they sosse,
His breast and throtebag greenishly are daw^d with clammy moss
His side along begrymed is with Lactuse red of hue,
On snarling knots his wrinkled rumps toward his face he drue,
His scaly haunch, and lagging tail most ugly dragges he up,
As Pristis in the deep of Seas the swallowed Keele does sup,
Or else perbraketh out again the undigested pup.
The earth did quake, the Cattle feared about the field do rampe,
The hunter stark with chilling fear begins to stare and stamp,
The he^^dman had no mind his scattrynge Heyfers to pursue,
The Dear amazed brake the pale and bad the Laundes adue.
But only yet Hippolytus. deuoyde of faynting fear
His neyng horses with the raynes of Bridles hard does bear,
With w^nted words he cheareth up his nymble Nagges afraid:
A st^epe hie way at Argos lies with stony cliues decaide,
That nodding ouerhangs the Sea, which vnderfleetes that ways:
That ugly Royle here heates him self, and rag^ng wrath does raise,
And kindling courage hoate, him force with burning breast assayes,
And chauflag eft himself before began fret with angry heart.
Lo then into a scouring course on sudden does he start,
With whirl^^g pace he girding forth does scarcely touch the ground,
Lighting a front the trimbling Ea^t with glaring Eyes he glow^d.
Then also does thy threatening Son with lowering brows vpstart,
Nor changes Counte^aunce, but speaks with stout courageous heart.
This foolish fear does not appaule my bold and hardened breast,
It comes to me by kind, that B^lls by me should ^ee oppressed.
His Steedes defying strait the R^ynes plonge forward with the Cart,
As rage did prick them, sore afright bestoe the way they start.
This bias way among the Rocks they raunge, and wander wide,
But as the Pylot (least the Bark should totter to one side)
Does bear it even in wrestling waves: so while his horses skip,
He rules them, now raines them hard, and now with winding whip
Free lashes on their buttocks lays: his Foe does him pursue,
Now step by step, now meeting full against his face he flue.
Provoking terror every where. No further fly they might:
The horned beast with butting Brow^s began run upon them right.
The trampling Gennets straught of wits do straight way break their ray,
The struggle striving hard to slip the Collar it they may.
And prauncing on their hinder Feet, the burden hurl on ground:
Thy Son flat falling on his Face, his body fast was bound,
Entangled in the winding ropes, the more he strives to loose
The slipping knots, he faster ^ticks within the s^ding noose.
The Horses do perceive the broyle: and with the Wagon light.
While none there is to rule the Raynes, with ski^tish fear afright
At randon out they ramping run, (even as the Welkin hye
The Cart that mist his woonted weight, disdayning in the Sky
The dreery day that falsely was commit unto the Sun,
From off the fiery Marble Poale that down a skew does run,
Flang Phaeton tops^e toruey tossed) his blood begdres the ground:
And dingd against the r^gged Rocks his head does often rebound:
The brambles rent his haled hair* the edged flinty stones,
The beauty batter of his Face, and break his crashing bones:
At Mouth his blaring tongue hangs out with squeased eyne out dashed,
His Jaws and Skull do crack, abroad his spurting Brains are pasht,
His cursed beauty thus defoylde with many wounds is spent:
The iotting Wheels do grind his guts, and drenched sims they rent.
At length a Stake with Tru^chion burnt his ripped Pau^ch has caught,
From riued Grine toth^ Navel stead within his womb it raught:
The Cart upon his Master pawsde against the ground ycrusht,
The Fellies stuck within the wounds, and out at length they rush^:
So both delay and Masters limbs are broke bystresse of Wheels:
His dragling guts then trayle about the wincing horses heels.
They thumping with their horny Hooues against his Belly kick,
From bursten Paunch on hea^es his blouddy bowels tumble thick:
The scratting Briars on the Brakes with needle poynted pricks
His gory Carkas all to race with spelles of thorny sticks
And of his flesh each ragged shrub a gub does snatch and rent,
His men (a mourning troop God knows) with brackish tears ^espre^t
Do stray about the field, whereas Hippolytus was tore:
A piteous sign is to be seen by tracing long of gore:
His howling Dogs their Masters limbs with licking follow still:
The earnest toil of woeful Wights can not the coars up fill,
By gathering up the gobbets sparst and broken lumps of flesh.
Is this the fla^nting bravery that comes of beauty fresh?
Who in his Fathers Empire erst, did reign as pryncely Pear
The Heir apparent to the Crown, and shone in honor clear,
Like to the glorious Stars of Heaven, his Limbs in piec^s small
Are gathred to his fatal Grave, and swept to funeral.

TH. O Nature that preuaylste too much, (alas) how do thou bind
Whyth bonds of blood the Parents breast? how love wethe^ by kinte?
Maugre our Teeth whom gullty ecke we would have rest of breath?
And yet lamenting with my tears I do bewail thy death.

NVN. None can lament with honesty that which he wished destroyde.

TH. The hugi^st heap of woes by this I think to be enioyde,
When flickering Fortunes cursed wheel doc cause us cry alas,
To rue the wrack of things which carst we wished brought to pass.

NVN. If still thou keep thy grudge, why is the Face with seats bespre^

TH. Because I slew him, not because I lost him, I repent.

Chorus. WHat heap of happes do tumble vpsyde down
The Estate of man? less raging Fortune flies
On little things: less leaming lights are thrown
By hand of Jove, on that which lower lies.
The homely couch safe merry hearts do keep:
The Cotage base does give the Golden sleep.
The lofty Turrets top that cleaues the cloud
VVithstandes the sturdy storms of Southren wind,
And Boreas boisterous blastes with threatening loud
Of blusteryng Corus shedding showers by kind.
The r^^ing Dales do seldom noiance take,
Byding the brunt of Lightninges slashing flake.
Th'aduaunced crest of Caucasus the great
Did quake with bolt of lofty thundering Jove:
When he from clouds his thunder dintes did beat,
Dame Cybels Phrygian fryth did trembling move:
King love in hawty heaven full sore affright
The nighest things with weapons does he smyght.
The ridges low of Vulgar peoples house
Stricken with storms do never greatly shake:
His Kingdoms coast Jove's thundering thumpes do souse:
With wavering wings that hour his fligth does take
Nor flitting Fortune with her tickle wheel
Lets any wight assured joy to feel.
Who in the World beholds the Statr^s full bright,
And chereful day forsaking ghastly Death,
His sorrowful return with groaning spright
He rewes, since it depriude his Son of breath
He sees his lodging in his court again,
More doleful is then sharp Auernus pain.
O. PALLAS unto whom all Athens land
Due homage owes, because that THESEUS thine
Among us worldly Wights again does stand,
And sees the Heavens upon himself to shine.
And passed has the parlous myrie Mud
Of stinking Stygian Fen, and filthy Flud.
Unto thy ravening Uncles dreery Gaile
O Lady chaste not one Ghost do thou owe,
The Hellick Tyrant knovves his perfect tale.
Who from the Court this shriking shrill does throw?
What mischief comes in frantic PHAEDRAS brain
With naked Svvord thus running out amayne.

THE FIFTE ACTF.
THESEUS. PHAEDRA. CHORUS. THrough pierst with pangues of penstuenesse
what fury pricks thy brain?
What means this bloody blade? what means
this shriking out amayne?
And langishing upon the Corpse
which was thy malice made?
PH. O tamer of the wrestling waves
me, me, do thou invade.
The Monstrous hags of Marble Seas to rampe on me send out,
What ever Thetis low does keep with folding arms about,
Or what the Ocean Seas alo^fe embrace with winding wave:
O Theseus that to thine alies do still thy self behave
So Currishly, O thou that for thy loving Friends avail
Do never yet return: thy Son and Father do bewail
Thy pasport brought by death, and blood, thy s^ooke thou do destroy,
By love or hatred of thy wife thou workest still annoy:
O sweet Hippolytus thus I behold thy battred face,
And I it is, I wretch (alas) that brought thee to this case.
What Scinis forced thy lims so torn his snatching boughs to feel?
Or what Procrustes rackt and rent thee streacht on bed of Steel?
Or else what Minotaur of Crete that grim twishaped Bull
With horny head (that Dedalls ^^ues with lo^^ing s^^leth (...)
Has thee in fitters torn? (aie me) where is thy beauty fled?
Where are our twinkling stars thine eyes? alas, and art thou ded?
Appear a while, receive my words, for speak I shall none ill.
This hand shall strike the stroke, wherewith thy bengeance quite I will.
And since that I, I Ca^ife, I, abridged have thy life,
Lo here I aut content, (...) thee mine with bloody knife.
If ghost may here be given for ghost, and breath may serve for breath,
Hippolytus take thou my soul, and come again from death.
Behold my bowels yet are safe my lims in lusty plight.
Would God that as they serve for me, thy body serve they might,
Mine eyes to render kindly light unto thy Carcass ded,
Lo for thy use this hand of mine shall pluck them from my head,
And set them in these empty cells and vacant holes of thine.
Thy weal of me a wicked Wight to win, do not repine.
And if a woman's woeful heart in place of thine may rest,
My bosom straight break up I shall, and tear it from my breast.
But courage stout of thine does loath ^aint woman's heart to have
Thy Noble mind would rather go with manly heart to grave.
Alas be not so manly now, this manliness forheare,
And rather choose to live a man with woman's sprite and fear,
Then as no man with manly heart in darcknesse deep to sit:
Have thou thy life, give me thy death that more deserves it.
Can not my profer purchase place? yet vengeance, shall thou have,
Hell shall not hold me from thy side nor death of dompish grave.
Since fates will not permit thee life, though I behest thee mine,
My self I shall in spite of fate my fatal twist untwine.
This blade shall riue my bloody breast, my self I will dispoile
Of soul, and sin at once: through floods and* Tactor gulphes y^ boil,
Through S^yx and through the burning Lakes I will come after thee:
Thus may we please the lowering shades, receive thou here of m^e
The parings of my Poll, and Locks cut off from forehead torn,
Our hearts we could not join in one, yet wretches now farlorne.
We shall together in one day our fatal hour close:
If thou be loyal to thy spouse, for him thy life then lose:
But if thou be vncestuous, dye for thy lovers sake.
Shall I unto my husbands bed again my corpse betake,
Polluted with so heinous crime? O death the chiefest joy
Of wounding shame: Death only ease of stinging Loves annoy:
We run to thee: embrace our sowles within thy gladsome breast:
Hark Athens, hark unto my talk, and thou above the rest,
Thou Father worse unto thy Child than bloody stepdame I.
False forged tales I told with shame, I fayning that did lie,
Which I of spite imagined, when raging breast did swerve.
Thou father falsely punished have him that did not deserve.
The youngman chaste is cast away for mine vncestuous vice,
Both bashful he and guiltles was, now play thy wonted guyse.
My guilty breast with bloody Lance of Sword deserved is riuen,
The Dirge toth^ dead to purge my spouse shall with my blood be given.
Thou father of the stepdame learn, what things thy Son should have
Of life deprived, as to lay his carcass in a grave.

Th. O wanny Jaws of black Auerne, ^ake Tartar dungeon grim,
O Lethes Lake of woeful Souls the joy that therein swim,
And eake ye glummy Gulphes destroy, destroy me wicked wight
And still in pit of pangues let me be plunged day and night.
Now, now, come up ye Gobline grim from water creekes allow,
What ever Proteus hugie swolue aloof does ouerflow,
Come dowse me drowned in swallows deep, that triumph in my sin:
And father thou that evermore full ready pressed has binne
To wreake mine ire, aduentring Ia deed deserving death
With new found slaughter have bereft mine only Son of breath.
His tattred lims I scatred have the bloody field about,
While the innocent I punish do, by chance I have found out*
The truth of all this wickedness: heaven, stars, and sprites of hell
I p^ster with my treachery that me does ouerquell.
No mischiefs hap remains more: iii. kingdoms know me well:
We are returned to this World. For this did Hell unfold
His gates that burials twain I might and double death behold?
Whereby I both a wyueles Wight andeak^ a Sonles Sire,
May with one brand to wise and Son inflame the funeral fire.
O ^amer of blackefaced light Alcides, now restore
Thy booty brought from Hell, redeem to me, to me therefore
These Ghostes that now be gone, ah sinful wretch to death in vain
I sue, most indiscreet by whom these wretched Wightes were slain.
Imagining destruction sore about it will I go,
Now with thine own hands on thy self due vengeance do bestow:
A Pine tree bough down straind perforce unto the ground allow,
Let slip into the open air shall cut my corpse in twain.
From top of Scyrons Rocks I will be tumbled down amayne.
More grievous vengeance yet I have in Phlegethon River found,
Tormenting guilty Ghostes enclosd with fiery Channel round.
What pit and pangues shall plunge my soul already have I known,
That tyring toil of Sisyphus that retchles rolling stone,
Let yield unto my guilty Ghost, and being laid on
These shoulders, these, these lifting hands of mine down let it sway:
And let the fleeting flood about my lips deluded play.
Yea let the ravening grype come hear and Tytius paunch forsake,
Forglutting food with grasping Cleaze my liver let him take,
Encreasyng still to feed the Foul, and for my torments sake.
And pause thou my Pyrothous Sire, and eke the snackle Wheel
That whirleth still enforce my limbs thy swinging swift to feel.
Gape, gape, thou ground and swallow me thou cruel Chaos blind,
This passage to thinfernall Sprightes is fit for me to find:
My Son I will ensue, thou Prince of ghastly ghostes in hell,
Dread not for chaste we come to thee: give thou me leave to dwell
Among thy dreadful dens for aye, and not to pass again.
Alas, my prayer at the Gods no favor can obtain,
But if that mischief crave I should how ready would they be?

Chapter O Theseus to thy plaint eternal time is granted thee:
Provide thy Son his O^it rytes, and shroude in dompish grave
His broken lims, which Monsters foul dispersed and scattered have.

Th. The shreadings of this dear beloved carcass bring to me,
His mangled members hither bring on heaps that tombled be:
This is Hyppolytus, I do acknowledge mine offense,
For I it is, that have deprived thee of life and sense.
Least that but once, or only I should be a guilty Wight,
I Sire attempting mischief have besought my Fathers might.
Lo I enjoy my fathers gift, O solitariness,
A grievous plague when feeble years have brought us to distress,
Embrace these lims, and that which yet does of thy son remain,
O woeful wight in baleful breast preserve and entertayne.
These scattred scraps of body torn O Sire in order fet,
The straying gobbetts bring again, here was his right hand set:
His left hand here instructed will to rule the raynes must be.
His left side rybbs (full well I know to be ^ewayld of me
With bittter tears) as yet alas are lost and wanting still,
O trembling hands behold this woeful business to fulfill,
And withered Cheeks forbid your streams of flowing tears to run
While that the father do account the members of his Son.
And eke patch up his body rent, that has his fashion lost,
Disfigured foul with gorye wounds, and all about betost:
I doubt, if this of thee be piece, and piece it is of thee:
Here, lay it here, in th'empty place, here let it laid be,
Although perhap it lie not right: (aye me) is this thy face?
Whose beauty twinckled as a star, and eake did purchase grace,
In sight of F^^procurd to ruth. Is this thy beauty lost?
O cruel will of Gods, O rage in sin preuayling most.
Does thus the Sire that great good turn perform unto his son?
Lo let thy fathers last fare well within thine ears to run,
Mychild whom often I bid farewell: the whilst the fire shall burn
These bones, set open his burial bower, and let us fall to mourn
With loud lamenting Mopsus wise for both the coarses sake:
With Princely Pomp his funeral fire see that ye ready make.
And seek ye up the broken parts in field dispersed round,
Stop her up hurlde into a Pit, let heavy clodds of ground
lie hard upon her cursed head.

FINIS.
THE FIFTH TRAGEDY OF SENECA, ENGLISHED The year of our Lord M. D. LX.
BY ALEXANDER NEVYLE.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, MASTER DOCTOR WOTTON: ONE OF THE Queens Majesty's
privy Counsel: Alexander Neuyle wishes Health, with increase of Honor.
THis sixtenth year of mine age (right honorable) renews a grateful memory
of your great goodness toward me: (for at Baptism your honor vouchsafed to
aunsweare for me): and causes me thus boldly to present these green and
vnmelowed fruicts of my first truailes unto you: as signs and testimonies of a
well disposed mind unto your honor. Albeit when first I undertook the
translation of this present Tragoedy, I minded nothing less, than that at any
time thus rudely transformed it should come into the Printers hands. For I to
none other end removed him, from his natural and lofty style, to our corrupt
and base, or as some men (but untruly) affirm it, most barbarous Language: but
only to satisfy the instant requests of a few my familiar friends, who thought
to have put it to the very same use, that SENECA himself in his Invention
pretended: Which was by the tragical and Pompous show upon Stage, to
admonish all men of their fickle Estates, to declare the unconstant head of
wavering Fortune, her sudden interchaunged and soon altered Face: and lively
to express the just revenge, and fearful punishments of horrible Crimes,
wherewith the wretched world in these our miserable days pyteously swarmeth.
This caused me not to be precise in following the Author, word for word: but
sometimes by addition, sometimes by subtraction, to use the aptest Phrases in
giving the Sense that I could invent. VVhereat a great number (I know) will be
more offended than Reason or VVysedome would they should be. Thus as I framed
it to one purpose: so have my friends (to whom I can not well deny any thing
that Frendshyps right may seem justly to require) wrested it to another
effect: and by this means blown it abroad, by ouerrash and unadvised
printing. By which fond deed I know undoubtedly I shall receive the poisoned
infamies, of a number of venomous tongues, Wherefore (right honorable) as I
give these the first Fruicts of my travail unto you: declaring therein the
great goodwyll and duty that I owe unto your Honor, for the noble disposition
of your virtuous mind: so am I driven humbly to require your strong aid, and
assured defense against the sclaunderous assaults of such malicious mouths,
which obtained: I shall be the better encouraged against an other time, to bestow
my travail in matters of far greater weighte and importance. In the mean
season (desiring your Honor to take these simple Attemptes of mine in good
part:) I leave you to the tuitio^ of the right high and mighty God: Who keep
you long in health, and grant you many happy years: with increase of Honor.

All your Honors to command. Alexander Neuile.

THE PREFACE TO the Reader.
BEHOLD HERE BEFORE THY Face (good Reader) the most lamentable Tragedy of that
most Unfortunate Prince O Edipus, for thy profit rudely translated. Wonder not
at the grosenesse of the Style: neither yet accounte the Inuentours Dylygence
dysgraced by the Translators Negligence: Who though that he has sometimes
boldly presumed to err from his Author, rouing at randon where he list:
adding and subtracting at pleasure: yet let not that engender disdaynefull
suspicion with in thy learned breast. Mark thou rather what is meant by the
whole course of the History: and frame thy life free from such mischiefs,
vvherevvith the World at this present is universally overwhelmed, The
vvrathfull vengeance of God provoked, the Body plagued, the mind and
Conscience in midst of deep devouring dangers most terribly assaulted. In
such sort that I abhor to write: and even at the thought thereof I tremble
and quake for very inward grief and fear of mind: assuredly persuading my
self that the right high and immortal God, will never leave such horrible and
detestable crimes unpunished. As in this present Tragoedy, and so forth in the
process of the whole hystory, thou may right well perceive. Wherein thou
shall see, a very express and lively Image of the inco^stant change of fickle
Fortune in the person of a Prince of passing Fame and Renown, midst whole fluds
of earthly bliss: by meare misfortune (nay rather by the deep hidden secret
Judgments of God) piteously plunged in most extreme miseries. The whole
Realm for his sake in straungest guise grievously plagued: besides the
apparaunt destruction of the Nobility: the general death and spoil of the
Co^minalty: the miserable transformed Face of the City, with an infinite number
of mischiefs more, which I pass over vnrehersed. Only wish I all men by this
Tragical hystory (for to that intent was it written) to beware of Sin: the
end whereof is shameful and miserable. As in the most unfortunate fall of
this unhappy Prince right plainly appears. Who by inward gripe of fearful
co^suming Conscience wretchedly tormented: beholding the lamentable state of
his vile infected Realms, wasted by the burning rage of privy spoiling
Pestilence, finds himself in tract of time, to be the only plague and misery
of the almost quight destroyed City. Whereupon calling together his Priests and
Prophets, and asking counsel of the Gods by them, for present remedy in those
evils, wherewith the Realm was than universally overflowed: answer was made
that the Plague should never cease, till king LAIVS death were thoroughly
revenged: and the bloody Murderer driven into perpetual exile. Which answer
received, OEDIPVS, far more curious in bowlting out the truth, than careful
of his own Estate: suddenly slides into an innumerable company of dreadful
miseries. For as soon as he had once the perfect vewe of his own detestable
deeds, and wicked misdemeanour cast before his eyes, together with the
unnatural killing of his Father LAIVS, the incestuous Marriage of his Mother
IOCASTA, the preposterous order of his ill misguyded life, with a hundred more
like mischiefs, which chaste and undefiled ears abhor to hear: fretting
Fury common enemy and torme^tor to corrupted co^scie^ces pricking him forvvard,
all inflamed with Frenzy and boiling in inward heat of vile infected
mind, he rooteth out his wretched eyes unnaturally, bereaueth his Mother her
life (though earnestly requested thereto) beastly, and in the end in most
basest kind of slavery, banished, dies miserably. Leaving behind him unto all
posterities, a dreadful Example of Gods horrible vengeance for sin. Such
like terrors as these requires this our present Age, wherein Vice has
chiefest place, and Virtue put to flight, lies as an abject, languishing in
great extremity. For the which cause, so much the rather have I suffered this
my base translated Tragoedy to be published: from his Author in word and verse
somewhat tra^sformed, though in Sense little altered: and yet oftentimes rudely
increased with mine own simple invention: more rashly (I confess) than
wisely, vvishing to please all: to offend none. But whereas no man lives so
uprightly, whom slaundring tongues leave vndiffamed, I refer my self to the
Judgment of the vvisest, little esteeming the prejudicial mouths of such
carping Marchau^ts, which suffer no men's doings almost to escape undefiled. In
fine, I beseech all to gether (if so it might be) to bear with my rudenes,
and consider the grosenes of our own Country language, which ca^ by no means
aspire to the high lofty Latinists style. Mine only intent was to exhort men
to embrace Virtue and shun Vice, according to that of the right famous and
excellent Poet Virgil

Discite insticiam moniti, and non temnere diuos. This obtained: I hold my
self thoroughly contented: In the mean season I end: wishing all men to shun
Sin, the plain (but most perilous) pathway to perfect infelicity.

The Speakers names.
OEdipus. Choru^. Tiresias. Sanex. Iocasta. Creon. Manto. Phorbas. [Nuntius]
THE FIRST ACT.
OEDIPVS the King. IOCASTA the Queen. THe Night is gone: and dreadful day
begins at length t'appeere:
And Phoebus all bedim'^e with Clouds,
himself aloft does reere.
And glyding forth with deadly hue,
a doleful blase in Skies
Does bear: Great terror and dismay
to the beholders Eyes.
Now shall the houses void be seen, with Plague devoured quight?
And slaughter that the night has made, shall day bring forth to light.
Does any man in Princely throne rejoice? O brittle Joy,
How many ills? how fair a Face? and yet how much annoy
In thee does lurk, and hidden lies? what heaps of endless strife?
They judge amiss, that deem the Prince to have the happy life.
For as the Mountains huge and bie, the blustering wiudes withstand.
And craggy Rocks, the belching fluds do dash, and drive fro land:
Though that the Seas in quiet are, and calm on every side:
So kingdoms great all Winds and Waves of Fortune must abide.
How well shund I my Father dear Polybius Scepters late?
Exil'de, bereft of careful fear, in Pilgrims happy state:
I call the Gods to witness this, and Stars that glyde in Skies.
A Kingdom is befauln to me. I frare least thereof rise
A mischief, (mighty Jove,) to great I fear, alas I fear
Least these my hands have re^t the life, or thee my Father dear.
Apollo byds me this beware, and yet a mischief more Foretells.
IOC. Can any greater be than that you told before?
Of Father slain by sons own hand?

OE. (O thrice unhappy state.)
With horror all dismaide I stand in dred of threatened fate.
I am ashamed my destinies foul (O Queen) to thunder out,
And openly to blase my fear my trembling mind does dout:
Yet out it goes. Phoebus me bids my Mothers Bed to fly.
As though that I her Son, with her incestuously should ly.
This fear, and only this me causde my fathers kingdom great
For to forsake. I fled not thence when fear the mind does beat.
The restless thought still dreds the thing, it knows can never chance.
Such fancies now torment my heart, my safety to advance,
And eke thine ever sacred laws (O Nature) for to keep
A stately Scepter I forsook, yet secret fear does creep
Within my breast: and frets it still with doubt and discontent,
And inward pangues which secretly my thoughts a sunder rent.
So though no cause of dred I see, yet fear and dred I all,
And scant in credit with my self, my thoughts my mind appall
That I cannot persuaded be though reason tell me no,
But that the Web is weauing still of my decreed woe.
For what should I suppose the cause? a Plague that is so general,
And Cadmus country wholly spoils, and spreds it self through all?
Should me, amongst so huge a heap of plagued Bodies spare?
And we alone amongst the rest reserude to mischiefs are?
O heavy hap. And bide I still alone the spoil to see?
Of Cities great, of men, of beasts, by plague that wasted be?
And thou amongst so many ils, a happy life to lead,
Could once persuade thy self (O wretch) without all fear or dread.
Of Phoebus secret Judgments to, and that in Kings estate?
Thou, thou, infected have the air, in such a filthy rate.
Thou art the only cause of woe: by thee these evils rise,
By thee to grave on such a sort, this wretched people plies.
The fiery flaming frying heat, afflicted hearts that wastes,
Is not relieude as wont it was by cold and pleasant blasts.
The gentle western winds have left with healthful puffes to blow,
And now the fiery Dog with blase of boiling heat does glow.
The Sun in Leo burns so hoate, and so the earth does broyle,
That fluds and herbs are dried up, and naught remaynes but soil,
So thoroughly schorcht and stued with heat, that moisture all is gone,
And now amongst so many fluds, remaynes alas not one.
The places dry are only seen the streams are drunken up.
And water that does yet remain: the soaking Earth does sup.
The Moon with clouds quight over cast, all sadly (...) she glides,
And doleful darksom shades of night the who^ world over hides.
No Star on high at all does shine, but black and (...) hue
Has ouershaded all the Skies, whence deadly mists ensue.
The corn that wonted was to grow and fruitfully to spring,
Now to the voyded Barnes naught else, but empty stalks does bring.
No part of all our kingdom is free from destruction:
But all together run and rush, to utter confusion.
The old men with the young (alas:) the (...) with the child
The plague consumes. Both man and wife, all beasts both tame and wild
Are spoiled by the Pestilence. No pomp at all remaynes,
That wonted was in Funeralles, to ease the mourners pains.
Alas this spoil of people made, by plague has dryde mine eyes:
And secretly within my breast, the grief it boiling fryes.
And that, that wonted is to hap, in most extremest ills:
My tearees are dry and glutting grief my wretched breast it fills.
The crased father bears the son, unto their dampish graves:
And after him with burden like, the Mother comes and raues:
And even lamenting as they stand, (...) both they fall,
And mourners new in like estate, for them (...) they call.
Who likewise in the midst of all their ^oyle and paynfull pain
Do drop into the grave they digd, and so the place do gain
That was prepar' de for others erst. A hell it were to here
The horror, and the miseries that every where appe^re.
A Tomb is made for noble men, fast on the people die,
And in, their burdens fling. Great Pieres all unregarded lie.
For lack of Graves, to Ashes clean their bodies some do wast*
And some half burnt do leave them there, and home away for have
They run, and more they fetch, and then wood, fire, grave, and all
Does want. And down for very grief the wretched mysers fall.
No prayers avail. No Art can help this raging Plague to appease:
For none almost is left alive each others woe to ease.
Before thine aulters here O God my feeble hands I hold,
Requiring all my destinies, at once with courage bold.
And that by death I may prevent, my Country pressed to fall.
For this, and only this (O God) upon thy name I call.
Let me not be the last that dies: The last that goes to Grave.
Grant this, and then (O mighty Jove) my full request I have.
O cruel Gods unkind: O more than thrice unhappy Fates:
That only me denied is, that lyghtes on all Estates.
I mean a speedy death (alas) these evils to prevent
And deadly woe (...) rage itorment.
Leave of thy blubb^ring (...) kingdoms foylde
With rotten plagues and (...) bile, and graves each where dispoylde.
All which diseases thou unhappy guest did bring with thee
Dispatch. Away. Gpe hence. At least, unto thy parents flee.

IO. What boots it (...), great with piteous plaints to aggre^ate.
Stoutly to bear aduers^^, (...) estate.
When dred and danger most assay^* when cruel Cares do crush
Thy princely breast, ^spant thou most to bear and bide the push.
It is no poin^^ of courage slout to yield to fortunes frown.

OED. Nay, Fear^^ could n^u^ cause me sloupe nor Fortune cast me down.
My manly winds was never thraule to vain and peau^^h fears,
But evermore in each (...) courage bears.
No not a thousand glister^^g swords, nor Mars himself in field.
Can once dismay my Countenuance, or cause my heart to yield.
The very Giaunts fierce and huge in fight withstand I dare.
That Monster Sohinx whose riddels through the world renowned are*
Could not dismay my deedles heart, nor cause my courage slide
For all the terrors I behold. I did that Fury bide.
I saw him belching G^bs of blood, I v^^wde full well the field
That all to (...) lay with blood, and bones quight ouerheelde.
And when y^ he on Mountains top with mouth full huge to see.
Stood gaping all with greedy Jaws to feed and pray on me,
Often fluttering with his fearful wings and shaking often his raise,
Began full like a Lion (...) with threats me to assail.
Of whom straight way the Riddell I, it rush^ into mine ^ares
With roaring sound His wings he claps, the Rock for have he tears.
Destring with my Bowels still his greedy Jaws to glu^:
But I full soon assoyled had the question that he put.
And all the subtle poincts there of, and twisted kno^s vntwinde.

IO. What makes you wish for death to late, and wave your words in wind.
You might have died than (you know) for Sphinx so nobly slain.
This kingdom unto you, and yours for ever shall remain.

OED. The ashes of that Monster vile, against us does rebel.
That vile misshapen loathsome Beast, that raging Feend of Hell.
Is cause of all the plague that does this mournful City smight.
Now only this remaynes alone, if Phoebus heavenly might,
Can any means invent for us, or way of mercy make:
Whereby these burning Plagues at length may happily chasice to slake.

Chorus. O More then thrice renow^ied Stock
of ancient Cadmus Race.
O mighty Thebes City grear,
O heavy ruthful Case.
Lo now you lie all desolate,
with Plague devoured quight.
Both you and all your Husbandmen.
(Oh miserable sight.)
O foul and fearful Fate (alas) what causes all this aid?
O God whence springs this Pestylence that us (...) so?
No age, no shape, no form is sparde, but all confounded lie.
Thus happiest now y^ man I count, whose chance was first to dye.
For he has shund a thousand ^ils, which wretched Eyes have seen:
And mischiefs great that us do pr^sse from him are taken clean.
O God withhold thy fury great, thy Plagues from us re^du^.
Cease of afflicted Souls to scourge, who thee, (...) and ^oue.
Power down on them diseases foul, that them deserved have.
A Guerdon just for sin (Oh God) this this of thee we ^^aue,
And only this. We ask no more, the cause and all is thine,
A thing not used of Gods it is, from pity to declyne.
My heart does vant, and trembling cold through all my lims does run,
As often as I remembering, count the noble Stocks v^^un,
By death and dolfull destenies that overwhelmed lie,
And yet alas the people still to Grave do faster hye.
In long Array all in a rank by thousands on a^o^,
On every side, in every streate to burial fast, they go.
The seven broad wide open Gates, are not (...) forway,
But throngd the people pestred stand still in a fearful stay,
And in the mydst of all their toil with corses on their backs,
The number that before does poast the hinder number slackes*
The corses in the streates do lie and Grave on Grave is made.
But all in vain. For naught it boots the plague (...) bestayde.
The sacrifices don to Gods have to to ill success.
And such strange sights and signs do rise that naught else I can guess,
But that at hand with ghastly paws, is utter destruction,
With thousand ills accompayned and extreme confusion.
The sheep of rot by heaps as thick, as dogs do fall and d^e*
And belching out their wasted lunges, on ground do sprawling lie.
And I my self of late did see: (a sight unseen before,)
As our high priest stood sacrifising at the Temple door,
And struck with grievous bloody wound the golden horned Bull
When down with liueles lump he drop^ and members made full dull.
And all the woude wide bleeding gapes and black goars blood out spues.
And yet the blade vnsprinckled was. The blood it buying (...)
And bubbles on the ground. Alas what do these things por^end?
Oh mighty Jove at length vouchsafe some good and ha^^y end.
At length withhold thy h^^d (O God) and health unto us send.
Nothing (alas) remaynes at all, in wo^^ed old estate,
But all are tu^ed to p^^t down, quight void and desolate
The famting horse for (...) banck his burden tats.
And after on (...):
Who cries for help (...) that bide
Unkept: unknown ways and pathe do raunge and ouerstride.
The Bull (...) and me a^e in field all faintyng lies.
And, all his flock (...), fely Shephard dies.
The (...) his zatal breath expiers
And to the (...) hisfast ^esters.
The (...) do live in aretched peace.
The rage, and wrathful (...) founds of ramping Lions cease.
The vengeance (...) Bears are now as ^ame as sheep
The ugly Serpent that was wont* the Rocky Den^es to keep.
Often quaffing poisoned (...) in inward hea^. she boyles,
(...) for longer ly^e she toils.
The woods are (...) withfresh and lively hue*
The wonted shades are gone. All things are quight out of their Que:
No greenish grass on ground does grow, the earth no moisture soupes.
The Vine withoute^ (...) ^ap, his drowsy head down drowpes.
What shall I say? all (...) but of course,
And as they (...) wors and worse.
O mighty (...) yls?
When cease (...) ^loud thus fierce and raging spils?
I thinck but we almost alive, there do no men remain:
Whom (...) Darrs (...) on earth have left vnslayne.
I think (...) shades of hell where filthy fluds do flow,
Where plages and vile diseases too, where dreadful horrors grow,
And (...) mischiefs on us throw,
With Botch and bla^e of sundry kinds which sother^ blasts do blow,
And wrekful vexed hagges of hell do dreath and on us bring:
The angry feddes of hell I think their vengea^^ce, on us flinge
And out their mortal poison spue which they against us bear.
Lo see how greedy death on us with scowling eyes does leare.
See, see. Oh Jove how fast he throws his Darts. Not one he spares
But all confounds. His thretning force, withstand no Creature dares.
No doubt the lothsom Feryman the sinful souls that traynes
Through stinking fluds, his labor loths that he for us sustaynes.
Such press by plu^ps to him is made which still renews his pains.
But hark yet mo^sters more the^ these, the Fame abroad does fly
That hellishe Dogs with bawling sound were heard to howl and cry,
And y^ the ground with trembling shook, and under feel did move.
And dreadful blasing Comets bright were seen in Skies above.
And ghastly shapes of men besides, to wander on the ground.
And wood, and trees on every side, did fearfully resound.
Besides all this strau^g Ghosts were seen in places where they stood.
And Ryuers more then one or two, that ran all black goorb blood.
O cruel plague, O vile discase, far worse then speedy death.
O we unhappy thrice and more, who do prolonge our breath.
In these accursed days and times. But hark to me a while.
When first this Iothsome plague begins these Mysers to defile,
It takes them thus. A fearful Cold through al their bones does r^n,]
And Cold and Heat together mixed, their se^es all benome.
Than little loathsome marks appear, and all their bodies spot.
And all their members slaming glow, and burning fast do rot.
The Lights, the Lungs, the heart, the Guts, and all that inward lies.
And all the secret parts iscorcht, with deadly, I fire fries.
The blood all clotterd in their Cheeks, in cluster lies by lumps.
And it and heat together makes, great, straung, and ruddy bumps.
And blood and flesh congeled stands, in Face as stiff as stake.
And Eyes in head fast fixed set, and often trickling make.
And down apace whole fluds they steame, and clots and drops do trill,
And all the skin from of their Face, by flakes and scales does pill.
A thousand fearful sounds at once, into their ears do rush.
And loathsome blood out of their Nose, by stilling streams does gush.
The very anguish of their heart does cause them for to shake.
And what with pain and heal, and fear, their weried lims do quake.
Then some the running Ryuers haunt, and some on gro^nd ^ce (...).
And some again their thirst to slake, cold water gulping (...).
Thus all our country ^ost with plague in Griefy it waltering (...).
And still desiring for to dye, a thousand deaths it dies.
But God to hear them then is pressed: and death to none (...).
Besides all this, the church some do frequent: but not to pray,
But only for to glut the Gods, with that that they do say.
But who is this that comes to Court in have with poasting pace?
What? is it Creon that noble Prince (for deeds and stately race?)
Or does my mind oppressed with care things false for true contriue?
Creon it is long looked for, his sight does me reuyue.

THE SECOND ACT.
The first Scene.
OEDIPVS. CREON. FOr fear my body chilles, alas,
and trembling all I stand
In quakinge dread. I seek and toil,
these mischiefs to withstand.
But al in vain I spend my thoughts
it will not be, I see,
As long as all my senses thus
by cares distracted be.
My mind desirous still (Oh God,) the truth for to unfold,
With doubtful Dread is daunted so, that it can scant uphold
It self. O Brother bear, if way or mean of health thou know,
Declare it out and stick not all the truth to me to show.
Cre. The Oracle (most noble king) is dark, and hidden lies.

Oed. Who doubtful health to sick men brings, all health to the^ denies.

Cre. Apolloes use yt is the troth in darkesome dens to hold.

Oed. And Oedipus of Gods it has things hidden to unfold:
Speak out, tell all, and spare not man: all doubts I can discus.

Cre. Apollo then (most noble King) himself commands thus.
By exile purge the Princes seat, and plague with vengeance due
That haples wretch, whose bloody hands of late King Laius slew:
Before that this performed be, no hope of milder air:
Wherefore do this (O King) or else All hope of help despair.

Oe, Durst any man on earth attem pte, that noble Prince to slay?
Show me the man that I may him dispatch out of the way.

Cre. God grant I may it safely tell: the hearing was to terrible,
My senses all amassed are: it is a thing so horrible,
That I abhor to utter it (oh God) for fear I quake
And even at the very thought my lims begin to shake.
As Soon as I Appollos Church, had entered in affrayd,
Upon my face flat down I fell, and thus to him I prayed.
Oh God if ever thou did rue, on wretched misers state,
If ever men oppressed thou easd, or did their cares abate,
If ever thou in present need did present help declare,
If ever thou afflicted Hearts with cares consumd did spare:
Show now thy wonted elemency and pity known of yore.
Scant had I said: Refounding all the mountains thondring rore:
And filthy feendes spout out their flames out of their darksome caves.
And woods do quake, and hills do move, and up the surging waves
Do mount unto the skies aloft, and I amassed stand.
Still looking for an aunsweare at Apollos sacred hand.
When out with ruffled hair disguisd^th: Prophet comes at last:
And when that she had felt the heat of mighty Phoebus blast.
All puffyng out she swelles in rage, and pattring still she raues,
And scant she entered had into Apollos shyning caves,
When out a thundering voice does brust that is far above man's reach.
So dreadful seemed then to me the mighty Phoebus speech.
Than thus he spoke and thus at length into mine cares he rusht
While sprawling still the Prophet lay before the doors in dust.
The Thebane City never shall be free from plagues (quoth he,)
Except from thense the Kingkiller forthwith expulsed be:
Unto Apollo known he was, or ever he was borne.
Do this: or else no hope of health, to this, the gods have sworn.
And as for thee, thou shall not long in quiet state endure,
But with thy self wage war thou shall and war thou shall procure
Unto thy children dear: and crepe again thou shall into thy mothers womb.

Oed. Look what the Gods commanded have accomplished shall be.
Nor never shall these eyes of mine abide the day to see,
A King of kingdom spoyld by force, by guyle or crast suppressed.
A king to kings the prop ought be, and chiefest cause of rest:
No man regardes his death at all whom living he does fear,

Cr. Great cause makes me my Princes death conceal and closiy bear

Oed. Ought any cause of fear or grief, the duty for to let?

Cre. The threatening of the prophesyes, do still my breast beset.

Oe. Let us (since God co^maunds) forthwith some good atonement make
If any way, or means there be their wrathful rage to slake.
Thou God that sits on seat on high, and all the world do guide,
And thou by whose commandment the Stars in Skies do glide:
Thou, thou that only ruler art of Seas, of Floods, and all.
On thee and on thy Godhead great, for these requests I call.
Who so has slain king Laius, oh Jove I do thee pray.
Let thousand ils upon him fall, before his dying day.
Let him no health ne comfort have, but al to crushed with cares,
Consume his wretched years in grief, and though that death him spares
Awhyle. Yet mischiefs all, at length upon him light.
With all the evils under Sun, that ugly monster smight.
In exile let him live a Slave, the rated course of life.
In shame, in care, in peuury in danger and in strife.
Let no man on him pity take, let all men him reuyle.
Let him his Mothers sacred Bed incestuously defyle.
Lim him his father kill. And yet let him do mischiefs more.
What thing more heinous can I wish then that I wished before?
Let him do all those illes I say, that I have shund and past.
All those and more (if more may be) oh God upon him cast.
Let him no hope of pardon have: but sue and all in vain.
All hellish Furies on him light, for to increase his pain.
O Jove power down thy fury great, thy thu^dring thumpes out throw
Let Boreas boisterous blastes and stormy plagues upon him blow
Consume him quight. Fre^ out his guts with pockes and botches vile
Let all diseases on him light that wretched bodies fyle.
Let these and more (if more may be) upon that Monster fall.
Let Harpies paws and greedy paunche deu^ure his members all.
Let no man him regard: or seek his limbs in grade to lay:
But let him dye ten thousand deaths before his dying day.
By this my Kingdom I do swear, and Kingdom that I left
By all my Country Gods that been in Temples closely kept,
I swear, I vow, I do protest, and thereto witness take:
The Stars, the Seas, the Earth and all that ere thy hand did make.
Except that I my self forthwith this bloody monster find,
To wreake the wrath of God some way with solemyne oath I bind.
And so my father, Polybius his happy days out live.
And so my mother Merope, no marriage new contriue:
As he shall dye that did this deed, and none shall him excuse.
Whosoever he be here I protest for that he shortly rues:
But where this wicked deed was don Creon now tell me plain:
Both by what means? and where: and how Ring Laius was slain.
Creon. Passing through Castalia woods and mountayns heapt with suoe
Where groves and scrubs, and bushes thick and brambles sharp do groe.
A threepathd crooked way there is that diversely does go.
One unto Bacchus city bends that Phoce does hight,
The other to Olenius, forth stretches out aright:
The third that reaches through the vales and by the rivers lies
Tends down unto the Bancks whereby Ele^a, water plyes
There unawares (O piteous chance) a troup of thieves entraps
The noble prince, and murders him hence spring these great mishaps
which heap you realms with hideous woes and plagues on every side,
By just decree of heavenly powers which can no murder bide.
But see Tiresias where he coms with old and trembling pace.
I think Apolloes heavenly might have brought him to this place.
See where he comes* and Manto too, his steps directing stays
It Is he who for your grace (O king) and for your country prays

THE SECOND ACT. THE SECOND SCENE.
OEDIPVS. TYRESIAS. MANTO. COme holy priest (to Phoebus next)
these doubtful aunswers Iose:
And whom that destnies will to dye,
Straightwayes to me disclose.
TY. Renowned Prince, though still I stand
in silence du^me dismayde:
And though by inward fear of mind
my lingering tongue is stayde:
Yet pardon me (O noble Prince,) and give me leave a while.
From lack of sight springs Ignorance which power has to exile
Unspotted Truth from doubtful breasts. This thing full well you knoes,
But whither God and Country calls, with willing mind I go.
Let deadly fatal destentes, be boulted out at length.
O King if I of greener years had now my wonted strength:
This matter soon discust should be, and I would take in hand,
My self in presence of the Gods, in temple for to stand.
A mighty Ox all coulourd white, up on the Aulters rear,
Which never yet on weried neck, the crooked yoke did bear.
And Manto thou, O daughter mine, mine only prop and stay:
The secret hidden mysteries, and sacred signs out say.
M A. The beast before the Altar stands.

T Y. To Gods a prayer make,
And on the holy Aulters cke, some pleasant odors shake.

M A. It Is done. And all the fires fieice, with incence bright do flame.

T Y. O Manto now what signs see thou? how do thy matters frame?
What? does the fire, the Sacrifice encompas round about?

MA. Not so. But first it mounts alost, and straight it flasheth out.

TY. Well Yet, how does the sacred flame all shining bright and clear
It self on high unto the Sktes, with sparkelting flakes v^reare?
Or doeh it often rebounding back, it self, from Skies unfold?
Or all with rumbling roaring noise, about the place is it rould?
Or dimmed with smoke, is it tossed from place, to place, now here, now theare?

MA. Not one. But diverse, colors mixed the flame does with it bear.
Much like unto the Rainbow, which with sundry painted hues
Foreshewes unto the husbandmen the weather that ensues.
What color it wants, or what it has, to me is like uncertain.
Now is it black, now blue, now red, and even now again
Quight out it is. Yet once again, all fierce it flashing flames:
But lo, yet mischiefs more then this, vnluckely it frames.
The fire quight a sunder parts, and flame with flame does fight.
O father I abhor to see, this ugly loathsome sight.
The Wine to blud is turned quight, and all the Princes head,
With thick black clouds enco^past is, with smoke all ouerspred.
O father tell what this portends?

TY. What should I tell alas?
My mind for fear astonished stands, and trembling cold does pas
Through all my lims. What shall I say? or where shall I begin?
O cruel Plagues, O wrekfull Gods, O vengeance due for sin.
Some dyre and blouddy deed (Alas) these hydeous signs declare.
What Is that the Gods would have reuealde, and yet do bid beware
To utter it? By certain signs their wrath is often descride:
Such signs appear, and yet they seem their fury great to hide.
They are ashamde: I wot nere what. Come hither, quickly bring
Some salt with thee, and it upon the sacrifice go fling.
What? are their looks pleasant and mild, and do they gently bide
The touching of thy sacred hands?

MA. What may this thing betide?
The Bull (a wonder great to see) his head on hie he lifts
And turned still unto the East, from thence it always shifts,
Still lothing as he seems to me, of heaven to see the light,
Often scouling with his blearing eyes with gastely ruthful sight.

TY. But does one blow the^ drive to ground, or more the one they have?

MA. The Heifer as it seemde, enflamd with courage stout and brave
Upon the mortal Blade did rush, and there hirselfe destries:
When out the blood it foming spoutes, and mounts unto the Skies.
The brawny Bull twice stroke or thrice, with groueling groaning tyres,
And toyling up and down he moyles. And still to live desires.
And yet at length with much ado, his brutish breath expiers.

TY. What? does the wound wide open gape, or is it closed up?
Or does the deepnes of the hole, the blood in soking sup?

MA. Out of the wounded Heifers breast Black bluish waters rush.
As for the Bull, but little blood, out of his wounds does gush.
^t back rebounds, and from his Mouth and Eyes by streams ^oth flow.
But what these dreadful signs portend the Gods aloane doc know.

TY. By this unhappy Sacrifice, great fears within me rise.
But tell me now: In the inner parts, what secret hidden lies?

MA. O Father what means this (alas) that more then wonted guise
The Inwards stir? and shake my hands, and heauing often arise,
The blood by streams out of the veins, full straungly skips aloft.
The heart all schorcht and hidden lies, and strykes are seen full often,
Of Color very wan and pale: The chiefest parts do want.
The Liver bla^kish gall out spurts, and somewhat rising pants.
And that, that myschiefes great, to kingdoms does foreshow:
Tw^ heads are seen, and yet both heads one skin does ouerg^ow
And ouerheales them quight, But yet the skin, it is so thin
That easily one may discern what lies hid therein.
And that which horror does increase, a man may plainly see
How both the heart, the Lights, and Lungs, and all disturbed be.
The fearful noise and sound you here is not of beasts, but fire
That roaring on the Alters makes, presaging wrekefull ire
Of angry Gods who do foretell some purpose that they have,
For to revenge some foul misdeede that vengeance just does crave.
No part his proper place observes, nor keeps his order due:
But altogether quight disguisde, with an unwonted hue.
Misshapen, out of frame, transformde, displaced quight (alas)
What thing is that the Gods entend ere long to br^ng to pas?

OEd. Why than declare from whence, and why these deadly signs arise,
With courage stout I will it hear, it shall not once aggrise
By valiant mind. Extremest ils have power to banish fear.

TY. You will wish that unhard which you so much desire to hear.

OEd. Yet sense the Gods will have him known tell me (I say) his name
That sieve your King.

TY. Nor wing, nor womb of Bird or beast ye same
Can tell (O king) new sacrifice, new means we must invent.
From dreadful dark infernal damps some Fury must be sent
These mischifes great for to unfold. Or else King Ditis he,
That Empire keeps on gri^sly Ghosts, entreated needs must be
These things forthwith for to disclose. Tell who shall have the charge,
A King thou art, than may not thou go through those kingdoms large.

OEd. Than noble Creon thou shall go, this pain is first for thee:
Who must this crown and kingdom great enjoy after me.

THE THIRD ACT.
THE FIRST SCENE.
Oedipus. Creon. THough that thy Face where sadness sits
in heavy mourning guise,
Naught else portend, but dedly griefs,
and mischiefs still to rise:
Yet tell some means whereby at length
the Gods we may appease,
And purchase^ to our Kingdoms wast,
some hope of health and ease.
Cre. Alas you bid me that disclose which fear does bid me hyde.

Oed. It that the Thebane Cities great, by doleful plagues destryde.
Perce not thy heart a: et ought thou* these Kingdoms for to rue,
Which were unto thy brothers house, of ancient title due.

Cre. You wish y^ thing to know, which you will wish unknown at length.

Oed. Why so? a simple remedy of little force and strength
Is ignorance of our estate when dangers us betyde.
But what? wi^t thou so great a good for common safety hide?

Cre. Irksome Medcines and perilous in s^cknes I abhor*

Oed. And I likewise at Subjects hands disdain to take a dorre,
Speak out with speed, or else by proof of torment thou shall find
How dangerous a case it is to gawle a Princes mind.

Cre. Kings often use to wish untold, which they bad tell before.

Oed. Go to, dispatch and cease in time to vex me any more.
Except that thou forthwith to me this ^einous deed ^isclose:
The gods I do protest, to death for all thou only goes.

Cre. O pardon me most noble king. O let me hold my pes,
Of all the gracis Princes grant, what favor may be less?

Oed As though y^ silence hurts not more both king and countries weal:
Then spech often times: which subjects thoughts to Prices both reveal?
Dispatch at once, stir me no more thou know my guise of old.

CRE. Silence denied, what priuileage may s^lly Subject hold?

OED. A iraytor he is, who stle^ce keeps, when king co^maunds to speak.

CRE. Then pardon my constrained speech, slth silence for to break
You me compel. A doleful tale (O king) my tongue must tell,
And which I fear your majesty will not interpret well.

OED. Was ever man rebukt for that, that he was bid to say?

CRE. Well than since needs I must: I am contented to obey.
A wood there is from City far, enhaunst with stately trees:
Where many a plant, and her be does grow, which Phoebus never sees:
With ever during bushes green, the Typresse there does rise,
And puts his alde and leffty had withing the cloud Skies.
The ancient Time eaten Oak with crooked be^ded lims.
The Te^l tree flue: The Alder which in Neptunes kingdoms swims,
The Bays with bitter beries eke the Elmes dear f^iends to Vyn^^
And many a noble tree besides, as M^rtels, (...)
Amidst them all, one tree there is with large out (...)
Whose roaring sound, and craking noise the lesser woods (...)
And ouershades them all: a Tree of monstrous huge (...),
Beset with fearful woods: there is that dyre, and dreadful gate,
That leads to loathsome Lymbo Lake, and pyts that ever flow.
Where choked miry mud does stream with slimy course full flow.
Here when the priest was entered in with comely (...) pace,
He stayed not: No need there was, for night was still in place.
Than all the ground wide open gapes, and smouthe ring ^apours rise,
And fire and smoke, and styfling stink, mounts up unto the Shyes.
The Priest with wayling werde ^clad, his fatal red out ^ooke:
And entering in, in black Array, full often times it shook.
With heavy cheer and dolful pace: his hoary ha^re was twynde
With bows of mortal Ewe. A tree wherewith the mourners wind,
Their mourning heads, and Garlands make. In this guise all arayde,
The sacred Priest does enter in, with trembling lims dismayde:
Than in the Sheep and Oxen black, by backwarde course are drawn*
And odoures sweet, and Frankencence, on flaming fyres are thrown.
The beasts on burning, Altars cast, do quake with schorched lims:
And bloody streams with fire mixed, about the Aultars (...).
Than on the dark internal Gods, and him that rules them all:
With deadly shriking voice aloude, the Prophet gins to call.
And rouls the Magic verse in mouth, and hidden Arts does prove:
Which either power have to appease or else the Gods to move,
Their bloody streaming Lycours black, with broyling heat do boil:
And all the Beasts consume and burn. The Prophet than to toil
Begins* And mixed wine and Milk upon the Aultars throws.
And all the Dongeon dark, and wide with streamin^ bl^od it flows.
Than out with thundering voice again the Prophet calls and cries.
And straight as much with mumbling mouth he champs in secret wise
The trees do turn* The Rivers s^a^^. The ground with roaring shakes.
And all the world as seems to me, with fearful trembling quakes.
I am heard, I am heard, than out aloude the Priest began to cry:
When all the damp^ed fo^^les by heaps abroad outrushing fly.
Then woods with rumbling noise, do often resounding make.
And Heaven, and Earth together go. And bows and trees do crake.
And Thu^ders roore. And Lightnings flash. And waves aloft do fly.
And ground retyres: and Dogs do bawl: and Beasts are heard to cry.
And whyther long of Acheron, that lothsom Flud that ^lowes
All stinking streams: or of the earth, that out her Bowels throws,
Free place to Sprights to give: or of that fierce infernal Hound,
That at such times does bustling make with chayns, and railing sound.
The Earth al wide it open ga^es. And I did see on ground,
The Gods with color pale and wan, that those dark kingdoms keep.
And very night I saw in deed, and thousand shapes to creep,
From out those filthy stinking Lakes, and lothsom pits of Hell.
Where all the evils under Son, in darksom shades do dwell.
So quaking all for fear I stood with mind right sore apalde,
Whilst on those Gods with trembling mouth the Priest full often calde.
Who all at once, out of their dens did skip with grie^ly Face.
And Monsters grim, and stinging Snakes seemd wander in that place.
And all the fowlest Feendes of Hell, and Furies all were theare.
And all tra^sformed Ghosts and sprights, that ever Hell did bear.
With Cares, ahd all Diseases vile, that mortal mynds do crush,
All those, and more I saw out of those Dangeons deep to rush,
And Age I saw, with riueled Fa^e, and Need, and Fear, and Death.
And Fire, and flames, and thousand ills out fro those Pits to breath.
Then I was gone: and quight amazd. The wenche in worser case.
And yet of old, acquaynted with her Fathers Arts she was.
The Priest himself unmoved stood, and boldly cited out:
Whole Armies of king Ditis men, who clustring in a Rowt:
All flittring thin like Clouds, dispersed abroad in Air do fly.
And bearing sundry shapes and forms do sc^d about in Sky,
A thousand woods I think have not so many leaves on trees.
Ten thousand meadows fresh have not so many flowers for bees.
Ten hundred thousand rivers not so many Foul can show:
Nor all the drops and streams, and gulphes that in the Seas do flow*
If that they might be wayed, can sure so great a number make
As could those shapes and forms that flew from out of Limbo lake.
Both Tantalus and Zetus too, and pale Amphions Ghost:
And A gave, and after her ten thousand Sprightes do post.
Than Pentheus, and more and more, in like estate ensue:
Til out at length comes Laius with foul and grisly hue:
Uncomely breast in wretched plight with fylth all ouergrowne:
All perst with wounds, (I loath to speak) with blood quight ouerflown
A Miser right as seemd to me, and most of Misers all:
Thus in this case, at length he spoke, and thus began to call.
O Cadmus cruel City v^le, that still delightste in blood,
O Cadmus thou, which kinsmens death, accountst as chiefest good*
Tear out the bloody Bowels of your Children, learn of me,
Do that, and rather more, then you would bide the day to see
Like ills as late on me are light. Lo mothers love (alas)
Has causd the greatest misery that ere in Theba was.
The Country with the wrath of Gods at this time is not tossed.
Nor earth nor air infect is not the cause that all been lost.
No No. A bloody King is cause of all these mischiefs great:
A bloody wretch: A wretched child that sits in Fathers Seat:
And Mothers bed defyles (O wretch) and enters in again,
In places whence he came from once and doubleth so her pain,
Whilst that he ^ils the haples womb where in himself did lie
With graceles seed and causes her twice childbirthes pangues to try:
Unhappy Son, but Father worse and most unhappy he,
By whom the laws of sacred shame so sore confounded be.
For that that very bestes (almost) do all abh^rre to do,
Even of his mothers body he has brothers gotten two.
O mischief great: O dredful deed, then Sphinx, O mo^ster more:
Example unto ages all of Gods foretold before.
But I thee, thee, that Scepter boldst, thy Father will pursue,
And wreacke my self on thee and thine with plagues and vengeance due.
All restles rage of spite and paiue I will upon thee blow,
And all the furies foul of hell upon thee I will throw.
I will subvert thy Houses clean, for this thy loathsome lust:
I will do this thou wretch: And thee, and thine consume to dust.
Wherefore dispatch at once (I say) into exile drive your King.
That ground y^ first of all he leaves, with fresh grene grass shall spring.
And sweet, and pleasant Air, and healthful blasts shall rise,
And all the evils under Sun, that mortal men surprise:
The Pocks, the Piles, the Botch, the blaine, and death with him shall fly.
And with him mischiefs all shall pass, and Monsters under Sky.
And as for him I know he would depart with willing mind:
But I will clog his Fec^^, and hands, hss way he shall not find.
But groping with his aged staff, shall pass from place to place.
This shall he do. And none shall rue upon his ruthful case.
Rid you the Monster from the Earth, for Heaven let me alone.
No sooner said, but straight away, his dreadful Ghost was gone.
And fast by thousands after him, the other Sprights in hyde:
Than Cold and trembling fear began through all my bones to glyde.

OED. The thing I always fearde, I see upon me now is laid:
But slender props they are (God wot) whereby your Treason is stayde.
Meropa my Mother dear, shall me from this defend:
Polybius eke shall purge me quight, from Actions all, that tend
To murder, or to incest vile, they both shall me excuse.
In such a case no means at all of trial I refuse.
Lay what you can unto my charge. No fault in me remayns.
The Thebanes long or I came here, of Laius death complayns.
My Mother yet alive, my Father still in like estate.
No, no, this is some dol^ishe drift, of yo^ false Prophets pate.
Or else some mighty God above, does bear me no good will,
And seeks by Plagues on me to wreke, his wrathful vengeance still.
Ah Sir I am glad at length I smell your drifts and fetches fine.
I know the whole confederacy your sleights I can untwine.
That beastly Priest, that blearayed wretch beelyes the Gods and me:
And thee thou Traitor in my place has promised king to be.

CRE. Alas would I my Sister of, her lawful kingdom spoil?
Think you such treason may have place in brothers breast to boil?
If that mine Oath could me not keep content with my degree:
But that contemning mean estate, I would cl^me aloft to be.
Yet should ill Fortune me deter, from such attempts I trow:
Whose guise it is on Princes heads, huge heaps of Ca^es to throw.
I would advise your grace betimes this charge from you to cast:
Least lingering long all unawares, you be oppressed at last.
Assure your self, in baser state, more safer you may live:
And shun a thousand Cares, and G^^ess: which Princes hearts do riue.

OED. And do thou me exhort thou ^laue my kingdom for to leave?
O saythlesse head. O shameless heart, y^ could such treasons weaue?
Dare thou attempt thou villayae vile this thing, to me to break?
And fearst thou not in such a cause so boldly for to speak.

CRE. I would persuade them so (O King) who freely might possess
Their Realms such piteous cares I see, do Princes hearts oppress:
But as for you of force you must your Fortunes chainge abide.

OED. The surest way for them that gape for kingdoms large, and wide,
Is first things mean, and rest, and peace, and base estate to praise:
And yet with Tooth and Nail, to toil to mount aloft always.
So often times, most restless beasts do chiefly rest commend.

CRE. Shall not my service long suffice my truth for to defend?

OED. Time is the only means for such, as thou to work their will.

CRE. It is so sir, but as for me, of goods I have my fill.
A great resort. A pleasant life: from Princely cares exempt.
All these might (surely) me dissuade from such a foul attempt.
There is no day almost (O King) the whale year through out,
Where in some royal gyfts are not from countries round about
Unto me sent, both Gold, and pearls, and things of greater cost,
Which I let pass, least I should seem but vainly for to bost.
Besides the life of many a man has bin preserude by me.
In such a blis^ull state (O King) what can there wanting be?

OE. (Good Fortune can no mean observe, but still she preaseth higher.)

CRE. Shall I than guiltless die (alas,) my cause and all vntryde?

OED. Were unto you at any time my life, my deeds discride?
Did any man defend me yet? or else my causes plead?
And guiltless yet I am condemn'de to this you do me lead,
And me express example give, which I entend to take.
What measure you do meat to me, like measure must I make.

CRE. The mind which causeless dred appawls, true cause of fear bewraies
That conscience is not guiltles sure, which every blast dismates.

OED. He that in midst of perilles deep, and dangers has been cast,
Does seek all means to shun like ills as he has ouerpast.

CR. So hatreds rise.

OE. He that to much does use ill will to fear,
Unskilful is: and knows not how, he ought him self to bear
In kings estate. For fear alone does Kingdoms chiefly keep.
Than he that thus does arm himself from fear all free may sleep.

CRE. Who so the cruel tyrant plays, and guiltless men does smight,
He dreadeth them that him do dread, so fear does chiefly light
On causers chief. A just revenge for bloody minds at last.

OED. Come take this traitor vile away, In dongeon deep him fast
Enclose. There for his due deserts, let him abide such pain
And scourge of mind (as meet it is) false traitors to sustain.

Chorus. SEt, see, the miserable State,
of Princes careful life.
What raging storms? what bloody broils?
what toil? what endless strife
Do they endure? (O God) what plagues?
what grief do they sustain?
A Princely life: No. No. (No doubt)
an ever duringe pain.
A state ene fit for men on whom Fortune would wreke her will.
A place for Cares to couch them in. A door wide open still
For griefs and dangers all that been to enter when they list.
A king these Mates must ever have, it boots not to resist.
Whole fluds of privy pinching fear, great anguishe of the mind:
Apparent plagues, and daily griefs. These playfayres Princes find.
And other none, with whom they spend, and pass their wretched days.
Thus he that Princes lives, and base Estate together ways:
Shall find the one a very hell, a perfect infelicity:
The other eke a heaven right, exempted quight from mysery.
Let OEdipus example be of this unto you all,
A Mirror meet. A Pattern plain, of Princes careful thrall.
Who late in perfect Joy as seem'de, and everlasting blis,
Triumphantly his life out led, a Myser now he is,
And most of wretched Misers all, even at this present time,
With doubtful waves of fear Itost, subject to such a Crime
Whereat my tongue amassed stays, God grant that at the last,
It fall not out as Creon told. Not yet the worst is past,

THE FOVRTH ACT.
THE FIRST SCENE.
OEdipus. Iocasta. MY mind with doubtful waves of dread,
is tossed to and fro,
I wot not what to say (Alas)
I am tormented so.
For all the Gods on me do cry,
for pains and vengeance due.
They say that these my guiltless hands.
king Laius lately slew.
But this my conscience void of crime
and mind from mischief free:
To Gods untried, to me well known denies it so to be:
Full well I do remember ^^ce* by chance I did dispatch,
A man who sought by force with me presumptuously to match.
His purpose was (a fond attempt) my Chariot for to stay,
This I remember well enough, the strife was in the way.
And he a man well steept in years, and I a lusty blood,
And yet of mere disdain and pride in vain he me withstood.
But this from, Thebes far was done, a crooked three pathd way,
That was the place in which we fought: it hard by Phocis lay.
Dear Wife resolve my doubts at once, and me expressly tell.
How old was Laius the King when this mischaunce befell?
Was he of fresh and lusty years? or stricken well in age
When he was kilde? O ease my thoughts of this tormenting rage.
IOC. Betwixt an old man an a young: but nearer to an old.

OED. Were there great Bands of men with him his Person to uphold?

IOC. Some by the way deceived were, and some deterd by pain.
A few by toil and labor long, did with their Prince remain.

OE. Were any slain in his defense?

IO. Of one report is rife,
Who constant in his princes cause full stoutly lost his life.

OED. It is enough, I know the man that has this mischief done.
The number and the place agrees. The time untried alone
Remaynes: Than tell what time he died, and when that he was slain.

IOC. It Is ten years since: you now revive my chifest cares again.

THE FOVRTH ACT. THE SECOND SCENE.
Senex. OEdipus. THe Corinth people all (O King)
in Fathers place to rayn
Do call your Grace: Polybius does
eternal rest obtayn.
OED. O God what Fortune vile does me
oppress on every side?
How do my sorrows still increase?
Tell how my Father did.

SEN. No sickness (sir) but very age did of his life him reaue.

OED. And is he dead: in deed? not slain? what joy may I tonceaue?
How may I now triumph? the Gods to witness I do call,
To whom are known my hidden thoughts and secret workings al:
Now may I li^^ to skies my hands, my hands from mischief free.
But yet the chiefest ^a^se of fear remains still to me.

SEN. Your Fathers kingdom ought al dred out of your mind to drive.

OED. That I confess. But secret thoughts my trembling heart do riue
With inward doubt of deep distress, my Mother I do fear.
This grudge is that continually my heart does rent and tear.

SEN. Do you your Mother fear? on your return that only slayes.

OED. I fear not her: but from her sight, a godly zeal me frayes.

S. What will you her a Wydow leave?

OE. Now, now, thou w^fi^st (...) heart.
This, this, and only this (alas,) is cause of all my smart.

SEN. Tell me (O king) what doubtful fear? does press thy princely breast:
Kings councils I can well co^ceale that ^en with Cares oppressed.

OED. Least as Apollo has forefolde, I should a Marriage make
With mine own Mother: only this foul fear does make me quake.

SEN. Such vain and peuysh fears, at length from out your breast exyle.
Meropa your Mother is not in deed, you do your self beguil^.

OED. What vauntage should it be to her adopted Sons to have?

SEN. A kingdom she shall gain thereby. Her Husband laid in grave.
The chiefest prop to s^ay her Realms from present confusion,
In children for to have: and hope of lawful succession.

OED. What are the means whereby thou do these secrets understand.

SEN. My self (your grace) an Infant gave into your fathers hand.

OED. Did thou me to my Father give? Who than gave me to thee?

SEN. A Sheparde str; that w^nted on Cytheron Hills to be.

OE. What made thee in those woods to rau^ge? what had thou there to do?

SEN. Upon those Hills my Beasts I kept, sometime a Sheepeherde to.

OE. What nots, what privy marks have thou, whereby thou do me kno?

SE. The holes y^ through your feet are board from whence your name did gro.

OE. Declare forthwith what was his name y^ gave me unto thee.

SE. The kings chief Shephard than that was, delivered you to me.

OE. What was his name?

SE. O king old men's remembrance soon does fail:
Obliuton for the chietest part, does boary heads assail.
And drowns their former memory of things long out of mind.

OE. What? can thou know y^ man by sight?

S. Perhaps I should him find,
And know by Face. Things over whelmd by time, and quight oppressed.
A small mark often to mind reuokes, and fresh renues in breast.

OE. Sirs bid the Herdmen forth with drive their Beasts to Aulters all.
Away with speed, make have, the Master Sheepherds to me call.

SE. Since that your des^ny this does hyde, and Fortune it detayue
And closely keep* let it be so, from opening that refrain.
That long canceald has hidden lain, that seek not to disclose*
Such things outsercht and found oftimes against the sercher goes.

OE. Can any mischief greater be? than this that now I fear.

SE. Advise you well remember first what weight this thing does bear:
That thus you go about to scarch, and slit with Tooth and Nail,
Observe the golden mean: beware bear still and equal sail.
Your Countries wealth (O King) your life, and all upon this lies.
Though you stir not, be sure at length your Fortune you escryes.
A happy state for to disturb does naught at all behoue.

OE. When things be at the worst, of them a man may safely move.

SE. Can you have ought more excellent? than is a Princes state?
Beware least of your Parents found it you repent to late.

OE. No (father) no I warrant that: repent not I (I trow.)
I seek it not to that intent. I have decreed to know,
The matter at the full. Wherefore I will it now pursus.
Lo Phorbas: where he trembling coms, with comely aged h^^.
To whom of all the kings flack than, the care and charge was due.
Do thou his name, his speech his Face, or yet his person know?

SE. Me thinks I should have seen his Face, and yet I cannot show
The places where I have him seen, small time brings such a chainge,
As well acquaynted Faces ost, to us appear still strainge.
This look is neither thoroughly known, nor yet unknown to me,
I cannot tell: I doubt it much, and yet it may be he.
In Laius time long since when he these Kindomes great did keep?
Wast thou not on Citheron hills chief Shepard to his sheep?

THE FOVRTH ACT. THE THIRD SCENE.
Phorbas. Senex. OEdipus. SOmetime a charge of sheep I had,
unworthy though I weer.
And did upon those hills chief rule
on other Shepards bear.
SE. Know thou not me.

PH. I cannot tell.

OE. Did thou once give this man
A Child. Speak out, why do thou stay?
if so, declare it than.
Why do thou blush and doubting stand,
troth seeks no delay?

PH. Things out of mind you call again, almost quight worn away.

OE. Confess thou slave, orels I swear, thou that constrained be

PH. In deed I do remember once, an Infant young by me,
Delivered was unto this Man: but well I wot in vain,
I know he could not long endure, nor yet alive remain.
Long since he is dead (I know it well) he lives not at this day.

SE. Eo? God sorbid, he lives no doubt, and long may live I pray.

OE. Why do thou say the child is dead, that thou this man did give?

PH. With Irons sharp his feet were board, I know he could not live,
For of the sore a swelling rose, I saw the blood to gush
From out of both the wounds: and down by pouring streams to flush.

SEN. Now stay (O king) ^p farther now, you know almost the troth.

OE. Whose child was ^^^tell ^^e forthw.

PH. I dare not for mine Oath.

OE. Thine Oath thou slave? Some fire here. I Will charm thine Oath and thee,
With fire and flames: except forthwith thou tell the troth to me.

PH. O pardon me, though rade I seem, I seek nor to withstand name?
Your graces mind: (most noble king.) My life is in your hand.

OED. Tell me y^ troth, what child, and whose, What was his Mothers

P. Born of your wife.

OE. O gaping earth devour my body quight:
Or else thou God that (...) art of houses void of light,
To Hell my Saul with thunder boltes to Hell my Soul down drive.
Where griesly Ghosts in dark nesse deep, and endless pain do live.
For thee alone, these Plagues do rage. For thee these mischiefs rise.
For thee, the Earth lies desolate. For thee thou wretch the Skies
Infected are. For thee, for thee, and for the slithy lust,
A hundred thousand guiltless men, consumed are to dust.
O people throw: cast heaps of stones upon this hateful Head:
Bath all your swords within my breast: you furies ouershed
My restless thoughts, with raging woes and plungde in seas of pain.
Let me those ho^rrors still endure, which damned souls sustain.
You citizens of Stately Thebes vex me with torments dile.
Let Father, Son, and Wife, and all with vengeance me ^^rsue.
Let those that for my sake alone with plagues (...) be
Throw dar^s, cast stones, fling f^er* and slames, and tortures all on me.
O shame: O slander of the World: O hate of Gods above.
Confounder O of Nature thou to laws of sacred love,
Even from thy birth an open Foe. Thou did deserve to dye
As soon as thou wast born. Go, go, vnt^ the Court thee hye,
There with thy Mother (slave) triumph rejoice as thou may do.
Who have thy house increased with unhappy children so.
Make haste with speed, away, some thing thy mischiefs worthy find.
And on thy self wrecke all the spite of thy revenging mind.

Chorus. FOrtune the guide of human life does al things change at will.
And stirri^g still, with restles thoughts our wretched mi^des does fill.
In vayn men strive their stats to keep when hidrous te^pests rise:
And blustering winds of dangers deep sets death before their eyis.
Who says he does her fauning feel? and chau^geth not his mind,
When fickle fight of Fortunes wheel does turn by course of kind.
These grievous plagues from private house to princely Thrones do flow,
And often their minds with cares they souse and thick upon the^ strew.
Whole heaps of grief and dyre debate, a woeful thing to see:
A Princely life to mysers state, converted for to be.
O OEdipus thy fatal fall, thy dreadful mischiefs right.
Thy dolfull state, thy mysery, thy thrice unhappy plight:
These things shall blase through all y^ world: what heart may the^ rejoice
At thy distress? I can no more: my tears do stop my voice.
But what is he that yonder stamps? and raging puffs and blows.
And often shakes his vexed head, some mischief great he knows.
Good sir your countnaunce does import some great and fearful thing,
Tell us therefore (if that you may) what news from Court you bring.

THE FIFTE ACT.
NVNTIVS. When OEdipus accursed wretch,
his fatal falls had spied,
To hell be damnd his wretched soul
and on the Gods he cried
For vengeance due. And posting fast
with frantic mood griesly hue,
Unto his dole full Court he went,
his thoughts for to pursue.
Much like a Lion ramping wild, his furtous head that shakes.
And roares with thundering mouth asowd, and often gnashing makes,
None otherwise this miser farde. A loathsome sight to see.
Besides himself for very rage, he still desires to dye.
And rolling round his wretched Eyes with vysage pale and wan:
Ten thousand Cursers out he powers. Himself the unhappiest man
Of all that live, he does account: as justly he may do.
A wretch, a slave, a cait^se vile. The cause of all our woe.
And in this case enflamd with spite he crtes, he stamps, he raues.
And boiling in his secret thoughts, he still desires to have
All torments under sun that may his Cares conceiude increase.
O wretched wight, what should he do? What man may him release?
Thus foming all for rage at mouth, with sighs, and sobs, and groans,
His damned head ten thousand times, as often his weryed bones
He beats. And often puffing makes, and roares, and swells, and sweats.
And on the Gods for death he calls, for Death he still entreats,
Three times he did begin to speak: and thryse his tongue did stay.
At length he cried out alowd: O wretch. Away, away.
Away thou monstrous Beast (he said:) will thou prolong thy life?
Nay rather some man strike this breast with struck of bloody knyfe.
Or all you Gods above on me your flaming fires outcast:
And dints of Thunderbolts down throw. This is my prayer last.
What greedy vile devouring Gripe, upon my guts will gnaw?
That Tigre fierce my hateful limbs will quight a lunder draw?
Lo, here I am you Gods: Lee, here, wreke now on me your will.
Now, now you fyry Feendes of Hell, of vengeance take your fill.
Send out some wild outrageous beast send Dogs me to devour.
Or else all ils you can devise, at once upon me power.
O woeful soul. O sinful wretch. Why do thou fear to dye?
Death only rids from woes thou know. Than stoutly Death defle.
With that his bloody fatal Blade, from out his sheath he draws.
And loud he rores, with thu^dring voice. Thou beast why do thou pawse?
Thy Father cursed caitife thou, thy Father thou have slain
And in thy Mothers bed have left an euerduring slain.
And Brothers thou have got: nay Sons thou lie: thy Brothers all
They are. Thus for thy monstrous lust thy Country down does fall.
And think thou than for all these ils enough so short a pain?
Thynkst thou the Gods will be apeasde, if thou forth with be slain?
So many mischiefs don: and is it enough one stroke to bydt?
Account'ste thou it sufficient pains, that once thy sword should glide
Quight through thy guilty breast for all? why than dispatch and dye.
So may thou recompense thy Fathers death sufficiently.
Let it be so: what mends unto thy Mother will thou make ^
Unto thy children what? these plagues (O wretch) how will thou slake?
That thus for thee thy country mastes? Ohe push shall end them all.
A proper fetch. A fi^e devise. For thee a worthy fall.
Invent thou monstrous beast forthwith: a fall even worthy for
Thy self invent: whom all men hate and loath, and do abhor.
And as dame Natures lawful course is broke (O wretch) by thee.
So let to such a mischief great, thy Death agreeing be.
O that I might a thousand times, my wretched life renew.
O that I might reuyue and dye by course in order dew.
Ten hundred thousand times and more: than should I vengeance take
Upon this wretched head. Than I perhaps in part should make
A meet amends in deed, for this my foul and lothsom Sin.
Than should the proof of pain reprove the life that I live in.
The choice is in thy hand thou wretch, than use thine own discretion.
And find a means, whereby thou may come to extreme confusion.
And that, that often thou may not do, let it prolonged be.
Thus, thus, may thou procure at length an endless death to thee.
Search out a death whereby thou may perpetual shame obtain:
And yet not dye. But still to live in everlasting pain.
Why stayst thou man? Go to I say: what mean these blubbring tears?
Why weepst thou thus? Alas to late. Leave of thy foolysh fears.
And is it enough to weep think thou? shall tears and wayling serve?
No wretch it shall not be. Thou do ten thousand deaths deserve.
Mine ey^es do dally with me I see, and tears do still out power.
Shall tears suffice? No, no, not so I shall them better scowre,
Out with thine Eyes (he said:) and than with fury fierce enflam'de.
Like to a bloody raging Feend and monstrous beast vntam, de.
With fiery flaming spotted Cheeks his breast he often beats.
And scratch, and tear his Face he does and Skin a sunder freats.
That scarce his eyes in head could stand so sore he them besets.
With furious fierce outrageous mind he stamps and cries alowd:
And roares and rayles, with ramping rage. Thus in this case he stood,
Perplexed, and vexed sore in mind, with deadly sighs and tears.
When suddenly all franticklike himself from ground he reares.
And rooteth out his wretched Eyes, and sight a sunder tears.
Than gnasheth be his bloody Teeth, and bites, and gnawes, and champs,
His Eyes all bathd and brude in blood, for fury fierce he stamps.
And raging more than needs (alas,) his Eyes quight rooted out:
The very holes in vain he scrapes so sore the wretch does dout:
Least sight should chance for to remain he rents and mangels quight
His Face, his Nose, his Mouth, and all whereon his hands do light
He rygs and ryues. Thus fowly rayd (alas) in piteous plight:
At length his head aloft he lifts, and therewith geues a shright.
And when he sees that all is gone, both light, and sight, and all.
Than schriching out: he thus begins upon the Gods to call.
Now spare you Gods, now spare at length my country pressed to fall.
I have done that you did co^ma^nd: Your wraths revenged be.
This wretched look, this mangled face, is fittest now for me.
Thus speaking, down the blackish blood by streams does gushing flow
Into his mouth. And clottred lumps of flesh the place does strew
Wherein he stands.
Beware betimes, by him beware, I speak unto you all.
Learn Justice, truth, and fear of God by his unhappy fall.
Chorus. Man's life with tumbling fatal course of fortunes wheel is rowld,
To it give place for it does run all swifily vncontrowld.
And Cares and tears are spent in vayn, for it cannot be slayed:
Sith hi^ decree of heavenly powers perforce must be obayed.
What mankind byded or does on earth it comes from above,
Then wayling groans powrd out in grief do naught at all behoue.
Our life must have her pointed course, (alas) what shall I say.
As fates decree, so things do run, no man can make them stay.
For at our birth to Gods is known our latter dying day.
No Prayer, no Art, not God himself may fatal fates resist.
But fastened all in fixed court, unchanged they persist.
Such end them still ensues as they appointed were to have,
Than fly all fear of Fortunes c^ng, leeke hot to live a slave
Enthrald in bondage vile to fear. For fear does often bring
Destnies that dreaded ben and mischiefs feared upon us fling.
Yea many a man has come unto his fatal end by fear.
Wherefore set peuish fear aside, and worthy courage bear.
And thou that subject art to death. Regard thy latter day.
Think no man blessed before his end. Advise thee well and stay.
Be sure his life, and death, and all, be quight exempt from mysery:
Ere thou do once presume to say: this man is blessed and happy.
But out alas, see where he coms: a wretch withouten Guide,
Bereft of sight. Half spoyld of life: without all Pomp, and Pride
(That unto Kings Estate belong.)
THE FIFTE ACT. THE SECOND SCENE.
OEdipus. Chorus, Iocasta. WEll, well, it is done: more yet? No, no,
no mischiefs more remaynee.
My Fathers Rytes performed are.
What God on Mysers pains
That rues within this Cloud has rolde,
and wrapped my wretched Pate.
Ah sir: this is a life alone.
This is a happy State.
This is a case ene fit for thee,
for thee thou wretch, for thee.
From whose accursed sight the Sun, the Stars and all do flee.
Yet mischiefs more, who gives to do? The dreadful day I have
Escapt. Thou filthy Paracide: thou vile mischievous Slave.
Unto thy right hand naught thou owst, all things performed be.
O woe is me that ever I liu'de this lucklesse day to see.
Where am I now? Alas, alas, the light and all does me
Abhor: O wretched OEdipus this look is first for thee.
CHO. See, see, where Iocasta coms, with fierce and furious mood,
Quight past her self. For very rage she frets and waxes wood.
Much like to Cadmus daughter mad, who late her Son did kill.
Feign would she speak her mind: for sear (alas) she dares not: still
She stays, and yet from out her breast these ills have quight exilde
All shame fastnes. See how she looks, with cou^^'naunce fierce and wild.

IO. Feign would I speak, I am afraid. For what should I thee call
My Son? doubt not. Thou art my Son. My Son thou art for all
These mischiefs great: alas, alas I shame my Son to see.
O cruel Son. Where do thou turn thy Face? Why do thou slay
From me. From me thy Mother dear? Why do thou shun my sight?
And leave me thus in misery, with Cares consumed quight.

OE. Who troubles me? Let me alone. I thought not to be found:
Who now restores mine Eyes to me, Mother? or Mothers sound?
Our labor all is spent in vain, now may we meet no more.
The Seas divide those meetings vile that we have had before.
The gaping earth divide us both, the one from the other quight.
Still let our feet repugnant be. So shall I shun the light
That most of all me grieves. So shall I space obtain to wayle
These bleeding woes on every side, that do my thoughts assail.

IOC. The Destentes are in fault. Blame them, Alas, alas, not we.

OED. Spare now. Leave of to speak in vain, spare now O Mother me,
By these Relics of my dismembered body I thee pray.
By mine unhappy Children pledges left. What shall I say?
By all the Gods I thee beseech. By all that in my name
Is good or bad, let me alone. Alas you are to blame
To trouble me. You see what hell my hapless heart does pain.
You see that in my Conscience ten thousand horrors rain.

IOC. O dying heart: O sindrownd soul. Why do thou faint alas?
Why do thou seek and toil in vain these ills to ouerpas?
What mean these sighs, and scalding tears? why do thou death refuse?
Thou mate of all his mischiefs thou, by whose means only rues
The law of nature all: by whom, Ah, Ah, confounded lies,
Both God, and man, and beast, and all that either lives or dies.
Die thou, dispatch at once thrust through thy vile incestuous breast:
Thou have none other means (alas) to set thine heart at rest.
Not thou, if God him self, if he his flaming fires should throw
On thee, or mischiefs all by heaps upon thy body strew
Could once for thy deserved ills due pains or vengeance pay:
Some means therefore to wreak Gods wrath upon thy self assay.
Death, death now best contenteth me, then seek a way to dye.
So may thou yet at length find end for all thy misery.
O Son lend me thy hand: since that thou art a Paracyde.
This labor last of all remaynes, this labor thee does bide.
Dispatch rid me thy mother dear from all my deadly woe
It will not be: no prayers avail. Thy self this deed must do.
Take up this sword. Go to, with this thy husband late was slain.
Husband? thou term'st him false: he was thy syer: O deadly pain.
Shall I quight through my breast it drive? or through my throat it thrust?
Can thou not choose thy wound? away: die, die, (alas) thou must.
This hateful womb then wou^d (O wretch) this, this with thine own hand
Strike, strike it hard: (O spare it not) since both a husband, and
(The same a Son it bare.)

CHOR. Alas, alas, she is slain, she is slain, dispatched with a push:
Who ever saw the like to this: see how the blood does gush.
O heavy doulfull case: who can this dyrefull sight enduer
Which for the hideousness thereof might tears of stones procuer.

OED. Thou God, thou teller out of Fates. On thee, on thee, I call,
My Father only I did owe, unto the Destnies all.
Now twice a Paracide, and worse than I did fear to be:
My Mother I have slain. (Alas) the fault is all in me.
O OEdipus accursed wretch, lament thine own Calamity,
Lament thy state, thy grief lament, thou Caitife borne to misery.
Where will thou now become (alas?) thy Face where will thou hyde:
O miserable Slave, can thou such shameful torments bide?
Can thou which have thy Parents slain? Can thou prolong thy life?
Will thou not dye? deserving Death: thou cause of all the grief,
And Plagues, and dreadful mischiefs all that Thebane City prease.
Why do thou seek by longer life, thy sorrows to increase?
Why do thou toil and labor thus in vain? It will not be.
Both God, and man: and beast, and all abhor thy Face to see
O Earth why gapst thou not for me^ why do you not unfold
You gates of hell me to receive? why do you hence withholde?
The fierce Infernal Feends from me, from me so wretched wight?
Why break not all the Furyes lose this hateful head to smight
With Plagues? which them deserved has (alas) I am left alone,
Both light, and sight, and comfort all from me (O wretch) is gone.
O cursed head: O wicked wight, whom all men deadly hate.
O Beast, what meanst thou still to live in this unhappy state?
The Skies do blush and are ashamd, at these thy mischiefs great
The Earth laments, y^ Heavens weep, the Seas for rage do freat.
And blustering rise, and storms do stir, and all thou wretch for thee.
By whose incest, and bloody deeds all things disturbed be.
Quight out of course, displaced quight, O cursed fatal day.
O mischiefs great, O dreadful times, O wretch, away, away.
Exile thy self from all men's sight, thy life half spent in misery,
Go end consume it now outright in thrice as great calamity.
O lying Phoebe thine Oracles my sin, and sheme surmount:
My Mothers death amongst my deeds; thou never did recount.
A meet Exploict for me that a^ to Nature deadly Foe.
With trembling fearful pace go forth, thou wretched monster go,
Grope out thy ways on knees in dark thou miserable Slave.
So may thou yet in tract of time due pains, and vengeance have,
For thy mischeuous life. Thus, thus, the Gods themselves decree.
Thus, thus, thy Fates: thus, thus, the skies appoint it for to be.
Then headlong hence, with a mischief hence, thou caitife vile away.
Away, away, thou monstrous Beast. Go, Run. Stand, stay,
Least on thy Mother thou do fall.
All you that wearyed bodies have, with stickenesse ouerprest.
Lo, now I fly: I fly away, the cause of your unrest.
Lift up your heads: a better state of Air shall straight ensewe
When I am gone: for whom alone, these dreadful myschiefs grew.
And you that now, half dead yet live in wretched misers case.
Help those who^ present torments press forth, hye you on apace.
For lo, with me I carry hence, all mischiefs under Skies.
All cruel Fates, Diseases all that for my sake did rise,
With me they go: with me both grief, Plague, Pocks, Botch, and all
The ills that either now you press, or ever after shall.
With me they go, with me: these Mates bin meetst of all for me.
Who am the most unhappiest wretch that ever Sun did see.

FINIS.
THE SIXTE TRAGEDY OF THE MOST GRAVE and prudent Author LUCIUS ANNAEVS SENECA,
entitled TROAS, with diverse and sundry Additions to the same, by JASPER
HEYWOOD.
To the Reader.
ALTHOUGH (GENTLE Reader) thou may perhaps think me arrogant, for that I
only among so many fine wits and towardly youth (with which England this day
florisheth) have enterprised to set forth in english this present piece of the
flower of all writers, Seneca, as who say, not fearing what grauer heads might
judge of me, in attempting so hard a thing, yet upon well pondering what next
ensues, I trust both thy self shall clear thine own suspicion, and thy
changed opinion shall judge of me more rightful sentence. For neither have I
taken this work first in hand, as once entending it should come to light (of
well doing whereof I utterly dispayred) and being done but for mine own
private exercise, I am in mine opinion herein blameles, though I have (to
prove my self) privately taken the part which pleased me best of so excellent
an author, for better is time spent in the best then other, and at first to
attempt the hardest writers, shall make a man more prompt to translate the
easier with more facility. But now since by request, and friendship of those, to
whom I could deny nothing, this work against my will extorted is out of my
hands, I needs must ^raue thy patience in reading, and facility of judgment:
when thou shall apparently se my witles lack of learning, prayng thee to
consider how hard a thing it is for me to touch at full in all points the
authors mind, (being in many places very hard and doubtful, and the work
much corrupt by the default of evil printed Books) and also how far above my
power to keep that Grace and majesty of style, that Seneca does, when both so
excellent a writer has past the reach of all imitation, and also this our
English tongue (as many think, and I here find) is far unable to compare with
the Latten: but thou (good Reader) if I in any place have swerued from the true
sense, or not kept the roialty of speech, meet for a Tragedy, impute the one
to my youth and lack of judgment: the other to my lack of Eloquence. Now as
concerning sondrye places augmented and some altered in this my translation.
First for as much as this work seemed unto me in some places imperfect,
whether left so of the Author, or part of it lost, as time deuoureth all
things, I wot not, I have (where I thought good) with addition of mine own
Pen supplied the want of some things, as the first Chorus, after the first
act beginning thus. O ye to whom etc. Also in the second Act I have added
the speech of Achilles Spright, rysyng from Hell to require the Sacrifyce of
Polyxena beginning in this wise. Forsakinge now. etc. Again the three last
staves of the Chorus after the same Act: and as for the third Chorus which in
Seneca begins thus, QVE VOCAT SEEDS? For as much as nothing is therein but a
heaped number of far and strange Countries, considering with my self, that
the names of so many unknown Countries, Mountains, Deserts, and VVoodes,
should have no grace in the English tongue, but be a strange and unpleasant
thing to the Readers (except I should expound the Historyes of each one,
which would be far to tedious,) I have in the place thereof made another
beginning, in this manner. O Jove that leadst. etc. Which alteration may be
borne withal, seeing that Chorus is no part of the substance of the matter.
In the rest I have for my slender learning endeavored to keep touch with the
Latten, not word for word or verse for verse, as to expound it, but
neglecting the placinge of the words, observed their sense. Take Gentle
Reader this in good worth with all his faults, favor my first beginninges,
and amend rather with good will such things as herein are amiss, then to
deprave or discommende my labor and pains, for the faults, seeing that I have
herein, but only made way to other that can far better do this or like,
desiryng them that as they can, so they would. Farewell gentle Reader and accept
my good will.

The Argument.
THe ten years siege of Troy, who list to hear,
And of thaffayres that there befell in fight:
Read ye the works that long since written were,
Of all Thassaultes, and of that latest night,
When Turrets tops in Troy they blased bright
Good Clerks they were that have it written well
As for this work, no word thereof does tell.
But Dares Phrygian, well can all report,
With Dictis eke of Crete in Greekish tongue
And Homer tells, to Troy the Greeks resort
In scanned verse, and Maro has it song
Each one in writ has pend a stoary long,
Who doubts of ought, and casts care to know
These antique Authors, shall the story show,
The ruins twain of Troy, the cause of each,
The glittering helmes, in fields the Banners spread,
Achilles yres, and Hectors fightes they teach.
There may the iestes of many a Knight be read:
Patroclus, Pyrrhus, Ajax, Diomed,
With Troylus, Paris, many other more,
That day by day, there fought infield full sore.
And how the Greeks at end an engine made:
A hugie horse where many a warlike Knight
Enclosed was: the Trojans to invade
With Sinons craft, when Greeks had feigned flight,
While close they lay at Tenedos from sight,
Or how Eneas else as other say,
And false Antenor did the town betray.
But as for me I naught thereof endight,
Mine Author has not all that story pend:
My pen his words in English must resight,
Of latest woes that fell on Troy at end,
What final fates the cruel God could send.
And how the Greeks when Troy was burnt began wreake
Their ire on Trojans, thereof shall I speak,
Not I with spear who pierced was in field,
Whose throat there cut, or head ycorued was
Ne bloodshed blows, that rent both targe and shield
Shall I resight, all that I ouerpasse.
The work I wryght more woeful is alas,
For I the mothers tears must here complain,
And blood of babes, that giltles have been slain.
And such as yet could never weapon wreast,
But on the lap are wont to dandled be,
Ne yet forgotten had the mothers breast,
How Greeks them slew (alas) here shall ye see
To make report thereof ay woe is me,
My song is mischife, murder, misery,
And hereof speaks this doleful tragedy.
Thou fury fell that from the deepest den
Could cause this wrath of hell on Troy to light,
That worckest woe guide thou my hand and pen,
In weeping verse of sobbes and sighs to wryght,
As does mine author them bewail aright:
Help woeful muse for me besemeth well
Of others tears, with weeping eye to tell.
When battered were to ground the towers of Troy
In writ as ancient authors do resight,
And Greeks again repayrde to Seas with joy,
Up rises here from hell Achilles Spright,
Vengeance he craves with blood his death to quight.
Whom Paris had in Phoebus temple slain,
With guile be trapt for love of Polyxeine.
And wrath of hell there is none other price
That may assuage: but blood of her alone
Polyxena he craves for sacrifyce,
With threatninges on the Grecians many one
Except they shed her blood before they gone.
The Sprightes the hell, and depest pittes beneath,
O Virgin dear, (alas) do thrust thy death.
And Hectors son, Astyanax (alas)
Pore seely fool his Mothers only joy,
Is iudgd to die by sentence of Calchas
Alas the while, to death is led the boy,
And tumbled down from Turrets tops in Troy.
What ruthful tears may serve to wayle the woe
Of Hectors wife that does her child forgo.
Her pinching pange of heart who may express,
But such as of like woes, have borne a part?
Or who bewail her ruthful heaviness
That never yet has felt thereof the smart?
Full well they wot the woes of heavy heart.
What is to leese a babe from mothers breast,
They know that are in such a case distressed.
First how the Queen lamentes the fall of Troy,
As has mine author done, I shall it wryght
Next how from Hectors wife they led the boy
To die, and her complayntes I shall resight,
The maidens death then I must last endight.
Now who that list the Queens complaint to here.
In following verse it shall forthwith appear.
The Speakers names.
HECVBA Queen of Troy. A company of women. TALTHYBIVS a Grecian. AGAMEMNON
King of Greeks. ASTYANAX. NVNCIVS. CALCHAS. PYRRHVS. CHORUS. ANDROMACHA An old
man TROJAN. ULYSSES. HELENA. The Sprihgt of Achilles.
THE FIRST ACT.
Hecuba. WHo so in pomp of proud estate,
or Kingdom sets delight:
Or who that joys in Princes court
to bear the sway of might.
Ne dreads the fates which from above
the wavering Gods down flinges:
But fast affiance fixed has,
in frail and fickle things:
Let him in me both se the Face,
of Fortunes ftattering joy:
And eke respect the ruthful end of thee (Oruinous Troy)
For never gave she playner proof, then this ye present see:
How frail and britle is the state of pride and high degree,
The flower of flowring Asia, lo whose fame the heavens refound,
The Worthy work of Gods above, is ba^ered down to ground.
And whose assaults they sought afar, from West with Banners spread
Where Tanais cold her branches seven, abroad the world does shed.
With hugie host and from the East, where springes the newest dea,
Where Luke warm Tygris channel runs, and meets the ruddy sea.
And which from wandering land of S^ythe, the band of widows sought:
With fire and sword thus battered be her Turrets down to naught.
The walls but late of high renown lo here their ruinous fall:
The buildinges burn, and flashingflame, swepes through the pallas al.
Thus every house full hie it smoakes, of old Assarackes land:
Ne yet the flames withholdes from spoil, the greedy Victors hand.
The surging smoke, the asure say, and light has hid away:
And (as with cloud beset) Troyes Ashes staynes the dusky day.
Through pearst with ire and greedy of heart, the victor from a far.
Does vtew the long assaulted Troy, the gain of ten years war,
And eke the miseryes thereof abhorres to look upon,
And though he se it yet scant himself, belieues might be won,
The spoils thereof with greedy hand, they snatch and bear away:
A thousand ships would not receive aboorde so huge a pray
The yreful might I do protest of Gods adverse to me,
My countries dust, and Troyan King I call to witness thee,
Whom Troy nowhydes, and underneath the stones art ouertrode:
With all the Gods that guides the Ghost, and Troy that lately, stood.
And you also you flocking Ghostes of al my children dear:
Ye lesser Sprightes what ever ill, has happened to us here.
What ever Phoebus watrish face, in fury has foresaid:
At raging rise from seas when erst, the monsters had him frayde.
In childbed bands I saw it yore, and wist it should be so:
And I in vain before Cassandra told it long ago.
Not false Ulysses kindled has these fires, nor none of his:
Nor yet deceyptful Sinons craft, that has been cause of this.
My fire it is wherewith ye burn, and Paris is the brand
That smoaketh in thy towers (O Troy) the flower of Phrygian sand.
But ay (alas) unhappy age, why do thou yet so sore,
Bewail thy Countries fatal fall thou knew it long before:
Behold thy last calamityes, and them bewail with wares:
Account as old Troys ouerturne, and past by many years,
I saw the slaughter of the King, and how he lost his life:
By The altar s^^e (more mischief was) with stroke of Pyrrhus knife.
When in his hand he wound his locks, and drew the King to ground,
And hid to hiltes his wicked sword, in deep and deadly wound.
Which when the ^ored King had took, as willing to be slaynt,
Out of the old man's throat he drew his bloody blade again.
Not pity of his years (alas) in man's extremest age:
From slaughter might his hand withhold, ne yet his ire assuage:
The Gods are witness of the same, and eake the sacrifyes,
That in his kingdom holden was, that flat on ground now lies.
The father of so many Kings Pryam of aunient name,
Vntombed lies and wants in blase of Troy: his funeral flame.
Ne yet the Gods are wreakt, but lo his Sons and daughters all,
Such Lords they serve as does by chance of lot to them befall.
Whom shall I follow now for pray? or where shall I be led
There is perhaps among the Greeks that Hectors wife will wed.
Some man desires Helenus spouse some would Antenors have,
And in the Greeks their wantes not some, that would Cassandra crave
But I (alas) most woeful wight whom no man seeks to choose,
I am the only refuge left, and me they clean refuse
Ye careful captive company, why stints your woeful cry?
Beat on your breasts and piteously complain with voice so hye,
As meet may be for Troyes estate, let your complayntes rebound
In tops of Trees: and cause the hills to ring with terible sound.
THE SECOND SCENE.
The Woman, Hecuba. NOt folk unapt, nor new to weep (O Queen)
Thou vvilst to vvayle by practice are we taught,
For all these years in such case have we been,
Since first the Troyan guest, Amiclas sought
And saild the Seas, that led him on his way
With sacred ship, to Cibell dedicate
From whence he brought his vnrepyning pray,
The cause (alas) of all this dire debate,
Ten times now hid the hills of Idey be,
With snow of Silver hevv all over laid.
And bared is, for Troyan rages each tree,
Ten times in field, the harvest man afraid,
The spikes of Corn has reapt, since never day
His waylyng wantes new cause renewes our woe
Lift up thy hand, (O Queen) cry well away:
We follow thee, we are well taught thereto.
HEC. Ye faithful fellows of your casualty,
Untie thattyre, that on your heads ye wear,
And as behooves state of misery.
Let fall about your woeful necks your hair.
In dust of Troy rub all your arms about,
In slacker weed and let your breasts be tied
Down to your bellies let your limbs lie out,
For what wedlock should you your bosoms hyde?
Your garments loose, and have in readiness
Your furious hands upon your breast to knock
This habit well beseems our distress,
It pleases me, I know the Troyan flock
Renew again your long accustomde cries,
And more then erst lament your miseryes.
We bewail Hector.

WOE. Our hair we have untied, now euerychone,
All rent for sorrow of our cursed case,
Our locks out spreads, the knottes we have undone
And in these ashes stained is our face.

HEC. Fill up your hands and make thereof no spare,
For this yet lawful is from Troy to take
Let down your garments from your shoulders bare.
And suffer not your clamor so to slake.
Your naked breasts wait for your hands to smight
Now dolor deep now sorrow show thy might:
Make all the coasts that compass Troy about
Witness the souude of all your careful cry
Cause from the Caves the echo to cast out:
Rebounding voice of all your misery:
Not as she wontes, the latter word to sound
But all your woe from far let it rebound
Let all the Seas it hear, and eke the land
Spare not your breasts with heavy stroke to strike
Beat ye your selves, each one with cruel hand
For yet your wonted cry does me not like
We bevvayle Hector.

VVO. Our naked arms, thus here we rent for thee,
And bloody shoulders, (Hector) thus we tear:
Thus with our fistes, our heads lo beaten be
And all for thee, behold we hale our hear.
Our dugges alas, with mothers hands be torn
And where the flesh is vvounded round about
Which for thy sake, we rent thy death to morn
The flowing streams of blood, they spring thereout.
Thy countres shore, and destinies delay.
And thou to vvearied Trojans vvast an aid,
A wall thou vvast, and on thy shoulders Troy
Ten years it stood, on thee alone it staide,
With thee it fell: and fatal day alas
Of Hector both, and Troy but one there was.

HEC. Enough has Hector: turn yonr plaint and moan
And shed your tears for Pryame every chone.

VVO. Receive our plaintes, O lord of Phrigian land
And old twice captive king, receive our fear,
While thou were king. Troy hurtles then could stand
Though shaken twice, with Grecian sword it wear,
And twice did shot of Hercles quiver bear,
At latter loss of Hecubes sons all
And roges for kings, that hgih on piles we rear:
Thou father shut stour latest funeral.
And beaten down, to Jove for sacrifies.
Like liueles block, in Troy thy carkas lies.

HEC. Yet turn ye once your tears, another way,
My pryams death, should not lamented be.
O Troyans all, full happy is Pryame say.
For free from bondage, down descended he,
To the lowest Ghost: and never shall sustain
His Captive neck with Greeks to yoked be.
He never shall behold the Atrids twain
Nor false Ulysses ever shall he see*
Not he a pray for Greeks to triumph at
His neck shall subject to their conquestes bear
Ne give his hands to tie behind his back,
That to the rule of Scepters wonted wear,
Nor following Agamemnons chare, in band
Shall he be pomp, to proud Mycenas land.

WOE. Full happy Pryame is, each one we say
That took with him his Kingdom then that stood
Now safe in shade, he seeks the wandering way,
And treads the paths of all Elizius wood,
And in the blessed Sprightes, full happy he,
Again there seeks to meet with Hectors Ghost.
Happy Pryam, happy whosoever may see,
His Kingdom all, at once with him be lost.

Chorus added to the Tragedy by the Translator. O Ye to whom the Lord of Land
and Seas,
Of Life and Death has granted here the power
Lay down your lofty looks, your pride appeas
The crowned King flees not his fatal hour.
Who so thou be that leadst thy land alone,
Thy life was limite from thy mothers womb,
Not purple robe, not Glorious glittering throne,
Ne crown of Gold redeemes thee from the tomb:
A King he was that waiting for the veil,
Of him that slew the Minotaure in fight:
Begilde with blacknes of the wonted sail
In seas him sonke, and of his name they hight.
So he that wild, to vvin the golden spoil
And first with ship, by seas to seek renown,
In lesser vvaue, at length to death began boil,
And thus the daughters, brought their father down:
Whose s^nges, the vvoodes has drawn, and rivers held,
And birds to hear his notes, did theirs forsake,
In piece meal thrown, amid the Thracian field,
Without return has sought the Stigian lake.
They sit above that hold our life in line*
And what we suffer down they fling from hie,
No carke, no care, that ever may untwine
The thrids, that vvoued are above the sky,
As witness he that sometime King of Greece,
Had Jason thought, in drenching seas to drown
Who escaped both death and gaind the Golden fleece,
Whom fates advance, there may no power pluck down
The highest God somety me that Saturn hight
His fall him taught to credit their decrees
The rule of heavens: he lost it by their might,
And Jove his son now turns the rolling Skies.
Who vveneth here to vvin eternal wealth,
Let him behold this present perfect proof.
And learn. the secret stop of chances stelth,
Most nere alas, when most it seems aloof.
In slipper joy let no man put his trust:
Let none despair that heavy haps has past
The svvete with sovvre she mingleth as she lust
Whose doubtful web pretends naught to last.
Frailty is the thride, that Clothoes rock has sponne,
Now from the Distaffe drawn now knapt in tvvaine
With all the world at length his end he won,
Whose works have wrought, his name should great remain
And he whose travels twelve, his name display,
That feared naught the force of worldly hurt,
In fine (alas) has found his fatal day,
And died with smart of Dianyraes shurt,
If prowes might eternity procure,
Then Priam yet should live in lyking lust,
Ay portly pomp of pride thou art unsure,
Lo learn by him. O Kings ye are but dust.
And Hecuba that wayleth now in care,
That was so late of high estate a Queen,
A mirror is to teach you what you are
Your wavering wealth, O Princes here is seen.
Whom dawne of day has seen in high estate
Before Suns set; (alas) has had his fall
The Cradels rock, appoyntes the life his date
From settled joy, to sudden funeral.
THE SECOND ACT.
The Spright of Achilles added to the tragedy by the Translator.

The first Scene.
FOrsaking now the places tenebrouse,
And deep dens of thinfernall region
From all the shadows of illusious
That wa^der there the paths full many one
Lo, here am I returned al alone,
The same Achil whose fierce and heavy hand
Of all the world no wight might yet withstand.
What man so stout of all the Grecians host,
That has not sometime craved Achilles aid,
And in the Troyans, who of prowes most
That has not feared to see my Banner splaide
Achilles lo, has made them all affrayde.
And in the Greeks has been a pillar post,
That stvrdy stood against their Troyan host.
Where I have lackt the Grecians went to wrack,
Troy proved has what Achills sword could do
Where I have come the Troyans fled a back,
Retyring fast from field their walls unto,
No man that might Achilles stroke fordoe
I dealt such stripes amid the Trojan route,
That with their blood I staynd the fields about.
Mighty Memnon that with his Persian band,
Would Pryams part with all might maintain,
Lo now he lies and knows Achilles hand
Amid the field is Troylus also slain.
Ye Hector great, whom Troy accounted plain
The flower of chiualry that might be found,
All of Achilles had their mortal wound.
But Paris lo, such was his false deceit,
Pretending marriage of Polixeine,
Behynd the altar lay for me in wait
Where I unawares have fallen into the train
And in Appolloes church he has me slain
Whereof the Hell will now just vengeance have,
And here again, I come my right to crave.
The deep Auerne my rage may not sustain,
Nor bear the angers of Achilles spright
From Acheront I rent the spoil in twain,
And though the ground I grate again to sight:
Hell could not hide Achilles from the light,
Vengeance and blood does Orcus pit require,
To quench the furies of Achilles ire.
The hateful land, that worse then Tartare is
And burning thrust excedes of Tantalus,
I here behold again, and Troy is this
O, travel worse, then stone of Sisyphus
And pains that pass the panges of Tityus
To light more loathsome fury has me sent
Then hooked wheel, that Ixions flesh does rent.
Remembered is allow where sprites do dwell
The wicked slaughter'wrought by wyly way*
Not yet revenged has the deepest hell,
Achilles blood on them that did him slay
But now of vengeance come the yrefull day
And darkest dens of Tartare from beneath
Conspire the fautes, of them that wrought my death.
Now mischief, murder, wrath of hell draws nere
And dyre Phlegethon flood does blood require
Achilles death shall he revenged here
With slaughter such as Stygian lakes desire
Her daughters blood shall slake the spirits ire,
Whose sonue we slew, whereof does yet remain,
The wrath beneath, and hell shall be their pain.
From burning lakes the furies wrath I threate,
And fire that naught but streams of blood may slake
The rage of wind and seas their ships shall beat,
And Ditis deep on you shall vengeance take,
The spirits cry out, the earth and seas do quake
The poole of Styx, ungrateful Greeks it seath,
With slaughtred blood revenge Achilles death.
The soil does shake to bear my heavy foot
And fearth again the sceptors of my hand,
The pooles with stroke of thunderclap ring out,
The doubtful stars amid their course do stand,
And fearful Phoebus hides his blasing brande
The trembling lakes against their course do flite,
For dread and terror of Achilles spright.
Great is the ransom ought of due to me,
Wherewith ye must the sprightes and hell appease,
Polyxena shall sacrifysed be,
Upon my tomb, their yreful wrath to please,
And with her blood ye shall assuage the seas
Your ships may not return to Greece again
Til on my tomb Polyxena be slain.
And for that she should then have been my wife,
I will that Pyrrhus render her to me,
And in such solemn sort bereave her life,
As ye are wont the weddinges for to see,
So shall the wrath of Hell appeased be,
Naught else but this may satisfy our ire,
Her will I have and her I you require.
THE SECOND SCENE.
Talthibius* Chorus. ALas how long the lingering Gre^kes in haven do make delay,
When either war by seas they seek or home to pass their way.
Chapter Why, show what cause does hold your ships? and Grecian navy stays,
Declare if any of the Gods have stopped your homeward ways.

Tal. My mind is mai'd, my trembling sin was quake and are affeard,
For stranger news of truth then these
I think were never heard.
Lo I my self have plainly seen in dawning of the day,
When Phoebus first began to approach and drive the stars away.
The earth all shaken suddenly and from the hollow grownde:
My thought I hard with roaryng cry a deep and dreadful sound:
That shoke the woods, and all the trees ^ong out with thunder stroke,
From Ida hills down fell the st^kes, the mountain ^oppes were broke.
And not the earth has only quakt, but all the Sea likewise*
Achilles presence felt and knew, and high the surges rise.
The cloven ground Erebus pittes then showed and deepest dens,
That down to Gods that guide beneath, the way appeard from hence.
Then shoke the tomb from whence anon in flame of fiery light,
Appears from the hollow ca^es Achilles noble spright.
As wonted he his Thracian arms and bannars to disploy
And weild his weighty weapons well against thassaultes of Troy,
The same Achilles seemde he than that he was wont to be
Amid the hosts and eas^y could I know that this was he.
With carcass slain in furious fight, that stopped and filled each floude.
And who with slaughter of his hand made Xanthus r^^ne with blood,
As when in Chariot high he sat with lofty stomach stout.
While Hector both and Troy at once he drew the walls about.
Alowd he cride, and every coast rang with Achilles sound,
And thus with hollow voice he spoke, from bottom of the ground.
The Greeks shall not with little price redeem Achilles ire,
A princely ransom must they give, for so the fates require
Unto my ashes Polyxene spoused shall here be slain
By Pyrrhus hand, and al my tomb her blood shall ouerstayne.
This said, he straight sanke down again to Plutoes deep region,
The earth then cloasd, the hollow caves were vanished and gone
Therewith the wether waxed clear, the raging wyndes did slake,
The tombling seas began to rest and all the tempest brake.

THE THIRD SCENE.
Pyrrhus, Agamemnon, Calchas. WHat time our sails we should have spread,
upon Sygeon Seas,
With swift return from long delay,
to seek our homeward ways.
Achilles rose whose only hand,
has given Greeks the spoil.
Of Troia sore annoyde by him,
and leueld with the soil,
With speed requiting his abode
and former long delay*
At Scyros isle, and Lesbos both amid the Aegaeon sea.
Til he came here in doubt it stood of fall or sure estate,
Then though ye have to grant his will ye shall it give to late.
Now have the other captains all the price of their manhood,
What else reward for his prewesse then her al only blood?
A^e his deserts think you but light, that when he might have fled,
And passing Pelyus years in peace, a quiet life have led,
Detected yet his mothers crafts, forsook his woman's weed,
And with his weapons proved himself a manly man indeed:
The King of Mysya, Telephus that would the Greeks withstand,
Coming to Troy, forbidding us the passage of his land:
To late repenting to have felt. Achilles heavy stroke
Was glad to crave his health again where he his hurt had took
For when his sore might not be salud as told Appollo plain.
Except the spear that gave the hurt, restoared help again.
Achilles plasters cured his cuttes, and saved the King alive:
His hand both might and mercy knew te slay and then reuyne.
When Thebes fell. Eetion saw it and might it not withstand,
The captive King could naught redress the ruin of his land.
Lyrnesus little likewise felt his hand and down it fill,
With ruin ouerturned like from top of haughty hill.
And taken Bryseps land it is and prisoner is she caught
The cause of strife between the Kings is Chryses come to naught.
Tenedos isle well known by fame and fertile soil he took
That fostreth fat the Thracian flocks and sacred Cilla shook
What boots to blase the brute of him whom trumpe of fame does show,
Through all the coasts where Caicus flood with swelling stream does flow?
The ruthful ruin of these realms so many towns bet down,
Another man would glory count and worthy great renown.
But thus my father made his way and these his iourneyes are,
And battayles many one he fought whylewarre he does prepare.
As wished I may his merits more shall yet not this remain.
Well known and counted praise enough that he has Hector slain
During whose life the Grecians al might never take the town,
My father only vanquist Troy, and you have pluct it down.
Rejoice I may your parents praise and brute abroad his acts,
It seems the son to follow well his noble fathers factts,
In sight of Priam Hector slain, and. Memnon both they lay.
With heavy theere his parents wayld to moutne his dying day.
Himself abhord his handy work in fight that had them slain,
The Sons of Gods Achilles knew were borne to die again
The woman queen of Amazons that greu'd the Greeks full sore.
Is turned to flight then ceast our fear we dread their bows no more.
It ye well weigh his worthynes Achilles ought to have
Though he from Argos or Mycenas would a Virgin crave,
Doubt ye herein? allow ye not that straight his will be done.
And count ye cruel Pryams blood to give to Peleus son?
For Helen sake your own childs blood appeasd Dianas ire
A wonted thing and done ere this it is that I require.
Ag. The only fault of youth it is not to refrain his rage
The Fathers blood already sturres in Pryams wanton age:
Sometime Achilles grievous checkes I bare with pacient heart,
The more thou may the more thou oughtst to suffer in good part
Whereto would ye with slaughtred blood a noble spirit stayne?
Think what is meet the Greeks to do, and Troyans to sustain.
The proud estate of tyranny may never long endure.
The King that rules with modest mean of safety may be sure.
The higher step of princely state that fortune has us signd
The more behou'th a happy man humility of mind
And bread the change that chance may bring, whose gifts so sone be lost
And chiefly then to fear the Gods, while they the favor most.
In beating down that war has won, by proof I have been taught,
What pomp and pride in twinke of eye, may fall and come to naught.
Troy made me fierce and proud of mind, Troy makes me frayd withal.
The Greeks now stand where Troy late fell, each thing may have his fall.
Sometime I grant I did my self, and Sceptors proudly bear,
The thing that might advance my heart makes me the more to fear
Thou Priam perfect proof presentst thou art to me eftsoon:
A cause of pride, a glass of fear a mirror for the nones,
Should I accoumpt the sceptors ought, but glorious vanity
Much like the borrowed brayded hair, the face to beautify.
One sudden chance may turn to naught, and mayme the might of men
With fewer then a thousand ships, and years in less then ten.
Not she that guydes the slipper wheel of fate, does so delay:
That she to al possession grauntes, of ten years settled stay.
With leave of Greece I will confess, I would have won the town
But not with ruin thus extreme to see it beaten down.
But lo the battle made by night and rage of fervent mind,
Could not abide the brydling bitte that reason had assignd.
The happy sword once slaind with blood insatiable is,
And in the dark the seruent rage does strike thee more amiss.
Now are we wreakt on Troy so much let all that may remain.
A Virgin borne of Princes blood for offering to be slain
And given be to slain the tomb and ashes of the ded,
And under name of wedlock see the guiltles blood be shed,
I will not grant for mine should be thereof both fault and blame.
Who when he may, forbids not offense: does will the same.

Pyr. And shall his sprights have no reward their angers to appeyse?

Aga. Yes very great, for all the world shall celebrate his praise,
And lands unknown that never saw, the man so praysd by fame,
Shall heat and keep for many years the glory of his name.
If bloodshed veil his ashes ought strike of an Oxes head,
And let no blood that may be cause of mothers tears, be shed.
What furious fransy may this be that does your will so lead,
This earnest careful sutte to make in travail for the dead?
Let not such envy toward your father in your heart remain,
That for his sacrifice ye would procure an others pain,

Pyr. Proud tirant, while prosperity thy stomach does advance,
And cowardly wretch that shrinks for fear in case of fearful chance.
Is yet again thy breast enflamde, with brand of Venus might?
Will thou alone so often deprive Achilles of his right?
This hand shall give the sacrifice, the which if thou withstand.
A greater slaughter shall I make, and worthy Pyrrhus hand.
And now to long from Princes slaughter does my hand abide,
And meet it were that Polyxene were laid by Priams side.

Aga. I not deny, but Pyrrhus chief renown, in war is this,
That Pryam slain with cruel sword, to your father humbled is.

Pyr. My fathers foes we have them known, submit themselves humbly,
And Pryam presently ye wot, was glad to crave mercy.
But thou for fear not stout to rule, lie close from foes up shit:
Whil thou to Ajax, and Ulysses, do thy will commit.

Aga. But needs I must, and will confess, your father did not fear:
When burnt our fleet with Hectors brands, and Greeks they slaughtred wear.
While loytring then a loofe he lay, unmindful of the fight.
In steed of arms with scratch of quill, his sounding harp to smight.

Pyr. Great Hector then despising thee, Achilles songs did fear:
And Thessale ships in greatest dread, in quiet peace yet wear.

Aga. For why aloof the Thessale fleet, they lay from Troyans hands,
And well your father might have rest, he felt not Hectors brandes.

Pir. Well seems a noble king to give an other king relief.

Aga. Why have thou then a worthy king berieued of his life?

Pyr. A poinct of mercy sometime is, what lives in care to kill.

Aga. But now your mercy moves you a virgins death to will.

Pyr. Account ye cruel now her death whose sacrifice I crave.
Your own dear daughter once ye know, your self to th'aulters gave.

Aga. Naught else could save the Greeks from seas, but the only blood of her:
A king before his children ought, his country to prefer.

Pyr. The law does spare no captives blood nor wil'th their death to stay

Aga. That which the law does not forbid, yet shame does often say nay.

Pyr. The conqueror what thing he list, may lawfully fulfill.

Aga. So much the less he ought to list, that may do what he will.

PYR. Thus boast ye these as though in all ye only bare the stroke
When Pyrrhus loosed has the greeks, from bond of ten years yoke.

A. Has Scyros isle such stomaks bred?

P. No bretherns wrath it knoes.

AG. Beset about it is with wave.

PYR. The seas it do enclose.
Thyestes noble stock I know and A^reus eke full well,
And of the bretherns dire debate, perpetual fame does tell.

AG. And thou a bestard of a may de, defloured privily.
Whom (then a boy) Achilles gat, in filthy lecherr.

Pyr. The same A chill that does possess, the reign of Gods above,
With Therys seas: with Aeacus sprights, the starred heaven with Jove

Aga. The same Achilles that was slain, by stroke of Par^s hand.

Pyr. The same Achilles, whom no god, durst ever yet withstand.

Aga. The stoutest man I rather would his checkes he should refrain
I could them tame but all your bragges, I can full well sustain.
For even the captives spares my sword: let Calchas called be.
If destyntes require her blood, I will thereto agree
Calchas whose counsel ruled our ships, and navy hither brought,
Vnlookst the poale and have by art the secrets thereof sought,
To whom the bowelles of the beast, to whom the thunder clap,
And blasyng star with flaming train, betokens what shall hap.
Whose words with dearest price I bought, now tell us by what mean
The will of Gods agrees that we return to Greece again.

Call. The fates apoint the Greeks to buy their ways with wonted price.
And with what cost ye came to Troy, ye shall repair to Greece
With blood ye came, with blood ye must from hence return again,
And where Achilles ashes lies, the virgin shall be slain,
In seemly sort of habit, such as maidens wont ye see,
Of Thessalie, or Mycenas else, what time they wedded be.
With Pyrrhus hand she shall be slain, of right it shall be so
And meet it is that he the son, his fathers right should do.
But not this only stays our ships, our sails may not be spread,
Before a worthier blood then thine, (Polixena) be shed,
Which thirst thirst the fates, for Praimes nephew. Hectors little boy:
The Erekes shall tumble hedlonge down, from highest tower in Troy.
Let him there die, this only way ye shall the gods appeas,
Then spread your thousand sails with joy ye need not fear the seas.

Chorus. MAy this be true, or does the Fable feign,
When corpse is dead the Sprite to live as yet?
When Death our eyes with heavy hand does strain,
And fatal day our leames of light has shet,
And in the Tomb our ashes once be set,
Has not the soul likewise his funeral,
But still (alas) do wretches live in thrall?
Or else does all at once together die?
And may no part his fatal hour delay.
But with the breath the soul from hence does fly?
And eke the Clouds to vanish quite away,
As danky shade flees from the poale by day?
And may no jot escape from desteny,
When once the brand has burned the body?
What ever then the rise of Sun may see,
And what the West that sets the Sun does know.
In all Neptunus raygne what ever be,
That restles Seas do wash and ouerflow,
With purple waves still tombling to and fro.
Age shall consume: each thing that liuth shall die,
With swifter race then Pegasus does fly.
And with what whirle, the twyse six signs do fly,
With course as swift as rector of the Spheres,
Does guide those glistering Globes eternally.
And Hecate her changed horns repeares,
So drauth on death, and life of each thing wears,
And never may the man, return to sight,
That once has felt the stroke of Parcas might.
For as the fume that from the fire does pass,
With turn of hand does vanish out of sight
And swifter then the Northren Boreas
With whirling blaste and storm of raging might,
Driuth far away and puttes the clouds to flight,
So flees the sprighte that rules our life away,
And nothing taryeth after dying day.
Swift is the race we run, at hand the mark
Lay down your hope, that wait here ought to win,
And who dreads ought, cast of thy careful carke:
Will thou it wot what state thou shall be in,
When dead thou art as thou had never bin.
For greedy time it does devour us all,
The world it swayes to Chaos heap to fall.
Death hurtes the Corpse and spares not the spright,
And as for all the dens of Taenare deeepe.
With Cerberus kingdom dark that knows no light,
And streightest gates, that he there sittes to keep,
They Fancies are that follow folk by sleep
Such rumors vain, but feigned lies they are,
And fables like the dreams in heavy care.
These three staves following are added by the translatour. O dreadful day,
alas, the sorry time*
Is come of all the mothers ruthful woe,
Astianax (alas) thy fatal line
Of life is worn, to death straight shall thou go,
The sisters have decreed it should be so,
There may no force (alas) escape there hand,
There mighty love their will may not withstand,
To se the mother, her tender child forsake,
What gentle heart that may from tears refrain
Or whosoever fierce that would no pity take,
To see (alas) this guiltles infant slain,
For sorry heart the tears mine eyes do stayne
To think what sorrow shall her heart oppress,
Her little child to leese remediless,
The double cares of Hectors wife to wayle,
Good Ladies have your tears in readiness.
And you with whom should pity most prevail.
Rue on her grief: bewail her heaviness.
With sobbing heart, lament her deep distress,
When she with tears shall take leave of her son,
And now (good Ladies) hear what shall be done.
THE THIRD ACT.
Andromacha. Senex. Ulysses. ALas ye careful company
why hale ye thus your hayres?
Why beat you so your boiling breasts
and stayne your eyes with tear?
The fall of Troy is new to you
but unto me not so,
I have foreseen this careful case
ere this time long ago
When fierce Achilles Hector slew and drew the Corpse about
Then then me thought I wist it well, that Troy should come to naught
In sorrows sonke I senceles am and wrapped (alas) in woe,
But sone except this babe me held, to Hector would I go
This seely fool my stomach tames amid my misery,
And in the hour of heauiest happes permittes me not to die,
This only cause constraynes me yet the gods for him to pray
With tract of time prolonges my pain, delays my dying day:
He takes from me the lack of fear the only fruit of ill.
For while he lives yet have I left whereof to fear me still.
No place is left for better chance with worst we are oppressed
To fear (alas) and see no hope is worst of all the rest.
Sen. What sudden fear thus moves your mind, and vexes you so sore?

And. Still still (alas) of one mishap there ryseth more and more,
Nor yet the doleful destenies of Troy be come to end.

Sen. And what more grievous chances yet prepare the Gods to send?

Andr. The caves and dens of hell be rent for Troyans greater fear
And from the bottoms of their tombs the hidden sprightes appear.
May none but Greeks alone from hell return to life again?
Would God the fates would finish soon the sorrows I sustain.
Death thankful were, a common care the Troyans all oppress,
But me (alas) amaseth most the fearful heaviness.
That all astonished am for dread, and horror of the sight:
That in my sleep appeard to me by dream this latter night.

Sen. Declare what sightes your dream has showed, and tell what does you fear

And. Two parts of all the silent night almost then passed were.
And then the clear seven clustered beams of stars: were fall to rest
And first the sleep so long unknown my wearyed eyes oppressed.
If this be sleep the astonished ma^e of mind in heavy mood,
When suddenly before mine eyes the spright of Hector stood.
Not like as he the Greeks was wont to battle to require:
Or when amid the Grecians ships, he threw the brandes of fire.
Nor such as raging on the Grees, with slaughtring stroke had slain
And bare indeed the spoils of him that did Achilles feign.
His countenance not now so bright, nor of so lively cheer,
But sad and heavy like to owres and clad with ugly hair
It did me good to see him though when shaking then his head:
Shake of thy sleep in have he said, and quickly leave thy bed:
Convey into some secret place our son (O faithful wife)
This only hope there is to help find mean to save his life.
Leave of thy piteous tears he said, do thou yet wayle for Troy?
Would God it lay on Ground full flat so ye might save the boy.
Up stir he said thy self in have convey him privily.
Save if ye may the tender blood of Hectors progeny
Then straight in trembling fear I wakt and rold mine eyes about
Forgettyng long my child pore wretch, and after Hector sought.
But straight (alas) I wist not how the Spright away did pass,
And me forsook before I could my husband once embrasse.
O child, O noble fathers brood and Trojans only joy,
O worthy seed of thauncient blood, and beaten house of Troy.
O image of thy father lo, thou lively bearst his face,
This countnaunce lo my Hector had, and even such was his pace.
The pitch of all his body such, his hands thus would he bear.
His shoulders high his threatening brows* even such as thine they were
O son: begot to late for Troy, but borne to soon for me,
Shall ever time yet come again, and happy day may be,
That thou may once revenge and build again the towers of Troy,
And to the town and Troyans both restore their name with joy?
But why do I (forgettyng state of present destenye),
So great things wish? enough for captives is to live only:
Alas what privy place is left my little child to hide?
What seat so secret may be found where thou may safely bide?
The tower that with the walls of go^s so valiant was of might,
Through all the world so notable, so flourishing to sight,
Is turnde to dust: and fire has al consumd'e that was in Troy,
Of all the town not so much now is left to hide the boy.
What place were best to choose for guile, the holy tomb is here,
That then mies sword will spare to spoil where sithe my husband dear.
Which costly work his father builte, king Pryame liberal:
And it up raisde with charges great, fo Hectors funeral.
Herein the bones and ashes both of Hector (lo) they lie,
Best is that I commit the son to his fathers custody.
A cold and fearful sweat does run, through o^t my members all,
Alas I careful wretch do fear, what chance may thee befall,

Sen. Hide him away: this only way has saved many more,
To make the enmies to believe, that they were dead before.
He will be sought: scant any hope remains of safenes,
The paise of his nobility does him so sore oppres:

Andr. What way were best to work: that none our doings might bewray

Sen. Let none bear witness what ye do remove them all away.

Andr. What if the enmies ask me: where Astianax both remain?

Sen. Then shall y^ boldly answer make that he in Troy was slain.

Andr. What shall it help to have him hid? at length they will him find.

Sen. At first the enmies rage is fierce, delay does slake his mind.

Andr. But what preuailes, since free from fear we may him never hide?

Sen. Let yet the wretch take his defense, me careless there to bide.

And. What land unknown out of the way what unfrequented place
May keep thee safe? who ayds our fear? who shall defend our case?
Hector, Hector that evermore thy friends did well defend
Now chiefly aid thy wife and child and us some succor send.
Take charge to keep and cover close the treasures of thy wife,
And in thy Ashes hyde thy son preserve in tomb his life.
Draw near my Child unto the Tomb, why fliest thou backward so?
Thou takst great scorn to lurk in dens thy noble heart I know.
I see thou art ashamed to fear shake of thy princely mind,
And bear thy breast as thee behoues as chance has thee assynd.
Behold our case: and se what flock remains now of Troy
The tomb: I woeful captive wretch and thou a seely boy,
But yield we must to sorry fates thy chance must break thy breast,
Go to, creep underneath thy fathers holy seats to rest.
If ought the fates may wretches help thou have thy sauegard there,
If not: already then pore fool thou have thy sepulchere.

Sen. The tomb him closely hides: but least your fear should him betray
Let him here lie and far from hence go ye some other way.

Andr. The less he fears that fears at hand, and yet if need be so,
If ye think meet a little hence for safety let us go.

Sen. A little while keep silence now refrain your plaint and cry,
His cursed foot now hither moves the Lord of Cephalie.

And, Now open earth, and thou my spouse from Stix rend up y^ ground,
Deep in thy bosom hyde thy son that he may not be found.
Ulysses comes with doubtful pace and changed countenance
He knittes in heart decetptful craft for some more grievous chance.

VI. Though I be made the messenger of heavy news to you,
This one thing first I shall desire that ye take this for true.
That though the words come from my mouth, and I my message tell
Of truth yet are they none of mine ye may believe me well.
It is the word of all the Greeks, and they the authors be,
Whom Hectors blood does yet forbid their countries for to see.
Our careful trust of peace unsure does still the Greeks detayne,
And evermore our doubtful fear yet drawth us back again.
And suffers not our wearyed hands, our weapons to forsake,
In child yet of Andromacha, while Troyans comfort take.

An. And says your Augure Calchas so?

Vli. Though Calchas nothing said
Yet Hector tells it us himself, of whose seed are we frayde.
The worthy blood of noble men often times we se it plain,
Does after in their heirs succeed and quickly springes again.
For so the hornles youngling yet, of high and sturdy b^ste,
With lofty neck and braunched brow, does shortly rule the rest.
The tender twig that of the lopped stock does yet remain,
To match the tree that bare the bough, in time startes up again
With equal top to former wood the room it does supply,
And spreads on soil allow the shade, to heaven his branches hye.
Thus of one spark by chance yet left it happens so full often.
The fire has quickly caught his force and flamth again aloft.
So scare we yet least Hectors blood might rise er it be long,
Fear castes in all thextremity and often interprets wrong.
If ye respect our case ye may not blame these old soldiars
Though after years and months twice flue, they fear again the wars.
And other trauails dreadyng Troy, not yet to be well won,
A great thing does the Grecyans move, the fear of Hectors son.
Rid us of fear, this stays our fleet, and pluckes us back again,
And in the haven our navy sticks, til Hectors blood be slain.
Count me not feerce for that by fates I Hectors son require,
For I as well if chance it would Orestes should desire.
But since that needs it must be so, bear it with pacient heart:
And Suffer that which Agamemnon suffered in good part.

And. Alas my child would God thou were yet in thy mothers hand.
And that I knew what destentes thee held or in what land.
For never should the mothers faith her tender child forsake:
Though through my breast the enmies al, their cruel weapons struck.
Nor though the Greeks with pinching bands of iron my hands had bound,
Or else in fervent flame of fire beset my body round.
But now my little Child (pore wretch alas) where might he be?
Alas, what cruel desteny what chance has hapt to thee?
Art thou yet ranging in the fields and wandrest there abroad?
Or smothred else in dusty smoke of Troy: or ouertroad?
Or have the Greeks thee slain (alas) and laughed to see thy blood?
Or torn art thou with jaws of beasts? or cast to fowls for food?

VI. Dissemble not, hard is for thee Ulysses to deceive,
I can full well the mothers crafts and subtilty perceive.
The pollecy of Goddesses Ulysses has undone.
Set al these feigned words assyde, tell me where is thy son?

An. Where is Hector? where all the rest that had with Troy their fall
Where Priamus? you ask for one but I require of all.

Vl. Thou shall constrained be to tell the thing thou do deny.

And. A happy chance were Death to her that does desire to dye.

Vli. Who most destres to die, would faynest live when death drawth on,
These noble words with present fear of death would soon be gone.

And. Ulysses if ye will constrayne Andromacha with fear,
Threaten my life for now to dye my chief desire it were.

Vl. With stripes with fire tormenting death we will the truth out wrest
And dolor shall thee force to tell the secrets of thy breast.
And what thy heart has depest hid for pain thou shall express,
Often times thextremity preuayles much more then gentleness,

And. Set me in midst of burning flame with wounds my body rent,
Use all the means of cruelty that ye may al invent.
Prove me with thirst and hunger both, and every torment try,
Pearce through my sides with burning yrons in prison let me lie.
Spare not the worst ye can deuyse (if ought be worse then this)
Yet never get ye more of me. I wot not where he is.

Vli. It is but vain to hyde the thing that straight ye will deteckt
No fears may move the mothers heart, she does them al neglect.
This tender love ye bear your child, wherein ye stand so stout,
So much more circumspectly warnth, the Greeks to look about.
Least after ten years tract of time and battle borne so far,
Some one should live that on our children might renew the war,
As for my self, what Calchas says, I would not fear at all
But on Telemachus I dread, the smart of wars would fall

And. Now will I make Ulysses glad and all the Greeks also,
Needs must thou woeful wretch confess declare thy hidden woe.
Rejoice ye sons of Atreus there is no cause of dread.
Be glad Ulysses tell the Greeks that Hectors son is dead.

Vl. By what assurance proves thou that? how shall we credit thee:

An^. What ever thing the enmies hand may th^ea ^en hap to me
Let speedy fates me slay forthwith, and earth me hyde at ones
And after death from tomb again, remove ye: Hectors bones,
Except my son already now, do rest among the dead.
And that except Astianax into his tomb be led.

Vliss. Then fully are the fates fulfild with Hectors childs disceace.
Now shall I bear the Grecians word, of sure and certain peace.
Ulysses why what do thou now^ the Greeks will every chone,
Believe thy words, whom creditst thou? the mothers tale alone.
Think thou for sauegard of her child the mother will not lie?
And dread the more the worse mischaunce to give her son to die?
Her faith she byndes with bond of oath, the truth to verify,
What thing is more of weight to fear, then so to swear and lie?
Now call thy crafts together al, bestirre thy wits and mind,
And show thy self Ulysses now, the truth herein to find.
Search well thy mothers mind: behold she weeps and wayleth out,
And here and there with doubtful pace, she raungeth al about,
Her careful ears she does apply to harken what I say,
More frayd she seems then sorrowful. Now work some wily way.
For now most need of wit there is and crafty pollecy,
Yet on^e again by other means I will the mother try.
Thou wretched woman may rejoice, that dead he is: (alas)
More doleful death by destenie for him decreed there was.
From Turrets top to have been cast and cruelly been slain.
Which only tower of all the rest does yet in Troy remain.

And. My spright failth me, my limbs do quake, fear does my wits co^founde
And as the Ise congeals with frost, my blood with could is bound.

Vl. She tre^bleth lo: this way, this way I will the truth out wreaste,
The mothers fear detecteth all the secrets of her breast:
I will renew her fear go sirs bestir ye spedely
To seek this enmye of the Greeks where ever that he lie.
Well done he will be found at length, go to still seek him out,
Now shall he dye. what do thou fear why do thou look about?

And Would God that any cause there were yet left that might me fray,
My heart at last now all is lost has laid all fear away.

Vliss. Sins that your child now has ye say already suffered death,
And with his blood we may not purge the hosts as Caschas says.
Our fleet pass not (as well inspired does Calchas prophecy)
Till Hectors ashes cast abroad the waves may pacify.
And tomb be rent now sins the boy has skapt his desteny.
Needs must we break this holy tomb where Hectors ashes lie.

An. What shall I do^^y mind distracted is with double fear.
On the one my son, on the other side my husbands ashes dear,
Alas which part should move me most, the cruel Gods I call
To witness with me in the truth, and Ghostes that guide thee all
Hector that nothing in my son is else that pleases me.
But thou alone God grant him life he might resemble thee:
Shall Hectors ashes drowned bee^hide I such cruelty,
To see his bones cast in the Seas? yet let Astyanax die,
And can thou wretched mother bide, thine own childs death to see?
And suffer from the hie towers top that headlong thrown he be?
I can and will take in goad part, his death and cruel pain,
So that my Hector after death be not removed again.
The boy that life and senses has may feel his pain and dye,
But Hector lo his death has plast at rest in tomb to lie
What do thou stay? determine which thou w^lt preserve of twain.
Art thou in doubt? save this: ^oe here thy Hector does remain,
Both Hectors be, the one quick of spright and drawing toward his strength
And one that may perhaps revenge his fathers death at length.
Alas I cannot save them both: I think that best it were,
That of the twain I saved him that does the Grecians fear.

Vl. It shall be done that Calchas words to us does prophecye,
And now shall all the sumptuous work be thrown down utterly

An That once ye sold?

Vl. I will it all from top to bottom rend.

An. The faith of Gods I call upon Achilles us defend,
And Pyrrhus aid thy fathers right.

Vl. This tomb abroad shall lie:

An. O mischief, never durst the Greeks show yet such cruelty.
Ye strain the temples and the Gods that most have favored you,
The dead ye spare not, on their tombs your fury rages now.
I will their weapons all resist my self with naked hand,
The ire of heart shall give me strength their armor to withstand.
As fierce as did the Amazones beat down the Greeks in fight,
And Menas once enspierd with God, in sacrifyce does smyght,
With spear in hand, and while with furyous pace she treads the ground
And wood as one in rage she strykes, and feels not the wound:
So will I run on midst of them and on their weapons dye,
And in defense of Hectors tomb among his ashes lie.

Vl. Cease ye: does rage and fury vain of women move ye ought?
Dispatch with speed what I command, and pluck down al to naught.

An. O slay me rather here with sword rid me out the way,
Break up the deep Auern, and rid my destenies delay.
Rise Hector and beset thy foes, break thou Ulysses ire,
A spright art good enough for him, behold he casts fire.
And weapon shakes with mighty hand do ye not Greeks him see?
Or else does Hectors spright appear but only unto me

Vl. Down quight withal.

An. What will thou suffer both thy sons be slain,
And after death thy husbands bones to be removed again?
Perhaps thou may with prayer yet aprease the Grecians all.
Else down to ground the holy tomb of Hector, straight shall fall.
Let rather die the child pore wretch and let the Greeks him kill,
Then father and the son should cause the tone the others ill.
Vllisses, at thy knees I fall, and hm^bly ask mercy,
These hands that no man's feet else knew, first at thy feet they lie.
Take pity on the mothers case and sorrows of my breast,
Vochsafe my prayers to receive and grant me my request.
And by how much the more the Gods have thee advanced hie,
More easily stryke the pore estate of wretched misery.
God grant the chaste bed of thy godly wife Penelope,
May thee receive and so again Laerta may thee see,
And that thy son Telemachus may meet thee joyfully.
His graundstres y^ares, and fathers wit, to pass full happily.
Take ptty on the mothers tears, her little child to save,
He is my only comfort left, and the only to^ I have.

Vl. Bring forth thy son and ask.

THE SECOND SCENE.
Andromacha, COme hither child out of the dens to me,
Thy wretched mothers lamentable store,
This Babe Ulysses (lo) this Babe is he.
That stays your ships and fears you so sore.
Submit thy self my son with humble hand,
And worship flat on ground thy masters feet,
Think it no shame as now the case does stand:
The thing that Fortune wilth a wretch is meet,
Forget thy worthy stock of Kingly kind,
Think not on Priams great nobility,
And put thy father Hector from thy mind,
Such as thy Fortune let thy stomach be,
Behave thy self as captive bend thy Knee,
And though thy grief pearce not thy tender years,
Yet learn to wa^le thy wretched state by me,
And take ensample at thy mothers tears.
Once Troy has seen the weeping of a child,
When little Priam turnde Alcides threats,
And he to whom all beasts in strength did yield,
That made his way from hell, and brake their gates
His little enmies tears yet overcame,
Priam he said receive thy liberty,
In seat of honor keep thy Kingly name,
But yet thy Sceptors rule more faithfully.
Lo such the conquest was of Hercules.
Of him yet learn your hearts to mollify,
Do only Hercles cruel weapons please,
And may no end be of your cruelty?
No less then Pryam, kneeles to thee this boy,
That lies and asks only life of thee.
As for the rule and governance of Troy
Where ever ^ortune will there let i^ be.
Take mercy on the mothers ruthful tears
That with their streams my cheeks do ouerflow,
And spare this guiltles insantes tender years
That humbly falls at thy feet so low.
THE THIRD SCENE.
Ulysses, Andromacha, Astianax, OF truth the mothers great sorrow,
does move my heart full sore.
But yet the mothers of the Greeks,
of need must move me more,
To whom t^ts boy may cause in time
a great calamtie.
Andr. May ever he the burnt ruins
of Troy reedifie?
And shall these hands in time to come, ereckt the town again?
If this be th only help we have, there does no hope remain
For Troy, we stand not now in case to cause your fear of mind,
Does ought avail his fathers force, or stock of noble kind?
His fathers heart abated was, he drawn the walls abought.
Thus evil haps, the haughttest heart at lengh they bring to naught,
If ye will needs oppress a wretch what thing more grievous were
Then on his noble neck he should the yoke of bondage bear?
To serve in life does any man this to a King deny?

Vl. Not Ulysses with his death, but Calchas prophecy.

An. O false inuentor of deceit and heinous cruelty,
By manhood of whose hand in war no man did ever dye.
But by disceipt and crafty train of mind that mischief seeks,
Before this time full many one dead is, yea of the Greeks,
The Prophets words and guilties Gods say thou my son require,
Nay: mischief of thy breast it is, thou do his death desire.
Thou night soldier, and stout of heart a little child to stay.
This enterprise thou takste alone and that by open day.

Vl. Ulysses manhood well to Greeks to much to you is known,
I may not spend the time in words, our Navy will be gone

And. A little stay, while I my last farewell give to my child,
And have with often embracing him my greedy sorrows filled.

Vli. Thy grievous sorrows to redress, would God it lay in me,
But at thy will to take delay of time I grant it thee.
Now take thy last leave of thy Son, and fill thy self with tears.
Often times the weeping of the eyes, the inward grief out weakes.

An. O dear, O sweet, thy mothers pledge, farewell my only joy,
Farewell the flower of honor left of beaten house of Troy.
O Troyans last calamity and fear to Grecians part
Farewell thy mothers only hope, and vain comfort of heart.
Often wish I thee thy fathers strength and half thy graundstres years
But all for naught the Gods have all dispoynted our desires.
Thou never shall in regal court thy sceptors take in hand,
Nor to thy people give decrees nor lead with law thy land.
Nor yet thine enmies overcome by might of handy stroke.
Nor send the conquerde nations all under thy servile yoke.
Thou never shall beat down in fight, and Greeks with sword pursew,
Nor at thy Charyot Pyrrhus pluck, as Achill Hector drew
And never shall these tender hands thy weapons weild and wrest,
Thou never shall in woods pursue the wyld and mighty beast.
Nor as accustomed is by guyse and sacrifice in Troy,
With measure swift: between the aulters shall thou dance with joy.
O grievous kind of cruel death that does remain for thee,
More woeful things then Hectors death the walls of Troy shall see.

Vliss. Now break of al thy mothers tears I may no more time spend.
The grievous sorrows of thy heart will never make an end.

An. Ulysses spare as yet my tears and grant awhyle delay,
To close his eyes yet with my hands er he depart away.
Thou die but young: yet feared thou art thy Troy does wait for thee,
Go noble heart thou shall again the noble Troyans see.

Asti. Help me mother?

An. Alas my child why take thou hold by me?
In vain thou calst where help none is I can not succor thee.
As when the little tender beast that hears the Lion cry,
Straight for defense he seeks his damme, and crouching down does lie,
The cruel beast when once removed is the damme away,
In greedy ^aw with ravening bit does snatch the tender pray
So straight the enmies will thee take, and from my side thee bear.
Receive my kiss and tears pore child, receive my rented hair.
Depart thou hence now full of me, and to thy father go,
Salute my Hector in my name and tell him of my woe
Complain thy mothers grief to him if former (...) may move,
The sprightes: and that in funeral flame they leese not all their love.
O cruel Hector suffrest thou thy wife to be oppressed?
With bond of Grecians heavy yoke and lie thou still at rest?
Achilles rose: take here again my tears and rented hear,
And (all that I have left to send) this kiss thy father bear.
Thy coat yet for my comfort leave, the tomb has touched it
If of his ashes aught here lie I Will seek it every whit.

Vl. There is no measure of thy tears I may no longer stay,
Defer no further our return break of our ships delay.

Chorus altered by the translatour. O Jove that leadst the lamps of fire,
and deckst with flaming stars the sky.
Why is it ever thy desire
to care their course so orderly?
That now the frost the leaves has vvorn^
and now the spri^g does close the tree.
Now fiery Leo rypes the corn,
and still the soil should changed be?
But why art thou that all do guide,
between whose hands the poale does sway,
And at whose vvil the Orbs do slide, careless of man's estate alvvay?
Regarding not the goodmans case, nor caryng how to hurt the ill.
Chance bears rule in every place and turns man's estate at will.
She geues the wrong the upper hand the better part she does oppress,
She makes the highest lovv to stand, her Kingdom all is orderlesse.
O parfite proof of her frailty, the princely tovvres of Troybeat down,
The flovvre of Asia here ye see with turn of hand quight overthrown.
The ruthful end of Hectors son, vvho^ to his death the Greeks have led,
His fatal hour is come and gone, and by this time the Child is ded:
Yet still (alas) more cares increase, O Troyans doleful destenie,
Fast does approach the maids decease, and now Polixena shall die.
THE FOVRTH ACT.
Helena, Andromacha, Hecuba WHat ever woeful wedding yet,
were cause of funeral,
Of wayling, tears, blood, slaughter else
or other mischiefs all,
A worthy watch for Helena,
and meet for me it ware,
My wedding torch has been the cause
of all The Troyans care.
I am constraynd to hurt them yet,
after their overthrow,
The false and feigned marriages of Pyrrhus must I show.
And give the maid the Greeks attire and by my pollecy:
Shall Paris sister be betrayed and by disceypt shall die.
But let her be beguiled thus, the less should be her pain
If that unware without the fear of death: she might be slain.
What ceasest thou the will of Greeks, and message to fulfill?
Of hurt constraynd the fault returnth to th'auter of the ill.
O noble Virgin of the famous house and stock of Troy,
To thee the Grecians have me sent I bring thee news of joy,
The Gods rue on thy afflicted state more merciful they be,
A great and happy marriage lo, they have prepared for thee.
Thou never should if Troy had stood, so nobly wedded be,
Nor Priam never could prefer thee to so hie degree.
Whom flower of all the Grecians name the prince of honor hie,
That bears the Scepters over all, the land of Thessaly
Does in the law of wedlock chose, and for his wise require.
To sacred rightes of lawfu bed, does Pyrrhus thee desire:
Lo Thetis great with all the rest, of Gods that guide by sea.
Each one shall thee account as theirs and toy by wedding day.
And Peleus shall thee daughter call when thou art Pirrhus wife,
And Nereus shall account thee his the space of all thy life.
Put of thy monrning garment now, this regal vesture wear
Fogret henceforth thy captive state and seemly broyd thy hair.
The fall has lift thee higher up, and does thee more advance
Often to be taken in the war does bring the better chance
An. This ill the Troyans never knew in all their griefs and pain
Before this time ye never made us to rejoice in vain.
Troy towers give light, O seemly time for marriage to be made,
Who would refuse the wedding day that Helayne does persuade?
The Plague and ruin of each part behold do thou not see,
These tombs of noble men, and how their bones here scattered be?
Thy brydebed has been cause of this for thee all these be ded
For thee the blood of Asia both and Europe has been shed.
When thou in joy and pleasure both the fighting folk from far,
Have viewde: in doubt to whom to wish the glory of the war.
Go to, prepare the martages, what need the Torches light?
Behold the Towers of Troy do shine with brands that blase full bright.
O Troyans all set to your hands, this wedlock celebrate:
Lament this day with woeful cry and tears in seemly rate.

^el. Though care do cause the want of wit, and reasons rule deny,
And heavy hap does ofttymes hate his mates in misery
Yet I before most hateful judge dare well defend my part,
That I of all your grievous cares sustain the greatest smart.
Andromacha for Hector weeps, for Priam Hecuba,
For only Paris privily bewayleth Helena.
A hard and grievous thing it is captivity to bear,
In Troy that yoke I suffered long a prisoner whole ten year.
Turned are the fates, Troy beaten down, to Greece I must repeare,
The native country to have lost is ill, but worse to fear.
For dread thereof you need not care your euilles all be past,
On me both parts will vengeance take al lights to me at last.
Whom each man prisoner takes God wot she stands in slipper stay,
And me not captive made by lot yet Paris led away.
I have been cause of all these wars, and then your woes were wrought,
When first your ships the Spartayn Seas and land of Grecia sought.
But if the Goddess wild it so that I their pray should be,
And for reward to her beautyes judge she had appointed me,
Then pardon Paris: think this thing in wrathful judge does lie,
The sentence Menelaus geues, and he this case shall try.
Now turn thy playntes Andromacha, and weep for Polyxeyne
Mine eyes for sorrows of my heart their tears may not refrain.

An. Alas, what care makes Heleyn weep? what grief does she lament?
Declare what crafts Ulysses castes, what mischief has he sent?
Shall she from height of Idey hill be hedlong tombled down?
Or else out of the turrets top in Troy shall she be thrown?
Or will they cast her from the clieues into Sygeon seas?
In bottom of the surging waves to end her ruthful days?
Show what thy countnaunce hides and tell the secrets of thy breast.
Some woes in Pyrhus wedding are far worse then all the rest.
Go to, give sentence on the maid, pronounce her desteny:
Delude no longer our mishappes, we are prepared to die.

H. Would God the'xpou^der of the Gods would give his dome so right
That I also on point of sword might leese the loathsome light,
Or at Achilles tomb with ^^ake of Pyrrhus hand be ^apne:
And bear a part of al thy fates O wretched Polixeyne.
Whom yet Achilles woeth to wed, and where his ashes lie,
Requires that thy blood be shed, and at his tomb to die.

An. Behold lo how her noble mind of Death does gladly hear,
She deckes her self? her regal weed in seemly wise to wear,
And to her head she settes her hand the broyded hair to lay,
To wed she thought it Death, to die she thinks a wedding day
But help (alas) my mother sounds to hear her daughters death,
Arise pluck up your heart and take again the panting breath.
Alack good mother how slender stay, that does thy life sustain?
A little thing shall happy thee thou art almost past pain.
Her breath returns: she does reuyue, her lims their life do take.
So see when wretches feign would die, how death does them forsake.

Hec. Does yet Achilles live (alas) to work the Troyans spite?
Does he rebel against us yet? O hand of Paris light.
The very tomb and ashes lo* yet thirsts for our blood,
A happy heap of children late on every side me stood.
It wearied me to deal the mothers kiss among them al.
The rest are lost, and this alone now does me mother call.
Thou only child of Hecuba, a comfort left to me.
A stayer of my sorry state and shall I now leese thee?
Depart O wretched soul, and from this careful carcas fly,
And ease me of such ruthful fates, to see my daughter die.
By weepyng wets (alas) my eyes, and stains them over al,
And down my cheeks the sodeine streams and showers af tears do fall.
But thou dear daughter may be glad, Cassandra would rejoice,
Or Hectors wife thus wed to be if they might have their choice.

And. We are the wretches Hecuba in cursed case we stand.
Whom straight the ship shall toss by seas into a foreign land.
But as for Heleyns grieves be gone and turned to the best,
She shall again her natyue country se and live at rest.

Hele. Ye would the more envy my state if ye might know your own,

Andr. And grouth there yet more grief to me that erst I have not known?

Hele. Such masters must ye serve as does by chance of lots befall.

Andr. Whose servant am I then become whom shall I master call?

Hele. By lot ye fall to Pyrhus hands you are his prisoner.

Andr Cassandra is happy, fury saues perhaps and Phoebus her.

Hele. Chief king of Greeks Cassandra keeps and his captive is she.

Hec. Is any one among them all that prisoner would have me?

Hele You chaunsed to Ulysses are his pray ye are become.

Hec. Alas what cruel* dyre and yrefull dealer of the dome.
What god unjust does so divide, the captives to their lords?
What grievous arbiter is he? that to such choice accordes,
What cruel hand to wretched folk, so evil fa^es has cast?
Who has among Achilles armor, Hectors mothers plaste?
Now am I captive, and beset with all calamity.
My bondage grieves me not, but him to serve it shameth me.
He that Achilles spoils has won, shall Hectors also have:
Shall barraine land enclosde with seas receive my boanes in grave?
Lead me Ulysses where thou wylt, lead me. I make no stay,
My master I, and me my fates, shall follow every way.
Let never calm come to the seas, but let them rage with wind,
Come fire and sword, mine own mischaunce and Priams let me find.
In mean time haps this deep distres my cares can know no calm:
I ran the race with Priamus, but he has won the Palm,
But Pyrrhus comes with swiftned pace and thretning brows does wrest.
What stayste thou Pyrrhus? strike thy sword now through this woeful breast.
And both at ones the parents of thy fathers wife now slay,
Murderer of age, likes thee her blood? he draw my daughter away
Defile the gods and stain the sprights, of hell with slaughtred blood,
To ask your mercy what auayles? our prayers do no good.
The vengeance ask I on your ships, that it the gods may pleas,
According to this sacrifice, to guide you on the seas.
This wish I to your thousand sails, Gods wrath light on them all,
Even to the ship that bears me, what ever may befall.

Chorus. A Comfort is to man's calamity
A doleful flock of fellows in distres.
And sweet to him that mournes in misery
To here them wayle whom sorrows like oppre^
In deepest care his grief him bites the les,
That his estate bewayles not all alone,
But sees with him the tears of many one.
For still it is the chief delight in woe,
And joy of them that sonke in sorrows are,
To see like fates by fall to many more,
That may take part of all their woeful fare,
And not alone to be oppressed with care.
There is no wight of woe that does complain,
When all the rest do like mischaunce sustain.
In all this world if happy man were none,
None (though he were) would think himself awretch.
Let once the rich with heaps of Gold be gone,
Whose hundred head his pastors ouerretch,
Then would the poor man's heart begin to stretch.
There is no wretch whose life him does displease,
But in respect of those that live at ease.
Sweet is to him that stands in deep distress,
To see no man in joyful plight to be,
Whose only vessel wind and wave oppress,
Full sore his chance bewayles and weepeth he,
That with his own none others wrack does see
When he alone makes shipwreck one the sand,
And naked falls to long desired land.
A thousand sail who sees to drench in Seas,
With better will the storm has ouerpast
His heavy hap does him the less displease
When broaken boardes abroad be many cast,
And shipwrackt ships to shore they flit full fast,
With doubled waves when stopped is the flood,
With heaps of them that there have lost their good.
Full sore did Pirrhus Helens loss complain,
What time the leader of his flock of sheep,
Upon his back alone he bare them twain,
And wet his Golden locks amid the deep,
In piteons playnt (alas) he began to weep.
The death of her it did him deep displease,
That shipwreck made amid the drenching seas.
And piteous was the playnt and heavy mood
Of woeful Pyrrha and eke Deucalion
That naught beheld about them but the flould,
When they of all mankind were left alone
Amid the seas full sore they made their moan
To see themselves thus left alive in woe
When neither land they saw, nor fellows more.
Anon these playnts and Tro^ans tears shall quail,
And here and there the ship them toss by seas:
When trompets sound shall warn to hoyse up sail,
And through the waves with wind to seek their ways
Then shall these captives go to end their days
In land unknown: when once with hasty ore
The drenching deep they take and shun the shore.
What state of mind shall then in wretches be?
When shore shall sink from sight and seas arise?
When Idey hill to lurk aloof they see?
Then point with hand from far where Troia lies,
Shall child and mother: talking in this wise:
Lo yonder Troy, where smoke it fumeth hie,
By this the Troyans shall their country spy.
THE FIFTH ACT.
Nuncius, Andromacha. Hecuba. ODyre, fierce, wretched, horrible,
O cruel fates accurste,
Of Mars his ten years bloodshed blows
the wofulst and the worst.
Alas which should I first bewail?
thy cares Andromacha?
Or else lament the wretched age
of woeful Hecuba?
Hec. What ever man's calamityes
ye wayle for mine it is.
I bear the smart of al their woes each other feels but his
Who ever he, I am the wretch all happes to me at last.

Nun Slain is the maid, and from the walls of Troy the child is cast.
But voth (as them became) they took their death with stomach stout.

And. Declare the double slaughters then, and tell the whole throughout.

Nun. One tower of all the rest ye know does yet in Troy remain,
Where Pryan wonted was to sit, and view the armies twain.
His little Nephew eke with him to lead* and from a far,
His fathers fightes with fire and sword to show on feats of war.
This tower, sometime well known by fame, and Troyans honor most.
Is now with captains of the Greeckes, beset on every coast.
With swift recourse and from the ships, in clustred heaps anon.
Both tagge and ragge they run to gase what thing should there be done
Some clime the hills to seek a place where they might see it best,
Some one the rocks a tiptoe stand to ouerloke the rest.
Some on their re^ples wear the pine, some beech, some crowns of bay,
For garlandes torn is every tree, that stands in they way,
Some from the highest mountains top aloof beholds all.
Some scale the buildinges half thurne, and some the ruinous wall.
Yea some there were (O ^^tichtee lo) that for the more despyghte.
The tomb of Hector sits upon beholders of the sight.
With princely pace Ulysses then past through the preased band
Of Greeks, King Priams little nephew leading by the hand.
The Child with vnrepyning gate past through his enmies hands,
Up toward the walls, and as anon in turrets top he stands,
From thence adowne his lofty looks he cast on every part,
The nearer death more free from care he seemd* and fear of heart.
Amid his foes his stomach swelles. and fierce he was to sight.
Like Tygere whel^e, that th^rats in vain with tue les chap to bight.
Alas, for pi^^y then each one, rue on his tender years,
And all the route that present were, for him they fhed their tears,
Yea not Ulysses them restraynd, but trickling down they sal,
And only he, wept not (poor fool) whom they bewailed al.
But while on Gods Ulysses called, and Calchas* words expound,
In midst of Pryams land (alas) the child leapt down to ground.

And. What cruel Calchas could or scith such slaughter rake in hand
Or by the shore of Caspyan Sea, what barbarous lawles land.
Busyridis to th'aulters yet no infantes blood has shed
Nor never yet were children slain for feast of Diomed.
Who shall alas in tomb thee lay, or hyde thy limbs again?

Nu. What limbs from such a headlong fall could in a child remain,
His bodies payse thrown down to ground, has batred al his bones.
His face, his noble fathers marks are spoyld against the stones.
His neck unjointed is: his head so dashed with flint stoane stroke*
That scattered is the brain about, the scul is al to broake.
Thus lies he now dismembered corpse, deformd and all to rent.

An. Lo herein does he yet likewise, his father represent.

Nun. What time the Child has headlong feign thus from the walls of Troy,
And at the Greeks the selves bewaild y^ slaughter of the Boy,
Yet straight return they back, and at Achilles tomb again
The second mischief go to work the death of Polixeine.
This tomb the waves of surging seas, beset the utter side,
The other part the fields encloase about, and pastors wide.
In vale enuyroned with hills, that round about do rise,
A sloape on height erected are the banks in Theater wise.
By all the shore then swarm the Greeks, and thick on heaps they prease
Some hope that by her death they shall their ships delay release.
Some other ^oy their enmies stock thus beaten down to be:
A great part of the people, both the slaughter hate, and see.
The Troyans eke no ^esse frequent their own calamityes
And all affrayd, beheld the last of all their miseryes.
When first proceeded torches bright as guise of wedlock is.
And author thereof led the way the Lady Tindaris.
Such wedlock ^ray the Troyans then, God send Hermiona
And would God to her husband so* restoard were Helena.
Fear mas^ each part, but Polixe^ne her bashful look down cast:
And more then erst her glittring eyes and beauty shyn'd at last.
As sweetest seems then Phoebus light, when down his beams do sway,
When stars again with night at hand oppressed the doubtful day.
Astonnted much the people were, and all they her commend,
And now much more then ever erst, they praised her at her end.
Some with her beauty moved were, some with her tender years:
Some to behold the turns of chance, and how each thing thus wears
But most them moves her valiant mind, and lofty stomach hie,
So strong, so stout, so ready of heart and well prepared to dye.
Thus pass they forth an^ bold before King Pirrhus goes the maid,
They pity her, they marvel her, their hearts were all affrayde.
As soon as then the hard hill top (where die she should) they trod,
And hie upon his fathers tomb the youthful Pyrrhus stood.
The manly maid she never shronke one foot, nor backward drew,
But boldly turns to meet the stroke, with sloute unchanged hew,
Her courage moves each one, and lo a strange thing monstrous like.
That Pyrbus even himself stood still, or dread, and dur^st not strike.
But as he had, his glittring sword in her to hills up done,
The purple blood, at mortal wound, then gushing ou^ (...) spoon.
Ne yet her courage her forsook, when dieng in that ^^ounde,
She fell as the'rth should her revenge with lieful rage to ground.
Each people wept the Troyans first with privy fearful cry,
The Grectans eake, each one bewayld her death apparently.
This order had the sacrifyce, her blood the tomb up drunk,
No drop remaynth above the ground, but down forthwith it sonke.

Hec. Now go, now go ye Greeks, and now repair ye safely home.
With careless ships and hoised sails now cut the salt sea foam.
The Child and Virgin both be slain, your battles finished are.
Alas where shall I end my age? or whether bear my care?
Shall I my daughter, or my nephew, or my husband moan?
My country else, or all at once? or else my self alone?
My wish is death that children both and virgins fiercely takes
Where ever cruel death does have to strike, it me forsakes,
Amid the enmies weapons all, amid both sword and fire,
All night sought for, thou fleest from me, that do thee most desire.
Not flame of fire, not fall of tower, not cruel enmies hand
Has rid my life, how near (alas) could death to Priam stand?

Nun. Now captives all with swift recourse repair ye to the says,
Now spread the ships their sayls abroad, and forth they seek their ways.

FINIS.
THE SEVENTH TRAGEDYE OF L. ANNAEVS SENECA, Entitled MEDEA: Translated out of
Latin into Engiishe, by JOHN STVDLEY.
The Argument. To the Tragedy, by the Translator.
CAre sore did grype Medeas heart to see
Her Jason, whom she tendered as her life,
And rescued had from plunge of perils free,
Renouncing her, to take another wife.
Love spent in vain breeds hate and malice rife
Enkindling coals, whose heat and greedy flame
(Save streams of blood,) naught else can quench the same.
Medea mad in troubled mind does muse,
On vengeance fell, to quit her grievous wrong.
Rough plagues at length entendeth she to use:
Ill venomous things she charms, with charming song
Seeks out a Bane made of their poison strong,
In Traiterous gifts a Robe, and chain of Gold,
Nycely she does the hidden poison fold.
Sent are the Gyfts to Creuse and her Sire,
They taking them that brought their dole to pass,
Unware are burnt by means of charmed fire,
Due vengeance yet for Jason greater was,
Life first on child by Mothers hand (alas)
Expired has, which though it him aggryse,
Yet his other child she slayes before his eyes.
The Speakers names.
MEDEA. CHORUS. NVTRIX. CREON. JASON. NVNTIVS.
THE FIRST ACT.
Medea, O Gods whose grace does guide their ghostes
that joy in wedlock pure,
O Juno thou Lucina hight,
on whom the chary cure
Allotted is of those, that groan
in paynfull chyldhed bands,
O Pallas by whose heavenly art,
Sir Typhis cunning hands
Have learnde to bridle with his helm his newly framed boat,
Wherewith the force of fighting fluds he breaking rides a floate.
O God whose forked Mace does storms in rigor rough appeas,
And cause the ruffling surges couch amid the rampinge Seas:
O Titan who upon the swift and werling Hemisphaer
Deuides the cheerful day and night by egall turns t'appere,
O threefolde shapen Hecate that sendest forth thy light,
Unto thy silent Sacrifice that offered is by night,
By whom my Jason swear to me O heavenly powers all,
And ye on whom Medea may with safer conscience call,
O Dungeon dark, most dreadful den of everlasting night,
O dampened Ghosts: O kingdom set against the Gods aright:
O Lord of sad and lowering lakes, O Lady dyre of Hell,
(Whom though that Pluto stale by force yet did his troth excel
The ficle faith of Iasons love, that he to me does beave,)
With cursed throat I conjure you, O grisly Ghostes appear.
Come out, come out, ye hellish hagges, feuenge this deed so dyre,
Bring in your scrauing pawrs a burning brand of deadly fire.
Rise up ye hiddeous devilish Feendes, as dreadful as ye wear,
When unto me in wedlock state ye did sometime appear.
Work ye, work ye, the doleful death of this new wedded Wife.
And martyr ye this Father in law: depryue of breath and life
King Creons ruthful family: in plunge of passing pain
Torment ye me, that on my spoule do wish this woe to raygne:
Preserve my Iasons life, but yet let him be bayted out
A myching, roging, ru^nagate, in foreign towns about.
To pass from door to door, with care to beg his needy bread,
Not knowing in what harbring place to couch his curssed head:
A banished wretch, disdaynde of all, and still in fear of life,
Then let him wish ten thousand times for me again his Wife:
This famous gest whom every man will entertayne and have,
Let him be driven at strangers gates the table ctu^mes to crave.
And that my bitter bannings may with mischief most abound,
God grant in gulf of like distress his children may be drounde,
To synke in sorrows storms, that do their mother ouerflowe:
Now, now, I have, I have the full reueng of all my woe,
I have dispatched: my pyteous playnt and words in vain I lose:
What shall not I with vyolence get up against my foes?
And wring out of their wrested hands the wedding torch so bright?
Shall I not force the firmament to lose his shrinking light?
What does my Graundsirs Phoebus face this heavy hap behold?
And standing gasyng at this gear yet westwarde is he rolde,
On glystring chariot hoysted high, and keeps his beaten Race,
Amid the crystal colourde sky, why turns he not his Face,
Retyring fast into the East back up the day to twyne?
O Father Phoebe to me, to me, thy Chariot reins resign,
That I advanced up, about the marble skies may ride,
Bequearh thy bridle unto me, and give me grace to guide
Thy yoked prauncing teame, with yerking lasshe of burning whip,
That with thy fervent fyry beams on purple poale do skip.
Let Corynth country burnt to dust by force of flame and fire
Give place, that both the iumbled seas may join: whom to retire
It does compel, and dassheth of from bank on either side,
Least meet in one their channels might, whose streams he does divide,
No way to work their deadly woe I have but this at hand,
That to the wedding I should bear a ruthsull brydall brande,
Anoying Creons careless Court: when finished I have
Such solemn service, as that right of sacrafice does crave,
Then at the Aulters of the Gods my children shall be slain,
With crimsen colourde blood of Babes their Aulters will I stayne.
Through Lyners, Lungs, the Lights and Heart, through every gut, and gal,
For vengeance break away perforce, and spare no blood at all:
If any lusty life as yet within thy soul do rest,
It ought of ancient courage still do dwell within my breast,
Exite all foolysh Female fear, and pity from thy mind,
And as th'untamed Tigers use to rage and rave unkind,
That haunt the croking combrous Caves, and clumpred frosen cliues,
And craggy Rocks of Caucasus, whose bitter cold depryues
The soil of all Inhabitours, permit to lodge and rest,
Such saluage brutish tyranny within thy brazen breast.
What ever hurly burly wrought does Phasis understand,
What mighty monstrous bloody feate I wrought by Sea or Land:
The like in Corynth shall be seen in most outrageous guife,
Most hyddious, hateful, horrible, to hear, or see with eyes,
Most devilish, desperate, dreadful deed, yet never known before,
Whose rage shall force heaven, earth, and hell to quake and tremble sore,
My burning breast that rowles in wrath, and does in rancour boil,
Sore thrysteth after blood, and wounds with slaughter, death, and spoil,
By renting racked lyms from lyms to drive them down to grave:
Tush, these be but as Fleabytings, that mentioned I have:
As weyghty things as these I did in greener girlishe age,
Now sorrows smart does rub the gall and frets with sharper rage.
But since my womb has yielded fruict, it does me well behoue,
The strength and parlous puissaunce of weightier illes to prous.
Be ready wrath, with all thy might that fury kindle may,
Thy foes to their destruction be ready to assay:
Of thy deuorsement let the Price to match, and counterpayse
The proud and precious pryncely pomp of these new wedding days.
How will thou from thy spouse depart? as him thou followed have
In blood to bath thy bloody hands and traytrous lives to wast.
Break of in time these long delays, abanden now again,
This lewd alliance, got by guilt, with greater guilt refrain,
Chorus altered by the Translatour. WHo has not wist that windy words be vain,
And that in talk of trust is not the ground,
Here in a mirror may he see it plain,
Medea so by proof the same has found.
Who being blind by blinded Venus Boy,
Her bleared Eyes could not behold her bliss:
Nor spy the present poison of her Joy,
While in the grass the Serpent lurked is,
The shaft that flew from Cupids golden bow,
With feathers so has dimd her daseld Eyes,
That cannot see to shun the way of woe:
The ranckling head in dented heart that lies,
So dulles the same, that can not understand
The cause that brought false Jason out of Greece,
To come unto her fathers fertile Land,
Is not her love, but love of golden Fleece.
Yet was his speech so pleasant and so mild,
His tongue so filde, his promises so fair,
Sweet was the fowlers Song that has beguilde
The seely byrd, brought to the limed snare.
Faith, in his Face, trust shined in his Eyes,
The blushing brow plain meaning seemde to show.
In double heart black treason hydden lies,
Dissembling thoughts that weaue the web of woe.
The honyed Lyppes, the tongue in sugar dept
Do sweet the poison rank within the breast,
In subtle show of painted sheath is kept,
The rusty knife of treason deemed least:
Life seems the bayte to sight that lies brim,
Death is the hook that vnderlies the same,
The Candell blase delights with burning trim,
The Fly, till she be burned in the flame.
Who in such shows least deemed any ills.
The hungry fyshe fears not the bayte to Brook,
Till up the line do pluck him by the gylls,
And fast in throat he feels the deadly hook.
Woe Jason, woe to thee most wretched man,
Or rather wretch Medea woe to thee,
Woe to the one that thus dissemble can,
Woe to the other that trained so might be.
Thoughtst thou Medea his eyes to be the glass,
Wherein thou might the Face of thoughts behold?
That in his breast with words so covered was,
As cancred brass with gloss of yealow gold?
Did thou suppose that nature (more then kind)
Had placde his heart his lying lyppes between,
His looks to be the mirror of his mind?
Faith in fair Face has sildome yet ben seen.
Who listneth to the flatering Maremaides note,
Must needs commit his tired eyes to sleep,
Yielding to her the taking of his boat,
That means unware to drown him in the deep.
What booteth thee Medea to betray
The golden Fleece, to fawning Isasons hand,
From Dragons teeth him safely to convey,
And fyry Bulls the warders of the land?
Why for his sake from father have thou fled,
And thrust thy self out from thy native soil?
Thy brothers blood what ayled thee to shed,
With Jason thus to travel and to toil?
Behold the meede of this thy good desarte,
The recompense that he to thee does give.
For pleasure, pain, for joy, most eger smarte,
With clogging cares in banishment to live.
Thou, and thy Babes, are like to beg and starve.
In Nation strange, (O miserable life)
While Jason from his promyses do swerve,
And takes delight in his new wedded Wife,
O Ground ungrate; that when the husband man
Has tilled it, to recompense his toil
No Corn, but Weeds, and Thystles render can,
To stinge his hands, that Fruict seeks of his Soil.
Such venom grows of pleasant colored flower:
Lo, Princes lo, what deadly poison sup
Of Bane, erst sweet, now turned into sower,
Medea drank out of a goulden Cup,
THE SECOND ACT.
Medea. Nutrix, AYe me, (alas) I am undone,
For at the Brydall cheer,
The warble note of wedding song
resounded in mine ear.
Yet for all this scant I my self,
yet scant believe I can,
That Jason would play such a prancke,
as most vntha^ckfull man,
Both of my Country, and my Sire, and kingdom me to spoil,
And yet forsake me wretch forlorn, to stray in foreign soil.
O has he such a stony heart, that does no more esteem,
The great good turns, and benefits that I imployde on him?
Who knows, that I have lewdly used enchauntments for his sake,
The rigor rough, and stormy rage, of swelling Seas to slake.
The grunting fiery foming Bulls, whose smoking guts were stuffed,
With smoltring fumes, that from their Jaws, and nosthrils out they puffed.
I stopped their gnashi^g mou^ching mouths, I que^cht their burning breath,
And vapors hot of stewing paunch, that else had wrought his death,
Or feeds he thus his sansy, fond, to think my skill of charm,
Abated is, and that I have no power to do him harm?
Brstract of wits, with wavering mind perplexed on every part,
I tossed, and turmoyled am, with wayward crasy heart.
Now this, now that, and neither now, but now another way,
By diverse means I toil, that so my wrong reueng I may,
I would the wretch a brother had: but what? he has a Wife.
Go cut her throat, with ghastly wounds bereue her of her life.
On her i will work my deadly spite: her, her alone I crave,
To quit such bitter sowsing storms, as I sustained have.
If any graund no^orious guilt in all Pelasga Land
Be put in practice, yet unknown unto thy harming hand,
Thereof to get experience the time does now begin:
Thy former feats do bid thee take good hope, to thryue herein:
Let all thy guilts with thronging thick assemble thee to aid,
The golden Fleece (the chief Novel) of Colchis I Will betrayde.
My tender Brother eke, that with my Syer did me pursue,
Whom with his secret parts cut of, I wicked Virgin slew,
Whose shreaded and dismembered corpse, with sword in gobbits hewd,
(A woeful Coarse toth' Fathers heart) on Pontus ground I strewed.
How hory headded Pelias his wythred age to shyft
To greener years, for longer life: his daughters by my dryft
His members all and mangled flesh with licour scalding hot
Ysodden, and perboyled have, in seething brazen pot.
How often in heinous blood have these my cruel hands been dyed?
And never any guilt as yet by wrath inflamde I tried.
But now the parlous poysning wound of Cupids percing dart,
Does boil and rage within my breast, it ranckles at my heart.
But how could Jason it redress, whom fortunes froward will
Has yield unto another hand, at lust to save or spill?
O rage of rusty cancred mind, this sclaundrous talk amend,
If Fortunes grace will grant it thus, let him unto his end
Live still my Jason as he was: but if not Jason mine,
Yet caytife suffer Jason live, though Jason none of thine:
Who being mindful still of us some favor let him show,
For these good turns that our good will could erst on him bestow:
King Creon is in all the fault, and only worthy blame,
Who puffed up with Scepter proud, unable for to frame
His tickle mind to modesty, made breach twixt us again,
Whom Hymen's bands, and link of love had made but one of twain,
By whom eke from her tender brats the mother (wretch) is drawn,
He breaks the vow, that gaged is with such a precious pawn.
Seek after such a villaynes blood, in daunting pangs of smart
Let him alone be surely dowst, such is his due desert,
A dungell hept of Cinders burnt his Pallayce make I shall,
That Malea where in winding strights, the lingering ships due crall,
Shall gase on smolthring turrets tops turmoylde in crackling flame.
NV. For godsake (Madame) I you pray your tongue to silence frame.
Eke hyde your privy languishing and grief in secret vain:
Who with a modest mind abides the Spurs of pricking pain,
And suffers sorrows patiently, may it repay again.
Who bears a privy grudge in breast, and keeps his malice close,
When least suspection is thereof, may most annoy his Foes.
He leeseth opportunity who vengeance does require,
That shows by open sparks the flame the heat of kindled fire.

ME. Small is the grype of grief that can to reasons lore obey,
And sneking down with stealing steps can slyly slip away.
But they that thoroughly sowsed are with showers of greater pain,
Can not digest such corsyes sharp, but cast it up agaye:
Feign would I give them trouncing girds.

NV. Good daughter dear assuage
Th'unbrydled sway, and boiling heat of this thy gyddy rage:
Scant may thou purchase quietness, although thou hold thy tongue.

ME. The valiant heart dame Fortune yet durst never harm with wrong,
But dreading dastards down she drives.

NV. It any courage dure,
And harbred be in noble breast, now put the same in ure.

ME. The show of sturdy valiaut heart, at any time does shine.

NV. No hope does in adversity thy way to escape assygne.

ME. He that has none affiaunce left, nor any hope at all.
Yet let him not mystrust the luck of ought that may befall.

NV. Thy Country clean has cast thee of, to let thee sink or swim,
As for thy husband Jason be, there is no trust in him:
Of all the wealth, and worldly mucke wherewith thou did abound:
No portion remaynes at all, whereby some help is found.

ME. Medea yet is left, (to much) and here thou may espy
The Seas to succor us in flight, and lands aloof that ly:
Yea pron tools, with burning brands we have to work them woe,
And Gods that with the thunder dint shall ouerquell our foe:

NV. Who wears y^ golde^crested crown him dred with awe ye should.

ME. My Father was a King, yet I betrayed his Fleece of gould.

NV. Can not the deadly vyolence of weapons make thee fear?

ME. No, though such grisly Lads they were, as whilom did appear,
That bred of gargell Dragous teeth in holow gaping ground,
When mutually in bloody fight each other did confound.

N. The^ will thou cast thy self to death.

M. Would God ye I were dead.

NV. Fly, fly to save thy life.

ME. Woe worth the time that once I fled.

N. What O Medea.

M. Why shall I fly?

N. A mother dear art thou,
Fly therefore for thy childrens sake.

ME. Ye see by whom, and how,
A wretched Mother I am made.

NV. Thy life by flight to save
Do thou mistrust?

ME. Nay, fly I will, but vengeance first i will have.

NV. Then some shall thee at heels pursue, to wrecke the same again.

ME. Perhap i will make his coming short.

NV. Be still, and now refrain
O despret dame thy thundering threats, and slake your raging ire.
Apply, and frame thy froward will as time and tides require.

ME. Full well may fortunes welting wheel to begging bring my state,
As for my worthy courage, that she, never shall abate.
Who bowncing at the Gates, does cause the creaking doors to Iar?
It is the wretch ( Creon his self,) whom princely power far
Has lift aloft, with lordly look, puffed up with pouncing pride,
That he may Corinth country, with the sway of Scepter guide.

Creon. Medea. NEdea that ungracious Imp, king Aetas wicked child,
Yet has not from our careful realm her lingering foot exilde.
Some naughty drift she goes about, her knacks of old we kno
Her iugling arts, her harming hands are known well long ago.
From who^ will she withhold her harm? whom will this cruel beast
Permit to live, from perrill free, in quietness and rest?
Clean to cut of this parlous plague it was our purpose bent,
But Jason by entreting hard, did cause us to relent.
At his request we granted have, her life she shall enjoy,
Let her acquit our country free from fear of all annoy:
Yea saufely let her pack her hence, in eger giddy fit,
With lumpish lowering look she comes in talk with me to knit:
Sirs keep her of and set her hence, least us she touch perhap,
And drive her back from coming nigh command her keep her clap.
And let her learn at length, how that her self submit she may,
The puissaunt payse and majesty of Princes to obey.
Run, hie thee quickly, trudge apace, have hence out of my sight
This horrible, most odious queen, this monstrous wicked wight.
ME. My soueraygne liege, what greater crime have I or less offense
Commit against thy majesty, to be ex^led hence?

CR. Alas, the guiltless woman does demand a reason why:

ME. If thou be Judge indifferent, ordaynde my cause to try,
Consider then my doubtful case, and wey the ground of it:
If thou be king, command a Judge for such a matter fit.

CR. The princes power thou shall obey, b'it either right or wrong.

M. The prosperous pride of wronging crowns cannot endeuer long.

CR. Auaunt, and yell out thy complaynts at Colchis, get thee hence.

ME. Full gladly will I get me home, if he that brought me thence,
Vouchsafe to bear me back again.

CR. Alas, to late arise
Entreating words, when as decree is taken otherwise.

ME. He that not hearing either part, pronounces his decree,
Unrighteous man accoumpted is, though right his sentence be.

CR. While Pclias trusted to thy talk, from life to death he fell.
Go to, begin, we give you leave your goodly tale to tell.

ME. That type of Regal majesty, that erst by Fortunes hand,
Advanced to I did attain, has taught me understand,
How hard a thing it is of wrath the rygour to assuage,
When burning heat of boiling breast in flames begins to rage.
Eke for th'aduan^cement of their power more to display in sight
Their kingly courage bolstred out with majesty of might.
They deem it does import asway, and has a greater grace,
Whom stately scepter causde to climbs aloft to prouder place.
To persevere with fansye fond, in that to reasons spyght,
Whose greedy choice attaynted first his mind with vain delight.
For though in pireous plyght I lie, thrown down to great decay,
With heavy hap, and ruthful chance, to miserable stay,
Thus hunted out from place to place, forsook and left alone,
A wyddow while my husband live, with cause to wayle and moan,
Perplexed in maze of misery, with cloying cares so ryfe,
Yet whylom I in golden trone have led in happy life.
By high and noble parentage my bright renown does shine.
From Phoebus take my Graundsire great deryued is my ligue.
Whear silver streamed Phasis flood his wasshing waves does shed,
Or with contrary croking ways his bathing channel spread,
What ever wandering coast stretched out is ^eft aloof behind,
From whence the roaming Scithyan Sea his channel forth does find,
Where as Maeotis fenny plashe with pure fresh water sprynges,
Does season sweet the briny Sea, that tide in thither brynges.
Eke all the coasts enuyroued and kept within the banks
Of Thermodon, where warlike troops, and armed wyddowes ranckes,
With painted bucklers on their arms hold all the land in fear,
With rigor rough of threatening sword, with force of denting spear.
So far to all these wandering coasts and countries round about,
My Fathers ample regiment at large is stretched out.
I being thus of noble Race, and in an happy plight,
With glorious gloss of pryncely pomp in honor shining bright,
Then pearelesse Pears my Spousall bed did seek and sue to have,
But those to be their loving Feeres, now other Ladies crave:
Rash, ticle, peuish, indiscreet, and wavering Fortunes wheel,
Has cast me out, the crusshing cares of banishment to feel.
In Scepter proud and hauty Crown fix thine affyaunce fast.
Since vpsidowne with welkin wheel, whole mounts of wealth is cast.
This Princes do possess, that should their royalty display,
Whose fame shall never razed be, with storm of lowering day,
To succor those whom misery in pit of pains does souse,
To shield and harber suppliaunts in roof of loyal house.
This only brought I from my Realm, the precious golden Fleece,
That Jewel chief, and eke the flower of Chyualry in Greece,
The sturdy prop, the Rampter strong the bulwark of your wealth,
And Hercules the boystrous Imp of Jove I kept in health.
It was by means of my good will that Orpheus did escape,
Whose harmony the liuelesse Rocks with such delight did rape,
That forced even the clottred lumpes with hobling pricked to praunce,
And eke the iocond nodding woods with footing fine to dance.
And that these heavenly twins Castor, and Pollux did not by,
My dew desert is doubled twice, since them preserved I.
Of Boreas blustering out with puffed Cheeks, his blasting Breath,
His wynged Sons I kept alive both Calais, and Zeath.
And Linceus that with pearcing beams, and sharper sight of Eye,
Could Nauies on the farther bank of Sicill shore espy.
And all the Mynians that did come the golden Fleece to win.
As for the Prince of Princes all, I will not bring him in.
With silence Jason will I pass, for whom though him I save,
Yet is not Greece in debt to me, no recompense I crave.
To no man him I do impute, the rest I brought again
For your ^^ayle, that you thereby some profit might attain.
But only on my Jason dear, him for my own loves sake
I kept in store, that he of me his wedded Wife should make.
None other fault (God wot) ye have to charge me with but this,
That Argo Ship by means of me returned saufely is.
If I a shamefast maid had not with Cupids bayte been caught,
If more my Fathers health to have then Iasons I had sought,
Pelasga land had been v^done, and feign to great decay,
The lusty valiant Capitaynes, had clean been cast away:
And ioly Jason first of all this now thy son in law,
The Bulls had rent his swalowed lims in fiery chomping iawe.
Let Fortune fight against my case as list her eluish will,
Yet never shall it grieve my heart, repent my deed I nill,
That I should for so many kings their reling honor save,
The guerden due that I for this my crime commit must have,
It lies Crecon in thy hand, if thus it lyketh thee,
Condemn my guilty ghost lo death, but render first to me,
My fault that forced me offend, then Creon grant I this,
Receiving Jason (cause of crime) I guilty did amiss.
Thou know that I was such an one when couring low I lay,
Before thy feet in humble wise and did entreating pray,
Thy gracious goodness me to grant some succor at thy hand.
For me a wreatch and wreatched Babes I ask within this land
Some cotage base, in outcast hole, some couching corner vile,
If from the town thou drive us out to wander in exile,
The some by place aloof within this realm let us obtar^e.

CR. How I am none that tyrant like with churlish Scepter raygne,
Nor proudly or disdaynfully, with hawty courage hie,
With vau^ting foot do stamp them down that vndertroden lie,
And daunted are in careful bale, this plainly does disclose,
In that to me of late I such a son in law have chose,
Who was a wandering pilgrim poor, with sore afflictions freight,
Dismayde with terror of his foe, that lay for him in wayght.
Because Acastus having got the crown of Thessail land,
Requires in thy guilty blood to bath his wreackfull hand.
He does bewail that good old man his feeble father slain,
Whom weight of years with bowing back to stoop allow constrayne
The godly minded systers, all yblinde with misty vale
And cloking color of thy craft durst ventrusly assail.
That mount of myschiefe marvelous, to mangle heaw, and cut*
Their Fathers dear unjointed limbs in boiling Caldron put.
But for thy open guiltiness if thou can purge the same,
Straight Jason can discharge him self from blot of guilty blame.
His gentle hands were never staynde with goare of any blood.
Aloof from your conspyracie refrayning far he stood.
His harmless hands put not in ure with goary tools to mell.
But thou that setst on fire first these mighty mischiefs fell,
Whom shameless woman's wily brain and manly stomach stout
Do set a God, for to attempt to bring all ils about.
And no regard at all thou have, how sounding trumpe of fame
With ringing blast of good or ill do blow abroad thy name:
Get out and cleanse my fyled realm, away together bear
Thine herbs vn^ilde of sorcery, my Lyeges ryd fro fear.
Transporte thee to some other land, whereas thou may at ease
With odious noise of devilish charm, the troubled Gods disease.

ME. If needs thou wylt have me avoid my ship to me testore,
Or else my mate with whom I first aryued on this shore:
Why do thou bid that by my self I only should be gone?
I came not heather at first without my company alone.
If this do thee aggryese, that brunt of wars thou shall sustain,
Command us both the cause thereof to shun thy realm again:
Since both are guilty of one art, why do thou part us twain?
For Iasons sake not for mine own, poor Pelias was slain.
Annex unto my traytrous flight the conquerde booty brave,
My hoary headded natural sier, whom I forsaken have,
With brothers bloody flesh that mangled was with caruing knife,
Or ought of Iasons forged lies he gabbes unto his wife.
These dreary deeds are none of mine, so often as I offend,
Not for mine own commodity, to come thereby in the end.

CR. Time is expierd, by which thou ought to have been gone away,
With keeping such a chat, why do thou make so long delay?

ME. Yet of thy bounty ere I go, this one boon will I crave.
Although the mother banished, so sore offended have,
Let not the vengeance of my fault through wrathful deadly hate,
Mine innocent and guiltless Babes torment in wreached state.

CR. Away: with loving friendly grype thy children I embrace,
And as a father natural take pity on their case.

ME. Even for the prosperous good encreace of fertile spousall bed,
Of Glauce bright thy Daughter dear, whom Jason late has wed.
And by the hope of fruictfull seed, whose flower in time shall bloome.
By th'onour of thy glystring crown, ythralde to fortunes doom,
Which she so full of chop and change, with ticle turning wheel
Whirls up and down, in staggring state makes to and fro to reele.
I thee beseech, since to exile I am departing now
O Creon but a little pawse for mercy me allow,
While of my mourning br^ts with kiss, my last farewell I take.
While gasp of failing breath perhap my shyuering lyms forsake.

CR. With craft entending some deceit thou crauest this delay.

ME. What falshode for so little time be cause of terror may?

CR. No tot of time is short enough displeasure to prevent.

ME. Can not one io^ to weeping Eyes, and trylling tears be lent?

CR. Although against thy ernest suite unlucky dread do strive,
One day to settle thee away, content I am to give.

ME. This is to much, and of the same somewhat abrydge ye may.

CR. Make speed apace if from our land thou get thee not away,
Ere Phoebus horse with golden gleede their streaming beams do shed,
Of dawning lamp, thou art condemde to leese thy wretched head.
The holy day, and brydall both do call me hence away:
And wills me at the sacred aare of Hymeneus to pray.

Chorus. Lavish of life and dreadlesse was the wight,
Attempting first in slender tottring Barge
With sliuing Ore theslyced wave to smite,
And durst commit the dainty tender charge
Of hazered life to inconstant course of wind,
That turns with change of chances evermore,
To view the land forsook aloof behind,
And shoouing forth the Ship fro safer shore,
And glauncing through the fomy Channel deep
On sunder cut with slender Stem the wave,
Twixt hope of life, and dread of death to sweep,
In narrow gut him self to spill or save:
Experience yet of Planets no man had,
They needed not the wandering course to know
Of Stars, (wherewith the painted sky is clad,)
Not Pleiads, (which return of sailing show)
Nor Hyads (that with showrs the Seas do beat)
No nor the stern Amaltheas horned head
(Who gave the lyppes of sucking Jove the Teate)
Were wont to put the blundering ships in dread.
They feared not the northern Isy wayne,
Which lazy old boots wieldes behind,
And twynes about, no name yet could they feign
For Boreas rough, nor smother western wind.
Yet Typhys bold on open seas durst show
His hoysted sails, and for the wyndes decree
New laws: as now full gale aloof to blow,
Now tackle turride to take side wind alee,
Now up to farle the crossayle on the mast,
There safe to hang, the topsayle now to spread,
Now missel sail, and drabler out to cast,
When dagling hanges his shottring tackle red
While stearsman stur, and busye never blin,
With pyth to pull all sails eke to display,
With tooth and nail all foree of wind to win,
To sheare the seas, and quick to scud away.
The golden world our fathers have possessed,
Where banysht fraud durst never come in place,
All were content to live at home in rest,
With horye head, gray beard, and surrowed face.
Which tract of time within his country brought.
Rich having little, for more they did not toil,
No vente for wares, nor Traficque far they sought,
No wealth that sprange beyond their native soil,
The Thessail ship together now has set,
The Thessail ship together now has set,
The World that well with Seas disseuered lay,
It biddes the fl^uds with Oars to be bet,
And streams unknown with shipwreck us to fray
That wicked Keele was lost by ruthful wrack
Ytossed through such perils passing great,
Where Cyane^ Rocks began rore as thunder crack,
Whose bouncing boult the shaken soil does beat.
The sowsing Surges dasshed every star,
The pesterd seas the clouds aloft berayde,
This scuffling did bold TYPHIS mind detarre,
His helm did slip from trembling hand dismayde.
The ORPHEUS with his drowping Harp was mum
Dead in her dumpes the flaunting ARGOS glee,
All hushed in rest with silence wexed dum,
What hardy heart astound here would not be?
To see at once each yawning mouth to gape,
Of Syllas gulf compact in wallowing paunch,
Of dogs, who does not loath her mongrell shape,
Her visage, breast, and hyddeous ugly haunch:
Whom erketh not the scoulde with barking still?
To here the Mermaydes dyre who does not quayle,
That lure the Ears with pleasant singing shrill
Of such as on Ausonius Sea do sail:
When ORPHEUS on his t^anckling Harp did play,
That erst the Muse Callio^ gave to him
Almost those Nymphs that wonted was to stay
The shyps, he causd fast following him to swim.
How dearly was that wicked journey bought?
MEDEA accursed, and eke the golden F^eece,
That greater harm then storm of seas has wrought
Rewarded well that voyage first of Greece.
Now seas controulde do suffer passage free,
The Argo proud erected by the hand
Of PALLA^ first, does not complain that she,
Conueyde has back, the kings unto their land
Each whirry boat now scuddes about the deep,
All stynts and wars are taken clean away,
The Cities frame new walls themselves to keep,
The open world lettes naught rest where it lay:
The Hoyes of Ind Arexis lukewarm leake,
The Perseans stout in Rhene and Albis stream
Does bath their Barks, time shall in fine out break
When Ocean wave shall open every Realm.
The wandering World at will shall open lie.
And TYPHIS will some nevve found Land suruay
Some trauelers shall the Countries far escrye,
Beyond small Thule, known furthest at this day.
THE THIRD ACT.
Nutrix. Medea. WHy trotst thou fisking in and out
so rash from place to place?
Stand still, and of thine eger wrath
suppress the ruthful race,
The rigor rough of ramping rage
from burning breast out cast,
As Bacchus bedlem priests that of
his spryte have felt the blast,
Run frantic, hoyting up and down
with scitish wayward wits,
Not knowing any place of rest, so pricked with froward fits,
On cloudy top of Pindus Mount all hyd with Snow so chyll:
Or else upon the lofty riddge of braunched Nisa hill:
Thus starting still with frounced mind she walters to and froe,
The signs pronouncing proof of pangues her frensy Face does show
With glowing cheeks, and blood red Face with short and gasping breath,
She fetches deep ascending sighs from sobbing heart beneath,
Now blyth she smiles, each ru^bled thought in pondring brain she beats,
Now stands she in a mammering, now myschiefe sore she threats.
With chafing fume she burns in wrath, and now she does compain,
With blubbering tears a fresh byliue she weeps and wayles again.
Where will this lumpish load of cares with headlong sway allight?
On whom entendeth she to work the threats of her despite?
Where will this huge tempestious surge slake down it self again?
Enkindled fury new in breast begins to boil a main.
She secretly entendes no mischief small nor mean of s^se
To pass her self in wickedness her busy brains devise.
The token old of pinching ire full well ere this know I:
Some heinous, huge, outrageous great, and dreadful storm is nigh:
Her fiery, scowling, steaming Eyes, her hanging Groyne I see,
Her powling, puffed, frowning Face, that signs of freatting be.
O mighty Jove be guile my fear.
ME. O wretch if thou desire,
What measure ought to payse thy wrath then learn by Cupids fire,
To hate as sore as thou did love, shall I not them anoy
That do unite in spousall bed, their wanton lust t'enioy?
Shall Phoebus fiery footed horse go lodge in western wave
The drowping day, that late I did with humble crowching crave,
And with such ernest busy suite so hardly granted was?
Shall it depart ere I can bring my deuylish dryst to pass?
While houering heaven does counterpaysed hang with egall space,
Amid the marble Hemispheares, while round with stinted race,
The gorgeous Sky above the Earth does spinning roll about,
Whiles that the number of the sands, lies hid vnserched out,
While dawning day does keep his course with Phoebus blase so bright,
While twinkling stars in golden traynes do guard the slu^bry night,
While Isle under propping poale with whyrling swyng so swift,
The shyning Bears vnbathde about the frosen Sky do lift,
While flushing floudes the frothy streams to rustling Seas do send,
To gird them gript with plonging pangues my rage shall never end.
With greater heat it shall reboyle, like as the brutishe beast,
Whose tyranny most horrible, exceeds all the rest,
What greedy gaping whyrle poole wide what parlous gulf vnmilde,
What Sylla coucht in roaring Rocks, or what Charybdes wild,
(That Sicill, and Ionium Sea by frothy waves does sup)
What Aetna bolking st^fling flames, and dusky vapors up,
(Whose heavy payse with stewing heat does smoldring crush beneath
Encelades, that fiery flakes from choked throat does breath)
Can with such dreadful menaces in sweeting fury fry?
No river swift no troubled surge of stormy Sea so hye,
Nor sturdy seas (whom ruffling winds with raging force to rore)
Nor puissaunt flash of fire, whose might by boystrous blast is more,
May bide my angers violence: my fury shall it foil:
His court I Will over hourle, and lay it leauell with the soil.
My Iasons heart did quake for fear of Creon cruel king.
And least the king of Thessaly would war upon him bring.
But loyal love that hardens hearts makes no man be afright.
But beete, that he convict has yield himself to Creons might.
Yet once he might have visited, and come to me his wife,
To talk, and take his last farewell, if danger of his life
In doing this (hard hearted wretch most cruel) he should fear,
He being Creons son in law, for him it ^efull were,
To have proroged somewhat yet my heavy banishment,
To take my leave of children twain one only day is lent:
Yet do I not complain, as though the time to short I thought,
As proof shall plain pronounce, to day, to day, it shall be wrought,
The memory whereof no tract of time shall wype away.
With malice bent against the Gods my wrath shall them assay:
And rifling every thing, both good, and bad, I will turmoyle.

NV. Madame thy mind that troubled is, and tossed with such abroyle
Of swarming ills* thy vexed breast now set at rest again,
The penish fond affections all of troubled mind refrain.

ME. Then only can I be at rest, when every thing I see
Thrown headlong topste turuey down to ruthful end with me.
With me let all things clean decay: thy self if thou do spill,
Thou m^ist drive to destruction what else with thee thou will:

NV. It in this folly stiff thou stand, behold what after clappes
Are to be fearde, none dare contriue for Princes trayning trappes.

Jason. Medea. O Lucklesse lot of froward Fates, O cruel Fortunes hap,
Both when she list to smite, or spare, in woe she does us wrap
A like, the salve y^ God has given so often, to cure our grief,
More noyeth then the sore it self, and sends less relief:
If for her good deserts: o me, amendment I should make,
I hazard should my ventrous life to leese it for her sake.
If I will shun my dismal day, and will not for her die,
Then want the love of loyalty, O wretched man must I.
No dastards dread my stomach stout can cause to droupe and shrynke,
But mere remorse appaulleth me, when on my babes I think.
For why? when careful parents are once reft of life and breath,
Some after them their wretched seed are drawn to doleful death.
O Sacred righteousness (if thou enjoy thy worthy place
In perfect bliss of happy heaven) I call upon thy grace,
And thee for witness here allege, how for my childrens part
With pity pricked I have commit these things against my heart.
And so I think Medea her self the Mother rather had,
(Though frantickly as now she ^ares with rage of heart so mad
And does abhor with paynfull yoke of combrous cares to toil)
Her spousall bed, then that her seed should take the plunging foil.
I did determine in my mind, to go her to entreat
With gentle words, and pray her cease, in fervent wrath to freate.
And lo, on me when once she cast the beams of glauncing Eye,
Full blythe she leapes, she tumpes for joy, in fi^s she ginnes to fry.
Deep deadly blackish hate she seems in outward brow to bear,
And wholly in her frowning face does glutting grief appear.
ME. I packing, packing, Jason am: this still to chop, and change
The fleeting soil of my abode, to me it is not strange.
The cause of my departure yet (to me is straung) and new.
I wonted was in followinge thee all places to eschew:
I will depart, and get me hence, to whom for helping hand
Entendest thou to send us forth, whom hence to fly the land
Thou do compel with thine alies? shall I repair again*
To Phasis flood, to Colchis Isle, or to my fathers raygne?
Or goary sweeting fields, that with my brothers blood do reeke?
What harbring lands aloof do thou command us out to seek?
What seas appoint ye me to pass? shall I my journey drive,
Upon the parlous hateful jaws of Pontus to arrive,
By which I did saufe conduct home kings valiant armies great,
Where roaring rocks with thundering noise the flapping waves do beat
Or on the narrow wrackfull shore, of Simplegades twain?
Or else to small Hiolcos town can I return again?
Or toil, the gladsome pleasant lands of Tempe to attain?
All places that I opened have unto thy passage free,
I shut them up against my self, now whether sendste thou me?
A banished wretch to banishment thou would have incline,
Yet to the place of her exyle, thou can not her assygne.
Yet for all that without delay I must depart and go:
And why? forsooth the king his son in law commands so.
Well: nothing will I stand against, with grypes of passing pain
Let me be scourgde, of my deserts such is the gotten gain.
Let Creon in his pryncely ruff lay to his heavy hands,
To whyp an whore in torments sharp, with iron gives, and bands
Let her be chaynd, in hydeous hole of night for aye her lock:
Let her be cloyed with pestring payse of restless rolling rock.
Yet less than I deserved have, in all this shall I find:
O thou discourteous Gentleman, consider in thy mind
The flamy puffes, and fiery gaspes of ghastly gaping bull,
And Aetas catell rych with Fleece of gorgeous golden wool,
That went to graze amid so great and mighty fears in field,
Of uncontrolled Nation, whose soil does armies yield.
Revoke to mind the deadly darts of sudden starting foe,
When ghastly warrior ( Tellus brood) to ground again did go,
Through slaughter red of mutual lance, to this yet further pass,
The lurched Fleece of Phrixes Ram, that all thine errand was.
And vgsome Argos slumberlesse, whom fast I causde to keep
His weary watching winking eyes with vnaquaynted sleep.
My brother eke, whose fatal twist of feeble life I shred,
And guilt that wrought so many guiltes when as with thee I fled.
The daughters whom I set on work entrapt in wily train,
To slay their sire, that shall not rise to quickened life again.
And how to travel other realms, I set mine own at naught.
By that good hope which of thy seed conceived is in thought,
Eake by thy stable Mansion place, and mighty monsters, that
Down beaten for thy health, I causde before thy feet to squat,
And by these drudging hands of mine vnspared for thy sake,
For dread of dangers over past that caused thee to quake,
By heavens above, and seas below, that witness bearers be,
To knitting of our marriage up, thy mercy veil to me.
Of all the heaps of treasure great so far of being fet,
Which Aetas savage Scythians did travel for to get,
From Ind, where Phoebus scorching blase does dye the people black.
Of all this gold which in our dowers we could not well compacke.
But trick and trym we garnished our groves with gold so gay,
I banished wretch of all this stuff gat naught with me away,
Except my brothers slaughtred flesh, yet I employed the same
On thee: the cares of countries health, my honesty and shame.
My Father, and my brother both has yielded place to thee,
This is the dowry that thou had my wedded spouse to be.
To her whom thou do abrogate restore her goods again*

IA. When Creon in malicious mood had thought thee to have slain,
Entreated with my tears, exyle and life he gave to thee.

ME. I took it for a punishment, but surely as I see
This banishment is now become a friendly good reward.

IA. While thou have time to go, be gone, for most seueare, and hard
The kings displeasure ever is.

M. thus would thou dodge me out?
Thy hated trull cast of thou do, that please Creuse thou might.

IA. Do thou Medea vpbrayde me with the breach unkind of love?

ME. And slaughter vile, with treachery, whereto thou did me move.

IA. When all is done what can thou say my guiltines to stayne?

ME. Even whatsoever I have done.

IA. Yet more this does remain:
That thy ungracious wickedness of harm should me accuse.

ME. Thine, thine, they are, they are all thine what ever I did use,
Who that of lewdness reapes the fruict, is grafter of the same.
Let every one with infamy thy wretched Spouse defame,
Yet do thou only take her part, her only do thou call
A just and undefiled wight, without offense at all.
If any man shall for thy sake polute his hand with ill,
To thee let him an innocent yet be accounted still,

IA. The life is loathsome that does work his shame who has it chose.

ME. The life whose choice does work thy shame thou ought again to lose.

IA. Let reason rule thy eger mind so vexed with crabbed ire,
And for thy tender childrens ease to be at rest require.

ME. I do defy it, wholly I detest it, I forswear,
That brethren bred unto my barnes Creusas womb shall bear.

IA. It will be trim, when as a Queen of majesty and might
Has issue, kin unto the seed of thee a banishe wight.

ME. So cursed day shall never on my wretched children shine,
To mingle base borne basterdes with the blood of noble Lygue.
Shall Phoebus stock (that bears the lamp of heaven in starry throne)
Be macht with drudging Sisiphus that roules in hell the stone?

IA. What meanest thou wretch, both thee and me in banishment to yoke?
I pray then hence.

ME. When humbly I my mind to Creon broke,
He gave an ear unto my suite.

IA. What lies in my might
To do for thee?

ME. If no good turn, then do thy worst dispyght.

IA. On this side with his swerd in hand king Creon does me ^carre:
On other part with armed host Acast does me detarre.

ME. Medea eke to coape with these, that more apaull us may:
Go to, to skyrmishe let us fall, let Jason be the pray:

IA. I yield whom sore adversities have tyerd with heavy sway.
Learn thou to dred thy luclesse lot that often does thee assay.

ME. I evermore have ruled the swinge of fortunes wavering will.

IA. Achastus is at hand, and nygh is Creon thee to spyll:

ME. Take thou thy heels to escape them both, I do not thee advise,
That thou against thy father in law in traytrous arms should rise.
Nor in Achast thy cosens blood thy wounding hands to gore,
The vows unto Medea made, do trouble thee so sore.
While yet thou have not spilt there blood, yet fly with me away.

IA. When armies twain their banners of defiance shall display,
And marching forth in field to fight seek battle at my hand,
Who then for us encounter shall their puissaunce to withstand?

ME. If Creon and Achastus king encampe together shall.
Admit that these in one with them should join their powers all
My Countrymen of Colchis I Will, and AEtas lusty king,
Suppose the Scythians join with Greeks, to ground I will the^ bring,
Clean put to foil.

IA. The puissaunt power of hawty mace I fear.

ME. Take heed, least more thou do affect the same, then for to clear,
Thy self of Creons servile yoke.

IA. Least some suspicion grow,
Of this our tatling long here let us make an end and go.

ME. Now Jove hurl out thy flames and force thy thundering bolts to fly,
With fiery drakes bright brandishing disparst in burning sky:
Strain forth thy dreadful threatening arm, dispose in due array
The rossing dint of lightning flashe, that wrecke our quarrel may.
With rumbling crack of renting cloud cause all the world to quake,
And Ieuell not thy houering hand to stryke with fiery flake
Upon my pasht and crushed corpse, or Iasons Carcass slain:
For whether of us thou smight to death his due reward shall gain,
Thy thumps of thwacking boltes on us amiss they cannot light.

IA. Fie, let thy mind on matters run that seem a modest wight.
And use to have more cheerful talk, if any thing thou crave,
Within my fathers house to ease thy flight, thou shall it have.

ME. Thou know my mind bath can, and eke is wont, to do no less,
Then to contemn the brittell wealth that Princes do possess.
This, this shall be the only boon that at thy hand I crave,
As mates with me in banishment, my children let me have,
That resting on their sighing breasts my careful mourning head,
I may my crystal teary streams into their bosoms shed.
But as for thee, new gotten sons of wife new wed do stay.

IA. I grant that unto thy request I wish I might obey:
But nature me with pity pryckes, that needs I must deny.
For though both Creon and Achast, in torments force me lie,
I could not yield unto their wills: on this my life does rest:
In times of tears, this is the joy of dull afflicted breast
For better far I can abide the want of vital breath,
And succor of my lymmes, or loose, the light of world by death.

ME. What Jove unto his seely Babes is deeply graft in him?
This works well I have him tript, lo now there lies brim.
An open place whereby receive a venny soon he may.
Let me or I depart, unto my seely children say.
These lessons of my last adewe, and grant to me the space,
With tender grype of colling last their loving limbs to embrace:
This will be comfort to my heart: yet at the latter word
I ask no more but only that you should me this afoorde.
If eger anguish cause my tongue to cast out words unkind,
Let all thing fly, let nothing be engraued in your mind
But let remembrance otherwhyle of me to touch your thought,
Let other things be wypte away that byle of wrath has wrought.

IA. I have forgotten every whit God grant thou may of shake,
These surging qualmes of frounced mind and milder may it make:
For quietness does work their ease that dented are with woe:

ME. What is he slily slypt and gone? falls out the matter so?
O Jason do thou sneake away, not having mind of me,
Nor of those former great good turns that I have done for thee?
With thee now am I clean forgot: but I will bring about
That from thy careful sighing mind shall not be banished out:
Apply to bring this to effect, call home thy wits again,
And all thy wyly fetches far, each artificial train.
This is the perfect fruict that may to thee of mischief spryng,
To presuppose that mischief is not graft in any thing.
Scant have I opportunity for my pretensed guile,
Because we are mistrusted sore: but try I will the while
To set upon them in such sort, as none can deem my sleyght:
March forth, now venture on, fall to, both what lies in thy might.
And also what does pass thy power. O faithful nourse and mate
Of all my heavy heart breaking, and diverse cursed fate.
Come help our simple mean device. Remaining yet I have
A robe of Pall the present that our heavenly Graundsire gave,
Chief monument of Cholchis I Will, which Phoebus did beslow
On Aetas for a pledge, that him his father he might know.
A precious fulgent gorget eake, that bravely glytters bright,
And with a seemly shyning seame of golden thryds is dight,
Through wrought between the row of pirles do stand in borders round,
Wherewith my golden crispen Locks is wonted to be crou^d.
My little children they shall bear these presents to the Bryde,
That first with slibber slabbar sosse of chauntments shall be tryde.
Request the aid of Hecate in readiness prepare
The lamentable sacrifice, upon the bloody Aare.
Enforce the fires catching hold upon the rafters hye
With crackling noise of flamy sparks rebound in azur sky.

Chorus. NOffers force, nor ru^bling rage of boistrus blustering wind,
No dart shot whirling in the skies, such terror to y^ mind
Can drive, as when y^ ireful wife does boil in burning hate
D^priued of her spousall bed, and comfort of her mate,
Nor where the stormy southern wind with dankish dabby face,
Of hoary winter sends out the gusshing showers apace.
Where veighment Isters waumbling stream comes waltring down amayne,
Forbidding both the banks to meet, and cannot often contain
Him self within his channels scoupe, but further breaks his way,
Nor Rodanus whose russhing stream does launch into the sea,
Or when amid the floured spring with hotter burning sun,
The winters snowes disolude with heat down to the ryuers run:
The clottred top of Haemus hill to water thin does turn,
Such desperate gogin flame is wrath that inwardly does burn,
And modest rule regards not, nor brydeis can abide,
Nor dreading death, does wish on dinte of naked blade to slide.
O Gods be gracious unto us, for pardon we do crave,
That him who tamde the scuffling waves, vauchsafe ye would to save.
But Neptune yet the Lord of Seas with frowning face will lower,
That over his second Scepter men to triumph have the power.
The boy that rashly durst attempt that great unwieldy charge
Of Phoebus everlasting Carte, and rouing out at large,
Not bearing in his recklesse breast his fathers warnings wise,
Was burned with the flames which he did scatter in the Skies.
None knew the costly glimsing glades, where straggling Phaeton rode,
Pass not the path, where people safe in former time have trod.
O fondling, wilful, wanton boy, do not dissolve the frame
Of heaven, since Jove with sacred hand has hallowed the same.
Who rowde with valiant Oars tough, that were for Argo made,
Has powled naked Pelion mount of thycke compacted shade.
Who entered has the fleeting rocks and serched out the toil
And tyring travels of the seas, and has on saluage soil
Knit fast his stretched Cable rope, and going forth to land.
To cloyne away the foreign gold with greedy snatching hand.
Unto the seas (because that he transgrest their laws divine)
By this unlucky end of his, he pays his forfeyte fine.
The troubled seas of their unrest for vengeance howl and weep.
Sir Typhis who did conquer first the danger of the deep,
Has yielded up the cunning rule of his unwieldy stern,
To such a guide, as for that use has need as yet to learn.
Who giving up his Ghost aloof from of his native land,
In forreyn more lies buried vile with durty soddes in sand.
He sits among the flitiring souls that strangers to him wear.
And Aulis Isle that in her mind her masters loss does bear,
Held in the Ships, to stand and wayle in croking narrow nocke:
That Orpheus Calliops son who stayde the running Brook,
While he records on heavenly Harp with twanckling finger sine,
The wind laid down his pipling blastes: his harmony divine
Procurde the woods to styr them selves, and trees in traynes along
Came forth with byrds that held their lays and listened to his song.
With lims on sunder rent in field of Thrace he lies dead.
Up to the top of Heber floude, eke haled was his head.
Gone down he is to Stygian dampes, which seen he had before,
And Tartar boiling pits, from whence return he shall no more.
Alcydes banging hat did bring the Northern laddes to ground.
To Achelo of sundry shapes he gave his mortal wound.
Yet after he could purchase peace both unto sea and land,
And after Ditis dungeon black rent open by his hand,
He living spread himself along on burning Oetas hill:
His members in his proper flame the wretch did thrust to spill:
His blood he brewd with Nestors blood, and lost his loathsome life
By traytrous gift that poisoned shyrt received of his wife.
With tuske of bristled groyning Bore Anceus lyms were torn.
O Meleagar (wicked wight) to grave by thee were borne
Thy mothers brethren twain, and she, for it with ruthful hand,
Has wrought thy doleful desteny, to burn thy fatal brand.
The rash attempting Argonantes deserved all the death
That Hylas whom Alcides lost bereft of fading breath.
That springall which in sowsing waves of waters drowned was:
Go now ye lusty bloudes, the Seas: with doubtful lot to pass.
Though Idmon had the calking skyll of destentes before,
The serpent made him leave his life in tomb of Liby shore.
And Mopsus that to other men could well their fates escry,
Yet only did deceive him self uncertain where to die,
And he that could the secret hap of things to come unfold,
Yet did not in his counrey Thebes. Dame, Theris husband oulde
Did wander like an outlawde man Our Palimedes sire
Did headlong whelm him self in seas. Who at the Greeks retire
From Troy, to rushe on rocks did them alure with wily light,
Stout Ajax Oleus did sustain the dint of thunder bright,
And cruel storm of surging seas, to quite the heinous guilt,
That by his country was commit, in seas he lies spilt.
Alceste to redeem her husbands Phereus life from death,
The godly Wife upon her spouse bestowed her panting breath.
Proud Pelias that wretch him self who bad them first assay
The golden Fleece that booty brave by ship to fetch away,
Perboylde in glowing cauldron hoate with fervent heat he fryes,
And fleering piece meal up and down in water thin he lies.
Enough, enough, revenged are O Gods the wrongs of seas,
Be good to Jason, doing that he did, his Eame to please.
THE FOVRTH ACT.
Nutrix. MY shiuering mind amazed is, aghast, and sore dismayde:
My chillish lims with quaking cold do tremble all afraid,
Such plagu^s and vengeance is at hand, in what exceeding wis^
Do sharp assaults of greedy grief still more and more arise,
And of it self in smothering breast enkindlesse greater heat?
Often have I seen how ramping rage has forced her to freate.
With frantic fits, mad, bedlem wise, against the Gods to rail,
And eke bewitched ghosts of heaven in plunging plagues to trayle:
But now Medea beats her busy brain to bring to pass
A myschiefe greater, greater far, then ever any was.
Erewhile when hence she tript away astonished so sore,
And of her poison closset close she entered had the door:
She powers out her Jewels all, abroad to light she brings
That which she dreading ^athed long* most irksome ugly things:
She mumbling coniures up by names of ills the rabble rout,
In hugger mugger cowched long, kept close, vnserched out:
All pestlent plagues she calls upon, what ever Libie land,
In frothy boiling stream does work, or muddy belching sand:
What tearing torments Taurus breeds, with snowes vnthawed still
Where winter flawes, and hory frost knit hard the craggy hill,
She lays her crossing hands upon each monstrous coniurde thing,
And over it her magic verse with chat ming does she sing:
A mowste, rowste, rusty route with cancred Scales Iclad
From musty, fusty, dusty dens where lurked long they had,
Do craull: a wallowing serpent huge, his co^brous Corpse out drags,
In fiery foming blaring mouth his forked tongue he wags.
He stares about with sparkling eyes, if some he might espy,
Whom snapping at with stinging spit he might constrayne to die:
But hearing once the magycke verse he hushed as all a gast,
His body boalne big, wrapped in lumps on twining knots he cast.
And wambling to and fro his tail in linkes he rowles it round.
Not sharp enough (quoth she) the plagues and tools that hollow ground
Engenders for my purpose are, to heaven up will I call,
To reach me stronger poison down, to frame my feate with all.
Now is it at the very point, Medea thou assay,
To bring about some farther fetch, then common Witches may.
Let down, let down, that sprawling Snake that does his body spread,
As does a running brook abroad his mighty channel s^ed.
Whose swelling knobs of wondrous ^^se and buystrous bobbing bumpes
Does thumpe the great and lesser bear that feet his heavy lumpes.
The bygger bear with golden gleede the greekish fleet does guide:
But by the less the Sidon ships their passage have espide.
He that with pinch of griping fist does bruise the adders twain,
His strening hard and clasping hand, let him unknit again.
And crushe their squeased venom out, come further thou our charm
O flymy serpent Python, whom Dame Juno sent to harm
Diana, and Apollo both, (those heavenly spyrites twain)
With whom Latona traueling did groan with pynching pain.
O Hydra whom in Lerna poole Alcides gave the foil,
And all the noisome vermen vile that Hercules did spoil.
Which when on sunder they were cut with slysing deadly knyfe,
Can knit again their sodred parts, and so recover life.
Help wakefull Dragon Argos, whom first magic words of mine
Made Morpheus lock thy sleepy liddes, and shut thy slugring eyne.
Then having brought above the ground of Serpents all the rout,
Of filthy weeds the ranckest bane she pyckes, and gathers out,
That spryng on knotty Eryx hill where passage none is found,
Among the ragged Rocks, or what on Caucasus his ground
Does grow that still is clad in Coat of hoary moary frost.
That evermore vnmelt abydes, whose spattred fylde is soste
With gubbs of blood, y^ spowteth from Prometheus gaping maw,
Whose guts with twitching talent out the ghastly gripe does draw.
Or any other venomous herb among the Medes that grows,
That with their sheafe of arowes sharp in field do scare their foes.
Or what the light held Parthian to serve her turn can send,
Or else the rych Arabians, that dyp their arrows end
In poison strong: the juice of all Medea out does wrynge,
That underneath the frosen poale in Svveuia land does spring.
Whose noble state Hircinus wood does high enhaunce and rear*
Or what the pleasant soil does yield in pryme of smiling veare,
When nature byddes the byrd begin her shrowding nest to build,
Or when the churlyshe Boreas blast sharp winter has exilde,
The trym array of branch and bough to cloth the naked tree,
And every thing with bitter could of Snow congealed be.
In any pestilent flower on stalk of any herb does grow,
Or noisome juice does lie in rotten wrythen roots allow,
Has any force in breading bane, those takes she in her hand.
Some plaugy herbs did Athos yield that mount of. Thessayle land.
And other Pindus roches hye and some upon the top
Of Pingeus, but tender twigges the cruel Sithe did lop:
These Tigris river norisht up, that choakes his whyrlpoale deep
With stronger stream. Danubius those in fostring wave did keep.
Those did Hidaspus mynister, who by the parching zone
With lukewarm silver channel runs, so ryth with precious stone.
And Bethis son, who gave the name unto his country great,
And with his shallowe ^oarde against the Spanyshe seas does beat
This herb aboade the edge of knyfe in dawning of the day
Ere Phoebus Face began peep, bedect with glittring goulden spray
His slender stalk was suepped of in deep of silent night,
His corn was cropped, while she with charm her poysned nails did dight.
She chops the deadly herbs, and wrings the squesed clottered blood
Of Serpents out: and filthy birds of irksome miry mud:
She tempers with the same and eake: she brayes the heart of Owl
Foreshewing death with glaring Eyes, and moaping Vysage foul,
Of shryke Owl hoarce alive she takes the durty stinking guts,
All these the framer of this feate in diverse percels puts.
This has in it devouring force of greedy spoiling flame,
The frosen ysle dulling could engenders by the same.
She chauntes on those the magic verse, that works no lesser harm,
With bustling frantickely she stampes, and cease not to charm.
MEDEA. O Flittring Flocks of grisly. ghostes
that sit in silent seat
O ougsome Bugges, O Gobblins grym
of Hell I you entreat:
O lowryng Chaos dungeon blind,
and dreadful darkened pit,
Where Ditis muffled up in Clouds
of blackest shades does sit,
O wretched woeful wawling souls your aid I do implore,
That linked lie with gingling Chains on wayling Limbo shore,
O mossy Den where death does couche his ghastly carrayne Face:
Relesse your pangues, O spryghts, and to this wedding hye apace.
Cause ye the snaggy wheel to pawse that rentes the Carkas bound,
Permit Ixions racked Lymmes to rest upon the ground:
Let hungry bytten Tantalus with gawnt and pyned panche
Soupe up Pirenes gulped stream his swelling thyrst to staunche.
Let burning Creon ^yde the brunt and gyrdes of greater pain,
Let payse of slyppery slyding stone type over back again
His moylyng Father Sisyphus, among the craggy Rocks.
Ye daughters dyre of Danaus whom perced Pychers morckes
So often with labor lost in vain this day does long for you
That in your life with bloody blade at once your husband slew.
And thou whose aares I honored have, O torch and lamp of night,
Approach O Lady mine with most deformed vysage dight:
O three fold shape^ Dame that knitst more threatening brows then one,
According to the country guise with dagling locks undone
And naked foot, the secret grove about I hallowed have,
From dusky dry vnmoysty clouds the showers of rain I crave.
Through me the chinked gaping ground the soked seas has drunk.
And mayner stream of th'ocian flood beneath the earth is sunk,
That swelteth out through hollow gulf with stronger gushing rage.
Then were his suddy wambling waves whose power it does assuage
The heavens with wrong disturbed course and out of order quight,
The darkened son, and glimmering stars at once has showed their light,
And dre^ched Charles his straggling wayne has ducie in dasshing wave,
The framed course of roaming time racte out of frame I have.
So my enchauntments have it wrought, that when the flaming sun
In summer bakes the parched soil then has the twigges begun,
With sprowting blossom fresh to blome, and hasty winter corn
Has out of harvest seen the fruit to barnes on sudde^ borne.
Into a shallowe foorde his sture distreame has Phasi^ wast,
And Isters channel being in so many branches cast,
Aba^ed has his wrackfull waves, on every silent shore
He lies calm: The tumbled floods with thundering noise did rore,
When couched clo^^ the winde^ were not moving pippling soft,
With working wave the prauncing seas have swollen and leapt aloft,
Whereas the wood in alder time with thick and braunched bow
Di^ spread his shade on gladsome soil no shade remains now.
I rolling up the magic verse at noone time Phoebus stay,
Amyd the darkened Sky, when fled was light of drowsy day.
Eke at my charm the watery flocks of Heyaeds went to glade.
Time is it Phoeba to respect the service to thee made:
To the^ with cruel bloody hands these garlands green were twynde
Which with his folding circles nine the serpent rough did bind.
Have here Tiphoias flesh, that does in Aetnas Foruace groan,
That shoke with baitery violent king Jove's assaulted trone.
This is the Centaures poisoned blood which Nessus villayne vile
Who made a rape of Dianire entending her to fyle,
Bequethed her when newly wound he gasping lay for breath,
While Hercles shaft stack in his Ribs, whose lau^ce did work his death:
Behold the Funeral cinders here which up the poison dried
Of Hercules who in his fire on Oeta mountain dyed:
Lo here the fatal brand, which late the fatal sisters three
Conspyred at Meleagers birth, such should his des^ny be,
To save alive his brethyng corpse, while that might whole remain,
Which saufe his mother Althe kept, till he his uncles tw^yne,
(That from Atlanta would have had the head of conquered Bore,)
Had reft of ly^e whose spightfull death Althea took so sore,
That both she showed her feruentnesse in systers godly love,
When to revenge her brothers death mere nature did her move,
But yet as mother most unkind, of nature most vnmylde,
To hasten the untimely grave of her beloved child,
While Meleagers fatal brande she wasted in the flame,
Whose swelting guts and bowels moult consumed as the same,
These plumes the Harpyes ravening fowls for have did leave behind,
In hidden hole whose cloase access no mortal wight can find.
When fast from Zethes chasing them with speedy flight they fled.
Put unto these the feathers which the S^ymphal bird did shed,
Whom duskyng Phoebus dymned light sir Hercules did stynge,
And galied with the shafte, that he in Hydraes hyde did flynge.
You Aares have yield a clattring noise I know, I know of old,
How unto me my Oracles are wonted to be toulde,
That when ye trem^l^ng flower does shake then has my Gods great,
Vouchsafe to grant me my request as I did her entreat,
I see Dianas wagon swife, not that whereon she glydes,
When all the night in darkened Sky with Face full open she rydes:
With countnaunce bright and blandishing but when with heavy cheer,
With dusky shimmering wanny globe, her lamp does pale appear.
Or when she trots about the heavens with horsecheade rayned strayte,
When Thessayle Witches with (...) threats of charming her do bayte.
So with thy dumpish dulled blase, thy cloudy faynting l^ght,
Send out, amid the lowering sky, the heart of people smyght
With agonies of suddeyne dread, in straung and fearful wise,
Compel the precious brazen pannes with iarri^g noise to rise
Through Corinth country ^uery where, to shield the^ from t^ie harm,
Least headlong ^rawne thou be from heaven to earth by force of charm.
An holy solemn sacryfice to worship thee we make,
Imbrewed with a bloody turphe the kindled Torche does take
Thy sacred burning night fire at the dampishe mory grave.
Sore charged with thy troubled ghost my head I shaken have,
And ducking down my Neck allow with shryking loud have shrigh
And groueling flat on floor in trance have lain in deadmans plight.
My ruffled Locks about mine ears down dagling have been bownd.
Tuckt up about my temples twain with gladsome garland crownde*
A drery branch is offered thee from filthy Stigis flood.
As is the guise of Bacchus priests the Coribanthes wood,
With naked breast and dugges laid out I Will prick with sacred blad^
Mine arm, that for the bubling blood an issue may be made,
With trilling streams my purple blood let drop on Th'aulter stones.
My tender Childrens crusshed flesh, and broken broosed bones
Learn how to brook with hardened heart: in practice put the trade
To florishe fearce, and keep a coil, with naked glittring blade:
I sprinkled holy water have, the lance once being made,
If tired thou complaynest that my cries thee ouerlade,
Give pardon to my ernest suite, O Perseus sister dear,
Still Jason is the only cause that urges me to rear
With squeking voice thy noisome beams, that sting like shot of bo
So season thou those sawced robes to work Creusas woe,
Whert with when she shall pranke her self the poison by and by
To rot her inward mary out, within her bones may fry,
The secret fire bleares their eyes with gloss of yeallow gold,
The which Prometheus gave to me that fire fylcher bold.
On whom for robbery that he did in heavens above commit,
With massy payse great Caucasus th'unweldy hill does sit.
Where under with unwasted womb he lies, and pays his pain,
To feed the cra^ming foul with gubs of guts that grows again.
He taught me with a pretty sleyght of conning, how to hyde
The strength of fire close kept in, (...) may not be espyde,
This lively tinder Mulciber has forged for my sake,
That tempred is with brymstone quick at first touch and take.
Eke of my Cosen Phaeton a wyldefyer flake I have
His flames the monstrous staghard rough Chimera to me gave,
In head and breast a Lion grim, and from the Rump behind
He sweepes the flower with lagging Tayl^ of Serpent fearce by kind
In Rybbes, and Loins along his paunche yshaped like a Goat.
These Fumes that out the Bull perbrakte from fyry spewinge throat^
I gotten have and brayde it with Medusas bitter gall
Commanding it in secret sort to duske and co^er all:
Breath on these venoms Heca^e with deadly might inspyre,
Preserve the touching poulder of my secret covert fire,
O grant that these my cloked crafts so may bewitch their Eyes,
That lykelyhoode of treason none they may herein surmyse:
So work that they in handling it may feel no kind of heat:
Her stewing breast, her seathing veins, let seruent fire freate
And force her roasted pyning lymmes, to drop and melt away,
Let smoke her rotten broyling bones: inflame this bryde to day
To cast a light with gr^ater gleede on fryseled blasing hear
Then is the shyning flame that does the wedding torches bear.
My suite is hard, thryse Hecare a dreadful barking gave
From doleful cloud a sacred flash of flamy sparks she drove.
Each poisons pride fulfilled is: call forth my children dear,
By whom unto the cursed Bryde these presents you may bear:
Go forth, go forth my little Babes, your mothers cursed fruit,
Go, go, employ your pains with brybe and earnest humble suite
To purchase grace, and eke to earne you favor in her sight.
That both a mother is to you, and rules with Ladies might.
Go on, apply your charge apace, and hye you home again,
That with embracing you I may my last farewell attain.
Chorus. WHat sharp assaults of cruel CVPIDS flame
With gyddie head thus tosseth to and froe,
This bedlem Wight, and diuelysh despret dame
What rouing rage her pricks to work this woe?
Rough rancours vile congeales her frosen face,
Her hawty breast bumbasted is with pride,
She shakes her head, she stalks with stately pace.
She threats our king more then does her betyde.
Who would her deem to be a banished wight,
Whose skarlet Cheeks do glowe with rosy red?
In faynting Face, with pale and wanny whyght
The sangayne hew exyled thence is fled
Her changing looks no color long can hold.
Her shifting feet still trauasse to and froe.
Even as the fearce and ravening Tiger old
That does unware his sucking whelps forgo,
Does rampe, and rage, most eger ferce and wood,
Among the shrubs and busshes that do grow
On Ganges stronde that golden sanded flood,
Whose silver stream through India does flow.
Even so MEDEA sometime wants her wits
To rule the rage of her unbridled ire,
Now VENUS Son, with busy froward fits,
Now Wrath, and Love enkyndle both the fire.
What shall she do? when will this heinous wight
With forward foot be packing hence away,
From Greece? to ease our Realm of terror quight,
And princes twain whom she so sore does fray:
Now Phoebus lodge thy Charyot in the West,
Let neither Raynes, nor Bridle stay thy Race,
Let groueling light with Dulceat night oppressed
In cloking Clouds wrapped up his muffled Face,
Let Hesperus the loadesman of the night,
In Western floode drench deep the day so bright.
THE FIFTH ACT.
Nuntius. Chorus. Nutrix. Medea. Jason. ALl things are topsy turuy turnde,
and wasted clean to naught.
To passing great calamity
our Kingdom State is brought.
The Sire, and Daughter burnt to dust
in blendred Cynders lie.
C. What train has them entrapt?

Nu^. Such as
are made for Kings to dye,
False traitrous gifts.

C. What privy guile could wrapped be in those?

Nu^. And I do marvel at this thing and skant I can suppose
That such a mischief might be wrought by any such device

Chapter Report how this destruction and ruin should arise

Nu^. The fyzzing flame most egerly does scour with sweeping sway
Each corner of the Princes court, as though it should obey.
Commanded thereunto so flat on flower the Palace falls:
We are in dread least further it will take the townishe walls.

Chapter Cast quenching water on it then to slake the greedy flame.

Nu^. And this that seems very strange do happen in the same,
The water feeds the fire fast, the more that we do toil
It to suppress, with hotter rage the heat begins to boil:
Those things that we have gotten for our help it does enjoy.

Nut. Medea thou that do so sore king Pelops land anoy,
Twine hence in have thy forward foot, at all assayes depart
To any other kind of coaste.

Me. Can I find in my heart
To shun this land? if hence I had first fallen away by flight,
I would have traueled back again, to gase at such a sight.
To stand and see this weddiug new, why stayst thou doting mind?
Apply, apply, thy sore attempt, that good success does find.
What great exployt is this, that thou of vengeance do enjoy?
Still art thou blinded witless wench with vale of Venus boy?
Is this suffisaunce for the grief? is root of rancour ded,
If Jason lead a single life in solitary bed?
Some netling, thorny, stinging plagues unpracticed devise:
Prepare thy self in redines and fall to on this wise:
Let all be fish that commes to Net, have no respect of right,
From mind on mischief fixed fast let shame be vanished quyte:
The vengeance they received at my little chyldrens hand,
Is nothing worth: in earnest ire ententiue must thou stand.
When heat of wrath begins to cool, cheer up thy self again:
Raise up those touches old that wonted were in thee to raygne,
That buried deep in breast do lie: and as for all the same
That yet is wrought: Of godliness let it usurp the name:
Do this, and I shall teach them learn, what tryfling cast it was,
And common practisde flimflam trick that erst I brought to pass.
By this my raging malady a preamble has made,
To show what howgier heaps of harms shall shortly them invade
What durst my rude unskillful hand assay that was of wayght?
Wha^ could the malice of a Gyrle invent her foes to bayte?
Still conuersaunt with wicked feats Medea am I made.
My blunt and dulled brains has so ben beat about this trade.
O so I joy, I joy, that I smote of my brothers head,
And slasht his members of: eake that from parents had I fled:
And filched have the privy fleece, lo Mars that sacred was.
It glads my heart that I to bring old Pelias death to pass:
Have set his daughters all on work: O grief pick out a way
Not any guilt thou shall with unacquainted hand assay
Against whom wrath entendest thou to bend thine Irefull might?
Or with what weapon do thou mean thy traiterous foes to smight?
I know not what my wrathful mind consulted has within,
And to be wray it to himself, I dare not yet begin.
O rash and unadvised fool, I make to hasty speed:
O that my Foe had gotten of his Harlots body Seed:
But what so ever thou by him enioyest, suppose the same
To be Creusas Babes, of them let her enjoy the name.
This vengeance, this does like me well good reason is there, why,
The last attempt of i^s, thou must with stomach stout apply.
A^as ye little seely fools that erst my children were,
The plaguing price of Fathers fault submit your selves to bear.
O, horror huge with sudden stroke my heart does ouercom:
With ycie dulling cold congealde my Members all benun^.
My shiuering lims appauled sore for ghastly fear do quake,
And banished rage of malice hoate begins it self to slake:
The hateful heart of wife against her Spouse has yielded place,
And pitious mothers mercy mild restores natures face.
O shall I shed their guiltless blood? shall I the frame unfold
Of that, which loving natures hand has wrought in me her moulde?
O doting fury change thy mind, conceive a better thought,
Let not this heinous savage deed by means of me be wrought.
What crime have they (poor fools) commit, for which they should abye?
Upon their Father Jason right all blot of blame should lie.
Medea yet their Mother I am worser far then he.
Tush let them frankly go to wrack no kith nor kin to me
They are: dispatch them out of hand: hold, hold, my babes they be
God wot, most harmless lambs they are, no crime nor fault have they
Alas they be mere innocents, I do not this denay:
So was my brother whom I slew: O false reuolting mind,
Why do thou staggring to and fro such change of fancies find?
Why is my Face be sprent with tears, what makes me falter so,
That wrath and love with striving thoughts do lead me to and fro?
Such fighting fancies bickringe storms my swaruing mind detarre,
As when between the wrestling winds is raised wrangling war,
Each where the tumbling wallowing waves, are hoyst and reared hye
Amid the iustling swolues of seas, that hot in fury frye:
Eue^ so my heart with struggling thoughts now sinks, now swells amain,
Wrath sometime chaseth virtue out, and virtue wrath again.
O yield thee, yield, a grising grief, to virtue yield thy place:
Thou only comfort of our stock in this afflicted case,
Come heather, come dear loved Impe, with colling me embrace,
While that by me your mother dear sweet Boys ye are enjoyed,
So long God grant your Father may you keep from harm vncloyed.
Exile and flight approach on me, and they shall by and by
Be pulde perforce out of mine arms, with vapourde weeping Eye,
Sore languishing with mourning heart, yet let them go to grave
Before their fathers Face, as they before their mothers have:
Now rancorus grief, with fiery fits begins to boil again,
The quenched coals of deadly hate do fressher force attain.
The rusty rancour harbred long within my cancred breast
Starts up, and stirs my hand anew in mischief to be pressed.
O that the rablement of brats which swarmde about the side
Of Niobe that scornful Dame, who perished by her pride
Had taken life out of his lymmes, O that the fates of heaven
A fruictfull mother had me made of children seven and seven.
My barreyne womb for my revenge has yielded little store:
Yet for my s^re and brother, twain I have, there needs no more:
Whom seek this rufflyng rowt of Feendes with gargell Visage dight^
Where will they deal their stripes, or who^ with whips of fire smight?
Or whom with cruel scorching brande and Stygian faggot fell,
With mischief great to cloy, entendes this army black of hell?
A chopping Adder began to hiss with wrethings wrapped round,
As soon as did the lasshing whyp flerte out with yerking sound.
Whom bumping with thy rapping post Megaera will thou crush?
Whose ghost does hear mishapt from hell with scatered members rush?
My slaughtred brothers ghost it is that vengeance coms to crave:
According to his dyre request due vengeance shall he have.
But flap thou fearce the fierbrandes full dassahed in mine Eyes,
Dig, rent, scrape, burn, and squeas them out, lo open my breast it lies,
To fighting furies bobbing strokes, O brother, brother bid
These royles, that preasse to worrey me, them selves away to rid.
Dawne to the s^lent souls allow not taking any care:
Let me be left hear by my self alone, and do not spare,
To bast, and capperclaw these arms that drew the bloody blade:
To quench the furies of thy sprite, that thus do me invade,
With this right hand the sacrifice on thaulter shall be made.
What means this sudden trampling noise? a band of men in Arms
Come bustling toward us, that me will cloy with deadly harms.
To end this slaughter set upon I will my self convey
Up to the garrets of our house, come Nurce with me away,
Bestow thy body hence with me from danger of our foes.
Now thus my mind on mischief set thou must thy self dispose,
Let not the flickering fame and praise in darkness be exilde
Of stomach stout, that you did use in murdering of thy child.
Proclaim in peoples ears the praise of cruel bloody hand.

IA. If any faithful man here be, whom ruin of his land,
And slaughter of his Prince do cause in pens^ue heart to bleed,
Step forth that ye may take the wretch that wrought this deadly deed.
Here, here, ye ioly champions lay load with weapons here,
Have now, hoyst up this house, from low Foundation up it rear.

ME. Now, now my Scepter guilt I have recovered once again:
My Fathers wrongs revenged are, and eke my brother slain:
The gouldens cattels Fleece returnde is to my native land,
Possession of my realm I have reclaymed to my hand:
Come home is my virginity, that whilom went astray.
O Gods as good as I could wisshe, O joyful wedding day,
Go shrowde thy self in darkness him, dispacht I have this feate:
Yet vengeance is not done enough, to cool our thristy heat.
O soul why do thou make delay? Why do thou doubting stand?
Go foreward with it yet thou may, while doing is thy hand:
The wrath that might should mynister does qualefy his flame:
The pryckes of sorrow twitch my heart attaynt with blusshing shame:
Through rygour of thy heinous gore, O wretch, what have thou done?
Though I repent a caityfe vile I am, to sle a my son:
Alas I have committed it, importunate delight,
Still egged on my froward mind that did against it fight:
And lo the vain coniect of this delight increases still,
This only is the thing, that wants unto my wicked will,
That Iasons eyes should see this sight as yet I do suppose,
Nothing it is that I have done, my travel all I lose,
That I employde in dyry deeds, unless he see the same.

IA. Lo here she looks out, and leanes upon the houses frame,
That pitchlong hanges with falling sway: here heap your fires fast,
Whereby the flames that she her self enkindled, may her wast.

ME. Go Jason, go the obit rights the windinge sheet and grave
Make ready for thy son, as last behooves him to have,
Thy spouse and eke thy father in law that are entomde by me
Received have the duties that to dead men's ghostes agree.
This child has felt the deadly stroke and lance of fatal knife,
And this with wailesome murder like shall lose her tender life.

IA. By all the sacred ghostes of heaven, and by thy often exile,
And spousall bed, which breach of love in me did not defile,
Now spare, and save the life of him my child and also thine:
What ever crime committed is, I grant it to be mine:
Make me a bloody sacrifice to dew deserved death,
Take from my sinful guilty head the use of vital breath.

ME. Nay since thou will not have it so as greeues thy pynched mind,
Here way to wreck my vengeance fell, my burning blade shall find.
Auaunt, now hence thou pesaunt proud employ thy busy pain,
To reap the fruits of virgins bed, and cast them of again
When mothers they are made.

IA. Let one for dew revenge suffice.

ME. If greedy thyrst of hungry hands that still for vengeance cries.
Might quenched be with blood of one, then ask I none at all,
And yet to staunche my hungry grief the number is to small,
If only twain I slay, if pleadge of love lie secret made,
My bowels I Will vnbreast, and search my womb with poking Blade.

IA. Now finish out thy deadly deed, that enterprised is,
No more entreataunce will I use, yet only grant me this,
Delay awhyle his doleful death, that I may take my flight.
Least that mine eyes with bleeding heart should view that heavy sight.

ME. Yet linger eger anguishe yet to slay this child of thine.
Run not to rash with hasty speed, this doleful day is mine:
The time that we obtained have of

Greon, we enjoy.

IA. O vile malicious minded wretch my loathsome life destroy.

ME. In craving this thou speakst, that I should show thee some relief,
Well goodinough, all this is done: O ruthful giddy grief,
This is the only sacrifice that I can thee provide,
Unthankful Jason hither cast thy coyesh looks aside.
Lo hear do thou behold thy wife? thus every wonted I,
When murder I had made, to escape, my way does open lie
That I may spring into the skies: the flying serpents twain
Subm^ted have their scaly Necks to yoke of rattling wayne,
Thon Father have thy sons again, I in the wandering Sky
In nymble wheeled Wagon swyfte, will ride advanced hye,

IA. Go through the ample spaces wide, infect the poisoned Air,
Bear witness, grace of God is none in place of thy repair.

FINIS.
THE EYGHTH TRAGEDYE OF L. ANNAEVS SENECA, Entitled AGAMEMNON: Translated out
of Latin into English, by JOHN STVDLEY.
The Argument.
AGAMEMNON, General of that Noble Army of the Greeks, which after ten
years siege wa^ne Troy, committed the entyer Government of his Country and
Kingdom (duringe his absence) to his Wife CLYTEMNESTRA. Who forgetting all
Wyuely loyalty, and Womanly chastity, fell in lawelesse love and used adulterus
company with AEGYSTHVS, son to THYESTES, whom aforetime ATREVS being his own
natural Brother, and Father to this AGAMEMNON, in reueng of a former adultry
had, caused to eat his own two Children.

At length, understanding by EVRYBATES, that Troy was won, and that her
husband AGAMEMNON was coming homewarde with a young Lady named CASSANDRA,
daughter to king PRIAMVS: partly enraged with iealousy, and disdain thereof,
and partly loath to loose the company of AEGYSTHVS her Coadulterer, practyzed
with him how to murder her husband. Which accordingly they brought to pass:
and not resting so contented, they also put CASSANDRA to death, imprisoned
ELECTRA Daughter to AGAMEMNON, and sought to have slain his Son ORESTES.
Which ORESTES fleeing for sauegard of his life to on STROPHILVS, his dead
Fathers dear friend: was by him secretly kept a long time, till at lenght,
coming privily into Mycene, and by his Systers means co^ducted where his
Mother CLYTEMNESTRA and AEGYSTHVS were, in revenge of his Fathers death, killed
them both.

The Speakers names.
THYESTES. CHORUS, CLYTEMNESTRA. NVTRIX. AEGISTHVS. EVRYBATES. A company of
Greeks. CASSANDRA. AGAMEMNON. ELECTRA. STROPHILVS.
THE FIRST ACT.
THYESTES. DEpartinge from the darkened dens
which Dicis low does keep,
Lo here I am sent out again,
from Tartar Dungeon deep,
Thyestes I, that wheather coast
to shun do stand in doubt,
Th'internall fie^des I fly, the foalke
of earth I chase about.
My conscience lo abhors, that I should heather passage make,
Appauled sore with fear* and dread my trembling sinews shake:
My fathers house, or rather yet my brothers I espy,
This is the old and antique porche of Pelops progeny.
Here first the Greeks on princes heads do place the royal crown,
And here in throne aloft they lie, that ietteth up and down,
With stately Scepter in their hand, eake here their courts do ly,
This is their place of banqueting, return therefore will I.
Nay: better were it not to haunt the loathsome Limbo lakes,
Where as the Stygion porter does advance with lusty crakes
His tryple gorge be hong with Mane shag hatry, rusty black:
Where ^xions Carcass linked fast, the whirling wheel does rack,
And rowleth still upon him self: where as full often in vain
Much toil is lost, (the tottring stone down tumbling back again)
Where growing guts the greedy gripe do gnaw with ravening bits.
Where parched up with burning thirst amid the waves he st^s,
And gapes to catch the flecting flood with hungry chaps beguilde,
That pays his parnefull punishment, whose feast the Gods defilde:
Yet that old man so stepped in years at length by trace of time,
How great a part belonges to me and portion of his crime?
Account we all the grisly ghostes, whom guilty found of ill,
The Gnosian Judge in Plutoes pyts does rosse in torments still:
Thyestes I in driery deeds will far surmount the rest,
Yet to my Brother yield I, (though I gorgde my bloody breast)
And stuffed have my pampred paunche even with my children three,
That crammed lie within my Rybs and have their Toumbe in me,
The bowels of my swallowed Babes, deuowred up I have,
Nor fickle Fortune me alone the Father does deprave,
But enterprysing greater guilte then that is put in bre,
To file my Daughters bawdy Bed, my lust she does alure.
To speak these words I do not spare, I wrought the heinous deed,
That therefore I through all my stock, might parent still proceed.
My Daughter driven by force of Fates and destenyes deuyne,
Does breed young bones, and lades her womb with sinful seed of mine.
Lo, nature changed vpside down, and out of order tornde
This myngle mangle has she made, (O fact to be forlornde)
A Father and a Grandsyre lo, confusedly I am,
My daughters husband both become, and Father to the same.
Those babes yt should my Nephews be, when nature rightly runs*
She being tumbled does confound, and mingle with my sons.
The crystal clearenesse of the day, and Phoebus beams so bright,
Are myxed with the foggy clouds, and darkness dim of night.
When wickedness had wearied us, to late truce taken was,
Even when our detestable deeds were done and brought to pass.
But valiant Agamemnon he graund captain of the Host,
Who bare the sway among the Kings, and ruled all the roste,
Whose flaunting Flag, and Banner brave, displayde in royal sort,
A thousand sail of sowsing ships did guard to Phrygian part,
And with their swelling shatling sails the surging seas did hide*
That beats on the banks of Troy, and flows by her side:
When Phoebus Carte the Zodiac ten times had aver run,
And waste the battred Walls do lie of Troy destroyde and woonne,
Returnde he is to yield his throat unto his traytresse Wife.
That shall with force of bloody blade bereue him of his life.
The glytering Swerd, the hewing Axe, and wounding weapons more,
With blood for blood new set abroche shall make the floor to flow.
With sturdy stroke, and boystrous blow, of pithy Pollaxe given
His beaten brains are pash^ abroad, his cracked Skull is reuen.
Now myschiefe marches on a pace, now falshoode does appear,
Now Butchers slaughter does approach, and muriher draws near.
In honor of thy natyue day Aegisthus they prepare
The sollemne feast with ^uncketing* and daynty tothsome fare.
Fie, what does shame abashe thee so, and cause thy courage quayle?
Why doubts thy righthand what to do? to smite why does it fail?
What he forecasting might suspect, why should thou take advise?
Why freteest thou, demanding if thou may it enterprise?
Nay: if a mother it beseem, thou rather may surmyse.
What now? how happens it that thus the sm^^ing summers night,
When Phoebus from Th'antipodes should render son the light,
On sudden chaung their turns with nights that last and linger long,
When wynters Boreas bitter blastes, does puff the trees among?
Or what does cause the glyding stars to stay still in the sky?
We wayght for Phoebus: to the World bring day now by and by.
Chorus. O Fortune, that do fail the great estate of kings,
On slippery sliding seat thou placest lofty things
And setst on tottring sort, where perils do abound
Yet never ki^gdome calm, nor quiet could be found:
No day to Scepters sure does shine, that they might say,
To morrow shall we rule, as we have done to day.
One clod of crooked care another brings in,
One hurly burly done, another does begin:
Not so the raging Sea does boil upon the Sand,
Where as the southern wind that blows in Afryck Land,
One Wave upon another does heap with sturdy blast:
Not so does Euxine Sea, his swelling waves up cast:
Nor so his belching stream from shallow bottom roll,
That borders hard upon the ysyfrosen poall:
Where as Boots bright does twyne his Wayne about,
And of the marble seas does nothing stand in doubt.
O how does Fortune toss and tomble in her wheel
The staggring states of Kings, that readdy be to reele?
Feign would they dreaded be, and yet not settled (...)
When as they feared are, they fear, and live (...) woe.
The silent Lady night so sweet to man and beast,
Can not bestow on them her safe and quiet rest:
Sleep that does overcome and break the bonds of grief,
It cannot ease their hearts, nor mynister relief:
What castle strongly buylt, what bulwark, tower, or town,
Is not by mischyefes means, brought topsy turuye down?
What ramperd walls are not made weak by wicked war?
From stately courts of Kings does justice fly afar:
In pryncely Palaces, of honesty the lore,
And wedlock vow devout, is set by little store.
The bloody Bellon those does haunt with gory hand,
Whose light and vain conceit in painted pomp does stand.
And those Erinnys wood turmoyles with frensyes fits,
That ever more in proud and hauty houses sits,
Which ficle Fortunes hand in twinkling of an eye,
From high and proud degree drives down in dust to lie.
Although that skyrmishe cease, no banners be displayed
And though no wyles be wroughe, and pollecy be stayed,
Down paysed with their weight the massy things do sink,
And from her burden does vn^^able Fortune shrynke*
The swelling Sails puffed up with gale of westren wind,
Do yet mystrust thereof a rempest in their mind:
The threatening tops (that touch the clouds) of lofty towers
Be sonest paid, and bet with south wind rainy showers:
The darkesome wood does see his tough and sturdy Oak,
Well waynde in years to be clean over thrown and broke:
The lyhhtnings flashing flame out breaking in the Sky,
First lyghteth on the mounts, and hills that are most hy.
The bodies corpulent and of the largest syse
Are ryfest still to catch diseases when they rise.
When as the flock to grase, in pasture fat is put,
Whose Neck is larded best* his throat shall first be cut:
What Fortune does advance and hoysteth up on hye,
She lets it up to ^all again more grievously.
The things of middle sort, and of a mean degree,
Endure above the rest and longest days do see:
The man of mean estate most happy is of all,
Who pleased with the lot that does to him befall,
Does sail on silent shore with calm and quiet tide,
And dreads with bruised barge on swelling Seas to ride:
Nor launcing to the deep where bottom none is found,
May with his rudder search, and reach the shallow ground.
THE SECOND ACT.
Clytemnestra, Nutrix O Drowsy oreaming doting soul,
what comes in thy brain
To seek about for thy defense
what way thou may attain?
What ayels thy skittish waiward wits,
to waver up and down?
The fittest shift prevented is,
the best path ouergrowne
Thou might once mayntayned have
thy wedlock chamber chaste,
And eake have ruld with majesty, by faith conjoined fast:
Now nurtures lore neglected is, all right does clean decay
Religion and dignity with faith are worn away:
And ruddy shame with blushing cheeks so far god wot is past,
That when it would it cannot now come home again at last.
O let me now at randon run with bridle at my will:
The safest path to mischief is by mischief open still
Now put in practice, seek about, search out and learn to find
The wily traynes, and crafty guyles of wicked womankind:
What any devilish traiterous dame durst do in working woe,
Or any wounded in her wits by shot of Cupids bow.
What ever rigorous stepdame could commit with desperate hand,
Or as the wench who flaming fast by Venus poisoning brand,
Was driven by lewd incestuous love in ship of Thessail land,
To f^^t away from Colchos isle, where Phasis channel deep.
With stiuer stream down from the hills of Armenie does sweep.
Get weapons good, get bylbowblades or temper poison strong,
Or with some yonker trudge from Greece by theft the seas along:
Why do thou faint to talk of theft, exile or pr^ute flight?
These came by hap, thou therefore must on grea^ter mischief light.
Nut. O worthy Oueene among the Greeks that bears the swinging sway.
And borne of Ledas royal blood, what muttring do thou say?
What fury fell inforceth thee, bereaved of thy wits.
To rage and rave with bedlam brains, to fret withfranticke fittes?
Though madam thou do counsel keep, and not complain thy case,
Thine anguish plain appears in thy pale and wanny face.
Reveal therefore what is thy grief, take leisure good and stay,
What reason could not remedy, often cured has delay.

Clit. So grievous is my careful case which plungeth me so sore,
That deal I cannot with delay, nor linger any more.
The flashing flames* and furious force of fiery fervent heat,
Outraging in my boiling breast, my burning bones does beat:
It suckes the sappy marow out the juice it does convey,
It frets, it tears, it reuts, it gnaws, my guts and gall away.
Now feeble fear still eggs me on (with dolor being pressed)
And cankred hate with thwacking thumpes does bounce upon my breast
The blinded boy that lovers hearts does reaue with deadly stroke,
Entangled has my linked mind with leawd and wanton yoke:
Refusing still to take a foil, or clean to be confound:
Among these broils, and agonies my mind beseging round,
Lo feeble, weary, batred down, and under trode^ shame,
That wrestleth, strives, strugleth hard, and fights with the same.
Thus am I driven to diverse shores and beat frow bank to bank,
And tossed in the fomy floods that strives with courage cranke.
As when here wynd, and their the stream when both their force will try,
From sands allow does hoyst and rear the seas with surges hye.
The wal^ring wave does staggeryng stand not weting what to do,
But (houeryng) doubts, whose furious force he best may yield him to*
My kingdom therefore I cast of, my sceptor I forsake
As anger, sorrow, hope, me lead, that way I mean to take.
At all adventure to the seas I yield my beaten Barge,
At randon careless will I run, now will I roue at large
Whereas my mind to fancy fond dath gad and run astray,
It is the best to choose that chance, and follow on that way.

Nu. This desprat dotage does declare, and rashness rude and blind,
To choose out chance to be the guide and ruler of thy mind.

Cli. He that is driven to utter pinch and furthest shift of all,
What need he doubt his doubtful lot or how his luck befall?

Nut. In silent shore thou saylest yet thy trespass we may hyde,
If thou thy self detect it not, nor cause it be descryde.

Cl. Alas it is more blasd abroad, and further it is blown,
Then any crime that ever in this princely court was sown.

Nu. Thy former fait with pensive heart and sorrow thou dest rue.
And fondly yet thou go about, to set abroch a new,

Cl. It is a very folishnes to keep a mean therein.

Nu. The thing he fears he does augment who heapeth sin to sin.

Cli. But fire and swoard to cure the same the place of salve supply.

Nu. There is no man who at the first extremity will try.

Cl. In working mischief men do take the rediest way they find.

Nu. The sacred name of wedlock once revoke and have in mind.

Cli. Ten years have I been desolate, and led a widows life.
Yet shall I entertayne a new my husband as his wife?

Nu. Consider yet thy son and heir whom he of thee begot.

Cly. And eake my daughters wedding blase as yet forget I not.
Achilles eke my son in law to mind I do not spare,
How well he kept his vow that he to me his mother swear.

Nu. When as our navy might not pass by wynd nor yet by stream,
Thy daughters blood in sacrifyce their passage did redeem:
She sturd and brake the sluggish seas, whose water still did stand,
Whose feeble force might not hoyse up, the vessels from the land.

Cl. I am ashamed here withal, it makes me repyne.
That Tyndaris (who from the Gods does fecch her noble ligne
Should give the ghost t'asswage the wrath of Gods and them appease,
Whereby the Grekish navy might have passage free by seas.
My grudging mind still harpes upon my daughters wedding day,
Whom he has made for Pelops stock the bloody ransom pay.
When as with cruel countenance embrewd with gory blood,
As at a wedding alter side th'unpitiful parent stoodt,
It erked Calchas woeful heart, who did abhor the same.
His Oracle he rewd, and eke the back reflicting flame
O wicked and ungracious stock that winnest il with ill,
Tryumphing in thy filthy featse ncreasyng leaudnes still.
By blood we win the waueryng winds, by death we purchase war

Nu. But by this means a thousand ships at once released are:

Cly. With lucky fate attempt the seas did not the losed rout?
For Aulis I Will, th'ungracious fleet from port did tumble out:
As with a lewd unlucky hand the war he did begin,
So Fortune favored his success to thrive no more therein.
Her love as captive holds him whom captive he did take
Not moved with the earnest suite that could Achilles make,
Of Phoebus prelat Sminthicall he did retain the spoil:
When for the sacred virgins love his furious dreast does boil:
Achilles rough and thundering threats could not him qualify.
Nor he that does direct the fates above the starry sky.
To us he is an Augur just, and keeps his promise due,
But while he threats his captive truls of word he is not true.
The savage people fierce in wrath once might not move his spright,
Who did purloyne the kindled tents with fire blasing bright:
When slaughter great on Greeks was made in most extremest fight
Without a foe he conquered, with leanes pines away,
In lewd and wanto^n chamber tricks he spends the idle day,
And freshly still he fedes his lust, least that some other while
His chamber chaste should want a stews, that might the same defile.
On Lady Brises love ag aine his fancy fond does stand,
Whom he has got, that wrested was out of Achilles hand.
And carnal copulation to have he does. not shame,
Though from her husbands bosom he has snacht the wicked dame,
Tushe, he that does at Paris grudge, with wound but newly stroke
Eflamd with Phrygian Prophets love, his boiling breast does smoke.
Now after Troyan boties brave, and Troy orewhelm'd he saw,
Returned he is a prisoners spouse, and Pryams son in law.
Now heart be bold, take courage good, of stomach now be stowt,
A field that easily is not fought, to pitch thou go about.
In practice mischief thou must put, why hopst thou for a day,
While Priams daughter come from Troy in Greece do bear the sway.
But as for the poor sely wreth, a wayteth at thy place
Thy wyddow, virgyns, and Orest his fatherlyke in face,
Consider their calamityes, to come, and cake their cares,
Whom all the peril of the broyle does threat in thy affairs.
O cursed captive, woeful wretch why do thou loyter so?
Thy little brats a stepdame have whose wrath will work their wo^.
With gashing sword (and if thou can none other way provide),
Nor thrust it through another ribs then launch thy gory side,
So murder twain with brewed blood, let blood immixed be,
And by destroying of thy self destroy thy spouse with thee.
Death is not sawst with soppes of Sorrow if some man else I have,
Whose breathless corse I wish to pass with me to deadly grave.

Nu. Queen, bridle thine affections, and wisely rule thy rage,
Thy swelling mood now mittigate, thy choler ^ake assuage.
Way well the wayghty enterprise that thou do take in hand,
Tryumphant victor he retur^es of mighty Asia land
Auenging Europes injury with him he bringes away.
The spoils of sacked Pargamy a huge and mighty pray.
In bondage eake he leads the foalke of long assaulted Troy,
Yet dare thou by pollecie attempt him to annoy?
Whom with the dynt of glittring sword Achilles durst not harm,
Although his rash and desperate dickes the froward Knight did arm:
Nor Ajax yet more hardy man up yelding vital breath,
Whom frantike fury fell enforst to wound himself to death:
Nor Hector he whose only life procurde the Greeks delay,
And long in war for victory enforced them to stay:
Nor Paris shaft, whose conning hand with shot so sure did aim:
Nor mighty Memnon swart and black, had power to hurt the same:
Nor Xanthus flood, where to and fro dead carcasses did swim,
With armor hewd and therewith all some maimed broken limme:
Nor Symois, that purple wawmes with slaughter died-doth steare.
Nor Cygnus lilly white, the Son of fenny God so dear:
Nor yet the musteryng Thrasian host: nor warlike Rhesus king:
Nor Amazons, who to the wars did painted Quiuers bring,
And bare their hatches in their hands with Target and with shield,
Yet had no power with ghastly wound to foil him in the field.
Sith he such scouringes has escapt and plungde of perilles past
Entendest thou to murder him returning home at last?
And sacred alters to profane with slaughters so vnpure?
Shall Greec thaduenger let this wrong long vnreuengde endure
The grym and fearce coragious horse, the battayles, shoutes, and cries,
The swelling seas which bruised barks do dread when storms arise,
Behold the fields with streams of blood oreflowne and depely dround,
And all the cheualry of Troy in servile bondage bound,
Which Greeks have writ in registers. Thy stubborn stomach byud,
Suddue thy fond affections, and pacify thy mind.

THE SECOND ACT THE SECOND SCENE.
AEgysthus, Clytemnestra. THe cursed time that evermore
my mind did most detest,
The days that I abhorred have
and hated in my breast,
Are come, are come, that mine estate
will bring to utter wrack:
Alas my heart why do thou fail.
and faynting flyest back?
What do thou mean at first assalte
from armor thus to fly,
Trust this, the cruel Gods entend my doleful destenie,
To wrap thee in with perils round and catch thee in a band?
Endeuer drudge with all thy power their plagues for to withstand:
With stomach stout rebellious to fire and sword appeal
Cli. It is no plague, if such a death thy native destnies deal.

Ae (O partners of my perils all begot of Leda thou)
Direct thy doings after mine, and unto thee I vow.
This drosel sluggish ringleader, this stout strong hearted fire,
S^l pay thee so much bldud again as she^ he bath in fire
How haps it that his trembling cheeks to be so pale and whight,
Lying aghast as in a trance with faynting face upright.

Cl. His conscience wedlock vow does prick and bringes him home again
Let us return the self same trade a new for to retain,
To which at first we should have stuck and ought not to forsake,
To co^enaunt continent a new let us our selves betake:
To take the trade of honesty at no time is to late:
He purged is from punishment whose heart the crime does hate.

Aeg. Why whither will thou gad (o rash and unadvised dame?)
What do thou earnestly believe, and firmly trust the same,
That Agamemnons spousall bed will loyal be to thee?
That naught does underprop thy mind which might thy terror be?
His proud success puffed up to high with lucky blast of wind,
Might make so cranke, and set aloft his hawty swelling mind:
Among his pears he stately was ere Troyan turrets torn,
How think ye then his stomach stout by nature given to scorn,
In haughtines augmented is more in himself to joy,
Through this triumphant victory and conquest got of Troy?
Before his voyage Miceane King most mildly did he raygne,
But now a Tyrant truculent returned he is again.
Good luck and proud prosperity do make his heart so rise.
With what great preparation prepared solemn wys^,
A rabblement of strumpets come that clong about him al?
B^t yet the Prophetess of Thebe (whom God of truth we call)
Appears above the rest: she keeps the King, she does him guide:
Will thou in wedlock have a mate and not for it provide?
So would not she, the greattest grief this is unto a wife,
Her husbands mimon in her house to lead an open life.
A Queens estate cannot abide her peete with her to raygne,
Ind ielous wedlock will not her companion sustain.

Cl. Aegist in desprat mood again why see thou me a flote?
Why kindlest thou the sparks of ire in imbers covered hot
If that the victors own free will ^elease his captives care,
Why may not. I his Lady spouse have hope as well to fare?
One law does rule in royal throne, and po^ pous princclye Towers,
Among the vulgar sort, another in private simple bowers.
What though my grudging fancy force that at my husbands hand,
Sharp execution of the law I stubbernly withstand?
Recording this that haynously offended him I have:
He gently will me pardon grant who need the same to crave?

Aeg. Even so on this condition thou may with him compound.
To pardon him if he again to pardon the be bound.
The subtle science of the law, the statutes of our land,
(That long ago decreed were) thou do not understand.
The Judges be malicious men, they spyght and envy us,
But he shall have them partial his causes to discus.
This is the chiefest privilege that does to Kings belong.
What laws forbidd^th other men, they do, and do no wrong.

Cly. He pardned Helen, she is wed to Menela again
Which Europe all with Asia did plunge alike in pain.

Aeg. No Ladies Lust has ravished yet Atrides in his life,
Nor privily purloynd his heart betrothed to his wife.
To pick a quarrel he begins and matter thee to blame,
Suppose thou nothing have commit that worthy is of shame?
What boteth him whom Princes hate an honest life to frame?
He never does complain his wrong, but ever bears the blame.
Will thou repair to Spart and to thy country trudge aryght?
Will thou become a ronnagate from such a worthy wight?
Deuorcement made from Kings will not so let the matter escape.
Thou easest fear by fickle hope, that falsely thou do shape:

Cli. My trespass is disclosd to none, but to a trusty wight:

Aeg. At princes gates fidelity yet never enter might.

Cl. I will corrupt and feed him so with silver and with gold.
That I by bribing bynd him shall no secrets to unfold:

Ae. The trust that hired is and bought by brybes and moneis fee,
Thy counsel to bewray again with brybes entyste will be

Cl. The remnaunt left of shamefastnes of those ungracious tricks,
Wherein of late I did delyght, my conscience freshly pricks.
Why kep'st thou such a busy stir and with thy flatring speech,
Enstructing me with lewd advise do wicked counsel preach
Shall I forsooth of royal blood with all the speed I can
Refuse the King of Kings, and wed an outcast banished man^

Aeg. Why should you think in that Thiest was father unto me.
And Agamemnon Atreus son he should my better be?

Cly. If that be but a tryfle small, and nephew to the same.

Aeg. I am of Phoebus lineage borne, whereof I do not shame.

Cl. Why makste thou Phoebus author of thy wicked pedagrew,
Whom out of heaven ye forced to fly when bridle back he drew,
When Lady Night with mantel black did spread her soden shade,
Why make thou the Gods in such reproachfulnes to wade?
Whose father has thee conning made by sleight and subtle guyle
To make thy kinsman Cockold while his wife thou do defyle.
What man is he whom we do know to be thy fathers mate,
Abusing lust of Lechery in such unlawful rate?
Auaunt, go pack thee hence in have, dispatch out of my sight
This infamy, whose blemish staynes this blood of worthy wight.

Aeg. This is no new exile to me that wickedness do hannt,
But if that thou (O worthy Queen) command me to auaunt,
I will not only straight avoid the house the town and field
My life on sword at thy request I ready am to yield

Cli. This heinous deed permit shall I (most churlish cruel drab)
Against my will though I offend, the fault I should not blabbe:
Nay, rather come apart with me, and let us join our wits
To wrap our selves out of this woe and parlous threatening fits.

Chorus. NOw chaunt it lusty laddes,
Apollos praise subborne,
To thee the frolic flock
their crowned heads adorn.
To thee King Inachs stock
of wedlock chamber void,
Brayd out their virgins locks
and thereon have employed
Their sauory garlandes green Itwist of laurel bow.
Draw near with us O Thebes our dancing follow thou.
Come also ye that drinck of Ismen bubling flood,
VVheras the Laurel treeful thick on banks does bood.
Eake ye whom Mando mild, the Prophetess divine,
(Foreseyng fate) and borne of high Tiresias lygne,
Has stird to celebrate with sacred use and right.
Appollo and Dian borne of Latona bright.
O Victor Phaebe unbend thy noked bow again.
Sith quie tnes and peace anew we do retain.
And let thy twanckling harp make melody so shril,
While that thy nimble hand stryke quauers with thy quill.
No curious descant I nor lusty music crave,
No jolly rumbling note, nor trouling tune to have.
But on thy treble Lute (according to thy use)
Stryke up a playnsong note as when thy learned muse
Thy lessons do record, though yet on baser string
It lyketh thee to play the song that thon did singe:
As when from fyery heaven the dint of lightning flue,
Sent down by wrath of Gods the Titans overthrew
Or else when mountains were on mountains heaped hie
That raise for Giauntes fell their steps into the sky,
The mountain Ossa stood on top of Pelion laid,
Olymp (whereon the Pynes their budding branches braide)
Down paised both: draw nere O Juno noble dame,
Both spouse of mighty Jove and sister to the same.
Thou that do rule with him made ioynter of his mace,
Thy people we of Greece give honor to thy grate.
Thou only do protect from per illes Aigos land,
That ever careful was to have thine honor stand,
Most supplient thereunto thou also with thy might
Do order joyful peace and battails fearce of fight
Accept O conquering Queen these branches of the bays
That Agamemnon here does yield unto thy praise:
The hollow boxen pype (that does with holes abound)
In synging unto the does give a solemn sound:
To thee the Damsels eake that play upon the stringes,
With conning harmony melodious music singes.
The matrons eke of Greece by ryper years more grave,
To thee the Taper pay that vowed often they have,
The Heyferd young and white companion of the Bull.
Unskillful yet by proof the paynful plow to pull.
Whose neck was never worn nor gald with print of yoke,
Is in thy temple slame receiving deadly stroke.
O Lady Pallas thou of most renoumed hap
Bred of the brain of Jove that smites with thunder clap.
Thou lofty Trojan towers of craggy knotty flint
Have bet with battring blade, and stroke with iaueling dint:
The elder matrones with the dames that younger be
Together in myngled heaps do honor due to thee,
When thou approaching nighe thy coming is espyde,
The priest vnbarres the gate, and opes the Temple wide:
By clustring thronges the flocks thine altars haunt apace,
Bedeckte with twisted crowns so trim with comely grace.
The old and ancient men well stepped and grown in years,
Whose feeble trembling age procures hory hayres
Obtaining their request crau de of thy grace divine,
Do offer up to thee their sacrify sed wine,
O bright Dian whose blase sheds light three sundry ways
VVemyndful are of thee, and render thankful praise,
Delon thy native soil thou did fyrmely bind,
That to and fro was wont to wander with the wind:
Which with foundation sure mayn ground forbids to pass
For Nauies (after which to swim it wonted was)
It is become a road defying force of wynd,
The mothers funeralles of Tantalus his kind.
The daughters seven by death thou victresse do account.
Whose mother Niobe abydes on Sipil mount
A lamentable rock and yet unto this hour
Her tears new gushing, out the marble old does power.
The Godhead of the Twins in sumpteous solemn wise,
Both man and wife adore with sauory sacrifyce,
But thee above the rest O father great and guide,
Whose mighty force is by the burninglightning tryde:
Who when thou gave a beck and d^dst thy head but shake
At once thextremest poales of heaven and earth did quake,
O Jupiter the root that of our lynage art.
Accept these offered gifts and take them in good part:
And thou O graundsire great to thy posterity.
Have some remorse, that do not swerve in chyualrie.
But yonder lo with stiuing steps the soldier comes amayne
In all post have, with token that good news declares plain
A Laurel branch, that hangs on his spear head he does bring
Eurybates is come, who has been trusty to the king.
THE THIRD ACT.
Euribates. Clytemnestra SOre tired after many years
with travail and with toil
Scant credityng my self, the Gods
of this my natyue soil,
The temple, and the alters of
the saints that rule the sky,
In kumble sort with reverence
devoutly worship I.
Now pay your vows unto the Gods*
returned is again
Unto his country court, where wont he was to rule, and reign,
Prince Agamemnon, victor he, of Greece the great renoume.
Cly. The tidings of a message good unto mine ears is blown.
Where stays my spouse who^ longing for ten years I have out scand?
What does he yet sail on the seas, or he is come a land?
Yet has he fyxt and set his foot bauck stepping home again.
Upon the sandy shore, that long he wished to attayne^
And does he still enjoy his health enhauncte in glory great,
And painted out in pomp of prays whose fame the sky does beat?

Eu. Bless we with burning sacrifice at length this lucky day

Cli. And eke the Gods though gracious, yet dealing long delay:
Declare if that my brothers wife enjoy the vytall air
And tell me to what kind of Coast my sister does repair.

Euri. God grant, and give us better news then this that thou do crave
The heavy hap of fyghting floods forbiddes the truth to have,
Our scattred fleet the swelling seas attemptes in such a plight,
That ship from ship was taken clean out of each others sight.
Atrides in the waters wide torwoyld and straying far
More vyolence by seas sustaynd then by the bloody war
And as it were a conquered man escaping home al weete
Now brings in his company of such a mighty fleet,
A sort of bruised broken barks, beshaken, torn, and rent.

Cli. Show what unlucky chance it is that has our navy spent.
What storm of seas dispersed has our Captains hear and there

Eury. Thou willest me to make report of heavy woeful gear.
Thou biddest me most grievous news with tydinges good to part:
For vttring of this woeful hap my feeble mind does start.
And horribly appauled is with this so monstrous ill.

Cly, Speak out and utter it: himself with terror he does fill,
Whose heart his own calamity and carke does loath to know:
The heart whom doubted damage dulles with greater grief does glow

Eu. When Troyan buildings blasing bright did burn away and broyle,
Enkindled first by Grekish brand, they fall to part the spoil:
Repayring fast unto the seas again we come aboard,
And now the soldiers weary loins were eased of his sword,
Their bucklers cast aside, upon the hatches lie above.
Their warlike hands in practice put, and Oers learn to move:
Each little hindraunce seems to much to them in hasty plight,
When of recourse the Admiral gave watchword by his light,
And trumpet blast began to call our army from delay,
The painted Pup with gilded snowt did first guide on the way:
And cut the course, which following on a thousand ships did ryue,
Then first a wynd with pipling puffes our launcing ships did drive,
Which glyded down upon our sails the water being calm
With breath of western wynd so myld scant moved any walme.
The shyning seas bespred about with ships does glister bright,
And also couerd with the same lay hid from Phoebus light:
It does us good to gase upon the naked shore of Troy:
The desert Phrygian plots so bare to view w^e hop for joy:
The yeuth each one besturres themselves, and striking altogether,
They tough their oers and with their toil they help the wynd and weather
They ^ug and chearely row by course, the spir^ing seas up dash,
Against the ^atling ^ibs of ships the flapping floods do flash
The hory froth of wrestling waves which ores aloft does raise,
Do draw and trace a furrow through the marblefaced seas.
When stronger blast with belly swollen our h^ysted sails did fill,
They row no more, but let the Pup to go with wynd at will,
Their sheryng oers laid assyde our Pilot does espy,
How far from any land aloof our sails reculing fly,
Or bloody battles does display the threats of Hector stout,
Or of his rattling waggings tells, wherein he rode about.
Or how his gashed carkas slain and traynd about the field
To funeral flan es and obit rightes for coin again was yield.
How Jupiter embathed was al in his royal blood.
The frolic fish disposed was to mirth in Tyrren flood,
And fetching friskes both in and out plays on the waters brim,
And on his broad and fynny back about the seas does swim,
With gambals quick in ringes around and s^de to side enclynd,
Erwhyle he sportes afront the pup, and whips again behynd,
Now fidling on the snout before the dalying wanton route
With iocundary ioly tryckes does skip the fleet about.
Sometime he stands gasing on and eyes the vessels bright,
Now every shore is covered clean, and land is out of sight,
The parlous point of Ida rock in sight does open lie,
And that alone epsy we could with fyrmly fixed eye,
A duskye cloud of stifling smoke from Troy did smolter black,
When Titan from the weary necks the heavy yokes did slack.
The fading light did groueling bend, and down the day did shroud,
Against the Stars amounting up a little misty cloud
Came belching out in yrksome Iompe, and Phoebus galland beams
He spewd upon, bestayning them duct down in Western streams.
The Sun set swaruing in such sort with diverse change of face,
Did give us cause to have mistrust of Neptunes doubted grace.
The evening first did burnish bright, and paynt with stars the sky.
The wyndes were laid, and clean forsook our sails that quiet lie.
When cracking, rattling, rumbling noise, tusht down with thundering sway
From top of hills, which greatter stir does threaten and bewraye.
With bellowinges, and yellinges loud, the shores do grunt and groan,
The craggy clyues and roaring rocks do howl in hollow stone.
The bubling waters swelles vpreard before the wrestling wynd,
When suddenly the lowering light of Moan is hid and blind.
The glymsing stars do go to glade, the surging seas are tossed
Even to the skies among the clouds the light of heaven is lost.
More nights in one compacted are with shadow dim and black,
One shadow upon another does more darkness heap and pack,
And every spark of light consumed the waves and skies do meet,
The ruffling winds range on the seas, through every coast they fi^t.
They heave it up with violence, oreturnde from bottom low,
The western wynd flat in the face of Eastern wynd does blow.
With hurley burley Boreas set open his blasting mouth,
And girdeth out his boysteous breath against the stormy south,
Each wynd with all his might does blow, and works dangers deep,
They shake the floods, a sturdy blast along the seas do sweep.
That rolls and rumbles wave on wave, a northren tempest strong,
Abundance great of flacky snow does hurl our ships among.
The southwynd out of Libia, does rage upon a should,
And with the puissant force thereof the quicksandes up be rold,
Nor bydeth in the south which does with tempest lump and lower,
And force the flowing floods to rise by pouring out a shower.
The stubberne Eurus, Earthquakes made, and shoke the countries East,
And Eos cost where Phoebus first aryseth from his rest.
How violent Corus stretched and tare his yawning breast full wide?
A man would sure have thought the world did from his center slide,
And that the frames of Heaven broke up the Gods adowne would fall
And Chaos dark confused heap would shade and cover all.
The stream straue with the wynd, the wynd did beat it down again.
The springing sea within his banks can not it self contain,
The raging shower his trilling drops does mingle with the seas,
And yet in all this misery the find not so much ease,
To see and know what ill it is, that works their decay.
The darkness dim oppresses still and keeps the light away:
The blackfa^st night with Hellicke hue was clad of Stygian lake
And yet full often with glimsing beams the sparkling fire out brake,
The cloud does crack, and being rent the lightning leapeth out,
The wretches like the same so well it shyning them about,
That still they wish such light to have (although God wot but ill)
The navy swaying down it self does cast away, and spill.
One side with other side is cracked, and helm is rent with helm,
The ship it self the gulping seas do headlong ouerwhelme.
Erwhyle a greedy gaping gulf does sup it up amayne,
Then by and by ^ost up aloft it spewes it out again,
She with her swagging full of sea to bottom low does sink
And drencheth deep aside in floods her totring broken brinke.
That underneath a dosen waves lay drowned out of sight,
Her broken plankes swim up and down, spoyld is her tackle quight,
Both sail and Oers clean are lost, the main mast eke is gone.
That wonted was to bear upright the sail yard thereuppon,
The timber and the broken bordes lie on the waters brim,
When cold and shiuering fear in us does strike through every lim,
The wysest wits entocksicate dare nothing enterprise,
And cunning practice naught auayles when fearful storms arise,
The mareners letting duty slip stand staring all aghast,
Their scoping ores suddenly out of their hands are wrast.
To prayer then apace we fall, when other hope is none,
The Greeks and Troyans to the Gods alyke do make their moan.
Alack what succor of the fates may we poor wretches find?
Against his father Pyr^hus bears a spyteful cankred mind,
At Ayax grudge Ulysses does, king Menela does hate
Great Hector: Agamemnon is with Priam at debate.
O happy man is he that does lie slain in Troyan ground,
And has deserude by handy stroke to take his fatal wound,
Whom same preserves, taking up his tomb in conquered land
Those momes whose melting cowardes heart durst never take in hand
Or enterprise no noble act, those force of f^oods shall drown
But fate forbearing long, will take stout Brutes of high renoume,
Full well we may ashamed be, in such a sort to dye,
If any man his spyteful mind yet can not satisfye,
With these outrageous plunging plagues that down from Gods are sent,
Appease at length thy wrathful God again and take relent.
Even Troy for pity would have wept, to see our woeful case,
But if that in thy boiling breast black rancour still have place,
And that the Greeks to ruin run, it be thy purpose bent,
Why do these Troyans go to wrack? for whom thus are we spent?
Assuage the rygaur of the sea that threarning hills up reares:
This drenched Fleet the Troyan folk and Greeks together bears.
Then from their prayers are they put, their foultring tongues do stay,
The roaring seas does drown their voice and caryes their cries away.
Then mighty Pallas armed with the lepping lightning sire,
That teasty Jove does use to hurl prouokt to swelling ire,
With threatening Iaueling in her hand, her prowess means to try.
And eke her force whose boiling breast with Gorgon fits does fry,
Or what with Target she can do, and with her Fathers fire.
Then from the Skies another storm begins abroad to spyre,
But Ajax nothing yet dismaide all force withstandeth stout,
Whom when he spread his swelling sails with Cable stretched out,
She lighting down did wring him hard, and wrapped him in her flame,
And slang another flasshing dint of lightning on the same,
With all her force and violence her hand brought back again,
She tossed him out, as late that feate her father tought her plain.
Both over Ajax and his Pup she flies overthwart,
And renting man and ship, of both she bears away a part,
His courage naught abated yet he all to singde does seem,
Even like a slubberne ragged Rock amid the striving stream,
He traynes along the roaring seas and eke the waltering wave
By shouing on his bourly breast in sunder quite he drove,
The Bark with hand he caught, and on it self did ripe it over,
Yet Ajax fhyneth in the flood which darkness blind does cover.
At length attayning to a rock his thundering crakes were these,
I conquered have the force of fire and rage of fighting seas,
It does me good, to master thus the anger of the sky,
With Pallas wrath, the lightning flames and floods tumultyng hye.
The terror of the warlyck god once could not make me fly,
The force of Mars and Hector both at once sustaynd have I.
Nor Phoebus darts could me constrayne, from him one foot to shoon,
All these beside the Phrygians subdued we have, and won.
When other Mecocks flinges his darts shall I not them withhis stand?
Yea, what if Phoebus came himself, to pytch them with his hand?
When in his melancholy mood he boasted without mean.
Then father Neptune lift his heat about the waters clean.
The beaten rock with for led m^ce he undermining pluckte
From bottom loose, and suncke it down, when down himself he ducke.
There Ajax lay, by land, by fire, and storm of seas destroid
But we by suffering shypwrack; are with greater plagues a^oyd.
A subtyle shallow flood there is flowne on a stony should,
Where crafty Caphar out of sight the lurking rocks does hold,
Upon whose sharp and ragged tops the swelling side does flow,
The boiling waves do beat thereon still sweaing to and fro:
A turrret nodding over it does hang with falling sway,
From whence on either side from height prospect espy we may
Two seas: and on this hand the coast where Pelops once did raygne,
And Isthmus flood in narrow creek, reculing back again,
Does stop Ionian sea, least into Hellespont it run,
On the other part is Lemnon flood that fame by bloodshed won.
On the other side Calcedon to one does stand against this forte,
And Aulis I Will that stayde out ships that thither did resort.
This Castle here inhabyte does our Palimedes sier,
Whose cursed hand held in the top a brand of flaming fire.
That did alure our fleet, to turn on lurking rocks a right,
Entysing them with with blaze to come unto the light.
All into fitters shaken are the vessels on the should,
But other some do swym, and some upon the rocks are roulde.
And other ^lipping back again so to eschew the Rocks,
His bruised Ryb^, and rattling sides against each other knocks,
Whereby the other he does break, and broken is himself,
Then would they launee into the deep, for now they dread the shelfe,
This perk of troubles thau^ct to hap in dawning of the day.
But when the Gods (be^ought of us) began the rage to stay,
And Phoebus golden beams began a fresh to render light,
The doleful day discried all the damage done by night.

CLY. O whether may I now lament, and weep with wayling sad?
Or shall I else in that my Spouse returned is be glad?
I do rejoice, and yet I am compelled to bewail
My countries great calamity that does the same assail.
O Father great whose majesty does thundering Scepters shake,
The sowring Gods unto the Greeks now favorable make,
With garlands green let every head rejoicing now be crounde.
To thee the pype in sacryfice melodiously does sound,
And on thine altar lies slain an Heyferd lilly whight,
Before the same do present stand with hanging locks vndight,
A careful Troyan company in heavy woeful plight,
On whom from high the Laurel tree with spredding branch does shine,
Whose virtue has inspyred them with Phoebus grace divine,

CHORUS. CASSANDRA. ALas the cruel sting of love
how sweetly does it taste,
A misery is mortal man
annexed while life does last?
The pathe of mischief for to fly,
now since there is a gap,
And wretched souls be franckly calde
From every woeful hap,
By death, a pleasant port, for aye in rest them selves to shroude,
Where dreadful tumultes never dwell nor storms of Fortune proud:
Nor yet the burning fiery flakes of Jove the same does doubt,
When wrongfully with thwacking thumpes be raps his thunder out:
Here Lady Peace th'inhabitours does never put in flight,
Nor yet the victors threatening wrath approaching right to fight,
No whyrling westernwynde does urge the ramping seas to praunce,
No dusty cloud that raised is by savage Dimilaunce,
On horseback riding rank, by rank no fearce and cruel host,
No people slaughtred, with their towns clean ropsie turuey tossed:
While that the foe with flaming fire does spoil and waste the wall,
Untamed and unbridled Mars destroys and batters all:
That man alone who forces not the fickle fates a straw,
The vysage grim of Acheront whose eyes yet never saw,
Who never vewd with heavy cheer the vgsome Limbo lake,
And putting life in hasarde, dare to death him self betake.
That person is a Princes pear, and like the Gods in might,
Who knows not what death does mean is in a pitious plight
The ruthful ruin of our natyue country we beheld:
That woeful night, in which the roofes of houses ouerquelde,
In Dardans City blasing bright with flasshing fiery flames.
When as the Greeks with burning brandes enkindle did the frames,
That: Troy whom war and beedes of arms might not subdue and take.
As once did mighty Hercules, whose Ouyuer causde it quake,
Which neither he that (...) son, and son to Thetis was,
Nor whom Achilles loved to well, could ever bring to pass,
When glytesing bright in field he ware ^al^e armor on his back,
And counterfayting fearse Achill the Troyans drove to wrack.
Nor when Achilles he him self his mind from sorrow wrast,
And Troyan women to the walls did scuddyng leap in have.
In myserte she lost her proud estate, and fast renoume,
By being stoutly overcome, and hardly pulled down.
Years five and five did Troy resis^e, that yet (...) must,
In one nights space by destenie he laid in the dust.
Their fained gifts well have we tried that huge and fatal gin,
We light of credit, with our own right hand have haled in,
That fatal gift of Greeckes: what ^yme at entry of the gap
The hugye horse did shyueryng stand, where in the in selves did wrap
The captains close, in holow vautes with bloody war y^reight.
When lawfully we might have tryde, and serched their deceit:
So by their own contryued snares the greeks had bin confound:
The brazen bucklers being shook did give a clattring sound.
A privy whyspering often times came tyckling in our ear.
And Pyrrhus (in a murreynes name so ready for to hear.
The crafty council picked out of falsa Vlifsses brain,)
Did ^angle in the halow Vaut^^ that range thereof again.
But fearing and suspecting naught the hea^dy youth of Troy
Laid hands upon the sacred ropes, to hale and pull with joy,
On this side young Astyanax came guarded with his train,
On the other part Pollixena disponsed to be slain
Upon Achilles tomb, she coms with maids, and he with men,
A ioly flock with equal years as young as they were then.
Their vowed oblations to the gods in holy day attire,
The matrons bring and so to church repayreth euecry sire.
And all the city did alyke, yea Hecuba our queen
(That since the woeful Hectors death or now was never fene)
She merry is: O grief accursed, of all thy sorrows deep
For which that first, or last befell entendest thou to weep?
Our battred walls which heavenly hands ^cected have and framde?
Or else the burning temples which upon their Idols flamde?
Lamenting these calamyties we have not time and space,
O mighty parent Pryam we poor Troyans wayle thy case.
The old man's thratling throat I saw, (alas) I saw yborde
With cruel Pyrrhus blade, that scante with any blood was gorde:
CAS. Refrain your tears yt down your cheeks should tricle evermore
With woeful waylings piteously your pryuate friends deplore
My myseries refuse a mate, so much accursed as I:
To rewe my careful case, refrain your lamentable cry.
As for mine own distress to moorne, I shall suffice alone.

CHO. To mingle tears with other tears it does us good to moan:
In those the burning teary streams more ardently do boil,
Whom secret thoughts of lurking cares in privy breast turmoyle:
Though that thou were a Gossop stout, that brook much sorrow may
I warraunt thee, thou myghtest well, lament this sore decay,
Not sad and solemn Aedon that in the woods does singe
Her sugared Ditties finely tunde on sweet and pleasant stringe:
Recording Irys woeful hap in diverse kind of note,
Whom Progne though he were her child and of her womb begot,
For to reueng his fathers fault, she did not spare to kill:
And gave his flesh and blood for food the fathers Maw to fill.
Nor Progne who in Swallows shape: upon the rydges hye,
Of houses sits in Biston town bewayling piteously,
With chattering throat, of Tereus her spouse the cruel act,
(Who did by strength and force of arms a shameful brutishe fact.
Defile the sister of his wife, fair Philomel by name,
And eke cut out her tongue, least she should blab it to his shame)
Though Progne this her husbands rape lamenting very sore
Do wayle, and weep with piteous plaint, yet can she not deplore
Sufficiently, though that she would, our countries piteous plight:
Though he himself among the Swans sir Cygnus lilly whight.
Who dwelles in stream of Ister flood, and Tanais channel could,
His weeping voice most ernestly though utter out her would:
Although the morning Halcyons with doleful sighs do wayle,
At such time as the fighting floudes their Cyex did assail,
Or rashly wexing boulde attempt the Seas now laid at rest,
Or being very fearful feed their brood in tottring nest,
Although as squemishe hearted men those priests in bedlem rage,
Whom mother Cyble being borne on high in lofty stage,
Does move, to play on shalmes, Atys the Phrygian to lament,
Yet can not they this lot bewail, though brawn from arms they rent.
Cassandra, in our tears there is no measure to refrain,
Those miseryes all measure pass, that plunged us in pain.
The sacred fillets from thy heads, why do thou hale and pull?
They chiefly ought to worship God, whose hearts with grief be dull.

CAS. My fear by this affliction is clean abaled all,
Nor praying to the heavenly Ghostes for mercy will I call.
Although they were disposde to cha^e and fret in fus^ten fumes,
They nothing have me to displease, Fortune her force consumes.
Her spyte is worn unto the stumpes, what country have I left?
Where is my Sire? am I of all my systers quite bereft.
The sacred tombs and alter stones our blood have drunk and swylde,
Where are my brethren blessed knor? destroyed in the fylde.
All widow Wives of Priams sons may easly now behold,
The Palace void and cast of court of silly Priam old.
And by so many marriages so many Wyddowes are,
But only Hellen coming from the coast of Lacon far.
That Hecuba the mother of so many a pryncely wight,
Whose fruitful Womb did breed the brand, of fire blasing bright:
Who also bare the swinge in Troy, by practice now does learn,
New laws and guise of desteny in bondage to discern.
On her she takath heart of grace with looks so stern and wild,
And barketh as a bedlem bitch about her strangled child
Dear Polidor, the remnaunt left, and only hope of Troy,
Hector, and Priam to revenge, and to restore her joy.

CHO. The sacred Phoebus Prophet is with sudden silence hushed:
A quaking trembling shiuering fear throughout her Isms has rusht:
Her Face as pale as Ashes is, her Fillits stand vpryght,
The soft and gentle goldilockes starte up of her affright.
Her panting breathing breast stuffed up within does grunt and groan.
Her glaring bryghe and steaming Eyes are hither and thither thrown.
Now glauncing up and down they roll: now standing stiff they stare.
She stretches up her head more straight then commonly she bare,
Boult up she goes, her wrestling Jaws that fast together clinge,
She does attempt by diverse means, on sunder how to wringe.
Her mumbling words in gabling mouth shut up she does assuage,
As Menas mad that Bacchus aares does serve in furious rage.

CAS. How does it hap (O sacred tops of high Parnassus hill)
That me berapt of sense, with pricks of fury fresh ye fiill?
Why do you me with ghost inspyre, that am beside my wits?
O Phoebus none of thine I am, releasse me from the sits:
Infixed in my burning breasts the flames extinguish out,
Who forces me with fury fell to gad and trot about?
Or for whose sake inspyrde with spryte mad mumbling make must I?
Why play I now the Prophet cold, since Troy in dust does ly?
The day does shrynke for dread of war, the night does dim mine eyes.
With mantell black of darkness deep clean couerd is the skies:
But lo two shining Suns at once in heaven appears bright,
Two Grecian houses muster do their armies twain to fight.
Among the mighty Goddesis in Ida woods I see,
The fatal sheepherd in his throne as vmpier plast to be:
I do advise you to beware, beware (I say) of kings,
(A kindred in whose cancred hearts old privy grudges springes)
That country clown Aegisthus he this stock shall overthrowe,
What does this foolish despret dame her naked weapons show?
Whose crown entendeth she to crack in weed of Lacon land,
With Hatchet (by the Amazons invented first) in hand?
What face of mighty majesty be witched has mine eyes?
The conqueror of saluage beasts Marmarick Lion lies,
Whose noble neck is wurried with currish fange and tooth
The curlish snaps of eger Lyonesle abide he does.
Alack ye ghostes of all my friends why should ye say that I,
Among the rest am only safe, from perils far to ly?
Feign father follow thee I would, Troy being laid in dust.
O brother terror of the Greeks, O Troyans aid and trust.
Our ancient pomp I do not see, nor yet thy warmed hands,
(That fearce on Greekish flaming fleet did fling the fyry brandes)
But mangled members, schorched corpse, and sake thy valiant arms,
Hard pimond and bound in bands sustayning grievous harms:
O Troyolus, a match unfit encountering with Achill
(That mighty man of arms) to soon come unto thee I will.
I do delight, to sail with them on stinking Siygian flood.
To view the churlishe mastife cur of hell, it does me good.
And gaping mouthed Kingdom dark of greedy Ditis raygne.
The Barge of filthy Phlegethon this day shall entertayne,
Me conquering, and conquered, and Princes souls with all.
You flitering shades I you beseech, and cake on thee I call,
O Stygian poole (whereon the Gods their solemn oaths do take
Vnbolt a while the Brasne bars of darksome Lymoo lake.
Whereby the Phrygian folk in hell may Mic^an state behold.
Look up ye silly wretched souls, the fates are backward roulde.
The sqally sisters do approach, and deal their bloody strokes,
Their smultring taggots in their hands half bru^ie to ashes smokes.
Their vysages so pale do burn, with fyry flaming eyes:
A garment black their g^awed guts does gyrde in mourning g^yse.
Dire dread of night begins to howl, the bones of body bast
With lying long do rot corrupt in miry pudle cast.
Behold, the weary aged man his burning thyrst forgot*
The waters dalying at his lips to catch endeavors not:
But mourns for the funeral, that shall ensue anen.
The Troyan Prince his royal robes tryumphant puts on.

CHO. The furious rage clean ouerpast begins it self to slake.
And slyps away, even as a Bull that deadly wound does take
On gasshed neck afront the aares: come let us ease at last
Her lymbes, that of the spryte of God has felt the mighty blast.
Returning home again at length and crounde with Laurel bow
(A sign of worthy victory) is Agamemnon now.
The Wife to meet her Husband, does her speedy passage ply,
Returning hand in hand, and foot by foot most lovingly.

THE FOVRTH ACT.
AGAMEMNON. CASSANDRA. AT length I do arryue again
upon my native soil:
God save thee O dear loved Land,
to thee so huge a spoil
So many barbarous people yield:
the flower of Asia. Troy:
To bear thy yoke submits her self,
that long did live in joy.
Why does this Prophet (on the ground her sprawling body laid)
Thus reele and stagger on her neck, all trembling and dismayde?
Sirs, take her up, with Lycour warm let her be chearished.
Now peepes she up again, with drouping eyes sonke in her head:
Pluck up thy spryte, here is the port wished for in misery:
This day is festival.
CAS. At Troy so was it wont to be.

AG. Let us to Th'alters worship give.

C. At Th'alters died my sire:
A, Pray we to Jove.

C. To love whose grace divine does me inspire?

AG. Do thou suppose that Troy thou see?

C. And Priam eke I see.

AG. Troy is not here.

C. where Helen is there take I Troy to be,

AG. Fear not as maid to serve thy dame.

C. Nay fredome draws ny.

AG. Take thou no thought how thou shall I^ue.

C. All cares for to defy,
Death gives a courage unto me.

AG. Yet say I once again
There is no danger left, whereby thou might hurt sustain.

CA. But yet much troublous danger both hang over thy head I wot.

AG. What mischief may a victor dread?

CA. Even y^ he dreadeth not.

AG. Ye trusty meny of my men come carry her away,
Till of the spryte she ryd her self, least fury force her say
That may be prejudicial, her tongue she cannot frame.
To thee O Father flinging forth the lightnings flasshing flame,
That do disperse the clouds, and rule the course of every star,
And guide the Globe of Earth, to whom the boottes won by war
With triumph victors dedicate: to thee O Juno hight
The sister dear of doughty Jove, (thy husband full of might)
Both I and Greece with flesh and blood, and eke our vowed beast,
And gorgious gifts of Arabie, give worship to thy hest.

Chorus. O GREECE by noble Gentlemen
in honor shyning clear,
O GREECE to wrathful IVNO thou
that art the darling dear,
Some jolly worthy lusty blood
thou fosters evermore,
Thou have made even the Gods, that were
a number odd before.
That puissaunt mighty Hercules a noble Impe of thine
Defer^ed by his travels twelve, rapt up in heaven to shine.
For whom the heavens did alter course, and Jupiter with all
Did iterate the hours of night, when dampishe dew does fall.
And charged Phoebus chariot swyfte to trot with slower pace,
And leasurely bright lady Moon thy homwarde Wayne to trace,
Bright Luci^er that year by year his name a new does change,
Came back again, to whom the name of Hesper seemed strange.
Aurora to her common course her reared head addressed,
And couching backward down again the same she did ares^,
Upon the shoulder of her spouse, whose years with age are worn
The east did feel, so felt the west, that Hercules was borne.
Dame nature could not clea^e dispatch, to utter in one night,
That boystous lad: the whyrling world did wayght for such a wight.
O babe whose shoulders underprop, the ample spactous sky,
In clasped arms thy prewesse did the crusshed Lion try.
Who from his fyry yawning throat sp^wes out his broyling brande,
The nimble hynde in Menall mount has known thy heavy hand*
The Bore has felt thy fyst, which did Arcadia destroy.
The monstrous conquerde Bull has rorde that Creta did anoy.
The Dragon dyre that breeding beast in Lerna poole he slew,
And chopping of one head forbad thereof to rise anewe.
With clubbed brusing battring batte he crankly did subdew.
(The brethren twins y^ tewde un Teate) whereof three monsters grew.
Of tryple formed Gerion the spoil into the east,
A drove of ECttell Hercules did fetch out of the weast.
Away from tyrant Diomede the Thracian horse he led,
Which neither with the grass that grew by Styrmon flood he fed,
Nor yet on Heber banks, but them the v^^layne did refresh
His greedy mounching cramming tades with aliaunts blood and flesh.
Their rawfed Jaws imbrewde were with the carmans blood at last,
The spoils and shaftes Hipolyte saw from her bosom wrast
As soon as he with clattring shaft the dusky cloud did smite,
The Stymphall bird that shadowed the sun, did take her flight.
The fertile tree that apples bears of gold, did fear him sore,
Which never yet acquayntaunce had with Tasters ^ooth before.
But whipping up with lively twigges into the air she fly^s,
And while the chinking plate does found then Argos full of eyes,
The watchman shrinking close for cold that sleep yet never knew,
Does hear the noise while Hercules with metal of yellow hew
Well laden packs away, and left the grove befliched clea^e.
The hound of hell did hold his tongue drawn by in tryple cheane,
Nor bark with any boughinge throat, nor could abide the heme,
Or color of the heavenly light, whose beams he never knew.
When thou were captain General, and did conduct our Host,
(They that) of Dardans Lygne, to come their Stock do falsely boste,
Were vanquished by force of arms and since they felt again
Thy Gray goose winge, whose bitterness to fear might the^ constrayne.
THE FIFTE ACT.
CASSANDRA. WIthin a revel rexe is kept,
as sore as ever was,
Even at the ten years siege of Troy:
What thing is this? (alas)
Get up my soul, and of the rage
auengmeent worthy crave:
Though Phrygians we be vanquished,
the victory we have.
The matter well is brought about:
up Troy thou rysest now,
Thou flat on floor have pulde down Greece, to ly as low as thou.
Thy Conqueror does turn his Face: my prophesying spright
Did never yet disclose to me so notable a sight:
I see the same, and am thereat, and busied in the broyle,
No vision fond fantastical my senses does beguile:
Such fare as Prygians feasts with on last unhappy night
At Agamemnons royal court full daintily they dight:
With purple hangings all adornde the brodred Beds do shine,
In old Assaracks goblets gylt they swincke and swill the wine.
The King in gorgyous royal robes on chair of State does sit,
And pranckt with pride of Pryams pomp of whom he conquered it.
Put of this hostile weed, to him, (the Queen, his Wife began say,)
And of thy loving Lady wrought wear rather this array.
This garment knit. It makes me loath, that shiuering here I stand.
O shall a King be murdered, by a banished wretches hand?
Out, shall Th'adulterer destroy the husband of the Wife?
The dreadful destinies approcht, the food that last in life
He tasted of before his death, their masters blood shall see,
The gubs of blood down dropping on the wind shall powered be.
By traytrous trick of trapping weed his death is brought about,
Which being put upon his head his hands could not get out*
The stopped poake with mouth set open his muffled head does hyde,
The mankind dame with trembling hand the swe^d drew from her side,
Nor to the utmost of her might it in his flesh she thrast,
But in the gieuing of the stroke she stayed all aghast,
He as it were a bristled Bore entangled in the net
Among the briars in busshy woods yet tries out to get.
With struggling much the shrinking bands more straightly he does bind.
He stryues in vain, and would sl^y of the snare that does him blind.
Which catches hold on every side. But yet th'entangled wreatch
Does grope about, his subtle foes with griping hand to catch.
But furious Tyndaris preparde the Pollaxe in her hand,
And as the priest to sacrifice at Th'alter side does stand,
And vewes with eye the Bullockes neck, ear that with Axe he smite,
So to and fro she heaues her hand to stryke and leauell right.
He has the stroke: dispatched it is: not quite fhopt of the head
It hangs by a little crop: here from the Carcass dead
The spouting blood came gusshing out: and there the head does lie,
With wallowing, bobling, mumbling tongue: nor they do by and bye
Forsake him so: the breathless coarse Aegist does all to coil:
And mangled has the gasshed corpse: while thus he does him spoil,
She puts to her helping hand: by detestable deed
They both accord unto the kind, whereof they do proceed.
Dame Helens sister right she is, and he Thyestes son:
Lo doubtful Titan stands still the day now being done,
Not knowing whether best to keep still on his wonted way,
Or turn his wheels unto the path of dyre Thyestes day.
THE FIFTE ACT. THE SECOND SCENE.
ELECTRA. O Thou whom of our Fathers death
the only help we have,
Fly, fly, from force of furious foes,
make have thy self to save:
Our house is ^opsey turuey tossed,
our Stock is cast away,
Our ruthful realms to ruin run, our kingdoms do decay.
Who comes here in Chariot swift thus galloping a main?
Brother, disguised in thy weed let me thy person feign.
O Bussard blind, what do thou mean from forrayne folk to fly?
Whom do thou shun? it does behoue to fear this family.
Orestes now be boulde, and set all shiuering fear a side,
The certain succor of a trusty friend I have espide.
THE FIFTE ACT. THE THIRD SCENE.
Strophilus. Electra. WIth solemn Pomp I Strophilus
forsaking Phocis land,
Bearing a branch of Paulme, that grows
at Eli^, in my hand,
Returned back I am, the cause
that wild me heather wend,
Is with these gifts to gratefie
and welcome home my friend,
Whose valiant army shal^e, and shook
the tattred Troyan walls,
Who wearied with the ten years war, now flat on floor she falls.
What woeful wight is this that staynes her mourning face with tears,
And drowned deep in drousp dumpes oppressed is with ^eares?
I know full well this damsel is of Princes lynage borne.
What cause Electra has this joyful family to morn?
ELE. By treason that my mother wrought, my Father lies slain,
And drincking of their fathers cup the children do complain.
Aegist engroceth Caste^s got by fornication.

STR. A lack that of so long a time, filicity is none.

ELE. I thee request even for the Jove my father thou do owe,
And for the honor of the crown, whose brute abroad both grow
In every coast: and by the Gods that diversely do deal,
Take into thy tuicion, convey away, and steal,
This poor Orest: such kind of theft is piety in deed.

STR. Although that Agamemnoas death does teach me to take heed,
Yet will I undertake the same, and with all diligence
Orestes shall I go about with strength to have thee hence.
Prosperity requires faith, but trouble exacts the same,
Have here a price for those that do contend and wage in game.
An Ornament with comely grace ordaynde to deck the brow,
And let thy head be couerde with this green and pleasant bow.
And carry this victorious triumphant branch in hand.
God grant this Paulme that planted was in fertile Pisa land,
(Where solemn games were celebrate Jove's honor to express)
May both a sauegarde be to thee, and bring thee good success.
Thou that bestryds thy fathers steedes, as he before has done,
Go stryke a league of amity with Pylades my son.
Now nimble Nagges let Greece hereof recording testify,
With headlong scouring course amayne this traytrous country fly.

ELE. He is escapte and gone, and with unmeasurable might
The Chariot horse with rain at will do scud out of my sight.
Now free from peril on my foes attendaunce will I make.
And offer willingly my head the deadly wound to take.
The cruel conqueresse of her spouse is come, whose spotted weed
With sprinkels (sign of slaughter) do bear record of her deed.
Her goary hands new bathde in blood as yet they be not dry,
Her rough and churlishe rigorous looks the fact do notify.
Unto the Temple will I trudge. Cassandra suffer me,
Oppressed with egall grief, take part of sacrifice with thee.

THE FIFTE ACT. THE FOVRTH SCENE.
Clytemnestra. Electra. AEgisthus. Cassandra. O Thou thy Mothers Enemy,
ungracious saucy face.
After what sorre do thou a maid
appear in publyque plate?
ELEC. I have with my virginity
the bowres of Baudes forsook.

CLY. What man is het, that ever thee to be a vyrgin took?

E. What your own daughter?

C. With thy mother more modest should,

EL. Do you at length begin to preach, such godliness to me. thou be.

CL. A marily stomach stout thou bast with swelling hawty heart.
Subdued with sorrow learn thou shall to play a woman's part.

EL. A swerd and buckler very well a woman does beseem,
(Except I dote.)

CL. Thy self do thou haylefellowe with us esteem?

EL. What Agamemnoon new is this, whom thou have got of late?

CL. Hereafter shall I tame, and teach thy gyrlish tongue to prate.
And make thee know, how to a Queen thy taunting to forbear.

EL. The whilst (thou Wyddow) au^sware me directly to this gear.
Thy husband is bereued quight of breath, his life is done.

CL Enquter where thy brother is, so seek about my son.

EL. He is departed out of Greece.

CL. Go fetch him out of hand.

EL. Fetch thou my father unto me.

CL. Give me to understand,
Where does he lurking hyde his head? where is he shrunk away?

EL. All plunge of perils past he is, and at a quiet stay,
And in another Kingdom where no harm he does mistrust,
This answer were sufficient, to please a Parent tust.
But one whose breast does boil in wrath, it cannot satisefy.

CL. To day by death thou shall receive thy fatal destiny.

EL. On this condition am I pleased, the Altar to forsake,
If that this hanc shall do the deed, my death when I shall take.
Or else if in my throat to bath thy blade, thou do delight,
Most willingly I yield my throat, and give thee leave to smite.
Or if thou will chop of my head in brutishe beastly guise,
My neck a waiting for the wound out stretched ready lies.
Thou have committed sinfully a great and grievous guilt.
Go purge thy hardened hands, the which thy husbands blood have spilt.

CL. O thou that of my perils all do suffer part with me,
And in my realm do also rule with egall dignity,
Aegisthus, art thou glad at this? (as does her not behoue,)
With checks and taunts y^ daughter does her mothers malice move.
She keeps her brothers counsel close conueyde out of the way.

AEGI. Thou mal^pert and w^tlesse wenche, thine cluishe prating stay,
Refrain those words unfit thy Mothers glowing cares to vex.

EL. What shall the breeder of this broyle control me with his checks,
Whose fathers gutit has caused him to have a doubtful name,
Who both is to his sister, son, and Nephew to the same?

CL. To snap her head of with thy swerd Aegist do thou refrain?
Let her give up the ghost: or bring her brother straight again:
Let her be locked in dungeon darck, and let her spend her days,
In Caves and Rocks, with painful pangues, torment her every ways.
I hope him whom she hidden has she will again discry,
Through being clapped in prison strong and suffering poverty
With yrksome and unsavory smells on every side annoyde,
Enforst to wear a wyddowes weed, er wedding day enioyde:
Put in exile and banishment when each man does her hate:
So shall she be by misery compeld to yield to late,
Prohibyted of wholesome air fruition to have.

EL. Grant me my dome by means of death to pass unto my grave.

CL. I would have granted it to thee, if thou should it deny.
Unskilful is the tyrant, who by suffering wretches die
Does end their pains.

EL. what after death does any thing remain?

CL. And if thou do desire to dye, the same see you refrain.
Lay hands s^is on this wondrous wretch, whom being carried on,
Even to the furthest corner of my jurisdiction.
Far out beyond Mycoenas land in bonds let her be bound,
With darkness diui in hiddeous hold let her be closed round.
This captive Spouse and wicked Queen, the Trull of Princes bed
Shall pay her pains, and suffer death by so^^ng of her head.
Come, hale her on, that she may follow, that way my spouse is gone,
Whose love from me entised was.

CAS. Do not thus hale me on.
I will before you take the way, these tidings first to tell
Unto my country men of Troy beneath in lowest hell.
How ouerquelmed ships each where are spread the seas upon:
And M^coene country conquerde, is brought in subjection.
He that of thousand captains was graunde captain general,
Come to as great calamity as Troy it self did fall,
Entrapped was by traytrous train, and whoredom of his Wife,
And by a gift received of her, deprived of his Life.
Let us not linger: on with me, and thanks I do you give.
I ^oy, that it might be my hap, thus after Troy to live.

CL. Go to, prepare thy self to dye thou frantique raging wight.

CAS. The fransy fits of fury fell on you shall also light.

EVRIBATES. Added to the Tragedy, by the Translator. ALas ye hateful hellish
Hagges,
ye furies foul and fell,
Why cause ye rusty rancours rage
in noble hearts to dwell?
And cancred hate in boiling breasts
to grow from age to age?
Could not the graundstres paynefull pangues
the childrens wrath assuage?
Nor famyne faint of pyning paunche, with burning thyrst of hell,
Amid the blackest stream of Sticks where poysning breathes do dwell.
Where vapors bile parbraking out from dampishe myry mud,
Increase the pains of Tantalus deserude by guiltles blood,
Could not thine own offense suffice Thyestes in thy Life,
To file thy brothers spousall Bed, and to abuse his Wife?
But after breath from body fled, and Life thy Lymmes has left,
Can not remembrance of revenge out of thy breast be reft?
What, yet have thou not laid thy lips, taiaste of Lethes floude?
Now afte death why do thou come to move thy son to blood?
Could cruel Ditis grant to thee thy pasporte back again?
To work this woe upon the world, and make such rigor raygne,
That Clytemnestra is become the fifty sister dyre
Of Danaus daughters, that did once their husbands death conspyre.
Lo here how fickle fortune gives but brytle fading joy.
Lot, he who late a Conqueror tryumphed over Troy,
Enduring many srtudy storms with mighty toil and pain
To sow the seed of fame, has reapt small fruit thereof again.
When as his honor budding forth with flower began to bloome,
(Alas) the stock was hewed down and sent to deadly doom.
And they that of his victory and coming home were glad,
To sudden mourning change their mirth with heaviness bestad.
The lusty pomp of royal court is dead: (O doleful day)
The people moan their princes death with woe and weal away:
With howling crying, wringing hands, with sobs, with sighs, and tears,
And with their fists they beat their breasts, they pull and hale their hears.
And as the sheep amassed run, and rampe about the field,
When as their shepherd to the Wolf his goary throat does yield
Even so as mad they rage and rave throughout Micoenas land,
Deprived of their Prince, they fear the bloody Tyrauntes hand.
While thus were woeful waylings hard in every place about,
The good Cassandra (come from Troy) to death is haled out.
Like as the Swan, who when the time of death approaches nigh,
By nature warned is thereof, and pleased well to dye,
Does celebrate her funeral with dirge and solemn song:
Even so the noble vyrgin who in woe has lived long,
Most joyful goes she to her death with mild and pleasant face,
Stout bouistring out her burly breast with pryncely port and grace.
Nothing dismayde with courage bold, and cheerful countenance,
On stage ordained for her death she began her self advance:
As though she had not thither come, to leave her loathsome life,
As though she had not come, to taste the stroke of fatal knyfe.
But even as it in brydale bed her journey were to meet
Corebus dear, not having mind of death, nor winding sheet,
When looking round on every side she took her leave of all,
From vapourde eyes of young and old the trickling tears do fall.
The Greeks them selves to grief are moude to see this heavy sight,
So pity pearst the headmans heart, that thrice about to smite
He stayde the smot: with shiuering hand yet once again he tried.
And from her shoulders stroke her head. And thus the vyrgin dyed.
But now the Greeks another cause of mourning have in hand:
Oresters, Agamemnon^ some, is forced to fly the land.
Among old rotten ragged Rocks there lies an ugly place.
A Dungeon deep, as dark as hell, unknown to Phoebus face.
An holow huge wide gaping hole, with way still bending down,
Whose mouth with venonous wythred weeds is hid and ouergrowne,
Where stinking smells come belching out from filthy durty dyke.
Where Verment vile do creep and craule, in hell is not the like.
Ilfauourde, foul misshapen bugges, do luck about this cave,
With dreadful sounds, and roaring noise withing the pit they rave.
Even heather is Electra sent, in darckenesse deep to lie,
In poverty, and comfortless without the light of sky,
Fast clogde with Iron boults and Chains, thus by her mother laid
In torments, till by her to death Orestes be betrayde:
Who (as Cassandra tells) shall revenge his fathers death,
Depryue with swerd th'adulterour, and Mother both of breath.
So after all these bloody broyle, Greece never shall be free:
But blood for blood, and death by turns, the after age shall see.
FINIS.
THE NINTHE Tragedy of Lucius Annaeus Seneca, called Octauia. Translated out of
Latin into English by T.N.
The Argument.
OCtauia daughter to prince Claudius grace,
To Nero espousd, whom Claudius did adopt
(Although Syllanus first in husbands place
She had received, whom she for Nero chopped)
Her parente both, her Make that should have been,
Her husbands present. Tyranny much more,
Her own estate, her case that she was in,
Her brothers death (pore wretch) lamenteth sore.
Him Seneca does persuade his latter love,
Dame Poppie, Crispynes wife that some time was,
And eake Octauias maid for to remove.
For Senecks counsel he does lightly pass*
But Poppie ioynes to him in marriage rites,
The people wood into his palace run,
Her golden fourmed shapes which them sore spytes,
They pull to ground: this uproar now begun,
To quench, he some to griesly death does send*
But her close cased up in dreadful barge,
With her unto Campania coast to wend,
A band of armed men, he gane in charge.
THE FIRST SCENE.
The Speakers names.
Octauia, Nutrix, Chorus Romanorum, Seneca, Nuntius, Agrippina, Poppea, Nero.
Praefectus.
Octauia. NOw that Aurore with glitteryng streams,
The glading stars from sky does chase,
Sir Phoebus pert, with spouting beams,
From dewy neast does mount apace:
And with his cheerful looks does yield,
Unto the world a gladsome day.
Go to, O wretch, with ample Field
Of heavy cares oppressed aye,
Thy grievous wonted playntes recount:
Do not alone with sighs and howles,
The Seaysh Aloyones surmounte,
But also pass the Pandyon fowls:
More yrksome is thy state then theirs*
O Mother dear whose death by fits,
I nyll lament but still shed tears,
My ground of grief in thee it sits.
If that in shade of darksome den,
Perceiving sense at al remain,
Hear out at large, O mother then,
My great complayntes, and grievous pain
O that immortal Clothos wrist,
Had torn in twain my vital thread:
Ere I unto my grief had wist
Thy wounds, and face of sanguine red.
O day which aye does me annoy:
Since that time did I more desire,
The fearful darkness to enjoy,
Than Phoebus fresh with fair attire.
I have abode the bitter hest
Of stepdame dire, in mothers place,
I have abode her cruel breast,
Her stomach stout, and fighting face.
She, She, for spyte unto my case,
A doleful, and a grave Eryn,
To Bridegromes chamber spousall space,
The Stygian flashing flames brought in.
And thee, (alas) most piteous Sire,
With traytrous traynes has she bereft
Of breathing soul with poisoned mire:
To whom ere while, the world all left
Vnvanquisht from the Ocean Seas
By martial feats did freely yield:
And did subdue with wondrous ease,
The Brittayne brutes that fled the field:
Whom living at their propre swaye:
No Romayne power did erst invade.
Now lo (full well lament I may)
Thy Spouse deceypte thy prowes has lade ^
And now thy court and child of yore,
With homage serve a Tyrants lore.
THE SECOND SCENE.
Nutrix. WHom so the glistering pomp of royal place,
With soden sight ynumd does quite disgrace,
Who so at courtly fleeting ebbing blase,
Astonished sore, himself does much amase:
Lo see of late the great and mighty stock,
By lurking Fortunes sudden forced knock,
Of Claudius quite subvert and clean extinct:
Tofore, who held the world in his precinct:
The Brittayne Ocean coast that long was free,
He ruld at will, and made it to agree,
Their Roman Galleys great for to embrace.
Lo, he that Tanais people first did chase,
And Seas unknown to any Romayne wight
With lusty sheering ships did ouerdight,
And safe amid the savage freakes did fight,
And ruffling surging seas has nothing dread,
By cruel spouses gilt does lie all dead.
Her son likewise more fiend then Tigre fierce,
Of natural mother makes a funeral her se,
Whose brother drenched deep with poisoned cup.
Pore Britannick, his senseles soul gave up
Octauia sister and unhappy make,
Does sore lament her case for Britans sake,
Ne can her ruthful piteous sorrow slake,
Though Neros wrath do sore constrayne her grace
She nil esteems the secret closet place:
But boiling still with equal peysd disdain.
With mutual hate gaynst him does burn again.
My true and trusty love that I do bear,
In vain I see does strive to comfort her,
Revenging greedy grief does straight repriue,
To Appease her smarte the counsel that I give,
Nor flame of worthy breast does once relent
But heaps of grief, her courage do augment.
Alas, what griesely deeds for to ensue
My fear foreseeth: God grant it be not true.
THE THIRD SCENE.
Octauia, Nutrix. O Staggering state, O peerless ill:
With ease Electra I repeat,
And call to mind thy mourning will.
With watered eyes like smarti^g sweat
Thou might lament thy father slain,
Still hoping that thy brother might,
That deadly deed revenge again.
Whom thou O tender loving wight
Did safely shield from bloody foe,
And natural love did closely keep:
But Neroes dreaded visage lo,
Does fear me that I dare not weep,
Nor wayle my parents ruchful case,
By cruel lot this slaughter cought:
Ne suffers me this geniall face,
To dash with tears to dearly bought
With brothers blood: who only was
Mine only hope in all my grief,
And of so many mischieues, as
My comfort great, and sole relief.
Now lo reserud for greater care,
And to abide more lingering pain,
Of noble famous lineage bare,
A drouping shade I do remain.
Nutrix. My Ladies heavy voice me thought
Within my listening ears can sound,
And snaylish age in going soft,
Unto her thews in not ybounde.

Octauia. O Nurse our dolours witness sure
By curroll cheeks distilling rain,
And heavy hearts complaynt endure.

Nutrix. Alas, what day shall rid of pain,
With care your welnye wasted heart?

Octauia. That sends this guiltles ghost to grave

Nutrix. This talk (good madame) set apart.

Octauia. In rule my state their destenies have,
And not thy prayers, (O matrone) just.

Nutrix. The down soft easy God shall give,
Your troubled mind a time I trust,
More sweet then ever you did live.
With feuell fair as one content,
And glosed face, but only please
Your man, and make, he will relent.

Octauia. The Lion fierce I shall appeal,
And sooner tame the Tygre stout,
Then mankind Tyrants brutish breast,
He spytes the noble raced ^out,
Contemmes high powers, disdaynes the least:
Ne can well use that princely weed,
Which venomous parent wrapped him in
By huge unspeakable griesly deed.
Although that wight unthankful, grynne,
In Kingly throne that he does raygne,
Through cruel cursed mothers aid:
Although he pay with Death again
So great a gift, it shall be said
And after fates in long spent age,
That woman wight shall have always,
This eloge yet and saying sage,
That he by her does bear the sway,

Nutrix. Let not your ragious mind so walk,
But do compresse your moody talk.

THE FOVRTH SCENE.
Octauia, Nutrix. THough much I bear that boiling breast do beat
And tollerably take diuor cements threate,
Deaths only deadly darte, I see an end,
Of al my broyle and pinching pain can send,
What pleasant light to me (O wretch) is left,
My natural Mother slain, and Sire be reft,
Of breathing life, by treason, and by gilt:
Of Brother eake depriude: with miseryes spilt:
And wayling overcome: kept down with care,
Enuyed of Make, which I dare not declare.
To maiden subject now, and now defied:
What pleasant light can me (O wretch) abide,
With fearful heart suspecting always ought:
Because I would no wicked deed were wroughte:
Not that I fear Deaths griesly gyrning face,
God grant I do not so revenge my case,
A better deed to dye: for to behold
The Tyrants visage gri^^^e, with brows vprolde
And with soft tender lips my foe to kiss,
And stand in awe of beckes and noddes of his,
Whose will to please my grief with cares yfirde
Since brothers death by wicked wyle conspirde,
Could never once vouchsafe for to sustain,
Less grief to die, then thus to live in pain.
His Empire Nero rules and joys in blood:
The cause and ground of death that Tirant wood.
How often (alas) does Fancy fondly feign.
When slumber sweet in pensive parts does reign,
And sleep in eyes, all tyrd with tears does rest,
I apprehend dear Brittans lively breast:
Ere while me thinks his feeble shiuering hands
He fenseth sure with deadly blasing brandes,
And fiercely on his brother Neros face,
With sturdy stinging strokes he flies apace.
Ere while thilke wretch recoyleth back* again,
And to my thewes for aid retyres amayne:
Him foming foe pursues with have to have:
And while my brother I desire to save,
And in my clasped arms to shield him free,
His goary bloudied falchion keen I see.
The boisterous raumping fiend to ^ugge, and hale
Through out my ^hiuering limbs, as ashes pale.
Forthwith a mighty trembling chattering quake
From weary lims all souple sleep does shake,
And makes me woeful wretch for to recount,
My wayling sobbing sorrows that surmount.
Hereto, put to that gorgeous stately (...) ouse,
All glistring bright, with spoils of Claudius house
His parent dear in bubling boat did douse,
That wicked son, this fisking dame to please.
Whom yet escaping dangers great of Seas.
He fiercer freake than waves that scantly rest,
With bloody blade her bowels did vnbrest.
What hope of health, can me, O wretch, abide,
That after them thilke way I should not ride?
My special foe, triumphant wise does weight,
With naked nates to press by lovers slight,
Our spousall, pure, and clean vnspotied bed:
Against whom, she burns, with deadly food blood red.
And, for a meede of filthy strumpets sport,
She causes Make from spouse for to diuort.
O ancient Sire, step forth from Limbo lake,
Thy daughters heavy troublous cares to slake:
Or your twygated hellysh porche unfold,
That down through gaping ground I may be rolde.
Nu. O piteous wretch, in vain, (alas) in vain
Thou calst upon thy fathers senseless sprite:
In whom, God wot, there does no care remain
Of mortal brood, that here does take delight.
Shall he, think you, assuage your sorry cheer,
Or shape you forth some slight, t^ appall your pain,
That could prefer, before his Brittan dear,
The Imperial throne, a strange begotten swain?
And with incestiall love benumbed quyte
His brother Germanicks daughter that could plyght,
And join to him in solemn marriage rites,
With woeful, and unlucky lovers lights?
Here sprang the roale of hurly burly great,
Here beastly veuomous slaughter began to sweat,
Here wily treasons trains appeared first,
Here rules desire, and brutish bloody thirst.
Syllanus first Prince Claudius son in law,
A bloody mangled offering fall we saw,
That in our graces Hymaenea^ bed,
Ymatcht with you, he might not couche his head.
O monstrous slaughter, worthy endless blame^:
In stead of gift unto that wanton dame,
A Carcass cold pore soul, and curelesse corse,
Sillane was given against his will perforce.
And falsely then attacht of traitors crime,
As one conspyring death in Claudius time,
With loathsome streakes spewde out upon the wall,
He all bedasht your fathers princely hall.
Eft stepped into servile Palace stroke,
To filthy vices lore, one easly broke.
Of Devilish wicked with this Princocks proud:
By stepdames wyle prince Claudius Son auoude.
Whom deadly damme did bloody match ylight:
And thee, against thy will, for fear did plight.
Through which success this Dame of courage fine,
Durst venture, mighty Jove to undermine.
Who can so many cursed kinds report
Of wicked hopes, and acts in any sort,
Or such a woman's glosed guyles can name,
That raumpes at rule, by all degrees of shame?
Then holy sacred zeal put out of grace,
Her stagring steps, directed forth apace,
And stern Erinnis in with deadly steps,
To Claudius Court, all desert left yleps.
And with her dririe drakes of Stygian fort,
Has quite distainde the sacred princely port.
And raging riuen in twain both natures lore,
And right to wrongs misshapen form has tore.
That haughty minded dame first gave her make,
A deadly poisoned cup, his thyrst to slake.
Straight ways again through vise unkindly touch,
Her Nero causde with him in hell to couch.
And thee, unhappy Britt, in all that broyle,
Till that of breath, and life he did dispoyle,
Thilk greedy bloody tyrant never stent:
Whose doleful death for aye we may lament.
Ere while, unto the world the star that shone,
And was the stay of princely court alone,
Now lo, light ashes easly puffed aforne,
And griesly goast to grave with torche yborne.
Whom blessed Babe, thy stepdame did lament:
Nor from her gushing tears, did scarce relent,
When as she gave each trim appointed part,
And goodly portraide limbs with natures art,
Of flaming stacke to be devoured quite,
And saw the scortching fervent fire in sight
Thy naked joints to rauin up a pace
And like the flittring God thy comely face.

Oct. Dispatch he me least with this hand he fall.

Nut. That power you, nature granted not at all.

Oct. But wondrous dolor, great and wrathful ire,
And miseries will it grant without desire.

Nu. Nay rather cause your angry moody make,
With souple cheer his fury for to slake.

Oct. What, that he will by guilt once slain before,
Alive again my brother me restore?

Nut. Nay, safe that you may live and issue bear:
Your fathers ancient court for to repair.

Oct. That court does wait another brood they say.
And poor Britts death tugges me another way.

Nut. Yet let the cities love unto your grace,
Your troubled mind confirm but for a space.

Oct. Their minds so pressed to pleasure me, I know
Great comfort brings: but do not slake my woe.

Nut. Of mighty power the people have been aye.

Oct. But princes force does bear the greater sway.

Nut. He will respect his lawful wedded wife,

Oct. His mynion brave can not so lead her life.

NV. Of no man she esteemde.

Oct. But dear to make*

NV. She can not truly yet of wifehood crake.

Oct. Ere long she shall a mother eke be made.
So far therein I dare most boldly wade.

Nut. His youthful heat at first in filthy love,
With lusty, crusty pangs does boil above:
Thylke courage quickly cold in lust apace
As vapor sone extinct in flame gives place.
But holy, loving, chaste unspotted spouse,
Her love endures aye with sacred vows.
That wanton first that there durst couch her head,
And tumbling stained quite your spousall bed,
And being but your maid has ruled long,
Her sovereign Lord, with beauties grace bestong,
That pranked Paramour pert shall croutch with pain,
When she your grace shall see preferred again.
For Poppie subject is, and meek of spright,
And now begins her goastly tombs to dight:
Whereby she closely granting does bewray,
Her secret hidden fear each other day.
That swift, unconstant, double winged lad
With cloute, before his blinded eyes, yclad,
That fickle brayned God, thunhappy boy,
Shall leave her in the midst of all her joy:
Although for beauty bright the bell she bear,
And goodly glistring garments new she wear,
And now do vaunt her self in gorgeous geere,
She shall not long enjoy this gladsome cheer.
Be not dismayde, Madame, for such like pain,
The queen of gods was forced to sustain,
When to each pleasant shape the heavenly guide,
And sire of Gods y^urnde, from skies did glyde.
The swannes white wings, to se how they could fadge
He did on him, and ruckoldes bullysh badge,
That God shone bright in Golden raynie shower
To Danaes breast through top of fortred tower.
The twinkling stars the twins of Laeda bright,
Whom Pollux, some, and Castor, call aryght,
In large and ample space of starry scope,
With cristal glimering faces shine wide open.
And Semeles son, whom Bacchus we do call,
In heavenly byrthright does himself ystall.
And Hercules that puissant Champion stout,
His sturdy brawnes, his Hebe wyndes about.
Nor once regardes how Goddess Juno fare:
Whose lowering stepdame now she is yframde,
That while on earth his prowes he did declare,
Against that marriage, aye, was sore inflamd.
Yet lo her wise, and closly couched grief,
Debonaire face, obeisaunce to her leefe,
Causde him at length his mind for to remove,
Through mortal feeres estraundge from Iunos love.
And now that mighty heavenly Goddess great,
No more adred of mortal strumpets feat,
Aloft alone in cloudy bower contents
The thundering Lord, which now to her relentes.
Nor now with earthly Ladies beauty bright
Yfyred, leaves his starry specked right.
Now madam since on earth your power is pight
And have on earth Queen Iunos princely place,
And sister are, and wife to Neroes grace,
Your wondrous restles dolours great appease.

Oct. Nay, sooner shall the roaring froathy seas,
And mounting flashing flawes ymatch the sky,
And smoking, stifling parching fire dry
With dankish pooles agree and watrye fenne:
And griesly Plutoes filthy feltred den,
With starbright heaven shall sooner coupled be,
And shyning light with glomy shades agree,
And with the clear dry day the dewy night,
Than unto servile lore of husband wight,
That brutish wise in blood takes his delight,
My heavy woeful mind can I address,
While brothers death my heart does still possess.
O that of heavenly powers the prince and sire,
That shogges and shakes the earth with thu^dring fire,
And with his wondrous, fearful, cursed crackes,
And strange misshapen monsters which he makes,
Our fearful musing minds does sore amase,
Would coin some cureles burning wildfyre blase,
To pelt and pash with thumping fire bright,
That devilish pate, that cruel cursed wight.
We saw from heaven, with beams forthshoting far
Doubtless a dreadful heary, blasing star:
That spouted out a mortal fiery flake,
Whose force a princes blood can only slake:
Even where that hayting carman sloe Boot
With chilling cold al starcke of frosen pole,
Does guide aright Charles whirling running rote,
In stead of night that never away does role.
Lo now the open air in every streate,
With doggish tyrants breath, is poisoned, quite,
And dreadful stars some sudden death do threate.
To people ruled, by wicked Neroes spright.
So stern a freake, or mankind tyrant stout,
Not Tellus with the Gods displeasd brought out,
When mighty Jove neglected she vphorlde
Huge, ugly, monstrous Typhon to the world.
A sorer plague, a cleaner scouryng scourge,
With bloody paws that cities bounds does purge,
Is Nero dyre, this cruel cursed wight.
That does himself gaynst God and man ydyght:
And thrustes from sacred shrynes their quiet port,
And goodly temples gay ^he sancted sort:
That cittyes dwellers puts from countries fort:
That has bereft his brother of his life,
And launcht his mothers sides with goary knyfe:
Yet does this present lightsome day enjoy
And leads his life, that does us sore annoy.
O Father of heaven, in vain why do thou throw
Thy great vnuanquisht rattling thundering blow
Upon the whistling woods and ample seas,
With force of princely power thy wrath to appease?
Ou such an hurtful and pernicious freake,
Thy due and just conceived ire to wreake.
Why stay thy mighty puissaunt braunds so long,
Ere thou fling down thy rattling cracking throng?
O Lord, that Nero once might pay the price,
Of all his deuilish deeds, and every vice,
The Whole wide worlds tyrant stern where he a stroke
Does bear: which he ouerlades with burdnous yoke
Of princely sire yborne, but does defame,
With beastly manners vile his princely name:

Nun. Vnworth he is your spousall chamber place:
But yet your destnies force, you must embrace,
And well, abide your fortunes crooked race:
Nor move unkindly Neroes gauly ire.
One day perchance, there will as I desire,
Some God revenge your lamentable case:
And once I trust a gladsome day shall be,
When you shall joy a fresh in wonted place.

Oct. Ah. no, now, long this court (alas) we see
With heavy wrath of Gods displeased ire
Has ouercharged been: which Venus dyre
With Messalinas monstrous ramping lust,
She first has brought adowne into the dust.
Who madly married to prince Claudius grace,
But little myndful then of that same case,
And not regarding much thappoynted pain,
With cursed cressets married once again.
To which unlucky incestuall brydall bed,
That drosell dyre that furious slut Erin,
With hanging hair about her hellish head,
And gyrt with snakes with deadly step went in.
And flaming brandes from spousall chamber cought,
In both their bloods ybathd, has quenched clean:
And has incenst prince Claudius burning thought
In bloody thratling stroke to pass all mean.
My mother first of wretches all the most,
With stripe of deadly sword gave up her ghost.
And now extinguished quite, left me forlorn,
With dolours pyning panges and mourning worn.
And after her in hellish teame does hayle,
Unto the senseles souls of Plutoes iaile
Her make, and Brittannick her son that way:
And first this ruinous court did she betray.

Nut. Let be, Madame, with tears your face to dight:
Ne so renew your bitter wayling just:
Cease troubling now your parents piteous spright,
That paid has the price of raging lust.

THE FIFTH SCENE.
Chorus. God grant the talk we heard of late,
To rashly trusted every where,
And blown abroad through each estate,
No badge of truth that it may bear.
And that no fresh espoused dame,
Our Princes thewes do enter in,
But that OCTAVIA keep the same,
And that the seed of GLADIV Skin,
May once bringforth some pledge of peace:
That to the world rest may redowne,
And wrangling strife may easly cease,
And Rome retain her great renown.
The peerlesse Princess Juno hight,
Her brothers wedlock yoke retaynes:
Why is AUGUSTUS sister bright,
Where like betroathed league remaynes,
From stately pomp of court reject,
What does deuoutnes her avail?
To sayncted sire who has respectt?
What does her Virgins life prevail?
And CLAVDIV Snow in ground ylayed,
Even we to much vnmyndefull be:
Whose worthy steme we have betrayed
Throught fear that made us to agree.
In breast our elders did embrace,
The perfect Romayne puissaunce,
The true unstained worthy race,
And blood of Mars they did advance.
The proud and lofty stomackt train
Of lusty hauty minded Kings,
They could not suffer to remain
Within this noble Cities wings.
And justly they reuengd thy death,
O Virgin chaste, VIRGINIA pure,
Depriude by sire of vital breath,
That bondage thou might not endure:
And that his shameless brutish lust,
So good a meede might not enjoy:
Although by filthy force unjust
Thy chastity he would annoy.
Thee likewise whom thine own right hand,
With sword did pearce, LVCRETIA true,
Who tyrants rape could not withstand,
Did bloody broils and wars ensue*
ANd with her proud disdaynfull Make
Lord TARQVIN ympe of cursed seed,
Correction due does TVLLIA take
For her unkindly shameless deed,
Who on her Fathers mangled corse,
To mischief bent, and wicked bane,
The Carman she to drive did force,
His cruel brusing wombling wane.
And quite against all natures law,
Even from her own dismembered ^yre,
The sacred rytes she did withdraw,
Denaying wonted burial fire
This grief our woeful age does feel,
Through monstrous act against all kind,
When as in deadely crafty keele,
To TYRRHEN seas, and wrestling wynd,
The proud presuming Prince did put,
His mother trapt in subtle sort*
The Mariners appointed cut,
The swelling Seas from pleasant port.
The clash resoundes with stroke of Ores,
The Ship out launcht apace does spinne,
In surging froath aloof from shores,
And ample course of seas does win.
Which glydyng forth with leusned plankes,
In pressed streams with peysed weight,
The riftes do open closed crankes,
That hidden were with secret slight:
And gulpeth up the leaking wave
The woeful roaring noise and cry,
With woman's shrikes themselves to save*
Do reach and beat the starry sky.
Then grie^ly present death does dance
Before their eyes with pyning Cheeks:
Whose deadly stroke and heavy chance
For to avoid, then each man seeks:
On ryuened ribs some naked lie,
And cut the beating waves in twain:
And some their skilful swimming try,
To get unto the shore again.
The greatest part that sailed there,
By destnies dire to men prefixed,
In whirling swallows drowned were,
The brinkes of Seas and ground betwixt.
Queen AGRIPPYNE her garments rendes,
She tears her ruffled locks of hair
Abundant blubbring tears she spendes,
Through deep distress of faynting fear.
Who when no hope of health she spies,
Enflamde with wrath, which woes appeasde,
O son, for so great gifts, she cries,
Have thou with such reward me pleased?
This keele I have deserved sure,
That bare and brought thee first to light:
Who empire witles did procure,
And CAESAR'S title for thy right.
Show forth thy fearful spritish face,
O CLADIVS now from Limbo lake,
And of thy wife in wretched case,
Revenge and due correction take.
Thy death I causeles did conspyre,
Which now I rue with woeful heart:
I dressed eake a funeral fire
Unto thy son by deadly smart.
Lo now as I deserved have,
Vntombde go to thy guiltles Ghost,
Encloasd in seas in stead of grave,
And wrestling waves of Romayne coast.
The flasshing flawes do flappe her face,
And on her speaking mouth do beat,
Anon she sinkes a certain space,
Depressed down with surges grea:
Anon she fleetes on weltring brim,
And pattes them of with tender hands
Through faynting fear then taught to swim
Approaching death, and fates withstandes
At length on troubled Seas displayde
She giving over working vain
And tyrd with streams is weary laid,
Not able toyling strength to strain
In close and secret silent breasts,
Of mates with her to sea that yode,
In whom no fear of death there restes
True faith unto their Queen abode.
Their Ladies weather beaten limbs
To help, some freely venture dare,
Some in the combrous waters swymmes
And desperate danger do not spare.
With cheereful voice they comfort her,
Though drawling dragling limbs she drew,
To lift her up with help they stir,
And nummed corpse to strength renew.
What bootesit thee the death to shonne
Of roaring raging ravening waves.
From deadly sword of wicked son,
Alas pore wretch thee nothing saues?
Whose huge and heinous cursed rage,
Against all course of natures lore,
Our after slow believing age,
VVil scarce beleene it done before,
The deuillish man repynde with grief
When he is mother saved saw,
From swallowing seas have safe relief,
And that she vital breath did draw,
He grudgde with grief and in his heat,
He huger mischief heaps to this:
He does not once delay his feate,
But headlong rashly carried is
Upon her death. A soldier sent,
Dispatcheth that he had in charge,
His Ladies breast his blade does rent:
She yielding up her soulde at large,
From wretched corpse for to entombe
Her slaughter man she then besought,
That bloody blade within her womb,
That first this woe to her had brought,
This, this accursed breast (quoth she)
Which this unkindly monster bare,
From pinching pain may not be free:
Dig, slash the same, no mischief spare.
When this with foltring tongue was said,
At last her sad and trembling ghost,
With latter sobbing sighs vnstayd,
Through goryd wounds leaves vital coast.
THE SECOND ACT
THE FIRST SCENE.
Seneca. ON me with like consent why did thou smile,
With glosed looks deluding me a while,
O fortune much of might and princely power?
To lift aloft to noble royal bower?
To the'nde that I to honors court extold,
From stately seat might have the greater fall,
And round about in every place behold,
Such dreadful, threating dangers to us all,
I safer lay aloof from enuyes knockes,
Removed among the craggy corsicke rocks:
Where as my mind there free at proper sway,
With leisure did repeat my studies aye.
A gladsome joy alone it was to view,
And earnestly to mark the heavens so blew:
And sacred Phoebus double wheeled wayne:
And eake the worlds swift whirling motion main.
The Sun so even his second course to keep:
And Phoebes glyding globe so swiftly sweep:
Whom wondrous starting stars encompasse round.
And to behold that shynes in every stound,
The glistring beauty bright of welkin wide:
Than which in all the world nothing beside.
Of all this huge and endless work the guide,
More wondrous nature fram'de that Iespyde,
For all the bumping bigness it does bear;
Yet waxing old is like again to wear,
And to be chaungde to an vnwyldy lump.
Now pressed at hand this worlds last day does iumpe,
With boystrous fall, and tumbling rush of sky.
To squease and make this cursed kind abye.
That springing once again, it may yield out
An other strange renewed virtuous route,
As once before it did, new sprung again,
What time Saturnus held his golden raygne.
That blameless, chaste, unspotted Virgin clear
A goddess much of might clept Justice here,
With sacred sooth sent down from heavenly space,
At ease on earth did rule the mortal race.
That people plain knew not of warlicke feats.
Nor trembling trompets tunes that rendes and beats*
The soldiers ears: nor chashing armont bright,
That warring wightes defend in field and fight.
Nor wonted was with walls to rampyre round,
Their open cities set in any stound.
To each man passage free lay open than:
Nothing there private was to any man.
And then the ground it self and fertile soil,
Her fruitful bosom baard all void of toil,
Into such bounden barnes a Matrone good,
And peaceable unto so just a brood.
But then an other second race arose,
Perceived not to be so meek as those.
A third more wise and witty sort up startes,
Of nature forged fit, t'inuent new arts:
As yet unspotted quite with filthy vice.
Soon after thoe, they raung^d with new deuyce,
That boldly venture dare in scudding race,
Unwieldy beasts for to pursue apace.
And mighty weying struggling fishes great,
With watery coats yclad with fishers feat,
With net in window wise draw forth, and streeke
With craft of quill, the nibling fysshes cheek.
And silly birds begylde with pyning train:
And light foot dear for life that flyng amayne
Intangling gins entrapt, that safely hold.
And sturdy scouling visage bulls controld,
On fleshye fillet necks, make wear the yoke:
And earth ere that vngrubbed up that broake:
Which then turned up with Plowmans shyning share,
In sacred bosom deep, her fruits kept their.
But now this age much worse then all the rest,
Has lept into her mothers broken breast:
And rusty lumpish iron and massye Gold,
Has dug out, that was quite hid with mold.
And fighting fistes have armd without delay:
And drawing forth their bonds for rule to stay,
Have certain several ioly kingdoms made,
And cities new have raysde now ruled with blade,
And fenseth either with their proper force
Strange stoundes or them assaults the which is worse.
The Starry specked virgin flower of skies.
Which Justice hight, that guilty folk discries,
Now lightly esteemd of mortal people here,
Each earthly stound is fled, and comes not near
The savage mannerd route, and beastly rude,
With dabbed wristes in goary blood embrude.
The great desire of griesly war is sprung:
And raping thurst of gold, it is not young.
Throughout the world a mighty monstrous vice,
Foul, filthy, monstrous lust has got the price,
A pleasant tickling plague, whom longer space,
And error deep have fostred up apace.
The heaps of vice rakte up in years long past,
Abounding flow in these our days at last.
And this same troublous time, and combrous age,
Oppresses all men sore, both young and sage.
Wherein those wicked ways that be do raygne,
And cruel, raumping woodnes boyles again.
Lust strong in filthy touch, does bear a sway.
And Princes, riot, now does catch away
With greedy paws, to bring it to decay.
Th whole worlds incredible wealth, without delay.
But lo, which staggring steps where Nero flinges,
And visage grymme, I fear what news he brynges.
THE SECOND SCENE.
THE SECOND ACT*
Nero, Prefectus, Seneca. DIspatch with speed that we commanded have:
Go, send forthwith some one or other slave,
That Plautius cropped scalpe and Sillas eke,
May bring before our face: go some man seek.
Pre. I nill protract your noble graces hest:
But to their camps to go am ready pressed.

Se. Gaynst lynage naught should rashly poynted be.

Ne. A light thing it is for to be just, I see
For him, whose heart is void of shrinking fear.

Se. A sovereign salve for fear is for to bear
Your self debonair to your subjects all.

Ne. Our foes to slay, a cheftaynes virtue call.

Se. A worthier virtue it is in countries sire,
His people to defend with sword and fire.

Ne. It well beseemes such aged wightes, to teach,
Unbridled springolles young, and not to preach,
Both to a man and prince of ryper years.

Se. May, rather frolic youthful blood appears,
To have more need of counsel wise and grave

Ne. This age sufficient reason ought to have.

Se. That heavenly powers your doings may allow.

Ne A madness it were to Gods for me to bow,
When I my self can make such Gods to be:
As Claudius now ycounted is we see.

Se. So much the more because so much you may.

Ne. Our power permittes us all without denay.

Se. Give slender trust to Fortunes flattring face:
She topsie turuy turns her wheel apace.

Ne. A patch he is that knows not what he may.

Se. A Princes praise I compted have always,
To do that same which with his honor stood,
Not that which frantic fancy counts good.

Ne. If that I were a meacocke or a slouch,
Each stubborn, clubbish daw would make me couch.

Se. And whom they hate, with force they ouerquell.

Ne. Then dynt of sword the prince defends well.

Se. But faith more sure defense does seem to me.

Ne. Full meet it is that Caesar dreaded be.

Se. More meet of subjects for to be beloved

Ne. From subjects minds, fear must not be removed

Se. What so by force of arms you do wringe out,
A grievous work it is to bring about.

Ne. Well hardly then our will let them obey.

Se. Will nothing then, but that which well you may.

Ne. We will decree what we shall best suppose.

Se. What peoples voice does jointly bynd or lose.
Let that confirmed stand.

Ne. Swords bloody dynt,
Shall cause them else at me to take their hint.

Se. God sheeld, and far that fact from you remove.

Ne. What then, why Senec do you that approve,
That we contemnde, despysde and set at naught,
With finger put in hole (full wisely wrought)
Our bodies blood to seek should them abide,
That they might us sometime destroy vnspyde?
Their native country bounds to banished be,
Nor Plautius breast nor Scillas eake we see
Has broke or camd: whose cankred churlish ire,
Shapes bloody freakes to quench our bodies fire.
And chiefly when these traiterous absent clounes,
Such wondrous favor find in cities bownes,
Which those same exiles lingering hope does feed:
Suspected foes with sword we will out weed.
And so Octauia shall that ioly dame,
Continue after them their bloody game.
And wend that way her nowne white brother went,
Such hye mistrusted things must needs be bent.

Se. It is (O Prince) a worthy famous thing,
Amids redoubted Lords alone to ring:
And wisely work your countries praise to save:
And well your self to captive folk behave:
From cruel brutish slaughter to abstain,
And void of mood to wreake your angry pain:
And to the world a quiet calm to give,
That al your age in peace their lives may live.
This is a Princes praise without al crime:
This is the path to heaven whereby we clyme.
So is Augustus prince and father called
Of country first in starbright throne ystald.
Whom as a God in minsters we adorn,
Yet troublous fortune tossed him beforne,
A great while long on lands and ruffling seas,
Until his fathers foes he could appease,
And throught wars diverse course could quel them quite.
To you did fortune yield her power, and might,
And raynes of rule without all blood, and fight.
And to your beck both land, and seas has bent.
Grim deadly envy daunted does relent.
The Senate Lords gave place with free consent:
The battaylous route of knights with willing hearts
(That same decree from sager sires departes)
Unto the lay men's choice do well agree.
Your grace the spring of peace they count to be.
And chosen Judge, and guide of mortal stock.
Your grace, your countries sacred sire, does rock
And rule with princely gorgeous title bright,
The cyrcled world in rundel wise ydight.
Which mighty mounting name to keep so great,
This noble city Rome does you entreat:
And does commend unto your royal grace
Her lively limbs in charge for your lives ^pace.

Ne. The gift of Gods it is, as we discus,
That Rome with Senafe sort does honor us,
And that the fear of our displeasure great,
From cankred enuyous stomachs makes sweat
Both humble talk and supplications meek.
And were not fear all these would be to seek.
Unwieldy, combrous cities, members ill,
That Prince and country both do seek to spill,
To leave alive (which swell, and puffed be,
Because of lynage great. and high degree)
What madness mere is it when as we may,
Even with a word, such freakes dispatch away*
Sir Brutus stern, his brawnes and arms did dight,
His soueraygne liege to slain by force and might,
That erst had helped him, and given him health,
And had endued him with princely wealth,
In brunt of raging war undaunted out,
That vanquished many people strong and stout,
Prince Caesar matched by great degrees of power
To love, in stately chair of starry bower,
By diu'lish citizens wicked wyle was slain.
What store of bloody stiffling streams on molde.
Did tatred Rome, of her own lims, behold?
He by his noble virtues worthy praise,
Who^ peoples, common brute to heaven does raise.
August among the Gods ysayncted well,
How many noble breasts did he compel,
How many springoldes young, and hoary heads,
Each where dispersed to lig in molded heds?
How many men did he bereave of breath
Tofore proscript that were condemnd to death?
When for the griesly fear of deadly dart
From propre home they were constraind to part
And fly Octauius force, and Lepidus might,
And not abide stern Mark Antonius sight,
Which then the ample world at once did guide,
That into kingdoms three they did deuyde,
To dumpish sadded syres, with heavy cheer,
Their childrens grie^ly cropped pates appear,
Hong out beforne the Senates judgment seat,
For each man to behold in open streate:
Ne durst they once lament their piteaus case,
Nor inward seem to mourn to Claudius face,
The market stead with blood from bodies spued,
And loathsome mattrie streams, is all imbrued:
And quite throughout their faces foul arrayed,
The piteous gubbes of blood drop down vnstayd.
Nor here did this same slaughterous bloodshed stay.
Phillyps Pharsalia ghastly fields each day,
The cromming ravening fowls, and cruel beasts
Long fed, with gobbe^s big of manlye breasts,
Beside all this, the cost he scoured quite*
Of Sicill sea and ships to ware ydyght
With force of arms did win, and havoc made
Of propper snbiectes slain with his own blade.
The rundle round of lands with mighty main
Of noble Chieftaynes stroke reboyles again.
Antonius overcome in Nauale fight,
To Egypt poastes in ships preparde to flight:
Not looking long to live nor hoping life.
Incesteous Egypt (through Antonius wife)
That worthy Romayne princes blood did suck*
And couerd lie their ghostes with durty mucke.
Long wicked, waged civil war there stayed,
In Marcke Antonius grave with him ylayed.
Augustus at the last of conquest great
His dulled swords that wounded souls did beat,
In peaceable sheathes repos^d has laid at rest:
And fear does rule, and guide his kingdom best
By ready force of arms at all assayes,
And Captains faith he shieldes him self always
Who^ now his sons most worthy virtuous praise,
To heaven a consecrated God does raise,
And causes all, in Churches for to place
The sacred Picture of Prince Claudius grace,
And us the starry reign of Gods shall bide
If first with dreadful sword about us wide
We wype away what so our person stayne:
And found our court with worthy stem again.

Se. Your noble spouse, sprung forth of saincted peer
Of Claudius stock, the starbright diamond clear,
That Goddess Juno wise her brothers bed*
Partaking, pressed down with buttockes red,
Your graces princely court shall garnish gay,
With wondrous heavenly fair descended stay.

Ne. Incestuous married dames, from stock and stem,
Detract all hope, that we should have of them.
Nor us, could she once love that we could see,
Nor with our person once at all agree

Se. In tender budding years, when love suppressed
With blusshing hydes the flames of burning breast,
Scant plain appears the love they bare indeed.

Ne. Thus we our selves with hope in vain did feed:
Although undoubted signs, as body wryed,
And frowning looks, which we have often espied,
Her spyteful hating stomach did bewray
Which she does bear, whom duty byndes t'obaye.
Which yet at last, big, boiling, grievous pain,
With death determind has t^auenge again,
We have found out, for birth and beauties grace.
A worthy make for such an Empress place:
To whom that lovely goddess Venus bright,
And mighty Jove his spouse that Juno hight,
and goddess fierce in boisterous warlike arts,
Geues place for bodies seemly portrayed parts.

Se. Faith, meeknes, manners mild, and bashful shame*
Of spouse, those ought an husband to reclayme.
The perles of judging mind, alone remain,
Not subject once to any rulers raygne.
The passing pride of beautyes numming grace
Each day appalls, and bleamisheth apace.

Ne. What praises woman wights have in them closd*
All those in her alone has God repo^de,
And such a peerlesse peer, the guydes of life,
The destnies would have borne to be our wife,

Se. O noble prince such blind unlawful love,
(Do rashly credit naught) from you remove.

Ne. Whom Jove can not repel that rules the clouds,
And pearcing raging floods, therein him shroudes,
And raungeth through the reign of Plutoes pit,
And pulls down in welkin hie that sit
The mighty powers of heaven, the God of love?
And can I then his force from me remove?

Se. Swift winged love, men's fancy fond, in vain
A mercy wanting God to be, does feign:
And arms his hands with woundinge weapons keen
And bows with burning brondes, for lovers green:
Of Venus to be sprung they al accord,
and blyndly forgde of thunders limping Lord.
Bland love the minds great torment sore appears,
And buddeth first in frolic youthful years.
Who while we drink of Fortunes pleasant cup,
With laysie pampring riot, is nes^led up:
Whom if to toster up you leave at length
It fleeting, falls away with broken strength.
This is in all our life (as I suppose)
The greattest cause how pleasure first arose.
Which since mankind by broodyng bydeth aye,
Through gladsom love y^ fierce wild beasts does sway
It never can from manly breast depart.

Ne. This self same God I wish withal my heart
The wedlock lights to bear before our grace,
And fasten Poppie sure in our bed place.

Se. The peoples grief might never yield to it:
Nor ver^ue can the same at all permit.

Ne. Shall I alone to do, forbidden be
That every patch may do? that grieueth me

Se. No tryfling toys the people looks to have
Of him, that ought to rule with wisdom grave.

Ne. It pleases us with daunted power to try,
If peoples rash conceived rage will fly.

Se. Seek rather for to please and calm their mood.

Ne. Ill ruled is that raygne where people wood,
Their subject Prince does weld, as they think good

Se. When naught that they require they can obtain,
They justly then agrieued are again.

Ne. That gentle prayers cannot win with ease,
By force to wring it out, it does us please.

Se. An hard thing it is the people not to have
That of their Prince, which they do justly crave.

Ne. And horrible it is a Prince to be constraynd.

Se. Let not your subjects then so sore be raynd.

Ne. Why then the common brute abroad will be.
How that the people have subdued me.

Se. That no man trustes that is of credit light.

Ne. Be it so, yet many it marks with deadly spyghte.

Se. With country peers to meddle it is afraid,

Ne. To quip and frump, it is nothing less dismayed.

Se. Your grace may easly couch that budding brute
Let Sayncted sires deserts with pliant suit,
Your graces mind remove: let spouses age,
And courteous bashful shame disrumpe your rage.

Ne. Leave off (I say) that we entend to grutch.
For now your talk our patience moves much:
I pray you let it lawful be to do,
That Senec gives not advise unto.
And we our peoples wishes do defer,
While Poppie feel in wombling womb to sterre,
The pledge of faithful love to me and her.
Why do we not appoint the morrow next,
When as our marriage pomp may be context?

THE THIRD ACT
THE FIRST SCENE.
Agrippyna. THrough paunch of riuened earth, from Plutoes reign
With ghostly steps, I am returned again.
In writhled wristes, that blood do most desire,
Forguyding wedlock vile with Stygian fire.
Let Poppie, which these cressets coupled sure,
Unto my son be joined in marriage pure:
Whom mothers grief, and hand revenging wrackes,
Shall send with heave and hoe to funeral stackes
I always do remember well beneath
Where piteous, ghostly, crauling souls do breath,
Th'unkindly slaughterous deed, which to our spright
Yet vnreuengd is grievous and of right:
And for the good I did a cruel prise,
That deadly framed ship in crafty wise:
And due reward that he gave me again,
For helping him to rule of Empyres raygne:
And eake that night, when as I did bewail,
Both loss of ship wherein we then did sail,
And mates unhappy death, and while I thought,
For this accursed deed to have besought
The Gods to trickling tears he gave scant time
But twice increased has his deuillish crime.
Quite slain with sword, thrust through my bodies bounds
And silthy laid through goary mattring wounds,
Delivered safe from seas, devouring sup,
In antique court my ghost I yielded up.
Nor yet his cancred, and unsatiate hate.
For all this blood does Nero once abate.
That Tyrant dyre does rage at mothers name.
And seeks ways my deeds for to defame.
Who threating death to them that do withstand,
My shapes he dingeth down in every land:
My princely tytles large he scrapeth out
In every place, the whole wydeworld about,
Which my unlucky parents love did give,
To much unto my pain while I did live,
Unto a boy to guide, which now I rue.
My poisoned make, my Ghost does often pursue:
And in my face with burning brondes does fly.
He stays a space with earnest talk hard by,
And threatens sore, and does impute his death
And tomb he should have had to me beneath.
And now desires to have some factious wight,
That dare despayle my son of breathing spright.
Let be you shall have one to work this crime,
I do require no long delayed time.
Revenging spright Erin, a death does coin,
Of life, that wicked tyrant to purloyne.
Sore smarting leaden strypes and shameful flight,
And pyning panges with thurst and hunger dight:
That Tantalus spungelike thursty mouth befurde,
And Sisyphus toil shall pass, and Tityus burde,
And Ixions paynful wombling wheel about,
That teareth all his bodies parts throughout.
Although that Tyrant proud and scornful wight,
His court with marble stone do strongly dyght,
And princelike garnish it with glistring gold:
Though troops of soldiers shielded sure, uphold
Their chieftaynes princely porch: and though yet still
The world drawn dry with taskes even to his will,
Great heaps of riches yield themselves to save,
Although his bloody help the Parthians crave,
And Kingdoms bring, and goods all that they have,
The time and day shall come, when as he shall
Forlorn, and quite undone, and wanting all.
Unto his cursed deeds his life and more,
Unto his foes his bared throat restore.
Alas, unto what end is all my pain?
Or in what case do now my vows remain?
Whereto does now thy rage and destnies spyte?
Draw thee O Son, with brain benumbed quite?
That to such monstrous heaps of ylles thy dame
(Whom thou with cursed mischief overcame)
Her wrath should yield? O that ere to the light
A sucking babe I brought thee forth in sight,
And fedd thee fine with pappe as princely borne,
The fierce, wild, savage beasts had rent and torn
My womb and bloody entrails all beforne.
Without all crime, and wanting reasons pride,
Mine own dear da^dling child thou should have did.
And fastened sure to me should aye behold,
The quiet place, where Ghostly souls be rolde:
And see thy graundsyres great of worthy fame,
And sire Domitius eake of princely name,
Whom now both shame and wayling does abide,
That while they dure, from them shall never slide.
For which both thee, O cursed Barn, they may,
And me, that thee have borne geeue thanks for aye.
But why cease I, with hell to hyde my face,
Wife, stepdame, mother dire, in my life space?
THE SECOND SCENE.
Octauia Chorus. DO not, alas, thus sore lament,
But rather yet your mourning stay,
Since that the city whole is bent
To celebrate this joyful day:
Least your great love and favor both,
Which I do count to be most sure,
The more cause Nero me to loath,
And eake his bitter wrath procure:
And I fall out to be the ground
To you of many mischieues vile,
This same is not the first deep wound,
That I have felt now this good while:
Far worse then this have I abode:
But of these troublous cares this day
Shall make an end I trust in God,
Although with Death he do me pay,
No man to see shall me constrayne
His bended brows knit furrowyse,
Nor step within the Chamber ragyne
Of maid dressed up in brydall guise
Augustus sister I will be,
And not his wife as wont I was:
But only pains remove from me,
And fear of death I will not pass.
Yet can thou piteous wreth once trust,
Thy cruel husbands father law,
Or these few things to have so lust
While mischieues yet in mind are raw?
Now long reserud, until this day,
And these same marriage rytes be past,
Thou shall poor wretch without delay,
A bloody offering dye at last.
Why thus with tears disfigured sore
Thy wonted home do thou behold?
Make have to shun this deadly shore
And leave this straughtrous Princes fold.
Cho. Lo see that day suspecttd long
And whispered Fame in all men's ears,
With glisteryng pomp of brydall throng,
To us pore wretches now appears.
And Claudius brood Octauias grace,
From Neroes wedlock place expelde,
Departed is, whose spousall space,
Has Poppie conqueror long time held.
The while, our pyety couched lies
Kept down with heavy, combrous fear.
And slow revenging grief likewise:
Where does the peoples power appear,
That brake the force of Princes great,
That conquerous city laws has framde,
That worthy men to honors ^eat
Preferred, that war and peace proclaymd,
That savage people strange did tame
That Kings and Princes caught in fight
Shut surely up in prison frame
To keep them close from all men's sight
Lo, which we cannot once abide,
To see where Poppies image trym,
Conjoined unto Neroes side
All glistring bright shynes very brim.
Let force of Arms pull down that frame
And match with ground that Ladies face
Too likely carved to his name,
And snatch her down from beddig place,
And let it forthwith fly with brandes*
With Darts and Iauelins fiercely flonge,
From pythy braunes and sturdy hands
Unto the princes courtly throng.

THE FOVRTH ACT.
THE FIRST SCENE.
Nutrix. Poppea, FRom out of spousal bower dismayed with fear,
Whither go you? what secrets daughter dear
Unknown, makes you to look so drousely?
Why spungelike lokes your face with tears from eye
That fell? of truth the time desired long,
And wished for by prayers, and vows among
Has shyned bright. Caesar's wedlock are you:
Your golden grace, whereof he took the view.
Him prisoner caught, and did him surely bind,
So much the more, how much Senec his mind
Did seek to change, and wild from love to weeld.
And Venus chief in love has made him yield.
O in beauty passing all, what beds then down
More soft, have borne thy weight when thou with crown
Did sit in mids of court the Senate all.
At thy great beauty aghast, thou did appall.
Whylst thou the Gods with perfume sendest fine,
And sacred alters drencht with thankful wine,
Thy head attyrd with veyle of yellow hiew
By Caesar's side thou wentst as princess new:
When he aloft extold above the rest,
With hauty courage merrily went to feast.
Like as king Peleus went sometimes to take
Queen Tethis, whom salt seas foam bred, his make.
Whose bridinge chambers, banquet wise ydrest,
The Gods vouchsaft to hallow with their hest,
Both they that rule in skies and eake in Seas.
But tell, O Lady, tell, if it you please,
What sudden chance does shade your beautyes light.
What means your color change from red to white?
What moves those trickling tears, how stands your plight?
Po. With dreams, and griesly sightes, this last night, Nurse,
My mind was troubled sore, but frayd much worse.
For when sir Phoebe his weary course had ryd,
While quiet restyng night each thing shadid,
My senses weary fell in slumber deep,
While Nero me within his arms did cleepe.
Resolving lims, at length began sleep discharge,
And long I rest not under quiets targe,
For lo, I saw a route that brought me fear,
Come to my chaumber with disheueled hair:
The Matrons sage of Latin land did mourn,
And sounded shryking sighs as though forlorn
They were, the dolefulst wightes that live on ground.
And often among the warlike trumpets sound,
I saw my husbands mother teribly stand,
With threatening look berayed with b^oud in hand
A light fire brand she bare which often she shook,
And made me go with her through fearful look.
When down we came through opened earth she led
The way, I after went with bowing head,
And musing much thereat, mark what I say,
My bed, me thought I saw, wherein I lay,
When first espousde I was to Rufe Chrispyne*
And he me thought, with first son of his line,
With many following them against me fast
Did come, and me to cleepe did swift his have,
And as he wonted was he ki^^ me often,
Then rusht into my house with pace not soft
Amassed Nero sore, in Chryspines breast
That hid his faulchion ^ene: fear shakte of re^t
From me: I trembling stood with quiuering fear,
And breast dismayed to speak made me forbear.
Til now (O Nurse) I met with thee, whose trust,
And faith into these words have made me brust.
Alas, what threatens me each griesly spright?
What means of husbands blood that doleful ^ight?

Nu. ^he hidden sacred vain that moves swift,
Which fantasy we call by secret drift,
When we do take our rest does show again,
The things both good and bad that broyle in brain:
You marvel that you saw your make, and bower,
His ghostly funeral stackes, at that same hour
Round clasped close in arms of husband new:
Hereto, the beaten breasts with hands moved you,
And maidens hair, on marriage day displayed:
Octauias friends with heavy hearts bewrayed,
Amids her brothers both and fathers hall
Their heavy cheer for her unlucky fall.
That dreadful blasing flame of fire forborne
In Agryppynas hand your grace beforne.
Which you did follow streigth declares renown
To you, though envy strive to keep it ^owne:
The seat you saw beneath does promise you
Your sta^e to stand full sure not changing new:
That Nero prince in Crispins throat did hyde
His sword, it tells that he in peace shall bide,
Unknown to bloody ruthful war for aye.
Therefore (Madam) pluck up your heart I pray:
Receive both mirth and glee cast fear aside,
With joy, and ease you may in bower abide.

Pop. To temples hie where mighty Gods do dwell,
I will repair, and offringes to them fell
In humble wise their heavy wrath t'ppease,
And me of mighty sight, and dreams to ease.
My second wish shall be, that this fear all
Upon my foes as sudden chance may fall.
O Nurse pray thou for me some vows do make
Toth' Gods, that ghostly fear his flight my take.

THE SECOND SCENE.
Chorus. IF stealth discloasde by blabbing fame,
And lusty, pleasant, thankful love,
Of JOVE be true: who form did frame
Of swan to come from skies above,
And did enjoy the sweet consent
Of Lady LEDAS loves delight:
Who like a Bull his labor spent,
Through flowing floods to carry quite,
EVROPA slily stolen away:
He will no doubt leave raygne of Sky
And POPPIES love disguisd assaye*
If he her soueraygne beauty spy.
Which he might well prefer before
Fair LAEDAS sugared sweet delight:
And DANAE whom he won of yore,
Amasde with golden shoure so bright:
Let SPARTE now for HELENS sake
Of beauty bragging fame vprayse:
Admit the TROJAN heardman make
Of gained spoil tryumphant praise:
Fair HELEN here is stained quight:
Whose beauty bredde such boiling ire,
That earth was matched even in sight
With TROJAN towers consumde with fire.
But who is this that runs with fear oppressed?
Or else what news bringes he in panting breast?
THE THIRD SCENE.
Nuntius, Chorus, WHat sturdy champion stout does joy with glee
Our chieftaynes royal bower safe to see,
Then to his court I counsel him to wend,
Against which the populus rout their force does bend.
The rulers run amasde to fetch the guard,
And armed troops of men, their town to ward.
Nor woodnes rashly cought through fear does cease,
But more and more, their power does increase.
Chapter What sudden rage does beat their br^^ling brain?

Nun. The garrisons great with fury astonde again,
And sturred up for Queen Octauias sake
With monstrous mischief vile, their rage to slake,
They rumbling rush into the Palace far.

Cho. What dare they do, their counsailers who are?

Nun. Advance their Empress old, suburt the new:
And grant her, brothers beds as is her due.

Cho. Which Poppie now, with hole consent does hold?

Nun. Yea that unbridled rage in breast vprold,
Sets them agog, and makes them wondrous wood.
What ever image graven in marble stood,
If Poppies badge it bare, or if in sight,
It tended for to show her beauty bright,
Though it on heavenly altares brave did stand,
They break, or pull it down, with sword or hand.
Some parts with ropes sure tide, they trayle the^ forth
Which spurnd with durty feet, as though naught worth
With ^^^thy stinking mire, they it all beray.
And with their deeds their talk does iumpe agree,
Which mine amassed mind, thinks true to be
For fiery flames they threat for to prepare,
Wherewith to waste, the princes Palace fair,
Unless, unto their furious mood he give
His second wife, and with Octauia live,
But he by me shall know in what hard stay
The City stands: the rulers I Will obey.

Cho. A lack, what made you cruel wars, in vain
To move, since prisoner love you can not gaine^
You can not him overcome, your fiery flame
He recketh not: his sire ouercomes the same.
He darkened has those thundering thumps that shake
Heaven, Earth, Hell, sea, al things y^ makes to quake.
Yea mighty Jove, in heaven that wears chief crown
His flames from welkin hie has brought adowne.
And you, not victors now, but vanquished,
Shall rau^some pay, the price of hearts blood red.
Love, pacient can not be, but hot in rage,
No easy thing it is, his wrath t'as^wage,
Achilles worthy ^ight, that was so stout,
To twang the Harp he made in Ladies rout,
Prince Agamemnon stern that boy benund,
And rabble rude of Greeks with love bronds bumd.
King Priams reign he topsie tu^uie tossed,
And goodly Cities great he chiefly lost.
And now my mind ^ore frighted stands aghast,
What Cupides furious force brings us at last.

THE FOVRTH SCENE.
Nero. AH, ah, our captains sl^e dispatching coil,
And our long suffering y^e in such a broyle,
That streams of blood yet do not ^ue^^h their rage
Which they against our propre person wage
And that all Rome, with corses strewed about,
Those cruel villains blood, does not sweat out.
But deeds already done, with death to pay.
A small thing it is, a greater slaughtrous day
The peoples cursed crime, and eke that dame,
Whom I did aye suspect, deserves the same.
whom, to yield those peasaunts would me make:
At last she shall, with life our sorrow slake,
And with her bodies blood shall quench our ire.
Then, shall their houses fall by force of fire:
What burning both, and buildings fair decay,
What beggarly want, and wayling hunger may
Those villains shall be sure, to have each day.
Ah, Proue^der pricks that vile rebellious race
Ne can they once our favor well embrace,
Nor be content, with peace in quiet state,
But broyling raumpe about with troubled gate.
Hereon with boldness straight, hereon they fly,
With harebraind rashness hedlong by and by.
Well, they must tamed be with heavy stroke,
And down be kept with peise of weighty yoke:
That they, with like attempt, do not arise,
Nor once cast up their deadly peasaunts eyes,
Against our loving spouses golden looks:
First punish them sure, then fear shall be their books,
To teach them, at their Princes beck t'obay
But see at hand, whom faith, and virtue rare,
Lieuetenant chief of camps, appointed their.
THE FIFTE SCENE.
Praefectus* Nero. THe vulgar peoples rash unruly rage
The slaughter of a few did sone assuage,
Which long wtstode our valiant force in vain*
To tell your grace this news, I come again*
Nero. And is this then enough, do thou so well*
O soldier mark what does thy captain tell?
Have thou with held thy hand frou bloody ire?
Is this the due revenge that we require?

Prae. The captain guides of treason paid their hyre,
By desperate death of bloody sword in fight.
The route which sought with flaming fire to light,

Ner. Our royal Palace great, who would assign
Their Prince what he should do: and pull in fine
Our mate from us dissoluing wedlock bands:
Whose hardy slanderous tongs, and wicked hands,
Her princely grace reprochfully withstandes,
From due revenge, are they dismissed free?

Prae. Shall subjects pain, by grief assigned be?

Ner. It shall assign which time shall never wear.

Prae. Which neither wrath may end, nor yet your fear*

Nero. She shall appease our hie displeased mind,
Who fiyrst, our wrath deserved due to find.

Praef. Declare whose death your mood does most require
Let not my hand be stayde from your desire.

Ner. It seeks our sisters death, and traiterous head.

Prae. Those words through all my luns, has stifnessespred,
Oppressed with griesty fear.

Ner: Us to obey.
Stands thou in doubt:

Praef. On faith why do you lay
So great a fault?

Ner. Because thou sparedst our foe.

Praef. Deserves a woman to be termed so?

Nero. If treason she begin.

Prae. Is any man
So sure, that hit accuse of creason can:

Ner. The peoples rage:

Praef. Those mad vnweldye wights
Who order could?

Ne. Who could stir up their sprits?

Prae. No creature as I think.

Ner. A woman could,
In whom a mind Dame nature has vpfould,
To mischief prone: she armed has her heart,
To hurt by wyles: yet strength she set apart,
Least she undaunted force with her should bear:
But now her slender power with doubting fear,
Is quickly quaylde, or else with punishment,
Which her condenmed state to mischief bent
To late does end: away with grave advise,
Us with entreating seek not to entyse.
Dispatch that we comm^und on shipboorde horn,
Far off to shore aloof with dashing worn,
Command she be: that tunlike swelling breast
At length in storming stomach may take rest.

THE SIXTE SCENE.
Chorus. Octauia. ALack the peoples bitter love,
And dyre good will to many one,
Which, when they hoysted sails above,
With pleasant blastes it made to groan,
And carried them from quiet shore,
That faynting, leaves them in the deep,
And tumbling, raging waters rore.
Cornelia piteous wretch did weep,
And sore bewail her sons estate:
The peoples love did undo them,
And wondrous favor, bred them hate:
Great worthy peers of noble stem:
Of high renown for virtues praise:
In faith and eloquence did pas
Their stomachs stout their fame did raise:
Ith laws each one most excellent was.
And Scipio, thee did Fortune yield
Unto like death, and curssed wrack,
Whom neither honors pomp could sheelde,
Nor fenced house thy foes keep back.
More to repeat, although I could,
Pure present grief forbids sore:
Ere while to whom the people would,
Her Fathers antique Court restore,
And Brothers wedlock once again,
Now weeping, wringing hands poor wretch,
Unto her cruel, deadly pain,
The armed soldiers do her fetch.
How safe does poverty lie content,
In thetched house safe shrouded there?
High raised towers with blasts are bent,
Which often times them over bear.
Oct. Where pull you me poor wretch? alas,
Into what banished exiles place,
Would Nero have me for to pass,
Or Fortune bids, with frowning face?
If now with faynting strength quite coolde,
And with my broils all wearied cease,
And longer life she grant me woolde,
If that she work for to increase,
My sorrows great with deadly dart,
Why is she then so much my foe,
In country that I may not part,
And leave my life before I go?
But now no help of health I feel,
Alas I see my Brothers boat:
This is the same, whose vaulted keele,
His Mother once did set a clote.
And now his piteous Sister I,
Excluded clean from spousall place,
Shall be so carried by and by:
No force has virtue in this case.
No Gods there be my woes to wrecke.
The griefly, dreadful drab Eryn,
Does weld the world at nod and beck,
Who can lament my state, wherein
I am, alas, sufficiently?
How can Aedon duly plain,
My smarting streams at bears that I
Do shed? whose wings I would be fame,
If destnies would them grant, to wear.
Then would I leave my mourning mates,
As swiftly fled, as wings could bear,
And so avoid these bloody pates.
Then sitting sole in shirwood shirle,
And hanging sure, by dandling twigge
With plaintiue pipe I might out twarle
My heavy tuned note so big.

Chor. The mortalt brood the destnies guide:
Themselves they nothing can assure,
That certainly does steadfast bide:
Which our last day of life, procure,
(Where of we always should beware,)
Much dangerous chances for to try:
Unto your troubled mind with care,
Now many saumples do applys,
Which your accursed court has brought,
To holden you in all your broyle:
For what has more your troubles wrought,
What does against you sorer toil,
Than fortune does? the first of all,
Agrippas child brought forth to life,
Whom we Tyberius daughter call,
By law, and eke Prince Caesar's wife,
Of many sons a careful dame,
I cannot chose but now recount,
Whose worthy, glorious ample name,
Throughout the world does much surmount.
So often with belly bolne that bare
Desired fruicts, and peaces pledge,
Ere long thou sufferedst exiles care,
Strypes, chains, and boltes of iron wedge,
And mourning much, which so did frame,
That death they causde thee to abide.
So Liuia, Drusus lucky name
In male kind babes, did hedling slide,
Into a cruel monstrous deed,
And death sore pearcing deadly dart.
Her mothers fates does Iulia speed,
To follow straight with all her heart,
Who after longer wasted time
With bloody fauchion kene, was slain,
Although for no just cause or crime.
Your mother eke that once did reign,
Who then esteemd of Claudius well,
Did wisely weld his court at will,
And fruitful was, as you can tell,
What could not her desire fulfill:
She sometime subject to her slave,
To death was put with soldiers blade.
What she, that easly hope might have,
Toth skies, her reign to rise have made,
Prince Neroes lusty Parent great?
First tossed with shipmans boisterous force,
Then torn with sword in Princes heat,
Did she not lie a senceles corse,

Oct. Lo me the tyrant stern will send
To yrcksome shades and hellish sprits.
Why wretch do I the tyiue thus spend?
Draw me to death you to whose myghts,
False Fortune has bequeathed me.
I witness now the heavenly power.
What do thou bedlame? leave to flee,
With prayer to Gods, who on thee lowre.
I call to witness Tartar deep,
And sprytes of Hell revenging freakes
Of heinous facts, in D^^geon steep,
And Sire whom death deserved wreakes.
I do not now repyne to dye,
Deck up your Ship, and hoyse your Sail,
On frothing seas to winds on hye:
Let him that guides the Helm not fail,
To seek the shore of Pharian Land.

Cho. O pippling puff of western wind,
Which sacrifice did once with stand,
Of Iphigen to death asfignde
And close in Cloud congealed clad,
Did carry her from smoking aa^es,
Which angry, cruel Virgin had:
This Prince also oppressed, with cares,
Save from this paynefull punishment,
To Dians temple safely horn:
The harbarous Moors toru^enesse bent,
Then Princes Courts in Rome forlorn,
Have far more Cyuile curt^sie:
For there does strangers death appease
The angry Gods in heavens on hie,
But Romayne blood, our Rome must please.

FINIS.
THE TENTH TRAGEDY OF L. ANNAE SENECA, Entitled HERCULES OETAEVS: Translated
out of Latin into English by I. S. *
The Argument.
HERCULES having subdued the Sons of EVRITVS King of OEchalia, (who
contrary to their promise, denied to give their Sister IOLE unto him) and
having made conquest of the City and country thereabout, meant to sacryfice
unto the Gods for his victory in that behalf, and success in briging away,
perforce, his beeloued IOLE. For the solemn celebration whereof, he sent LYCAS
his servant, unto DEIANEIRA his Wife, to fetch his Robe, which he always
used when he sacrifized. DEIANEIRA dippinge and besprinckling the same Robe in
the blood of NESSVS the Centaure, because she feared least her husband loved
IOLE better then he did her, (for NESSVS being shot through, and slain by
HERCULES, had persuaded and advised her that she should so do, whenever
she doubted that her husbands love were alienated from her to any other,) sent
it unto him. Which Garment when HERCULES had put on, the poison wherein it was
dipped, and washed, enuenomed all his Vital parts, and drove him into most
intolerable torments. For remedy whereof he sent to APOLLO his Oracle at
Delphos: from whence he received answer, that he should be carried unto
Mount OEtus, and there, that a great fire should be made: and as for all
other things, they should be referred to the pleasure and direction of
IVPITER. The fire being there made and kindled by PHILOCTETES, (unto whom
HERCULES bequeathed his Arrows,) HERCULES went up into it, and was there
burned. Whose boanes being afterward sought for and not found, the standers by
were fully persuaded that he was deified, and taken up into Heaven. When
knowledge thereof was brought unto DEIANIRA, she thinking herself to be
the cause of her husbands tormenting death, strangled her self.

FINIS.

The Speakers names.
HERCULES. ALCMENA, HYLLVS. NVTRIX. IOLE. CHORUS. PHILOCTETES. DEIANIRA.
THE FIRST ACT.
HERCULES alone. O Lord of Ghostes whose fyrye flashe
(that forth thy hand does shake)
Does cause the trembling Lodges twain
of Phoebus Carre to quake,
Raygne reachlesse now: in every place
thy peace procurde I have
Aloof where Nereus locks up land
Empalde in winding Wave.
Thwack not about with thunder thumpes, the rebel kings be down,
The ravening tyrauntes Scepterlesse, are pulled from their crown:
By me all daunted is whereon, thy boults thou should bestow.
And yet O Father, yet the Heavens are still withhelde me froe,
At all assayes I serve, as might an Impe of Jove behoue,
And that thou ought to Father me, my stepdame well does prove.
Why do thou linger in delay, is Heaven of us afraid?
Seem we so awful, fell, and fierce? and wherefore are we staide?
And cannot Atlas boysteous back on stouping shoulder tough,
Uphold the payse of Hercules, and heaven well enough?
What is it sier? what is it Jove that thee so much detarres?
What may thee force keep back thy son from scaling of the Stars
For death has let me pass again from dungeon dark to thee.
When mischiefs fell and monsters all destroyde and spoiled be
That either Land, or Seas, or Air. Or hell engender could
Arcadian Lion none to raunge in saluage Nemea wolte.
The Stymphall Foul has chased bin with Bow, and Brusell boulte.
No nimble heart of Menalus does lie in hill nor houlte
The Dragon daunting with his blood has goarde the goulden grove.
And Hydra has his courage coolde, and Diomedes drove
Whose puffed paunches pampred were with stoare of strangers blood
That scoarde the Coaste and barren banks of cruel Heber flood
I slaughterd them, and that the force of foe might well be seen.
I prowlde away the boottes of the proud Amazon Queen,
Of silent shades in glummy Goulphes the dreadful doomes I saw.
On Cerber black the Tartar Tike the son did shine with awe,
And he with steaming Goggle eyes has glyed upon the soon:
Anteus yawnes, and gapes no more whose gasping breath to done.
A front his alters Busir fell was knocked unto the ground,
By him whose hand gave Gerion his deep and deadly wound
And slew the mighty Bull that was to hundred hearts a dread,
All noyous plagues I spoiled have that ever Tellus bread,
And daunted by my hand they lie: the Gods now need not free:
The world to answer Iunoes ire, no monsters now can get.
Now show thy valiant son his sire, or set him in the clouds,
Thou shall not need to be my guide, my self will climb the shrowdes.
Do thou my passage but allow, and I shall find away,
But if thou dread, that monsters more the earth engender may,
Have on each monster hideous, to show it self in time,
While Hercules has his aboade beueath the heavenly Clyme.
For who encounter shall the fiendes? who is it that Grecia has,
That may be meet, to bide the brunt of mighty Iunoes wrath?
My praise burtes not my health: my fame does fly, from land to land:
The ysy poale does know me, where the northern bear does stand:
The easterlings encombred with the gleede of scorching sun.
The south, where Phoebe by crooked clear of Tropic Crab does ru^ne:
In every coast O Titan where thou do thy self reveal.
How I have met thee face to face, to thee I do appeal.
Aloof beyond the compass of thy light I set my foot,
And never could thy blaze so far his glymsinge glory shoot.
As I have forced the honor of my triumphs for to streatch,
The day it self has had his stint, within my trauells reatch
Dame Nature faylde, the world was shogd beside his center dew,
And ougsome night in shimmering shade, from dungeon darck I drew.
And cankred Chaos lodged aloafe encountered me awayne:
Yet from the deep I gat to ground, whence none returns again.
We straue against the Ocean storms, I balasen the keele
Fraught with my weight, that wrestling waves could not compel it reele.
What heaps of hazardes tempted I through all the open air,
To qualify thy wedlocks wrath can mischief none repair
The earth would loath such baggage bred as I would match by might,
Yea monsters none are to be found, the fiendes do shun my sight.
And Hecules for want of fiendes against him self did rage
What eluishe creatures cursed did I with naked arm assuage.
Was ever any peuish thing so big upon the ground
That coapt with me, but that my hand alone did it confound.
Not hither to from vermin vile through faynting fear I leapt
In babish years, not when to me in Cradell laid they leapt:
Each thing that was commanded me, at ease I did obey:
Thus free from paynefull toil to me there never past a day.
What vermin have I vanquished, no king commanding it?
My courage cloyes me more then all the wyles of Iunoes wit.
But what avails me to rid mankind of fickle fear?
The Gods yet cannot raygne in rest: while up the world does pear,
New rid of furious fiendes, it sees a loft in starry skies
The cruel creatures all, that erst on earth did fore aggrise.
Dame Juno has transport the elues The scorching Crab does creep
Abouth the burning zone, and loofe at Africa does keep
The Tropic line: and Harvest fat he feeds with parching heat:
To Virgo, Leo turns the time, and in a reaking sweat.
He buskling up his burning Mane, does dry the dropping south.
And swallows up the slabby clouds in fyry foming mouth.
The Vrchins all are creapt to skies, and have prevented me:
I Conqueror from Earth to Heaven, my trauells all may see:
These gargle Faces grim on heaven, Dawe Juno first did set:
As though thereof the terror might to skies my passage let:
Although she scatter them in Skies, or make the Heavens forlorn
More then y^ Earth, or hellike Goulphes, (whereby y^ Gods are sworn)
Yet room for Hercles shall be made, if after monsters quelde,
Or battles fought, or hellike hound in Chains as captive held,
If all exploytes cannot prevail, in skies a place to gain,
Then soukt up be the midland Sea twixt Barbary, and Spain,
That either shore may join in one, with channel none between
There will I dam the running stream, that Sea shall none be seen*
Or as for Corinth out shot land that tweene two seas does lie,
It shall give way to ^yther stream, that through the same shall fly.
And when the seas on passage have, the Fleet of Athens town
May floate in Channel new: thus shall the world turn tops^downe:
Let Ister turn his stream, and Tanaus slow another way:
Grant Jove a placket, grant, whereby the Gods uphold I may.
Discharge thy thunder dint. where I shall keep due watch, and ward,
If either to the ysy poale thou bid me have regard,
Or burning zone, here let the Gods full safe all force defy:
Prince Paean purchased has an house amid the cristall sky,
And well deserved he the temples of Pernassus hill,
For slaughter of a Dragon made? how often recovering still
In Hydra poison Python lay? with Bacchus Perseus strong
By less desert then Hercules, have crept the Gods among.
But all the East (a mighty coast) to bond is brought, by him.
Whom Juno spightes, how stearne a bug was snaky Gorgon grim?
What Impe is he, begot between my stepdame dyre and thee,
Whose praised pains have purchaste him a place in heaven to be?
The heaven that on my shoulders I have hoisterd up I crave:
But Lycas, (partner of my pains) dispatch our triumph brave.
Display in pomp the ruin of Euritus house, and Crown:
And for the sacrifice with speed strike yet the Bullocks down,
Where as the Aare (that does adnaunce the Church of Cenei Jove.)
Lies open to Euboca sea: that wrackfull wave does move.
Chorus. THe Gods in bliss that man does cou^teruaile,
That can at once both Grave, and glory gain,
Death upon death the whilst does him assail
Whose wretched life is lingered on in pain,
With frowning fate in spurning spighte who shiues,
And sets the Keele of gaping goulphe at naught,
Will not submit his captive hands to gives,
As dishe of dishonor in triumph to be brought:
Like careful caytife he shall never droupe,
Whelmed in storming thoughts of sower annoy
Whose stomach scorns, for dawnting death to stoop,
Though seas amid the deep in hoysted hoy
Drive him aloof, when as a southern gale
Beats Boreas back, or eastern puff again
Recoiles the western wind, and seems to hale
From deepest sands the surges torn in twain.
Tht broken planckes to catch he scrambles not
Of wracked bark, as one that hopes to have
Amid the Channel deep a landing plot,
When dismal death appears in every wave
He cannot suffer shipwreck all alone:
With pined karrayne coarse, and streams of tears,
And with our country dust our heads upon,
Powldring our locks, we languishe out our years.
Neither flashing flame, nor thumping thunder crack
Will once dawnt us: O death thou do pursew,
Where fortune fawnes: but where she works wrack,
Thou shunnest those, that would thee not eschew,
We stand not in our razed country wall,
Whose ground shall now be ouergrowne (alas)
With bramble, and bryer, and down the temples fall:
While mucky sheepecotes are planted in their place.
And now the frostifaced Greek (alas)
This way, this way, with all his drove of Neat
By so much of AEchalia must pass,
As heapt on ashes gloweth still with heat.
The Tessayle sheepherd sitting by the way
On iarringe Pype shall play his country ryme,
Singing with sighs alack, and weladay,
Thus to bewail the sorrows of our time.
Ere time shall roll the race of many a year,
It will be asked, where erst the town did stand?
O well was I, when as I lived a leare,
Not in the barren balkes of fallow land,
Nor in Thessalia on the foodelesse cliues,
But now among rough Trachin craggy Rocks,
And ougly shrubs necessity me drives,
Whose flaming tops detarres the feeding Ox.
And in the way less woods vntrode before
All comfortless, afright and in a maze
Needs must I trot alone, that would abhor
The saluage beasts, that on the mountains graze
But better lot (if any Dames may have)
They over Inach wambling stream shall row,
Or shroud in Dirce Walls, where Ismen wave
With feeble force of shallow fourde does flow.
The hawty Hercles mother here was wed,
What Scythian crag, what stones engendered him?
What Rocky mountain Rhodope thee bred,
Of Tyrant, Titans race a cu^sed lim?
Stipe Athos hill, the brutish Caspia land.
With teate unkind fed thee twixt rock and stoane:
False is the tale, wherewith thou bearst in hand,
Two nights for thee thy Mother dear did groan.
While lingering stars long lodged in purple sky:
The shepherd star his course did enterchaunge
With the load star, and up the Moon does sty,
That couched Phoebe durst not the Welkin raunge,
No Lance can pearce his monsters ruggy skin,
The blunted Iron tried it with thumping thwack,
And Steel is not so tough: on naked skin
A swerd was brast, and stones rebounded back.
The force of fate he utterly defies,
And toughly timberd as he is of lim
He does contriue, how quarrels may arise,
That death might prove his febled force in him
The quaries could not enter to his flesh,
Nor yet the bow with Scythian steule drawn deep,
No nor the glaues, with which Sarmacians fresh,
Hot skirmishes in th'ysy Clyme do keep.
No nor the Parthian better Archer far,
Then Creete, who parcht with Phae^tons soultring flame,
Under the Equinoctial rayseth werre,
Gaynst the easterling discomfetinge the same.
He with his body did batter down the wall,
Of Oechalie: nothing may him withstand:
By valiant prowess he has conquered all:
It Is won before, that he does take in hand:
The howgy Briar that fifty paunches had,
The hawty Giges with hundred arms likewise,
That clamb up Thassayle hills as Giant mad,
When rebels rage would take from love the skies,
Such steaming Eyes, such ghastly visage foul,
Such Gargle face, such countnaunce glaring grim,
Wherewith stearne Hercles glowningly does scowle,
Those Gyaunts had resembling plainly him.
Thus greatest bliss is prone to greatest bale
There wants no woe whose cup we have not taste
We wretched women have with countnaunce pale.
IOLE. But careful caytiffe I
do not bewail forlorn
The sweeping flames, nor Idolles, with
their taitred Temples torn:
Nor that the Fathers burn
together with their Sons,
That Gods, and men, that tombs and Church,
at once to ruin runs.
Upon the common care
wec do not power our playnt,
For Fortune wills us turn our tears with other woes attaynt:
And thus my frowning face allotteth unto me
Another kind of wretchedness, that must lamented be:
What shall I first beweepe? Or chiefly what complain?
And to bewail them all at once, would mitigate my pain.
Alas that but on breast Dame Nature did me frame,
That blows agreeing to my grief might bounce upon the same.
With weeping Sipill rock, br^^se ye my balefull breast,
Or on Eridanus silent shore in sorrows let we rest,
Where as the mourning troop of Nymphs do hale their hears.
To wayle the death of Phairon, with showers of dropping tears.
Or else in Sicill rock cause me encoucht to dwell,
Where Scilla Hag with howling noise, and barking big does yell.
Or else in Lynnets shape let me tell on my tale,
And weep with Adon in the woods, or turnde to Nightingale
As Lady Philomele, records with weeping lay
In shade of hawly Ismar hill upon a tender spray,
With soking sighs her grief, O Gods: and me addight
In shape, that may be suetable vnso my playntiffe plight.
And of my piteous moan let craggy Trachin sound,
Since Myrra saw the tears where in Dame Venus eyes were drownde,
That she for Adopis with smoky sighs did shed,
And Halcion might wayle at will her loving Ceyx dead:
The Lady Tastalis get life to weep alone,
And Philomele did change her shape, and earnefully did move
Her tender Itis death: (alas) why are not yet
With flickering Feathers fit for wings, my naked arms beset?
O happy shall I be, and happily be bleast,
When in the woods as in an house I make my shrowding neast,
And sitting like a bird upon my country ground
In doleful harmony shall tune the cares, that me confound.
That thus the people fond may talk how they have seen
In piteous likeness of a Bird, the Daughter of a Queen.
I careful caytiffe, I, beheld my Fathers fate,
When in the Court a deadly club did Pale him on the pate,
And sprawling on the floor with brains pasht out he lay,
Alas if fates would let thy Coarse beshrynde in pit of Claye,
What flowing tears (O Syer) would I on thee bestow?
And could I brook it Toxeus, to see thy death with woe?
That were vnwand^ in years, and take in pits vnpaysde,
Upon whose naked Cheeks the pregu^^ (...) hayres had raysor.
Why should I parents dear your fates with tears detest,
Whom death with hand ind^fferent has taken hence to rest:
My Fortune seeks my tears, due is mine own distress,
Now as a captive must I dawnce attendaunce more and less,
Upon my Ladies rock: and twyst her threde yspoon,
Woe worth my beauty, for the which in dread of death I run.
And for thy sake alone my stock has lost his life,
While that my syer Denies me to Hercles as his wife
And did for fear refuse his stepfather to be,
But to our Laydes balefull bower as Captives hence go we:
THE SECOND ACT.
Nutrix. Deianira. WHat furious fits of ramping rage
does boil in Women's brain,
When in one roof both wedded wife
and Harlor do remain?
Both Scylla, and Charibdis gulf
no danger like it have,
That raging roll on Sicill shore
by heaps the wrestling wave.
Ne saluage beast so bad there is,
that betters not the same.
For brute no sooner blew abroad the captive Harlots name,
And that the beauty of Iolas countnaunce shyned brym,
As does the day, when marble skies, no filthy fog does dim:
Or like the glimse of twinkling star, that in the welkin bright
Displayes abroad his shooting beams amid the frosty mght:
But Deianira Hercles Wife all bedlem like does stand,
And scowleth as the Tiger wild which couched on the sand
In shade of rock does shrowde his whelps, and buskells up in hesse,
Espying him that of his young both come to make the waste:
Or like as Menas ouercharg with Bacchus licour sixeete
With Iuy bunche on thurled Darte from place to place does fleet:
She makes a pawse, in doubt where to she might derect her pace,
Then frantickly as on bestraught, she (...) from place to place
In Hercles douse. thus was she rayt in rage of flaming ire,
The house to narrow was, to cool the despret dames desire.
She runs in, she ^rots about, she makes a soddayne stay.
The mallady in frowning face it self does plain display.
No galling grief remaynes at heart. The tears gush from her Eyes,
Nor in on kind of temper still in frenly sits she fryes:
Her glowning looks with fury fell do change her former hew,
Now glaring stand her steaming Eyes, and palenesse does ensew
The ruddy color in her Cheeks: the anguish of her heart
Drives out her dolors deep, to show them selves in every part:
She languisheth, she moanes for help, she wayles her froward fate,
And all the house an Echo makes resounding her estate.
Lo headlong to and froe she hies, and running still about
Goes mumbling, and the secrets of her mind she mutters out:
Oh Juno Spouse to Jove, what part of heaven soever thou keep,
Raise up some saluage beast, against lewd Hercules to creep,
That I shall think sufficient: If any combrous snake
With breeding he do craule, more big in alt the slimy lake,
That may not take a foil: or if that ought do yet remain,
So ougsome, grisely, cursed, and grim, so fraught with filthy bayne,
That he may loathe to look thereon, that may his sight appaule.
Undo their Dens, from hydeous hoales procure such vermin craule.
Or if that flendes can none befounde, then couture thou my ghost
To what thou ^tst: this soul of mine can welt abide the most:
Some vucouth shape, some ghastly face, such one bestow on me,
Whereby the horror of my pangues may counteruayled be.
My boiling breast cannot conceive the vengeance, I would try:
Why serchest thou the corners far, of lands aloof that lie?
And turnst y^ world thus vpside down? why seekst thou harm of hell?
To trance him, furious fl^irndes enough within this breast do dwell:
Make me thine instrument of hate: his stepdame I will be,
And thou may work the overthrow of Hercules by me:
Appoynct my hand to any thing. Why do thou make delay?
Use thou my frensy, as the means to compass his decay.
The mischief shall be brought to pass, what ever thou will crave:
Why stand ye musing still thereon? contrived all I have:
Thou may forbear thy malice now: thy rancour shall suffice,
To bring this wretch unto his end, my self can well devise.
Nv. My Foster gyile, of rauing mind, these dreary playnts assuage,
Forbear this heat, and brydell yet the rigor of thy rage:
Behave thy self for such an one, as men may worthy judge
The noble Spouse of Hercules.

DEI. Shall Iole (slavish drudge)
Bring basterd brethren to my Babes? of her that is a slave
Shall Jupiter the God of heaven forsooth a daughter have?
The flashing flames, and fighting floodes shall toyne together first.
The northern bear to Marble seas shall stoop to quench his thyrst.
Yea vengeounce, vengeance, will I have, though on thy back thou wyeld
The boysteous heavens, and all the world do peace unto thee yield:
There is a thing shall stinge thee worse then Hydra hissing Snake,
The corsey cursed of angry Wife. Does any fiery Flake
Vpthrowne from Etnas boiling Foarge, so sowse the beaten skies?
More then all things that thou have daunt, my ghost shall thee aggryse.
Shall thou prefer a seruill Trull before thy wedded Wife?
For fear of many monsters more I tendered still thy life,
And now for to increase my care. I see no monsters lurk,
And now steps in an hateful whore, (which more my mind does vrke)
To cumber us, as ill as fiendes. O Father thou of might,
The shield of Gods: and Titan thou, that bearst the Lamp of light,
I only unto Hercules a loyal wife abod,
And to an Harlots use are turnde my prayers made to God:
The fruit of my felticity a Strumpet does obtain,
And for an Harlots love ye Gods have hard my prayers vain:
Is Hercules returnde for her? O grief not yet content.
Devise some tearing torments, seek some pangues, and punishment.
Let Juno learn of me, what force a woman's fury has.
She knows not how in deep despite, to use her harming wrath.
For me you did these batrtayles wage: for my sake Acheloe
Did let his streaming blood amid his wamblinge waves to floe.
When snarling Adders shape he took, and to the boysteous Bull
He gieuing up his sloughy shape did bend his malice full.
And thus thou foylde a thousand foes by conquest of this one:
Yet presently thou plunged art, and that by me alone:
A prisoner now must be prefer de before thy loyal wife.
I Will none of that: but even the day that first begins the strife,
And to our wedlock brings the breach, shall be thy dismal day,
And knap in twain the fatal twist where on thy life does stay:
What means this? my mind relents. My malice breaks his rage:
O wretched grief why do thou faynte? thy spite will thou assuage?
With fealty of a faithful Wife do thou thy conscience charge?
Why lets thou not my boiling ire for to increase at large?
Why do thou slake thy frying fits? this mallady still survive.
Even now I able was with him for maistership to strive.
In deed I have not craved aid: yet Stepdame Juno will,
To weilde my hands to work his wrack, be here assistant still:

NV. What treachery entendest thou mad bedlem to commit?
Thy husband will thou murder wreatch? whose flickering fame does flit:
From east to west: whose bright renown the earth could not contain
But raysde aloft, from marble Skies it does rebounde again:
The mother Earth shall ryfe in arms for to revenge his grave.
His former Stepsiers stock hereby the overthrow shall have:
And all Aetolia royal blood will feel an vtterfall:
In quarrel of thy Hercules the world conspier shall.
Then silly wight how many plagues shall thou alone abide?
But be it that from the face of man thou might thy body hyde.
Yet Jove the lightning leames of heaven does hold in armed hand,
Behold the flying fyry flakes in ranckes all ready stand:
And threatening thunders thumping thick do bounce out all the day.
Deaths dungeon (that thou do defy) full duly scaare thee may.
For there his Uncle vmpyre sits: Myche where thou may vnspyde.
And every where thou shall perceive the Gods to him (...).

DE. I grant it despert deed, whereto despair now does me drive.

NV. Die sure thou shall.

DE. And die I will, (as presently I live)
The loyal spouse of Hercules. And ere this night do pass,
Day shall not see that Deianire a living Wydow was.
Nor of my spousall head an whore shall get the interest.
The dawning day shall sooner make the morning peer in West,
Unto the eastwarde Indians the ysy poale shall melt,
And freezing Scithian first shall fry with flames that he has felt
Of Phoebus fervent wheel: ere me Thessalia Trulls shall see
Diuorst: my brydall blase shall with my blood iquenched be:
And either let him murdered be, or take away my Life.
So soothly let him count among the foiled flendes his Wife.
Among Alcides labors let me reckned be as on.
His love in heart I hold, until the utter gasp be gone.
Thus vndiuorst (not vureuengde) I will to Hercles tomb.
It Iole be with child by him, i will tear it from her womb,
And rent it with these paws of mine. Yea in the wedding place,
I flying at her fearce will set my tallantes in her face:
Let him not spare in raumping rage a sacrifyce to make
Of me upon his wedding day, when he his Trull does take,
So that I falling down may light on Jones senceles coarse
He dies a happy man, that first has quelde his foes by force.

Nu. O wretched might why do thou thus increase thy fuming heat:
And feed thy fury wittingly least hap should thee defeat.
He loved Lady Iole, but while her fathers crown
Stood florishyng in royal state and were not bartred down,
And as unto the daughter of a King be suter was,
But when from type of hawty pomp she did to thraldom pass
He shook her of hot love was coold, and now her bitter bale
Would not allow the wrack ^^ kele to bear to hie a sale:
Vnleeful things that should be shund we gredely desire.
But matters meeter for our state we seldom do require.
The pytying of adversity does often enkindle more
The fervent fittes of love, and this perhappe does urge him sore,
To see her reaft of natyue soil, it may his fancy touch,
Her hair not tuct with tresses trim, nor dect with golden ouche
Perhap the man with pity pricked does love her for her carc.
Unto his noble heart to pity prisoners it is not rare.
The sister dear of Priamus (fair Lady Hesyon) he
Did cause to Thelamon the Greek in wedlock knit to be:
Account how many wives before, and maidens did he love,
And raung'd abroad to cool the rage that Venus brand did move.
Fair Auge maid of Arcadye ententiue set to lead
Dianas drunce, by force of him did leese her maiden head.
And yet no token could she show nor pledge of any jove,
What shall I speak of any more, or does it me behoue,
To pra^e what prankes he played with fifty daughters in one night.
And yet how soon of such a pange he over came the might,
He set much store by Omphale of Lidia land the Queen,
When like a guest on Timolus the mount he has been seen.
He was so prict with Cupids dart, and caught in Venus trap,
That tucke in woman's weed he sat with distaf in his lap
And spoon the flax with sombling fyst, and rudely thumbde the threede
And flong from him the syons case the price of noble deed.
With tresses trick on plaited locks he wayled as a maid
With myrre his ftiseled poale was smeard, and curied bush was brayde,
Thus every where as fancy flits, the fondling dotes in love.
But in such sort as easily he can the same remove.

DEI. But they whom fickle fancies (...) have taynt, do learn at last
In link of love by tract of time to fix affiaunce fast.

NV. Trow ye that he this captive queen, and on whom he do see
The daughter of his deadly foe, will more esteem then thee?

DE. As gladsome groves at Prime of spring in beauties pride are seen
When fresshest warmth the naked twigges does clad in pleasant green.
But when could Boreas boysteous blast the pipling puffes does stop
Of south wind sweet, rough winter powles the naked busshes top:
The barewoode with misshapen stumpes does show a withered Face,
Even so my beauty marching forth a season on his Race
Still fades away, and evermore abates his glimsing gloss,
And what so ever was in me, by care is come to loss.
And that which erst by fansy fed the greedy gazing eyes,
Is fallen away by bearing child: so often it droupes, and dies.
And since I came to mothers state. I faded fast away.
And wrinckled age with furrowed face steps in with quick decay.
But yet this bondmaydes ^eauter fresh her sorrow better brooks.
Her comely countnaunce crazied is with lean and wanny looks.
And yet for all her kark and care amid her deep ^istresse.
She bears a glimse of beauty bright, and favor nothing less.
Her heavy hap, and frowning rate can nothing from her pluck.
Save Scepter from her royal hand by all this lowering luck.
By means of this first faynting fear did lodge within my breast,
That makes me wake the weary nights, and leese my kindly rest.
In all men's eyes at first I seemde to be a blessed Wife.
And Ladies all at our estate repining very ryfe
Did wyshe my watch in spite of fate what S^eps^er shall I hope
As match in majesty to Jove within the heavenly coape?
Dear fosterdame whom shall I make my feere in spowsall bed?
Although Euryst that Hercules to all these toils has led,
Do link with me in bridal bands, my state shall be impayrde.
It Is small worth to deserve to be to kingly wedlock rayrde.

NV. But Issue is the thing that does in marriage kindell love.

DE. And Issue is the thing that does in marriage malice move.

NV. This while the bondmayde to thee for present shall be braught

DE. Lo he ^etreth up and down with pryncely pore full haught,
And buckles fast about his Loins the lively Lions case,
Who does inuest the wretched with the right of kingly mace,
D^posing those from honors type that late so lofty sat.
And pestereth his puissaunt paws with huge dvnweildy bat,
Of whose exploytes, and maarciale acts the Seres sing aloof,
And all enclosde in Ocean sea thereof have perfect proof
Is now became an amorous knight: the honor of his name
Does nothing touch his conscience, to tender once his ^ame.
He roueth through the world, as on that does no whit esteem,
Although that men as soon to Jove shall him unworthy deem.
Nor like the man whose credit through the towns of Greece is great.
He seeks to compass his des^er, to work a Lovers feate.
With single Dames is his delight: If any him deny,
Then to attain his lawless lust by rigor does he try.
With men he fares frantickly, to others smart and blame
He win^ his Wy^es, his folly frail is cloackt by virtues name.
The noble City Oechalie is made a razed town.
The Sun twixt morn and even did set, in one day up, and down*
One day did see it stand in state, the same did see it fall.
These bloody broils, and wasting wars of Love proceeded all,
As often as parents unto him deny their daughters dear,
So often I warrant them they need his wrathful fury fear.
So often a man with Hercules shall be at deadly food:
As he denies his stepfather to be by joining blood.
If he may not be son in law, then does he rage, and rave:
Why do these guiltless hands of mine still keep him from his grave,
Till he dissemble frantic fits, to bend his aiming bow,
And deaths wound on my child, and me with bloody hands bestow?
Thus hawty Hercules was wont his wedlockes to deuorce.
Yet naught there is, that law of guilt on him might have recorse.
He makes the world blame Juno, for the ills he has commit.
O rigor, of my rage why do thou quallify my fit?
Now must thou set thy hands on work, to it while thy hands be hot.

N. Thy husband will thou slay?

D. Him who^ his Leman lewd has got.

NV. But yet, he is the son of Jove.

DE. And so Alemenas son.

N. With stroke of steel?

D. With stroke of steel if it cannot be done,
Then for to bring his death to pass, i will set for him a snare.

NV. What kind of madness may it be that makes thee thus to fare?

D. Such as my husband has me taught.

N. Will thou thy spouse destroy,
On whom y^ stepdames spite yet had no power to work annoy?

D. The wrathes of heavenly minds do make the^ blessed on who^ they light
So does not spite of mortal men.

N. Oh silly wretched wight
For bear thy rage, and fear the worst, man's force may not assail
Him, that against the power of hell, and death could once prevail.

DE. I Will venture on the dint of swerd.

N. Thy wrath (dear foster child)
Is greater then the crime, that has thy Hercules defilde.
With egall malice measure saultes. Alas why do thou bring
So great and sore, a penalty upon so swale a thing?
Let not thy grief be greater, then the sorrow thou sustaynes.

DE. Set you it light that with our wedlock linkt an harlot raygnes ^
Nay rather think it still to much, that does thy sorrows breed.

NV. And is the Jove of Hercules revolt from thee in deed?

DE. It Is not revolt, dear foster Dame, fast in my bones it sticks:
But ire boyles hoate in burning breast, when love to anger pricks.

NV. It is almost a common guise, that wedded wives do haunte,
Their husbands hearts by magic Art, and witchcraft to enchaunte.
In winter could I charmed have the woods, to make them sprout.
And forced the thunder dint recoyle, that has bin boulting out.
With waltring surges I have shook the seas amid the calm.
I smoothed have the wrestling waves, and land down every walme.
The dry ground gaped has like gulphs, and out new springs have gusht.
The roaring rocks have quaking sturd, and none therest has pusht.
Hell glounimy gales I have brast cape, where grisly ghosts all hushed
Have stood and aunswering at my charm the goblins grim have scoulde.
The threefolde headed hounde of hell with barking throats has houlde.
Thus both the seas, the land, the heavens, and hell bow at my beck.
Noone day to midnight, to and froe turns at my charming check.
At my enchauntment every thing declynes from natures law.
Our charm shall make his stomach stoop, and bring him more in awe.

D. What herbs do grow in Pontus sea? Or else on Pindus hill?
To trownce this machelesse champton, where shall I find the ill?
The magic vearse ^uchaunts the Moon from Starry skies to ground,
And fruictfull harvest is thereby in barren winter found.
The whisking flames of lightning leames often sorcery does stay.
And noonetyde ropsy tur^y ^ost does dim the dusky day.
And leave the welkin to the stars, and yet not cause him stxsoupe.

N. The Gods them selves by charm of love have forced bin to droupe.

DE. Perhap he shall be won by one, and yield to her the spoil.
So love shall be to Hercules the last and latest toil.
By all the host of heavenly powers, and as thou see me fear,
The secrets that I shall attempt, in council see thou bear:

NV. What may it be, that thou would have me keep so secretly?

DE. No broyle of blades, no prive cote, no fiery force perdye:

NV. I you assure I can conceal, if mischief none be meant.
For then the keeping close of it is sure a lewbe intent.

DE. Then look about, if none be here, our council to betray:
Look round about, on all sides cast thy countnaunce every way.

(NV. Behold the place is safe enough from any listening ear.)

DE. Beside the place of our estate there is a secret nooke,
A covert corner for our talk, that sonneshyne never took.
Neither at morn, nor evening tide, when Titans blaze does quench.
And he in ruddy western wave his ^iry wheels does drench.
There secret lies the privy proof of Hercules amorous thought,
I Will tell thee all dear foster dame: This witchcraft Nessus taught,
Whom Ixion engendered of a mysty grouing cloud,
Where Pindus hauiy hill his top among the stars does shrowde,
And other stipe does heave his Crest about the ryding rack
When Achelous over laid, with many a thumping thwack
Of Hercles club, did shift him self to every kind of shape,
And trial made of all his sleights none served to escape,
At length he turnde him self into the likeness of Bull.
And so was fowly vanquished in form of horny scull.
(While Hercules being Conqueror did me his Wife enjoy.)
Returning home to Greece again, it happened Even lake
To ouerflow the drowned marshe and channel to forsake,
And strongly streamde to seas he runns, and swells above his banks.
And Nessu^ used to pass the poole, and search the croking crankes
As Ferryman demaundes his fare, and bare me on his back,
And wading forward brake the Waves, and surges of the lake.
At length yet Nessus waded out unto the farther shore,
Yet Hercules had swam but half the river and no more:
And plyde it hard to cut the stream: but when espied had he,
That Hercules was far behind, Madam (quoth he) to me.
(Be thou my booty, and my wife, and clasping me about)
Away he flings, and Hercules besturres him mauger Wave:
Though Ganges gulf and Ister stream (quoth he) thou traitor slave
Might roon in on, yet shi^ to escape them both, well could I make,
And in thy have a shaft shall soon they running over take:
And ere he spoke the word, his arrow flew out of his bow,
And wrought a wound in Nessus ribbs, he could no farther go.
It sped him sure, to look for death. He cried, well away.
The baggage running from the wound reserved as he lay,
And putting it into his hoof the which undoing, he
In cutting yt with his own hand, did give it unto me.
And thus at latter gasp he said, the witches have me toulde,
That love may charmed be by this, to have and keep his hold.
The conning witch dame Michale did teach Thessalia dames,
Who only forced the Moon to stoop to her from heavenly frames.
Therefore (quoth he) at any time when hateful whores abuse
Thy spoufall bed, or waueryng man do haunt to any stews
Then with this salve annoint his shyrtes, and let it see no son,
But keep it close in corners dark, the blood then shall not shonne
His strength: and thus full suddenly he left his talk with rest:
And deadly sleep with senceles death his feeble lims oppressed.
Thou Dame to whom in hope of trust my secrets all bewray,
On, that the poison soakt into the vesture bright, it may
Preace through his limbs, unto his heart, and sink through every bone,

N. I will dispatch it all in have, make thou thy earnest moan
Unto the God, whose tender hand his steadfast darts does weild,

D. I thee beseech that art of earth and heaven in honor held.
And thou that shakest burning boltes, thou cursed and cruel boy,
Whose eluish weapons make thy mother fear thy sharp annoy.
Now arm thy hand with speedy shaft not of the slender sort,
But biggest boultes, with which as yet thou have assault no fort,
We need no little shaft that may stir Hercules to love
Bring cruel hands and force thy how his depest draught to prove
Now, now draw forth thy shaft wherewith thou caused cruelly
The burning breast of Jove by fy^tes of seruent love to frye.
When as the God his thonder bolt and lightning laid assyde,
Began boalne with bumpes on fo rehead big: and throught the wave he hid,
And swam with Europ on his back in shape of horny Bull.
Now power down love, and therwithall let Hecles heart be full.
If Ioles beauty kyndle heat and Hercles heart does move,
Quench thou these coals, and force him glow with us in lawful love.
Full often the thunder thumping Jove has stouped to thy yoke:
And him that weildes the moary mace of black Auerne to smoke.
Thy flames enforce, and ^ake the Lord of glummy Stigian lake:
But only match thou Hereules, and of him triumph take
O Jove, whose wrath more wrackful is then yreful Iunoes might.
The charm is made in perfect force is al our medcine right,
Wherein the shirt shall steeped be that wearyed many wighte.
Whose hands on Pallas distasse spoone the weary Web with pain.
And it for Hercules avail shall brincke up all the bane.
And with my charm I Will strengthen it. But lo ye in the nick
Defte Lycas comes here at hand who will dispatche it quick:
But tell him not what force it has least he the guilt betray.

DEI. Alas that faith to kings dwells not in howses of estate:
Have Lycas here this shirt, the which my hands have spun of late,
While Hercules at randon roues, and ouershot with wine
Does rudely dandle on his lap the Lidiane Lady fine.
Now doates he after Iole: but this his boiling rage
That burns in his breast I will with curtesy assuage,
For curtesy conquers canckred churles. See thou my spouse desire,
He spare the Shirt, until he set the Franckinfence on fire,
And offer up his sacrifice, and wear his Garlond gray
Of Popler boughs on wreathed ^^ckes. And I will go my way
To The royal Gods, and will beseeke the cruel Cupids dame.
Ye ladies and companions that with me heather came,
Now force the fountaynes of your tears from watered eyes to roon,
To wayle our Country Calydon on every side undone.

Chorus. O DEIANIRE dear daughter of our King
OENEVS late, to see thy frowning fates
Woe after woe thus down on thee to fling,
It irks our hearts, that were thy foster mates.
O woeful wight it pitieth us to see,
Thy wedlock in this tickle state to be.
We Lady, we, that with thee wonted were
With flapping Oar on Acheloe to row,
When having past the spryng time of the year,
With Channel smoth he newely wexeth low,
And makes again his swelling surges calm,
And boobling runs at Ebb withouten walme.
Through weal and woe we still with thee remain,
And now what grief so ever thou fear in mind,
Account thou us as partners of thy pain,
For commonly when Fortune turns the wind.
And makes thee bear thy beaten Sail but low,
Then friendship ebbes, where it before did flow.
And who so guydes the sway of golden mace,
Though people thick do haunte his stately court,
And in at hundred gates do preace a pace,
Yea though that thou mayntaine so great a port,
To ga^de thee with this garrison, yet shall
Thou scarcely find one faithful heart of all.
In painted porche, and gates of gilded bowers
The lurcking hagge Eryn her tuskes does whet:
And sturring s^rife with quarreling face she lowers.
The portly doar ^^ es no s^^ner o^pe are set,
But treason black, pale envy deep deceight,
With privy knyfe of murder step in straight.
And when the Prince appears in open place,
To show him self before his subjects sight,
Swelling despite attends on his grace:
As often as dawning day remoues the night,
And every time the sun at West goes down,
They look another man should claim the Crown.
Few hearts love kings, not few their kingly might:
The glorious show of courtly countenance
Bewitcheth many: where one sets his delight
How next the king he may him self advance.
That through high streets he may as lord of rule
With lofty looks, ride mounted on his Mule.
Ambitious heat enflames his hawty breast.
Another would his greedy hunger staunch
With gubbes of goulde, (and though he it possessed)
Rich Arabie serves not his pyning paunch,
Nor western India (aworlde for to behoulde)
Where Tagus flows with streams of glittring goulde.
The covetous charle, the greedy gnoffe in deed,
In whom from cradell nature so it plants,
No hourded heaps his endless hunger feed.
In plenty pines the wreatch, in wealth he wantes.
Some other fondlings fansy thus does guide,
To fawn on kings, and still in court to bide.
As one disdayning like a Country mome
And crooked clown, the plowe to follow still:
Although the dingthryfte daily keep at home
A thousand drudges, that his land do Till:
Yet wantes his will and wissheth wealth therefore,
Only to waste on other men the more.
Another claweth and flattreth fast the King,
By clymbing up to tread down every wight:
And some at least to blookam Feast to bring.
And thus he strives to arm himself with might
In blood: but of their ship does Fortune fail,
When safe they think to floate with highest sail.
Whom Moon at morn on top of Fortunes wheel
High swayed has seen, at fullness of renown,
The glading sun has seen his Scepter reele,
And him from high fall topsey turuey down.
At morn full merry, blithe, in happy plight,
But whelmde in woes and brought to bale ere night.
These sildome meet hoare hayres and happy days:
The Lord that lies on stately crimsen bed
Sleeps more in fear, then snoring drudge, that lays
Upon the country clod his drowsy head.
In goulden roofes, and hauty courts they keep,
Whose dreadful dreams do make them starte in sleep.
The purple roabes lies waking many a night,
And slombers not, when homely rags do rest.
O if as at a Grate espy we might
The sorrows, shrined in a Princes breast.
What pangues, what storms, what terror, O what hell
In sighing hearts or proud estates does dwell?
The Iryshe Seas do nener roar so ruff,
When wrestling waves, and swelling surges ryfe,
That hoysted are with sturdy northern puff,
As fearful Fansyes do their minds aggryse.
But he sighs not, nor combred is with care,
Whom Fortune has bequeath'de a slender share.
In wooden dishe and black beche Bole he swills,
And heaues it not to mouth with quaking hand.
With homely fare his hungry Mawe he fills,
And leares not back for fear of those that stand
With naked swerdes: but Kings in goulden cup
Wine blent with blood (most dreadful draughts) do sup.
In dainty dishe the poison bayte is laid,
And treason lurkes amid the sugared wine
A^ every bit they quake, and are a frayde,
The sword will fall, that hanges but by a twyne,
And ever as he liftes his head, and drynkes,
The rebels Knyfe is at his throat he thinks.
Such flattring joys these happy worldlinges have.
Their outward pomp pretends lusty lives.
When inward^ly they drowpe, as does the slave
That pines in pangues fast clogde in goulden guies.
Strive not in have, to climb the whirling wheel,
For hasty climers often in haste do reele.
Mean dames defy both peareles and glittring spanges,
And goulden chains with rubies rich beset,
Nor at their ears do massy Iewelles hang
With turkey stones: nor pranked proud they iet
Iu murrey gowns: nor does the wool they wear
Of Crymsen dye the costly color bear
Neither in Tissew, nor silken garments wrought
With needle, nor embroadred Roabes they go:
And yet this state is free from Jealous thought,
Their wedding is not unto them their woe.
When thousand storms in Ladies hearts do dwell
By wedlock breach, that breeds their noysom hell.
Who so he is that shunnes the middle way,
Shall never find fast footing any where.
The wilful lad that needs would have a day.
And wayghty charge of Fathers charyot bear:
While he from wonted ways his Iades does iaunce,
Among strange stars they pricking forward praunce,
Enforcing them with Phoebus flames to frye,
Whose roaming wheels refuse the beaten rutt:
Thus both himself, and all the Cristall sky
In peril of the soulthring fire he put.
So hawty minds that clymbe above their skill,
Do work their own decay, and others ill.
While Daedalus in flying through the air
Did keep the midst between the sky and ground
He could in safe to Italy repair,
And gave no gulf his name by being dround.
But Icarus presumes to mount on hie,
And stryues above the fethered fowls to fly.
And scorns the guyding of his fathers train.
And in his flight will coape to lofty son:
Which molt his wings so down he drops again
Into the seas, whereby his name they woone
Thus proud attemptes of hauty clyming hier
Receive shrewde falls to quit their fond desire.
Let other mount aloft let other sore,
As happy men in great estate to sit.
By flattring name of Lord I set no store:
For under shore my little keele shall flitt:
And from rough wyndes my sails feign would I keep,
Least I be driven into the dangerous deep.
Proud Fortunes rage does never stoop so low
As little roades, but them she ouerflyes
And seeks amid main seas her force to show
On argosies, whose tops do reach the skies
But lo, here comes our Lady Deianire,
Straught of her wits, and full of furious ire,
THE THIRD ACT
Deianira, Chorus, ALas through all my quiueryng joints
a running fear does rest,
My staryng hair stands stiff upright
and in my quaking breast
Deep terror dwelles, and eake my heart,
with dread amazde does pant,
With swelling veins my liver beats,
as when the wynd does want
Asswagd in calmy day, and yet
the raging Seas do rore
Whose wrestling waves were raised aloft
by Southren blastes before.
So yet my wits be tocksicate, although my fear be gone:
Thus God turmoyles us when he means to cloy the unhappy one.
Thus proud attempts bedasht at length,
Chapter Oh wretch, O careful wight,
What mischief may it be wherewith thou art so sore affright.

Dei. The shirt with Nessus ban^ imbrewde no souer hence was s^nt,
And wretched woman that I am toth closet straight I went.
(My mind mistrusts I know not what, and treason dath surmyse)
And Nessus by the heat bewrayed, that faynted was the blood:
The God foreshewed that here the force of all the treason stood:
For by good hap the fomy glede no foggy cloud does dim.
But with full power of burning beams he shyned blasing brim.
Scant yet I can for feeble fear unlock my fastened ^^wes,
The scorching heat does d^ye away, and up by force it draws
The soaked blood that being laid amid the frying flame
And boiling heat of shyning son did shrink before the same:
Wherein the shyrt was steept, and all the royal robe imbrewde:
I cannot show the villainy wherewith it was indewde:
For as the Eastern wynd does force the winter snow to melt,
Or lukewarm South when in the spring from Mimas mount they swelt
As Lucas else that fronters on Ionian sea, a land
Does break the wave the beaten surge lies foaming on the strand
Or by the warmth of heavenly heat the frankincense does drop
So all the venim wastes away, and melts every croppe.
And while I wonder still hereon the wonder shrynkes away
But with a froath it spo^^es the ground, and there the poison lay,
It rotts the cloth: my woman boalne and sweld does follow me,
And shakes her head* my son as one astonished I see:
And hying hither all in have declare what news ye bring.

Hillus, Deianira, Nutrix. GO mother go, seek out aloof
if place of bydyng dwell
Beyond the ground both goulfe and stars
beyond both heaven and hell,
Fly mother far beyond the bounds
of Hercules his toil
Dei. A mischief great I know not what
within my breast does boil:

Hill. Unto the royal temples of dame Iunoes triumph hie
These will allow the sanctuary though other it deny

Dei. What heavy hap is it that may annoy my guiltless ghost

Hyl. Oh mother, O that diamond of the world that pillar post
Whom fate as Jove's lieuetenaunt hear have placed for the nones
Is dead: and Nessus burning bane deuouers Hercles boanes
The daunter of the brutish beasts he conquering knight before
Is conquered now: he mournes, he walls, what ask ye any more

Dei. We wretches love the order of our wretchedness to hear,
Tell me the state now of our stock what countnance does it bear:
O stock, O sylly wretched stock now shall I be esteemd,
A widow now, a cost of now, and now a beggar deemd.

Hill. Thou do not languish all alone for Hercules yes dead:
For whom the eyes of all the world have cause their tears to shed.
Count not thy fate allotted thee alone: now all our kind
Do howl and mourn for him whom thou beway lest in thy mind,
Thou suffrest grief, the smart whereof belonges to every land
Although the sower ^ast thereof first happen to thy hand
Thou careful caytiffe do not wayle for Hercules alone.

D. Speak, speak, how nigh to Deathward was my dear Alcides go^?

Hi. Death whom in his own empire he had conquered before,
Did shrink from him and fate durst not allow a deed so sore,
And Clotho she perhap put out her rock with trembling arm
As one that hastening Hercles death, did fear to do such harm,
O day, O dismal day, and shall even Hercules the great
Pass thus to death, and silent shades and to a worser seat

(De. Is he think you already dead or may I dye before)
Speak on, if yet he be not dead

Hi. Euboea that does rise,
With hauty crest ringes every where, and Caphar rock likewise
Deuydeth Hellespontus sea and turns that side to south,
Whereas it bides the boysteous blastes of Boreas wyndy mouth:
Euripus bendes his wandering stream and winds in creakes about
His crooked course seuentymes and does as often break it out:
While Phoebus drencht his wecye teame amid the Western wave
(Here on a rock above the reach of clouds a temple brave)
Of Caenaei Jove show bright while all the beasts for sacrifice
At th'alter stood, and through the wood the noise began to rise,
Of all the herd: then of he put he matterd Lions case,
And likewise did discharge him of his houge and heavy mace
And easde his shoulder from the burden of his quiver light.
Then tuckt in your attire he shone among the people bright
With ougly locks, and on the alter made the fire flame
Receive (quoth he) these fruits (O sire) though fire send the same
And not the harvest Sith: but let with frankincense good store
The fire burn that far the rich Arabyan therefore
Does gather out of Saba trees for Phoebus sacrifyce
The earth (quoth he) is now at peace, so be both sea and skies
All beasts be conquered, and I am victor come again.
Lay down thy lightning leames (O Jove) in fear thou need not reign
In midst of his prayers thus whereat I was aghast,
He fell to sighs and grievous groans, and all the skies at last
With dreadful crying loud he filles Even as the braynsick bull.
When with the axe in wound he scapes does fill the temples full
Of roaring noise.
Or as the thunder thrown from heaven does rumble in the skies,
Even so the seas and stars of heaven does Hercles shake with cries
Both Calpe clyue, and Cyclas isle well hard his yellyng have,
Here Caphat rocks there all the woods thereof an Echo gave.
We saw him weep, the people thought his former franucke fyttes
Had now again as erst they did bereave him of his wi^tes
His servant scatter then for fecare, while he with flaming eyes,
Al staryng stands with tleaming looks among them all he pryes
For Lyca: him alone he does pursew, who in his arm
With trembling hand the alter held and escaped all the harm,
By dying first for faynting fear, and while Alcyde* held
The quaking Carkas in his hand thou shall (quoth he) be queld
And beaten with this fist of mine, O Gods eternal raygne*
Wretch Licas kills Hercules, and has his conqueroure slain,
But ^o another slaughter yet: for Hercules again
Killes Lycas: thus the sacrifyce of Gods with blood they stayne,
With Lycas thus his labors and thrown up to heaven they say,
That with his dropping blood the clouds he stained all the way.
Even as the pitched dart of Get with pith does score the skies,
Or as the whirling sting of Creete does make the p^ller rise:
So swift he mounted up to heaven, but down his body dropte,
And as his Carkas fell, among the rocks his neck it chopped.
The grave prepared for their corpse (quoth Hercules) bestill,
I am no brainsteke frantic man, but lo this defpret ill
More noylome is theu rage or wrath, it caleth much my will
To wrecke my rage upon my self, his mallady he scant
Bewryes: but fares frantt^kly: and he himself does rent
His limbs, and ryflyng them, with mighty hand a sunder tears,
And strives to strip him self of all th'apparell that he wears,
And only this was it, of all the things that I do know,
That past the power of Hercules yet stands he pulling so
And plucketh of his limbs withal the vesture does not linne
To bring of lumpes of filthy flesh the shyrt sticks to the skyne
But what should ayl^ the poy^on rank none knows what, nor why
And yet there is good cause it er of: now grouelyng does he lie
And beats his face against the ground to water now he hyes,
But water cannot cool his heat, and now to shore he plyes.
And for his sucoure seckes to seas, at lengri, his men him calth
We holding him (alas the whilst were able him to match
Now in a keele amid the seas we launched were aloof,
And Hercles payse was hosted with a little southern puff
My Ghost then left my careful coarse and darkness dimd my sight
Why stay I wreche? why does this dreary deed make me afright.
Her coapefellow dame Juno does reclayme, and Jove his son,
The world must render him* then do as much as may be done,
And boar my body with a sword such sower sauce is dew
To her, whose cursed caytiffe hand her love so lightly slew.
O Jove with fire and lightning flash destroy thy wretched Niece.
Let not thy mighty hand be armed with a slender piece.
Let brast the boult from skies wherewith thou would Hydra burn.
If Hercles had not bin thy son thereof to serve the turn
Strike me with v^couth pestilence, and with such weapon smite,
As may be far more yrkesome plague then all my stepdames spite.
Drive forth those deadly darts that erst young Phaethon overthrew
When be full crancke in fiery carte, about the heavens flew:
For thus by slaying Hercules, eake Nations slain I have
What need thou Deianire of Gods a tool of death to crave.
Now trouble not thy stepster Jove, think scorn may Hercles wife
To wish for death, for to her heart her hand shall set the knyfe
Dispatch then quickly with the blade, yet let thy blade alone,
For who with weapon ends their life it is long ere they be gone
I will be headlong hurled from a rock as hie as skies.
The Oeta hill this shall be it, where first the son does rise,
Thence will I throw my body down, the edge of brasten rock
Shall cleave my corpse, and every crag shall give a broosing knock.
My hand shall hang torn by the way the rugged mountain side
Shall with the gushing bubbles of my dropping blood be did
On death were vengeance small, though small yet may it be delayde.
What despret death I should attempt it makes my heart dismayde:
Alas, alas that Hercles swerd within my chamber stuck
Then well were I if for to dye on that it were my luck.
It is enough if one right hand do bring us both to grave.
Come near, come near ye Nations, now let all people have
In readiness, both stone and fire the same to throw at me,
Now hold your hands, and take ye to your tools for I am she
That of your succor spoiled you now cruel Kaysars may
All uncontrolled tyrantlike, in kingdoms weilde the sway,
Now every mischief may start up, and not rebuked be.
The alters now shall up again that wonted wers to see
A bloody offering like him self in kind that offer should.
Thus have I made the guilty gap to let in bloodshed boulde
I render you to tyrants kings, bugges, beasts, and grysely devils.
By taking him away that should revenge you of these euilles.
O spouse thou of the thunderer and can you yet forbear
Will thou not fling thy flames from heaven as did thy brother dear?
Dispatch me hence sent up to Jove, will thou not me destroy
The greatest praise that thou might win then shall thou not enjoy
Nor lusty tryumphe: I am she that bear the name to be
The daughter of the man that would in prowes caape with thee.

N. Why will thou stayne thy stock which has vntaynted been before,
This il procedes of ygnorance although it be full sore:
He is not gylty that committes the gylte not with his will.

D. Well may he err of ignorance that favors his ill
And spares himself: my self of death most worthy I do deem.

N. He does condemn himself to dye that needs will guylty seem.

D. Death can deceive no one but such as innocents may be.

N. Will thou forsake the glorious son?

D. The son forsakes me.

N. Wretch will thou cast away thy life.

D. Yea though it be to death,
I follow will my Hercules

N. He has both life and breath

D. When he perceived him ouermatcht he hastened his decay.

N. Will thou forgo thy son, and eake prevent thy dying day?

D. Her self has lived long enough who buried has her child.

N. And will thou follow on to death thy spouse

D. yea Ladies mild
Before their husbands use to dye.

N. Thy self thou do accuse
Of guylt if thou condemn thy self.

D. No gylty one does use
To take reuengemente of themselves.

N. But those are pardoned (...)
That do oftend of ygnoraunce and not of peuish will
Who will condemn the deed he does?

D. Each man does seek to shun
His lot when spite of frowning fate against him seems to run.

N. And he for whom thou languishest, with arrow slow his wife
Hight Megara, and did destroy his tender childrens life.
When as a braynsicke beast in hand he tossed his knarrye mace,
That squeasde the snake in Lerna lake before his fathers face.
He played thryse the murderer, himself yet he forgave
And for the heinous gylt he did when frenzy made him rave
He purgde himself in Cynips spring toward the Southern poale
And in the water bathed his hand again to make him hoale.
Now whether will thou caytiffe wretch, why do thou dam thy hands

D. In condemnation of these the ghost of Hercles stands.
I mean to plague the treachery.

N. Your Hercules well I know,
Perhap he will be hear again and master al his woe:
Then shall your slaked grief unto yobr Hercules give place.

DE. They say the serpents poison does deuowen him apace
The poison of his wicked Wyle his lusty lims destroys.

NV. And think ye it to be the serpents bane that him annoyes,
That he cannot escape who bare the brunt of it alive,
And how to pare of Hydraes heads he could full well contryue
When as the victour stood with grinning teath amid the mood,
And all his body slauerde foul with venomous spit and blood,
And shall the Centaur Nessus goare against the man prevail
That made thy pithy strength it self of Nessus for to quayle.

DE. In vain ye rescue her that is of purpose set to dye
Therefore I have determinde with my self this life to fly
And long enough he lived has that may with Hercles dye.

NV. I do beseech thee humbly for this gray and hoary head,
And for these pappes that as thy Mother have thee nourished,
Remove the fervent sits that cage within thy boiling breast,
And suffer not these despret thoughts of death in thee to rest.

DE. Who would persuade a wretch to live. He has a cruel heart?
And though that death be unto me a great and grievous smart:
Yet unto other some it is an e^s^ing of their pain.

NV. O wreatch excuse thy handy work, and say at last again,
It Is ignorance that did the deed, and not the wilful Wife.

DE. It wilt be quit whereas the infernal ^^endes shall stint the strife
And quit my guilty ghost: my conscience does my hands condem.
But Pluta Prince of glummy goulph shall purge from slaughter them:
Before thy banks I will appear forgetful Lethes Lake,
And being then a doleful ghost my husband will I take.
But thou that wields the scepter black of dark internal skies
Apply thy toil: the heinous guilt that nons durst enterprise,
This ignorance has ouercom, Dame Juno never dare
To take away our Hercules. Thy plunging plagues prepare,
Let Sisiphs stone on my neck force my stouping shoulders shrynke,
And let the fleeting licour from my gaping gums to synke.
Yea let it mock my thyrsty throat when as I mean to drink,
And thou that rackes Ixion King of Thessayle O thou Wheel,
My heinous hands deserved have thy swinging sway to feel,
And let the greedy gripe scratch out these guts on either side,
If Danaus pitchers cease: by me the rome shall be supplide.
Set open hell, take me Medea as (...) of thy giult.
This hand of mine, then both of thine more cruel blood has spilt
More then thou did as in respect of mother to thy thylde.
Or loking to thy brothers ghost whose gore has thee defylde,
Have with the Lady thou of Thrace for such a cruel wife,
And the Althe that burnt the brand of Meleagers life.
Receive thy daughter now, deny me not thy babe to be:
Why such a one should quayle by you, some reason let us see:
Ye honest matrons that enjoy the groves of holy wood
Against me shut the heavens, or such whose hands with husbands blood
Have been imbrewde, if any of the fifty sisters dyre
Defying honest duty all that wedlock did require:
But desprat dames with goary blades stood armde: in me let them
See and allow their bloody hands that other will condem.
I will go get my self among the troop of cruel wives
But they will shun such gylty hands as shred their husbands lives.
O valiant spouse, a guil^^sse ghost, but gylty hands I have
Ah silly woman, woe is me, that given light credit have
O traitor Nessus while I meant by Centaures subtle charm
To draw from Iole Hercles love my self sustain the harm.
Hence Phoebus hence, and thou O slickring life of her that lackes
Her Hercules and give day to wretches in their wrackes.
This is a dismal day: to thee Small penance yield I will
And life with all: my woeful fate shall I continue still
Deferryng death, O spouse that of thy hand I may be slain,
And does their any spark of life yet in thy breast remain?
Or can thy hand yet draw the bow Sarmacian shaft to cast,
Do weapons cease, and have thy feeble hands given up at last
Thy bow? but if thy hardy wife to thee a tool may reach
I long to perysh of thy hand, mine hour yet will I stretche
Like gyltlesse Licas mangle me disperse in other towns
My corpse, and hurl me (...) world beyond the trauayles bownes.
Trounce me like monster Arcadie or ought that did rebel,
And yet thou shall do naught but that becommes an husband well.

Hi. I pray you mother spare your self, forgive your fatal lot,
If ye offend of ygnoraunce, then blame deserve ye not

De. If thou regard true honesty, thy wretched mother slay.
Why trembles thus thy fearful hand, why lokest thou away?
Such sin shall be a sacrifyce why dastard do thou fear?
I spoylde thy father Hercules, this hand, this hand aleare
Has murdered him whereby I have done thee a more despyte,
Then joy I did, in that my womb did bring thee first to light.
If yet thou know not how to kill, then practice first on me.
If as thou like within my throat thy blade shall sheathed be^
Or if to paunch thy mother soon thou mean to take in hand
To yield her dreadlesse ghost to thee thy mother still shall stand,
It shall not wholly be thy deed, by thee it shall be done,
And caused by my will to be. Art thou Alcides soon
And all affrayd? so shall thou never great exployts atchieue
Nor pass the world such feats of arms and sleightes for to contriue.
If any monster should be bred thy fathers courage show,
And to it with vnfeareful arm, lo ouerchargde with woe
My breast lies bare unto thy hand. Stryke, I thy gylt forgive
The f^endes infernal for their sin thy soul shall never grieve.
What yerking noise is this we hear* what hagge here have we fownd^
That bears about her writhen locks these ugly adders wound,
And one her yrksome temples twain her blackysh ^innes do wagge.
Why chase ye me with burning brandes Megera filthy hagge*
Alcides can but vengeance ask, and that I will him get
But have the judges dyre of hell for yt in counsel set
But of the dreadful dongeon doors I see thunfoulding leaves
What ancient sier is he that on his tatred shoulder heaues
Th'un weiloy stone that borne toth top again does downward reele
Or what is ^e that spraules his lims upon the whirling wheel
Lo hear stood ougly Tisiphon with stern and ghastly face,
And did demand with steaming eyes the manner of the case.
O spare thy strypes Megera spare, and with thy brandes away,
The Offense I did was meant in love, but whether do I sway
The ground does sink, the roof does crack, whether went this raging route,
Now all the world with gasing eyes stand staring me about
On every side the people grudge and call for their defense.
Be good to me O nations whither, shall I get me hence?
Death only is my load of rest there may my sorrows bide
I do protest the fiery wheels that Phoebus charyot guide.
That hear I dye and leave the world, there is Hercles yet behind.

Hi. Away she runs aghast: aye me, she has fullylde her mind,
For purposed she was to dye and now remaynes my will
For to prevent her that by force her self she shall not kill
O mise rabble pretty, if I my mother ^aue.
I sim a gaynst my father then, but if unto the grave
I let her go, then toward her a trespass soul there lies.
And t^hus (alas) on either side great mischief does aries,
And needs her purpose must be stayde I Will hie and take in hand
To stop her despret enterprise and mischiefy to withstand.

Chorus. FVll true the dytty is
That holy ORPHEUS sang,
On Thracian harp with sound whereof
the Rocks of Rodop rang,
That nothing is creat
For ever to endure.
Dame Natures birds each on must stoop
when death throws out the lure.
The head with Crispen locks,
or goulden hayres full:
In time has borne an hoary bush,
or bin a naked scull.
And that which tract of time
does bring out of the grain,
Old SATVRNE sharps his Sith at length
to reap it down again.
Though PHOEBVS rise at morn,
with glistring rays full proud,
He runs his race, and ducketh down
at length in foggy Cloud.
Toth Gaetans ORPHEUS sang
such kind of melody.
And how the gods themselves were bound
to laws of destiny.
The God that does the year.
By egall parts dispose,
How fatal web in every clyme
are daily spunne he shows.
For all things made of moulde
The ground again will gape,
As Hercles preaches plain by proof
that nothing can escape.
For shortly shall ensue
Discarge of Natures Law
And out of hand the gloming day
of doom shall onwarde draw
Then all that lies within
The scorching Libicke clyme,
The poale antarticke of the South.
shall ouerwhelme in time.
Poale articke of the North
Shall iumble, all that lies
Within the Axeltree, whereon,
dry BORES blasinge flies
The shiuerynge Sun in Heaven
Shall leese his fadyng light
The Palace of the frames of Heavens
shall run to ruin quight.
And all these blockish Gods
Some kind of Death shall quell,
And in confused CHAOS blind
they shall for ever dwell,
And after ruin made
Of Goblin, Hegge, and Elfe,
Death shall bring final destenye,
at last upon it self.
Where shall be then bestowde
The world so huge a mass,
The beaten hye way unto hell
is like away to pass,
To lead unto the Heavens
That shall be laid flatt:
The space between the Heaven and earth,
enough think ye is that?
Or is it not to much
For worldly miseryes:
VVher may such heaps of sins be lodgd
what place above the skies?
Remaynes, but that the sea
With Heaven and lowest Hell,
Three Kingdoms cast in one are like
within one roof to dwell.
But hark what roaring cry,
Thus beats my fearful ear
But lo its Hercules that yelles
it is Hercules I hear.
THE FOVRTH ACT*
Hercules, Chorus. Retire, retire thy breathing breasts,
O Titan blasing bright,
Unfold thy mysty mantle black
of dim and darkesome Night:
And dash this dreary day wherein
I Hercules must die.
With blemishblack of filthy fogge defyle the griesly sky:
Pre^^ en^ my stepdames naughty mind. Now should I have resignde,
(O Father) my inheritance of Plutoes dungeon blind
Heaven frames should here and there be brast, and either poale should crack
Why sparest thou the stars and le^st thy Hercles go to wrack?
Now Jove look round about the heavens, and if thou can espy
On giant heave the Thessaill cliues against thassalted sky
Vnburdned be Enceladus of hugye Osir hill,
And hurled be on Hercules the mighty mountain still
Proud Pluto shall vnbarre the gates of black and glummy cave
Yet maugre all their might (o Father Jove) I will thee save
From fury of thy ^oes, and set thee up again in skies,
Yet lo Jove, lo, her that on earth thy thunderdint supplies,
And for to be liuetenaunt of thy boultes on earth was borne,
Is sent to burning Limbo lake in torments to be torn
The stern Enceladus again in ramping rage shall rise
And hurl the weighte (that now does cro^de him down) against the skies,
Thus by my death they shall presume to conquer heaven all
But ere that day upon my corse compel the heavens to fall
Break down, break down, the welkin that thou suffrest to decay,
Chapter O son of thunder thumping Jove no shadows do thee fray,
Now Ossa mount of Thessalie shall Pelion hill down crush
And Athos pilde on Pindus top his bushy head shall push
Among the starry skes thereby above the craggy rocks.
Typhoeus up shall clyme, and thumpe with store of ba^tryng knockes
Iuarmen stone in Tyrren sea from thence eake shall he beat
The smoaky forge of Aetna mount, that glowes with stewing heat
Enceladus not overthrown yet with the thunder crack
Shall hew the mountain side in twain, and trusse it on his back
The signs of heaven shall follow thee* and go with thee to wrack

Her. I that returnde from dens of death, and Stigian stream defied
And ferryed over Lethes lake, and dragd up, chaind, and tide
The tryple headded mastiffe hownd, when Tytans teeme did start
So at the ougly sight that he fell almost from his cart.
Even I whose pith the kingdoms three of Gods full well have known
Lo yet mine end I daunted am by death and overthrown
But yet no bloody blade against my riued rybbes does crash
It is no rock that unto death my bruised bones does pash
Nor as it were with O sir hill that cloven were in twain,
Nor with the sway o^ all the mountain falling am I slain.
The glaring eyed giant grym does not now squeaze my coarse
With paise of Pindus roch and thus not feling enmyes force
I conquered am and yet alas this coarsie frets me more
O feeble force of man: he whom no might could match before
Withouten any conquest made does end his latter day,
Without exployt or feat of arms my self I pass away.
O mighty vmpier of the world and all ye Ghostes above
That witness how in quarrel good my right hand ever strove
O all ye lands, O earth alas, may it your mercy please
To spoil the spiteful sting of death that dauntes your Hercules
Fie fie, what shame is it to us what filthy fate we have?
A woman proud shall boast her bane brought Hercles to his grave
Then what are they whose mortal mayme Alcides weapon gave
If thus with sway invincible my fatal wheel do run
And need must on this shameful rock my fatal twist be spunne:
As by a woman's cursed hand my blood should thus be shed
Yet Iunoes malice migh have powrd this vengeance on my head,
So might a woman's deadly band have brought me to my beer:
But pet a woman wellding sway amid the welkin clear
But this seemde ouerprowde attempt for Gods to take in hand
The paples dame in Scithia borne where pight on hie ^o^h s;tand
The Apeltree whereon the underpropped poales do sway*
It might as well have been her hap to take my breath away,
What woman's might may master me Queen Iunoes hateful foe
Fie stepdame fie the fowler shame by this to thee does grow?
Why do thou triumph in this day? why did dame Tellus breed
Such parlous bugges thy humor rank of color hoate to feed?
A mortal woman's peauishe spite does pass thy rancour rough,
Thou say thou cannot have revenge on Hercules enough
Then are we twain y^ pass thy power the Gods may blushe for sham?
To see their malice ouermacht by such a mortal dame.
Would God the ramping Lions pawe that noyed Neme wood,
Had fillde his greedy mounching Jaws with plenty of my blood:
Or while the twining snakes had hembde me in by hundreds thick,
Why might not Hydra swallow up my wrinched body quick?
Why was it not the centaures hap my silly flesh to gnawe?
Or that I bound on Tantalls rock should gape with greedy Iawe?
In vain to catch the fleeting food when deep from Tartar soil,
Where at the Gods aggrized were, I did purloyne the spoil.
And from the darck infernal Styx I got again to light,
Or Ditis dungeon all the stops and stays I conquerde quight.
Death shranke from me in every place that I a noble knight
At length might end my days in shame, and in dishonor spoylde
Oh Jove the creatures terrible thou know that I have foylde
The threefolde shapen mastiffe curre whom up I draggde in chain,
He starring from the sunnewarde could not hale me back again.
The sheepherdes churlishe rabble that aloof in Iber he
Under the Spanishe fervent clyme could never master me.
Nor serpents twain that unto me in tender cradell creapt.
Aye woe is me that valiant death so often I ouerleapt:
What honor shall I dye withal?

CHAPTER Behold how death and hell
Cannot appaule the verteous mind that of deserving well.
By guiltless conscience warrant has the death that does him spoil,
Irkes not as thus of such an one to take this filthy foil.
If with this torment life were lost, his mind should much be ^asde,
As with vnwe^ldy Gyauntes sway he had his body squeasde.
Or Titans burden with his monsters all he would abide.
Or wish of raging Giants rent in pieces to have did,
And if thy d^lefull death because that monster none is left.
Who may be worthy thought by whom Alcides life be reft?
But thine own hand to do the deed.

HE. Aye me and wellaway,
What Scorpion scrapes within my Mawe? what cralling Crab I say
With crooking cleaze to comber me, from scorching zone returns,
And boat within my boiling bones the seathing Marowe burns.
My River whilom rank of blood my rotting Lunges it tawes,
And teareth them in shattred gubs, and filthy withered flawes.
And now my Gall is dried up my burning Liver glowes.
The stewing heat has stulde away the blood, and Jove he knows
My upper skin is scorcht away and thus the Cankar strong
Does eat an hole that get it may my wretched Limbs among,
And from my frying Ribs (alas) my Liver quite is rent.
It gnawes my flesh, deuowers all, my Carkas quite is spent,
It soakes into the empty bones, and out the juice it suckes
The bones by lumps drop of while it the joints a sunder pluckes
My corpulent Carkes is consumde of Hercules every Iim
Yet stauncheth not the festring ^ot that feeds fast ^n him
O what a tingling ache it is that makes me thus to smart,
O bitter plague, O pestilence that gripeth to the heart.
Lo Cittes, lo what now remaynes of Hercules the great.
Are these the arms that did with stripes the roaring Lion beat?
And in Nemea wood did tear him from his hary case
Might this hand bend y^ bow from clouds the Stimphall foul to chase?
Are these the shankes that coapt the heart who shifting pace full often?
Did bear his braunched head ypranckt with garlond gay aloft?
Was Cal^e craggy cliue of these my feeble clowches broake?
To raise a dam in ^eas that did their foamy channel choke.
Had these arms pith the breath of Kings, of Beasts, and bugs to stop?
Or might these shoulders tough the payse of heaven underprop?
Are these the lusty Lims and Neck that shrank not at the payse?
Are these hands that I against the weltring heavens did raise?
Alas whose hands shall now perforce from hence hell Iaylo^^ lead?
Alas the noble courage erst that now in me is dead.
Why call I Jove my Father great of whom my stock should rise?
Why by the Thunderer make I my challenge to the skies?
Now, now Ampitrio is my ster all men may it avouch.
Come out thou murreyn foul that do within my bowels couch.
Why do thou thus with privy wound my careful Carkas foil?
What gulf under the frozen Clyme in saluage Scithian soil
Engendered the^? what water Hag did spawne thee on the shore?
Or stony C^lpe Rock in Spain that borders on the Moare:
O yrksome ill, and art thou not the Serpent that does sting
With crest on ougly head, or else some other lothly thing,
Or spronge of Hydraes blood, or left here by the hellick hound.
Art thou no plague? and yet a plague in whom all plagues abound?
What ghastly countnaunce cariest thou (alas) yet let me know?
What kind of mischief may thou be that do torment me so?
What saluage sore, or murreyn strange, or uncouth plague thou be?
With open combat face to face thou should encounter me.
And not thus ranckle in my flesh, nor soake into the sap.
By sowltring heat within my bones thy boiling bane to wrap,
And in the mid thereof to fry the Maroe that does melt.
My iagged skin is ripped, and out my smoaky Bowels swelt.
From bursten Paunch my self do flea the skin with grasping pawse,
And from the naked boanes do tear the mangled flesh by flawes,
I searched for thee through my Mawe, yet further do thou creep,
And festring farther in my flesh have gnawne an hole more deep.
O mischief match to Hercules, what grief could make me greet?
Whence flow these streams of trilli^g tears y^ down my cheeks do fleet
The time has bin no plunging pangues could cause our courage quail,
That never use with cristall tears our anguish to bewail.
Ah, fie, I am ashamde that I should learn these tears to shed:
That Hercules in weeping wise his grief has languished:
Who ever saw at any day in any time or place?
All bitter brunes I bare with dry, and eake vnreky face
The manhood that so many ills has maistred heretofore,
Has yielded only unto thee, to thee thou Cankar sore.
Thou first of all have straynde the tears out of my weeping eyes
Thy gargle face thy visage man that does me sore aggrise.
More towgh then mossy Rocks, more hard then Gads of sturdy sleele,
Or roaming stream of Simplegade, whereby this smart I feel
Has crushed my cracking Jaws, and wrong the streaming tears from me.
O wielder of the Welkin swifte, lo, lo the Earth does see
How Hercules does weep and wayle, and to my greater pain
My Stepdame Juno sees the same, behold, behold again
My Lunges do fry, the scorching heat preuayleth more, and more.
Whence fell this thunder Boult on me that burns in me so sore?

C. Who stoupeth not when grief does gal? more tough the^ Aem of Thrace
Whas whilom hawty Hercules, and did no more gieue place
Then does the marble axelltree, his Lims he now does yield
To paynefull pangues: and on his Neck his aching head does wielde,
And tossing still from side to side, he bendes with hugy sway,
And often his noble heart does force his trilling tears to stay.

Hercules. Alcmena. O Father with thy heavenly Eyes,
Behold my wretched plight,
For never HERCULES till now
bid crave thy hand of might,
Not when as Hydraes fruictfull heads
about my Lyms were wound,
Nor when I lock in Lakes allow
fought with th'inferdall hownde,
These hideous fiends I foylde, with kings, and tyraunts proud likewise.
Yet in these broils I never looked for succor to the skies.
This hand did still avouch the vow, no thunder for my sake
Did glitter in the holy heavens, this day has hid me make
Some suite to thee, and of my boones yet heeres the first and last,
One only Thunder boult I crave at me O Jove to cast.
Count me a Giaunt of my self, I can no less devise,
While Jove I thought of promise true, I spaarde the starry skies.
Be thou either a cruel sier, or pity if thou have,
Yet lend thy son thy help, and get the glory of my grave:
Preventing this my dreary death, of this if thou do skorne,
Or that thy hand abhor the guilt, from Sicill cliue suborne
The soultring Giaunts that in hand high Pindus mount can weilde,
Or Ossa that it hurlde on me I may therewith bequielde,
Brast up hell Gates, and let Bellone scourge me with Iron rod,
And let in arms encounter me the mighty Martial God,
My brother I acknowledge him but by my s^epdames side,
And Pallas thou my sister take, let at thy brother slide
A thirling Darte. O stepdame mine with humble suite I crave
A wound of thee that woman's hand may bring me to my grave.
Why do thou feed thy fury now as one whose wrath were end
And satisfied? what seek ye more? I stoop, I yield, I bend.
Thou see Alcides humbly laid, where as unto this day
That ever I entreated thee, no Land, no Beast can say,
Now do I need thy deadly wrath to rid me of my pain,
And now thy rankour is appeasde, thy hate is quenched again,
And thus thou sparest me my life, when as I wish to dye:
O Earth will none make me the fire wherein my bones may fry?
Nor reach a blade to Hercules, convey ye all from me?
So let no country Monsters breed when I shall buried be,
And let none wayle the loss of me if (...) more arise,
God send another Hercules to succor Earth and skies.
But as for me on every side ding out my broosed brain,
And crash with sturdy stroke of stones my cursed Scull in twain
And rid my torments: will thou not? O world to me unkind,
And are so soon our benefits forgotten in thy mind.
Even to this bower with bugs and beasts thou had (...) over laid
Had not I bin: good people cause his torments to bestayde
That succored you: time gives you leave to recompense my pain,
If ye with death will guerden me, I ask none other gain.
AL. Where shall I wretched mother of Alcides wish to be?
Where is my child? where is my son? If sight deceive not me
With gasping mouth, and panting heart lo where he sprawling lies.
Where as (alas) in raging heart of boiling fits he fryes,
He groves, all is dispacht, dear child let me Alcides mine
Embrace thy pining lims: with kiss enfoulde my arms in thine
Where are the lims? where is the neck that bare the skies alone?
What thus has mangled thee that all thy corpse is waste and gone?

HE. I am your Hercles mother dear, whom thus ye see here lost.
Acknowledge me all though God knows I seem but as a ghost.
Why do you turn your face away and mourning visage mylde.
Are ye ashamde that Hercules should counted be your child?

AL. What world has bred this uncouth bug? what land engendered it?
Or else what monstrous mischief may on thee triumphing sit?
Who is it that conquers Hercules?

HE. By treason of his Wife
Thou see how wretched Hercules do leese his lothed Life.

AL. To overthrow my Hercules, what treason has the might?

HE. That which a wrathful Dame does seek to case her of her spite.

AL. How has this pestilence gotten to thy Lims and bleeding bones?

HE. I^to a Shyrt the woman had conuayde it for the nonce.

AL. Where is the Shyrt for nothing but thy naked coips I see?

HE. The vesture by the poison rank de^owred is with me.

AL. And can such poison be contrived?

HE. I think within my guts,
That hideous Hydra hissing Snake his slowghy body puts,
A thousand plagues of Lerna Poole within my Bowelles rampes:
What raging dear is this that drives up all Sicilia dampes?
What E^me of Hell forbids the day to pass the boiling ^one?
O Ma^es amid the greedy gulphes and pooles let me be thrown.
What Ister can my Carkas cool? no not the Ocean main
Of these my stewing vapors may the raging quench again?
(Al moisture of my limbs in these my fits are fryde away)
The juice will sone be soaked up, what president of hell
Let me return from under ground again with Jove to dwell
He ought to have retaynd me still, receive me once again
Into thy dungeon dark that hell may in this pickle plain
Behold the man that conquered yt, no booty bring I will
Away with me: why do thou quake for fear of Hercles still.
Set on me death coragiously for now I may be kilde

A. Now stint thy tender tears that down thy checkes so long have trild,
And master this thy mallady compel thy sorrows sloupe.
And show that in these plunging panges Alcides did not droupe,
And as it has been can thy guyse force death and hell to shri^ke.

Her. If ougly grested Cau^asue. In chain of yrone link
Should bynd me as ag^oning pray the greedy grype to feed
Yet from mine eyes it should not strain a broken tear indeed
If wandering Symplegads would me wish either rock assail,
To bide the brunt of double wrack my courage would not quayle.
Let Pindus tumbled be on me, houge Aemus let me have
Or Athos rock in Thracian seas that breaks the weltring wave,
And bode the boultes of thondring Jove although thunweildy mass*
Of all the world should fall on me and might be brought to pass
That Phoebus flaming apeltree should burn upon my grave
No uncouth cry should force the mind of Hercles thus to rave.
Let meet a thousand savage beasts and rent me al atonce
Let Stymphal ^oules with houling hoarse lay strokes upon my bones
Or scrowling bull on the other side strike on with head and horn
Or else of other serpents wild let al my parts be ^orne
With roaring earthquakes, hougy lumpes be puffed upon me
With griping grief let all my limbs to nothing pyned be
Although I be to powder crushed I will with patience peace
In spite of beasts or brusing blows my sighs and tears shall seace

Alc. It is not son the woman's bane that in thy bones does boil
But festring tears and broosing knockes of thy continual toil
The wrinches old with aching panges begin to smart anew.

HE. O where is death where is he now? of all that I do rue:
Can any witness what it is? let death now bend his bow
A naked hand is strong enough to make me stowpe full low
Let any wight in all the world attempt to set on me
I warrant him, approach let him, Ah wretched might I be
This wayward agony has take his perfect wits away.
Have hence his tools, and eake his shaftes for danger hence co^uay.
His ruddy gills that glow like fire some mischief do pretend.
To shrowde my self (alas) into what corner shall I wend?
This mallady a frensy is, this only is the mean
To conquer Hercules, why then do I as doting quean^
Thus fall to tears and seek to shrynke, may be that he will have,
Alcmenas hand to give the stroke, to bring him to the grave.
But dye he in a Murreynes name, ere I for cowarde will
Such deadly penance be enioynde, that on my doings still,
His baynous hand may vaunt it self, lo how the pangues full deep,
With stuggling ceast, do hind the purple veins with deadly sleep,
And beating sore lift up and down his faint and panting breast:
If I O Gods of this my noble Child be dispossessed:
Be gracious yet, and for the world some lusty champion save.
Rid his annoy and let his limbs again their courage have.

Hyllus. Alcmena. Hercules. O Dismal day, O anguishe, O
the heaper up of ill.
Jove's Son is flayne, his Daughter dies,
his Nephew lives still.
First by the Stepdames treason, is
the Son to ruin brought.
The Daughter likewise trapt in traynes,
and thereby come to naught.
What hoary head in change of tunes, or teanour of his age
Has seen, that Fortunes frowning Face has sturd such stormy rage.
One doleful day bereaueth me (alas) of parents twain.
But least I speak to spite the Gods, I will somewhat refrain.
I lost a Father, Hercules this only I complain.
AL. O noble Impe of Hercules, (alas) my Nephew dear,
That do of wretched Alcmens Son the lively feature bear.
Refrain my child thy wayling words, this quiet sleep perhap
Will overcome these plonging fits. But lo? lo in my lap.
He does begin to strive again, his fits begin a fresh.
Sleep gieuing up the feeble ghost to ranckle in the flesh.

HE. What means Thrachin craggy crest to show before mine eyes?
Or now forsaking man am I aduaunst above the skies.
Why do the heavens provide for me? the father Jove I see,
And eake my stepdame Juno dire appeased now with me.
What heavenly harmony is this that sounds in mine ear.
Dame Juno calls me son in law, I se the palace clear
(Of crystal skies and beaten rakes of Phoebus flaming wheel)
I see the dumpish moary den of glowming lady night
Here he commands darkness dim to show it self in sight.
What means this, who is it that the heavens against me sparres?
And am I thus O father mine brought down again from stars.
Even now Appolloes sowltring car did fume about my face
So nie I past the pinch of Death, lo Thrachin top in place
Who brought me back to ground again, beneath me erst it lay
And all the world was under me, thou smart were worn away,
Thou forcest me confess the same. Ah mercy, mercy now.
In stead of farther vengeance do these humble words allow.
Lo Hillus, lo thy mothers gifts such presents she preparde
Ah, might my trunchion punch her puddinges once as whilom farde
The haughty Lady Amazon well trounsed for her pride
On thedge of ysy Caucasus afront the mountain side.
O noble lady Megara were thou my wretched wife,
When rapt in rage of frantic fittes, I rest thee of thy life
Give me my batt and bow in hand, my wrestes I will imbrew.
And force ye all your brages on me with blemish black to rue.
Thus let of Hercules exployts a woman be the last.

Hi. Forbear O Sire thy hateful threats, she has it, all is past.
The vengeance that ye seek on her already has her spedd.
With wound received at your hand my mother lies dead

(Her. O blinded anquish: dye she should of Hercles furious hand)
Thus Licas has his marrow lost the heat of burning breast
Will have me on the breathless coarse for to revenge the rest
Why does she not yet feel her force both let her want a grave
And on her cursed flesh to feed let beasts her carcass have.

Hill. The silly woman was more woe then ye that bide the smart.
Ye will release some part hereof for pity in your heart.
For grief of you with her own hand, alas her self she slew
Thus more then ye do ask of her, she does her doing rewe
Yet is it not your Wyfes misdeede that brought you to this plight.
No nor my mothers traytrous hand has wrought this deep deceit.
This treason Nessus did contriue whom ye did pay his hire,
With arrow shot into his Ribs for rape of Deianire.
Thus father with the Centaures blood your shyrt was sore embrewde.
At Nessus hand the vengeance of your deed thus have ye rewde.

HE. He has his will: all is dispacht, our Fates themselves display.
This is the day of death to me. Thus erst to me did say,
A charmed Oak, and all the wood that range with yetling noise
Of Parnass hill the Temples shook, and thundered out this voice.
The dead man's hand whom thou before have slain,
O Hercules shall murder thee again.
Thou having mot the space of gulf and ground,
And deapth of hell, hear shall thou be confound.
I therefore do bewail no more, such should our ending be.
That Hercles conquerde after him no man alive may see.
Now let me dye a manly death, a stout and excellent,
And meet for me: this noble day shall valiauntly be spent.
Fell all the Timber on the ground hew down all OEta wood.
Let coals deuower Hercules, let fire fry his blould.
But ere I dye thou noble Impe of Peans royal race.
This doleful duty do for me: See that an whole day space*
My funeral fire flaming burn. And now my tender Hill,
The last peticion of my mouth make unto thee I will.
Among the captive Ladies, one there is, a noble Dame,
Of royal blood, Euritus Child, Iole is her name:
Accept her to thy spousall Bed, whom victour I vnkind^
Have trained from her native home and but my heart, and mind
Poor silly maid I gave her naught, and now she shall me lose.
Lo thus the wretched woman walls her still increasing woes.
But let her foster that she has conceived as Jove's ally,
And child to me, be it thine by her that erst begot have I:
And as for thee dear mother mine your dreary dole forgo,
Your Hercules shall live: do not vain tears on him bestow:
My manhood made a strumpet thought a Stepdame unto thee,
But if that either Hercles birth show her unsure to be,
Or be a man my ster or else be falsified my kin.
Now let Jove's (...) cease, and let my mothers slander ^in,
I have deserved a father well that have aduaunst so hye
The glory of the rolling heavens, of nature tramde was I.
To work the wondrous praise of Jove, and Jove him self does Joy,
To have the name of Hercules, begetting such a boy.
But pardon now my strayned tears, but you as Jove his niece.
Shall as a stately matrone be among the Dames of Greece.
Though Juno with the thunderer in spousall chamber lies
And in her heavenly hand does weilde the scepter of the skies,
When ever bare she such a Babe, and yet though heaven she hold
In heart against a mortal man she fosters malice oulde,
For spighte that borne of woman's womb becounted thus I should.
Go Tican go, run out thy Race, thee only I forsake.
I that went with thee foot by foot now to the infernal lake.
And Ghostes, I go yet with this praise to'ch pit down will I pass
That Hercules of open foe yet never foiled was.
But he in open combats brought his conquests all to pass.

Chorus. O Titan crowned with blas^ing bush whose morning moystures make
The Moon her foamy bridell from her tired teame to take.
Declare to the Easterlinges whereas the ruddy morn does rise.
Declare unto the Irishmen aloof at western Skies.
Make known unto the Moors annoyed by flaming axentree.
Those that with the ysy Wayne of Archas pestred be.
Display to these that Hercules to the eternal ghostes is gone
And to the bauling mastriffes den from whence returns none.
With dusky dampe of filthy fog O Titan choke thy blaze,
With lowering light of wanny Globe on woeful wordlings gaze,
And let thy head be muffled up with clouds and darkness dim.
For Hercles sake, when shall thou find, or where the like to him?
(O wretched world to whom will thou henceforth thy woes complain,)
If any scattring pestilence on ear^h shall be renewde,
By benom rank, from poison mouth of scaly Dragon spewde:
If any Bore of Arcadie shall comber all a wood,
And tear the trauelers flesh with tuske embrewed in goary blood:
If any champion rough of Thrace with heart more hard in breast,
Then are the ysy rocks, where as the frozen Bear does rest,
Shall trample thick his stables foul with blood of slaughterd men,
When people quake for fear of war, who shall assist them then?
If wrathful Gods for vengeance will fo^he monsters to be bread?
Lo now enfebled all of force his Karkasse lies dead,
Whom Natures moulde had made a match to thu^dring Jove in strength.
Hale out (alas) and let your playnt be heard to towns at length.
Let women beat their naked arms, and wring their trembling hands,
Untrusse their hair, and from their locks pluck of their binding bands.
Boult up, and lock the Temple gates of Gods, and ^ape be none,
But despret Iunoes Chapple doares. O Hercles thou art gone
To Lethes lake, and stream of Stix, from whence no Keele again
Shall bring thee back: O silly soul thou go to remain
Among the grisely goblins grymme: from whence thou whilom came
With triumph sooner daunted death, and conquest of the same.
With ghastly face, and karrayne arms, and neck that yeeldes to weight,
Thy ghost returns, but Carons boat then shall not have her freight.
As balased with thy only payse, and yet shall thou not bide
Among the rascal sprites, but sit on bench by Eacus side,
And with the Judges twain of Creete as Umpier there to be,
Appoynting pains to souls that may to their desartes agree.
From slaughter hold your guiltless hands, bath not your blades in blood.
Ye states, that bear high sail on earth, and floa^e in worldly good:
It merits praise a maiden sword vndipt in goare to bear,
And while thou rain, to keep thy realm from cruel doings clear.
But virtue has a pryuiledge to pass unto the skies.
To The top of frosen Apell tree O Hercules will thou rise?
Or where the sun with scorching blaze his burning beams does rest?
Or will thou be a shyning star amid the lukewarm west?
Where Calpe Rock is heard with roaring noise of wrestling wave?
What place amid the azur sky entendest thou to have?
What place shall be in all the heavens from hurley burley free?
When Hercules amid the stars shall entertained be?
Let Jove appoint thy byding from the ougly Lion far,
And burning Crab* least thou with grysely countnaunce do the^ skarre.
And make the trembling stars in heaven for fear to break array
And Titan quake: while spring does prank with flowers y^ tender spray.
Then hasty winter strip the trees of all their branches green.
Or sudden Summer decked with leaves in busshy woods be seen.
And from the trees the Apples fall, the harvest being done:
No age on earth shall wipe away the fame that thou have woone.
As far as Sun, or Stars can shine, thy glorious name shall go.
Amid the botome of the Sea first Corn shall sprout, and grow,
And brackish Seas his waters salt to water fresh shall change:
And fixed star of ysy bear from Clime to Clyme shall raunge,
And sink into the frozen poole against his kindly sway,
Ere people cease the honor of thy triumphs to display:
O soueraygne Jove we wretched wightes this boon of thee do crave,
No monstrous beasts, no noisome plagues, hereafter let us have:
With bloody champions let the earth encombred be no more:
Cast down the hauty sway of Courts: if ought annoyaunce sore
Shall cloy the earth, a champion to be our shylde we cave,
Whom as an honor of the Crown his ruefull realm may have.
(That still will keep his swerd from being taint with guiltless blood.)
But lo what means this rumbling noise? Ioe Hercles ster does groan,
And sigheth for his son: is it the Gods that wayle, and moan.
Or is it Iunoes fearful shrike, whom Hercles does aggrise,
That seeing him for fear she roares, and r^nneth from the skies.
Or else did Atlas faltring feet with feeble sturring stumble?
And shrinking from his tottring weight thus force the Gods to rumble?
Or scared he the wauling ghostes, the which to fear he drove?
Or Cerberus brast his gingling Chains with buskling in his cave.
It is not so: but lo where Philoctetes does appear,
And Hercles famous shaftes to him bequeathed does he bear.
THE FIFTH ACT.
Nutrix. Philoctetes. OF Hercules most heavy haps
Good youngman make report
How did he bear it at his death?
PH. In such a cheerful sort
As no man lives.

NV. And could he with
so sweet and merry look,
The scorching panges and torments of
his ending fire brook?

PH. That there was any heat at all his face did not bewray,
Who prou'de that power might force al things to stoop and to obey,
That under son untamed be.

NV. Where did the noble knight,
Among the wrestling waves of sea display his matchless might:

PH. That mischief witch all only yet the world knew not before,
Even fire has bin conquered as beasts, and monsters more
Among the toils of Hercules the fire is crept in.

NV. Declare us how the flaming force of fire could he win.

PH. As soon as he with smarting hand the Oeta hill had grypte,
And forthwith from ye braunched Beeche ye shrinking shade was wipte:
And felled from the stump it lies, a Pyne tree hard he bendes,
That crakes the clouds, and down from skies his hawty head he sende^
The Rock did totter ready for to reele, and with the sway
It tumbleth down, a little grove withal it bears away.
A spreading Oak of Chaon big, whose leaves did ever rush,
And dimde the sun, and did beyond the wood his branches push.
It being hewde does crack, and eake in twain the wedges knappes:
The steel startes back and thus the tool of Iron bides the rappes,
And flies out of the Logge, at length at roore it shogde and shook,
And falling down full lythly the overthrow it took.
Forthwith the place lost all his light, the byrds scaard fro their nest
Do foare about the cropped wood, and holes wherein to rest,
And chirping with their weary wings about the plot they flicker
In every tree the ringing strokes were multiplied thicker.
The holy Oaks in hugy hand the Iron Axe did feel.
No timber on the stallen stocks might escape the hewing steel,
Thus all the wood upon a pile is heapt, and one by one
The Logges are laid as high as heaven that Hercules thereon
Might have a narrow room: his burning bones for to bestow.
On Pynetree top, and towghest Oak the fler begins to glowe.
And on the stumped willowe flamth, and thus the forest wide
Does make the Kill* the Popler wood all Hercles blocks does hyde.
But as the puissaunt Lion when his fits do vex him sore,
Lies wallowing on his back, and through the forest loud does rore.
So fares he, who would have thought he had to burning gone?
As one that climbs to heaven, not fire, he was to look upon
When up he stepped on Oera mount and gazed on his Kill.
Being laid aloft he brake the block, so heavy was he still.
The shyues yet could not bear his wayght he calling for his bow
Did say to me, have Philocktet, on thee I it bestow,
This same is it that Hydra with his swarming heads did know.
This did fetch down the stimphall fowls, and all that we have daunt,
Go thou with this let victory, and happiness thee haunt,
For never shall thou shute against thy foes with these but speed.
If at a bird amid the clouds thou aame she dies indeed.
These certain shaftes shall bring thy mark down from the azur sky,
This bow shall not deceive thy hand, full often I did it try,
And made it meet to bear a shaft, and cast his leauell dew.
Thine arrows shall not fail thine aame if that thou nock them true,
I ask but only this of thee, put fire to the Stack,
Bestow on me my funeral flame to bring me to my wrack.
This knarry Club (quoth he) the which no hand shell ever loss
Shall only with his Hercules in fire go to loss,
This also (quoth he) should thou have if thou could weild the same,
Beside his master let it lie to help toward the flame.
And then beside him down he lays the Lions vayry skin
To burn with him: the shaggy case hid all the pyle within.
The people sobde, and none there was but sorrow straynde his tears.
The mother mad for egar grief her breast all bare she bears,
And naked down toth Nauill stead displayes her tender teates.
And languishing with wringed hands her naked dugges she bears
And cries out upon the Gods on Jove himself she ca^es,
Her shriking rang through all (...) place so womanlike she yalles*
Be still (quoth he) good mother: force your showers of tears to cease.
Your dreary dole disgraceth much the death of Hercules.
Wayle secretly unto your self: why make ye Juno glad,
To se that you a weeping day with store of tears have had?
(It does her good to see her bawdes, to stand with weeping eyes.)
Forbear, forbear your malady, it is deadly sin for ye,
To tear the tears, and rent the womb, that first did foster me.
And as he blustred giving gruntes when carst he led in chain
The hownd about the towns of Greece what time he came again
Tryumphing over conquered hell defying Plutoes might,
And dreadful desteny: so on the fire he lay upright.
What conqueror ever sat in coatch with such a chereful grace?
What tyrant did control his folk by law with such a face?
How hushed was al thing at his death? himself he could not weep
And also we had clean forgot the wound of sorrows deep
None does lament him at his death now were it shame to wayle:
Alemen (whom nature ought to move) her tears now do her fail.
And thus as ill as was the son the mother stood almost.

N. But at his burning did he not call on the heavenly host,
Remembering Jove to hear his suite.

Ph. As on in deep despair
He lay, and staryng up so rould his eyes into the air
To spy if Jove look down to him from any turret hye.
Then with his hands displayed to heaven (quoth he) where so thou lie,
And lokest down to se thy son, this same, this same is he,
Whom one day eeked with a night engendered has to thee
If East and West if Scithia, and every burning plot,
That parched is with glowing glede of Phoebus fire hot
Does sing my praise? and if the earth full satisfyde with peace
If languishing and wayling words in every town do cease.
If none their alters do imbrew with any guiltles gore,
Then Jove let my vncaged spirit have heaven for evermore.
As for thinfernall dens of death they do not me detarre?
Nor scouling Plutoes dungeon darck, but Jove I do abhor.
Unto those ghastly Goblins as a stlly shade to go.
Since I am he whose conquering hand gave them their overthrow.
Withdraw these foggy clouds of night, display the glimsyng light
That Hercles broyld with flying flames the Gods may have in sight
And if thou do deny (O fire) the stars and heaven to me
To give me them against thy will thou shall constrained be,
If glutting grief do stop thy speech, the Stygian goulphes set oape,
And let me dye, but first declare within the heavenly coape,
That thou accepst me as thy soon: this day it shall be wrought,
That to be raysd aloft to stars, I may be worthy thought.
Thou have done little for me yet: it may be doubted well
Whether Jove did first beget his son, or damnd him first to hell.
And (quoth he) let my stepdame see, how well I can abide
The scorching heat of burning brandes: for fire then he cride,
And says to me O Philoctet in have upon me throw
The burning logges, why quakest thou? do dastard thou forslow,
For fear to this wicked deed? O coward peasant slave,
Thou art to weak to bend my bow, unmeet my shaftes to have
What aylest thou to look so pale? and as thou see me lie
With cherefull look courageously do thou the fire plye.
Behold me wretch that broyle and burn my father opes the Skies
And unto me son Hercules come, come away he cries.
O father Jove (quoth he) I come: with that I waxed pale
And toward him a burning beam with might and main I hale:
But back from him the billets fly and tumbling out they leap,
And from the limbs of Hercules down falls all the heap.
But he encrocheth on the fire as it from him does shrink.
That many mountains whole were set on fire a man would think
No noise was hard, and all was hushed, but that the fire did hiss
In Hercles glowing paunch when as his liver burning is.
It boysteous giant Typhus had amid this fire been thrown,
These torments would have straind his tears and forced him sigh and groan.
Or tough Euceladus that tossed a mountain on his back.
But Hercles lifted up himself amid his fyres all black,
With smoke besmeard his corpse half burnt in shiuers, gube and flawes,
And down the throat his gasping breath and flames at once he draws
Then to Alemen he turned himself: O mother mine (quoth he)
Should ye so stand at Hercles death? should you thus wayle for me?
And thus between the fire and smoke, upright and stiff he stands.
And neither stoupes nor leanes awrye, but moves and stirs his hands,
With all his lively gestures still, and thus he does persuade.
His mother leave the langusshing, and mourning that she made.
And did encourage all his men t'encrease the fire than
As though he were not burning, but would burn some other man.
The people stood astonished, and scant they would believe
That fire had any force on him, or that it did him grieve.
Because his chereful look had such a majesty and grace.
And never wild us meue the fire that he might burn apace,
(And now when as he thought, he had endured pangues enough,)
And stoutly bode the brunt of death, the blocks he does remove,
That smothering lay, to make the^ burn: then downward does he shoue
And where the stewing heat did chiefly scorch, and burn most hot,
That way he thrusts his frying lims, and thither has he got.
(With steaming countnaunce vnapaulde his mouth now does he fill)
With burning coals, his comely Bearde the^ blazed about his cheeks:
And now when as the sparkling fire unto his visage seeks,
The flame lickt up his s^^ged hair, and yet he did not wink:
But open kept his staring eyes But what is this? my think
Alomene comes yonder as a woeful wight forlorn,
With sighs and sobs, and all her hair befrounced rent, and torn.
And bears the remnaunt in her Lap, of Hercules the great.

Alcmena. Philoctetes. Learn Lordings, learn to fear and dread
th'unwelldy fatal force.
This little dust is all that's lef^
of Hercles hugy coarse.
That boysteous Giaunt is consumde
unto these ashes small
O Titan what a mighty mass
is come to naught at all.
Aye me an aged woman's lap all Hercules does shrowde,
her lap does serve him for a grave, and yet the champion proud,
With all his lump stils not the room. Aye me a burden small
I ^eele of him to whom whole heaven no burden was at all.
O Hercules, bear child, O son the season whilom was,
That thou to Tartar pits, and sluggish deus aloof did pass
For to repasse: from deep of hell when will thou come again?
For to put loyne the spoils thereof, or bring from captive chain
To life thy friendly Theseus. But when will thou return
Alone: can flaming Phelegethon thy ghost in torments burn:
Or can the masti^^e Dog of hell keep down thy woeful sprite?
Where then might I come see thy soul and leave this loathed light?
When shall I rap at Tartar gate? what Jaws shall me deuower?
What death shall d^wnt me: go thou to hell, and have no power
To come again: alas why do I wast, the day in tears and (...)
O wretched life why do thou last thou should droupe and saint,
And loath this dreary day: how: can I bear to Jove agay^e
Another noble Hercules, what son may I obtain
So valiunt to call me thus ( Alcmena mother mine)
O happy spouse Ampliterio twyse happy have thou been
In entering at the dens of death, and through the noble son
The Deutis arthy presents quake to see thee thither come.
Though thou but forged father were to Hercules of late
Whether shall old beldam go whom many kings do hate:
If any prince remain with blody breast and murdring mind
Then woe to me: if groaning babes be any left behynd,
That sorrow for their parents deaths now, now for Hercles sake
Their malice let them wrecke on me, on me dyre vengeance take
If any young Bustris be, I fear the Persians sore
Will come and take me captive hence in chains for evermore.
If any tyrant feed his horce with gubbes of strangers flesh
Now let his pampred iades unto my Carksse fall a fresh.
Perhap dame Iun^ coueteth on me to wrecke her yr^.
And e^vs of her burning breast will turn the flaming fire
Her wreckful hand does loyter now since Hercules is slain.
And now to feel her spurning spyte as harlot I remain.
My valyant son is cause of this my womb shall barrayne be,
Least I shoul bear another child as hardy as was he.
Oh whether may Alcmena go? or whether shall she wend?
What country or what kingdoms may my careful head defend
Where may I couch my wretched coarse, that every where am knownde
If I unto my native soil repair among mine own,
Euristeus is of Argoe lord thus woefully forlorn.
I will to Thebes where I was wed, and Hercules was borne:
And where with Jove I did enjoy dame Venus dear delight.
O blessed woman had I been and in most happy plight,
It Jove with flash of lightning leams and blasing flakes of fire
Had smolthred me as Semele was sowst at her desire.
Would God that Hercles while he was a babe had rypped been
Out of my womb, then wretchedly I should not this have seen
The pangues and torments of my son, whose praise does cou^teruaile
Even Jove: then had I learnd that death at length might him assail,
And take him from my sight: O child, who will remember thee?
For now unthankfulness is great in men of each degree:
(...), for thy (...) I do not know where entertaynd to be).
The ^word* of the Cleonies I will attempt and fire
Whom from the Lion resc^wde he and made the monster dye,
Or shall I too the Archadians go where thou did sle^ the boar
Where thy renown remain (...) of great exploytes before,
The parlous (...) Hydra hear was slayue there fell he dead,
That with the flesh of slaughtred men his greedy horses fed
And yondes were the Stimphall burdes compelde to leave the say
And tamed by the handy toil, now does the Lion fry,
And belketh (...) fumes in heavens while thou lie in thy grove
O if mankind but any spark of thankful nature have
Let all men prcace to succor me Alcmene thy mother dear.
What if among the Thracians I venture to appear,
Or on the (...) of Hebet flood? thy prowess every where
Has succored all these soylts: for erst in Thrace thou did put down
The fleshy meangres of the King and put him from his crown,
By slaughter of the saluage printe the people live in peace,
Where did thou deny thy help to make tormoyling cease?
Unhappy mother that I am a shryne where may I have
To shrowde thy coarse: for all the world may strine about thy grave
What temple may be meet to shryne thy relics safe for aye,
And hallowed bones? what nations unto the ghost shall pray?
O noble son what sepulchere what hearse may serve for thee?
The world it self through flying flame thy fatal tomb shall be:
Who takes here this payse from me his ashes which I bear
Why loath I them? embrace his bones keep still his ashes here,
And they shall be a shield to thee his dust that thee defend,
To see his shadow, princes proud for fear shall stoop and bend
Ph. O mother of noble Hercules forbear your dreary playnt:
His valiant death thus should not be with femal tears attaynt.
Ye should not languish thus for him, nor count him wretched man
In dying, who by noble mind prevent his destny can.
His cheuatry forbyddeth us with tears him to bewail:
The stately stomach does not sloupe: they sigh whose hearts do fail.

Alc. (I Will moan no more: behold, behold. most wretched mother I)
Have lost the shield of land end sead, where glittring Phoebe displayes
With whirling wheels in foamy gulphes, and red and purple rays
The loss of many sons I may lament in him alone.
Through him I lifted Kings to frown, when crown my self hadnone
Aid never any mother liude, that neded less to crave.
Of Gods, then I. I asked naught while I my son might have.
What could not Hercles tender love like on me to bestow?
What God would once den^^ to (...) or what he held me froe,
I was in my power to ask and have. If Jove would ought deny,
My Hercules did bring to pass I had (...) by.
What mortal mother ever bare and lost so dear a son?
Erst down the cheeks of Niobe the (...)
When of her dear and tender brattes she wholly was hereuen,
And did bewa^le with strayned sighs her children seven and seven
And yet might I compare this one (my Hercles) unto those
And I in him as much as she in all her imp^s die lose.
The mothers that are mourning dames do lack on h^d and chief,
And now Alcmene shall be she depriude of all releese,
Cease woeful ^^thers cease, if that among you any are
Constrayne to shed your streaming tears by force of peas^ue care^
Ye Lady whom lamenting song of women fourmed rocks,
Give place unto my gluttyng grief, beat on with burning knockes
Ye hands upon my riueled breast, alas am I alone
Enough for such a funeral to languish and to move,
Whom all the world shall shortly need? yet steech thyfeble arms
To thumpe upon thy sounding breast thy grief with boleful (...)
And in despyte of all the gods power put thy woeful erye
And to receive thy flowing tears thy warry cheeks apply.
Bewail Alcmenas woeful state: the son of Jove bewail,
Whose birth did cause the du^ay day in kindly course (...) fail.
The East compact two nights in one: Lo, to, a greater thing
Then glorious day the world has lost now let your forrowes ring,
Yet people al whose lowryng lords he draw to dens of death
Their blades (that reckt with guiltles (...)) he (...) into the sheath.
Bestow on hin your Crystal tears, which he deserved wellt
Howl out ye heavens, ye mardle seas, and goulphes with gronings yell.
O Crete Dear darling unto Jove For Jove of Hercles ro^e,
Ye hundred cities beat yont arms: my son, for evermore
Is gone among the gries^y ghostes, and shimmering shades of hell
Lament for him ye woeful mightes, that here on (...) do dwell,

Hercules. Alcmen^ WHy Mother wayle you me an (...)
(...) ho^t of hell?
Or (...) of death, since I
among (...) Spheres do dwell?
Forbear, forbear, to moan for me
for virtue opened has
To me the passage to the Stars:
and set me in the path,
That guides to everlasting Life,
whence co^s this dreadful sound?
Alc. Whence roares this thundering voice. y^ does against mine ears rebosid,
And bids me to shine my tears? I know it now I know,
The darksome dunge^^^ daunied are, and Demies of Lakes allow.
O Son art thou ret^rnd to the from Stygian gulf again?
And can thou twice of ougly death the con quest thus obtain?
And brast the balefull prisons twice, of glum and ghastly night.
Aga^^st (...) thus by might?
May any escape from (...) thou stape alone?
Has hell no power to hold thy sprite, when breath from breast is gone?
Or else has Pluto baalde thee out, for fear least thou alone
Should cloyne his Scepter from (...) hand, and pluck him from his front?
For I am sure I saw thee laid upon the burning trees:
And from thy Corpse the slame and sparks against the welkin flies:
That sure thou wast to po^ldee burn, and feeble life was lost:
But sure the deepes and pits of (...) did not lock up thy ghost.
Why were the devils alrayde of thee? why quaked Ditis grim?
And did thy noble ghost seem such a ghastly bug to him?

HE. The dampy (...) of Cocitas could not keep me from light.
Nor Carons fusty musty Barge iramsported has my sprite,
Now Myther (...) more once have I seem the (...) of hell,
And all the (...) that dwell.
That mortal moulde I took of you to naught the flames have fried:
Heaven has the substance that I took of Jove: in fire yours died.
And therefore rawse your playntius teare^, which parents use to shed,
When wretchedly they wayle their sons, that dastardly are dead.
Thus vulgar varlets weep: Ioe virtue hopes the Stars to get:
But faynting fear (...) on death, from heaven where I am set,
You hear my voice: Euristeus now shall bide the deadly push
With charyot sway his cracked scull ye shall on sunder crush
Now must I hence advance my Ghost up to the rolling skies
Once more I daunt the deuilles, and do the goblins grim aggrise

Alc. But stay awhile my son: he fades and shrinketh from my sight
Aduaunst he is among the stars: does this my charmed Spirit
Dote in a trance and or do I dream that I have seen my son
A troubled mind can scante believe the things he sees done.
But now I see thou art a God possessing heaven for aye.
I see it sure. I will to Thebes thy triumphs to display.

Chorus. LO virtue scapes the ghastly shades of hell,
Ye noble peers that shine in virtue bright
Dire desteny cannot constrayne you dwell
Among the glowming glades of ougly might,
Nor sink your fame in loathsome lakes of spyte.
But when deaths day draws on the gasping hour,
You purchased glory shall direct your right
To find the passage to the heavenly bower.
When flesh does fall, and breathing body dies
Then (Fame the child of Virtue) does arise.
But sluggish sottes that sleep their days in sloth,
Or give their golden age to loath some lust.
Them and their names the wretches bury both,
When as their bones shall shryned be in dust:
The clay shall cover their carkases forlorn,
As though such kaytisses never had been borne.
But if that ought of memory they have.
In thafter age it shall be filthy shame.
The gnawing worms torment not so in grave
Their rotten flesh, as tounges do tear their name,
That daily killed to further mischief lives.
Lo both the fruits, that vice and virtue gives.
FINIS.
Ovid. Omne genus scripti grauitate Tragoedia vincit.
IMPRINTED AT LONDON IN FLETSTREATE Near unto Saint Dunstons church by Thomas
Marshe. 1581.


