THE WEAPON-SALVES MALADY: OR, A DECLARATION OF ITS INSVFFICIENCIE TO perform
what is attributed to it. Wherein also is described, 1 The several ways of
making the Weapon-Salve. 2 The manner of using it. 3 Reasons of Confirmation to
justify it. 4 Arguments of Confutation to overthrow it.


BY The learned and judicious Physician DANIELL SENNERTUS, Doctor and public
Professor at WITTENBERG. Translated out of his 5th. Book, Part. 4. Chap. 10.
Practicae Medicinae.

LONDON, Printed for JOHN CLARK, and are to be sold at his Shop (...)

To the Reader.
CHRISTIAN READER, This Argument of the Weapon-Salve, is a thing often talked
of in private Meetings among Friends, and not seldom disputed of by Learned
men in their public Writings. Nor can any man with reason blame them for
sifting out the Truth; especially, in a point that involveth a case of
Conscience in it, the mistaking whereof, might breed an offense against GOD and
his Sacred truth. But yet they are blame worthy, who in searching for the Truth
do fly upon their Adversary with uncivil language. In which kind, I must
needs confess Mr. FOSTER has exceeded the bounds of Christian charity. He
has in mine opinion the Truth on his side, and has cleared it well: but yet
he should have remembered the Apostles rule, (...), Ephesians. 4.15. That we
speak the truth, or (as others translate it) follow the truth in love; Not
forgetting, that even the Heathen could say, Tuscul. Q. lib. 2. fol. 176.
Aldin, edit.
Et refellere sine pertinaria, and refelli sine iracundia parati sumus. And
again, De finib. lib. 2 fol. 81. page 2.
Sit ista in Graecorum levitate perversitas, qui malidictis insectantur eos, a
quibus de veritate dissentiunt: That is, Let the light-brain'd Grecians pursue
them with reproaches, who dissent from them in opinion: we are ready both to
refute without pertinacie, and to be refuted without anger. These rules I wish
had been observed in that Disputation; especially considering that the
Adversary whom he opposes, is a learned Doctor, well esteemed at home for his
practical skill in Physic, and much V. Jacob. Boissard. Biblioth. claroru^
virorum, part. 2. effigy 60. page 198.
honored abroad for his learned Books in Print.

Now this little Treatise, sent abroad in our English tongue, is the work of a
man not only famous for his Learning, but one that had no interest in these
personal quarrels. And therefore, I hope the learned Doctor will with his good
leave permit us to publish this small Treatise in our Mother tongue, for the
direction of such, as seek satisfaction in this questionable Point. And that
is all, that either the Translator or Publisher do seek after in this Work.
GOD grant us peace and truth in CHRIST our Lord, Amen.

PErlegi librum hunc cui Titulus est [The Weapon-Salves malady,] nec in eo
quicquam repetio quo minus cum utilitate publica imprimatur.

Ex aedib: Londin: Ian. 20. 1636. SA: BAKER.

THE VVEAPON-SALVES MALADY.
THat which has been said in the precedent Chapter, concerning the opinion of
Caesar Magatus, and Ludovicus Septalius, of the Cure of Wounds, puts me in
mind of that Ointment which is commonly called the Weapon-Salve. For as the
green Wounds of the flesh, as is said in the precedent Chapter, are healed
without much ado, and without the frequent opening of the Wound, or applying
many Salves, only by the benefit of mere Nature; just so those Wounds, which
are thought to be Cured by the Weapon-salve, I think to be cured by the help
of Nature only.

But since some others determine the contrary, let us in this place consider
what is to be thought of this Weapon-Salve.

And first of all, we will lay down the several descriptions of this
Weapon-Salve, and then the use of it; and then the things they use to produce
in its defense.

Most men attribute this Unguent to Paracelsus, or affirm it certainly to be
divulged by him.

The description of Paracelsus.
Paracelsus himself, Archidox: Magicae, lib. 1. gives this description of it;
Take Scull-Mosse, two Ounces, Mummy, half an ounce, Man's fat, two ounces, Man's
blood, half an ounce, Linseed Oil, two Drams, Oil of Roses, and Bole
Armoniack, of each one ounce.


Mix them together and make an Ointment: Into the which he puts a Stick,
dipped in the Blood of the wounded person, and dried, and binds up the wound
with a rowler dipped every day in the hot Urine of the wounded person. For the
anointing of the Weapon he adds moreover; Honey, one ounce, Bulls fat, one
dram.


Porta his description of it, etc.
Johannes Baptista Porta, Mag: Not: lib. 8. cap. 12. Writes thus of it; The
Weapon-Salve which was long since given by Paracelsus to Maximilianus Caesar,
and by him used, and made very chary of so long as he lived, was communicated
to me, by a Nobleman of his Court. If the Weapon which has wounded any one
shall be brought, or a Stick dipped in the same Blood; the affected person
shall be Cured, although he be distant far away:

Take Moss or Scurffe (that grows thick, on a Man's scull left to the open
air,) and Man's fat, of each two Ounces, Mummy, and Man's blood, of each half
an ounce, Linseed Oil, Turpentine, and Bole Armoniack, of each one ounce.


Let all these things be brayed together in a Mortar, and kept in a long and
narrow pot. Dip the Weapon into the Unguent, and there let it lie: Let the
person hurt, in the morning cleanse his Wound with his own water; and so bind
it up, without any thing else put to it, and the wounded person shall be cured
without any pain.

Crollius himself also, The description of Crollius.
attributes it to Paracelsus, and calls it the Sympatheticall or Starry
ointment of Paracelsus, and describes it thus:

Take Wild-Boares grease, and Bears grease, of each four ounces.

The elder the Beasts are, the better is their Fat, and first let the Fat of
either beast, boil softly in Red Wine, over a gentle fire, for the space of
half an hour; and then power it out upon cold water, and let all the Fat that
swims at top, be gathered up with a spoone, and whatsoever sinkes to the
bottom, let it be cast away.

Then take two A measure containing 18. Ounces.
Sextarios of Earth-wormes, washed either in Wine or in Water, partch them in
some Bakers oven, in a covered pot, yet take heed they burn not; and then let
them be beaten to powder.

Take of this powder, -- The dried brains of a wild Boar, Sweet red
Saunders, Mummy, and Boodstone, of each one Ounce:


Then take the Moss of the scull of a Man, killed by some violent death,
scraped off in the increase of the Moon she being in a good house, as of
Venus, if it may be, not of Mars or Saturn, in quantity about the weight of
two Filberds: and of these broken mixed together with the Fat, let the Ointment
be made according to Art, and kept safely in a close Glass or gally-pot for
your use.

If perchance in time this Ointment should wax dry; it may be made supple and
moist again with the foresaid Fat, or Virgin-honey. Let this ointment be made
the Sun being in Libra.

Concerning the Use and Efficacy thereof, he writes thus. This Cure is done
by the magnetique attractive power of this Salve, caused by the Stars, which
by the mediation of the air, is carried and adjoined to the Wound, that so the
Spiritual operation thereof may be effected.

It is caused I say, by a Starry and Elementary conjunction. For as the heat
of the Sun does join it self with the Earth, so does the Perficar^^.
Balsome with the Wound; the Sun departing the heat departs, so here
likewise.

There be then Three things, which by this Ointment do work this wonderful
effect. First, Sympathy of Nature. Second, the influence of the Celestial
bodies, perfecting its operation by the Elements. Third, a Balsome which has a
power of healing, and is naturally given to every man.

By this Ointment are all wounds healed, by whatsoever, weapon, blow, or throw
soever, they are made, or unto what Sex soever they are inflicted, (yet so,
that neither one of the Nerves, or Arteries, or one of the principal Members
be hurt) so that the Weapon may be had though the Patient, be many miles from
us. And because it is of a conglutinating, suppurating, and renewing nature, it
suffers not any hurtful Symptom to grow, if it be rightly applied.

First, The manner of applying it.
let the Weapon with which the man is wounded, be anointed every day once if
necessity require, and the wound be great; otherwise every second or third day,
will serve. Let it be kept in a clean linen cloth, in a warm place, not
too hot least there accrue any hurt to the Patient: and beware that the Weapon
fall not down, nor the wind blow on it in a cold place, for it will force the
patient to madness.

Secondly, before you annoint the Wound, consider whether the wound be made by
a thrust or point-wise; which if it be, then let the weapon be anointed
above, (and not below,) descending down, otherwise it will hurt the patient.

Thirdly, but if you cannot know, how deep or in what manner the Weapon went
into the flesh, you may annoint it all, otherwise it suffices to annoint the
very place, with which the hurt was made.

Fourthly, it is needless to sow up the wound as Barber-Surgions do; but
only to bind it up every day with a clean cloth, dipped in the Urine of the
Patient.

Fifthly, that day wherein any one does annoint the Weapon, let him abstain
from Venery.

Sixthly, before the annoynting of the Weapon, let the blood of the wounded
person be speedily stanched.

Seaventhly, in Fracturies or breaking of bones, you may add some of the
powder of great Walwort, or the roots of black Hellebore, to the ointment.

Having the Weapon with the which any one has bin hurt, and desires to know,
whether the Patient will live or dye, you shall thus try it: If you sprinkle
powder of red Saunders, and Bloodstone, upon the Weapon, warmed over a few
coals, so as one may well hold his hand upon it, if it sweat drops of Blood
the patient shall dye; if not, he shall escape.

But if you would know, whether your Patient be temperate in his drink or
other necessaries; it is known if there appear spots of blood in the weapon:
if there be none, he carries himself well.

And note also; first, if you get not the weapon or sword, yet any cut or
violent hurt of the flesh out of which issues blood, may be cured by this
Ointment; if that a little Sallow stick, dipped in the bloody cut; the blood
sticking on it being dried (not at the heat of the Sun or fire, but of it
self) be put into the fore-sayd Ointment, kept in a close box or glass, and
there left in it.

Secondly, if it be a great deep wound, it may be cleansed every morning and
bound up with a fresh cloth, without any other use of extrenuous Oils,
Ointments, or any such like; and so this wound is cured of it self, howsoever
inflicted; a little stick once dipped into the bloody wound or cut, and put in
the Ointment in the Box, avails to a full cure.

Thirdly, but so often as any new wound is to be cured; it requires also a new
stick.

Fourthly, but if the wound will not bleed, it must be so long scarified with
the little stick till it bleed.

So also in curing the Toothache, the Tooth that aketh is to be scarified with
a penknife till it bleed, and then anoint the penknife, with this Ointment,
after the blood is dried into it, and the pain will presently cease. If a
Horse be pricked in the foot with a nail, draw out the nail and anoint it,
and the horse foot will be forthwith cured without suppuration.

After the same manner, may any creature that has flesh and bones be cured.

Oswaldus Gabelchover in Practic. Germanic. describes it thus:

Take Bores grease, and Bears grease, of each a pound, they must be dissolved
and have red Wine powered into them;

Then he adds, powder of Blood stones, one ounce, Red saunders, six drammes,
Prepared Worms, two drams. Moss of a dead man's scull, as much as can be had;


So he mixeth it, that it may make an ointment: concerning the use, it is even
the same that Crollius has.

Others have this description;

Take the Lard of a wild Bore, dissolved at the fire, and powered upon water,
as much as shall suffice, Powder of prepared Earth-wormes, Blood stone, Red
sanders, and Moss of a dead man's scull, as much as shall suffice. Mix it at
the fire.


Johannes Wittichius omitteth the Moss and thinks it mattereth but little
whether it be used or not. Neither adds he Mummy, nor Fat, nor Blood; which
thing also others do. And I my self knew one who professed this Cure, who
made this Ointment as often as he pleased, only with the fat of a tame common
Boar, and some few other things, without either Moss, or any thing at all,
had out of the body of man.

Iacobus Colerus that Polyprag non, Colerus his description.
lib. 18. Oeconomiae. cap. 154. gives this description.

Take Wild Boares and Bears grease, of each half a pound. Tame Boares and
Bears grease, of each half a pound. Moss of a man's scull, an handful.
Earth-wormes Men's 5/4. Boodstone two ounces. Red saunders, and Great Comfry
roots, of each iij. ounces.


Mingle them with wine, and make an ointment.

Of the time of making this Ointment they agree not, Crollius will have it made
the Sun being in Libra; others confine the time in more narrow limits, only
to the 10. or 11. of September. Others at any time.

The use of this Ointment has been before largely described by Crollius, The
manner of using it.
so that I think it needless to repeat it. The maine point is, that the
wound it self is not to be anointed with this ointment, but the weapon or
instrument whatsoever it be, with which the wound was made; or if that cannot
be had, another weapon or piece of wood; but especially Sallow, or any other
thing dipped or smeared in the blood of the wounded person.

Neither think they it availes, whether the Patient be present, or many miles
absent; Neither take they any care of the wounded person; but of anointing the
weapon: yet some, order that the wound be every day washed, and cleansed with
white Wine or Urine.

But lest any man should doubt of the effect of this ointment, First of all
they produce experience: and Rudolphus Goclenius Junior, writes that he is
able to nominate Emperors, Kings, Princes, Earls, Nobles whose authority and
truth is not to be doubted of, which give testimony of the efficacy of this
Ointment.

Moreover the Patrons of this Ointment doubt not, but natural causes may be
given of this action; and Crollius calls them ignorant fools that doubt of its
efficacy, or refer the cure to Sorcery. And to make it appear that the cure
may be done by a natural way, they prove at large, that first there are
actions which no corporal touch interceding, are done by an hidden Sympathy or
Magnetisme as they call it. And so the Loadstone draws Iron, although it
touch it not with its body, and makes it move toward the Pole: the Stars
also work upon inferior things, which they touch not bodily. The Cramp-fish
affects his hand that touches it only with his Iavelin. There be some that
cannot endure to be where a Cat is, though she be locked up in a Chest that
they see her not; and unless the Cat be removed, or they go out of the place
they fall into a swoone. Dogs know the footsteps of their Masters, and of
wild Beasts too, and follow them by their track. The shade of the Ewe-tree is
hurtful to many. And very many such things which are observed in nature, they
heap up as examples, of hidden actions, which because they are most evident in
the Magnet or Loadstone, are called Magneticall actions in general.

Another thing which they presuppose is that there is a spirit of the world,
diffused over the whole Universe, which is the conveyer or conveyance of all
occult virtues and actions; and conjoyneth all the parts of the World, and
effects a wonderful harmony between them.

But thirdly, concerning the virtues of this Weapon-salve it self, they
determine a double operation to be in it; one in the Ointment it self, that
is, the healing and closing up of the wounds: the other which is in the Weapon
anointed, and carries that virtue to the wound. They deduce the former
operation, from those many things of which this Salve is composed, from the
influence of the Stars, and a Syderiall and Elementary conjunction: and
therefore as has been said, some make this Ointment at a certain time of the
year, and in a certain position of the Stars.

The other operation they deduce from the natural Balsam; which with the blood
sticks fast to the weapon or instrument, thrust into the wound and stained
with the blood of the wounded person. For this Balsam by reason of a sympathy
it has with the part wounded, does communicate that virtue of the Salve to the
wound, the spirit of the world intervening and mediating between them.

And of this thing they bring other Examples also; the Zenith (as they call
it,) or the first menstruous blood of young Maids, being cast into the fire,
as they report, is very offensive unto the Virgin from whom it flowed. The
Secundines or after births, if they be ill handled, are very dangerous to the
Women, from whom they come; although neither in this do they declare
themselves plainly enough: For Crollius writes, that this Cure is perfected,
by the attractive magneticall operation of this Salve; which by the mediation
of the Air is brought, and conjoined to the Wound. And presently after he
says, there be three things which by this Medicament, do cause so wonderful
an effect; First, Natural Sympathy. Second, The influence of Celestial
bodies, perfecting their operations by the Elements. Third, A Balsome which
has a healing virtue, and is in every man by nature.

Reasons against the Defenders of Weapon-Salve.
But to give our own opinion of this Ointment; First, this makes it to be
suspected, because one manner of composing it, is not agreed on: but there are
many, and in some those things are omitted from which others deduce, all the
virtue of this Salve; as appears plainly out of the forenamed Descriptions.

Thus, Wittichius omits Moss, Fat, and Blood, which others account the
foundation and chief part of this Salve, and yet all of them promise the same
effect, and every one extols his own ointment for Curing all kinds of hurts
done, with what kind of Weapon soever, whether Stab or Cut with a blow or a
fall: although Goclenius, and Crollius except those Wounds, which are in the
Nerves, arteries, or principal members, as the Heart and Brain.

Whereas others object against the composition of this Salve, that the Authors
of this Ointment do use, the Moss of a man hanged, Mummy, warm Blood, and
Fat of men, and do think the whole power and efficacy of this thing to be in
Man's fat and blood; and therefore, think it superstitious: I assent not to
them, since it is very well known, that the Fat and sculls of men, and Mummy,
and Moss, are used by other Physicians, to cure Diseases without superstition.

Yet this I advise, that forasmuch as Witches and Wizards, as appears, out of
Apuleius Metamorph. lib. 2, and 3. And Nicolas Remigius, lib. 1. cap. 16. and
Lib. 2. cap. 1. De demonolatria; and out of others which have writ concerning
Witches, That they are wont to use the Blood and Flesh of a Man, and other
parts of man's body, for their Sorceries, that every one who will use such
things should take heed, that he do not superstitiously use a Salve, for
producing a natural effect; and so gratify the Devil, and unawares serve
him, who is the Enemy both of man's Body and soul: which may be done, if we
use such things to those effects, which are not in the Natural power of the
things.

And therefore if they find event, it is rather to be imputed and ascribed to
the Devil, laying snares for men by such superstitious means, than to the
thing it self.

Now concerning the effect of this Salve, Guilielmus Fabritius, Observat. 25.
Cent. 3. says, That it does not always answer their expectation: and that it
may be, that many have been healed, that have used this Salve, and so many
great men can testify; yet they can testify no more then this, that one was
wounded; and that this Weapon-Salve was applied for the Cure, and that he grew
well again: but they cannot testify, whether he recovered by the efficacy of
this Salve. For many things may oftentimes be conjoined with the effect, which
are not the cause of it; so that as it follows not: While this man was
walking it Lightened, therefore his walking is the cause of the Lightening: so
it follows not; This wounded man, is healed, and has used the Weapon-Salve,
therefore the Weapon-Salve is the cause of his healing; Unless it may appear
that this effect, has necessarily followed from this Weapon-Salve. Nor is the
When that is taken to be the Cause, which is not the Cause.
fallacy of the Cause, more frequent any where then in Physic; where
oft-times the Cure of a disease is attributed to a Medicine, when it proceeds
not from it; but from nature, or some other salve, either used before, or
together with it.

And indeed, the reason of Physique is far different, from that of other
Arts. For in other Arts the effect, altogether wholly depends upon the
Artificer; and if any thing be done either well or ill by him, (unless
perhaps, by reason of the unfitness of the matter and subject, (for Ex
quolibet ligno non fit mercurius,) or by reason of the Instrument some fault
may happen) all is to be imputed and ascribed, to the Artificer seeing, as I
have showed ( Instit. lib. 1. cap. 1.) the subjects of other Arts work
nothing, but only submit themselves to be wrought on: but the subject of
Physique has a certain inbred power, whereby assisted by the Physicians help,
it does for the most part, of its own accord tend to health, whence it is that
HIPPOCRATES says, 6. Epid. Com. 5. Text. 1. (...), Natures are the Physicians
of diseases.

The point therefore is this, that here the state of the controversy is not,
whether in the Cure of the wounded person now recovered, the Weapon-Salve was
applied, but whether the Weapon-Salve was the cause of the healing: of which
now we are to make inquiry.

But seeing (as it is said before) Nature may be the cause of closing up a
wound, and not the virtue of any Medicine by what name soever it be called: yea
oftentimes wounds are cured with Lard or some other small thing laid to,
without the help of a Physician or any other Medicaments. Therefore in the cure
which is thought to be done by the Weapon salve, the closing of the wound is to
be attributed only to Nature; as the next and principal cause. Which since it
is so; and it can by no means be denied; now the Question is, whether in that
cure the healing of the wound, be ascribed to Nature only, or whether some
efficacy of this Weapon salve does concur together with it. The former
seems to me to be the more probable, because it is certain, as was said
even now, that wounds are very often healed by Nature, without the help of any
Medicament. This, the inward wounds, to which no Medicaments can be applied,
do testify: and hither tends all that discourse of Caesar Magatus
concerning the course of curing wounds, of which is spoken in the precedent
Chapter, that the business be committed to Nature, the heat and temper of the
part, (which is an instrument) be kept sound, and not be troubled with
Medicaments where there is no necessity: and sometime such dangerous wounds,
are healed chiefly, by the help of Nature, and by none at all, or else but
slender Medicaments applied; so that it may seem to be ascribed, rather to a
Miracle then medicaments. The observations and examples whereof are every where
well known; Neither are the Patrons of this Ointment so bold as to extend its
power to all wounds, seeing (as was said) Crollius and Groclenius except the
wounds of the Principal members, and also of the Nerves and Arteries; and no
man was ever yet found, who durst use this Ointment about such as have been
wounded by Gun shot. And who is there, that dares deny, that other smaller
wounds may be healed only by Nature? yet if any thing fall out in the cure by
the Weapon salve, which may exceed the power of Nature, take heed it be not
done by the help of the Devil, drawn thereto by some implicit or explicit
compact.

Seeing then Nature only and immediately closes up Wounds, and Salves (as
has been showed before) serve for no other use, then to conserve native heat,
and natural temper of the part, or to remove those impediments, which hinder
nature in its work; we are now to consider, whether this Weapon salve can do
those things.

Where the first difficulty is this; whether or no, there is any salve at all,
that can do any good not being anointed on the wound it self, but on the
weapon or some other thing stained with the blood out of the wound: chiefly, if
the wounded person be absent, and be distant from the weapon that is anointed,
the space of some certain miles. To prove it they use two reasons, as is said
before; The first is, that there is some actions, from the occult qualities
called Magneticall which work at a distance; and again, that the power of
this Ointment is conveyed to the wound, by the Spirit of the world; as the
Sympathy and Antipathy of many things.

But neither Argument proves the thing they should. For first of all, though
we grant that there are such actions, which mutually do work upon and suffer
one from another, though they be not always united by corporal contact.
Notwithstanding, wh^^her this happen in the Weapon salve; or whether, any
virtue or force be brought to the wound, from the anointed weapon through a
great distance of place; that is not yet proved. Neither does it follow, that
because there are miraculous actions of other things, therefore this Weapon
salve should have such a virtue. And that this is not so, he who shall enquire
into other the like actions of Nature; which are done at a distance, shall
easily perceive.

Seeing that Operation does follow the being of a thing; It is necessary,
there must be a certain Conjunction, and mutual Contact between the Agent
and the Patient: And again, seeing that things between which there is action,
touch not one another with their bodies; it is necessary they should touch some
other way; and that may be two ways: For either the thing which is said to
work at distance, sends out somewhat from its body and substance, which the
Ancients call effluvium, seu (...), an Overflowing, or Flux: the Physicians
where they speak of Contagion, call it (...), (See our Lib. 4. de Febribus,
cap. 4. and Institut. Lib. 2. Part. 2. cap. 12.) To wit, where the smallest
parts or atoms flow out of the body, and the air or some other body
mediating, are transferred to another body; and do work upon it by the virtue
which they have common with the entire body from which they flow. But such like
little bodies, and effluxes have no regular motion, but are disorderly moved
hither and thither, according to the motion of the air, and by any breath are
variously dispersed, as we may see in the smoke of a Candle, and other
lighted things being extinguished and put out.

Other bodies which are said to work at a distance, send not forth any thing of
their own proper body, which is carried to another body; but only a Species or
semblance: after this manner bodies far distant, are affected or wrought by
the Species sensibiles, as by Light, by Sound, by Smell: and it is probable
that there are more such species or resemblances, then are apprehended by our
senses: and this commonly is said to be done by a virtuall contact. Yet this
virtue does always presuppose a subject out of which it flows; so the flame
being out, the illumination or enlightening of the things about it cease.
Besides, a fit subject is required by which it may be propagated, which if it
be not, the action cease. So if a dark body be interposed between the light
and our sight, the illumination cease. Thirdly, this virtue is diffused round
about a certain distance: Philosophers call it, the Sphere of Activitie;
which in some things is greater, in some things less.

It is greatest in things that send out Light; it is least in those that make
Sounds: yet by how much the greater the light body is, by so much the greater
is its Sphere of activitie: Hence it is, that Stars do disperse light from
themselves in the greatest distance and farthest off, of all other bodies.

Now therefore the question is, because it is certain, that the Weapon-Salve
with which the Weapon is anointed is corporally absent from the wounded
person, whether there be any contact by either of these ways, a third way can
not be named. Nor can it be done by any accident, or quality; For an
accident, passes not out of one Subject into another; neither can it diffuse
it self into another and distant body. I say it cannot be done by either of
these ways.

Weapon-salve works not by any Corporal effluxe.
For first of all, whereas corporal Fluxes can have no certain motion, but are
inordinately carried hither and thither, according to the motion of the Air,
how shall they directly come to the wounded person? Neither availes it, that
any one should flee for answer to the similitude of their substance. For
although such little bodies do in the end apply themselves to that which is of
their own kind, as we may see in the Thunder and Lightening: yet
notwithstanding, while they do first break out from their body, they do
inordinately wander about here and there. Much less is it availeable to flee
to the Spirit of the world; by which these little bodies, may be conveyed from
the anointed Weapon, to the wounds.

For those things concerning the Spirit of the World; are said, but are not
proved; yea rather are opposed, with sufficient strong Arguments. Moreover
seeing this Cure extends it selte far off, and as they will have it, for some
number of miles; if it should be done by the effusion of those small bodies;
whereas but a very little of the Ointment and less of the natural Balsam,
does adhere to the Weapon; that Ointment with the Balsam would easily turn
into Air and vanish away: and so the original of the Cure being taken away,
the cure of it self should cease.

But if they say that this Action is done by Species, or a magnetique action,
The Weapon Salve works not by Species.
they must first prove that there are such species in the Ointment. (For Nature
has given the power of sending forth species or semblances of this kind, to
some certain things simple and natural, not composed by Art,) and then they
must show us what the Nature of these things is, and what the Sphere is of
their activity. For neither is it credible, that the virtue of this Ointment
should extend it self Orbicularly, or every way round about for the space of
12. miles.

As concerning the Loadstone, from whence those actions use to be called
Magneticall, the Loadstone indeed attracteth the Iron which is a little way
distant from it; but that which is very far off, and beyond the Sphere of
its activity, it attracts not; which also is known to be done, in other occult
and magneticall actions of the same kind. The Loadstone also and other things
of this sort, put forth their virtue by a right line, which notwithstanding is
not extended in infinitum, or without limits; and oftentimes also is hindered
by the interposition of other things. So the Sunbeams are excluded by the
interposition of a dark body. Who therefore can believe, that out of so little
Ointment, and as little Blood, so many little bodies or Species can break
thorough the Chest in which the Weapon anointed is shut up, to be carried a
great distance even the space of twelve miles, to penetrate Mountains and
Walls, and directly to come to the wounded person, shut up in his Chamber, and
go through a great many Rollers in which the wound is wrapped, and insinuate
it self into the wound? The Loadstone is put to the Iron it self; but this
Ointment is not applied to the Wound but to the Weapon. The Loadstone applied
to the Iron, attracts it after one manner, but in the applying of this Ointment
aright, how many superstitious ways of anointing there are used; has bin
already declared. And in other respects too there is a great difference
between, the Loadstone and the Weapon salve: for the Loadstone is a natural
Body, and has its natural effects, which it always produces after the same
manner; the Weapon salve is a thing by diverse men compounded of different
ingredients, and made after a different manner, as has been said before.

This Ointment also by these men's opinions, is to produce diverse effects, and
to perform all things that are necessary to the healing of a wound: to keep
the wound free from pain, and if it be not kept orderly, or be soyled, to
cause pain. For if it ought to perform that in the cure of wounds, which
otherwise is the work of nature, it is necessary that it must do many
things: namely, it must digest that which is to be digested, it must expel
corruption and excrements, and beget flesh; and must do both the offices of a
Physician and Salve too, which are different. For neither are the bodies
wounded always of the same disposition, but some are sound, others are full of
corruption, and abound with vicious humors; the parts are diverse, as Flesh,
Nerves, Membranes, which require salves of diverse sorts, the efficacy of all
which, this Weapon salve must contain; And if one at the same time should
receive diverse wounds in diverse places, which often times falls out from diverse
weapons, is it enough to anoint one weapon for all? And is the efficacy
thereof carried to all the other wounds? Or must every particular weapon be
anointed? And whether will every particular Ointment or Salve do its proper
office, so that this goes directly to this wound, that was made by this
weapon, and that to that wound which was done by another weapon?

A reason also should be given, why the Ointment should not work the same
effect being in the box, which it will do, being anointed on the weapon.
Neither can it be, as they say, that the force of this Ointment should be
carried to the wound by the help of the Balsome, which is in the blood. For if
that blood it self should be reduced into Atoms, it were not able to reach
through such a great distance. Neither yet they proved that the blood can send
forth any such species; and if by the benefit of the blood the power of this
Salve, is carried to the wound, why then should it not carry to the wound the
efficacy of other things, on which the blood of the wounded is diverse times
shed, which we see is not done.

As for those things, which in particular they allege of the Secundines, and
first menstruous blood of Maids, and determine that if any abuse be done to
them, the women also suffer: those things are to be ascribed to the
Superstitions of women. For if in mankind the Secundines of women, being cast
into some sordid place, do annoy the party; why is it not so in Brutes, when
their Secundines are cast into the mire and rot? Besides, in what place soever
these Secundines be buried, yet they do putrify notwithstanding. Why do not
the exuberant lumps of flesh which women burn, do hurt to the women? Why does
the first menstruous blood being burnt annoy the Virgin, and not other that
comes after.

Therefore these things being so, we need not seriously to dispute what power
is in this Ointment, for the cure of a wound: seeing hitherto, we have
sufficiently proved, that none comes from the Ointment to the wound: and if
this have any power either of preserving or cherishing the temper of nature, or
heat of the part, (which they call Balsome) or drying up excrements: they
might better apply it to the wounded part, then anoint it on the Weapon.
Moreover, if the power and strength of this Ointment consist in the Fat or
blood of man, (as some would have it) why then do many of them apply it to the
wounds of some Beasts, for example, of Horses? For how great a difference is
there between a Man and a Horse?

But now whereas Crollius and some others (that I omit not their conceit) draw
the power of this Ointment from the Heavens, and therefore would have it made
in some certain Position thereof; neither does this further their cause. For
they have not yet proved, that there is any power of healing either in the
Heaven or in the Stars, or if there were, that they so communicate it to this
Ointment, that it being as it were shut up and kept close, may be carried up
and down, and when they please be produced into use.

Moreover for the manner of using this Ointment it has no ground, neither is
it without Superstition. For first, when they make the whole cause of the Cure
to be, that the power of this Ointment is convayed to the wound by reason of
that natural Balsome which is in the blood, why then do they anoint that
weapon with which a man was wounded, or another weapon or a piece of wood
besmeared with the blood of the wound; and do not anoint the shirt, or some
other garment of the affected person, or a stone or any thing else upon which
the blood is powered, if there be not some implicit compact contracted with the
Devil? And then if the wound be made by a Stab or point-wise they anoint the
weapon on the point toward the Hilt; and if with a blow from the edge, toward
the back, and if it may be seen how far the sword has penetrated the wound,
then they annoint it so far as it has penetrated; if not, they anoint it
all: which things are superstitious, whereof no reason can be given.

If the power of this Ointment be Natural, what effect does that manner of
annoynting produce? whether does it add any new power or quality? If the
virtue be natural, there needs no Ceremonies; as appears in all natural
things. The Loadstone draws Iron, and the Iron touched with the Loadstone
makes toward the Pole, without using any Ceremonies.

Moreover some annoint the Weapon once every day, some anoint it every other
day, some every third day, some only once: others lest they should fail in
the anointing of it, do for a perfect Cure bury the Weapon or a Sallow stick
that is instead of it; in the Ointment which is left in a Box, but they
neglect the Weapon who wholly cover it or that which is instead of it in the
Ointment; Others when they have anointed the Weapon keep it in some temperate
place, others shut it up in a Chest; and all of them take care, that the Weapon
be not in a place too hot or too cold, and that it be not soyl'd with any
durtinesse: For if this happen, it hinders the Cure, and brings great pain to
the affected and wounded person: All which things are frivolous and
superstitious; For seeing that it has been sufficiently proved, that there is
no action of this Weapon salve, on the wound, being far asunder from the
wound; neither can it cause any Grief. And therefore if it happen according to
the desire of him that uses the Medicine, it is done by the help of the
Devil. Doubtless the blood of wounded persons, is not always spilt in clean
places, but sometimes in foul ones; it is frozen in Winter, and the bloody
Rags are washed in warm water; Sticks sprinkled with the blood are burned, and
yet the wounded person feels no hurt.

Finally, they ascribe very impossibilities to this Ointment, and such
operations which in one natural medicine cannot be found. For they affirm
that all Wounds made with a stab, or with a blow, by a fall or by a throw, may
be cured by this Ointment. But great is the diversity of Wounds, according to
their several circumstances, and so not one only Salve, but diverse are
requisite to their Cure. A Wound made with a sharpe-pointed weapon, is cured
without the generation of much corruption. But in that which is bruised,
whatsoever is bruised must needs turn to corruption. There is great diversity
also in the parts; A wound in a fleshy part, especially in a sound and
well-tempered man, is easily cured, but far more difficult is it to cure a
wound, given in the Brain, Nerves, Sinews, Ligaments, especially the great
Ligaments, as those of the Hams: They promise also to cure wounds without any
Pain, which in every part to perform, is impossible. Verily if a Nerve be
pricked, no man can perform that the Patient, shall not be pained. And
therefore to conclude this business, the cure of a wound which is ascribed to
the Weapon-salve, is for the most part the work of mere Nature, which not
only cures small wounds, but very great ones; which appears from this, that
there are such diverse descriptions of this Weapon-salve; and that some instead
of this compounded Weapon-salve, use only Lard or Hog's Grease; and yet
nevertheless have cured wounds, which the forecited Johan. Colerus in his
Oeconom. in the place before cited, affirms he has seen. But if by the
application of this Ointment any very great wound be cured, so that it seem
to surpass the strength of Nature, this Cure is achieved by the help or
power of the Devil himself, drawn thereto by some close or open compact.

Neither does it take away the suspicion hereof will some say: namely, that all
the simples used in the composition of this Ointment are merely natural, and
that no Characters, Conjuratians or Charms, are used in the making or using
thereof. For the Devil can conceal his compact, not only under Characters
and Consecrations, and a set form of words, but also under natural causes: if
at his command things natural (which are used in the first and explicit
Covenant, to the which covenant others implicitly which use the same things,
may unawares interpose themselves) are used to another use, then they were
created of good: and so Magical and divelish actions are covered, and shifted
in under the veil of Magnetique actions. It being granted then (which for the
most part we affirm to be done by the benefit of Nature) that the wounded
person is healed by this Ointment; it is not impossible but credible, that the
Devil may some way help the body that he may destroy the soul. Seeing he is
man's greatest enemy, and by every way that he can, is ready to hurt him; and
therefore as much as in him lies, he draws man from God, our bountiful
Creator, and from means ordained by him, to things full of Superstition.

FINIS.

