A DISCOVRSE OF HIS OWN, OF THE MEANS AND SVFFICIENCIE OF ENGLAND, for to
have abundance of fine silk, by feeding of Silke-wormes within the same; as by
apparent proofs by him made and continued appears. For the general use and
universal benefit of all those his Countrie-men which embrace it.

printer's or publisher's device Pro patria pario.


blazon or coat of arms

TO THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE JAMES, BY THE Grace of God, King of Great
Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
MY desire to answer most dread Sovereign) the care and study of my
parents, so to breed me, as that I might be made fit for some serviceable
imployme^t in the Commonwealth, and the remembrance of that matter, whereunto
mine earthly part must return, being nothing else but food for worms, has
these 7. years entertained some part of my life, with an earnest or rather
burning desire, not only to learn and find out the readiest and assuredst way,
how to rear up, nourish, and feed Silkworms, the most admirable and
beautifullest clothing creatures of this world: but also the exactest and best
means to preserve and sustain the^, with no less affection to make good and
profitable use of both. Whereunto having in some small measure attained, am
willing for the public benefit of so many of my cou^trey-men, as shall as
thankfully embrace it, as I lovingly and freely offer it, to frame my labors as
motives and means for the^: to draw from their proper lands the inestimable
treasure of Silk (there til now enclosed and locked up,) ever since the first
Chaos. And to the end, that these mine endeauours might purchase the better
credit and allowa^ce with your Majesty: have Englished a most worthy and
select treatise of this subject, written in French by D'oliuier de Serres L* of
Pradel, with an annexed discourse of my own continued proofs in England, and
the sufficiency thereof, for the yielding of abundant store of pure Silk.
Wishing that after this my publishing of the^, the thing it self may fructify
and increase in such ample measure and proportion here, as it did there, when
mine Author had once brought his to view. Which undoubtedly will be done, if
your Highness will be graciously pleased to give life and strength to this my
sle^der and weak firstborne Impe, that thereby it may grow and spread like the
flourishing Cedar-tree of Libanus, to the perpetual, and universal good of all
that shall imitate mine example: and the granting thereof likewise by your
Majesty, will not only more earnestly stir the^ therein; but also encourage and
egg me on to perfect this work by longer and more continued practice and
experience; (if perhaps my through want of further knowledge) of the natures of
these excellent creatures, have left any part thereof defective or unpolished.
All I aim at is to do your Highness, and my Country service, where in I will
perpetually strive with irresistable perseuera^ce to mine uttermost, and will
ever pray to God for your Majesty's long and most happy reign over all your
Kingdoms and Dominions.

Your Majesty's most loyal and dutiful subject, borne and bound to do you
service: NICH. GEFFE.

TO MASTER NICHOLAS GEFFE.
AS thou dear friend with they industrious hand
Reachest this rich inualuable Clue;
So once Columbus offered to this land
That from which Spain her now-hie courage drue.
And had not she prouok'd by his designs,
Traueld to find what hidden was before,
Never had her Argo's from the Indian mines
Powered their full panches, on the Iberian shore.
From small beginnings how brave noble things
Have gathered vigor and themselves have reared
To be the strength and maintenance of Kings
That at the first but frivolous appeared:
So may thy Silk-wormes happily increase
From sea to sea to propagate their seed
That plant still, nourished by our glorious peace
Whose leaf alone, the laboring Worm does feed.
And may thy fame perpetually advance
Rich when by thee, thy country shall be made
Naples, Granado, Portugale, and France,
All to sit idle, wondering at our trade.
The tree acquainting with the British soil
And the true use unto our people taught
Shall trebble ten times recompense the toil
(From foreign parts) of him it hither brought,
In spite of them would rob thee of thy due,
Yet not deprive us of thy noble skill,
Still let fair virtue to her self be true,
Although the times ungrateful be and ill.
MICHAEL DRAYTON.

TO MA^^ER NICHOLAS Geffe, my esteemed friend.
Never was yet the subject in this land
H'as brought to light, like hope as thou have done,
Nor set his brains to work; nor moved his hand
More purposely, then what thou have begun.
Whilst greater heads were poring upon toys
Thine has been fraught this Island to advance
With studious care, and intermixed annoyes
And times expense; (sull seven ye'res perfectance)
Has made us freemen, of thy rich found trade,
And freely have imparted unto all;
The art, skill, means, and way have open laid
For to enrich the great ones and the small.
Spain shall hence forward keep her silks at home,
And Italy disperse hers where she may;
The Merchant shall not need so far to rome,
Since thou have shown a short and cheaper way
By silly worms, which ever heretofore
The use to keep with us has bin unknown,
To draw that great abundant fleece of store
From them, (by thy discovery amply showen)
The silken fleece to England thou have brought
There to endure till Doomes day cut her clue,
And when thy bones, the worms have eat to naught,
Yet shall the worms thy fame still fresh renew,
And ere thy name, thy house, thy stock, thy line,
Be highly honored by this great design.
GEO: CARR.

TO HIS OWN, WORTHY MASTER GEFFE.
LEt me (of those so many of our Clime,
Who stand to thee (sweet friend) in honor bound,
For thy dear pains conferred upon the time,
Who have for us, fame, pleasure, profit, found:)
Render thee thanks, that cannot speak thy praise,
Wishing all condign honor to thy days.
Henceforth the greedy prison shall not eat
Poor wretches, woeful mappes of misery,
Since in thy work all may some living get,
By use of much, or little industry,
Wherein the finest wits their power may strain,
The grosser, exercise their bodies pain.
Our populous land is free from foreign broile,
These iron times but little business give,
Yet now the discontent his head may toil,
And learn a quiet virtuous life to live.
A blessed medicine fair Employment is,
Cu'ring sick minds that else would do amiss.
Among'st those lands which sing the memory
Of their dear Children, who with pious care
Have them ennobled, by th'vtility
Of Arts, that long unto them hidden were:
Fair England boast's thy birth in happy hour,
Who to her garlond ad'st so rich a flower.
ROBERT GOODWIN.

THE PERFECT USE OF SILKE-WORMES AND THEIR BENEFIT.
IF the Silke-worme had been known by the ancient Authors and writers of
Agriculture and husbandry, we need not doubt, but the praise of so rich and
worthy a creature had been sung by them, as they have done that of Bees: but by
such default, it has remained without name many ages. Virgil discourses* as by
passing, of the rich fleece that the Forests of Ethiopia, and Setes brought
forth, without mentioning the quality or means to gather it See in these words.

Virg. Georg. 11.
Quid nemora Aethiop^^m molli canentia lana?
Velleraque vt folijs depectant tenuia Seres?
The first notice of silk at Rome.
From whence some, as Solin and Sernius, have thought this to be Silk and that
to proceed directly of the trees* Such has been the first notice of the Silk
given in Italy, which was in the reign of the Emperor Octauius Augustus
confirmed by Pliny more then seventy years after, (for he lived in the time
of Vespatian) he there to adds, that in the I Will of Coos, there grow, Cypres
trees, Turpentine trees, Ashes, and Oaks; of the leaves of which trees, fallen
to the ground in maturity, through humiditie of the same, breed worms
bringing forth silk. That in Assyria the Silke-worme called by the Greeks and
Latins, Bombyx, makes his neast upon the earth, which he fastens to the
stones, where it hardneth very much, remaining there conferued all the year,
that makes webs after the fashion of Spiders. Aristotle also says, that in the
I Will of Coos, Pamphyllia daughter of L^tous, was the first inuentris of spinning
and weauing silk, by the which intricate and folded* up discourses, compared
to the practick of these times, appears how far off the ancients were from
the true knowledge of the Silke-worme, having not known from whence they came,
nor how they are nourished, so by their silence they witness, in holding their
peace, of the eggs, and the leaves of the Mulberries for their food.

V^piscus witnesses, that in the time of the Emperor Aurelian (two hundred
years after Vespatian and more) silk was sold for the weight of gold, for
which dearnes, but especially for modesty, he would never wear to be all of
silk, but mingled with other matter; although Heliogabalus his predecessor was
not so sparing, as says Lampridius. Like modesty is noted of King Henry the
second, which would never wear silk stockings, although that in his time the
use of them was then received in France. Many others in diverse times, have
spoken of the silk, as Solin, Marcelin, and S^r^in^, which name the
Silke-worme Zir, from whence comes the Latin wood, Siricam, that is to say,
Silk, as witnesses Pausanias in his description of Greece, Martial also makes
mention of the silk by these verses.

Nec vaga tam tenui disc^rs^t aranea tela,
Tam leave nec Bombyx pendulus vrget opus.
And of the work of Silk-wormes Propertius says, Nec si qua Arabia lucet
Bombyce puella.


Vlpian an ancient Lawyer, speaks of the silk in the title De Auro and
Argento Legato, in this sort, vestimentorum sunt omnia lanea, lineaque vel
serica bombycina etc. It is a thing received of al, that the inhabitants The
beginning of the silk.
of the country of Seres, first of al manifested the silk, having brought the
seed from the I Will Taprobane, otherwise Sumata, situate under the Aequinoctiall,
in longitude from them of forty six, to forty eight degrees of latitude. The
country of Seres, so called of a city of the Province, is that which at this
day is named, Cattay and Cambalis, in East Asia, adjoining on the West to
Scytia Asiatick; and of the South to the Indies, governed by the great Cham of
Tartary. At the length these things came to light, by two Monks, which brought
from Sera a city of the country of Cattay the grain of Silke-wormes to
Justinian to Constantinople, (the reign of which Emperor began the year of
Christ 526.) from whence the knowledge of rearing and bringing up this
creature, is dispersed throughout all Europe. So Procopius has written after
many other. From the city of Panorme Where first of all the silk was wrought
in Europ, and finally
in Scicile is come the manner to use the silk, where first of all it was
showed by the means of certain workmen in this art, brought thither
prisoners by ^^ger King of the for^said I Will of Scicile, in the time of the
Emperor Conrade. Lastly these excellent sciences have taken footing in certain
Provinces of this realm, but by tract of time and distances, not all at once*

For as God has accustomed to distribute his benefits by little and little, so
much the better to make us relish his graces: so the knowledge of the Mulberry
tree has first been given unto us, after that the use of it, to the end to
make provision of food, before we charge our selves with the creature.

In what time, and in what Province of this kingdom.
I will not here reckon the causes and times of their more forward bringing in
into this Realm, but in the reign of Charles the 8. in the voyage that this
King made to the kingdom of Naples, the year a thousand, four hundred,
fourscore and fourteen, some Gentlemen of his train, having noted the
richnes of the silk, at their return home did affect to provide their houses
of such commodity. Afterward the wars of Italy ending, they sent to
Naples, to fetch pla^ts of Mulberries, which they placed in Prouence, by reason
of the little distance of climates of each country, making the enterprise
easy. Some say it was in the borders of such a province, joined with that of
Dauphine, where the Mulberries first grew, marking also Alan, near to
Montellimar, which was then planted by the means of his Lord, which
accompanied the King in his voyage: As the old great white Mulberries yet at
this day to be seen, give some assurance. But be it there, or elsewhere, it is
certain that in diverse places of Prouence, Langredoc, Dauphine, the
principality of Crenge, and above all the County of Venessaine and the
Arshbish opricke of Auignon, (for the great commerce that they have with the
Italians) the Mulberries and their service are at this present very well
known, there also the handling of the silk appears in great beauty; where
continually increases an earnest desire to plant Mulberries, for the
experimented commodity which comes of them. In su^me, there the Mulberry is
held for the most assured penny falling into the purse. At Toures this business
is already received with great profit and applause; and certain years since
has begun to manifest it self at Caen in low Normandy; yet unknown to the
Silk will come fair and good throughout all this Realm, a few places excepted.
rest of this kingdom, through the careless retchlesnesse of the inhabitants,
and to the great shame, almost of all these provinces, seeing that in them the
Mulberrie, and Silk-worme may live and profit. For the affection I bear to the
public, I have in the beginning of the year a thousand five hundred eighty
nine caused to be printed a particular Treatise of this food and norture,
entitled, The gathering of the Silk, and addressed it to those of the common
Counsel of the city of Paris, to the end that thereby their people might be
sufficiently stirred up, to draw from the entrails and bowels of their lands,
the rich treasure of silk therein hidden. By this means, bringing to light
the millions of gold enclosed and locked up: and by such riches to finish the
honor of their city, with this last of her ornaments, abounding above the rest
in all sorts of riches. Amongst the pleasant places of the void fields of
Paris, I have marked Madril, and Vicenes wood, royal mansions, and very
capable to receive and norish three hundred thousand Mulberries, for the
largenes and quality of their grounds, and faculty of the air, the leaves of
such trees in their times, may be happily and profitablie employed; The
appearance of which is great, to draw from thence abundance of silk, for the
public commodity, and particular profit of the city of Paris, when by
dressing of the silk, it shall nourish infinite numbers of people of her
proper inhabitants, and poor and miserable folks, which flock thither from
all the Provinces of the Realm.

What places it desires.
Where the Vine grows, there also will come the silk, an apparent
demonstration, sufficiently verified by reiterated experiences, in diverse
countries discordant of climats. Nay going farther, where the Mulberry only
lives, without speaking of the Vine, the Silk-worme will not choose but profit;
as is known not long since, within the city of Leiden in Holland, in the
years a thousand five hundred ninety three, nintie four and ninty five; where
the Noble Duchess of Ascot caused to be nourished Silkworms with good
success, and of the silk which came of them, was made apparel, which her
gentlewomen wore, with great wonder of those which saw it, because of the
coldness of the country. Histories record that in the time of the ancient
Gauls, France brought forth no wine: behold now at this day abundantly
provided of so exquisite a drink, by dexterity of those which have opportunly
employed their profitable curiosity. Many beasts and strange plants, consent to
live amongst us with requisite care, (which former times held impossible) the
which every one notes almost every where, without coming to examples. I will
not here reckon up the Orange trees, Lymon trees, Pouncitron trees, and other
precious trees, which are nourished in all aires and countries, though never so
cold, seeing that in such curiosity ^unnes out great expense.

The care of gathering the silk is not alike, the end of that is profit, not
only particular delectation. For there is no heed at all to be taken for the
Mulberries which as in the open field, it is only for the little cattle that
fears the cold, which would be preserved from it. And what thing is easier to
do then that, how cold soever the country be, seeing the Silk-wormes are
lodged in houses, and not abroad, and also in a season, not altogether cold but
in the spring time, and part of the summer? All the hindrance that can be here
alleged, is, that the gathering the silk will be more late then in a south
country: what imports that, so one has abundance of good and fine silk, if
one reapes not in the north parts in May and June, as they do in Languedoc and
Prouence, if they do it in July and August? In like manner, we want no store
of good wine in France, though our vintage be not so soon as in hotter
countries. The Mulberries have foregone the knowledge of nourishing the Worms,
as I have said, in attending the which, many upon hearesaie, were constrained
in vain to nourish Silk-wormes, and have discredited such husbandry, esteeming
this cattle can profit but in places where they hauebeen of long time
naturalizde, whereby, with impatience have extirped and pulled up the Mulberries
as unprofitable trees, which before, and at the first report of their worth,
they had planted with great affection. But those which constantly have attended
the seasons, are proved better husbands, and abundantly provided of Mulberry
leaves, then, when the knowledge to guide and conduct this creature is known:
an example which is marked at Nismes, and in many other places of Languedoc,
serving for instruction of those which at this day will delight in so profitable
an husbandry: the which to their conte^tment they shall find in these
discourses, assembled the Sciences, both to dress the trees, and nourish the
creatures: whereby they shall be delivered from the trouble of a languishing
attempt, and the hazard of ill feeding the Worms.

Silk brought first into the heart of France by the King.
The King right well knowing these things, by the discourse which he commanded
me to make for him on this subject, the year a thousand five hundred ninety
eight, resolved to have white Mulberrie trees brought up in all the gardens of
his houses. And for this effect, in the year following that his Majesty went
the voyage of Sauoy, sent into Prouence, Languedoc, and Viuares* Monsieur de
Bordeaux, Baron of Colences, general Surueyor of the gardens of France, a Lord
accomplished with all rare virtues* and by this same way the King honored me to
write unto me, to employ me for recovery of the foresaid plants; to which I
gave such diligence, that by the beginning of the year 1601, there was brought
to Paris to the number between fifteen and twenty thousand. The which were
planted in diverse places in the gardens of Tuilleries, where they are happily
sprung up. And his Majesty not willing that such treasures should remain any
longer thrust together in certain corners of his realm, but that his people
should universally relish them, adding to the riches of the peace, which by his
means and the celestial favor, all France most quietly enjoys, has
ordained by the Commissioners already deputed by his Majesty for the general
commerce, should advise for the most easiest dispatches that might be
possible, to furnish his kingdom with Mulberries, to the end to gather silk
from them; and in going on to establish the handiworke. Upon which, and
following his Majesty's will, after good and mature deliberation, contracts
were passed with the merchants upon this subject, at Paris the fourteenth of
October and the third of December a thousand six hundredth and two, confirmed
authorized, and ratified by Letters Patents of his Majesty, containing the
furnishing of the said Mulberries in the four generalities of Paris, Orleans,
Toures, and Lion. Also of a certain quantity of seed or grain of the said
trees, to be dispersed by the elections of the said Generalities. And for so
much more to accelerate and advance the said enterprise, and to make known and
diuulge the facility of this work, his Majesty caused expressly to be
builded a great house at the end of his garden of Tuilleries at Paris,
furnished with all necessaries, as well for feeding the Worms, as for the first
works of the silk: enioyning furthermore, that all the leaves that might be
found, as well of white, as black Mulberries, already planted in diverse places
of the said generalities, should be taken by the expertests for this deputed,
and employed to the nourishing of the Worms the said year, to the end to give
general notice that the temperature of the air, and francknesse of the soil
are more then sufficient to bring forth silk, in like or better force, luster,
and goodness than that which we have accustomed to receive with great expense,
from provinces the most farthest off. All which things have so easily sprung
out through the grace of God, and the good success of our Prince, for whom
theheauens have reserved all the most excellent inventions of our age, that we
must no more doubt, but within short space, by the co^tinuation of his thrice
excellent beginnings, France shall see it self redeemed from the value of more
then four millions of gold, that every year goes out for furniture of
stuffes compounded of this substance, or of the matter it self, to the end to
work it in this kingdom. Behold the beginning of the introduction of silk
into the heart of France, where the example of his Majesty has been joined to
his commandments with great efficacy, for the good of his people.

Into Germany by the Duke of Wittenberge.
And as by commendable emulation, worthy Sciences never rest in one only
place, but pass ever forwarder in the spirits of virtuous personages, it is
come to pass not long since, that Frederick Duke of Witenberg, a Prince
meriting all praise, has established in his territories, both the feeding of
the Silk-wormes, and the handling of such matter. The success whereof has
been so fortunate in the beginnings, that those have been constrained to
confess the enterprise to be profitable, which before condemned the counsel
of it, builded upon the coldness of the country of Germany.

The Worm brings forth Silk.
But seeing that the silk comes directly from the Worm, which vomits forth
all the silk; and the Worm proceeds from the grain, the which is kept ten
months of the year, as a dead thing, taking life again in his season. The
worm is nourished of the leaf of the Mulberrie, the only victual of this
creature, which living no longer then six, seven, or eight weeks, more or
less, according to the country and constitution of the year (the heat
shortning his life, and on the contrary the cold lengthening it) within this
little while, by the silk which he leaves us* he paieth largely the expe^ce of
his feeding. As the nations are sundry which keep him, so is he named
diversely. The Greeks and Latins have called him Bombyx: and at this day in
Italy, Caualieri, and Bachi; and in Spain, Glauor: in France, Vers-a-soye; in
Languedoc, Prouence and there abouts, Magniaux.

What earth and what manuring the Mulberrie desires, what seed of worms is
to be chosen, what lodging, and what handling the beast requires, which comes
of those, what is his bearing and use, shall be showed hereafter. By which
discourses, shall clearly appear the riches of this food: and that the land
employed to such husbandry, brings more money in less time, than by other
fruits which may be planted on it, at least, whereof one may make any account.
An audit of the expense, and the coming in of this feeding.


Commonly, a thousand pounds of the leaves of Mulberries being ten hundred
weight, is sufficient to satisfy and feed an ounce of the seed of
Silk-wormes; and the ounce of grain, makes five, or six pounds of silk;
every pound being worth two or three crowns, and more; wherefore ten or twelve
crowns come of ten hundred wait of leaves: the which quantity twenty, or
five and twenty trees of a mean sise will always bring forth; yea a much
less number will suffice them, if they be old trees and great, as there are in
many places, as near Auignon, being so ample and abundant in arms and
branches, that one tree will furnish with sufficient leaves to feed an ounce
of seed. But because such trees so qualified are very rare, there is no
certain account to be made. For the cost of the affair, the fourth of the
total is taken: so there remains three parts of liquid reuenew, which makes
seven crowns and a half, or nine crowns, that twenty, or five and twenty
Mulberries will bring every year. I confess that always an ounce of seed
does not make five or six pound of silk, for sometimes it makes almost
nothing; when by the infelicitie and unluckiness of the season the leaf being
ill qualified, by unwholesome nourishment, causes diverse maladies in the Worms,
when the pest is rife amongst this cattle; or when their stages are not made
very firm where the Worms are lodged, falling upon them are surely killed,
or when by other accidents they die. But likewise it is a thing confessed of
all those which exercise themselves to this food, that such a year happens,
when an ounce of feed will arise to make ten pound of silk and more: and that
is then when the race of the creature, his lodging, his food, the time, the
hand of the governor, do acccord and agreee for the good of this household.
And who knows not that corn, wine, fruits of trees, and cattle, of ten times
fail by tempests, drowthes, humidities, and other excesses of the year? And
who would desist from tilling and sowing the ground, or who would stub up his
Vines and trees, or casshier the food of this little beast, for their failing
in some year? There is none to be found so brainlesse and ill advised. It shall
appear hereafter that by the government of this creature there can be nothing
raised without curiosity, diligence, and expense: For the which things many
despise this household, as fantastique, painful, and chargeable. But they
deceive themselves, because they consider not, that for moderate hire, one
shall find people ^now sufficient exactly understanding this art, which will
undergo the charge of all that which depends upon it.

Of gathering the leaves.
And for to particularise the expenses, I may say, that an hundredth or sixskore
gatherers, whereof three quarters, are women, or boys* are sufficient to
gather all the leaves necessary to feed ten ounces of the seed of the Worms,
and to bring them into the place of the cattle, the Mulberries being not far
distant from the house as is requisite. To the payment of which work for the
quality of the persons, arises not to much money. For it is in victuals that
the most is consumed. But if the feeding of the leafegatherers trouble you; for
money only you may be supplied with their service by the day, or by the
gathering, according to the order of many cities where such traffic is used.

The wages of the Governor.
Touching the governor, his wages are commonly two, three, or four crowns a
month, besides his diet: and his charge is to govern the Worms, and to hatch
them from their seed even till their silk be made; that is to say, to render
it wound up* One only man will govern so many Worms as you will, provided he
be assisted: the which will be done with folk of little price, seeing all
sorts of persons, men and women are capable of it.

Touching the seed.
As for the feed of the Worms, you are not to reckon up that which they have
cost you, because they will restore you enough every year in renewing the^, for
the conservation of the grain. But here will lie such expense in the rank of
that made in the buying of bords and tables, for the skaffolds, as also for the
making fit the lodging: these things are to be ordained for the groundwork of
this revenue being durable, and without consuming, at the least but very
little. And although it is requisite to have every year some small quantity of
new seed, to continue a good race, as shall be said, yet is there for that no
more expense, seeing that of the sale of the seed, which you shall reserve, you
may buy of another for your purpose.

Upon which discourses making your account, you shall find that much better
cheap you shall keep the Worms coming of ten ounces of grain, then five and
twenty or thirty sheep: for the which, yea for less number, you must keep a
shepherd all the year* which are three hundred sixty five days. So by that
you evidently see how much the expenses of one cattle differs from the other:
And by this reckoning, which of the two makes more revenue, though that by
universal judgment the yielding of sheep is very profitable. And doubt not,
but that Cato in his answers touching feeding, for to become rich, had meant
it of the Silke-worme, if This feeding hinders no work of the ground.
he had had the knowledge of it. The feeding of Silke-wormes is likewise very
commendable, because they hinder not any work of the fields; coming in the
months of April and May, when they have no other occupation to call them from
it. Giving such backwardnes, a mean for the master easily to find sufficient
people to serve this turn: the which in this time having no other business, are
very easy to be had, to get their living, and some piece of money, to come
forth out of the back season of the year; whereby the nourishing of this
cattle is made more easy, by them only contemned, which know not how much the
ell is worth: But for the rest, the licorishnesse of the coin, that they draw
from it (without loss of their other husbandry, but as casual accounts)
affects them continually, to plant new Mulberrie trees, with augmentation of
the number, in like sort to augment their revenue.

Of the Mulberrie trees.
The Mulberry trees being the chiefest foundation of this reave(...)e, that
shall be the first whereat you shall level, for to plant so great a quantity,
and so soon, that in a short time they may give you contentment. The which you
cannot hope of a small number while they are young, for the little leafe-age
which they render, till they are come to a mean growth. But to attend while
the Mulberries have reached their perfect greatness, and not till then to
disleaue them, to serve in this purpose, would be to pass your time without
tasting the sweetness of this revenue. Wherefore it is necessary to have
abundance of these trees, to the end that of many little ones, you may draw as
many leaves, as from a few great ones. So without much tarrying after their
planting, you shall reap pleasure and profit within a few years. Such a great
quantity of Mulberries may be limited to two or three thousand trees; a less
number, I think the master of the work ought not to enterprise this business
withal: because here is a question of the profit, which cannot grow but of a
sufficient number of trees. For the particular nature of the work, it is
necessary here to employ it in a great volume, otherwise the play will not be
worthy the candle; that being for women, which for pleasure nourish some few of
this creature. Yet the master of the work shall not stay here in so fair a
way, but shall augment always his Mulberrie yard, thereto adding every year
certain hundreds of Mulberrie trees, for that at the length, plentiously
abounding in leaves, he may have wherewith to nourish great quantity of Worms;
and the rest also for the succor of his trees, whereof a part shall rest, as
shall be demonstrated in these discourses following.

The 7. book, 7. chapter of Husbandry.
Of the order requisite to plant, and bring up the Mulberries, is not here a
question to speak of, elsewhere the Science being showed: but very well to
represent the observations necessary for their situation and entertainment;
that the trees may be conveniently lodged and governed, to endure long in
service. For not taking good heed, within a little time they will fail, as
waxing old in their first youth. These trees are so easy to take root, that
wheresoever it please you, you may bring them up: but with much more
advancement, they will grow in a fat and moist ground, then in a lean and
dry. For the quantity of the leaves, it is to be desired, to plant the trees
in a good soil, but not for the quality; because that the leaf never comes
forth so fruitfully out of the fat earth as out of the lean (having that of
common with the Vines) whereof the most exquisite grow in a light molde, so
that that land there brings a gross and fulsome leaf, and this here a
delicate and sauorous; likewise of the nurture of this latter leaf, the Worms
commonly make a good end; the which happens very rarely of the other, yet that
The fifth place for good and wholesome leaves.
is by the meeting of a kindly season. The leaves of Mulberries will be well
qualified as appertains, if you plant them in a lean place, and far from
springs of water, provided that they he exposed to the Sun, for with the Vines,
the Mulberries hate a watrish and shadowie situation: in some there will be
the most assured food, where thevines grow best. And though that the Vine, and
the Mulberries, to compare them together, brings forth more in a strong ground
then in a feeble; yet so it is that the little of their bearing being delicate,
is more to be prized then the abundance of that which is gross. Adding, that
touching this cattle here, one cannot abuse nor deceive him in giving him
meat, contrary to his nature, for either he will refuse to eat it, or eating
of it will never do well. And this his delicateness, turns to the profit of
his master, which imployes his lean grounds in Mulberries, and by consequent
occupies not his fertile plow-lands, which remain to him francke, and not
charged with these trees: of which the importunity is very great oppressing by
the roots and branches, almost all sorts of seed which can be sowed near
them. But to think also to plant Mulberries in a base and infertill ground,
that should be a falling into extremity, grossly deceiving ones self, for
the little growth they will make although they take there; their tarditie
giving you cause enough to repent you of this Where to plantthe Mulberrie.
counsel. These shall be then the places where you shall edify your
Mulberries, which you shall judge proper for the vine; that is to wit, in a
soil of a mean goodness rather dry then moist, light then heavy, sandy then
clayie. Such a ground will bear leaves to your desire, and in a mean
quantity whereby you shall have sufficient, by the way of numbers of trees,
amplifying them as has been said.

How to dispose the Mulberries for woods in ranckes.
From four to four fathoms, or from five to five, in all paths to the line,
you shall plant the Mulberries if you will make forests of them and desiring
to dispose the^ by ranks at the borders of your plough lands, or about the
sides of other possessions; they may be planted somewhat nearer together
without restraining the^ too much: the which cannot be done without great loss
to the trees: one may very well amplify the distance, as much as one will, for
the Mulberries cannot be set too far a sunder, seeing the appare^t profit that
the air, the Sun, and the amplitude of the grounds, aides to the growing great
of the trees, and goodness of the leaves. But for that, the only sides and By
allies.
borders of arable lands, Vineyardes and other parts of a demeanes moderately
large, do not suffice to receive a great number of Mulberries requisite for
abundance of food: and that elsewhere, the leaves of the trees which are within
the thickets, is not so good as those about, because they neither have sun nor
winds at liberty. A mean between these two extremes has been found,
conveniently to plant the Mulberries, for the profit of their leaves, and
without hindering the tillage of good lands; that is, to plant the Mulberries
amongst the lands, in double racks equally distant two fathomes and a half,
being of like measure espaced one tree from an other, the two rancks making one
alley, and to dispose the allees in length and cross the field, intercrossing
one another, leaving great square plots empty, every one co^teyning an acre,
or more if one will, there to sow corn, which will be reaped without being
trowden down by the gatherers of the leaves: But these will be the allies,
which only will suffer the treading down, where for their small occupation of
ground, the loss of the corn will not be great. It will likewise be
necessary to plant the trees in such sort, that they be not one right against
the other, to the end not to enterpresse, rather that he of one rank be set
against the empty place of the other, by that they will have air enough to
grow flourishngly by the aid of the Sun, which will remain free for them on
the sides of the great squares. In the which, not only may be commodiously
sown corn, but also planted vines where they will profit; being not there too
much cloyed with the shadow of the trees, yea spread with pastures, having but
given to the trees 4 or 5 years, for to root. For by the manner of the parted
land, of the allies, well tilled, and sometimes dunged the Mulberries will
profit enough. For the hard turfe of the pasture cannot much hurt them, seeing
it joins but on one side. So shall the Mulberrie-yard be directed, with much
profit for the good of the leaves, and without any thing hindering the demeanes;
which so furnished with Mulberries will remain most pleasant to behold, so
will they spread and amplify, so much the better, the more often the master
shall visit his land, as to that he shall be stirred up by the easy walks in
these fair allies, in which, if it seems him good, he shall sow some
grains, as oats or field pease, which will always pay for tillage of the
ground.

The sorts of the Mulberries.
There are two races of Mulberries discerned by these words, black and white,
discordant in wood, leaf and fruit: having nevertheless that in common to
spring late, the dangers of the coldes being past, and of their leaves to
nourish the Silk-worme. One sees but one sort of the black Mulberries the
wood whereof is solid and strong, the leaf large and rude in the handling,
the fruit black, great, and Three colors of fruit of white Mulberries.
good to eat. But of the white, there is manifestly known three species, or
sorts, distinguished by the only color of the fruit, which is white, black,
and red, so separately brought forth by diverse trees, bearing all nevertheless
the name of white. This fruit is little disagreeable of taste, for his flashie
sweetness, whereby it is not edable by others then by women which have lost
their relish, children, and poor people in time of famine. For the rest they
resemble all three one another, discording nothing by themselves; neither in
leaves which they bring forth of a mean greatness and a smooth feeling: nor in
wood, being yellow within, as that of the black Mulberry, and almost as firm,
by reason whereof all these Mulberries are proper and fit for Ioyners work.
The leaf coming of the black Mulberries, The silk takes his quality of the
leaf.
makes the silk gross, strong, and heavy: on the contrary that of the white,
fine, weak, and light: so different through diversity of the nature of the
leaves, wherewith the Worms are nourished, which they yield of their work. For
which many desiring to compound these things in hope of profit, feed the
Worms with two sorts of meats, by distinction of times; that is to say at the
beginning, with white leaves, to have the silk fine; and in the end with
black to fortify it, and make it weigh. In which always they meet not:
sometimes the changing of the meat, as of the delicate, into gross, being not
agreeable to the Worms which are importuned and cloyed with it. Nor shall it
be to purpose for the gross founding which one would give to the silk,
holding a contrary way, to begin by the black leaf and end by the white. So
such mingling of meats is not received in the great feedings of the
Silke-wormes, but only where the leaf of the white Mulberrie is rare, invented
for necessity. For the most assured, it shall be all of one victell, wherewith
we will nourish our Worms, and that of the most profitable, which yeeldes to
silk; the which how much the more fine it is, so much the more prized, and in
the ensuing so much more money it gives, the end and period of this business.
And yet though that the white leaf makes the silk feeble and light, you must
not for that set it behind the black: seeing the same discords not so much in
his qualities from that coming of the black leaf, but that there remains
force enough for the most exquisite works, and weight sufficient to bring in
reasonable sums. This is in comparison of that silk there, that this is held
light and weak: such being the difference between gross and subtle things.
Nevertheless one must not be so scrupulous, as utterly to reject the black
Mulberries for the silk, but only for the mingling of the food, it being not
permitted in the nourishing of them, but by constraint, as I have said.
Touching that which remains, there are countries where they are very
profitable for this business: as in diverse places of Lumbardie, and hitherwards
in Anduze, and Alez, and in other places toward the Seuenes of Languedoc,
where great profit is made of the silk which comes of the black Mulberries.
And although that such sorts of silk for the grosenes, be but of little price,
in respect of the other, yet leaves it not for that, but to bring in a good
revenue, considering the quantity. Jointly that for the sale, it is found
necessary, though it be course, in many works in which it is employed.

The white Mulberries grow faster the^ the black.
If your land be already planted with black Mulberries, keep you there without
affecting your self to accompany them with white, for the reason alleged: but
being a question to begin the husbandry, having not any Mulberries, of one
sort, nor other, preferring the better before the good; you shall always choose
the white for your Mulberrie-yard. In which it seems that nature her self
incites us by the fore growing, that she has given to the white Mulberrie
beyond the black: it being an assured thing that the white Mulberries do more
easily take, and grow then the black, advancing more in two years, then the
other in six. Besides which commodity, the branches which by that speedy
shoot they bring forth, is cut at times, as wood, augmenting the revenue of
such trees.

How to choose the best kind of Mulberries.
Amongst the white Mulberries yet there is choice: By the searching out of
some, it has been found that the leaves coming of the white Mulberrie,
bearing the black berries are better then any other. Of which curiosity
making use, we will furnish our Mulberrie-yard, if it be possible, only with
the Mulberries of such sort, to the intent that in our nurture, nothing be
wanting. Nevertheless as the humors of men are diverse, some hold that the
leaves of the trees bearing the white Mulberries, are the best: proving their
opinion by the poullen and swine, which never delight in the fruit of the
Mulberrie trees bearing red and black berries, but through want of others, by
that deeming them most delicate. Above all be sure to banish from your
Mulberrie-yard the leaves too much indented, for besides that, it is an
apparent sign of small substance, it abounds not so much in food, as that
which has To graft those Mulberries which have need.
less nickes. Wherefore the remedy is to inoculate such trees in the budde or
scutchion having need of such freedom, whence the profit which comes of it is
great for this food; seeing that by this means, the little of the naughty and
wretched leaves, may be converted into abundance of substantial and good,
with as much advantage, to change in orchards, by like art the savage and
wild fruits, into manured and good, a notable article and point for this
husbandry. This infra^chising may be practiced to your wish in Mulberries of
all ages, young and old, in those here, on their new shoots of the precedent
year, the trees having bin then poled (or without so much delaying, to have
dissheaded them in the month of March, and June following to graft them) and
in those there upon the smallest trees of the nurserie. To graft these trees in
their tender youth is much to be prized, for the advantage to be had in making
the Mulberry ground entirely affranchised. For providing that certain hu^dreds
of trees may be grafted, it suffices once for all, without constraint to
return back again; so that the nursery be always kept full; the which is
done by planting the branches coming from the grafts, of the which so many
trees will grow up, as there are branches couched in the ground, and of those
afterward others coming forth, are of the same planted infinitely; from
which, the trees coming of them for ever are furnished with excellent leaves,
sweet and great: and by consequent exempt from all wildness; exquisite and
abundant in nourishment. See what places and trees you are to choose for your
Mulberry yardes, to the end to have abundance of good silk.

To gather the leaves for to be given to the Worms.
For the order which one is to hold in gathering the mulberry leaves, for the
victuales of these creatures, consists the second article of this work, for
to make the trees of a perpetual service. It is to be noted, that to pluck
off the leaves bringes great damage to al trees, oftentimes even causing them
to dye: but seeing that the Mulberry is destined to that, it naturally
supporteth such tempest better then any other plant: yet nevertheless you must
go to it very retentiuely, for to disleaue the Mulberrie inconsideratlie is
the way to scorch them, for ever, to cause them miserably to die in
languishment. Every one confesses that to gather the leaves with both hands,
leaf after leaf, without touching the shoot, is the most assured way for
conservation of the trees; but yet the most expensiue, because of the great
number of necessary persons for such work. For to spare cost, the vulgar
proceeds in an other sort, which is in stripping of the leaves by handfuls,
the which cannot be done but that often the branches are barked and sliued,
whereby at the length the trees perish. And also this gathering corrupts and
soyles the leaves, to the detriment of the Worms, when in taking them after
the fashion, as they use to milk kine, one crushes them, as though one would
make the joyce come forth: and most oftentimes with unclean hands, causing
them to have an ill smell and savor.

These losses may be prevented, if after the uses of In cutting them off with
sheeres.
certain places in Spain, the leaves be gathered, by shearing of them from
the trees with great taylers sheeres: the which cutting many stalks at once,
and that falling upon sheets spreed under the treee, the expense being
moderate, as by being directly carried to the little beasts, without any
sorting, as necessarily it behooves to do before to employ them, in separating
that which is spoiled, from the good, and the young springs with it, which for
their tenderness are hurtful to the Worms, seeing that in using the sheeres
one spares the tops of the trees, taking none but the well qualified leaves.
Of this invention one cannot indifferently be furnished every where, but only
where the situation of the trees favors the work, fitly to spread the
sheets, receptacles of the leaves, nor likewise in windy nor rayny times; the
which is committed to the discretion of the worke-master, for to employ it
finding the commodity. For want of which clipping one may draw the leaves the
most gently that one can, and with the smallest detrime^t of the trees that may
It behooves their hands be washed before they gather the leaves.
be possible; the gatherers of the leaves shall wash their hands before they
touch them, and shall repose them in very clean sackes, to the end they may
be preserved from all soil.

The trees suffer less when one clipes them, than The danger of the leaves
which are not well governed
when one disleaues them otherwise: nevertheless although one goes to it very
vigila^tly, it is always with their loss, whereby at last they perish,
pulling every year the value of their leaves vnmeasurably, that their vigor
decays. The which is the principal cause that the keeping of the Worms is
not always of like yielding, the one as others, seeing other then good leaves
cannot succesfully nourish these creatures. For that cannot be good which
comes of a tree ill governed in taking of the leaves, but only that tree which
having been well handled during the precedent years, remains vigorous. For
so those deceive themselves, which without taking near heed to this, sink
themselves in this business. From thence proceeds the most frequent defaults of
this food, and not of the nature of the work as scrupulouslie, nay
superstitiouslie and fantastiquely many of the vulgar ignorants hold, that they
cannot meet well two years together for some hidden imperfection, that they
hold to be in this creature, that some gives without any reason, taking for
their lodging no heed to the things It shall be good to disleaue the trees but
once in two years.
aforesaid. To the end therefore to assure this business, for one which ought to
have preeminence, you shall advise touching the Mulberries, in placing and
governing them as I have said. And going on farther, to have so great a
quantity of these trees, if it be possible, that the only half may suffice
for your food, which shall be disleaued while the other will make ready for
the next year following. After the imitation of arable lands, enter changing
every year, the Mulberrie-yard divided in two parts shall serve, and rest;
whereby the trees will be maintained in perfect state, abundantly to furnish
with good leaves for many generations, as well for the trees not to be so much
tormented in their branches as by this resting, there roots will have to be
tilled without expense, for that the cost of plowing will arise from the corn
which one sowes in that part of the resting ground (remaining from the
annoyance of the Mulberries) the which only one shall sow with corn, leaving
the other vnsowen the year of disleauing your Mulberries, so much the more
easy to gather the leaves of the trees, without laying the corn; as without
such order one should do in treading it down, by this means drawing the
worthy yielding both of the trees and ground. (...) which comes of it.
Over and besides this notable commodity there is joined, that then when by
luckie food the leaves ordained for the Worms, want, as some times that
happens with great displeasure and sorrow to see them perish through famine,
the Worms are happily succored with the leaves which one takes of the trees
that rest, here and there, in many trees and in diverse places, without damaging
them in such quantity as is requisite for the perfection of the enterprise: and
also that under the Mulberries all sort of seeds can hardly thrive, for the
hinderance of the roots and branches of these trees, as has been said; yet so
it is that the loss will be less, the less the corn being there is trodden
down; as freed from such tempest, it will remain which there shall be sown
in the manner aforesaid, the yielding of which, although it be but little, will
defray the tillage, whereby in this place you shall do that which you desire,
that is, you shall keep in good temper the roots of your trees.

What seed to sow under the Mulberries with smallest loss.
Of all grains those which most constantly endure the detriment of the
Mulberries, are, oats and field pease, although one be constrained to tread
them down, for the gathering of the leaves, yet cannot one do them great hurt,
by reason that the blades of these grains will be then backwards, when the
trees shall be disleaued, having not yet much grown, which also somewhat helps
them, having pressed them to the earth; a thing which cannot be done to
wheat, rye, nor barley, by reason whereof one cannot sow them conveniently in
the Mulberryyard but by constraint. But to sow nothing at all in the
Mulberrie-yard, and yet less, not to till the ground, for the good of the
Mulberries, would be too expensiue; which will be spared by the way
aforesaid. To soil these trees is likewise requisite; it is To soil the
Mulberries.
to be understood of those which by the leanness of the ground remain in
languishment, the which by such handling, are helped to continue their service,
the want of doing the which will cause them to fail The leaves of the old
Mulberries are very good.
before their time. Experience shows that the leaves of the old Mulberries, are
more profitable and healthful for the Worms, than those of the young ones;
provided that they be not fallen into extreme decay, but retayning their
ancient vigor, having yet some remainders of strength; communicating such
quality with the Vine, which brings better wine, old, When the leaves of the
young ones are good.
then young. And as the Vine begins to bear good wine after the seven or eight
first years of his planting; so likewise the Mulberries in the same age* open
the gate to their assured reuenew, so that from thence ever after, one shall
not fail to draw from them their hoped-for service. Many nevertheless at this
day do not tarry till this term; using without delay all sorts of leaves, even
of the youngest Mulberries, being yet in the nurserie, before their replanting.
But it is with more uncertainty of a good issue than of that growing on trees
already grown to perfection, according to the more common usage.

When and how to prune the trees.
So soon after you shall have bared the trees, of their leaves, you shall
cause them to be pruned, in cutting off all that shall be found broken and
writhed with tempest of disleauing, to the end they may put forth to shoot
afresh, the which without that, they will never do well, but languishingly.
The last gatherers of the leaves shall be then followed foot by foot, with a
couple of men that shall so dress the Mulberries, the which shall cut the dead
wood, the disbarked branches writhed and shiuered: likewise the tops of all the
others, in what part of the tree soever they be, above, or on the sides; for to
constrain the trees to cloth themselves afresh, and of this new shoot to
bring forth for the next year after abundance of leaves, tender and delicate.
And whether it be in gathering the leaves, or in pruning the trees, it behooves
you to be careful to bare them entirely, without leaving them any leaves: for
fear to turn back their liberal new spring an observation; that practice
has taught a little while since, against the custom, which was, not to touch
the shoot, thinking by that to give growth to the trees; but the effect is
seen clean contrary. Using such order, they will not tarry to spring out most
vigorously, so that they will leaf again in such sort, that within one month
after, one will say there has not been a leaf touched, and this shall be
done equally, that they may new apparel themselves again without any
deformity, that never agreeing with the old leaves. But with much more
efficacy if the grounds be watered in this time then, for tempering the heat
of the season with water to relieve the trees, and give them new force, whereby
it happens, that of their springing again of leaves, nearly compared to their
after crop, one may make a second nourishment of the Worms with success, as
some fortunately have attempted; the which nevertheless is not approved, not
so much for to be very incertaine, such food happening in the greatest heates
of the summer, contrary to this creature; as for the assured loss of the
trees, being not able to suffer double disleauing in one season. For besides
that our Worms are never well disposed, fed with leaves growing in a waterish
place, as I have related, a distinction shall be made of the times of watering
the Mulberries; to the end not to make them drink, but after they are
disleaued, not before; whereby, without doubt of naughtiness, the leaves will
yield themselves well qualified. Under such consideration you shall employ the
benefit of the water during summer, by that causing so much succor to your
trees, after their great travail, as in the drought all sorts of plants find
comfortable the opportune watering, a particular observation for the South
countries, not for others which never almost water.

The means to gather the leaves, the rain falling on them or threatn^ng.
The raines happening on the course of this food, strangely hinder the Worms,
as if they chance toward the end of their life, then when they are in the
greatest force of devouring: for that the wette leaves do breed them dangerous
diseases. The most common remedy for that, is to make provision of leaves for
two or three days, perceiving the time to be giuent to rain, for it is as
well kept good, provided that one lays it in a neat place, fresh ayred, and
for to preserve it from getting of heates, oftentimes a day turning it vpside
down. And although that the rain press not, yet what fair weather ever be,
one ought never to remain without leaves: not so much for fear to have need,
as for the quality of the victual, in so much that it is better being a little
kept, as twelve or fifteen hours before it be given to the creature, coming
directly from the trees. If the rain pressing drives you back from gathering
so many leaves as you need, make recourse to this short way, which is, to cut
the branches of the Mulberries that you destine to be dissheaded the next
year: the which with all their boughs, you shall make to be carried into the
house, where hanged as raisons under the bearers, planchers or other couertures
in an ayrie place, as in barnes and haylofts, being then almost empty, their
leaves will dry well and quickly; yea in the one and the other you shall find
much more perfection, then by any other way whatsoever. For neither to winnow
them with clothes, nor to dry them at the fire, are not of such efficacy as
is this means: by the which, besides that it winnes much time, because there
needs nothing but certain strokes with a hatchet, for to take all the leaves
of a tree. Do not doubt that that will discourage the Mulberries, but that on
the contrary does rejoice them, so quickly putting them to shoot forth more
strongly, whereby they win time; for the ensuing year, such hasty cutting
causing their great increase of branches. In the which, although it seems
that the hot season is contrary for such work, yet so it is, that experience
manifests daily the nature of the Mulberries, yea of many other trees, to
endure to be cut in the summer. For the which commodity joined the saving in
this business, resolve you not to cause to be gathered the leaves of your
Mulberries in any other fashion that you shall deliberate to pole the first,
keeping them for the raynie days, as has been said, or the time remaining
fair, for the end of the food. The same reason has place for the trees which
you are resolved to prune, the^ disbranching their superfluous boughs, when
you shall see there is need of leaves, the time being raynie or not, as one
does to dishead them. A thing which you shall find to come to good purpose, for
the great spoil of leaves that the Worms make in that time, being then their
greatest devouring, attending that with moderate labor, and much facility,
abundance of victual is furnished for them. The winning of time is adjoined to
this business, because that the morning bestowed to this disleauing, (otherwise
lost by reason of the dewes, during the which, it is forbidden to touch the
leaves,) for that the branches of the Mulberries cut with their boughs, being
the afternoon before carried into the house, are disleaued very early the
morning following, the which one bestows in the work, and that is done in
tarrying till that by the Sun, or winds, the dewes be cleared from off the
trees. To dishead the Mulberries.


All the injury that one can do to the Mulberries, in disleauing them, is
helped by the cutting off their branches, (a remedy serving almost for all the
maladies In the 7. book 27. of husbandry.
of the trees, as is said of the fruit trees) that is to be understood, taking
from them all universally, pouling them or cutting off their heads, as one does
willowes, whereby in small time they renew again: for their branches grow great
and strong, to serve as before. Wherefore it is at the end of a certain time,
that one lops the Mulberries, which is then when one sees them to consume by
too much travail. The term is not restrained to certain years, the only
faculty of the earth ordaining these things, making them to put out, and bring
forth again more wood in one place than in another. Nevertheless one may say
that almost every where, from ten to ten, or from twelve to twelve years, that
will be reasonable to practice, for the good of this affair: and by this
means, to loppe the Mulberrie-yard every year of the tenth, or twelfth part
of his trees. In dishedding the Mulberries, one shall leave them long snagges,
ouer-growing certain feet of the forkednes of the trees, or otherwise, as it
shall best accord with their capacity: serving themselves in this place with
very sharp instruments, to the end not to disbarke nor shatter the trees, and
to make the cut very right, which shall be aslope to cast off the annoyance of
the rain. The time of this business is even as the lopping of other trees, that
is, the winter to be passed, the sap beginning to enter (not before for the
reasons alleged elsewhere.) In a fair day, not in a windy, mistie, nor
rainy; for the Mulberries shooting in like manner as other trees, yea so
vigorouslie as any other plant have commonly the season of felling.

When to lay the bill to them.
But because in the Mulberries is considerable the lease, the chiefest of their
revenue, it is requisite to be vigilant to lose nothing, if it be possible, the
which one shall come unto in delaying to cut them until May, or in the
beginning of June, then when it behooves to employ the leaves: By this means,
one has service of the leaves the same year of the cutting of the trees: the
which one cannot do without this backwardness. And although that for the
disbranching of them in such season, the trees bring not forth that same year
so great branches, as if one lopped them in the months of February or March,
the time being a little shortened of their growing, it inportes not, seeing
there is as much gotten for the year after: in the which such branches though
they be but little, yet having won the advantage, grow great marvelously,
whereby the trees in a small time are amply spread again: yet that against
the precepts of art, constrained by necessity, that one cuttes the trees in
rainie weather and without regarding the Moon, as is fit, they are of so free
and good a disposition.

What time of the Moon is to be observed.
Touching the age of the moon it is handled diuersely according to the
diversity of the grounds that gouernes such actions. By the heavenly
influence the Mulberries pouled in the increase of the moon, bringes forth
their young shootes long without spreading branches, and in the waine, short;
with many little branches crossing the principalles. For to compose the things,
(having election of the time without constraint) we will dishead those of our
Mulberries, being in a lean ground in the new Moon, and in the last quarter,
planted in a fat ground. So those there will be furnished with new shootes, as
long as the feeblenes of the grounds will permit them; and these here, through
the force of the grounds, will conveniently regaine that, which to purpose they
would not cut in the increase, by reason that their spirie branches being not
kept back by the little shoots, will lengthen too much, whereby bending down
they will deforme the trees; those remaining empty in the midst after the
manner of palm trees, that being not to be feared in the rest by reason of the
leanenesse of the grounds, which never causes the^ to shoot out too
abundantly. By this means they will put themselves in wood again,
nevertheless some more then others, according to the goodness of the soil: but
not any so slowly, but that at the tenth year they will be capable to begin
again their accustomed service; provided It behooves to plow the ground of
the Mulberries.
the grounds be tilled as appertains. For in vain one should travail exactly
to entertain the Mulberries by their branches if one makes not account of
their roots, whereby at the length they fail; as in such error those fall,
which to spare the tillage, plant their Mulberries in meadows, where they
impair. In which they deceive themselves, because they consider not that the
Mulberries left in untilled grounds, cannot bring so many nor so good ieaues as
those which are tilled. And although there are seen many fair Mulberrie trees
in meadows, the answer is, that the earth is fat, and in ensuing, if not
contrary, yet at the least, not at all good for the Worms: or being lean, the
trees will not dure long through lack of tilling. The assured means In the
vi. chapter the xxvii. book of husbandry.
that there is to dress a Mulberrie-yard, thick spread with boughs, and to
keep it without expense, until a reasonable greatness to serve well, is
represented hereafter in the discourse of the fruit trees; that is in planting
the Mulberries in ranks by line and leuel, from four to four, or from five
to five fathams; and in the same ranks to plant Vines amongst them, low, or
propped according to the usage of the country: the which by labor will bring
their fruit without alteration, fifteen, or twenty years; when being
oppressed under the shadow of the trees, they will fall under the burden: then
one shall pull them up, to leave the place free for the trees, which will only
occupy it; and so one shall find to have brought them up for nothing. The
which shall be to finish the discourse of the victual of our little beast, for
to make them their lodging.

The lodging of the Silkwormes.
It behooves also to dress a lodging for our Worms with such commodity, that
they may easily* do their work, for to yield us abundance of good silk. The
which one should hope in vain, lodging them in a place improper and contrary
to their nature: for as they cannot be deceived in their food, without
manifest loss; no more can they suffer an ill habitation. And as one must not
enterprise to plant the vine, if he be not forthwith provided of cellers and
vessels for the wine: so this would be to no purpose, if one should plant the
Mulberrieyard, without afterward, to give quarter and place to the Worms. All
such like habitation desire they, as men, that is, spacious, pleasant,
wholesome, far from ill sents, dampes and humidities, warm in the cold time,
and fresh in the hot; near the foundation, nor under the lathings of the
couerings near the tyles, one must not lodge the Silke-worme, because of the
intemperatenes of these two contrary situations, whereby the one may be too
moist, and the other too windy: too hot, and too cold, according to the
seasons. Nevertheless that is to be borne withal, so that one can erect the
lodging of the Worms on one only stage near the ground, provided that the
plot-forme be erected three or four feet, for to avoid dampes, and over that
that there be boords close joined, to the end the creatures may be kept aloof
from the tyles, the approach and neerenesse of which is always hurtful unto
them, because that the winds and colds pierce through them, and the heat of
the Sun is there insupportable, when it lights The reckoning up of the fitnes
of the lodging for the Worms.
upon them in his force. If for the capacity of your house, you can commodiously
be fitted for room to feed them in, it will be great ease to you, and you
shall spare the cost to build new lodgings expressly for this: making your
account that the Worms coming of ten ounces of seed, will be nourisht at
ease, within a haule of seven fadomesin length, three in breadth and two in
height; upon which advice you may ground, for to dispose your house to such
use; or being to build it new, you may amplify your edifice with some members:
the which by this means will be very well represented, and will be so much more
convenient, as for the little beasts you shall have more augemented it: when
after having occupied it some small time, it will remain free to you the rest
of the year, to entertain and receive company. Their dispositions.


But let it be within or without the house of the master, which desires to
nourish these creatures in, it is very requisite their chambers and haules be
to be opened on both sides, opopsite one against another, of the East to the
West, or of the North to the South: to the intent, that the air and winds
having free passage through them, may refresh the Worms, that then being ready
to perfect their work are upon point to stifle, through the silk wherewith
they are filled, and the great heat of the season. Taking heed nevertheless,
that the windows be so well glased, or papered, that one may shut them in any
other time, so properly and so well, that the coldes cannot enter, being as
prejudicial to the Worms in their beginning, as the heates in their ending.
These creatures also desiring to be in a light place, willingly not suffering
the dark, from which they creep away seeking the light, the inner part of
their lodging shall be pargeted and entirely whited, that the Rats may not eat
through the slippery walls, leaving not there any chinckes, creuesses, nor
holes, for Mise, Rats, Creckets nor other vermin, enemies to our Silk-wormes.
The haules or chambers shall be Their moueables.
proportioned with tables necessary to rest on these creatures, the which one
shall make of all sorts of wood; the best whereof is the most light, for his
easy handling. Some prefer before boordes of any wood whatsoever, the tables
made of reeds or canes, cleft or whole: not only for the ease of their
lightness, but also for the health of the cattle, which are fed upon these
canes, or hurdles made of them, so that there is a certain air piercing
through them, keeping them cheerfully and without offensive heat. Upon which
it behooves to distinguish prudently, such air being not always proper to the
Worms, but only to be chosen at the end of their life for refreshing them. To
that purpose also the wild reeds and bulrishes of marish places and pooles
may serve, yea rye straw, which is got for a How to set up the skaffold to hold
the Worms.
small price. In like manner, linen, stretched with little tackes upon light
wood, is used with ease in this steed. Many pillars of carpenters work,
directly squared shall be perpendicularly erected from the ground to the seeling
to support the tables, bearers of our Worms, the which shall be set upon
little ioysts crossing the pillars, planted of equal distance on these pillars
sixteen or eighteen inches one from another. The tables being so ranked in
such measure, the Worms will be fitly served. But the boords shall not be of
equal breadth, but one shall exceed the other four fingers; the lowest next
the floor, being the most largest; and the highest approaching the seeling,
the most narrowest, whereby the skaffold which shall be composed of all
together will be made in the fashion of a pyramidis, to the great advantage of
the worms, the which by such disposition shall be preserved from ruin, when
wandering by the edges of the tables, from one end of the skaffolds to the
other, seeking a fit place to vomit their silk, they fall from above, down
upon the floor, where they squat in pieces. A loss which one need not fear,
the tables being in such sort sitted, for each to reoeiue the Worms, falling
from his higher next to it, the which are not offended at all through the
little distance of one table to another. The breadth of the most lowest table,
shall be limited even to this proportion, that easily of one side a man with
his hand may reach to the middle, for to tend the Worms. As for the others,
their deminishing will make easy the serving them, by measure as one shall go
up on high, and shall approach near the seeling. Many of such skaffolds shall
be erected in every part, hall or chamber, after his capacity, and in such
manner, that any touch not the walls, for fear of rats: and likewise for to
be able of all sides to give victuals commodiouslie to the creatures: between
the which skaffolds one shall leave way large enough, easily there to pass and
repasse. One shall also take careful heed, to make very firm the skaffolds;
to the end that the Worms growing great do not cause some part to fall, (as
heretofore that has chanced me with loss,) and that they do not shake by
the weight of the ladders which are set against them, going to visit the
creatures, but shall remain assuredly firm unto the end, for that cause
sparing neither wood nor Iron. There are diverse sorts of ladders which are made
for this service according to fancy. Some make boords about the skaffoldes,
upon the which one goes as by galleries, for to tend the Worms, making them
round about: one goes up to them by little stairs, appropriated to this.
Others make high forms and long of light wood, so much the more easy to be
removed, as need shall require. Others do not use any other touching this,
but a common ladder. But what ladders, or mountings so ever they be, all are
good; provided, that they serve to this business, so that without too much
pain, by them one may fitly go to feed and visit the creatures.

The grain of Silk-wormes.
The end of these provisions, is the silk, the which so much the better, and
more abundant you shall have, as the seed shall be better chosen. A common
consideration with all sorts of sowings for the difference that there is of
seed, to seed. For what ought you to expect of bastard grain, but bastard
silk, what good leaves soever that you have, each thing bringing forth his
like? With great curiosity the^ let us search the most profitable grain,
rejecting that, the worth whereof is suspected; In the proof consists the
most sure knowledge of this seed, though there be many directions to discern
the good, from the il. Amongst all the seeds of Worms, whereof we have
knowledge, till now, we have held that of Spain, for the best, fructifying
very well, through all the provinces of this Realm, where they make a trade of
this feeding. That of Calabria, since certain years, has won the repute,
not so much for the goodness of the silk that it brings forth, as for the
abundance that comes of the cod which is great, in respect of that of Spain.
And although they both be hard, an assured sign of abundance of matter, and by
such reason one is to be preferred before the other: the quality winning the
prize, the seed of Spain shall be held in the first rank, in expecting that
by reiterated proofs, we cannot reasonably set it behind any other. As for
the grain which of long time is naturalized in the provinces of Languedoc, and
those neighboring parts, one must make no great account of it, neither for the
finenes nor for the quantity of silk that it makes: for how exquisit soever
the seed of silk Worms is, transported from far in to such quarters, it does
not continue long in goodness, but degenerates at the end of certain years:
the grain which is directly brought from Spain, the first year it does not
so well, as the three or four years following: the which being passed, it
begins to decline in his goodness. In the grain it self, is also known
of the changing by the time, and in his body, and in his color. For coming
directly from Spain, it is little, of a dark tawny color; and kept, waxes
great, and grows bright, till then, that at the term of certain years, it
becomes gray, as gray cloth. The grain of Silk-wormes of they Seuenes of
Languedoc is so qualified, the which as well for their proper natures, as for
being feed with the leaves of black Mulberries, brings forth cods or bottoms
great, and soft, by consequent smally furnished with silk, of an orange color,
or gold yellow, manifesting the grossness of the silk from the difference of
the fine coming of the Spanish seed, the Worms of which have been nourished
with the leaves of white Mulberries, and the most part of bottoms are white,
incarnadines, of the color of flesh. Behold the judgment, that one can make
of the knowledge of the goodness, of the seed of Spain: the best of which
will be the smallest and most dark of color; provided it be alive and not
child with cold: the which is proved on the nail, in all seeds of the
Silk-wormes: accoumpting for good, that which breaks in cracking, casting forth
humor and moisture. The littleness of the grain of Spain makes the number of
Worms, the which joined with the hardness of the bottoms cannot choose but
make abundance of silk, which for his finenes is of great request.
Indifferently all seed coming directly from Spain is not such as you shall
desire, there being countries in that kingdom better for this, some then
other: and that the more honestly to make it up, there go rather trusty, then
deceitful persons. Of the which particularities you shall take heed, to the
end so much the more profitably to end your feeding, as with Every four
years to change the seed.
more art you shall have begun it. Wherefore this article is notable, that after
the imitation of good husbandmen, it is necessary to change the seed every
four years, or from other term to other, according to the reason of
experienes. And for to do that with less hazard, it shall be fit to have
every year, some ounces of new seed of Spain, the which set apart, you shall
conserve carefully, and so long as you shall find, for the proouing, his worth
to merit. By which resolution your feeding will keep a good course, and
without confusion, maintained always in good order and estate. You must not
furnish your self with old seed for his infertilitie, that being of no worth
which passes one year. And though that the keeping of the seed, of this
creature be difficult, because that naturally of it self it hatcheth in his
season, yet so it is, that avarice has so much gotten, that by deceitful
invention certain impostures forcing nature, conserve the seed a long time
without hatching: when they cannot sell it in time they keep the^ in little
bottels of glass, in a cool place, as within deep wells, hung down with
cords near the water, during the great heates, so keeping them more then a
year, to the loss of those which by it.

Some before they put to hatch the grain of Silk-wormes, steep them in the
most exquisite wine To imbibe the seed in wine before you put them to hatch.
they can get, Malmsie or other, finding by such proof, that the good, as the
most heavy, goes tothe bottom, and the naughty for his lightness swimes
above, by reason whereof it is rejected. After the good is taken out of the
wine, it is set to dry in the sun, or before the fire, laid upon very clean
paper, covered with white linen, or smooth paper, to the end that too much
heat hurt it not; after it is put to hatch. And not only serves such steeping
to distinguish the good grain from the naughty, but also to legitimate and
fortify the good, to make the Worms come forth free and strong, and for to
cause them to hatch almost all at once; according to the practice of hens
eggs, which for the same cause are plunged in water a little before that one
puts them to hatch. A commodity which one cannot hope for of the light grain,
but to hatch late (or not at all) whereby the Worms continue slow to all their
works, to hatch, to feed, to spin: yea subject to diseases, being not able to
suffer any accident; but almost always languishing, not only dye they by
little occasion, but infect the best qualified of their next neighbors. To
which danger he exposes himself, that without distinctions mingles together
the good seed with the ill.

How to hatch the grain.
To hatch this grain under the arme-pits, or between women's paps, is not a
profitable thing; not so much for fear of their flowers as some think, as for
the shaking it to and fro: which they cannot do withal, carrying the seed
about them, but that they tumble and mingle it; happening at every minute that
the Worms willing to come forth of their eggs, are misturned by one pase or
step of them which carry the seed about them, ouerwhelming all one upon
another, to the loss of the creatures which are stifled in the throng, though
but with their like. Setting this article the farthest off, it is most
requisite to keep curiously the seed during all the year, preparing in good
time, easily to hatch them in the season. Having recovered them, either of your
own, or elsewhere, you shall lodge them within boxes of wood well joined,
garnished within with paper on the creasts, to the end that through them no
seed go out; nor any dust, vermin, nor other offensive thing enter in the box;
but that the grain may remain there neately. You shall put these boxes within
chests, or elsewhere amongst clothes, except linen, which because of the
moystnes of such matter, is hurtful to these, there to remain until the
season for to employ them; and to the end that they feel not any molesting
dampe, nor cold during such remaining, it is requisite continuing winter, to
make fire in the chamber where these chests shall be: for being more hot then
cold, the grain is there prepared afore-ha^d, as you desire; which it would
not do, if after the order of some, one should keep it within viols of glass,
the coldness of which substance makes them to hatch late. These necessary
observations have learned us never to expose the seed of these Worms (no more
then the Worms themselves) to the mercy of the colds: but to reserve it so
together as one can from the humidity and frosts. For to do this effectually
chancing to send for it into Spain, or elsewhere, it shall be done during
summer: by this means, shunning the incommodities of Autumn and winter, it
will come to you well qualified, and very good if it be brought by land; by sea
the thing being not without hazard, because of the foggie dampes, and other ill
qualities that it has, contrary for such seed, so as the loss of many, (with
reason) makes us to fear such danger. The long keeping of the seed with you,
helps to naturalize it in your air, whereby it hatcheth better and rather
then having not at all abid with you: wherefore it is requisite to furnish your
self of seed immediately after the gathering of the silk, if it may be
done, to do it without any delaying; you must abstain from visiting too often
the grain of Worms, especially the spring approaching, for fear that by such
curiosity, one treades not awrie to his loss. The time to put to hatch this
grain cannot be directly ascertaind, for that the season being forward or
backward, entirely gouerns the work; causing the shooting forth, or stay of
the Mulberries, the only victual of these creatures. This In what time.
shall be then the true point, that then when the Mulberries begin to budde, not
before, to the end the little cattle at their hatching may find meat ready to
live on, and of their own age, (as the child of the milk of his mother) and
not to be troubled through want of Mulberrie leaves; fearing to let them die
for famine you shall feed them with the buddes of nettles, with young lettice,
or with the leaves of roses, and like druggeries. But being fallen into such
necessity, the best shall be to serve them with the leaves of Elm, somewhat
edable by the Worms, by which they receive succor, for some sympathy that it
has with that of the Mulberrie. Foreseeing which trouble afar off, it shall
be requisite to plant a certain small number of Mulberries in the hottest place
of a garden against some sunny bancke, and there by good dressing, dunging, and
watering, to have them to budde quickly, by such artificialnesse hastening his
slow nature. And this shall be for to shun the loss of the little beasts,
when being newly hatched, the leaves of the Mulberries are universally spoiled
by frostes or mistes happening unawares (as that was seen in Languedoc,
Prouence, and in those bordering places, these years past) if one keeps such
Mulberrie trees, purposely to this particular service, sheltred against the
perverse time, after the manner that the prudent gardner keeps his precious
plants: the which Mulberrie trees preserved from such tempests will feed the
small cattle, in attending while the others have sprung forth.

The danger of too hasty or slow hatching the eggs.
And as by too much hasting one falls into this danger and in consequence by
famine in peril to lose the little beasts in their beginning, likewise to
delay the hatching of the Worms, puts them to hazard of death in their ending,
when by such backwardness their climing happens in a very hot time, contrary
to their nature, because that being then heated, through the silk wherewith
they are filled, they desire nothing but refreshing, easily to end their task.
Such difficulties are provided for by the means of the hastened Mulberries,
above mentioned, the which furnishing timely leaves you shall in like manner
hasten to hatch the Worms, which they repay at the end of their life, whereby
they will remain so much more assured, as you shall less fear their coming
in the time of the great heates. The remaining colds of the winter being not so
unseasonable at the beginning of the life of these Worms, as the heates at the
end of the same: for that in the coldes there is some remedy for the succoring
of the Worms, which is in keeping them in a very close place and warmed with
embres, during the sinister times of cold; but against the heats other is not
found than the fitness of the lodging, the only means to safeguard these
creatures from such annoyance.

What time of the moon is proper for it.
The course of the moon is also obserueable in this action; the Worms desire
to hatch and spin their silk during the increase of the Moon; for that they
find themselves more able; than in her waine. But that cannot accord every
where nor in every time, for the diversities of regions, and seasons, hotter or
colder, some then others, lengthening or abridging the life of these creatures.
If you are in a place where the Worms are eight weeks ere they work, as
commonly they do in a place more cold then hot, or in a time extraordinary
chill, the thing will so fall out, that in like time of the Moon as they
hatch, they will also spinne. Wherefore coming at the first quarter, they will
be then spinning: but where through the benefit of the climat, their
nourishment is more forwarded, as toward Auignon, and throughout all her
neighboring parts, being not farther remote then forty, or five and forty
days: it is impossible so to dispose this affair, for the inequality of the
days. Wherefore leaving the success of the end in the hand of God, their
nourishing shall begin in the increase of the Moon (if nevertheless the
leaves of the Mulberries will permit it, which lays the foundation of this
business) for that the Worms fortified in their beginning, by the influence of
such a Planet, forthwith go cheerfully on in augmenting it, ma king them to
come fromthe second or third, until the fifth or sixth day of the new Moon, the
cluing of these creatures according to the last computation will happen toward
the beginning of the waine of the Moon, certain days after her full, which
having then force enough, communicates it sufficiently to the Worms.

To prepare the boxes before to hatch the Worms.
For to hatch the grain at the time named, you must remove them from their
first vessel, into boxes of wood, lined within with cotton or with fine tow
pasted to them; after that the said cotton shall be covered with a white paper,
to the end to contain the seed warmely and without loss: on the top of the
seed one shall put a little bed of tow, and over that a paper thick pierced as
a sieue, with little holes, every one capable for a grain of millet only to
pass through. Through the tow, and the pierced paper the Worms coming forth
of their eggs shall go, afterward having left the shells under the tow, they
go to fasten at the leaves of the Mulberry, set to this purpose over the
pierced paper, from whence being taken they are transported and lodged
elsewhere as shall be demonstrated. To keep the boxes warm with the seed in
them, and to visit them often to withdraw the hatched Worms.


And to the end that that come so to pass as appertains, it shall behoue you
to help the Worms to hatch in adding to their natural heat this device of
art. One shall keep continually the boxes within a bed, the curtains close
drawn between two featherbeds, moderately heated with a warming pan every two
hours, without sparing the night, one shall visit them, for to withdraw the
Worms, by quantity as they come. Such frequent visiting is necessary, as
well for that cause, as also to renew the heat of the bed, in warming it
oftentimes, to the end To lodge the^ in sieues and to keep them warmely.
to keep the seed equally hot, for fear that by slothfulnes, leaving the^
there too chill, they should catch cold, to the ruin of the Worms. From the
boxes one shall take the new Worms, for to rank them in sieues, with paper at
the bottoms, or other vessels appropriated to receive them in their beginning,
and for fear to hurt the^ in removing, asto that their tenderness subjects
them, one shall touch nothing but the leaf to which the Worms being fastened
They shall be used to the air by little and little.
with that they shall be lifted up and lodged in vessels. There they shall be
held during certain days, whilst which you shall by little and little
accustom them to the air, to the end the violence of the change cause them
not to perish. As on the contrary they will by too much heat, if one aduises
not to temper them by reason, going from degree to degree, keeping them less
warm one day then another, by measure as they advance in time, without
retrograding, that is to say, not to bring them nearer to the heat, having
begun to keep them aloof, for fear to parch or stifle them, until that age
discharge They shall rest upon beds, the curtains being close drawn for
certain days.
their governor of such pain. The sieues, great boxes or other receptacles,
covered with linen, garnisht at the bottoms with paper, shall be put to rest
upon beds, with the curtains drawn, for to shield these little creatures from
the winds and coldes, till the four or five first days of their tender
youth, from thence forward they shall be transported into a little chamber, hot
and very close, out of the force of the wind, upon perfect clean and neat
tables covered Afterward taken forth of the sieues in a warm chamber laid
upon tables.
with paper, there for to begin to hold their rank. One shall lodge the^ very
near one to another, to the end that so pressed with unity, they may conserve
their natural heat: that which they could not do, being a far off in their
beginning, until that, when they shall grow great, more ample lodging be given
them. But it shall be under this necessary observation, Without confusion of
age or kind.
not to mingle confusedly the worms. It rather behooves to distinguish them,
by the times of their ages, for the importance of this food, touching the
ease, and the sparing. For if from the beginning this point has been provided
with curiosity, assembling the Worms by the days of their coming, without
entermingling them together, one shall see them without disorder to agree
together, during their lives in all their works: in eating, in sleeping, in
spinning, with much pleasure, accompanied with profit, for the abundance of
silk which will come of them, the aymeof this business. Through want of which
singularity there will happen confusion to your food, the old Worms never
sorting with the young; the one desiring to sleep while the other eat, and to
eat when it is a question to spin: but with the aforesaid disposition the
work comes to a good issue. By such distinction the races are separatly
prescrued, as is most requisite; to furnish ones self with the sorts of this
cattle, according to the opinion, one shall take of their worth by the effect
of their work. In steed of sieues and great boxes, The Spanish Garbillos.
which we use in this turn, the Spaniards fits themselves with vessels which
they call Garbillos, made of straw, osiers, rushes, or other light matter,
which they plaster within with ox dung, wherewith they make pargeting: which
dried in the Sun makes the vessels to smell of a savor agreeable to the
Worms, and sufficiently warm. The which qualities joined with the capacity of
the vessels, makes them serve the^ long enough. For that is till their third
change, that they keep the Worms there; framing these Garbillos so great, and
furnishing themselves with such abundant number, that it suffiseth to satisfy
their purpose.

A very fit lodging for the Worms in their first beginning.
For more ease, a lodging for the Worms shall be expressly erected for to keep
them ioynde together, nevertheless by distinct separations, until their
second or third change, if one will: where they will be conserved warmely, and
out of danger of Mice, Rats, dust and other injuries, with more assurance than
any where else. That is, after the manner of a great press or cubbord made
with many stages distant one from another four fingers, or half a foot, on
which the little cattle shall be put, without any whit bruising them. These
stages shall be as it were little planchers, composed either of light fur
boords, or of some other proper for this, or of cleft reeds, or long straw, and
set so fitly that one may separately draw them out and in at pleasure, in
sliding them as tilles easily to visit and tend the small beasts. And they
shall be pasted with oxe-dunge after the Spanish fashion, if one so desires it;
seeing such curiosity has been found profitable, to the end that nothing be
wanting in the rearing up of our Worms. The lodging shall be compassed about
with linen cloth tackt to the doors, as paper windows opening and shutting
of three sides; and before the foremost door a little window to give vent shall
be added; in shutting of it at need to keep them so much the warmer, or in
opening of it to give them air as one will. So with much commodity the Worms
shall be lodged in their first time, which is then when they have most need of
it, passing in assurance these gliding pases of their tender age, where many
perish through want of good habitation: for being fortified with time, they
shall be taken from thence, and removed into more spacious lodging, as shall be
showed.

To cause them to come within few days is necessary.
It is to be desired that the Worms come forth all within four or five days
distance from the first hatching until the last* those never lightly making
good end which tarry longer, but miserable and sluggish end their life in
languish oftentimes without profit. Wherefore it is, for that that one prouokes
the seed, warming it with curious diligence, as has been showed: using which
order, little seed remains vnhatched. You shall not then make any account of
the grain which shall be remaining in the said boxes after the said term, nor
of the Worms likewise that shall be so backward: but rather reject all that as
unprofitable. Such hatching of a company is one of the most notablest points of
this business, whereby finally with saving, the profit issues according to the
project, because that these creatures taking life almost in the same day, are
more easily handled than if they were of diverse ages. I have also said that
they suffer This creature fears the cold and the heat.
much by the colds, and by the heats in all their ages: for in their youth, the
cold troubles them strangely, having great power over them, being the most weak
and delicate cattle which is fed: and in age the heat killes them. When in
their greatest force, you find them big and vnwealdy, through the silk
wherewith they are filled, which constraines them to seek fresh air. By
contrary remedies one prouides for The remedies.
these things: but with less difficulty one dresses the Worms in the cold,
than in the heat, that is, in hol^ing them straightly in the beginning, and
largely at the end, by little and little according to their age enlarging them;
finally to put them for altogether at their ease on the skaffolds. In the mean
while employing to purpose according to accidents, the warmings by the aid of
the fire, and the refreshings by opening of the windows of the house.

They have four naturall^ and ordinary diseases.
The Silk-wormes during their life change four times their skins, (as Serpe^ts
do once a year) which causes them so many maladies; during which, they eat
not at all, but immovable they do nothing but sleep, passing so their ill.
These diseases, (for these reasons called of the Spaniards Dormilles,) are
comparable to these of young children, as small pockes, measles, shingles, and
other that in necessity they have in their youth, of which they are helped
being well looked to. So by good governing our Worms are saved from these
necessary mischiefs, shunning the danger of death: nevertheless with more
difficulty in the latter, then in the first, through age in being more
oppressed old then young, as it happens to men, which having not had in season
the diseases of youth, being stricken more late, more dangerous is They have
also accidental diseases.
also the issue. Besides these ordinary diseases, the Worms have accidental
diseases coming of the time, the meat, the lodging, and of the government: the
which one helps using particular remedies, as shall be showed. In the care of
the ordinary ones there is no point of skill, you must only abstain from
giving them to eat, when they refuse their meat, and to give them moderately,
their appetite being come again; always to feed them with good leaves, and to
keep them neately. The first malady, (being diversely called) as a change, a
drowsines, or a benumming, happens at the eighth or tenth day of their coming
forth: the eight or ten days following them one after another, more or less,
according to the climat and quality of the season, of which the heat shortens
the distance of these terms. To which also serves the goodness of victuals,
and diligent care; for so much more as one gives to these creatures of leaves
well quallified (if so be they will eat them,) so much more shorter will their
life be.

How to know their diseases.
The sickness of these worms is known first of all by the head, which swelles
then, when they will change, insomuch that in that part their skin begins to
peele, but more apparently in their last benummings then in those that follow,
not being able almost in the first to discern what it is for the littleness
of the creature. While their drowsiness has seized them you must refrain to
give them meat, (for that would be but lost labor) only one shall cast them
some pittance to sustain those amongst the drowsy ones, which wake; the which
by this means discerned shall be separated from the others, for to be assembled
with those which are of equal age. Each disease holds them two days, at the
third beginning to get their health again: the which one knows by their
feeding which comes to them with much appetite; then one shall give them
victuals again, but sparingly, to the end not to fill them to quickly,
augmenting their ordinary day by day as one shall find them affectioned to eat.

Their diet limited.
Twice a day, morning and evening, at certain hours one shall serve the
Worms with meat, from their hatching, till their second change or drousines,
so limiting their repast. From the second to the fourth and last, thrice a day:
and from that till the end of their life, four, five, or six times a day:
(and in some,) so much as you please, and that you shall see the creatures can
eat. For then you must spare no food, but rather cloying them, to fill and
satiate their appetite, hasting them by much eating to perfect their task. And
as the vessel will never run over, except it be full; so these Worms will never
vomit their silk, till their bodies be satisfied: the which engendring of the
leaf of the Mulberrie, all is as soon found ready to be sponne, as the
quantity of the leaves destinde by nature to such work, shall be dissolved.
By such carefulnes there is no more leaves wasted, then if one distributed the^
skarselie: for that within eight days, the Worms will eat near as much, by
little and little, as within four given them liberally. Then this is without
occasion that one should fear the expense, seeing that on the contrary by
such liberality (besides all well compted, it expendes nothing more) comes
this sparing, which winning The qualities of the leaves very considerable.
time, the cost of the feeding falls out less. Afterward one shall mark
very curiously the qualities of the leaves, as an article bearing sway in this
food. For all leaves are not proper for this, though they be producted by
Mulberries without fault: happening sometimes, that by extremity of drought,
or moisture, meldew, heat drops, and other intemperatures of the time, all
the leaves, or most part of the trees become yelowish, spotted, or speckled, a
sign of unwholesome and perniciouse food. Of such one must make no account, no
more, then of that growing out of the Sun, within the the interior parts of
thick treees, or in shadow valleys, nor of that which is wet, by raines or
dewes; but rather it behooves to reject them, as infected, not using them at
al, for fear of killing the Worms. The leaves of the second spring, one shall
put in the same predicament, that is to say, those which shoot afresh, on the
trees already disleaued, which the ignorant employ for want of other: but with
too much hazard, because of their malign substance, contrary to the
creatures, happening through the ineguallitie of their ages. For there needs
but one repaste to be given them, to make them all perish of the flix, that
such new leaves, will bring them; because that by their tenderness the little
beasts, eats them with so auidous and greedy an affection, that they fill
themselves till they burst. Wherefore this shall be for a maxim, that the
Silk-wormes shall be always A notable maxim.
fed with leaves of their own age, to the end that by good correspondencie,
the leaves be as tender, and hard, as the creatures shall be feeble, and
strong, according to the time of their ordinary commings. The fault of the
wet leaves, is corrected by patience; for one must but tarry till the raines
be past and the dewes dried up, to gather the leaves, going to work after the
Sun shall have shonne certain hours on the trees; never before. But for the
others which are ill qualified there is no means to correct them, from which,
as pernicious food, you shall abstain. One shall not need to take care for
the expense of these precious creatures, during the first three weeks, because
of their youth, and littleness of bodies which makes them be contented with a
little, and yet that little taken in the lost parts of the trees, as of the
body, of the succers amongst the good branches, and elsewhere, from whence for
the profit of the trees, also one should cut them. At the beginning, one must
go to the leaves with handkerchers, afterward with little baskets, then with
great ones, and finally one employes, for this victualing both maunds and
fackes, increasing their food, by measure as the grow in age.

The governor of the Worms shall keep himself neately.

Shall drink wine before to come near his flock.


I have shown how necessary it is for the leaves to be handled with clean
hands, for the danger of foulness* Of this point the governor of these
magnificent creatures shall beware, for himself to be an example of
neatenesse, to all those which he has under his charge, to the end that any
of them, approach not otherwise, then apperteineth. The governor shall not
forget to drink a little wine early in the morning before he goes to work,
for that in communicating the smell of such licour to the Worms, it preserues
them from all stench, specially from the naughty breath of folks (more strong
being fasting, then after eating) which these admirable The Worms shall not be
visited with many folk.
beasts fear much. Wherefore the entering of their lodging is not to be
indifferently permitted to al sorts of persons, by that shunning the harm that
too free frequenting brings to the creatures; which the supersticious vulgar,
sottishly attribute to the eye, believing that there are people with by their
looks brings ill luck to the Worms; but it rather is, nay, assuredly, the
breathing of the ill breath which causes Their lodging shall be kept neatly,
it shall be perfumed sometimes.
them, indispositions. For which considerations, the lodging shall be swept
every day, and to keep them sweet you shall often sprinckle the floor with
vinegar, after to strew it with some herbs of a good smell, as with lauander,
spike, rosmarie, time, sauorie, penny royal, and such like: adding some
times, perfumes, made with frankencense, beniewin, storax, and other
odoriferous drougues, which shall be burnt on coals in the halles and
chambers. The tables The tables often made clean.
in like manner, of the Worms, shall be often made clean not suffering the
cattle to rest long upon the litter, the which one shall take away every third
day, or every fourth, after the second change, or benumming, for to keep them
especially sweet and clean, then when as the soultrie heats approach, whereby
they are pestered: until that time, being not requisite to go to it so
curiously, for the litter during the coldes, is rather profitable then any
ways hurtful to the Worms, keeping them warm amongst it; foreseeing also,
that one deceiues not himself with such sluggishnes, in leaving there to much.

Remedies against unexpected coldes.
Unawares sometimes violent blasts of after storms returns, against the
attempt, and course of the season, very offensive to our Worms. These
accidents are remidied, by keeping curiously shut all the open parts of the
lodging doors and windows even to the least: and in warming it within, with
whot coals in diu^^se places. The sloth of the governor has laid this
taxation on our Worms, that they are esteemed stinking, wherefore many
abhorres them; Those are the casting of their skins, and their dead
carcasses, intermingled with the litter, made with the residue of the leaves
which the Worms smelles of, from whence proceeds all the stincke which one
finds in the chambers: not of these noble creatures, the which of themselves
smells nothing at all, no not their very dung, no more then sand, having
naturally in as great detestation filth and infectio^, as they love sweet and
good smelles, using the order before mentioned, one shall not only govern
these delectable cattle with profit, but their habitation made pleasant, and
sweet smelling as the shop of a perfumer shall be found a place agreeable for
good conditioned folks. So will it be for Ladies and Gentlemen, for whom these
excellent creatures trauaill.

Necessary maxims.
That then the governor of our Worms strive to be diligent in his charge;
that he suffer not inconsiderately his cattle to be visited of all comers,
with too much liberty, for fear that by fraud, some mischance happen them:
that he keep the lodging clean; that he spare not perfumes, for to bestow
them fitly; that he be scrupulous of the leaves, not to distribute them to the
Worms, but such as be perfectly good; for this cause that he give command
to the gatherers never to go to work before they have washed their hands,
and that he have an eye unto it: that he suffers, rather his little beasts to
be a hungerd, then by impatience, to feed them with leaves ill qualified.

The requisite order to remove the cattle.
In taking away the litter all at once, the ^^ttell is removed from one place
to another, to their great contentment. For to do that commodiously, at one end
of each skaffold shall be left an empty place for to put the Worms on, that
one shall take adjoining to that; in as much of the breadth of the table, the
which by this means being empty, will receive the Worms of the neighboring
part, and so of those that follow, whereby all the continuance, in the skaffold
will be uncovered, and couerd again, course after course by portions; after the
manner of drying hay in meddowes, ouerturning it; the full part filling the
empty. So without carrying the cattle far, they shall be gently put near
their lying; and this will be without touching them at all, for fear to offend
the^, because of their delicatenes; if at the instant that one would change
them, from one place to another, one gives them meat; for it behooves not but
to take the leaves, at which so soon as ever the Worms shall be fastened, to
lift them up, and without resting them in any place, to lodge them all at once
where one desires. It will be needful to dispose the tables in such a
fashion, that without shaking by separated pieces, one may easily take them all
out, and put them on the skaffolds again, to make them easily clean. For by
this means, pulled out of the skaffolds as drawing tilles one after another,
one shall strike them against the flower, to the end to discharge them of
filth: afterward one shall sweep and brush them perfectly well.

So much the more longer that the Worms live, so much the more space it
behoues to give them, and to rub the tables with wine etc.
In measure that by age the Worms increase and grow great, they go from day to
day occupying more place; wherefore it is necessary to keep ready fresh
tables, to the end to receive those, which you shall separate from the throng,
and to put them all at their ease, for to fructify very well together. For it
is a thing well experimented, that a few Worms fed at large, makes more
silk then a great number at a strait. You shall cause the tables to be rubbed
with vinegar, or with wine before they be put on, and with sweet herbs to
encourage them. As also they are delighted with the smell of leekes, garlic,
or onyons, if you accustom them to it in their youth; against the opinion of
those which hold that these strong smells hurt, having not well experimented
the^, this doubt being sufficiently cleared by proof; and you shall not only
rejoice your Worms by agreeable smelles; but you shall succor them in the most
part of their malladies. Touching which we will The causes of the maladies of
the Worms and their remedies.
speak of their diseases, and of their remedies.

The extremities of the colds and heates, the too much or too little feeding;
and the feeding them with naughty leaves, are the principal causes of the
extraordinary malladies of these creatures. If they be annoyed by reason of
cold, one shall succor them by warmeth in shutting the lodging, as before in
perfuming it with frankincense and other sweet matters: to the which perfume
some adds lard and sausages cut in little slices, the smell also of good wine,
strong vinegar, and Aqua-uitae comfort these creatures having caught cold. If
on the contrary they are ouercharged with heat, you shall recover them with
fresh breath in opening the doors and windows, for to give entrance to the
air and winds, passing through the chambers and halles, breathing the inward
parts to the great contentment of the Worms, setting them in good liking by
this only and little remedy. The lodging being not so well disposed as is
necessary, the Worms shall be carried by tables forth into the air, to make
them gather breath, half an hour before Sun rising. The diet is the true
means to heal those, which by too much feeding are become diseased; one shall
give them nothing for two days together, the which being past, they shall be
fed very moderately, and a little at once: As also little and often it behooves
to give the^ meat, which through famine are become languished, for to restore
and satisfy them, without ouergorging A very dangerous disease, and
them. The disease is much more difficult to cure, of those which have bin fed
with ill leaves, as with yellow, spotted, or too young. For oftentimes of this,
as first has bin said, there happens the flixe, and of the latter the plague
most assuredly. Of this disease the Worms becomes all yellow and spotted with
black brusings; which you perceiving never so little, fail not to remove them
diligently into another chamber and separated tables, for to assay to save them
by good handling, or at the least to shun the contagion from the rest of the
flock. But hold for This here incurable.
desperate the healing of those which with the marks aforesaid, you shall see
to be bathed on the belly, by a certain humor flowing in that part of their
bodies, which you shall take from the rest, as meat for poultry. As perfumes
help to cure all the maladies of these creatures, so to remove them from one
chamber to another, is generally healthful for them, by such change being
restored to wonted vigor. The Worms will not fall into any or few of The
profit of curious diligence.
these diseases, if their governor handles them with skill and diligence
aforesaid; in which besides the hazard of losing all, is spared the trouble:
being much more easy to prevent these maladies by foresight, then to cure them
by medicines. At which one shall first level, to the end that by negligence,
one be not deprived of the hoped-for benefit of this food. Carefulnes being
most requisite in the managing of these notable cattle, which constrains
them that have them in charge, not only to be near them all the day, but to
bestow a good part of the night, to succor them at all occasions, the which
curiously To drive away Rats, the destroyers of our Worms.
one shall endeavor. The Mice, Rats and Cats, do great spoil to the troop of
our Worms, when they can come by them, eating them with great appetite as most
exquisite delicates. Against such tempests, for a singular remedy, one keeps
lights during the night about the Worms, whereby the inner part of the lodging
being lightened, the rattes and cattes go not but with fear. And are at the
last chased and feared away, by the sound of little bells, which one rings
there. Both with the one and the other one shall be fitted, disposing the lamps
in the places requisite, in diverse parts: also the bells and other engines
making noise, put in a place easy to remove them. But all that is but in vain
if often times in the night one goes not round about the cattle; to which
purpose the lights will serve, which lightning the room, will be a means to
go and come easily through all. In the mean time, you That no oil touch the
Worms.
shall beware that any oil fall not upon the Worms. For there needs but a drop,
to offend them much, through the maladies that the oil engenders them.
Preventing the which, one shall not use any oil to watch with, but in lamps
fastened against the walls: and for portable light to tend the creatures,
tallow, or wax candels, or of other substance according to the countries.

To make ready the matter, for to spinne on their silk.
By such managing, both of the food, and hand, within seven or eight days
following, after the last casting their skins, or drowsines, your Worms will
dispose themselves to pay the expense of their diet. The which foreseeing in
fit time, you shall cause to be prepared necessary rods, for the climing up of
the Worms, to vomit their silk, fastening their webs unto the^. To assemble
the Worms (so called in such work) many things are good, but not any green
bows, for danger to offend the cattle, they waxing fresh, placed in the
work, as they will do, the time being given to rain. The most proper
matters, are Rosemary, Kneeholme, cuttings of Vines, Broom, shoots of Chestnut
trees, of Oaks, Osiers, Salowes, Elmes, Ashes; and in sum, of all other trees
or flexible shrubs, having not ill smelles. In application of the rods, one
goes to work diversely, according to the sundry aduises of men. After having
euened the foot of the rods or branches, to the end so much the less to
trouble the place, one shall rank them directly, as ranks of columns equally
distant a foot and a quarter, little more or less, crossing the tables from
one side to other. The feet of the twigs shall join to the tables beneath, and
the heads shall meet the tables above, under which, their length shall be
bended, whereby will be fashioned the arches. By such disposition, the stages
will resemble, like galleries made of arches, with many stages surpassing one
another, as Amphitheaters a thing very pleasant to behold. The empty place,
between the two arches joining to the table above, shall be filled with the
sprigs of lauender, spike, thyme, and the like sweet smelling shrubbes;
according to the commodity of the country, for to serve doubly. For in this
intermixing of twigges, the Worms shall have choice of place, firmly to
fasten their rich matter, as to that they are very difficult, going to it
fantastickly, and there they are as it were perfumed by the agreeable sent of
the shrubbes, whereby they travail freely in such place to the profit of the
work.

At the seventh or eight day then, that your Worms shall be come forth of
their last change or disease (such a disease being very properly called a
change, through the great sickness they then endure, more vehemently then in
any other, oftentimes to die) you shall remove them to the tables, so furnished
with twigges without looking to shift their places or litter any more. There
you shall feed them as accustomedly, that is to say, with all abundance,
without denibiting them till then, that you shall see the most lustiest Worms
to enter the roods, which is when they take their course to get up; which
perceived by their extraordinary countenance wandering through the troop, in
skattering, without making account of the meat, and a little after you shall
see them to clime by the feet of the twigges, forsaking their food, going to
vomit, or rather to spinne their silk. From that time you shall begin to
diminish their ordinary, day by day, in the end for to give them nothing at
all; when they shall have united and grafted with the twigges, all the troop
will have forsaken the table, or few will fail, none remaining behind but the
latter and idle ones. In this time is known those which were long a hatching,
by climing up the last: being a necessary consequence, that the first coming
forth, are the first spinning. And as there is no great reckoning to be made
of the hatching later; no more behoues it to make account of the idle Worms
that clime not. Wherefore at the end of three or four days, that the first
shall have taken the twigges, you shall take To gather the idle ones together.
away the rest from all the tables, for to assemble them in one, and so to
nourish them till their end. So the forward and the backward Worms will spinne
their silk: the which they cannot do fitly when without such distinction the
latter should cast themselves on the work of the foremost, with great loss,
and this apparent danger, that before these had ended their work, the
Butterflies of the foremost by such How long time they bestow to spinne their
silk.
longnesse, already formed in the codde, should not come forth to the detriment
of the enterprise. Two or three days the Worms have to perfect their coddes,
bladders, or bottoms, (diversely named according to the places) at the end of
which they are utterly finished, as one shall know in curiously approaching near
the^ with the ear; For as these creatures make some little and pleasing noise
in feeding, so likewise do they make a sound in fashioning their coddes; the
which noise they give over, ending their work.

Behold the silk made, this is not for all that the end of the labor of the
Worms; for it is by the grain that they end to work and to live, finishing
their life by their dear seed which they leave us, for to renew themselves by
every year, and by this means to conserve for us the possession of the silk
as to their heirs. Miracle of nature, A Worm to be shut up in his bottom of
silk, is there transformed into a Butterfly! He imployes ten days to that,
at the end of other ten days he comes forth through a hole for this effect
piersing the cod, from whence disimprisoning himself, he returns to the view
of me^, but that is in his new figure of a Butterfly: males and females
accouple themselves joint together, the femall lays her eggs or grain;
ending so their labor with their lives. And that which augments the wonder, is
the long abstinence of this creature, living twenty three days without taking
any sustenance, also deprived of the light, for the time which he remains
within his bladder, as in a close prison.

An admirable creature.
But to enter into discourses on the qualities of this animal, to the which
are manifestly wanting, flesh, blood, bones, veins, arteries, sinews,
bowels, teeth, eyes, ears, skailes, back bones, pricks, feathers, hairs,
except on the feet a little fine thrum, resembling down, and other things
common almost to every earthly, waterie, and airie creature: it would be too
much to philosophise, such contemplation rauishing humane understanding, even
in this, that this Worm one of the abiects creatures of the world is ordained
of God to clothe Kings and Princes: in which is found, sufficient argument to
humble themselves. And this same one particularitie is to be marked, that she
yields the rich silk all spun, ready to be wounded off, vomiting quite made,
the thread; whereof she composeth her bottom, with extreme care and
affenctionate labor. The which is not communicated neither to wool, cotton,
hemp, nor flax, wherewith men apparel themselves; but with skill they must
prepare them for to bring them to the point to be spunne.

A strange mean to be provided of Silk-wormes without seed.
Here it is to purpose to show the subtle art that man has inverted, for to
repair the defect of grain and seed of Silk-wormes, happening that it should
be lost. A thing drawn from the secrets of nature, and found out with great
curiosity, like to the production of Bees; whereof the Ancients have written
(as heretofore I have said.) In the springtime a young calfe is shut up in a
little dark stable, and there fed only with the leaves of Mulberries twenty
days, without drinking at all, or eating any other thing during this time; at
the end of which, it is killed, and put in a tub there to rot. Of the
corruption of his body comes forth abundance of Silkworms, which one takes
with the leaves of Mulberries, they fastening vno them: the which fed, and
handled according to art and common fashion, bring forth in their times, both
silk and seed as others do. Some making short the expense and the way of such
an invention, have drawn this here. Of the leg of a sucking calfe, a slice
waying seven or eight pounds, and laid to putrify in a fresh celler, within a
vessel of wood, amongst the leaves of Mulberries, to which the Silke-wormes
coming forth of this flesh, take hold on: from whence being taken, they are
handled as a foresaid. I offer you these things under the credit of another, in
attending that the proof gives me matter to assure you that which it is:
Complaining my self in this place of our predecessors, with Pliny, as he did of
his, in this which they said, that a vessel of Iuy could not contain wine,
and not one of them had experienced it. I represent you these things, I say,
for that such creation of Silk-wormes happening to be true, and thereby finding
the advantage we may be freed from the trouble to send to seek the seed in
Spain and elsewhere, renewing the care to provide it every year. If there be
question to discourse thereupon, I shall say that such engendering of
Silke-Wormes is not incredible, seeing that all corruption is the beginning of
generation. We see daily, that of putrified things issue diverse vermines,
according to the diverse qualities of the matters. Of the Bull, and, according
to writing, of the Lion, is engendered the Be: of the Horse, Hornets: and of
humane flesh, the Serpent. The Ancients hold, that two sundry sorts of Waspes
are engendered of the Horse and of the Mule; through the diversity of these two
creatures, as I have said in the precedent chapter, and of Asses, Drones. And
whether they be meats, clothes, household stuffes, even unto woods, every where
in the land, in the water, and in the air, in moist places and dry, one
finds that nature creates little beasts, worms, and gnats, with so much
admiration, as the Creator is admirable.

The knowledge of the maturity of the Worms.
Some few days before the Worms begin to clime the twigges, to vomit the
silk, they manifest their purpose by the brightness of their bodies, which
becomes shining and translucent, as grapes waxing Of what color the silk
shall be. The distinction of the sex of this creature.
ripe: by which point one knows somewhat after the color of their bodies, the
color of the silk, which they will make. Then one marks the Worms to be
diversely colored, nevertheless distinctly, with yellow, orange, carnation,
white and green, which are the five colors of the silk. Likewise one
discernes the males from the females; the pretended eyes of the Worms will
satisfy to such curiosity: for the coloring of those of the males, is more
apparent to black, than that of the females, the which in that part have but
very small marks, and fine streakes. As for the color of their bodies,
according to the The Worms are of diverse colors.
climats one is to be preferred before another. The most part of the seed of
Spain brings forth white Worms: and such grain being more worthy than any
other in these climates, we prise also the whitest more then the black, or
gray, or any other.

To withdraw the silk from the twigges and when.
After, with the same diligence whereby we have managed our silk; finally we
must reap, seeing that this last action cannot suffer delay without notable
loss, no more the^ any other harvest of the year. The refuse silk is the
first matter which the Worms vomit, of which they make the foundation of their
building. They fasten it firmly with much art between the rods, which laden
with these rich coddes resemble exquisit trees, garnisht with Apricockes,
summer Paires, and other precious fruits. There one takes the bottoms in
perfect ripenes, which is marked by the directions already given. To tarry
longer then seven or eight days, to pull them from the twigges, would be to
put them to hazard, to convert the silk into sleaue, for the leisure that one
should give the Butterfly to pierce his codde, to the end to go about his
seed. Wherefore the most assured shall be, to begin within the sixth day after
the climing up of the Worms. One shall take them off gently, without crushing
the creature which is within, by that preventing the spots of the bottomes,
which happen by their broken bodies, co^uerting the^ into so gluie a humor,
that afterward it is impossible to divide and wind off all the silk.

The grain for seed.
Providing for the time to come, one shall advise to furnish himself with seed
for the conservation of the brood. I have shown the scope of this Worm to be,
after having weaued the silk, to go to lay her eggs, to perpetualize her
self amongst us. For which it behooves, to limit and bound his natural
affection, for fear that leaving it to do at pleasure, instead of silk, which
we have of this business, we should have nothing but sleaue. Because that the
Worm being converted into a Butterfly to lay the eggs, as I have said,
comes forth of the bottom, and
which for such cause he pierseth. Being thus bored the threeds of the silk are
found broken, by consequent indeuidable, and not to be wonde off, whereby one is
constrained to card such matter as wool, afterward for to spinne it: which
by this means losing his gloss wherein consists the chiefest beauty of the
silk, wanting the same is turned into sleaue. For to prevent the which loss,
and also not to have need of so much seed, as the nature of the The signs of
the worth of the bottoms.
Worms would furnish us withal; of one part of the coddes or bottoms, we will
serve our turns for grain or seed, leaving the other for the winding of the
silk, as hereafter shall be shown: As for to have fair corn one chooses
the best ears to sow; so we will choose for seed, the best qualified coddes,
without fearing so much the present loss of piercing the bottoms, as to desire
the ensuing profit. For such cause let us select, of the clues or bottoms, the
chiefest, the greatest, the hardest, the weightiest, the sharpest pointed: of
carnation or flesh color, tokens of value. In such quantity as one shall
desire, according to this reckoning, that an ounce of seed commonly issues
from a hundred females, seldom more, by the accoupling of the like number of
males. By curious finding out some hold that every femall lays a hundred eggs
or grains; and therefore an ounce of seed to contain ten thousand grains:
but for the inequality of the seeds and waights, that cannot every where
agree, nor in every sort of grain. Some for sparing, put two femals to one
male, believing that it suffices: but because of the incertentie of the
success, and the great carfulness requisite in this place, for to couple them
together, from time to time, the best shall be to rest upon that which
experience has authorized for good, that is, in putting to so many males, as
females. Of their sex.
The coddes enclosing the male Butterflies, are slender, and long; those
whereout the females come, are thick and great in the midst: and both of them
more sharp in one place then in the other, agreeing to the figure of an egg.
The mossie ones at both ends, having not any point, or very little, are not to
be desired; but rather the race to perish, for the difficulty that one finds
to wind off the silk, it being not possible, how one should handle them, to
wind all the silk out of the cawthern, by reason of certain snarlings which
happens in the bottoms which are of this shape, (not in others) hindering them
to divide, a thing very considerable, both for the quantity of the silk, and
quality: for neither so much silk, nor so fair will it yield, being mingled
with such bottoms as if it came only of the pointed ones.

The mean to gather the seed.
The coddes so chosen, shall be thredded, not in piersing the^ a cross, for
fear to let them take wind, and consequently to make the^ unprofitable, but
only in passing the needle, through the first down, called sleaue; of which
shall be made little chains, each composed of so many males as femals: One
shall hang them on wodden pinnes, in a chamber, more cool then hot,
nevertheless dry, for the Butterflies at their ease to come forth of their
coddes, to engender together males and females, and there in dying for company,
to lay their eggs; so ending their lives. It is necessary to help a little
to the furtherance of these Worms, being then upon the period of their age, to
the end to manage the seed well, otherwise much of it would be lost. By
quantity that one shall see the Butterflies come forth of the bottomes, one
shall accouple them, male and femall, if already they be not of themselves, to
which they show themselves very diligent; and being joined together, they shall
for the last time, be set to rest on Wal-nut leaves, ready spread upon a table
under the coddes, there for to end their work, the femall laying her eggs or
grain, on the leaves of Wal-nuts: from whence afterward, although they be
firmly annexed unto them, yet are they easily taken off; for that the leaves
being well dried, are easily between the hands rubbed to powder, and that
blown away with the wind, the seed remains clean as one desires. Some with
great reason, spread not Wal-nut leaves upon a table; but make little bundles,
which they hang adjoining to the chains of coddes; seeing that the femals lay
their seed more easy being hanged over the males, then lain flat upon a
table. For to make the Butterflies empty their grain upon paper according to
the usage of some, is not the profit of the work, because one cannot take off
the grain but in scraping it with a knife, whereby much of it is broken. But
yet also those go more ill to work, which put their Butterflies upon linen;
for so much, that the seed fastening it self to it very firmly, cannot be
taken away, but with loss; which for to shun, one is constrained to keep
such linen, til the spring time, and then in warming it to make the grain to
hatch, and from that same to take the Worms. By such order one cannot use the
proof, of wine, nor peise the eggs to know what quantity of Worms you will
charge your self with; by which, confusion may happen in the feeding them.
Neither the leaves of Wal-nut, nor paper, nor linen, are not so proper to
receive the grain coming from the creature, as chamblet, or burato, for that,
that upon stuffes, (the grain is assuredly fastened) so is it in like sort
taken away without any violence or loss: for it is only done in rubbing
gently the chamblet, or burato, between the hands, by which means it is
easily taken off.

Sleaue.
The bottoms which shall have served for seed, cannot afterward be used, but
in sleaue; not because of the substance which always remains one; but for the
breaking of the thread which has been cut by the Worm, in making there a hole,
to have passage out of the prison, as has been said. Of which the Spaniards
taking heed sparing the best qualified coddes, for to be wonde off, employ for
seed the double, and triple ones, without great loss of silk, if otherwise
they be of good mark. So can they not very well wind them off, because of the
multiplicitie of creatures; the which spinning their silk in common, make the
work very confused; whereby they are put in the rank of the pierced ones for
sleaue. The double and triple ones.
The being double or triple is not the fault of the Worm, but rather of
lustiness, and supplenesse. Sometimes also it happens by default of the place,
which being too much thronged, constraines these creatures, in vomiting their
silk to heap it one upon an other, confusedly assembling two or three Worms,
and more, in one bottom without distinction of male or femall; though that
ignorantly some say, that a double cod cannot co^teine two creatures of a
diverse sex. The negligence of the governor causes oftentimes such disorder,
when taking not near heed at the beginning of the climing of the Worms, he
leaves them to wander where they will: to which he shall look to, in guiding
the^ conveniently; The short and idle Worms.
and likewise shall relieve them which fall to the ground: he shall put the
short and idle ones into little cornets or coffines of paper, thereby to
facilitate their work, guiding them to perfect their bottom: without which
diligent curiosity, many Worms are lost, be it in smothering, or in vomiting
their silk to ill purpose, amongst their litter. Of every double, or triple
bottom, comes forth but one Butterfly, though it have many within, insomuch
that being not able to be all ripe at once, the first, which comes forth in
piercing the cod by his issue, gives vent to the other Butterflies; by which
catching cold, they remain imperfect and die, or when that by their meeting
together, their common ripeness and issue happens in the same point and
moment, the which is not seen but very rarely.

The winding of the silk would not be delayed.
For the abundance and goodness of the silk, it is to be desired, that the
bottoms be cast into the basin, for to wind them immediately having pulled
them from the rods, without any stay, seeing that so freshly taken, all the
silk comes off easily, and without violence or any loss; the which one cannot
hope for of the bottoms kept some time, because that the gum wherewith the
Worm fastens her threeds one against another, being dried does so harden the
bottom, that one cannot wind it but with great difficulty and loss, whereby
some portion of the silk rests in the basin, and never remains so fair And
wherfor^*
as that which is newly and easily wonde up. Besides by such festination, is
spared the fear that the Butterflies should spoil the work, there being not
given them the leisure to bore the coddes for to come forth. But because that
within seven or eight days, one can very hardly wind off all the silk of a
reasonable feeding, for the great number of work men that for that one should
employ, one shall keep both the one and the other of these two ways, that is,
in setting themselves a work to wind off the bottomes, so soon as ever one
shall perceive to be a number of perfect ones, casting them directly from the
twigges into the basen, having first pilled and bared them of their sleaue,
without other delay. And to kill the Butterflies of the rest which one is
constrained to keep, to the intent that the creatures being dead within, the
coddes remain exempt from fear to be bored, and by consequent reserved for
good silk, may atte^d the leisure of the winder. That The means to kill the
Butterflies in the coddes.
is done in exposing and laying the coddes in the sun, the heat of which
stifles the creature in his proper work: but you must use a mean, for fear
of burning the silk. Three or four times in sundry days the coddes shall be
set in the sun, and at each time they shall remain two hours before noone,
and as much after, to the end that the great heat of that part of the day may
readily stifle the Worms, before they be metaphorised or changed into
Butterflies: which will come to pass in spreading the bottoms upon sheets,
and oftentimes removing them to make them all feel it, without excepting any
from the heat of the sun: nevertheless to take heed to the charge, that by
too rude handling one bruises not the Worms within the coddes, for fear of
stayning the silk with the matter of their bodies; the which (as has been
said) does so glue together the silk, that it is impossible afterward to
wind it off. Therefore very softly oftentimes a day one shall remove them from
one side to another, afterward they shall be heaped warmely together, and
wrapped up in the sheets, and so carried into a fresh chamber, not into a danke
celler, as to il purpose some do. The sun failing (as often times it comes to
pass, that the sky is clouded) you shall use an oven moderately heated, as it
shall be two hours after the drawing of bread; within the which by sackfuls,
one shall put the coddes, which shall be laid upon boords, for fear that the
stones of the ouens bottom should burn them. There they shall remain an
hour, or an hour and a half, in reiterating the manner, till that you shall
know the creatures to be certainly dead, the which you shall be resolved
without great loss, in re^ding one of the most suspectedst bottoms, for to see
the inner part. In the mean time you shall take heed, not to burn your silk
by too vehement heat, foreseeing which, the most sure way shall be to heat
the oven a little at once, and to return so much the oftener, then too much,
and so hasting lose all the work. This smothering of the Worms, or
Butterflies already formed, is of great import, for going to it either
ignorantly, or retchlessely, not taking heed whether that the Butterflies
should come forth of the coddes, according to their nature, or not being able
at all to take the air, should remain in the way, after to be forced to pass
further, nibbling the inner part of the coddes: of the which little silk can
come afterward, and that yet not very well qualified. Ill comparable to that of
the Rats in this point differing, that the Rats gnaw the exterior of the cods,
for to eat up the creature which is there enclosed; and the Butterflies the
interior to free themselves. The bottoms so prepared shall attend the leisure
of the winder. But this shall be no longer then that without delay you may
conserve the silk in his natural beauty, without loss of weight: in the one
and in the other, being so much the more defrauded of it, as more longer the
coddes shall be kept. For that every day the hardness of the bottoms
augmenting. In like manner is augmented the difficulty of winding it off;
whereby the silk breaks with diminishing the quantity: and by long keeping,
the quality is empaired. To these losses, diligence remedies, so that there be
not given too much time to the bottoms to ouer-harden, the silk will be wonde
off well enough: the winding whereof shall be continued, without diuerting to
other uses, until the last bottom. So shall you entirely gather from this
food both silks and sleaues, without any loss.

To sort curiously the cods, for to wind off the silk.
This done, the bottoms shall be sorted, setting apart the pierced and spotted
ones, on one side, for to make fair sleaue, as being of the most fine
substance: and of the other side, the entire, simple, and clean ones to wind
off the most fair and pure silk; of all the which, for a foregoing, one shall
draw off all the down in pulling off the outside of the bottoms, of which one
shall make course sleaue, for that this is the reffuse and skumme, which the
creature vomits at the beginning of his work.

Of tools and engines for winding off, and other observations.
Of the fashion of the furnaces, basens, wheels or Rices, named at Paris
deuidors; and at Tours, windersvp: but how one ought to turn them, if it shall
be by the hand, by the foot, or by the water, for the winding off, there is no
need to speak of in this place: the workmen almost never agreeing together,
every one having his particular practice. Only I will say, that the basens of
lead makes the silk more pure, than those of copper; because of the rust that
this metal is subject unto, though water remains in it but a little while,
from which the lead is utterly exempt. That the wheels ought to be great for
the forwarding of the work, the which shall be made to wind off two skeanes
at once. That the fire of the furnace be of char-coales, or at the least of
very dry wood; to the end that the fire be without smoke, as well for the
commodity of the winder, as for the bewty of the silk, the which through his
delicatenes is easily blacked in the smoke. So is it in the liberty of the
workman, to wind diversely the silk according to the works wherein one will
use it. But in so much that the master of the work principally desires it, for
to sell and convert it into money, the best shall be to do it the fairest that
one can, having regard to the faculty of the matter, and the desire of the
buyers.

The task of the winder.
Of the bottoms come of Worms of a good race, and fed with the leaves of white
Mulberries, it shall suffice that the workman winds off a pound and a half by
day Paris weight, little less, for by such limit it will be small enough to be
appropriated to all uses, and for that more vendable, than being grosser. This
same shall be wonde of the single and best bottoms, according to the sorting
aforesaid, reserving the double and spotted ones (if one will not mingle the^
with the pierced ones, for sleaue,) to make certain separated skeanes, that
the Merchants take at the same price as they do the fine silk, such course
stuff To distinguish the silks.
being profitable to them in some works. But this would be to intermingle all
the silk, and by consequent to debase the price, if without distinction one
should wind off all the bottoms together. The which the Merchants fearing, at
the sight of the gross skeanes, buy willingly all the silk, by that assuring
themselves not to be any intermixed confusion, nor fraudulent mingling, in the
winding up. The double and soyled ones, are very hard to wind up, and yet
howsoever one takes them, they yield but course silk: the tufted ones being
also in the same predicament, as has bin said, which by reason of that you may
mingle together. The difficulty of their winding up shall be assuaged by soap,
put in the basin of water with the bottoms; soap also helps to wind off the
old coddes, hardened by time, in mollifying the natural gum, which holds
glued together the threeds of silk, the which by this remedy are easy enough
to manage. The workman shall make two skeanes of silk by day, or four, if to
that his wheel and his other skill be appropriated; for that the silk shows
fairer in little skeans, or skarfes, than in great ones; as that by bestowing
more fastenings tha^ they do breakings of the silk, but in one only skeane: by
this means they sell it for as much as the other; seeing that it is the
commodity of the Mercha^ts, which put it in work, being more proper to be
given to be wonde in a little, than in a great volume.

The remainder of the winding which cannot be wonde with the skeanes, as the
breakings off of the silk, and that which will not be got off, resting in the
basin, shall be husbanded for to be wrought in tapistries, for Carpets,
Chaires, Beds, and such like moueables of the house; intermingling these
matters with wool, hemp, flax, cotton etc. As also of good sleaues, with
fine silk, shall be made stuffes, fair and profitable to serve for the use
of the house.

This is the manner to gather the silk, unknown of our Ancestors, through
want of enquiring it out: having of long time believed, as from the father to
the son, that this creature could not live elsewhere, but in the countries of
his original. But time, the master of Arts, has shown how much the
reasonable seeking of honest things is worth: from such curiosity, being
grown the true science to govern this cattle, which at this day are managed
with as little hazard, as the grounds are sowed, and Vines planted, for to have
corn and wine. So often times it comes to pass, to find that which one
seeks; God blessing the labor and travail of those which emploie their wits,
not only for themselves, but also for the public benefit.

Such is the beginning of the Silk-worme, such his government, such the effect
and issue of his feeding, a creature most admirable for many causes, whereby
not a little is given to the conservation of his race; when with no expense and
small care it is kept during the year, as a dead thing, in his season for to
take again a new life.

THE PREPARATION OF THE BARK OF THE White Mulberrie, for to make linen cloth
on, and other works.
THe revenue of the white Mulberrie, consists not only in the leaf for to have
silk, but also in the bark, for to make ropes, course clothes, mean, fine, and
thin, as they will, preparing the bark so, as shall be shown hereafter; by
which commodities the white Mulberrie manifests it self, to be the richest
plant, and of most exquisite use, whereof we yet have had knowledge. Of the
leaf of the white Mulberrie, of his profit, of his handling, and the manner of
gathering the silk, has been heretofore discoursed at large. Here shall be
presented the bark of the branches of such a tree, whereby I will represent
you the faculty, since it has pleased the King to command me to give to the
public, the invention to convert it into cords and linen, according to the
proofs which I have shown his Majesty. And although we be not constrained to
beg clothes of our neighbors, (as till now we have done silk) in having
enough for our provision, yet for that the master shall not leave to employ
this benefit, which God so liberally offers him, the same being in the
Provinces of this kingdom, where Flax and Hemp are so rare, as of such there
is more than of the other, it will be found so much the more commodious, as the
constraint will be less to disburst money, for the buying of so necessary
furnishments.

Many exquisite and rare knowledges are come to light by accident. The Lute an
excellent instrument of Music, is come of the curiosity of a Physician, which
making the Anatomy of a Tortoise, for to see the interior, and placing of his
parts, handling of it dried, touched unawares some sinews stretched within it,
the which making an agreeable sound, by means of the hollownes of the shell,
resolved by that occasion to make a new instrument, since called in Latin
Testudo, of the name of the creature. The almost miraculous science to graft
fruit trees, is proceeded of a shepherd, when setting up his bower, he thrust
without thinking of it, a little live branch of a tree within the body of
another freshly cut near the ground, where it taking showed the admirable
marriage of these two diverse plants afterward so sought for, and refined by
new additions. So it happened to me touching the knowledge of the faculty of
the bark of the white Mulberrie. For by the easy separation from his wood,
being in sap, in having caused to be made cords* (after the imitation of
those of the rind of Tillet, which they make in France, even at the Louure in
Paris) and put to dry at the top of my house, were by the winds thrown into
the ditch, afterward were taken forth of the muddie water, having remained
there four days, and washed in fair water, and then untwisted, and dried, I
saw appear the down or thrum, the matter of linen, like to silk or fine
flax. I made these barks to be beaten with mallets, to separate the sheds,
which going to dust, left the gentle and soft substance remaining: the which
bark, hetcheld and combde after the manner of hemp and flax, was made proper
to spinne; and in ensuing, has been wouen and reduced into cloth. More then
thirty years before I employed the bark of the tender shoots of whit
Mulberries, to bind graffes in the skutchion, in steed of hemp, which they
commonly use in such delectable business.

Behold the first proof of the value of the bark of the white Mulberrie: the
which accident, brought into art, is not to be doubted, but to draw good
service from such invention, the white Mulberrie being repleat with so many
commodities, to the great profit of his possessor. The bark of Tillet besides
that it serves to make ropes, as has been said, is somewhat tractable to be
made in clothes: but that is in very gross work, as for to serve in windmill
sails, and such like things. The nettle yields an exquisit matter, whereof is
made fine and delicate cloths: but there is so little of it that they cannot
make other reckoning of it then for curiosity. There are also certain other
herbs and shrubbes yelding thrum or down, but some so weak, others in so
small a quantity, some so gross, and with so great difficulty to be drawn
off, that it is not possible to use them to any profit, or to very little. It
is not so of the white Mulberrie, whereby the abundance of branching, the
facility of disbarking, the goodness of Thrumme or Down proceeding from that,
makes this business most assured: yea verily with very small expense the
master shall draw infinite commodities from this rich tree. The worth whereof
unknown to our ancestors has remained interred and buried until now, as by
the eyes of understanding it shall be known, yet better by experiences. But to
the end that they may make this business durable, that is to say, to draw off
the bark of the Mulberrie, without offending it, this here shall be noted;
that for the good of the silk, it is necessary to prune, to cut, and dishead
the Mulberries, immediately after having gathered the leaves for the food of
the Worms; nevertheless according to requisite distinction, as I have
demonstrated; whence the branches coming of such cuttings, shall serve for our
intention: for that, that being then in sap (as in other time you must never
put the bil to the trees) they will very easily disbark: and this shall be to
make profit of a lost thing, for else they should be cast into the fire.
Likewise the same cuttings cannot but serve well; if they love them no better,
for the first, to use them in fensings of gardens, Vines etc. where such
branches are very proper, for their hard snagges, being dry and of long
service, through which durablenesse they rot not in a great time; from whence
finally taken, for their last profit shall be burnt in the kitchen.

And because that the diverse qualities of the branches diuersifie the value of
their barks, whence the most fine proceeds from the tender tops of the trees,
the gross ones from the great branches already hardened, the mean ones from
those which are between both. Then when they shall cut the trees, be it in
pruning them, disbranching or disheading them, the branches shall be sorted,
setting apart in bundels every sort, to the end that without confused mingling
all the barks may be drawn off, and handled according to their particular
properties. Without delay the said rindes shall be separated from the branches
using the favor of the sap, which passes quickly, without which they cannot
work in this business. And having bundled up the barks, of all the three
sorts a sunder, they shall be laid in clean or foul water, as shall be fit
three or four days more or less according to their qualities and places
where they are, the trials whereof shall limit the term, but in what part
soever they be, the tender and small would be less steeped, than the big and
great ones; being taken forth of the water, at the approach of evening they
shall be spread upon the grass in a meadow, if conveniently you may, or
elsewhere, exposed to the the air, having untied their fardels, for to remain
there all the night, to the end to drink up the dewes of the morning; then
before the Sun lights upon them, they shall be heapte together, till the
return of the evening; then put again in the dew, and taken from thence at
Sun rising, as before, continuing that ten or twelve days, after the manner of
flax, (and in sum) until then, that you shall know all the stuff to be
sufficiently watered, by the proof that you shall make in drying, and beating a
handful of each of the three sorts of the barks, laying those again in the
dew which shall not be ready enough, and withdrawing the rest, as you shall find
by the eye.

It has been recited here before, that for to have profit of feeding the
Silk-wormes, with less then two or three thousand trees, the Mulberrie-yarde
ought not to be enterprised; and that well for to govern them, to the purpose
to have long service of them, it is requisite, that there be lopped every year,
the tenth or twelfth part, so by that there may be disheaded, every year, from
two hundred and fifty, to three hundred Mulberries, which will always yield
between three or four hundred burdens of wood and more. To which quantity,
adding that which they take off from the trees immediately after their
disleauing in pruning and topping them, there will be abundance of branches,
and by consequent abundance of bark every year, from which will arise much
work of diverse sorts, according to requisite sortings.

But yet the master of our work shall not rest here but shall plant woods of
white Mulberries, to cut low the moitie of them every year; for such purpose
dividing them into two parts, from whence he shall have branches delicat and
young, the bark whereof will be proper to make fine and exquisit linen. And
the said woods will not be only profitable to furnish every year, abundance
of new bark, but also faggoting to burn; and poles for arbors in gardens, and
to make hoopes for tubbes and barrels, choosing for this the greatest branches.
Also to give the leaves for to feed Silk-wormes, gathering them in the best
aired and sunniest parts of the trees. And for the augmenting of good
husbandry, The 12. chapter in the book of Husbandry.
to feed an infinite number of connies, provided that the woods be enclosed
for a warren after the manner before described. So there will be four notable
commodities, which the master shall reap from these woods: which for the
spoil that the connies may do in disbarking the feet of the trees in winter,
as they do all sorts of plants, a few excepted, he shall not leave himself
unfurnished of so profitable a beast. Wherefore somewhat to amend such a fault,
helping the connies to meat, it behooves not but to sow oats in certain
places and great allies, which for such purpose shall be left empty in the
woods, where the connies may feed during the coldes, by so much sparing the
Mulberries: for the succoring of which, besides, you shall cause to be thrown
to the connies, the outcasts of your garden, hay, cuttings of Vines, and other
druggeries in winter, then when the snowes constraines these cattle to go to
the trees, for want of other food. Yet for the fifth commodity, I will add
here, that the leaves of Mulberries, in what place soever they be planted,
falling of themselves to the ground in the end of summer, put together in some
separated loft, taken from thence day by day, and given boiled to swine, keeps
them in good state, beginning to put them into flesh: the which comes to them,
when in ensuing, there falls a good mast, whereby they grow to the superlatiue
degree of fatness.

I would couch here for the sixth commodity the Mulberries fruit of these
trees, so much loved of poultrie, for their exceeding sweetness, if the
gathering of the Mulberrie leaf for the Worms, were not the means for us to
make profit: the which pulled from the trees with the leaves, yet green, long
before their maturitie, remain nothing worth, whereby no certain account can
be made.

All the which things, bringes to light the worth of the Mulberrie, a tree
filled with the blessing of God, which in this only plant gives to all sorts
of men, and estates, these excellent matters, for to furnish and apparel
the^, according to their affections. The soil proper for the Mulberrie to
bear agreeable food for the Worms, is that same which the Vine desires.
Wine is healthful for the Worms, fortifying, preserving and curing their
diseases. And as the Vine begins to bring forth good wine, in his fifth or
sixth year, so in like age the Mulberrie begins to bear leaves, very good to
nourish the creature, an observation heretofore already marked. Having made
these two excellent plants here to march in company, it shall not be to ill
purpose in continuing to represent their sympathies, to say, that the spirit of
wine, by distillation, is converted into water of life: So the quint-essence of
the Mulberrie yielded in the leaf, is from thence extracted by the Worm,
which turns it into silk, the earthly matter remaining in the wood, of the
which, yet the most digested part, yeeldes in the bark, from whence it is
taken, as has been seen. But to enter further into the consideration of such
secrets of nature, that would be to surpass the limits of my deliberation,
which is not to treat in this place but of the bark of the white Mulberrie,
for to gather the riches which therein is hidden. So my discourses not diuing
to the Center, shall rest themselves at the Superficial.

By this figure is showed the order, to rank the tables on the skaffolds, for
to lay the leaves on, to feed the Worms there.
By this figure is showed the manner to place the rods between the tables, for
the Worms to clime up and spinne their silk.


TO wind off the Silk from the cods you shall proceed in this fashion, that is,
to set a cawthern in a furnace filled with fair water, the neatest and
cleerest is best, which shall be heated til such a degree, that the water
becomes bubbled, as though there were small pearls in the middle, casting up a
little white skum, which it will do when it is ready to sees; and then you
shall cast in your cods or bottoms, which you shall remove and stir up and down
with a little broom, or small bushes; and if they will not wind easily, you
shall augment your fire, and being begun to wind, if you see that they wind
easily, you shall slacken it.

The bottoms winding, the threeds will catch hold at the said broom, or bushes,
which you shall draw out with your fingers the length of half a yard and more,
till that all the grossness of the cods be wond off, which you shall cut off
and lay aside, holding always with one hand all the threeds of your bottoms
joined, and united to one thread, and then according to the silk that you
desire to make, you shall take of the threeds of the bottoms; that is, if you
will make Organcin, you shall take the threeds of six bottoms, or if you will
make Verone, you shall take twelve or fifteen cods, and having joined and
united them in one thread, you shall put it first of all through a wire ring,
appointed for to rank the threeds, which must be fastened against the forepart
of a piece of wood, set directly upon the form, before the round or circle
which we call a bobbin, for that in the top of that piece of wood in a little
space that there is, are fastened two bobbins distant one from another two
fingers; from the said ring you shall draw your thread, and shall cross it
upon the said bobbins, which are fastened there, to no other end, but to twist
the silk, and from the bobbins you shall put thorough the said thread above in
a ring, which is fastened in the midst of a staff, which goes to and fro as
the Turn goes, called a lincet, set a cross beneath the wheel, and from that
ring you shall draw and fasten the said thread upon the wheel, which you shall
always turn till your skeane of silk be wonde up. It is represented in this
next figure.

You must note also that according to the number of threeds of bottoms, which
you have taken to compose your thread, you shall continue the said quantity of
cods for your thread, and shall always furnish the like number, when any one
shall be quite wonde off, or their thread broken, which you shall perceive by
the moving of the bottoms, when the full number stirs not, and you shall
continue that until your skeane be made.

You shall also be curious to cut the knots which will be at your bottoms, or
thread, to make your silk more pure and strong.

In the winding of the silk, some put Gum Arabic in the water, where they
cast the cods to wind off the silk, (which they say) they do to the end to
make it more pure and glossie; but it is for mere deceit, of purpose to make
it weigh.

By this figure is showed the fashion of the Engine, how to wind off the silk
from the cods, with the furnaces and cawtherns for that purpose.
By this figure is showed the portraits of the cods, and the Butterflies comne
forth of them, to engender and lay their eggs upon black Serge, Chamblet, Tammey
or such like stuffes as has been said.



