The work of the excellent Philosopher Lucius Annaeus Seneca concerning
Benefyting, that is too say the doing, receiving, and requyting of good
Turstes.

Translated out of Latin by Arthur Golding.

Imprinted at London by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate. 1578.

To the right honorable Sir Christopher Hatton Knight, Capiteine of the Queens
Majesty's Guard, Uicechamberlaine too her highness, and one of her Majesty's
most honorable privy Counsel, Arthur Golding wissheth health and
prosperity with increase in honor.
Under hope of your honorable favor and good likyng, I pr^ace now intoo the
Court ageine after long discontinewaunce, attendyng as an interpreter upon the
worthy Phlosopher Seneca, sometime a Courtyer, and also a Counselor of the
greatest state in the world. The matter which he is too speak of, is the
true manner of benefityng or doing of good turns; a thing of all others most
profitable for man's life, and which makes men like unto God. In the
declaration whereof, he shows what a Benefit is; why, how, when, too what
end, and on whom it is too be bestowed; what reward is too be looked for in
the doing of it, and what fruit it yields again. Likewise at whose hand,
with what mind, and when a benefit is too be received: how and when we
should requite it, or remain still detters for it; and by what means a man
may be either beneficial or thankful, even without cost or peine. His
principles and precepts are, in substance, Divine; in form, Philosophical;
in effect, fruitful. His sentences are short, quick, and full of matter; his
words, sharp, piththie, and unaffected; his whole order of writing grave,
deep, and severe; fitted altogether to the reforming of men's minds, and not
too the delyghting of their ears. But great is the liberty of truth among
wise men, and yet greater is the prerogative thereof among good men. For wise
men know that the wholsemost meats are not always best in taste, nor the
most souerein medcines always pleasauntest. And good men being desirous too
have their faults rather cured than covered, do find as well in infirmities
of mind, as of body, that the first step to health is too discern the
diseaze, and the next is too receive the right Medicine for it: Only too the
unwise and wicked sort, truth is troublesome and odious; because they cannot
abide the bryghtnesse of her countenance, nor the power and majesty of her
presence. I have therefore thought this work not unmeet too be put intoo
our Moothertung, that the mo might take benefyte by it; nor yet inexpedient too
comme in Courtyers hands, who shall be so much the greater Ornament too
themselves, and too the place whereof they take their name, as their Courtesies
and Benefytes be mo and greater toward others. And how worthy it is too
be embrased of Counselors; I refer me too the judgment of such as shall
voutsafe too read it. Of this I am fully persuaded, that you will think it a
very fit present for me too offer unto you in respect of the place wherintoo
you are called; and a sufficient Argument and Witness of my duetyfull good
will toward you. And thus recommending this my travel too your good and
honorable protection, I humbly take my leave. Written at my House in the
Parish of all Hallowes in the Wall in London the.xvii. day of March. 1577.

Most humbly at your commandment. Arthur Golding.

The first book of Lucius Annaeus Seneca, concerning Benefyting, or the
doing of Good turns, written too his friend EBVTIVS LIBERALIS.
The first Chapter.
MY dear friend Liberalis, among the many and sundry errors of our
indiscreet and unadvised life: I may well say, there is in a manner nothing
more hurtful, than that we know not, either how too bestow, or how too take
good turns. For it follows of consequence, that the good turns which are ill
bestowed should be i^ owed. And therefore if they be not requited, it is too
late for us too complayn, forasmucheas they were lost in the very bestowing of
them. And it is no marvel that among so many and so great vices, there is
none more ryfe than unthankfulness. I see many causes thereof.

The first is, that we choose not worthy persons too bestow upon. But if
we mind too put out money too interest, we make diligent inquiry of the
lands and substance of our detter. We cast no seed intoo hu^grie and
barreine soil. But as for our benefits (without any choycemaking) we rather
throw them away, than bes^owe them. And I can not easily say, whether it be
more shame too deny a man a benefit, or too claim it ageine. For this is
such a kind of credit, as a man must receive no more of it, that is frankly
offered him. Whereof too mislike, truly it is the foulest shame that ca^ be,
even in this respect, that too the discharge of this ^^edit, there neede^h not
wealth, but will. For he requiteth a good turn, that owes it willingly. But
whereas those are too blame, that cannot find in their heart so* much as too
acknowledge it: there is a fault in us also. We find many unthankful* but
we make mo. For one while we be bitter in vpbraiding and chalenging: an
other while we be ^^ckle, and such as anon after repent us of our weldooing:
and other whiles through our waywardness and fynding fault at every trifle,
we utterly disgrace all courtesy, not only after we have done good turns,
but also even in the very doing of them. For which of us is contented with
light intreataunce, or with once intreataunce? What is he, which suspecting
that somewhat should be requested of him, has not knit the brows, turned
away his face, feyned buzinesse, with long and endless bytalke purposely cut
of occasion of suit, and by sundry devises dalied out the necessity that
required speed? Or if he were taken at advantage, either he has made
delays, or flatly said nay too it. Or if he granted, it was hardly, it was
with a sour look, it was with murmuryng words scarce uttered from the
lips. But no man will gladly be in ones danger, for that which he gets
by importunatenesse, and not by gentleness. Can any manne be beholden too
such a ^ne, as either fastened a good turn upon him for a glory, or forced
it upon him in a fury, or did it too be rid of trouble, because he was
weerie of him? He mistakes his marks, which thinks that party bound unto
him, whom he has weeried with long delay, or tormented with long lingeryng.
Look with what mind a good turn is done with the same it is due ageine. And
therefore it must not be done unadvisedly: (for a man owes no thank for the
thing which he has gotten at such a ones hand, as wiste not what he did)
Nor ^^owely: (for since the estimation of all tourtisie depends chiefly upon
the will of the dooer: he that is ^low in doing, may seem too have bin
unwilling) No, nor yet disdeinfully: for inasmucheas Nature has so framed us,
that shrewd turns sin^ke deeper in our stomachs than good turns, so as the
good be soon forgotten, but the other stick fast in remembrance: what can
he look for, which displeases even in pleasuryng? A man is thankful
enough toward such a one, if he do but bear with his unkindly courtesy.
But there is no cause why the multitude of thanklesse persons should make us
the ^lower too do men good. For first (as I said) we our selves increace the
number of them. Ageine, the Gods immortal are not driven from their needful
lavishness, though men be wicked and without regard of them. They use
their own Nature, and bear with the wicked: yea, and they do good even too
those that abuse their gifts. Let us then follow the^ for our guydes, so
much as man's fra^^tie auoordeth. Let us give our good turns, and not put
them out too Usurie. Worthy is he to be deceived, which minded receiving
ageine, when he gave.

But he has had ill success.

Both children and wives deceive our expectation: and yet we bring up
children, and Marry wives still. And we be so headstrong against experience,
that being vanquished we go ageine too the wars, and after shipwreck, we go
ageine too the seas. How much more then becomes it us to continue in doing
good turns? which if a man bestow not, because he receives not; then
bestows he too the end he may receive, and so justifies he the case of the
unthankful, unto whom it is a shame not too requyte if they may. How many
are unworthy of the light? And yet the day springs still. How many bewail
that ever they were borne? And yet Nature yields new issue, and suffers
those too be, which had lever not too be. It is the property of a noble and
virtuous mind, not too respect the profit of welldooing, but the welldooing
itself: yea, and too do good even after it has met with evil men. For what
noblehartednesse were it too do good too many, if no man did deceive? The
true nobleness then, is too bestow benefits that shall never make return,
whereof the princely heart reapeth his fruit out of hand. Surely, so little
ought that matter too discourage me, or too hinder the doing of so goodly a
thing: that although I were past hope of finding a thankful person, yet
should I rather forbear the receiving of good turns, than the doing of them.
For he that does the^ not, is unkind before unkindness be offered.
Nevertheless, to say as I think, he that renderet^ not one good turn for an
other, offends more than he that does it not speedily.

The Second Chapter.
If lauishe too all men thou purpose too be,
A like of thy benefits: hold thee content,
For one well bestowed, a number too see,
On persons unthankful quyte lost and misspent.
IN the first verse, a man may find fault with both the parts of it. For
neither are benefits to be lasshed out upon all men: and as for lauishenesse,
it is vncommendable in any thing, and least commendable in benefits: for i^
ye take discretion from them, they cease too be benefits, and may rather
be called by what other name ye list. The residue that follows, is
wonderful geere, as which with the bestowyng of one good turn well,
comfort the bestowyng of many amiss. But see I pray you, if it be not
both trewer, and more agreeable too the noble heart of a well doer: That we
encourage him too do good turns, even though he should bestow none well. For
it is a false ground, too say that many must be lost. None is lost, forasmuch
as he that forgoeth it, made his reckenyng too hazard it. There is but one way
for thee too do good turns: bestow them. If he render any thing, it is
clear gain: and if he render not, yet it is no loss. I bestowed it too make
a free-gift of it. No man keeps a register of his benefits: neither does the
covetous Usurer call daily and howrely upon his detter. A good man never
thinks upon the good tournes he has done, except he be put in mind by him
that requires. For otherwise they pass intoo y^ nature of de^^es. It is a
vy^e Usurie too keep a reckening of benefits, as of expenses. Whatsoever
success thy former benefits have had, continue thou still in bestowyng upon
others. Better is it for thee, too let them rest among the unthankful, whom
either shame, or occasion, or fear may at one time or other make thankful.
Cease not too bestow: go through with thy work: and accomplish the duty of
a good man. Help this man with thy goods, that man with thy credit, the
third with thy favor, an other with thy counsel, and an other with thy
wholesome instructions.

The third Chapter.
YEa even wild beasts perceive who do them good: neither is there any Beast
so savage, but that by cherishing it, a man shall make it tame, and win it too
love him. Lio^s suffer their keepers too handle their mouths, and hurt them
not. Prouender wins the wild Elephantes, even unto slauishe obedience. So
much does the continuance of diligent cherishyng overcome, even those things
that are without the compass of understanding, and consideration of a
benefit. A man perchance is unthankful for one good turn: for an other he
will not be so. He has forgotten two: The third will bring him too
remembrance of both the other that were slipped away. That man has lost his
good turn, which in haste believes he has lost it. But he that holds on,
and loadeth benefit upon benefit; wresteth out kindness, even from the
churlishe and forgetful person. He can not have the heart too lift up his eyes
ageinste many. Wheresoever he turn himself too shun his own conscience
there let him see thee. Besette him with thy benefits: and I will tell thee
what the force and property of them is, if thou will first give me leave too
ouerronne these things that pertain not too the matter: namely why there be
three Graces, why they be sisters, and why they go hand in hand: why they
look smyling, why they be young, and why they be maide^s, and appareled in
looce and sheere raiment. Some would have it meant thereby, that the one of them
bestows the good turn the other receives it, and the third requiteth it.
Othersome, meene that there be three sorts of benefyting: that is too wit, of
be^reendyng, of requyting, and both of receiuyng and requyting together. But
take which of these you list too be true. What does this manner of knowledge
profit us? Why walks that knot in roundell hand in hand? It is in this
respect, that a good turn passing orderly from hand too hand, does
nevertheless return too the giver: and the grace of the whole is mard, if it
be anywhere broken of* but is most beautiful, if it continue toogether and
keep his course. The cause why they look smyling, is for that the
countenances of such as deserve well, are cheerful, like as theirs also is
wont too be, both which bestow, and which receive benefits. Young they
be, because the remembrance of good turns must never wex old. Uirgins they
be, because benefits must be without foil, pure, and holy too all men,
wherein there ought too be no bondage nor constreint. And therefore they wear
looce garments, howbeit very sheere and thin, because weldooinges are willing
too be seen. Admit now that some man be so far in thraldomme too the
Greeks, as too uphold that these things are necessary: yet is there no man
that can deem these things following too perteyne too the matter: namely, that
Aegle should be the eldest, Euphrosyne the middlemost, and Thaleia the third:
which are names that Hesiodus gave them. And whereas Hesiodus gave them these
names upon pleasure: every man wresteth the interpretation of them according
as he thinks they will best fit his own purpose, and indeuereth too apply
them unto some meening. Homere therefore changed the name of one of them, and
called her Pasithea. Yea and he brought her forth unto a marriage: whereby ye
may know they be no cloce Nuns. I can find you another Poet, that bringes
them forth with Girdles about them, and Ears of Corn in their hands. Yea
and Mercury stands with them: not because reason commends benefits, but
because it so pleased the Peinter. Chrysippus also (in whom is so excellent
sharpness of wit, and so percing intoo the bottom of the truth, who speaks
altogether too the purpose, and uses no mo words than serve for the
understanding of the matter:) stuffeth all his book with these toys: i^somuch
that he speaks very little of the manner of the bestowyng, receiving, and
requyting of benefits. Neither powdereth he these things with Fables, but
fables with these things. For bes^des the said things (which Hecaton writes)
Chrysippus says, that the three Graces are the daughters of Jupiter and
E^ri^^me, and that they be yoonger than the Hours, but far more beautiful
of face, and therefore are appointed too wait upon Venus. Moreover he thinks
the name of their moother to make greatly too the matter. For he says she
was called Eurynome, because he had need too be a man of great wealth, that
should do many men good. As who would say, that moothers were woo^t too be
named after their daughters, or that Poets reported true names. Nay verily,
like as a reporter of news uses boldness in sted of memory, and when he
cannot rea^dely hit upon men's names, gives them some name of his own making:
even so Poets think it not material too say truth: but either upon force
of necessity, or upon imagination of comeliness, they term a man by such
name as sometime makes trimly against them. Neither is it any crack too their
credit, though they enlarge the matter with some new device of their own. For
the last mentioned Poet makes the foresaid Ladies to bear names of his
appointyng. And that ye may know it too be so, behold Thaleia (abow^ whom is
most adoo) is with Hesiodus one of the Graces, and with Homer one of the Muses.

The fourth Chapter.
BUt least I do that thing myself, which I find fault with in others: I
will ^eaue all these toys, which are so far out of the matter, that they
come nothing near it nor about it. Only stand thou in my defense, if any man
chardge me for contro^ling of Chrysippus (in good sooth) a great clerk, but
yet a Greek, whose sharpnes of wit being over thin, is soon blunted and
oftentimes turns edge: and when it seems too do somewhat; it pricketh, but
pearceth not through. For what sharpness of wit is this? He should speak of
Benefits, and set order in a thing that most of al other knitteth men together
in fellowship: he should have made a law too live by, so as neither unadvised
plyantnesse might be setby under color of gentleness: nor liberality
(which ought too be neither skant nor ouerlauish) be restreined by the same
rule that goes about too measure it. He should have taught men too receive
willingly, and too requyte willingly: and that those which bynd men by their
deeds, provoke them too a great encounter, not only how too match them, but
also how too surmount them in good will, because that he which must requyte;
never ouertaketh, if he have not outgone. The one sort were too be taught too
upbraid nothing: and the other sort too think themselves the more in de^te.
Too this m^st hon^rable striuyng who might ouermatche other in doing good,
Chrysippus exhorts by telling us, that inasmuchas the Graces be Jupiters
daughters, we must beware that we think it not a small offense too their
father, if we offer wrong too so trim Ladies. Teach thou me some of those
things that may make me the forewarder too do men good, and the thankfuller
too such as deserve well at my hand: whereby the mynds of them that make men
beholden, and of them that are beholden may strive: the bestowers too forget,
and the detters too bear in remembrance. And as for these toys, leave them
up too Poets, whose purpose is too delight men's ears, and too frame pleasant
tales. But as for those that meene too amend men's dispositions, and too
maintain faithfulness in worldly affairs, and too imprint the remembrance
of good turns in men's minds: let them speak earnestly, and deal
effectually: unless perchance thou imagine, that the oue^throwe of gooddooing
(the thing of all others most perilous and hurtful) may be let by light
and fond fabling, and by old wives doting reasons.

The fifth Chapter.
BUt like as I must ourronne superfluous things: so must I needs show, that
the first lesson which we ought too learn, is what we owe when we have
received a good turn. For some man thinks he owes the Mouny that he has
received, another the Co^sulship: another the Preesthod: and another the
Presidentship. These things are badges of benefits, but not the benefits
themselves. The benifite it self may be carried in heart, but it cannot be
touched with hand. There is great difference between the matter of a
benefit, and the benefit it self. Therefore, neither Gold, nor Silver, nor
any of the things that we receive of our neighbors, is a benefit: but the
good will of the giver. Nevertheless, the unskillful regard only the thing
that is seen with the eye, and delivered with the hand, and hild in
po^session: and as for the thing that is dear and precious in the matter, they
set light by it. These things which we handle and ^ooke upon, and which
our greediness is so fast tied unto are transitory. B^th misfortune and
force may take them from us. But a good turn endu^eth still, yea even when the
thing that was given, is gone. For it is such a good deed as no force can
undo. As for example: I have reskewed my friend from Pirates: another enemy
catches him and castes him in prison: now he bereeueth him, not of my benefit,
but of the use of my benefit. Agein I have saved a man's children from
shipwrecke, or plucked them out of the fire, and delivered them home too him:
afterward either sickness or vnfortuna^e mischaunce takes them away from him:
yet the thing that I gave in them, contineweth even without them. All the
things therefore that wrongfully vsurp the name of a good turn, are but
instruments whereby the friendly good will, utters it self. The same happens
in other things likewise; insomuch that the show of the thing is one where,
and the thing it self another where. The general of an Army rewards some
Soldier with garlondes for skaling or for reskewing: What preciowsenesse has
the Garlond or Crown it felf? what has the Robe? what has the Scepter? what
has the Chair of Estate? what has the Chariot? None of all these things is
honor, but the Badge of honor. Even so the thing that is seen is not a
benefit, but the sign and token of a benefit.

The.vi. Chapter.
WHat is a benefit the^? It is a friendly good deed, giving gladness au^
taking pleasure in giving, foreward and ready of it own occord, too do the
thing that it does. And therefore it is not material what is done, or what is
given, but with what mind. For the good turn consists not in the thing that
is done or given: but in the very intent of the dooer or giver. And that
there is great difference betwixt the said things, a man may perceive even by
this, that the benefit it self is qnestionlesse good: but the thing that is
done or given, is neither good nor bad. It is the meening that aduau^ceth
small things, and ennobleth bace things: that imbaceth great things, and
disgraceth things of estimation. For the things that are coueted, are of
their own nature neither good nor evil: the matter stands altogether upon
the directing of them by the mind, which has the rule of them, and which
gives all things their right names. Then is it not the good turn it self,
that is nombered or delinered: like as also the honoring of God consists not
in the flaughter of beasts, be they never so fat and glistering with Gold:
but in the devout and right meening of the woorshippers. Therefore are good men
religious, though they offer but Bran in Earthen vessels: whereas on the
othersyde, evil men escape not the blame of ungodliness, though they imbrewe
the Altars with never so much blud.

The.vii. Chapter.
IF good turns consisted in the things, and not in the very will of
wel-dooing: tha^ should they be so much the greater, as the things be greater
which we receive: but that is not so. For oftentimes we be most beholden too
him that gave us small things, howbeeit with great good will: that with his
heart did match the wealth of Kings: that gave but little, howbeeit gladly:
which forgate his own poverty, too relieve mine: who had not only a good
will, b^t also a desyrounesse too help me: who thought himself too receive a
good turn, when he did o^e: who gave without mynding too receive, and received
as though he had not given: who both sought, and also prevented occasion too
do me good. Contrariwise, unacceptable (as I said) are the things, either
that be wrong out, or that slip from the bestower; seem they never so great
in the deed doing, or in the outward appearance. And much more welcome is the
thing that is given quickly, than the thing that is given with full hand. It
was a small thing which that man bestowed upon me: but he was able too do no
more. Agein it is a great thing that this man gave me: but he cast douts but
he made delays: but he syghed when he gave it me: but he gave it
disdeinfully: but he blazed it abroad, and he meant not too please him too whom
he gave it: he gave it too his own vaynglorie, and not too me.

The.viii. Chapter.
AT such time as many men (each one according too his ability) offered many
things unto Srcrates: Aeschines being a poorescholer of his, said: Sir, I find
nothing of sufficient worthiness too bestow upon you, and by that means I
feel myself too be poor. Therefore I give unto you the only thing that I
have, even myself. This present, such as it is, I pray you take in good
woorthe: and consider that whereas others have given mutch unto you, they have
left more too themselves. To whom Socrates answered: And why is not the gift
that thou haste given me great, as well as theirs? unless perchance thou
think thy self little worth. I will do my indeuer therefore, too restore
thee too thyself, better than I received thee. In this gift, Aeschines
surmou^ted the mind of Alcibiades matched with equal riches, and also the
bountifulness of all the the welthy young men.

The.ix. Chapter.
YOu see how the heart may find wherewith too be liberal even in the utter
distress of poverty. He s^emeth too me too have said thus: O fortune, thou
ha^t woonne nothing by making me poor. For I will nevertheless find out a
gift meet for this man: and because I cannot give him of thine, I will give
him of mine own. And there is no cause why ye should think he made small
account of himself: he gave himself in exchau^ge for. Socrates Like a witty
fellow, he found the means how too win Socrates too himself. We must not have
respect how great things be: what manner of person he is that gives them.
Some fineheaded fellow grants access even unto such as are unmeasurable
crauers, and feeds their importunate desires with fair words, mynding not
too help them at all in deed. Bu^ yet worse is he too be liked of, who being
churlish in speech, and sour in countenance, utters his case with disdeine.
For men do both fawn upon him that is in prosperity, and also envy him:
yea and they hate him that does but as themselves woold do, if they could.
Some men, because they have dishonested other men's wives, (and that not privily
but openly) are content too lend their own wives unto other men. If there be
any man that wilnot suffer his wife too setfoorth hirself too sale in her
Coche, and too be iaunced from place too place as a gazingstock for all men
too toote at: he is a Rudesbie, a Cloyne, and a cankred Carle, yea and a
hatingstocke among great Ladies. If there be any that has not blased himself
by some lover, or lent his Ring too another man's wise: him do the brave
Dames call a Hodip^^ke, a sorry Leacher, and a singlesoaid lover. Heeruppon
comes it too pass, that whoredom is counted honest wedlock: and in the
opinion of vnwyuing Bachelors, noman has wedded a wife, but he that has
inuegled her from her Husbond. Furthermore, they onewhyle strive to was^e
whatsoever they can rap and rend: and anon with like couetouseness they strive
as fast too scrape toogether agein the things they have scatered. They set all
at six and at seven, disdeyning other men's poverty, and dreading their own;
and as for other harm, they fear none. They spare no wrong, but make havoc
of the weaker sort, and keep them under with force and fear. For, that
Provinces are pilled, and Offices ^hopped and changed with loving and boding
from man too man: it is no wonder, considering that by the Law of al realms,
a man may sell that which he has bought.

The.x. Chapter.
BUT the matter itself has provoked me too rau^ge further than I thought too
have done. Therefore let us so end it, as the blame light not altogether upon
our present age. This have our Father complained of, this complayn we of, and
this shall our posterity complayn of: that good behauyour is subverted, that
lewdness reigns, and that the world decaying into all kind of wickedness,
grows every day worse than other. Notwithstanding, these things keep at
one stay, and shall keep with small odds under or over, like the waves of the
Sea, which the Tide at his flowing brings further in, and at his ebbing
draws back agein too the uttermost points of the shore. One while men shall
sin more in whordome than in other vices; and chastity shall have no stay of
hirself. Another while outrageous feasting shall florishe, and the Kitchen
shall most shamefully devour men's liuinges. Another while the world shall be
given too overmuch curiousenesse of apparel and regard of beauty, bewraying
in the body the deformity of the mind. In another age inordinate liberty
shall turn too malapert behauour and flat Ruffianrie. Otherwhyles men shall be
set wholly upon cruelty as well publikly as privately, and shall go toogither
by the ears like madfolk, whereby al Religion and right shall be confounded. The
time will come that Drunkenness shall be had in estimation, and it shall be
counted a vertew too quaffe much wine. Uyces continue not always at one stay,
but are evermore fleeting and at war among themseues, and in turmoyling do
heave out one another by turns. And yet for all that, we may always sing one
song of ourselves: naught we are naught we were, and (loath I am too say it)
naught we shall be. The world shall never be without Murderers, Tyrants,
Thieves, Whoremoongers, Extorcioners, Churchrobbers, and Traitors. Beneath all
these were an unthankful person, saving that al these proceed from a
thanklesse mind; without which there has not lightly grown any great
mischeef. On thine own part eschew thou the committing of this, as the
greatest fault that can be: but if another man commit it, bear with it as a
light offense. For, all the harm that thou can receive by it, is but the
loss of thy good turn. But the best of it, (which is, that thou have bestowed
it) remains whole unto thee. Nowthen, like as heed is too be taken that we
bestow our benefits specially upon such as wilbee thankful for them: so must
we bestow and do some good turns, even where we have no good opinion at
al; not only although we mistrust that they wilbee unthankful hereafter, but
also though we know them too have bin so before. As for example. If I can
save a thanklesse man's children from some great danger, and restore them too
him without inconvenience too myself: I shalnot stick too do it. As for a
worthy man, I shall defend him with the loss of my blud, and hazard myself
too do him good. Also if I can save an unworthy man from robbing by raising
hew and krye: it shall not grieve me too auoord him my voice too do him good,
because he is a man.

The.xi. Chapter.
IT follows that we declare what benefytes are too be bestowed, and how.
First let us bestow suchas be needful, secondly such as be profitable,
thirdly sucheas are acceptable, and in any wise durable. But we must begin at
such as are needful. For things that concern life or living, do touch a
man's mind otherwise than the things that do but garnishe, or furnishe him.
A man may well make light account of the thing that he may easly forbear, of
which it may be said, I pass not for the having of it, I am content with
that which I have of mine own: yea, and when a man can find in his heart,
not only too send back the thing that he receives, but also too cast it
away. Of things that be needful, sum challenge the cheef room, without
which we cannot live: Sum chalendge the second roomee, without which we
should not live: and ^omme the third room, without which we would not live.

Of the first sort be such as these: too be rescewed out of the hands of
enemies, from the cruelty of Tyrauntes, from arreignement, and from the
^undrie and uncertain perilles that beseege man's life. From whichesoeuer of
these things we rid a man, the greater and terribler it is: the more thank
shall we win. For it ronneth always in their mind, from how great miseries
they were delivered, and the fear that went before, is an aduauncing of the
good turn that enseweth. Yet notwithstanding, we must not therefore use the
less haste in saving of a man, than we can, too the end that fear may make
our good turn of more weight. Next unto these, are the things without which
we may in deed live: howbeeit in suehewyse as a man had lever be dead: as
liberty, Chastity, and a good mind. After these we may place the things
that are dear unto us by reason of Aliaunce, kindred, customme, and long
acquaintance: as children, wives, howsehold and such other things, which the
mind has so nearly alyed too it self, that it esteems it agreater greef too
be pulled from them, than too dye. Then follow profitable things, which
have sundry and large grounds too work upon. Of this sort is monnye, not
superfluous, but orderly prepared for necessary uses. Of this sort also is
Honor, and the proceedinges of them that seek too clymbe high: for of all
profits, the best is to profit a man's self. As touching the things that
serve but for delyght, there is great store of them. In these we must
indeuer, that they may be acceptable for their opportunity; that they be not
common, but such as feawe have had, or feawe have within that time; or such as
though they be not precious of their own Nature, may becomme acceptable for
the season or place of them. Let us consider what may do most pleasure when
it is offered, and what may oftest comme too hand with him that shall have it,
so as it may stand us in sted as often as it is with him. In any wise let us
beware, that we send not unfit presents: as hunting^eawe too a woman or an
old man, or books unto a Cloyne, or Nets too one that is given too study
and learning. Likewise we must look about us on the ^ontrarie part; that when
we mind too send acceptable things, we send not such things as may note a
man's disease: as wine to a drunkard, or Poti^arie ware to a ^^kly man. For
the thing becomes a Corzie, and not a Courtezie, wherein the disease of the
receiver is noted by it.

The.xii. Chapter.
IF the choice of giving be in our own power, we must chiefly seek durable
things, that our gifts may not dye over hastily. For feawe are so thankful
as too think upon a thing that they have received, when it is out of their
sight. But even thanklesse persons stumble upon the remembrance of a gift,
when they see it before their eyes, so as it suffers them not too forget it,
but presents and offers unto them the giver of it. And truly so much the
more durable things must we seek too give, because we must never putt the
receyuer in mind of them. Let the very thing it self reuyue the remembrance
of it that was vanishyng away. I had lever give silver wrought, than coy^ed:
and I had lever give Images and pictures, than apparel or a thing that w^ll
soon be worn out. Feawe think them selves beholden for a thing when it is
once gone. But there be many that never mind things given, longer than they
serve their turn. Therefore if it be possible, I wllnot have my gift
consumable. Let it abide with my friend, let it stick by him, let it live and
dye with him. None is so foolish as too need warning, that he should not send
swoordplayers, or baytingbeastes too him that is gone out of office: or that he
should not give Sommergarmentes to wear in Winter, or Wintergarmentes too
wear in the hoate Summer. Inbestowing benefytes, le^t a man follow common
reason. Let him observe time, place, and person. For sum things are
acceptable or unacceptable, according too their times. How much more
thanksworthy is it, if we give a man the thing he has not, than if we give
him that whereof he has store? Or a thing that he has long sought and could
not find, than a thing that is too be had euerywhere? Let presents be, not
so much costly, as rare and gezon: and sucheas may bid themselves welcomme
even unto a rich man: Like as common Apples which within feawe days after
wilnot be worth the eating, are well liked when they comme more tymely than
other fruits do. Also it can not be that such things should be vnesteemed,
as either none other man has given them the like, or as we ourselves have not
given to others before.

The.xiii. Chapter.
AT such time as Alexander King of Macedonie took upon him above the state
of a man, because he had counquered the East: the Corynthians sent their
Ambassadors to rejoice with him of his good success, and offered too make him
Lord of their City. When Alexander lawghed at this kind of Courtesy: We
never (quod one of the Ambassadors) gave any man the protection of our City,
save you and Hercules. Then took he willingly the honor that was offered him:
and interteyning the Ambassadors with feasting and all other kind of royal
Courtesy, began to think with himself, not what they were that gave him this
honor, but what he himself was too whom they had given it. And being a man
given all too glory, (whereof he knew neither the nature nor measure) in
following the footesteppes of Liber and Hercules, (yea and not staying there
where they left of,) he turned his eye from the giuers, too him with whom they
had matched him in honor. As who woold say, that bycawse he was matched with
Hercules, he had alredye gotten up too heaven which he had apprehended in his
own vain imaginacion. For what likeness was there between Hercules and this
mad young spri^gald, whom prosperouse rashness served instead of
valeantnesse? Hercules winning nothing too himself, traueled over the whole
world, not conquering it, but setting it at liberty. For what could he win,
that was an enemy too the evil, a defender of the good, and a pacifyer both
of sea and Land? But Alexander was from his chyldhod a Robber, a waster of
Countries, a destroyer of his friends as well as of his foes, and such a one as
made it his cheef felicity too be a terror too all men: forgetting that not
only the feercest, but also even the cowardlyest beasts are feared for their
hurtful poison.

The fourthtene Chapter,
NOw let us return agein too our purpose. The benefyte yt is bestowed upon
every man without exception, is bestowed upon noman. Noman thinks himself
beholden too an Inkeeper or too him that keeps an ordinary table, for his
interteinement^ neither does any take himself for a bidden gwest, too him
that maks a common feast, whereof it may be said, what has he bestowed upon
me? marie even as he bestowed upon this man whom he was scarce acquaynted
with, or upon that man that is his utter foe yea and perchance a very
varlet. What? did he think me a worthy person? no, he did it but too feed
his own humor. look what thou wooldest have well accepted, that make thou
gezo^. Who can abide too be cloyd with any thing? Let noma^ so conster these
words as though I w^nt too restrein liberality, and too reyne it back with a
rowgh bit. Let it go at as large scope as it liste^h: but let it go, and not
gad. A man may give in such wise, as although a number receive all of one
thing, yet eueryman shall think himself too be made more account of than y^
rest. Let eueryma^ have some familiar token, whereby he may conceive opinion,
that he was better accepted than others. Let him say, I have received the same
thing that he did: but mine was unrequested. I received the same that he did:
but in shorter time, whereas he had deserved it long before There are that have
the same thing: but not given with like words, nor with like courtesy of the
bestower. He obtained it by intreatance: but I was entreated too take it. This
man received as well as I: but he is able too requyte it eas^y, and he is such
a one as his age and lack of children promise great things. Although he gave
us all one thing: yet was his gift greater too meeswards, because he gave where
there is no hope too receive. Like as a courtizane so imparteth hirself unto
many ^ouers, as none goes away without some sign of her kind heart: even so he
that purposes too have his good turns well liked, deuyseth both how he may
make many beholden unto him, (...) yet that each one of them may have some
peculiar point, wherein too prefer himself before the residew. But I will be no
hinderer of gooddooings. The mo and the greater that they be, the more
come^dacion do they procure. Nevertheless, let discretion be used. for noman
can like well of the things, that are done at all adventures and unadvisedly.
Wherefore if any man think us (in giving these precepts) too streighten the
bownds of welldooing, and not too give it free scope ynowgh: undoubtedly he
misconstrueth our lessons. For what virtue do we more reverence? To what
virtue give we more encoragement? Or too whom belongs it so mutch to exhort
men thertoo, as unto us which indeuer too stablish the society of mankind?

The.xv. Chapter.
WHat then? Inasmuch as there is no opera^ion of the mind commendable (no not
although it proceed from a right intent) saving such as is measured by the
rule of vertew: I forbid liberality too run royet. The^ does it a man good
too receive a benefit, (even with open hands) when reason leads it unto
the worthy, and not when every light occasion and unadvised geerishnesse
offers i^: the which a man may vaunt of as clear gotten good, and thank
noman for it but himself. Termest thou them good turns, the author whereof
thou art ashamed too be acknowen of? How much more acceptable are they, and
how much more deep^ly sink they intoo a man's breast never too depart agein,
when it delyghteth him too think, rather of whom, than what he has received:
Crispus Passienus was wont too say, he had lever have some men's judgment
than their benefyte, and some men's benefyte than their judgment: and he
added examples. I had lever (says he) too have the good opinion of the
Emperor Augustus: and I had lever have the benefyte of Claudius. But I am of
opinion that nomannes benefyte is too be desired, whose discretion is too be
mislyked. What then? was not the gift of Claudius too be received? Yis marie
was it: Howbeeit as at fortunes hand, who (as men know) may byanby become
evil. Why then deuyde we these things that are interlaced toogither? It is no
good turn which wants the best part of itself, that is too wit, too be
done with discretion. Otherwise, a great mass of Monnye (if it be not given
with discretion and with right meening) is no more a benefyte, than a Treasure.
There be many things that a man may receive, and yet not be indetted for
them.

The end of the first Book.
The second book of Lucius Annaeus Seneca, declaring in what wise a benefyte
or good turn ought too be bestowed.
The first Chapter.
MY very good friend Liberalis, let us consider that which remains of the
former part: that is too wit, after what sort good turns are too be dooen.
Whereof me thinks I can show a very ready way. Let us so do, as we would
ber dooen unto. Before all, let us do them willingly, speedely, and without
sticking. Scarce worth gramercie is the good turn, that cleaves long too the
hands of the bestower; which a man seems loath too forgo, and which he
seems too depart with in such wise, as if it were wrested from him perforce.
If there happen any delay, let us in anywyse be ware that we seem not too
have cast doutes of the matter: for he that douteth, is next cousin too him
that denies; and such a one deserves no thanks. For seeing that in a
bene^ite, the acceptablest thing is the good will of the bestower: he that by
his long lingeryng witnesses himself too bestow unwillingly, bestows not at
all; But untowardly draws back from him that would feign hale him on. Many
there be that becomme liberal, because they have not the countenance too say
a man nay. Most acceptable are those benefytes that are ready at hand, that
comme ^asely, and wherein there is no stop but the modesty of the receiver. The
best point is too outgo a man's desire, and the next is too follow it. But yet
is it farbetter too prevent it, before we be requested. For inasmuche as an
honest man is out of countenance, and ashamed too crave: he that releaceth him
that torture, dubbleth his good turns. He that obteynes a thing by
intreatance, commes not freely by it. For (as it seemed too our aunceters, who
were men of very grave consideration,) nothing is bought more deerly, than
that which is gotten by intreataunce. Men would pray very seeldomme, if they
should pray openly: So much had we lever to make our petitions secretly, and
within ourselves, yea, even too the Gods, unto whom we may do it with most
honesty.

The second Chapter.
IT is a sore and a heavy word, yea, and such a word as will make a man
too cast down his head in his bosom, too say, I beseech you sir. We must
discharge our friend of that word, yea, and whomsoever w^e purpose too make
our friend by our good usage. Make he never so much haste, yet gives he too
late, that gives upon intreatance. Therefore we must guess what every man
would have: and when we understand it, we must ease them of that most
gr^euous necessity.

Assure thyself that that benefyte does a man good at the heart, and will
continewe long in remembrance, which meets a man at the half turn. If it
be not our hap to prevent ones request: lette^vs cut him of from many words,
least we may seem too be sewed unto: and as soon as we know his mind*
let ^s grant it out of hand, and let us show by our hastemaking, that we
would have dooen it unrequested. For like as in sickfolke the coming of sum
meat in dew time has brought health, and the giving of water in season has
remedyed the disease: Even so, be the benefyte never so mean and small, yet
if it comme ridely without lingering or for^lowyng of time, it greatly
aduaunceth it self, and wins more thank than a costly present that is s^owe
in coming, and long breathed upon.

The third Chapter.
NO dout but he that does so ridily* does it willingly, And therefore he
does it cheerfully, with a countenance agreeable too his mind. Sum men
have disgraced their great good turns by counterfetting a gravity and
soberness in holding their peace or speaking leisurely, because they granted
them with countenance of de^yall. How much better is it too m^^che good
words with good deeds, and too beautify the things that thou performest,
with courteous and gentle speech? Too the end the party may blame himself for
being too s^owe in asking, thou may find fault with him in such familiar
manner as this. I am angry with you, that whereas you wanted any thing, you
have not made me privy too it sooner, or that you have trubbled your self too
sewe for it, or that you have used any other mean than yourself. But for mine
own part, I am glad that it pleased you too try my good will. Whatsoever you
have need of hereafter, you shall command it at your pleasure. I will bear
with your bashfulnesse for this once.

So shall thou make him too set more by thy good will, than by the thing that he
came too desire, whatsoever it be. Then is the bountifulness of the giver
great, then is his courtesy great: when the party that is gone from him
shall say too himself, This day have I made a great purchase. It does me more
good that I have found him such a one, than if the thing had come duble and
treble too me another way. For I shall never be able too requite this good
will of his.

The fourth Chapter.
BUt there be many that bring their benefytes in hatred by their rough words
and stately looks, using such language and pride, as it woold irk a man too
have obtained the thing at their hands. Agein, when they have granted, there
follow delays. But truly there is no greater corzie, than too be driven too
^ew for that which a man has gotten grant of already. It is a harder matter
too get a good turn out of some men's hands, when it is granted, than too
get grant of it; and such must be called upon. One must be prayed too put
him in remembrance, and another too take it up. And so one gift is tossed
through many men's hands, by means whereof the least part of thanks
redoundeth too the giver. For whosoever is sewed unto afterward, must needs
be a derogacion too the first graunter. Therefore if thou will have the
performance of thy good turns accepted thankfully: thou must deal so, as they
may come whole and untasted unto them whom thou have promised, without any
abatement as they term it. Let noman have too deal with them by the way. For
noma^ can make his own ^han^e of that which thou myndest too give, but that
he must diminish thine.

The fifth Chapter.
NOthing is more greeuouse tha^ long lingering. Some can better b^are a flat
nay, than too be foaded of. But it is the fault of diverse men, too delay the
performance of their promises through a fond vaingloriousenesse, least the
number of their Suitors should abate. Of which sort are the Officers in Kings
Courts, and suchas bear authority about Princes, which have a pleasure too
behold the long train of their own pride, and think themselves able too do
little, if they set not out their port too every man, by making them dance
attendance a long while. They do nothing out of hand, they dispatch nothing at
once. They be swift too do harm, but slow too do good.

Wherefore assure thyself it is most true which the Comical Poet says: What?
perceiuest thou not that the longer thy delay is, the less is thy thank?
Heeruppon come these speeches, which the gentle heart utters with greef. If
thou do the thing, do it out of hand. Nothing is worth so much sewt. I had
lever now too have a flat nay: for I am so weerie of way^ing for the
Benefyte, that my heart begins too hate it.

Can a man be thankful for such dealing? Like as it is a point of a most
bitter cruelty, too prolong a man's punishment, and a kind of mercy too kill
him out of hand, because speedy torment brings end too itself, and the time
that goes before execution, is the greatest part of the pain that follows
with it: even so, the less while a good turn has lingered, the better
welcome is it. For even in good things* lingering is greeuouse too such as
long for them. And whereas many benefytes may remedy some man's necessity:
he that either suffers the party too be long martyred, whom he may dispatch
out of hand, or delayeth his gladness: fordooeth his benefyte with his own
hands. All courtesy makes have* and it is the property of a weldooer, too
do things willingly and quickly. He that has given slowly, and done a man
good with delay of time, has not done it with his heart. And so has he lost
two cheef things at once; that is too wit, both his time, and the trial of
his freendly good will. For too meene a thing slowly, is as much as not too
meene it at all.

The.vi. Chapter.
IN all matters (my friend Liberalis) the manner how any thing is said or done,
is not the smallest part. Speediness has much helped, and delay has much
hindered: like as in Darts the power of the Steel is all one, and yet there
is exceeding great odds, whither they be thrown by a forcible Arm, or
whither they be let slip from a lazy hand. One selfsame Sword may both prick
and perce through: the matter is, with what force the Arm sendz it. Likewise
the thing that is given is all one: but the manner of the giving makes the
difference. How sweet and how precious is the gift, when he that gave it
suffered not himself too be thanked for it, but forgate his giving of it by
that time he had given it? For too check a man though thou do never so much
for him, or too mingle tauntes with thy good turns, is a madness. Benefytes
therefore must not be made bytinges, neither must they be sawced with any
sowernesse. If there be any thing whereof thou would warn him, take some
other time for it.

The.vii. Chapter.
SUch a good turn, hardly bestowed by a churlish person, Fabius Verucosus was
wont too call stony bread* which a hungry body must needs take, though it
be too his pain. Tyberius Caesar being desired of his Nephew Marcus Aelius
sometime Praetor of Rome, to help him out of det, bade him give him a Bill of
his Creditors names. This was no rewarding, but a calling toogither of his
Creditors. When the Bill was exhibited, he wrate too his Nephewe, that he had
given order for the payment of the Monnie. By which reprochefull admonition he
brought to pass, that his Kinsman was neither indetted too others, nor
beholded too him. Somewhat there was that Tyberius meant by it. I believe he was
loath that any mo should trubble him with the like sewte. Peraduentur it might
be (...) speedy way too repress men's importunate suits with shame: But he
that will bestow benefytes, must utterly follow a clean contrary way.

The.viii. Chapter.
IN all things that thou give, too the intent it may be the more
acceptable, thou must beautify it by some means or other. This dealing of
Tyberius, is not too do a man a good turn, but too take him in a trippe. And
by the way, that I may say what I think in this case also; It s^arsly stands
with the honor of a Prince, too reward a man too shame him withal. Yet for
all that, Tyberius could not escape disquietting by that mean that he thought
too have done. For there were diverse afterward, which made the same sewte unto
him: all whom he commanded too show the causes of their Det too the Senate,
and thervppon gave certain sums among them. This is not a liberality: it is
a check: it is a poor help, it is a Princis alms. That is no Benefyte which
I cannot remember without blusshing. I was sent too the Judge, and I was feign
to plead my case before I could get any thing.

The.ix. Chapter.
Therefore all Authors of wisdomme teach, that some benefits must be bestowed
openly, and some secretly. Openly, which are a praise too attein: as rewards
of Chivalry, and honor, and whatsouer else becomes more honorable by
being known. But asfor the things that auaunce not a man's credit or
estimation, but relieve his weakness, his want, or his shame: they must be
given secretly, so as they may be known too none but those that take good by
them. ^et not thy ^^ght hand ^^nowe what ^hy left hand ^ooeh.
Yea and sometimes even he that is too be helped must be beguyled, so as he
may have the thing, and yet not know of whom he had it.

The.x. Chapter.
ARcesilaus (as the report goes) having a poor friend that cloked his own
poverty, which was also sik and woold not be acknowen of it, nor yet that he
wanted wherewith too bear out his needful charges: considered how he was too
be succored secretly, and put a Bag of Gold under his Bolster without making
him privy too it, to the intent that the man which was shamefast too his own
hinderance, might rather find the thing that he wanted, than receive it. What
then? shall he not know of whom he had it? At the first let him not know it,
since the not knowing of it is a piece of the good turn. I will afterward do
many other things, and I will give him many things, whereby he may
understand from whence the other came. Finally though he know not whence he
had it, yet shall I know who gave it. That is too small purpose, say you. Too
small purpose in deed, if thou mind too take Loan for it. But if thou mentest
too give it in such wise as might most avail him that received it; thou will
give it freely, and thou will desire no mo witnesses but thy self. Otherwise
thy meening is not too do well by him, but too seem too have done well by
him. But (say you) I will have him know it. Then seek you too make him your
Detter. No, but I woold have him know it. What if it be more for his behoof,
not to know it? what if it be more for his honesty? what if it be more too
his lyking? will you not be of another mind? I tell you I would have him know
it. So shall thou not keep the man in darkness. I deny not but that as often
as the case will bear it, a man may reap pleasure of the good will of y^
receiver. But if he stand in need of help, and is ashamed too have it known;
if the thing that I bestow upon him shall grieve him if it be not concealed
from him: I wilnot make my benefit a matter of record. For why should I
discover myself too him to have given it, seeing it is one of the first and
most uecessarie Rules, never to upbraid a man, no nor never too Cipher it unto
him? For the Law of benefyting between men is this: That the one must
forthwith forget that he has given, and the other must never forget what he
has received. For the often rehearsal of good deseruinges, does greatly
frette and grieve the mind.

The.xi. Chapter.
I Could find in my heart too krye ou^, as the man did that was not able too
bear the pride of certain friend of the Emprors, which had saved his life at
such time as the Triumuirs proclaimed traitors who^ they listed. Put me intoo
Cesars hand agein, (quoth he). How often say thou too me, I have saved
thee, I have delivered thee from death. If I make mention of it of mine own
free will, it is life: but if thou put me in mind of it, it is death. If thy
saving of me was too make a vaunt of me, I owe thee nowght. How long wilt
thou lead me about as a gazing-stocke? how long will it be ere thou suffer
me too forget my misfortune? In y^ tryu^ph I should have bin led about but
once. We must never make words of that which we have done for any man. He
that tells him of it, demands it agein. But he must not be urged, he must not
be put in rememberance, otherwise than by reuyuing the former benefyte by the
bestowing of another: no, we may not tell it unto other folks. Let him that
has done the good turn, hold his peace: and let him that received it blaze
it abroad. For else it wilbee said unto him, as one said too a man that was
bosting euyrewhere of his good turn that he had done: Wilt thou deny that
thou had recompense? and when he answered where or when? Oftentimes and in
many places (said he): namely as often and in as many places as thou haste
babbled of it abroad. What neededest thou too tell it out? what neededest thou
too take another man's office out of his hand? There is another man that might
have done it with more honesty, upon whose good report, this also woold turn
too thy praise, that thou ^ellest it not abroad thyself. Thou must needs
condemn me for a churl, if thou think that noman should have known it but
by thine own reporting. Which dealing is so much too be eschewed, y^ if a man
should make report of our benefits before our faces, we should answer, Truly
he is right worthy of greater benefyts, which I know myself more willing
than able too perform. And this must be spoken, not as of one that woold set
himself too sale, nor with such colorablenesse as some me^ put the things from
them which they woold faynest draw too them. Besides this, Be not ^eerie of
doo^^ good.
there must be added all manner of courtesy. The husbandman shall lose that he
has sown, if he leave his labor at the seed. It requires much pain too
bring the seed too harvest. Nothing comes too yielding of fruit, if it be
not throwly tended and husbanded from the first too the last. In like case is
it with benefyts. Can there be any greater than those that fathers bestow
upon their children? Yet were all but lost, if they should give them over in
their chyldhod, and not cherish their charge foorthon with continewall
kyndnesse. All other benefits are in the same state. If you help them not
foreward, The ground of all good doing is love from an unfeigned heart.
you lose them. It is too small purpose too have bestowed them: they must be
still cherished. If thou will have them thankful whom thou make beholden
unto thee: thou must not only be beneficial too them, but thou must also
love them. Inespecially (as I said) let us not trubble men's ears. Rehearsal
breeds irksomeness; and vpbrayding, hatred. In doing good turns, nothing is
too be eschewed so much as pride. that needs any high looks? what needs
any great words? The thing itself aduaunceth thee. Uayne vaunting must be
put away. The things themselves will speak thowgh we hold our peace. A good
turn that is done with pride, is not only thanklesse, but also hateful.

The.xii. Chapter.
C Aesan gave Pompey of Affrike his life (if at leastwyse he may be said too
give, which takes not away): and afterward when he came too give thanks for
his Pardon, he offered him his left foot too kiss. Such as excuse Caesar,
say he did it not for any pride, but only too show his Gilt or rather his
Golden shoe set with Pearl and Preciouse stones. And so, what dishonor was it
for a nobleman and a Consulles peer, too kiss Gold and Perle?

And could that Caytif, borne for the nonce too change the customs of his
free Country intoo Persian ^^auerie, could he (I say) pick out no clenlyer
part of all his body too be kissed? Thought he it a small matter that an
ancient Se^ator, should so far abace his honor, as to cast himself down at
his feet, in the presence of Princes, in such sort as vanquished enemies have
bin wont too couche at the feet of their Conquerors? He had found a place
beneathe his knees, too thrust freedom and liberty down unto. Is not this a
trampling of the common weal under foot? In good faith (will some man say) it
can make nothing to the matter, that he did it with his left foot. For it had
not bin a pranke of pride foul and outrageouse enough, too sit upon the life
of a Consulls peer in shoes of Gold and Pearl, except that like a lusty
Gallant, he had also thrust his goutie Feet into the Mouth of a Senator.

The.xiii. Chapter.
Oath pride of great prosperity! O most mischeuous folly! How happy is it
too receive nothing at thy hand! O how thou turnest every benefyte intoo bane!
O how thou delightest too ouerdoo all things! O how all things disgrace thee,
and the higher that thou aduauncest thyself, the more art thou abased! Thou
show thyself not to know these good things wherewith thou art so puffed up.
What soever thou give, thou marrest it. Therefore I woould feign weete of thee
what it is that makes thee so careless, what alters so thy look and
countenance, that thou had lever have a visor than a face. Pleasant are
the things that are given with a courteowse and gentle countenance, which when
my superior gave me, he tryumphed not over me, but behaved himself as
familiarly as could be, and made himself fellowlyke with me, and without any
glorious setting out of his gift, waited a convenient time too pleasure me,
rather upon occasion than upon co^streint. There is but one way too persuade
such manner of men that they should not mar their benefits through their
own stateliness: namely too show them that their benefytes are not the
greater, because they be given with greater adoo; nor they themselves the
better thought of for so doing: but that the greatness of their pride being
fond, causes things otherwise worthy of love, too be hated.

The.xiiii. Chapter.
THere are sum things that would turn too the hurt of the receyuer; the
which it is a benefyte too deny, and not too perform. And therefore we must
rather consider the profit of the demaunders, than their* desire. For
oftentimes we covet hurtful things, and we be not able to discern how
noysomme they be, because affection blyndeth reason. But when our
passionatenesse is well settled, and the rage of the fyrie fury that chaced
away discretion, is thoroughly alayed: the^ hate we the mi^ bestowers of these
hurtful gifts. Wherefore like as we de^ye cold Water too sickfolkes, and
weapon too such as be in sorrow or rage; and whatsoever the heat of love
desires too use against it self, too such as be in love: even so must we
continue too deny hurtful things too those that earnestly, humbly, yea and
oftentimes also rewfully request them. It becomes men too have an eye, both
too the beginning and too the ending of their benefyts and good turns, and too
give such things as may like a man, not only at the receiving of them, but
also ever after. There be many that will say, I know it will do him no good:
but what should I do? He entreats me, and I cannot withstand his request,
let him look too himself, he shalnot blame me. That is untrue. For he shall
blame thee, and that woorthely too, when he is come too his right wits
ageine, and when the fit that inflamed his mind is ouerpast, for why should he
not hate him, by whom he was furthered too his hurt and peril? It is a cruel
kyndnesse too be entreated too mischeef one. Like as it is a goodly point of
charity to save men that be even loath and unwilling too be saved: so is it a
fawning and courteouse kind of hatred, too grant things hurtful too those
that desire them. Let our benefyte be such as the use of it may make it still
better belyked, and such as never may turn too harm. I shall not give a man
money, if I may know he will bestow it upon a harlot, least I be found too
be a maynteyner of his filthy act or purpose. If I can, I shall call him from
it: if not, I shalnot further his wickedness. Whither anger drive a man too
do that he ought not, or whither the heat Ambition withdraw him from his
welfare: yet shall I not suffer him too mischeef himself, neither shall I give
him cause too say afterward, He has killed me with his kyndnesse.

The.xv. Chapter.
Oftentimes there is no deffere^ce between the pleasuringes of friends, and
the practizes of foes. For look what the enemy could have wisshed, that
does the unseasonable ouerkyndnesse of the friend, both force unto, and
arm unto. And what fouler shame can there be, than that there should be no
difference between a bane and a benefate? which thing comes too pass
oueroften. Let us never give things that shall redound to our own shame.
For seeing that the highest poi^t of freendship, is for a man too set as
much by his friend as by himself: both parties must be provided for alike. I
will give too him that wants, but so as I want not myself, I will succor one
that is like too perish, but so as I perish not myself, except I may be the
borowe of sum singular person, or of sum great thing.

I will bestow no such be^efyte, as I could not ask with out shame.

I will neither inhaunce small things, nor suffer great things too be taken
for small. For like as he that twitteth a man by that he has given him, does
mar the grace of his gift: even so he that does but show, how much he has
given too one that abaceth the same, does but commend his gift, and not
upbraid it.

Every man must have an eye to his own ability and power, that we bestow
neither more nor less tha^ we be able.

We must consider the person of him to whom we give. For sum things are
too small too come from great men: and sum are too great for him that
should receive them. And therefore wey with thyself, the person of either of
them. When thou myndest too bestow, examine whither the thing be more than
the giver can forbear, or whither it be too little for him too bestow: and
ageine, whither he that is too receive it, may hold skorne of it; or whither it
be more than is meet for him.

The.xvi. Chapter.
ALexander being indiscreet, and myndyng none but over great things, gave
one a City. When he too whom it was given, measuring himself in himself,
re^uzed it for ^eare of being enuyed for so great a reward, saying it was not
agreeable too his estate: I pass not (quod Alexander) what becomes thee to
receive, but what it becomes me too give. It seems too be a noble saying,
and yet being a kings saying, it is most foolish. For nothing becomes any
man, in respect of himself alone. The respects that make it comely, are what,
too whom, when, why, where, and such other, without which there is no reason
in doing. Proud Peacocke, if it becomme not him too receive it, neither
becomes it thee too give it. There is a proportionable respect of persons
and degrees. And seeing that on either side, the (...) is the mean; as well is
that a fault that ouerreacheth, as that which comes too short. Well, admit
it be lawful for thee, and that Fortune has so highly advanced thee, that
thon may give whole Citees for rewards, in the not receiving where of, there
was more noble courage, than in the rechele^^e gift of them: yet is there sum
man too mean too have a City thrust intoo his bosomme.

The.xvii. Chapter.
ONe of Diogenes sect desired Antigonus too give him a Talent. ^^^ueling in
^^^oing good ^nes.
Antigonus answered it was more than one of the Doggishe sect ought too crave.
Upon this denial he desired a pennye. Antigonus answered it was less than
became a king too give. Such caueling is too shameful. He found a shift too
give neither of both. In the penny he respected his own royalty, and in the
Talent the others beggerie: whereas notwithstanding the might have given the
penny as to a beggar, and the Talent as a king. But admit there may be
sum thing to great for a beggar to receive: yet is there nothing so small,
which the courtesy of a Prince may not give with his hono^r. If you demand
mine opinion, I allow the dealing of Antigonus. For it is not too be borne
with, that a man should both crave monnie, and contemn it. Thou have vowed
the hatred of monnie: it is thy profession: thou have taken that part to
play: and thou must play it thoroughly. It is against right and reason, that
thou should gather monnie under the glory of begging. ^^he persons ^^^othe
of the ^^^uer, and of ^^e receiver ^^ust be con^^dered.
A man therefore must as well consider his own person, as the person of him
whom he myndeth too relieve. I will use my frer^d Chrysippus similitude of the
play at the ball, which doubtless falls (...) the ground, if either the
sender or the receiver miss his stroke. It do^eth then keep his ^ourse, when
it is featly tossed and turned from hand too hand on both sides. It be^oueth
the good player too ^^rike it after one sor^e, if his play fellow be a (...)
man, and after another if he be a low man. In like case is it with a good
turn. For except it be fitly applied to both persons, as well of the dooer,
as of the receiver: it shall neither pass from the one, nor comme to the other
in such wise as it ought too do. If we have too do with a practiced and
skillful player, we may strike the ball the boldlyer: for howsoever it
comes, a redye and nimble hand will strike it back ageine. But if we deal
with a Nouice and a learne^, we must not in^ounter him so roughly, nor with so
full blow, but we must meet the Ball ley^urely and softly, and as it were
lead it intoo his hand ageine. The like thing is too be dooen in benefytes.
We must train on sum men, and think it enough if they putfoorthe
themselves* if they adventure, and if they be willing. But commonly we
ourselves do make men unthankful, and we like well of it that it should
be so: as who would say, our benifites were therefore the greater, because
the party is not able too requite them, according to the manner of wranglyng
game^^ers, which find fault with their playfellowes for the nonce, to the
intent too give over the game, which cannot be co^tinewed but by consent.
Many are of so untoward a nature that they had lever lose that which they have
bestowed, than too seem too have reteiued aught, they be so proud and so
skornefull. But how much better, and how much greater cour^e^ie were it, too
deal so as the otherside might play their parts also; and so too bear with
them, as they might be able too show themselves thankful; and too conster
all things too the best, and too like of him that yields thanks, no less
than if he yielded recompense; and too behave ones self so gently, that look
whom he has most bound, him he is most willing to discharge? The Usurer is
wont too be ill spoken of, if he be too hasty in demanding: and as ill he
spoken of, if he seek delays and be ^lowe and loath to receive. As well is a
good turn too be received ageine, as not too be exacted ageine. He is best
that gives ridely, and never exacteth agein. He that receives the re^^^ne of
a benefyte, with like mind as if he receiue^ the first gift of it: is glad that
it is rendered, and yet forgets in good earnest what he had dooen for the
other.

The.xviii. Chapter.
SOme men not only bestow good tur^es skornfully, but also receive them
skornfully: which is not too be committed. For now we will pass too the
other part, and show how men ought too behave themselves in receiving good
turns. Therefore where a dewtie consists of two parties: there is required
as much of y^ one as of ye other. When a man has looked what manner a one a
Father ought too be; he shall understand, there remaynes as much work for
him, too see what manner a one the Son ought too be. There ^e certain duties
requisite in the Husbond; and no less is looked for in the wife. As much as
these do require one of another, so much also do they owe one another; and
are to be measured all by one rule, which (as Hecaton says) is hard. For all
honest things are hard too atteine unto, and so are the things that approach
near too honesty. For they must not only be done, but they must be done
with reason. She must be our guide too follow all our life. All things both
small and great must be done by her aduyce: according as she counsels, so
must we give. The first thing that she will teach us, is that we must not
take at all men's hands. Of whom then shall we take? Too answer thee in
feawe words, of them too whom it may beseem us too give. For certesse we
ought too be more precyse in seeking too whom we may make ourselves detters,
than on whom we may bestow. For although there follow none other
discommoditie; (as there follow very many) Yet is it a great corzie too be
in danger too such a one as thou would not. Contrariwise it is the greatest
pleasure in the world, too have received a good turn at such a man's hand, as
thou could find in thine heart too love, even after he has done thee wrong.
But for a man too be driven too have him of whom he has no liking; it is too
an honest and shamefast mind, the greatest misery that can be. I must
always put you in remembrance, that I speak not of perfect wise men: which
like whatsoever they ought too do, which have their wills at commandment,
which bynd themselves whervntoo they list, and perform whatsoever they have
bound themselves unto: but of imperfect men, which have a desire too follow
honesty, but their affections are stubborn in obeying. Therefore he must be a
chozen man, at whose hand I should receive a benefyte. And truly I ought too
be more heedfull too whom I indette my self for a benefyte, than for money.
For too him that lendes me monny, I must pay no more than I have taken: and
when I have paid it, I am free and discharged. But unto the other I must pay
more: and when I have requyted him, yet nevertheless I am still beholden to
him. For when I have requyted I must begin new agein, and freendship warns
me too admit no unworthy person. So is the Law of benefits a most holy law,
wherout of sprinketh friendship. Some man will say, It lies not always in mine
own power too refuse: I must sommetyme take a good turn whither I will or no.
A cruel and testie Tyrant profers me a gift, and if I refuse it, he will
think I hold skorne of him. Shall I not take it? Put the same case of a
Murderer or a Pyrate, as of a Tyrant that has a murdering and theeuish heart:
what shall I do? He is not worthy that I should be beholden too him. When I
say thou must make choice too whom thou will be beholde^; I except force and
fear, in whose presence choice has no place. If it be free for thee, if it
be at thine own discretion too take or refuze: then aduize thyselfe what to
do. But if constreint bar thee of thy liberty, thou must understand that
thou dooste not receive, but obey. Noman is bound by the receiving of that
which he might not refuse. Will thou know whither I be willing or no? then set
me at liberty too be unwilling if I list. But what and if he have given thee
life? It makes no matter what it be that is given* except it be given
willingly too one that is willing too have it. Although thou have saved me,
yet art thou not therefore my Savior. Poison has some times healed a man; and
yet is it not therefore counted a wholesome thing. Sum things do a man good,
and yet they bynd him not.

The.xix. Chapter.
A Certain man that came too kill a Tyrant, happened too lance a Byle of his
with his Sword: and yet the Tyrant kund him no thank for his curing of that
thing by hurting him, which the Surgio^s were afraid too set hand unto. You
see there is no great weight in the deed it self. For he seems not to have
done him a good turn, which did it with purpose to have done him harm. For
he may thank chance for his good turn, and the man for his harm. I saw once
a Lion in the round Listes, which knowing one of the condemned men that had bin
his Keeper aforetymes, defended him from the assaults of the other beasts.
Was not this Lions help a benefyte? No verily, because the Lion neither had
will too do it with all, nor did it of purpose to do good. Look in what case
I put the wyld beast, in the same put thou also the Tyrantqueller. For both he
and the beast gave life, and yet neither he nor the beast did a good turn,
because that too he compelled to receive a good turn, is no good turn in
deed. It is no benefyting too make a man beholden whither he will or no. For
first thou must give me free liberty of myself, and the^ offer me thy good
turn.

The.xx. Chapter.
IT is wont too be a question concerning Marcus Brutus, whither he ought to
have accepted his life at Julius Caesar's had, seeing he judged Caesar worthy of
death. What reason led him to kill him, I will declare another time. For
although in all other things he were a noble man: yet in this case me thinks
he was far ouershot, and behaved not himself according to too the disciplyne
of the Stoikes, inasmuchas he either feared the name of a King, whereas the best
state of a ^ammon weal is under a ryghtfull king; or hoped for freedomme where
there was so great reward both of souereintie and slavery; or imagined that
the City might be brought back agein too her former state, when she had lost
her former conditions, or that indifferency of Justice might continue and
Laws stand in force, where he had seen so many thousand men fighting, too
whither party they should becomme slaves. But how quyte had he forgotten the
nat^re of the world, or of his own Country, which believed that if one were
dispatched, there were no mo of the same mind; seeing that after so many
kings s^ayne by sword and lyghteninges, there was yet still a Tarquyne too be
found? Yet for all this, Brutus might have taken life at Caesar's hand: but he
should not have accepted such a one for his father, as had wrongfully purchased
that power too* do him good. For he saues not a man, which killes him not:
neither does he benefyte him, but dismiss him.

The.xxi. Chapter.
THis may rather come in question, what a prisoner should do, when a man of
filthy life and slaunderouse tung profereth too pay his Ransom for him.
Sall I suffer myself too be saved by a varlet? And when he has saved me,
what thank shall I yield him? shall I live with a ribawd? no. Shall I not live
with my Rau^somer? no another. What will you have me to do then? I will tell you.
Eue^ of any such person I may take money too pay for y^ rau^some of my life.
And I take it as a thing lent, but not as a benefyte. I will pay him his monnye
agein; and if occasion serve that I may save him in danger, I will save him
also: but as too join freendship with him, which matcheth like too like, that
will I not do; neither will I account him as my Savior; but as an usurer, too
whom I know I must restore that which I have received. (...) must not ^^eiue
too ^^hindera^ce the giver.
Some man is worthy too have a benefit received at his hand, but it will
hurt him if he give it: and therefore shall I not take it. As for example, as he
is ready too do me good, too his own hindera^ce, yea or also too his own
peril, (as peradventure he is willing too defend me at the Bar, but by his
standing in my defense he shall procure himself the kings displeasure): now
were I his enemy, if I should not do that which might be done with his
most ease, yt is too wit, if I should no stand too mine own peril without
him, seeing he would hazard himself for my sake. Hecaton puts this fond and
tryfling example of Arkesilaus, whom he reports too have refuzed monnye that
was offered him by a man's son yet under years of discretion, least the
child might have run in the dspleasure of his nigardly father. What thing did
he worthy of praise? That he received not stolen goods? and that he had
rather not too receive than too be driven too restitution? Not too receive
other men's goods, was a point of stayednesse. But if we want an example of
a noble mind, let us look upon that worthy wight Graecinus Julius, whom
Caius Caesar slew, for none other offense, but because he was a better man than
it is expedient that any should be too a Tyrant. At such time as this
Graecinus took monye of his friends that made a contribution toward his
charges of certain gaminges: one Fabius Persicus sent him a great sum of
monnie, but he would in no wise receive it. And when his friends having
respect too the gift and not too the giver, found fault with him for refusing
it: shall I (quoth he) take a benefyte at the hand of him, who^ I would not
voutsafe too pledge in a cup of drink? Likewise when one Rebilus, a Consulles
peer, but yet of the same stamp that Fabius was, had sent him a greater sum,
and was very importunate upon him too receive it: I pray you pardon me
(quod he) for I have taken none of Persicus.

The.xxii. Chapter.
WHither was this a receiuyng of gifts, After wha^ manner bin^^ fites are t^
be receiu^
or a choozing of Senators? When we think it meet to receive, let us
receive cheerfully with apparaunce of gladness, and let the same be manifest
too the giver, that he may reap present fruit thereof. For it is a just cause
of gladness, too see a man's friend glad; but it is a iuster cause too have
made him glad. Let us show that we accept the thing thankfully, by powryng out
our affections; and let us witness it, not only in his heeryng, but also
euerywhere. He that has taken a good turn thankefully, has paid the first
payment of it.

The.xxiii. Chapter.
Sum will not receive a good turn but in secret, shunnyng too have any manne
as witness, or privy of it. You may be sure such men meene no good. Like
as the bestower must bring his benefit so farfoorth too knowledge, as it may
delight him on whom it is bestowed: so he that receives it must make others
privy to it. Look what thou art ashamed too owe* that receive thou not. Sum
give thanks by stelth, and in a corner, and in ones ear. This is not
shamefastness, but a lothnesse too be acknowen of it. That man is
unthankful, which gives thanks in hudther mudther. Some men would borowe
monnie, and yet neither make the Brokers nor the publik* Notaries privy too
it, nor yet give bill of their hand. In like sort deal they, which indeuer
too keep from all men's knowledge, the good turn that is bestowed upon them.
They be loath too blaze it abroad, beeause they would be said to have
compassed it by their own connyng rather than by any other man's help. They
seldomme make any countena^nce too those that they are indetted too for life or
preferment: and while they shun too be counted hangers upon other men's
sleeves, they run intoo the reproach of unthankfulness, which is worse.

The.xxiiii. Chapter.
OThersomme speak woorst of them that deserve best. A man may more safely
do sum men a displeasure, the^ a good turn. For they seek too prove
themselves nothing beholden too men, by hating them. But we ought too labor
for nothing more, than that the remembrance of good turns, may always stick
fast in our minds: which must be new burnished from time to time, because
none can requite a good turn, but he that bears it in mind, and the very
bearing of it in mind is a requital. A man must receive neither squeimishly,
nor underling like and bacely. For he that is negligent in the first taking,
when all good turns like men best because of their newness: what will he do
when the first pleasure of it is ouerpast?

One takes a good turn skornefully, as though he would say, In good faith I
have no need of it, but seeing thou art so greatly desirous, I am content thou
shall use my patience. Another takes it reckelesly, so as he leaves the
bestower in doutte, whither he perceived it or no. The third scarce opens his
lips, and pla^es the churl more than if he had hild his peace. A man must
speak out earnestly according to the greatness of the matter: and he must
knit it up with such words as these: You have made me beholden too you more
than you are awareof. (For there is noma but he is glad too have his good turn
extend with the furthest.) you know not how much you have done for me: but I
assure you, it is much more than you take it too be.

He requyteth out of hand, which charge himself thus. I shall never be able
too requyte your freendlienesse. But surely I will never cease too report
euerywhere that I am not able too requite it.

The.xxv. Chapter.
FVrnius did not in any thing more purchase himself the favor of the Emperor
Augustus, and win him easy too grant him other things, than that when he had
gotten his fathers pardon, who had taken part with Antonie against Augustus, he
said: This one wrong do I receive at thy hand O Caesar, that thou haste dealt
in such wise with me, as I must live and dye unthankful. What so grease sign
of a ^^thankfull mind can be, as by no means to satisfy a man's self, no
nor yet too conceive any hope that ever he shall be able too come near the
requityng of a good turn? By this and such other kind of speeches let us so
deal, as our good will may not lie hidden, but be disclosed and come too
light. Yea, and though words cease: yet if we be minded as we ought too
be, the conscience will bewraye it self in our countenance. He that purposes
too be thankful, myndeth requityng as soon as he receives. Chrysippus
says he ought too be disposed, like one that has put himself in a readiness
too run for a wager, and stands within the listes, waityng for his time to
step forward at the sound of the Trumpet. And surely he had need of great
swiftness, and great enforcing of himself, that should overtake him that is
gone before him.

The.xxvi. Chapter.
NOw is it too be seen what thing makes men unthankful most. What thing
makes men unthankful most.
It is either the ouerweenyng and ouerlikyng of themselves, and of their own
things, a fault ingreffed in man's Nature: or it is covetousness, or else it
is Envy. Let us begin at the first. There is no man but he is a favorable
Judge in his own case. Herevppon it commes to pass, that he thinks he has
deserved al things, and takes himself too be bound to noman, sopposing
himself not too be esteemed according too his worthiness. He gave me this
(says he): but how late, and after how much trauess? How many mo things
might I have obtained in the while, if I had fa^^ed upon such a man, or such
a man, or if I had sought mine own profit? I looked not for this. I am made a
rascal. Could he beteeme me no more than this? It had bin more honesty too
have quite ouerslipt me.

The.xxvii. Chapter.
CNeus Len^ulus the Soothsaier, the greatest example of riches that ever was
seen, That is twenty hundred thousand pound ster^lyng*
before such time as his Franklinges m^de him poor, (for he saw * Four
thousand Sestertia of his own, I spoke properly in^^ saying, for he did no
more but see them) was as dull of wit, as weak of courage. For although he was
exceeding covetous: yet did he utter his monnie faster than his words; so
far was he too seek what too say. Whereas this man owed all his advancement
too the Emperor Augustus, unto whom he had brought nothing but beggerie,
distressed under the title of Nobility: being now beco^me cheef of the City,
both in monnie and favor; he was wont oftentimes too make his moan too the
Emperor, that he was drawn away from his study, and that all that ever the
Emperor had bestowed upon him, was nothing in comparison of his loss, by
giving up his study of Eloquence. And yet among other things, the Emperor
Augustus had done this for him also, that he had delivered him from being
mocked, and from his vain labor. Covetousness suffers not any manne too
be thankful. For whatsoever is given, is never enough too him that gapeth for
more. The more we have* the more we covet, and much more eagre is the
covetousness that is beezied in the raking together of great riches: like as
the force of a flame is a thousand times feercer, according as the fire is the
greater that it blazeth out of. Also after the same sort, Ambition suffers
not any manne too rest within the measure of that honor, which heretoofore he
would have bin ashamed too have wisshed. Noman gives thanks for a
Tribuneship, but grudgeth that he is not advanced too a Pretorship. Neither
thinks he the Pretorship worth gramercie, if he comme not too the
Co^sulship. Neither will the Consulship suffize him, if he have it not more
than once. Ambition stalketh still foreward, and never perceives when he is
well, because he never looks from whence he came, but always whither he
would. A more vehement and persing malady than all these is Envy: which
vexes us with making of comparisons. He bestows this upon me (says
Envy) but he bestowed more upon him, and more speedily upon that man. Thus
weyeth he no man's case but his own, and favors himself against all men.

The.xxviii. Chapter.
HOw much playner dealing, and how much more wisdomme were it, too advance a
good turn received* and to consider that noman settes so much by another, as
every man settes by himselsef.

I ought too have had more at his hand, but it was not for his ease to^
forbear any more. There were many other too be rewa^ded at his han^^ as well
as I. This is a beginning; Let us take it in good worth, and toll him
forewarde by accepting his good will thankfully.

He has done but a little at once: he will do it the oftener. He has
preferred that man before me, and me before many others. That man is not able
too match me in virtue courtly behauior, but yet has he his peculiar grace.
By grudging* I shall never make myself worthy of greater benefits: but I may
make myself unworthy of those y^ I have alredie. There was more given too
those lewd vnthrifter. What is that too me? how sildome does fortune use
discretion? We daily complain that evil men be luckie. Oftentimes the Hayle
that ouerpassed the grounds of the woorst folk, has stricken the Corn of the
best. Every man must hold him to his Lot, as well in receiving of freendshippe
as in other things. There is no benefyte so perfect, which envy can not nip:
nor no benefit so skant, which a good accepter may not enlarge. Thee shall
never want causes of complaint, if a man look upon benefits on the worse
side.

The.xxix. Chapter.
SEE how vnindifferentlye Gods gifts are esteemed, The unthankfulness of men
toward God.
even of some that profess wisdomme. They find fault that we be not as
big bodyed as Elephantes, as swifte of foot as Hertes, as light as Birds,
as strong as Bulls: that beasts have substancialler hydes than we, that the
falow Dear has a fairer hear, the Bear a thicker, the Beuer a softer: that
Dogs excel us in smelling, Aegles in seeing, Ravens in long living, and
diverse beasts in easy and happy swimming. And whereas nature suffers not
certain things to join toogither in one, (as, that swiftness of body should
be matched with equal strength: they call it an injury, that man is not
compounded of diverse and disagreable properties: and they blame the Gods of
neglecting us, because they have not given us perfect health, invincible
strength and courage, and knowledge what is too comme. Yea and they scarce
refreyne themselves from russhing into so shameless impudency, as too hate
nature for making us inferior too the Gods, and not fellows with them and
full as good as they. How much more meet were it for us too return back too
the beholding of their so many and so great benefits, and too yield them
thanks, that it hat pleased them too allot us the second room in this most
beautiful house, and too make us Lords of all earthly things? Is there any
comparison between us and those beasts whereof we have the souereintie?
Whatsoever is denied us, How great^^^ manne is (...) holden to^ God for his
benefits.
could not be given unto us. And therefore whosoever thou art that do so
vnderualew man's Lot, bethink thee how great things our souerein Parent
has given us: how much stronger creatures we bring in subjection, how much
swifter creatures we overtake, and how there is no mortal thing exempted from
our power. Consider how many virtues we have received, how many arts, and
what a mind, which perceth through all things even in the same instaunt that
it sets itself unto them, being more swift than the planettes, whose
courses it foreseeth many hundred years before they come too pass. Finally
mark what plenty of fruits, what abundance of riches, what store of all
things heaped one upon another be bestowed upon us. Well: Take the view of
all things, and because thou can find no one whole thing that thou had
lever be: pick out such several things as thou would wish too be given
thee out of them al. So when thou have wellweyed the loving kyndnesse of
nature, thou shall be forced too confess, that thou wart her Dealing. And so
it is in deed. The Gods immortal have loved us and do love us most deerly:
and (which is the greatest honor that could be given) they have placed us
next unto themselves. Great things have we received, and greater we could
not take.

The.xxx. Chapter.
THese things) my friend Liberalis) have I thought requisite too be spoken,
both because it behooved me too say somewhat of great benefytes when we were
talking of small benefits: and also because the boldness of his horrible vice
flows from thence into all other things. Vnthenkfulnesse too God breeds
unthankfulness toward me^.
For unto whom will he become thankful, or what good turn will he esteem
great or worth the requy^ing, which despyzeth the highest benefits? Too whom
will he think himself beholden for his life, which denies himself too have
received life of the Gods, to whom he prays daily for it? Whosoeuerthen
teaches too be thankful, dealeath with the case both of men and Gods; too
whom, notwithstanding that they neither want aught nor covet aught, we may
render thankfulness nevertheless. (...) requyte (...) good turn (...) an
easy ^atter.
There is no reason why any man should lay the blame of his thanklesse mind
upon his own weakness or poverty, and say, what shall I do? How or when
may I requite thanks too my superiors the Lords of all things? Too requyte
is an easy matter: yea, if thou be a Nigard, even without cost: and if thou
be slothful, without labor. Truly, if thou listest, thou may be even with
any man, even in the same instaunt that he makes thee beholden unto him. For
he that has received a benefyte with a weldisposed mind, has requyted it.

The.xxxi. Chapter.
IN my opinion, this Paradox of the Stoikes, That he which has received a
good turn with a weldispozed mind has requyted it, is neither strange nor
incredible. For inasmuche as we measure all things by the mind; look how
much a man is fully minded too do, so much has he done. Wherewith a man may
requyte without cost or labor.
And forasmuch as Godliness, faithfulness, uprightness, and finally all
virtue is perfect in itself: although a man could not put forth his hand, yet
may he be thankful even with his heart. As often as a man compasses his
purpose, he reapeth the fruit of his own woork. What the^ purposes he that
bestows a benefit? Too profit the party on whom he bestows it, and to
delight himself. Now if he have accomplished that which he meant, so as his good
turn is come too my hands, and has made both of us glad: he has obtained
that which he sought. For his intent was not too have any thing in
recompense: for then had it not bin a benefit but a bargeine. He has sailed
well that comes too the haven which he made his course unto. The darte that
hitteth the mark it is thrown at, has performed the part of a stedie hand.
He that does a good turn, meeneth too have it accepted thankfully. If it be
well taken, he has his desire.

But he hoped for some commodity by it. Then is it no benefit; the property
whereof is too mind no return. As for the thing that I took, If I took it
with like meening as it was given, I have requyted it. Otherwise the thing that
of itself is best, were in woorst case. Too the end I should be thankful, I
am sent unto fortune. If I cannot requyte for want of her favor, I will
satisfye good will with good will. What then? Shall I not do what I can too
requyte, and seek opportunity of time, and matter, and indeuer too fill the
bosom of him, at whose hands I have received any thing? Yes. But yet the
world went ill with gooddooing, if a man might not be thankful even with
empty hands.

The xxxii. Chapter.
HE that has received a good turn (say thou), although he have taken it
with never so wellmeening a mind: yet has he not done his deutie too the
full. For there is a piece yet still behynd, namely too Require: like as it
Te^nis it is somewhat too take the ball conningly and ridily, and yet he is not
called a good player, unless he send it back agein as fast and featly as he
took it. This example is unlike. Whyso? Because the co^mendacion of this game,
consists in the quick stirring and nimblenesse of the body, and not in the
mind. And therefore it is requisite that the whole should be laid forth at
large, where the eye must be judge. Yet will I not for all that, deny him too
be a good player, that takes the ball as he owght too do, though he strike
it not agein, so the fault be not in himself. But (say thou) although there
be no want of connyng in the player, inasmuchas he did part and was able too
have done the rest that he did not: yet is the game itself mayned, which
consists of taking and striking back the ball agein. I will stand no longer
about confuting in this case: let us grant that there is some want in the
play and not in the player. So also in this matter which we treat of, there
wants somewhat in respect of the the thing that was given, whervntoo another
part is dew; but there wants nothing in respect of the mind: he that has
found one like minded too himself, has accomplished his own desire as much
as lies in him.

The.xxxiii. Chapter.
HE has bestowed a good turn upon me, and I have accepted it even as he
would have wished. Now has he the thing that he sought, yea and the only thing
that he sought: for I am thankful. Herafter remains the use of me, and some
commodity too redound too him by my thankfulness. This is not the remnant of
an imperfect dewtie, but an income too a perfect one. Phidias makes an Image.
The fruit of his woorkmanship is one, and the fruit of his woork is another.
The end of his woorkmanship is too have made the thing that he meant too make.
The end of his work is too have done it too some profit. Phidias has
finished his work, though he have not sold it. He reapeth three fruits of his
woork. The one is of his own conceyte; and this he receives as soon as his
work is finished: the other is of his fame; and the third is of his profit
which shall come unto him either by favor, or by sale, or by some other
mean. Likewise of a benefyte or good turn, let the first fruit be the fruit
of a man's own conceyte. This has he reaped which has brought his gift
thither as he would. The second fruit is of fame: And the third fruit is of
such things as may be performed by one toward another. Therefore when a
good turn is accepted freendly, he that bestowed it has alredie rece^ued
recompense, but not reward. And therefore look what is without the benefit
itself, it must be repayed by taking the same well.

The.xxxiiii. Chapter.
WHat then? has he requited, which has done nothing? Nay he has done very
much: he has rendered good with a good will, yea and like for like also, which
is the property of friendship. Ageine the payment of a Benefit is one way, and
the payment of a det is another way. You must not look that I should show my
payment too the eye: the thing is done between mind and mind. Although the
thing that I say, do feight at the first against thine opinion: yet shall it
not seem hard unto thee, if thou will apply thyself unto me, and consider
how there be mo things than words. The want (...) proper name causes
diverse things too be termed all by one name.
There are a great number of things without names, which we utter not by
their proper terms, but by terms applied from other things. For we say
this word foot, of our selves, of a Bed, of a Hanging, and of a Uerse. We
call by the name of Dog, both a Hound, a Fish, and a Star. For we have not
words I now too yield unto every seueall thing his several name: and
therefore when we (...), we borowe. Stoutnesse is a virtue that rightly
despyseth perilles: or else it is a knowledge how too repulse, eschew, and
adventure upon perilles. Yet notwithstanding we say that a Fencer, and a
leawd Servant whom rashness dryueth headlong too the contempt of death, are
^tout men. Sparingnesse is a knowledge how too eschew superfluous charges, or a
skill how too use a man's household provision measurably: and yet we call him
a very sparing man, which is of a nigardly and pinching mind, whereas
notwithstanding there is infinite odds between measurablenesse and pinching.
These are of diverse natures, and yet for want of words, we be feign too
call both the one and the other a Sparer. And also as well he that despyzeth
casual perilles through reason, as he that rusheth out into perilles without
reason, are called (...) men* So also, does the (...) of benefyeing and the
thing that is given or done by that act, (as Monnye, House, and Apparel,) are
called a benefyte. The name of both of them is all one, but truly the force
and power of them is far differing.

The.xxxv. Chapter.
Give ear therefore. Now thou perceiuest that I say nothing which thine
opinion should mis^ike. That benefyte or good turn which is finished in the
doing of it, is requited if we take it thankfully. But asfor the other which
is contained in the thing: we have not yet requyted it, but we intend too
requyte it. We have satisfied good will with good will, and we owe still thing
for thing. Therefore although we report him to have requited, whch takes a
good turn with a welmeening mind* yet do we will him too render (...) like
thing unto that which he has taken. Some of the things* that we speak, do
differ from common custom: and afterward another way they return too custom
again. We deny that a wise man takes any wrong: and yet the man that ^miteth
him with his Fist shall be condemned of ^^ongdooing. We deny that a fool has
any goods of his own: and yet if a man steal any thing from a fool, we
will condemn him of felony. We say that all men be mad, and yet we cure not
all men with Elleborus. We give voices in election of officers, and we commit
authority too the same men whom we call mad. So also do we say that he
which has taken a good turn with a welmeening mind, has requited it: but yet
nevertheless we leave him still in debt, too make recompense even when he
has requyted. Our so saying is an exhortation, and not a renouncing of the
good turn. We need not be afraid, that the burden should be so
intolerable, as too bear us down, and to daunt our hearts. Goods be given
me, my good name is defended, my misery is taken from me, I enjoy life and
liberty. And how shall I requyte these things? when will the day come that I
may show him my good will again? This is the day wherein he has showed his.

Take up the good turn, embrace it, and be glad: not for that thou take,
but for that thou requirest, and yet shall thou abide in this Debt still. Thou
shall not adventure upon so great a thing, as that mischance may make thee
unthankful. I will cast no incomberances in thy way: let not thy heart fail
thee: shrink not for dout of pains and long thraldom. I defer thee not, it
may be done with things that thou have already. Thou shall never be
thankful, if thou be not thankful out of hand. What must thou do then?
must thou not put thyself in Arms? Perchance thou must. Must thou not sail
over the Seas? Perhaps yes, yea even with blustering wyndes at thy
settingfoorth. Will thou requyte a good turn? Take it in good worth, and thou
haste requyted it: not so as thou should think thyself quyte discharged, but
so as thou may owe it with the more hearts ease.

The end of the second Book.
The third book of Lucius Annaeus Seneca, concerning Benefits.
The first Chapter.
NOt too be tha^kfull for a good turn (my friend Eubutius Liberalis,) is
both a shame, ^f vhthank^ulnesse, and ^ho be most ^nthankfull.
and so counted among all men. Therefore even the unthankful find fault with
them that be unthankful, when nevertheless that cleaves too them all, which
all of them mislike. And we be so froward that we hate some men most
deadly, not only after they have done us good, but also even for doing us
good. I deny not but it happens in sum men through the crabbednesse of
their Nature: But in mo because continewaunce of time makes them forgetful.
For, the things that were fresh in mind with them, while they were newly
done, do wear out of remembrance in process of time. Concerning which
sort of men, I remember I have had hard hold with you, because you termed them
not unthankful, but forgetful. As who would say, that that thing should
excuse an unthankful person, which made him unthankful: or else that because
some man happens too be forgetful, he should therefore not be counted
unthankful, whereas noman happens too be forgetful, but the unthankful.
There are many kinds of unthankful persons, as Thieves and Murderers: of
whom the fault is all one, but there is great diversity in the circumstances.
Unthankful is he that denies the receiuyng of a good turn which he has
received. Unthankful is he that dissembleth it. Unthankful is he that
requiteth it not. But most unthankful of all, is he that has forgotten it.
For although the rest discharge not themselves; yet are they detters still, and
there remains with the^ some print of the good turns, shet up within their
evil conscience. And the time may come, that sum cause or other may turn
them too thankfulness, if either shame shall put them in mind, or some
soodein pang of honest dealyng, such as is wont too start up for a time even in
evil Natures, if occasion serve them too do it with their ease. But never
can he become thankful, that has utterly forgotten the whole benefit. And
whither think thou him worse, in whom the thank of a good turn is lost,
or him in whom the very remembrance of it is lost also? Faulty are those
eyes that cannot away with the light: but stark blind are those that see not
at all. Not too love ones Parents is a point of wickedness: But not too know
them is stark madness. Who is so thanklesse as he, which having such a
thing as he ought too bestow in the foremoste part of his mind, where it
might always be ready at hand, has laid it so far back, and cast it so
far of, as he knows not of it at all? It should seem he thought not often
of requityng, that could utterly forget it.

The second Chapter.
TOO be short, The vice of forgetfulness a hinderance too thankfulness.
too the requityng of a good turn there needs travel, and time, and
ability, and favorable Fortune. But he that bears it in mind, is thankful
without cost. He that performs not this, wherevntoo he needs neither
painstaking, nor wealth, nor good Fortune; has no covert to shroude himself
withal. For never meant he too be thankful, which did cast a good turn so
far of that he bestowed it out of sight and remembrance. Like as the things
that are occupied, and daily handled, are never in peril of rusting, whereas
the things that come not in sight, but lie out of the way as superfluous, do
gather soil by continewance of time: Even so whatsoever is occupied and new
burnished by often thinking upon, is never worn out of memory, which lofeth
not any thing, save that which it has not often looked back unto.

The third Chapter.
BEsides this, ^ouetouse^esse a hin^erance too ^hankfulnes.
there be other causes also, which droune men's greatest deserts in us. The
first and theefest is, that being always busied about new desires, we never
consider what we have, but what we would have: setting our whole mind, not
upon that which is obtained, but upon that which is coueted. For whatsoever
we have in possession, is nothing worth. Now then it follows, that as soon
as the desire of new things has made a man set light by that which he has
received alredie, the bestower of them must also grow out of estimation. We
love some man and fa^ne upon him, and protest him too be the founder of our
welfare, so long as the things that we had at his hands do like us. Anon
after there steppeth intoo our conceit a greater likyng of other things, and
our mind ronnes upon them, (as the manner of men is) after great things
couetyng still greater: straight way is forgotten whatsoever we termed
heretoofore by the name of a benefit. Envy another hinderance unto
thankfulness.
And we look not upon those things that have preserved us before others:
but only upon those things wherein other men have had the Fortune too outgo
us. But it is not possible for any man, both too repine and too be thankful.
For, to repine is the property of him that finds fault, and is
discontented: but too give thanks, is the property of him that is well
pleased. Moreover, although none of us know but the time that is alredie paste:
yet do feawe or none cast back their mind too things past. By mean
hereof it faules out, that Schoolemaisters and their weldooynges go too the
ground together, because we leave our whole childhod behind us. By means
hereof it commes to pass, that the things which are bestowed upon us in our
youth are lost, because our youth never comes too hand agein. Noman accounts
that which has bin, as a thing past, but as a thing lost. And therefore
flyghfull will the rememberance be of things that are too come.

The.iiii. Chapter.
IN this place I must hold with Epicuras, who contineually complayneth of our
unthankfulness for things past, because that what good turns so ever we
receive, we call none too rememberance, nor account them among pleasures:
whereas notwithstanding, there is no pleasure more certain, than that which
cannot be taken away any more. Present good things are not yet whole and
full: some mischau^ce may cut them of. Good things too come do hang in
uncertainty. But that which is past is laid up in safety. How then can that
man be thankful toward such as do him good, who bestows all his life iu
gazing upon things present, and in gaping after things too come. It is
myndfulnesse that makes a man thankful. He that hangs most upon hope,
groundeth least upon myndfulnesse.

The.v. Chapter.
MY Liberalis, like as some things once perceived do stick fast in memory;
and in some things, the once lerning of them is not enough too make a man
cunnyng in them: (for the knowledge of them decaieth, if it be not co^tinewed
by exercise, I mean Geometry and Astonomie, and such other things as are
slipperie by occasion of their subtlety:) Even so the greatness of some
Benefits suffers them not too be forgotten; and some being less (though
they be very many in number, and bestowed at sundry times) do slip quite
away, because (as I said) we do not record them from time too time, nor
willyngly bethink us how much we are in each man's debt. Harken what
speeches sewters cast forth. Every man says he will bear it in mind while
he lives: Every man protests and voweth himself too be at commandment,
and whatsoever other lowely term he can devise too indaunger himself withal.
But within a while after, the same persons eschew their former words, as too
bace and scarce gentlemanlike: and finally they comme too that point which (as
I suppose) every of the leudest and vnthankfullest ca^ come unto, that is to
say, too forget it. For even as unthankful is he that forgets, as he is
thankful that bears in mind.

The.vi. Chapter.
BUT here rizeth a question, whither this hateful vice ought too be
unpunished, or whither the law that is put in ure in schools, ought also too
be executed in Comonweales; so as a man might have his Action against an
unthankful person, which seems indifferent Justice for all men. Why not?
Seeing that Realms upbraid Realms with the things they have done for them,
and pick quarelles too the successors, for the things that were bestowed
upon their predecessors? Our aunceters being (as a man may perceive) men of
noble courage, demanded only monnie of their enemies. As for benefits, they
bestowed them frankly, and bare the loss of them as frankly. There was never
yet action granted against an unthankful person in any Nation, saving in the
Realm of Macedonie. And this is a great reason why none should have bin
granted; because that whereas we have given consent too the punishment of all
other missedeedes, so as both for manslaughter, witchcraft, unnatural
murder, and breach of Religion, there are in sundry places sundry
punishments, and in all places some: This fault which is ryfeste of all, is
euerywhere misliked, but nowhere punished. Yet do we not acquit it: But
forasmuch as the trial of so uncertain a matter would be very hard: we
have but condemned it too be hated, leaving it among those things, which we
put over too the vengeance of the Gods.

The.vii. Chapter.
I Find many reasons, why this fault ought not too be made a matter in Law.
First of all, the best part of the benefit or good turn perishes, if a man should have his Action for it, as he uses too have for lending of
monnie, or for bargains of hyring and letting out. For the greatest grace of a
good turn, is that we have done it, even though we should lose it, so as we
have put the matter wholly too the courtesy of the receivers. But if I arrest
him: If I call him before a Judge: It begins too be a debt, and not a
benefit. Agein whereas it is a most commendable thing too requite: It cease
too be commendable, if it comme too be of necessity. For noman will commend
a thankful person, more than him that has restored a thing that was
delivered him too keep, or discharged his debt without being sewed. So shall
we mar two things at once, that is too wit, a thankful man, and a
beneficial man; than which, there are not any goodlier things in man's
life. For what great point of excellency is there, either in the one if he
bestow not his good turn freely, but lend it: or in the other if he requite,
not because he is willing, but because he needs must? It deserves no praise
too be thankful, except a man may safely be unthankful. Moreover this
inconvenience would insewe: that all Courts would be too little for this
Law. Who is he that might not sewe; who is he that might not be sued? All men
extol their own dooinges, all men enlarge the things that they have bestowed
upon others, be they never so small. Furthermor, whatsoever things do fall
within the compass of examination, may be determined without giving the Judge
infinite liberty. And therefore the state of a good case, seems better if it
be put too a Judge, than if it be put too an vmper; because the Judge is
bound too an order, and has his certain bounds set him, which he may not
pass: But the vmpers conscience being free, and tide too no bounds, may
both add and take away, and direct his sentence, not according as Law and
Justice counsel him, but according as humanity and pity shall move him. An
Action of unkindness would not bind the Judge. but set him at liberty too
rule things as he listed. For it is not certain what a benefit should be.
Agein* how great soever it be, it were much too the matter, how favorably
the Judge would conster it. No Law defines what an unthankful person is.
Oftentimes he that has rendered as much as he received, is unthankful: and
he that has not rendered, is thankful. Also there be sum matters, which
even an unskillful Judge may dismiss the Court of: as in caces where the
parties must confess a deed, or no deed. Where the opening of the Evidence
dispatcheth all doutes: where very reason is able to determine the right. But
when men's minds must be coniectured of; when a thing comes in question,
which only wisdom is able too discern: in such caces a man cannot take
him for a Judge, that is called to office for his riches, or because he is a
gentleman borne.

The.viii. Chapter.
THis thing therefore seemed not very unmeet too have bin made a matter in Law,
The greatest benefits admit not requital with like for like.
but that noman could be found too be a competent judge in the case. Which
thing thou will not think strange, if thou consider throwly how hardly he
should be graueled, which should enter intoo the ouerruling of such caces.
Some man gives a great piece of Monny: but he is a rich man, and such a one
as can not feel the loss of it. Another gives likewise, but with danger of
forgoing his whole inheritance. The some is all one, but the benefit is not
all one. Yea let us yet add further: that the ^ne pays Money for a welwi^^er
of his, but he has it at home lying by him: and that the other gives as
much, but he is feign too take up it upon Interest, or too borrow it with
much intreatance, and too indaunger himself greatly too him that lent it.
Think thou there was no odds betwixt him that bestowed his good turn with
ease, and this other that borrowed too give? Some things become great for
their season, and not for their sum.

The giving of a piece of ground, whose frutefulnesse may ease the derth of
Corn, is a benefit. And one Loaf of Bread given in time of Fam^n, is a
benfite also.

Too give a man whole Countries with many great Rivers in them able too bear
Ships, is a benefit. And too ^hewe a Waterspring too such as are thirsty
and scarce able to fetch their breath for dryness, is a benefit also.

Who shall compare these things together? who shall wey them thoroughly? Hard
is the determination of that case, which requires the force of a thing, and
not the thing it self. The things may be all one; and yet the manner of
bestowing them shall alter the estimation of them. A man has done me a good
turn; but he did it unwillingly; he was sorry when he had done it: he
looked scornefullyer upon me than he was wont ont too do: he did it with
such lingering, as he had pleased me much more too have said me flat nay
out of hand. How shall a judge make an estimate of these things, when the
speech, and the douting, and the countenance if a man may mar the grace of
his good turn.

The.ix. Chapter.
AGein, some things are termed Benefits, because they be overmuch desired:
and othersome being not of that common sort, but much greater, do bear a less
show. Ye call it a benefit too have made a man free of the head City of our
puissant commonweal; and too have advanced him too honor, or to have saved
him upon an Indictment of Life and Death. And what call you it too have given
a man good counsel? too have wrested the Sword out of a man's hand, that was
ready too have fordoone himself? too have recomforted a forlorn person with
effe^tuall persuasions? and too have brought him back agein too the folowship
of life, from his wilful seeking of that which he longed for? What think you
it too be, to have sit by a sick man; and whereas his health consisted
intending him, too have given him his Meals when his Stomach would serve him
best, and too have refreshed his feeble pulfes with Wine, and too have helped
him too a Phisician when he was like too dye? Who shall valewe these things?
who shall command these benefits too be recompensed with the like?

Some man perchance has given thee a house: and I have forewarned thee that
thine own is falling down upon thy head. He has given thee Lands and
Goods: and I have given thee a Board too flote upon in shipwrecke. Another
has fought for thee and was wounded: and I have saved thy life by holding my
peace. Seeing that a good turn is done one way, and recompensed another: it is
a hard matter too make them matches.

The.x. Chapter.
FUrthermore, there is no day set for the requyting of a good turn, as there
is for repayment of Monnye that is lent. Therefore he that has not requyted,
may requyte. For I would have thee too tell me within what time a man may be
found too be unthankful. The greatest benefits have no trial at all.
Oftentimes they lie hidden between the consciences of the two parties,
unspoken of. Shall we bring the world too that point, that we may not do a
good turn without witness? What punishment then shall we appoint for the
unthankful? Shall we punish all alike, whereas the benefits be unlike? or
shall we appoint diversity of punishments, greater or lesser, according too
the measure of each man's benefit? Peradventure you will have the penalty too
be but a monny matter. Why? Some benefits concern life, yea and are greater
than life. What penalty shall be appointed for those? Less than the benefit?
That were not indifferent. Aequall and deadly? What can be more unkindly, than
that the end of benefits should be bluddie?

The.xi. Chapter.
Certain prerogatives (say you) are given too Parents. Look how
consideration is had of these extraordinarily: so must consideration be had of
other men's benefits likewise. We have privileged the state of Fatheres and
Moothers, because it was expedient too have Children bred and brought up. They
were too be incoraged too this travel, because they adventure upon
uncertain chance. It cannot be said too them as may be said too others
that bestow benefytes: If thou be deceived, take one that is meet for thee
and help him. In bringing up of Children, it is not at the choice of the
Parents too have them such as they list: all that they can do, is but too
wish well and hope well. Therefore too the intent they might the more
willingly adventure this chance, it was reason that some prerogative should
be given them. Agein the case stands otherwise with Parents: for they both
do and will still bestow benefits upon their Children, although they have
done never so much for them already: and it is not too be feared that they
will beelye themselves in giving. Certesse in all other men, it may stand
upon trial, not only whither they have received, but also whither they have
given or no. But asfor the deserts of Parents, they be always to be taken
for matter confessed. And because it is beehooffull for Youth to be ruled: we
have set as it were household magistrates over them too keep them in awe.
Besides this, the benefyting of all Parents is after one sort, and therefore
it might be valewed all after one rate. But the benefytinges that are done by
others, are diverse and unlike, and there is infinite odds of difference
betwixt them: by reason whereof they could not fall within the compass of any
law, forasmuch as it were more reason that all should be let alone, than that
all should be made equal.

The.xii. Chapter.
Sum things are costly too the giuers* and some are much worth too the
receivers, and yet stand the giuers in nothing. Sum things are given too
friends, and sum too folks of no acquaintance. It is more (though the thing
that is given be all one) if thou give it too such a one, as thou beginnest
thy first acquaintance with him by thy good turn. This man gives releef, that
man preferment, and another man comfort. Ye shall find sum man that thinks
not any thing more pleasant, or any thing greater; than too have one that may
be a stay too him in his misery. Ageine ye shall find some man more
careful for his honesty, than for his safety. And there be other sum that
would think themselves more beholden too him by whose means they might live
at their ease, than too him by whose means they might live in sum
counntenaunce of estimation. Therefore these things would fall out too be
greater or lesser, according as the Judges mind were bent too the one, or too
the other. Furthermore, I am at mine own choice for my creditor: but now and
then I take a good turn of him that I would not, and sometime am bound ere I
wot of it. What will thou do? Will thou call him unthankful, that had thy
good turn cast upon him, and wist it not; who if he had known it, would not
have received it? And will thou not call him unthankful, who after a sort
accepted it, and yet requited it not?

The.xiii. Chapter.
A Man has dooen me a good turn: and afterward he does me a shreude turn.
Now whither does that one good turn of his, bind me too bear all
displeasures at his hand: or whither is it all one as if I had requited him,
because he himself has cut of his own good turn, by dooyng me wrong
afterward? Ageine how will thou discern, whither that be more wherein I was
pleasured, or that wherein I was harmed? Time would fail me, if I should take
upon me too reckon up all inconveniences. Sum man will say, that we make men
slower too do good, when we challenge not the things that are given, but
suffer the denyers too escape unpunished. But you must bethink you of this also
on the contrary part: that men wilbee much lothther to receive benefits, if
they shall stand in peril of answeryng to the case. Also, by this means we
our selves shall becomme the lother too do men good: for no man will gladly
pleasure men ageinste their wills. But whosoever is provoked too pleasure
men of his own goodness, and for the very goodlynesse of the thing itself:
he will be willing too do good, even unto such as shall think themselves no
more beholden too him, than they list. For the commendation of that benefit or
good turn is maimed, which carries a prouiso with it.

The.xiiii. Chapter.
SO shall there be fewer good turns.

Yea, but they shall be trewer. And what harm is it too have the rashness of
benefiting restreined? For eue^ this sought they which made no Law for it:
namely, that we should be the circumspecter what we bestowed, and the warer
in choosing on whom we bestowed. Consider throwghly too who^ thou give. So
shall there be no sewing, so shall there be no chalendging. Thou art deceived
if thou think that any judge can help thee. no Law is able too set thee
clear agein. Only have thou an eye too the faithfulness of the receyuer. So
shall benefytes keep their estimacon, and continue honorable. Thou staynest
them, if thou make them a matter of Law. In dettes it is a most upright
speech and agreeable too the Law of all Realms, too say, Pay that thou
owe. But it is the fowlest word than can be in benefiting, too say, Pay.
For what shall he pay? Admit he owe life, Dignity, safety, welfare, or
health? All things that are of the cheifest sort, are vnpayable. Let him (say
you) pay somewhat of like valewe. This is it that I spoke of: namely that the
estimation of so noble a thing should perish, if we make a merchandyze of
benefits. The mind is not too be provoked unto couetowsenesse, repyning, and
discord: it ronneth intoo these things of the own accord. Let us withstand
them as much as we can, and let us cut of occasions of complaint.

The.xv. Chapter.
I Would we could persuade men too take no monnye agein that they have lent
upon credit, save only of such as were willing too repay it. Whould God that
no ^^retie might be taken of the purchacer by the seller, nor bargains and
couenantes be made under hand and seal: but rather, that the performance of
them were referred too the faithfulness and upright meenyng of men's
consciences. But men have preferred profit before honesty, and they had lever
enforce men too be faithful, than too find them faithful. One manne by
means of Brokers takes up monnie of diverse men, upon assurance in writing,
and witnesses are called on both parts. Another is not contented with
sufficient sureties, unless he has also a pa^ne in his hand. O shameful
bewraying of the deceitfulness of man, and of the lewdness that is commonly
used. Our Seals are more set by than our souls. For what purpose are
worshipful men called to record? Why set they too their hands? Uerely least
the party should deny the receipt of that, which he has received. Would not a
man take such too be incorrupt persons, and mainteiners of the truth? And
yet even they also by and by after cannot be trusted for any monnie, but upon
like dealyng. Had it not bin more honesty, too let sum men go with the
breakyng of their credit, than that all men should be mistrusted of
unfaithfulness? Covetousness wants only but this one point, namely that
we should do noman good without suretiship. It is the property of a
Gentlemanlike and Noble heart, too help and profit others. He that does men
good freely, resembles the Gods: but he that looks for recompense,
resembles the Usurers. Why then abace we our selves too those vilest sort of
rakehelles, by resembling them.

The.xvi. Chapter.
BUt if no Action may lie against a thanklesse person, there will (say
thou) be the mo thanklesse persons. Nay rather there wilbee the feawer: for
men will take the better heed too the bestowing of their benefits. Agein it
is not good too have it known too the world, what a number of unthankful
persons there be. For the multitude of offenders takes away the shame of a
deed; and a common crime cease too be counted a reproach. Is there almost
any woman now adays ashamed of dyuorcement, since the time that certain of the
noble Ladies and Gentlewomen have made account of their years, not by the
number of Consulles, but by the number of their husbands, and have gone from
their husbands too be married, and married too be dyuorced? So long as
Dyuorcement was rare, so long was it feared. But after that feawe Marriages were
co^tinewed without Dyuorce: the often heering of it taught them too use it. Is
any Woman now a days ashamed of whoredomme, since the world is come to that
point, that few take a Husband but too cloak their Whoredom? Chastity is a
token of deformity. Where shall a man find so very a Wretch or so very a
Puzzle, that one pair of Adulterers may suffyze her? Nay, ^hee doteth and is
to much of the old stamp, which knows not that the keeping of one Leman is
counted good wedlock. Like as too be ashamed at these faults is vanished away
at these days, since the thing began too get larger scope: so shall thou make
the thanklesse sort both mo and more bold, if they may once begin too muster
themselves.

The.xvii. Chapter.
WHat then? Shall the thankelesse person escape unpunished?

What becomes of the malicious? what becomes of the couetouse? what becomes of
him that has no stay of himself? What becomes of the cruel man? Think thou
that the things whithe are hated, are unpunished? Or think thou that there
can be a sorer punishment, than too be hated of all men? It is a punishment,
that he dares not take a good turn at any man's hand, that he dares not
bestow a good turn upon any man, that he is a gazingstocke too all men, or
at leastwyse believes himsef too be so, and that he has forgone the
understanding of the thing that was both singularly good and singularly sweet.
Call thou him unhappy that wants his eyesight, or whose ears be stopped
by some disease: and will thou not call him a wretch, that has lost the
feeling of Benefits? He is afraid of the Gods the witness bearers against al
unthankful persons. The disappointing of him of benefiting or being benefited,
fretteth and gnaweth his conscience: and finally it is punishment great enough,
that (as I said before) he has forgone the fruition of so sweet a thing. But
he whom it delyghteth too have received a good turn, inioyeth a measurable and
continual pleasure, and it does him good too behold, not the thing, but the
mind of him at whose hand he had it. A good turn delights a thankful person
ever, and an unthankful person but once. Besides this, let either of their
lives be compared with others. The one is sad and sorrowful, and such as a
denyer and deceyuer is wont too be, who has no dew regard of Father and
Moother; or of them that brought him up, or of his Teachers. The other is
merry, cheerful, longing for occasion too requyte, and taking great pleasure
of the same desire; not seeking in what wise, too whom, or in what thing, but
how he may answer most fully and bounteously: not only too his Parents and
Friends, but also too Folk of the meanest sort. For though it be a Bondsman
that has done him the good turn: he regards not of whom, but what he has
received.

The.xvii. Chapter.
BUT some men (among whom Hecaton is one) demanded whither a Bondsman can
benefit his Master or no. For there be that make this distinction: That some
things are Benefits, sum duties, and sum services: and that a benefit
is that which is done by a Freeman: (A Freeman is such a one as might have
left the thing undone without blame.) That dewtie is of children, of wife, and
of those persons whom kindred or aliance stirs up, and wills too help us:
And that service is of the Slave or Bondsman, whom his degree has put in such
state, as he cannot chalege his superior for any thing that he does for him.

Notwithstanding all this, he that denies that Bondmen may sometime too their
Masters a good turn, is ignorant of the Law of Nature. For it skilles not of
what calling the man be that does the good tnrne, but of what mind he is.
Virtue is forstalled from noman: She is set open for all men: She admits all
men: She allureth all men: Gentlemen, Franklinges, Bondmen, Kings, and
Banishedmen: She fancyeth neither house nor Substance, but is contented with
the bare man. For what safeguard should there be ageinste casualties, or what
could the noble heart assure itself of; if Fortune could alter virtue by
substance? If the Bondsman cannot do his Master a good turn: neither can the
Subject do it for his Prince, nor the Soldier for his Capitein. For what
matter makes it, in what state of subjection a man be, if he be in any? For
if necessity and fear of extremity do bar a Bond man from atteining the
name of desert: the same thing will also bar him that is under a King, or a
Capiteine, because they have like authority over him, though by unlike title.
But men do good turns too their Princes, and men do good turns too their
Capiteies: Ergo they may also do good turns too their Masters. A Bondsman
may be just, he may be valiant, he may be of a noble courage: Ergo he may
also benefit, or do a man a good turn, for even that also is a point of
vertewe. Yea, and it is so possible for Bondmen too benefit their Masters,
that oftentimes they have bound their Masters too the^ by their good turns.
There is doutt but a Bondsman may benefit any other man: and why then should
he not be able too benefit his master also?

The.xix. Chapter.
BEcause (say thou) he cannot become his Masters creditor. though he should
lend his Master monnie. Otherwise he should daily make his Master beholden
unto him. For he lackyeth after him when he iourneyeth, he tends him in his
sickness, he tooyleth himself out of his skin too do him ease: And yet all
these things (which should be called good turns, if another body did them)
are but services as long as a Bondsman does them. For that is a good turn,
which is done by a man that was at his own free choice, whither he would
do it or no. But a Bondsman has not liberty too say nay. And therefore he
does not benefit, but obey: neither can he boaste of his doing, which too
refuse he had no power.

Now will I cast thee; and in thine own turn, I will bring a Bondsman so far^e
forth, as too many things he shall be free. But tell me by the way: If I
show thee a Bondsman fighting for his Masters safeguard, without respect of
himself, and stricken through with many wounds, and yet still spe^ding the rest
of his blood, even from the very heart, and by his own death, making respit
that his Master may have leisure too escape: will thou say he did not his
Master a good turn, because he is his Bondsman? If I show thee one that by no
promises of a Tyrant could be corrupted, by no threats be feared, by no
torments be forced too bewraye his Masters secrets, but (as much as he
could) removed all suspicions that were surmised, and spent his life too keep
his faithfulness: will thou deny him too have done his Master a good turn,
because he was his Bo^dman? Se^ rather if it be not so much the greater good
turn, as the example of vertewe is rarer in Bondmen: and consequently so much
the more woorthe thanks, for that whereas superiority is commonly hated, and
all ^onstreint grievous: yet the love of some one toward his Master, has
surmounted the common hatred of bondage. So the^ it is not therefore no good
turn because it proceeded from a Bondsman: but it is so much the greater good
turn, for that not even bondage could fraye him from doing of it.

The.xx. Chapter.
IF any body think that bondage enters intoo the whole man: he is deceived.
The better part of him is privileged; men's bodies are subject and tied too
their Masters. But the mind is at his own liberty; which of itself is so
free and unbound, as it cannot be hild, no not even within this prison wherein
it is enclosed, but uses his force, and woorketh great things, and passes
beyond all ^oundes in company with the heavenly sort. It is the body
therefore, which fortune has given too the master. This he buyeth, this he
sells. Asfor that inward part, it cannot be brought in bondage. Whatsoever
isseweth from that, is free. For neither may we masters in all things
command: neither may our bondmen in all things obey. They shall obey no
commandment against the common weal: they shall put their hands too no
wickedness.

The.xxi. Chapter.
THere be some things which Laws neither ^id nor forbid a man too do. In
these has a bondma^ matter too work a good turn upon. As long as no more
is done than is wont too be exacted of bondmen^ it is service. But when a
bondsman does more than he is bound too do, it is a Benefit. When it passes
intoo the affection of a ^reend, it cease too be called a service. There be
some things which the Master is bound too bestow upon his Bondsman: as
food and raiment. Noman will term this a benefit. But if he have dealt
favorably with him, and have brought him up like a gentleman, and trained him
in the Sci^nces that are taught unto gentlemen; it is a benefit. The same
thing is done on the contrary part, in the person of ^he Bondsman. Whatsoever
it is that exeedeth the rate of a Bondmannes duty, which is not done of
awe, but of good will: it is a benefit, if it be so great as it may bear
that name, if any other man do it.

The.xxii. Chapter.
A Bondsman (as it likes Chrysippus) is a con^^ne hyreling. Now like as the
hyreling befreendeth a man, whom ^e does more than ^ee was hired too do:
so when the Bondsman, of good will toward his Master, surmounteth the measure
of his degree, and attempteth some higher matter, which might beseem even one
of noble birthe, and ouergoeth his Masters hope: It is a freendship found at
home within his house. Seems it indifferent unto thee, that with whom we
are offended, if they do less than their duty; we should not be beholden
too them, if they do more than duty and ordinary? Will thou know when it
is no benefit? It is then none, when it may be said, he shall neither will
nor chooze but do it. But when he does that which he needed not, except he
had listed: it is praiseworthy that he listed. A good turn and a shreude turn
are contraries. If he may take wrong at his Masters hand, he may also do
his Master a good turn. But concerning the wrongs done too Bondmen by their
Masters, there is one set in office too hear their caces, who has
authority too restreyne both their cruelty, and their lewdness, and their
nigardship in giving their Bondmen needful things too live by. What then?
Does a Master receive a good turn of his Bondsman? Nay, rather one man
receives a good turn of another. Too be short, he has done what was in
his power too do: He has benefited his Master. Not too receive it at thy
Bondmannes hand, that is in thy power. But who is so great, whom Fortune
compels not too have need even of the basest? I wlil streytwaies reherce
many examples of befreending, both unlike, and some also contrary one too
another. Sum have saved their Masters life, sum have bin their Masters
death. Another has saved his Master from perishing; and (if that be but a
small matter) he has saved him by perishing himself. One has furthered his
Masters death, and another has saved his master by beguyling him.

The.xxiii. Chapter.
Claudius Qudrigarius in his xviij. book of Chronicles, reports that when
the City Grument was beseeged, and stood in utter peril to be lost, two
Bondmen fled too the enemy, and took wages too serve him. Afterward when
the Town was taken, and the (...) oue^ranne all places: the Bondmen ran
before by privy ways, to the house where they had served, and drove out their
Mistress before them. And being demanded what she was; they said she was
their Maistresse, and the cruellest woman that ever lived, and that they carried
her out to put her too death. But as soon as they had her without the walls,
they hid her close till the ^ge of the enemy was alayed. And afterward when
the Roman soldiers were satisfied and comme ageine to their own disposition,
(which was soon done): the Bondmen also returned too their own side ageine,
and set their Mistress at her liberty. She immediately made them both free,
and disdeined not too have taken life at the hands of those, over whom she
herself had had power of life and death. Yea, so much the more for that, had
she cause too think herself happy. For had she bin saved otherwise, it had
bin no strange matter, nor any thing else than a point of common and ordinary
gentleness. But being saved after this manner, she became a famous bywoorde,
and an example of two Citees. In so great hurlyburly at the taking of the
City, when eueryman shifted for himself, all creatures forsook her save the
runnagates. But they (too show with what mind they had revolted before) fled
ageine from the conquerours too a captive, pretending the countenance of
murderers, which was the greatest point in that benefit. So much thought
they it better too seem murderers of their Mistress than that she should
have bin murdered in deed. It is not, believe me, it is not the point of a
stauishe cour^ge, to compass a noble fact with the slander of wickedness.
As Antonius the Mayer of the Marses, was led to the Lieutenante General of
the Romans, a Bondsman of his (...) out the Souldyers sword that led him,
and first slew his Master. And having done so, it is time for me (says
he) to provide for my self. I have alredie given my Master his freedom: and
with that word he struck himself through with one blow. Show me any that
has saved his Master more stoutly?

The.xxiiii. Chapter.
Caesar beseeged Corfinium and Domitius being shet up within the Town,
commanded his Phisician (who was a Bondsman of his) too poison him. When he
saw him make Courtesy at the matter; why stickest thou (quod he) as though the
matter lay wholly in thy power? I that desire death am armed. Then his Bondsman
agreed and gave him a hurtlesse medicine too drink, wherewith he cast him intoo
a dead sleep, and going out of hand too his Son, said: Sir, cammaund me too
be kept but so long till you perceive by the sequel, whither I have poisoned
your father or no. Domitius escaped and had his life pardoned by Caesar: but
yet his bondsman had sa^ed him first.

The.xxv. Chapter.
IN the time of the Civil wars, a Bondsman hid his master that was proclaimed
Taitour. And when he had put his Masters Ringes on his Fingers, and arrayed
himself in his Apparel, he went out too the Executioners, and telling them
that he craved no favor, bade them execute their Commission, and therwithall
hild out his neck for them too cut of. How great manhod was it for him too
yield himself too death for his Master, in a time when faithfulness was geson:
and too be loath that his Master should dye in the common cruelty: yea and
too be found so trusty when treachery was universal, as too crave death in
recompense of his faithfulness, even when Treason was most highly rewarded?

The.xxvi. Chapter.
I Will not let pass the Examples of mine own time. Under Tiberius Caesar,
the outrage of appeachi^g men was very ryfe, and in manner common: wh^che thing
gave a sorer wound too the settled state of this City, than all the Civil
wars had done. Advantage was taken of dronkenmens talk, and of things
spoken simply in mirth, nothing was in safety. Every occasion of picking
thanks was liked of. And men mused not what should become of them that were
accused: for they were all served with one sauce. One Paul a man of honor
being at a certain feast, had on his finger a ring with a rich stone sticking
out, whereon was ingraue^ the image of the Emperor Tyberius. I should play the
fool too much, if I should make nycenesse too tell you how he took a
Chamberpotte. Which thing over Maro a common known promoter of that time, took
good heed of. But a bondsman of this drunkenma^ for whom the bayt was laid,
pulled of his masters ring And when Maro bade the gwestes bear witness, that
he had put the Emperors image too his priuities, and thervppo^ would have
framed a bill for them too have subscrybed: the bondsman showed him the ring
upon his own finger. If a man may call this man a slave, he may also call the
other an honest gwest.

The.xxvii. Chapter.
IN the time of the Emperor Augustus, before men's words were yet treason,
though they bred them trubble: one Ruffus a Senators peer (as he sat at
Supper) wished that the Emperor might not come home ageine alive from a
progress which he then intended: adding furthermore, that all Bulls and
Calves wished the same. There were that took good heed of those words. As Soon
as next morning came a bondsman of his that had waited upon him at Supper over
night, told him what words he had cast forth in his drunkenness as he
was at Supper, and counseled him too hye him too the Emperor before hand, and
too be his own accuser. His master following his aduyce, met the Emperor at
his first coming abroad. And when he had sworn unto him that he was not well
in his wits over night: he prayed God that his wish might light upon himself
and his Sons, beseeching the Emperor that he would pardon him and receive
him intoo his fa^our agein, When the Emperor had granted his sewt: noman
(said Ruffus) will believe you have taken me intoo your favor agein; unless
you give me some thing. Therewithal he asked no tryfling some of Monye, and
obtained it. And I for my part (said the Emperor) will indeuer that I may
never be displeased with thee. Honorably did the Emperor deal with him,
both in pardoning him, and also in matching liberalit^e with his gentleness.
Whosoever shall here of this example, must needs praise the Emperor: but yet
he must praise the Bondsman first. Do ye not look I should tell ye that he
was made free for doing this deed? He was so: but not for naught: for the
Emperor paid for his manumission.

The.xxviii. Chapter.
AFter so many examples, there is no dout but a Master may receive a freendly
turn at his Bondmannes hand. Why should the person rather imbace the thing,
than the thing innoble the person? All men have one beginning, and all spring
out of one Root* Noman is more Gentleman than other saving he that has a
better disposed nature, and more apt too good arts. They that setfoorth their
Pedegrees and their aunceters on a long row interlyned with many branches of
Collateralll descentes on the fore^^unt of their houses, are rather notorious
than noble. There is but one parent of all men, even the world. Whither it be
by famous or bace desce^t, every man conueyes his (...) Pedigree from him.
There is no cause why these that keep (...) their aunceters should beguile
thee. Whersoeuer the (...) has made any man re^owmed, byandby they feyne him
too be a God. D^spize no man though his Pedigree be worn out of
remembrance, and smally furthered by unfriendly fortune. Whither your aunceters
were freemen, or bondmen, or Alean^es: be of good courage hardily, and
whatsoever bacenesse lies in your way, leap over it. Great nobleness
abides for you alost. Why should Pride puff us up into so great fondness,
that we should disdeyne too take a good turn at our Bondmennes hands; and
look so much at their degree, that we should forget their deserts? Call
thou any man Slave, being thyself the bondslaue of Lechery and Gluttony, and
the common kickhor^e, not of one Strumpet but of many? Call thou any man
^^aue? Whither a Gods name do these Colecariers iaunce thee, carrying this thy
Couch up and down? Whither do these Clokemen like a sort of brave Soldadoes,
whither (I say) do they convey thee? Too the door of some doorekeeper, or
else too the Garden of some Rascal that has not so much as an ordinary
office. And yet denyest thou thyself too be beholden too thine own Servant,
which think it too be a great friendship too get a kiss of an other man's
Servant? How happens it that thou art so at odds with thyself? At one
instaunt thou both despysest and honor slaves. Within doors thou art
Lordly and full of commandments: and without doors Loutlyke and as much
skorned as skornfull. For none are sooner out of countenance, than they that
take most stoutly upon them in all naughtiness. Neither are any folk buzyer
too tread others under foot, than such as have learned too ride upon others,
by putting up reproach at other men's hands themselves.

The.xxix. Chapter.
THese things were too be spoken, to pull down the pride of men that hang
upon fortune, and too recover unto bondme^ the right of benefiting, in
likewise as it is too be yielded unto children. For it is a question, whether
children can by any means be more beneficial too their pare^tes, than their
parents have been unto them? This is a plain case, that many sons have
become greater, and of more ability than their fathers, and in that respect
have bin better than their fathers: which thing being admitted, it may also
fall out that they have done more for them, considering that both their
ability was greater, and their will better. Uerely (will some man say)
whatsoever it be that the son does for his father, it is less than his
father has done for him, because he had not bin in case too have doo^ it, if
it had not bin for his father. So can no benefiting surmount him that is the
ground of the surmounting of itself.

First it is too be considered, that some things take their beginning of
other, and yet are greater than their beginninges. Neither is any thing
therefore less than that from whence it has his beginning, for that it could
not have grown too that greatness, except it had had a beginning. There is
almost nothing but it far exceeds his first original. Seeds are the
causes of all things, and yet are they the least part of the things that
grow of them. Look upon Rhyne, look upon Euphrates: too be short, look
upon all noble Rivers: and what are they, if you measure them by their heads
from whence they spring? whatsoever they be fearedfor, whatsoever they be
renowned for, they have purchaced it in their far going. Take away roots, and
there shall be no woods; neither shall the great Mountains be clad with
Trees. Look upon the growing timbertrees. If ye regard the great height and
hougenesse of their Bodies, or the great thiknesse and broad spreddingout of
their Boughs: how small a thing in comparison of these, is that which is
contained in the Root with his fine little stringes? Temples stand upon their
foundacions, and so do the Walls of this famous City: and yet the things
that bear up the whole work, lie hidden in the ground. The same comes too
pass in all other things. The greatness that grows out, does always
ouerspred his own original. I could not atteyne too any thing, except my
Parents had first begotten me. Yet is not every thing that I have atteined
too, less therefore than the thing without which I had not atteyned unto it.
If my Nurce had not cherished me when I was a Ba^e, I could have compassed
none of the things which I now do both with head and hand: neither should I
have com^^^ ^his renown and honor which I have earned with my tra^ell both
in peace and war. Will thou therefore prefer my Nur^^s dooinges before my
greatest deeds? And what differ^^de is there, seeing I could no more have
^om^^^^ ^^o any thing without the benefyte of my Nurce, than without the
benefyce of my father?

The.xxx. Chapter.
BUt if all that ever I am now able too do, ought too be imputed too my
first original: You must consider that my Father is not my beginner, no nor
my Grandfather another. For always the further ye go, there shall be still some
other beginning of the beginning that went last before. But no man will say I
am more behold too mine Aunce^ers whom I never knew, and which are passed
the reach of remembrance, than too my Father. But I should be more beholden
too them than too my Father, if I be beholden too mine aunceters that I had a
Father to beget me.

Whatsoever I have done for my Father, though it be neuerso much, yet (say
thou) it is nothing in respect of my Fathers deserts, because I had not bin if
he had not begotten me. After this manner of reasoning, if any man have healed
my Father when he was sick and at deaths door: there is nothing that I can
do for him, but it is less than he deserves, because my Father had not
begotten me if he had not bin recovered. But see if this carry not a more
likelyhod of truth: that the thing which I both could do and have done,
shouldbee esteemed as mine own, and in mine own power, and at mine own will.
That I am borne, if thou look throwly what a thing ^o is, thou shall find it
a small matter and an uncertain, and an occasion of good and evil alyke,
doutlesse the first step unto all things, but yet not by andby greater than
all things because it is the first of all things.

I have saved my Fathers life and advanced him too high estate, and made him a
Prince in his Country; and I have not only innobled him with deeds done by
me, but also given him a large and easy ground too woork upon himself, no
less void of peril than full of renown. I have heaped upon him both honor,
and welthe, and whatsoever may allure man's mind unto it: and whereas I was
above all other men, I submitted my self under him. Tell me now: that a man is
able too do these things, comes it of his Father? I will answer for thee.
Yea undoubtedly if too the doing of these things, it was enough too be only
borne. But if too living well, the least part be too live: or if thou have
given me no more, th^^ that which wyld Bea^tes and other living things
(whereof some are very small, and some most vile) have as well as I: then
challenge not that too thyself, which I have not of thee, though I have it not
without thee. Put the case I have rendered life for life. In so doing I have
surmounted thy gift, in asmuchas I have given it wittingly, and thou have
received it wittingly: and in that I have given it thee, not for mine own
pleasures sake, or at leastwyse not through pleasure: and finally in that it is
so much a greater thing too keep life still than too receive life, as it is a
lyghter matter too dye before a body can fear death, than afterward.

The.xxxi. Chapter.
I Gave life too thee when thou might use it out of hand: but thou gave
life unto me, when I could not tell whither ever I should enjoy it or no. I
gave thee life when thou wart afraid of death thou gave me life, that I might
dye. I ga^e thee a full and perfect life: tho^ beg a^est me void, of reason,
and another bodies burden. Will thou know how, small a benefi^e it is too
give life in such wise? Thou shoulde^s have cast me away: or tho^ did
me wrong too beget me. Whereby I ga^^^^, ^^at the begetting up the ^ather and
Moother, is the least benefit that (...), vn^esse there go with it all other
things, which ought too follow this enteraunce of benefiting, which is too
be ratified with other natural duties. It is not good too live: but too live
well. But I live well: yea, and I might have lived ill. So is there no more
thine, but that I live. If thou vpbrayed me with a life, which of it self is
naked, and witless, and vaunte^^ of it as of a great good thing: remember
that thou twytest me by such a good thing, as is common too Flies and Woormes.
Ageine, (that I may allege none other matter, tha^ the appliyng of my self
too good learning, too the intent too direct the race of my life in the right
way): If I live well, thou haste even in this benefit, received a greater
thing than thou gave. For thou gave me too myself, rude and unskillful:
but I have rendered thee thy son such a one, as thou may be glad that
ever thou begattest him.

The.xxxii. Chapter.
MY Father has cherish^d me: if I do the same too him. I render with an
overplus, because it does him good, not only too have cherished his son,
but also too be cherished by his son: and he takes more pleasure of my
good. (...), than of the very deed. But his (...) of me, (...) no further
than too my body. What if a man had procceded so far, that for his
Eloquence, his Justice, (...) his Chiu^lrie* he were becomme* famous in foreign
(...) also made his Father, highly renowned, (...) of his (...) to shine forth
by the (...) should ^e (...) Should any man have known (...) Marc^^ Agrippa
more beholden to his Father, who was not so much as known after the decease
of Agrippa; or his Father more beholden too him, who nobly atteined a
Seagarlande (the highest honor among all the rewards of Chivalry); and
builded so many great works in the City, surmounting the royalty of all
former works, and unable too be matched of any that were made after? Whither
did Octauius more for his son Augustus: or the Emperor Augustus more for his
Father Octauius? howbeit that the shadow of the Father by adoption, did
ouercouer the Father by nature. How would it have rejoiced his heart, if he had
seen him reigning in quiet peace, after the Ciuell wars were ended? He had
bin more happy than he could have perceived; and as often as he had looked
upon himself, he would scarcely have believed, that so noble a person could
have bin borne in his house. What should I now proceed with any mo, whom
forgetfulness had outworne long ago, had not the glory of their children
delued them out of darkness, and kept them still in the light? Hereafter let
us not ask, whither any son has done more for his Father, than his Father
has d^one for him* but whither it be possible for any Son, to do more for
his Father, or no? Although the examples that I have reherced alredie do not
yet satisfy thee, or surmount the benefits of their Parents: yet is it
possible by Nature, ^oo be done, howbeeit that no age has hither too brought
forth any such as has done it. For albeeit that no one benefit or mo
severally, be able too ^urmount the greatness of the Parents deserts: yet
may many knit together in one surmount them.

The.xxxiii. Chapter.
SCipio saves his Father in battle: and being scarce man grown, sets
Spurs too his horse* and gives charge upon his enemies. Is it but a small
thing, that for desire too res^owe his father, he regards not so many
perilles, so many noble Capiteines, so many things assailyng him, so many
stoppes incountering him? That being a raw soldier, and the first time that
ever he came intoo the feelde, he ouerrunneth the old expert souldyers, and
^utgoeth his own years? Ad here unto that he defends his Father arreigned,
and delivers him from the conspiracy of his e^emies that were too strong for
him: That he makes him Cosull twice or thrice and prefers him too other
offices of honor, meet too be covered even of Consulles, and Consulles
pee^es: That he releeueth his poverty with gooddes gotten by the Law a^ arms,
and (which is the honorablest thing of all among men of war) inricheth him
with the spoil of enemies. If all this be too little, put too further, that
he contineweth him in extraordinary offices, and in the government of
Provinces: ad also, that by overthrowing of most mighty (...) without
fellow, being the founder and mainteiner of the Roman Empire, that was too
comme from East too West, aduaunceth the nobleness of his noble Father. Show
me the match of this Scipio, and there is (...) of begetting, shall be (...)
and vertewe of such a one, I am not able too say, whither too the greater
welfare, or too the greater honor of his country.

The.xxxiiii. Chapter.
Moreover, if all this be too little: admit that sum man have discharged
his Father from torments, and taken them too himself. For you may enlarge the
weldooinges of a son, as far as you list, considering that the benefiting
of the Father is simple and easy, yea, and also delightful to the dooer. What
need we many words? The father gives life he knows not too whom. And in
dooyng of it he has a Copartner: he has an eye too the Law of fatherhod; too
the reward of fathers, too the continewance of his house and family, and unto
all things rather, than him too whom he did it. What if a man having obtained
wisdom, do teach the same too his father? (For we will reason upon that
point also:) whither has he done more for his Father, in teaching him too
live a blessed life: or his Father more for him in giving him life only?
Whatsoever thou dooest (will sum men say) and whatsoever thou art able too
bestow, it is by the benefit of thy father. As well may my Schoolema^ster
claim it for his benefit, that I have profited in the liberal Sciences under
him: and yet we excel those that have taught us such things: at leastwise
those that have taught us our first principles. And although no man can
atteine any thing without them: yet is not all that a man has atteined,
inferior to them. There is great difference between the first things, and
the greatest things. The first things are not by and by comparable too the
greatest things, because the greatest can not be atteined ^nto^^^ithout the
first things.

The.xxxv. Chapter.
NOw it is time for me to bring somewhat out of mine own store, if I may so
term it.

He that bestows such a benefit as may be bettered, may be surmounted.
The father has given his son life: but there are things better than life:
Ergo the father may be surmounted, because there is some better thing than the
benefit that he has bestowed.

Yea if one that has given a man life be once or twyce delivered from peril
of death for it, he has received a greater benefyte than he gave: Ergo if the
Son save his father oftentimes from danger of death, the father receives a
better turn than he bestowed.

He that receives a good turn, receives so much the greater good turn, as
he has more need of it: But he that lives has more need of life than he
that is not yet borne, (as who can find no want at all of it): Ergo the father
receives a greater benefit in his sons saving of his life, than the son
receives in his fathers begetting of him.

[But thou say still, that] the fathers benefits cannot be ouermatched by
the sons benefits. Why so? Because he has received life of his father,
which if he had not received, he could have done no good turns at all. This
care of the father is common too all men that have preserved any bodies life:
for they could not have requyted, if they had not received life. By the same
reason it is not possible too reward a Phisician above his desert, (for a
Phisician is wont too give life): nor a mariner if he have saved a man from
shipwrecke. But the benefytes as well of these men, as of all others that by
any means have given us life, may be surmounted: Ergo the benefits of
parents may be surmounted also.

If a man have bestowed such a benefit upon me as has need too be
furthered by the benefytes of many men: and I bestow such a benefit upon
him, as should need the help of noman: I have bestowed a greater than I have
received.

The father gives his child such a life as should have perished out of hand
if there had not followed many things too maintain it: But if the son save
his Fathers life, he gives him such a life as wants the help of no man, as
too the continewance of it: Ergo the Father that has received life at his
sons hand, has received a greater benefit than he gave.

The.xxxvi. Chapter.
THese things diminishe not the reverence toward Parents, ne make their
Children worse too them, but rather better. For by Nature Uertewe is desirous
of praise, and preaceth too outgo the formest. The child's love will be the more
chereful if it go on too requite benefits, with hope of surmounting. If this
may comme too pass by the mutual consent of the Fathers and the Children: for
as much as there be many things wherein we may be vanquished too our own
behoof: what luckier encounter, what greater felicity can there be to
Parents: than too be driven too confess the^ selves, ouermatched by their
Children in weldooyng? If we be not of this opinion: we give our Children
cause of excuse, and make them the ^lower too render thankfulness, whereas we
ought rather to spur them foreward, and too say? Gotoo good sons there is
an honorable wager laid between the Fathers and the Sons, whither they
shall have given or received greater benefits. They have not therefore won
the wager, because they have begun first: Only pluck up a good heart as
becommes you, and faint not, that ye may ouercomme them that would be glad of
it. In so goodly an enterprise, you cannot want Capiteines too incorage you too
do as they have done before you, and too haste you foreward in their own
footesteppes, too the victory which they have often heretofore gotten of
their Parents.

The.xxxvii. Chapter.
AEnaeas ouermatched his father. For whereas his father had borne him a Babe
when he was a light and safe carriage: he took up his father heavy with age,
and carried him through the thickest preace of his enemies, and through the
ruins of the City falling down about him, at what time the devout old man
holding his holy Relikes and housholdgods in in his arms, loded him with
another burden heuyer than himself. Yet bare he him in the fire, yea and (what
is not natural love able too do?) he bare him thorough, and shryned him too
be woorshipped among the Founders of the Roman Empire. The yoongmen of
Sicilie ouermatched their Father. For when Mount. Aetna bursting forth with
greater force than was accustomed, had cast forth his fire intoo the Towns,
intoo the Feeldes, and into the greatest part of the Island: they caught up
their Parents, and men believe that the ^^ames claue a sunder, and withdrawing
on either side of them, did set open a Gap for those most worthy yoongmen too
run out at, that they might safely perform their great attempt. The like
victory befell too Antigonus: who having vanquished his enemies in a sore
Battle, did put the reward of the victory over too his Father, and gave the
kingdom of Ciprus intoo his hands. Titus Manlius, the Son of Lucius
Manlius. Look in Liuie the vii. book of the first Decad. Marcus Pomponius.
The true reigning, is, not to reign when thou may. Manlius also overcame
his lordly father. For when his father had put him away for a time, because of
the brutishness and dullness of his youth: he came to a Tribune of the people
that had sommoned his father too answer too an indictment: and when the
Tribune (in hope he had hated his father, and would therefore have bin a
Traitor too him) believing he should have done the yoongman a pleasure,
whose banishment (among other things) he objected too Manlius as a heynouse
crime,) demanded of him the time that his Father had set him: The yoongman
getting him alone, drew out a Dagger that he had hidden in his sleeue, and
said too him. If thou swear not too me to discharge my father of his
Indytement, I will thruste thee through with this Dagger. It is in thy choice
after what sort my Father shall have no accuser. The Tribune swear, and kept
touch with him, certifying the Court of the cause why he let his Action fall.
It had not bin for any other man thus too have ouerruled the Tribune, and too
have gone clear away with it.

The.xxxviii. Chapter.
THere are examples upon examples, concerning such as have delivered their
Parents out of Dangers, advanced them from the bacest degree to the highest
state; and lifting them from the common and rascal sort, have commended them
too the world, never too be forgotten. No force of words, no excellency of
wit is able too express, how great, how commendable, and how worthy a
matter it is too be had always in remembrance, for a man too be able too
say: I have obeyed my Parents, I have given place too their commandments
were they right or wrong, easy or hard, I have behaved myself obediently and
with submission: In this one point only have I bin wilful: that I might not
be ouermatched in well doing. Contend you also I pray you: and when you be
vanquished, give a new onset. Happy are those that shall so vanquish; happy
are those that shall be so vanquished. What thing can be more noble, than that
yoongman which might say too himself, (for it is not lawful for him too say
it too any other body) I have ouermatched my father in weldooing? What thing
can be more fortunate than that old man, which might every where make his
vaunt unto all men, that his son has ouergone him in weldooing? And what
greater felicity can there be, than too yield in such a case?

The end of the third Book.
The fourth book of Lucius Annaeus Seneca, concerning Benefits.
The first Chapter.
OF all the things that we have discoursed (my friend Ebutius Liberalis,) it
may seem that no one thing is so needful, or (as Salust says) too be
treated of with more heed, than that which we be now in hand with: namely
whither the doing of good tur^es, and the rendering of thankfulness, are
things too be desired for themselves. There are too be found, which set not
by honesty but for advantage sake, and which like not virtue without reward:
which notwithstanding has no nobleness in it, if it have any thing set too
sale. For what fowler shame can there be, than for a man too make reckening
what it may be worth too him too be honest? when as Virtue is neither
allured with gain, nor frayed away with loss, and is so far from brybing
any man with profers or promises, that she wills men too too spend all upon
her, and is commonly with them that give themselves freely unto her? He that
will go unto her, must tread profit underfoot. Whithersoeuer she calls,
whither ^^euer she sends; thither must a man go without regard at his
worldly goods, yea and sometime without sparing his own blud, and he must
never refuze too do her commaundment. What shall I gain (say thou) if I do
this thing valeantly, or that thing bountifully? There is nothing promised
(...) happen too thee, (...) things is in themselves. (...) thing is too be
desired for it self, (...) goo^^^oing is an honest thing: it must needs be in
the same (...) seeing it is of the same nature. But that the thing which is
honest, is too be desired for it self: it is often and sufficiently proved
already.

The second Chapter.
IN this point I must wage Battle against the delicate and nyce company of
Epicures, whose Philosophy is in their feasting, among whom Virtue is the
Handmayd of pleasures. Them she stoopes unto, them she attend upon, them
she beholdes above her. There is no pleasure (says the Epicure) without
virtue. But why is pleasure put before virtue?

Thou reasonest concerning the order. Our question concerns the whole thing,
and thou argewest upon a part of it. Virtue is not virtue if she can follow.
Virtue chalengeth the cheifest pre-eminence. She must lead, she must
command, she must stand in highest place: and thou biddest her fetch her
watchwoord at another.

What skilles it thee, say thou? for I also do deny that there can be any
blissed life without virtue. I myself also disallowe and condemn the pleasure
which I follow, and too which I have yielded myself in bondage, if virtue be
severed from it.

The only thing that is in question, is whither virtue be the cause of the
souerein good, or the souerein good it self.

Admit that these be the only thing in question. Suppos^st thou that the
asking of it concerns but the transposing of the order only? Certesse it
were a very confusion and a manifest blindness, too set the Cart before the
Horse. I am not displeased that virtue is marshalled behynd pleasure: but that
^hee is in any wise matched with pleasure. She is the disdeyner and enemy of
pleasure, and shu^neth her as far as she can. She is better acquaynted with
peynfulnesse and grief, and more meet too be grafted into manly misfortune,
than intoo this womanish felicity.

The third Chapter.
THese things were too be spoken (my Liberalis) because the dooyng of good
turns (which is the matter whereof we treat) is a point of virtue: and it is
a foul shame that it should be done in any other respect, than to have it
done. For if we should do it in hope of receiving agein: then should we do
it too the richest, and not too the woorthyest. But now we prefer the poor
man before the greedy rich man. That is no benefyte, which has an eye too
the wealth of the person. Moreover, if only profit should allure men too do
good: they should do least good, that best might: namely rich men, men of
authority, and Kings, because they have least need of other men's help.
And a^for the Gods, they should bestow none of these their manifold gifts
which they power out upon us Night and Day without ceassyng. For their own
nature suffizeth them in all things, and maynteyneh^ tthem in abundaunce, in
safety, and in impossiblitie too be annoyed. Therefore shall they do good
too none, if the only cause of doing good be the regard of themselves and
their own profit. Too look about one, not where it may be best bestowed,
but where it may be bestowed too most advantage, and from whence it may be
taken away with most ease: is not beneficialnesse, but usury. But forasmuchas
such dealing is far of from the Gods: It follows that they be rightly
liberal. For if the only cause of doing good be the profit of the dooer:
Since God can look for no profit at our hand: there is no cause why God
should do us any good.

The fourth Chapter.
I Know what answer is made too this. Surely God does no good turns at
all, but is careless and regardlesse of us; and being quyte given from the
world, buzieth himself about other matters, or (which seems too the Epicure
too be the souereine felicity) about nothing, nor is a^ie more inclyned too
benefiting, than too doing wrong. He that so says, thinks not y^ God
heereth the voices of them that pray, nor of them yt euerywhere lift up their
hands too heaven in making their vows both private and public. Which thing
doutlesse had never comme too pass, neither would all the world have agreed
too be so mad, as too make sewt unto deaf Gods and helpless Idolles,
except they had felt their benefytes in very deed, one while freely bestowed,
anotherwhyle given upon prayer, and the same too be great, sent in dew
season, and by their tymely coming ridding men from great miseries that
manaced them. And who is so much a wretch or so smally regarded? who was ever
borne too so hard a destiny and too so sore penance, that he has not felt
this so great bountifulness of God? Look upon the miserables^ of them, even
when they lament and bewail their own case: and ye shalnot find them
altoogither void of the heavenly benefytes. yea Ye shall find none that has
not drawn somewhat out of that most bountiful fountain. Is it a small thing
that is given indifferently too all men in their birth? Or (too let pass the
things that are distributed afterward in unequal proportion) did nature give a
small thing when she gave herself?

The.v. Chapter.
Does not God bestow benefytes? from whence the^ have thou these things
whereof thou art owner? which thou give? which thou Denyest? which thou
keep? which thou catchest? From whence comme these inumerable things that
delyght the eyes, the ears, and the mind? From whence is this abundance that
furnishes even our ryotous excess? For, not only our necessities are provided
for, but even our pleasures also are tendered. Whence have we so many trees
bearing sundry sorts of fruits, so many wholesome herbs, and so many
diversities of meats serving for all seasons through the whole year?
insomucheas the very food that comes of the earth we wot not how, were
able too find an vnpurueying sluggard. What should I speak of all kind of
living things, some breeding upon the dry and hard ground, some within the
moist waters, and some sent down from aloft, too the end that every piece of
nature should yield some tribute unto us? what should I say of Rivers, some
with most pleasant wyndlasses inuironing the feeldes, and othersome passing
forth with houge streams able too be are ships, and intermedling themselves
with the sea? uphrates. ^ygris. Nilus. ^o. and others.
Whereof some, at certain ordinary days, take wonderful increace, so as the
soodein force of the summers flud, moysteneth the grounds that are situate
under the Droughtie and burning clymate. What shall I say of the veins of
medcinable waters? what shall I say of the boiling up of whot Bathes even upon
the very shores?

And what of thee o Mighti Lare, and Benacus which swell*
With roaring Bilowes like the Sea when winds do make it fell?
The.vi. Chapter.
IF a man had given thee a feawe Acres of Ground, thou would say thou
had received a benefit at his hand: and denyest thou the unmeasurable
hougenesse of the broad earth too be a Benefit? If a man should give thee
Monnie and fill thy Chest (for that is a great matter with thee) thou would
call it a benefit: and think thou it no Benefit, that GOD has hoorded up
so many Metalles, and shed forth so many streams upon the Sands, in
ronning down whereupon, they carry with them a houge mass of Gold, Silver,
Brass, and Iron hidded euerywhere: and also that he has given thee cunning
too find it out by setting marks of his covert riches upon the upper part of
the Earth? If a man should give thee a house wherein there were a little
glistering Marble, and a roof shyning with gold or vernished with colors;
wooldest thou call it a mean benefit? God has builded thee a great house,
out of peril of burning or falling, wherein thou see, not little pieces and
thinner than the Chizell itself wherewith they were heawen: but entier huge
Masses of most Preciouse stone, whole through out of sundry and several
woorkemanship the small pieces whereof thou woonderestat; the roof of which
house shyneth after one sort in the day time, and after another in the
nighttyme: and doo^t thou now deny that thou have received any benefit at
all? Agein, whereas thou set great store by these things which thou
have: think thou (which is the point of a thanklesse person) that thou art
beholden too nobodie for them? from whence haste thou this breath which thou
drawest? from whence have thou this light, whereby thou disposest and orderest
the dooinges of thy life? from whence have thou thy blud, by whose mean thy
lively heat is maynteyned? from whence haste thou these things which with
their excellent taste provoke thine appetyte, even more than thy stomach can
bear? from whence have thou these intycementes of pleasure even till thou be
weerie of it? from whence have thou this ease wherein thou welterest and
witherest away? will thou not (if thou be thankful) say?

God gives this ease, and he shall be my God for evermore:
His altars shall my tender Lambs imbrew full often therefore.
For he it is that makes my Neat to wander (as ye see)
And gives me power on Ote^ Reed to pype with merry glee.
God is he, not that has sent out a feawe Oxen, but which has dispersed
whole herdes of all manner of Catell intoo the whole world: which gives pasture
too the flocks that stray here and there in all quarters: which gives
Somerfeede and Winterfeede one under another: which not only has taught men
too play upon a reed, and after some manner too sing a rude and homely song
unto it: but also has devised so many arts, so many varieties of words,
and so many soundes, too yield sundry tunes, some by force of our own breath,
and some by outward wynd. For we can no more say, that the things which we
have invented, are our own dooinges: than that it is our own doing that we
grow, or that the body has his full proportion and properties according too
his determinate times: as the falling away of teeth in chyldhod the lu^tinesse
of youth growing unto years of more discretion, and the strongnesse of man's
estate passing from thence in too the last age, which pitcheth the bounds of
our flyghtfull life. There are sown in us the seeds of all ages, and of all
arts: and God as a schoolmaster does secrettly train forth our natural
dispositions.

The.vii. Chapter.
NAture (say thou) gives me these things. Perceyuest thou not, that when
thou saye^t so, thou do but change Gods name? For what else is Nature, than
God, and Gods ordinance planted in the world and in the parts thereof? As often
as thou listest, thou may call him, sommetymes the author of all things, and
sometimes Jove, Jupiter Opt. Max. Tonans. Stator. Stat^lio.
that is too say, the most graciouse and most myghtie. Also thou may well
term him y^ Thunderer, and the Stander: for he is the very Sta^der, and
Stayer: not because the battle of the Romans which was fleeing, stayed and
stood still after the making of their vow, (as our historiographers have
reported): but because all things stand and are stayed by his benefit. (...).
Moreover if thou call him Fate, thou shall not lie. For whereas Fate is
nothing else but a holding on of causes linked one within another: he is the
first cause whervppon all the rest depend. Finally thou may properly apply
too him what names so ever thou will, which contain any force and effect of
heavenly things. Look how many properties or operacious he has: so many
names may he have.

The.viii. Chapter.
OUr men do also term him father Liber. and Hercules, and Mercury. Father
Liber, because he is the father of all things, by whom was first found out the
power of seeds, which should be the maynetenance of all things through
pleasure. Hercules, because his power is invincible, and shall return intoo
fire when it is weerie of woorking. And Mercury, because Reason, and number,
and order, and kunning are in his power. Whithersoeuer thou turn thyself, thou
shall find him meeting thee. Nothing is exempted from him. He himself fills
his work too the full. Therefore thou vnthankfullest of all wyghtes, thou
talkest vaynly when thou say thou art not beholden too God, but too nature.
For neither is nature without God, nor God without nature: but both are one
thing, without difference of office. If for a thing that thou had received
of Seneca, thou wooldest say thou art detter too Annaeus, or Lucius, thou
should not thereby change the person of thy Creditor, but his name:
because that whither thou call him by his forename, his proper name, or his
Surname, yet shall he be but all one man. Even so, whither thou use the terms
of Nature, Fate, or Fortune, it makes no matter: because they al are the names
of the selfsame God, using his power diversely. Justice, Honesty, Wisdom,
Manliness and Thriftinesse are the goods of the mind which is but one. If
thou like any of these, thou lykest the mind.

The.ix. Chapter.
BUt too the intent I raunge not aside intoo bymatters: I say that God
bestows right many and exceeding great benefytes upon us, without hope of
receiving aught agein, because that neither he needs any thing too be
bestowed upon him, nor we are able too bestow any thing upon him, Ergo
Benefiting is a thing too be de^yred for it owneself, and nothing is too be
respected in it but only the receyuers commodity. This is the thing that we
must tend unto, setting a^yde our own commodities.

But (says he) thou have told us we must make ware choice on whom we bestow
our good turns: because that not even the husbandman will beta^^ his seed too
the sand: Ergo we must seek our own profit in doing good turns, like as
we do in tilling and sowing: for too sow is not a thing too be desired for
itself. Besides this, ye take aduysement in doing your good turn: which
thing ought not too be, if the doing of good Turns were a thing too be
desired for itself: for in what place so ever and in what wyze so ever it were
done, it were still a good turn.

We follow the thing that is honest, for none other cause than for it self.
And although none other thing be too be sought in in it: Yet notwithstanding
we bethink our selves what we may do, and when, and after what sort, for in
these things it consists. Therefore when Ibethinke me upon whom I may
bestow my good turn: I indeuer that it may be a goodturne in deed. For if
it be bestowed upon an dishonest person; it can he neither honest, nor a
goodturne.

The.x. Chapter.
TOO restore a thing that a man has taken too keep, is a thing too be
desired for itself: Yet shall I not always restore it, nor in all places, nor
at all times. Sometime my utter denying of it may be as good as the open
restoring of it. I must have an eye too the profit of him to whom I should
restore it: and if the deliverance will do him hatme, I shall keep it still
from him. The same thing must I do in benefyting. I must consider too whom I
give, when I give, in what wise, and wherefore. For nothing is too be done
without discretion. It is no good turn except it be done upon reason:
because reason is the companion of all honesty. How often have we herd men
(that found fault with them selves for their unadvised bestowing), cast forth
these words? I had lever I had lost it, than bestowed it where I did. It is
the fowlest kind of bestowing that can be, too bestow unadvisedly: and it is
much more greef too have bestowed a good turn amiss, than not too have
received any. For it is the fault of other men that we have received none: but
it is our own fault that we made no choice in bestowing. In making my choice,
I will respectt nothing less than that which thou surmysest: namely of whom I
shall be best recompensed. For I will choose such a one as will be thankful, and
not such a one as will make recompense. Oftentimes, he that shall never
requite, shall be thankful, and he that has requyted shall be unthankful. I
make estimation of him by his mind. Therefore I ouerpasse the rich man, if he
be unworthy: and bestow upon the poor man that is good. For in extreme
poverty, he will be thankful: and when he wants al things, his heart shall
yield abundance. I hunt not for gain by my good turn, nor for pleasure, nor
for glory. Contenting myself too please but one, I will bestow too the end
too do as I ought too do: And that which I ought too do, is not too be
done without choice. What manner of choice the same shall be, that do you
demand.

The.xi. Chapter.
I Will chooze a man that is honest, plain, myndful, thankful, not gripple of
other men's goods, nor couetously pinching his own, and such a one as is
well minded. When I have found such a man, although fortune lend him nothing
wherewith too requyte: yet is the matter fallen out as I wished. If selfprofit
and filthy forereckenyng upon gain do make me liberal: If I shall befreend
non, but because he should befreend me agein: then shall I not benefit him
that is taking his journey into foreign and far countries: then shall I not
pleasure such a one as must dwell away for ever: then shall I not do for one
that is so sick as he is past all hope of recovery: Then shall I not bestow
aught when I am passing out of the world myself: for I shall have no time too
receive friendship agein. But too the intent thou may know, that the doing
of good turns is a thing too be coueted for itsef: we must relieve the
strangers that arrived but even now upon our coast, and shall go away by and
by ageine. If a stranger suffer shipwrecke, we must give him a ship ready
rigged too convey him home agein. He goes his way scarce knowing the woorker
of his welfare: and never thinking too come in our sight agein, he sets us
over too the Gods for his Det, and prays them too make recompense for him.
In the mean while we be delighted with the rememberance of a barrein
Benefit. I pray you, when we be hard at deaths door, and when we make
our Will: do we not distribute benefits that shall nothing profit
ourselves? How much time spend we, how long debate we in secret, how much
we may give, and too whom? But what skilles it too whom we give, seeing we
shall receive of none? Nay rather, we be never more ware in bestowing, nor we
never streyne our wits more than at that time, when all profit set aside,
there stands nothing before our eyes but honesty. For so long as fear, or
the doltish vice of voluptuouse^esse corrupts or judgment, we continewe
evil judges of deuties and deserts. But when death has forestalled all
things, and sent an vncorrupt judge to give sentence: Then seek we the
worthyest too bestow our things upon. Neither have we a more conscionable
care too set any thing at a stay, than that which perteyneth no longer unto
us.

The.xii. Chapter.
AND in good sooth, it is even then a great pleasure for a man too think with
himself, I shall make such a one welthier: and by increasing his riches. I
shall advance the countenance of his estate. If we shall do no good, but when
we may receyne agein: then must we dye intestate.

You avouch (says he) that a benefit is an vndischargeable Debt: but a Debt
is not a thing too be coueted for itself: Ergo benefyting or gooddooing is
not too be desired for itself. When we term it a Debt, we use a
resemblance and a borrowed speech. For likewise we know that Law is the rule
of right and wrong: and yet that a rule is not a thing too be covered for it
self. Our falling intoo these terms, is for the better opening of the matter.
When I say a Det, I meene as it were a Det. And that thou may know my
meening to be so, I ad, vndischargeable: when as there is no Debt but it
either may or ought too be dischaged. So little ought a goodturne too be
done for lukers sake, that oftentimes (as I said) we must do it with our
loss and peril. As for example: I reskwe a man beset with thieves, so as he
is suffered too go away safely. I defend an accused person that is in danger
to be oppressed by parcialitie, and purchase the displeasure of great men for
my labor: so as they charge me with mayntenance: and the misery that I
dispatched him out of, lights perchance upon myself, whereas I might have
gone against him, or safely have sitten still as a looker on in another man's
matter. Yea I undertake for him when judgment is past against him, and suffer
not execution to go out upon his goods, but offer too be bound for him too his
creditors: and too the intent I may save him from outlawing. I run in danger
to be outlawed myself. Noman being ready too purchase the Manur of Tusculum or
of Tyburt for his healthes sake, or too repose himself in it in the summer
season, will stand debating for what years he shall buy it: when he has
bought it, he must hold him too it. The like reason is in benefyting. For if
ye ask what it should yield agein, I answer, a good conscience. What does
Benefyting yield? Tell thou me what Justice yields, what innocence
yields, what nobleness of courage yields, what chastity yields, what
aduysednesse yields, and whither thou exactest any more of these, than the
virtues themselves.

The.xiii. Chapter.
FOr what purpose acc^mplisheth the world his dew course? For what purpose
does the Sun lengthen and shorten the day? All these be benefits: for
they be done for our behoof. Like as it is the duty of the world too
carry things about in order: And as it is the duty of the Sun too shift
his place from whence he rizeth, too the coast where he sets: and too do
these things for our welfare, without reward: even so is it man's duty,
among other things, too do good turns also. Wherefore then does he them?
Least he should not do them, and so lose occasion of welldooyng. It is a
pleas^re too you too accustom the lither body to lazy Idleness, and too
seek a kind of ease very like theirs that are in a slumber: and too lurk
under a couerte shadow, feeding the sluggishenesse of your drouzie minds,
with most nyce co^ceites, which you term quietness: and too pamper your
vnweeldie carkeses till they wex wan, with meats and drinks in the
lurkingholes of your gardeines. But as for us we have a manly pleasure:
namely too do good turns, either too our own pain while we ease other
men of their pains; or too our own peril, while we pluck other folks
out of peril; or too the increase of our own charges, while we relieve the
necessities and distresses of others. What matter is it too me, whither I
receive any good turns or no? For even when I have received, then must I
bestow. Benefiting has respect too the commodity of him on whom it is
bestowed, and not too our own. Otherwise we bestow it on our selves, and not
on him. Therefore many things that greatly profit other men, do lose their
grace and thank, because they be done for gain. The Merchantman does good
too his Country, the Phisician too sick persons, the Horsecourser too his
Chapmen: and yet all these men make not those beholden to them that receive
good by them, because that in their profiting of others they seek their own
gain.

The.xiiii. Chapter.
IT is no benefit, that is set too sale. This will I give, this will I take,
is plain bargainyng. I cannot call her a chaste woman which has given her
Lover a repulse too set him the sharper. She that keeps her self honest for
fear of the Law, or fear of her housebande, is not honest. For as Ovid
says, The wife that lives chastely compelled thereto,
Because that she dares none otherwise do:
Deserves too be counted as ill in effect,
As she whom her doings do plainly detect.


Not undeservedly is she accounted in the number of offen^ers, which kept
herself honest for fear, and not for honesties sake. In semblable wise, he
that does a good turn too the i^tente too receive another, does none at
all. Otherwise it might be inferred, that we benefit the brute beasts,
which we cherishe either for our service, or for our food: and that we
benefit our Drtyardes when we tend them, that they may not decay through
brought or binding of the sooyle, for want of digging and lookingtoo. But it is
not in respect of right and equity, that any manne takes in hand too Manure
the ground, or to do any other thing whose fruit is without it self. Neither
is it a couetouse and filthy thought, that leads a man too do good turns:
but it is a manly and a frank heart, desirous too bestow even when it has
bestowed alred^e; and too augment the old with fresh and new; not regarding
how gainful they may be too the bestower. For else, too do good because it
is a man's own profit, is a bace thing, praiselesse, and commendacionlesse.
What excellency is it for a man too love himself, too spare himself, and to
gather for him self? The true purpose of benefiting, calls a man away from
all these things: and laiyng hand upon him draws him too loss. It
forsakes selfprofit, and ioyeth exceedingly in the berie act of gooddooing.

The.xv. Chapter.
IS there any doubt, but harm is contrary too dooyng good? Like as too do
harm is a thing too be eschewed and shunned for it self: even so too do good,
is a thing too be coueted for it self. In the first, the shame of dishonestie
prevails against all rewards that allure to wickedness: in the other the
beautifulness of honesty, being effectual of it self, allureth men unto it.
I shall speak no untruth, if I say there is no man but he loves his own
benefits; nor no man but he is of that mind, that he would be the gladder
too see him, for who^ he has done much; nor no man that would forbear too
do one good, because he had done for him once before. Which thing could not
comme too pass, except the welldooyng it self delighted us. How often shall ye
here men say: I cannot find in my heart too forsake him whose life I have
saved, and whom I have delivered out of danger. He requesteth me to stand on
his side against men of authority. I am loath too do it: but what shall I dod?
I have befreended him once or twice alredie. See you not how in this case,
there is a certain peculiar force which compels us too do men good? First
because it behooves too do it: and afterward because we have done it
alredie? Upon whom we had no cause too bestow any thing at the first, upon
him we bestow somewhat afterward, even in respect that we have done for
him alredie. Yea, and so-little does our own profit move us too benefiting:
that we persevere in tendering and mainteinyng the same, even without profit,
only for love of doing good. And it is as natural a thing too bear with our
unlucky bestowing, as to bear with our children when they do amiss.

The.xvi. Chapter.
THE same persons bear us in hand, that men render thankfulness also, not
for that it is honest so too do, but because it is profitable. Which thing
may be disproued with the less labor, because that look with what
arguments we have gathered, that the dooyng of good turns, is a thing too
be desired for it self: by the same way we also gather, that the rendering
of tha^kfulnesse is of the same sort. This is once an immovable ground, from
whence we fetch our proofs for the rest: that the thing which is honest is
too be followed, for none other cause, than for that it is honest. And who is
so fond as too doubt, whither it be an honest matter too be thankful? Who
would not detest an unthankful person unprofitable too himself? When thou
hear of one that is unthankful to his freende that has bin very
beneficial too him, how will thou conster it? That he has played an dishonest
part in so doing: Or that he has dealt fondly, in omitting the thing that was
for his commodity and profit? I trow thou will take him too be the wicked
man, which ha^h need of punishment; and not him which has need of an
ouerseer too look too the orderyng of things too his profit. Which thing
should not fall out so, unless thankfulness were a thing both honest, and
too be desired for itself. Other things perhaps do less utter their own
worthiness, and have need of an interpreter too tell whither they be honest
or no. But this is more apparaunte and beautiful than that the brightness
thereof should cast but a dim and glimeryng light. What is so commendable,
what is so universally received in the minds of all men: as to render
thankfulness for good deserts?

The.xvii. Chapter.
BEsides this: tell me what cause leads us too be thankful? Gain whosoever
despises not gain is unthankful. Ambi^ion? And what brag is it too have
paid that which thou owe? Fear? A man needs not be afraid too be
unthankful. For as though Nature had provided sufficientely in that behalf:
we have made no Law for it, like as there is no Law too bind children too
love their Parents, or Parents too tender their children: For it is more than
needs, too enforce us too that thing wherevntoo we are inclined of Nature.
And like as noman needs too be incoraged too self love, because he has it by
kind: So is noman too be exhorted too covet honest things for their own
sake, because they like us of their own nature. Yea and virtue is so graciouse
a thing: that too allow of good things, is ingraffed even in evil men. Who
is he that would not seem beneficial? who couets not too be counted good,
even when he does most wickedness and wrong? Who is he that settes not
sum color of right, upon the things that he has done most outrageously?
Or that would not seem too have bin good master, even too those whom he has
harmed? Therefore are they contented too receive thanks of those whom they
have vexed. And because they cannot show them selves too be good and liberal
in deed: they set a good face upon the matter. Which thing they would not
do, unless the thing that is honest, and too be desired for itself,
compelled them too seek an opinion contrary too their disposition, and too
cloak the naughtiness whose fruit they couette, though they hate the thing
itself, and are ashamed of it. Neither has any man revolted so far from the
Law of Nature, and degenerated so far out of kind, that he would be naught
for none other cause, but for his minds sake only. Ask any of these that
live upon the spoil, whither they had not lever too comme by the things
which they seek, by good means, than by robbing and stealing? He that makes
his gain of setting upon men by the highwayes side, and of killing men that
pass by, would wish too find those things, rather than too take them by
force. Yea, ye shall find no man, whose heart would not fame inioye the reward
of his naughtiness, without the doing of the naughty deed it self. Most
highly are we bound too Nature in this respect, that virtue sheadeth her
light so intoo men's minds, as even they that follow her not, do see her.

The.xviii. Chapter.
TOO the end thou may know that the affection of a thankful mind, is a
thing too be desired for it self: too be unthankful is a thing too be
eschewed for itself: Nothing does so much unknit and pluck asunder the
concord of mankind, as that vice. For in what other thing have we so much
saferie, as in helping one another with mutual freendlynes? Through this only
one intercourse of good turns, our life is both better furnished, and better
fenced against sodein assaults. Put eueryman too himself alone, and what are
we? A pray for beasts, a slaughter for Sacrifice, and very eazie to have our
blud shed. Because the rest of living creatures, should have strength enough
for their own defense: as many of them as are bred too stray abroad, and too
live solitary by themselves, are armed. Man is hemmed in with weakness.
Nature has given him two things (namely Reason and Fellowship) which make
him strongest of all, whereas else he should be underling too all. And so, he
that by himself alone could be able too match none; by means of fellowship
ouermatcheth all. Fellowship has given him the souereintie of all things.
Whereas he is borne but for the Land: fellowship has conveyed him intoo the
souereintie of an other nature, and made him Lord of the Sea also. This has
restreyned the rage of Diseases, provided helps aforehand for old age, and
given comfort against sorrows. This makes us strong: so as we may be able
too hold plea against fortune. Take away this fellowship, and ye rend asunder
the unity of Mankind, whereby our life is maynteined. But ye take it away, if
ye bring too pass that a thanklesse mind is not too be eschewed for itself,
but because it should stand in fear of some other thing. For how many be
there, that might be unthankful without hurt or danger? Therefore too
conclude, whosoever is thankful for fear of afterclappes, I auow him too be
vnthanfull.

The.xix. Chapter.
NOman that is sound of his Wits, fears the Goods. For it is a madness
too fear wholesome things: Neither does any man love those whom he fears.

Bylyke then thou Epi^ure disarmest God. Thou have bereft him of al his
weapons, and of all his power. And least any man might be afraid of him, thou
have cooped him up in a corner, beyond the reach of fear. For since thouhast
enclosed him within so house a wall, where it is not possible for him too get
out, and have separated him so far from men, as he can neither touch them
nor see them: it were no reason thou should be afraid of him, for he has
nothing to deal with thee, either too do thee good or harm. Sitting in a
middle room between thus Heaven and another, all alone without company of
any creature, without any thing, he shunneth the ruins of the worlds falling
down above him and about him, neither herkening too our prayers, nor having
any care at all of us. And yet thou will needs seem too woorship him as thy
Father, only (as I ween) of a thankful mind. Or if thou will not seem
thankful, because thou art not benefited by him, but art casually and at all
adventures clumpered together by these little mores and fine crommes of thine:
why do thou woorship him? For his excellent majesty (say thou) and for
his singular nature. I grant thou do so: and then dooest thou it not upon
persuasion of any reward: Ergo there is some thing too be desired for itself,
the very worthiness whereof draws thee unto it* and that is honesty. But
what is more honest, than too be thankful? The substance of this virtue
spreads out as far as does our life.

The.xx. Chapter.
BUT in this good thing (say thou) there is some profit: for in what virtue
is there no profit?

Nay verily, that thing is said to be coueted for itself, which though it have
some commodities without itself, is notwithstanding well lyked of, even when
those commodities be set aside and taken away. It profits me too be
thankful: yea, and I wilbee thankful though it were too my harm. What
seeks he that is thankful? That his thankfulness may win him mo friends
and mo goodturnes. But what if it should procure him displeasure? what if a man
shall perceive himself too be so far from gayning any thing at all by it,
that he must for go much, even of that which he had gotten and laid up in
store? Shall he not willingly hazard his own loss? He is a Churl which
bears a sick man company, because he is about too make his will: or has his
mind ronning upon the Heritage or Legacies that shall be bequeathed him. For
although he do all things that a good friend and one that is myndfull of his
duty ought too do: yet notwithstanding, if his mind wave in hope, if he long
for luker, if he castfoorth his angle, if he linger for the death of the party
and houer about his Carkesse, like Caryon Crows which stand spying near at
hand for the fall of Cattle with the Rotte: He is but a Churl. The
thankful mind is led with the goodness of his own purpose.

The.xxi. Chapter.
WIlt thou^bee fure that this is so, and that a thankful person is not
corrupted with gain? There be two kinds of thankfulness. He is called
thankful which rendereth somewhat for that which he has received. This man
perhaps may vaunt himself, he has where of too boast, he has too allege
for himself. And he is called thankful also, which has taken a goodturne
with good will, and with good will owes it. This man is shet up within his
own conscience. What profit can befall him of his own hidden affection? Yet
is this man thankful, if he be able too do romore: for he loves, he owes,
and he would feign requyte. What soever is wanting else, the lack is not in
him. A woork man is a woork man though he want tools too woork withal: and a
cunuing Musician is a Musician, though his voice cannot be hard for the noyze
of tramplers. If I be willing too requyte: yet is there somewhat behynd: not
that may make me thankful: but that may make me free. For oftentimes he
that has requyted is unthankful, and he that has not, is thankful. For like
as of all other virtues: so of this also, the whole estimation redoundeth too
the mind. As long as he does his dewtie: whatsoever wants besides, is the
fault of fortune. In like manner as an eloquent man is eloquent though he hold
his peace: and a strong man is strong, even when his hands are shet together,
yea or fast bound: and as a Pylot is a Pylot though he be upon the dry Land:
because there is no want of perfectness in their skill, although there be some
let that their skill cannot show itself: Even so also is he thankful that,
only has a desire too be thankful, and has none other record of his
willingness but himself. Nay, I will say thus much more: Sometime even he is
thankful, which seems unthankful, and whom misweening opinion has
reported too be blame worthy. What other thing now has such a one too sti^ke
too, but his own conscience? which gladdeth even when it is overwhelmed;
which k^yeth co^rarie too the multitude and the report of common brute, and
reposeth all her trust in herself: and though she see never so houge a
multitude holding against her: she accou^teth not the number of their voices,
but iustifyeth herself by our own secret knowledge. And albeeit she perceive
her faithfulness too bear the punishment of falshhod: Yet she abateth nowhit
of her haultinesse, but aduau^ceth hirself above her punishment.

The.xxii. Chapter.
I Have (says he) that I would have, and that I desired. It repentes me not
ne shall repent me, neither shall fortune (do the woorst she ca^ (bring me
too the point that I should say: what meant I? what has my good will booted
me? It booteth me even upon the Rack; It booteth me even in the fire. For
though it should be put too every me^be^ one after another, and consume the
body alive by pee^emeale: yet too a man that knows well by himself, whose
heart being good is full fraughted with the stream of a clear conscience, the
fire shall be welcome wherethrough the b^yghtnesse of his good conscience (...)
forth. Now also let this argument aforesaid come in place ageine: namely, what
is the cause that moves us too be so friendly at the time of our death? why
we should wey each persons deserts? why we should enforce our memory too
examine all our former life, and by all means indeuer too show that we have
not forgotten any man's kyndnesse? At that time there remains nothing for
hope too ^inger upon: and yet standing at the pi^tes brim, our desire is too
depart this world as freendly as may be. Uerely ye may see there is a great
reward of the deed, in the very doing of it. And great is the power of
honesty too allure men's hearts unto it. For the beauty thereof surpryseth
men's minds, and rauisheth them with singular pleasure in beholding the
bryghtnes of her light.

But many commodities ensew of it, and good me^ live more in safety, yea and
(according too the judgment of good men) more at ease too, where innocence and
a thankful mind go with it. For nature had done us too much wrong, if it
had made this so great a good thing, too have been miserable, and uncertain,
and barrein.

But look thus much further: whither thou could find in thy heart, too
make thy way unto this vertew, which (ofte^tymes has a safe and easy
passage unto it) by stones and rocks, or by a passage beset with savage
beasts and Serpents.

The.xxiii. Chapter.
A Thing is not therefore the less too be desired for it own sake, because it
has sum foreign profit cleaving unto it too boot. For commonly the
goodlyest things are all of them accompanied with many casual commodities:
but yet so, as they draw (...) commodities after them and they the^ selves go
before. Is there any dout, but that the Son and the Moon do govern this
dwelling place of mankind, by keeping their tur^es in passing about? or that by
the heat of the (...) bodies be cherished, the earth relieved, superfluouse
moisture abated, and the irksomeness of winter that byndeth all things alayed?
or that by the effectual and percing warmth of the Moon, the rypening fruits
are moystened? Or that the frutefulnesse of man is answerable too the course of
her? Or that the Son by his far compassing, makes the year discernable:
and the Moon by her turning in shorter space, makes the month? But admit
thou tookest these things away: were not the Son of itself a meet sight for
the eyes to behold, and worthy too be had in estimation, though he did no
more but pass by us? were not the Moon worthy to be reverenced, though she
ran by us but as an idle Star? When the Sky casts forth his fyres by
Night, shyning with such an innumerable multitude of Stars: whom does it not
force too look earnestly upon it? And who thinks then of any profit by
them, when he so woondereth at them? Behold these things that glyde aloft in
the still Sky, after what sort hyde they their swiftness under appearance of a
standing and immovable work? How much is done in this night, which thou
obseruest only for a reckening and difference from the days? what a multitude
of things is wound out in this stillness? what a row of Destinies does this
certeie bound bring forth? These things which thou regardest not otherwise
than as things dispersed for beautifying, are every one of them occupied in
woorking. For thou must not think, that only the seven Planets do move, and
all the rest stand still. We comprehend the mouinges of feawe, but there be
Gods innumerable and withdrawn far from our sight, which both go and come.
And of those that our sight can perceive, diverse walk an elendge course, and
pass in covert. Whythen should thou not be delighted to behold so houge a
work, yea though it ruled thee not preserved thee not, cherished thee not,
ingendered thee not, ne watered thee not with his spirit?

The.xxiiii. Chapter.
NOw like as in these things, although they be most behooffull, and are both
necessary and profitable, yet is it the majesty of them that occupies the
whole mind: Even so all vextue, (and specially the virtue of thankfulness,)
yields very much profit. but it will not be loved for the same, for it
has yet a further thing in it, neither is it sufficiently understood of him,
which accounts it among gainful things.

A man is thankful because it is for his own profit: Ergo, also he is
thankful but so much as is for his profit. Virtue interteineth not a miserly
lover. A man must not come unto her streytlaced. The Churl thinks thus: I
would feign requyte kyndnesse, but I am afraid of cost: I am afraid of danger:
I am afraid of displeasure: I will rather do that which is for mine ease. One
selfsame cause of dealing cannot make a man both thankful and unthankful. As
their woorkinges are diverse, so are their purposes diverse. The one is
unthankful though he ought not, because it is for his profit. The other is
thankful though it be not for his profit, because he ought so too be.

The.xxv. Chapter.
OUR purpose is too live according too Nature, and too follow the example of
the Gods. But whatsoever the Gods do, no other reason leads them too do it,
save only the deed it self: unless peradventure thou imagine them too receive
the reward of their dooinges, from the smoke of beasts Bowelles, and from the
rank sent of Frankincence. See how great things they daily bring too pass:
how great things they bestow among men: with how great foyzon of Fruits
they replenishe the earth: with how seasonable wyndes and fit too carry at
all hours, they blow through the Seas: and with how great Showers soodeinly
powered down, they soften the ground, refresshing the dried Ueynes of the
Springes, and renewing them by sheading covert nurrishment intoo them. All
these things do they without any profit coming too themselves thereby.
Therefore let our Reason also (if it disagree not from his Pattern) keep the
same course, that it come not as an hyreling too honest things. Let it be
ashamed too make saleware of any weldoowing. We have the Gods francke and
free. If thou follow thexample of the Gods, thou must do good even to the
thanklesse: For the Son ryseth upon the wicked, and the Seas are open too
Pirates.

T.xxvi. Chapter.
IN this place they demand, whither a good man shall do a thankelesse person
a good turn, knowing him too be thanklesse. Give me leave too say somewhat
by the way, least I be overtaken with this captiouse question. You must
understand, that after the constitutions of the Stoikes, there be two manner
of thanklesse persons. The one of these thanklesse persons, is the Fool. For
a fool is he that is evil; but he that is evil, is void of no vice: Ergo he
is also unthankful. Likewise we say that all evil men are heddie,
couetouse, lecherous, and malicious. Not because all these great vices are
notorious in every evil person: but because they may be, and are in them
though they be vndis^ouered. The other thanklesse person is he that is
commonly said too be naturally inclyned too the vice of unthankfulness. To
that thanklesse person which has the vice of thankfulness, none otherwise
but as he has al other vices, a good man must do good turns. For if he
should withhold from such: he should do good too noman. But affor the other
thanklesse person, too whom all is fish that comes too Net, and which makes
no conscience at all of the matter: he shall no more bestow a good turn upon
him, than upon a Thief. Who will put an unthrift in trust with his Money, or
leave a Pledge in the hand of him that has forsworn many men their Pledges
before? We call him fearful which is foolish and led by naughtipackes that
are beset with all kind of vices without exception. Also he is properly called
fearful by nature, which is frighted at every tryfling noyze. The fool has
all vices, yet is he not naturally given to them all. One is given too
Nigardship, another too Lechery, and another too malapertnesse.

The.xxvii. Chapter.
They do^ (...) therefore, which say to the Stoikes: What then? Is Achilles
^earfull? What then? Is Aristides (who is renowned for Iu^ice) vnius^? Wha^
then? Is Fabius (who (...) the Common weal by his pausyng) rash? What then? I^
Decius afraied of Death? Is Mutius a traitor? Is Camillus a forsaker? We say
not that all vices are after like sort in all men, as they utter themselves
severally in sum men: but we say that an evil man and a fool are not
utterly v^yde of any vice, in so much that we acquit not the bold man of
fear, nor di^charge the prodigal man of nigardlynes. Like as men have all
senses, and yet all men have not eyesight like unto Lyncens Even so all Fools
have not all vices so feerce and head^e, as sum of them have some vices. All
vices are in all men: But yet all utter not them selves in every man. One man
is nat^rally led unto Covetousness, another unto Lechery, and the third
is given too Drunkenness: Or if he be not yet given over too it, at leastwise
he is so framed too it, that his disposition draws him toward it. Therefore
(too the intent I may turn agein too my purpose,) There is no man but he is
unthankful, because there is no man but he is evil: for he has the seeds of
all naughtiness in him. Notwithstanding, properly he is called unthankful,
which is bente too the vice of unthankfulness. Upon such a one shall I
bestow no benefit. For like as he provides ill for his daughter, that
marieth her to a man diffamed and often divorced: and like as he is counted an
ill householder, which makes such a one Steward of his house, as has bin
condemned of false dealyng: and like as he shall make a very mad will,
which leaves such a one too be his sons Gardeine, as is a spoyler of
Fatherless Children: So shall he be tho^ght too bestow his benefits very
unadvisedly, which picketh out thanklesse persons, on whom all that is
bestowed is lost.

The.xxviii. Chapter.
THe Gods (says he) give many things too the thanklesse, whereas they had
prepared them only for goodmen. Nay, they happ^n also too the evil, because
they cannot be parted asunder. And it is more reason too profit even the
badde for the gooddes sake, tha^ too fail the good for the baddes sake. For
according to thine own saying, the Day, the Sun, the intercourse of Winter
and Summer, the middle temperatenesse of Springtyme and Harueste, the Showers
and Waterspringes, and the ordinary blastes of the Winds were devised by the
Gods for all men in general, and they ^ould not bar men from them in
several. The king gives promotions too the worthy, and dole even too the
unworthy. As well the Thief as the perjured person, and the Whoremonger, and
without exception, whosoever is a citezen, takes part of the como^^g^aine.
When there is any thing too be bestowed simply as upon a Citezen and not as
upon a good Citezen; both the good and the badde receive of it indifferently.
God also has granted sum things in common too all mankind, from which no
man is excluded. For it could not be, that one ^el^ same w^nde should be
prosperous too good men, an^ ^ontrary too evil men. Now then, that the sea
should be open for traffike, and that the dominion of mankind should have a
larger scope: it was for the common benefit of all men. Agein, it was not
possible too ^ynde the Rain too any Law in falling, so as it should shun
the grounds of e^ill and wic^^d men. (...) things are set indifferente.
Citees are (...) as well (...) men as for good. The monumentes of (...) are
pu^^^shed by setting forth, and shall comme too the hands even of the
unworthy. Lea^hecrafte ministereth help even too the wicked. Noman
suppresseth the making of wholsomme Salues, for (...) leas^ the vnwoorth^e
should be healed. (...) thou a (...) examination and (...) in the things that
are be^^towed severally as upon the worthy, and no^ in the things that admit
every rasc all without exception. For there is great difference between the
not excludyng of a man, and the choosyng of a man^ The right of the Law is
yielded too all men. Even Murderers inioye the peace, and those that have
taken away other men's goods recover their own. Such as are ready too
quarrel, and too strike every manne in time of peace, are defended from the
enemy with a wall in time of war. Such as have offended most heinously
against the Law, are defended by protection of the Law. Sum things are of
that Nature, that they could not happen too any in several, if they were not
permit^ed too all in general. Therefore there is no cause why thou should
make any talk of these things, wherevnt^ we be called in common. But as for
the thing that must comme too another man by my discretion, I will not bestow
it upon such a one as I know too be a Churl.

The.xxix. Chapter.
Will thou then (says he) neither give ^ Churl coun^ell if he ask thyn^
advice, nor suffer him too draw water, nor show him his way if he be ^ut of
it? Or wilt^ thou do these things, but not be^^owe any thing upon him?

I will make a distinction in this case, or a^ leastwise I will assaye too make
one. A benefit is a behooffull deed, and yet is not every (...) deed ^
Benefit. For sum things are so small as they atteine not too the name of a
benefit. Two things (...) m^kyng of a benefit. First, Greatness: for some
things are far under the reach of that name. Who ever termed (...) a
benefit, too have gotten a shiuer of bread, or a vile Dodkin by beggyng? O^
^oo have ^otten leave too light a Candell at an other man's fire? And (...)
and then; these things (...) in more stead than the greatest things. But the
profit of them bereeueth them of their grace, even when the necessity of the
time makes them needful. Ageine, (which is of greatest force) it must fall
out that I do my good turn for his sake too whom I would have it comme, and
that I deem him worthy of it, and that I give it with a good will, as one
that is glad of his welfare. Of which points there is none at all in these
things that we spoke of. For we bestow them not as upon worthy persons,
but carelessely as small things: and we give them not for the man's sake,
but for manners sake.

The.xxx. Chapter.
I Deny not but I may now and then bestow sum things, even upon the
unworthy, for other men's sakes: like as in sewtes of promotion, sum that
were very dishonest have for their nobility bin preferred before those that
were full of actiuitie: and not without reason. For holy is the memorial of
great vertewes, and it provoke the mo too be good, when the thank of their
well doings dies not with them selves. What thing made Ciceroes son
Consul, but his Father? What thing received Cinna now alate out of the enemies
Camp too the Consulship? What thing admitted Sextus Pompeius and the other
Pompeies likewise, but the greatness of that one manne Cneus Pompeius, who had
been of such reputation, that even his very fall was enough too his
posterity? What made Fabius Persicus (whose mouth even the filthy sort of
men were loathe too kiss) what made him preeste (I say) in mo Colleges than
one, but the Verrucoses and Allobrogikes, and those three hundred which
adventured their whole fam^lie, in defense of the common weal, against the
invasion of the enemy? So much are we beholden unto vertewes, that we
ought too honor them, not only while they be present, but also when they be
gone out of out sight. For like as those persons have delte in such wise, as
they not only did good unto one age, but also left their bene^^tes behind
them: so also are we thankful too the^ in mo ages than one. This man has
begotten noble personages: he is worthy of good turns whatsoever he himself
is, because he has brought forth such. Another is borne of noble aunce^ors:
whatsoever he himself is, let him be shrouded under the shadow of his
forefathers. Like as unclean places be lightened by the brightness of the
Sun: so let unthrifts be ouershined with the brightness of their auncetors.

The.xxxi. Chapter.
MY friend Liberalis, Here I meene too excuse the Gods. For oftentimes we
be wont too say, what providence was it to^ make Arrhideus king? Think
thou that this befell him for his own^ sake? No: it befell him for his father^
and his brothers sakes. Why did God give the souereintie of the world too
Caligula, a man so ouerdesyrous of man's blud, that he made it too comme
sp^uting out before his face, as if he would have received it in his mouth.
Welthen, supposest thou he had this preferment for his own sake? No: it was
for his father Germanicus sake; it was for his graundfather and great
graundfathers sake; and for other of his auncetors sakes before them, who were
as noble as they, though they lived a pryuate life no higher in degr^e than
other me^. What? when thou thyself made Mamercus Scaurus consul, wist thou
not in what filthiness he wallowed with his lasses? For, did he himself
dissemble the matter? Had he any will too seem honest? I will rehearse a
saying of his which I remember is commonly bruted, and which was praised in
his own presence. Using a Ribaudly term, he said too one Pollio Annius, that
he woould do a thing too him which he had lever have done too himself. And
when he saw Pollio begin too knit the brows at him; if I have said amiss
(quod he) too myself and to mine own head be it spoken. This saying of his,
he himself blazed ^br^de. Haste thou admitted a man so ^penly filthy, too the
Mace and the Iudgementseate? Uerely when tho^ thoughte^^ upon the ancient
Scanrus the cheef president of the Se^ate, it grieved thee that his offspring
should be imbaced.

The.xxxii. Chapter.
IT is a likelyhod that the Gods deal the fa^orablier with some men for
their Parents and Aunceters sakes: and with othersome for the towardness that
shall be in their Children and childers children, and in the issue of them a
great while too come. For they know the success of their w^orke, and (...)
thurrowe their (...), is always manifest unto them: b^t it steals upon us
(...) of the covert. The things that we suppos^ too be casual and soodein,
are foreseen and familier unto them. Let these be Kings (say they) though
their Aunceters were none, because they have accounted Justice and ab^t^nencie
too be the highe^^ souereintie, and because they have applied themselves to
the com^nwelth, and not the como^welth to themselves. Let these reign because
some good man was their great grau^dfather, whose mind surmounted his fortune,
who in civil dissension chose rather too be vanquished than too vanquish,
because it was for the pro^ite of the common weal. His goodness could not be
requyted of so long a while. In respect of that man, let this man have
pre-eminence over others: not because he is of knowledge and ability too use
it, but because the other has deserved it for him. For peradventure this man
is of body misshapen, of countenance loathsome, and will be a slander too the
place and persons of his adua^ncement. Now will men find fault with me, and
say I am blind and rash, and ignorant where too bestow the things that are
due too the cheifest and excellentest persons. But I know that my giving of
this thing too the one, is a paying of it too the other too whom it was due
long ago. Whereby (say they) do you know that this man that was such a
shunner of glory when it followed him, that he adventured upon peril with the
same c^untena^ce that others escape it, and that he never made difference
betwe^n^, his own profit and the profit of the common weal? Where is this
man? who is he? how know you him? These reckeninges of such Receites and
Paymentes are stricken out of my books I know what I owe too every man. Too
so^me I make payment after long time, too other some I give aforehand: or else
I deal with them according as occasion and the ability of my substance will
bear.

The.xxxiii. Chapter.
THe^ shall I now, and then bestow (...) ^^^hankfull, but not for his own
(...) (says he) what if you know (...) whither he be thankful or
vntha^^full? Will you tarry till you may know? Or will you not let slip
your time of benefiting? You may ^ary too long. For (as Plato says) it is
hard too conie^ture ^ man's mind. And not too tarry is a point of rashenesse.
Hereunto I answer: That we never tarry for the exact bo^ltyng out of
things, because the trial of truth is far of: but we proceed by that
way, which likelihod of truth leads. This is the path that all duties
trace. So do we sow, so do we sail, so go we on warfare, so Marry we
wives, so bring we up children: and yet the falling out of them all is
uncertain. We adventure upon those things whereof we think there is good
hope. For who ca^ warrane increase too him that sows, a haven too him that
saileth, victory too him that g^eth awarfare, a chaste wife too him tha^
marries, or godly children too the Father? We follow that way which
reason draws, and not that way which truth draws. Stand ling^^ing and
do nothing, till thou be sure of the success, or meddle thou with nothing
till thou be assured of the truth* and then shall tho^ do^ nothing at all,
thy life is at a stay. So long as likelihodes of truth, may move me too
this or that, I will not shrink too do a good turn, to such a one as is
likely too be thankful.

The.xxxiiii. Chapter.
MAny things (say thou) will step in, where through an evil man may
creep up for a good, and a good man be misliked for an evil. For the
apparaunces of things that we trust too, are deceitful.

Who says nay too that? But I find none other thing whereby too direct my
meening. By these footesteppes must I pursewe the truth. Certeiner means I
have none. I will do the best I can too weye them thoroughly, and I will not
be hasty in yielding too them. For it may so happen in battle, that my
hand being misguyded by sum mistaking, may thrust at mine own fellow, and
spare mine enemy as if he were my freende. But it shall sildome happen so, and
not through mine own fault, who am purposed too strike mine ene^ie, and too
defend my countryman. If I may know him too be thanklesse, I will cast away
no benefit upon him. But what if he have krept in upon me and beguyled me?
In this case I am not too blame for my bestowing, because I have done it as too
a thankful person.

If thou have promised one a good turn (says he) and afterward understand
him too be thanklesse, will thou perform it or no? If thou perform it
wittingly: thou offendest: for thou do it too whom thou ought not. And if
thou refuse too do it, thou offendest that way also, because thou performest
not thy promis. Thus your conscience staggereth in this behalf, and so fails
that proud brag of yours, that a wyseman never repents him of his doing,
nor never repealeth that which he has done, nor alters his determinacion.

A wise man alters not his determinacion, so be it that all things continue
as they were at the time of his determining. And therefore he is never touched
with repentance, because at that time no better thing could have bin done than
was done, nor better thing have been determined than was determined.
Nevertheless, his aduenturing upon all things is with exception, if nothing
b^^yde that may be a let. And therefore we^ say that all things fall out well
unto him, and that nothing happens contrary too his opinion: because he
for^^asteth in his mind, that somewhat may step in by the way (...) hinder his
determinacions. It is a fond presumption too assure ones self of Fortune. But a
wiseman bethinketh him of both her parts. He knows what swaye error
bears, how uncertain worldly things be, and how many things may
withstand men's determinations. Too the doutfull and slipperie lo^^e of
things he proceeds with suspense, and too the uncertain fallinges out of
them he proceeds with certain aduisednes. And so his exception, (without
which he determines not any thing, ne enterpryseth any thing) defends him
in this cas^ also.

The.xxxv. Chapter.
I Have promised a good turn, so there happen nothing why I should not
perform it. For what if my Country forbid me to perform that which I have
promised him? What if a Law be made that noman shall do the thing* that I
had promised too do for my friend? Put the (...) I have promised thee my
daughter in marriage, and afterward it falls out that thou art a stranger
borne, and I may not alye myself with a Forreiner. The ^ame thing defends me
which forbids me. Then let me be counted a promis^reaker, then let me
be blamed of inconstancy, if all things continewing the same they were at
any promismaking, I be not full as good as my word. Otherwise, whatsoever is
altered, settes me free too take deliberation new agein, and discharges me
of discredit. I promis you too be your advocate: and afterward it appears
that the same case tends too the prejudice of my Father: I promis to go a
journey with you, and woo^d is brought m^e that the way is laid with Th^eues:
I should have come too some present buisinesse of youres, but my ^^ildes
^^^^nesse ^r my Wives labor keep me at home. If ye will bynd the credit of
him that promises: al things must continewe in the same state as they were at
the promismaking. But what greater alteration can there be, than if I have
found thee an evil and unthankful man? Look what I promised thee as too a
worthy, that will I withhold from thee as from an unworthy; yea and I shall
have good cause too be angry with thee for deceyuing me.

The.xxxvi. Chapter.
Nevertheless, I will look upon the thing that thou claymest, and see how
great it is. The manner of the thing promised shall counsel me. If it be but
a small thing, I will let thee have it, not because thou art worthy, but for
my promis sake. And yet will I not do it as too pleasure thee, but as too
redeem my word, and I will wring myself by the Ear. My rashness in
promising, I will punish with my loss. Lo, (say I too my self) too the intent
it may grieve thee, and that thou may be better aduysed ere ^hou speak
hereafter, I will give thee a Barna^^e as we ^erme it. But if it be too
great a thing, I will not be so costly (as Mecoenas says) as too buy mine
own blame with a ^undred Sesterti^sses. That is CC. (...) of our M^n^ye.
For I will compare the odds of both toogether. It is somewhat worth too be
as good as a man's promis; and agein it is much worth not too be too precyse
in pleasuring an unworthy Person. So great a matter as this must be
considered accordingly. If it be a light thing, we^ may wincke at it. But if
it may be either greatly too my loss, or greatly to my shame; I had lever
blame myself once for denying it, than con^inually for performing it. All the
whole w^ight of the matter re^teth (I say) upon this point: namely, at how
much I am worthy too be amerced for my words. For if it he much, I
shalnot only withhold the thing that I promised rashly; but also I shall call
that bark agein which I have bestowed amiss. He is out of his wits, which
performs for his error sake.

The.xxxvii. Chapter.
PHilip King of Macidonie had a tall soldier, and a stout man of his hands,
whose service he had found profitable in many voyages. He had diverse times
rewarded him with part of the booties for his hardiness. And because he was
a man that had his soul too sell, he evermore kindled his courage with often
pays.

This man suffering shipwreck, was cast a land on the Manor of a certain
Macedonian. Who having word thereof, came running to him out of hand, and
recoueryng life of him, conveyed him home too his said Manor, and laid him
in his own bed, refreshed him ill at ease and half dead, tended him
thirty days at his own charges, recovered him, and at his departure gave him
wherewith too bear his charges by the way. And the other said oftentimes
unto him, I will requite thy kyndenesse, if ever I may comme where I may see
my King and Capitein. He told Philip of his Shipwrecke, but he spoke not a
word of his succor, but by and by desired him too give him a certain man's
Lands. The manne was even he that had bin his host, even he that had taken
him up, and recovered him. Ye may see by the way, how Kings now and the^
(and specially in war) give many things with their eyes shet. One just
manne is not of power enough against so many armed lusts. A man cannot do the
duties of a good man, and of a good Capitein both at once. How shall so many
thousands of insatiable men be satisfied? What should they have, if every man
may keep his own? So did Philip say too himself, when he gave
commandment, for the putting of him in possession of the gooddes that he had
craved. The manne that was violently thrust from his possessions, did not put
up the wrong with silence like a cloyne, and hold him well appaied that he
himself had not bin given away to^: But wrate a letter unto Philip, both
r^ugh and full of liberty. At the receite whereof, Philip was in such a
chafe, that without delay, he comma^^ded Pausanias too restore the first owner
to his goods agein: and too imprint upon that lewd Soldier, that unkind
guest, and that covetous seabeaten wretch, such marks as might witness him
too be an unthankful Gueste. Believe me, he that could find in his heart,
too strip his host out of all that ever he had, and too drive him like one
that had suffered Shipwrecke, too the same shore where he him self had lain;
was worthy too have had those Letters, not Imprinted, but engraven upon his
face. But let us see what measure had bin too be kept in his punishment. In
deed, the thing that he had most wickedly intruded upon, was too be taken
from him ageine. And who would have bin sorry for the punisheme^t of him, whose
fact was so heinous, as no man could have pitied him, had he bin never so
pitiful?

The.xxxviii. Chapter.
Must Philip be as good t^o thee as his promise? Even though there be cause
too the contrary? Though he should do wrong? Though he should do a wicked
deed? Though by that one fact of his, he should bar all Shipwreckes from
the shore? It is no point of lightness for a man to forsake a known and
condemned error. ^ man ought rather too confess plainly and too say, I
miss^^^^ke the ca^e, I am deceived. For it is a point of wilful pride and
folly, too be so heddie as too say, Look what I have once spoken, be what it
be may, I will abide by ^t, and make good my word. It is no dishonestie too
alter a man's mind, ^hen the matter requires. Go too, if Philip had
maintained the S^^ldier i^ possession of those grounds, which he had gotten
by his Shipwr^cke: had he not barred all out cast^s from succor and ^eleef?
Nay (says Philip) yet were it better that thou should bear about these
Letters printed in thy most shameless forheade, for all men to gaze upon,
throughout the bounds of my kingdom. Show thou how sacred a thing the table
of hospitality is. Let every man ^eade this d^eree of mine in thy face, for a
wa^^a^t y^ it shall not be prejudicial for any manne too succor afflicted
persons in his house. So shall this constitution of mine be more auailable,
than if I had ingra^ed it in Brass.

The.xxxix. Chapter.
WHat think you ^hen (says he) by our fou^der Zeno? for whereas he had
promised too lend one five hundred pence, and afterward found him too be
scarce a meet man: Yet contrary too the persuasion of his freedes, he
preserved in trusting him for love of his ^romis. First the case is otherwise
in a credit, than in a benefit. If I lend monny amiss, I may call f^rit
ag^^^e, and I may arre^^ my detter at his day. And if he driue^e^ too ^ewe him,
I shall recou^r part. But asfor a (...) too have ^^^dited him* if the (...) but
five hundred pe^ce. O^e sickness (...) as men are wont too say. It was not
worth the reuok^ng of a man's promis. If I promis a (...) will go though i^
be cold, but not if it (...). I will (...) wedding, for my pr^^is sake, though
I have (...) my mea^e: but not if I have a fit of an (...) will come too give
my wo^rd f^r thee because I have promised* but not if thou would make me
give my word upon uncertainty, or bynd me too the forfe^ture ^f all that I
(...) (...) Lawful. If things must be performed: set the matter in the same
state when thou demaundest, that it was in when I promised, and have with thee.
But it can be no point of lighte^esse too disappoint one, If there happen any
altera^io^ by the way. For why should thou think it strange, that a man
should alter his determinacion, when the state of the pr^miser is altered? Make
me all things too be the same that they were: and I am the same man that I
was. We bynd our selves too appear at a day, and appear not: Yet shalnot the
forfet be taken in all caces. A greater extremity shall excuse the default of
appeeraunce.

The.xl. Chapter.
THE same may serve thee for a full answer too thy said question, whither
kyndnesse be too be requyted in any wise, or whither a good t^rne ^ee euerm^re
too be performed. I am (...) too yield a th^nkfull heart: but as for too
re^^yte, sommetyme mine own vnfortunat^esse, and sommetyme his fortunat^esse
too whom I am indetted, wilnot suffer me. For what recompense can I make too a
King, or too a Prince, or too a great rich man? specially seeing that sum
are of that nature, that they think they have wrong, if they receive a good
turn at a another man's hand: and they are always loading of men with
benefits one upon another. What help have I against such persons, more than
too be willing? For I may not therefore refuze his new benefits, because I
have not requyted the old. I will take it with as good a will as it is offered,
and I will yield myself too my friend as a mou^d of large receyte, fit for him
too work his goodness in. He that is loathe too receive anewe, is sorry that
he has received alredie.

I requite not. What is that too the matter? If I want either occas^on or
ability, that lack is not in me. But he performed unto meeward. I grant
it, and he had both occasion and ability too do it, Whither is he a good
manne, or a bad? With a good manne my case is good enough: with a badde manne I
will not plead. Truly I think not that we ought too be so eagre, as too
requite in post haste, whither men will or no, or too preace upon them when
they refuze. It is no requiting of kyndenesse, too render that thing against a
man's will, which thou receiueddest with his will. Sum men when they be
presented with sum small gift, send another by and by ageine out of season,
and say they owe him naught. This sending of an other out of hand agein, and
this driuyng of one present out of doors with another, is a kind of
rejecting. Sometime I shall not requyte a good turn though I can. When is
that? when I shall more hinder myself by it than profit him. When he shall
feel himself nothing amended by receiving it, and I shall feel myself greatly
impaired by forgoing it. Wherefore, he that hastes too requyte, has not the
heart of a thankful person, but of a good Detter. And too conclude in feawe
words he that desires too discharge himself too hastily, is loath too owe,
and he that is loath too owe is unthankful.

The end of the fourth Book.
The fifth book of Lucius Annaeus Seneca, concerning Benefits.
The first Chapter.
I May well seem too have accomplished my purpose already in my former
books, forasmucheas I have showed after what manner a good turn is too be
done, and after what manner it is too be taken. For those are the ends of
that duty. Whatsoever I tarry upon further, is not of necessity, but for
the wellyking of the matter: which must be followed so far as it leads,
but not so far as it allureth. For there will continually rise some one thing
or other, which may intyce the mind with some sweetness, rather
vnsuperfluouse than necessary. N^uerthelesse since you will have it so: now
that we have dispatched the things that contained the pith: let us also go
foreward in searching the things y^ are as appurtnances too them, but not
percell of them; which whosoever considers diligently, ^eyther does a thing full
worth his labor, nor yet loses his labor. But unto thee my Ebutius
Liberalis, who art of a sing^lar good nature and foreward too benefyting, no
commendacion of it can suffize. Never yet saw I any man that was s^ fre^dly
an esteemer of good turns, were they never so small. Yea and so far is thy
goodness proceeded, that whatsoever good turn is done too any man, thou
accountest it done too thyself. And because noman should repent him of his
weldooiyng, thou art ready too make recompense for the vnthanfull: and thou art
so far from all bragging, and so desirous out of ^and too unburden those
whom thou byndest unto thee, that whatsoever thou bestowest upon any manne,
thou would seem, not too perform it, but too pay it. And therefore the
things that thou bestowest so, return too thee more ple^teously, For commonly
good turns pursue him that d^^h not challendge them. And like as glory
follows more and more after such as flee from it: so the fruit of gooddooing
redoundeth more thankfully, too such as give men lea^e too be thanklesse if
they list. Uerely there is no let in thee, but that such as have received good
turns, may freely call for new: and thou will not refuze too bestow more upon
them: but rather suppressing and dissembling the former, thou addest more and
grea^er. It is the point of a singular good nature and of a very noble mind,
too bear with a thanklesse person, so long till he have made him thankful.
Neither does this reckening de^eyue thee. For Uyces sincke down under
virtues, if a man make not too much haste too hate them over soon.

The.second. Chapter.
THou haste a singular lyking of this saying, as most princely, That it is a
shame too be ouercomed in doing good. Which saying* whither it be true or no,
there is good reason too demand: for it is a ^arre other thing than thou
weenest. It is no shame at all too be overcome in the encounter of honest
things, so thou have a desire too vanquish even when thou art ouercommed, and
cast not away thy weapons. Al men bring not like strength too a good
enterprise, nor like ability, nor like fortune, which alonly orders the
success, even of the best determinations. The will of him that indeuereth
aryght is too be commended, although another man have outgone him by
swiftness of pace. It is not in this case as it is in wagers that are made at
Gaminges, where the victory shows who is best* (...) that in those also,
cha^^ce ^ooth oftentimes prefer the woorser* For Whereas the matter stands
upon freend^inesse, which either party coue^eth too have performed too the
full: Although the one be of better ability, and have sufficient at hand
wherewith too work his will, so as fortune gives him leave too do what he
li^^eth* If the other have as good will as he, though he yield (...) things
than he received, yea or requyteth not all, but is willing (...) requyte, and
is full bent theruntoo with his whole heart: He is no more overcome, than he
that dies fyghting, whom his enemy may ^a^^yer kill, than make him turn
head. That which thou countest shameful, cannot happen too a good man, that is
too say, that he should be ouercomme. For he never shrinketh, he never gives
over, he stands upon his guard too the last day of his life, and he will dye
on his ground that he has taken too defend, acknowledging himself too have
received great things, and showing himself desirous too have rendered the like.

The.iii. Chapter.
THe Lacedaemonians forbade any of theirs too contend in Pancracie or in
buffeting with Bags, where the confession of the party shows who is
overcome. The ronner that comes first too the races end, has outgone his
Marrow in footema^ship, but not in mind. The wrestler that is cast three
times, has lost the wager* but not yielded the wager. Because the
Lacedaemonians made great account of it too have their Countrymen vn^anquished:
they ^arred them from al Wagers wherein the (...) his heart. The case is all one
in good turns. What though a man have received greater things and oftener?
Yet is he not overcome. Peradventure his benefits are ouermatched with
benefits, in respect of the things that are given and received. But if ye
compare the giver with the receyuer, whose mynds also must be con^idered apart
by themselves: neither of them both shall have woonne the vpperhand. For it is
woonte too come too pass, that when sum man is mangled with many wounds,
and his adversary is but lightly hurt: they be say^ too have gone away of
even hand, though the one ^f them may seem too have gone by the worse.

The.iiii. Chapter.
ERGO no man can be ouercom in benefiting. That man knows how too be
beholden, which is willing too requite, and supplieth the thing with his
heart, which he cannot do with his goods. So long as he holds at that
^taye, and so long as he concineweth in this mind, he ratifieth his thankful
heart by signs. What skilles it on whither part mo gifts can be reckened?
Thou art able too give many things, and I am able only too take. Good fortune
is on thy side, and good will is on mine. And yet for all that, I am as able
too match thee, as a feawe naked or light armed men are able too match many
armed too the proof. Therefore no man needs too be overcome in good turns:
because he may be as thankf^ll as he lists. For if it be a shame too be
(...) There be some that are withdrawn without the compass of covetousness,
and are scarsly touched with any worldly desires* whom Fortune her self is not
able to pleasure at all. I must needs be ouercomme by Socrates in benefits.
I must needs be ouercomme by Diogenes, who walked naked through the mids of
the wealth of the Macedonians, trampling the kings riches under his feet.
Might not he then whorthely have seemed, (both too himself and too all others,
whose eyes were not too dim too epsy out the truth) too surmount him that
had all things under him? Truly he was much mightier and richer than
Alexander, who at that time was Lord of all the world. For there was more
that Diogenes would not take, than there was that Alexander was able too give.

T.v. Chapter.
IT is no shame too be ouercomme by such. For neither am I the worse man of
my hands, though ye match me with an enemy that cannot be wounded:
neither has fire the less nature of burning, though it light upon so^me
stuff that cannot be hurt by fire: neither has an edgetoole therefore lost
his property of cutting, because it is put too the clyuing of sum stone that
is ouerhard and of nature invincible against the edge of things. The same
thing do I answer you for a thankful person. It is no shame for him too be
overcome in benefiting, if he be bound too such men, as the greatness of
their state, or the prerogative of their virtue, stops up the way that
benefits should return by. Commonly we be ouercomme by our Parents. For as
long as we deem them grievous unto us, and as long as we want discretion
too consider their benefits: so long do we misselike them. But as soon as age
has gathered sum discretion, and it begins too appear, that they
deserved. Love at our hands for the same things for which we misliked them,
^amely for their admonishementes, for their straightness, and for their
diligent bridlyng of our indiscreet youth: then are we ravished with the love
of them. Feawe have lived so long, as to reap the true fruit of their
children. The rest have felt their children but in burthenwise. Yet is it no
shame too be outgone by a man's Parents in benefiting. And why should it not
be no shame at all, seeing it is no shame too be ouergone by any man? For
some there be too whom we be both matches, and no matches. Matches in
mind, which is the only thing that they seek; and the only thing that we
promise: and no matches in ability, whereby though we be hindered too
requite, yet must we not therefore be ashamed, as though we were quite
ouercomme. It is no shame not too overtake, ^o a man pursewe still.
Oftentimes we be driven too require new benefits, before we have requited
the old. Neither do we therefore leave crauyng, or crave too our shame,
because we run further in debt, being unable too requite. For we would
feign be thankful if we might: But there steppeth in some foreign thing by
the way, which lets us. Yet shall we not be ouermatched in heart, neither
shall it redounde too our shame, too be ouermatched in such things as are
not in our own power.

The.vi. Chapter.
ALexander King of Macedonie was won^ too boaste, that never manne ouermatched
him in benefits. There was no cause, why he being over high minded, should
regard the Macedones* Gre^kes, Cari^ns, Persians, and other Nations, whom he
him self had distressed, and left without force. But least he should think
that his king^om^ (which stretched from the corner of Thrace, too the shore of
the v^knowen sea) had given him that prerogative: Socrates might boaste in that
behalf as well as he, and so might Diogenes too, who ouermatched him. For why
should he not be thought too be ouermatched tha^ day, when he swellyng above
the measure of worldly Pride, saw one whom he could neither give any thing
too, nor take any thing from: King Archelaus requested Socrates to comme unto
him: and it was reported that Socrates should answer, he was loath too comme
too such a one, as at whose hands he should receive freendshippes, seeing he
could not requite the like ageine. For it was in Socrates power not too
receive: and secondly, he him self began first to show freendshippe. For he
came at his request, and gave him that thing, which he doutlesse could never
give Socrates ageine. For whereas Archelaus should give Gold and Silver: he
was too receive the contempt of Gold and Silver. Could not Socrates then have
requited the kyndnesse of Archelaus? What thing could he have received so
great as he had given, if he had showed him the knowledge of life and death,
and thoroughly taught him the ends of the^ both? Or if he had made the King
acquainted with the nature of things, who went astraye in the open light, and
was so ignorant, that on a day when the Sun was eclipsed he shet in his
Court gates, and polled his Sons head, (as men are wont too do in
mourning and adversity): How great a benefit had it bin, if he had drawn
him out of his lurking hole, and willed him too pluck up a good heart, saying?
This is no failyng of the Sun, but a meeting of the two Planettes, wherein
the Moon running the lower way, has put her Circle directly under the Sun,
and hidden him by setting her self between him and us. Sometime hidyng a small
part of him, if she cote him lightly in her passing by: and sometime coueryng
more, if she bear more fully upon him: and sometime hidyng him whole out of
sight, if she got full underneath him, betwixt him and the earth. But anon
the swiftness of these Planettes will carry them a sunder, one onewaye and
another another way: anon the earth shall recover her wonted light; and this
order shall continue for ever. They have their days certain and foretold,
wherein the Sun is hindered too show forth the fullness of his rays, by
reason of the coming in of the Moon. Tarry awhile, and he will forsake as it
were this cloudinesse, and strait ways he shall be rid of all impedimen^es, and
he will give forth his wonted light freely agein. Could not Socrates have done
as much for Archelaus, as Archelaus should have done for him? What if he had
taught him how too reign? As little as you make of it, it had bin so great a
benefi^e, as he could have given Socrates none like it. Wherefore then did
Socrates say so? Being a pleasant conceited manne, and wont too utter his
mind in figurative speeches, and a Iester with all men (but specially with
great men) he thought rather too say him nay cunningly, than stoutly and
proudly. He said he would receive no benefits at such a man's hand, as he
could not render him the like. Perchance he feared least he might have bin
compelled too take things that he would not. Sum will say if he would not,
he might have refuzed. But then should he have provoked the kings displeasure,
who was hautie, and would have all things highly esteemed which came from
him. It is all one with kings, whither you will give them nothing, or take
nothing of them. Either of the gainsaiynges are too them alike. And too a
proud Prince, it is a greater corzie too be dis dayned, than not too be
feared. Will thou know what Socrates was so loath of? He whose freeness a
free City could not away with, was loath too go into wilful bondage.

The.vii. Chapter.
AS I suppose, we have sufficiently discussed this point, whither it be a
shame too be ouercomme in benefiting. Which question whosoever demands, knows
that men are not wont too bestow benefytes upon themselves. For it had bin
manifest, that it is no shame for a man too be vanquished of himself.
Notwithstanding, among sum Stoikes it is also debated, whither a man can
benefit himself, and whither he ought too requyte himself with thankfulness.
The causes why this seemed a question too be moved, were these. We are wont
too say, I may thank myself, I can complain of noman but my self, I am
angry with myself, I will punish myself, and I hate myself. And many such
other things do we say* wherein ^che man speaks of himself as of another.
If I can hurt myself (says he) why can I not also do myself a good turn?
Ageine, why should not the things be called benefits when I bestow them
upon myself, which should be called so if I bestowed them upon anotherman?
why should I not be beeholding too myself for giving too myself, as well as
be beholding too anotherman for receiving at his hand? why should I be
unthankful too myself, which is no less shame than too be nigardly too
myself, or than too be hard and cruel too mysef, or to be careless of
myself. A Bawd is defamed as well for his own body as for another. Uerely a
Flatterer and a soother of other men's words, and such a one as is ready too
justify untruths, is blameworthie. And no less is he too be blamed, which
stands in his own conceyt, and has an ouerweening of himself, and (as a man
might term him) is a selfflatterer. Uices are hateful, not only when they
prejudice others, but also when they redound unto men's own selves. Whom will
ye more commend, than him that ouermaystereth himself, and has himself at his
own commandment? It is easyer too ouerrule the barbarous nations that cannot
abide too have their heads under another man's girdle, than too bridle a
man's own affections, and too make obedient the^ too himself. Plato (says
he) thanketh Socrates for that which he learned at his hand: and why should not
Socrates thank himself for teaching himself? Marcus Cato says: That which
thou want, borowe of thyself. And if I can lend too myself, why should I
not give too myself? Innumerable are the things wherein custom deuydeth us.
We be wont too say let me alone, I will talk with myself, and I will
twitch myself by the Ear. If these things be true: then like as a man may
be angry with himself: so may he also thank himself. Like as he may rebuke
himself, so may he also praise himself. Like as he may hinder himself, so may
he also further himself. For an ill turn and a good turn are contraries. If
we may say, he ^ath done himself harm: we may also say he has done
him^^lf good. By nature (say thou) he has done it. Nature requires that a man should first owe before he can requyte. A Detter is not without a
Creditor, no more than a huseband is without a wife, or a father without a
child.

The.viii. Chapter.
TOO the intent there may be a receyuer, there must first be a giver. Too
convey out of the left hand intoo the right, is neither giving nor receiving.
Like as noman caryeth himself although he move and remove his body from place
too place: Like as noman is counted his own Advocate, though he have pleaded
his own case: Like as noman settes up an Image too himself as his own
founder: and like as a sick man demands not reward of himself for
recovering himself by his own cunning: So in all other matters, although a man
have done never so well, yet can he not requyte his own kyndnesse, because he
has not toward whom too requyte it. But admit that it be a bestowing of a
good turn, when a man is both the giver and receyuer thereof himself. And
admit it be a receiving of a good turn, when he is both the taker and the
giver. The return (as men term it) is made at his own door, and it passes
away forthwith, as a name of dalyance. For he that gives is none other than
he that receives, but they be both one. This word Owe has no place, but
between two several parties. How then continues not he still in one, which
discharges himself by bynding himself? Even as in a Bowl or a Ball nothing is
nethermost, nothing is uppermost, nothing last, nor nothing first, because the
order of it is shifted by moving, so as the things go before that came
behind, and the things come up that went down, and all things, howsoever
they go, return intoo one: even so must thou think it falls out in man.
Change thou him intoo neuerso many things, and yet is he the same party
still. He has beaten himself: he has no man too sewe for doing him wrong.
He has tied or shut up himself: he can have no action of false imprisonment.
He has done himself a good turn: he requyted it even with the doing of it.
The nature of the thing cannot be said too have forgone aught, because that
whatsoever is plucked from it, returns intoo it agein: neither can any thing
be lost, which has not whereoutof too pass, but wyndeth back agein intoo
whence it came. What likeness (says he) has this example too the question
propounded? I will tell thee. Put the case thou be unthankful too thyself:
yet is not this good turn lost: for the bestower of it has it still. Put the
case thou will not rec^iue it: thou have it with thee before it be delivered
thee. Thou can not forgo aught: for whatsoever is taken from thee, is gotten
too thee. The Wheel is turned within ^hyself: In ta^ing, thou gi^est, and in
giving, thou take.

The.ix. Chapter.
A Man (says he) must do himsef a good turn, ergo he must also requyte
it. The Antecedent is false, whereupon the consequent hangs. For noman does
good turns too himself: but he follows his own Nature, which has framed
him to^ a certain selfloue, by means wh^rof he has a singular regard too
eschew things hurtful, and too seek after things that may do him good.
Therefore, neither is he liberal that gives too himself, nor merciful that
forgiueth himself, nor pitiful that reweth his own miseries. That which were
liberality, Mercy, and Pity, if it were done too another man: is but
nature, being done too a man's self.

A good turn is a free thing: but too do good too ones self, is of natural
necessity. The more good turns a man does, the more (...) is he. But who was
ever praised for helping himself or for defending himself from robbers? Noman
bestows a benefit upon himself, no more than he bestows interteinement
upon himself. Noman gives too himself, no more than he lends too himself. If
a man befreend himself: he does it always and without ceassing. He cannot keep
a just reckening of his freendships: and how shall he then requyte them, since
that by his requyring, he benefiteth himself ageine? for how should a man
discern, whither he do himself a good turn or requyte one, seeing the matter
is wrought all in one person? I have delivered myself out of some danger:
have I now bestowed a benefit upon myself? I deliver myself ageine from
danger: now whither do I bestow or requyte? Moreover, although I should
grant thee the first part: namely that we bestow benefits upon our selves:
Yet will I not grant thee that which follows. For althouge we bestow, yet
do we not owe. Whyso? Because we receive ageine out of hand. In benefiting,
it behooves us, first too receive, then too owe, and afterward too requyte. But
here is no time of owing, inasmuche as we receive ageine without taryaunce.
There is no giving, but too another man: there is no requyring, but too
anotherman. This thing which so oftentimes requires two properties, is not
possible too be done still in one.

The.x. Chapter.
TOO have done a thing too a man's behoof, is a benefit. Yea, so the word
do, have respect too an other man. For wilnot men think him too he out of
his wits, that shall say he has sold a thing too himself? For selling is an
alienatio of a thing that is a man's own, and a conueying over of his right
in the same too another man. And like as too sell, so also too give, is too
pass away a thing from thyself, and too make anotherman owner of that which
was thine before. Now if benefiting be of the same forte: then can (...)
benefit himsef, because noman can give aught to himself. For then should two
contraries cloze in one; so as giving and taking should be al one thing. But
there is great difference betwixt giving and taking. And good cause why:
considering how those words are matched fullbutte one ageinste another. I
said a little before, how some words have relation too otherfolkes, and are of
such nature, that the whole signification of them departs from ourselves. I
am a brother, howbeeit too anotherman: for noman is brother too himself. I am a
peer; but too anotherman: for noman is peer too himself. The thing that is
compared, is not understood without his match: and the thing that is cuppled
is not without a fellow. So also, the thing that is given, is not without a
receyuer: neither is a Benefit without another too be benefited by it. The
same thing appears by the very Term wherein this benefiting is contained.
But noman benefiteth himself, no more than he favors himself or takes part
with himself. We may prosecute this matter yet longer and with mo examples.
And why not? since a benefit is to be counted in the number of those things
which require a second party. Some things, though they be honest, very
goodly, and right excellently virtuous: yet have they not their effect, but in
a copartner. Faithfulness is commended and honored for one of the greatest
things belonging too mankind. And yet, is any man said too have bin faithful
or to have kept promis with himsef?

The.xi. Chapter.
NOw comme I too the last part. He that requytes a good turn, must forgo
sommewhat, like as he does that pays monnye. But he forgoeth nothing,
which rendereth too himself: No More than he gayneth, which receives of
himself, Benefyting, and Requyting must pass too and fro: but within one man
there is no intercourse. He that requiseth most pleasure the party that had
pleasured him before. He that requyteth too himself, whom pleasureth he?
Himself. But what man looks not for the requital of a benefit onewhere, and
for the benefit itself anotherwhere? He that requit^th too himself, pleasureth
himself. And where was there ever so rank a carle that would not do that? Yea
rather, who has not played the Carle, too do that? If we may thank our
selves (says he), we may also requyte kyndnesse to our selves. We say, I
thank myself that I took not such a woman too wife, and that I entered no
fellowship with such a man. In so saying we praise ourselves, and for the
better allowing of our fact, we abuse the words of thanksgiving. That is a
benefit, which is at liberty not too be received, even when it is in
performing: But he that bestowed a benefit upon himself cannot but receive
his own profer: Ergo it is no benefit. A benefit is received at one time,
and requyted at another. And in benefiting, the thing that is most allowable,
the thing that is most commendable, is that a man forgets his own profit
too do anotherman good, and takes from himself to give to anotherman. But so
does not he that benefiteth himself. Benefiting is a felowlike thing: it
purchases favor: it makes men beholden. But in giving too a man's self there
is no fellowship at all, there is nomans favor purchased, it makes noman
beholding, it incorageth noman too say, This man deserves too be much made
of, he has done such a man a good turn, and he will do me one too. That is
a benefit, which a man gives not for his own sake, but for the parties sake
to whom he gives it. But he that does himself a good turn, does it for
his own sake: Ergo it is no benefit.

The.xii. Chapter.
Seems it now unto thee, too be untrue which I said at the beginning? Thou
say I am quyte gone from doing that which is worth my labor, or rather
that I lose all my labor in good sadness. Give me leave a little, and thou
shall have yet better cause too say so, when I shall have brought thee too such
(...)* as when thou art escaped out of them, thou shall have gained no more by
it, but that thou may wynd thee out of such narrow points, as thou need
not too have come intoo, except thou had listed. For too what purpose is it
too buzie a mannesself, in untying the knottes which he himself made too
untie? But like as some are so twisted toogither for pleasure and pastyme. as
an unskillful body shall hardly vnknitte them: and yet he that twisted them
vndooeth them with ease, because he knows the braydes and lettes of them,
which notwithstanding have some pleasure in them, (for they try ye sharpnes
of men's wits, and make them too take heed): Even so, these things which
seem su^tle and captiouse, do rid men's minds from Security, Dullness, and
Sloth: and therefore the feeld wherein they walk, must now and then he strewed
with such things, and some harshnesse and roughness must erewhyles be cast
in their way, so as they may but even ^reepe out, and take the better heed
where they set their foot. It is said, that noman is unthankful: and that is
gathered thus. A benefit is that which profits: but as you Stoikes uphold,
noman can profit an evil man: Ergo an unthankful man takes no benefit: and
so consequently he is not unthankful. Age in, a benefit is an honest and
allowable thing: but an honest and allowable thing cannot be fastened upon an
evil man: neither then can a benefit be fastened upon an evil man. But, if
he cannot receive it, then ought he not too requyte it: and so is he not
unthankful. On the other sade, (as you say) a good man does althinges aright:
But if he do all things aright, then can he not be unthankful: Ergo
inasmuche as a good man requires, and an evil man takes not: it follows
that there is neither good man nor evil man unthankful: and so, unthankful
and thanklesse are but wast terms among men, and utterly without signification.

There is but one good thing among us, and that is honesty. This cannot light
upon an evil man. For he ceasseth too be evil, as soon as virtue enters
into him. But as long as he is evil, noman can fasten a good turn upon him,
because good things and evil things are at discord among themselves, and
cannot cloze in one. The same also is the reason why noman can profit him,
because that whatsoever comes too him, he marreth it by abusing it. For like
as the stomach that is infected with sickness and accloyed with choler,
changes all the meats that it receives, and turns all food intoo the
nurrishment of his disease: Even so a blinded mind, whatsoever you commit unto
it, makes it a burden, a mischeef, and an occasion of misery unto itself.
But the greater prosperity and wealth that evil men have, the more is their
excess of outrage: and they feel themselves so much the less, as they have
lighted intoo greater matter wherein too flote: Ergo nothing can come too evil
men, which should do them good: or rather, nothing can come at them that
shall not do them hurt. For whatsoever befalles them, they change it into
their own nature: and the things that of themselves should be very goodly
and profitable if they were bestowed upon a good man, are unto them right
noisome. Therefore, neither can they do a good turn (for noman can do that
which is not in him too do) neither have they any will too do good.

The.xiii. Chapter.
WEll, though these things were as you say; Yet may an evil man receive
things like unto benefits, for the not requyting whereof he shall be
unthankful. There be goods of the mind, goods of the body, and goods of
fortune. The goods of the mind are barred from a fool and an evil man. But
he is admitted too the goods of fortune, and he is able too receive them, and
bound too requite them: and if he requyte not, he is unthankful. And this is
not our constitution only. For the Peripatetikes (who give very large and
wide scope too man's felicity) say that the smaller sort of benefits do
befall unto evil men also. Now he that requyteth not those, is unthankful. But
we like not that those things should be called benefits, whereby the mind
fares not the better. Howbeeit we deny not that they be commodities: and
we deny not but they be too be coueted. These be the things that an evil
man may both give too a good man and take of a good man: as monnye raiment,
promotions, and life. Which if he requite not, he falls into ye blame of an
unthankful person.

But how can you call him unthankful, for not requiting of that which you say
is no benefit?

Sum things, although they be not the true things themselves: Yet are
comprehended under the same term, by reason of their likeness unto them. So
term we Scalop shelles though they be made of silver or gold. So term we
him unlearned, not only which is altoogither without lerning, but also which
has not atteyned too sum deep knowledge. So a man that has seen one
thinclothed and altoo ragged, says he has seen a naked man. After the same
manner, these things are no benefits, but yet they bear the countenance of
benefits.

Then like as these be as it were benefits, and not benefytes in deed: so is
he as it were unthankful, and not unthankful in deed.

That is false, because that as well he that receives them as he that gives
them, do both account them as benefits.

And therefore as much is he unthankful, which deceives under pretense of
taking a true benefit: as he is poysoner which gives a man Poyzon, instead
of good Iewce.

The.xiiii. Chapter.
CLeanthes deals yet more rigorously. Although (says he) it be no
benefit, which he receives: yet is he unthankful, because he would not have
requited, though it had bin one. So also is a man a Murderer, before he have
steyned his hands: because he is alredie armed, and fully purposed too rob and
flea. The very deed does put his naughtines in execution, and discloze it,
but not begin it. The thing that he received, was not a good turn, but was so
termed. Churchtraytors are punished though none of them can lay hand upon the
Gods.

But how (says he) can any body be unthankful toward an evil man, seeing
that a benefit cannot be fastened upon an evil man? Uerely in this respect,
that he has received of him, sum of the things that go for good among the
v^skilfull: and therefore evil though he be, yet must he be thankful
toward him with sum like thing: and seeing he took them for good, he must
requite them for good, whatsoever they be. They are said too have borrowed
monnye, both he that owes gold, and also he that owes Lether coined with the
common stamp, such as was among the Lacedaemonians, because it serves the
turn of current monnye. Look in what kind of thing thou art bound, in the
same kind discharge thou thy credit.

The.xv. Chapter.
WHat thing benefits be, and whither the majesty of that noble name ought
too be plucked down too this vile and bace geere, it skilles not you, it is
demanded for other folks sakes. Settle you your minds upon the outward
show of the truth, and when ye speak of honesty, whatsoever it be that is
bruted by the name of honest, that hold you your selves unto.

As by you (says he) noman is thanklesse: so ageine by you all men are
thanklesse. For you hold opinion that all evil men are fools: and he that
has one vice has all vices: and so are all men fools forasmuch as all are
evil: Ergo all men are unthankful. Now what then? does not the reproach
light universally upon all mankind? Is it not a common complaint, that good
turns are lost, and that there be very feaue, which requite not evil too
such as have deserved well? There is no cause why ye should think this too
be the grudge of us only: and that we alone do think all things are enill
and starkenaught that fall not out even and just with the Rule of right.
Behold, I wot not what a voice, (not sent out of the house of the
Philosophers, but out of the mids of the common mu^titude) condemning whole
Peoples and Nations, kryeth out.

The Guest may scarsly trust his host, nor yet the host his Guest:
Nor fathers well their soninlawes. Yea seeldome times does rest
Between borne brothers such accord as brothers ought to have.
The man woold bring his wife, the wife her husband too his grave.
This is more than I spoke of. Benefits are turned intoo Banes, and the blud
is not spared of those for who^ blud ought too be spent. We persecute
benefits with Sword and poisoning. Too rebel against a man's own Country,
and too oppress it with her own Sword, is now reputed for puissance and
worthiness. He that has not mounted above the Common weal, thinks himself
too stand very lowelike an underling. The armies received of her, are turned
too her confusion, and it is become a Capteinly exhortation too say: Sirs,
fight against your Wines, fight against your Children, make assault upon your
own Churches, your houses, and your Gods. You that ought not too have
entered into the City, (...) not even: to a triumph, without the leave of the
Senate: and (...) that o^ght too have hi^d your Courts without the Walls,
even when you bring home your armies with victory: now march ye intoo the
City with Banners displayed, after you have murdered your own Countrymen,
and bathed your selves in the blud of your own Kinsmen. Let liberty be clean
driven ou^ among Soul^^^^^ Ensigns, and let that people which is the
Conque^^^^ and (...) of Nations, be now at length beseeged within her own
Walls, and be put in fear of her own Baners after she has chaced away al
outward Wars, and suppressed all foreign fear.

The.xvi. Chapter.
Unkind was Coriolane, who becoming pitiful too late, laid away Weapon after
repentance of his wickedness, howbeit in the mids of Civil slaughter.
Unkynde was Cateline, who thought it but a small matter too conquer his own
Country, except he might lay it wast, and bring in the Armies of Sauoy and
Delphynois, and call in the enemies from beyond the Alps, too wreake their old
and native hatred upon the City, so as the Roman Capteines might pay the
yeeremyndes de we of long time too the Tumbes of the Galls. Unkind was Caius
Marius, who being called from the Gallis^op too the Consulship, could not feel
his displeasure sufficiently revenged, nor himself well settled in his former
state, till he had ouermatched all former slaughters with the slaughter of the
Cimbrians, and not only blown up a Trumpet, but also bin himself as a Trumpet
too the banishment and Civil flaughter of his Countrymen. Unkynd was Lucius
Sylla, in healing his Country with ^orer remedies than the perilles themselves
were. Who having gone upon man's blud from the Tower of Prenest too the Gate
Collina, (...) was of ripe years: rendered this thancke too the Common weal,
that he put others in possession of it also, as though he might have made his
own pre-eminence the less enuyed, by making the thing lawful for many men,
which was lawful for many men, which was lawful for noman. For while he
sought extraordinary gouernementes: while he distributed Provinces to take
the choice of them to himself: while he divided the common weal too the
Threemen, so as two parts of it remained in his own House: he brought the
People of Rome too fuche an afterdeele, as they could not continue in safety,
but by the benefit of bondage. Unkind was the very enemy and vanquisher of
Pompei, Caius Julius Caesar: who, for all his tendering of the Common weal, and
for all his fawning upon the Comonaltie, led the Wars about from France and
Germany intoo the City, and pitched his Camp in the Circle of Flaminius,
nearer than Porsenna had done. In deed, right did temper the rigor of his
victory, and he performed his ordinary saying, which was that he slew noman
but if he were in Arms. What fault had he then? Whereas the residue used their
weapons more bluddily, yet at length they were satisfied, and laid them down
agein. But this man did soon put up his Sword, but he never laid it away.
Unthankful was Antodie too his own preferrer, in that he auowed him too he
lawfully slain, and admitted his murderers too Provinces and government. And
when he had torn his Country with proscriptions, invasions, and battelles:
after all these mischeeues, he gave it over intoo bondage: and that not unto
Roman Kings, but after such a sort, as the same Common weal which had
fully restored right liberty, and freedom, too the Achayas, Rhodians and
many other noble Cities, should it self pay tribute too gelded men.

The.xvii. Chapter.
Time would fail me if I should reckon up all that have bin unthankful, even
with the utter destruction of their countries. And as endless a matter would
it be, too run over the excellent and weldispozed men, too whom the Common we
ale itself has bin unthankful: and ^oo show how she has oftentimes
off^^ded no less against others, than others have offended against her.

It ba^ished Camillus, it sent Scipio out of the way, and it outlawed Cicero
even after he ^ad suppressed Catiline, beating down his house spoiling his
goods, and doing whatsoever Catiline himself would have done too him if he
had gotten the victory. Rutilius was rewarded for his innocence, too go hyde
his head in Asia. The people of Rome said Cato nay of the Pretorship, and
utterly denied him the consulship. We be commonly unthankful all of us. Let
every man ask his own conscience. Each man complaynes of others
unthankfulness. But it could not fall out that all should complain, unless
there were cause too complain of all. Are all men then but only unthankful?
Yis, they be also all couetouse, all maliciouse, and all fearful, specially
those that seem too be most hardy. Yea I say further, they be all
ambitiouse, and all ungodly. But there is no cause why ye should be angry
with them: rather bear with the^, for they be all out of their wits. I
wilnot call thee back too vncerteinties, I prey thee see how unthankful youth
is. Who is he, (be he never so innocent, meek, and kyndharted,) that does
not wish, wayt, and long for his fathers death? Where is there one among a
number, that would be loath his wife should dye, and not rather, makes
reckening upon her death, be she never so good a wife? I pray you, what man
being entangled in the Law, and rid out of it by sum other man's help,
will bear so great a benefit in mind, any longer than till the next matter
that commes may put it out of his head? This we be sure of: there is noman
dies without gurdging: there is noman that at his last hour dares say, Now
welcome death which ends the race
That fortune gave me here too trace.
Who departs not unwillingly? who departs not sighing* But it is the point
of an unthankful person, not too be contented with the time forepast.
Always the days of a man's life wilbee few, if he fall too numbering them.
Consider how the sou^^ein good consists not in time. How long or short so
ever thy time be, take it in good worth. The prolonging of thy deaths day
avails thee nothing too blissednesse, because that by co^tinewance the life
is not made the blisfuller but the longer. How much better were it, too be
thankful for the pleasures that a man has received, and not too stand
counting of other men's years, but too esteem his own gently, and too take
them for a vauntage? This has God voutsaued upon me, this is enough, he
could have given me more, but even this also is his benefit. Let us be
thankful too the Gods, thankful too men, thankful too such as have
bes^owed aught upon us, and thankful too those also which have done good
too any of ours.

The.xviii. Chapter.
THou byndest me out of measure (say thou) when thou say Ours. Therefore
set me sum ^ad. By your saying, he that does a good turn too the child,
does it also too the father. First I would have thee too set me sum bound:
and afterward too tell me, if a good turn be done too the father* (...)
the same extend also too the brother too the uncle, too (...) father, too the
wife, and too the father inlawe? Tell (...) I may stop, and how far I shall
pursew thee pedigree of persons? If I till thy Land for thee, I shall do
thee a good turn: and if I quench thy house that is on a (...) in reparacions
that it der^^ not, shall (...) If thou save ^ut my slave, I shall think myself
(...) too thee: and wilt not thou count it a ^enefite if I (...)

The.xix. Chapter.
TH^^ (...) unlike examples. For he that (...), benefiteth (...) my Land; but
me. And he that shoreth up my house that it fall not, does the pleasure too
me: for the house i^self is senseless. I am his d^tter for it, or other wise
he has none. Also he that (...) it not too deserve well of my ground, but of
me. The same do I say of my Bondsman, for he is a part of my chatteiles, and
is saved for me, and therefore I am detter for him. But my son is himself
capable of a good turn. Therefore it is he that receives it, and I am glad of
his we^speeding. I am touched with him, ^ut not bound with him.

Well then I would fay^e that thou which think not thyself bound, should
answer me; whither the health, welfare, and prosperity of the so^^e perteyne
no^ ^oo the father? He shall be the happyer if he have his son safe, and the
vnhappyer if he forgo him. Now then, if by (...) means he be made the more
happier, and delivered from the danger of extreme misery; receives he no
benefit?

No, says he. For sum things are bestowed only upon othermen, though they
reach even unto us. And therefore the thing is too be demanded at nomannes
hand but his that received it: like as (...) is dema^^ded of the party too
whom it was lent, although the same did in sum wise come too my hands also.
There is no benefit^ whose commodity extends not too them that be next
hand, yea and now and then also too such as be furtherof. Our (...) is not,
too whom the good turn is passed over from him (...) it bestowed upon him:
but where (...) bestowed (...) must ^eeke the thanks at the party himself,
and at the very wells head.

Go too the^ I pray thee, when thou acknowledgest that I have given thee thy
son, and tha^ if he ^ad (...) had (...) life of (...) such time as I saved
thy son, thou fellest (...), thou paydest thy (...) unto the Gods, as if
thou had bin saved thyself, and thou did cast forth such words as
these: It is all (...) me: you have saved two, and (...) most of (...) thou
so, if thou received no good (...)?

Because that if my son (...), I will pay his creditor; but not as dewtie of
mine own. And if my son be taken in aduowtrie, I wilbee ashamed of it, but
yet shalnot I therefore be the adulterer. I say I am bound too the for my
son: not because I am so in deed, but because I am contented too offer
myself too be thy detter of mine own free will. But thou alledgest, that by
thy sa^^ing of my son, I received great pleasure and commodity, and escaped
the grievous ^orzie of being chyldlesse. The question is not now, whether you
have pleasured me, but whither you have benefited me. For a beast, or a
S^one, or an her^e may pleasure us; but yet they benefit us not: for a
benefit cannot be bestowed, but by a thing that is indewed with will. Now
then, thy will was not too bestow upon the father, but upon the son, and
it may be, that thou knew not the father. Therefore, when thou say, I
have benefited the father by my saving of his Son: say thus also on the
otherside, I have benefited one that I never kne^ nor never thought of. Besides
this, now and then it falls out, that a man may hate the father and yet save
the son; and will thou seem too have benefited him, too whom thou wart an
enemy at the time of the deed doing? But too the intent too set aside this
alter^ation of intertalke, and too answer like a counseler in Law: the mind
of the be^ower must be considered. Look on whom his will was too bestow his
good turn, on him he bestowed it. If he did it for the fathers ^ake, the
father received a benefit. Otherwise, the father is not bound by the benefit
bestowed upon his son, although he have fruition ofit. Notwithstanding, if
opportunity serve him, he h^mself also will do (...) for him: not as of
(...), but as taking occasion too begin. The benefit is not (...) ^ee claymed
at the fathers hand. If he do any thing of courtesy for his sons sake, he
is just, but not thankful. For it were an infinite matter, if the benefit
that I bestow upon the son, were (...) his father, and his (...), and his
(...), and his (...) v^cle, and his (...), and his (...), and his friends, and
his servants, (...) country.

Where then beg^^neth a benefit too stay? For now comes in the inso^^ble
kreeper, which is hard too restreyne, because it steals up by inchmeate, and
never leaves kreeping. Men are wont too put such a ^ace as this. Two
brothers are at variance. If I save the one of them: whither do I be^efite the
other, who wilbee s^rie that his brother perished not? No dout but that like as
it is no benefit if I do a man good against my will: so is it a benefit too
do an unwilling man a good turn against his will.

T.xx. Chapter.
TErmest thou it a good turn (says he) wherewith a man is offended and
grieved? ma^ie good turns have a sorrowful and sower look, as the cut^ing and
searing of a man too heal him, and the ^rydling of men by imprisonment. A man
(...) not look whither one be so^^ear the receiving of a good turn; but
whither he have cause too be glad. A piece of Coyneis not the worse because
an Alient and one tha^ kn^wes not the common stamp refu^^^h it. He both ha^eth
the good turn, and ^^iceyueth it. Now if it do him good, and that the
inte^^^^ the bestower was too do him good: it makes no matter th^^gh a man
receive the good turn with an evil will. Gotoo, turn this the contrary
way. A man hates his Br^ther, whom it were for his behoof too have still
^^yue. Him (...) I slay. It is no be^efite, al^ecit that he take it for one,
and he glad of it. Most trayter ou^^y does he hurt, which gets thanks
(...) doing harm.

I understand you. Because a thing does good, therefore it is a benefit: and
if it do harm, it is therefore no benefit.

Behold I will bring you a thing that shall do neither good nor hame, and yet
it shall be a benefit. I find a man's father, dead in wilderuesse, and I burye
his body. I have done the deadman no good, (for what had it skilled him after
what manner he had bin consumed?) nor yet too his son: for what commodity had
he thereby?

I will tell thee what the Son got. By me he performed a reverend and
necessary duty. I have done that thing for his father, which he himself
both would and should have done. Now, if I did it not for common pity and
manners sake only, as I might have buried any other dead man's body: but knew
the carkesse, and thought upon the Son at the same time, and did it for his
sake: then is it a Benefit. But if I cast earth upon an unknown person: I
have no detter for this courtesy, because it was but a point of Publik
humanity.

Some man will say why make you such a question on who^ you bestow your
benefit, as though you meant too claim it ageine at some time or other?

There are that think it ought never too be claymed ageine, and they allege
these causes. He that is unworthy wilnot render though it be claymed: and a
worthy person will render of his own accord. Moreover if thou have
bestowed upon a good man, take heed thou do him not wrong in calling upon
him, as though he would not have requyted of his own free will. And if thou
have bestowed upon an evil man, be sorry for thy so dooyng: but disgrace not
thy benefit with thine own words, by making it a Det. Furthermore, look,
what the Law of benefiting has not commanded to be claymed, that has it
forbidden too be claymed.

These be but words. For as long as nothing pincheth me, and as long as
misfortune compelles me not: I will rather let my good turn slip, than
chalendge it. But if my Children stand in hazard of their life, if my wife be
brought in peril, if the welfare and liberty of my Count^^e send me too
such a place as I am loath too comme at: I will streyne courtesy with my
shame, and I will show myself too have done all that ever I could do, that I
might not have needed the help of a Churl. In fine, the necessity of
receiving a good turn, shall overcome the shame of clayming it. Agein when I
bestow a ben^fite upon a good man, I bestow it in such wise as I will never
call for it ageine, unless necessity enforce me. But the Law (says he) in
not giving leave too claim, forbids thee too claim.

The.xxi. Chapter.
Many things have neither Law, nor Action. But customme of man's life, which
is of more force than all Law, brings them in. No Law forbids a man too
bewraye his friends secrets, nor byndeth a man too keep promis with his foe.
Yea what Law byndeth us too be just of our word too any man? None. Yet will
I find fault with him that shall bewray my talk had with him in secret, and I
wilbee discontented with him that shall give me his faith and not keep it.

By this means (says he) of a benefit thou make a Det.

No, not so. For I do not exact it, but request it ageine, no nor request it
agein, but warn him of it. For utter necessity may drive me so far, that I
shall come unto him. Asfor him that is so churlish, that a warning will not
suffyze him, but I must be feign too strive with him: I will pass him over,
and not make so much account of him, as too force him too be thankful. For
likewise as there be some Detters whom a Creditour wilnot call upon, because he
knows they have wasted al away, and it were but farther loss too meddle with
them, forasmuchas nothing can make them ashamed: even so also will I pass over
some that are openly and wilfully thanklesse, neither will I claim a good
turn at any man's hand, save where I may receive it without haling of it
from him.

The.xxii. Chapter.
THere be many that know neither how too deny that which they have received,
nor how too requite it: which sort are neither so good as thankful, nor so
bad as unthankful, but are dull and grossewitted, and slow Paymaysters,
howbeeit not evil. Too such as these I wll make no claim: but I will admonish
them and train them forth too their duty while they be otherwise occupied,
so as they shall by and by answer me in this wise. I pray you bear with me.
In good faith I knew not that you had need of this; for had I known it, I
would have offered it you. I beseech you think not any unkindness in me, I
remember well what you have done for me.

Why should I stick too make such as these, both better too me, and better
too themselves? If I can, I shall keep any man from offending: and specially
from offending against my self. In not suffering him too become a Churl, I
bestow another benefit upon him. Yet shall I not roughly upbraid him with
that which I have done for him: but too the end I may give him leave to
render friendship, I shall with gentleness renew the rememberance of it, and
request him too do me some pleasure: and asfor my clayming, let him espy
that himself. Now and then also I shall use somewhat quicker words, if I hope
he may be amended by them. But if he be past recovery, I shall not stir
his patience, least of my faint friend I make him mine utter foe. For if we
let the unthankful slip without prompting them by some remembrance; we shall
make them but the slower too requite. Agein there be othersome within compass
of re^ouery, which may be brought too goodness if they be a little bitten:
whom we shall suffer too come too naught by withdrawing admonishment,
wherethrough the father otherwiles has amended his Son, and the wife
reclaymed her straying Husband, and the friend quick^ned up the faithfulness
of his fainting friend.

The.xxiii. Chapter.
TOO wake some men, you must not strike them, but iog them. After the same
manner, the assuredness of sum men in requiting kyndnesse, does not cease,
but faint: and these must we iog. Turn not thy goodturne intoo a shrewd
turn. For thou do me wrong if thou chalendge not sommetyme, too the end I
should be thankful. What if I know not whereof thou haste want? What if I
espied not the occasion, because I was buzyed in weyghtie affairs, and called
too other matters? Show me what I may do, and what thou would have.
Wherefore despayrest thou before thou have tried? Wherefore make thou such
haste too lose both thy benefit and thy friend? How know thou whither I
wilnot, or whither I wot not: whither I want will, or whither I want ability?
Try me.

Then will I admonish him, not bitterly, nor openly, but with out reproach, so
as he may think he calls it too mind of himself, and is not put in mind of
it by me.

The.xxiiii. Chapter.
ONE Publius Militio an old souldyer of Julius Caesar's, had a sewt before him
against his neyboures, and was like to have gone by the worse. Captain (quoth
he) remember you not how you spre^t your ancle once about Sucro in Spain? Yis
said Caesar. Then you remember also, that when you went too sit do^ne under a
certain tree that cast very little shadow, (for the son was exceeding whot
and the place very rough in which that only one tree grew out from among the
^ragged cliffes): one of your souldyers did spread his cloak under you. When
Caesar had answered, yea marry, why should I not remember it? for when I was
nygh dead for thirst: because I was not able too goo too the next spring by
reason of my foot, I would have krept thither upon all four, but that a
souldyer of mine, a tall stout fellow, brought me water in his burganet.
Captain (quoth he) and do you know that man, or that burganet if you see
them ageine? Caesar said he knew not the burganet, but the man he knew very
well. And (as I think being angry with him for withdrawing him from the
heering of the matter too that old stale pageant) he added, but I am sure thou
art not he. Caesar (quoth he) I blame you not though you know me not. For
when this was done, I was whole and sound. But afterward mine eye was stricken
out in the battle at Munda, and splitters of bones were pikt out of my skull.
Neither could you know that Burganet if you saw it. For it was clyued asunder
with a Spanish Holberd. Hereuppon Caesar commanded that this souldyer should
be trubbled no further, and gave him the ground through which the way lay
that made this strife and sewt between him and his neyboures.

The.xxv. Chapter.
WHat then? Should he not claim the good turn at his Capteines hand, whose
memory the multitude of things had confounded, and whom the greatenesse of
his charge in ordering whole armies, suffered not too think upon every several
souldyer? This is not a clayming of a benefit, but a fetching of it in a good
place, where it was laid up in store and ready for him. And yet if a man will
have it be must reach out his hand too take it. Therefore, forasmuch as the
thing that I will do, shall be either for mine own necessities sake, or for
his sake of whom I demand it; I will challenge it. As one was saying too
Tyberius Caesar, Remember you? at the first dash, before he could utter any
more tokens of old acquayntance, I remember not (quoth he) what I have bin.
How long should a man have forborne the clayming of a benefit at this man's
hand? He stopped his mouth with forgetfulness. He could not away with the
acquayntance of any of his friends and companions. His present state was the
only thing that he would have them too look at, too think upon, and too
speak of. Affor an old friend, he took him but for a spy. A man must be
more choice in taking of his time when he will claim a benefit, than when he
will request one: and he must use a discreetnesse in his words, so as even
the unthankful may not be able too dissemble. If we lived among wise men, we
should hold our peace and tarry their leisure. And yet is it good too make wise
men privy too our estate. For we traue of the Gods, from whom the knowledge
of nothing is hidden, and yet do not prayers certify them, but entreat them.
Yea truly, that ^^hryses the ^^est of Aplo. lib. 1. ^^ad.
Priest in Homere appoints services and altars devoutly haunted, even too the
very Gods, thereby too make them pliable, and they inclyne unto him. Too be
willing and inclynable too be admonished, is a principal virtue. The mind of
such (which in feawe men is the best ruler of itself) must be reyned
softly this way and that way. The next are such as amend upon
admonishment: and such are not too be left destitute of a Guide. When a
man's eyes are blyndfolded, the sight of them is the same it was, but it
stands him in no steed, till the Gods do let in the light too them, and
call them forth too their accustomed seruis. The instruments cease, except
the woorkman apply them too their work. Likewise, there is a good will in
our minds: but it is benommed onewhyle with pleasures, anotherwhyle with
restinesse, and anotherwhyle with ignorance of our dewtie. This must we make
profitable, and not through impaciencie leave it in the stocks. But like as
^^hoo^^masters do patiently bear with the seapes of their young scholars,
that happen through stippernesse of memory, and bring them too say their
whole lessons without book, by prompting the^ a word or twain: Even so must
men be reclaymed too requite kyndnesse, by gentle admonishment.

The end of the fifth Book.
The sixth book of Lucius Annaeus Seneca, concerning Benefits.
The first Chapter.
S^mme things (my friend Liberalis) are sought only for exercise of wit, and
lie always without the life, and othersome are both delightful in the
seeking, and profitable when they be found: I will make thee partaker of them
all. According as thou think good, command thou them too be either gone
through with, or too be brought in, but to set forth the order of the game,
Yea and even in these things also there will be some good done, if thou bid me
dispatch them out of hand. For it is good too know even that thing which is
superfluouse too learn. Therefore I will hang upon thy countenance, and
according as that shall counsel me, sum things I will stand long upon,
sum I will dispatch out of hand, and othersome I will abridge.

The second Chapter.
IT is a question whither a Benefit can be taken away from a man. Sum say
it can not, because it is not a substance, but a deed. For like as a present
is one thing, and the presenting of it is another: and like as he that sayleth
is one thing, and the sailing itself is another: And albeeit that a sick man
be not without sickness: yet is not the sick man and his sickness alone
thing: So likewise the benefit itself is one thing, and the thing that comes
too each of us with the Benefit, is another thing. The benefit itself is a
bodilesse thing* and cannot be made void: but the matter of it is tossed too
and fro, and changes his Master. Therefore although thou take it away, yet
can not nature call back that which she has given. Nature may break of her
benefits, but she cannot revoke them. He that is dead, has bin alive: and he
that has lost his eyes, has also seen. It may be brought too pass that the
things which are come too us, may cease too be: but that they may not have
bin, it is impossible. A part of a benefit, yea and the surest part of a
benefit, is that which has bin. Diverse times we be let too inioye the
use of a benefit any long time: but the benefit itself cannot be razed out.
Although nature should call all her powers about her too do it, yet should she
not be able too undo that which is once done. Houses, Monnye, Bondmen, and
whatsoever else the name of a benefit cleaves unto, may be taken away. But
the Benefit itself is steadfast and immovable. No force can bring too pass,
that the one shall not have given, and the other received.

The.iii. Chapter.
ME thinks it was very well done of Marcus Antonius (in the Poetry of
Rabirius) when he saw his good fortune passing away, and nothing left him save
the right of death, whereof he was like too be disapointed also (if he took
it not betimes) too krye out: What I gave, I have. O how much might he have
had, if he had listed? These be the assured riches which shall always abide
in one place (let the world turn which way it will) and the greater that
they be, the less shall they be enuyed. Why sparest thou them as though they
were thy^e own? Thou art but an Amner. All these things which make you
swell, and hoyse you up above man's estate, causing you too forget your own
frayltie: which you keep i^ yr^n chistes guarded with armed men: which you
purchase with othermennes blud, and defend with your own: for which you send
forth Nauies too dye the Seas red with blud: for which you shake Cities, and
yet you know not what store of Artillery Fortune has prepared against your
selves: for which with so often breach of the Leagues of Alyance, friendship,
and fellowship, the whole world is crusshed betwixt you two, while you strive
for the Gole: al these things (I say) are none of youres, they are but as
things committed too your custody, whereof another man is already the right
owner, and which shall shortly be possessed either by your open enemy, or by
one that has an open enemies heart.

Thou ask how these things may be made thine? By giving them away. Provide
thou then for thine own estate, and put thyself in sure and unavoidable
possession of them: so shall thou make them, not only more honorable, but also
more certain. The things which thou make so much of, whereby thou think
thyself rich and puissant, lie under a bace name as long as thou keep them:
for they be but Houses, Servants, and Monnye. But when thou haste given them,
they are a benefit.

The.iiii. Chapter.
YOu grant (says he) that sometime we are not in his Det, of who^ we have
received a good turn: Ergo we are bereft of it agein.

There are many causes why we cease too be beholden for a benefit: not
because it is taken away from us ageine, but because it is marred by him that
receives it. Admit a man have defended me at the bar, and afterward he
rauisheth my Wife by force. In so doing he has not bereft me of his former
benefit, but he has discharged me of being indetted, by matching it with as
great a wrong. And if he have done me more harm than he had erst done me
pleasure: I not only owe him no thanks but also am set at liberty to revenge
myself and too krye out upon him, because that in comparison the wrong
outweyeth the benefit: and so the benefit is not bereft, but ouercountered.

What? are not sum fathers so hardharted and wicked, that of good right a man
may loathe them and eschew them? Do such then bereeue their children of the
things they had given them?

No. But yet the unnaturalness which they use afterward, takes away the
commendacion of all their former kyndnesse. The benefit is not taken away,
but the thank of the benefit: and it comes too pass, not that I have it
not, but that I am not beholden for it. A man lendes me Monnye, and he burns
my House. My loss discharges my Debt; and though I pay him naught, yet I
owe him naught.

Even so stands the case here. Though a man in sum point deal freendly and
liberally with me: yet if he afterward deal proudly reprochfully and cruelly
with me many ways* he has set me in such case, that I am as free from
him, as if I had never received aught at his hand. He has overthrown his
own benefits. If the Landelorde tread out his Fermours corn upon the
ground, and fell down his frute-trees: the Fermor stands not bound too him
though the Indentures remain uncancelled. Not because the Landlorde has
received that which he couenanted for: but because that he himself was the let
that he could not recei^e it. So also diverse times the creditor is cast in
domages too his detter, when he has by sum other means taken more from him
than the det came too. Not only between the creditor and the detter sits
the Judge too say: Thou haste lent him monnye. But what for that? Thou haste
driven away his Cattle, thou have slain his Servants, thou hold away his
ground which he should pay thee for. Ualew these things one with another,
(...) thou that came hither a creditor, shall depart hence a detter. Many
times also the benefit remains, and yet is not the receiver beholden for it:
as for example, if the bestower repented him of his gift, if he found fault
with himself for giving it, if in departing from it he sighed, or looked big,
or thought it lost and not given, if he gave it for his own sake, or at
leastwyse not for mine, if he ceased not too twytt me by it, if he boasted of
it, if he blazed it abroad, or if he made his gift irksomme. The benefit
therefore remains, although it be not too be requyted, in likewise as sum
dettes are owing and yet shalnot be recovered, because the creditor can have
no Law against the party.

The.v. Chapter.
THere is also an Audit too be kept between goodturnes and badturnes. A man
does me a pleasure, and afterward he does me a displeasure. There is both
thanks dew too his good turn, and reuengement too his shrewd turn. For
neither ought he to be thanked of me, nor I too be revenged of him. Either
quitteth other. When I say I have requyted his good turn^; I meene not that I
have redeliuered y^ same thing I received, but that I have yielded sum other
thing for it. For too requyte is too give one thing for another. And why not,
seeing that in all paymentes, it is not the selfsame thing, but as much that is
restored. For we be said too have paid our debt, although we render gold
for silver, and although we deliver no monnye at all, but make our payment by
setting over, or by exchange. Me things I here thee say, thou losest thy
labor. For what am I the better by knowing whither the thing that is not owed
abide still or no? These are pretty nyce points of Lawyers, which hold opinion
how it is not the inheritance itself that can be inioyed, but the things
that are contained in the inheritance. As who should say, the inheritance
were aught else than the things that are contained in the inheritance. Nay
rather, dispat^h me of this dout, which may make too the purpose: namely, when
the same man that has done me a good turn does me afterward a displeasure,
whither ought I both too requy^e his good turn, and yet nevertheless too be
revenged of him, and so to make even with him severally, as in several
respects: or else to set the one against the other, and too make no more adooe
of it: so as the displeasure shall wype away the good turn, and the good turn
wype away the displeasure? For I see that that is the order of this court. What
is the law of your school, look you to that. Actions must be pleaded
severally, and look whereof we commence, too the same must we be answered.
If a man that has committed Monnie to my keeping, do afterward steal it from
me, and I sewe him of felony and he answer me of Det, the manner of pleading
is confounded.

The.vi. Chapter.
MY friend Liberalis, the examples that you have alleged, are contained within
certain bounds which must needs be followed. For y^ one La^e is not
intermingled with the other. Either of them keeps his own course. Uerely as
well is there a peculiar action for gages, as for theft. But benefiting is not
fubiect to any Law. It refers itself too mine own discretion. It is
lawful for me too compare, how each man has profited me or hindered me.
And when I have done, I may give sentence whither I be more in his det, or he
in mine. In Lawmatters we have no power of our selves, we must follow as we
be led. But in benefiting I have full authority in myself: and therefore I
neither separate nor divide them, but bring as well the wrongs as the
benefits, both before one Judge. Otherwise thou would have me both too
love and too hate, and to give thanks, all at once: which is an impossibility
in nature. Nay rather, by comparing the benefit and wrong toogither* I shall
see who is most in others det. For like as if a man should write other ly^es
aloft upon my wrytinges he should deface the first letters but not take them
away: Even the displeasure that follows upon a good turn, does but blemishe
the good turn.

The.vii. Chapter.
THy countenance (too the gouer^ement whereof I have submitted myself) gathers
wrincles and frowneth upon me, as though I ran at randon. Me thinks I here
thee say: whither raungest thou me out so far on the Right hand? draw more
hitherward and keep thee too the shore.

I can keep no nearer. Therefore if thou think I have satisfied thee in this
point: let us pass to the other; namely whither we be any thing beholden
too him that has done us good against his will. I could have spoken this more
plainly, but that the proposition must be somewhat confuzed, too the end that
the distinction immediately insewing may show how I demand, both whither we
be beholden too him that has done us good and meant it not, and also whither
we be beholding too him that has done us good and wist it not. For if a man
be forced too do us good, it is more manifest that he byndeth us not, than
that any words should be spent in the proof of it. This question, and all
other that may be moved like unto it, is easily discussed, if we bear this
principle continually in mind: namely that it is no benefit at all, which is
not first by some mean meant toward us, and therewithal also both friendly
and courteouse. And therefore we thancke not the Rivers although they bear
great Ships, and r^n in large continual streams too convey home store of
wealth: nor for their ro^ning full of fish, and with pleasure through batling
grounds. Noman thinks himself more bound too Nilus for the good he
receives by it, than he hates him for his swelling over high, or for his
falling away too slowly. Neither does the wynd bestow a benefit, though it
blow gentle and prosperous: nor our meat because it nourishes and is
wholesome. For he that shall benefit me, must not only do me good, but
also have an intent too do it. Therefore men be not indetted too the dumb
beasts: and yet what a number have bin delivered from danger by the swiftnes
of their horses? nor yet too the Trees: and yet how many have bin succored with
the shadow of their boughs in extremity of heat? What skilles it me
whither he that does me good know not that he does it, or be not able too
know it: since that both of them wanted will too do it? And what difference is
there whither you would have me too owe a good turn too a ship, or a Charyot,
or a Spear; or too such a man as no whit more purposed too benefit me, than
any of those things did: but did me good by hap only?

The.viii. Chapter.
A Man may receive a benefit unwitting, but he cannot bestow it unwitting.
For like as many men be healed by mischaunces and yet the same mischaunces
are no medicines; as for example, the falling intoo a river with great rush,
has unto some men bin a cause of health, and sum have bin rid of a quartane
by whipping, so as the sodein fear has disappointed the fit by turning the
mind too another thought, and yet are none of these things helthfull though
they have wrought health for the time: Even so sum men do us good when they
meene it not, or rather by meening the contrary, and yet we are not their
detters of a good turn. What if fortune have turned their hurtful intentes
too my good? Suppose you I am any whit beholding too him whose hand struck at
me and hit mine enemy, and had hurt me if it had not swarued? Oftentimes the
perjury of a man's enemy has discredited him upon true allegations and
witnesses, and made the defendant too be pitied, as intrapped by conspiracy.
The main force that oppressed sum man has bin the cause of his deliverance,
and the judges would not condemn him for pity, whom they would have condemned
for his case. Yet have none of these benefited me, though they have saved me.
For the question is, whereat the dart was thrown, and not what it did hit: and
the thing that puts the difference between a benefit and a wrong, is not
the falling out, but the intent. Mine aduer sarie offends the judge with his
pride, and furthereth my case by speaking contraries, and by putting himself
rashly upon one witness. I ask not whither he misbehaued himself too pleasure
me or no: for his will was bent against me.

The.ix. Chapter.
Verily too the end I may be thankful, I must have a will too do as he has
done too me: like as it behooved him too have an intent too do me good, too
the end too benefit me. For what greater wrong can there be, than too hate a
man for treading on his foot in a throng, or for spitting upon him, or for
thrusti^g him whither he would not. And yet forasmuch as there is misusage in
the deed: what other thing is it that can excuse him from blame, than that he
will not what he did? The same thing that exempteth the one from being thought
too have done wrong, exempteth the other also from being thought too have
done a pleasure. It is the intent that makes friend or foe. Many have bin
excused from warfare by sickness. Sum have bin held from meeting with the
fall of their own house, by keeping their day of appeerance at the suit of
their enemies. And some by sh^pwr^cke have escaped the hands of Pirates. Yet
owe we none of these a good turn, because chance is without the compass of
courtesy: Neither am I any thing beholden too mine enemy, whose suit saved
me while he trubled me and hild me away. It is no good turn except it
proceed from a good will, and except the party that did it wist it. Has a
man profited me, and knew not of it? I am nothing in his det for it. Did he
me good when he would have hurt me? I will follow his example.

The.x. Chapter.
LET us turn ageine too the first point: That too the end I should be
thankful, thou will have me too do sommewhat: and yet the other, too
benefit me, has done nothing at all. Secondly thou will have me too be so
kyndharted, that I must requyte that thing willingly, which I received of him
against his will. For what should I speak of the third, whose harm turned too
my benefit? If thou will have me too owe thee a good turn, it is not enough
for thee too be only willing too do me good. But too make me vnbeholden
too thee, it is enough that thou mentest it not toward me. For the bare will
makes not a benefit. And like as it is no benefit if there want success of
performance, though the will be never so well disposed and bente too do good:
so likewise it is no benefit, except good will go before the success of the
deededooing. For if thou will have me beholden too thee: thou must not only
do me good, but also thou must do it purposely.

The.xi. Chapter.
CLeanthes uses such an example as this. I sent out two boys (says he)
intoo the Academie too seek Plato, and too bring him too me. The one of them
searched all the Walks and Galeries, and ran seeking him through all other
places where he thought he might be found, and yet came home weerie and
disappointed. The other of them sat him down at the next Puppetplayers, and
afterward gadding about the Streets like a Stray, fell in company with other
wagges, and as he was playing, spyed Plato pass by, whom he never sought. I
(says Cleanthes) will commend the Boy which (as much as in him lay) did the
thing he was commanded: and I will beat the other Boy that was rechelesse,
for all his good luck. It is the will that woorketh me friendship: the intent
whereof must be considered, if thou will have it too bynd me too be thy
detter. It is small worth to meene a man good, unless thou do it. For put
the case a man meant too give me sowewhat, and gave it not: soothly I have his
heart, but not his good turn, which requires both the deed and the intent,
to make it perfect. For like as I owe naught to him that minded too lend me
Monnie, and lent it not: so likewise, unto him that was minded to do me good
and couldnot, I shall bear good will, but I shall not be bound. And I meene
too do for him, because he meant too have done for me. Notwithstanding, if
good fortune serve me too do aught for him: in so doing I shall be the
first dooer of a good turn, and not the requyter of a good turn. It shall be
his duty too render thanks, and the entrance of his thankfulness shall
have proceeded from me.

The.xii. Chapter.
I Perceive already what thou meenest too demand. Thou need not too tell
me, thy countenance tells it me. If a man have done us good for his own
sake, are we any thing indetted too him say thou? For I here thee
complaining ofte^tymes of this, that men do many things for themselves, and
chalendge other men for them.

I shall tell thee my Liberalis: But first I will diuyde this question, and
set the right asunder from the wrong. For it is much too the purpose, whither
a man do us a good turn for his own sake, or for our sake, or for his own
and ours toogither. He that has regard all wholly too himself, and does us
good because he can none otherwise profit himself: seems unto me too be all
one with him, that prouydeth winterstouer and Sommerfeede before hand for his
Cattle, or that feeds well his Prisoners too fell them the better, or that
stalleth and currieth his fair Oxen too make the redyer utterance of them, or
like a Master of Fence that exercyseth his Usshers with all care, too set them
out as brave as he can. There is great odds (says Cleanthes) between
benefiting and barganing.

The.xiii. Chapter.
AGeine, I am not so streyt laced, that I would be nothing beholden too him
that has profited himself by doing me good. For I require not that he should
pleasure me without regard of himself: but rather I wish with all my heart,
that the benefit bestowed upon me, may turn too the greater avail of the
bestower; condicionally that he had an eye too both of us in bestowing it, and
had an intent too part the stake between him and me, though the greater share
fell too himself. If he made me his partener and meant it too us both: I not
only do him wrong, but also am a rank churl if I rejoice not that the same
thing profited him which profited me. It is the greatest churlishness that
can be, too account a thing too be no benefit, except it be so mine
discommonitie too the bestows. But asfor him that respected only himself when
he profited me, I will answer him otherwise. Seeing thou did use me but
too serve thine own turn, why should thou say thou did pleasure me,
rather than that I pleasured thee? Put the case (says he) that I could not
otherwise be admitted too sum office, than if I raunsomed ten of my
countrymen from out of a great number of prisoners. If I redeem thee for one
of the ten, will thou think thyself nothing beholden too me for delivering
thee out of thraldomme and bonds? And yet I do it for mine own sake.
Heruntoo I answer: In this case thou do somewhat for thine own sake, and
sommewhat for mine. Thy raunsoming of me is for thine own sake, and thy
choozing of me is for mine. For the accomplishment of thy purpose, it was
sufficient for thee too have redeemed any ten. And therefore I am beholding too
thee, not for redeeming me, but for choozing me. For thou might have
obtained the same thing, by raunsoming of sum other as well as me. Thou
impartest the profit of the thing to me, and admittest me too thy benefit
which shall turn too the behoof of us both. This thou proferest me before
others, and this thou dooest wholly for my sake. But if thy redeeming of ten
prisoners should make thee Praetor of the City, and there were no more but ten
prisoners of us in all none of us should be beholding unto thee, because thou
could not say thou had done aught for any of us, which respected not
thine own peculiar profit. I am not a misconstrewer of good turns, neither
covet I that they should redound too myself only, but also unto thee.

The.xiiii. Chapter.
BUT (says he) what if I had put your names intoo a Lotterie, and that thy
name had bin drawn for one of those that should be raunsomed: should thou
be nothing beholden too me? Yis marie should I, howbee it very little. And
what that is, I will tell thee. Thou did sommewhat for my sake, in that thou
did put me in the lot of raunsoming. That my name is drawn, I am beholden
too fortune: That it could be drawn, I am beholding too thee. Thou haste
given me an entrance too thy benefit, the more part whereof I owe too good
luck: but yet I am also beholden too thee, for that I might be beholden too
good fortune. Asfor those that make a merchandyze of their good turns, passing
not too whom they do them, but how much too their own advantage, so as they
may always return home too themselves: I will quite ouerpasse them. As for
example: A man selles me corn, and I should starve if I bought it not: yet am
I not beholden too him for my life: because I paid for it. Neither reckon I how
much I stood in need of the thing wherwithout I could no^ have lived: but
what an unkindness it was that I had gone without it, if I had not paid for
it: in the bringing in whereof, the chapman thought not how too relieve me, but
how too make his own gain. Thus am I not beholden for that which I have
bought.

The.xv. Chapter.
BY this reckening (says he) thou will say thou owe nothing too thy
Physician, because thou have given him a little ^ee, nor too thy Shoolema^ster,
beca^se thou have paid him some wages. But among us there is great love and
great reverence yielded unto such. Too this we answer thus: that some
things are more worth than is paid for them. Of (...) buyest life and health:
and of thy (...) behauyour and furniture of mind which are things (...).
Therefore unto these ^ee pay^, not the price of the thing, but the price of
their pains, for that (...) turns, and for that they were called a^ay from
their own businesses, too imp^oy their time upon us. They reap the reward,
not of their desert, but of their trade. Yet may another thing be more truly
alleged, which I will anon declare, when I have first showed how this may be
disproued. Some things (says he) are worth more than they cost: and
therefore albeeit that thou ^oughtest them, yet thou owe me somewhat what
over and besides for them.

First, what skilles it how much they be worth, seeing the price was agreed
upon between the buyer and the se^ler? Agein, the buyer did not set the price
upon the thing, but thou thy self did set it. It is more worth says he
than it was sold for. But (say I) it could be sold for no more. The price of
things ryseth and falls according too the time. When thou haste praised them
too the uttermost, they are worth but asmuchas may be gotten for them. Besides
this, he that has bought good cheap, owes his Chapman n^thing. Moreover
although these things be more worth: yet is it no Godhamereie too thee,
considering that the estimation of these things depends not upon the use
and effect of them, but upon the custom and derth of them. What price will thou set upon him, who in passing the Seas (yea even through the thickest of
the Surges,) when he is out of sight of the Land, keeps his course cer^ein,
and fore seeing the storms at hand, when all men think least of it, does
soodeinly bid them strike Sail and let down the Takling, and too stand in a
redines against the sodein coming and brunt of the storm? None: and yet is
the Monney which is paid too such a one for his Fare, a full recompense for
his travel. How much worth esteem you a lodging in a Wilderness, a House
in a shower, and a st^^ue or a fire when a man is acold? And yet I know we how
much these things will cost me when I come too mine Inn. How much does he
for us, which shoreth up ^ur decayed house, and by wonderful cunning hangs
it up like an I Will, from the foundation which is riuen? Yet is the price of
such shoring, both certain and ^asie too be paid. A wall defends us from
^ur enemies, and saves us from the sodeine invasions of Robbers: yet is it
known what the Mason that builds those Bulwarks for defense of the common
weal, may earne by the day for his Wages.

The.xvi. Chapter.
IT would be an endless matter, if I should rau^dge further in alleging the
examples, wherbey it may appear, how great things are sold cheap. What
then? why owe I sum further thing to my phisician and schoolemasters, so as
my paying of their fee discharges me not?

Because that from a phisician and schoolemasters they pass intoo a freende,
and their bynding of us, is not by their art which they sell; but by their
freendly and familiar good will. And therefore asfor the phisician that does
no more but feel my pulse, and recke^ me but as one of those who^ he visits
in his ordinary walk, prescrybing what is to be done or eschewed without
further affection: I am no whit in his Det, because he visited me not as a
freende, but as a customer of his. Neither is there any reason why I should
reverence my schoolmaster, if he made none other account of me than as of a
common scholar, nor thought me worthy of any singular and peculiar care, nor
ever set his mind specially upon me, insomuch that when he powered out the
things that he knew among us, I rather took them, than was taught them. What
is the cause then why I should think myself much beholding too such as
these? Not for that the thing which they have ^olde, is more worth than it
cost, but because they have done sum special thing too myself. The Phisician
did more for me than he needed too have done. He was careful for me, and not
for the report of his couning. He was not contented too show me the medicine,
but als^ ministered it. In the mean while he sat carefully by me, and
resorted too me at times of danger. No paynestaking was paynfull too him, no
pain was l^thsomme too him. It grieved him too here my groninges. Among a
number of patie^tes that called upon him, I was his cheef cure. He bestowed no
more leisure upon others, than the tyming of me would give him leave. I am
bound too such a one, not as too a Phisician, but as too a freende. Ageine,
the ^^hoolemaster took great labor and pain in teaching me. Besides the
things that he taught in common too my fellows as well as me, he trained and
instructed me in certain other things: sommetyme he quickened up my good
inclination by exhorting me; and gave me courage by commending me: and
otherwhyles he drove away my flothe by calling upon me. Furthermore he drew
foreward my dull and lingering wit, as it were by laying hand upon it, and he
was not nigardlie in bestowiug his knowledge upon me too make me have need
of him the longer, but coueted too have powered it out intoo me all at once, if
he had could. Unthankful were I if I loved him not as on of the dearest and
nearest of my kin.

T.xvii. Chapter.
WE give somewhat more than couenan^, even too the teachers of the bacest
handicraftes. And if we find a Pylot, or handicraftes man, or a labourer that
is hired by y^ day more earnest and peinfull at his woork than of ordinary;
we give him a sprincling more than his ordinary wages. Unthankful then is he
that in the best arts, which either preserve or adorn man's life, thinks
himself too owe no more than he couenantes for. Ad heereuntoo, that the
teaching of such arts linketh men's minds toogither: in consider ation
whereof, as well too ^he Phisician as too the Schoolemaister, the reward of
their pains is paid, but the reward of their good wills is owing still.

The.xviii. Chapter.
WHen a certain Ferriman had carried Plato over a River, and demanded nothing
of him for his fare: Plato believing he had done it for courtesy too himward,
said he would keep his coursie in store for him. Within a while after, when
Plato saw him ferrye over others with like diligence, and of fre^ cost: he
denied that he kept any courtesy of his in store for him. For if a man will
have me^ too be a detter for the thing that he does too me, it behooves him
too do it, not only too me, b^t also for my sake. Thou (...) any one man, for
that which thou la^^hest out among a multitude. What then? is there nothing
owing for this? No, nothing, as at any one ma^^^s hand. For I will pay with
all men, that which I owe (...) men.

The.xix. Chapter.
DEnyest thou (says he) that that manne has befreended me at all, which
has brought me up the River Po in his Ship for nothing? I deny it. He does
me sum good, but he befreendeth me not. For he does it for his own
sake, o^ at leastwyse not for mine. Too be short, not even he himself deemeth
himself too bestow a benefit upon me: but he does it either for the common
weal, or for the next towneship, or for his own vayneglorie, or else in lieu
thereof he tooketh for sum further commodity, than he should have had by
taking every man's fare. But what if the Emperor should make al frenchmen
Freedenizens, or set all Spanyar^es free from subjection? should none of them
severally owe aught in this case? yes, why should they not? Notwithstanding*
they shall owe, not as for a peculiar benefit, but as for a piece of a publik
benefit.

He never thought on me at all (says he) at the time that he did good too us
all. He meant not precysely too make me free of the City, neither did he set
his mind upon me. And so, why should I be in Debt too him, who purposed not
upon me when he intended the thing that he did?

First when he purpose too do good too all Frenchemen, he purposed too do
good too me also, for I was a Frencheman: and although he marked me not out
by name, yet he comprehended me under the general mark. And therefore I
shall be his Detter, not as a peculiar person, butas one of the whole
multitude. And I shall not requyte it as in mine own behalf, but I shall be
contributarie too it as in the behalf of my Country.

The.xx. Chapter.
IF a man lend Monny too my country, I shall not account myself his detter,
neither shall I acknowledge it as my Det, either too sewe or too be sewed: and
yet* shall I give my portion too the payment of it. Even so I deny myself too
be Detter for the benefit that is bestowed upon all in common, because that
althongh he bestowed it, yea and upon me also: yet did he it not for my sake,
neither knew he whither he did it too me or no. Nevertheless. I ought too
know that my part must be in the paying of it, because it came by a long
circumstaunce even unto me also. The thing that should bynd me, should be
done peculiarly for mine own sake.

By this reckening (^ayth he) thou art not beholden too the Moon nor too the
Son. For they move not peculiarly for thy sake.

No: and yet notwithstanding, forasmuchas their moving is too preserve all
things in general: they move for me too. For I am a part of the whole.
Moreover, the state of these things and of us is unlike. For he that does me
good, only to profit himself thereby, has not benefited me, because he made
me but the instrument of his own profit. But asfor the Son and the Moon,
although they do us good for their own sakes: yet the intent of their doing
good unto us, is not too profit themselves thereby. For what can we bestow
upon them?

The.xxi. Chapter.
I Might be sure (says he) that the Son and* the Moon are willing too do
us good, if it lay in their power too be unwilling: But they cannot but mo^e.
Let them stand still a little and rest from their woork.

See how many (...). A man is not therefore the less willing because he
cannot be unwilling. But it is a great proof of a steadfast will, that it
cannot be altered. A good man cannot do otherwise than well, for he should
not be a good man if he did not well. Ergo a good man bestows no benefit,
because he does but as he ought too do, and he cannot do otherwise than as
he ought too do. Besides this, there is great difference whither you say, he
cannot but do this thing because he is compelled too do it: and whither you
sa^e, he cannot be unwilling too do it. For if he must needs do it whither
he will or no: then am I not beholden unto him for my good turn, but too the
party that compelled him. But (...) the (...) of his willingness proceed of
this, that he cannot will but well: then compels he himself. And so, look
for what thing I should not have bin beholden too him as compelled by others:
for the same shall I be beholden too him as too the compeller.

Yea, but let them cease too be unwilling, says he.

Consider thou here, who is so far out of his (...), as too deny that too
be willingness, which is not in peril of ceassing, or of altering itself
too the contratie: seeing that on the other side, noman may of right seem so
willing, as he whose will is so utterly certain, that it is ever las^ing? If
he be willing, which may anon after be unwilling: (...) he be thought too
be willing, who is of that nature that he cannot be unwilling?

The.xxii. Chapter.
GO too, (says he) let them do otherwise, if they can.

This is it that thou meenest: namely, that all these things which are
seuer^^ (...) way asunder, and settled (...) places for the preservation of
the whole, should forsake their standinges: that the Stars should
rushtogither through ^oodein confusion: that the heavenly things should braste
their concord and run to decay: that the exceeding violent swiftness of the
Skies should stand still in the mids of their race, and disapoint the
interchaunges behighted for so many ages yet to come: and that the things
whithe now go and comme interchaungeably in seasonable course, guyding the
world by indifferent sway: should be burned up with sodein fire, and be quyte
let looce from so great varietle, and be confounded all intoo one. Let fire
consume all things, and afterward let droopy night ouerwhelme the fire, and
consequently let the deep Gulf of confusion swallowe up so many Gods: And let
all this cost be bestowed, only too disprove thee. They can yield thee these
things even against thy will, and keep on their course for thy sake, howbeeit
that there is another greater and former cause than these.

The.xxiii. Chapter.
AD further, that outward things compel not the Gods: but their own
everlasting will is as a Law too themselves. The things that they have
decreed, are such as they meant not too alter. Therefore they cannot seem to do
any thing against their will. For whatsoever they cannot cease too do, that
was it their will too continue. Neither does it ever repent the Gods of
their first determination. Doutlesse they can not both be stable, and
starting too the contrary. Notwithstanding, albeeit that their own power hold
them in their determination: yet is not their co^tineweing in it, of weakness:
but because it is not for them too step aside from the best things, and
because they have determined so too go. At that first determination of theirs
when they disposed all things, they saw our affairs also and had regard of
man. Therefore they cannot seem too keep their ^ourses, and too lay out their
works for their sakes alone: for even we also are a part of the woork. Then
are we indetted to the Son, and the Moon, and the other heavenly powers for
their benefits, because that although they be better than the things
whereintoo they shine: yet they help us too the atteinement of greater
things: And also, that they help us of set purpose: And therefore we be the
more bound unto them. For we stumble not upon their benefits without their
knowledge: but they wist well we should receive these things which we
receive. And although they have sum greater purpose and sum greater fruit
of their work, than the preservation of mortal things: yet notwithstanding,
even for our wealesake also, there was a providence sent before at the first
beginning of things, and there was such order stablished in the world, as it
may appear there was no small regard had of us. We owe deutifulnesse too our
Parents: and yet many of them matched not toogither too beget Children. The
Gods cannot seem too have done they wist not what, considering how they have
provided food and all other things aforehande for all men, neither begat
they us unawares for whom they have created so many things. For nature minded
us before she made us: and we are not so slyght a work, that we could slip
from her unawares. See how much she has permitted us, and how far man's
dominion fir^t^heth further than over man only. See how far our bodies may
raundge, and how Nature has not restrained them within the bounds of any
Lands, but has given them free scope into every part of hirself. See how
much men's minds dare adventure, and how they only either know or seek
the Gods, aspyring too heavenly things, by the mind which is given too
mount alost. You may perceive how man is not an unadvised piece of work
clumpered up in have. Among the greatest works of nature, there is nothing
wherein nature more gloryeth, or at leastwyse wherein she may more glory. How
great a madness is it too quarrel with the Gods for their own gifts? How
will he be thankful toward those that cannot be requyted without cost: who
denies himself too have received aught at their hands, which will ever give
and never reciue? And what a frowardness is it for a man not too think himself
beholden too one, even because he is good to him that denies it; and too say
that the very continuance and holding on of his goodness, is but a token that
he could not otherwise do though he would? Say thou, I will none of it, let
him keep it too himself, who craved it at his hand: and pack thou toogither
all the words of a thanklesse mind: yet shall thou not therefore find the
less goodness in him, whose bounteousnes comes unto thee, even while thou
de^yest it, and of whose benefits even this is one of the greatest, that he
will give unto thee, even though thou grudgest against him.

The.xxiiii. Chapter.
See thou not how parents enforce the tender chyldhode of their children too
the inura^ce of good and wholesome things? With heedfull care do they cherish
their bodies, though the children weep and strive against it. And least
untimely loocenesse might make them grow awrye: they hynd them streyt too make
them grow right, and anon after instruct them in liberal sciences,
restreyning them with fear if they be unwilling. Moreover, they frame and
apply their headie youth unto Thrist, shamefastness, and good manners, if
they follow them not of themselves. Also when they be men grown, and have
sum stay of themselves, if then they reject their remedies through
sheepishnesse or unruliness: they use force and streyt keeping under. Therefore
the greatest benefits that we receive of our parents, are those that we
receive either unwittingly or else unwillingly.

The.xxv. Chapter.
Unto these unthankful folk which refuze good turns, not because they cannot
find in their hearts too have them, but because they cannot find in their
hearts too be beholden for them: they be like on the contrary part, which
through ouermuche kyndnesse, are wont too wish sum inconvenience or
adversity unto those, too whom they be most beholden, thereby too show how
myndfull affection they bear them for their benefit received. Whither they
do this thing aright and of a good will, it is a question: since their mind is
like too theirs, who burning in (...) love, do wish their lover banishment,
too the end they might accompany her in her distress and departure: or
poverty, too the end they might relieve her want: or sickness, too the end
they might sit by her too tend her: and finally which under profession of
Love, do wish whatsoever her enemy would have wisshed unto her. Therefore
the end of ^atred and of Frentike love is welneere all one. The like thing
also betydeth too those that wish their friends harm, too the intent that
they maierid them of it, and make wa^e too benefiting by doing them wrong:
whereas it were much better, even utterly too leave of, than too seek occasion
of benefiting by means of wickedness. What if a master of a ship should pray
the Gods too send cruel storms and tempests, too the intent too make his
conning the better liked for the danger? What if the general of a feeld
should desire the Gods, that a great multitude of enemies might beseege his
Camp, and with soodein violence fill up the trenches and pulldoune the rampyre,
and (to the great torror of his army) advance their antesignes in at the
very gates, too the intent that when things were under foot and at the last
cast, he himself mightmake all safe ageine too his own greater glory? All
these convey their benefits by a cursed way, when they call the Gods
against him whom they themselves would succor, and desire too have him first
thrown down, that they themselves might raise him up. It is an unnatural and
untoward manner of kyndnesse, too wish misfortune too such a one as a man
cannot with honesty forsake.

The.xxvi. Chapter.
MY wish (says he) hurts him not because I wish the peril and the remedy
both at once.

That is as much too say, as thou art not altoogither clear from offense: but
thou offendest less than if thou should wish him harm without help. It
were but a leawd part too thrust a man intoo the water too the intent too pull
him out ageine: or too throw him down, to the intent too set him at
liberty. It is no benefiting too make an end of doing wrong: neither is is a
point of kyndnesse for a man too withdraw that thing from one, which he
himself had laid upon him. I had lever that thou should not wound me,
than that thou should heal me. It is worth Godhamer^ie if thou give me a
Plaster because I am wounded, but not if thou wound me too give me a
Plaster. A man never liked too have a Skarre, but in comparison of the wound:
and yet as well as he likes of the closing of it, he had lever to have bin
without it. If thou should wish so too one that thou wart nothing behold
entoo, it were an unkind wysh: and much more unkind were it for too wish so
unto him that has done thee friendship.

The.xxvii. Chapter.
I Wish therewith (says he) that I may be able too su^cour him. First, (for
I will cut thee of in the mids of thy wish) thou art already unkind. I here
not yet what thou would do for him: but I know what thou would hau him
suffer. Thou wishest him perplexity, fear, or some greater (...) the end he
may have need of thy help. This is once against him. Thou wishest he should
have need of thy help. This is for thyself. Thy meening is not too succor
him, but too pay him. He that so posteth, would feign have him paid, but he
would not be Paymayster himself. And so the only thing that bare a
countenance of honesty in thy wish, (namely the thinking long too be out of
Det) is dishonest and unfriendly. For thou wishest not that it may lie in thy lot
to requyte kyndnesse: but that he may be enforced too crave thy succor. Thou
make thyself his superior, and (which is a wickedness) thou castest him
down to thy feet, who has deserved well at thy hand. Now much meete^ were
it too owe with an honest good will, than to be discharged by evil means.
Thou should have offended less, if thou had forsworn the thing that
thou haste re^eyued. For he should have lost no more but his gift. But now thou will have him become thy vnder^ing with the loss of his goods, and be pulled
so low by the alteration of his (...), that his own benefits must ouermaister
him. Shall I (...) it too his face whom thou (...) so too pleasure. Termest
thou it a kind wish, which may as well beseem a foe as a friend, and which
no dout but an (...) and an enemy would have made, the latter points
excepted? Even mortal enemies have wished (...) too the intent they might save
them: and to ouer^ome some me^, too the intent too pardon them. And yet were
not such wish^s the less enemylyke, considering how the meekest part of them
comes after cruelty. Finally what manner of wisshes deemest thou them to be,
which noman would less too take, effect, than he unto whom thou wisshest
them? Too evil do^st thou deal with him, whom thou (...) by thyself: yea and
too leawdly (...) thou with the Gods, for thou put over the cruelty
unto them, and reseruest all the kyndnes too thyself. Too the intent that thou
may do good, the Gods must do harm If thou should suborne an accusar,
and afterward remove him thyself: or if thou should entangle him in some
sew^e, and afterward rid him out of it: noman would dout but thou deltest
wickedly. And what skilles it whither such a thing be gone about by couin or
by wisshing, saving that thou wisshest him ouerstrong adversaries? Thou can
not say, what wrong do I too him? Thy wish is either needless, or wrongful:
nay rather, it is wrongful though it want success. That thou bring it not
too pass, it is Gods gift: but thy wisshing of it, is plain wrong. Thou have
done enough. And we ought to be no less offended with thee, than if thou
had brought it too full effect.

The.xxviii. Chapter.
IF my prayers (says he) had prevailed, they had prevailed too thy safety.

First thou wishest me certain harm under uncertain help. And secondly,
though both were certain: yet is that first, which hurts. Besides this, the
condition of thy wish is known but too thyself: asfor me I am surprysed in
the mean while by the tempest, and wot not whither I shall find harborough
or succor. What a torment is it (trow you) too have wanted, though I happen
too obtain releef? or too have bin in fear, though I fortune too be saved?
or too have hilde up my hand at the bar, though I chance too be quitte? No
end of fear can be so well liked of, but that the sound and vnappayred
quietness should be better liked of. Wish that thou may be able too
requyte my benefit, if I should stand in need of thee: but not that I should
stand in need of thee. If the thing that thou wisshest had bin in thine own
power, thou had done it thyself.

The.xxix. Chapter.
HOW much more honesty is it too wish thus? I pray God continue him in such
state, as he may always deal benefits, and never need too receive. Let
such ability evermore follow him, as may suffyze him too use bountiful
pouring out and releeuing, so as he may never make nyce too do good, nor
repent him of that he has done. God grant that his nature which is foreward
of itself too all kind of courtesy, pity, and mercy, may be stirred up
and provoked by the multitude of thankful persons, of whom God send him
store, but yet so as he may never have need of them. I would he should be
vnintreatable too noman, nor have need too entreat any man. I would that
fortune might perseue^ with so equal favor toward him, as noman might be
able too be thankful too him, other wise than in heart. How much more
rightful are these wisshes, which dri^^e thee not of too wayt for occasion,
but make thee thankful out of hand? For what should let thee too requyte
freendship too him that is in prospertie? How many things are there whereby
we may requite, even toward such as have the world at will, be we never
so far in their det? As for example, faithful counsel, continewall
attendance, gentle talk and pleasant without flattery, ears (if he be
minded too ^ebate things) heedfull, and (if he comunt auie thing too them)
trusty, and familiar conversation. Prosperity never advanced any man so
high, but he might so much the more feel the want of a friend, as he found
less want of all other things.

The.xxx. Chapter.
THis ^^ksomme wisshing is too be banished and driven far away with heart and
mind. Can thou not be thankful, but thou must have the Gods displeased
with thy friend? Or understand thou not how thou si^^est in this behalf,
that thou dealest better with him too whom thou art unkind? Let thy mind run
upon imprisonment, bo^des, (...) b^tell and beggerie. These are the occasions
that thou wishest for: and they are such, as if a man have ^ouenanted with
thee, they shall save him harmless of his bond against thee. Why would
thou not rather have him continue in ableness and prosperity, too whom thou
art so greatly beholden? for (as I said) what lets thee too requyte
kyndnesse, even toward those that are in happyest state, since thou may find
wherewith too do it abundantly? What? know thou not that men pay their
Dettes even too the welthie? Too the intent I streyne thee not against thy
will: be it so that welthy prosperity have excluded all things: yet will I
show thee what thing it is that great states have great scarsnesse of, and
what it is that they want which are owners of all things. Uerely even such a
one as speaks the truth; who fynding a man in a maze among flatterers, and
brought too utter ignorance of the truth by very custom of herkening too
pleasant things instead of right things, reclaymeth him from the lyking and
allowing ^f false fellows. See thou not how the loss of their liberty
drives them headlong into slauishe thraldom through their fo^d belief, while
noman counseleth or disswadefh them as he (...) who may flatter most, and all
the feru^^ablenesse and all the labor of all their friends tends only too
this one point, namely by what means they may deceive them most pleasantly?
They knew not their own strength, and therefore while they believed
themselves too be as great as they were borne in hand too be, they brought
upon themselves both needless wars, and such wars as did fall out to the
peril of all things: they brake necessary and profitable concord: and
following vnrestreyned wrath, they shed the blud of many men, and at the last
their own too. While they rene^ged untried quarrelles for tried esteeming it
no less dishonor too be persuaded than too be vanquished, and thought the
things too be durable, which stagger then most when they be brought too the
highest: they ouerthrewe great kindomes upon themselves and theirs: neither
perceived they that upon that stage so glistering with goods that are both
vain and fightfull, it stood them in hand too have looked for much
adversity, specially from that time forth that they could here no truth.

The.xxxi. Chapter.
AT such time as Xerxes proclaimed war against Greece, there was noman but
he pricked forewarde his courage which of itself was puffed up and forgetful
how fick^e the things were that he trusted too. One said that the Greeks
would never tarry the first tydinges of the war, but would run away at the
first brute of his arrival. Another said, there was no dout but his houge
multitude was able not only too conquer, but also too over whelme all Greece,
and that it was rather too be scared, least they should find the Cities
empty and desolate, so as his enemies should be fled away, and nothing be
left for him but wast wilderness, wherthrough he should want whervppon too
employ his so great puissance, Another bare him in hand that the whole world
was s^are^ wide enough for him, that (...) matter for his ships nor (...)
hosts too incamp in, nor (...) enough for his horse men too march in nor
scope enough in the air too let fly the arrows and dar^es that should be
sent out of all hands. When many bragges had bin made in this wy^e, too
prick foreward y^ party that was alredie besides his wits through
ouerweening: Only Demaratus the Lacedemonian told him, that the selfsame
disordered and houge multitude whereof he had so great a lyking, was too be
feared of him that should lead it, because it was rather combersomme than
strong: for ouergreate things cannot be ru^ed, and whatsoever cannot be
ruled cannot long dure. The (...) (said he) will encounter thee at the very
foot of the Hill, and give thee a trayall of their force. Threehundred men
will hold tacke against these so many thousands of people. They will stand
fast upon their ground, too defend the (...) Streigh^es, clozing them up
against thee wi^h their own bodies. All Asia shall not remove them out of
their place. As ^eawe as they be, they will outstande the rage of the Battle,
and the Brunt in manner of whole mankind rushing in upon them. When nature has
altered her order too convey thee over, thou shall be graueled at the first
step: and when thou haste cast thy Cards how much the streytes of Thermopyle
(...) thee in, thou shall be able too make an esttimate of thy further loss
thereafter. Thou shall then learn that thou may be vanquished, when thou
shall perceive that thou may be encountered. Uerely they will shun thee at
the first, in many places, as carried away by the hougenesse of some soodein
watershot, whose first stream comes gusshing with great terror: but anon
after they will rise whole toogither against thee on all sides, and distress
thee with thine own power. The report is true that the Furniture for this
War is greater than can be received of those Countries which thou purposest
too assail. But this thing makes most against thee. For even therefore shall
Gree^e vanquish thee, because it cannot receive thee. Thou (...) not use thy
whole force. Moreover, (which is the only ^afegard of things) thou ^anst not
bestirre thee too prevent the first brunt of things, thou can not succou^
things at the pinche, nor relieve and strengthen them when they go too wreck.
Thou shall be vanquished a great while ere thou shall perceive it. Thou must
not thinck^ (...) cannot therefore be withstoode because the Captain himself
knows not the number of it. Nothing is so great but it may perish: and
though other occasions wanted* yet would destruction grow unto it by it own
ouergreatnesse. The things that (...) fore spoke, came too pass. (...) of all
things perteyning as well too God^s (...) man, and bare down all things that
stood in his way, was stopped of his course by threehundred men. And so
Xerxes being ouerthbrowen euerywhere throughout all Greece, understood how
far (...) gave him leave too ask what he^ (...) that he might enter intoo
Sard^s the greatest City of Asia, in a Charyot, with a high Cap of mayntenance
upon his head, which was a thing Lawful for none but Kings too do. He was
worthly of thereward before he sued for it. But how wretched a Nation was that,
where there was noman that would tell the king the truth, saving he that told it
too his own loss?

The.xxxii. Chapter.
THe Emperor Augustus had banished his Daughter sor steyning of her honor by
the breach of her chasti^^e, and had b^azed abroad the ^launder of the
imperial house. As how she had admitted Adulterers too her by heaps: how she
had gadded over all the City, with nightreuelinges: how she had haunted the
very Iudgement^our^ it^elfe with her whoredom, yea even the common ^all wherein
her Father had made a Law against whoredom: and how she ran daily too the
Marsia, becoming of a privy Adulteress, an open strumpet and seeking all
liberty of licentious loocenesse, by dealing with unknown Adulterers. These
things, which a Priuce ought sometime as well too conceal as too punish,
(for the shame of some things redoundeth also too the punisher) the Emperor
being unable too master his own wrath, had published abroad. Afterward when
by continuance of time, ^emorse had succeeded in the place of ange^: then
syghing that be had not suppressed those things with silence, which he had
bin ignorant of so long till it was a shame too speak of them, he kryed out
oftentimes, none of these things had happened too me, if either Agrippa or
Moec^nas had bin alive. S^ hard a matter was it for him that had so many
thousand men, too supplye the like of two. His Legins were ^^ayne, and
^yandby new were leuyed. His (...) seawe days after a (...) buildinges, and
there (...) that were burnte. But the places of Moecen^s and Agrippa were
empty all his life long. What should I think? That there wanted the like of
them to be taken into their rooms? or that the fault was in himself, who
had rather complain, than seek? It is not too be thought that only Agrippa
and Moecenas were wont too tell him the truth, who if they had bin alive,
should have bin dissemblers as well as the rest. It is the guyse of kyngly
natures, too praise things forepast in derogation of things present, and too
attribute the virtue of truethtelling unto those, at whose hands they be
past peril of heering the truth any more.

The.xxxiii. Chapter.
BUT too the end I may bring myself back ageine too my purpose, thou see^t
how easy a matter it is too requyte kyndnesse, even toward such as are in
prosperity, and settled in the seege of worldly wealth. Tell them, not what
they list to here presently, but what they may like too here ever. A true
saying may perhaps sum time enter intoo the ears that be full of
flatteringes. Give thou sound counsel.

Ask thou what thou may do for him that is in prosperity? Bring too
pass that he way put no trust in his prosperity, and let him understand
that the same has need of many and faithful hands too hold it fast. Is it
but a small thing that thou do for him, if thou rid him from his fondness
of believing that his good fortune shall continue always with him; and teach
him that the things are mouable which chance has given him, insomuche as
they fly away faster than they came, and that men retire not down ageine by
the same greeces that they went up too the top by but [fall so headlong] that
oftentimes there is no distance between cheef prosperity and uttermost
adversity? Thou know not of how great value freendship is, if thou
understand not y^ thou give him a great thing, too whom thou give a friend,
a thing gezon too be found, not only in howses, but also in whole worlds,
which is not any where more missing, than where it is thought most too
abound. What? supposest thou that these bills which scarcely the rememberance
or hands of their Clerks comprehend, are the hills of their friends? These
that stand in great thronges knocking at their gates, and are admitted by now
sum and then sum, are not friends. It is an old customme of kings and of
such as counterfeit kings, too sort out the multitude of their friends. And
it is the property of pride, for a man too make great account of giving men
leave too comme within his house, and too think he does men honor too let
them sit at his gate, or too be the persons that shall set foot first (...)
his (...), where^^ afterward there be many m^ doors too keep them out when
they be come in.

T.xxxiiii. Chapter.
Amongst us, the first that made any sorting of their company, by admitting
sum intoo secret familiarity, sum in company of many, and othersome with
all men, were Gracchus, and aftewarde Liuius Dursus. These men therefore had
friends of a first sort, and of a second sort, but never any of the true
sort. Call thou him a free^de, that must tarry his turn ere be can salute
thee? Can thou assure thyself of his faithfulness, which enters not in,
but crowdeth in at thy gate half against thy will? May that man preace unto
thee with full use of his liberty, which may not (...) God save thee, (a
common ryfe word and ordinarily used even too the unknown) but in his turn?
Therefore too whomsoe (...) of these thou come, whose gr^eting shakes the
whole City: assure thyself, that although thou find the ^ounes pestered with
resort of folk, and either sides of the s^reates thronged with preace of
comers and goers: thou come intoo a place replenished with people, but
void of friends. A free^d is too be sought in the heart, and not in the hall.
From thence must he be interteyned, there must he be kept, and in the very
intrayles must he be lodged. Teach this, and thou art thankful. Thou haste
an ill opinion of thyself, if thou can stand in no stead but in adversity,
or if thou think there is no need of thee in prosperity. According as thou
behauest thy self wisely, both in doutfull fortune, and in adversity, and in
prosperity, dealing in doutfull state discreetly, in adversity stoutly, and
in prosperity stayedly: so may thou yield thyself profitable too thy friend
in all respects, if thou neither abandon him in his adversity, nor wish
adversity too him. In so great variety, many things will fall in by the
way, and minister thee matter too woor^e thy faithfulness upon, although thou
wish them not. In like manner as he that wishes a man riches too the end too
be pertaker of them himself, seeks his own auayles though he seem too wish
for the other: Even so he that wishes his friend any misfortune, too rid him
of it by his own help and faithfulness, prefers himself before his
friend, (which is the point of an unkind person), and stands so much upon
his own reputacion, that he would have his freende in misery, too the end
that he himself might be thankful, and therefore in the very same respect he
is unthankful. For his meening is too unload himself, and too be discharged
of a (...) burden. There is great difference whither a man's hasting too
requy^e kyndnesse, be too yield ^ne good turn for another, or because he is
loath too be in det. He that myndeth too requite, will apply himself to the
others commodity, and wish that there may comme a convenient time for it. But
he that meeneth nothing else but too be discharged, will covet too comme too
his purpose by any means, which is the property of a very ^^disposed mind.

The.xxxv. Chapter.
Say thou that this ouermuche hastemaking is a point of unkindness? I
cannot express it more pl^ynly, than by repeting that which I have spoken
alredie. For Thy meening is not too requyte the good turn received, but too
escape from it. Thou seem to say thus: when shall I have rid my hands of it?
I must labor by all means possible, that I may not be bound too him. If
thou should wish too pay him of his own, thou might seem far wide
from a thankful man: and yet is this wish of thine a greater wrong. For thou
cursest him, and with thy cruel miswishing, dasshest out the Brains of him
whom thou ough^ell most to honor. I thin^k there is noman that would dout of
the cruelty of thy mind, if thou should wish him poverty, bondage, famine,
or fear, openly. And what odds is there between wishing it in words, and
wishing it in heart? For if thou be well in thy wits, thou will wish none of
these things. Go now, and count this too be a point of thankfulness, which
even the thanklesse person would not do, so he were not come too the hating of
the party, but only too the denial of his benefit.

The.xxxvi. Chapter.
WHo would call Aenaeas godly, if he would have had his country conquered, too
the end he might save his Father from captivity? Who would think any
natural love in the yoongmen of Sicilie, if they had wished that Mount Ae^na
might have broken out with abundance of fire far beyond his accustomed wont,
too yield them occasion too utter their duetifull goodwill toward their
Parents, by ^arying them hastily through the mids of the fire, too the end
they might leave good examples too their Children? Rome is nothing beholden to
Scipio, if he wished the continuance of our wars with Afric, too the intent
that he himself might make an end of them. Rome is nothing beholden too the
Deciusses for saving their country by the death of themselves, if they first
wished that our utter necess^^ (...) might make place for theirmost manly vow.
It is the greatest shame that can be, for a Physician to make work for the
Physician. Many that had increased the dizeazes of their Patientes or set them
back, to the end too purchase themselves the more glory in curing them;
oftentimes either have not bin able too drive the diseases away at al, or else
have martyred the poor Souls in healing them.

The.xxxvii. Chapter.
IT is said (for surely so reports Hecaton) that when Callistratus fled his
country, (the seditiousenesse and unbridled liberty whereof had banished
many other with him,) at what time one wished that the Athenians might have
need too call home their Outlawes, he mislyked such manner of return. But our
Rutilius dealt yet more corageously. For when one comforted him and told him
that Civil Wars were at hand, by means whereof it would shortly come to
pass, that al Outlawes should return ageine: What harm have I done thee
(quoth he) that thou should wish me a worse coming home, than going
out? I had lever that my Country should be ashamed of my banishment, than
bewail my return. It is no banishment, whereof every man is more ashamed than
the party that is banished. Like as these men performed the duty of good
Citizens, in that they would not be restored to their natyue soil with the
Damage of the Publik weal, because it was more reason that two should be
grieved unjustly, than that all should be grieved for the hurt of the Common
weal: Even so he observes not the duty of a thankful person, which would
have his benefactor fall into distress, too the intent that he himself might
rid him out of misery. For though that man meene well, yet wishes he ill. It
is not too be defended, and much less too be commended, if a man quench a
fire that he himself has kindled. In some Commonweals a wicked wish has
bin hilde for a wicked deed.

The.xxxviii. Chapter.
CErtesse at Athens, Demades condemned one that sold buryallware, upon proof
that he had wished great gain, which could not happen to him without the
death of much people. Yet is it wont too be a question, whither he were
justly condemned or no? For peradventure his wishing was not too sell unto
many folks, but too sell at high price, and to buy the things cheap which
he sold by retayle. (...) that bargayning consists of buying and selling:
why (...) thou his wish too the one side, whereas the gain rys^th by both?
Furthermore thou may as well condemn all other men that use the same trade
of occupiyng: for all of them (...) one same thing, and all of them wish one
selfsame thing in their hearts. Thou shall condemn the greatest part of men.
For whose gain ryseth not by another man's loss? The Soldier wishes war
for his own glory. Derth of Corn settes up the Husbandman. The trimmest
Lawyers desire store of pleas. A contagieus year is for the Phisicians
advantage. Corrupt youth inricheth the Millaners and Haberdashers, and all
such as sell fine Wares. Let no fire nor wether appayre houses, and the
Carpenter may go lie down and sleep. One man's wish was caught hold on, and
all men's wishes are alike. Think thou that Aruntius and Aterius, and the
rest that have professed the art of Executor ship, wish not the same things
in their hearts, which the Heraultes and Mooruers do at Funeralles? For these
know not whose deaths they wish: but the other wish the deaths of their
nearest acquaintance, and of those too whom they pretend most friendship, for
their goods sake. The one sort have no loss by nomans life: but if men live
long, the other sort are undone. And therefore their wishing is, not only too
receive that which they have earned by their filthi^ trade: but also too be
^^^^harged of their paymentes. No dout therefore, but that they which count his
life their hinderance by whose death they may have gain, go one ae beyond
the other in wishing the thing that is condemned. And yet are the wisshes of
all such men as well known, as unpunished. Too be short, let each man
examine himself, and enter intoo the secret of his own heart, and see there
what he has wisshed too himself. How many wisshes are there which it is a
shame for a man too be acknowen of too himself? And how feawe be there which
we may iu^^ifie before witness?

The.xxxix. Chapter.
YET must not every thing that is blame woorthye, be byandby condemned: as
this wish of the freende that misuseth his good will, and falls intoo the
vice that he shunneth, wherewith we be now in hand. For in making overmuch
have too show a thankful mind, he becommes unthankful. Let my freende fall
intoo my danger (says he): let him have need of my favor: let him not be
able too maintain his welfare, honesty, and safety without me: Let him be
brought too such an afterdeele, that whatsoever I do^ in recompense of his
former freendeship, it may be as a free benefit unto him. Let the Gods hem
him in on the oneside, and let the treason of his own house hem him in on the
otherside, and let me only be able too rid him out of it. Let a mighty and
sore enemy assault him with a rout of his deadly foes, and not unarmed. Let
his creditor and his accuser be feerce and extreme upon him.

The.xl. Chapter.
SEE how indifferently thou dealest. Thou would wish none of these things
unto him if he had not done thee good. Too letpasse other greeuowser faults
which thou committest in requi^ing evil for good, certainly thou offe^dest in
this, that thou taryest not the proper time of each thing: the preventing
whereof is no less offense, than the not taking of it when it comes. For
like as a benefit is not too be taken at all times: so also is it not too be
requyted at all times. If thou should render it before I have need or
desire of it, thou should be unthankful. And how much more unthankful
then a^^ thou, in compelling me too have need of it? Tarry thy time.
Wherefore will thou not have my gift too rest with thee? Wherefore is it a pain
too thee too be beholden too me? Wherefore do thou haste too make an even
reckening with me, as if it were with sum nipping usurer? Why seek thou
my trubble? Why set thou the Gods against me? After what sort would
thou demand, that do so requite?

The.xli. Chapter.
FIrst and formest then my friend Liberalis, Let us learn too owe good turns
quietly, and too wayt for opportunities too requite, and not too make them by
force. Let us bear in mind, that this desyrousnesse of discharging ones self
in post haste, is the point of a Carle. For noman is willing too requyte that
which he is unwilling too owe. Look what he is loath too have too rest with
him, he d^emeth it a burden, and not a benefit. How much better and more
rightful is it too bear the deserts of our friends in reme^berance, and too
offer them kyndnesse, but not too threape it upon them, nor too think
ourselves too much in their det? Forasmuch then as a benefi^e is a comonbond,
and linketh cupples toogither: say thou thus. I wilnot be against it that
thine own should return unto thee: my desire is that thou may have it
ageine cheerfully: if any of us both be overtaken with necessity, so as it
falls out by sum destiny, that either thou must be feign too receive thy
good turn agein, or I be feign too take another at thy hand: let him give
still that was wont before. I am ready: there is no let in Turnus: I will show
this my willing mind as soon as time serves: In the mean while let the
Gods be my witnesses.

The.xlii. Chapter.
MY Liberalis, I am wont too mark this affection in thee, and as it were too
grope it with my hand; that thou fear and frettest, least thou should be
too flow in any kind of courtesy. It beseems not a thankful mind too
have any careful misconceyt against the assured confidence of itself. For the
conscience of true love is quyte rid of all carfulness. It is as great a
reproach too receive that which thou ought not, as not too give that which
thou ought. Let the first bestower of a benefit have always this
prerogatyue: That he may as well choose his time too receive, as he choze too
bestow. But I am afraid (say thou) least men will misreport me. He
deals evil, which is thankful for reports sake; and not for conscience
sake. Thou have two judges of this case: Him, whom thou may deceive: and
thyself, whom th^^ (...) not deceive.

Then what if no occasion happen? shall I be in his det ever?

Yea, ever: and that openly, and gladly, and thou must take great pleasure too
behold his gage laid up with thee. It repents that man of the taking of a
benefit, whom it greeueth that he has not yet requited it. Why should thou
think him unworthy too have thee long his detter, at whose hand thou
could find in thy heart too take a good turn?

The.xliii. Chapter.
THey ^ee very far euerseene, which think it the property of a noble
heart, too lay out, too give, or too fill the bosoms and how^es of many men;
when as oftentimes it is (...), but a great ability that does these
things. They know not how much it is a greater and harder matter at some
time, too take, than too pour out. For too the intent I may (...) neither of
them, for asmucheas either of them is others (...), as long as it is doo^e
vertuou^^y: (I say) it is no less property of a noble heart too owe a
benefit, than too bestow one. But yet so much the more laborsomme is this
than the other as the keeping of things received requires more heedfulnesse,
than does the giving of them. Therefore we must not stand in fear least
we should not requyte soon enough, nor make haste too do it out of season.
For even as much offends he that hastes too requyte kyndnesse out of dew
time, as he that requyteth not in dew season. It is laye^ up with m^e for him.
Neither in his behalf, nor in mine own, am I afraid. He has provided well
for himself. For he cannot lose this good turn but with the loss of me, no
nor with the loss of me another. I have thanked him, and that is as much too
say as I have requyted. He that myndeth the requyting of a benefit too much,
imagines the other too mind the receiving of it too much. Let a man yield
himself easy both ways. If he be willing too take the return of his
benefit, let us render it and requyte it cheerfully. But if he had lever have
it too remain still in our keeping: Why should we throw his treasure out of
doors? Why refuze we too be his storers? He is worthy too have his own
choice. Assor opinion and report, let us so esteem of them* as of things that
should wait upon us, and not lead us.

The end of the sixth book.
The seventh and last Book of Lucius Annaeus Seneca, concerning Benefits.
The first Chapter.
MY Liberalis, take a good heart too thee, even in the bottom of hell.

I will not here withhold thee long, I will not beat about
The bush, nor yet with Windlasses suspende thee long in dout.
This book is but a packet of looce Remnantes. Now that I have spent my
stuff, I look about me, not what I have too say, but what I have not said.
Notwhstanding, thou must take in good worth whatsoever is of overplus, seeing
the overplus is for thy sake. If I had meant too set myself too sale, this woork
should have gowen by little and little* and that part of it should have bin
reserved too come last, which every man would have desired even though he had
bin glutted. Whatsoever was most needful, that have I conveyed intoo the
first beginning. If any thing have escaped me, that do I now gather up.
And in good faith, seeing that the things which direct men's manners are
spoken of already: If ye should examine me upon my conscience, I thin^ke it
not greatly too the purpose, too pursew the rest, which are invented, not for
amendment of life, but for exercise of wit. For (...) was excellently said of
dogg^sh Demetrius (a man in mine opinion right excellent, even though he were
^ompared to the excellente^^) that it is more worth for a man too know a few
Rules of Wisdomme, so he bear them in rememberance and practice them: than if
he learn never so many, and have them not ready at hand. For (says he) like
as that man is a great Wrestler, not which has learned all ^^^ckes and
^^eyghtes, (which he shall seldom have occasion too put in ^re against his
(...)) but which has well and diligently practiced himself in some one or
two, and watches earnestly too take the advantage of them: (for it skilles
not how feawe things he know, so he know enough too get the maystrie:) Even
so in this kind of study, there be many things that delyght, but feawe that
profit. Although thou know not the reason why the main Sea does ebb and
flow: or why every seventh year imprinteth a sig^e upon man's age: or why
the wydenesse of a Church keeps not his full proportion in the vewe of them
that behold it a far of, but gathers his ends or sides intoo a narownesse,
so as the tops of the Pillars and Pinacles grow intoo one: or what it is that
separateth the conception of Twins and joins their birth; whither one
companying of the Parents be dispersed intoo twain, or whither the two be
begotten at two several times: or why those that be borne at one burden
have sundry destinies, and whereas there is small distance or none betwixt
their birthes, yet they have as great difference as may be in their lives: It
is no great harm too thee too let such things pass, which are neither
possible nor profitable too be known. Tee truth lies wrapped up toogither
aloft. Yet have we no cause too blame Nature of unkindness: for nothing is
uneasy too be found, save such as when they be found, yield us no further
fruit than the only fynding of them. But whatsoever may make us both better
and more blissed, that has nature set either open too us, or near at hand too
us. If the mind can despise casualties: if it rau^dge not into endless desires
through covetous hope, but have learned too seek her riches in hirself. if it
have shaken of the slauishe fear of Gods and men, and know that men are
not too be feared much, and GOD nothing at all: if it despise all those
things wherewith the life is Racked while it is decked with them, and be come
too that point that he manifestly perceives death too be the cause of no
evil, but the end of many euilles: if a man have v^wed his mind unto virtue,
and count the way plain whithersoeuer she calls: if he be a fellowly wight,
and (as one borne too the behoof of all men) esteem the whole world but as one
household: if he lay his conscience open before the Gods, and live continually
as if all men behild him, standing more in awe of himself than of othermen: He
has withdrawn himself from all Storms, and is harbroughed in the calm and
sewer Haven: he has atteyned too the necessary and profitable knowledge. The
residue be but pleasures too pass away idle time. For when a man has once
withdrawn his mind intoo safety, he may then also start out intoo these
things, which garnish men's wits but strengthen them not.

The second Chapter.
THese are the things which our friend Demetrius wills him that myndeth his
own profit too take hold on with both his hands, and never too let them go,
but rather too fasten them too him, and too make them part of himself, and too
proceed so far by daily mynding of them, that wholsomme things may meet
him of their own accord, and euerywhere be straight ready at hand with a
wish, and that the distinction of honest* and shameful may come too his mind
without taryaunce, assuring himself that nothing is evil but that which is
dishonest, nor any thing good but that which is honest. Let this be his Rule
too order his dooinges by: let this be his Law too do and demand all
things by* and let him count those too be the miserablest of all men,
(glister they never so much in riches) which are given too the belly and the
bed, whose mind is sot^ed in lazy idleness. Let him say too himself,
Pleasure is frail and short: soon weerie of the things whereon it woorketh:
the gredilyer it is haled in, the sooner it turns too greef: it is always of
necessity accompanied either with repentance, or with shame: and there is
nothing in it either noble or beseeming the nature of man which resembles the
Gods. It is a ba^e thing, proceeding from the seruis of the shameful and
vile members, and in the end filthy. The pleasure that is meet for a man, yea
and for a manly man, is not the examining and pampering of the body, nor the
stirring up of the lusts which do least harm when they be most at rest:
but too be void of unquietness of mind, as well of that sort which the
ambitiousenesse of men provoke when they quarrel among themselves, as of that
sort which comes of in^olerable loftiness, when we deem of the Gods by
report of fame, and esteem them as sinful as our selves. This pleasure which
is always alike, always void of fear, and shall never be weerie of itself,
does the man enjoy whom we frame; who being (as ye would say) most skillful
both of Gods Law and man's Law, takes fru^tion of the things present, and
hangs not upon that which is too come. For he that yields too
vncerteinties, has never auie firmness. Therefore being rid of great
cares, and such as rack the mind in pieces, he hops for nothing, he
coueteth nothing, neither puts he himself upon vncerteinties, but is
content with his own. And thou must not imagine that he is contented with a
little, for all things are his. Howbeeit, not so as they were Alexanders, who,
even when he was come too the Shore of the Red Sea, wanted more than he left
behynd him from whence he came. Surely they were not his: no not even the
things that he possessed and had conquered. When Onesicritus the Admiral of
his Fleet was sent before him, to roue abroad in the Ocean like a Pyrate too
seek new wars in an unknown Sea: did it not sufficiently appear that he
was poor, seeing he advanced his wars without the bounds of nature, and
thrust himself headlong intoo a Sea of houge depth, of unmeasurable wydnes,
and unsearched before, only for blind couetousenesse? What matter makes it how
many realms he wa^ by force: how many Kingdoms he gave away, or how many
Countries he brought under tribute? Look how much he coueted, so much he
wanted.

The third Chapter.
AND this is not the fault of Alexander alone, whom luckie rashness drove
beyond the steps of Liber and Hercules: but it is the fault of all such as
fortune has made eagre by ouerfilling them. Look upon Cyrus and Cambyses,
and upon all the whole Pedigree of the Persian Kings through out: and which of
them shall thou find satisfied with the largeness of his Empire, or that
finished not his life in the purpose of proceeding still further and further?
And no wonder at al. For whatsoever couetousenes catches hold on, he
swaloweth it down and deuoureth it quyte: and it makes no matter how much a
man cast intoo a thing that cannot be filled. The wise man is the only he that
is owner of all things, and they put him not too any trubble in the keeping. He
has no Ambassadors too send beyond the Sea, nor Tents too be pitched in
the Marches of his enemies. He has no need of Garrisons too be placed in
convenient Fortresses, he has no need of Legions nor Bands of Horsemen. Like
as the Gods immortal do govern their kingdom, and maynteine their state
aloft in quietness, without Armor: even so the wyseman performs his duty
without trubblesomnesse, though he have never so much too do. And being
himself the mightiest and best, he sees all men else too be underneath him.
As much as thou skornest it, yet is it the property of a right high courage,
for a man (when he has vewed [the whole worlde] from East too West by sight of
mind, which perceth even the furthest things and such as are for^lozed with
wildernesses, and has behild the infinite number of living Creatures and the
great abundance of other things, which nature has most bountifully powered
out) too utter this saying meet for GOD* All these things are mine. So
comes it too pass, that he coueteth nothing, because there cannot be any
more than all.

The.iiii. Chapter.
THis is it (say thou) that I wisshed for: I have thee at advantage. I will
see how thou can rid thyself out of these snares whereintoo thou art fallen
by thine own seeking. Tell me how a man may give any thing to a wise manne,
if all things be a wise man's? For the same thing that is given him, is his
own alredie. Therefore a Benefit cannot be bestowed upon a wise man,
because that whatsoever is given too a wise man, is but a Pigge of his own
Sow. But you say that a giift may be given too a wise man. The Same question
demand I also concerning friends, you say, all things are common among them:
Ergo no man can give his friend any thing, for his freende has as good
interest in them, as he himself.

Nothing lets, but that a thing may be both a wisemannes, and also his
that possesses it, too whom the gift and assignement of it belongs. I say
that all things are a wisemannes, howbeeit in suchewise, as every manne
nevertheless has his peculiar ownershippe in the thing that is his. By the
Civil Law, all things are the kings. And yet the same things whereof the
universal possession pertains too the king, are left too several owners,
and every thing has his peculiar proprietarie. Therefore we may give the
King, both House, and Villaynes, and Monnie, and yet not be said too give
him of his own gooddes. For the prerogative of all things belongs too
Kings, and the property too each several person. We term it the
territory of Athens, or Campaine, which otherwise the neighbors part among
themselves by private bounds: and yet is all the whole Territory belongyng
either too the one common weal, or too the other, and afterward each parcel
remains too his several owner. Therefore I may give my Lands too the
Comonweale, although it he said too belong too the same, because they be the
Commonweals in one respect, and mine in another. Is there any doubt but a
bondsman, and all that he has is his Lords? Yet may he give his Lord a
present. For the Bondsman has not therefore nothing because he should have
nothing if his Landlorde lifted. Neither is it therefore the less a gift,
when he has presented it willyngly, because it might have bin taken from him
whither he would or no. What should we stand prouyng of all things? For it
is alredie agreed betwixt us, that all things are a wisemannes. Let us
gather that which is in question: namely how there may remain matter of
liberality toward him, whom we have granted too be owner of all things.
All things that Children possess, are their Fathers: and yet who knows not
that the Son may give somewhat too the Father? All things are the Gods:
yet offer we gifts too the Gods, and cast offerynges intoo their box. That
which I have is not therefore none of mine, because mine is thine: For it may
so happen that one self same thing may be both mine and thine.

He (say thou) that is owner of Common Harlottes, is a Baude: but a wise man
is owner of all things, and among all things are also common Harlottes: Ergo a
wise man is a baud By the same reason they bar a wise manne from buiyng. For
(say they) no man buyeth his own gooddes: but all things are a wise man's:
Ergo a wise man buyeth nothing. So do they also bar him from borowyng,
because no man pays interest for his own Monney. Innumerable are the
things that they quarrel about, whereas they vnd^^stand well enough what our
meenyng is.

The.v. Chapter.
TOO be flat with you, I uphold that all things are a wise man's, in such
wise as every man has nevertheless his proper ownership in his own gooddes:
Like as in a good Monarchy, the King possesses all things by way of
souereintie, and each man severally by way of property. A time will come to
pro^e this matter. In the mean while it is enough too this question, that I
may give a wise manne that thing, which in diverse respects is both his and
mine. And it is no marvel that somewhat may be given too him that is owner
of the whole. Put^ the case I have hired a Ferme of thee. Herein, somewhat is
thine, and somewhat is mine. The thing it self is thine, and the occupying of
it is mine. Therefore thou shall not meddle with the fruits, without thy
Fermours leave, though they grow upon thine own ground. And if there come a
derth of Corn, or a time of Famine, yet shall it not boot thee (alas) too
behold his great store, that grows upon thine own ground, that is laid
up in thine own Bernes, and that shall go intoo thine own Garners. Thou
shall not enter intoo my Ferme, though thou be Lord of it, nor take away thy
Bondsman that is my hired servant. For I will fetch him from thee ageine, if I
have paid for him, and thou shall accept it as a courtesy, if I give thee
leave too ride in thine own wagon. Thus thou see, that a man may receive
a freendly turn, in receiving his own goods.

The.vi. Chapter.
IN all these things which I have rehearsed, both the parties are owners of
one self thing. How so? Because the one is owner of the very thing, and the
other is owner of the use or occupying of it. We say these Books are
Ciceroes: and Dorus the Bookeseller says they be his: and both be true.
The one chalengeth them as Author of them, and the other as his wares; and so
are they rightly said too be the Books of either of them. For they be so,
howbeeit not after one manner. So may Titus Liuius take of gift, or buy his
own books of Dorus. I may give a wiseman that which in seueralitie is mine,
though otherwise all things be his. For seeing that he posse^seth all things
in common like as Princes do, and yet nevertheless the property of things is
dispersed too every person in several: he may both take a good turn, and
owe one, and also both buy and hyre. The Emperor has all things, and yet
none but his private gooddes, and peculiar revenues do come too his
Exchequer. All things in the Empire are his: and yet properly he has no more
of his own, but his peculiar heritage. What is his, and what is not his
without impeachement of his Empire, that is the question. For even that which
is given away from him by verdit as none of his, is his ageine in another
respect. So likewise, in mind a wiseman is owner of all things: and by law
and possession, he owes but his proper and private goods.

The.vii. Chapter.
BY such manner of reasoning, Bion was wont too gather, sommetyme that all men
were churcherobbers, and some time that noone were so. When he minded too put
them all too their nek^erse, He reasoned thus. Whosoever has stolen aught
that perteyned too the Gods, or spent it, or turned the same too his own use,
is a churchrobber. But all things perteyne too the Gods: Therefore
whatsoeuerthing a man takes away, he takes it from the Gods, Forasmuch as
all things are theirs: Ergo whosoever takes away any thing, is a
Churchrobber. Ageine when he would have Churches broken up, and the Capitol
spoiled, he would say there was no Churchrobberie committed, because that
whatsoever is taken out of one place that perceived too the Gods, the same is
conveyed intoo another place that perteyneth too the Gods like wise. Here it
is too be answered, that all things in deed are the Gods, but not that all
things are dedicated too the Gods: and that Churchrobbing is in those
things that Religion has dedicated unto God. So say we that the whole
world is the temple of the Gods immortal, al^nely beseeming their
greatness and majesty: and yet notwithstanding we say there is a difference
between holy and unholy, and that it is not Lawful too do all those
things in the Nookes that we term by the name of Churches or Chappelles,
which are Lawful too be done under the open sky and in the sight of the
Stars. A Churchrobber cannot do any harm unto God, whom his own God head
has set out of man's reach, but yet is he punished, because he has done it
as it were too God. The opinion of us and of the offender h^mself byndeth him
too punishment. Therefore look in what manner he that takes away any hallowed
thing seems a Churchrobber, although the thing that he has stolen (carye it
whither he will) remains still within the bounds of the wor^de: after the
same manner also may theft be committed against a wise man. For there is
sommewhat conveyed from him, not as he is owner of things in universal, but
as he is inty^led too them in particular, and as they belong unto him in
several. That other ownership he will acknowledge: But asfor this, he would
not have it though he might, but would burste out intoo this saying which the
Roman Graund captain did cast forth, when it was decreed, that for his
prowess and his good seruis too the common wealth, he should have as much
Land given him as he could plowgh about in one day. You have no need (quoth
he) of any such Citizen, as has need of more than one Citizens living. How
much more honor (think you) was it for that man too refuze so great a
reward, than too have deserved it? For many Capteines have removed the
Bounds of other men, but never any did set bounds too himself.

The.viii. Chapter.
THerefore when we behold how the wysemannes mind ouermaystreth all things
and passes through all things: we say all things are his. And if the case
require that he must be taxed by the powle too this ordina^ie right: there is
great difference whither his ownership be too be esteemed by his mind and
by his own greatness, or by his substance. Too have all these things whereof
thou speak, it would loathe him. I will not tell thee of Socrates,
Chrisippus, Zeno, and other Philosophers that were great in deed, howbeeit so
much the greater, because envy withstandeth not the praise of those of old
time. A little before, I spoke of Demetrius, w^om nature seems to have bred in
our days, of purpose too show how he was the man that neither could be
corrupted by us, nor we corrected by him: a man (though he himself would not
be acknowen of it) of perfect wisdom and assured constanc^e in such things
as he had purposed: yea and of such eloquence* as was most seemly for stout
matters, not too gay nor too precyse in terms, but setting forth his matters
with great courage, according as the earnestness of his case occasioned him. I
dout (...) but the heavenly providence gave him such life and such ability
of utterance, too the intent there should not want either example, or reproach
to our age.

The.ix. Chapter.
IF sum one of the Gods would give Demetrius the possession of all things
in this world, upon condition that he should not give aught away: I dare
abide by it he would refuze them, and would say: I will not bind my self too
so vnd^schargeable a burden, nor cast ^his vncombered heart of mine intoo
that sincke of things. Why presentest thou me with the mischeeues of all
people, which I would not receive, no not even too give away, because I see
many things that are not comely for me too give? Set thou forth in my
sight, the things that blere the eyes of whole Nations and Kings. Let me
see the things for which m^n ^ell their lives, and their souls. Lay before
me the cheef things whereof Riotte vaunteth: choose whither thou will
unfold them in order one after another; or (wh^che is better) deliver them in
one gross sum together. I see roofes of houses cunnyngly wrought with
curious devises, and shelles of bace and most vile and sluggishe beasts,
bought at exessiue prices, wherein the self same variety that delights, is
made of counterfette colors, according too the likeness of the things them
selves. I see there tables, and a piece of wood valewed at an Aldermannes
substance, ^ounted so much the preciouser, as the warrinesse of the Tree has
wrythed it intoo mo knurres. I see there Crystal glasses the brittlenesse
whereof auaunceth their estimation. For among the unskillful, even the very
daungerousnesse of things which should cause them too be eschewed, makes
them too be the better beliked. I see Cups of Mirrhe, as who would say that
Riot were not costly enough of it self, except they made them great Boulles
of Iewelles, too quaffe up that thing one too another, which they should be
feign anon after too vomitte out ageine. I see Per^es mo than one alone fitted
too each ear (for now women's cares are inured too carry burdens): and they
be linked together by cupples, with a third hanging under them both. Men
ha^ not bin subject enough too women's madness, if they had not hanged two or
three men's substaunces at either of their ears. I see silken garments, if
at leastwise a man may term them garments, in which there is nothing
whereby either the body or womanhod may be garnished: which when a woman
has put on, she may safely swear she is little better than stark naked.
And these things are fetched at great prises by traf^ike, even from unknown
Nations, too the end that our Ladies should not discover much more of their
bodies too their paramours in their Chambers, than they show openly too all
men in the ^^reetes.

The.x. Chapter.
WHat preuailest thou O covetousness? How many things are there which in
valewe surmount thy gold? All the things that I have spoken of, are of more
estimation, and of greater price. Now will I peruse thy riches, I meene the
plates of both the mettalles, at the sight whereof our coueteousnesse Dazeleth.
In good soothe, the earth (which has laid forth whatsoever may be for
our behoof) has delued these things deep, and sonken them intoo the
ground, yea, and she lies upon them with all her whole might, as upon
noisome things that could not comme abroad, but too the hurt of all Nations.
And least there should want either instrument, or reward of manslaughter: I see
Iron fetched forth of the same Caves, that Gold and Silver are dug out of.
Yet have these things sum substanciall matter in them: there is somewhat in
them that may cause the mind too be led by the error of the eyes. But I
see there Patentes, Indentures, and Obligations, which are but empty Images
of greediness, and a certain shadow of egre Covetousness, seruyng too
beguile the mind, that delights in opinion of vain things. For what are
these things? What is interest? What are Iournalles or Dayebookes? What is
Usury, but names of man's coue^ousnesse, which Nature, is not acquainted
with? I could find fault with Nature, that she hid not Gold and Silver
further out of reach, and that she laid not a greater weight upon them than
could have bin removed. What are the^e conueyances in writing? What are these
Reckeninges, and the sale of time, and these blouddy hundredthes? Verily they
be wilful mischeeues, grounded upon our own constitutions, wherein there is
not any thing that can be discerned by eye, or hilde with hand: Dreams they
be of vain covetousness. O wretch whosoever he is, that delights too have
a great Inventory of substance, or large Demeanes too be Tilled by Bondmen,
or infinite Herdes and Flocks that may require whole Countries and Realms
too feed them, or a Household greater than sum Warlike Nations; or private
buildinges, exceeding the wydenesse of good great tounes. When he has
thoroughly vewed these things, whereby he has laid forth and spread out his
riches and made himself proud: if he compare that which he has, too that
which he cou^teth: he is but a poor man. Let me go, and restore me agein too
those riches of mine own. I know the kingdom of wisdom too be both
great and daungerlesse: I will have all things in such wise, as all men
may neuerthe^esse have their own property in them.

The.xi. Chapter.
WHerefore when Caesar proffered the same Demetrius two hundred Talentes, he
smiled and forsook them: not deeming it too be a sum of such valewe, as
the refuzall thereof were woor^he the boasling of. O GOD how silie a sum was
that, either too honor or corrupt so noble a mind withal? For I must needs
yield so singular a man his due commendacion. I have herd a great thing
reported of him: That when he had wondered at the lack of discretion of Caius
Caesar for imagining that so small a matter could have altered him, he said
thus: if he had meant to try me, he should have tempted me with his whole
Empire.

The.xxii. Chapter.
THen may sommewhat be given too the wise man, though all things be his.
Likewise there is no let but that somewhat may be given too a friend, though
we say that all things be common among friends. For I have not things after
such sort in common with my friend* as with a partner, so as my part and his
should be both one: but in such wise as Children are common too the Father and
the Moother: who having two betwixt them, have not each of them one, but two
a piece. First of al I will bring too pass, that this man (whatsoever he is
that chalendgeth copartnership with me) shall understand, he has nothing in
common with me. Whyso? Because this kind of intercomoning is only among
wysemen, between whom there is also friendship. The rest are no more friends,
than they be coparteners. Ageine, things may be common diverse ways. Things
belonging too the degree of Knighthod are common too all knights of Rome: and
yet if I have taken a place in sitting, the same is properly mine own: and if
I depart with it too some other knight, although I depart with a thing that is
ours in common, yet seem I to have given him somewhat. Some things are common
too men upon certain conditions. As, I have a place among the knights: not
too sell it, not too let it out, not too dwell upon it: but too sit and see
things. And therefore if I come intoo the Theater when the knights places be
all full furnished and can have no room because the place is taken up before,
by those that have as good right in it as I: I shall make no lie though I say
still that I have a place among the knights, because I have right too a place
there, and because I have privilege too sit there. Think thou that the case
stands in like wise among friends. What^oeuer our friend has, is common unto
us: and yet is the propriety of it his that possesses it: and therefore may I
not occupy it against his will.

Thou mockest me, say thou. For if the thing that is my friends be mine:
is it not lawful for me too sell it? No. For thou may not sell the rightes
of Knighthod, and yet are they common too thee with the residue of the same
order. It is not a proof that a thing should not be thine because thou can
not sell it, or because thou may not spend it, or because thou may not
change it for better or for worse. For that is thine also, which is thine
upon any condition: and although I receive such a thing of thee, yet haste
thou it still nevertheless.

The.xiii. Chapter.
LET me not hold thee too long. A benefit itself cannot be greater or
smaller: but the things whereby a benefit or good turn is performed, may be
greater or lesser: and the things wherein good will shows itself, mae be
more or feawer: and so it may fode itself, according as lovers are wont too
do, whose store of kisses and straight imbracinges, do exercise love, but not
increace it. This question also that inseweth, is discussed in the premises:
and therefore it shall be touched but lightly. For the arguments that are
applied unto the other things, may also be drawn unto this. The question
is, whither he that has done all things toward the requyting of a benefit,
have requyted it or no. Too the intent (says he) that you may know he has
not requyted: he did all that he could too requyte. Whereby it appears that
the thing is not doo^e which he wanted occasion to do. For that man can not
be said too have paid a piece of monnie, who has euerywhere sought his
creditor too pay him, and could not find him. Sum things are of that sort,
that they require a performance in deed: and in sum things it is as much
too have done what a man could, as too have performed the very deed in
effect. If a Physician have done all that he could too heal, he has done his
part. If an Orator have used as much cunning as could be, he is too be
counted eloquent though his clyentes case be overthrown. Though a General or
a Cap^eine be ouercomme: yet are they worthy of commendacions, if they have
not wanted diligence, nor prowess. He has done what he might too requyte thy
good turn, and he could not for thy great good hap. Nothing could happen more
hard too the trial of true freendship. He could not reward a man of wealth, he
could not tend a man in health, he could no^ relieve a man in prosperity. Yet
has he requyted, though thou have received no benefit at his hand. For he
that has always bent himself thereuntoo, waiting opportunity for the same,
and employing great care and diligence there aboutes: has done more in
effect; than he whose luck it was too requyte betymes.

The.xiiii. Chapter.
THE* example of the detter is unlike, inasmuche as it is not enough for him
too have sought his Creditor, unless he have paid him his monnye. For in that
case the cruel creditor stands over his head, who will take the advantage of
his day. But in this case thou art matched with a most courteouse creditor,
who perceiving how thou trottest up and down careful and unquiet, will say:
away with this care out of thy heart: cease too be so earnest too thine own
trubble. I have all of thee. Thou dooest me wrong, if thou think I seek any
more at thy hand. Thy good will is comme unto me too the full.

But tell me (says he) would thou say that he has requited a benefit,
which has requited none otherwise than so? By this reckenyng, he that has
requited, and he that has not requited should be all one.

Well: then set this against it. If he had forgotten the benefit that he
received, or if he had not once proffered too be thankful: thou would deny
him too have requited. But this man has weeried him self day and night, and
neglected all other duties, yeeldyng himself wholly too this one, and waityng
narowly that no occasion might escape him. Now then, shall the case be all one
as well of him that never had any care of requityng, as of him that never left
seeking how too do it? Thou dooest me wrong if thou challenge the deed at my
hand, when thou see I wanted no will too do it. Too be short, put the
case thou wart taken prisoner, and that I having laid all my goods too gage
too my credito^r, too make money for thy rauns^mme, do sa^le (...) sore
Winter by coasts all l^ied with Pirates, and therewith all do pass through
all peril, that the sea can yield besides the annoyances which it has of it
own, and that afterward having iourneyed through many deserts, and coming at
length too the same Searouers which all other men shunned and I sought, I find
thee raunsomed already by another man: will thou deny me too have requited
kyndenesse? Furthermore, if in that voyage of mine, I lose the Monney by
Shipwrecke which I had made too do thee good with, yea, or if I fall intoo
captivity myself, while I seek too rid thee out of captivity: will thou deny
me too have requited thy kyndnesse? Truly, the Athenians call Harmodius and
Aristogiton Tyrantquellers: And Mutiussis leauyng of his hand upon the Altar
of the enemy, was as much as if he had slain Porsena: and valeantnesse that
wrestleth against Fortune, does always get the upper hand, though she
bring not the work of her purpose to effect. He that has pursewed occasions
fliyng from him, and ever hunted after new, whereby he might requite
kyndnesse: has performed more than he whom speedy opportunity has made
thankful at the first pushe, without painestakyng.

T.xv. Chapter.
THy benefactor) says he) has yielded thee two things: namely his Will and
his Deed: and therefore thou owe him two things likewise. Woorthely
myghtest thou say this to him that has yielded thee an idle will. But thou
can not say it unto him, that both is willing and also indeuereth, leaving
nothing unassayed: for he has performed both the parts, as muchas in him
lies. Agein, it is not always required that number should be ma^ched with
number. For some one thing is worth twain. Therefore so ^oreward a will and
so desyrouse to requyte, stands in sted of the deed doing. But if the will
without the deededooing be not auayleable too requyte kyndnesse: then is noman
thankful to God, upon whom nothing is bestowed but the will. Toward the Gods
(says he) we can perform nothing else but our will. Well then, if I be
able too render nothing else unto the same man also whom I owe a good turn
unto: why should I not be thankful in yielding that thing too a man, than
which I can bestow no greater upon the Gods?

The.xvi. Chapter.
YET thou demaundest what I think of the matter: and thou will have me too
shape thee a full answer. I say, let the one thin^ his good turn requyted:
and let the other assure himself he has not requyted. Let the giver hold the
receyuer discharged, and let the receyuer acknowledge himself bound still. Let
the one say, I have it: and let the other say I owe it. In all matters of
controversy let us ever set the welfare of both parties before us. The
unthankful must be shet out from all excuses whereuntoo they might have
recourse too color their wrangling withal. I have done all that might be.
Yea and do so still. What? Think thou our Aunceters were so unwise, that
they understood it not too be utter wrong, too have put no difference
between him that has wasted away the Monnie that he has borrowed, in
whoredom or at Dyce: and him that has lost both his own goods and other
men's too, by Fire or by Robbing, or by some other heauyer misfortune? And yet
too the intent that men should know, that faithfulness was in any wise to be
performed, they admitted none excuse at all. For it were better that a feawe
should be put even from their just excuce, than that all should pretend some
excuce or other. Thou have done what thou could too requyte. Let him accept
it as sufficient, but think thou it too little. For like as if he can find in
his heart too pass over thine ^arnest and diligent indeuer unregarded, he is
unworthy too be requyted with kindness: Even so also art thou a very
Churl, if thou on the othersyde, in respect that he accepts thy good will
for payment, be not so much the more willingly beholden too him because thou
art released. Thou must not catch hold of it, nor call witness upon it: but
thou must seek occasion nevertheless too requy^e. Requyte the one because he
claymeth it and the other because he releaseth thee. Requyte the one because he
is evil, and the other because he is not evil. And therefore there is no cause
why thou should think thyself too have any interest in this question,
namely whither a man that has received a benefit of a wyseman, ought too
requyte it him if he cease too be a wyseman, and is becomme an evil man. For
thou ought too redeliuer the gage that thou haste taken of a wyseman, yea
and too discharge thycredit too an evil man: and why should thou not also
requyte his good turn? Because he is changed, shall he change thee? What if
thou had taken a thing of a man in health? should thou not restore it too
him if he were sick? we ought always too bear more with our friends
weakness, than that comes to. Surely such a man is sick in mind: let him be
helped, let him be borne withal. For folly is a disease of the mind. Too the
end that this may be the better understood, I think it good too make a
distinction.

The.xvii. Chapter.
THere are too kinds of Benefits or good turns. The one a perfect and true
benefit, which cannot be given but by a wyseman and too a wyseman: The other
a vulgar and common benefit, whereof the intercourse is among us that have no
skill. Asfor this latter, there is no dout but I ought too requyte it too him
that I owe it, whatsoever he is, whither he be becomme a murderer, a thief,
or an adulterer. Felonies have their Laws: and judgment will better redress
such caces than unthankfulness. Let noman make thee evil, because he is
evil. Upon an evil man I will cast away a good turn: and unto a good man
I will render it. So will I requyte the good man, because I owe it: and the
evil man, because I would not be in his det.

The.xviii. Chapter.
OF the other kind of benefit, there is some dout: as that if I could not take
it but being wise, neither could I render it but too one that continewed wise.
For put the case I render: yet cannot he receive it, because he is not master
of himself in this behalf, but has forgone the knowledge how too use it. It is
all one as if ye should bid me, strike the ball back too a maimed hand. It
is a folly too give a man the thing that he cannot take.

That I may begin too answer thee from this last point: I will not give him
that which he cannot take, but I will restore though he cannot receive it. For
I can bind no man but him that takes: but I may discharge my self, if I
do but only deliue. What if he cannot use it? Let him look too that. The
fault shall be in him, and not in me.

The.xix. Chapter.
TOO redeliuer (says he) is too deliver agein too such a one as shall
receive. For what if you owe a man Wine, and he hid you power it into a
Racket or a Sine? Will you say you have delivered it ageine? Or will you
deliver that ageine, which shall be spilt betwixt you in deliueryng?

Too redeliuer, repaye, render, or restore, is too yield agein the thing that a
man owes, unto him that has interest in it, when he lists too have it. And
that is the only thing too be performed on my behalf. Too owe him the
keepyng of the thing when he has taken it ageine of me, that is now a further
charge. I owe him the performaunce of it, but not the keeping of it: And I had
much lever that he should so go it, than that I should not restore it. I must
pare my (...) that which I have had of him, though he will go^ w^^h it by and
by intoo the Stews. Although he would send me a harlotte too receive it, yet
should I pay it him: and albee it that he would put the monney that he
receives of me into his looce bosom, yet shall I pay it. For I must yield
it agein: but when I have once yielded it, I am not bound too stand still too
the keeping and saving of it. I am bound too keep his benefit while it is in
my hand vnrestored. As long as it is with me, reason would I should save it.
But if it be called for, it must be delivered though it should be spilte in
the hands of the receiver. I will render it too a good man, when it shall be
expedient for him: and too an evil man when he calls for it.

Thou can not (says he) render him his benefit after such forte as thou
receinedest it. For thou receiuedest it of a wiseman, and thou renderest it too
a fool.

I render now unto him, in such wise as he is now able too receive: and it is
not made the worse by me, but by him: and therefore I will restore that which
I have received. Look too whom I would render such a manner of benefit as I
received, if he came too wisdom ageine too him will I (as long as he is
evil) render such a one as he can receive. But (says he) what if he be
become, not only evil, but also (...) and outrageous, as Appol^odorus and
Phalaris were? Will th^^ also render too such a one the benefit that thou
receiuedest of him?

Nature su^^ereth not so great an al^^^ation in a wiseman. For in falling from
the best too the woorste, it cannot be but some printes of goodness must
remain in him, even when he is become evil. Vertewe is never so utterly wyped
out, but that she leaves sum furer marks in the mind, than any change can
scrape quite and clean out. When the wild beasts that have bin brought up
among us, do break away intoo the wooddes, they keep still sum part of
their former tamenesse: and look how much they be wilder than the tamest
beasts, so much are they tamer than the wildest beasts, and such as never
were used too man's hand. No man that ever stacke unto wisdom, has fallen
intoo extreme wickedness. He is died of a deeper hew, than may be utterly
washed out, or altered quite into another color. Agein I demanded of thee,
whither this wild man be become so too himself only, or whither his
woodnesse bursteth out too the hurt of all the common weal? For thou tellest
me of Apollodorus and Phalaris the tyrant, whose nature if a man have, and keep
his naughtiness too himself, why should I not render such a one his benefit,
too the end I may quite and clean rid my hands of him for ever? But if he
not only delight and take pleasure in man's blood, but also execureth
insatiable cruelty in murtheryng folk of all ages, and rage not for anger,
but of a certain geeedinesse (...) be cruel: If he cut the throtes of
children before their Parents faces: if he be not contented with simple
Death, but does torment folk, and not only burns those that must dye, but
also broyleth them: if he make an art of murder, and be always in gore
blood: the nonrendering of a benefit is too small a punishment for such a
one. Whatsoever it was whereby he and I were linked together, that has he
quite cut or by breaking the bonds of the Law of Nature. If a man have
done (...) for me, and a^^erward makes war against my C^untrie: In so
dooyng he has lost whatsoever he had de^erued, and it were a wickedness to
ren^er any ^yndnesse unto him. Agein, if he assail not my country, but yet
is noysomme too his own, and being separated from my country, troubles his
own: That so great leawdnesse of his heart has nevertheless cut him of:
and though it have not made him an open enemy too me, yet has it made him
hateful too me: and I must have a former and a more special regard of that
dewtie which I owe too all mankind, than of that which I owe too any ^euerall
person.

The.xx. Chapter.
BUT although this be so, and that I stand free in all respects from that
time forth that he by violating all Law has brought too pass that nothing
may be unlawful against him: yet I believe there is this measure too be
observed on my behalf, that if my benefit shall neither augment his power to
the destruction of the common state, nor stablishe that which he has already,
and so consequently may be rendered without prejudice of the common weal* I
shall render it. I shall save his child lying in the Cradle. For what does this
benefit hurt any of those whom his cruelty teareth in pecces? But I shall not
feed him with Monnye to maynteyne his Guard in wages. If he desire Marble or
fine cloth of me: my furnishing of his supersluetie can hurt noman. But affor
men and Armor, I shall not help him with them. If he desire as a great gift, to
have cunning Players of Enterludes, Lemans, and such other things as may tame
his feercenes: I will willingly offer them. Though I would not send him Galyes
and Ships: yet would I send him Rowbarges and Chambershippes upon the
water. And though he be utterly past all hope: yet shall I render unto him,
with the same hand that I bestow benefits upon others. Howbeeit (too say the
truth) the best remedy for such dispositionsis the shortening of their life.
And the be^thing that can be for him that will never be reclaymed, is too be
dead. But it is a rare thing too lynd one so far gone; and it has always
(...) counted a wonder, like as the opening of the Earth, and breaking forth
of fire out of the Caves of the Sea. Therefore (...) withdraw ourselves from it,
and speak of such things as we may mislyke without terror. Too the
ordinary evil persons whom a man may find in every Market, and of whom every
man is afraid, I shall render the good turn that I have received. I must not
make my gayn of his naughtines. Look what is not mine, let it return too the
owner, be he good or bad. How diligently would I sift this thing if I should
not render, but bestow? This place craves a merry tale.

The.xxi. Chapter
ACerteine Philosopher of Pythagoras sect, having bought a cupple of Rags of
a Taylour upon trust (a great matter) came ageine within a feawe days after
to his shop too pay him, and found it shet up. And when he had knocked a good
while, one being disposed to ^est at the Pythagorin^ said; wherefore losest
thou thy labor? The Taylour whom thou seek is dead and buried, which thing
is a greef unto us that forgo our friends for ever, but peradventure not
unto thee that know he shall be borne ageine. Hereuppon this our
Philosopher carried home his three or sower Pence very glad, shaking them
diverse times in his hand as he went. Afterward fynding fault with this his
secret pleasure of nonpayment, and perceiving his own ouerliking of that
simple gain: he returned too the Shop, and said too himself: he lives to
theeward, and therefore pay that thou owe him. With that word he thrust the
four Pence intoo the Shop at a cranie of the wall where the closing of the
panel was shroonk, and there left them, laying punishment upon himself for his
fond desire, least he might acqu^y^t himself with the coveting of other men's
goods.

The.xxii. Chapter.
IF thou owe a man any thing, seek too pay it. And if noman demand it, call
thou upon thyself. Be he good or be he bad, it makes no matter too thee. For
his naughtiness ought not too vauntage thee. Render and blame thyselfe, and
forget not in what manner the duetyes be diuyded beetw^xt you. Unto him we
have enjoined forgetfulness, and unto too thee we have commanded
myndfulnesse. Notwithstanding, when we say that he which has done a good
turn should forget it: that man mistaketh us, which imagines that we would
have (...) of the thing (specially being a most honest thing) quyte out of his
head. We inioyue some things above measure, too the end they may return too
their true and proper measure. When we say he must not remember it: our
meening is, that he must not proclayme it, nor brag of it, nor grieve the
party with it. For if some folk do a man a pleasure: they make all the would
privy to it. Their talk is of it in their soberness, and they cannot hold
it in in their drunkenness. They blab it out too strangers, and they tell it
in counsel too their friends. Too alay this ouerfreshe and vpbrayding
myndfulnesse: we willed him that had done the good turn, too forget it: and
by inioyning him more than could be performed, we counseled him too keep
silence.

The.xxiii. Chapter.
AS often as thou haste too deal with such as are of small trust, thou may
exact more than enough, too the end that enough may be performed. To this end
serve the ouerreaching speeches, y^ by an untruth, men may come too the very
truth. Therefore he that said there were some that were whyter tha^ snow, and
wyghter than the wynd (which is impossible to be) said it too the end that the
most which could be, should be deleeued. And he that said: more immovable
than these Rocks, and more violent tha^ this stream: meant to persuade no
more, but that some man is as immovable as a Rock. An ouerreach never requires
so much as it pretends. But it aduourheth things incredible, that it may
atteyne too the credible. When we say, let him that has bestowed a benefit
forget it: our meening is he should be as one that had forgotten it. Lee not
the remembering of it appear, nor thy mind run upon it. And when we say
that a benefyte must not be challenged agein, we do not wholly take away the
demanding of it agein: for oftentimes evil men have need of a chalendger,
and good men have need of a rememberancer. For why? If a man be ignorant of
the opportunity, may I not show it him? may I not discover my need unto
him? Why should he beelye himself, or be sorry that he knew it not? Let a
watchewoord be now and then used, howbeeit after a modest sort, not with
exacting nor with clayming of dewtie.

The.xxiiii. Chapter.
SOcrates said in audience of his friends: I would feign buy me a Cloak if
I had monnye. He craved of noman, yet admonished he them all, and every man
demed that he would take it of him. And why should they not? For how small a
thing was it that Socrates received? But it was a great matter too have
deserved too be the man of whom Socrares would receive. He could not have
given them any incling more meeldly. I had bought me a Cloak (quoth he) if I
had had monnye. After this, whosoever made most haste, gave too late. For
Socrates had wanted alredie. Thus for the bitter chalen^gers sakes, we forbid
clayming: not that it should never be used: but that it should be used very
sildomme.

The.xxv. Chapter.
ARistippus being on a time delighted with an ointment, said: evil comme too
these effeminate fellows that have disfamed so trim a savor. The same Evil
comme too them, is too be said too these leawd and importunate huddlers up of
benefits, who have barred so goodly a thing as the admonishment of friends.
Yet notwithstanding, I will use the Law of freendship, and will claim a good
turn at his hand, of whom I would have craved one: and he shall accept it as
another benefit, that he might requyte it. I shall never say in way of
complaynt, I took him up poor silly soul by shipwreke cast on shore,
And made him partener of my Realm: More fool am I therefore.
This is not an admonishing, but rather a reuyling. This is even too bring
benefits intoo hatred. This is even the hyghwaie too make it either lawful or
delightful too be thanklesse. It is enough and too much, too call a man too
rememberance with such lowly words as these. If ever I have pleasured you,
or if ever you have had lyking of any thing of mine. And let him say ageine
on the other side: Yea truly, you have pleasurde me: you took me up right
poor
And needy when that I was cast by shipwrecke on your shore.


The.xxvi. Chapter.
BUt (says he) this kind of dealing booteth us not. For he dissembleth, and
has forgotten it. What should I do? Thou demaundest a thing most necessary,
and wherein it becomes this matter too be finished: namely after what sort
thanklesse persons are too be borne with. Truly even with a quiet, meek, and
stout mind. Let never unkind, unmindful, and unthankful person so much
offend thee, but that nevertheless it may still delight thee too have given.
Let never any wrong compel thee to say, I would I had not done it. Let ever
the vnluckynes of thy benefit like thee. It shall repent him ever, if thou
repent never. Thou must not be grieved, as though some strange thing had
happened (...) thou might rather wonder if it had not happened. Some are
^eared away with pains, some with cost, some with peril, some with shameful
shamefastness, least by requityng they might acknowledge themselves to have
received; some through ignorance of their duty, some through flothe, and
othersome by being over buzied. See how the unmeasurable lusts of men be
always gaping and always craving. Thou can not wo^nder too see noman
requyte where noman receives enough. Whithe of these is of so stedy and sound
a mind, that a man may safely put him in trust with a benefit? One outrageth
in Lechery: another serves his Paunche: onother is given all too gain, and
yet he has the Devil and all alredie: another is atteynted with envy: and
another is ready to run upon the Swords point through ambition. Hereunto ad
dullness of wit and do^ing old age, and contrariwyse the turmoyling and
continewall unquietness of a restless mind. And hereunto the ouerregarding of
a man's owneself, and his strange swelling for which he is too be despised.
What shall I speak of the frowardness of such as strive too be
ouerthwarting, or of the lyghtnesse of such as are ever fisking too and fro?
Put vnto^ these, headie rashuesse, and fearfulness which never gives
faithful counsel, and a thousand other errors that we tumble intoo: as the
malapert bragging of them that be most towardly, the discord of them that be
most familiar, and (which is a common malady) the trusting of those that be
most vnsuer, the despyzing of things that men have in possession, and the
wisshing for such things as there is no hope too obtain.

The.xxvii. Chapter.
Seek thou faithfulness which is a thing most quiet, among the affections
which are things most unquiet? If thou set the true Image of our life before
thee, thou will think thou beholdest the Portrayture of a great City that
is taken, where al regard of shame and right is shaken of, and force reigns
insted of sage aduyce, as though a trumpet were blown to make hanocke of al
things. Neither fire nor sword is spared; mischeef is broken looce from law:
and religion itself, which has sheelded Supplyantes even amid the weapons of
their enemies, cannot stop them awhit from their ronning to the spoil. One
snatches out of a pryuate place, another out of a publik place, the third out
of an unhallowed place, and the fourth out of a hallowed place. This mam breaks
up, that man leapes over, another man mislyking the narrownes of his way,
overthrows the things that stop him, and comes too his luker by casting
down of things. One wastes without bludshed, another bears his booty in
bluddie hand, and there is noman but he catches sommewhat from another man. In
this greediness of mankind, verily thou art tootoo forgetful of the common
case, which seek a soberman among snatchers. If thou be grieved at
thanklesse persons, be grieved also at ryottous persons, be grieved at
nigardes, be grieved at unchaste folks, be grieved at sikfolke, at misshapen
folk, and at palefolke. It is in deed a greeuouse fault, an intolerable
fault, a fault that breaks the fellowship of mankind, and a fault that
cutteth asunder the concord wherewith our weakness is underpropped, and
throws it too the ground. Nevertheless, it is so common a thing, that not
even he that complayneth most of it, can clear himself of it.

The.xxviii. Chapter.
EXamine thyself whither thou haste rendered kindness too every man that
des^rued it at thy hand: or whither there was ever any good turn lost upon
thee: or whither thou bear in mind (...) the good turns that ever were done
thee: and thou shall see that the things which were given in thy childhoode,
were forgotten ere thou wast a strippling: and that the things which were
bestowed upon thee in thy youth, continewed not still in mind unto thine old
age. Some things we have lost, sum we have cast from us, sum have krept
out of our sight by little and little, and from some we ourselves have turned
our eyes. Too the end I may excuse thy weakness for thee: first memory is
brittle, and not sufficient for the number of things. It must needs send out
as much as it takes in, and ouerlay the formest things with the newest. So
comes it too pass that thy Nurce can bear no sway with thee, because the
age insewing has laid her benefit far of from thy hand. So comes it too
pass that thou haste no regard of thy schoolemaister. So comes it too
pass, that while thou art buzie in sewing for the Consulship, or stand for
the preestod, he that gave thee his voice for the Treasurership is forgotten.
Peradventure, if thou search thyself thoroughly, the fault that thou lookestfor,
wilbee found in thine own bosomme. Thou do wrong too be angry with a
general fault, and thou dooest foolishly in not being angry with thine own
fault. Too the end thou may be acquitted thyself, bear with others. Thou
may perchance make him better by forbearing him, but thou shall doutlesse
make him worse by vpbrayding him. There is no reason that thou should
harden his heart: If there be any shame left in him, give him leave too keep
it. Often times where as shame was but sommewhat crazed, the oueropen reproving
of it defaceth it altoogither. Noman is ashamed too be that, which he is
seen to be. A man grows past shame when he is openly detected.

The.xxix. Chapter.
I Have lost my good turn*. Do we term the things lost which we have
consecrated too a holy use? A benefit is of the number of y^ things that are
hallowed, yea though it have ill success whereas it was well bestowed. *He is
not the manne we took him for. *Let us continewe such as we were, unlike
too him. The loss was even then, but it appeered not till now. A tha^klesse
person is not brought to light without our own shame, because our fynding of
fault with the loss of our bene^^te, is a token we looked not well too the
bestowing of it. As much as we can, let us plead his case with ourselves,
th^s: peradventure he wist it not, peradventure he will do it hereafter. The
patient and wise Creditor has made some Detters too become g^od, by bearing
with them and by tendering their case with respit. The same thing must we do.
We must cherishe the fainting faith.

The.xxx. Chapter.
I Have lost my good turn *. Thou fool, thou discernest not the times of thy
loss. Thou have lost it in deed: but that was at thy first bestowing of it,
and now it is come too light. Discretion has greatly prevailed even in those
things that seemed as good as lost. As the diseases of the body are too be
handled softly, so are the diseases of the mind also. Oftentimes the thing that
would have bin vnwound with leisure, is broken of by the roughness of him that
pulles it out. What need evil words? what needs complaint? what needs
brawling? Why do thou discharge him? Why do thou let him go? If he be
unthankful, now owes he thee nothing. What reason is it too set him on a
chafe, upon whom thou have bestowed many things, that of a doutfull friend
he may beecome an undoubted enemy, and seek, too excuse himself by raising a
slander upon thee? There are inow that will say, I am sure there is some
great matter in it, that he could not bear with him too whom he was so much
beholden. Somewhat there is in it. There is noman but he may stayne the
estimation of his better by complaining of him, although he utterly deface him
not. Neither will a man be contented too surmyze light things, when he
seeks credit by the great^esse of his untruths.

T.xxx. Chapter.
HOw much is the other way better, whereby the hope of frendshippe is reserved
to him, yea and the very friendship itself, if he will return too his right
mind? wilful goodness overcomes evil men. And there is not any man so hard
hearted, nor so deadly an enemy in his mind against things that are worthy too
be loved, but he loves good men even when he is at his worst, specially
fynding himself beholden too them even in this respect also, that he
susteyneth no displeasure at their hands for not requyting. Therefore bend
thyself too think thus: My kyndnesse is vnrequyted: what shall I do? Even as
the Gods the best Patterns of all things do, who begin too benefit man when
he knows it not, and continue it toward him when he is unthankful for it.
One charge them with carelessenesse of us, another with vnindiffe^entnesse,
and the third thrustes them out of this world, and le^^^s them alone, slothful
and dumpish, without light or without woorking. And whereas we be beholden
too the Son for our distinction between the time of Labor and Rest: for
^scaping the confuzion of endless night so as we be not drowned in
darkness: for governing the year by his course, for nourishing of our bodies,
for making seeds too sprout forth and for rypening of our fruits: Yet there
are that term him some fyrie stone, or a ball of fire packed together by
chance, and what ye else will rather than a God. And yet for all that, the
Gods, like good parents that smyle at the ill language of their young
Children, cease not too heap benefits upon those that dout of y^ Authors of
them: but holding on with their goodness in equal rate, do distribute them
too all Nations, having this one property peculiar too themselves, namely to
do good. They besprin^le the earth with seasonable showers: they move the Seas
with the winds: they disseuer the times by the course of the Stars: they
me^ken both the Winter and the Somer with the intercours^ of a^^^lder air: and
quietly and mercifully do they bear with the e^^our of our drerye souls. Let
us follow their example. Let us gi^e still, though we have given many things
in vain before. Let us give nevertheless unto others: yea and let us give
ageine too the same parties by whom we have sustey^ed loss. The falling down
of a House never made man afraid too build. When our dwelling is consumed by
Fire, we lay foundation ageine ere the floor be through cold: and when
Cities are destroyed, we oftentimes reere them agein on the same Plot. So
stubborn is the mind toward good hope. Men's works would be at a point
both by Sea and by Land, if they listed not too ad^enture agein upon things
misdecayed.

The.xxxii. Chapter.
HE is a man unthankful. He has not hurt me, but himself. When I bestowed my
Benefit, I used it as I thought good. And I wilnot therefore be the ^lower,
but the warer in giving. Look what I have lost in this man, I will recover in
another. Yea I will do the same man good still: and like a good husbandman, I
will overcome the barrenness of the soil, with composte and tilth. I have
lost my good turn, and he has lost all men's hearts. It is no point of
noble courage too give and loze, but too loze and give.

FINIS.
All honor, thanks, and praise be given too God always. AMEN.

