A blazyng Star or burning Beacon, seen the 10. of October last (and yet
continewyng) set on fire by Gods providence, to call all sinners to earnest and
speedy repentance. Written by Francis Shakelton, Minister and preacher of the
word of GOD.



I will show wonders in heaven and in the earth, blood, and fire, and pillars
of smoke. Joel. 2, 30. Imprinted at London by Ihon Kyngston, for Henry Kirkham,
and are to be sold, at the sign of the black boy, adioynyng to the little
Northdore of saint Paul. 1580.

To the right Honorable sir Thomas Bromley knight, lord Chancellor of
England, and one of her Majesty's most honorable privy Council, long life
and health, with increase of honor, and all manner of spiritual blessings.
IT may be demed in the judgment of the world, a great presumption in me
(right Honorable) thus unadvisedly to adventure the discourse of this late
blazing Star, which appeared the x. day of October last 1580. whereof
very small (or rather no account at all) is made among the vulgar sort, for
that it has not altogether such sple^dant brightness, and glisteryng
radiation, as some other Cometes heretofore have had. I know (I say) I shall be
launced with the bitter reproves and Zoilous reprehensions of certain fine
mouthed mates, who look for finer phrases, and more mellow and sugared
sentences, then my poor skill or ability will aford. My only drift herein
(right Honorable) is to dissuade the world, from freezing in the dregs of
their sins, by admonisheyng them of the final dissolution of the Engine of
this world, and second coming of Christ in the clouds, which by many
manifest and inevitable reasons J gather, can not be far of. Jn respect
whereof, according to the duty of my profession, J exhort all men to awake
out of their sleep by earnest repentance, which is the perfect and plain path
way to auert Gods just plagues, deservedly threatened unto us. The
artificial description of which Star, together with his appearance, motion,
color, continuance, matter, form, signification, and effect, as J by the advice of some right skillful in the Mathematiques, have (by the way)
superficially touched: So do J leave the fuller delineation thereof to them,
who professedly dwell in the same Art, (Astronomy I mean) and are best hable
to yield their learned resolutions. My profession drawyng me an other way,
requires an other manner of method, which as J have here to my poor skill
discovered: So am J with all humility, most duetifully to crave your Honors
pardon, for the acceptance thereof at my hands, till it shall please God to
enhable me with other opportunity, to prefer unto your Lordshippes censure,
some other work of greater momente and importance. Till then, always J shall
humbly beseech the Almighty, long to preserve your good Lordshippe with
honor, health and all felicity to his Divine will and pleasure. Amen.

Your Honors most humble, Francis Shakelton.

Jn hanc Francisci Shakeltonj Cometologiam, Ogdoastichon.
ECce Shakeltonj non parua volumine paruo
Commoda, Brutigenis hexapla certa suis.
Eia age lector: in hoc forsan reperire libello
Multa potes, tibi quae vix aliunde patent.
Vt tibi and vt patriae prodesset amicus amicae,
Participem tersi te facit esse styli.
Tu tantum grates memor esto rependere dignas,
Sic fructum studij demetet ipse sui.
Thomas Newton, Cestreshyrius.

SO often as there has been at any time seen eclipses of the Son or the
Moon, either any Comette, or blasyng Star in any part of the Heaven: Those
that are Christians, have forthwith been taught by Christ himself to lift up
their heads, Luke. 21.28.
knowing that their redemption draws nigh (that is to say) Christians are
admonished thereby, that the day of Judgment is at hand: When they shall see
the Son of man coming in the Clouds with power and great glory, to
judge the quick and the dead, and to give to every man according to his
deeds, that they have done in their bodies, be they good or evil. 2. Pet.
3.10.
Whose coming shall be (as Peter says) as a thief in the night: In the which
day, the Heaven shall pass away with a noyce, and the Elements shall melte
with heat, and the earth with the works that are therein shall be burnt up
(which is as much to say) that all the world shall be consumed, according
to the saying of our Savior Christ: Math. 24.35.
Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away.
Arist. lib. de caelo. and lib. 8. Phis.
Yet notwithstanding I am not ignorant, how that Aristotle the Prince of all
those Philosophers (which the Latinistes do call (Peripatetici) does labor
very earnestly to prove that the world is eternal: meaning thereby that it
has no beginning neither shall it have any endyng. Of this opinion is Galenus
also (that most expert Physician of Pergamus a city of Asia) who lived in
those days that Marcus and Commodus were Emperors, Galenus.
and dreamyng also of the perpetuity and continuance of the world, says
after this manner: Se^per ita stetit, sic igitur perdurabit. Moreover Manilius
writes thus: Manilius.
Non alium videre patres, alumne ne potes aspicient? (that is to say) our
Fathers have seen no other world, and shall our Nephews see any other? etc.
Moreover you shall understand, that among the Latinistes, Pliny.
Pliny does also maintain this opinion, affirming Mundum esse aeternum,
immensum, neque genitum, neque interiturum vnquam. Auerrois. lib. 1. de caelo.
And in like manner, Auerrois a follower and imitator of Aristotle, does tread
so right in his Masters steps, that in his first book De caelo, Idem
super. 8. Phis. Arist.
he disputes earnestly against those, who do acknowledge that the world was
created etc. Declaryng also the same thing in his Commentaries, where he does
expound and defend the argument of his Master Aristotle concerning the
eternity, and perpetuity of the world.

I am not unmindful also of those words which Peter does allege in the
person of the ungodly and wicked worldlinges, 2. Pet. 3.4.
saying: Where is the promise of his coming? For since the fathers dyed, all
things continue alike from the beginning of the creation. But ye shall
understand, that all these profane and wicked reasons, and Heathnishe and
unfruitful questions, shall be confuted orderly God willing in their places,
by the authority of the holy Scriptures.

Know ye therefore first dear Christians, that almighty GOD him self does
teach us, by his holy Prophettes and Apostles: but most specially by his
only begotten Soonne ( Hebr. ^.2.
whom he has made heir of all things) that the world was created of
nothing, and shall return into nothing again. And therefore we must not
only believe it, Read. Gene. 14.19. cap. 20.11. cap. 31.17
but also defend the same to be so, as he has undoubtedly spoken it.

And to the end that out of many testimonies, a few may be recited, the
Prophet Moises being a lively witness of this matter, has described the
work of the creation of the world after this manner, saying: Nehem. 9.6. Job.
2.9. Gene. 1.1.
In the beginning GOD created the heaven and the earth, etc. The Prophets
also followyng Moises, and maintainyng the same truth: do affirm God to be
the creator of heaven and earth Especially David saying. Psalm. 89.11.
The heavens are thine, the earth also is thine, thou have laid the foundation
of the world, and all that therein is. Thou haste created the North and the
South etc. And again: Psalm. 102.25.
Thou have aforetyme laid the foundation of the earth, And the heavens are
the work of thy hands. They shall perish, Read more of this. Psalm. 115.16.
Psalm. 135.6.
but thou shall endure, even they shall all wax old as does a garment, and
as a vesture thou shalt change them, and they shall be changed, but thou art
the same, and thy years shall not fail, etc.

And as the Prophets have made mention of the creation of the world, Iere.
27.5. and cap. 32.17. Amos. 4.13. Esaias. 43.5. ca^ 45.12. Zachary. 12 Acts.
4.24. cap. 24.15. Apoc. 10.6.8. Gene. 7. vers^ 19.20.21.22.^ 24. Luke. 17.26.
so have they made rehersall of the consummation of the same. Especially Moises
in the deluge (or the universal floode) does very notably describe unto us,
the type or figure of the consummation of the world. And therefore our Savior
Christ, alludyng unto the same general destruction by his Evangelist Luke
says. That as it was in the days of Noe, so shall it be in the days of the
Son of man. The eat, they drank, the married wives, and gave in marriage,
unto the day that Noe went into the Arc. And the flood came and destroyed
them all: Likewise also as it was in the days of Lot, they eat, they drank,
they bought, they sold, they planted, they builte. But in the day that Lot
went out of Sodom, it rained fire and Brimstone from heaven, and destroyed
the^ all. After these ensamples shall it be in the day when the Son of man
shall be revealed, etc. And therefore Christ says, that the harvest is the end
of the world. Math. 13.39 Cap. 28 20.
And in like manner: Behold I am with you alwaie until the end of the world.
Romans 8.21.22. 1. Cor. 10.11.
Read more Romans 8.21.22. etc. And again. All these things were written to
admonish us, upon who^ the ends of the world are come.

Apoc. 21.1. 2. Pet. 3.13.
Out of all these testimonies, which I have hitherto alleged (that in the
mean season I may omit that, which is written of a new heaven, and a new
earth, this may be concluded. viz. That whatsoever God by his holy Prophets
and saints, has revealed unto the world, must of necessity be just and
true: But he has taught us (by their Ministry) that the world was not only
created by God, but also shall he consumed by him: Therefore we must believe
that the world had a beginning, and shall have an endyng. But that I may
omit many other reasons, Aug. in 28. quest. in vet. Testam.
that I could allege for the maintenance of the same thing. I will only
allege the arguments that Augustine uses in his 28 question of the new
Testamente, whose words are these (to the utter confutation of all those that
do affirm, that the world is eternal.)

The words of S. August.
Res aeterna diuersitatem abhorret, cum sit nec tactu, nec visu capienda. etc.
(That is to say) That thing which is everlasting, does abhor all
co^trarietie, because it can neither be felt, nor seen (seeing that it is
without a body.) But the world is subject to passions, because that water
does strive against fire, and fire (if it do abou^de) does overcome the
water. And for as much as the earth is cold and dry, and may be burned,
because it is Res coporalis: therefore it is a foul absurditte to affirm,
that the world is eternal. etc.

But lettyng these things pass, it shall manifestly be proved that this
world shall perish and pass away, if we do but consider the parts
whereof it does consist, for do we not see the earth to be changed and
corrupted? Sometimes by the inundation of waters? Sometimes by fires? And by
the heat of the Sun? And do we not see that some parts of the same do
wax old, and wear away even for very age? Do we not in some places also
read, that mountains have fallen down, by reason of earth quakes? And Rocks
have been cracked, and broken so in pieces, that by the means thereof,
certain Rivers have been (as it were drunk up, or else, have had recourse an
other way? Also have ye not read, that the seas have rebounded back, and
overwhelmed whole Cities, and utterly drouned whole Provinces? And what are
these strange alterations else, but evident arguments that the world shall one
day have an end?

Naie I do say moreover, that if we will give credit to the Mathematiques,
yt constitution of the celestial world, is not the same that it has been in
times paste, for so much as the Sun, is not so far distant from us now, as
it has been heretofore. So that some do affirm, that the distance between
the Son and the earth (which is the center of the world) is less now, by
the fourth part almost, then it was in the time when Ptolomeus lived. Where
hence they do conjecture and gather, that the Su^ne (at this day) is nerer
unto us by 9976. German miles then it was before.

Wherefore, if there be so great alteration in the superior world, what shall
we say of the inferior? Let this therefore be a forcible argument to prove,
that the world shall have an end: for so much as it does wax old, and every
part thereof does feel some debilitie and weakness. For there is less
virtue in Plants and herbs then ever was before: And more feeble strength in
every living creature then ever was before. And less age in men then ever was
before. It remains therefore (of necessity) that shortly there shall be an
end and consu^mation of the world, because it is (as it were) subject to
old age, and therefore feeble in every part.

But it is not sufficient for me to affirm that there shall be an end, but I
must also prove the manner of the end of the world, which shall be by fire:
according as it is written 2. Peter. 3.7. 1. Cor. 7.31.
The heavens and the earth which are now, are kept by the same word in
store, and reserved unto fire against the day of Judgment, and of the
destruction of ungodly men. But if ye do demand of me, how the heaven that
now is and the yerth shall be burned with fire? The answer is easily made that
it shall be Secundu^ formam, non secundu^ essentia^. (As the Philosophers and
the Divines do affirm. According to the saying of Paul. Praeterit sigura
huius mundi. 1. Cor. 7.31.
Whereunto I might add the Judgment of Heathen writers, which shall be very
profitable to be considered of those that are conversant in the readyng of
Ouide. Ovid. lib. 1. metamorp.
lib. 1. Metamorpho. where (speaking of Jupiter) he says thus. Esse quoque in
fatis reminiscitur affore te^pus,
Quo mare, quo rellus, correptaque regia coeli,
Ardeat, and mundi moles operofa laboret,
Of the same thing read Lucane also lib. i. Who does as it were appoint a
certain hour, wherein all the world shall be consumed and brought to nothing,
saying: Sic cum compage soluta.
Saecula tot mundi suprema coegerit hora,
Antiquum repetens iterum chaos, oi^a mistis,
Sydera syderibus concurrent ignea pontum
Astra petent etc. Whereunto I do refer that which Peter does set down
unto us, saying: 2. Pet. 3.20.
The heavens shall pass away with a noise, and the Elements shall melt with
heat, and the earth with the works that are therein, shall be burnt up by sire
(as has bin before declared.) Vbi figura mu^di praeterit non natura. For
which cause the master of the Sentences does affirm, Magister sententia.
lib. 4. did. 47.
that the qualities of the corruptible elements, which were somtymes agreeable
unto our corruptible bodies, should be burnt up utterly in the general
consummation. And the substance of those Elements shall have the same
qualities, which through a marvelous mutation, shall agree with immortal
bodies. This sentence was borrowed out of Augustine lib. xx. cap. xvj. de
ciuitate Dei. August. lib. 20 cap. 16. de ciuitate dei.
And seeing that we have proceaded thus far, I think it not to be much
amiss for me, to speak somewhat of the time when this day of Doom, or
general consummation of the world shall be.

Know ye therefore, that the Mathematiques do dream of a great year, after
the which all the Stars shall return, Ad sua principia. And then they
say, that the end of the world should immediately follow. And their opinion
is, that heaven and earth shall be burned, when all the Stars which do now
observe, diverse and sonderie courses, shall mete together in the sign Cancer.
Even as Berosus that Chaldaean Astronomer does affirm, that the first age
(in the days of Noe) was drouned, when all the Stars had their concurse and
meetyng together, in the sign called Capricornus.

Naie there have been some in this our age, that have gone about to appoint a
certain year, when this day should be. (As Hosiander and Stiphelius did) but
they were deceived, Hosiander Stiphelius.
by the erroneous spirit of the Anabaptists, inspired into them by Satan,
who is altogether delighted in lies, and erroneous opinions thereby (if it were
possible) entendyng to deceive all those, that thirst after the simple truth,
which is only found in the sacred Scriptures, wherein there is no mention
made at all of the duration, or the continuance of the world.

I know also that there be certain, which do divide the world into six
ages The first from Adam unto Noe. The second from Noe unto Abraham: The third
from Abraham unto David: The fowreth from David unto the transmigration into
Babylon: The fifte from the transmigratio^ unto Christ. And the sixth and last
from the Incarnation of Christ unto the end of the world. Wherefore they
allege, that seeing that age wherein now we live, is the last age, it may be
very fitly called aetas decrepita, a crooked age. Seeing that the Evangelist
Ihon does term it the last hour, 1. Ihon. 1.18.
but yet nevertheless, how long that age (or hour) shall endure, is kept from
the knowledge of all men.

I am not ignorant, yet notwithstanding, how some (being moved thereunto
through certain weak and feeble conjectures) have (as it were) appointed out
the time of the day of Judgment, and end of the world: Bringyng forth the
Oracle of Elias, which they borowe from the tradition of the Hebrews,
whereunto many do give very great credit. And these fellows do affirm:
That the world shall endure 6000. years: and they do also divide those years
after this manner. Affirmyng that 2000. years, should be consumed, before the
time that almighty God gave the law to Moises, and to the rest of the
children of Israel. They acknowledge also that the other two thousand years
should be spent under the time of the Law. And the last 2000. years should
be expired in the Kingdom of Christ. And they add moreover that these two
last 2000. years, shall not be fully finished, the sins of the world,
should be so abundantly increased, and should appear so abominable in the
sight of God.

I can not forget but that there are other some also, who have feigned, that
the world shall endure six days, even as it was created in six days. But
for so long time as it shall endure, they do give to every day a thousand
years (which comes all to one rekonyng as before). As though the Prophet
David would have it to be so? Psalm. 90.4.
when he says: for a thousand years in thy sight, are as yesterdaie when it
is paste, etc.

Other some also are found, who do think that the mystical body of
Christ (that is to say his Church) shall live the space of 33. years upon
the earth, because Christ himself lived so long in the world after he had
taken his human body of the Virgin Marie: but they do add to every year
fifty lackyng one, to make the years of Iubelaei. But all these things are
but the foolish inventions, and dreams of mortal men. And (without all
doubt) it is a miserable, and most lamentable case, that we having so many
plain, and manifest, and comfortable testimonies in the holy Scriptures,
concerning Faith, Hope, and Charity, and other Godly and Christian offices
and duties: wherein there is no obscurity or darkness at all, that we do
altogether neglecte I say, and despise them as matters not worthy the talkyng
of, and with so great diligence and pains (I will not say superstition) will
seem to prosecute and busy our heads about such unfruitful questions, as
are no whit appertainyng to our Salvation. But such is the wretchedness, and
curiosity of our age and time. That as the Apostle says: 1. Tim. 6.4.
Every man is puffed, albeeit he know nothing in deed at all, but doteth
about questions and strife of words, whereof comes envy, strife railynges,
evil surmisynges, vain disputations of men endewed with corrupt minds, and
destitute of the truth, etc. Let us therefore answer this question
(concerning the time when the world shall be consumed) with Augustine, and
conclude after this manner (viz) that this is altogether a vain, frivolous, and
vnfuitfull question. For if it were convenient, and meet for us to know the
time, who might more better enstructe us in this poincte, then our Savior
Christ himself? who made answer unto his Disciples (when they used this
question in his presence, saying unto him. Acts. 1.6.
Lord will thou at this time restore the kingdom to Israel? And he said
unto them: It is not for you to know the times or the seasons, which the
Father has put in his own power, etc.

This answer which they did receive of Christ, a man would think would
suffice any Christian, seeing Christ his own Disciples, did neither enquire of
the hour, the day, or the year, but simply proposed their question of the
time, unto who^ Christ made an excellent answer, as is before declared.
Agreeable unto which place is the testimony of Christ Jesus himself, saying
Of that day and of that hour knows no man, Math. 24.36. Math. 13.32.
no not the Angels that are in heaven, (neither yet the son of man) but the
Father only. And again Paul says. 1 Thessalonians. 5.1.
Of the times and seasons brethren I have no need that I do write unto you:
for you your selves know perfectly, that the day of the Lord shall come even
as a Thief in the night. For when they shall say peace and saffetie, then
shall come upon them sudden destruction: as the travail upon a woman with
child, and they shall not escape. But ye brethren are not in darkness, that
that day should come upon you as it were a Thief. Ye are all the children of
light, and the children of the day, we are not of the night, neither of the
darkness. Therefore let us not sleep, as others do, but let us watch and
be sober, etc. For it is in vain for us to go about to make a computation of
those years, which are remainyng in this world or to appoincte the day, or
hour, year, or time when it shall be consumed? Seeing it is not our parts and
duties to know, and search these things: as we have heard out of the mouth
of the truth himself Christ Jesus. Wherefore albeeit the Devil our common
adversary, does labor by all means to fill our heads, with infinite and
unprofitable questions (setting a side all such as are necessary for our
salvation) yet let us that are Christians, prepare our selves to watchfulness,
and Christian meditation and prayers: so often as we do hear any mention of
the day of Judgment, for fear least when Christ our Master comes, he
find us sleepyng, etc.

Let us therefore stay, and rest our selves here, not seeking curiously into
the secrets of almighty God, against his Divine will and pleasure. And yet
notwithstanding, to the end we may be persuaded of the certainty thereof,
and of Christ's godly care and brotherly love and affection, showed toward
us: He has left behind him some thing in the word of GOD, concerning this
matter, which is necessary for our comfort, and enstruction.

Math. 24.22.
First, that those days shall be shortened for the electes sake. Whereby he does
give us to understand, that the number of those years shall not be
accomplished, and fulfilled, which otherwise were appoincted, until the
consummation of the world.

Secondly the same Christ, has added, thus much for our learning, that seeing
it is not expedient for us, to know the time of the consummation of the
world: yet notwithstanding, there should appear certain signs and tokens of
the same, by the course whereof we may easily conjecture of the euentes
followyng. Whereby our Savior Christ has declared, not only his singular
love which he bears toward us: but also shows how much he does tender
our salvation, in that he does send signs and tokens, in heaven and in
Earth, as the forerunners of his second coming unto Judgment. Whereof some
are partly known of us, because they are familier unto our senses: and some of
them also are unwonted and strange, so that we may truly say, that it
pleases almighty God, by such monsters of Nature, to admonish us of our
duties, and obedience, which we owe unto his divine Majesty. For as when we
see the body of man (which is the prison of the soul) to be subject to many
infirmities: As namely, when we see the hair of a man's head, to begin to
shed and fall away, or else to wax white: the eyes to wax bleared, and dim
of sight: The stomach to be weak, and unapt to digestion: the ears to be
deffe, the tongue to falter: The knees to be ready to bow under a man: and
all the members and parts of man, to be feeble and brought into subjection
(as it were) through Biles, and Ulcers, and other diseases whatsoever, that are
incide^t to the Nature of man: and at the present sight thereof we can say,
that those signs do presage, that death is imminent, and not far of from
that man: And in like manner, as when we se the tiles of any edifice or buiding
to be broken, the walls to begin to totter, the roffe to be ready to fall
down, the posts and principal timber to begin to shrink out of their
iointes, the foundation to be rotten, etc. Forthwith we can say that the same
house, is ready to decaie and come to utter ruin, for lack of a good tenant,
or Landlorde that should keep the same in due reparation: Even so can not we
choose, but confess, that all these late horrible, and monsterous monsters of
Nature (I speak as well of men, as of brute beasts) which are daiely seen
in this our age: Besides the manifold strange tokens, and unwonted signs,
which are oftentimes evidently seen in the Son, and in the Moon, and in
the Stars, and in all the host of Heaven: Are (as you would say) the
Ulcers, and Biles, naie I may say plainly, the blaines of the whole world:
and do very notably prognosticate, and foreshewe unto us, the universal
dissolution, and destruction of the same.

No less then the Star that stood over Jerusalem like unto a Sword, (and
also the strange Comet which endured for the space of a whole year: the
Devil in the figure and shape of a man: An army of soldiers seen in the
clouds, marchyng about the city, with a number of horsemen and chariotts:
with this voice yt was heard in the Temple, saying: Let us go hence. Besides
other evident and ugly shapes, etc.) did foreshewe and Prognosticate unto the
Jews, the destruction that should come upon the City of Jerusalem, and the
Inhabitauntes thereof. Who contemned not only these demo^strations of their
destruction (that was imminent): but also like blind and senseless beasts,
would not give credit unto those words, which Christ him self, (while he was
conversant in the earth) did utter against Jerusalem. Who when he was come
nere unto it, Luke. 19.41.
he beheld it, and wept for it, saying: O if thou had, even known at the
least in this thy day, those things which belong unto thy peace. But now are
they hid from thine eyes, for the days shall come upon thee, that thine
enemies shall cast a trenche about thee: and compass thee round, and keep
thee in on every side: And shall make thee even with the ground, and the
children which are in thee: and they shall not leave in thee, a stone upon a
stone, because thou knew not the season of thy visitation.

All which things came to pass forty years just after the passion of
Christ, Anno dn^i 73.
who, in his life time, (through his Divine power) foresawe those things,
should happen which he foreshewed, in that Prophecy. And with weepyng tears,
(as the Evangelist Luke does witness) he bewailed their grievous misery.
Josephus lib. 6. cap. 11. de bello Iudaico
And therefore, our Savior Christ, did not without just cause vpbraide the
Jews, for their impenitencie, and hardness of heart, and unbelief when he
says unto them: O Jerusalem, Math. 23.37.
Jerusalem, which killest the Prophets, and stonest them which are sent
unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together, as the Hen
gathers her Chickens under her wings, and ye would not? Behold therefore
your habitation shall be left unto you desolate, etc. And in deed it came so
to pass, for according to the saying of Christ, there was so great distress
within the land of Judah: and Gods wrath was so heavy over the people of
Jerusalem, that they were ledd captive into all Nations and were trodden down
under the feet of the Gentiles, etc. Luke. 21.24.
And what other thing was this I pray you but a grievous ruin and destruction
of the Jews? Being also a lively figure of the consummation of the whole
world: which I am certainly persuaded is not far of. For as our Savior
Christ, before Jerusalem was besieged, and destroyed, Luke 21.20.
did use these words unto the Jews: When ye see Jerusalem besieged with
soldiers, then understand, that the desolation thereof is near, (and it came
so to pass. Luke. 21.20.
) Even so let us be persuaded that if those signs, which Christ has
showed, should go before, his second coming to Judgment: have manifestly
appeared, in the sight of all men, and can not be denied, but that they are
already fulfilled: there remains nothing then, but that we should look for
the son of man to come in the clouds, with power and great glory. Let us
therefore, consider the number of the signs, which are mentioned in the holy
Scriptures, which are called either, signa precedentia, vel concomitantia
mu^di interitum (that is) either signs going before, or else the signs that
shall be joined with the consummation of the world. Concerning the which
signs: Read that place where Christ his Disciples came unto him a part,
Math. 24.3.
saying. Tell us when these things shall be, and what sign shall be of thy
coming, and of the end of the world? Unto whom Jesus made answer, Verse. 4.
and said: take heed that no man deceive you: For many shall come in my name,
saying: I am Christ, and shall deceive many. And you shall hear of wars, and
rumors of wars: see that you be not troubled, for all these things must
come to pass, but the end is not yet: For Nation, shall arise against Nation,
and Realm against Realm and there shall be Famine, and Pestilence, and
earthquakes, in diverse places.

Now if we will examine our own selves, and rippe up our own hearts, we can
not deny, but that these things have been already fulfilled, which Christ
has here forespoken: call therefore to remembrance that where as Christ
says: first, that many shall come, in my name, saying: I am Christ, etc.)
How that in the third year of the reign of the Queens Majesty, Anno. 1561.
the tenth day of April, one Willyam Geffray was whipped from the Marshalsie
in South warke, to Bedlem: for that he professed one Ihon Moore to be Christ
our Savior. And you shall find that the same Ihon Moore also, was whipped,
until he had confessed, Christ to be in heaven, and himself to be a sinful
man.

As touching the rumor of wars, and the risyng of Nation against Nation: and
Realm against Realm, the greetious invasion, and daiely siege, that the Turk
makes against Christendom, the bloody broiles between the king of Spain,
and the Estates of the low Countries, the bloody battle fought between the
King of Portugale, and Amole Moluco King of Fess, Anno. 1578. August 4.
and diverse other worthy personages. The preparation of the Pope into
Irelande, the Civil wars and late bloody Massacres made in France, also
the present wars between England and the rebels of Ireland, can witness,
that these signs are also come to pass already.

Concerning Famine, think upon the dearth of Corn that was in the fifth year
of Queen Marie, when Wheat was sold for four Marks the quarter, and people
were driven to eat bread made of Acorns, but especially (which is the greatest
dearth of all) call to mind, the Famine of the word of God, which could not
then be preached, but in corners, so that the people had well nere perished,
for want of Spiritual food.

As touching the Pestilence, whether that has not reigned in many places of
the world of late: call to mind the year of the Lord God 1563. wherein from
the first of January 1562. until the last of December followyng, there died
of the plague within the City of London, and liberties thereof 20146. As the
Chronicles do witness. That I may omit to speak of the Pestilence that
was since in other places of the realm, as namely in Norwitch, Rye. etc. Also
of the plague that is now in Paris, where there dies 3000. in a weke. And that
in the mean while also I say nothing, of that grievous plague, that has
reigned in Italy, and Spain, and else where, etc.

Moreover, I need not (I hope) to make any proof, whether there has been any
yearthquakes already, in sondrie places of the world? Seeing that I (am
persuaded) that the remembrance of the late yearthquake, which happened the
sixte of April last 1580. is not yet quite forgotten, of those that fear
GOD, and thirst after his coming. Which earthquake seemed to be universal,
or at the least, to be perceived and felt, at that very time, in the most
part of Christendom, which is miraculous, and wonderful. These things
therefore which our Savior Christ has foreshewed to be the foreronners, of
his second coming, are truly verified, and fulfilled already, so that he is
altogether blind, who will not se, and (for the most part) bereft of his
senses, who neither can, nor will understand the same. But to proceade
(notwithstanding all this, Math. 24.8.
which hitherto has been spoken.) Christ does affirm moreover, that all
these are but the beginning of sorrows. For then shall they deliver you (says
he) up to be afflicted, and shall kill you, and you shall be hated, of all
nations, for my names sake: which thing has been already verified in the
late persecution, of faithful Christians, in Queen Mary's days. And since
that time in France, and Spain, and other places, there has been thereof, to
much experience, if the will of GOD had been otherwise. Verse. 10.
More over he says: And then shall many be offended, and shall betraie one
an other, and shall hate one an other. And has there not been many offenses
both given and taken? Yea oftentimes more offense taken, then occasion has
been given? Was there ever the like treasons, and treacherous conspiracies,
committed in any age, As has been in these our days? And was there ever more
bitter hatred showed betwixt one and other, then is at this present? I am
persuaded the like enemitie between party and party was never seen, as is in
this our age? otherwise there would not be so many brabbling matters set
abroche almost in every Court in England as there be. etc.

Moreover Christ shows that many false Prophets shall arise, and shall
deceive many: for proof whereof, what say you to the swarms of Anabaptists,
which do sow their Deuelishe doctrine almost in every place in the world?
And is not this verified also think you? Of the secret revelation of H. N.
and of the deuelishe darnell, and cursed doctrine of David George, and
Christopher Vitell, and diverse others the cheifest Pillars of the family of
Love? Whose books of damnable heresies, directly against diverse of the most
principal Articles of the christian faith: are scattered abroad in many
places of this realm to the great disturbaunce, and breach of that unity of
faith, which ought to be kept in the bond of peace. But thanks be given unto
God, the Queens Majesty, by her grave and learned Counsel, has taken such
order, that not only all such books shall be called in again: throughout ye
whole Realm, but also that the Sectaries them selves shall be attached, and
committed to close prison, there to remain till either, they shall be purged and
cleared of their heresies, by recantation: or else by the Laws of the Realm,
to suffer the just sentence of condemnation for their demerites: and to be
condemned as heretics. The heresies which they maintain, as they are
infinite in number: so are they also full of blasphemy.

1 As namely, they affirm that they do live so perfectly, that they sin
not.

2 Also that who soever is one of their congregation, is either as perfect as
Christ, or else a very Devil.

3 Thirdly, they deny with Arrius, that Christ is equal with the Father, in
the power and substance of the Godhead: groundyng that opinion out of this
place of the Scripture, where Christ says: Ihon. 14.27.
My Father is greater then I. Not considering that Christ says in an other
place. I and my Father are one, etc. Ihon. 10.30.


4 They do affirm, that the Resurrection is paste already with Hymeneus and
Philetus: Which concerning the truth have erred, 2. Tim. 2.18.
and do destroy the faith of certain.

5 They do refuse to suffer persecution for their Religion: because they say
that their bodies are the temples of the holy Ghost: wherein they do deny
the words of Christ who says: Math. 5.10.
Blessed are they which suffer persecution for righteousness sake, for theirs
is the kingdom of heaven. etc. These with an infinite number of other gross
errors, do this deuelishe family of Love maintain in their blasphemous
books, which I do omit for breuities sake. Only have I given the world a
taste of a few of their opinions, that by the consideration thereof, all men
may may take heed of the rest of their Pharisaicall Leuine, and damnable
doctrine, which is set a broche in their seditious Books first made in the
Dutche tongue, in the name of H. N. and lately translated into English, have
been secretly brought over from beyond the Seas into the Realm. The titles
whereof are called Euangeliu^ Regni* or a Joyful Message of the Kingdom.
Documentall sentences. The Prophecy of Love. A publishyng of the peace upon
earth, and diverse others, which (for avoiding of tediousness) I will not
recite at this present.

Math. 24. verse. 12.
And furthermore Christ says, ver. 12. that because iniquity shall be
increased, the love of many shall be cold, but he that endures to the end
shall be saved. Was there ever I pray you more iniquity? Did sin and
transgression so abundantly reign every where, as it does at this present?
Was Christian love and brotherly fellowshippe, more cold at any time then now?
No truly: Such wickedness at this day is reigning generally, upon the face
of the earth, that if it were not for the electes sake, that these wretched
days should be shortened, it were not possible that any flesh should be
saved. But to conclude, our Savior Christ adds verse 14. Math. 24.14.
That this Gospel of the kingdom, shall be preached through the whole world,
for a witness unto all Nations, and then shall the end come.

Now (I hope) that there is no man so impudent, that will deny these Prophecies
of Christ, to be already fulfilled. For so much as the Gospel has been so
universally, and plentifully preached throughout the world, that there is none
who ca^ excuse himself in the day of the lord, and say that he has not
heard the sound of his Gospel preached, and published unto him by those,
which are appointed to be the stewardes of such holy mysteries: but rather
they must needs confess, that great has been the multitude of the
Preachers, etc. What reason can there be alleged to the contrary then, but
that the consummation of the world is imminent? Seeing that Christ who is the
truth, the way, and the life has spoken it. Of who^ it is written, Math.
17.5.
that a voice came out of a Cloud saying: This is that my beloved Soonne in
whom I am well pleased, hear him. Hereunto I do add that, which is written
by the Apostle Paul.

2. These. 2.1.
Now we beseech you brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by
our assemblyng unto him. That you be not suddenly moved from your mind, nor
troubled neither, by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter, as it were from us,
as though the day of Christ were at hand. Let no man deceive you by any
means. For the day shall not come, except there come a departing first (that
is to say Apostasy, or a denial of the Christian faith) and that the man of
sin be disclosed, even the son of perdition, which is an adversary, and
exalts himself against all that is called God, or that is worshipped, etc.
Well, all these signs ye see, have been already paste, and we can not deny,
but that we have seen, and yet do daiely see an infinite number of
Antichrists, which deny the manifest and undoubted truth, and fall to
Popery, and all abominable Idolatry: so that the day of the Lord can not
be far of, but must needs be at hand.

Moreover I beseech you, harken what Christ says (speaking of certain
signs which shall go before the coming of Christ to Judgment. Luke. 21.25.
) There shall be signs then (says he) in the Son, and in the Moon, and
in the stars: And again, Math. 24.^9.
immediately after the tribulation of those days, shall the Sun be darkened,
and the Moon shall not give her light: and the stars shall fall from heaven,
and the powers of heaven shall be shaken. Esaias. 13.9.
The Prophet Esaias also says thus, Behold the day of the lord comes
cruel, with wrath, and fearce to anger: to lay the land waste, and he shall
destroy the sinners out of it. For the stars of heaven; and the Planettes
thereof shall not give their light, the Son shall be darkened in his going
sorthe, and the Moon shall not cause her light to shine. Of this read more
Ezechiell 32.7. Daniel 7.13. 1. Cor. 15.2. etc. Iol. 2.31.
Also the Prophet Ioell says: that the Son shall be turned into darkness,
and the Moon into blood, before the great and terrible day of the lord
come. By all which sondrie testimonies is signified, that all the creatures of
God, as well in heaven above, as in the earth beneth, whether it be the Son,
the Moon, or the Stars: or any part of the host of heaven above, or the
earth beneth: (shall be (as it were summo^s, to summon the whole world, unto
Christ's tribunal feate of judgment. Which kind of Sommons, the ungodly
and impenitent sinners, shall every day, contemn more and more, until the
very Judgment day. Before which time both heaven and earth
(notwithstanding) shall after a sort, resemble the countenance of an angry
Judge, the rather, to stir up all wicked sinners, to repent their ungodly
lives, and to turn unto the Lord: Being moved thereunto, by these and
such like signs, and tokens of Gods wrath, which shall evidently appear,
unto all the whole world, before the end, and consummation of the same, (as
has been before declared): And then shall they see the Son of man come in a
Cloud, with power and great glory. Wherefore, let us diligently call to our
remembrance, whether any of these forenamed signs be passed, yea or no-(that
is to say) whether there have been, many and very often Ecclipses, of the
Son: and likewise of the Moon or whether the Stars, have seemed to fall
from heaven? Or the powers of heaven, have been at any time moved, or shaken,
yea, or no? It can not be denied, but that there has been of late years, more
wonderful and strange sightes seen, both in the Son, and in the Moon, and
in the stars (clean against the order of nature) then ever was seen, in any
age here tofore.

Have we not read of two Moons that shined at one time, in the seventh year
of king Henry the first? Did ye never hear tell, of those five Moons that
shined at once in the second year of king Henry the seventh? Have ye not
found in the Chronicles, how that the Son has appeared, as red as blood,
and so continued the space of six hours the last day of October, in the
fiftene year of King Edward the second? But to come more nerer to our time
have ye not heard, how in the year of the Lord 1543. And the xxxv. year of the
reign of king Henry the eight, there chanced four Eclipses, one of the Son
(the 24. of January) and three of the Moon, which was a marvelous thing to
behold. That I may omit to speak of the strange Eclipses of the Son and
Moon, these years last paste. But because, I have hitherto spoken
sufficiently of signs and tokens, which have been seen in the Son, and in
the Moon: for so much as our Savior Christ, Math. 24.29.
does make mention also, that the Stars shall fall from heaven, I think it
most meet and convenient for me, to speak somewhat of blasing Stars: And
so much the rather, because at this present so just occasion is offered unto
me, by the reason of a blasyng Star, which did appear, at the first, in
the Judgment of those, which are learned Astronomers, in the sign called
Pisces, the tenth day of October 1580. and was left in Aquarius, (The motion
thereof being retrograde, contrary to the common course of other moveable
Stars) and yet does it continue still to be seen, and vewed of all men,
albeit it does not lighten the air with her glimmering beams, and glistring
brightness, so much as it did at the first appearyng thereof, being set on
fire by Gods divine council, and providence, that by the sight thereof, we
might be advertised of after clappes: And so to prepare our selves, spedely to
turn unto God by faithful, and unfeigned repentance, that we may be the
more ready, to meet him, in the clouds with joy, at his coming: or else,
through the hardness of our heart, which can not repent, justly to suffer,
the bitterness of his sharp judgment, and so heap up (as a treasure unto
our selves) wrath, against the day of wrath, and of the declaration of the
just Judgment of God.

Therefore, in the title of this treatise, I do term this Star, which is
seen at this present: A blasyng star (or a burning Beacon, etc.) set on fire
by gods providence to warn the whole world, of dreadful wars, between God
and those, that do go on still in wickedness, and will not be touched, and
moved to repentance. And I was partly moved, so to name it, for this
consideration. For as in England (and in most places of the whole world
besides) Beacons are placed upon the stipest and highest hills that may be
seen farthest of: and in time of war, and of the invasion of the enemy, into
any Nation, are (night and day) watched and set on fire, to signify, and
declare unto the inhabitants thereof, that some great peril and danger is
nigh: Even so this Comet, is as it were, set on fire in the height of the air,
by the Almighty power and providence of our eternal God, to the end that so
many as shall behold the same, may be admonished and stirred up, by the
consideration thereof, to avoid such after clapps, (by their faithful
repentance) as should otherwise fall upon them, in the just Judgment of
almighty God.

Aristotle.
I am not ignorant, how Aristotle, and diverse other Philosophers, do define,
a blasyng Star, to be but an yearthly vapor, somewhat thick, and clammie,
and fat in substance, which being drawn up, by little and little, from
the bowelles of the earth, into the upper region of the air (nigh to the
Sphere, of the fiery element) is there set on fire, and through heat made
thin, till it be clean dissolved, etc. Which opinion of Aristotle, albeit
it be thought to be worthy of credit, and subscription in the judgment of
most Philosophers (who with one consent, and assent, do agree, that blasyng
Stars do spryng of natural causes) yet notwithstanding all godly divines,
for the most part are of this Judgment, that the Lord God himself is the
original aucthour, and principal worker of this Star (as of all others)
making it, an immediate messenger, and minister of his will, according to the
time, and place, as it best pleases his divine, and eternal majesty. Who
seeing that we, be such an obstinate, and stiffenecked people, that we will
not be moved to love him: neither in respect of his long sufferaunce, and
loving mercy, showed all ways toward us: neither yet in respect, of that
most sweet, and comfortable voice of the Gospel, which has been preached
full.xxij. years unto us, by his faithful servants, and Ministers: Does
now in his secret council go an other way to work, and by fearful
Eclipses of Son, and Moon and by glisteryng flames of fierrie Cometes, and
other such like monstrous signs and tokens in the heaven, and in the earth:
does go (I say) about, to enforce and compel us, (against our wills) to be
mindful of the latter day, which is not far of: If we will give any
credit, to the words of Christ, who immediately after, he had made mention,
of the signs which should be seen, in the Son, and in the Moon, and in
the Stars: does forthwith add these words, Cu^ haec videritis euenire,
cognoscite quod prope est regnu^ dei (That is to say. Math. 24.33.
) When ye se all these things, know that the kingdom of God is nere, even at
the doors. Luke. 21.28.
And again: when these things do begin to come to pass, then look up and
lift up your heads: For your redemption draws nere. Behold the Fig tree,
and all trees, when they now shoot forth ye (seeing the^) know of your own
selves, that Summer is nere: So likewise ye when ye se all these things come
to pass, know you, that the kingdom of God is near. Verily I say unto you:
This age shall not pass, till all these things be done: heaven and earth
shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away. By that which
hitherto has been spoken, you see how almighty God, is not only the creator,
and governor of Nature it self, and of all Natural causes, but also, he is
such a one, as in the work of this blasyng Star, is to be acknowledged and
confessed, to be the only efficient cause. And therefore he only (and not
the blasyng Star) is to be feared, and had in reverence, considering that he
is of power able, not only, to chasten us, with temporal punishementes, for
the amendment of our lives, in this wretched world: But also, in his Justice,
may condemn us to eternal death and destruction, in the kingdom of
darkness, where there is everlasting fire prepared, for the Devil and his
angels. For which cause I can not deny, but I must needs confess that (for
the most part) blasyng Stars are a token and sign of great horror and
fear: and do prognosticate of some strange wonder, and do threaten some
imminent evil, and mischief, commonly unto that part of the earth, toward
the which, they seem to cast their beams most directly. And therefore those
Philosophers, which have written of the effects of blasyng stars, have
found by good experience, that sometimes they do signify drouthe, and
barronnesse of the earth: which made Augustinus Niphus to witness, that
after the appearyng of a Comete, Anno domini 1506. (which was about the 22.
year of the reign of king Henry the seventh there followed, within two years
after, such a drought in Lumberdie, that from the month of January, unto
November after, there fell no Rain at all in that Country. Sometimes also
after the appearyng of blasyng Stars, there follows (most commonly cruel
and great winds, and mighty te^pestes, with hail stones of such a
bigness, that through the same many houses are thrown down, and often times
are consumed and burned with fire, through the winds: As almost the whole
country of Scotland, was once wasted by fire the 9. of January. 1251. a
great Comete of marvelous bigness, having been seen before in Scotland for
many days. (Anno 1248.) Sometimes they do signify the death and change of
Kings and Princes, and the alteration of kingdoms and co^monwealthes: As may
appear Anno 1116. When Chichester was burnte, there was seen a blasing star,
and the Moon, not long time after, seemed to be turned into blood: after the
which Maude the Queen of England died, and was buried at Westminster

Likewise Anno do. 1165. appeared a mighty Comete in Scotland, burning out
with two long beams. And within forty days after died Malcolmus the iiij.
King (by name) of the Scotts, as the Chronicle reports.

Moreover Anno 1214. in the month of March, two Cometes of a marvelous
bignesses very fearful to behold, appeared in Scotland, the one going
before, and the other followyng the Son, in the which year that most
happy, and good King Willyam died, after he had rained forty and nine years.

Likewise Anno 1538. appeared a Comet, after the setting of the Son, which
was placed in the sign Pisces, and the tail of it lookyng toward the East,
and shortly after died the Duke of Saxon.

Also Anno 1539. the sixth day of May appeared a Comete, which endured
burning three weeks, and not long time after Isabell the wife of Charles the
fifth Emperor, died in travail of child, in which year also died George yt
duke of Saxony. And in the same year, (as some do write) there appeared three
Cometes in the month of April, after the which the Duke of Cleave died, and
also the Bushop of Trent and diverse other noble personages.

In the year of the Lord 1540, the seventh day of April, happened a great
conjunction of the Planettes, and there appeared also a marvelous Eclipse of
the Son, whose beginning was before the Son risyng, and did endure in the
same Eclipse two whole hours after it was risen. Also there was seen about
the same time, a marvelous strange Comete in the even, after the which there
followed so great a drought, that Hay, Corn, and all kind of Pulse were
very scarce. And the same year the Castle of Prage (a noble City in the
kingdom of Bohemia,) with the Cathedral Church were burned with fire: and
many fearful fires happened in sondedrie places the same time.

Moreover Anno 1547. in Heluecia in Germany, were seen in the air two hosts
of men of war, and two Lions grievously and terriblie fightyng together, so
long that the one seemed to bite of the others head quite. And the year
followyng the x. day of February, was seen in Saxony (a Country also in
Germany) a fire from heaven, that fell upon certain Cities, and two hosts
of men were seen in the air, runnyng and skirmishyng one against an other,
besides diverse other strange sightes, very wonderful to behold. And yet in
these days it will not sincke into the heads of many, that there may any
such strange sight appear in the air, because we can not render a natural
reason thereof. And therefore this makes most men to doubt, whether the last
strange sightes, which were seen in Rome 1580. January 18. and in other
places, (the reports whereof are extante in print to be seen) be true or no?

Also in the year of our Lord 1551. the 28. day of January, there appeared a
bloody rod, and sondrie fearful fires seen in the air over Lisborne, the
cheef City of Portugal: and there it rained blood also, after the which
followed such a fearful yearthquake, that about two hundred houses were
grievously shaken, and thrown down, through the fall whereof above a
thousand persons were slain.

And here also I can not forget to speak of that great blasing star, which
was to see to, in form of a Broom (or a bundell of rods) which appeared in
the year of our Lord 1531. the ninth of September over Mentz, a City in
Germany, which did betoken a heavy burden of Gods vengeance, not only to
the state temporal, but also to Ecclesiastical persons.

But to proceade Anno 1551. the 21. of March at Madeburge in Germany, about
seven of the clock in the morning seven Rainebowes, and three Sons were
seen, and in the euenyng the same day three Moons.

Also Anno 1553. was heard a woeful cry, saying: Woe Woe, twice together,
besides the sound of Belles, and the noise of Trompettes. And at the same time
it happened, that at Duryngia the Trees and Herbs, did not only sweat
blood: But fearful noises were heard also every night. After the which
Mauricius the Duke of Saxon, fought in battle with Alberte of Brandenburge,
and at the same time (being smitten with a Bullet) died the third day after
the battle.

Moreover Anno 1554. the first day of February, in the City of Catalane in
France, there appeared a marvelous sight about the Moon, like unto a great
fire, arisyng from the East part, and declinyng toward the Weste: and the
Moon it self appeared like to a firebrand in sight: And moreover this fire in
thaire, did burn with a great noise, and often times did cast forth flames,
and sparks of fire: In the like sort as a hot burning Iron, is wont to
do, being beaten upon a Smithes handuile.

And the 26. day of May followyng it rained blood also, not far from the
town of Dunckelspuell in Germany. Also there were seen three fair
Rainebowes, and so many Sons and Moons, and two bloody Crosses. And the 11.
day of June followyng, about five miles distaunce from Norinberge, in
Germany: there was seen in the Son a bloody rod, and many companies of
horsemen iustlyng together in the air, which so did continue, for the space
of two hours, in so much that it caused men greatly to fear, that Doomes
day was at hand: After the which strange sight, Frederick the duke of
Saxony, died the same year. And after that, a notable town in Germany, was
wasted with fire.

Also in the year of the lord 1555. were seen in the City of Duringia, three
Sons the tenth day of February. And moreover at Lune^berge was seen in the
air, a great company of Soldiers, at the right hand of whom there stood
an Angel, holdyng a fiery sword in his hand, and a child was there seen
suddenly, emongst the people, which did earnestly exhort the people generally,
unto hearty repentance: Affirmyng Gods Judgments to be at hand. And when
he had thus exhorted the people, he vanished suddenly out of their sight, and
no man could afterward tell where he was become.

And in the same year within the bounds of Polonia, were heard and seen a
great company of Dogs barkyng and fightyng together, and many of them were
torn in pieces. After the which fight, there followed great wars, and
manslaughter, between the inhabitauntes of Polonia, and the Moscouites.

Also in Duringia (the Son shinyng clear) there appeared in the air, a
bright sword like unto a Turkey blade, directing the poinct toward the South,
and the edge toward the East.

Moreover Anno 1557. on the nineth day of March, there were seen three Sons,
and a very fair Rainebowe, and the 17. day of the same monethe followyng,
there fell fire from heaven.

Also in an other place, a fiery Globe was seen: and it rained blood, in so
much that lumpes of blood, like to the bigness of a man's hand, did drop
from heaven, in the sight of many: and in each drop were seen certain
figures, like to men's faces. And upon Saint Laurence day afterward, the
Son appeared all bloody: after the which the French King fought a great
battaill with Philip King of Spain. And after that saint Quintaines was
taken, etc.

Also Anno 1558. there appeared a very fearful Comet, which continued
burning many weeks. After the appearance of which Comete, was seen a
strange sight, and no less fearful to behold. For the 21. of August the day
being clear, and the weather calm, (two hours before Noone) the Son
being then very clear also, was enclosed, about with a great circle, which
was of many colors, like unto a Rainbowe, and continued so in sight for four
hours and a half, to the great fear and amasement of all such, as beheld
the same. And such a fearful sight (as Plutarche reports) was seen before
the death of Caesar.

Moreover Anno 1562. Heaven was seen to burn in many places of Germany and a
celestial firebrande, shined by night in the air, and stretched from the
North unto the Southe. Also, a great band of soldiers, were seen in the
air, which seemed to shed much blood down. And in the month of April
following, the Son appeared marvelous bloody, as well at the risyng, as at
the setting, and continued so for three days together.

Also Anno 1564. and in the sixth year of the reign of our gracious Queen
Elizabeth, the 7. of October at night, all the North parts of the Element
seemed to be covered with flames of fire, proceadyng from the North East, and
North West, toward the midst of the firmamente, where it stayed afterward
for the space of an hour, and so descended West.

Also Anno 1572. and the 15. year of the reign of the Queens most excellent
Majesty, the 18. day of November in the morning, a Star was seen Northward,
very bright and clear in the constellation of Cassiopeia, and it seemed so
strange: as from the beginning of the world, the like was never seen: for in
the judgment of the most expert Astronomers, (and such as are most
skillful in the Mathematiques in this our time and age) that star which did
then appear unto our sight, was no Comete, but mere supernatural, directly
opposite to the Star, which appeared at the Nativity of our Savior
Christ, and placed in the very intersection of Aequinoctium Terrestre, and
therefore may worthily be termed or named a sign, unto the whole earth. As
more at large appears in a Book, which was written by that worshipful
gentleman master Thomas Digges, called Alae, seu Scalae Mathematicae, where
the miracle is by demo^strations Mathematical, plainly and most manifestly
proved. Unto which book I do refer all those that are desirous to be
resolved of that Star sufficiently.

Moreover in the 17. year of the reign of the Queens Majesty, the 14. day
of November about midnight, diverse strange impressions of fire and smoke, were
seen in ye air, to proceed forth of a black cloud in the North, declinyng
toward the South which continued after that manner, until the next morning.
And the next day followyng, the heavens from all parts did seem to burn,
and the flames did meet together over the heads of all those, which beheld
the same: and this light burning flame, did seem to arise as it were, round
about from the Horizon.

Also in the year of our Lord 1577. the tenth day of November at night, there
appeared a blasyng Star in the firmament with a long stream (or tail)
proceadyng from the same, and stretchyng the beams thereof directly toward
the East, very wonderful to behold. And the same Comete endured for the
space of 99. days, shinyng every night until eight of the clock, that the
same descended: and when the matter thereof was quite dissolved, and her
splendant brightness utterly extinguished, in the Judgment of those that be
expert in the rules of Astronomy, it rested it self nere unto the seat of
Cassiopeia. The effects of which Star, are better known unto them then
unto me. But yet in the mean season, I would not have you unmindful of those
boisterous blastes of winds, and terrible tempests, and monsterous Snowes:
Also the grievous shipwrackes, which have happened since in most places of
the world, beside the high floudes, and wonderful inundations of waters,
Morraine of beasts, and barronnesse of ground, which happened not only in
this Realm of England, but in diverse other countries, since the appearyng of
the same Star. That in the mean season I speak nothing, of the great and
grievous sedicions, and treatourous conspiracies: that have been put in
practice in the Regions round about us. And all to bring in Idolatry and
Popery into Enlande again (if it were possible) which the al mighty God, by
the ministry of our most gracious Prince, and her honorable grave, and wise
counsel has miraculously stayed hitherto. And I hope shall do, if we have
grace to be thankful unto God for the same

Hitherto ye have heard (dear Christians) how that by common experience, the
flowyng of waters beyond their bounds, the barronnesse of the earth, the
scarcity of victualles, the Plague and Pestilence, with great winds, and
tempests: the alteration of Common wealths, and wars between Nation and
Nation: As also the late dreadful yearthquake, with the new and most gentle,
and loving remembrance, which the Lord sent afterward, throughout diverse
places of Christendom, but especially in England and Spain, etc. And many
other calamities, which happened since besides, may truly be named the
effects of the former blasyng Star, which was seen the tenth of November
1577. etc.

And now has the Lord God kindeled an other Star, this last tenth of
October 1580. the first appearyng whereof (with his continuance) which has
been in Aquarius, hitherto has been before declared unto you, by the reason of
the conference that I have had with those, who are expert in the study of the
Mathematiques: the proceadyng whereof, with his color, motion, and effects I
leave only to their handlyng, whom I know to be hable (and I hope also are
willing) to resolve the world fully thereof, when opportunity shall serve. In
the mean while (that I may use no longer delay) this may be concluded of a
certainty: that it is the good pleasure and purpose of almighty God, (of his
inspeakeable love and mercy, showed always toward us) that this strange
Comete (or blasyng Star) should now appear even whilst that we are rocked
in the Cradle of sin and security, and are wholly given unto all manner of
abomination: to premonishe and forewarne us of afterclappes (that is to say)
to threaten, and prognosticate condign punishemente, to light upon all
persons generally, who daiely and howerly do (of let purpose and malice,
wilfully offend, Gods divine Majesty) and do continually wallow and persevere
in their wicked and abominable sin and transgression. For which cause
Almighty God would have as well Prince as people, to look into their former
abominable and sinful lives: And when they have considered the horror and
lothsomnesse thereof, forthwith to frame their hearts, and to prepare their
minds, to be earnestly penitent and sorrowful for the same. And whereas before,
we can not deny, but that every one of us has erred and gone astraie, and from
the highest unto the lowest (yea, from the Priest, to the Prophet,) have been
so secure and careless of our duties, that we have wilfully contemned, the
Judgments of GOD threatened against us, by his faithful Preachers and
Ministers: know you therefore (dear Christians) that it is now the good
purpose, and divine pleasure of almighty God: (as well by this burning Comete,
which now appears: as also, by the late dreadful yearthquake, but most
chiefly by that supernatural Star of all others, that was seen in
Cassiopeia, with other such strange and wonderful sightes and monsters in
Nature) to move and stir up all the sort of us (being most wretched and
miserable sinners) to be mindful of the Judgment day. And beforehande to
examine and rippe up, every manne his own heart and conscience, and diligently
to seek, and search the causes of the wrath of almighty GOD in our own
selves by the reason of our manifold and grievous sins: and having found the
cause of his heavy displeasure against us, to be in our own rebellious
Nature, we ought every one of us to judge our selves, that we be not Judged
of the Lord. And albeeit some do offend his divine Majesty, more grievously
then other some: yet would not our good and gracious God have any of us all, to
esteem himself to be free from blame, either void of sin: But rather (as
before I have declared) he would have us every one with all expedition, to
renounce our former wickedness. And by bowyng our selves down before his
Tribunal seat, and stoupyng under the mighty scepter of his kingdom, he
would have us confess, that we have all sinned. And by our faithful
repentance, and unfeigned conversion unto his divine Majesty, (in weeping,
fasting and mournyng) to preuente the sharp sword, and the smart rods and
whippes which he has in his just judgment prepared in a readiness, for to
whippe and punish us withal, if we go onwardes in our former rebellion, as
we have done heretofore. Therefore let every man, or woman of what condition so
ever they be, apply that, which hitherto has been spoken unto the^ selves,
and know this for an undoubted truth, that albeeit we have deserved to be
utterly cut of and destroyed, by the sharp sword of Gods divine
indignation: and albeit these vnwo^ted and strange signs and tokens, which he
sends daiely amongst us (both in the Son and in the Moon, and the
Stars, and in all living creatures) be presages of his heavy displeasure,
that he has taken against us, and also notable forewarnynges of a most
grievous calamity and destruction, that he shall in equity and righteousness
bring upon us, by the reason of our filthy sins: yet notwithstanding, if
that we will but even in this the day of his loving and merciful visitation,
turn unto him with all our soul: If so be that to day we will hear his
voice, and not harden our hearts, etc: If so be (as Joel says) that we will
rent our hearts, and not our garments, and turn now unfeignedly unto the
Lord: we shall find him so merciful and loving a God, that he will receive
us again into his favor. Yea he will be so glad of our conversion, and
amendment of life, that he will have compassion upon us (if he see us truly
penitent) naie he will fall upon our necks and kiss us, and bring forth the
best coat, and put it on us: and put a ryng on our hand, and Shoes on our
feet, and kill the fat Calfe for us, and make us merry, after that he has
received us home unto himself saffe and sound: (that is to say) whereas
heretofore we were eue^ dead by the reason of sin and wickedness, he will
make us alive again, and quicken us by the Resurrection of Christ Jesus. And
whereas we have hitherto wandered very far, and gone astraie like lost
Sheep: he of his fatherly kindness and mercy, will bring us home again
upon his back unto the Sheepefolde of his son Jesus Christ, who is the
cheef Bisshoppe and Shepherd of our souls, unto whom with the Father, and the
holy ghost, three persons and one God be all praise and dominion for ever.
AMEN.

Finis.

